Selections from Muhammadan Traditions (William Goldsack, 1923)
==========================================================
Goldsack's 1923 classified English selections from the six canonical hadith collections — traditions from Bukhari, Muslim, Abu Dawud, Tirmidhi and others arranged by subject. Public domain. Source: Internet Archive.

GL 297.124 
SEL 


102640 

LBSNAA 


ft TTBStir SRIT^R 3T^Rfft 

Academy of Administration 
MUSSOORIE 


LIBRARY 


arerfer 

Accession No._ 

Class No. _ 

Book No. _ 


/OZt L / o 


2<ni2<i 


SELECTIONS 


FROM 

MUHAMMADAN TRADITIONS 

Being a Carefully Chosen and' Thoroughly 
Representative Collection of the 
Most Authentic Traditions 
from the Celebrated 

MISHKATU’ L-M AS ABIH 


Translated from the Arabic 
by the 

REV. WILLIAM GOLDSACK 


THE CHRISTIAN LITERATURE SOCIETY FOR INDIA 

MADRAS ALLAHABAD RANGOON MYSORE COLOMBO 

1923 * 


PREFACE 


In the system of Islam the Traditions occupy a place second 
only in importance to the Qur'an itself. They are described 
as a record of 1 the words of the Prophet and his actions and 
what he permitted/ Their importance is derived from the 
Muslim belief that Muhammad, in all he said and did, was 
divinely guided. The Traditions are technically known as 
wahi ghairu'l-matln, unrecited revelation, in contradistinction to 
the revelation of the Qur’an which is said to have been recited 
word for word by Gabriel to the Prophet. Thus it will be 
seen that whilst the Qur’an, according to Muslims, is a purely 
objective revelation, in the Traditions the inspiration is sub¬ 
jective only. 

In Islam the Traditions are used both in the formation of 
canon law and also in the exegesis of the Qur’an ; whilst not a 
little of what we know of the life and character of Muhammad 
is derived from the same source. As every word and act of 
the Prophet is for the Muslim a divine rule of faith and 
practice, the influence of the Traditions on the lives of millions, 
all over the world, is difficult to over-estimate. 

A Tradition is technically divided by Muslim theologians 
into two parts. There is first, the is?idd, the support or author¬ 
ity on which the Tradition rests. This consists of the names 
of the succession of reporters by whom the particular Tradition 
was handed down. This is?idd ) to be complete, must begin with 
the name of the original person who actually heard the words 
spoken by Muhammad, and must continue in an unbroken 
chain up to the name of the last reporter from whom the 
written record was made,.when, of course, oral transmission 
automatically ceased. In a genuine Tradition (IJadithuVSahih) 
each nafrator in the Isndd must be a pious man, of unblemished 
character. Traditions in which there is a break in the chain of 
narrators are of slight value . 1 The second part of a Tradition 


For a list of these see, The Faith of Islam , Chapter iv, pp. 120-2. 


IV 


SELECTIONS FROM MUHAMMADAN TRADITIONS 


consists of the actual text of what Muhammad is reported to 
have said or done. This is called the matii or text. 

The Traditions were at first handed down orally from one 
generation to the next, and it was not until more than a 
century had passed away after the death of Muhammad that 
any attempt was made to collect and reduce them to writing. 
Since that time, however, very numerous collections of 
Traditions have been made, amounting, according to the 
Ithdfu ?i-Nubala> to no less than 1465 different collections. 
By general consent six collections have come to be accepted 
as of paramount authority and value amongst Sunni Muslims. 
These are the collections of Al-Bukhari who died in 256 a.h., 
Muslim who died in 260 a.h., Abu Daud who died in 275 a.h. 
Ibn Majah who died in 273 a.h., At-Tirmidhi who died in 299 
a.h., and An-Nasa’i who died in 303 a.h. These six great 
collections are known to-day as the Al-Kutubu s-sitta, ‘ the six 
(correct) books ’, and arc universally revered by Sunnis all 
over the world. They are not all regarded hs of equal 
authority, however, for the first two are considered as of 
pre-eminent authority and are known as $ahih , sound or 
authentic, whilst the others are simply called sunnn , usages, or 
hasan , good. 

As hundreds of Traditions are found repeated in more than 
one of the above-mentioned collections, efforts have been made 
from time to time to eliminate repetition and at the same time 
secure a trustworthy and thoroughly representative collection of 
Traditions by compiling, from these six, one standard and 
authoritative collection. One of the most famous of such 
compilations, or reductions, is that known as the Mishkatu l- 
Ma$abih from which the present selection has been drawn. 
This work, originally called the Ma$abih , was compiled by 
Imam Abu Muhammad al-^iusain ibn Mas‘ud al-Eirai’ of 
Baghdad, who died in 516 a.h. It contained 4,484 Traditions, 
of which 2,434 were §ahih and the rest hasan . The compiler, 
besides making use of the 4 six (correct) books' mentioned 
above, also used a few other well-known collections such as 
those of Al-Daraqutni, Al-Baihaqi, Al-Darimi and Razin. In 
the year 737 a.h. Shaikh Waliyu’d-Din Abu ‘Abdu’llah Mahmud 
revised and enlarged the Mafabih , adding another chapter 


PREFACE 


V 


to each section. He also added much to the value of the 
original compilation by quoting the authorities whence the 
various Traditions were derived. This revised edition is now 
known as the Mishkdtu l-Ma$abih . 

The Mishkat was translated into English, with many 
omissions however, by Captain Matthews in 1809. That work 
is long since out of print, and now unobtainable. Matthews' 
translation suffers by being paraphrastic to a degree, and loses 
in value by its omission of the names of the authorities from 
whose compilations the various Traditions have been taken. 

Some slight variations exist in different editions of the 
Mishkat in the headings to books and sections. The present 
translation of selections was made from a Lahore edition of 
1321 A.H. 

No attempt is here made to discuss the question of the 
authenticity and integrity of the Traditions. The reader will 
find the whole subject critically discussed in the translator's 
The Traditions in Islam , and to that work he is referred. 

It is hoped that this book of Selections will enable the 
English reader to form an adequate idea of the general 
character and scope of Muslim Tradition, and will help mis¬ 
sionaries in particular to a more sympathetic approach to the 
followers of the Arabian Prophet. 

For typographical reasons diacritical letters such as dh th 
have not been used. 

I have not dealt with the question of the authenticity and 
genuineness of the Traditions. 1 In modern days, intelligent 
Muslims place less reliance on many of them. It is known that 
in the first century of Islam Traditions were forged for political 
and religious reasons. The late Sir Sayyed Ahmad accepted 
very few as genuine ones. The Hon’ble Sir ‘Abdu'r-Rahim 
says: 1 Nothing has been a more fruitful source of conflicting 
opinions in matters of law among the Sunni jurists than the 
question whether a particular tradition is to be regarded as 
genuine t>r not, though it may be one for whose authority one 


1 Fos a statement on this subject see Appendix A in Sell’s Faith of 
Islam (Fourth Ed.) 


VI 


SELECTIONS FROM MUHAMMADAN DRADITIONS 


or more of these writers (Bukhari and Muslim) may have 
vouchsafed.’ 1 

The study of the Traditions (‘llmu’-1-Hadith) is an im¬ 
portant part of the curriculum of Muslim Theological Schools. 
Traditions are of varying value. A Tradition of the highest 
class is called Hadithu’l-Mutawatir. In this case the isndd 
must be perfect, that is, the chain of narrators must be continu¬ 
ous, and each narrator must have been a man of unblemished 
conduct. These Traditions are few in number. Next to them 
come Traditions known asHadithu’s-$ahih or genuine Traditions. 
Those in the collections made by Bukhari and Muslim are 
generally placed in this class. Traditions known as Hadithu’l- 
Hasan, are accepted as good, though inferior to the other two 
classes. Weak Traditions, Hadithu’d-Pa’if, are those, amongst 
the narrators of which were men of doubtful reputation, or who 
committed the crime of introducing innovations (bid‘at) in belief 
or in worship. A Hadithu’l-Mu‘allaq is a Tradition in which 
there is a break in the chain of narrators, that is, tile isndd is not 
perfect. If the Tradition does not come from a Companion of 
the Prophet, but from a Tabi’, a man of the next generation, 
it is called a Mur sal. In some cases there are other defects : 
these have to be taken note of by the Muslim student, but we 
may pass them by. A Tradition must not be contrary to a 
statement in the Qur’an and it can be abrogated by a verse of the 
Qur’an. The place of the Traditions in Islam theology and law 
is a very important one. They form the basis of the Sunna, 

‘ To an orthodox Muslim, the Book and the Sunnai, God’s word 
direct and God’s word through the mind of the Prophet, record¬ 
ed in the Traditions, are the foundation and sum of Islam.’ 
The great collectors of the Traditions were ignorant of the 
sound canons of historical research : they lacked the spirit of 
the 4 higher criticism ’: they paid little attention to internal 
evidence. The subject of a Tradition might be foolish, or 
improbable : that did not matter, if the isndd was sound. Like 

1 Muhammadan Jurisprudence , p. 31; see also Maulavi Cheragh ‘All, 
Critical Exposition of Jihdd, pp. 65, 67, 73 and his Reforms Under Muslim 
Rule , p. 19; for Mirza Ghulam Ahmad’s view see Walter, The Ahmadiyya 
Afovement, p. 39. Margliouth’s The Early Development of Atuhammadan - 
ism, Chapter iii, is a valuable contribution to the subject. 


PREFACE 


vii 


so much else in Islam, the procedure was purely mechanical and 
this accounts for the changed attitude of many modern intelli¬ 
gent Muslims to the whole question of the authenticity, genuine¬ 
ness and authority of many Traditions. 

In conclusion the translator desires to thank Mr. A. T. 
Upson, the talented Superintendent of the Nile Mission Press, 
for much valuable help received in the interpretation of obscure 
passages and the Rev. L. Bevan Jones, B.A., B.D., for valuable 
assistance in reading the proofs. 

Jessore , Bengal , 1923 . W. G. 


CONTENTS 


Chapter Page 

I. The Book of Faith .. .. .. .. .. 1 

On Mortal Sins, and the Signs of Hypocrisy .. .. 5 

On the Whisperings of Satan 

On belief in Predestination .. .. .. .. 7 

On the Punishments of the Grave .. .. .. 10 

On Relying upon the Book and the Traditions .. 12 

II. The Book of Knowledge .. .. .. ..16 

III. The Book of Purifications .. .. .. 20 

What Acts Necessitate Ablutions .. .. .. 21 

Rules Regarding Natural Evacuations .. .. 21 

On the Use of the Twig for Cleaning the Teeth .. 21 

Laws Regarding Purification with Water .. .. 22 

On Bathing .. .. .. .. .. 28 

On Intercourse with the Unclean .. .. .. 23 

Orders Concerning Different Waters .. .. .. 23 

On the Cleansing of Impurities .. .. .. 24 

On*Touching the Boots .. .. .. ..24 

On the Use of Earth for Purification .. .. .. 25 

On Obligatory Washings .. .. .. .. 25 

On the Menses .. .. .. .. .. 25 

IV. The Book of Prayer .. .. .. 26 

Concerning the Times of Prayer .. .. .. 27 

On Promptitude in Prayer .. .. .. .. 27 

On the Excellencies of Prayer .. .. .. 27 

On the Call to Prayer .. .. .. 28 

On the Excellence of the Call to Prayer .. .. 29 

On Delaying the Call to Prayer .. .. 30 

On Mosques and Places of Prayer .. .. .. 30 

On Covering Oneself .. .. .. .. 33 

On that which Conceals .. .. .. .. 34 

On the Nature of Prayer .. .. .. .. 34 , 

On what should be repeated after the words, ‘ God is 

Great ’.35 

On Reciting the Qur'an in Prayer .. .. 36 

On the Genuflection called Ruqu‘ .. .. .. 38 

On Prostration and Its Excellence .. .. .. 39 

# On Bearing Witness .. .. .. .. .. 39 

On Asking Blessings on the Prophet .. .. 40 

On Supplication at the Time of Bearing Witness .. 41 

Concerning Things to be Mentioned after Prayer .. 42 

* Concerning What Is or Is Not Permitted to be Done in 

Prayer .. .. .. .. .. 43 


ii 


X 


SELECTIONS FROM MUHAMMADAN TRADITIONS 


Chapter Page 

IV. On Forgetting in Prayer .. .. .. ..44 

On the Prostrations to be Made when Reciting the 

Qur’an .. . .. .. .. .. 45 

On the Times when Prayer is Forbidden .. .. 46 

On Praying in an Assembly, and the Excellence thereof 46 
On Dressing Ranks for Prayer .. .. .. 48 

On the Places for Standing in Prayer.. .. 48 

On the Office of Leader of Prayers .. .. .. 49 

On What is Necessary for the Leader of Prayers .. 50 

On the Duties of a Congregation .. .. .. 50 

Concerning Those Who say the Prayers Twice .. 51 

On Supererogatory Prayers .. .. .. .. 51 

On Prayers Said at Night .. .. .. 52 

On What is to be Said in the Night Prayers .. -. 53 

On Things which Encourage to Prayer at Night .. 54 

. On Determination in Religious Observances .. .. 55 

On Witr Prayers .. .. .. .. 55 

On Special Forms of Supplication .. .. 56 

On Standing in Prayer in the Month Ramadan .. 56 

Concerning the Morning Prayers . .. 57 

On Voluntary Prayers .. .. .. 58 

On the Prayer called Tasbih .. .. .. 58 

On Prayers for a Journey .. .. .. 59 

Concerning the Friday Prayers .. .. .. 60 

On the Obligatory Friday Prayers .. .. .. 61 

On Cleansing the Body and Hastening to Prayer .. 61 

On the Public Address and Prayers .. .. .. 62 

On Prayers of Alarm .. .. .. 63 

Concerning the Prayers of the Two Great Festivals .. 64 

On Sacrifice.. .. .. .. .. .. 6fr 

On Prayers at Eclipses .. .. .. 67 

On Prostration for Gratitude.. .. .. .. 68 

On Prayers for Rain .. .. .. 69 

Concerning Winds .. .. .. .. .. 70 

V. The Book of Biers .. .. .. .. 71 

On Visiting the Sick, and the Rewards of Sickness .. 71 

On Wishing for Death .. .. .. 74 

On What should be Said, to One approaching Death .. 75 

On Washing and Shrouding the Dead.. .. .. 75 

On Going with a Bier .. .. .. .. 76 

On Burying the Dead .. .. .. c .. 77 

On Weeping over the Dead .. .. .. 77 

On Visiting Graves .. .. .. .. 79 

VI. The Book of Alms .. .. .. « ..80 

Concerning the Things on which Alms are Obligatory .. 81 


CONTENTS Xi 

Chapter Page 

VI. Concerning the Alms to be given at the Festival of the 

Breaking of the Fast .. .. .. .. 82 

Concerning Those for Whom Alms are Unlawful .. ‘82 

Concerning Those for Whom Begging is not Lawful, and 
for Whom it is .. .. .. .. 83 

On Spending, and Being Niggardly .. .. .. 84 

On Obligatory Alms .. .. .. .. 85 

On the Excellence of Almsgiving .. .. .. 87 

On a Woman’s Giving Alms from Her Husband’s 
Property .. .. .. .. .. .. 88 

Concerning Those Who May Not Take Back Alms Once 
Given .. .. .. .. .. 89 

VII. The Book of Fasting .. .. .. ..90 

On Seeing the New Moon .. .. .. .. 90 

On What Nullifies the Fast .. .. .. .. 92 

Concerning the Fast of the Traveller.. .. .. 93 

On the Execution of an Omitted Duty .. .. 94 

On Voluntary Fasts .. .. .. .. 94 

Concerning the Night of Power .. .. .. 97 

On Seclusion for Religious Exercises .. .. 97 

VIII. The Book of the Excellencies of the Qur’an .. 98 

On the Recitation of the Qur’an .. .. .. 102 

On the Various Readings of the Qur’an .. .. 104 

IX. The Book of Supplications.. .. .. .. 109 

On Remembering God and Approaching Near to Him .. 110 

X. The Book of the Names of God .. .. .. 113 

On the Rewards of Magnifying and Praising God .. 114 

On Asking Pardon, and Repentance .. .. .. 115 

On the Abundance of God’s Mercy .. .. .. 118 

On What Should be Said in the Morning, the Evening, 
and the Time of Sleep .. .. .. .. 119 

Concerning Prayer on Special Occasions .. .. 122 

On Seeking Refuge .. .. .. .. .. 124 

On Comprehensive Prayer .. .. .. .. 125 

XI. The Book of the Rites of Pilgrimage .. .. 128 

Concerning the Pilgrim Garb and Cry .. .. 129 

Concerning the Farewell Pilgrimage .. .. .. 130 

On Entering Mecca and Going Round the Mosque .. 135 

On Stopping at Mount Arafat.. .. .. .. 136 

• On Returning from Arafat and Muzdalifah .. .. 137 

Concerning the Throwing the Pebbles.. .. .. 138 

On Animals for Sacrifice .. .. .. .. 138 

On Shaving the Head .. .. .. .. 139 

On the Public Address on the Day of Sacrifice, and 
Throwing the Pebbles, and Taking Farewell.. .. 140 


xii 


SELECTIONS FROM MUHAMMADAN TRADITIONS 


Chapter Page 

XI. Concerning those Things which Pilgrims must Abstain 

from .. .. .. .. .. .. 140 

On Abstaining from Hunting During Pilgrimage .. 141 

On being Prevented from Going on Pilgrimage, and 
Missing the Time for its Observance .. .. 142 

Concerning the Sacred Territory of Mecca which God 

has Guarded .. .. .. .. .. 142 

Concerning the Sacred Territory of Madina .. .. 144 

XII. The Book of Buying and Selling .. .. 146 

On Earning and Seeking what is Lawful .. .. 146 

On Gentleness in Mutual Behaviour .. .. 147 

On Option in Respect of Buying and Selling .. .. 148 

On Interest .. .. .. .. .. 148 

Concerning Sale .. .. .. .. .. 150* 

On Payment in Advance, and Pledges .. .. 151 

On Monopolies .. .. .. .. .. 151 

On Bankruptcy and Delay in Demanding Payment .. 152 

On Partnership and Agency .. .. .. .. 153 

On the Right of Pre-emption .. .. .. 154 

Concerning Payment in Kind for Services Rendered .. 155 

On the Lease of Revenues or Labour .. .. .. 155 

On Rejuvenating Dead (Lands) and Water .. .. 157 

On Giving .. .. .. .. .. 158 

Concerning What is Found .. .. .. .. 159 

On the Division of Inheritance .. .. .. 160 

Concerning Wills .. .. .. .. .. 162 

XIII. The Book of Marriage .. .. .. .. 163 

On Looking at one Betrothed.. .. .. .. 163 

Concerning the Guardian, and Asking the Consent of the 
Woman .. .. .. .. .. .. 164 

On Publishing Marriages, andithe Conditions Governing 
Them .. .. .. .. .. .. 165 

Concerning those Whom it is Unlawful to Marry .. 166 

Concerning Cohabitation .. .. .. .. 168 

Concerning Marriage Dowries .. .. .. 168 

Concerning the Marriage Feast .. .. .. 169 

Concerning the Division of Time Between Different 
Wives .. .. .. .. .. .. 170 

On Intercourse with Women, and the Rights of each .. 170 

Concerning Divorce .. .. .. .. .. 172 

On Mutual Cursing .. .. .. .. • .. 173 

Concerning the Period of Waiting for a Divorced Woman 174 
On Searching for the Signs of Pregnancy .. .. 175 

On Subsistence Allowances, and the Duties of Slaves, .. 175 

Concerning the Young Arriving at Puberty, and on Their 
Up-Bringing .. .. .. .. ..177 


CONTKNTS 


Xltl 


Chapter Page 

XIV. The Book of the Emancipation of Slaves .. 178 

On the Emanciption of a Slave who is Jointly Owned .. 178 

Concerning Oaths and Vows .. .. .. ' .. 179 

XV. The Book of Retaliation .. .. .. .. 181 

Concerning Various Kinds of Blood-Money .. .. 183 

Concerning Faults for which there is no Retaliation .. 183 

Concerning Oaths .. .. .. .. .. 184 

On Killing Apostates and those Who Hasten in Impiety 184 

XVI. The Book of Punishments .. .. .. .. 186 

Concerning Amputation for Theft .. .. ..187 

On Intercession for Remission of Punishment .. .. 188 

Concerning the Punishment for Drinking Intoxicants .. 189 

Concerning What is not Allowed to be Said to Those 
Punished .. .. .. .. .. .. 189 

Concerning Punishments Undefined by Law .. .. 189 

Concerning Intoxicants, and Threats to the Drinkers 
thereof .. .. .. .. .. .. 190 

XVII. The Book of Rule and Judgement .. .. .. 192 

On the Duty of Rulers in the Matter of Clemency .. 194 

On Acting in Judicial Affairs.. .. .. .. 194 

On the Allowances and Presents of Rulers .. .. 195 

On Judgements and Evidence .. .. .. 195 

XVIII. The Book of Religious War .. .. ' .. 197 

On Preparing Weapons of War .. .. .. 200 

Concerning the Rules of Travelling .. .. .. 200 

Concerning Letters to Infidels, and Inviting Them to 

Islam .201 

On Fighting in Religious War .. .. .. 204 

On Orders Regarding Prisoners .. .. .. 204 

Concerning Giving Protection .. .. .. 206 

Concerning the Division of Plunder, and Purloining 
therefrom .. .. • .. .. .. 207 

Concerning the Poll-Tax .. .. .. , .. 210 

Concerning Peace .. .. .. .. .. 210 

Concerning the Exclusion of the Jews from Arabia .. 213 

Concerning Spoil Taken from Infidels Without Fighting 214 
XIX. The Book of Hunting and Killing .. .. 215 

Concerning Dogs .. .. .. .. .. 215 

On What is Lawful and Unlawful as Food .. .. 216 

• Concerning the Ceremony called‘Aqiqah .. .. 217 

XX. The Book of Foods.. .. .. .. ..218 

Concerning Hospitality .. .. .. .. 220 

• Concerning Drinks .. .. .. .. .. 220 

Concerning Infusions of Grapes and Dates .. .. 221 

On Covering Vessels and other Things „. .. 221 


xiv 


SELECTIONS FROM MUHAMMADAN TRADITIONS 


Chapter Page 

XXI. The Book of Clothes .. .. .. .. 222 

Concerning Signet-rings .. .. .. .. 223 

Concerning Shoes .. .. .. .. .. 224 

On Combing the Hair.. .. .. .. .. 224 

Concerning Pictures .. .. .. .. .. 226 

XXII.’The Book of Medicine and Spells . .. ..228 

Concerning Omens and Auguries .. .. .. 229 

Concerning Divination .. .. .. .. 230 

Concerning Visions .. .. .. .. .. 231 

XXIII. The Book of Good Manners .. .. .. 232 

On Salutations .. .. .. .. .. 232 

On Asking Permission to Enter .. .. .. 234 

On Shaking Hands and Embracing .. .. .. 234 

On Rising Up .. .. .. .. .. 235 

On Sitting and Sleeping and Walking .. .. 235 

On Sneezing and Yawning .. .. .. .. 236 

On Laughing .. .. .. .. .. 236 

Concerning Names .. .. .. .. .. 236 

Concerning Rhetoric and Poetry .. .. .. 237 

On Keeping the Tongue, and on Calumny and Abuse .. 238 

Concerning Promises .. .. .. .. 240 

Concerning Joking .. .. .. .. .. 240 

On Boasting and Partisanship .. .. ,. 241 

On Filial Piety and Charity .. .. .. .. 242 

On Compassion and Mercy towards the Creation .. 243 

Concerning Love in God and for God.. .. .. 244 

On What is Forbidden regarding Breaking Off Friend¬ 
ships, and Searching Out Defects .. .. .. 245 

On Caution and Deliberation in Matters .. .. 246 

On Kindness and Modesty and Good Dispositions .. 246 

On Anger and Pride .. .. .. .. 247 

Concerning Oppression .. .. .. .. 247 

Concerning Things Which Are Lawful .. .. 248 

XXIV. The Book of Kind Words .. .. .. .. 250 

On the Excellence of Poverty, and Concerning the 
Prophet’s Manner of Life .. .. .. .. 251 

On Hope and Avarice .. .. .. .. 252 

On the Desire for Wealth and Long Life in order to 
Further Obedience.. .. .. .. .. 253 

On Reliance on God and Patience .. .. # .. 253 

On Hypocrisy and Ostentation .. .. .. 255 

On Crying Aloud and Fear .. .. .. .. 256 

On the Mutability of Men .. .. .. .. 257 

XXV. The Book of Seditions .. .. .. . 259 

Concerning Battles .. .. .. .. .. 260 


CONTKNTS 


XV 


Chapter Page 

XXV. Concerning the Signs of the Hour of Resurrection .. 262 

On the Signs Preceding the Hour of Resurrection, and 
Accounts of Antichrist .. .. .. .. 264 

The Story of I bn Say y ad .. .. .. .. 267 

Concerning the Coming Down of Jesus .. .. 268 

Concerning the Approach of the Hour of Resurrection .. 268 

The Hour of Resurrection Will Not Come Except on 
Wicked Men .. .. .. .. .. 269 

Concerning the Blowing of the Trumpet .. .. 269 

Concerning the Gathering Together .. .. .. 269 

On the Reckoning, and the Retaliation and the Scales .. 271 

Concerning the Pond and Intercession .. .. 272 

A Description of Paradise and the Inhabitants thereof 277 
Concerning the Vision of God Most High .. .. 279 

A Description of the Fire and the Inhabitants thereof .. 280 

Concerning the Creation of Paradise and the Fire .. 281 

Concerning the Beginning of Creation, and Mention 

of the Prophets. .. .. .. .. .. 282 

Concerning the Excellences of the Prince of the 
. Apostles ,. .. .. .. .. .. 285 

On the Names of the Prophet, and His Attributes .. 287 

On the Morals and Natural Disposition of the Prophet., 288 
Concerning the Sending of the Prophet, and the Begin¬ 
ning of Inspiration .. .. .. .. 289 

Concerning the Signs of Prophecy .. .. .. 292 

Concerning the Night-Journey to Heaven .. .. 292 

Concerning the Miracles of the Prophet .. .. 296 

Concerning the Miracles of Holy Men .. 301 

Concerning the Death of the Prophet.. .. .. 302 

Concerning the Virtues of the Quraish .. .. 304 

On the Virtues of Abu Bakr' .. .. .. .. 304 

On the Virtues of ‘Umar .. .. .. .. 305 

On the Virtues of ‘Uthman .. .. .. .. 305 

On the Virtues of ‘All .. .. .. .. 306 

On the Virtues of the Ten with Whom God was Pleased 306 
On the Virtues of the People of the Prophet’s Family .. 307 

On the Virtues of the Wives of the Prophet .. .. 308 

Concerning the Rewards of This People ., .. 309 


SELECTIONS 

FROM 

MUHAMMADAN TRADITIONS 

i 

THE BOOK OF FAITH 

It is related from ‘Omar binii’-l-Khuftab that, ‘On a cer¬ 
tain day when we were near the Prophet, there appeared before 
us a man dressed in white apparel. His hair was extremely 
black, and no marks of travel could be seen upon him, and none 
of us recognized him. At length he sat down beside the Prophet. 
Then he placed his two knees near the Prophet’s knees, and 
placed the palms of his hands on his thighs and said, “O 
Muhammad, teach me about Islam.” He replied, “Islam is 
that thou bear witness that there is no God but Allah, and that 
Muhammad is the Apostle of Allah, and that thou observe 
prayer, and that thou give alms, and that thou keep the fast in 
the month Ramadan, and that thou make the pilgrimage to the 
House (i.e., the temple at Mecca), if thou art able to provide 
for the journey.” He said, “Thou hast spoken truly.” At 
that we wondered at his questioning the Prophet and telling 
him he had spoken truly. Then he said, “Teach me about 
faith.” The Prophet replied, “ It is that thou believe in God 
and His angels and His books and His apostles and in the last 
day, and that thou believe in predestination, both of good and 
evil.” He said, “Thou hast spoken truly.” Then he said, 
“Teach me concerning the best action.” He replied, “It is 
that thou worship God as if thou didst see Him ; for if thou dost 
not see Him, yet He sees thee.” The man said, “Teach me 
concerning the hour of resurrection.” He replied, “Concern¬ 
ing this matter the questioned is no wiser than the questioner.” 
He said, “ Teach me concerning its signs.” He replied, “ It is 
that a female slave will give birth to her master, and that thou 
wilt see the barefooted and the naked and the indigent and 


& SELECTIONS FROM MUHAMMADAN TRADITIONS 

shepherds possessing houses/' After that the man departed, 
and I remained sitting for some time* Then the Prophet said 
to me, “O ‘Omar, dost thou know who the questioner was? " 
I said, “ God and Ris Apostle know best.” He replied, “ It was 
Gabriel. He came to teach you your religion." ’— Muslim . 

It is related from ‘Abdu’llah bin ‘Omar that, ‘The Apostle 
of God said, “A Muslim is he from whose tongue and hands 
Muslims are safe. And one who flees for religion is he who 
flees from what God has forbidden." ’— Muslim , Al Bukhari . 

It is related from Anas that, ‘ The Apostle of God said, 
“ None of you will believe until I become more precious to him 
than his father and his son and all men together." ’— Muslim, 
Al Bukhdri. 

It is related from ‘Abbas bin Abdu’l-Muttalib that, ‘The 
Apostle of God said, “ He has tasted the food of faith who is 
pleased with Allah as his Lord and with Islam as his religion 
and Muhammad as his Apostle." ’— Muslim. 

It is related from Abu Hurairah that, ‘ The Apostle of 
God said, “ By Him in whose hand is the life of* Muhammad! 
no one of this people, whether Jew or Christian, shall have 
heard of me, and shall afterwards die without believing in that 
with which I am sent, but shall become of the companions of 
the fire (of hell)." '— Muslim . 

It is related from Abu Musa Al-Asha‘ri that, ‘ The Apostle 
of God said, “There are three classes of people who will 
obtain a double reward : the man of the people of the Book 
who believes in his own prophet and in Muhammad ; the slave 
when he does his duty both to God and his masters; and the 
man who possesses a female slave and, after having connection 
with her, teaches her good manners and improves them, and 
gives her instruction and betters it, and then emancipates and 
marries her." ’— Muslim, Al Bukhdri . 

It is related from Ibn ‘Omar that, ‘ The Apostle of God 
said, “ I am ordered to make w r ar on men until they bear wit¬ 
ness that there is no God but Allah and that Muhammad is the 
Apostle of Allah; and until they observe the prayers 5nd give 
alms. And if they do that, then their blood and their property 
will be safe from me, except what is due to me according to the 
laws of Islam; and their account is with God."'— 'Muslim, 


THE BOOK OF FAITH 

Al Bukhdri , with the exception that Muslim makes no mention 
of the words “except what is due to me according to the laws 
of Islam.” 

It is related from Abu Musa Al-Asha‘ri that, ‘ The Apostle 
of God said, “ There is no one more patient than God at the 
sins which He hears. They attribute a son to Him, yet, after 
that, He preserves them from evil and provides their daily 
food.” ’— Muslim , Al Bukhdri. 

It is related from Abu Dharr that he said, ‘ I came to 
the Prophet, and he had a white cloth over him and was 
sleeping* Later on I came to him after he had awakened. 
Then he said, “There is no servant who shall say, ‘There is 
no God but Allah,’ and shall afterwards die relying on that, but 
will enter heaven.” I said, “Although he commit adultery 
or steal! ” He replied, “ Although he have committed adultery 
and theft.” I said, “ Although he commit adultery and theft! ” 
He replied, “ Although he commit adultery and theft.” I said, 
“Although hp commit adultery and theft!” He replied, 
“Although he commit adultery and theft, and in spite of Abu 
Dharr.” ’— Muslim, Al Bukhdri . 

It is related from ‘Ubadah bin As-$amit that, 4 The Apostle 
of God said, “ Whoever bears witness that there is no God but 
Allah alone, and that He has no partner, and that Muhammad 
is His servant and His Apostle, and that Jesus is the servant of 
God and His Apostle and the son of His handmaid and His 
word which He cast into Mary and a spirit from Him ; and 
(bears witness) that heaven and hell are true, God will take 
him into paradise in spite of what his works may have been.” * 
— Muslim , Al Bukhdri . 

It is related from Abu Umamah that, ‘ The Apostle of God 
said, “ He who loves for God’s sake, and hates for God’s sake, 
and gives for God’s sake, and withholds for God’s sake, has 
perfected the faith.” ’— Abd Daud . 

It is related from Anas that he said, ‘ The Apostle of God 
scarcely' ever addressed us without saying, “He who is not 
true to his trust has no faith, and he who does not keep his 
promise has no religion.” ’— Al Baihaqi. 

It is related from Abu Hurairah that he said, ‘ We were 
sitting around the Apostle of God, and with us in the party 


4 SELECTIONS FROM MUHAMMADAN TRADITIONS 

were Abu Bakr and ‘Omar. And the Apostle of God stood up 
in our midst and went out from us and delayed (his return) to 
us. And we feared that, being separated from us, some 
calamity might befall him ; so we rose up, and I was the first 
to be afraid and I went out seeking the Apostle until I came to 
a wall belonging to the Helpers, the Bani Nazzar, and I walked 
round it to see whether I could find a door to it, but I found 
none. And behold ! a drain which entered a cavity of the wall 
from a well outside.’ Abu Hurairah said, ‘Sol squeezed myself 
through and went in to the Apostle. He said “Is it Abu 
Hurairah?” I said, “Yes, O Apostle of God.” He said, 
“ What is the matter with thee ? ” I replied, “ Thou wert in 
our company, but didst rise up, and delayed to return to us; 
therefore we feared that, being separated from us, some 
calamity might happen to thee ; and I was the first to be 
afraid ; and I came to this wall, and squeezed myself through 
like a fox, and these men are following me.” The Prophet 
said, “ O Abu Hurairah—and he gave me his shoes—take these 
shoes of mine, and whoever meets thee behind this wall and 
bears witness that there is no God but Allah, affirming it from 
his heart, then give that one the good tidings of heaven.” 
And the first whom I met was ‘Omar, and he said, “ What are 
these shoes, O Abu Hurairah?” I replied, “These are the 
Apostle’s shoes. He has sent me with them that whomsoever 
I meet, who bears witness from the heart that there is no God 
but Allah, to him I should give the good tidings of heaven.” 
Then ‘Omar struck me between the breasts and I fell down on 
my back. And he said, “Return, O Abu Hurairah.” So I 
returned to the Apostle of God with loud weeping. And 
‘Omar followed closely in my tracks. Then the Apostle of 
God said, “ What is the matter with thee, O Abu Hurairah ? ” 
I replied, “ I met ‘Omar, and informed him of the message 
with which thou sentest me, but he struck me between 
my breasts, so that I fell on my back. Then he told 
me to return.” Then the Apostle of God said, ‘ t ‘What, O 
‘Omar, incited thee to act as thou didst?” He replied, “O 
Apostle of God, by my father and my mother, didst thou send 
Abu Hurairah with thy shoes to inform whomsoever,, he met, 
and that bare witness from the heart that there is no God but 


THE BOOK OF FAITH 


5 


Allah, that he should give him good tidings of heaven? ” He 
said, “Yes.” ‘Omar said, “ Then do not do so ; for I fear that 
men will depend upon this alone. Therefore leave them alone 
to perform their works.” Then the Apostle of God said, 
“ Leave them alone.” ’— Muslim. 

It is related from Abu Umamah that, ‘A man asked the 
Apostle of God, “What is faith?” He replied, “When your 
good actions give you pleasure, and your evil actions give you 
pain, then you are a believer.” He said, “O Apostle of God, 
then what is sin ? ” He replied, “ When anything pricks your 
conscience, then forsake it.” ’— Ahmad. 

It is related from Mu‘adh bin Jabal that, ‘ He asked the 
Apostle of God as to what was the best part of faith. He 
replied, “That you love for the sake of God and hate for the 
sake of God, and that you employ your tongue in the mention 
of God.” He said, “And what else, O Apostle of God ? ” He 
replied, “ And that you love for men what you love for yourself, 
and hate for.them what you hate for yourself.” ’— Ahmad. 

On Mortal Sins and the Signs of Hypocrisy 

• 

It is related from ‘Abdu’llah bin ‘Omar that, ‘ The Apostle 
of God said, “The greatest sins are the associating anything 
with God, and being disobedient to one’s parents, and the taking 
of life, and making a false oath.” ’— Muslim , Al Bukhari. 

It is related from Abu Hurairah that, ‘ The Apostle of 
God said, “Avoid seven destructive things.” They said, 
“O Apostle of God, and what are they?” He replied, “The 
associating anything with God, magic, the taking of life— 
which God has forbidden—except for a just cause, the taking of 
interest, taking the property of an orphan, turning back in the 
day of battle, and charging with adultery good women who are 
believers and ignorant of sin.” ’— Muslim , Al Bukhdri. 

It is related from Abu Hurairah that, ‘ The Apostle of God 
said, “The signs of a hypocrite are three ”—and Muslim adds 
the wojds, “If he fasts and prays and pretends that he is 
a Muslim,” afterwards the two (Muslim and Bukhari) agree— 
“ That when he relates anything, he relates falsely, and when 
he makes a promise he breaks it, and when he is entrusted with 
anything he is false to his trust/’ '—Muslim, Al Bukhdri . 


6’ SELECTIONS PROM MUHAMMADAN TRADITIONS 

It is related from Safwan bin ‘AssaJ that, ‘A Jew said to 
a companion of his, “ Go with us to this Prophet.” His com¬ 
panion said to him, “Do not call him a Prophet, for if he 
hears thee, he will be pleased/’ Then they came to the 
Apostle of God and asked him about the nine clear signs. Then 
the Apostle of God said, “Do not associate anything with God, 
do not steal, do not commit adultery, do not take life—which 
God has forbidden—except for a just cause, do not take an 
innocent person before one having authority in order to kill 
him, do not practise magic, do not take interest, do not accuse 
a good person of adultery, do not turn to flee in the day of 
battle, and it is specially obligatory on you Jews that ye do not 
hunt on the sabbath.” Then they kissed the Apostle’s hands 
and feet and said, “ We bear witness that thou art a Prophet/* 
He replied, “Then what forbids you from following me?” 
They replied, “ Verily David prayed to his Lord, that there 
should never lack a Prophet in his descendants, and we fear 
that if we follow thee, the Jews will kill us.” ’— Tirmidhi, Abu 
Daud , An Nasai. 

It is related from Mu'adh that he said, ‘ The Apostle of 
God commanded me ten things: He said, “Associate not any¬ 
thing with God, although thou art killed or burnt, do not disobey 
thy parents although they command thee to go out from thy 
family and thy possessions, do not wilfully forsake the 
prayers which are written down (as obligatory), for verily he 
who wilfully forsakes the prayers which are written down, 
from him will be withdrawn the protection of God, and do not 
drink wine, for it is the root of all evil. Beware of disobed¬ 
ience, for by disobedience is set loose the anger of God, and 
beware of fleeing from battle although men are destroyed, and 
when death approaches men (in pestilence) and thou dwellest 
among them, then remain there, and spend for thy family 
according to thine ability, and do not spare the rod upon them 
in order to teach them good manners and instruct them in the 
fear of God.” ’— Ahmad. 

On the Whisperings of Satan 

It is related from Ibn Mas‘ud that, ‘ The Apostle # of God 
said, “ There is no one of you but has appointed over him a 


THE BOOK OF FAITH 


/ 


companion from the genii and a companion from the angels/ ’ 
They said, “And what of thee, O Apostle of God ? ” He replied, 
“And for me also, but God has aided me against him, and I 
resign myself to Him, and He only commands me that which 
is good.” '— Muslim. 

It is related from Abu Hurairah that, ‘ The Apostle of 
God said, “There is no son of Adam born, except Mary and 
her son, but Satan toucnes him when he is born, and he cries 
out from the touch of Satan.” '— Muslim , Al Bukhari. 

It is related from Abu Hurairah that, ‘The Apostle of God 
said, “The cry of a new-born babe at the time of its birth is 
from the touch of Satan.” '— Muslim , Al Bukhdri. 

It is related from ‘ Othman bin Abii’l-‘As that he said, 
‘I said, “O Apostle of God, verily Satan intruded himself 
between me and my prayers, and between me and my reading, 
and confused me in them.” The Apostle of God replied, 
“That is a Satan called Khinzib, therefore when thou realize 
his presence, .then take protection with God from him and spit 
over thy left side three times,” Therefore I did that, and then 
God drove him away from me.’— Muslim. 

On Belief in Predestination 

It is related from ‘Abdu’llah bin ‘Omar that, ‘The 
Apostle of God said, “God wrote the fate of all creation fifty 
thousand years before He created the heaven* and the earth.” 
He said, “And His throne was upon the waters.” *— Muslim . 

It is related from Abu Hurairah that, ‘ The Apostle of God 
said, “Adam and Moses debated near their Lord, and Adam 
prevailed over Moses. Moses said, ‘ Thou art Adam whom God 
created by His hand and breathed into from His spirit; and He 
made the angels to bow down to thee, and He caused thee to 
dwell in His garden. Afterwards thou, by thy sin, didst cause 
men to fall to the earth.' Adam said, ‘Thou art Moses whom 
God chose with His message and His word, and He gave thee 
the tables (of stone) in which were an explanation of all 
matters, and He brought thee near and taught thee His secrets. 
Then how long didst thou find that God wrote the Taur&t 
before I.was created?' Moses replied, ‘Forty years.' Adam 
said, ‘ Then didst thou find therein that “Adam disobeyed his 


8 


SELECTIONS FROM MUHAMMADAN TRADITIONS 


Lord and went astray”?* He said, ‘Yes.* He said, ‘Then 
dost thou blame me for doing actions which God wrote concern¬ 
ing me that I would do them forty years before He created 
me?’ The Apostle of God said, “Adam defeated Moses in 
this argument. ” *—Muslim. 

It is related from ‘Ayesha that, ‘ The Apostle of God was 
called to the funeral of a young child of one of the Helpers ; and 
I said, “O Apostle of God, this one is blessed. He is one of 
the birds of paradise, for he has neither done evil nor thought 
it.” He replied, “O ‘Ayesha, it may be otherwise, for verily 
God created a people for paradise when they were yet in their 
fathers’ loins, and He created a people for the fire when they 
were yet in their fathers’ loins.” ’— Muslim. 

It is related from Abu Hurairah that he said, ‘ I said, 

“ O Apostle of God, I am a youth, and I fear lest I commit 
adultery, and I have not the means wherewith to marry a 
wife ”—as if he were seeking permission from him to become 
an eunuch—but the Apostle of God remained silent. Then I 
said the same thing again, but he remained silent. Then I 
repeated it, but he remained silent. Then I repeated the same 
words, and the Apostle of God said, “ O Abu Hurairah, the pen 
has already dried (after registering) what you will be worthy 
of ,* therefore become an eunuch or refrain.” ’— Al Bukhari. 

It is related from ‘Abdu’llah bin ‘ Omar that, ‘ The Apostle 
of God said, “ Thg hearts of the sons of Adam are all between 
two fingers of the Merciful, like one heart. He turneth them 
* as He wills.” Then the Apostle of God said, “O God, turn 
our hearts to obey thee.” ’— Muslim . 

It is related from ‘Ubadah binu’$-$amit that, 4 The Apostle 
of God said, “Verily the first thing which was created was 
a pen. And He said to it, ‘ Write. ’ It said, 1 What shall I write ?’ 
He replied, ‘ Write down the divine decrees.’ So it wrote down 
all that was and all that will be to eternity.” ’— At Tirmidhi 

It is related from Muslim bin Yasar that he said, ‘ ‘Omar 
binu’l-Khattab was asked concerning this verse (of the Qur’an), 
“And when thy Lord brought forth their descendants # from the 
backs of the sons of Adam.” 1 ‘Omar said, “ I heard the Apostle 
of God questioned concerning this verse, and he replied, ‘ Verily 


Qur’£n, Suratu’l-A‘raf (vii) 171. 


THE BOOK OF FAITH 


9 


God created Adam and then stroked his back with His right 
hand and brought out from it certain descendants and said, 
“ I have created these for paradise, and they will do the actions 
of the people of paradise.” Then He stroked Adam’s back with 
His hand and brought forth (other) descendants and said, 
“ These I have created for the fire, and they will do the actions 
of the people of the fire.”’ Then a man said, ‘Of what use, 
then, are works, O Apostle of God?’ The Apostle of God 
replied, ‘Verily when God creates a servant for paradise, He 
causes him to do the actions of the people of paradise, until he 
dies doing the actions of the people of paradise, and then He 
causes him to enter paradise thereby ; and when He creates a 
servant for the fire, He causes him to do the actions of the 
people of the fire, until he dies doing the actions of the people 
of the fire. Then He causes him to enter the fire thereby.’ ” ’— 
Mdlik , At Tirmidhi , Abu Baud. 

It is related from Abu Khizamah from his father that he 
said, ‘ I said/ ‘‘O Apostle of God, inform me about the charms 
which I use, the medicine which I swallow, and the shields 
which I use for protection, whether they will prevent anything 
of that which is predestined by God.” He replied, “These 
are amongst the things predestined by God.” ’— Ahmad , At 
T irmidht . 

It is related from Abu Hurairah that he said, 4 The Apostle 
of God came out to us when we were debating about fate. 
Then he became so angry that his face became red to such a 
degree that it seemed as if the seed of a pomegranite had been 
split open on his two cheeks. Then he said, “ Is it this you 
have been commanded to do ? or was it for this that I was sent 
to you ? Those who preceded you were destroyed when they 
debated about this matter. I adjure you! I adjure you! not 
to argue about it.” ’ 

It is related from ‘Ayesha that she said, ‘I said, “O 
Apostle of God, what becomes of the children of believers ? ” 
He replied, “They are as their fathers.” I said, “O Apostle 
of God, even without works ? ” He replied, “ God knows best 
what they would have done.” I said, “ And what of the children 
of the‘polytheists ? ” He replied, “They will be as their 
fathers.” I said, “ Without works ? ” He replied, “God knows 
best what they would have done.” *— Abfi Ddud . 2 


10 SELECTIONS FROM MUHAMMADAN TRADITIONS 

It is related from ‘All that he said, ‘ Khadijah asked the 
Prophet concerning her two children who had died in the time 
of ignorance (i.e., before Islam). The Apostle of God replied, 
“They are both in the fire.” ‘Ali said, When Muhammad 
saw displeasure in her face he said, “ If thou hadst but seen 
their place (in hell) thou wouldst certainly be displeased with 
them both.” She said, “O Apostle of God, then what of the 
son (now dead) which I had of thee ? ” He replied, “ It is in 
paradise.” Afterwards the Apostle of God said, “Verily 
believers and their children are in paradise, and polytheists and 
their children are in the fire.” Then the Apostle of God 
recited (the verse) “And to those who have believed, whose 
offspring have followed them will we again unite their off¬ 
spring.” 1 ’— Ahmad . 

It is related from Abu Hurairah that, 1 The Apostle of God 
said, “ When God created Adam he stroked his back, and there 
fell from his back all the men whom He was creating from his 
descendants until the day of resurrection. And He placed 
before the eyes of each man of them a flash of light. After¬ 
wards He brought them to Adam. Adam said, ‘ O my Lord, 
who are these?’ He replied, ‘They are thy descendants.’ 
And he saw a man amongst them whose flash of light between 
his eyes astonished him. He said, ‘ O my Lord, who is this ? ’ 
He replied, ‘ David.’ Then he said, ‘ O my Lord, how long hast 
Thou fixed his life ? ’ He replied, ‘Sixty years.’ Adam said, 
‘My Lord, increase it from my life by forty years.’” The 
Apostle of God said, “ When the life of Adam was completed 
except forty years, the angel of death came to him. And Adam 
said, ‘ Are there not yet forty years of my life remaining ? ’ 
He replied, ‘ Didst thou not give them to thy son David ? ’ 
Then Adam denied, and his descendants have denied, and 
Adam forgot and ate of the tree, and his descendants have 
forgotten, and Adam sinned, and his descendants have sinned.” ’ 
—At Tirmidhi. 

* 

On the Punishments of the Grave 

It is related from Anas that, ‘ The Apostle of God said, 
“Verily when a servant is placed in his grave and his com- 


1 Qur’an, Suratu’t-Tur (Hi) 21. 


THE BOOK OF FAITH 


11 


panions return from him, he certainly hears the noise of their 
shoes. Then two angels come to him and make him sit up, 
and they say to him, ‘ What didst thou say concerning this man 
Muhammad? ’ As to the believer, he will reply, ‘ I bear wit¬ 
ness that he is a servant of God and His Apostle.’ Then 
it will be said to him, ‘ Look at thy resting-place in the fire 
which God has changed for thee to a place in paradise.’ Then 
he will look at them both. But as for the hypocrite and the 
unbeliever, it will be said to him, ‘ What didst thou say with 
respect to this person ? ’ Then he will reply, ‘ I do not know; 
I used to say what men said.’ Then it will be said to him, 
‘ Didst thou neither know nor read ? ’ Then he will be struck 
forcibly with an iron hammer ; and he will call out with a loud 
cry; and all near him will hear it except men and genii.”’— 
Muslim , Al Bukhdrt. 

It is related from ‘Ayesha that. ‘A Jewess came in to her 
and mentioned the punishment of the grave, and said to her, 
“ May God pVotect thee from the punishments of the grave.” 
Then ‘Ayesha asked the Apostle of God concerning the punish¬ 
ments of the grave. He replied, “ Yes, the punishments of the 
grave are true.” ‘Ayesha said, “ I never saw the Apostle of 
God after repeating the prayers, but what he took refuge with 
God from the punishments of the grave.” ’— Muslim , Al Bukhdri. 

It is related from Abu Hurairah that, ‘ The Apostle of God 
said, “ When a dead person is placed in the grave, then two black 
angels with blue eyes come to him, one of whom is called 
Munkar and the other Nakir. And they say, ‘ What didst 
thou say concerning this person (Muhammad)?’ Then, if he 
be a believer, he will say, 4 He is the servant of God and His 
Apostle. I bear witness that there is no God but Allah and 
that Muhammad is His servant and His Apostle.’ Then the 
two angels will say, ‘ We knew that thou wouldest speak thus.’ 
After that his grave will be enlarged for him seventy cubits by 
seventy cubits. Then the grave will be illuminated for him, 
after which it will be said to him, ‘ Sleep on.’ And he will say, 

‘ Let me return to my family and inform them ’; but the angels 
will say, ‘ Sleep on like the sleep of the bridegroom when no one 
can awaken him but the loved ones of his family, until God 
raises him up from his place of sleep. ’ And if the man be a 


12 SELECTIONS FROM MUHAMMADAN TRADITIONS 

hypocrite he will say, 1 1 heard men saying a certain thing, and 
I said the same; I do not know/ Then the angels will’ say, 
4 We knew that thou wouldst speak thus/ And it will be said 
to the earth, 4 Close in upon him/ and it will close in upon him, 
and its sides will change about; and he will continue therein 
suffering punishment until God raises him up from his resting- 
place/’ *— At Tirmidht . 

It is related from ‘Othman that, 4 When the Prophet 
completed the interment of a corpse he stood over it and said, 
44 Do ye ask forgiveness for your brother, and then pray for 
him that he continue firm, for verily he is now being ques¬ 
tioned.” ’— Abu Ddud . 

It is related from Abu Sa‘id that, 4 The Apostle of God 
said, 44 There are certainly appointed over the infidel in his 
grave ninety-nine serpents to bite and sting him until the hour 
(of resurrection) comes. If one of such serpents should 
breathe upon the earth, no green thing would bud forth.” Al 
D&rimi. At Tirmidht relates the same, but substitutes 4 seven¬ 
ty ’ for 4 ninety-nine ’. 

On Relying upon the Book and the Traditions 

It is related from Jabir that, ‘The Apostle of God said, 
44 Verily the best word is the Book of God, and the best guid¬ 
ance is the guidance of Muhammad ; and the worst thing is a 
new invention, and all innovation is a going astray.” ’— Muslim . 

It is related from Rafi 4 bin Khadij that, 4 The Prophet of 
God came to Madina when they were artificially pollenising the 
dates. Therefore he said, “What are you doing?” They 
replied, 44 We were wont to do this (before the coming of 
Islam).” He said, 44 Perhaps it would be better if you did not 
do it/* So they abandoned it; but the crops grew less. 
Then they mentioned the matter to him. He replied, 44 1 am only 
a man. When, therefore, I command you anything concerning 
your religion, then accept it; but when I command you 
anything as a matter of my own opinion then—verily I am only 
a man.” ’— Muslim . 

It is related from Abu Hurairah that he said, 4 The people 
of the Book were reading the Taurat in Hebrew’ and explaining 
it in Arabic to the people of Islam. Then the Apostle of God 


THE BOOK OF FAITH 


13 


said, “ Do not say that the people of the Book are telling the 
truth, and do not accuse them of falsehood, but say, 1 We believe 
in God and in what has been sent down upon us, ” *—Al Bukhdri . 

It is related from Al Miqdam bin Ma‘dikarib that, ‘ The 
Apostle of Gfod said, “ Have I not been given the Qur’an, and 
with it that which is like it! Will not some arrogant person say 
to you concerning the Qur’an, ‘ Consider that lawful which you 
find made lawful in it, and consider that unlawful which you 
find made unlawful in it.’ Verily what the Apostle of God has 
made unlawful is like what God has made unlawful. Beware, 
the flesh of the tame ass is not made lawful for you, nor that 
of beasts of prey, nor is the thing lawful which is dropped by 
any one with whom you have made a compact, except its 
owner is in no need of it. And whosoever alights amongst a 
company, it is their duty to entertain him ; and if they do not 
give him hospitality, then he may take food sufficient for his 
requirements.” ’—Abu Ddud. 

It is related from ‘ Irbad bin Sariyah that he said, ‘The 
Apostle of God stood up and said, “ Doth any one of you in his 
arrogance suppose that God has not forbidden anything except 
what is in the Qur’an ? By God ! I have commanded and 
taught and prohibited things which are certainly like the Qur’an 
or more (than it). Verily God has not made it lawful for you 
that ye enter the houses of the people of the Book, except by 
permission, or that ye beat their women, or that ye eat their 
fruit, when.they give you what they are obliged to (as tax).” ’ 
—Abu Ddud . 

It is related from ‘ Irbad bin Sariyah that he Said, ‘ On a 
certain day the Apostle of God said prayers with us ; then he 
drew near to us and gave us eloquent instruction that brought 
tears to our eyes and by which our hearts were affected. A 
man said, “O Apostle of God, this is as if it were a farewell 
address, therefore give us a command.” He replied, ‘‘I 
command you the fear of God, and giving ear and obedience (to 
my successor) although he be an Abyssinian slave; for those 
of you who will live after me will see many schisms. 
Therefore it is your duty to follow my rule of faith and the 
rule of faith of the rightly guided Khalifas. Seize it and hold 
it fast. Beware of new things, for all new things are an 


14 SELECTIONS FROM MUHAMMADAN TRADITIONS 

innovation, and all innovation is a going astray.’ 1 ’— Ahmad , 
Abu Ddud , At Tirmidht . Ibn Majah; except that the last two do 
not mention the prayer. 

It is related from ‘Abdu’llah bin ‘Omar that, ‘ The Apostle 
of God said, “There will certainly happen to my fftllowers such 
as happened to the Bani Israel, as one shoe is to another, so 
that if any of them commit incest openly with his mother, there 
will certainly be some of my followers who will do the same. 
Verily the Bani Israel are divided into seventy-two sects, and 
my followers will be divided into seventy-three sects, all but 
one of whom will enter the fire.” They said, “ O Apostle of 
God, which is that one ? ” He replied, “ That which I and my 
followers follow.” ’— At Tirmidht . 

It is related from Jabir from the Prophet that, ‘When 
‘Omar came to him and said, “ Verily we hear stories 
from the Jews which excite our admiration ; dost thou wish 
that I should write some of them down ? ” He replied, “Are 
ye bewildered like the Jews and Christians! Verily I have 
brought you something white and pure. If Moses had been 
alive, he would have been nothing but a follower of me.” ’— 
Ahmad . 

It is related from Abu Hurairah that, ‘ The Apostle of God 
said, “The Qur’an came down embodying five different features: 
things lawful, things unlawful, positive precepts, hidden 
mysteries and parables. Therefore make the lawful lawful, 
and make the unlawful unlawful, obey the positive precepts, 
believe in the hidden mysteries, and take warning from the 
parables.” ’ 

It is related from Malik bin Anas that, ‘The Apostle of 
God said, “ I have left amongst you two things, and you will 
never go astray so long as you hold them fast. The one is the 
word of God, and the other is the practice of His prophet.” ’— 
At Muwutta . 

It is related from Jabir that, ‘Omar binu’l-Khattab came 
to the Apostle of God with a copy of the Taurat*and said, 
“O Apostle of God, this is a copy of the Taurat.” But he 
remained silent. Then ‘Omar began to read ; but the coun¬ 
tenance of the Apostle of God changed, and Abu Btekr said, 
“Mothers bereft of their children weep for thee! Dost thou 


THE BOOK OF FAITH 


IS 


not see what has happened to the Apostle’s countenance!” 
Then ‘Omar looked at the Apostle’s face and said, “ I take 
refuge with God from the anger of God and His Apostle. We 
are satisfied with Allah as our Lord, with Islam as our religion, 
and with Muhammad as our Prophet.” Then the Apostle of 
God said, “ By Him in whose hand is the life of Muhammad! if 
Moses had appeared to you, ye would have followed him and 
would have forsaken me, and would have gone astray from the 
straight path. But were Moses alive and had received my 
prophecy, he would certainly have followed me.” ’—Al D&rimi . 

It is related from Jabir that, 4 The Apostle of God said, 
11 My words do not abrogate the words of God, but the words 
of God abrogate mine, and some of the words of God abrogate 
others.” ’ 


II 


THE BOOK OF KNOWLEDGE 

It is related from ‘Abdu’llah bin ‘Amru that, ‘The Apostle 
of God said, “ Transmit from me, though it be but one verse, 
and relate from the children of Israel. There is no fault in 
that, but whoever wilfully relates from me falsely, let him find 
his resting-place in the fire.” *— Al Bukh&ri . 

It is related from Samurah bin Jundub and Al Mughirah 
that; ‘The Apostle of God said, “Whoever relates a tradition 
from me knowing it to be false, verily he is one of the liars.” ’ 
— Muslim . 

It is related from Abu Hurairah that, ‘ The Apostle of God 
said, “When a man dies, then his actions, except three, are 
dissociated from him, namely, his alms, which continue, or 
his knowledge by which men are benefited, or a good son 
who prays for him.” *— Muslim . 

It is related from Abu Hurairah that, ‘ The Apostle 
of God said, “Verily the first person who will be judged 
on the day of resurrection will be a man who died a 
martyr; and he will be brought and will be shown the 
benefits (he formerly received) and he will recognize them. 
And God will say, ‘ What didst thou with regard to these ? ’ 
He will reply, ‘ I fought for Thee until I died a martyr.' God 
will say, ‘ Thou hast lied, rather thou foughtest in order that it 
might be said of thee, “ A hero! ” and all this has been said.’ 
Then the order will be given concerning him, and he will be 
dragged on his face until he is cast into hell. Then a man will 
be brought who acquired knowledge and then taught it to 
others, and read the Qur’an. And he will be brought and will 
be shown the benefits (he formerly received) and he will recog¬ 
nize them. And God will say, ‘ What didst thou with regard 
to these ? ' He will reply, ‘ I acquired knowledge and taught 
it to others, and I read the Qur’an in Thy name.’ God will say, 

‘ Thou hast lied, rather thou acquiredst knowledge in order 
that it might be said to thee, “Thou art a learned man,” and 
thou didst read the Qur’an in order that it might be said of thee 
“ He is a Qur'an reader,” and all this has been said. Then the 


THE BOOK OF KNOWLEDGE 


17 


order will be given concerning him, and he will be dragged on 
his face until he is cast into hell. Then a man will be brought 
whom God had enriched, and had given various kinds of wealth. 
And he will be brought and will be shown the benefits (he 
formerly received), and he will recognize them. Then God 
will say, * And what didst thou with regard to these ? ’ He will 
reply, ‘ I neglected not to spend in Thy name and in those 
ways in which Thou lovest things to be spent.* God will 
say, * Thou hast lied, rather thou didst that in order that it 
might be said, “He is most generous,” and all this has been 
said.* Then the order will be given concerning him, and he 
will be dragged on his face, and afterwards will be cast into 
hell.” *— Muslim . 

It is related from Kathir bin Qais that he said, ‘ I was 
sitting faith ‘Abu’l-Dardai in the mosque of Damascus when a 
man came to him and said, “O Abu’l-Dardai, verily I have 
come to thee from the city of the Apostle of God for a certain 
tradition whfch, I have been informed, thou dost relate from 
the Apostle of God. I have come for no other purpose.” He 
replied, “Verily I heard the Apostle of God say, ‘He who 
walks a road, seeking knowledge therein, God will cause him to 
walk on one of the roads of paradise ; for verily the angels 
spread their wings with pleasure for the seeker of knowledge, 
and verily whatsoever is in the heavens and on the earth and 
the great fishes in the bosom of the waters will pray for the 
forgiveness of his sins. And verily the pre-eminence of a 
learned man over a worshipper is equal to the pre-eminence of 
the moon at the night of full-moon over all the stars. And 
verily the learned men are the heirs of the prophets, and the 
prophets did not inherit a single dinar or a single dirham , 
but they only inherited knowledge; and whoever takes that 
takes an abundant portion.” ’— Ahmad , AtTirmidhi , Abd Ddud % 
Ibn Mdjah . 

It is related from Abu Umamahu’l-Bahili that he said, 
‘Two men were mentioned to the Apostle of God: one of 
them a worshipper, and the other a learned man. Then the 
Apostle of God said, “The pre-eminence of the learned man 
over the? worshipper is like my pre-eminence over the meanest 
of you,” After that the Apostle of God said, “Verily God 

3 


18 SELECTIONS FROM MUHAMMADAN TRADITIONS 

and His angels and the inhabitants of the heavens and the 
earth, even the ants in their holes, and even the great fishes 
certainly pray for the teacher of good to men.”’— At Tirmidhi. 

It is related from Anas that, 4 The Apostle of God said, 
“ The search after knowledge is an incumbent duty on every 
male and female Muslim; but the placing knowledge before 
one who does not appreciate it is like placing a necklace of 
pearls, jewels and gold on the necks of swine/’ ’— Ibn Mdjah. 

It is related from Abu Hurairah that, ‘ The Apostle of God 
said, “ He who is asked a question concerning knowledge which 
he possesses, and then hideth it, will, on the day of resurrec¬ 
tion, be bridled with a bridle of fire.” ’— Ahmad , Abu Daud> 
At Tirmidhi . 

It is related from Ibn 'Abbas that, ‘ The Apostle of God 
said, “ Whoever speaks concerning the Qur’an from his own 
opinion, let him find his resting-place in the fire.”’— At 
Tirmidhi . 

It is related from Ibn Mas'ud that, ‘The Apostle of God 
said, “ The Qur’an was sent down in seven readings. In every 
verse of them are clear and hidden sentences, and for every 
boundary there is height.” ’ 

It is related from Abu Hurairah that he said, ‘ Amongst 
the things which I learned from the Apostle of God is that he 
said, “ Verily God, the Exalted and Magnified, will send for 
the people at the end of every hundred years one who will 
rejuvenate for them their religion.” ’— Abu Ddud. 

• It is related from Abu Hurairah that, ‘ The Apostle of God 
said, ‘‘Verily amongst the things which reach the believer 
with rewards after his death from his works and good actions 
are knowledge which he acquired and dispensed to others, a 
good son which he left behind, or a Qur’an which he bequeathed 
to others, or a mosque which he built, or a rest-house for 
travellers which he built, or a canal which he caused to flow, or 
alms which he bestowed out of his goods whilst in health and 
during his life-time.” ’— Ibn Mdjah . < 

It is related from Abu'l-Dardai that, ‘ The Apostle of God 
was asked, “ What is the degree of knowledge, which, if a man 
attains, he becomes a learned man?” The Apostle of God 
replied, “Whoever preserves for my followers forty traditions 


THE BOOK OF KNOWLEDGE 


19 


concerning their religion, God will raise him up as a learned 
man, and I will be for him, on the day of resurrection, both 
intercessor and witness.” ’ 

It is related from A1 A’masha that, 1 The Apostle of God 
said, “The danger of knowledge is forgetfulness, and the loss 
of knqjvledge is that thou speak of it to one who does not 
appreciate it.” '— Al Ddrimi . 

It is related from Sufyan that ‘Omar binu’l-Khattab said 
to Ka‘b, “ Who are the possessors of learning ?” He replied, 
“ They who practise what they know.” He said, “ And what 
removes learning from the hearts of the learned?” He 
replied, “Avarice.” *— Al Ddrimi. 

It is related from Abu Hurairah that, 4 The Apostle of God 
said, “Take refuge with God from the pit of sorrow.” They 
replied, “O Apostle of God, what is the pit of sorrow?” He 
replied, “ A valley in hell from which hell itself seeks refuge 
four hundred times a day.” It was said, “ O Apostle of God, 
and who wiH enter it?” He replied, “Those readers of the 
Qu’ran who are hypocrites in their behaviour.” *— At Tirmidhi\ 

It is related from ‘All that, 4 The Apostle of God said, 
“The time is near which will come to man, when nothing of 
Islam will remain but its name, and nothing will remain of the 
Qur’an but a trace of it. At that time mosques will be (used 
as) dwelling-places, and men will be devoid of guidance. Their 
learned men will be the most wicked under the surface of the 
heavens, for from them will go forth contention, and to them it 
will return.” *— Al Baihaqi . 

It is related from Ziyad bin Labid that, 4 The Prophet 
mentioned something and said, “That will take place at the 
time when knowledge will disappear.” I said, 44 O Apostle of 
God, how will knowledge disappear when we are reading the 
Qur’an and teaching the reading of it to our children, and our 
children are teaching the reading of it to their children till the 
day of resurrection ?” He replied, “ May thy mother weep for 
thee, Ziyad! Verily I thought thou wast one of the wisest men 
in Madina. Are not these Jews and Christians reading the 
Taurat and Injil, but they observe nothing of what is in 
them.”.’— Ahmad , /bn Mdjah . 


Ill 


THE BOOK OF PURIFICATIONS 

It is related from Abu Hurairah that, * The Apostle of 
God said, “ Shall I not point you to that by which God blots 
out sins and raises (your) rank?” They replied, “Yes, O 
Apostle of God.” He said, “The completion of ablutions in a 
time of difficulty, and the going a long distance to the mosques, 
and the waiting for another prayer after the completion of one. 
This is a protection for you.” '— Muslim. 

It is related from ‘Othman that, 4 The Apostle of God 
said, “ He who performs his ablutions and does them well, his 
sins go out from his body, so that they even go out from under 
his finger nails.” ’— Muslim , Al Bukhari . 

It is related from ‘Othman that he performed his ablutions 
and poured water on his hands three times, then hfe washed his 
mouth, and then cleansed his nose. After that he washed his 
face three times, then he washed his right arm to his elbow 
three times, then he washed his left arm to his elbow three 
times. After that he wiped his hand over his head, then he 
washed his right foot three times, then the left three times. 
After that he said, 4 I saw the Apostle of God perform his 
ablutions like these ablutions of mine/ Then he said, 

4 Whoever performs his ablutions like these ablutions of mine, 
and then prays two sets of prayers, whilst his mind speaks 
nothing the while, all his preceding sins will be forgiven him/ 
— Muslim , Al Bukhdri. 

It is related from Jabir that, 4 The Apostle of God said, 
“The key of paradise is prayer, and the key of prayer is 
purification.” ’— Ahmad . 

It is related from Shabib bin Abi Rauh from one of the 
companions of the Apostle of God that, 1 The Apostle of God 
prayed the morning prayer and recited (the chapter) Rum, 
when he become confused. Then when he had prayed, he said, 
44 What is the matter with the people that they recite the 
prayers with us, but do not perform the ablutions properly! 
These people only confuse the Qur'an for us.” '— An Nasdi , 


THE BOOK OF PURIFICATIONS 


21 


What Acts Necessitate Ablutions 

It is related from Abu Hurairah that, ‘The Apostle of God 
said, “ Prayer will not be accepted from the one who is impure 
until he performs his ablutions.” *— Muslim , Al Bukh&ru 

It is related from Buraidah that, ‘ The Prophet prayed the 
prayers on the day of the conquest (of Mecca) with one ablu¬ 
tion, and he wiped his hands over his shoes (instead of wash¬ 
ing his feet). Then ‘Omar said to him, “Verily thou hast 
done a thing today which thou never didst before.” He replied, 
“ I did it intentionally, O ‘Omar.” ’— Muslim . 

It is related from Suwaid bin Al*Na‘man that, ‘ He went 
out with the Apostle of God in the year of (the conquest of) 
Khaibar until, when they came to Sahbai, which is near Khaibar, 
he prayed the afternoon prayer. Then he called for food, and 
nothing was brought but parched grain. Then he gave orders 
with regard to it, and it was moistened. Then the Apostle of 
God ate, and we ate. After that he rose up for the evening 
prayer, and he rinsed out his mouth and we rinsed out our 
mouths. Then he prayed, but he did not perform the ablu¬ 
tions. '—Al Bukhdrt. 

It is related from Umm Salamah, that she said, ‘ I placed 
near the Prophet a roasted shoulder of mutton, and he ate part 
of it. After that he rose up for prayers, but he did not perform 
the ablutions/— Ahmad . 

Rules Regarding Natural Evacuations 

(The traditions in this section are unfit for translation. 
We content' ourselves with one only.) 

It is related from Salman that, ‘One of the polytheists 
said, as he ridiculed the Prophet, “Verily I see that your 
companion (Muhammad) gives you instruction even regarding 
the voiding of excrement.” ’— Muslim , Ahmad\ 

On the Use of the Twig for Cleaning the Teeth 

It is*related from Abd Hurairah that, ‘The Apostle of 
God said, “ Were it not that it would inflict hardships on my 
followers, I would certainly order them to prolong the evening 
prayer, and to use a twig for cleaning the teeth with every 
prayer/’ '—Muslim, Al Bukh&ri . 


22 


SELECTIONS FROM MUHAMMADAN TRADITIONS 


It is related from Shuraih bin Hani that he said, ‘ I asked 
‘Ayesha what the Apostle of God began to do first when he 
entered his house. She replied, “ (He began) with a twig for 
cleaning his teeth.” ’— Muslim . 

It is related from ‘Ayesha that, ‘The Apostle of God said, 
“That prayer for which a twig for cleaning the teeth has been 
used is seventy times more excellent than the prayer for which 
it has not been used,” ’ — Al Baihaqi. 

Laws Regarding Purification with Water 

It is related from Abu Hurairah that, ‘ The Apostle of God 
said, “ When any one of you awakes from his sleep and per¬ 
forms his ablutions, then let him cleanse his nose three times, 
because verily Satan takes up his abode in his nose.”’— 
Muslim , Al Bukhari . 

It was said to ‘Abdu’llah bin Zaid bin ‘A§im, ‘ How did the 
Apostle of God perform his ablutions? ’ Then he called for 
water for ablutions, and poured it on his hands and washed his 
hands twice. Then he rinsed out his mouth and nose three 
times, then he washed his face three times, then he washed his 
hands twice to the elbows, then he wiped his head with his 
hands, beginning from the forehead to the back of the head and 
back again until they returned to the place whence they began. 
Then he washed his feet.— Malik , An Nasai . 

It is related from ‘Abdu’llah bin ‘Abbas that he said, ‘ The 
Apostle of God only performed his ablutions once (for each 
member of the body). He did not do it more than this.'— Al 
Bukhdri . 

It is related from ‘Abdu’llah bin Zaid that, ‘ The Prophet 
performed each ablution twice.’— Al Bukhdri . 

It is related from ‘Abdu’llah bin ‘Omar that he said, ‘We 
returned with the Apostle of God from Mecca to Madina, 
until when we came to some water by the roadside, a party 
hastened to afternoon prayers and they performed their 
ablutions. And they hurried over them ; and we« overtook 
them, and the soles of their feet shone, the water not having 
touched them. Then the Apostle of God said, “ Woe to the 
soles of your feet! for they are in the fire. Complete your 
ablutions.” ’— Muslim . 


THE BOOK OF PURIFICATIONS 


23 


It is related from ‘Ayesha that she said, 4 The Prophet 
loved (to begin with) the right hand side, so far as it was 
possible, in all matters, whether in ablutions or combing his 
hair or in putting on his shoes.’— Muslim , Al BukhdrU 

It is related from Sa‘id bin Zaid that, ‘The Apostle of 
God said, “There can be no ablutions for him who does not 
mention the name of God.” ’— At Tirmidht , Ibn Mdjah . 

It is related from Laqtt bin $abirah that he said, ‘ I said, 
“O Apostle of God, inform me in what ablution consists.” 
He replied, “Complete the ablutions, and draw your hngers 
between your toes, and inhale water through the nose, unless 
you are fasting.” ’— Abu Ddud , At Tirmidht . 

It is related from Al Mistaurid bin Shaddad that he said, 
‘ I saw the Apostle of God, when he performed his ablutions, 
draw his little finger between his toes.’— Abu Ddud> At Tir - 
midhii Ibn Mdjah. 

It is related from Anas that, ‘ When the Apostle of God 
performed his ablutions he took a handful of water and placed 
it under his chin and therewith combed his beard, and said, 
“ Thus hath my Lord commanded me.” ’— Abu Ddud . 

On Bathing 

(The traditions in this section are almost entirely devoted 
to sexual matters, and are quite unfit for translation). 

On Intercourse with the Unclean 

(Most of the traditions in this section are unfit for 
translation). 

It is related from ‘All that, ‘ The Apostle of God said, 
“The angels will not enter that house in which there is a 
picture, or a dog, or an unclean person. ” ’— Abd Ddud An Nasdi. 

It is related from ‘Abdu'llah bin Abu Bakr bin Muhammad 
bin ‘Amru bin IJazm that, ‘ In the letter which the Apostle of 
God wrote to ‘ Amru bin IJazm (it was written that) “ No one 
should touch the Qur’an, except the pure.” ’— Mdlik . 

Orders Concerning Different Waters 

It is related from As Saib bin Yazid that he said, ‘ My aunt 
took me*to the Prophet and said, “ O Apostle of God, verily the 
son of my sister is suffering from pain.” Then he stroked my 


24 


SELECTIONS FROM MUHAMMADAN TRADITIONS 


bead, and supplicated a blessing for me. After that he 
performed ablutions, and I drank from the water with which he 
had performed the ablutions, and then stood up behind his back. 
And I saw the seal of prophecy between his shoulders like the 
tassel of a bride’s canopy.’— Muslim , Al Bukhdri . 

It is related from Abu Zaid from ‘Abdu’llah bin Mas‘ud 
that, ‘ The Apostle of God said to him on the night in which 
the genii (accepted Islam), “What is that in thy dish?” 
I replied, “The juice of dates.” He said, “Dates are good, 
and water is pure.” ’— Abie Ddud. Ahmad and At Tirmidhi add 
to this the words, ‘Then he performed his ablutions with it 
(the date juice).’ And Tirmidhi says that Abu Zaid is in error ; 
and the truth is that received from ‘Alqamah from ‘Abdu’llah 
bin Mas‘ud who said, “I was not with the Apostle of God on 
the night when the genii (accepted Islam.)” ’— Muslim . 

It is related from ‘Omar binuM-Khaftab that he said, ‘ Do 
not bathe in water warmed by the sun, because it induces 
leprosy.’— Al Ddraqut?ri. 

On the Cleansing of Impurities 

It is related from Abu Hurairah that, ‘ The Apostle of 
God said, “ When a dog drinks from a vessel of any one of you, 
then let him wash it seven times.” ’— Muslim , Al Bukhdri . 

It is related from ‘Abdu’llah bin ‘Abbas that, ‘A sheep was 
given in alms to a freed woman of Al Maimunah, and it died. 
And the Apostle of God passed by and said, “Have you not 
taken its skin and tanned it and made some profit by it?” 
They replied, “ But it died!” He said, “ Only the eating of it 
was unlawful (for you).” ’— Muslim , Al Bukhdri . 

It is related from Al Miqdam bin Ma‘dikarib that he said, 

‘ The Apostle of God prohibited the wearing of skins of beasts 
of prey and the riding upon them.’— Abii Ddud> An Nasdi . 

On Touching the Boots 

It is related from Shuraih bin Hani that he said, 1 1 asked 
‘All bin Abu Talib about wiping the hands on the boots (in 
place of removing them and washing the feet before prayer). 
He replied, “The Apostle of God fixed three days and nights 
(as a limit) for travellers, and one day and one night for those 
residing in a fixed place.” ’— Muslim . 


THE BOOK OF PURIFICATIONS 


25 


It is related from A1 Mughirah bin Shu‘bah that he said, 
‘ I waited upon the Prophet in the battle of Tabuk, and he 
wiped his hands on the top and bottom of his shoes/— Abd 
Daudf Al Tirmidhr, Ibn M&jah . 

It is related from Al Mughirah bin Shu‘bah that he said, 
‘ The Apostle of God wiped his hands on his shoes, so I said, 
“O Apostle of God, thou hast forgotten/' He replied, 
“ Rather thou hast forgotten. My Lord, the Exalted and 
Magnified, has commanded me to do this/' '— Ahmad , Abd Ddud . 

On the Use of Earth for Purification 
It is related from ‘ Imran that he said, ‘ We were with the 
Prophet on a journey; and he prayed with the people. When he 
had finished his prayer, behold! a man sitting apart who had 
not prayed with the company. The Prophet said, “ W"hat 
prevented thee, O so and so, from praying with the company ?" 
He replied, “ I was impure and could get no water/' He said, 
“Thou shouldst have used some earth, for verily that would 
have sufficed for thee." ’— Muslim , Al Bukhdru 

It is related from Abu Dharr that, 1 The Apostle of God 
said, “Verily clean earth is ablution for the Muslim, although 
he does not obtain water for ten years. But if he finds water, 
then let him touch his whole body with it ; for verily that is 
better." '—Abu Ddud , Ahmad , At Tirmidht. 

On Obligatory Washings 

It is related from Ibn ‘Omar that/ The Apostle of God said, 
“When any one of you comes to the Friday prayers, then 
let him wash himself all over." ’— Muslim , Al Bukhdrt , 

It is related from Abu Hurairah that, * The Apostle of God 
said, “He who washes a dead body must (afterwards) wash 
himself all over." '— Ibn Mdjah . Ahmad and At Tirmidhi and 
Abu Daud have added the words “ And whoever lifts up (a dead 
body) let him perform ablutions." 

It is related from ‘Ayesha that, * The Apostle of God 
washed hiffwhole body for four things: for personal impurity, 
for the Friday prayers, after being cupped, and after washing a 
corpse/— Abd Ddud . 

• On the Menses. 

(The traditions under this section are quite unfit for 
translation/) 4 


IV 


THE BOOK OF PRAYER 

It is related from Abu Hurairah, that, 1 The Apostle of God 
said, “The five daily prayers, and the Friday prayer to the next 
Friday prayer, and the fast of Ramadan to the next fast of 
Ramadan are an expiation (for all sins committed) between 
them so long as the mortal sins are avoided.’’ '—Muslim. 

It is related from Anas that he said, ‘ A man came and said, 
“ Q Apostle of God, I have done something worthy of punish¬ 
ment, therefore execute the punishment for it upon me.” But 
the Prophet did not ask him what it was. And the time for 
prayer arrived, and he prayed with the Apostle of God. And 
when the Prophet had finished prayer the man stood up and said, 
“O Apostle of God, I have done something worthy of punish¬ 
ment, therefore execute my punishment as it is l^id down in the 
Book of God.” He replied, “Hast thou not said prayers with 
us ? ” The man replied, “Yes.” He said, “Then God has for¬ 
given for thee thy sins or thy punishment.” '—Muslim, Al- 
Bukhdri . 

It is related from Ibn Mas‘ud that he said, ‘I asked the 
Prophet, “Which work is the most pleasing to God most 
high?” He replied, “Prayer at its proper times.” I said, 
“After that, which?” He replied, “The honouring of 
parents.” I said, “And after that, which?” He replied, 
“ Religious warfare in the way of God.”’ Ibn Mas‘ud said, 

‘ He related this to me, and if I had asked him for more, he 
would certainly have mentioned them to me.’— Muslim , Al- 
Bukhari. 

It is related from Abu Umamah that, 1 The Apostle of God 
said, “ Perform your five stated prayers, and fast your stated 
months, and give alms of your substance, and obey the one 
who has rule over you, and you will enter paradise with your 
Lord.” ’— Ahmad , At Tirmidhi . 

It is related from ‘Amru bin Shu'aib from his father from 
his grandfather that, ‘ The Apostle of God said, “ Command 
•your children to say the ptayers when they are seven years 
old, and beat them for dereliction of duty therein when they 


THE BOOK OF PKAYEK 


27 


are ten years of age ; and separate between (the sexes) in their 
beds (at the latter age).” ’— Abu Ddud . 

Concerning the Times of Prayer 

It is related from ‘Abdu llah bin ‘Omar that, ‘The Apostle 
of God said, ‘‘The time for the midday prayer is when the 
sun declines, and a man’s shadow becomes equal to his height, 
and the afternoon prayer has not arrived. And the time for 
the afternoon prayer is so long as the sun has not become 
yellow; and the time for the evening prayer is so long as the 
ruddy light of twilight has not disappeared,* and the time of 
the night prayer is to the first half of the night; and the time 
for the morning prayer is from the breaking of the dawn until 
the sun rises. When the sun rises, then withhold from the 
morning prayer, for verily it rises between the two horns of 
Satan.” ’— Muslim . 

On Promptitude in Prayer 

It is related from Anas that he said, ‘When we said the 
midday prayers behind the Prophet, we prostrated upon our 
clothes in order to escape the heat.’— Muslim , Al Bukhdri . 

It is related from Abu Hurairah that, ‘ The Apostle of God 
said, “ When the heat is excessive, then say your prayers when 
it gets cooler.” ’ 

It is related from Anas that, ‘The Apostle of God said, 
“ He who forgets a prayer, or goes to sleep without saying it, 
then the expiation of his fault is that he repeat the prayer 
when he remembers it.” And in some traditions it runs, ‘‘There 
is no expiation for it except this.” ’— Muslim , Al Bukhdri . 

It is related from Abu Hurairah that, ‘ The Apostle of God 
said, ‘‘If it were not that it would be distressing to my 
followers, I would cerfainly command them to prolong the 
evening prayer to one third of the night, or to one half of it.” ' 
—Ahmad , At Tirmidhi, I bn Mdjah . 

0 On the Excellencies of Prayer 

It is related from ‘ Umarah bin Ruwaibah that he said, ‘ I 
heard the Apostle of God say, “ No one will enter the fire who 
prays before the rising of the sun, and before its setting, that 
is (who prays) the morning and afternoon prayers.” ’— Muslim . 


28 SELECTIONS FROM MUHAMMADAN TRADITIONS 

On the Call to Prayer 

It is related from Anas that he said (when the question of 
calling to prayer was being discussed), * Some mentioned a fire 
and a bell. They also mentioned (the customs) of the Jews 
and Christians. Then Bilal was ordered to make the call to 
prayer twice, and to repeat the words “ Prayer is now ready,’’ 
once.’— Muslim , Al Bukhari . 

It is related from Abu Mahdhurah that, ‘The Apostle of 
God himself placed on me the duty of calling to prayer and 
said, “Say, ‘God is great, God is great, God is great, God is 
great. I bear witness that there is no God but Allah, 
I bear witness that there is no God but Allah ; I bear witness 
that Muhammad is the Apostle of God, I bear witness that 
Muhammad is the Apostle of God.’ Then repeat it and say, 1 1 
bear witness that there is no God but Allah, I bear witness that 
there is no God but Allah ; I bear witness that Muhammad is 
the Apostle of God, I bear witness that Muhammad is the 
Apostle of God. Come to prayers, come to prayers. Come to 
salvation, come to salvation. God is great, God is great. 
There is no God but Allah.” Muslim . 

It is related from Ibn ‘Omar that he said, ‘ When the 
Muslims came to Medina they used to come together and draw 
near for prayer ; and there was no one (appointed) to call them 
to it. And on a certain day they were discussing the matter, and 
some of them said, “ Let us take something like the bell of the 
Christians,” and others said, “ Let us take a horn like the horn 
of the Jews.” And ‘Omar said, “Why do ye not appoint a 
man to call to prayers ? ” Then the Apostle of God said, “ O 
Bilal, rise up and call to prayers.” *— Muslim , Al Bukhari . 

It is related from ‘Abdu’llah bin Zaid that he said, ‘ When 
the Apostle of God ordered a bell to be rung for calling the 
people to come together for prayers, there came to me a person 
as I slept, carrying a bell in his hand. I said, “O servant of 
God, wilt thou sell the bell?” He replied, “And what wilt 
thou do with it?” I said, “With it I will call the people to 
prayers.” He replied, “ Shall I not point thee to something 
better than that?” I said to him, “Yes.” He said, “Say, 
God is great to the end of the call, and thus with the announce¬ 
ment of being ready for prayers. And when I arose in the 


THE BOOK OF PRAYER 


29 


morning, I came to the Apostle of God and informed him of 
what I had seen. He said, “ Verily this is a true vision, if God 
will; therefore stand up with Bilal and teach him what thou 
hast seen, and let him make the call to prayer in accordance 
with it, for he is of stronger voice than thou.” So I stood up 
with Bilal, and began to teach him ; and he made the call to 
prayer in that way. And ‘Omar binu’l-Khattab heard of that 
when he was in his house, and he came out, dragging his mantle 
and saying, ”0 Apostle of God, by Him who hath sent thee 
with the truth, verily I have seen (a vision) similar to that 
which was shown him.” Then the Apostle of God said, “ Praise 
be to God.” ’— Abu Baud, Al D dr ini i t I bn Mdjah . 

It is related from Malik that information reached him that, 
the one who called to prayers went to ‘ Omar to call him to the 
morning prayer and found him sleeping. So he said, ‘ Prayer is 
better than sleep.* Then ‘Omar ordered him to include these 
words in the call to morning prayer.— In Al Muwatta . 

It is relarted from ‘Abdu’r-Rahman bin Sa‘d bin ‘Ammar 
bin Sa‘d the caller-to-prayer of the Apostle of God that he said, 
* My father informed me that lie heard his father say from his 
grandfather that the Apostle of God ordered Bilal to put his 
fingers in his ears, and said, “It will raise thy voice.” *— 
Ibn Mdjah . 

On the Excellence of the Call to Prayer 

It is related from ‘Abdu’llah bin ‘Amru binu’l-‘As that, 

4 The Apostle of God said, “ When ye hear the caller-to-prayer, 
then say the same as he says. Then pray for blessings on me, 
for verily, whoever prays for blessings on me, God will bless 
him ten times for it. Then ask God for favour for me, and that 
is a station in paradise. This is not fitting for any but one of the 
servants of God, and I hope that I shall be that one. And 
whoever asks (this) favour for me, intercession will be available 
for him.” *— Muslim. 

It is related from Anas that he said, ‘ The Prophet used to 
go in quest of plunder, and when the morning dawned he used to 
listen for the call to prayer ; and if he heard the call to prayer 
he would •withhold, otherwise he plundered. And he heard a man 
calling, “God is great, God is great,” and the Apostle of God 


30 SELFCTIONS FROM MUHAMMADAN TRADITIONS 

said, “ (He) is in the true religion.” After that the man said* 
“ I bear witness that there is no God but Allah.” And the 
Apostle of God said, “Thou hast come out from the fire.” 
And they looked at him and, behold! he was a goatherd/— 
Muslim . 

It is related from Jabir that he said, ‘ I heard the Apostle 
of God say, “Verily when Satan hears the call to prayer, he 
goes away to the place called A1 Rauhai: a place distant thirty- 
six miles from Madina.” ’— Muslim . 

On Delaying the Call to Prayer 

It is related from Ibn ‘Omar that, ‘The Apostle of God 
said, “ Verily Bilal calls to prayer in the night, therefore eat 
and drink until Ibn Umm Maktum makes the call.” Ibn ‘ Omar 
said, ‘ Ibn Maktum was a blind man and did not call to prayers 
until it was said to him, “The morning has come! the 
morning has come !” ’— Muslim , Al Bukhdri . 

On Mosques and Places of Prayer 

It is related from Ibn ‘Abbas that, * When the Prophet 
entered the House (i.e., the temple at Mecca) he made his 
extempore prayers in every side of it ; but he did not repeat the 
canonical prayers until he came out of it. And when he came 
out he prayed in two rak'ahs 1 in front of the mosque and said, 
“ This is the direction to face in prayer.” ’— Muslim . Al Bukhdri. 

It is related from Abu Hurairah that, ‘The Apostle of God 
said, “One prayer in this mosque of mine (i.e., the mosque of 
Madina) is better than a thousand players in any other, 
except the holy mosque (of Mecca).” ’— Muslim , Al Bukhdri . 

It is related from Abu sa‘ idu’l-Khudri that, ‘The Apostle 
of God said, “Let not men bind themselves to visit mosques 
other than these three: the holy mosque (of Mecca), the 
distant mosque (at Jerusalem) and this mosque of mine (at 
Madina).” ’— Muslim , Al Bukhdri . 

It is related from * Othman that, ‘. The Apostle of God said, 
“He who builds a mosque for God, God will build a house for 
him in paradise.” *— Muslim , Al Bukhdri . 

1 The rak'ah is a term used to cover one complete performance of the 
Muslim liturgical prayers, and ending with the takbir , * God is great * 
which is repeated standing. If the form of prayer be repeated a second 
time, it ends with the repetition of the Muslim confession of faith. The 
five obligatory prayers are generally said in either two or four rak'ahs . 


THE BOOK OF PRAYER 


31 


It is related from Abu Hurairah that, ‘ The Apostle of God 
^id, “ The prayers of a man said in an assembly are (worth) 
double the prayers said in his house, and twenty-five times more 
than those said in the bazaar. That is because when he per¬ 
forms his ablutions, and does them well, and then goes out to a 
mosque, nothing sends him out but the prayers. He does 
not walk a step but what there is raised for him thereby a high 
position, and his sins are removed from him thereby ; and when 
he prays, the angels continue to pray for him so long as he is in 
the place of prayer (saying), ‘O God, bless him, O God, have 
mercy upon him.' And one of you will continue in prayer so 
long as he waits for it.” 9 — Muslim , Al Bukhari . 

It is related from Ibn ‘Abbas that, ‘The Apostle of God 
said, “I was not commanded to build high mosques.” Ibn 
‘Abbas said, “You may certainly adorn them as the Jews and 
Christians do theirs.” ’— Abu Ddud . 

It is related from Fatimah bintu 9 1-Husain from her grand¬ 
mother Fatimahu 9 1-Kubra, that she said, ‘ When the Apostle of 
God entered a mosque he used to ask for peace and blessings 
on Muhammad, and said, “My Lord, forgive me my sins, and 
open for me the gates of Thy mercy.” And when he went 
out he would ask for peace and blessings on Muhammad, and 
would say, “ My Lord, forgive me my sins, and open for me 
the gates of Thy favour.” ’— Ibn Mdjah , At Tirmidhi . 

It is related from Abu Sa‘ id that, ‘ The Apostle of God 
said, “The whole earth is a mosque except a graveyard and a 
bath.” ’— Abu Ddud , At Tir mid hi. 

It is related from Ibn ‘Abbas that, ‘ The Apostle of God 
cursed the. female visitors to tombs, and the builders of 
mosques thereon, and the (maker of) places for lamps thereon/ 
-~Abu Ddud , At Tirmidhi . 

It is related from Mu‘adh bin Jabal that he said, ‘The 
Apostle of God, on a certain day, hindered us from the morning 
prayers until we were nearly seeing the sun. And he came out 
quickly,land the call to prayer was made, and the Apostle of 
God prayed and hastened in his prayers; and when he had 
made the salutation (at the end of the prayers) he called out 
and said, to us, “ Stay in your ranks as you are.” Then he came 
out to us, and afterwards said, “ I will inform you what it was 


32 SELECTIONS FROM MUHAMMADAN TRADITIONS 

that hindered me from coming to you this morning. Verily 
I rose whilst it was yet night and performed my ablutions and 
prayed the prayer appointed for me, and I became drowsy in 
my prayers, so much so that I was overcome with sleep, and 
behold! my blessed Lord, the most High, in a most lovely 
form! And He said, ‘ O Muhammad/ I said, ‘At Thy service, 
my Lord/ He said, ‘Concerning what do the highest angels 
dispute?' I said, ‘I know not/ He said, ‘They are three/'* 
Then Muhammad said, “ I saw Him place the palm of His 
hand between my two shoulders, until I felt the cold of His 
finger-tips between my breasts. Then everything appeared 
clear to me, and I knew. Then He said, ‘O Muhammad/ 
I said, ‘ At Thy service my Lord.' He said, ‘ Concerning what 
do the highest angels dispute ? ’ I said, ‘ They dispute concer¬ 
ning atonement of sins/ He said, ‘And what are they?' 
I replied, ‘ The going on foot to the assembly, and sitting in 
mosques after the prayers, and completing the ablutions under 
circumstances of difficulty.' He said, ‘After that, concerning 
what do they dispute ? ’ I replied, ‘ Concerning high ranks.' 
He said, ‘ And what are they ? ' I replied, ‘ The giving of food, 
the using of mild language, and prayers at night whilst people 
sleep.' He said, ‘ Ask ! ' I said, ‘ O God, I supplicate of Thee 
good actions and the abandonment of evil actions, and love of 
the poor, and that Thou forgive me and have mercy on me, and 
when Thou desirest a trial amongst the people, that Thou take 
me without being tried ; and I pray Thee for Thy love and the 
love of those who love Thee, and I pray for the love of those 
actions which will bring me near to Thy love.'" Then the 
Apostle of God said, “ Verily it (the dream) is true, therefore do 
ye study it and afterwards teach it.” ’— Ahmad, At Tirmidhu 
It is related from Anas bin Malik that, ‘The Apostle of 
God said, “The prayer of a man in his house is equal to one 
prayer, and his prayer in an adjacent mosque is equal to 
twenty-five prayers, and his prayer in a mosque in which men 
assemble is equal to five hundred prayers, and his prayer in the 
distant mosque (at Jerusalem) is equal to fifty thousand prayers, 
and his prayer in my mosque (at Madina) is equal to fifty 
thousand prayers, and his prayer in the holy mosque (at Mecca) 
is equal to one hundred thousand prayers.” '— I bn Majah 


THE BOOK OF PRAYER 


33 


It is related from Abu Dharr that he said, *1 said, “O 
Apostle of God, which mosque was built first on the earth ?” 
He replied, “The holy mosque (at Mecca).” I said, “And 
after that, which one?” He replied, “The distant mosque 
(at Jerusalem).” I said, “How long was it between (the 
building of) the two?” He replied, “Forty years.” Then 
he said, “ The earth is a mosque for thee, therefore wherever 
the time of prayer reaches thee, there pray.” ’— Muslim , Al 
Bukhdri . 

On Covering Oneself 

It is related from Abu Hurairah that, ‘ The Apostle of God 
said, “Let not any one of you pray in a single cloth, some 
portion of which does not cover both his shoulders.” *— Muslim , 
Al Bukhdri . 

It is related from ‘Uqbah bin ‘Amir that he said, ‘The 
Apostle of God was presented with a silk garment. This he 
put on, and then said his prayers. Afterwards he departed and 
threw it off with force, as if it were distasteful to him. Then 
he said, “ This is not fitting for those who fear God.” ’— Muslim , 
Al Bukhari . 

It is related from Abu Hurairah that he said, 1 Whilst a man 
was praying in long trousers, the Apostle of God said to him, 
“ Go and perform ablutions.” So he went and performed his 
ablutions and then returned. And a certain man said, “O 
Apostle of God, what was the reason that you ordered him to 
perform ablutions?” He replied, “Verily he was praying in 
long trousers. Verily God does not accept the prayer of a man 
clothed in long trousers.” ’— Abu Ddud % 

It is related from Shaddad bin Aus that, ‘ The Apostle of 
God said, “Do the opposite to what the Jews do, for they do 
not say prayers in their boots or shoes.” ’— Abd Ddud . 

It is related from Abu Sa‘idu’l-Khudri that he said, 1 Whilst 
the Apostle of God was praying with his companions, behold 
he took off his shoes and placed them on his left side. And 
when the* people saw that, they too threw off their shoes. 
And when the Apostle of God had finished his prayers he said, 
“ What induced you to throw off your shoes ? ” They replied, 
“We saw thee cast off thy shoes, therefore we cast ours off.” 
The Apostle of God said. “Verily Gabriel came to me and 

5 


34 


SELECTIONS FROM MUHAMMADAN TRADITIONS 


informed me that on them (my shoes) there was some impurity. 
When any one of you comes to the mosque, then let him look, 
and if he sees any impurity on his shoes, then let him wipe 
them and then pray in them.” *—Abu D&ud^Al Darimi. 

It is related from ‘Amru bin Shu‘aib from his father, from 
his grandfather, that he said, 4 1 saw the Apostle of God pray¬ 
ing barefooted and also in his shoes .’—Abu Dated . 

On That Which Conceals 
It is related from Abu Hurairah that, 4 The Apostle of God 
said, 44 When any one of you prays, let him place something in 
front of him ; and if he cannot find anything, then let him set up 
his stick ; and if he has no stick with him, then let him draw 
a line on the ground. Then nothing that passes in front of him 
will do him any harm.” ’—Abu Dated , Ib?i Majah . 

It is related from Abu Sa‘id that, 4 The Apostle of God 
said, 44 When any one of you prays towards anything placed in 
front of him as a cover from men, and anyone wishes to pass 
in front of him, then let him turn him back ; and if he refuses, 
then let him fight him, for he is none but Satan.” ’— Muslim , 
Al Bukhari . 

It is related from Ka‘bu’l-Ahbar that he said, 4 If the one 
who passes before one engaged in prayer had but known the 
punishment that awaits him! It would have been better for 
him that he were swallowed up by the earth, than that he 
should pass before him.’— Mdlik. 

On the Nature of Prayer 
It is related from ‘Ayesha that she said, 4 The Apostle of 
God used to begin the prayers by repeating the words, 44 God is 
great ”; and by the recitation of (the chapter beginning with the 
words) 44 Praise be to God, the Lord of the worlds ” ; and when 
he used to bow down he did not raise his head, nor bend it low, 
but midway between. And when he used to raise his head from 
the bowing, he did not prostrate himself until he had stood 
erect; and when he used to raise his head from the prostrations, 
he did not prostrate again until he had sat up erect. And he 
used to repeat the salutation in every two sections of prayers ; 
and he used to spread out his left foot and raise his right 
foot. And he used to forbid sitting with the buttocks resting on 


THE BOOK OF PRAYER 


35 


the heels. And he used to forbid men stretching out their limbs 
when sitting down as wild animals stretch their limbs ; and he 
used to complete his prayer with the salutation. '—Muslim. 

It is related from Sa‘id binu’l-Harith binu’l-Mu‘alli that 
he said, ‘Abu Sa'idu’l-Khudri prayed (that is, acted as leader) 
for us and said, “God is great,” when he raised his head from 
the prostrations, and when he prostrated himself, and when he 
raised himself from bowing down, and he said, “Thus I saw 
the Prophet do.” Al Bukhari . 

It is related from Abu Hurairah that he said, ‘ The Apostle 
of God prayed the midday prayer with ns, and in the back part 
of the rows (of worshippers) there was a man who said his 
prayer badly. When, therefore, he had said the salutation, the 
Apostle of God called him and said, “O so-and-so, dost thou 
not fear God, and dost thou not observe how thou prayest ? 
Do ye imagine that anything of what ye do is hidden from me ? 
By God! I certainly see behind me as I see before me.” ’ 
— Ahmad . 


On What should be Repeated after the Words, 

‘ God is Great * 

It is related from Abu Hurairah that he said, ‘ The Apostle 
of God used to remain silent between the repetition of the 
words “ God is great” and the recital (of a portion ot the 
Qur’an). Therefore I said, “May my father and mother be 
sacrificed for thee, O Apostle of God, what sayest thou when 
silent between the repetition of the words ‘ God is great ’ and 
the recital?” He replied, “I say, ‘O God, place a distance 
between me and my sins as Thou hast placed a distance between 
East and West. O God, cleanse me from my sins as a white 
garment is cleansed from impurities. O God, wash away my 
sins with water and snow and hail.’ ” ’— Muslim, Al Bukhari . 

It is related from ‘All that he said, ‘ When the Prophet 
stood up to prayer—or, according to another tradition, ‘ When 
he opened his prayer’—he said, “God is great.” Then he 
said, “ I turn my face as a Hanif to Him who created the heavens 
and the earth ; and I am not a polytheist. Verily, my prayers 
and my ‘worship and my life and my death are for God, the 
Lord of the worlds. He has no partner, and to that was 1 


36 SELECTIONS FROM MUHAMMADAN TRADITIONS 

ordered, and I am one of the Muslims. O God, Thou art the 
King. There is no God but Thee. Thou art my Lord, and I 
am Thy servant. I have offended against mine own soul, and 
I confess my sins; therefore forgive me all my sins, for none 
can forgive sins but Thou. Guide Thou me to the best disposi¬ 
tion, for none can guide to the best but Thou ; and turn Thou 
away from me its evil, for none can turn away evil from me 
but Thou. I am ready for Thy service and to assist Thee. And 
every good is in Thy hands, and no wickedness can be ascribed 
to Thee. I am (strong) in Thee, and to Thee (I shall return). 
Thou art blessed and exalted. I ask forgiveness of Thee, and 
I repent towards Thee.” And when the Apostle of God bowed 
down he said, “ O God, to Thee have I bowed down, and in Thee 
have I placed my trust, and to Thee I resign myself. My ears 
and my eyes, my brain, my bones and my nerves humble them¬ 
selves before Thee.” And when he raised his head he said, 
“ O God, our Lord, to Thee be praise to the full of the heavens 
and the earth and what is between them and to the full of 
whatever Thou mayest desire hereafter.” And when he 
prostrated himself he said, “ O God, to Thee have I prostrated 
myself, and in Thee have I placed my trust, and to Thee am I 
resigned. My face has prostrated itself to Him who created it 
and formed it and divided its ears and its eyes. Blessed be 
God, the best of Creators !” After that he used to say at the 
end, what he said between the bearing witness and the salutation, 
“ O God, forgive me the sins I have committed before, and those I 
shall commit hereafter, and those I have concealed, and those 
I have committed openly, and those I have committed to excess, 
and those which Thou knowest better than I. Thou art the 
beginning and Thou art the end. There is no God but 
Thee.” *— Muslim. 

On Reciting the Qur’an in Prayer 

It is related from ‘UbadahbinuV$amit that, 1 The Apostle 
of God said, “There can be no prayer for the one whft does not 
recite the opening chapter of the Book.” ’— Muslim , AlBukhdrt . 

It is related from Anas that, ‘ The Prophet and Abu Bakr and 
‘Omar used to begin the prayers with the words, “ Praise be to 
God, the Lord of the worlds.” ’ — Muslim. 


THE BOOK OF PRAYER 


37 


It is related from Abu Hurairah that, ‘ The Apostle of God 
said, “ When the leader of the prayers says 1 Amen,’ then do ye 
say ‘ Amen ’ likewise ; and whoever says ‘ Amen,’ the amen of 
the angels, the sins which he committed previously are 
forgiven.” '— Muslim , Al Bukhari . 

It is related from ‘Abdu’llah binu’s-Saib that he said, 
‘The Apostle of God said the morning prayers for us (as 
leader) at Mecca, and he began the recital of the chapter, “ The 
Believers,” until he came to the mention of Moses and Aaron 
or the mention of Jesus, when he was seized with a fit of 
coughing. Then he bowed down/— Muslim . 

It is related from Ibn ‘Abbas that he said, ‘ The Apostle of 
God used to begin his prayers with the words, “ In the name of 
God, the merciful, the compassionate.” ’— At Tirmidhi . 

It is related from ‘Uqbah bin ‘Amir that he said, ‘ I used to 
lead the female camel of the Apostle of God when on a journey • 
and he said to me, “ O ‘Uqbah, shall I not teach thee what are 
the two best chapters (of the Qur’an) to be recited ? ” Then he 
taught me, “ Say, I take refuge with the Lord of the daybreak,” 
and “ Say, I take refuge with the Lord of men. 1 ’” ‘Uqbah said, 

‘ The Prophet did not see me very pleased with these two 
chapters, and when he alighted for the morning prayers, he 
prayed those two for the morning prayers for the people ; and 
when he had finished he turned to me and said,‘‘O ‘Uqbah, 
how dost thou like them ? ” ’— Ahmad , Abii Baud , An Nasai. 

It is related from Ubadah binu’s-Samit that he said, ‘ We 
were behind the Prophet at the morning prayers, and he 
recited (a portion of the Qur’an), but the recital became 
difficult for him. And when he had finished, he said, “ Perhaps 
you recited after your leader ? ” We said, ‘‘Yes, O Apostle of 
God.” He said, “ Do not do it, except for the opening chapter 
of the Book ; for he who does not recite that chapter, does not 
say prayers at all.” ’— Abd Baud, At Tirmidht . 

It is related from Ibn ‘Omaru’l-Bayatfi, that he said, 
‘The Apostle of God said, ‘‘Verily the one who prays com¬ 
munes secretly with his Lord, therefore let him take heed as to 
what he says to Him ; and let not some of you raise their voices 
above the voices of others in (reciting) the Qur’an.” ’— Ahmad \ 

1 Chapters cxiii and cxiv. 


38 SELECTIONS FROM MUHAMMADAN TRADITIONS 

It is related from ‘Abdu’llah bin abi Awfi that he said, 
‘A man came to the Prophet and said, 14 1 am not'able to 
remember any portion of the Qur'an, then teach me that -which 
is proper for me to say (in place thereof)." He replied, 
“ Say, ‘ Glory be to God ! ' and, ‘ Praise be to God ! ’ and, ‘ There 
is no God but Allah ’ and, ‘Gods is great, there is no power and 
no strength but in God.’ " He said, “O Apostle of God, this 
all has reference to God, but what is there which has reference to 
me ? " The Prophet replied, “ Say, ‘ O God, have mercy on me, 
and forgive me, and guide me, and give me my daily bread.'" 
The man spoke thus (beckoning) with his hands and then closed 
them. Then the Apostle of God said, “Verily this man has 
filled his two hands with good." '— Abu Daud. 

On the Genuflection called Ruqu 41 

It is related from Anas that, ‘ The Apostle of God said, 
“Perform the bowing and the prostrations, 1 2 for by God! I 
certainly see you from behind me." ’— Muslim, Al Bukhari. 

It is related from Ibn ‘Abbas that, ‘ The Apostle of God 
said, “Have I not been forbidden to recite the Qur'an whilst 
bowing down and prostrating; and as for the bowing down 
magnify God therein, and in the prostrations be diligent in 
supplication. It is fitting that they should be granted to you." ' 
— Muslim. 

It is related from Abu Mas‘udu’l-Ansari that, ‘The Apostle 
of God said, “ The prayer of a man will not be accepted until he 
straightens his back in the bowing and in the prostrations.” ’— 
Abie Daud , At Tirmidhi , An Nasai , Ibn Mdjah. 

It is related from Auf bin Malik that he said, ‘ I stood up 
with the Apostle of God; and when he bowed he stayed in that 
position for a time equal to that occupied in the recital of 
chapter Baqarah 3 ; and he said in his bowing, “Praise be to 
God, the One endued with power and royalty and majesty and 
greatness." ’— An Nasdi. 

1 It is made by bending the head forward with the palms of* the hands 
resting upon the knees. Here translated 4 bow.* 

2 The Sajdah , here translated ‘ prostration * is made by bowing down 

on the knees until the forehead touches the ground. 

8 This chapter of the Qur’an contains two hundred and Eighty-five 
verses. 


THE BOOK OF PRAYER 


39 


It is related from Abu Qatadah that, 4 The Apostle of God 
said, “The worst man for thieving is he who steals from his 
prayers.”, They said, “O Apostle of God, and how does he 
steal from his prayers ? ” He replied, 44 He does not complete 
it in its bowing down or its prostrations.” *— Ahmad . 

On Prostration and its Excellence 

It is related from' Ibn‘Abbas that, ‘ The Apostle of God 
said, “ I was commanded to prostrate in seven members of my 
body: on my forehead, my two hands, my two knees, and the 
extremities of my two feet, and that we should not tuck up 
our clothes or hair.” Muslim , Al BukhdrL 

It is related from Al Barai bin ‘Azib that, 4 The Apostle 
of God said, 44 When thou makest a prostration then place the 
palms of thy hands (on the ground), but raise up thine 
elbows.” *— Muslim . 

It is related from Abu Hurairah that, ‘ The Apostle of God 
said, “A servant is nearest to his Lord when he is making the 
prostration, therefore multiply your supplications.” ’— Muslim . 

It is related from Abu Hurairah that, ‘The Apostle of 
God said, “When a son of Adam recites the chapter entitled 
4 Prostration’ 1 and prostrates himself, Satan betakes himself 
away weeping and saying, ‘ Woe is me! the son of Adam was 
commanded to prostrate, and he prostrated, and for him is 
paradise ; and I was ordered to prostrate, but I refused, and 
for me is the fire.’ ” ’— Muslim . 

It is related from Wail bin Hujr that he said, 4 1 saw the 
Apostle of God when he prostrated himself, place his knees (on 
the ground) before his hands, and- when he rose up from 
prostration he raised his hands before (he got up from) his 
knees.*— Abu Ddud , At Tirmidht . 

On Bearing Witness 

It is related from Ibn ‘Omar that he said, 4 When the 
Apostle of God used to sit in the act of bearing witness 
(concerning the unity of God and the apostleship of Muhammad) 
he used to place his left hand upon his left knee, and his right 
hand upon his right knee, and used to clasp his fingers together 
and make a sign with the fore-finger.*— Muslim . 


Chapter xxxii of the Qur'an. 


40 SELECTIONS FROM MUHAMMADAN TRADITIONS 

It is related from Jabir that he said, ‘ The Apostle of God 
used to teach us the (method of) bearing witness in the same 
way that he taught us a chapter of the Qur’an. (He used to 
say) “ In the name of God. Salutations are for God, together 
with prayers and alms. Peace be on thee, O Prophet, and the 
mercy of God and His blessing, and peace be on us and on the 
virtuous servants of God. I bear witness that there is no God 
but Allah, and I bear witness that Muhammad is His servant 
and His Apostle. I supplicate God for paradise, and I take 
refuge with God from the fire.” ’— An Nasdi. 

On Asking Blessings on the Prophet 

It is related from ‘Abdu’r-Rahman bin abii Laila that he 
said, ‘ Ka‘b bin * Ujrah met me and said, 11 Shall I make thee a 
present of that which I heard from the Prophet ? ” I replied, 
“Yes, make me a present thereof.” He said, “ We asked the 
Apostle of God, and said, ‘ O Apostle of God, how are blessings 
to be asked for you, the people of the house, for verily God has 
taught us how we should pray for thee ? ’ ” He replied, “Say, 

‘ O God, bless Muhammad and the family of Muhammad, as 
Thou hast blessed Abraham and the family of Abraham. Verily 
Thou art praised and glorified. O God, bless Muhammad and 
the family of Muhammad, as Thou hast blessed Abraham and 
the family of Abraham, verily Thou art praised and glorified.’ 

— Muslim , Al Bukhari. 

It is related from Anas that, ‘ The Apostle of God said, 
“ Whoever prays a single prayer for blessings on me, God will 
send on him ten blessings, and ten sins will be taken away 
from him, and there will be raised for him ten steps in rank.” ’ 
—An Nasdi . 

It is related from Ibn Mas‘ud that, 4 The Apostle of God 
said, “ Verily God has angels who move about on earth and 
bring greetings to me from my followers.”’— An Nasdi, Al 
Ddrimi. 

It is related from Fadalah bin 4 Ubaid that he said, 4 Whilst 
the Apostle of God was sitting, behold a man entered and 
prayed and said, 44 O God, forgive me, and have mercy on me.” 
Then the Apostle of God said, “ Thou hast hastened, O thou 
that prayest. When thou prayest and sittest down, then praise 
God in a manner of which He is worthy, and ask blessings on 


THE BOOK OF PRAYER 


41 


me. Afterwards, present thine own supplications to Him.”’ 
Faflalah said, ‘ Then, after that, another man prayed, and praised 
God, and asked blessings on the Prophet. Then the Prophet 
said to him, “O thou that prayest, ask and it shall be given 
thee.” ’— At Tirmidhu 

It is related from Abu Hurairah that, ‘ The Apostle of God 
said, “ Whoever wishes to fill up the measure of his desires, 
when he asks blessings on us, the Prophet’s family, then let 
*him say, * O God, bless Muhammad, the ignorant Prophet, and 
his wives, the mothers of the faithful, and his descendants, and 
the people of his family, as Thou hast blessed the family of 
Abraham; for verily Thou art praised and glorified.’ ” ’— Abu 
Ddud . 

It is related from Ruwaifa* that, ‘ The Apostle of God said, 
‘‘ He who prays for blessings on Muhammad, and says, ‘ O God, 
appoint him a sitting-place near Thee on the day of resurrec¬ 
tion,’ my intercession will be available for him.’”— Ahmad. 

It is related from ‘Omar binu’l-Khattab that he said, 
1 Verily supplications are kept stationary between heaven and 
earth, and nothing of them ascends until thou pray for blessings 
on thy Prophet.’— At Tirmidhi . 

On Supplication at the Time of Bearing Witness 

It is related from ‘Ayesha that she said, ‘The Apostle of 
God used to make supplication in prayer and say, “O God, I 
take refuge with Thee from the punishments of the grave, and 
I take refuge with Thee from the sedition of the false Messiah, 
and I take refuge with Thee from the seditions of life and 
death. O God, I take refuge with 'Thee from sins and from 
debt.” Then a certain person said to him, ‘‘It is very 
strange that Thou shouldest take refuge from debt.” He 
replied, ‘‘Verily when a man falls into debt, he talks and lies, 
and makes promises, and then acts contrary to them.”’— 
Muslim , At Bukhari . 

It is # related from Abu Hurairah that, ‘The Apostle of God 
said, ‘‘When any one of you finishes the repetition of the 
bearing witness, then let him take refuge with God from four 
things: # from the punishment of hell, from the punishment of 
the grave, from the seditions of life and death, and from the 
wickedness of the false Messiah.” ’— Muslim . 


6 


42 SELECTIONS FROM MUHAMMADAN TRADITIONS 

It is related from Umm Salamah that she said, ‘Verily, in 
the time of the Apostle of God, when women repeated the 
salutation in the obligatory prayers, they used to rise up, but 
the Apostle of God and those men who prayed remained 
sitting so long as God wished ; and when the Apostle of God 
rose up, then the men rose up also.’— Al Bukhdru 

It is related from Mu’adh bin Jabal that he said, ‘ The 
Apostle of God took me by the hand and said, “ I certainly love 
thee, O Mu‘adh.” I replied, “And I love thee, O Apostle of* 
God.” He said, “Never omit tq say at the end of every 
prayer, ‘O my Lord, assist me to remember Thee and to give 
Thee thanks, and to render Thee fitting worship. 1 ” ’ — Ahmad , 
Abu Ddud, An Nasau 

It is related from Shaddad bin Aus that he said, ‘ The 
Apostle of God used to say in his prayer, “ O God, I supplicate 
from Thee firmness in the works (of religion) and deter¬ 
mination in the right way ; and I supplicate from Thee grati¬ 
tude for Thy favours, and worthiness in Thy worship ; and 
I supplicate from Thee a sincere heart and a truthful tongue ; 
and I supplicate from Thee the good that Thou knowest; and I 
take refuge with Thee from the evil that Thou knowest; 
and I ask pardon of Thee for (the sins) which Thou knowest.” 1 
—An Nasdi. 

Concerning Things to be Mentioned After Prayer 
It is related from Ibn ‘Abbas that he said, ‘ I used to know 
the conclusion of the prayers of the Apostle of God by the 
words “ God is great.” ’—Muslim, Al Bukhdru 

It is related from ‘Abdullah bin Zubair that he said, ‘The 
Prophet of God, when giving the salutation in the prayers, used 
to say with a loud voice, “There is no God but Allah alone. 
He has no partner. His is the dominion, and His is the praise, 
and He is powerful over all things. There is no power and no 
strength but in God. There is no God but Allah, and we 
worship none but Him. His is the grace, and for Him is 
the excellence, and for Him is the excellent praise. There 
is no God but Allah. We exhibit for Him the sincerity 
of our religion, although the unbelievers abhor it.” ’— Muslim . 

It is related from Abu Hurairah that he said, 'The poor 
people of those who fled from Mecca to Madina came to the 


THE BOOK OF PRAYER 


43 


Apostle of God and said, “The rich (among us) have attained 
to a high station and permanent favour/ 1 He replied, “And 
what is that ? ” They said, “ They pray as we do, and fast as 
we do, and they give alms, which (by reason of our poverty) 
we do not, and they free slaves which we (having none) do not 
do.” The Apostle of God replied, “ Shall I not teach you 
something by which you will reach (in rank) those who 
preceded you and will precede those who follow you; and none 
will be more excellent than you, except he who shall do as ye 
do?” They said, “Yes, O Apostle of God.” He replied, 
“Then at the end of each prayer repeat the adoration of God, 
and magnify Him and give voice to His praises thirty-three 
times.” Abu Salih said, “Then the poor who had fled from 
Mecca to Madina returned to the Apostle of God and said, 1 Our 
brethren, the rich, heard what we did, and they did the same/ ” 
The Apostle of God said, “ That is the grace of God. He gives 
to whom He wills.” 1 — Muslim , Al Bukhdru 

It is related from Abu Hurairah that, ‘ The Apostle of God 
said, “ Whoever repeats the adoration of God thirty-three times 
at the end of each prayer, and gives voice to the praise of God 
thirty-three times, and magnifies God thirty-three times, that is 
ninety-nine times, and whoever completes the hundred by 
saying, 4 There is no God but Allah alone. He has no partner. 
His is the dominion and His the praise, and He is powerful over 
all things/ his sins will be forgiven, although they be as the 
foam of the sea.” *— Muslim . 

It is related from ‘All that he said, ‘ I heard the Apostle of 
God say on the wood of this pulpit that, “ He who recites the 
verse of the throne 1 at the end of each prayer, nothing will 
prevent him from entering paradise but death; and whoever 
recites it when he retires to his bed, God will keep him safe in 
his house, and in the house of his neighbour, and in the houses 
of the people round about him.” ’— Al Baihaqi 

Concerning What Is or Is Not Permitted to be Done 

in Prayer 

It is related from ‘Abdu’llah bin Mas‘ud that he said, ‘We 
used to salute the Prophet whilst he was saying his prayers, and 


1 Qur’&n, Suratu’l-Baqarah (ii) 254. 


44 SELECTIONS FROM MUHAMMADAN TRADITIONS 

he used to return our salutation; but when we returned from 
Abyssinia we saluted him, but he did not return our salutation. 
So we said, “ O Apostle of God, we used to salute thee during 
prayer, and thou wert wont to return our salutation! ” He 
replied, “Verily in prayer there is labour.” ’— Muslim , Al 
Bukhdri . 

It is related from Abu Hurairah that, 1 The Apostle of God 
said, “ Verily a demon from the genii escaped yesterday in 
order to obstruct my prayers ; but God enabled me to overcome 
him ; and I seized him, and wished to tie him to one of the 
pillars of the mosque in order that ye all might see him. But I 
remembered the supplication of my brother, Solomon, ‘ O Lord, 
give me a dominion which it is not proper for any to possess 
after me/ Therefore I sent him away humiliated.” ’— Muslim , 
Al Bukhdri . 

It is related from T&lq bin ‘All that, ‘ The Apostle of God 
said, “ When any one of you breaks wind during prayer, then 
let him depart and perform the ablutions, and then let him 
return to his prayers.” *— Abu Ddud , At Tirmidhi . 

It is related from Abu Hurairah that, 4 The Prophet came 
out to the prayers, and when he had said “ God is great,” he 
departed and motioned to them to remain as they were. And 
then he went out and bathed himself. Then he came again, 
and his head was dripping, and prayed with them. And when he 
had prayed he said, “ Verily I was impure, and I had forgotten 
to bathe myself.” *— Ahmad . 


On Forgetting in Prayer 

It is related from Abu Hurairah that, ‘ The Apostle of God 
said, “When any one of you stands up to pray, then Satan 
comes to him and confuses him, so that he does not know how 
many times he has prayed. Therefore when any one of you 
finds it thus, let him make two prostrations whilst he is sit¬ 
ting.” *—Al Bukhdri . 

It is related from ‘Abdu’llah bin Mas‘ud that, * Tke Apostle 
of God prayed the midday prayer in five rak'ahs .* So it was 
said to him, “ Have the prayers been increased ? ” He replied, 
“What is that?” They said, “Thou hast prayed in five 


1 See note on p. 30. 


THE BOOK OF PRAYER 


45 


rak*ah$” Then he made two prostrations, after he had given 
the salutation.'—And in another tradition it runs, 1 He said, “ I 
am only a man like you. I forget as ye do. Therefore if I 
forget, do ye remind me ; and if any one of you doubts in his 
prayers, then let him act on a correct opinion, and complete 
the prayers according to that. Then let him give the salutation, 
and then prostrate himself twice.” '— Muslim^ Al Bukhdri . 

It is related from Ibn Sirin from Abu Hurairah that he 
said, ‘ The Apostle of God prayed with us one of the afternoon 
prayers—Ibn Sirin said, “ Abu Hurairah named the prayer, 
but I have forgotten it ”—and he prayed with us two rak'ahs. 
Then he gave the salutation and stood up by a piece of 
wood placed in the mosque, and leaned upon it as if he were 
angry. And he placed his right hand upon his left, and put 
his fingers through each other, and placed his right cheek on 
the back of his left hand. And the people hastened out by 
the doors of the mosque, and said, “ The prayers have been 
shortened.” And amongst them were Abu Bakr and ‘Omar, 
but they feared to speak to the Prophet about it. And amongst 
the people was a man with long hands, called “ The one of the 
two hands.” He said, “ O Apostle of God, didst thou forget, or 
have the prayers been shortened?” He replied, “I neither 
forgot, nor have the prayers been shortened.” Then the 
Apostle of God asked (the people) “ Is it as ‘ The one of the two 
hands'says ?” They replied,” Yes.” Then he went forward and 
prayed what he had omitted. Then he made the salutation and 
then said, ” God is great.” Then he prostrated as was his wont, 
or made the prostration longer. After that he raised his head 
and said, “God is great.” Then he again said, “God is 
great,” and prostrated as was his wont, or longer. Then he 
raised his head and said, “ God is great.” And perhaps they 
asked him (Ibn Sirin), “After that did he give the saluta¬ 
tion?” He said, “I have been informed that ‘Imran bin 
Husain said, ‘After that he gave the salutation.' — Muslim , 
Al Bukhdri. 

On the Prostrations to be Made when Reciting 
the Qur'an 

s 

It is related from Ibn ‘Abbas that, ‘ The Prophet prostrated 
when reciting the chapter entitled “ The Star,” and the Muslims 


46 


SELECTIONS FROM MUHAMMADAN TRADITIONS 


and the polytheists and the genii and the people prostrated with 
him/— Al Bukhdri. 

•It is related from ‘Amr binu’l-‘A§ that he said, ‘The 
Apostle of God taught me fifteen prostrations during the recital 
of the Qur’an. Of these, three were for various subjects, and 
two prostrations were for the chapter entitled “ Pilgrimage.” * 
—Abu Ddud , I bn Mdjah. 

It is related from ‘Uqbah bin ‘Amir that he said, ‘ I said, 
“O Apostle of God, the chapter entitled ‘Pilgrimage 1 is 
superior to others, for during its recital two prostrations are 
required.” He replied, “Yes, and whosoever does not make 
the two prostrations, has not recited the two (verses for which 
they are prescribed).” ’— At Tirmidht . 

It is related from Ibn ‘Abbas that he said, ‘Verily the 
Prophet prostrated himself, when reciting the chapter entitled 
“Sad” and said, “David made this prostration as a sign of 
repentance, and we make it out of gratitude.” *— An Nasdi, 

On the Times when Prayer is Forbidden 

It is related from Ibn ‘Omar that, ‘ The Apostle of God 
said, “ Let not any one of you seek to repeat the prayers at the 
rising or the setting of the sun.” And in another tradition it 
runs, he said, “ When the edge of the sun rises, then leave the 
prayers until it (fully) appears. And when the edge of the 
sun sets, then leave the prayers until it disappears; and draw not 
near to your prayers at the rising of the sun or at its setting, 
for verily it rises between the two horns of Satan.” *— Musliniy 
Al Bukhari . 

It is related from Jubair bin Muf‘im that, ‘ The Prophet 
said, “ O Bani ‘Abd Manaf, do not forbid anyone from walking 
round this house (i.e., the temple at Mecca) and from praying 
at any hour of the night or day they please.” * — At Tirmidhiy 
Abu Daudy A?i Nasdi . 

On Praying in an Assembly, and the Excellence 

THEREOF 

It is related from Ibn ‘Omar that, ‘The Apostle of God 
said, “The prayers said in an assembly excel the prayers said 
alone by twenty-seven degrees*” Musliniy Al Bukhdru 


THE BOOK OF PRAYER 


47 


It is related from Abu Hurairah that he said, 1 A blind man 
came to the Prophet and said, “ O Apostle of God, I have no 
guide to lead me to the mosque.’* And he begged of the 
Apostle of God that a concession might be made for him, so 
that he might pray in his house. So the Apostle of God made 
a concession for him ; and when he turned his back, the Apostle 
called him and said, “ Dost thou hear the call to prayer ? ” He 
replied, “Yes.” He said, “Then do thou answer it.”’— 
Muslim. 

It is related from Ibn ‘Omar that, ‘ He made the call to 
prayer on a cold and windy night. Then he said, “Beware! 
pray in your houses.” After that he said, “ Verily the Apostle 
of God used to order the one who called to prayers, when it was 
a cold and rainy night, to say 1 Beware ! pray in your houses.’ ” ’ 
— Muslim , Al Bukhdri . 

It is related from Ibn ‘Omar that, ‘The Apostle of God 
said, “ When the wife of any one of you asks permission to go 
to the mosque, then let him not forbid her.” ’ — Muslim , Al 
Bukhdri . 

It is related from Ibn ‘Omar that, ‘The Apostle of God 
said, “Do not forbid your wives the mosques, but their houses 
are better for them.” ’— Abu Ddud, 

It is related from Abu Hurairah that he said, ‘ Verily I 
heard my beloved Abu’l-Qasim say, “The prayer of that woman 
will not be accepted who comes perfumed to the mosque, until 
she washes herself with the washing prescribed for impurity.” * 
—Abu Ddud. 

It is related from'Abu’l-Dardai that, ‘ The Apostle of God 
said, “There are no three persons in a village or desert who do 
not perform the prayers amongst themselves, but Satan 
prevails over them. Pray in an assembly, for the wolf only 
eats the one that has strayed from the flock.” ’ — Ahmad , Abu 
Ddud y An Nasdi. 

It is related from Abu Hurairah that, ‘ The Prophet said, 
“ If it wtfre not that there were women and children in the 
houses, I would have performed the evening prayers and com¬ 
manded my young men to burn with fire whatever was in the 
houses (df those 1 who do not attend prayers in the mosque.)” * 
—Afrmad. 


48 SELECTIONS FROM MUHAMMADAN TRADITIONS 

It is related from ‘Abdu’llah bin Umm Maktum that he 
said, ‘ O Apostle of God, in the city are many venomous reptiles 
and rapacious animals, and I am blind. Wilt thou, therefore, 
obtain a concession for me (to say prayers at home)?’ He 
replied, 4 Dost thou hear the call, ‘‘Come to prayers! come 
to salvation! ” ’ He said, ‘Yes/ The Prophet replied, 
‘ Then come at once/ And he did not give him a concession. 
—Abu Ddudy An Nasai. 

It is related from Abu Musau’l-Ash‘ari that, ‘ The Apostle 
of God said, “Two people, or any greater number, constitute 
an assembly for prayers.” ’— I bn Mdjah . 

On Dressing Ranks for Prayer 

It is related from Nu'man bin Bashir that he said, ‘The 
Apostle of God used to dress our ranks so that they looked as if 
he had made them straight as arrows. This he did until he saw 
that we had understood the matter. After this he came out on 
a certain day and stood up until it was near the time for repeat¬ 
ing the words, “ God is great.” Then he saw a man whose 
breast projected from the rank, and said, “O servants of God, 
you must keep your ranks even, otherwise God will certainly 
make a difference in your faces.” ’— Muslim . 

It is related from Abu Hurairah that, ‘ The Apostle of God 
said, “The best rank of men is the first of them, and the 
worst of them is the last. And the best rank of women is the 
last of them, and the worst of them is the first rank.” 9 — 
Muslim . 

It is related from Anas that, ‘ The Apostle of God said, 
“Arrange your ranks, and keep close together between them. 
Keep the necks in line, for, by Him in whose hand is my life! 
I certainly see Satan enter through an opening in the ranks, as 
if he were a kid.” *— Abd Ddud . 

On the Places for Standing in Prayer 

It is related from Samurah bin Jundub that he said, * The 
Apostle of God commanded us that when we were three persons 
(for prayer), one of us should stand in front (as leader)/— 
At Tirmidht . 

It is related from ‘Ayesha that she said, ‘ The A'ptostle of 
God prayed in his room, and the people followed him from 
behind the room/— Abd Ddud . 


THE BOOK OF PRAYER 


49 


On the Office of Leader of Prayers 

It is related from Abu Mas‘ud that, ‘The Apostle of God 
said, “Let him act as leader in the prayers who knows best 
the recital of the Book oiGod; and if all be equal in reciting, 
then the one who knows best the laws of religion ; and if they 
be all equal in knowledge of the laws of religion, then let that 
one act who was first of them in forsaking his home for the 
sake of religion ; and if they be all equal in that respect, then 
let the eldest of them lead. And let not any man act as leader 
in the prayers to a man in the latter’s sphere of authority (i.e. 
where he is the constituted leader); and let him not sit in a 
seat of honour in his house, except with his permission.” ’— 
Muslim . 

It is related from Abu ‘Atiyahu’l-‘Uqaili that he said, 

1 Malik binu’l-Huwairith used to come to us to our place of 
prayer and converse. And one day the time for prayer arrived, 
so we said to him, “ Stand thou in front and act as leader in the 
prayers.” He said to us, “ Put a man from amongst yourselves 
in front to lead the prayers for you, and I will tell you why I 
did not pray for you (as leader). I heard the Apostle of God 
say, ‘ Let not that one who visits a people act as leader of the 
prayers for them, but let a man from amongst themselves act 
as leader.’ ” ’—Abu Dajid, At Tirmidhi , An Nasdi. 

It is related from Anas that he said, 1 The Apostle of God 
appointed Ibn Umm Maktum to act as leader of the prayers for 
the people ; and he was blind.’— Abz/ Ddud. 

It is related from Ibn ‘Omar that, ‘ The Apostle of God 
said, “ There are three persons whose prayers will not be 
accepted from them : he who stands before the people as leader 
of the prayers when he is disliked by the people ; the man who 
comes to prayers at the end—to come at the end is to come 
when the time is past—and the man who enslaves a free 
woman.” ’—Abu Ddud , Ibn Majah. 

It is related from Abu Hurairah that, ‘ The Apostle of God 
said, “ Religious warfare is incumbent upon you in company 
with every prince, whether he be righteous or unrighteous, 
even though he be guilty of mortal sins. And prayer is incum¬ 
bent upon you after every Muslim, whether he be righteous or 
unrighteous, even though he be guilty o£ mortal sins. And 

7 


SO SELECTIONS FROM MUHAMMADAN TRADITIONS 

prayer is incumbent over every (dead) Muslim, whether he be 
righteous or unrighteous, even though he be guilty of mortal 
sins.” *—Abtl Daud . 

On What is Necessary for the Leader oe Prayers 

It is related from Abu Hurairah that, ‘ The Apostle of God 
said, “When any one of you prays for the people (as leader), 
then let him be brief, because amongst them are sick and weak 
and aged persons; and when any one of you prays for himself, 
then let him be as long as he likes.” *— Muslim, Al Bukhdri. 

It is related from Qais binu’l-abu Ijjazim that he said, 
‘ Abu Mas‘ud informed me that a man said, “ O Apostle of God, 
by God! verily I delay to come to the morning prayers on 
account of so-and-so making the prayers so long for us.” Then 
I never saw the Apostle of God more angry in the place of 
instruction than he was then. Afterwards the Prophet said, 
“Verily amongst you are those who cause people to withdraw 
themselves (from prayers) ; therefore whoever of you prays 
(as leader) for the people, let him be indulgent, because there 
are amongst them, weak and aged and indigent.” *— Muslim, Al 
Bukhdri 


On the Duties of a Congregation 

It is related from Abu Hurairah that, 4 The Apostle of God 
said, “ Do not hasten before the leader of the prayers (in recit¬ 
ing). When he says, ‘God is great*, then do ye say ‘God is 
great*, and when he says, ‘Nor of those who go astray,’ 
then do ye say, ‘ Amen,* and when he bows down, then do ye bow 
down, and when he repeats the words, ‘ God hears him who 
praises Him,’ then say ye, ‘O God our Lord, to Thee be the 
praise.* ” *— Muslim, Al Bukhari', except, that Al Bukhdri does 
not mention the words ‘ When he says, “ Nor of those who go 
astray.” * 

It is related from ‘Ayesha that she said, ‘When the Prophet 
became oppressed (with the sickness from which he died), Bilal 
came to call him to prayers, and he said, “ Command Abu Bakr 
to pray for the people (as leader).” So Abu Bakr prayed 
those days. Afterwards the Prophet felt some alleviation (of 
his sickness) and rose up and was led between two men, and 
his feet dragged upon the earth, until he entered the mosque. 


THE BOOK OF PRAYER 


51 


And when Abu Bakr heard the low sound (of the Prophet's 
approach) he began to go to the rear ; but the Apostle of God 
motioned to him not to go to the rear. ' Then the Prophet came 
until he sat on the left hand of Abu Bakr. And Abu Bakr was 
praying standing, but the Apostle of God was praying sitting. 
Abu Bakr was following the prayer of the Apostle of God, and 
the people were following the prayer of Abu Bakr.'— Muslim , 
Al Bukhdrt . 

It is related from Abu Hurairah that he said, * Whoever 
raises his head or lowers it before the leader of the prayers 
does, verily his forelock is in the hands of Satan.’— Mdlik r. 

Concerning Those Who say the Prayers Twice 

It is related from Jabir that he said, ‘ Mu‘adh used to say 
the evening prayer with the Prophet, after which he used to 
return to his family and pray the evening prayer with them. 
And this was supererogatory for him.’— Muslim , Al Bukhdrt . 

It is related from Busr bin Mihjan from his father that, 4 He 
was in an assembly with the Apostle of God, and the call to 
prayer was given; and the Apostle of God stood up and 
repeated the prayer ; and he turned, and Mihjan was in his seat. 
Therefore the Apostle of God said to him, “ What prevented 
thee from praying with the people ? Art thou not a Muslim ?” 
He replied, “ Yes, O Apostle of God, but I had already said my 
prayers in my family.” Then the Apostle of God said to him, 
“ When thou goest to the mosque, having already said thy 
prayers, and the prayers are being said, then pray with the 
people, although thou hast already prayed.” ’— Mdlik > An Nasal . 

It is related from Sulaiman, a freed man of Maimunah, 
that he said, ‘ Ibn ‘Omar came to us on the pavement (of the 
mosque) when they were praying. So I said, “ Wilt thou not 
pray with them ? ” He replied, “ I have already prayed, 
and I heard the Apostle of God say, ‘ Do not pray one prayer 
twice in the same day.’ ” ’— Ahmad , Abu Ddud , An Nasdi. 

• 

On Supererogatory Prayers 

It is related from, ‘Abdu’llah bin Shaqiq that he said, * I 
asked ‘Ayesha concerning the voluntary prayers of the Apostle 
of God, and she replied that, “ He used to pray in four 


52 SELECTIONS FROM MUHAMMADAN TRADITIONS 

rak'ahs 1 in my house before the mid-day prayer; then he used 
to go out and pray with the people. Then he would enter 
(my house) and pray in two rak'ahs . And he used to pray the 
sunset prayers with the people, after which he would enter (my 
house) and pray in two rak'a/is. After that he would pray 
the night prayer with the people, and would then enter my 
house and pray in two rak'ahs. And he used to pray in nine 
rajahs at night, amongst which were the ivitr 2 prayers. And 
he used to pray a long time at night, standing, and a long time 
at night, sitting. And when he used to recite standing, he 
performed the bowing and the prostrations whilst he was 
standing ; and when he recited sitting down, he bowed and 
prostrated himself whilst he was sitting. And when the dawn 
broke he would pray in two rak'ahs .” ’— Muslim . 

It is related from Umm Habitath that she said, 4 1 heard the 
Apostle of God say, “Whoever performs prayers in four 
rak'ahs before the midday prayer and in four after it, God has 
made the fire prohibited for him.” ’— Ahmad , At Tirmidhi , Abu 
Ddud , An Nas&i , Ib?i Mdjah . 

It is related from Abu Hurairaih that, ‘ The Apostle of God 
said, 44 Whoever prays in six rak'ahs after the sunset prayer, 
and does not between the time of praying them say anything 
evil, he will be recompensed (with a reward) equal to that of 
twelve years of worship.” ’—At Tirmidhi. 

It is related from Ka‘b bin 4 Ujrah that he said, 4 The 
Prophet came to a mosque of the Bani ‘Abdu’l-Ashhal and 
prayed in it the evening prayers. And when they had finished 
their prayers he saw them after that praising God, and he said 
to them, 4 4 These are prayers for your houses ”’—Abu Ddud . 
According to At Tirmidhi and. An Nasdi , the tradition runs thus, 
4 The people stood up to say supererogatory prayers, and the 
Prophet said, 44 You must say these prayers in your houses.” ’ 

On Prayers Said at Night 

It is related from Masruq that he said, 4 I asked ‘Ayesha 
about the prayers which the Apostle of God used to say at 

1 See note on p. 30. 

* A witr prayer, is one consisting of an odd number of rak ' ahs . It is 
said at night, and is said in addition to the obligatory prayers. 


THE BOOK OF PRAYER 


53 


night, and she replied, “ He used at various times to say them 
in seven and nine and eleven rak'ahs , besides the two rak'ahs 
which he made in the morning/' ’— Al Bukhdri. 

It is related from Ibn ‘Abbas that/ He went to sleep near the 
Apostle of God. Then the Apostle of God awoke and cleaned 
his teeth and performed the ablutions, saying as he did so, 
“ Verily in the creation of the heavens and the earth,” until he 
finished the chapter. Then he rose up and prayed in two 
rak'ahs, and in these he prolonged the standing and the bowing 
and the prostrations. After that he turned away and went to 
sleep until he snored. He did that three times ; six rak'ahs in 
all. In each of those he cleaned his teeth and performed the 
ablutions and recited those verses. Then he repeated the witr 
prayers three times/— Muslim. 

It is related from ‘Ayesha that she said, ‘When the 
Apostle of God grew corpulent and heavy, most of his prayers 
were said sitting/— Muslim, Al Bukhdri. 

It is related from Abu Hurairah that ‘ The recital of the 
prayers of the Prophet at night was sometimes in a loud voice, 
and sometimes in a low voice. ’— Abil Ddud. 

On What is to be Said in the Night Prayers 

It is related from Ibn ‘Abbas that he said, ‘ When the 
Prophet rose at night to keep the night watch he used to say, 
“O God, to Thee be the praise. Thou art the Founder of the 
heavens and the earth and of whatsoever is therein, and to 
Thee be the praise. Thou art the Light of the hesyens and 
the earth and of whatsoever is therein. And to Thee be the 
praise. Thou art the King of the heavens and the earth and of 
whatsoever is therein. To Thee be the praise. Thou art the 
Truth, and Thy promise is true, and the meeting with Thee is 
true, and Thy word is true, and paradise is true, and the fire is 
true, and the prophets are true, and Muhammad is true, and the 
hour (of resurrection) is true. O God, to Thee I resign my¬ 
self, and in Thee I place my faith, and upon Thee I put my 
trust, ancf to Thee shall I return, and with Thee (as Helper) do 
I fight, and to Thee I make my plaint. Therefore, forgive me 
(the sins) which I have committed heretofore, and those which 
I shall commit hereafter, and those which I have concealed, and 
those which I have committed openly, and those which Thou 


54 SELECTIONS FROM MUHAMMADAN TRADITIONS 

knowest better than I. Thou art the Beginning and the End. 
There is no God but Thee, and there is no God beside Thee.” * 
— Muslim , Al Bukhari . 

It is related from ‘Ayesha that she said,* When the Apostle 
of God used to wake at night, he would say, “There is no God 
but Thee. Adoration and praise be to Thee. O God, I ask 
pardon of Thee for my sin, and I supplicate Thy mercy. O 
God, increase me in knowledge, and lead not my heart astray 
after that Thou hast guided me. And bestow on me mercy 
from Thyself, for Thou art the Giver.” ’— Abu Daud . 

On Things which Encourage to Prayer at Night 

It is related from Abu Hurairah that, * The Apostle of God 
said, “ Satan ties three knots on the back of the head of each 
one of you when he goes to sleep, and repeats over each knot 
the words, * The night is long for thee, therefore take thy sleep.’ 
And if the man wakes up and remembers God, then one of the 
knots becomes unloosed; and if he performs the ablutions, 
another knot becomes unloosed ; and if he engage in prayer, 
the remaining knot becomes unloosed, and he rises from sleep 
in the morning with gladness and a pure mind ; otherwise he 
rises with an impure mind and void of energy.” ’— Muslim , Al 
Bukhari. 

It is related from Al Mughira that he said, * The Prophet 
stood (at night prayers) until his feet swelled. Therefore it 
was said to him, “ Why dost thou act thus, when the sins thou 
hast committed heretofore and those thou wilt commit here¬ 
after are all forgiven ? ” He replied, “Shall I not be a grateful 
servant ? ” ’— Muslim , Al Bukhari. 

It is related from ‘AbduMlah bin ‘Omar that, * The Apostle 
of God said, “The prayer most precious in the sight of God 
was the prayer of David, and the fasts most precious to God 
were the fasts of David. He used to sleep half the night, and 
then rise for one-third of the night, and then sleep one-sixth 
of it. And he used to fast a day and then abstain from fasting 
for a day.” ’— Muslim , Al Bukhari . 

It is related from Abu Umamah that, * The Apostle of God 
said, “You ought to rise at night (for prayer), for verily that 
was the practice of the righteous who lived before you. And it is 


THE BOOK OF PRAYER 55 

a means of your drawing near to your Lord, and a covering for 
sins and a preventive of evil.” *— At Tirmidhi . 

It is related from Abu Sa‘idu’l-Khudri that, ‘The Apostle 
of God said, “There are three persons with whom God is well 
pleased: a man when he rises at night in order to pray, people 
when they dress their ranks for prayer, and people when they 
dress their ranks for fighting with the enemy/’ ’— In Sharhus- 
Sunnah . 

It is related from Abu Hurairah that he said, ‘ A man came 
to the Prophet and said, “Verily such an one prays at night, 
and steals when the dawn breaks.” He replied, “ That which 
thou speakest of will prevent^ him.” ’— Ahmad . 

It is related from Ibn ‘Abbas that, ‘ The Apostle of God 
said, “ The noblest of my followers are those who carry the 
Qur’an (in their memories), and are companions of the night 
(by keeping awake for prayer).” ’— Al Baihaqi . 

On Determination in Religious Observances 

It is related from ‘Ayesha that, ‘ The Apostle of God 
said, “Take such works as ye are able to perform, for verily 
God will not tire (of rewarding) till ye tire (of doing).”’— 
Muslim , Al Bukhari 

It is related from ‘Imran bin Husain that, ‘The Apostle 
of God said, “ Say your prayers standing, but if you are not able, 
then say them sitting, and if you are not able to do that, then 
say them reclining on your side.” ’— Al Bukhari . 

It is related from ‘Imran bin Husain that, ‘He asked the 
Prophet concerning the prater of a man which he said sitting. 
He replied, “ It is better if he pray standing, and he who prays 
sitting will get half the reward of him who prays standing, 
and he who prays lying down will get half the reward of him 
who prays sitting.” ’— Al Bukhari . 

On IVitr 1 —Prayers 

It i£ related from ‘Ayesha that she said, * The Apostle of 
God used to pray at night in thirteen rak'ahs , five of which 
were made witr prayers. He sat in none of them except the 
last.*—Muslim, Al Bukhdri. 


x See note on p. 52. 


56 


SELECTIONS FROM MUHAMMADAN TRADITIONS 


It is related from Abu Hurairah that he said, ‘ My friend 
(Muhammad) ordered me three things: to fast three days in 
each month, to pray in two rak'ahs in the early morning before 
sunrise, and to pray witr prayers before going to sleep.*— 
Muslim , Al Bukh&ri . 

It is related from Ghudaif binu’l-Harith that he said, ‘ I 
said to ‘Ayesha, “ Didst thou see the Apostle of God whether, 
after impurity, he bathed himself in the beginning of the night 
or the latter part of it ? ” She replied, “ Sometimes he bathed 
himself in the beginning of the night, and sometimes he 
bathed himself in the latter part of it.” I said, “ God is great! 
Praise be to God, who has established such latitude in this 
matter.” Then I asked, “ Did he perform ivitr prayers at the 
beginning of the night, or at the latter part of it.?” She 
replied, “Sometimes he performed witr prayers at the begin¬ 
ning of the night, and sometimes he performed them at the 
end of it.” I said, “God is great! Praise be to God, who has 
established such latitude in this matter.” Then I asked, “ Did 
he raise his voice in the recitation (of the Qur’an), or lower 
it ? ” She replied, “ Sometimes he raised it, and sometimes he 
lowered it.” I said, “God is great! Praise be to God, who 
has established such latitude in this matter.” ’— Abu Daud . 

On Special Forms of Supplication 
It is related from Abu Hurairah that, * When the Apostle 
of God wished to invoke a curse on anyone, or supplicate (a 
blessing) on their behalf, he prated after bowing down, and 
generally said, when he prayed, “God hears him who praiseth 
Him. O Lord, to Thee be the praise. O God, free Al Walid 
binu’l-Walid and Salamah bin Hisham and ‘Ayyash bin.abi 
Rabiyah O God, be severe to (the tribe of) Mutfar, and make 
it in years (of famine) like unto the years of Joseph.” And he 
used to say in some of his prayers, “O God, curse such and 
such tribes of Arabs,” until God sent down the verse, “Thou 
hast no part in the matter.” ’— Muslim , Al Bukhdrt . 4 

On Standing in Prayer in the Month Ramapan 
It is related from Zaid bin Thabit that, 1 The Apostle of 
God said, “The prayer of a man in his house is better than 


THE BOOK OF PRAYER 57 

his prayer in this mosque of mine, except the obligatory 
prayers. ” *— Abu Ddud , At Tirmidhi ". 

It is related from Ayesha that, ‘The Prophet said, “ Dost 
thou know, O ‘Ayesha, what (excellence) is in this night, namely 
the night of the half (month) after Sh‘aban (i.e., the fifteenth 
of Ramadan) ? ” She replied, “What is in it, O Apostle of 
God ? ” He said, “ In it all those born of the sons of Adam in the 
current year are written down, and in it all those who are to 
die of the sons of Adam in the current year are written down, 
and in it their actions are taken up, and in it their daily 
subsistence is sent down.” She replied, “O Apostle of Godi 
do none enter heaven, except by the mercy of God most 
High ? ” He said three times, “ None enter heaven, except by 
the mercy of God most High.” I said, “Not even thou, O 
Apostle of God? ” Then he placed his hand on his head and 
said, “ Not even I, except that God cover me with His mercy.” 
This he said three times. 1 — Al Baihaqi. 

It is related from ‘All that, ‘ The Apostle of God said, 
“ When it is the night of the half (month) after Sh‘aban then 
remain standing (in prayer) the night thereof, and fast during 
the day thereof, for verily God most High sends down on that 
night at the setting of the sun to the heavens surrounding the 
earth and says, ‘ Is there no one to ask forgiveness, that I may 
forgive him ; and is there no one seeking food, that I may pro¬ 
vide for him ; and is there no one in affliction, that I may relieve 
him ? And is there such-and-such ? ’—until the day breaks.” ’— 
I bn Mdjah . 


Concerning the Morning Prayers 

It is related from Mu‘adhah that she said, ‘ I asked 
‘Ayesha, “ How many rak'ahs did the Apostle of God perform 
at the morning prayers ? ” She replied, “ Four rak'ahs , and 
he also exceeded that, according to the will of God.” Muslim . 

It is related from Buraidah that he said, ‘ I heard the 
Apostle of God say, “ There are three hundred and sixty joints 
in a man, therefore it is his duty to give alms for each joint of 
them.” They replied, “ And who is able to do that, O Prophet 
of God?” He said, “Bury the phlegm which falls in the 
mosque, and remove anything from the road, and if thou dost 

8 


58. SELECTIONS FROM MUHAMMADAN TRADITIONS 

not find anything (impure), then two rak'ahs at the morning; 
prayer will suffice thee.” ’— AbH D&ud. 

It i$, related from Anas that, 4 The Apostle of God said, 
“ He who performs twelve rak'ahs at the morning prayer, God 
will .build for him a palace of gold in paradise.” ’— At Tirmidhi , 
I bn M&iah. 

It is related from Abu Sa‘id that he said, 4 The Apostle of 
God used to pray so long in the morning prayers that we used, 
tp say, “He will never leave off.” And he used to abstain 
from.them so long that we used to say, “He will never pray, 
them.” ’— At Tirmidhi. 

On Voluntary Prayers 

It is related from Abu Hurairah that, ‘ The Apostle of God 
said to Bilal at the time of the early morning prayers, “O 
Bilal, inform me of the act which thou hast performed in Islam 
from which thou hopest most ; for verily I heard the noise of 
thy shoes before me in paradise.” He replied, “I never 
performed any action from which I hoped any thing, with the 
exception that I never purified myself at any hour of the night 
or day without praying the prayer laid down for me conform¬ 
able to that purification.” ’— Muslim , Al Bukhari. 

On the Prayer called Tasbih 

It is related from Ibn ‘Abbas that, 4 The Prophet said to 
‘Abbas bin ‘Abdu’l-Muttalib, “O ‘Abbas, O my uncle, shall 
I not give thee, shall I not bestow on thee, shall I not inform 
thee of ten particular acts which, when thou doest them, God 
will forgive thee thy sins first and last, old and new, uninten¬ 
tional and intentional, small and great, hidden and disclosed, 
namely, that thou pray in four rak'ahs and recite in every 
rak'ah the opening chapter of the Book and any other chapter, 
and when thou dost finish, the recital in the first rak'ah then 
stand up and say ; 4 Adoration be to God! ’ and 4 Praise be to 
God!’ 4 There is no God but Allah,’and ‘God is great,’ 
fifteen times. Afterwards, that thou perform the bowing 
down and say the above words whilst bowing ten times. After 
that thou must raise thy head from the bowings and repeat 
them whilst thou art bowing ten times. After that thou must 
Vtwn Y>oV\ngs and repeat the words ten 


THE BOOK OF PRAYER 


<59 


times. After that thou must fall down in prostration and 
repeat them whilst thou art prostrating ten times. After 
that thou must raise thy head from prostration and repeat 
them ten times. Then thou must prostrate again and repeat 
the words ten times. Then thou must raise thy head and say 
them ten times, that is seventy five times in every rak'ah . 
Thou must do that in four rak'ahs . If thou art able to pray 
thus once every day, then do so ; but if thou canst not do 
this, then once every Friday ; and if thou art not able to do 
this, then once in every month ; but if thou canst not do this, 
then once every year ; but if thou canst not do that, then do it 
once in thy lifetime.’’ 'Abu Daud , IbnMajah . 

On Prayers for a Journey 

It is related from Anas that he said, ‘ We went out with the 
Apostle of God from Madina to Mecca, and he was praying in 
two rak'ahs at each prayer, until we returned to Madina.’ It 
was said to him (Anas), ‘ Did you stay any time in Mecca ? ’ He 
‘replied, ‘ We stayed in it ten days.’— Muslim , Al Bukhdri. 

It is related from Ibn ‘Abbas that he said, ‘ When the 
Apostle of God was on a journey he used to say the midday 
and afternoon prayers together, and he used to say the sunset 
and night prayers together .’—Al Bukhdri. 

It is related from Ibn ‘Omar that he said, ‘ When the 
Apostle of God was on a journey he used to say his prayers, 
except the obligatory prayers, on his camel in any direction it 
turned with him. And he used to make signs for the night 
prayers, and he used to perform the witr 1 prayers on his 
camel.’— Muslim, Al Bukhari. 

It is related from Jabir that he said, ‘ The Apostle of God 
sent me on a certain business, and I returned, and he was 
saying his prayers on his camel towards the East, and he was 
making his prostrations lower than the bowings ’ —Abd Ddtid . 

It is related from ‘Ayesha that she said, ‘ Prayers were 
first ord§ined in two rak'ahs. Afterwards the Apostle of God 
fled to Madina and four rak'ahs were appointed ; but the prayers 
to be said on a journey were according to the first ordinance 
(two rak'ahs ). Al Zuhri said, ‘ I said to ‘Urwah, “What is 


See note on page 52. 


60 SELECTIONS FROM MUHAMMADAN TRADITIONS 

the matter with ‘Ayesha, that she says the full prayers ? ” 
He replied, 44 She interprets it as ‘Uthman does.”’— Muslim , 
Al Bukhdri . 

Concerning the Friday Prayers 
It is related from Abu Hurairah that, 4 The Apostle of God 
said, “We the last (in time) will be the first on the day of 
resurrection although they (the Jews and Christians) were 
given the Book before us, and it was given to us after them. 
Then they changed this day of theirs, the observance of which 
was made obligatory for them, namely Friday, and God guided 
us to it, and the people follow us in this matter. The Jews 
observe the morrow, and the Christians the day after the 
morrow.” * And in a tradition from Muslim it runs, 1 He said, 
44 We, the last, will be the first on the day of resurrection, and 
we will be the first who will enter heaven.” ’ 

It is related from Abu Hurairah that he said, 1 1 went out 
to Mount Tur and I met Ka‘b, a learned man of the Jews, and 
I sat down with him, and he spoke to me about the Taurat, and 
I told him about the Apostle of God. And it came to pass 
that when I spoke to him I said, “The Apostle of God said 
that the best day on which the sun rose was Friday, because on 
that day Adam was created, and on it he was cast down (out of 
paradise), and on it he repented, and on it he died, and on it 
will take place the resurrection, And there is no moving 
creature, except the genii and men, that does not await Friday 
from the time it dawns till the sun rises out of fear of the 
resurrection. And on that day there is an hour in which no 
servant, being a Muslim, prays and asks God for anything but 
God gives it to him.” Ka‘b replied, 44 That takes place on one 
day in every year.” I said, “Rather it comes on every 
Friday.” Then Ka‘b read the Taurat and said, “The Apostle 
of God spoke truly.” 1 Abu Hurairah said, * I met ‘Abdu’llah 
bin Salam, and I spoke to him of my sitting with Ka‘b, the 
learned man of the Jews, and of what I had said to him 
concerning Friday ; and I informed him that Ka‘b said, “ That 
takes place on one day in every year.” ‘Abdu’llah bin Salam 
replied, “ Ka‘b lied.” I said to him, “After that Ka‘b read 
the Taurat and said, ‘Rather it comes on every. Friday.* ” 
Then ‘Abdu’llah bin Salam said, “ Ka‘b spoke the truth.*' 


THE BOOK OF PRAYER 


61 


Afterwards ‘Abdu’llah bin Salam said, “ I have certainly come 
to know what hour it is.” Abu Hurairah said, “ Tell me of it, 
and keep it not to thyself.” ‘Abdu’llah bin Salam replied, 
41 It is the last hour of Friday.” I said to him, 44 How can it 
be the last hour of Friday, when the Apostle of God has said, 

4 It is an hour in which no servant, being a Muslim, prays and 
asks God for anything, but God gives it to him ? ’ ” ‘Abdu’llah 
bin Salam replied, 44 Did not the Apostle of God say, ‘ He who 
sits in an assembly waiting for prayer is in prayer until he 
prays ? * ” I said, 44 Yes.” He said, 44 Well it is that hour.” ’ — 
Mdlik % Abu Ddud , At Tirmidhi , An Nasdi . 

It is related from Aus bin Aus that, 4 The Apostle of God 
said, “Verily Friday is one of the excellent of your days. In 
it Adam was born, in it he died, in it will take place the blow¬ 
ing (of the trumpet at the resurrection) and in it (will be 
heard) the noise of the thunderbolt. Therefore on that day 
multiply your prayers for blessings on me, for verily your 
prayers are presented before me.” They replied, 44 O Apostle 
of God, how will our prayers be placed before thee when thou 
hast turned to dust ? ” He said, “ Verily God has forbidden to 
the earth the bodies of the prophets.” ’— Abu Ddud , An Nasdi , 
I bn Mdjah 

It is related from ‘Abdullah bin ‘Omar that, ‘ The Apostle 
of God said, 44 There is no Muslim who dies on Friday or on the 
night thereof, but God preserves him from the tortures of the 
grave.” *— Ahmad , At Tirmidhi. 

On the Obligatory Friday Prayers 
It is related from Samurah bin Jundub that, ‘The Apostle 
of God said, “ He who neglects the Friday prayers without 
excuse, let him give in alms one dinar , and if he cannot get 
it f then half a dinar.” *— Ahmad , Abu Ddud . 

It is related from Tariq bin Shihab that, * The Apostle of 
God said, “ The Friday prayers in the assembly are proper and 
obligatory for every Muslim, except for four persons : a slave, 
a woman, a child, or a sick person.” ’— Abti Ddud . 

On Cleansing the Body and Hastening to Prayer 
It is related from Nafi 4 that he said, 4 1 heard Ibn ‘Omar 
say that the Apostle of God prohibited any man from making 


62 


SELECTIONS FROM MUHAMMADAN TRADITIONS 


another to rise from his seat and sitting therein himself/ It 
was said to Nafi‘, ‘ Does this refer to Friday prayers ? ' He 
replied, 4 To Friday prayers, and to others also.’—Mustim, Al 
Bukhdri. 

It is related from ‘Abdu’llah bin ‘Omar that, ‘The Apostle 
of God said, “ Three classes of people come to Friday prayers : 
the man who comes to them indulging in idle talk, and that 
is his reward therefrom ; the man who comes in order to make 
supplication, and he is a man who asks of God, and if He wills 
He gives him his request, and if He wills He refuses it; and 
the man who comes to prayers in quietness and silence, and does 
not mark the neck of a Muslim nor inconvenience any one, 
and this is an atonement (for his sins) until the Friday which 
follows, and for three days longer, because God says, “ He who 
comes with one good action, will receive ten like unto it.”’— 
Abu Ddud. 

It is related from Ibn ‘Abbas that, ‘ The Apostle of God 
said, “ He who speaks on Friday whilst the leader of the 
prayers is delivering his address, is like an ass which carries 
books; and whoever says to him, ‘Be silent!’ will not have 
performed acceptable Friday players.” ’— Ahmad. 

On the Public Address and Prayers 

It is related from Jabir bin Sanuirah that he said, ‘The 
Prophet made two public addresses (at the Friday prayers), 
and he used to sit between them and recite the Qur’an and 
admonish the people. And his prayers were of medium length, 
and his address was of medium length.’— Muslim. 

It is related from ‘Ammar that he said, ‘ I heard the 
Apostle of God say, “Verily the length of a man’s prayers and 
the brevity of his public address are signs of his understand¬ 
ing. Therefore lengthen the prayers, and shorten the public 
address. Verily in rhetoric is deception.” ’— Muslim: 

It is related from Jabir bin Samurah that he said, ‘The 
Prophet used to give the public address standing/ Then he 
would sit down, then he would rise up and deliver the second 
address standing. Whoever tells thee that he used to deliver 
the address sitting has lied, for by God ! I prayed with the 
Prophet more than two thousand prayers/— Muslim. 


THE BOOK OF PRAYER 


63 


It is related from ‘Umarah bin Ruaibah that, 1 He saw Bishr 
bin Marwan standing: on the pulpit and raising his hands 
(when delivering the public address), and he said, “May God 
curse these two hands! for verily I have seen the Apostle of 
God, and he did no more than speak with his hand thus ”—and 
he made a sign with his fore-finger.’— Muslim . 

On Prayers of Alarm 

It is related from Salim bin ‘Abdu’llah bin ‘Omar, from his 
father, that he said, ‘ I went on a military expedition with the 
Apostle of God towards Nejd, and we faced the enemy and 
drew up in line to meet them. Then the Apostle of God stood 
up to lead the prayers for us; and one party stood up 
with him and one party remained facing the enemy, and the 
Apostle of God bowed down with those who were with him and 
prostrated himself in two prostrations. After that, they moved 
off to the place of those who had not prayed, and they came 
and the Apostle of God bowed once with them and prostrated 
in two prostrations. Then he gave the salutation, and every 
one of them stood up and bowed once for himself and pro¬ 
strated in two prostrations.’ And Nafi‘ has related the same, 
but adds, ‘ And if the danger were more imminent than that, 
they prayed man by man, standing on their feet or mounted or 
facing the Qibla or without facing it.’ Nafi‘ says, ‘I do not 
imagine that Ibn ‘Omar mentioned that, except he had it from 
the Apostle of God .’—Al Bukhdri . 

It is related from Jabir that he said, ‘ We went forward 
with the Apostle of God until we came to Dhatu’l-Riqa‘; 
and when we came to a shady tree we left it for the Apostle of 
God. And a man of the polytheists came, and the Apostle’s 
sword was hanging from the tree, and he took the sword of 
the. Prophet of God and unsheathed it and said to the Apostle 
of God, “Art thou not afraid of meV’ He replied, “No.” 
He said, “ Who can protect thee from me ? ” He replied, “ God 
will protect me frojn thee.” Jabir said, “ Then the companions 
of the Prophet frightened the man, and he returned the sword 
to its sheath and hung it up. Then we were called to prayers, 
and.the Prophet prayed with one party in two rak'ahs, and then 
they moved behind and he prayed with the other , party in two 


64 SELECTIONS FROM MUHAMMADAN TRADITIONS 

genuflections. Thus the Apostle of God prayed in all, in four 
rak'ahs, but the people prayed in two only.”*— Muslim , Al 
Bukhdri\ 

It is related from Abu Hurairah that, ‘ The Apostle of God 
alighted between Pajnan and ‘Usfan. Then the polytheists 
said, “Verily prayer is more precious to these people than 
their fathers and their children—and it was the afternoon 
prayer—do ye, therefore, join forces and advance upon them 
in one attack.” But verily Gabriel came to the Prophet and 
commanded him to divide his companions into two parties and 
to pray with them, and that the other party should stand behind 
them and remain on guard holding their arms. And they 
prayed in one rak K ah, but the Apostle of God prayed in two 
rak'ahs.'—At Tirmidhi, An Nasai. 

Concerning the Prayers of the Two Great Festivals 

It is related from Jabir bin Samurah that he said, * I 
said prayers with the Apostle of God at the two festivals (of 
sacrifice and of breaking the fast) not only once or twice, 
(but many times) without the call to prayer or the words 
“ Prayers are now ready.” '— Muslim. 

It is related that Ibn ‘Abbas was asked, ‘ Wast thou 
present with the Apostle of God at the festival ? * He replied, 
‘Yes, the Apostle of God came out at the festival and said 
the prayers, after which he gave the address—but Ibn ‘Abbas 
did not mention the call to prayers or the repetition of the words, 

“ Prayer is now ready ”—then he came to the women and 
admonished them and gave them advice and commanded them to 
give alms. And I saw them put their hands to their ears and 
throats and throw (their ornaments) to Bilal, after which he 
and Bilal went away to his house/— Muslim , Al Bukhari . 

It is related from ‘Ayesha that she said, ‘Abu Bakr 
entered where she was, and there were two girls with her on 
the day of Mina, and they were playing the tambourine and 
beating it/—And in another tradition it runs, ‘ They were singing 
the words which the helpers repeated on the day (of the battle) 
of Bu‘ath—and the Prophet was covered with his cloth. And 
Abu Bakr rebuked them; but the Prophet uncovered his face 
and said, “ Let them alone, O Abu Bakr, for verily these are 
days of festival/' * And in another tradition it runs, “O Abu 


THE BOOK OF PRAYER 6$ 

Bakr, every nation has its festival, and this is ours.’— Muslim, 
Al Bukhdrt. 

It is related from Al Barai that he said, ‘The Prophet 
addressed us on the day of sacrifice and said, “ Verily the first 
thing: we do on this day of ours is that we repeat the prayers. 
Then we return and offer the sacrifice. And whoever does 
that has followed our practice ; and whoever sacrifices before 
we pray has merely hurried in providing sheep’s flesh for his 
family, he has in no respect fulfilled his duty towards God.” ’— 
Muslim , Al Bukhari . 

It is related from Anas that, ‘ The Prophet came to 
Madina and the people of Madina had two days on which they 
used to have sports. And he said, “ What are these two days ? ” 
They replied, “ We used, in the time of ignorance (before 
Islam)-to play on these days.” The Apostle of God said, 
“ God has exchanged for you something better than these f 
namely, the day of sacrifice and the day of breaking the fast.”’ 
—Abu Daud . 

It is related from Abu’l-Huwairith that, ‘ The Apostle of 
God wrote to ‘Amru bin Ilazm when he was in Najran, “ Be 
quick in the performance of the feast of sacrifice, and delay in 
the observance of the feast of breaking the fast; and admonish 
the people.” ’—Ash Shall, 

It is related from Abu Sa'idu’l-Khudri that, ‘ The Apostle 
of God used to come out on the day of the festival of sacrifice 
and on the day of the festival of breaking the fast and begin 
with the prayers. And when he had said his prayers he used to 
rise up and face the people, whilst they remained sitting in the 
place in which they said their prayers. And if he had occasion 
to send (an army anywhere) he used to mention it to the 
people, or if he had occasion for anything else he commanded 
them with regard to it. And he used to say, “Give alms! 
give alms! give alms!” And most of those who gave alms 
were women. Then he would take his departure. And the 
practice continued thus until Marwan binu’l-lJakam. And I 
came out by the side of Marwan until we arrived at the place 
of prayer, and behold! Kathir binuVSalt had built a pulpit 
of mud and unburnt bricks, and Marwan began to push me by 
the hand as if he would drag me to the pulpit. And I was 

9 


66 SELECTIONS FROM MUHAMMADAN TRADITIONS 

dragging him towards the prayers. And when I saw his 
design (to have the address before the prayers) I said, 
“Where is the beginning of prayer? ” He replied, “No, O 
Abu Sa'id, that which thou knowest has been abandoned.” I 
said, “Never! by Him in whose hand is my life! You will 
never bring anything better than what I know.” This he said 
thrice and departed.’— Muslim . 

On Sacrifice 

It is related from ‘Ayesha that, ‘ The Apostle of God 
ordered a ram with horns to be brought that walked in black¬ 
ness, slept in blackness and looked in blackness (i.e., which had 
black feet, sides and eyes). And it was brought that he 
might sacrifice it. He said, “ O ‘Ayesha, bring me a knife.” 
Then he said, “ Sharpen it with a stone,” and I did so. Then 
he took it and took the ram and threw it on its side, then he 
slew it. After that he said, “In the name of God! O God, 
accept this from Muhammad, and the family of Muhammad, 
and the followers of Muhammad. ” Then he offered the flesh 
to the poor.’— Muslim . 

It is related from Jabir that, ‘The Apostle of God said, 
“ Do not sacrifice any but a beast of full age ; but if that be 
difficult for you, then sacrifice a female lamb.” ’— Muslim. 

It is related from Jabir that he said, ‘The Prophet, on the 
day of sacrifice, killed two black and white, castrated, male 
sheep with horns; and when he turned them (towards the 
temple at Mecca) he said, “ I turn my face to Him who created 
the heavens and the earth, according to the religion of Abra¬ 
ham the Hanif; and I am not one of the polytheists. Verily my 
prayers and my devotions and my life and my death are 
devoted to God, the Lord of the worlds. He has no partner, 
and for that I have been commanded, and I am one of the 
Muslims. O God (this sacrifice) is from Thee and for Thee on 
behalf of Muhammad and his people. In the name of God. 
God is great.” Then he sacrified.’— Ahmad % Abu Daud , Ibn 
Mdjah . 

It is related from tlanash that he said, 1 1 saw ‘AH sacrifice 
two male sheep, and I said to him, “What is this?” He 
replied, “ Verily the Apostle of God ordered me to sacrifice for 
him. Therefore I am sacrificing for him.” ’— Abit Ddud. 


THE BOOK OF PRAYER 


W 


It is related from A1 Barai bin ‘Azib that, 4 Verily the 
Apostle of God was asked what (animals) were unfit for 
sacrifice. Then he made a sign with his hand and said, 44 There 
are four: the lame whose lameness is clearly perceived, the 
blind whose blindness is manifest, the sick whose disease is 
manifest, and those very emaciated which are not without 
blemish.” ’— Malik , Ahmad , At Tirmidht . 

It is related from ‘Ayesha that she said, 4 The Apostle of 
God said, 44 The sons of Adam have done no action on the day 
of sacrifice more pleasing to God than the shedding of blood, 
and verily it will come on the day of resurrection with its horns 
and its hairs and its hoofs, and verily the blood will be accepted 
of God before it falls to the ground. Theiefore rejoice in it.” * 
—At Tirmidht , Ibtt Majah. 

It is related from Zaid bin Arqam that he said, 4 The com¬ 
panions of the Apostle of God said, 44 O Apostle of God, what 
are these sacrifices?” He replied, 44 They are the practice of 
your father Abraham.” They said, 44 And what benefit do we 
derive from them, O Apostle of God?” He replied, “There 
is benefit in every hair.” They said, 44 And what if it be wool, 
O Apostle of God?” He replied, “There is benefit in every 
hair of the wool.” *— Ahmad , Ibn Mdjah . 

On Prayers at Eclipses 

It is related from Abu Musa that he said, 4 There was an 
eclipse of the sun, and the Prophet rose up in terror, fearing 
that the hour (of resurrection) was coming. And he came to 
the mosque and prayed standing and bowing and prostrating 
himself a long time such as I never saw him do before. And 
he said, “These signs which God sends are not on account 
of the death or life of any one ; but God frightens His servants 
therewith. Therefore when ye see any such, flee for refuge by 
remembering Him and calling upon Him and asking pardon of 
Him.” ’— Muslim , Al Bukhari. 

It is related from Jabir that he said, ‘There was an eclipse 
of the sun in the time of the Apostle of God on the day on which 
Abraham, the son of the Apostle of God, died. And he 
prayed with the people in six rak'ahs and with four prostrations.* 
— Muslim . 


68 SELECTIONS FROM MUHAMMADAN TRADITIONS 

It is related from Asma 4 bint Abu Bakr that she said, ‘ Verily 
the Prophet ordered the liberation of a slave at the time of an 
eclipse of the sun/— Al Bukhdru 

It is related from Nu 4 man bin Bashir that he said, 4 The 
sun was eclipsed in the time of the Apostle of God, and he 
began to pray in two rak'ahs at a time, and he continued to ask 
concerning the sun until it became bright again.’— Abu Ddud . 
And in a tradition from An Nasai it runs, 4 Verily the Prophet 
prayed when the sun was eclipsed the same as our (ordinary) 
prayers. He both bowed down and prostrated himself.*— 
And in another tradition it is related that, 4 The Prophet 
came out on a certain day, hastening to the mosque, and the sun 
had become eclipsed. And he prayed until it became bright 
again. Then he said, “Verily the people of the time of ignor¬ 
ance (before Islam) used to say that the sun and the moon 
were eclipsed only for the death of some great person of the 
world. But verily the sun and the moon are not eclipsed for 
the death of anyone, nor yet for their life ; but they are two 
parts of His creation. God makes new anything of his crea¬ 
tion that He wishes. Therefore whichever of these two is 
eclipsed, pray until it becomes bright again, or God gives some 
new order.” *— A?i Nasdi . 

On Prostration for Gratitude 

It is related from Abu Bakr that he said, ‘ The Apostle 
of God, when a pleasing order came to him or one by which he 
was pleased, used to fall down in prostration as a thanksgiving 
to God most High.’— Abu Ddud , At Tirmidht . 

It is related from Sa 4 d bin abu Waqqas that he said, 4 We 
went out with the Apostle of God from Mecca, wishing to go 
to Madina. And when we approached Azwaza he alighted. 
Then he raised his hands and prayed to God for an hour. Then 
he fell down in prostration and remained thus for a long time. 
Then he rose up and raised his hands for an hour. Then he 
fell down in prostration, and remained thus for a long time. 
Then he rose up and raised his hands for an hour. Then he 
fell down in prostration, and he said (to us), “Verily I asked 
of my Lord and interceded for my followers, and He gave me 
one-third of my followers. Therefore I fell down in prostration 
before my Lord in thanksgiving. Then I raised my head and 


THE BOOK OF PRAYER 


69 


supplicated my Lord for my followers, and He gave me 
one-third of my followers. Therefore I fell down in prostra¬ 
tion before my Lord in thanksgiving. Then I raised my 
head and supplicated my Lord for my followers, and He gave 
me the last third. Therefore I fell down in prostration before 
my Lord.” *— Ahmad , Abu Ddud . 

On Prayers for Rain 

It is related from ‘Abdu’llah bin Zaid that he said, ‘ The 
Apostle of God came out with the people to the place of prayer 
in order to pray for rain, and he prayed with them in two 
rak'ahs which he recited in a loud voice ; and he turned towards 
the temple at Mecca and made supplication, and he raised his 
hands and drew his garments around him when he faced in the 
direction of the temple at Mecca.’— Muslim , Al Bukhari . 

It is related from ‘Umair, a freed slave of Abu Al Lahm 
that, ‘He saw the Prophet at Ahjaru’l-Zait near Zawrai 
standing and supplicating for rain ; and he was raising his 
hands before his face, but he did not raise them above his head/ 
—Abu Daud y At Tirmidhi . 

It is related from Ibn ‘Abbas that he said, ‘The Apostle 
of God came out to pray for rain, dressed in poor clothes and in 
humble mien and with fear and self-abasement/— At Tirmidhiy 
Abu Ddud, Ib?i Mdjah . 

It is related from ‘Ayesha that she said, ‘ The people 
complained to the Apostle of God concerning the want of rain. 
Then he ordered the pulpit, and it was placed for him in the 
place of prayer. And he arranged with the people a certain 
day on which they should come to it. Then the Apostle of God 
came out when a part of the sun appeared, and he sat down on 
the pulpit. Then he said, “ God is great!” and he praised God. 
Then he said, ‘‘Verily ye have complained of the drought in 
your region and of the withholding of the rain from you in its 
season; and God has commanded you to supplicate Him, and 
has pronjised you that He will answer your supplications.” 
After that he said, “ Praise be to God, the Lord of the worlds, 
the Merciful and Compassionate, King of the day of judgement. 
There is no God but Allah. He does whatsoever He wills. 
O God, Thou art God. There is no God but Thee, the self- 
sufficient ; but we are poor, send down upon us the rain, 


70 SELECTIONS FROM MUHAMMADAN TRADITIONS 

and make that which Thou sendest down for us strength and 
a sufficient portion for the time.” Then he raised his hands, 
and did not desist from raising them until the white of his 
armpits were visible. Then he turned to the people, and 
turned or changed his mantle whilst he was raising his hands. 
Then he turned towards the people and came down and prayed 
in two rak'ahs. And God brought a cloud, and it thundered 
and lightened, after which it rained by the permission of God ; 
and he did not come to his mosque until the rain flowed 
in torrents. And when he saw their haste in making for 
shelter, he laughed until his teeth appeared. And he said, “I 
bear witness that God is powerful over all, and that I am the 
servant of God and His Apostle.” ’— Abu Daud . 

It is related from Anas that ‘There was a drought, and 
‘Omar binu’l-Khaftab prayed for rain in the name of ‘Abbas 
bin ‘Abdu’l-Muttalib and said, “ O God, we used to supplicate 
Thee through our Prophet, and Thou gavest us rain, and now 
we supplicate Thee through the uncle of our Prophet, therefore 
do Thou send us rain.” Anas said, “Then they were given 
rain.” ’— Al Bukhari . 

Concerning Winds 

It is related from Abu Hurairah that he said, ‘ I heard the 
Apostle of God say, “The wind is from the breath of God. It 
comes in mercy and in punishment. Do not abuse it, but 
supplicate from God some of its benefits, and take refuge with 
Him from its evils.” *— Abu Ddud, Ibn Mdjah . 

It is related from Ibn ‘Abbas that, ‘ A man cursed the wind 
near the Prophet. He said, “ Do not curse the wind, for it has 
been ordered. And whosoever curses anything which is not 
deserving thereof, his curses will return upon himself.” ’—At 
Tirmidhi . 

It is related from ‘Ayesha that she said, ‘ When the 
Prophet saw any creation in the sky as, for example, a clopd, 
he left his work and turned towards it and said, “ O God, I take 
refuge with Thee from whatever evil may be in it.*' And if 
He dispelled it, he would say, “Praise be to God!” And if it 
rained, he would say, “ O God, (give) profitable rain.” ’—AbH 
D&ud , An Nasdt, Ibn Mdjah, As Shalt. 9 


V 


THE BOOK OF BIERS 

On Visiting the Sick/and the Rewards ofJ'Sicknbss 

It is related from Abii Musa that, 4 The Apostle of God said, 

“ Feed the hungry, visit the sick, and free the captive/* *—Al 
Bukhari . 

It is related from Abu Hurairah that, ‘ The Apostle of God 
said, 44 The duties of a Muslim towards fellow-Muslims are 
five: returning a salutation, visiting the sick, following a bier, 
accepting an invitation and replying to one who sneezes (by 
saying 4 May God have mercy on thee*)/* *— Muslim , Al 
Bukhari. 

It is related from Abu Hurairah that, ‘ The Apostle of God 
said, “ Verily God most High will say on the day of resurrec¬ 
tion, ‘O son of Adam, I was sick, and thou didst not visit me/ 
He will say, ‘ O Lord, how could I visit Thee when Thou art 
the Lord of the worlds ? * He will say, 4 Didst thou not know 
that My servant so-and-so was sick, and thou didst not visit 
him. Didst thou not know that if thou hadst visited him, thou 
wouldst certainly have found Me beside him/ And God will 
say, 4 O son of Adam, I asked food of thee, but thou gavest Me 
no food/ He will reply, 4 O Lord, how couldst I give Thee 
food, when Thou art the Lord of the worlds ? * He will say, 

4 Didst thou not know that so-and-so, a servant of Mine, asked 
food of thee, and thou gavest him no food. Didst thou not 
know that if thou hadst given him food, thou wouldst certainly 
have found that with Me. O son of Adam, I asked drink of 
thee, but thou gavest Me nothing to drink/ He will reply, 4 0 
Lord, how could I give Thee water to drink, when Thou art the 
Lord of the worlds ? * He will say, 4 So-and-so, a servant of* 
Mine, asked water of thee, but thou gavest him nothing to 
drink. Didst thou not know that, if thou hadst given him to 
drink, thou wouldst have found that with Me/ ” *— Muslim . 

It is related from Ibn 4 Abbas that, 4 The Prophet entered' 
in to a desert Arab to visit him—and it was his custom when: 
he visited the sick to say, 44 There is no fear. It is a purification, 


72 


SELECTIONS FROM MUHAMMADAN TRADITIONS 


if God will”—and he said to him, “ There is no fear. It is a 
purification, if God will.” The man replied, “Never! rather 
it is a fever boiling on an old man, which will send him on a 
visit to the graves! ” The Prophet replied, “ Very well, then 
be it so.” ' — Al Bukhdri, 

It is related from Abu Sa'idu’l-Khudri that, ‘ Gabriel came 
to the Prophet and said, “O Muhammad, art thou ill ? ” He 
replied, “ Yes.” He said, “In the name of God I utter 
this spell for thee, that He will protect thee from the evil of 
every person and of every envious eye. May God heal thee. 
In the name of God I utter this spell for thee.” ’— Muslim . 

It is related from Ibn ‘Abbas that he said, ‘ The Apostle of 
God used to make over Hasan and Husain to the protection of 
God, saying, “ I make you over to the protection of the perfect 
word of God from the evil of every Satan and from every rep¬ 
tile and from every evil eye.” And he used to say, “Verily 
your father (Abraham) used to protect Ishmael and Isaac by 
these words.” 1 — Al Bukhdri, 

It is related from ‘Abdu’llah bin Mas‘ud that he said, 
1 1 entered in to the Prophet when he was in a fever, and I 
massaged him with my hand, and said, “O Apostle of God, 
verily the fever is severe upon thee.” He replied, “ Yes, I am 
afflicted with fever equal to that of two other men of you.” 
I said, “That is because thou wilt obtain a double reward.” 
He replied, “Yes.” Then he said, “There is no Muslim 
afflicted with illness or anything else, but God thereby puts 
away his sins, as a tree sheds its leaves.” ’— Muslim , Al Bukhdri, 

It is related from ‘Ayesha that she said, ‘ I never saw any¬ 
one suffer such severe pain as the Apostle of God.'— Muslim , Al 
Bukhdri . 

It is related from Abu Hurairah that, ‘ The Apostle of God 
said, “ Martyrs are of five kinds: those who die of pestilence, 
of stomach troubles, of drowning, of a broken back, and those 
who die in war for the faith.” 9 — Muslim , Al Bukhdri . 

It is related from ‘Ayesha that she said, ‘ I asked the 
Apostle of God about the plague, and he informed me that it 
was a punishment which God sends upon whomsoever He wills, 
and that God had made it a mercy for the believers. He said, 
“ There is no one on whom the plague comes who remains in 


THE BOOK OF BIERS 


73 


his own country, patiently considering the matter, and knowing 
that nothing can befall him unless God has written it for him, 
but he will receive a reward equal to that of a martyr.'* '— Al 
Bukhari . 

It is related from Usamah bin Zaid that, ‘ The Apostle of 
God said, The plague is a punishment which was sent on one 
of the tribes of the Children of Israel, or on those who preceded 
you. Therefore when ye hear of its presence in a country, do 
not go into it; and when it breaks out in the land in which ye 
are, then do not flee away from it.” '— Muslim , Al Bukhari . 

It is related from ‘All that he said, ‘ I heard the Apostle of 
God say, “ There is no Muslim who visits a sick Muslim in the 
morning, but seventy thousand angels pray for blessings upon 
him until the evening comes. And if be visits him in the 
evening, seventy thousand angels pray for blessings upon him 
until the morning dawns ,* and there will be prepared for him a 
garden in paradise.” ’— Abu David, At Tirmidhi. 

It is related from Abu’l-Dardai that he said, ‘ I heard the 
Apostle of God say, “ Whoever of you complains of any 
sickness, or his brother complains of sickness, let him say, ‘ Our 
Lord God, who art in heaven, hallowed be Thy name. Thy 
command is in heaven and on earth. As Thy mercy is in 
heaven, so make it \ipon earth. Forgive our sins and our 
transgressions. Thou art the Lord of the pure. Send down 
mercy from Thy mercy, and healing from thy healing upon 
this pain, and it will be healed.’ ” '—Abu Ddud. 

It is related from ‘ Abdu’llah bin ‘Omar that, ‘ The Apostle of 
God said, “ When a man comes to visit the sick, let him say, ‘ O 
God, heal Thy servant, that he may wound for Thee the 
enemy or go for Thee to a funeral.’ ” ’— Abu Ddud . 

It is related from ‘Ayesha that she said, 1 I saw the 
Prophet when he was dying, and near him was a vessel in 
which was water ; and he put his hand into the vessel, and then 
wiped his face and then said, “ O God, aid me against the evils 
of death <jr the agony of death.” ’— At Tirmidhi , I bn Majah . 

It is related from Abu Sa‘id that, ‘ The Apostle of God said, 
“ When ye enter in to a sick person, then speak hopefully of 
his condition. That will not avert anything from him, but it 
will be a solace for his soul.” ’—At Tirmidhi , Wbn Mdjah. 


10 


74 


SELECTIONS FROM MUHAMMADAN TRADITIONS 


It is related from Anas that he said, ‘ A Jewish boy used 
to wait on the Prophet, and he fell sick. And the Prophet came 
to visit him and sat down near his head. And he said to him, 
“ Become a Muslim.” And the boy looked towards his father, 
who was near him. He said, “ Obey the father of Qasim (i.e. 
Muhammad).” Then he embraced Islam. And the Prophet 
went out saying, “ Praise be to God, who has saved him from 
the fire.” , —At Bukh&ri . 

It is related from Yahya bin Sa‘id that he said, 1 Verily 
death came to a man in the time of the Apostle of God. And a 
certain man said, “ He was fortunate. He died without being 
afflicted with disease.” The Apostle of God replied, “ Alas on 
thee ! Who told thee ? If God had tormented him with dis¬ 
ease, it would have made expiation for his sins.” *— M&lik . 

It is related from ‘Ayesha that, ‘ The Apostle of God said, 
“ When the sins of a servant (of God) increase, and he has no 
works wherewith to make expiation for them, then God 
afflicts him with grief in order to make expiation for him.” ’— 
Ahmad . 

It is related from Thawban that, ‘ The Apostle of God 
said, “ When fever attacks any one of you—and verily fever is 
a part of the fire—then let him extinguish it with water ; and 
let him immerse himself in a flowing river, and let him face 
the current and say, 1 In the name of God. O God, cure Thy 
servant and establish the truthfulness of Thine Apostle.’ 
(This should be done) after the morning prayer and before the 
rising of the sun. And let him plunge himself in it in three 
immersions for three days. And if he is not well in three, 
then let him do it for five days ; and if he is not cured in five, 
then let him do it for seven ; and if he is not cured in seven, 
then for nine. For verily it scarcely ever exceeds nine, by the 
permission of God, the Exalted and Magnified.” ’—At Tirmidhi. 

It is related from ‘Omar binu’l-Khattab that, ‘ The Apostle 
of God said, “ When thou enterest in to a sick person, command 
him to pray for thee, for verily his supplication is like the 
supplication of the angels.” '—Ibn M&jah. 

On Wishing for Death 

It is related f^>m Abu Hurairah that, ‘ The Apostle of God 
said, “ Let not any one of you wish for death ; the good man 


THE BOOK OF BIERS 


75 


because, perchance, (if he live) he may increase in goodness, 
and the wicked man because, perchance, he may seek the 
pleasure of God.” '—Al Bukhdru 

It is related from ‘Abdu’llah bin ‘Omar that he said, ‘ The 
Apostle of God seized me by my shoulder and said, “ Be in the 
world as if thou wert a stranger or one passing on a journey.” * 
—Al Bukhdru 

It is related from Abu Umamah that he said, ‘ We sat near 
the Apostle of God, and he was reminding us (of death), and he 
touched our hearts. And Sa‘d bin abu Waqqa? wept and 
exceeded in his lamentation, and said, “Would that I had 
died! ” The Apostle of God said, “ O Sa‘d, near me dost thou 
wish for death ! ” This he repeated three times. Then he 
said, “O Sa‘d, if thou hast been created for paradise, then the 
longer thy life and the better thine actions, the better it will 
be for thee.” ’— Ahmad . 

On what should be Said, to One approaching Death 

It is related from Abu Sa‘id and Abu Hurairah that, ‘ The 
Apostle of God said, “ Repeat to your dead, ‘ There is no God 
but Allah/ ” Muslim . 

It is related from Mu’adh bin Jabal that, ‘ The Apostle of 
God said, ‘ ‘ That person whose last words are, ‘ There is no God 
but Allah/ will enter paradise.” ’— Abu Ddud . 

On Washing and Shrouding the Dead 

It is related from ‘Ayesha that, ‘ The Apostle of God was 
shrouded in three garments of white cloth of yemen of cotton 
from Suhuli. There was no shirt and no turban.’— Muslim , Al 
Bukhdri . 

It is related from Ibn ‘Abbas that, i The Apostle of God 
said, “ Dress yourselves in white clothes, for they are the best 
of your clothes ; and shroud your dead in them. And the best 
collyrium for you is ithniid , for it makes the hair grow and 
brightens the eyes.” ’— Abu Ddud , At Tirmidhu 

It is related from Abu Sa‘lidu’1 Khudri that, ‘ When death 
drew near to him, he called for new clothes and put them on. 
Then he said, I heard the Apostle of God say, “The dead will 
be raised up in the clothes in which he dies.” ’— Abd Ddud . 


76 


SELECTIONS FROM MUHAMMADAN TRADITIONS 


On Going with a Bier 

It is related from Abu Sa*id that, ‘The Apostle of God 
said, “ When a corpse is placed (on a bier), and men carry it on 
their shoulders, then, if it was a good person, it will say ‘ Carry 
me forward/ And if it was not a good person, it will say to 
its bearers, ‘Woe to it! where are you carrying it!’ And 
everything hears its voice except mankind ; and if mankind 
heard it he would swoon away.” ’— Al Bukhari. 

It is related from Jabir that he said, ‘A funeral passed by, 
and the Apostle of God stood up for it, and we stood up with 
him. And we said, “ O Apostle of God, verily it was a 
Jewess.” He replied, “ Verily death is a terrible thing, there¬ 
fore whenever you see a funeral, stand.” Muslim , Al 
Bukhdri . 

It is related from Auf bin Malik that he said, ‘ The Apostle 
of God prayed over a cofpse, and I memorized a part of his 
prayer. He said, “ O Lord, forgive him, and have mercy on 
him, and preserve him from evil, and remit his sins for him, 
and make his resting-place honourable, and expand the (grave) 
into which he enters, and wash him with water and with snow 
and with hail, and purify him from sins as Thou cleansest a white 
robe from impurity, and exchange for his (present) house a 
better one, and for his people a better people, and for his wife 
a better wife. Enter him into paradise, and protect him from 
the punishments of the grave and the punishment of the fire.” 
And in another tradition it runs, “ Protect him from the 
afflictions of the grave and the punishment of the fire.” Auf 
said, (He prayed thus) until I wished that I might become that 
dead man/— Muslim . 

It is related from Ibn ‘Omar that, ‘ The Apostle of God 
said, “ Make mention of the good deeds of your dead, but abstain 
from their faults.” Abu Ddud . 

It is related from ‘Ubadah binuV$amit that he said, 
‘ When the Apostle of God used to follow a corpse he did not 
sit down until it was placed in the grave. And a learned man 
of the Jews approached him and said to him, ‘‘O Muhammad, 
we do the same as this.” * ‘Ubadah said, ‘ Then the Apostle of 
God sat down apd said, “ Do the opposite to what they do.” *— 
At Tirmidhi % Abu Ddud } Ibn Majah , 


THE BOOK OF BIERS 


77 


It is related from Abu Musa that, ‘ The Apostle of God 
said, “ When a corpse passes by thee whether it be of a Jew, 
a Christian, or a Muslim, then stand up for it, for ye do not rise 
for it, but ye only rise for the angels who are with it.” 
Ahmad . 

On Burying the Dead 

It is related from Abu’l-Hayyaju’l Asadi that he said, ‘ ‘AH 
said to me, “ Shall I not send thee on a business on which the 
Apostle of God sent me ? Namely, that thou do not leave 
any image without effacing it, or any high tomb without levelling 
it with the ground.” ’— Muslim . 

It is related from Jabir that he said, ‘ The Apostle of God 
prohibited tombs from being built with mortar, or from being 
built over, or from being sat upon '—Muslim. 

It? is related from ‘Ayesha that, ‘ The Apostle of God said, 
“ The breaking of the bones of a dead person is like breaking 
them when he is alive.”— Malik , Abu Ddud , I bn Mdjah . 

It is related from ‘Amru bin Hazm that he said, ‘ The 
Prophet saw me leaning on a grave, and he said, “ Do not 
annoy the occupant of this grave, or (he said) do not annoy 
him.” *— Ahmad . 


On Weeping over the Dead 

It is related from Anas that he said, 4 We entered in with 
the Prophet to Abu Saif, the blacksmith, and he was the husband 
of Abraham’s wet-nurse. And the Apostle of God took 
Abraham (his son) and kissed him and smelt him. After that 
we entered into him again when Abraham was at the point of 
death, and the eyes of the Apostle of God were flowing with 
tears; and ‘Abdu’r-Rahman bin Auf said to him, “And dost 
thou (weep also), O Apostle of God?” He replied, “O Ibn 
Auf, verily they are tears of compassion.” Then he followed 
it with more tears and said, “ Verily the eyes shed tears, and 
the heart is oppressed with grief; and we say nothing but what 
is pleasiwg to our Lord ; and we, O Abraham, are verily sore 
grieved at thy separation from us.” ’— Muslim , Al Bukhdri. 

It is related from Usamah bin Zaid that he said, ‘ The 
daughter of the Prophet sent to him saying, “ My son is at the 
point of death; come to us.” And he sent one to give his 


78 SELECTIONS FROM MUHAMMADAN TRADITIONS 

salutations and to say, 44 Verily to God belongs what He has 
taken, and to Him belongs what He has given, and everyone 
has a fixed time with him. Therefore let her have patience 
and consider.** Then she sent to him adjuring him that he 
must certainly come to her. And he rose up, and with him 
were Sa‘d bin ‘Ubadah and Mu‘adh bin Jabal and Ubai bin 
Ka‘b and Zaid bin Thabit and other men. And the child was 
lifted up for the Apostle of God, and his life was flickering 
away. And the Apostle’s eyes overflowed with tears, and 
Sa‘d said, 44 O Apostle of God, what is this! ” He replied, 
“ This is compassion which God has placed in the hearts of His 
servants ; and verily God only compassionates those of His 
servants who are compassionate.” ’— Muslim , Al Bukhdri . 

It is related from ‘Abdu’llah bin Mas 4 ud that he said, 1 The 
Apostle of God said, 44 That person is not one of us who beats 
his cheeks and rends the bosom of his garments and cries out 
with the cries of the time of ignorance.” ’— Muslim , Al Bukhdri . 

It is related from Abu Hurairah that, * The Apostle of God 
said, 44 No Muslim loses three children by death and enters the 
fire, except to expiate the oath (that all must enter hell).” ’— 
Muslim , Al Bukhdri . 

It is related from Abu Sa‘idu’l-Khudri that he said, 4 The 
Apostle of God cursed the woman who made lamentation (for 
the dead), and he cursed the one who listened to her.’— Abu 
Ddud . 

It is related from Abu Barzah that, 4 The Apostle of God 
said, 44 He who comforts a woman bereft of her children, will 
be clothed with the cloak of a derwish in paradise.” ’— At 
Tirmidhi . 

It is related from Al Mughira bin Shu 4 bah'that he said, 

4 I heard the Apostle of God say, 44 He over whom lamentation 
is made will be punished at the day of resurrection for the 
lamentation made over him.” ’— Muslim , Al Bukhdri. 

It is related from ‘Amrah bint ‘Abdu’r-Rahman that she 
said, 4 1 heard ‘Ayesha say—when it was mentioned to her 
that ‘Abdu’llah bin ‘Omar had said that the dead would certainly 
be punished for the lamentations of the living over them—“God 
forgive the father of 4 Abdu’r-Rahman. Beware ! he did not lie, 
but he forgot or he made a slip. The facts were these : the 


THE BOOK OF BIERS 


79 


Apostle of God only passed by a Jewish woman over whom 
lamentation was being made, and he said, 1 Verily these are 
lamenting over her, and she is certainly being punished in her 
grave.* ** *— Muslim t Al Bukhari . 

On Visiting Graves 

It is related from Buraidah that, ‘ The Apostle of God said, 
“ I prohibited you from visiting graves, but (now) visit them ; 
and I prohibited you from meat which had been offered in 
sacrifice above the space of three days, but (now) retain it 
as long as you like ; and I prohibited you from unfermented 
wine, except in a leathern bag, but now drink it from all kinds 
of drinking vessels ; but do not drink anything intoxicating.** * 
— Muslim . 

It is related from Abu Hurairah that he said, 1 The Prophet 
visited his mother's tomb and wept, causing those around him 
to weep also. And he said, “ I sought permission of my Lord 
to pray for forgiveness for her, but permission was not given 
me ; and I asked His permission to visit her tomb, and per¬ 
mission was given me. Therefore visit the tombs, for they 
remind of death.**’— Muslim . 


VI 


THE BOOK OF ALMS 

It is related from Ibn ‘Abbas that, ‘The Apostle of God 
sent Mu‘adh to Yemen and said, “ Verily thou art coming to 
a community of the People of the Book (i.e., Jews and Chris¬ 
tians), therefore call on them to bear witness that there is no 
God but Allah and that Muhammad is the. Apostle of Allah. 
And if they agree to that, then teach them that God has made 
obligatory on them five prayers in the day and night; and if 
they submit to that, then teach them that God has made obliga¬ 
tory for them the giving of alms, to be taken from the rich 
among them and given to their poor ; and if they submit to 
that, then beware and refrain from taking the best of their 
property, and be on thy guard against the complaints of the 
oppressed, for verily there is no veil between them and God/’ ’ 
— Muslim , Al Bukhdrt. 

It is related from Abu Hurairah that, ‘ The Apostle of 
God said, “ He to whom God has given wealth and does not give 
alms thereof, his wealth on the day of resurrection will be 
changed into the form of a serpent, having two black spots over 
its eyes, which will be hung like a necklace around his neck. 
Then on the day of resurrection it will seize him by the jaws, and 
after that will say, ‘ I am thy property. I am thy treasure/ ” 
Then the Prophet repeated the verse, “ And let not those who 
are niggard of what God hath vouchsafed them in His bounty 
(imagine that their avarice is better for them ; nay, rather, it is 
worse for them 1 ).” ’— Al Bukhdri . 

It is related from Jabir bin ‘Abdu’llah that he said, ‘ Some 
people of the desert Arabs came to the Apostle of God and 
said, “ Verily some people of those who collect the alms come 
to us and oppress us.” He replied, “ Satisfy your collectors of 
alms.” They said, ‘‘O Apostle of God, although they 
oppress us?” He replied, ‘‘Satisfy your collectors of alms, 
even though you are oppressed.” ’— Abti Daud . 

1 Qur’an. Suratu Ali ‘Imran (iii) 180. 


THE BOOK OF ALMS 


81 


It is related from ‘Amru bin Shu'aib from his father, from 
his grandfather that, 4 The Prophet addressed the people and 
said, “Are there those among you who are guardians of 
orphans who possess property ? Then let them trade therewith, 
and not leave it (uninvested), so that the alms due on it do not 
swallow it up.” 9 — At Tirmidhi. 

It is related from Abu Hurairah that he said, 4 When the 
Prophet died and Abu Bakr succeeded him as Khalifa, and 
certain of the Arabs became infidels, ‘Omar binu’l-Khattab said 
to Abu Bakr, 44 How is it that thou dost fight with the people 
when the Apostle of God has said, 4 1 was commanded to fight 
with the people until they say, 44 There is no God but Allah,” and 
whoever says, 44 There is no God but Allah, ” makes his goods and 
his person safe from me, except what is due (as alms); and his 
account is with God?’ ” Then Abu Bakr replied, 44 By God! I 
will certainly fight with those who make a distinction between 
prayers and alms ; for alms are due from property. By God ! 
if they had denied me a lamb, such as they used to give to the 
Prophet of God, I would certainly have fought with them 
because of such refusal.” ‘Omar said, 44 By God! I saw 
nothing, except that God had opened the heart of Abu Bakr to 
fight. Then I knew it was right.” ’— Muslim , Al Bukh&ri. 

Concerning the Things on which Alms are 
Obligatory 

It is related from Abu Sa‘idu’l-Khudri that, 4 The Apostle 
of God said, 44 There are no alms required for less than five 
camel-loads of dates, and no alms are required for less than 
five uqiyas , (i.e. three hundred drams) of silver, and no alms are 
required for less than five camels.” ’— Muslim , Al Bukh&ri, 

It is related from Abu Hurairah that, 4 The Apostle of God 
said, 44 A Muslim is not obliged to give alms for his slave or his 
horse.”—And in another tradition it runs, “There is no alms 
for his slave, except the alms for the feast of the breaking the 
fast.” *— Muslim , Al Btikh&ri. 

It is related from Mu 4 adh that he said, 4 Verily the Prophet 
when he sent him to Yemen, commanded him to take one 
yearling heifer or bull from every thirty, and one full-grown 
cow from every forty.* —Abu D&ud\ At Tirmidht. 


11 


82 SELECTIONS FROM MUHAMMADAN TRADITIONS 

It is related from ‘Ayesha that she said, ‘ The Prophet 
used to send ‘Abdu’llah bin Rawahah to the Jews, and he used to 
compute the dates when they became sweet, ‘and before they 
were eaten from.’— Abfi Dated. 

It is related from Zainab the wife of ‘Abdu’llah that she 
said, ‘The Apostle of God addressed us and said, “ O assembly 
of women, give alms, although it be of your ornaments, for 
verily you will compose the majority of the inhabitants of hell 
on the day of resurrection.’* ’ —At Tirmidhi. 

Concerning the Alms to be Given at the Festival of 
the Breaking of the Fast 

It is related from Ibn ‘Omar that he said, ‘ The Apostle of 
God made the alms obligatory for the feast of the breaking of 
the fast: a measure of dates, or a measure of barley to be 
given by a slave or a free man, a male or a female, the young 
and old of all Muslims ; and he ordered that it should be 
given before coming out to the prayers.’— Muslim, Al Bukhari . 

Concerning Those for Whom Alms are Unlawful 

It is related from ‘Abdu’l-Muttalib bin RabFah that, ‘The 
Apostle of God said, “ Verily these alms are only the impurities 
of men, and they are not lawful for Muhammad or the family of 
Muhammad.” ’— Muslim . 

It is related from Abu Hurairah that he said, ‘ When food 
was brought to the Apostle of God, he used to ask about it. 
whether it was a present or alms. And if it was said, “It is 
alms,” he would say to his companions, ‘‘You eat,” but would 
not eat it himself. But if it was said, “ It is a present,” he 
would stretch out his hand* and eat with them.’— Muslim, 
Al Bukhari. 

It is related from ‘Abdu’llah bin ‘Omar, that, ‘ The Apostle 
of God said, “Alms are not lawful for the rich, nor for the 
strong and healthy.” '—At Tirmidhi. 

It is related from Zaid bin Aslam that he said, ‘ ‘Omar 
binu’l-Khattab drank some milk which delighted him, and he 
asked the one who gave him to drink, “Whence came this 
milje ? ” He informed him that he arrived at a watering-place, 
which he named, and (said he), Behold some camels which had 
been given in alms ; and they were watering them. And they ’ 


THE BOOK OF ALMS 


83 


milked some of them, so I placed it in my leathern bag, and 
that is the milk which thou hast drunk.” Then ‘Omar put his 
hand into his mouth, and caused himself to vomit/— Mdlik. 

Concerning Those for Whom Begging is not Lawful, 
and for Whom it is 

It is related from Abu Hurairah that, ‘ The Apostle of God 
said, “ He who begs from men their wealth in order to increase 
his own, only asks live coals, whether he ask little or much.” ’— 
Muslim . 

It is related from Sahal binu’l-Hanzaliyyah that, ‘The 
Apostle of God said, “ He who begs, when he has what makes 
him independent of it, is only asking for an increase of the 
fire.” A1 Nufail, who was one of the reporters of traditions, 
said, in another tradition, “ What are the riches, having which 
it is not right to beg?” He replied, ‘‘That amount which 
suffices for the morning and evening meal.” And he said in 
another place, “ That he have enough to satisfy him for a day 
or a night and a day.” ’— Abie Ddud. 

It is related from Anas that, e A man of the helpers came 
to the Prophet to beg from him. He said, “ Is there nothing 
in thy house ? ” The man said, ‘‘Yes, there is a blanket, with 
a part of it we cover ourselves, and a part of it we spread on the 
floor. And there is a large drinking-bowl from which we drink 
water.” The Prophet said, ‘‘Bring them to me.” Then he 
brought them. Then the Apostle of God took them in his hand 
and said, “ Who will buy these two ? ” A man said, “ I will take 
them for one dirham .” He replied twice or thrice, ‘‘Who will 
give more than one dirham ? ” A man said, “ I will take them 
for two dirhams'* Then the Prophet gave them to him, and 
he took the two dirhams and gave them to the helper and said, 
“ Buy with one of them food and give it to thy family, and with 
the other buy a hatchet and bring it to me.” So he brought it 
to him. Then the Apostle of God fitted a handle to it with 
his own hahds, and after that said, “ Go and cut firewood and 
sell it, and let me not see thee for fifteen days.” So the man 
went to cut firewood and sell it. Then he came back to him, 
and he had gained ten dirhams , and with a portion of it he had 
bought clothes, and with a portion of it he bought food. Then 


84 


SELECTIONS FROM MUHAMMADAN TRADITIONS 


the Apostle of God said to him, 11 This is better for thee than 
that thy begging should come on the day of resurrection as 
marks on thy face. Verily begging is not lawful except for 
three persons: a poor man who lives in miserable circumstances, 
or one who is excessively in debt, or one who has a bleeding 
sore.” *— Abu Ddud. 

On Spending and Being Niggardly 
It is related from Abu Hurairah that, ‘ The Apostle of God 
said, “ If I possessed gold equal to the mountain of ‘Uhud, it 
would delight me that nothing of it should remain with me 
after three nights had passed over me, except something I 
might keep for debt.” *— Al Bukhdri. 

It is related from Abu Hurairah that, ‘ The Apostle of God 
said, “ God most High has said, ‘ Spend, O son of Adam, and I 
will spend on thee/ ” *— Muslim,)Al Bukhdri . 

It is related from Abu Hurairah that, 4 The Apostle of God 
said, “The liberal man is near to God, near to paradise and 
near to men, and far removed from the fire ; but the miser is 
far from God, far from paradise and far from men, and near 
the fire; and the ignorant (but) liberal man is more beloved 
of God than the miserly worshipper.” ’— At Tirmidhi. 

It is related from Abu Sa‘id that, ‘ The Apostle of God said, 
“ Verily that a man give one dirham in alms in his lifetime, is 
better for him than that he should give one hundred in alms at 
his death.” *— Abu Ddud . 

It is related from ‘Ayesha that, 4 Some of the wives of the 
Prophet said to him, “ Who of us will be quickest in joining thee 
(after death)?” The Prophet replied, “The one of you who 
has the longest arm.” Then they took a rod and began to 
measure their arms, and Saudah had the longest arm of them all. 
But afterwards we came to know that the length of the arm 
signified almsgiving, and the quickest of us in joining the 
Prophet was Zainab, and she used to love almsgiving.*— Al 
Bukhdri. * 

It is related from a freed slave of ‘Othman that he said, 
‘A present of a piece of meat was sent to Umm Salamah, and 
the meat was relished by the Prophet; and she said to a servant, 
“ Put it in the house, perhaps the Prophet will eat it.** So she 


THE BOOK OF ALMS 


85 


placed it in a recess in the wall. And a beggar came and stood 
at the door and said, “ Give me alms, and may God bless you.” 
And they replied, “And may God bless thee.” Then the beggar 
went away, and the Prophet entered and said, “OUmm Salamah, 
hast thou anything for me to eat ? ” She replied, “Yes,” and 
said to the servant, “Go and bring the Apostle of God that 
meat.” So she departed, but found nothing in the recess except 
a piece of stone. Then the Prophet said, “Verily that meat 
has turned to stone, because ybu did not give it to the beggar.” ’ 
—Al Baihaqi . 

It is related from ‘Ayesha that she said, ‘ There were, 
during the illness of the Apostle of God, six or seven dinars 
belonging to him in my keeping. And the Apostle of God 
ordered me to distribute them. But the pain of the Prophet of 
God kept me busy. Afterwards he asked me about them as 
to what the six or seven dinars had accomplished. She said, “ No 
by God! thy pain kept me busy.” And he called for them and 
placed them in the palm of his hand and said, “ What would the 
Prophet of God think if God, the Exalted and Magnified, met him 
whilst these were still with him ?” ’ —Ahmad. 

On Obligatory Alms 

It is related from Abu Musau’l-Ash'ari that, ‘The Apostle 
of God said, “Alms are obligatory on every Muslim.” They 
said, “And if he has nothing?” He replied, “Then let him 
work with his hands, and gain something for himself, and give 
alms.” They said, “ And if he is not able to work, or has not 
done so ? ” He replied, “Then let him assist those who are 
in need and in distress.” They said, “And if he does not do 
that? ” He replied, “ Then let him order people to do right.” 
They said, “ And if he does not do that ? ” He replied, “ Then 
let him withhold himself from evil; and verily that will be alms 
for him.” ’— Muslim , Al Bukhdri . 

It is related from Anas that, ‘ The Apostle of God said, 
“ There is no Muslim who plants a tree or sows a field, and 
men or birds or beasts eat therefrom, but it becomes alms for 
him.” ’— Muslim , Al Bukhdri .—And in another tradition from 
Muslim the words are added, ‘ And whatever is stolen from him 
will be counted as alms for him/ 


86 


SELECTIONS FROM MUHAMMADAN TRADITIONS 


11 is related from Abu Hurairah that, 4 The Apostle of God said, 
“An adulteress was forgiven (under the following circumstances): 
She passed by a dog at the entrance to a well. And its 
tongue was hanging out, and it was about to die from thirst. 
And she took off her shoe and tied it to her veil and let it down 
(to draw) water for it. And for that she was forgiven her sins.” 
It was said, “Is there any reward for us (for doing good) to 
beasts ? ” He replied, “ For every merciful woman there is a 
reward.” ’— Muslim , Al Bukhari . . 

It is related from Abu Hurairah that, 4 The Apostle of God 
said, 44 A man passed by the branch of a tree which over¬ 
hung the road, and he said, 4 1 will remove this from the road of 
Muslims, so that it may not incommode them.’ Then he was 
given entrance into paradise.” ’— Muslim , Al Bukhari . 

It is related from Anas that, 4 The Apostle of God said, 
44 Verily alms quench the Lord’s anger, and put away an evil 
death.” ’— At Tirmidhi. 

It is related from ‘Abdu’llah bin Mas 4 iid, from the Apostle 
of God, that he said, 4 There are three persons whom God loves : 
the man who rises at night to recite the Book of God ; the man 
who gives alms with his right hand and, I think, he said, hiding 
it from his left; the man who, being in a band of soldiers, and 
his companions being put to flight, continues to face the 
enemy.” ’— At Tirmidhi ?. 

It is related from Anas that, ‘The ^postle of God said, 
44 When God created the earth, it began to tremble, therefore 
He created the mountains and placed them upon it, and it 
became firm. And the angels were astonished at the strength 
of the mountains and said, 4 O Lord, is there anything in Thy 
creation more powerful than the mountains ? ’ He replied, 
‘Yes, iron.’ They said, ‘O Lord, is there anything in Thy 
creation more powerful than iron?’ He replied, ‘Yes, fire/ 
They said, 4 O Lord, is there anything more powerful in Thy 
creation than fire?’ He replied, ‘Yes, water.’ They said, 

4 O Lord, is there anything in Thy creation more .powerful 
than water?’ He replied, ‘Yes, the wind.’ They said, ‘O 
Lord, is there anything in Thy creation more powerful than 
the wind?’ He replied, 4 Yes, the son of Adam who gives 
alms with his right hand, and hides it from his left.’ ” *— At 
Tirmidhi . 


THE BOOK OF ALMS 


87 


On the Excellence of Almsgiving 

It is related from Abu Hurairah that, 4 The Apostle of God 
said, “Of a dinar which thou hast spent in the way of God, 
and a dinar which thou hast spent in freeing a slave, and 
a dinar which thou hast spent in giving alms to the poor, and 
a dinar which thou hast spent on thy family, the greatest of 
them all, in point of reward, is that which thou hast spent on 
thy family.” *— Muslim . 

It is related from Maimunah bintu’l-Harith that, ‘ She 
emancipated a slave-girl in the time of the Apostle of God, and 
mentioned that to the Apostle of God. He replied, “If thou 
hadst given her to thy maternal uncles, thy reward would have 
been greater.” ’— Muslim , Al Bukhari . 

It is related from Abu Hurairah that, ‘ A man came to the 
Prophet and said, “ I have a dinar." He replied, “Then spend 
it on thyself.” He said, “I have another.” He replied, 
“ Then spend it on thy child.” He said, “ I have another.” He 
replied, “Then spend it on thy family.” He said, “I have 
another.” He replied, “Then spend it on thy servant.” He 
said, “ I have another.” He replied, “ Thou knowest best.” ’— 
Abu Baud, An Nasai . 

It is related from Ibn ‘Omar that, ‘The Apostle of God 
said, “ Give protection to him who asks protection of thee in 
the name of God, and give to him who asks alms of thee in the 
name of God, accept the invitation of him who invites thee, 
and recompense him who does thee a favour ; but if thou hast 
not wherewith to recompense him, then pray for him until thou 
consider thou hast recompensed him.” ’— Ahmad , Abu Ddud , 
An Nasai . 

It is related from Anas that he said, ‘Abu Talhah was the 
richest of all the helpers in Madina in date trees; and the 
most treasured of his possessions was Bairha’a (a garden) 
facing the mosque. And the Apostle of God used to enter it 
and drink from the excellent water therein'. And when this 
verse descended, “Ye will never attain unto righteousness 
until ye spend in alms of what ye love, 1 ” Abu Talhah rose up 
and said to the Apostle of God, “ O Apostle of God, verily God 
most High says, 1 Ye will never attain unto righteousness until 
1 Qur’an. Suratu Ali ‘Imran (iii) 92. 


88 SELECTIONS FROM MUHAMMADAN TRADITIONS 

ye spend in alms of what ye love,’ and verily the most 
treasured of my possessions is Bairha'a (the garden), therefore 
it is given in alms to God most High. I hope for the righteous¬ 
ness thereof, and its provision is with God, therefore, O Apostle 
of God, bestow it wherever God shows thee." The Apostle of 
God replied, “Well done! Well done! that is a profitable 
property. I have heard what thou hast said, and verily I see 
that the place to bestow it is with thy relations.'' Abu Talhah 
said, “I shall do that, O Apostle of God." Then Abu Talhah 
divided it amongst his relations and the sons of his paternal 
uncle/— Muslim , Al Bukhdrt . ' 

On a Woman's Giving Alms from Her Husband's 
Property 

It is related from Abu Hurairah that, ‘ The Apostle of God 
said, “ When a woman spends in alms from the earnings of her 
husband, without his orders, then he will get half its reward." ' 
— Muslim , Al Bukhari. 

It is related from ‘Ayesha that, ‘A man said to the 
Prophet, “Verily my mother died suddenly, and I think that, 
had she spoken, she would have given alms. Will she, then, 
obtain the reward if I give alms on her behalf ? " He replied, 
“Yes." ’— Muslim , Al Bukhdru 

It is related from Abu Umamah that he said, * I heard the 
Apostle of God say, in his public address, in the year of the 
farewell pilgrimage, “ Let not a woman spend anything in alms 
from the house of her husband, except with the permission of 
her husband." It was said, “O Apostle of God, not even 
food ? " He replied, “ That is the best of our property." '— At 
Tirmidhi . 

It is related from ‘Umair, a freed slave of Abu'l-Lahm, 
that he said, ‘ My master ordered me to dry a piece of meat ; 
and there came to me a poor beggar, and I gave him to eat 
of it. And my master was made aware of the fact and beat 
me. Then I came to the Apostle of God and mentioned the 
matter to him. And he called Abu’l-Lahm and said, “Why 
didst thou beat him? " He replied, “He gave away my food 
without my ordering him to do so." He said, “Its reward is 
(divided) between the two of you." And in another tradition 


THE BOOK OF ALMS 


89 


it is stated that he said, “ I was a slave, and I asked the Apostle 
of God, may I give anything in alms of my master’s goods ? ” 
He replied, “Yes, and its reward is (divided) equally between 
the two of you.” ’— Muslim . 

Concerning Those Who May Not Take Back Alms 
Once Given 

It is related from ‘Omar binu’l-Khattab that he said, 
1 1 provided a horse for a man in the way of God (i.e. for 
religious war), but he with whom it was neglected it. Then 
I wished to buy it back, and imagined that he would sell it 
cheaply. So I asked the Prophet, and he said, “ Do not buy it, 
and do not take back thine alms, even though he give it thee 
for a dirham ; for verily one who takes back his alms is like 
a dog'which returns to its vomit.” ’— Muslim , Al Bukhdri . 

It is related from Buraidah that he said, ‘ I was sitting by 
the Prophet when a woman came to him and said, “O Apostle 
of God, I gave a slave-girl in alms to my mother, and the latter 
has died.” He replied, “Thy reward (for the alms) is thy 
proper right, and the inheritance will return her to thee again.” 
She said, “O Apostle of God, my mother had undertaken to 
fast for a mouth; may I fast on her behalf?” He replied, 
“Fast on her behalf.” She said, “Verily my mother never 
performed the pilgrimage ; may I perform it on her behalf ? ” 
He replied, “Yes, perform the pilgrimage on her behalf.”’— 
Muslim . 


12 


VII 


THE BOOK OF FASTING 

It is related from Abu Hurairah that, ‘ The Apostle of God 
said, “ When (the month) Ramadan begins, the doors of heaven 
are opened/’ And in another tradition it runs, “The doors of 
paradise are opened, and the doors of hell are closed, and the 
satans are chained.” And in another tradition it runs, “The 
doors of mercy are opened.” ’— Muslim , Al Bukhari . 

It is related from Abu Hurairah that, ‘ The Apostle of God 
said, ‘ ‘ He who fasts in the month Ramadan, in faith, hoping 
for a reward, all his past sins will be forgiven him ; and he who 
stands up (to pray) in Ramadan in faith, hoping for a reward, 
all his past sins will be forgiven him ; and he who stands up 
(to pray) in the night of power in faith, hoping for a reward, 
all his past sins will be forgiven him.” ’— Muslim , Al Bukharu 
It is related from Abu Hurairah that, ‘ The Apostle of God 
said, “The blessed month, Ramadan, has come to you. God 
has made its fast incumbent upon you. In it the doors of 
heaven are opened, and in it the doors of hell are closed, and in 
it the rebellious satans are manacled. In it there is a night 
better than a thousand months. He who is deprived of its 
benefits is deprived indeed.” ’— Ahmad , An Nasdi . 

It is related from ‘Abdu’ll’ah bin ‘Amru that, 4 Verily the 
Apostle of God said, “The fast and the Qur’an intercede for 
the servant (of God). The fast says, ‘O Lord, verily I for¬ 
bade him food and sensual pleasures by day, therefore accept 
my intercession for him.’ And the Qur’an says, ‘ I forbade 
him sleep by night, therefore accept my intercession for him.’ 
Then both their intercessions are accepted.’ ” ’— Al Baihaqi . 

It is related from Ibn ‘Abbas that, ‘ The Apostle of God 
used, when the month Ramadan arrived, to release all captives, 
and used to give to all beggars.’ 

On Seeing the New Moon 
It is related from Ibn ‘Omar that, ‘ The Apostle of God 
said, “ Do not fast until ye see the new moon, and do not break 


THE BOOK OF FASTING 


91 


the fast until ye see it; and if it be concealed from you by 
clouds, then compute (the time) for it.” And in another 
tradition it runs, “ A month is twenty-nine nights, therefore do 
not fast until ye see it, and if it be hidden from you by clouds, 
then complete the full period of thirty.” Muslim , Al Bukh&ri . 

It is related from Abu Hurairah that, ‘ The Apostle of God 
said, “ Let none oi you fast a day or two days before Ramadan, 
unless he be a man who is in the habit of fasting. In that case, 
let him fast on that day.” ’— Muslim, Al Bukh&ri. 

It is related from Umm Salamah that she said, ‘ I never 
saw the Prophet fast on two successive months, except in the 
months Sha‘ban and Ramadan.’— Abu Baud, Ibn Mdjah, At 
Tirmidhi a?id An Nas&i. 

It is related from Ibn ‘Abbas that he said, ‘A desert Arab 
came to the Prophet and said, “ I have seen the new moon,” 
namely, the new moon of Ramadan. The Prophet replied, 
“Dost thou bear witness that there is no God but Allah?” 
He said, “Yes.” He replied, “Dost thou bear witness that 
Muhammad is the Apostle of God ? ” He said, “ Yes.” Then 
the Prophet said, “O Bilal, proclaim to the people that they 
keep the fast from to-morrow.” ’— Abu Baud, At Tirmidhi, An 
Nas&i, Ibn Mdjah . 

It is related from Anas that, ‘ The Apostle of God said, 
“ Eat in the early dawn, for verily in the meal taken at early 
dawn there is a blessing.” ’— Muslim, Al Bukhari . 

It is related from ‘Amru binu’l-‘A§ that, ‘ The Apostle 
of God said, “ The difference between our fasts and the fasts of 
the People of the Book is in the meal taken at early dawn.” ’— 
Muslim. 

It is related from Abu Hurairah that he said, 1 The Apostle 
of God forbade fasting continuously for two or more days during 
the fast Ramadan. Then a man said to him, “O Apostle of 
God, verily thou dost fast continuously for two or more days.” 
He replied, “ Which of you is like me ? Verily I pass the 
night, and* my Lord gives me food and drink.” ’— Muslim , Al 
Bukhdri. 

It is related from Salman bin ‘Amru that, ‘ The Apostle of 
God said, “ When any one of you breaks the fast, then let him 
break it with dried dates, because that is a blessing, but if he 


92 


SELECTIONS FROM MUHAMMADAN TRADITIONS 


cannot find such, then let him break it with water, because it is 
pure. ” *— Ahmad , At Tirmidhi , Abu Daud , I bn Mdjah . 

It is related from Mu 4 adh bin Zuhrah that, 4 When the 
Prophet broke the fast he used to say, 44 O God, for Thee I 
have kept the fast, and with food provided by Thee I have 
broken it.” ’— Abu Daud. 

It is related from Abu Hurairah that, ‘The Apostle of God 
said, “ Religion will continue victorious so long as men hasten 
in breaking the fast, because the Jews and Christians delay 
(therein).” *— Abu Daud, Ibn Mdjah . 

On What Nullifies the Fast 

It is related from Abu Hurairah that, 4 The Apostle of God 
said, “ He who does not abandon false words, and acts 
accordingly, God requires not that he give up his eating and 
drinking.” *— Al Bukhdri . 

It is related from Abu Hurairah that, ‘ The Apostle of God 
said, 44 The person who has forgotten whilst engaged in the fast, 
and eaten and drunken, let him complete his fast, for verily it 
was only God who caused him to eat and drink.” ’— Muslim, Al 
Bukhdri . 

It is related from Abu Hurairah that he said, ‘ Whilst we 
were sitting with the Prophet, behold a man came to him and 
said, 44 O Apostle of God, I am undone ! ” He replied, 44 What 
has happened to thee ? ” He said, 44 I have had connexion 
with my wife whilst I was observing the fast.” The Apostle 
of God replied, 44 Hast thou a female slave whom thou canst set 
at liberty ? ” He said, 44 No.” He replied, 44 Art thou able to 
fast two months in succession?” He said, 44 No.” He said, 
44 Hast thou victuals wherewith to feed sixty poor people ? ” He 
said, 44 No.” He said, 44 Sit down.” Then the Prophet waited, 
and whilst he was waiting there was brought to the Prophet a 
bag in which were dry dates, and the bag was made of fig- 
leaves. Then the Prophet said, 44 Where is the beggar ? ” He 
replied, 44 1 am he.” He said, 44 Take this and give alms from 
it.” The man replied, 44 O Apostle of God, shall I (be able to 
give to) one poorer than myself ! By God! there is no house¬ 
hold between the two hills (of Madina) poorer than mine!” 
Then the Prophet laughed until his teeth were exposed. Then 


THE BOOK OF FASTING 


93 


he said, “Give to thine own family to eat.”’— Muslim, Al 
Bukhdri. 

It is related from Ma‘dan bin Talhah that Abu Dardai* 
informed him that the Apostle of God vomited and broke 
his fast. He said, ‘Then I met Thauban in the mosque of 
Damascus and said, “ Verily Abu Dardai’ informed me that the 
Apostle of God vomited and broke his fast.” He replied, “ He 
spoke truly, and I poured out water for his ablutions.” Abu 
Ddud , At Tirmidhu 

It is related from Abu Hurairah that, ‘ The Apostle of God 
said, “ He who breaks the fast for one day in the month 
Ramadan without permission, or except for sickness, the fasts 
of all the ages will not atone for it, even though he keep 
them.” *— Ahmad , At Tirmidhi , Abu Ddud , Ibn Mdjah . 

It is related from Abu Hurairah that, ‘ The Apostle of God 
said, “ How many there are who keep the fast, who receive 
nothing from their fast but thirst! And how many there are 
who stand up (to pray at night), who receive nothing from their 
standing but wakefulness ! ” ’— Al Ddrimi . 

Concerning the Fast of the Traveller 

It is related from ‘Ayesha that she said, ‘ Verily Hamzah 
bin ‘Amru’l-Aslami said to the Prophet, “ Should I fast 
during a journey ? ” And he was a great faster. The Prophet 
replied, “ If thou desirest, fast; and if thou desirest, discontinue 
the fast.” ’— Muslim , Al Bukhdru 

It is related from Abu Sa‘idu’l-Khudri that he said, ‘We 
went on a warlike expedition with the Apostle of God until 
sixteen days of the month Ramadan had passed. And some of 
us kept the fast, and some of us broke it. And those who 
fasted did not blame those who broke the fast; and those who 
broke the fast found no fault with those who fasted .'—Muslim. 

It is related from Anas bin Maliku’l-Ka 4 bi that, ‘ The 
Apostle of God said, “ Verily God has removed half the prayers 
from the ’traveller ; and He has removed all the fast from the 
traveller, and from one giving suck, and from one who is 
pregnant.” *— Abu Ddud , At Tirmidhi, An Nasai, Ibn Mdjah . 

It is related from Salamah binu’l-Muhabbaq that, ‘ The 
Apostle of God said, “ I^e who has a beast of burden, which 


94 


^ELECTIONS FROM MUHAMMADAN TRADITIONS 

carries him to his destination in comfort, must keep the fast of 
Ramadan wherever it comes to him.” *— Abu Ddud . 

On the Execution of an (Omitted) Duty 

It is related from Abu Hurairah that, ‘ The Apostle of God 
said, “ It is not right for a woman to fast when her husband is 
present, except with his permission ; or for her to allow anyone 
in his house, except with his permission.” ’— Muslim. 

It is related from ‘Ayesha that, ‘ The Apostle of God said, 
“ He who dies leaving a fast unperformed, his heir must fast 
for him.” *— Muslim , Al Bukhdri. 

It is related from Malik that he heard that Ibn ‘Omar was 
asked, ‘ May one person fast for another, or may one pray in 
place of another ? ’ He replied, ‘ No one may fast for another, 
and no one may pray in place of another.’— Al Muwatta. 

On Voluntary Fasts 

It is related from Abu Hurairah that, ‘ The Apostle of God 
said, “The best fast, after that of Ramadan, is that of the 
month of God, Muharram. And the best prayers, after the 
five obligatory prayers, are the night prayers.” ’— Muslim . 

It is related from Ibn ‘Abbas that he said, ‘ When the 
Apostle of God fasted on the day of ‘Ashura (i.e. the tenth of 
Muharram) they said, “O Apostle of God, verily it is a day 
held in respect by the Jews and Christians.” The Apostle of 
God said, If I remain till next year, I will certainly keep the 
ninth day.” ’— Muslim . 

It is related from Abu Qatadah that, ‘ A man came to the 
Prophet and said, “ How dost thou keep the fast, O Apostle of 
God ? ” Then the Apostle of God became angry at his words. 
And when ‘Omar saw his anger, he said, “ We are satisfied 
with Allah as our Lord, with Islam as our religion, and with 
Muhammad as our Prophet. We take refuge with God from 
the anger of God and the anger of His Apostle.” And ‘Omar 
continued to repeat these words until his anger subsided. Then 
‘Omar said, “ O Apostle of God, how is it with the man who 
fasts the whole of the time ? ” The Apostle of God replied, 
“There is (for him) neither fast nor breaking of fast,” or he 
said, “He has neither fasted nor broken the fast.” ‘Omar said, 
“ How is it with the man who fasts two days, and breaks the 
fast one day?” He replied, “Is ^pyone able to do that?” 


THE BOOK OF FASTING 


95 


He said, “How is it with the man who fasts one day, and 
breaks the fast one day ? ” He replied, “ That was the fast of 
David.” He said, “ How is it with the man who fasts one day, 
and abstains from fasting two days ? 99 He replied, “ I wished 
that I might be able to do that.” Then the Apostle of God 
said, “Three days in each month and the month Ramadan (are 
sufficient) till the next Ramadan ; and this is the fast of the 
whole year, and the fast of the day of Arafat. I hope in God 
that these will atone for the year which precedes it and the 
year which follows it. And the fast of the day of ‘Ashura, I 
hope in God that it will atone for the year which precedes it.” *— 
Muslim . 

It is related from Abu Sa'idu’l-Khudri that he said, ‘The 
Apostle of God forbade fasting on the day of the breaking of 
the fast and on the day of sacrifice.’— Muslim , Al Bukhdri . 

It is related from Abu Sa‘idu’l-Khudri that, ‘ The Apostle 
of God said, “ He who fasts one day in the road of God, 
God removes his face seventy years from the fire.” ’— Muslim , 
Al Bukhdri . 

It is related from ‘Abdu’llah bin ‘Amru binu’l-‘As that he 
said, ‘The Apostle of God said to me, “O ‘Abdu’llah, have I 
not been informed that thou dost fast in the day and stand up 
(in prayer) during the night?” I said, “Yes, O Apostle of 
God.” He replied, “Then do not do it. Keep the fast, and 
also eat; and stand up to pray, and also sleep ; for verily thou 
hast a duty towards thy body, and thou hast a duty towards 
thine eyes, and thou hast a duty towards thy wife, and thou hast 
a duty towards thy guests. He who fasts all the time, does not 
fast at all. The fast of three days in each month is equal 
to a constant fast, therefore fast three days in each month, 
and read the Qur’an in every month.” I said, “ Verily I am able 
to do more than that.” He replied, “ Fast. The best fast is 
the fast of David, namely to fast one day and eat one day. 
And recite the (Qur’an) once in every seven nights, and do not 
do more than that.” ’— Muslim , Al Bukhdri . 

It is related from ‘Ayesha that, ‘ The Apostle of Gd used to 
fast on Mondays and Thursdays.’—-vf/ Tirmidhi , An Nasdi. 

It is related from Abu Hurairah that, ‘ The Apostle of God 
said, “The actions of men are placed before God on Mondays 


96 


SELECTIONS FROM MUHAMMADAN TRADITIONS 


and Thursdays, and I wish that my actions should be placed 
before Him whilst I am fasting,” *— At Tirmidhi . 

It is related from Ibn ‘Abbas that he said, ‘ Verily the 
Apostle of God came to Madina and found the Jews fasting on 
the day of ‘Ashura. Therefore the Apostle of God said to 
them, “ What is this day which you are observing by a fast ? ” 
They replied, “This is a great day. On it God saved Moses 
and his people, and drowned Pharaoh and his people ; so Moses 
fasted on that day out of gratitude; and we fast thereon.” 
Then the Apostle of God said, “We are more worthy of and 
nearer to Moses than ye.” Then the Apostle of God fasted on 
that day, and ordered the people to fast thereon/— Muslim , Al 
Bukhdri . • 

It is related from Umm Salamah that, ‘ The Apostle of God 
used to fast on Saturdays and Sundays more than on any other 
day, and used to say, “Verily these two days are festivals of the 
polytheists, and I like to act contrary to them.”’— Ahmad. 

It is related from Abu Hurairah that, ‘ The Prophet used to 
fast on Mondays and Thursdays, and it was said, “ O Apostle of 
God, thou fastest on Mondays and Thursdays?” He replied, 
“ Verily on Mondays and Thursdays God forgives every Muslim 
except the two who are alienated from one another. He says, 

1 Leave them alone until they become reconciled/ ” *— Ahmad , 
Ibn Majah. 

It is related from Umm Hani that she said, ‘ On the day of 
the conquest of Mecca, Fatimah came and sat on the Apostle's 
left, and Umm Hani sat on his right. Then there came a girl 
with a vessel containing drink, and she gave it to him, and he 
drank from it. Then she gave it to Umm Hani, and she drank 
from it. Then she said, “ O Apostle of God, I have broken my 
fast, for I was fasting.” He said to her, “ Were you carrying 
out anything (omitted from a previous fast)?” She said, “ No.” 
He said, “Then it will do you no harm, if it was a voluntary 
fast.” AbuDdud , At Tirmidhi.— And in another tradition from 
Ahmad and At Tirmidhi it runs, ‘ She said, “ O Apostle of God, 
beware, verily I was fasting.” He replied, “ The performer of 
a voluntary fast is his own master; if he wishes he may fast, 
and if he wishes he may break the fast.” ’ 


THE BOOK OF FASTING 


97 


Concerning the Night of Power 
It is related from ‘Ayesha that, 1 The Apostle of God said, 
“Seek the night of power in the odd nights of the last ten days 
of the month Ramadan.” *—Al Bukhdri. 

It is related from Ubadah bin $amit that he said, ‘ The 
Prophet came out to inform us of the night of power ; and two 
men of the Muslims were disputing together, and he said, “ I 
came out to inform you of the night of power, and such-and- 
such an one were disputing together, and it was taken away 
(from my memory). And perhaps it is better for you; there¬ 
fore seek it in the ninth and seventh and fifth.” *—Al Bukhdri. 

On Seclusion for Religious Exercises 
It is related from Abu Hurairah that, ‘ The Qur’an was recited 
to the -Prophet once every year, but it was recited twice to him 
during the year in which he died. And he used to seclude him¬ 
self each year for ten days ; but he secluded himself for twenty 
days during the year in which he died .’—Al Bukhdri. 

It is related from Anas that, ‘ The Prophet used to seclude 
himself during the last ten days of Ramadan ; but one year he 
did not seclude himself, and when the following year came 
round he secluded himself twenty days .’—At Tirmidhi . 

It is related trom ‘Ayesha that she said, * It is the rule 
that they who seclude themselves should not visit the sick, nor 
be present at funerals, nor touch a woman, nor live with her, 
nor go out for any purpose except what is indispensably neces¬ 
sary. And there is no seclusion apart from fasting, and there is 
no seclusion except in a mosque .’—Abu Ddud. 


13 


VIII 


THE BOOK OF THE EXCELLENCIES 
OF THE QUR’AN 

It is related from ‘Othman that, ‘The Apostle of God said, 
“ The best of you is he who learns the Qur’an and teaches it.” ’ 
—Al Bukhari 

It is related from Abu vSa‘idu*l-Khudri that Usaid bin 
tJu<Jair said, 4 On a certain night when he was reading Suratu’l 
Baqara, and his horse was tethered near him, behold! the horse 
wheeled round. Then he became silent, and it also became 
steady. Then he read (again), and it wheeled round. Then 
he became silent, and it ceased wheeling round. He again read, 
and the horse wheeled round as before. Then he turned away, 
and his son Yahya was near it, and he feared that it would 
injure him. And when he moved the child away he raised his 
head to the heavens, and behold ! something like a cloud and 
in it objects resembling lamps. And when the morning came he 
informed the Prophet. He replied, 44 Read, O Ibn Hudair, 
read of Ibn Hudair.” He replied, ‘‘I feared, O Apostle of 
God, that it would tread on Yahya who was near it, and I moved 
near to him, and raised my head to the heavens, and behold! 
something resembling a cloud, in which were objects like lamps, 
and I went out in order that I should not see them.” He 
replied, ‘‘And dost thou know what that was?” He said, 
“ No.” He said, ‘‘Those were angels which came near at the 
sound of thy voice, and if thou hadst continued to read, they 
would have remained until the morning, and men would 
have seen them. They would not have remained hidden.”*— 
Muslim , Al Bukhari . 

It is related from Abu Umamah that he said, 4 1 heard the 
Prophet say, “ Read the Qur’an, for verily it will come on the 
day of resurrection as an intercessor for those who read it. 
Read the two bright chapters : chapter Baqara and chapter Ali 
‘Imran, for verily they will come on the day of resurrection as 
if they were clouds, or two canopies, or two flocks of birds in ranks 
arguing on behalf of those who read them. Read chapter 


THE BOOK OF THE EXCELLENCIES OF THE QUR^N 99 


Baqara, because memorising it is a blessing, and neglecting it 
a grief. The slothful cannot memorise it.” *— Muslim. 

It is related from Ubai bin Ka‘b that, ‘ The Apostle of God 
said, “ O Abu A1 Mandhar, dost thou know which verse from 
the Book of God most High which is with thee is the greatest ? ” 
I said, “ God and His Apostle know best.” He said, “ O Abu 
A1 Mandhar, dost thou know which verse from the Book of God 
which is with thee is greatest ? ” I said, “God, there is no God 
but He, the Living, the Self-subsisting. 1 ” ’ Ubai said, 1 And he 
struck me on my breast and said, “ O Abu A1 Mandhar, may 
knowledge be welcome to thee.” ’— Muslim. 

It is related from Ibn ‘Abbas that he said, ‘ Whilst Gabriel 
was sitting near the Prophet he heard a sound above him, and 
raised his head. And Gabriel said, “ This is a door of heaven 
which has been opened to-day. It was never opened before 
to-day.” And an angel came down from it. And he said, 
“ This is an angel who has come down to the earth. He never 
came down except to-day.” Then he saluted him and said, 
“Be glad in the two lights which have been given thee, and 
which were not given to any Prophet before thee, namely the 
chapter opening the Book and the last sections of Suratu’l 
Baqara. Thou wilt never recite a single letter from them 
without being given (its reward.)” ’— Muslim . 

It is related from Abu’l-Dardai that, ‘ The Apostle of God 
said, “Is any one of you unable to recite one third of the 
Qur’an in one night ? ” They replied, “ How can he recite one 
third of the Qur’an?” He said, ‘‘Say, ‘He is Lord alone.’ 2 
It will equal one third of the Qur’an.”.’— Muslim . 

It is related from Anas that a man said, ‘ O Apostle of 
God, I love this chapter (beginning with the words) “ Say, He 
is God alone.” He replied, “Verily thy love for it will take 
thee to paradise.” ’— At Tirmidhi. 

It is related from Ibn ‘Abbas that, ‘ The Apostle of God 
said, “Verily he in whose heart there is nothing of the Qur’an 
is like a deserted house.” ’— At Tirmidhi. 

It is related from Abu Sa‘id that, ‘ The Apostle of God 

1 Suratu’l-Baqara (ii) 256. 

* That is, repeat the chapter of the Qur’an beginning with these 
words, viz. Suratu’l-Ikhla§ (cxii). 


100 SELECTIONS FROM MUHAMMADAN TRADITIONS 

said, “The Blessed and most High Lord says, 4 He whom (the 
reciting of) the Qur’an diverts from the remembrance of me 
and from praying to me, I will give him better than what I 
give those who pray. And the superiority of the Word of God 
over other words is like the superiority of God over His 
creation.’ ” ’— At Tirmidhu 

It is related from A1 Harithu’l-A‘war that he said, ‘ I 
passed into the mosque, and behold the people were engaging 
in conversation ; so I went in to 4 Ali and informed him. He 
said, “Have they done so ? I said, “Yes.” He replied, 
“Verily I heard the Apostle of God, say, ‘Beware! for there 
will be strife.’ ” I said, “ O Apostle of God, what is the way out 
of such strife ? ” He replied, “ The Word of God in which is the 
history of what happened before you, and information of what 
will come after you, and a command concerning the things 
which are amongst you. It is a separator between (true and 
false). It is not a vain utterance. He who is proud and 
abandons it, God will break him in pieces, and he who desires 
guidance apart from it, God will lead him astray. And it is the 
strong rope of God, and it is a wise'admonition, and it is a 
straight road, and it is that by which men do not go astray, 
and by which the tongue does not become entangled. And 
the wise do not become satiated thereby. It does not 
become worn out by much repetition, and its wonders do not 
cease. It is a Book which, when the genii heard it, they said, 
4 Verily we have heard a wonderful Qur’an. It guides to the 
straight path, and we have believed in it.’ Whoever speaks by 
it wijl speak the truth, and whoever acts according to it will be 
rewarded, and he who judges by it will judge justly, and 
whoever invites men to it, will himself be guided to the straight 
path.” ’— At Tirmidhi. 

It is related from 4 Uqbah bin ‘Amir that he said, 4 1 heard 
the Apostle of God say, “If the Qur’an were placed in a 
leathern skin and cast into the fire, it would not be burned.” ’ 
—At Ddrimi . 

It is related from ‘All that, 4 The Apostle of God said, 

4 4 He who reads the Qur’an and remembers it, and makes 
lawful the lawful in it, and considers unlawful what is unlawful 
in it, God will bring him into paradise, and will accept his 


THE BOOK OF THE EXCELLENCIES OF THE QUR’AN 101 


intercession for ten people of his household, for each of whom 
the fire was fitting.” ’— Ahmad ., At Tirmidht, Ibn Mdjah. 

It is related from Abu Hurairah that, 4 The Apostle of God 
said to Ubai bin Ka 4 b, 44 How dost thou recite in prayer? ” 
Then he recited the 44 Mother of the Qur’an” (viz. Suratu’l- 
Fatiha). The Apostle of God said, 44 By Him in whose hands is 
my life, there has not been sent down in the Taurat, or the 
Gospel, or the Psalms, or in the Furqan the like of it. Verily 
it is the seven (verses) twice repeated, and the great Qur’an 
which was given to me.” ’— At Tirmidht . 

It is related from Abu Hurairah that, 4 The Apostle of God 
said, 44 Learn the Qur’an and recite it, for verily the likeness 
of the Qur’an for him who learns and recites it, and stands up 
for it, is like that of a leathern bag filled with musk which 
diffuses its scent in every place. And the likeness of him who 
learns it, and goes to sleep, although it is in his heart, is like 
that of a bag of musk with its mouth tied.” ’— At Tirmidht, An 
Nasai. 

It is related from An Nu 4 man bin Bashir that, 4 The 
Apostle of God said, 44 Verily God wrote a book two thousand 
years before He created the heavens and the earth, and sent 
down two verses from it with which He ended Suratu’l- 
Baqara. Satan approaches near to that house in which they 
are not recited for three nights.” ’— At Tirmidht , At Darimi . 

It is related from Anas that, 4 The Apostle of God said, 
44 Everything has a heart, and the heart of the Qur’an is (the 
chapter entitled) Ya Sin 1 . And he who recites the chapter Ya 
Sin, God will, for its recital, write down for him (the reward) 
for reading the whole Qur’an ten times.” ’— At Tirmidht , At 
Darimi . 

It is related from Ibn ‘Abbas and Anas bin Malik that, 
4 The Apostle of God said, 44 (The chapter beginning), 4 When 
the earth shall quake 2 ’, equals one half of the Qur’an, and (the 
chapter beginning), 4 Say, He is God alone 3 ’, equals one third 
of the Qhr’an, and (that beginning), 4 Say, O unbelievers 4 ’, 
equals one fourth of the Qur’an.” ’— At Tirmidhu 

It is related from Anas that, 4 The Apostle of God said, 
14 Whoever recites two hundred times every day (the chapter 


Chapter xxxvi. 
Chapter cxii. 


Chapter xcix. 
Chapter cix. 


102 SELECTIONS FROM MUHAMMADAN TRADITIONS 

beginning with the words), ‘ Say, He is God alone,' the sins of 
fifty years will be erased from him, unless he has a debt." ’ 
—At Tirmidhi, Al Ddrirni. 

It is related from ‘Uqbah bin ‘Amir that he said, ‘ Whilst 
I was going with the Apostle of God between A1 Hajfah and 
A1 Abwai, behold! there overtook us a wind of deep darkness, 
and the Apostle of God began to seek protection by (reciting 
the two chapters beginning) “ I take refuge with the Lord of 
the daybreak 1 ," and “ I take refuge with the Lord of men 2 ." 
And he said, “ O ‘Uqbah, seek protection by reciting these two 
chapters, for no one has ever sought protection by anything 
like these." ’— Abu Daud. 

It is related from ‘Ayesha that, ‘ The Prophet said, 
“ Verily the recitation of the Qur’an in prayer is better than 
its recitation at other times, and the recitation of the Qur’an at 
other times than the time of prayer is better than repeating the 
praises of God and saying, 4 (rod is great.’ And repeating the 
praises of God is better than alms, and alms are better than 
fasting, and fasting is a protection from the fire." ’ 

On the Recitation of the Qur’an. 

It is related from Ibn Mas‘ud that, ‘The Apostle of God 
said, “It is a bad thing for any one of you to say, ‘ I have 
forgotten such-and-such a verse.’ Rather say, ‘ I have been 
caused to forget it.’ Remember the Qur’an, because it is quicker 
in leaving the hearts of men than a quadruped.’”— Muslim, Al 
Bukhari ’. 

It is related from Ibn ‘Omar that, 4 The Prophet said 
“ The likeness of one who owns (that is memorizes) the Qur‘an 
is like that of the owner of the camel which is tied up. If he 
pays attention to it, he will retain it ; but if he frees it, it will 
go away." ’— Muslim, Al Bukhari . 

It is related from Qatadah that he said, ‘ Anas was asked 
what the recital of the Prophet was like (when reciting the 
Qur‘an). He replied, “ It was drawn out." After* that he 
recited, “ In the name of the Merciful, the Compassionate,"and 
he lengthened the words," In the name of " and, “ the Merciful ’’ 
and, “ the Compassionate." ’— Al Bukhdri . 


1 Chapter cxiii. 


Chapter cxiv. 


THE BOOK OF THE EXCELLENCIES OF THE QUr’An 103 

It is related from Anas that, ‘ The Apostle of God said to 
Ubai bin Ka‘b, “ Verily God has commanded me to recite the 
Qur’an to thee.” He replied, “ Did God mention me by name ? ” 
He said, “Yes.” He replied, “ Then I have been mentioned by 
the Lord of the worlds ! ” He said, “ Yes.” Then KaVs eyes 
flowed with tears.’— Muslim , Al Bukhari ’. 

It is related from Ibn ‘Omar that, ‘ The Apostle of God 
forbade travelling with the Qur’an towards the land of an 
enemy.’— Muslim , Al Bukhdri. —And in another tradition by 
Muslim it runs, ‘ Do not travel with the Qur’an, for I cannot 
protect it from being taken by the enemy.’ 

It is related from Abu Sa‘idu’l-Khudri that he said, ‘ I sat 
in a company of the feeble amongst those who had fled from 
Mecca to Madina, and some of them were covering others on 
account of nakedness. And a reciter was reciting the Qur’an 
to us, when, behold ! the Apostle of God came and stood beside 
us. And when the Apostle of God stood, the reciter became 
silent. And the Prophet saluted and then asked, “ What were 
you doing?” We replied, “We were listening to the Book 
of God.” He said, “Praise be to God, who has appointed 
amongst my followers a people with whom I am commanded 
to make my soul patient.” ’ Abu Sa‘id said, ‘Then he sat in 
our midst in order to make himself our equal. After that he 
beckoned with his hand, (Sit) thus! Then they sat in a circle, 
and their faces were visible to him. Then he said, “ Rejoice, 
O poor and needy emigrants, for the perfect light on the day 
of resurrection. You will enter paradise before the rich men 
by half a day, which is equal to five hundred years.” ’—Abd 
Daud . 

It is related from Hudhaifah that, ‘ The Apostle of God 
said, “Recite the Qur’an in the dialect and tone of the Arabs, 
and beware of the tones of lovers and the tones of the people 
of the two Books; for there will come after me a people who 
will repeat the Qur’an in the tones of singing and wailing. It 
will not go further than their throats. Their hearts and the 
hearts of those whose dignity excites their admiration will be 
involved in faction.” ’— Al Baihaqi . 

It is related from Taus that he said, ‘ The Prophet was 
asked, “ What man has the best voice for the Qur’an, and is the 


104 SELECTIONS FROM MUHAMMADAN TRADITIONS 


best in reciting it ? ” He replied, “ He who, when thou hearest 
him recite, appears to fear God.” ’ Taus said, ‘ Talq was such 
an one /—Al Darimi . 

On the Various Readings of the Qur’an 

It is related from ‘Omar binu’l-Khattab that he said, ‘ I 
heard Hisham bin Hakim bin Ilizam recite Suratu’l-Furqan in 
a different way from which I recited it, and from which the 
Apostle of God taught me to recite it. And I wished to 
hasten upon him, but I gave him respite until he had comple¬ 
ted the recital. After that I bound him with his cloak and 
took him to the Apostle of God and said, “ O Apostle of God, 
verily I heard this man recite Suratu’l-Furqan in a different 
manner from that in which thou taughtest me to recite it.” 
The Apostle of God replied, “ Let him go.” (Then he said to 
him) “Recite.” Then he recited in the way in which I had 
heard him recite. Then the Apostle of God said, “Thus it 
was sent down.” After that he said to me, “ Do. thou recite.” 
Then I recited. And he said, “Thus it was sent down. 
Verily this Qur’an was sent down in seven readings. Recite 
in whichever of them is easy for you.” ’— Muslim , Al Bukhdrt . 

It is related from Ibn Mas‘ud that he said, ‘ I heard a 
man reciting the Qur’an, and I heard the Prophet reciting 
differently from it. Then I brought him to the Prophet and 
informed him. And I perceived in his face signs of displeasure. 
Then he said, “ Both of you are right, therefore do not 
contradict each other; for verily those who were before you 
differed and were destroyed.” ’—Al Bukhari . 

It is related from Ubai bin Ka‘b that he said, 4 1 was in a 
mosque, and there entered a man to pray. And he recited in 
a reading of which I disapproved. After that there entered 
another man, and he recited in a reading different from that 
of his companion. And when we had finished the prayers we 
all went in together to the Apostle of God, and I said, “ Verily 
this man recited in a reading of which I disapproved ; and this 
other came in and recited in a reading different from that of 
his companion.” Then the Prophet commanded them both, and 
they recited. And he commended the reading of both of them. 
Then there entered my mind a desire to accuse of falsehood 


THE BOOK OF THE EXCELLENCIES OF THE QUR’AN 105 

such as had not existed when I was in ignorance (of Islam). 
Then, when the Apostle of God saw what had come to me, he 
struck me on my breast, at which I broke out into perspiration, 
as if I were looking at God from fear. Then he said to me, 
44 O Ubai, (orders) were sent to me that I should recite the 
Qur'an in one reading. Then I took the matter to God that it 
might be made easy for my followers. Then (orders) were 
sent back to me a second time, 4 Recite it in two readings.’ 
Then I took the matter back to God that it might be made 
easy for my followers, and (orders) were sent back to me a 
third time, 4 Recite it in seven readings. For thee (O 
Muhammad) is every reply which I have sent thee at the 
request thou didst make.' Then I said, ‘O God, forgive 
my people; O God, forgive my people.’ And I delayed a 
third request for the day when the whole world, even to 
Abraham, would long for me ” ’— Muslim . 

It is related from Ibn ‘Abbas that, 4 The Apostle of God 
said, “Gabriel taught me to recite in one reading, but I 
referred the matter back to him and continued asking him 
to increase it, and he continued to increase it for me 
until it ended up in seven readings.” Ibn Shihab said, 44 1 was 
informed that those seven readings were one in substance. 
They did not differ in the matter of lawful and unlawful.” ’— 
Muslim , Al Bukhari . 

It is related from Ubai bin Ka‘b that he said, 4 The Apostle 
of God met Gabriel and said, 44 O Gabriel, verily I have been 
sent to a people who are ignorant. Amongst them are old 
women and old men, and boys and girls, and men who have 
never read a book.” He replied, 44 O Muhammad, verily the 
Qur’an has been sent down in seven readings.” ’—At Tirmidht . 

It is related from ‘Ibn Abbas that he said, 4 The Apostle 
of God did not know the divisions of the chapters (of the 
Qur’an) until there descended upon him the words 44 In the 
name of God, the Merciful, the Compassionate.” ’—Abfi Ddud . 

It is Velated from Alqamah that he said, 4 We were in 
Homs, and Ibn Mas‘ud recited the chapter entitled 44 Joseph.” 
And a certain man said, 44 It was not sent down in this 
manner.” Then ‘Abdu’llah said, 44 By God! I certainly recited 
it in the time of the Apostle of God, and he said, * Thou hast 


14 


106 SELECTIONS FROM MUHAMMADAN TRADITIONS 

recited well.’ ” And whilst the man was speaking to Ibn 
Mas‘ud, behold the latter discerned the smell of wine upon 
him, and he said, “Dost thou drink wine, and falsify the 
Book!” Then he beat him to the utmost limits of the 
law.’— Muslim , Al Bukhdri. 

It is related from Zaid bin Thabit that he said, 1 Abu 
Bakr sent to me at the time of the battle of the people of 
Yamamah, and behold ‘Omar binu’l-Khattab was with him. 
Abu Bakr said, “Verily ‘Omar came to me and said, ‘Verily 
the slaughter amongst the reciters of the Qur’an was very 
severe on the day (of the battle) of Yamamah, and I fear that 
if the slaughter of reciters in the (surrounding) countries be 
severe, much will go from the Qur’an. I am therefore of 
opinion that thou shouldst order the collection of the Qur’an.’ 
I said to ‘Omar, ‘ How canst thou do a thing which the 
Apostle of God did not do ? ’ ‘Omar said, ‘ By God! this is 
good.’ And ‘Omar continued repeating it to me until God 
opened my mind to (understand) that, and I became of the 
same opinion about it as ‘Omar.” ’ Zaid said, ‘ Abu Bakr said 
to me, “Verily thou art a young man and wise, and we do not 
suspect thee, and thou wert in the habit of writing down the 
revelations for the Apostle of God. Therefore do thou search 
out the Qur’an and collect it together.” Then by God! if they 
had imposed upon me the task of removing one of the moun¬ 
tains, it would not have been more difficult for me than what 
he ordered me regarding the collection of the Qur’an. I said, 
“ How canst thou do a thing which the Apostle of God never 
did?” He replied, “By God! it is good.” And Abu Bakr 
continued repeating it to me until God opened my mind to 
understand that which he had opened Abu Bakr’s and ‘Omar’s 
minds to understand. Then I sought out the Qur’an and 
collected it together from leaves of dates and white stones and 
the breasts of men until I found the last part of Suratu’t-Tauba 
with Abu Khazaimahu’l-Ansari. I found it with none else beside 
him. (It was this) “There hath come to you an Apostle from 
amongst yourselves,” up to the end of the chapter. And the 
written pages remained with Abu Bakr until God caused him to 
die, after that (they remained) with ‘ Omar during his lifetime. 
Then (they remained) with Hafsa the daughter of ‘Omar.’- 
Al Bukhari. 


THE BOOK OF THE EXCELLENCIES OF THE QUr'An 107 

It is related from Anas bin Malik that, ‘Hudhaifa binu’l- 
Yamancame to ‘Othman; and he had been fighting with the 
people of Syria in the conquest of Armenia and Adharbijan 
with the people of ‘Iraq. And their differences in reciting 
(the Qur'an) had made Hudhaifa afraid, and he said to 
‘Othman, “O Commander of the faithful, assist this people 
before they differ in the Book, as do the Jews and Christians.” 
Then ‘Othman sent to Hafsa saying, “ Send to us the written 
pages. We will copy them into a number of copies, and then 
return them to thee.” Then Hafsa sent them to ‘Othman, 
and he commanded Zaid bin Thabit and Abdu'Jlah binu’l- 
Zubair and Sa‘id binuT-‘As and Abdu’llah binu’l-Harith bin 
Hisham, and they copied them into a number of copies. And 
‘Othman said to the three who were of the tribe of the Quraish, 
“ When you three and Zaid bin Thabit differ in anything from 
the Qur’an, then write it in the tongue of the Quraish, for it 
only came down in their tongue.” Then they did so until, 
when they had copied the written pages into a number of 
copies, ‘ Othman returned the pages to Hafsa. And he sent 
into all regions with a copy of that which they had copied. 
And he gave orders with respect to all other written pages or 
complete copies of the Qur’an that they should be burnt. Ibn 
Shihab said, “ Kharijah bin Zaid bin Thabit informed me that 
he heard Zaid bin Thabit say, ‘ I lost a verse from (the chapter 
entitled) A1 Ahzabwhen we copied the Book, and which I used 
to hear the Apostle of God recite. Then we sought for it and 
found it with Khuzaimah bin Thabitu’l-Ansari, namely, “ Of the 
believers there are men who remain true to the covenant which 
they make with God. 1 ” Then we placed it in its chapter in the 
Book.’ ” ’— Al Bukltdru 

It is related from Ibn ‘Abbas that he said, ‘ I said to 
‘Othman, “ What incited thee to give thine attention to Suratu’l- 
Anfal—and it was one of the twice-sent—and to Suratu’l-Barat, 
and to join them together ? And thou didst not write the words 
‘In the name of God the Merciful, the Compassionate’ (bet¬ 
ween them). And thou didst place them amongst the seven 
long chapters. What incited thee to that ? ” ‘Othman replied, 
“A time used to come to the Apostle of God when many 
1 Suratu’l-Ahzab (xxxiii) 23. 


108 SELECTIONS FROM MUHAMMADAN TRADITIONS 

chapters descended upon him : and when anything used to 
descend upon him, he would call some of those who used to 
write (his revelations) and would say, 4 Place these verses 
in the chapter in which such-and-such things are mentioned/ 
And when the verses descended upon him, he used to say, 
4 Place these verses in the chapter in which such-and-such 
things are mentioned/ And Suratu’l-Anfal was amongst the 
first chapters which were sent down at Madina, and Suratu’l- 
Barat was one of the last of the Qur’an to come down. And 
the subject-matter of the one was the same as the subject- 
matter of the other. And the Apostle of God was taken, and 
he never pointed out to us whether the one was a part of the 
other. And for that reason I joined them together, but did not 
write the words, 4 In the name of God the Merciful, the Compas¬ 
sionate/ And I placed it amongst the seven long chapters.” ’ 
—At Tirmidhi , Ahmad , Abu Dated . 


IX 


THE BOOK OF SUPPLICATIONS 

It is related from Abu Hurairah that, ‘ The Apostle of God 
said, “ There is a supplication which is accepted from every 
prophet. And every prophet hastened to offer his supplication ; 
but I have concealed my supplication, namely intercession for my 
people, until the day of resurrection ; and it will be available, 
if God will, for whoever of my people dies without associating 
anything with God.” ’— Muslim, Al Bukhdri . 

It is related from Abu Hurairah that, ‘ The Apostle of God 
said, 7 O God, verily I have received a covenant from Thee 
which Thou wilt never break. But I am only a man, therefore 
whomsoever of the believers I injure, or revile, or curse, or 
scourge, do Thou make these for him prayers and alms and a 
means by which Thou mayest bring him near to Thyself on 
the day of resurrection.” *— Muslim , Al Bukhari . 

It is related from Abu Hurairah that, ‘The’ Apostle of 
God said, “ When anyone of you prays, then let him not say, 
‘O God, forgive me, if Thou wilt; have mercy on me, if Thou 
wiltbut let him pray with firm purpose. For He will do what 
He wishes; there is none who can compel him.” *— Al Bukhdri. 

It is related from Nu'man bin Bashir that, ‘The Apostle of 
God said, “Supplication is worship.” Then he recited (the 
words) “Your Lord said, ‘Call upon me, and I will answer 
you*”*— Ahmad, At Tirmidhi, Abu Ddud, Ibn Majah , An 
Nasdi . 

It is related from Ibn Mas‘ud that, ‘The Apostle of God 
said, “ Pray to God for his favours, for verily God loves to be 
supplicated. And the best part of worship is waiting for relief.” ’ 
—At Tirmidhi. 

It is related from Abu Hurairah that, ‘ The Apostle of God 
said, “ He who would be pleased by God’s answering his prayer 
in times of distress, let him multiply his prayers in times of 
abundance.” *— At Tirmidhi . 

It is related from Abu Hurairah that, ‘ The Apostle of God 
said, “ Pray to God when you are certain that it will be answer- 


110 SELECTIONS FROM MUHAMMADAN TRADITIONS ' 

ed; for know ye that God will not answer the prayer of a 
proud and negligent heart.’’ ’— At Tirmidht. 

It is related from ‘Omar binu’l-Khattab that he said, ‘ I 
asked permission of the Prophet to make the lesser pilgrimage, 
and he gave me permission. And lie said, “ O dear brother, 
make us partners in thy supplications, and do not forget us.” 
He said a thing than which the whole world in exchange would 
not have pleased me more.’— Abu Ddud , At Tirmidht. 

It is related from Anas that, ‘ The Apostle of God said, 
“ Let each one of you supplicate his Lord for all his needs, even 
to asking him for his bootlaces when they are broken.” ’ And in 
a tradition from Thabitu’l-Bunani it is added, ‘ Even to asking 
Him for salt, and to asking Him for his boot-lace when it is 
broken.’— At Tirmidht . 

On Remembering God, and Approaching Near to Him 

It is related from Abu Hurairah and Abu Sa‘id that, ‘The 
Apostle of God said, “ No people sit remembering God, but the 
angels encompass them about, and mercy covers them over, and 
there comes down upon them the Sakinah , and God remembers 
them amongst those who are near Him.” ’— Muslim. 

It is related from Abu Musa that, ‘ The Apostle of God said, 
“The likeness of him who remembers his Lord, and of him 
who remembers Him not, is as the living and the dead.”’— 
Muslim , Al Bukhari . 

It is related from Abu Dharr that, ‘ The Apostle of God 
said, “God most High says, ‘ He who comes with one good action 
will get ten (rewards) like unto it and more. And he who 
comes with one evil action, its punishment is one evil equal 
thereto, or I will forgive him. And he who approaches near to 
me one span, I will approach near to him one cubit; and he 
who approaches near to me one cubit, I will approach near to 
him one fathom; and whoever approaches me walking, I will 
come to him running ; and he who meets me with sins equivalent 
to the whole world, but does not associate anything with me, I 
will greet him with forgiveness equal to it.’ ” ’— Muslim . 

It is related from Abu Hurairah that, ‘ The Apostle of God 
said, “ Verily God has certain angels who go round the roads 
seeking people who remember Him ; and when they find a peo- 


THE BOOK OF SUPPLICATIONS 


111 


pie who remember God, they cry out, 4 Come ye to what ye 
seek.' ” He said, “ Then they surround them on all sides with 
their wings, even to the skies of the world. Then their Lord 
asks them—and He knows better than they— 4 What say My 
servants ? * They reply, 4 They adore Thee and magnify Thee 
and praise Thee and glorify Thee.’ Then He says, 4 Have 
they seen Me ? * They reply, 4 No, by God ! they have not seen 
Thee.’ He says, 4 How would it be if they had seen me ?’ They 
reply, 4 If they had seen Thee, they would have worshipped 
Thee still more earnestly and glorified Thee still more earnest¬ 
ly and praised Thee still more.’ He says, 4 And what do they 
ask?’ They say, ‘They ask of Thee paradise.’ He says, 

4 And have they seen it ? ’ They say, 4 No, by God ! O Lord, 
they have not seen it.’ He says, 4 How would it be if they had 
seen it?’ They say, 4 If they had seen it, they would have 
longed still more for it, and would have searched still more for 
it, and would have desired it still more.’ He says, 4 From 
what do they seek protection ? ’ They say, 4 From the fire.* 
He says,‘Have they seen it?’ They say, 4 No by God! O 
Lord, they have not seen it.’ He says, ‘Then how would it 
be if they had seen it ? ’ They say, 4 If they had seen it, they 
would have fled from it still more, and would have feared it still 
more.’ He says, 4 I call you to witness that verily I have 
forgiven them.’ Then one of the angels says, 4 Such an 
one amongst them is not (really) of them. He only came of 
necessity.’ He says, 4 They are sitting (with those who 
remember me). Their sitting will not render them unhappy.’ ” ’ 
—Al Bukhdru 

It is related from Hanzalah binu’l-Rubai’ul-Usaidi that he 
said, ‘Abu Bakr met me and said, “How art thou, O Hanza¬ 
lah?” I said, 44 Hanzalah has become a hypocrite.” He 
replied, 44 Praise be to God ! What sayest thou ?” I said, 44 We 
stay with the Apostle of God when he reminds us of the fire 
and paradise, and it seems as if. we see them with our eyes ; 
but when*we go out from the Apostle of God we become busy 
with our wives and children and cultivated lands, and we forget 
much.” Abu Bakr said, “ By God ! verily we meet (difficulties) 
like this.” Then Abu Bakr and I departed until we entered in 
to the Apostle of God. And I said, 44 (3 Apostle of God, 


112 SELECTIONS. FROM MUHAMMADAN TRADITIONS 

I^anzalah has become a hypocrite.” Then the Apostle of God 
said, “What is that?” I said, “O Apostle of God, we stay 
with thee when thou dost remind us of the fire and paradise, 
and it seems as if we see them with our eyes. But when we go 
out from thee, we become busy with our wives and children 
and cultivated lands, and forget much.” The Apostle of God 
said, “ By Him in whose hand is my life ! if you had continued 
in that state in which you were with me, and in remembrance of 
me, verily the angels would have taken you by the hand on 
your beds and in your journeys ; but O Hanzalah, give an hour 
(to religion) and an hour (to worldly duties).” This he said 
three times/— Muslim . 

It is related from Thawban that he said, ‘ When the verse 
descended, “ To those who treasure up gold and silver,” we 
were with the Prophet in some of his journeys. And some of 
his companions said, “The revelation came down concerning 
gold and silver. If we had known what property was better, 
we would have taken it.” He replied, “Better than these 
is a remembering tongue and a grateful heart, and a believing 
wife who helps him in his faith.”’— Ahmad, At Tir midhi, Ibn 
Mdjah . 


X 


THE BOOK OF THE NAMES OF GOD 

It is related from Abu Hurairah that, ‘ The Apostle of 
God said, “Verily God Most High has ninety-nine names. 
Whoever counts them will enter paradise. He is Allah, than 
whom there is no other God, the Merciful, the Compassionate, 
the King, the Holy, the Peace, the Faithful, the Protector, the 
Mighty, the Compeller, the Proud, the Creator, the Maker, the 
Fashioner, the Forgiver, the Dominant, the Bestower, the Pro¬ 
vider, the Opener, the Knower, the Restrainer, the Speaker, 
the A baser, the Exalter, the Honourer, the Destroyer, the 
Hearer, the Seer, the Ruler, the Just, the Subtle, the Aware f 
the Clement, the Grand, the Forgiving, the Grateful, the 
Exalted, The Great, the Guardian, the Strengthener,the Reckoner, 
the Majestic, the Generous, the Watcher, the Approver, the 
Comprehensive, the Wise, the Loving, the Glorious, the 
Raiser, the Witness, the Truth, the Advocate, the Strong, the 
Firm, the Patron, the Laudable, the Counter, the Beginner, the 
Restorer, the Quickener, the Killer, the Living, the Subsisting, 
the Finder, the Glorious, the One, the Eternal, the Powerful, 
the Prevailing, the Bringer-forward, the Deferrer, the First, 
the Last, the Evident, the Hidden, the Governor, the Exalted, 
the Righteous, the Accepter of Repentance, the Avenger, the 
Pardoner, the Kind, the Ruler of the Kingdom, the Lord of 
majesty and liberality, the Equitable, the Collector, the In¬ 
dependent, the Enricher, the Giver, the Withholder, the Dis¬ 
tresses the Profiter, the Light, the Guide, the Incomparable, the 
Enduring, the Inheritor, the Director, the Patient.” '—At 
Tirmidhi. 

It is related from Asma’ bint Yazid that, ‘The Prophet 
said, “ The greatest name of God is in these two verses, ‘Your 
God is one God ; there is no God but He, the Merciful, the 
Compassionate,’ and the opening verse of Suratu Ali ‘Imran, 
‘ Allah, there is no God but He. He is the Living, the Self- 
subsisting.’ ” ’—At Tirmidhi , Abu Daud, lb 71 Majah. 

l.S 


114 SELECTIONS FROM MUHAMMADAN TRADITIONS 

It is related from Sa‘d that , 4 The Apostle of God said , 
“The supplication of the man of the fish (Jonah) when he 
called upon his Lord, when he was still in the belly of the fish, 
was this, ‘ There is no God but Thee. Praise be to Thee. 
Verily I was of the unjust.* No man, being a Muslim, prays 
this prayer in regard to anything, but it is granted to him.” *— 
Ahmad, At Tirmidhu 

On the Rewards of Magnifying and Praising God 

It is related from Samurah bin Jundub that, ‘The Apostle 
of God said, “The best words are four: ‘Glory be to God,* 
‘Praise be to God,* ‘There is no God but Allah,* and ‘God is 
Great*** And in another tradition it runs, “ The words most 
loved of God are four : 1 Glory be to God,* ‘ Praise be to God,* 
‘ There is no God but Allah,* and ‘ God is great.* It will bring 
you no injury if you begin with any one of them.** *— Muslim . 

It is related from Abu Hurairah that, ‘ The Apostle of God 
said, “Whoever says, ‘Glory be to God,* and, ‘ In His praise,* 
one hundred times in a day, his sins will be put away from him 
though they be as the foam of the sea.” *— Muslim , AlBukhari. 

It is related from Abu Hurairah that, ‘The Apostle of God 
said, “Whoever says, ‘There is no God but Allah alone. He 
has no partner. For Him is the Kingdom and for Him the 
praise; and He is powerful over all,* one hundred times in a 
day, there will be for him a reward equal to the freeing of ten 
slaves ; and one hundred good actions will be written for him, 
and one hundred evil actions will be erased for him; and they 
will be a protection for him against Satan on that day until the 
evening.. And no one will come with anything better than what 
he brings except the man who has done more than he.** *— 
Muslim, Al Bukhdri . 

It is related from Abu Musau’l-Ash‘ari that he said, ‘We 
were with the Apostle of God on a journey, and the men began 
to repeat the words, “ God is great ** in a loud voice. And the 
Apostle of God said, “O men, be easy on yourselves. Verily 
ye are not calling upon One who is deaf or absent. Ye are 
calling upon One who hears and sees; and He is with you. 
And He whom ye call upon is nearer to one of yon than the 
neck of his camel,** Abu Musa said, “ When I was behind him, 


THE BOOK OF THE NAMES OF GOD 


115 


I was saying to myself, ‘ There is no power and no strength, 
except in God/ and he said, 4 O ‘Abdu’llah bin Qais, shall I not 
point thee to one of the treasures of paradise ?’ I said, ‘ Yes, 
O Apostle of God.’ He said, ‘It is (the phrase), There is no 
power and no strength, except in God.’ ” ’— Muslim , AlBukh&ri. 

It is related from Abu Sa‘idu’l-Khudri that, ‘ The Apostle 
of God said, “Moses said, ‘O my Lord, teach me something by 
which I can remember Thee and call Upon Thee/ God replied, 

* O Moses, say, “There is no God but Allah/’ ’ He replied, ‘O my 
Lord, all Thy servants say this. I only wish for something by 
which Thou wilt specialize me/ He said, ‘ O Moses, verily if the 
seven heavens and their inhabitants—omitting me—and the 
seven earths were placed in one scale, and the words, “There 
is no God but Allah ” in the other scale, that in which the words, 
“ There is no God but Allah ”>are placed would go down/ ” ’— 
In Sharhit s-Su?mah. 

It is related from Ibn Mas‘ud that, ‘ The Apostle of God 
said, “I met Abraham on the night on which I made the 
journey to heaven, and he said, ‘ O Muhammad, give my saluta¬ 
tion to thy followers, and inform them that paradise has good 
earth and sweet water, and it is level, and its vegetation is, 
Glory be to God, Praise be to God, and There is no God but 
Allah, and God is great/ ” *— At Tirmidhi . 

On Asking Pardon and Repentance 

It is related from Abu Hurairah that, ‘ The Apostle of God 
said, “By God! I certainly ask pardon of God and repent to¬ 
wards Him more than seventy times a day.” ’—Al Bukh&ri. 

It is related from Agharu’l-Muzanni that, 1 The Apostle of 
God said, “O men, repent towards God; for verily I repent 
towards Him one hundred times in a day.” ’— Muslim . 

It is related from Abu Hurairah that, ‘ The Apostle of God 
said, “ Verily a servant (of God) committed a sin and said, 
‘My Lord, I have sinned, therefore forgive me/ His Lord 
said, ‘Doth My servant know that he has a Lord who forgives 
sins and punishes on account of them. I have forgiven My 
servant/ Then he remained as long as God wished, and then 
he committed a sin and said, ‘ My Lord, I have committed a 
sin, therefore forgive me.’ He said, ‘Doth My servant know 


116 SELECTIONS FROM MUHAMMADAN TRADITIONS 


that he has a Lord who forgives sins, and punishes on account 
of them. I have forgiven My servant.’ Then he remained as 
long as God wished, and afterwards he committed a sin and 
said, ‘ My Lord, I have committed another sin, therefore forgive 
it for me.’ He said, ‘Doth My servant know that he has a 
Lord who forgives a sin and punishes on account of it. I have 
forgiven My servant. Therefore let him do what he likes.’ ” ’— 
Muslim , Al Bukhari. 

It is related from Abu Bakru’s-$iddiq that, ‘The Apostle 
of God said, “That person who asks pardon, does not remain 
immersed in sin, although he returns to it seventy times a 
day.” ’— At Tirmidhi , A bit Daud . 

It is related from Safwan bin ‘ Assal that, ‘ The Apostle of 
God said, “ Verily God Most High has placed in the West a door 
for repentance whose width is seventy years journey. It will 
not be shut so long as the sun does not rise before it (i.e. in 
the West). And that is the word of God Most High in the day 
when certain signs of thy Lord shall appear, ‘ The faith of no 
soul shall benefit it, which has not believed before that.’ ” ’— At 
Tirmidhi, I bn Majah . 

It is related from Abu Hurairah that, ‘The Apostle of God 
said, “ Verily there were two men of the Children of Israel who 
were friends together. One of them was intent on worship, 
but the other used to proclaim himself a sinner. And the first 
began to say, ‘Give up that in which thou art (entangled).’ 
His companion said, ‘ Leave me and my Lord,’ until one day he 
found him engaged in grievous sin. Then he said, ‘ Forsake 
it.’ He replied, ‘ Leave me and my Lord. Hast thou been 
sent as a guardian over me ! ’ He said, ‘ By God! God will 
never forgive thee, nor enter thee into paradise.’ Then God 
sent an angel to them both, who took both their souls, and they 
were brought together near to God. He said to the sinner, 

‘ Enter paradise by My mercy.’ And He said to the other, ‘ Art 
thou able to forbid My servant My mercy ? ’ He replied, ‘ No, 
O God.’ He said (to the angels) ‘ Take him away to the fire.’ ” ’ 
— Ahmad . 

It is related from Abu Hurairah that, ‘ The Apostle of God 
said, “Verily God, the Exalted and Magnified, most certainly 
raises the rank of the good servant in paradise. And the latter 


THE BOOK OF THE NAMES OF GOD 


117 


will say, ‘O Lord, why is this (dignity) for me?' He will 
reply, ‘On account of the prayers of thy son for thee for My 
forgiveness.’ ” ’— Ahmad . 

It is related from ‘Abdu’llah bin ‘Abbas that, ‘ The Apostle 
of God said, “There is no dead person in the grave, but he is 
like one immersed in water and crying for help. He expects 
the prayer of his father or mother or brother or friend may 
reach him ; and when it reaches him, it is more pleasant to him 
than the world and all that is therein. And verily God Most 
High certainly causes to enter the tombs, on account of the 
prayers of the people of the earth, (rewards) like mountains. 
Verily the gifts of the living to the dead are asking forgiveness 
for them.” ’— Al Baihaqi . 

It is related from ‘Ayesha that, ‘Verily the Prophet used 
to say, “O God, make me one of those who, when they do good, 
rejoice; and when they do evil, pray for forgiveness.”’— Ibn 
Mdjah. 

It is related from Al Harith bin Suaid that he said, 
‘ ‘Abdu’llah bin Mas‘ud related to us two traditions ; one of them 
from the Apostle of God, and the other from himself. He said, 
“Verily a believer sees his sins as if he were sitting beneath a 
mountain, and fearing that it would fall upon him. And the 
sinner sees his sins as if they were a fly that had passed over 
his nose ; and he says concerning it, ‘Thus!’ that is, he drives 
it away from him with his hand.” After that (Ibn Mas‘ud) 
said, ‘I heard the Apostle of God say, “God rejoices at the 
repentance of one of His believing servants more than a man 
who alights on the ground in a destructive desert, with whom is 
his camel laden with his food and water. And he lays down his 
head and sleeps for a while, and then awakes to find that his 
camel has gone. Then he searches for it, until when the heat 
and thirst oppress him—or whatever else God wills—he says, 

‘ I will return to the place where I was, and there I will sleep 
until I die.’ Then he places his head upon his forearm in order 
that he may die. And he awakes, and lo ! his camel stands be¬ 
side him, and on it his food and drink. Verily God rejoices 
more at the repentance of a believing servant, than this man at 
the return of his camel and food.” ’— Muslim . 

It is related from Abu Dharr that, ‘The Apostle of God 
said, “ Verily God Most High will certainly forgive His servant, 


118 SELECTIONS FROM MUHAMMADAN TRADITIONS 


so long as a veil does not intervene.” They said, “O Apostle 
of God, what is the veil ? ” He replied, “That a soul expires 
whilst associating: something with God.” *— Ahmad . 

On the Abundance of God’s Mercy 

It is related from Abu Hurairah that, ‘ The Apostle of God 
said, “ When God completed the work of creation, He wrote a 
book which is with Him above His throne; 1 Verily my mercy 
outruns my anger.’ And in another tradition it runs ‘over¬ 
comes my anger.’ ” ’— Muslim , Al Buklidri. 

It is related from ‘Omar binu’l-Khattab that be said, ‘Some 
captives appeared before the Prophet. And, lo ! a woman of the 
captives, whose breasts were flowing with milk, when she found 
her child amongst the captives, took it and clasped it to her 
breast and suckled it. Then the Prophet said to us, “ Do you 
’think that this woman would throw her child into the fire ? ” We 
replied, “No, not if she be able to do otherwise.” He said, 
“God is more merciful towards His servants than this woman 
towards her child.” ’— Muslim , Al Bukhdri ". 

It is related from Jabir that, ‘The Apostle of God said, 
“ The actions of none of you will take him into paradise, or pro¬ 
tect him from the fire. Not even I, except by the mercy of 
God.” ’— Muslim. 

It is related from Abu Dardai that, ‘ He heard the Prophet 
repeat from the pulpit, when he was speaking, these words ; 
“ For him who fears the standing before his Lord are two para¬ 
dises.” I said, “ O Apostle of God, although he commit adultery 
and steal?” He replied a second time, “ For him who fears 
the standing before his Lord are two paradises.” I said a 
second time, “O Apostle of God, although he commit adultery 
and steal ?” He replied a third time, “ For him who fears the 
standing before his Lord are two paradises.” I said a third time, 
“ O Apostle of God, although he commit adultery and steal ? ” 
He replied, “ Even though Abu Dardai’s nose be humiliated 
thereby.” ’— Ahmad. 

It is related from ‘Amiru’r-Ram that he said, 4 When we 
were with the Prophet, behold a man drew near to him, dressed 
in an upper garment, and on his head was something which he 
had wrapped up (in a cloth). And he said, “O Apostle of God, 


the book of the names of god 


119 


I passed by a thicket of trees, and I heard therein the sound of 
young birds. Then I took them and placed them in my upper 
garment, and their mother came and circled round my head. 
Then I uncovered them for her, and she descended upon them. 
Then I again wrapped them up in my garment, and they are 
these with me.” The Prophet replied, 11 Put them down.” 
Then I put them down, but their mother refused to leave them. 
Then the Apostle of God said, “Art thou surprised at the 
kindness of the mother of the young birds towards them ? By 
Him who sent me with the truth! God is more merciful to 
His servants, than the mother of the young birds to her young. 
Return with them until thou replace them whence thou didst 
take them, and their mother with them.” Then he returned 
with them.’— Abu Ddud. 

It is related from ‘Abdu’llah bin ‘Omar that he said, ‘We 
were with the Prophet in certain warlike expeditions when he 
passed a band of people, and asked “ Who are these people ? ” 
They said, “We are Muslims.” And a woman was lighting 
a fire under her pot, and her son was with her. And when the 
heat of the fire rose up, she moved him away from it. Then 
she came to the Prophet and said, “Art thou the Apostle of 
God? ” He replied, “ Yes.” She said, “ May my father and 
my mother be sacrified for thee ! Is not God the most merciful 
of the merciful?” He replied, “Certainly.” She said, “Is 
not God more merciful towards His servants than a mother 
towards her child?” He replied, “Certainly.” She said, 
“Verily a mother would not cast her child into the fire!” 
Then the Apostle of God bowed his face to the ground weeping ; 
afterwards he raised his head towards her and said, “ Verily 
God does not punish any of His servants, except the rebellious 
one who rebels against him, and refuses to say, ‘ There is no 
God but Allah.* ” *— Ibn Mdjah . 

On What should be Said in the Morning, the 
Evening, and the Time of Sleep 

It is related from ‘Abdu’llah that he said, ‘ When the 
evening came the Apostle of God used to say, “We have 
reached the evening, and God’s kingdom has reached the 
evening. Praise be to God! There is no God but Allah alone. 


120 


SELECTIONS FROM MUHAMMADAN TRADITIONS 


He has no partner. His is the kingdom, and His is the praise, 
and He is powerful over all. O God, I ask of Thee the good of 
this night, and the good that is in it; and I take refuge with 
Thee from its evil, and the evil that is in it. O God, verily 
I take refuge with Thee from negligence and from the 
weakness of old age and from the evils of old age, and from 
the calamities of the world, and the punishments of the grave/’ 
And when the morning dawned he used to repeat that 
again (saying), “We have reached the morning, and God’s 
kingdom has reached the morning.” And in another tradition 
it runs, “My Lord, verily I take refuge with Thee from the 
punishment of the fire and the punishment of the grave.”’— 
Muslim. 

It is related from Hudhaifa that he said, * When the Prophet 
lay down at night he used to place his hand under his cheek. 
Then he would say, “ O God, in Thy name I die and live.” And 
when he awoke he would say, “ Praise be to God who gives us 
life after that He caused us to die ; and to Him is the resurrec¬ 
tion.” ’— Muslim , Al Bukhari . 

It is related from Abu Hurairah that, ‘ The Apostle of God 
said, “ When anyone of you retires for rest to his bed, then let 
him dust his bed with the inner side of his drawers ; for he 
does not know what may have fallen upon it. After that let 
him say, ‘ In Thy name, O my Lord, I have laid down on my 
side, and in Thy name I will raise it up. If Thou takest my 
soul, then have mercy upon it ; and if thou send it back (after 
sleep), then guard it with that by which Thou guardest 
Thy victorious servants.’ ” And in another tradition it runs, 
“ Then let him lie down on his right side, and after that let 
him say, ‘In Thy Name.’ ’* And in another tradition it runs, 
“Then let him dust it with the border of his garment three 
times,” and “If Thou takest my soul, then forgive it.” ’— 
Muslim , Al Bukhdri. 

It is related from Abu Hurairah that, ‘Abu Bakr said, “I 
said, O Apostle of God, command me something which I can 
say when I reach the morning and when I reach the ’evening.” 
He replied, “ Say, ‘O God, the Knower of the hidden and the 
revealed, the Creator of the heavens and the earth, Lord of all 
things and Master thereof, I bear witness that there is no God 


THE BOOK OF THE NAMES OF GOD 


121 


but Thee ; and I take refuge with Thee from the evil of my 
own soul, and from the evil of Satan and his associating 
partners.(with Thee).’ Say this when thou readiest the morn¬ 
ing, and when thou reachest the evening, and when thou takest 
to thy bed .”’—At Tirmidht , Abu Daud , A l Dari mi . 

It is related from Abu ‘Ayyash that verily, * The Apostle 
of God said, “He who says, when morning dawns, ‘There is 
no God but Allah alone. He has no partner. For Him is the 
kingdom, and for Him is the praise ; and He is powerful over 
all,’ will receive a reward equal to that for emancipating a slave 
of the sons of Ishtnael. And ten good deeds will be written 
down for him, and ten evil deeds will be taken away from 
him ; and ten degrees of eminence will be accredited to him > 
and he will be protected from Satan until the evening comes. 
And if he repeats these words when the evening comes, he 
will receive the same (rewards) until the morning.’’ Then a 
certain man saw the Apostle of God in his sleep, when he was 
dreaming, and he said, “O Apostle of God, verily Abu ‘Ayyash 
relates concerning thee in such-and-such a way.” He replied, 
“ Abu ‘Ayyash has told the truth.” Abu Daud , Ib?i M&jah . 

It is related from Thaw ban that, ‘ The Apostle of God said, 
“There is no Muslim servant who says three times, when 
evening comes and morning comes, ‘ I am satisfied with Allah 
as Lord, and with Islam as a religion, and with Muhammad as a 
Prophet, ’ but it becomes incumbent on God to be satisfied with 
him on the day of resurrection.” ’— Ahmad , At Tirmidht, 

It is related from Abu Sa‘id that, ‘The Apostle of God 
said, “ Whoever says, when he seeks rest upon his bed, ‘ I ask 
pardon of God, beside whom there is no God, the Living, the 
Self-subsisting; and I repent towards Him three times,’God 
will forgive him his sins, though they be as the foam of the sea, 
or in number like the sands of the desert, or in number like the 
leaves of the trees, or in number equal to the days of the 
world.” ’— At Tirmidht . 

It is related from Shaddad bin Aus that, ‘ The Apostle of 
God said, “There is no Muslim who goes to bed reciting a 
chapter from the Book of God, but God appoints an angel over 
him as guard, so that nothing approaches him to hurt him until 
he awakes, whenever that may be.” ’— At Tirmidht ’. 


16 


122 


SELECTIONS FROM MUHAMMADAN TRADITIONS 


Concerning Prayer on Special Occasions 

It is related from Sulaiman bin §urad that he said, ‘Two 
men were abusing each other near the Prophet, and we were 
sitting near him. And one of the two was reviling his 
companion .in anger, until his face became red. Then the 
Prophet said, “ Verily I know a word which, had he spoken it, 
that (anger) which he has would have gone from him, namely, 
1 I take refuge with God from the accursed Satan.’ ” Then 
they said to the man, “Dost thou not hear what the Prophet 
says?” He replied, “Verily I am not mad.”’— Muslim, Al 
Bukhari. 

It is related from Abti Hurairah that, ‘ The Apostle of God 
said, “ When you hear the crow of a cock, then supplicate God 
for a portion of His grace ; for verily it has seen an angel. 
And when you hear the bray of an ass, then take refuge with 
God from the accursed Satan; for verily it has seen Satan.” 
— Muslim , Al Bukhari . 

It is related from I bn ‘Omar that, ‘ When the Apostle of 
God used to mount his camel in order to set out on a journey, 
he would say, “God is great” three times, and then say, 
“ Praise be to Him who has made this (animal) to work for us ; 
for we were not able to do it; and verily to our Lord do we 
return. O God we ask of Thee in this journey of ours virtue and 
abstinence and actions with which Thou wilt be pleased. O 
God, make this journey easy for us, and shorten for us its length. 
O God, Thou art the Companion on a journey, and the substi¬ 
tute in our families. O God, I take refuge with Thee from the 
difficulties of the journey, and from evil sights, and from an 
inauspicious return to my property and my family.” And 
when he returned, he would repeat these words, and add to 
them (the words), “We return, we repent, we worship, we 
praise our Lord.” ’— Muslim . 

It is related from Abu Hurairah that, ‘A man came to the 
Apostle of God and said, “ O Apostle of God, how much I have 
suffered from a scorpion which bit me yesterday ! ” He replied, 
“ If thou hadst said, when thou reachedst the evening, 1 1 take 
refuge in the perfect word of God from the evil of what He has 
created,’ it would not have injured thee.” ’ —Muslim. 

It is related from ‘Alxl’ullah bin abi Awfi that he said, 

1 The Apostle of God invoked a curse against the polytheists 


THE HOOK OF THE NAMES OF GOD 


123 


on the day (of the battle) of Ahzab, and said, “ O God, the 
Sender-down of the Book, the Quick in taking account, O God, 
put to rout the confederates. O God, put them to rout, and 
cause them to tremble.” ’— Muslim , AI Bukhari. 

It is related from Mu‘adh bin Jabal that he said, ‘The 
Prophet heard a man praying and saying, “O God, verily I 
supplicate of Thee complete favours.” (The Prophet) said, 
“What are complete favours?” He replied, “This is a 
prayer by which I hope for good.” (The Prophet) said, 
“ Verily complete favours give an entrance into Paradise and 
escape from the fire.” And he heard a man saying, “ O Lord, 
to Thee be glory and honour.” Then he said to him, “Thy 
prayer has been answered for thee, therefore ask.” And the 
Prophet heard a man saying, “ O God, verily I ask of Thee 
patience.” The Prophet said, “Thou hast asked God for 
calamity ,* but ask Him for health.” ’— At Tirmidhi . 

It is related from ‘Abdu’llahu’l-Khatmi that he said, ‘ When 
the Apostle of God wished to bid farewell to the army, he used 
to say, “ I commit to the care of God your religion and your 
safety and the results of your actions.” ’— Abu Ddud. 

It is related from Ibn ‘Omar that, ‘ When the Apostle of 
God was on a journey and night drew near, he used to say, “O 
earth, my Lord and thy Lord is Allah. I take refuge with God 
from thy evil, and from the evil that is in thee, and from the 
evil that is created in thee, and from the evil that moves over 
thee. And I take refuge with God from lions and black snakes 
and serpents and scorpions, and from the evil of the inhabitants 
of the land, and from the father and what he begets.” ’— Abu 
Ddud . 

It is related from Anas that, ‘ When the Apostle of God went 
on a warlike expedition, he used to say, “ O God, Thou art my 
support and my help. In Thee I devise stratagems, and in 
Thee I spring to the assault, and in Thee \ fight.” ’— At Tir¬ 
midhi , Abu Ddud . 

It is related from Abu Maliku’l-Ashari that, ‘The Apostle 
of God said, “ When a man enters his house, then let him say, 
‘ O God, I ask Thee for a favourable entrance and a favourable 
exit. In the name of God we enter, and on God our Lord we 
lean.’ After that let him salute the people of the house.” *— 
Abu Ddud . 


124 


SELECTIONS FROM MUHAMMADAN TRADITIONS 


It is related from Abu Bakr that, ‘ The Apostle of God 
said, “ The prayer of a person in grief is this, ‘ O God, for Thy 
mercy I hope. Do not leave me to myself for a single instant, 
and make all my condition favourable. There is no God but 
Thee.’ ” ’— Abu Ddud . 

It is related from ‘Ayesha that she said, ‘ When the 
Apostle of God sat in an assembly or prayed, he used to repeat 
certain words. So I asked him concerning the words. He 
replied, “ If good words have been spoken, they will be a seal 
upon them till the day of resurrection; but if bad words have 
been spoken, they will be an atonement for them. (They are 
these), ‘Glory be to Thee, O God, and praise be to Thee. 
There is no God but Thee. I ask pardon of Thee, and I repent 
towards Thee.’ ” ’— An Nasai . 

It is related from Abu Sa‘idu‘l-Khudri that he said, ‘ On 
the day of (the battle of) the ditch we said, “ O Apostle of 
God, is there anything which we can say, for our hearts are in 
our throats (from fear).” He replied, “Yes, (say) O God, 
guard us from our faults, and protect us from our fear.” Abu 
Sa‘id said, ‘Then God struck the faces of His enemies with a 
wind, and put them to rout with the wind.’— Ahmad. 

On Seeking Refuge 

It is related from ‘Ayesha that, ‘ The Prophet used to say» 
“ O God, I take refuge with Thee from laziness and from the 
weakness of old age and from debt and from that which causes 
me to sin. O God, verily I take refuge with Thee from the 
punishment of the fire and the calamity of the fire, and from 
the calamity of the grave and the punishment of the grave, 
and from the evil of the seduction of riches, and from the evil 
of the affliction of poverty, and from the evil of the sedition of 
the (false) Messiah, Dajjal. O God, wash my sins in snow-water 
and hail-water, and purify my heart as a white garment is 
cleansed from impurity, and place a distance between me and 
my sins, as thou hast placed a distance between the* East and 
the West.”’— Muslim , Al Bukhari. 

It is related from ‘Ayesha that, ‘ The Apostle of God 
used to say, “ O God, verily I take refuge with Th£e from the 
evil which I have done, and from the evil which I have not 
done.” *— Muslim. 


THE BOOK OF THE NAMES OF GOD 


125 


It is related from Ibn ‘Abbas that, ‘The Apostle of God 
used to say, “ O God, for Thee I have become a Muslim, and in 
Thee I trust, and upon Thee I lean, and to Thee I return, and by 
Thee I fight. O God, verily I take refuge in Thy honour—there 
is no God but Thee—lest Thou lead me astray. Thou art the 
Living, who dieth not; but the genii and men die.” ’— Muslim , 
Al Bukhari . 

It is related from Abu Hurairah that he said, ‘ The Apostle 
of God used to say, “ O God, I take refuge with Thee from four 
things: from knowledge which does not benefit, and from a 
heart which is not submissive, and from a soul that is not 
satisfied, and from a supplication which is not heard.” ’— Ahmad , 
Abu Dandy lbn Mdjah . 

It is related from ‘Imran bin Husain that he said, ‘The 
Prophet said to my father, “O Husain, how many gods hast 
thou worshipped to-day?” My father replied, “Six on earth 
and one in heaven.” He said, “Then which of them dost 
thou count upon (to satisfy) thy desires, and which dost thou 
fear?” He replied, “He who is in heaven.” The Prophet 
said, “O Husain,'beware ! If thou hadst been a Muslim, I 
would have taught thee two words, which would have benefitted 
thee.” ' ‘Imran said, ‘ When Husain became a Muslim, he said, 
“O Apostle of God, teach me the two words which thou 
promised me.” He replied, “ Say, O God, inspire me with 
regard to my proper road, and give me protection from the 
evil of my inner self.” ’—At Tirmidhu 

It is related from Abu Sa‘id that he said, ‘ I heard the 
Apostle of God say, “ I take refuge with God from infidelity 
and debt.” Then a man said, “ O Apostle of God, dost thou 
make infidelity equal to debt?” He replied, “Yes.” And in 
another tradition it runs, “ I take refuge from infidelity and 
poverty.” A man said, “ Are these two equal ? ” He replied, 
“ Yes.” ’—An Nasai . 

. On Comprehensive Prayer 
It is related from Abu Musau’l-Ash‘ari from the Prophet, 
that he used to pray this prayer, “ O God, forgive me my sins 
and my ignorance and my extravagance in my affairs, and what 
thou knowest better than I. O God, forgive my (wrong) 
intentions and my jesting and my unintentional sins and my 


126 SELECTIONS FROM MUHAMMADAN TRADITIONS 

intentional sins; for all these are with me. Q God, forgive me 
those sins I have committed before, and those I shall commit 
hereafter, and those I have committed in secret, and those I 
have committed openly, and those which Thou knowest better 
than I ; for Thou art the Seiter-forward and the Holder-back, 
and Thou art powerful over all things.” ’— Muslim , Al Bukhari . 

It is related from ‘Abdu’llah bin Ma‘sud that, 4 The 
Prophet used to say, 44 O God, verily I ask of Thee guidance 
and piety and chastity and riches.” ’— Muslim . 

It is related from Abu Maliku’l-AshjVi from his father 
that he said, 4 When a certain man became a Muslim, the 
Prophet taught him the prayers and then commanded him to 
offer supplication in these words, 44 O God, forgive me and 
have mercy on me and guide me and give me health and my 
daily food.” ’— Muslim . 

It is related from Ibn ‘Abbas that he said, 4 The Prophet 
used to pray and say, 44 My Lord, help me, but do not help 
(others) against me ; and give me the victory, but do not give 
(others) the victory over me ; deceive on my behalf, but do not 
deceive against me ; and guide me, and make the guidance easy 
for me ; and aid me against those who oppress me. My Lord, 
make me grateful to Thee, and a remembrancer of Thee, and 
one who fears Thee. Make me obedient to Thee and humble 
before Thee, and one who returns to Thee with crying. My 
Lord, accept my repentance, and wash away my sins, and 
answer my prayers, and strengthen my proofs. Direct my 
tongue and guide my heart and take out the blackness of my 
heart.” ’—At Tirmidhi , Abu Daud , Ibn Mdjah . 

It is related from ‘Omar binu’l-Khattab that he said, 
4 When revelations were sent down to the Prophet, a confused 
sound was heard near his face like the hum of bees. And, on 
a certain day, revelation was sent down upon him. Then we 
stayed an hour, and it ceased from him. Then he turned 
towards the temple at Mecca and raised his hands and said, 44 O 
God, increase us, and do not diminish us; honour us, and do not 
abase us ; give to us, and do not disappoint us ; give us the 
precedence, and do not give others the precedence over us; 
satisfy us, and do Thou be satisfied with us.” Then he said, 
“Ten verses have been sent down upon me. Whoever obeys 


THE BOOK OF THE NAMES OF GOD 


127 


them will enter paradise.” Then he recited, “Now are the 
believers happy, 1 ” to the end of the ten verses.’— Ahmad , At 
Tirmidhi . 

It is related from ‘Othman bin IJunaif that he said, ‘ Verily 
a blind man came to the Prophet and said, “ Pray to God that 
He would cure me.” He replied, “If thou desirest it, I will 
pray, and if thou desirest, thou mayest have patience, for that 
is better for thee.” He said, “Pray to Him.” (‘Othman) 
said, “Then he ordered him to perform ablutions thoroughly 
and to pray this prayer, * O God, I supplicate Thee, and turn 
to Thee through Thy Prophet Muhammad, the Prophet of 
mercy. Verily I turn to Thee : to my Lord that He may satisfy 
for me these my wants. 0 God, accept his intercession on my 
behalf.’ ” ’—At Tirmidhi. 

It is related from Abu Dardai that, ‘The Apostle of God 
said, “ One of the prayers of David was this. He used to say, 

‘ O God, I ask of Thee Thy love and the love of him who 
loveth Thee, and the action which will secure Thy love for me. 
O God, make Thy love more precious to me than mine own soul 
and my property and my family and than cold water.’ ” Abu 
Dardai said,* When the Apostle of God mentioned David, he used 
to speak of him and say, “He was the greatest worshipper 
amongst men.” ’—At Tirmidhi. 

1 Suratu’l-Mu’minun (xxiii) 1-10. 


XI 


THE BOOK OF THE RITES OF PILGRIMAGE 

It is related from Abu Hurairah that he said, 1 The Apostle 
of God addressed us and said, “ O men, the pilgrimage hath 
been made incumbent upon you; then perform it.” A man 
asked, “ (Shall we perform it) every year, O Apostle of God ?” 
He remained silent until the man repeated the question three 
times. Then he replied, “ If I had said, ‘Yes,’ it would certain¬ 
ly have become obligatory, but ye are certainly not able (to 
perform it every year).” Then he said, “ Leave me alone, so 
long as I leave you alone. Those who were before you were 
destroyed simply because of their many questions and their 
contradicting their prophets. Therefore, when I command you 
anything, perform what you are able of it, and when I forbid 
you anything, then leave it alone.” ’— Muslim. 

It is related from Abu Hurairah that, ‘ The Apostle of 
God said, “ He who makes a pilgrimage for God, and 
abstains from sexual intercourse, and does not forsake the path 
of righteousness, returns like he was on the day when his 
mother gave him birth.” ’— Muslim , Al Bukhari . 

It is related from lbn ‘Abbas that, ‘A woman of (the 
tribe of) Khash‘am said, “ O Apostle of God, it is a duty 
imposed by God on His servants that they perform the 
pilgrimage. My father is an old man and cannot sit firmly on 
his camel ; then shall I perform the pilgrimage on his 
behalf?” He replied, “Yes.” That occurred during the 
farewell pilgrimage.’— Muslim , Al Bukhari . 

It is related from lbn ‘Abbas that, ‘ A man came to the 
Prophet and said, “ Verily my sister made a vow to perform 
the pilgrimage, but she died.” The Prophet said, 11 If she had 
been in debt, wouldst thou have redeemed it ?” He replied, 
“Yes.” He said, “Then redeem the debt of God, for that is 
the most worthy of redemption.” ’ — Muslim , Al Bukhari. 

It is related from ‘Ayeslia that she said, 4 I asked the 
Prophet’s permission to join in the religious wars. He replied, 
“ Thy religions war is pilgrimage. ” ’— Muslim , Al Bukhari. 


THE BOOK OF THE RITES OF PILGRIMAGE 


129 


It is related from ‘All that, c The Apostle of God said, 
“ He who possesses food for the journey and a camel to carry 
him to the House of God (at Mecca), and does not perform the 
pilgrimage; then if he dies, there is no difference between him 
and a Jew or a Christian. That is because God Most High says, 
‘ The pilgrimage for God to the House is incumbent upon men 
who are able to perform the journey/ ” ’— At Tirmidhu 

It is related from Ibn ‘Abbas that, 4 The Apostle of God 
heard a man saying, “ I am ready to serve Thee on behalf of 
Shubrumah.” He said, “Who is Shubrumah?” He replied, 
“ My brother,” or (he said) “ Some relation.” He said, “ Hast 
thou performed the pilgrimage for thyself?” He replied, 
“No.” He said, “Perform the pilgrimage for thyself, and then 
perform it for Shubrumah.” ’— As Shaft , Abu Ddud , Ibn Majah. 

It is related from Ibn ‘Abbas that, ‘ The people of Yemen 
were performing the pilgrimage, but had not provided them¬ 
selves with food for the journey, and they said, “ We put our 
trust (in God).” Then when they reached Mecca, they begged 
of the people. Then God sent down the revelation, “ Provide 
yourselves with necessary food ; and verily the best of food is 
piety.” ’ — Al Bukh&ri . 

It is related from ‘Ayesha that she said, ‘I said, “O 
Apostle of God, is religious war incumbent upon women ? ” He 
replied, “Yes, religious war is incumbent upon them in that in 
which there is no fighting. It is the pilgrimage and the lesser 
pilgrimage.” ’— Ibn Mdjah . 

It is related from Abu Umamah that, ‘ The Apostle of God 
said, “ He whom evident needs or a tyrannical king or restrain¬ 
ing disease does not prevent from performing the pilgrimage, 
and yet dies without performing it; let him die,'if he wishes, a 
Jew, or if he wishes, a Christian.” *— Al Darimi . 

It is related from Abu Hurairah that, ‘ The Apostle of God 
said, “ Whoever sets out to perform the pilgrimage or the lesser 
pilgrimage, or to wage religious war, and then dies in the road 
thereof, God writes for him the reward of a fighter and a pilgrim 
and a performer of the lesser pilgrimage.” 1 — Al Baihagi 

Concerning the Pilgrim Garb and Cry 

It is related from ‘Ayesha that she said, ‘ I used to per¬ 
fume the Apostle of God for the pilgrim garb before he put it 

17 


130 


SELECTIONS FROM MUHAMMADAN TRADITIONS 


on, and for putting off the pilgrim garb before he went round 
the House. There was musk in the perfume. It was 
as if I saw the light of the musk in the part of the Apostle's hair 
whilst he was performing the ceremonies of the pilgrimage.' 
— Muslimi, Al Bukhdrt . 

It is related from Ibn ‘Omar that he said, ‘ I heard the 
Apostle of God profess the unity of God with matted hair and 
say, “ Here I am at Thy service, O God. Here I am at Thy 
service. Here I am at Thy service. Thou hast no partner. I 
am at Thy service. Verily praise and power and dominion are 
for Thee. Thou hast no partner." He did not add to these 
words.’— Muslim , Al Bukhdrt . 

It is related from Ibn ‘Omar that, ‘ The Prophet matted 
his hair with a decoction of mallow and myrtle leaves.'— Abu 
Daud . 

It is related from Khallad binu’s-Saib that, 1 The Apostle of 
God said, “Gabriel came to me and ordered me to command 
my companions to raise their voices in the declaration of the 
unity and in repeating the words, ‘ Here I am at Thy service.' " ' 
— Mdlik, At Tirmidhi , Abu Daud , An Nasai . 

It is related from Sahl bin Sa‘d that, ‘ The Apostle of God 
said, “ No Muslim repeats the words, ‘Here I am at Thy ser¬ 
vice, ' but whatever is on his right hand and on his left repeats 
the same, whether it be stones or trees or clods of earth, until 
the earth is shaken from one end to the other." ’— At Tirmidhi , 
Ibn Mdjah . 

It is related from ‘Abbas that, ‘ The polytheists used to 
say, “Here I am at Thy service. Thou hast no partner." 
Then the Apostle of God used to say, “Woe to you ! Enough ! 
Enough ! (‘no partner ') except the partners which ye own, and 
which rule you ! " They used to say this when they went round 
the House.'— Muslim . 

Concerning the Farewell Pilgrimage 1 

It is related from Jabir bin ‘Abdu'llah that, ‘The Apostle 
of God remained at Madina for nine years, and did not make 
the pilgrimage. Afterwards, in his tenth year, he announced 

x The last pilgrimage performed by the Prophet, who died a few 
months later. 


THE BOOK OF THE RITES OF PILGRIMAGE 


131 


amongst the people news of a pilgrimage (saying), “Verily 
the Apostle of God goeth on pilgrimage.” Then many men 
came to Madina, and we went out with him until we reached 
Dhu’l-Hudaifah. Then Asma bint ‘Umais gave birth to a son, 
Muhammad bin Abu Bakr. And she sent to the Apostle of God 
(saying), “How shall I manage?” He replied, “ Bathe, and 
bind thy loins with a cloth, and put on the pilgrim garb.” Then 
the Apostle of God prayed in the mosque, and afterwards 
mounted (his camel) A1 Qaswa, until, when his camel arrived 
• with him at Baidai, he made the declaration of the unity, saying, 
“ Here I am at Thy service, O God. Here I am at Thy service. 
Here I am at Thy service. Thou hast no partner. Here I am 
at Thy service. Verily praise and favour and dominion are for 
Thee. Thou hast no partner.”* Jabir said, ‘We had not 
intended any more than the pilgrimage. We had not known 
of the lesser pilgrimage, until, when we came to the House (of 
God at Mecca) with him, he kissed the (black) stone and ran 
round the house quickly three times, and walked round it four 
times. Then he approached the place of Abraham and 
recited, “Then take the place of Abraham as a place 
of prayer.*’ 1 And he fixed the place between it and the 
House.* And in another tradition it runs, ‘ He recited in two 
rak'ahs , “Say, He is one God” and, “ Say, O unbelievers.’* 
Then he returned to the stone, and kissed it. Then he came 
out from the door to (Mount) Safa, and when he drew near to 
(Mount) Safa, he recited, “ Verily, A1 $afa and A1 Marwah are 
of the signs of God. I begin with what God began.** Then he 
began with A1 $afaand ascended it until he saw the House. Then 
he faced the temple of Mecca and repeated the declaration of 
the unity and said, “God is great! There is no God but Allah 
alone. He has no partner. For Him is the dominion, and for 
Him is the praise, and He is powerful over all things. There 
is no God but Allah alone. He has kept his promise and helped 
His servant, and alone put to rout the confederate enemy.” 
After thaf he prayed in the midst of it and said similar words three 
times. Then he descended and walked to (Mount) Marwah 
until his feet went down into the bottom of the valley. Then 
he ran until, when ascending, he walked until he came to A1 


1 Suratu’l-Baqara (ii) 126. 


132 SELECTIONS FROM MUHAMMADAN TRADITIONS 


Marwah. Then he did on A1 Marwah as he had done on A1 
Safa, until when he came to the last circumambulation of 
Marwah he called out whilst still on Marwah and the people 
beneath him. He said, “If I had known before what I knew 
afterwards, I would not have brought the sacrifice and would 
have made it a lesser pilgrimage. And whoever of you has 
not a sacrifice with him, let him put off the pilgrim garb, and 
let him consider it as the lesser pilgrimage.” Then Suraqah 
bin Salik bin Ju'shum stood up and said, “ O Apostle of God, 
is this for this year only or for always ? ” Then the Apostle of 
God entwined his fingers in one another and said twice over, 
“The lesser pilgrimage has entered into the pilgrimage not 
(for this year only) but for always.” Then ‘Ali came from 
Yemen with the Prophet’s victims for sacrifice. The Prophet 
said, “ What didst thou say when thou imposed upon thyself 
the pilgrimage ? ” He replied, “ I said, O God, verily I put on 
as the pilgrim garb what Thine Apostle put on.” He said, 
“Verily the victims for sacrifice are with me, therefore do not 
put off thy pilgrim garb.” ' (Jabir) said, 4 All the victims for 

sacrifice which ‘All had brought from Yemen, and those which 
the Prophet had brought numbered one hundred.’ He said, 

* Then all the people put off their pilgrim garb and shortened 
their hair, except the Prophet and those with whom were 
victims for sacrifice. Then when the day of Tarwiyah came 
they set their faces towards Mina and put off the pilgrim garb. 
And the Prophet rode to it, and performed the midday, after¬ 
noon, evening, night and morning prayers. Then he remained 
a little until the sun rose, and then he ordered a tent of hair to 
be pitched for him in Namirah. Then the Apostle of God 
went on, and the Quraish did not doubt but that he would stop 
at A1 Masha‘ru’l-IJaram, as the Quraish used to do in the times 
of ignorance. But the Apostle of God passed on until he came 
to Arafat. And he found that a tent had been pitched for him 
in Namirah, so he dismounted and entered it until, when the 
sun had declined, he ordered his camel, A1 Qaswah, rfhd it was 
brought to him, and he came to the bottom of the valley. 
Then he addressed the people and said, “Verily your blood 
and your goods are forbidden you, as this day in this month in 
this land is forbidden. Are not the commands of the time of 


THE BOOK OF THE RITES OF PILGRIMAGE 


133 


ignorance placed under my feet (that is, abrogated) ? And the 
blood of the time of ignorance is so placed. And verily the 
first of our blood shed was the blood of Nadam bin Rabiya 
binu’l-llarith. Verily he was brought up amongst the Bani Sa’d, 
and Hudhail killed him. And the taking of interest in the time 
of ignorance is abrogated. And the first interest taken 
amongst us was that taken by ‘Abbas bin ‘Abdu’l-Muttalib, and 
it is totally abrogated. And fear God in the matter of your 
wives, for ye have taken them with the protection of God and 
have made them inviolate by the Word of God. Their duty 
towards you is (to see) that no one is brought to your bed 
whom ye despise ; and if they do that, then beat them, though 
not severely. And your duty to them is to give them sustenance 
and their clothing with kindness. And verily I have left 
amongst you that by which ye will never stray after (receiving) 
it, if ye protect yourselves by it, that is the Word of God. And 
ye will be asked concerning me (on the judgement day). Then 
what will ye say ? 99 They replied, “ We will bear witness that 
thou hast brought us news and carried out thy commission and 
given us instruction. ,, Then he said, raising his forefinger 
towards heaven, and turning it towards the people, “ O God, be 
Thou witness; O God, be Thou witness. M This he said three 
times. After that Bilal gave the call to prayers and repeated 
the affirmation of the intention to pray. And he prayed the 
midday prayer. After that he gave the call to prayer and said 
the afternoon prayer. And he never prayed any prayer 
between these two. After that he mounted his camel, and came 
to the place of standing. Then he placed the breast of his 
camel, A1 Qaswah, in the direction of As $akhrat, and placed the 
Ilablu’l-Mashat in front of him and faced the temple of Mecca. 
And he continued standing until the sun sank in the West and 
the yellow tints faded away and the sun set. Then he took up 
Usamah behind him, and returned until he came to A1 Muzdali- 
fah, where he prayed the evening prayer and the night prayer 
with one Sail to prayer, but with two announcements of the in¬ 
tention to pray. And he did not praise God between the two. 
After that he lay down upon his side until the morning dawned. 
Then he prayed the morning prayer when the morning was 
announced to him by the call to prayer and the announcement 


134 SELECTIONS FROM MUHAMMADAN TRADITIONS 


of the intention to pray. Then he rode A1 Qaswah until he 
came to A1 Mash‘aru’l-Haram, and he faced the temple of 
Mecca and prayed and repeated the words, “God is great. 
There is no God but Allah ” and “God is one.” And he con¬ 
tinued standing until the sky became very red, after which he 
returned before the sun rose. Then he mounted behind him 
A1 Fadl bin ‘Abbas until he came to the bottom of the valley 
Muhassir. There he hastened a little. Afterwards he took 
the middle road, which comes out at A1 Jamrahu’l-Kubra, until 
he came to A1 Jamra, which is near a tree. There he threw 
seven pebbles, similar to the small stone pebbles which he threw 
in the bottom of the valley, and with each pebble he repeated the 
words, “God is great.” After that he returned to the place of 
sacrifice and sacrificed sixty-three camels with his own hand. 
After that he gave what remained to ‘AH and he sacrificed them. 
Thus he made ‘All a partner in his sacrifice. Then he ordered a 
small piece from each camel, and they were placed in a cooking 
vessel and were cooked. And they both ate of their flesh and 
drank the soup. After that he mounted his camel and hastened 
to the House (of God), and prayed in Mecca the midday 
prayer. Then he came to the sons of ‘Abdu’l-Muttalib as they 
were giving the people to drink of the water of (the well) 
Zamzam. And he said, “ Draw, ye sons of ‘Abdu’l-Muttalib, 
for had it not been that the people would have gained possession 
of your right to draw, and would have given this water to drink, 
verily I would have drawn with you.” Then they gave him a 
bucket, and he drank from it.’— Muslim . 

It is related from ‘Ayesha that she said, ‘ The Prophet of 
God arrived (at Mecca) on the fourth or fifth night of (the 
month) Dhu’l-Hajj, and came in to me, and he was angry. I 
said to him, “ Who has angered thee, O Apostle of God ; may 
God put him in the fire!” He replied, “Dost thou not know 
that I ordered the people a certain thing, and behold, they 
hesitate (to do it). If I had known before what I have learned 
since of my affairs, I would not have brought the sacrifice with 
me, until I had bought it (in Mecca). Then I would have 
taken off the pilgrim garb as they have done.” ’— Muslim . 


THE DOCK OF THE RtTES OF PILGRIMAGE 


135 


On Entering Mecca and Going Round the Mosque 

It is related from 'Ayesha that, ‘ When the Prophet came 
to Mecca, he entered it from its high side, and left it by its 
lower side/— Muslim , Al Bukhdru 

It is related from 'Urwah binu’l-Zubair that he said, 4 The 
Prophet performed the pilgrimage, and 'Ayesha informed me 
that the first thing he did when he arrived at Mecca was to 
perform ablutions. Then he went round the House. And it 
was the lesser pilgrimage. After that Abu Bakr performed the 
pilgrimage, and the first thing he did was to go round the 
House. And it was not the lesser pilgrimage. After that 
'Omar and ‘Othman did the same.’— Muslim , Al Bukhdn . 

It is related from Jabir that, ‘When the Apostle of God 
arrived at Mecca, he came to the (black) stone and kissed it. 
After that he walked on its right, and he ran three times and 
walked four times (round the Ka'bah)/— Muslim . 

It is related from Ibn ‘Omar that he said, ' I did not see the 
Prophet kiss anything in the House, except the two pillars of 
Yemen/— Muslim , Al Bukhdri . 

It is related from Ibn 'Abbas that, ' The Prophet of God 
went round the mosque at the farewell pilgrimage mounted on 
a camel, and he kissed the pillar by means of a hooked stick/ 
— Muslim , Al Bukhdri. 

It is related from Abu Hurairah that he said, ‘ Abu Bakr 
sent me, in the pilgrimage over which the Prophet ordered him 
(to preside), before the farewell pilgrimage, on the day of 
sacrifice amongst a small company of people. He commanded 
him to proclaim amongst the people, “ Beware ! After the 
present year no polytheist must make the pilgrimage, and none 
must make the circuit of the Ka'bah naked.” ’— Muslim , Al Bu¬ 
khdri. 

It is related from Ibn ‘Abbas that, ‘ The Prophet said, 
" Making the circuit round the House (of God) is the same as 
saying the prayers, except that you may converse during it. 
Then let him who converses in it speak nothing but good 
words.” *— At Tirmidhiy An Nasdi. 

It is related from Ibn 'Abbas that, ' The Apostle of God 
said, “ The black stone came down from paradise. It was 
whiter than milk, but the sins of the children of Adam have 
made it black.” *—Ahmady At Tirmidhi. 


T36 SELECTIONS FROM MUHAMMADAN traditions 

It is related from I bn ‘Abbas that, ‘ The Apostle of God said 
with regard to the stone, “ By God! God will certainly raise it 
up on the day of resurrection; and it will have two eyes by 
which it will see, and a tongue by which it will speak, and it 
will bear witness concerning those who have kissed it in 
truth/* *— At Tirmidhi ; Ibn Mdjah . 

It is related from Safiyah bint Shaibah that she said, 1 Bint 
Abi Tujrah informed me and said, “ I entered with other women 
of the Quraish into the house of the family of Abu Husain, and 
we were watching the Prophet as he ran between As $afa and 
A1 Marwah. And I saw him run, and verily his garments were 
turning about from the intensity of his running. And I heard 
him say, ‘ Run, for verily God has written the running as a duty 
incumbent upon you.’ ” * — SharaJm s-Sunnah. 

It is related from Qadamah bin ‘Abdu’llah bin ‘Ammar 
that he said, * I saw the Apostle of God hastening between 
As Safa and A1 Marwah on a camel. There was no striking 
or driving away or saying, “Get out of the way! Get out of 
the way ! ” ’— Sharahu's-Sumiak, 

It is related from ‘Abis bin Rabi‘ah that he said, ‘ I saw 
‘Omar kiss the (black) stone, and heard him say, “Verily I 
certainly know that thou art a stone which can neither benefit 
nor injure. And if I had not seen the Apostle of God kiss 
thee, I would not kiss thee.” ’— Muslim , Al Bukhari. 

On Stopping at Mount Arafat 
It is related from ‘Ayesha that, ‘ The Apostle of God said, 
“There is no day on which God redeems a servant from the 
fire more than on the day of (the visitation of) Arafat. And 
verily He draws near to them, and then boasts of them to the 
angels and says, ‘ What do these want ? * ” ’— Muslim, 

It is related from Khalid bin Hawdha that he said, ‘ I saw 
the Prophet addressing the people on the day of Arafat, 
mounted on his camel, and he was standing up in his stirrups.’ 
—Abii Daud, t 

It is related from Jabir that, ‘The Apostle of God said, 
“ When the day of Arafat comes, verily God comes down to the 
skies of the world and boasts of them to the angels and says, 

‘ Look at my servants, who have come to me with dishevelled 
hair, dusty, and crying out from the long journey. I call you 


THE BOOK OF THE RITES OF PILGRIMAGE 


137 


to witness that I have forgiven them ? * The angels say, ‘ O 
God, such an one used to tyrannise over men, and so and so 
and such and such a woman did so and so.’ ” He said, “ God, the 
Exalted and Magnified, will reply, ‘I have forgiven them/ ” 
The Apostle of God said, “ There is no day on which more are 
redeemed from the fire, than on the day of Arafat.” ’—Sharahu 
s-Sunnah . 

It is related from ‘Abbas bin Mirdas that, ‘ Verily the 
Apostle of God asked forgiveness for the sins of his people on 
the night of Arafat, and he was answered, “ Verily I have for¬ 
given them, with the exception of oppressors, and I will take 
from them an account of the oppressed.” He replied, “ O 
Lord, if thou wilt, Thou canst give paradise to the oppressed 
and forgive the oppressors.” But he was not answered that 
night: And when it dawned at A1 Muzdalifah he repeated his 
supplication, and he was answered as he had asked/ ‘Abbas 
said, ‘ Then the Apostle of God laughed, or he said, He 
smiled. Then Abu Bakr and ‘Omar said to him, ‘‘May our 
fathers and mothers be sacrificed for thee ! Verily this is a time 
in which thou hast not been wont to laugh. Then what is it which 
caused thee to laugh ? May God cause Thy teeth to laugh! ’ 
He replied, / Verily the enemy of God, Iblis (Satan) when he 
knew that God, the Exalted and Magnified, had answered my 
prayer and forgiven my people, took up dust and began to 
throw it on his head, crying out at his misery and misfortune. 
Then what I saw of his impatient grief made me laugh.” ’— 
I bn Mdjah . 

On Returning from Arafat and Muzdalifah 

It is related from Ibn ‘Abbas that, ‘ He returned with the 
Prophet on the day of Arafat, and the Prophet heard behind 
him loud shouting and beating of camels ; and he beckoned with 
his whip and said, “ O men, you ought to go quietly, for verily 
righteousness is not in haste.” ’— Al Bukhari . 

It is related from ‘Abdu’llah bin Ma‘sud that he said, ‘ I 
never saw the Apostle of God say the prayers except in their 
proper times,' with the exception of the sunset and night prayers 
which he said together. And he prayed the morning prayer 
that day before its time/— Muslim , Al Bukhari . 


18 


138 


SELECTIONS FROM MUHAMMADAN TRADITIONS 


Concerning the Throwing the Pebbles 

It is related from Jabir that he said, ‘ I saw the Prophet 
throw pebbles (whilst seated) on his camel on the day of 
sacrifice; and he said, “Take note of the rites of your 
pilgrimage, for I do not know whether, perchance, I shall not 
perform pilgrimage after this pilgrimage.” ’— Muslim . 

It is related concerning ‘Abdu’llah bin Mas’ud that he 
arrived at A1 Jamru’l-Kubra and placed the House (of God) on 
his left and Mount Mina on his right, and threw seven pebbles 
and repeated, ‘ God is great,’ with each pebble. Then he said, 
1 Thus did he throw, upon whom came down Suratu’l-Baqara.’— 
Muslim , Al Bukhari . 

It is related from ‘Ayesha from the Prophet that he said, 
‘Verily the throwing of pebbles and the running between 
A§ Safa and A1 Marwah have only been appointed for re¬ 
membering God.’— At Tirmidhi . 

On Animals for Sacrifice 

It is related from Ibn ‘Abbas that he said, ‘ The Apostle of 
God prayed the midday prayer at Dhu’l-Hudaifah. Then he 
called for his female camel and struck it with a lance in the 
right side of its hump, and then wiped off the blood from it. 
Then he placed two straps around its neck, after which he 
mounted his riding camel. Then when it arrived with him at 
Baidai he repeated the words for pilgrimage, “Here I am at 
Thy service.” *— Muslim . 

It is related from ‘Ayesha that she said, ‘ The Prophet on 
a certain occasion sent a sheep for sacrifice to the House of 
God, and he put a necklace upon its neck.’— Muslim , Ai Bukhari . 

It is related from Jabir that he said, ‘The Prophet sacri¬ 
ficed a cow on behalf of his women during his pilgrimage.’— 
Muslim . 

It is related from Ibn ‘Abbas that he said, ‘ The Apostle 
of God sent sixteen camels for sacrifice with a man and gave 
him charge of them. Then the man said, “O Apostle 
of God, how shall I act with that one of them which is 
unable to travel ? ” He replied, “ Slaughter it, and then colour 
its feet with its blood and place it on its side ; but do not thou or 
any of thy travelling companions eat of it.” ’— Muslim . 


THE BOOK OF THE RITES OF PILGRIMAGE 


139 


It is related from Jabir that he said, ‘ We sacrificed with 
the Apostle of God in the year of Hudaibah one camel for seven 
people and one cow for seven people.’— Muslim . 

It is related from 4 AH that he said, 1 The Apostle of God 
ordered me to take care of his camels for sacrifice, and to give 
in alms their flesh and skins and saddles. And (he ordered) 
that I should not give a portion to the one who killed them. 
He said, “We will give him something from ourselves.”’— 
Muslim, Al Bukhdri . 

It is related from Ibn ‘Abbas that, ‘The Apostle of God 
sent for sacrifice in the year of Hudaibah, in the sacrifice for 
the Apostle of God, a camel which formerly belonged to Abu 
Jahl. It had a silver ring in its head (nose)—and in another 
tradition it has “golden”—and the polytheists were angered 
thereat.’— Abu Daud. 

It is related from Salamah bintTl-Akwa* that, ‘ The Pro¬ 
phet said, “ Whoever of you offers a sacrifice, let him not rise 
after the third day with any of it still in his house.” Then when 
the next year came round they said, “ O Apostle of God, must 
we do (this year) as we did last year.” He replied, “ Eat ye 
of it and give others to eat and put by in store ; for verily in 
that year there was want amongst the people, and I wished 
that ye should help them.” ’— Muslim , Al Bukhdri . 

On Shaving the Head 

It is related from Ibn ‘Omar that, ‘ Verily the Apostle of 
God shaved his head in the farewell pilgrimage, and some of 
his companions (did the same). And some of them cut their 
hair short.’— Muslim , Al Bukhdri . 

It is related from Anas that, ‘ Verily the Prophet came to 
Mina. After that he came to al) Jamrah and threw pebbles 
there. After that he came to his lodging at Mina and sacrificed 
his victims. Then he called a barber and turned to him the 
right side (of his head), and he shaved it. Then he called Abu 
Talha, the helper, and gave it to him. After that he offered 
the left side of his head and said, “ Shave ! ” Then he shaved 
it And he gave it to Abu Talha and said, “ Divide it amongst 
the people.” ’— Muslim , Al Bukhdri . 

It is related from ‘All and ‘Ayesha that they said, ‘ The 
Apostle of God forbade women to shave the head. ’— At Tirmidhi . 


140 SELECTIONS FROM MUHAMMADAN TRADITIONS 

It is related from Usamah bin Shank that he said, ‘ I came 
out with the Apostle of God to perform the pilgrimage. And 
the people were coming to him, and some were saying, “O 
Apostle of God, I performed the running (between As Safa and 
A1 Marwah) before going round the Ka‘bah ” or “ I delayed to 
perform something” or “I did something before its time.” 
And he was saying in reply, “ There is no sin, except for the 
man who takes away the reputation of a Muslim and is an 
oppressor ; for that is he who commits a sin and is destroyed.” ' 
—Abu Daud. 

On the Public Address on the Day of Sacrifice, and 

Throwing the Pebbles, and Taking Farewell 

It is related from Rafi‘ bin ‘Amru’l-Muzanni that he said, 

* I saw the Apostle of God addressing the people at Mina, when 
the early morning approached (seated) on his black and white 
mule. And ‘Ali was explaining it; and some of the people 
were standing and some sitting .’—Abu Ddud . 

It is related from ‘Ayesha that, ‘ The Prophet said, 
“ When any one of you throws pebbles at Jamrahu’l-‘Aqabah, 
then everything has become lawful for him except women.” ’— 
Sharhu' s-Sunnah. 

Concerning Those Things Which Pilgrims Must 
Abstain From 

It is related from ‘Abdu’llah bin ‘Omar that, ‘ A man 
asked the Apostle of God what clothes a pilgrim must wear. 
He replied, “ Do not wear shirts nor turbans nor trousers nor 
the dress called bur?iiis nor shoes, except one cannot obtain 
sandals, when he may wear shoes ; but in that case let him cut 
them down below the heels. And do not wear any clothes 
which saffron or the dye called waras have touched.” ’— Muslim , 
Al Bukhari. And Bukhari has added the words, ‘ And let not a 
woman on pilgrimage veil her face, and let her not wear 
gloves.’ t 

It is related from ‘Othman that, ‘ The Apostle of God 
said, “ Let not one performing the pilgrimage, marry or give 
in marriage or effect a betrothal.” ’— Muslim. 

It is related from Ibn ‘Omar that he heard the Apostle of 
God lorb\d women who were performing the pilgrimage from 


THE BOOK OF THE RITES OF PILGRIMAGE 


141 


wearing gloves or veils and whatever the dye waras and saffron 
had touched, 4 but let them (said he), after that, wear whatever 
they like of yellow-coloured clothes or the cloth called khazz 
or ornaments or long drawers or a chemise or shoes.*— Abu 
Baud. 

On Abstaining from Hunting During Pilgrimage 

It is related from As §a‘b bin Jathamah that he brought a 
present of an ass to the Apostle of God when he was at Abwai 
or Waddan ; but he returned it to him. Then when the Apostle 
of God saw what (displeasure) was in his face, he said, 

* Verily I would not have returned it to thee, except that we 
had put on the pilgrim garb.’— Muslim , Al Bukhari . 

Itds related from Abu Qatadah that he went out with the 
Apostle of God, but he lingered behind with some of his com¬ 
panions. And they were engaged in the pilgrimage, but he 
was not so engaged. Then they saw a wild ass before he did ; 
but when they saw it they left it alone, until at length Abu 
Qatadah saw it also. Then he mounted his horse and asked 
them to give him his whip, but they refused. Then he took it 
and attacked and wounded it. Afterwards he ate of it, and they 
ate of it. Then they regretted having done so, and when they 
came up with the Apostle of God they asked him about it. He 
replied, ‘Is there any of it with you?’ They said, ‘We 
have a leg of it with us.’ Then the Prophet took and ate of it. 
— Muslim , Al Bukhari, And in another tradition, given by both 
Muslim and Al Bukh&ri, it runs, ‘ When they came to the 
Apostle of God he said, “ Did any one of you order him to 
attack it or point towards it ? ” They replied, “ No.” He said, 
“ Then eat what remains of its flesh.” * 

It is related from Ibn ‘Omar from the Prophet that, ‘He 
said, “ There are five things which it is no sin to kill on sacred 
ground and when one is performing the pilgrimage : a mouse* 
a raven, a ( hawk, a scorpion and a biting dog*” *— Muslim , Al 
Bukhari . 

It is related from Jabir that, ‘The Apostle of God said, 
“•The flesh of game is lawful for you when performing the 
pilgrimage, so long as you do not hunt it yourselves , or it is 
not hunted on your behalf.” *— Abu Baud, At Tirmidhi . 


142 SELECTIONS FROM MUHAMMADAN TRADITIONS 

It is related from ‘Abdu’r-Rahman bin abi ‘Ammar that 
he said, ‘ I asked Jabir bin ‘Abdu’llah concerning the hyena: 
whether it was game. He replied, “ Yes.” I said, “ May it 
be eaten? M He said, “Yes.” I said, “Didst thou hear it 
from the Apostle of God ? ” He replied, “Yes.”'— At Tirmidhi, 
An Nasdi. 

On Being Prevented from Going on Pilgrimage and 
Missing the Time for Its Observance 

It is related from ‘Abdu’llah bin ‘Omar that he said, ‘ We 
went out with the Apostle of God, but the unbelievers of the 
Quraish prevented him from entering the House (of God). 
Then the Prophet killed his sacrifices and shaved, and his 
companions cut their hair short.’— Al Bukhari . 

It is related from Ibn ‘Omar that he said, ‘Is not the 
practice of the Apostle of God sufficient for you ? If any one of 
you is prevented from performing the pilgrimage, he must 
make the circuit of the House of God, and (run between) §afa 
and Marwah. After that he will be free from all obligations 
until he performs the pilgrimage in the following year. And 
let him offer a sacrifice, or, if he has not wherewith to sacrifice, 
then let him fast.’— Al Bukhari . 

It is related from Al Hajjaj bin ‘Amru’l-Ansari that, ‘ The 
Apostle of God said, “ He whose limb is broken or who is lame 
has been released from the obligation to perform the pilgrim’ 
age ; but he must perform the next pilgrimage.” ’— At Tirmidhi , 
Abu Ddud , An Nasdi , Ibn Mdjah. And Abu Daud has added 
in another tradition the words, 1 Or is sick.’ 

Concerning the Sacred Territory of Mecca which 
God has Guarded 

It is related from Ibn ‘Abbas that, ‘ The Apostle of God 
said on the day of the conquest of Mecca, “There must be no 
more fleeing, but fighting, and the intention (to do one’s 
duty). Therefore if ye are called on to go out to fight; then 
go out to fight.” And on the day of the conquest of Mecca he 
said, “ Verily God made this city sacred on the day when He 
created the heavens and the earth. Then it is sacred with the 
sanctity of God until the day of resurrection. And verily 
fighting therein is unlawful for any one before me, and it is 


THE BOOK OF THE RITES OF PILGRIMAGE 


143 


unlawful for me, except for one hour of the day. Therefore it 
is sacred with the sanctity of God until the day of resurrection. 
Its thorns must not be cut, its game must not be hunted, and 
that which has fallen upon the ground must not be picked up, 
except that any one makes it known to the people, and its grass 
must not be cut.” Then A1 ‘Ayyas said, “O Apostle of God, 
(let it remain) except the (grass called) idhkhara , because it 
is useful for their blacksmiths and for their houses.” Then he 
replied, 11 Except idhkhara .” ’— Muslim , Al Bukhdri . 

It is related from Jabir that he said, ‘ I heard the Prophet 
say, “It is not lawful for any one of you to carry arms in 
Mecca.” ’— Muslim. 

It is related from Anas that, ‘ The Prophet entered 
Mecca on the day of its conquest, and on his head was a piece 
of mail worn beneath the helmet. And when he took it off a 
man came and said, “Verily Ibn Khatal is clinging to the 
veil of the Ka‘bah.” He replied, “Kill him.”’— Muslim, Al 
Bukhdri . 

It is related from ‘Ayesha that, 4 The Apostle of God said, 
“An army will come to attack the Ka‘bah, and when they 
come to Baidai the first and last of them will be swallowed up 
by the earth.” I said, “O Apostle of God, how will the first 
of them and the last of them be swallowed up, when amongst 
them will be their camp-followers and those who are not .of 
their party. ” He replied, “The first of them and the last of 
them will be swallowed up. Then (at the end) they will be 
raised up according to their intentions.” ’— Muslim , Al Bukhdri . 

It is related from Abu Hurairah that, ‘ The Apostle of God 
said, “A man of Abyssinia, having small legs, will destroy 
the Ka‘bah.” *— Muslim , Al Bukhdri . 

It is related from Ibn ‘Abbas that, ‘The Apostle of God 
said, addressing Mecca, “How fine thou art amongst cities! 
and how beloved of me ! If it were not that my people turned 
me out of thee, I would live in none other but thee.” *— At 
Tirmidhi. * 

It is related from Abu Shuraihu’l^Adwi that he said to 
‘Amru bin Sa‘id when he sent an army to Mecca, ‘ Give me 
permission, O ‘Amir, and I will relate to thee something that 
the Apostle of God said on the day after the conquest of 


144 


SELECTIONS FROM MUHAMMADAN TRADITIONS 


Mecca. I heard him with my two ears, and my heart re¬ 
membered it, and my two eyes saw it. When he spake he 
glorified and praised God, and then said, “Verily God has 
made Mecca sacred, and it is not man who has made it sacred, 
therefore it is not lawful for a man who believes in God and 
the last day to shed blood therein, or to cut down trees therein. 
And if any one seeks a concession to do so by virtue of the 
fighting of the Apostle of God therein, then say to him, 

‘ Verily God gave permission to His Apostle, but has not 
given you permission/ He only gave me permission (to fight) 
in it for one hour of the day. And its sanctity has remained 
to-day what it was yesterday. Then let those present inform 
those who are absent.” Then it was said to Abu Shuraih, 
“What did ‘Amru say to thee.” He replied, “He said, I 
know that better than thou, O Abu Shuraih. Verily the sacred 
land (of Mecca) does not offer a refuge to rebels, or to those 
that flee after shedding blood, or to those who flee after 
destroying property.’* ’— Muslim , Al Bukhari . 

Concerning the Sacred Territory of Madina 

It is related from Sa‘d that, 1 The Apostle of God said, 
“ Verily I have made sacred all that lies between the two strong 
plains of Madina, that its trees be not cut nor its game killed.” 
Aijd he said, “ Madina is best for them, if they had but known. 
No one takes leave of it willingly, but God brings to it in 
exchange one who is better than he ; and no one remains 
constant in the midst of its hardships and afflictions, but I 
shall be an intercessor or witness on his behalf on the day of 
resurrection.” ’— Muslim. 

It is related from Abu Hurairah that he said, ‘ The people, 
when they saw the first fruits, used to bring them to the 
Prophet; and when he took them he used to say, “O God, 
bless us in our fruits, and bless us in our city, and bless us in 
filling up (the grain measures) $a a and mudda . O God, 
verily Abraham was Thy servant and Thy friend^ and Thy 
Prophet. And I am Thy servant and Thy Prophet. And he 
prayed to Thee for Mecca, and I pray to Thee for Madina like as 
he prayed for Mecca, and a (second) equal portion with it.” 
After that (Abu Hurairah) said, he used to call the smallest 
boy of his household and give him the fruit.’— Muslim. 


THE BOOK OF THE RITES OF PILGRIMAGE 


145 


It is related from ‘Amir bin Sa‘d that verily Sa d was 
riding towards his home in A1 ‘Aqiq, and he came across a 
slave cutting trees, or beating off the leaves ; so he plundered 
him. Then when Sa‘d returned, the masters of the slave 
came to him, and spoke to him, saying that he should return to 
their slave or to them what he had taken from their slave. 
He replied, ‘God forbid that I should return anything which 
the Apostle of God gave me as booty. And he refused to 
return (the things) to them.— Muslim . 

It is related from ‘Ayesha that she said, When the 
Apostle of God came to Madina, Abu Bakr and Bilal were 
attacked by fever. Then I came to the Apostle of God and 
informed him. Then he said,. “ 0 God, make Madina beloved 
to us as thou hast made Mecca beloved to us, or even more so, 
and make it healthy, and bless us in (filling up its grain 
measures) $aa and mudda , and take away its fever and put 
it in Juhfah.” ’— Muslim , Al Bukhdri. 

It is related from Abu Hurairah that, ‘ The Apostle of 
God said, “ I was ordered to (flee to) a city which eats up other 
cities. They called it Yathreb, which is Madina. It expels 
men as a blacksmith’s bellows expels the dross of iron. 
Muslim , Al Bukhdri . 

It is related from Anas that, * The Apostle of God said, 
“There is no city which Anti-Christ will not tread upon, 
except Mecca and Madina. These have no road upon which 
angels do not stand in rank to protect them. Then he will 
come down on marshy ground, and Madina, with the people 
thereof, will tremble three times. And all unbelievers and 
hypocrites will go out to him.” ’ — Muslim , Al Bukhdri . 

It is related from Ibn ‘Omar that, ‘ The Apostle of God 
said, “ Whoever is able to die in Madina, let him die therein ; 
for verily I will intercede for whoever dies therein.’ — Ahmad, 
At Tirmidht . 

It is related from Abu Hurairah that, ‘ The Apostle of God 
said, “ The last of the cities of Islam to be destroyed is 
Madina.” ’— At Tirmidht . 

J/JsssJjitec) Jsm> JJzp 

said, “ Whoever goes on pilgrimage and visits my grave after 
my death will be as he who visited me in my lifetime.”’— Al 
Baihaqi . 19 


XII 


THE BOOK OF BUYING AND SELLING 

w 

On Earning and Seeking What is Lawful 

It is related from A1 Miqdam bin Ma‘dikarib that, ‘The 
Apostle of God said, “No one can ever eat better food than 
that he eat of the work of his own hands. Verily Gods 
Prophet, David, used to eat of the work of his hands.” *—Al 
Bukhari . 

It is related from Abii Hurairah that, 4 The Apostle of God 
said, “ A time will come to man when a person will not care 
whether what he takes be lawful or unlawful.” '—Al Bukhdri . 

It is related from Abu Juhaifah that,‘The Prophet for¬ 
bade the price of blood and the price of a dog and the hire of an 
adulteress. And he cursed the taker of interest and the giver 
of it, and the woman who tattoes the skin and the woman who 
is tattoed, and the painter /—Al Bukhdri . 

It is related from Jabir that in the year of the conquest of 
Mecca, when the Prophet was in Mecca, he heard him say, 
‘Verily God and His Apostle have made unlawful the selling 
of wine, and that which dies of itself and swine and idols.’ 
Then it was said, ‘ O Apostle of God, inform us with regard 
to the fat of what dies of itself, for verily boats are smeared 
with it and leather is greased with it, and men light their lamps 
by it.’ He replied, ‘No! it is unlawful.' Then he said at 
that time, ‘May God destroy the Jews! Verily when God 
made unlawful their fat they congealed it and afterwards sold 
it and ate its price.'— Muslim, Al Bukhdri. 

It is related from Anas that, ‘The Apostle of God cursed 
ten people in connexion with wine : the one who presses it out 
of the grapes for others, the one who presses it out for him¬ 
self, the one who drinks it, the one who carries it, the one to 
whom it is carried, the one who serves it, the one who sells it, 
the one who takes its price, the one who buys it, and the one 
for whom it is bought .'—At Tirmidhi y I bn Mdjah . 

It is related from Abu Umamah that, ‘ The Apostle of God 
said, u Do not sett singing slave-girls, nor buy them, and do not 


THE BOOK OF BUYING AND SELLING 


147 


teach them; and their price is unlawful.” And in (a tradi¬ 
tion) similar to this it runs, 44 And, amongst men, the one who 
sells amusing stories.” *— Ahmad> Tirmidht , Ib?i Mdjah . 

It is related from ‘Abdu’llah bin Ma‘sud that, 4 The Apostle 
of God said, 41 It is an obligatory duty to seek to earn a lawful 
livelihood after (performing) one’s religious duties.” *—Al 
Baihaqi . 

It is related from Ibn ‘Abbas that he was asked about 
taking remuneration for writing the Qur’an. He replied, 

4 There is no harm ; they are only makers of pictures, and 
they only eat from the work of their hands.’— Razin. 

It is related from Nafi‘ that he said, 4 1 used to send 
expeditions to Syria and to Egypt. Then I sent an expedition 
to ‘Iraq. And I came to the Mother of the Faithful, ‘Ayesha, 
and said to her, 44 O Mother of the Faithful, I used to send 
expeditions to Syria, and I have (now) sent an expedition to 
‘Iraq.” She replied, 44 Do not do so. What is wrong with 
thee and thy merchandise ? For verily I heard the Apostle of God 
say, 4 When God provides a means of livelihood for any one of 
you in a certain way, then let him not give it up until it 
becomes impossible to him.’ ” ’— Ahmad , Ibn Mdjah . 

It is related from ‘Ayesha that she said, 4 Abu Bakr had a 
slave to whom he used to give a certain allowance of food ; and 
Abu Bakr used to eat of his allowance. And he came on a 
certain day with some food and Abu Bakr ate of it. Then the 
slave said to him, 44 Dost thou know what this is? ” Abu Bakr 
replied, 44 What is it? ” He said, 44 t In the times of ignorance 
I foretold the future for a man; but I did not tell his fortune 
well, rather I deceived him. And he met me and gave me 
something ; and this is it of which thou hast eaten.” (‘Ayesha) 
said, “Then Abu Bakr put his finger down his throat, and 
vomited up everything that was in his stomach.” ’—Al Bukhdrt. 

On Gentleness in Mutual Behaviour 

It is related from Hudaifah that, 4 The Apostle of God said, 
44 Verily there was a man of those who were before you : and 
the angel (of death) came to him to take his soul. And it was 
said to the man, 4 Hast thou done any good thing ? ’ He 
replied, 4 1 do not know.’ It was said, ‘Consider.’ He 
replied, 4 1 do not knpw of anything, except that J used to 


148 


SELECTIONS FROM MUHAMMADAN TRADITIONS 


buy and sell to men in the world,* and I satisfied them. And 
I waited foi>the rich (to pay), and forgave those in straitened 
circumstances.’ Then God took him into paradise.” ’— Muslim , 
Al Bukhdri . And in another tradition from Muslim , as 
received through ‘Uqbah bin ‘Amir and Abu Ma‘sudu’l-Ansari, it 
runs, ‘God said, “I am more worthy to do that (namely, 
forgive) than thou. (O angels), pass over my servant.” ’ 

It is related from Abu Qatadah that, ‘ The Apostle of God 
said, “Beware of many oaths in buying and selling; for 
verily it causes goods to sell well, but afterwards it destroys.” ’ 
— Muslim . 

It is related from Abu Sa‘id that, 4 The Apostle of God 
said, “ The truthful and trustworthy merchant will be with the 
prophets and the just and the martyrs.” '—At Tirmidhi , Al 
DdrimL 

On Option in Respect of Buying and Selling 

It is related from Hakim bin Hizam that, 4 The Apostle 
of God said, “The buyer .and the seller have an option, so long as 
they do not separate. And if they speak the truth and explain 
(the defects) there is a blessing for them in their buying and 
selling; but if they conceal (defects) and lie, the blessing of 
their buying and selling is destroyed.” Muslim , Al Bukhdrt . 

On Interest 

It is related from Jabir that he said, 4 The Apostle of 
God cursed the taker of interest and the giver of it, and the 
writer (of the bond) for it, and the witness to it; and he said, 
“ They are all equal.” '—Muslim. 

It is related from Abu Sa‘idu’l-Khudri that, 4 The Apostle 
of God said, “(Give) gold for gold, silver for silver, wheat for 
wheat, barley for barley, dates for dates, salt for salt, like for 
like, from hand to hand. He who gives more and asks for 
more, has given and taken interest. The taker and the giver 
of it are alike.” ’— Muslim . 

It is related from Abu Sa‘id and Abu Hurairah that the 
Apostle of God appointed a man over Khaibar. And he brought 
some jamb dates to him. The Prophet said, 4 Are all the dates 
of Khaibar like this ? ’ He replied, 4 No, by God ! O Apostle of 
God, we take one (measure) of these for two $aas (of other 


THE BOOK OF BUYING AND SELLING 


149 


dates), or two $a as for three. ’ He said, 4 Do not do so ; but sell 
the whole for money. After that buy janib dates with money/ 
And he said, 4 In weights it is the same/— Muslim , Al Bukhdrt . 

It is related from Abu Sa 4 id that he said, 4 Bilal brought 
some barni dates to the Prophet. The Prophet said to him, 
44 Whence are these ? ” He replied, 44 We had some bad dates, 
and I sold two $d l a measures of them for one (of these good 
dates).” He said, ‘‘Ah! the very essence of interest! the 
very essence of interest! Do not do so; but when you wish to 
buy, then sell the dates by another transaction. After that buy 
with the proceeds/’ ’— Muslim , Al Bukhari . 

It is related from Jabir that he said, ‘A slave came and 
declared fealty to the Prophet, promising to emigrate to 
Madina; but the Prophet did not know that he was a slave. 
Then, his master came, asking for him. And the Prophet said 
to him, 44 vSell him to me.” And he bought him for two black 
slaves. And after him he never accepted the fealty of any one 
until he had asked him whether he was a slave or a free man/ 
— Muslim . 

It is related from Abu Hurairah that, 4 The Apostle of God 
said, 44 Certainly a time will come to men when not one will 
remain who will not take interest. And even if he does not 
take it, its smoke will reach him.” And in another tradition it 
is said, 44 Its dust” will reach him/— Ahmads Abu Ddud> An 
Nasaiy I bn Mdjah . 

It is related from ‘Abdu’llah bin Hanzalah that, 4 The 
Apostle of God said, 44 One dirham of interest which a man 
takes, knowing it to be so, is more grievous than thirty six 
adulteries.” ’— Ahmad . 

It is related from Abu Hurairah that, 4 The Apostle of God 
said, 44 Interest is composed of seventy parts, the least of which 
is that a man marry his own mother.” ’ 

It is related from Ibn Ma‘sud that, 4 The Apostle of God 
said, 44 Although interest brings increase, yet its end tends to 
scarcity.’/’— Ibn Mdjah. 

It is related from Abu Hurairah that, 4 The Apostle of God 
said, 44 On the night of my journey to heaven I came to a people 
whose bellies were like houses in which were snakes. These 
were seen from outside their bellies. Then I said, 4 0 Gabriel, 


150 SELECTIONS FROM MUHAMMADAN TRADITIONS 

who are these ? * He replied, ‘ These are the takers of inter¬ 
est/ ” ’— Ahmad , Ibn Mdjah . 

It is related from ‘Omar binu’l-Khattab that, ‘The last 
revelation which came down was the verse about interest; and 
verily the Apostle of God was taken without having explained 
it to us. Therefore abandon interest and all doubtful things/ 
— Ibn Mdjah , Al Ddrimi . 

It is related from Abu Burdah bin abi Musa that he said, 
I came to Madina, and I met ‘Abdu’llah bin Salam. And he 
said, “ Verily thou art in a land in which the taking of interest is 
prevalent. Therefore when thou hast a claim upon any man 
for debt, and he presents thee with a load of straw or a load of 
barley or a load of qatt grass; then do not take it, for verily it 
is interest/’ ’— Al Bukhdrt . 

Concerning Sale 

It is related from ‘Abdu’llah bin ‘Omar that, ‘The Apostle 
of God prohibited the sale of fruit until its good condition 
appeared evident. And he prohibited both the seller and the 
buyer.’— Muslim , Al Bukhari . And in another tradition from 
Muslim it runs, ‘ He forbade the sale of dates until they 
blossomed, and the selling of corn until it became white and safe 
from blight. 7 

It is related from Ibn ‘Omar that, ‘ The Apostle of God 
said, “ Whoever buys food must not re-sell it until he has got 
it into his full possession.”’— Muslim, Al Bukhari . And in 
another tradition from Ibn ‘Abbas it runs, ‘ Until he measures it/ 

It is related from Wathila binu’l-Asqa‘i that he said, ‘I 
heard the Apostle of God say, “ Whoever sells anything with 
a fault in it which he does not make known will remain hated 
of God, and the angels will continue to curse him.” ’— Ibn 
Mdjah . 

It is related from Ibn ‘Omar that, ‘ The Apostle of God 
said, “ Whoever buys a date tree after the pollen has appeared, 
its fruit belongs to the seller, unless the buyer makes a condi¬ 
tion (to the contrary). And whoever buys a slave who 
possesses property, his property belongs to the seller, unless 
the buyer makes a condition (to the contrary).” ’— Muslim . 

It is related from ‘Ayesha that she said, ‘ Barirah came 
and said, “ Verily I have written (a bond to pay for my liberty) 


THE BOOK OF BUYING AND SELLING 151 

nine uqiyas , one in each year ; therefore assist me.” ‘Aye- 
sha replied, “ If thy masters desire, I will count it over to them 
in one counting and set thee free ; but the right to inherit thy 
property must remain with me.” Then Barirah went to her 
masters, but they refused, unless the right to inherit her 
property remained with them. Then the Apostle of God said, 
“ Take her and set her free.” Afterwards the Apostle of God 
stood up amongst the people and magnified God and praised 
Him. Then after that he said, “ What will be the condition of 
those men who make stipulations which are not in the Book of 
God ! Whatever stipulation is not in the Book of God is null and 
void, even though there be one hundred of them. And the 
commands of God are more worthy (to be obeyed), and the 
stipulations of God are more binding. And verily the right to 
inherit is only for the one who emancipates.” *— Muslim , Al 
Bukhari . 


On Payment in Advance and Pledges 

It is related from ‘Ayesha that she said, ‘ The Apostle of 
God bought some food from a certain Jew (to be paid for) in 
a certain time. And he pledged him his iron coat of mail/— 
Muslim , Al Bukhdrl . 

It is related from ‘Ayesha that she said, ‘ The Apostle of 
God died, and his coat of mail remained in pledge with the Jew 
for thirty $&'as of barley.’— Al Bukhdri. 

It is related from Ibn ‘Abbas that, ‘ The Apostle of God 
said to the users of measures and weights, “ Verily ye have 
been appointed over two matters in which the people who were 
before you were destroyed.” ’— At Tirmidhi. 

On Monopolies 

It is related from Ma‘mar that, ‘ The Apostle of God said, 
‘‘Whoever holds goods for excessive prices is a sinner.” ’— 
Muslim . , 

It is related from ‘Omar binu’l-Khattab that he said, ‘ I 
heard the Apostle of God say, “ Whoever stores up the food of 
Muslims in order to obtain excessive prices, may God smite 
him with leprosy and bankruptcy.” ’— Ibn M&jah . 


152 SELECTIONS FROM MUHAMMADAN TRADITIONS 

On Bankruptcy and Delay (in Demanding Payment) 

It is related from Abu Sa‘id that he said, ‘A man in the 
time of the Prophet had a misfortune with some fruit which he 
had bought, and his debts increased. Then the Apostle of 
God said, “ Give him alms.” So the people gave him alms; 
but it did not reach the amount required to liquidate his debts. 
Then the Apostle of God said to his creditors, “Take what you 
get; for you will get nothing else beside that.” *— Muslim . 

It is related from Abu Hurairah that, ‘ The Prophet said, 
“ There was a man who used to lend men money. And he was 
in the habit of saying to his young man, “ When thou comest to 
one who is reduced to poverty, then forgive him. It may be 
that God will forgive us.” (The Prophet) said, “That man 
met God, and he was forgiven.” 9 — Muslim , Al Bukhari . 

It is related from Salamah binu’l-Akwa* that he said, ‘ We 
were sitting near the Prophet when a bier was brought. And 
they said (to him), “ Pray over it.” He replied, “ Has he any 
debts?” They said, “No.” Then he prayed over him. 
After that another bier was brought, and he said, “ Has he any 
debts?” It was said, “Yes.” He asked, “Has he left any¬ 
thing?” They replied, “Three dinars .” Then he prayed 
over him. After that a third (bier) was brought. He asked, 
“Has he any debts?” They replied, “Three dinars .” He 
said, “Has he left anything?” They replied, “No.” He 
said, “Then you may pray over your friend.” Abu Qatadah 
said, “O Apostle of God, pray over him, and I will be responsible 
for his debts.” Then he prayed over him.’— Al Bukhdru 

It is related from Abu Qatadah that, ‘A man said, “O 
Apostle of God, tell me, if I am killed in the way of God, being 
patient, hoping for rewards, facing (the enemy), and not 
turning my back to them, will God expiate my sins ? ” The 
Apostle of God replied, “Yes.” Then when the man turned 
away, he called him and said, “Yes, except debt. Thus said 
Gabriel.” ’— Muslim . 

It is related from Al Barai bin ‘Azib that, ‘ The Apostle of 
'God said, “A man who is in debt is a prisoner to his debt. He will 
complain to his Lord of loneliness on the day of resurrection.” ’ 
—In Sharhu s-Sunnat. And it is related that Mua clh was in 
debt, and his creditors came to the Prophet. Then the Prophet 


THE BOOK OB BUYING AND SELLING 153 

sold everything which Mua’dh possessed in satisfaction of his 
debts, until Mua’dh stood without a thing. 

It is related from Abu Musa that, ‘The Prophet said, 
“ Verily the greatest sin in the sight of God, after the mortal 
sins, is that a servant should meet Him with what God has 
forbidden, namely, that a man should die in debt, and leave 
nothing wherewith to redeem it.” ’— Ahmad , Abu Baud. 

On Partnership and Agency 

It is related from Zuhrah bin Ma‘bad that his grandfather, 
‘Abdu’llah bin Uisham, used to take him out to the bazar and 
buy food. And Ibn ‘Omar and Ibn Zubair met him and said to 
him, “ Take us into partnership, for verily the Prophet prayed 
for a blessing for thee.” Then he took them into partnership. 
And it sometimes happened that he gained a camePs load, and 
sent it to his lodging. And it was that ‘Abdu’llah bin Hisham 
whose mother had taken him to the Prophet ; and he had 
stroked his head and supplicated a blessing for him /—Al 
Bukhdn . 

It is related from Jabir that he said, ‘ The sun was eclipsed 
in the time of the Apostle of God, on the day that Ibrahim, the 
Apostle’s son, died. And the Prophet prayed with the people 
in six rak'ahs and four prostrations, and then turned away. 
And the sun had returned to its ordinary condition ; and he 
said, “ There is nothing which you have been promised which 
I have not seen in this prayer of mine. Hell fire was certainly 
brought, and that was when you saw me draw back in fear lest 
its scorching heat should reach me, till I saw in it a man with a 
hooked stick dragging his intestines in the fire. And he used 
to rob pilgrims with his hooked stick. And if he was spoken 
to about it, he used to say, ‘ It only got caught in my hooked 
stick.’ And if the people were unaware of his thieving, then 
he would take the thing away. And I saw in the fire a woman 
who used to own a cat, which she tied up, and neither fed nor 
released so that it might eat of the birds and small animals of 
the earth, until it died of hunger. After that paradise was 
brought, and that was when you saw me move forward until I 
stood in my place and stretched out my hand wishing to take 
some of its fruit that you might look at it. After that it 

became manifest to me that I should not do so.” '— Muslim . 

20 


154 SELECTIONS FROM MUHAMMADAN TRADITIONS 


It is related from Ilaram bin Sa‘d bin Muhaisah that, ‘ The 
camel of A1 Barai bin ‘Azib entered a garden and spoiled it. 
Then the Apostle of God gave judgement that the protection of 
gardens is the duty of their owners in the daytime; but that 
which animals destroy by night their owners are responsible 
for/— Malik, Abu Baud , I bn Majah. 

It is related from A1 Hasan from Samurah that, ‘The 
Prophet said, “ When any one of you comes to cattle, then if 
their owner be amongst them, let him ask his permission (to 
milk them). But if he be not present, then let him call out 
three times. Then if any one answer him, let him ask his 
permission ; but if no one answer him, then let him milk and 
drink ; but he must take nothing away.” *— Abu Baud, 

It is related from Ibn ‘Omar that, ‘ The Prophet said, 
“ Whoever enters a garden may eat thereof, but let him not take 
away anything in his garments.” *— At Tirmidhi , Ibn Majah. 

On the Right of Pre-emption 

It is related from Jiibir that he said, ‘ The Prophet gave 
orders for pre-emption in everything which was not divided. 
But when the boundaries are delimitated and roads laid out, 
there is no pre-emption.’— Al Bukhari . 

It is related from Jabir that, ‘The Apostle of God gave 
orders for pre-emption in every matter of partnership which 
had not been divided : lands or gardens. In such cases it is not 
lawful for a man to sell until he inform his partner. Then, if 
the latter wish, he may take it, and if he wish, he may leave it. 
And if he sell and do not inform his partner, then the latter 
has a prior right to it.’— Muslim. 

It is related from Abu Hurairah that, ‘ The Apostle of God 
said, “Let not a neighbour forbid his neighbour from fixing a 
beam of wood in his wall.” ’— Muslim , Al Bukhari. 

It is related from ‘Abdullah bin yubaish that, ‘The 
Apostle of God said, “ Whoever cuts down a lotus tree, God will 
put down his head into the fire.”’— Abu Bdud . And he said, 
‘This tradition is abbreviated (it should be), “Whoever wan¬ 
tonly and injuriously cuts down a lotus tree in the desert, under 
which the traveller and beasts seek shade, having no right to 
do so, God will put down his head in the fire.” ’ 


THE BOOK OF BUYING AND SELLING 


155 


Concerning Payment in Kind for Services Rendered 

It is related from ‘Abdu’llah bin ‘Omar that, ‘The Apostle 
of God handed over to the Jews of Khaibar its date trees and 
its land, with the stipulation that they should cultivate them at 
their own expense ; but that the Prophet should have half its 
fruits. ’— Muslim . 

It is related from Rafi‘ bin Khadij that he said, ‘We, the 
majority of the people of Madina, were cultivators. And there 
was one of our number who used to hire out his land and say, 
“(The fruit of) this plot will be mine, and of that yours.” And 
something happened, so that the one produced a crop, and the 
other did not. Then the Prophet prohibited them (acting thus)/ 
— Muslim , Al Bukhari. 

It is related from Abu Umamah that he saw a ploughshare 
and other implements of cultivation and said, ‘ I heard the Pro¬ 
phet say, “This does not enter the home of any people, but it 
causes abasement to enter it.” ’— Al Bukhari . 

It is related from Rafi‘ bin Khadij that, ‘ The Prophet said, 
“ Whoever sows in the lands of a people without their permis¬ 
sion, will have nothing of the crop except what he expended on 
it.’”— At Tirmidhi , Abu Ddud. 

It is related from Qais bin Muslim from Abu Ja‘far that he 
said, ‘There were none of the refugees in Madina who sowed 
the ground, except on the stipulation that they should receive 
one-third or one-fourth (of the produce). And ‘All and Sa‘d 
bin Malik and ‘Abdu’llah bin Ma'sud and ‘Omar bin ‘Abdu’l-Aziz 
and Al Qasim and ‘Urwah and the family of Abu Bakr and the 
family of ‘Omar and the family of ‘All and Ibn Sirin sowed in 
partnership. And ‘Abdu’r-Rahman binu’l-Aswad said,“I was a 
partner with‘Abdu’r-Rahman bin Yazid in the crop.” And 
‘Omar arranged with the people that if he supplied the seed 
himself, he should have one half of the crop; and if they 
supplied the seed they should have the same.’— Al Bukhdri . 

On the Lease of Revenues or Labour 

It is related from Abu Hurairah from the Prophet that he 
said, ‘God sent no prophet who did not graze goats.’ Then 
his companions said, ‘And thou?’ He replied, ‘Yes! I 
used to graze goats for the people of Mecca for a few karats .’ 
—Al Bukhdri . 


156 SELECTIONS FROM MUHAMMADAN TRADITIONS 

It is related from Abu Hurairah that, ‘The Apostle of God 
said, 14 God Most High said, 4 There are three classes of people 
whose adversary I shall be on the day of resurrection : the man 
who makes a promise in my name, and afterwards breaks it; 
the man who sells a free man, and eats his price ; and the man 
who engages a labourer, and receives full labour from him, but 
does not pay him his wages.’ ” ’— Al Bukharu 

It is related from Ibn ‘Abbas that, ‘A party of the com¬ 
panions of the Prophet passed by some water, and amongst 
them (i.e. the people camping there) was one who had been 
bitten by some poisonous scorpion or snake. And a man from 
the people living near the water came to them and said, “ Have 
you a charmer amongst you ; for amongst those living near the 
water is a man who has been bitten by some poisonous scorpion 
or snake.” Then a man of their number went and recited the 
opening chapter of the Book, on condition of receiving some 
goats in payment. Then the man recovered, and he (who had 
recited) brought the goats to his companions. But they were 
displeased thereat, and said, “Thou hast taken a reward for 
reciting the Book of God,” until they came to Madina and said 
to the Apostle of God, “He took a reward for reciting the Book 
of God?” The Apostle of God replied, 44 Verily the most 
proper thing for which you can take a reward is the Book of 
God.”’— Al Bukh&ri. And in another tradition it runs, 4 You 
have acted righty. Divide them; and allot me a share with you.’ 

It is related from Kharija binu’s-$alt, from his paternal 
uncle, that he said, 4 We came from the Apostle of God to some 
Arabs. They said, 44 Verily we have been informed that God 
has brought blessings from this man (Muhammad). Have you 
any medicine or charm, for verily we have here a madman in 
fetters.” We replied, 44 Yes.” Then they brought the madman 
in fetters, and I recited over him morning and evening for three 
days the opening chapter of the Book, collecting the spittle in 
my mouth, and then spitting it on him. Kharija said, “And it 
was as if a rope were unbound from an animal’s leg!” Then 
they gave me payment. But I said, 44 No, not until I ask the 
Prophet.” He replied, “Take it, for by my life! certainly 
whoever takes a reward for a false charm (has sinned), but thou 
hast taken it for a true one.” ’— Ahmads Abu Ddud . 


THE BOOK OF BUYING AND SELLING 157 

It is related from ‘Abdu’llah bin ‘Omar that, ‘ The Apostle 
of God said, “Give the labourer his wages before his perspira¬ 
tion becomes dry.” *— Ibn Majah . 

It is related from ‘Utbah binu'l-Nuddar that he said, ‘We 
were with the Apostle of God when he recited the chapter of 
the Qur'an entitled “The story.” And when he reached the 
story of Moses he said, “Verily Moses hired himself for eight 
or ten years on condition that he preserved his continence and 
received his food.” ’— Ahmad , Ibn M&jah . 

On Rejuvenating Dead (Lands) and Water 

It is related from ‘Urwah that he said, 1 Zubair had an 
altercation with a man of the helpers concerning a place where 
water flowed from the hot stony plains. And the Prophet said, 
“ O £ubair, do thou use the water, and then afterwards send it 
on to thy neighbour.” Then the helper said, “(This judge¬ 
ment) is because he is the son of thy aunt!” Then the 
Prophet's face changed colour, and he said, “ O Zubair, use the 
water, and then impound it until it returns to the dam. After 
that send on the water to thy neighbour.” And the Prophet 
protected the rights of Zubair for him by his plain orders when 
the helper made him angry. As a matter of fact, he had 
advised them a course which had in it amplitude for them both.' 
— Muslim , Al Bukhdri. 

It is related from Ibn ‘Omar that, ‘ The Prophet gave 
Zubair land as a fief as far as his horse could go. Then Zubair 
drove his horse until it stopped. After that he threw down 
his whip; and the Apostle of God said, “Give him as far as 
the whip reaches.” ’— Abu Ddud . 

It is related from Ibn ‘Abbas that, ‘ The Apostle of God 
said, “ Muslims are partners in three things: in water and 
herbage and fire.” ’— Abu Ddud , Ibn Majah . 

It is related from Taus that, ‘ The Apostle of God said, 
“Whoever rejuvenates dead land, it becomes his, and ancient 
lands belong to God and His Apostle. Afterwards they become 
yours from me.” '— Ash Shaft . 

It is related from Samurah bin Jundub that he had some 
date trees in a garden belonging to a man of the helpers. And 
the man had his family with him. And Samurah used to go 
into the garden, and thereby caused him annoyance. Then the 


158 


SELECTIONS FROM MUHAMMADAN TRADITIONS 


man came to the Prophet and mentioned the matter to him. 
Then the Prophet requested him (Samurah)to sell to him ; but 
he refused. Then he requested him to exchange them for 
others ; but he refused. Then the Prophet said, “Then give 
them to him, and thou wilt obtain such-and-such a reward,” 
inspiring him with a desire for it. But he refused. Then the 
Apostle of God said, “ Thou art a troublesome fellow/’ After 
that he said to the helper, “ Go and cut down his date trees.’’ ’ 
—Abu Ddud . 


On Giving 

It is related from Ibn 'Omar that he obtained some land in 
Khaibar. And he came to the Prophet and said, ‘ O Apostle of 
God, I have obtained some land in Khaibar, more valuable 
property than which I have never possessed. Then what dost 
thou command me with respect to it ? ’ He replied, 4 Thou 
mayest endow its principal in the name of religion and give in 
alms of its produce.’ Then ‘Omar gave it in alms, so that its 
principal should not be sold, and should not be given away or 
inherited. And he gave its produce in alms to the poor, and to 
his relations, and for the emancipation of slaves, and in the 
road of God, and for travellers and guests. (And he proclaimed) 
that it should be no fault in those whom he had thus made 
participators in the produce if they ate of it in a reasonable 
manner or gave others to eat when in want. Ibn Sirin said, 
‘And provided they did not hoard up wealth.’— Muslim , Al 
Bukhdru 

It is related from Al Nu'man bin Bashir that his father 
brought him to the Apostle of God and said, ‘Verily I have 
given this son of mine as a slave.’ He said, ‘ Hast thou made 
presents of all thy sons in this manner?’ He replied, ‘No.’ 
The Prophet said, ‘Take him back.’ And in another tradition 
it runs, ‘He said, “Would it please thee that they should be 
equal before thee in righteousness?” He replied, “Yes.” 
He said, “ Then do not give him as a slave.” ’ And in another 
tradition it runs, ‘ He said, “ My father gave me away as a 
present. And ‘ Umrah bint Rawahah said, ‘ I shall not be 
satisfied until thou make the Apostle of God a witness.’ Then 
he came to the Apostle of God and said, ‘ Verily I have given 
my son, born of ‘Umrah bint Rawahah, as a present, and she 


159 


THE BOOK OF BUYING AND SELLING 
/ 

ordered me to make thee a witness, O Apostle of God/ He 
replied, 4 Hast thou given away the rest of thy sons in this 
manner ? 7 He said, 4 No/ He said, 4 Then fear God, and act 
justly between thy children/ Nu‘man said, 'Then he returned 
and took back his present/ 77 7 And in another tradition it runs, 

4 He said, 44 I shall not be a witness to injustice. 77 7 — Muslim , Al 
Bukhdru 

It is related from Anas that he said, 4 When the Apostle of 
God came to Madina, the refugees came to him and said, 44 O 
Apostle of God, we do not see any people more generous in 
great matters or more helpful in small than the people amongst 
whom we have settled. Of a truth they have sufficed us in 
trouble and made us their sharers in food, until we fear that 
they will take all the reward.” He replied, 44 No, not so long 
as you pray to God for them and praise them.” 7 — At Tirmidhi. 

It is related from ‘Ayesha that, 4 The Prophet said, 44 Make 
presents to one another ; for verily presents dispel hatred / 7 7 

Concerning What is Found 

It is related from Zaid bin Khalid that he said, 4 A man 
came to the Apostle of God and asked him concerning (a 
straying animal) that is found. He replied, 44 Take note of its 
powers and its halter ; then make it known for a year. Then 
if its owner comes (give it him), otherwise it becomes yours . 77 
The man said, “Then what of a goat which has wandered ? 77 
He replied, 44 It is thine, or thy brother’s, or the wolf's.” He 
said, 44 Then what of a camel that has strayed ? 77 He replied, 
44 What is that to thee, when it has with it its supply of water 
and the soles of its feet! It comes to water, and eats the trees 
until its master meets it.” 7 — Muslim , Al Bukhari . And in 
another tradition from Muslim it runs, 4 He said, 44 Make it 
known for a year. Then take note of its halter and its powers. 
After that make use of it; and if its owner comes, then hand it 
over to him.” 7 

It is related from ‘Amru bin Shuaib, from his father, from 
his grandfather, that the Apostle of God was asked about fruit 
hanging (on the trees). He replied, 4 Whoever has a need of 
them (and eats them), without carrying any away in his 
garment, is blameless ; but whoever takes any away must give 
double its value as damage, as well as (suffer) the punishment 


160 SELECTIONS BROM MUHAMMADAN TRADITIONS 

\ 

due. And whoever steals anything: from it after that the 
threshing-floor has provided a place for it, its value being that 
of a shield, amputation (of the hand) is his punishment/ And 
‘Amru made a remark with regard to a camel or goat that had 
strayed as others have mentioned. He said, ‘(The Prophet) 
was asked concerning what is found. He replied, “ That which 
is found on a public road, or in a populous village, advertise it 
for a year. Then if its owner conies, hand it over to him ; but 
if he does not appear, then thou mayest keep it. And whatever 
is found in old, abandoned land, of it and of what is hidden 
therein—one fifth/’ *— An Nasai. 

It is related from Jabir that he said, ‘The Apostle of God 
made a concession to us in the matter of walking-sticks, whips, 
ropes and the like which a man picks up, that he might use it 
for his own benefit/— Abu Ddud. 

On the Division of Inheritance 

It is related from Abu Hurairah that, ‘ The Prophet said, 
“ I am more fit (to aid) Muslims than they themselves, 
therefore whoever dies in debt, leaving nothing wherewith to 
liquidate it, its payment rests with me. And whoever leaves 
property, it is for his heirs.” ’— Muslim , Al Bukhari . 

It is related from Usamah bin Zaid that, ‘ The Apostle of 
God said, “ A Muslim shall not inherit from an infidel, nor an 
infidel from a Muslim.” 9 — Muslim , Al Bukhdri . 

It is related from Abu Hurairah that, ‘ The Apostle of God 
said, “A murderer shall not inherit.” 9 — At Tirniidhi , Ibn Majah . 

It is related from Buraidah that, 1 The Prophet appointed a 
sixth for a grandmother, when there is besides her no mother/ 
— Abii. Ddud . 

It is related from Jabir that, ‘The Apostle of God said, 
“When a (new-born) child utters a cry (and then dies), it 
must be prayed over, and its inheritance is passed on.” ’— Ibn 
Mdjah . 

It is related from ‘Amru bin Shuaib, from his father, from 
his grandfather, that, ‘ The Prophet said, “ Whatever man 
commits adultery, either with a free woman or a slave girl, the 
child is the child of adultery. It shall not inherit, nor be 
inherited from.” *— At Tirmidht. 


THE BOOK OF BUYING AND SELLING 


161 


It is related from ‘Ayesha that, ‘A freedman of the 
Apostle died and left some property, but left no relations or 
child. Then the Apostle of God said, “ Give his inheritance to 
a man of the people of the village.” *— Abu Daud y At Tirmidht . 

It is related from ‘All that he said, ‘ Ye read this verse 
(of the Qur’an), “After the legacies which ye bequeath and the 
debts,” but, verily the Apostle of God ordered the (payment) 
of debts before the (distribution) of the legacies; and he 
ordered that the sons of the same mother should inherit from 
one another, but not if they be by different mothers ; and that a 
man should inherit from his brother born of his own father and 
mother, but not from his brother by his father only.’— At 
Tirmidht, Ibn Mdjah. 

It is related from Jabir that he said, ‘The wife of Sa‘d 
binu’l-Rabi, came to the Apostle of God with her two daughters 
by Sa‘d binu’l-Rabi‘ and said, “ O Apostle of God, these two 
are daughters of Sa‘d binu’l-Rabi*. Their father was killed as 
a martyr (when fighting) together with thee on the day of (the 
battle of) ‘Uhud. And verily their uncle has taken their 
property, and left no property for them ; and they cannot 
marry unless they obtain their property.” He replied, “God 
will adjudicate on that matter.” Then came down the verse of 
inheritance. So the Apostle of God sent to their uncle and 
said, “Give to the daughters of Sa‘d two-thirds, and to their 
mother one-eighth ; and what remains over is for thyself.” ’— 
Ahmad , At Tirmidlii , Abu Ddud , Ibn Mdjah. 

It is related from Huzail bin Shurahbil that he said, ‘Abu 
Musa was asked concerning (the inheritance of) a daughter, a 
son’s daughter and a sister. He replied, “ One half is for the 
daughter and one half for the sister ; but go to Ibn Mo‘sud, 
and he will corroborate me.” Then Ibn Ma‘sud was asked, 
and was informed of the words of Abu Musa. He replied, 
“Then (if I corroborate) I shall go astray, and shall not be of 
those who are guided aright. I shall pass judgement in the 
matter as the Prophet passed judgement. For the daughter is 
one-half, and for the son’s daughter one-sixth to complete a full 
two-thirds, and what remains is for the sister.” Then Abu 
Musa came to us and informed us of the words of Ibn Ma‘sud 
and said, “Do not ask me so long as this wise man remains 
amongst you.” ’— At Bukhdri . 21 


162 SELECTIONS FROM MUHAMMADAN TRADITIONS 

It is related from Qabisah bin Dhuwaib that he said, ‘ A 
grandmother came to Abu Bakr to ask about her inheritance. 
He said to her, “ There is nothing for thee according to the 
Book of God, and nothing for thee according to the traditions of 
the Prophet. Then return until I can ask the people.” Then 
he enquired, and A1 Mughirah bin Shu‘bah said, “ I was present 
with the Apostle of God when he gave her (i.e. a grandmother) 
one-sixth.” Abu Bakr said, “Was there anyone present with 
thee besides thyself?” Then Muhammad bin Maslamah 
answered in the same terms that A1 Mughirah had spoken. 
Then Abu Bakr sent it to her. After that another grandmother 
came to ‘Omar to ask him about her inheritance. He replied, 
“ It is that one-sixth. If you both agree, then it may be divided 
between the two of you ; or whoever of you remains alone, it 
is for her.” ’— Malik , Ahmad, At Tirmidhi . 

Concerning Wills 

It is related from Sa‘d bin abi Waqqas that he said, ‘ I was 
ill in the year of the conquest of Mecca, and I was nigh unto 
death. Then the Apostle of God came to me to visit me. And 
I said, “O Apostle of God, verily I have much wealth, and I 
have no one to inherit from me except my daughter. May I 
will away all that I possess?” He replied, “No.” I said, 
“Then two-thirds of my property?” He replied, “No.” I 
said, “Then one-half?” He replied, “ No.” I said, “Then 
one-third ? ” He replied, “ Yes, one-third, for that is sufficient; 
and it is better to leave your heirs rich than indigent and 
begging, and holding out hands to beg of men. For thou wilt 
never expend alms, seeking thereby the face of God, but thou 
wilt be rewarded for it, even to the morsel thou raisest to thy 
wife’s mouth.” ’— Muslim , Al Bukhari . 

It is related from Abu Hurairah that, 1 The Prophet said, 
“ Verily a man and his wife acted in accordance with the will 
of God for sixty years. Then death claimed them. But they 
did some one an injury in their will, therefore the fire became 
their rightful portion.” ’—Abu D&ud, Ibn Majah . 


XIII 


THE BOOK OF MARRIAGE 

It is related from Abu Hurairah that, ‘ The Apostle of God 
said, “A woman may be married for four reasons: for her 
wealth, for her noble lineage, for her beauty, and for her 
religion ; therefore obtain one with religion, otherwise may 
your hands be covered with dirt/’ ’— Muslim , Al Bukhari . 

It is related from ‘Abdu’llah bin ‘Omar that, ‘ The Apostle 
of God said, “The whole world is valuable ; but the most valu¬ 
able thing in the world is a good woman.” *— Muslim. 

It is related from Umamah bin Zaid that, ‘ The Apostle 
of God -said, “ I have not left after me any calamity more 
distressing to man than woman.” *— Muslim , Al Bukhari. 

It is related from Abu Sa‘idu’l-Khudri that, * The Apostle 
of God said, “ The world is sweet and green, and verily God has 
made you inheritors therein; therefore take heed how ye 
behave, and abstain from the world and from women ; for 
verily the first rebellion of the children of Israel was on account 
of women.” ’— Muslim. 

It is related from Abu Hurairah that, ‘ The Apostle of God 
said, “There are three persons whose assistance is incumbent 
upon God: the freed slave who wishes to discharge his bond of 
freedom, the one who marries desiring abstinence from what 
is unlawful, and the one who fights in the way of God.”’— At 
Tirmidhi, An Nasdi , I bn Majalu 

It is related from Abu Umamah that, ‘ The Prophet said, 
“A believer has not benefitted more, after the fear of God, than 
by a virtuous wife who, if he commands her, obeys him ; and 
if he looks at her, pleases him ; and if he swears by her, justi¬ 
fies him ; and if he goes away from her, acts sincerely in respect 
to herself and his property.” ’— Ibn Mdjah. 

It is related from Anas that, ‘ The Apostle of God said, 
“ When a servant (of God) marries, he has perfected half of 
religion ; then let him fear God for the remaining half,”* 

On Looking at One Betrothed 

It is related from Al Mughira bin Shu‘bah that he said, * I 
asked a woman in marriage ; and the Apostle of God said to 


164 SELECTIONS FROM MUHAMMADAN TRADITIONS 


me, “ Hast thou looked at her ? ” I said, “ No.” He said, 
“ Then look at her, for that is the best thing: for arousing love 
between you.” ’— Ahmad , At Tirmidhi , An Nasdi , Ibn Mdjah . 

It is related from Buraidah that, ‘The Apostle of God 
said, “O ‘All, O ‘All, do not follow up one look with another. 
For verily the first will be forgiven thee, but the last will not.” ’ 
— Ahmad , At Tirmidhi, Abu Daud. 

It is related from Umm Salamah that, ‘ She was with the 
Apostle of God and Yamunah when lbn Umm Maktum drew 
near and entered in to him. Then the Apostle of God said, 
“Conceal yourselves from him.” I said, “O Apostle of God, 
is he not blind and unable to see us ? ” The Apostle of God 
replied, “Are you two blind? Do you not see him?”’— 
Ahmad , At Tirmidhi , Abu Daud . 

It is related from Jabir that, ‘The Prophet said, “ Do not 
visit those women whose husbands are absent; for verily 
Satan circulates in every one of you like the circulation of 
blood.” We replied, “And in thee also, O Apostle of God?” 
He said, “And in me also, but God has aided me against him 
so that I am secure.” ’— At Tirmidhi. 

It is related from A1 Hasan that he said, ‘ I was informed 
that the Apostle of God said, “ God cursed the one who looks 
(ona woman), and He cursed the one looked on.” ’— At Baihaqi. 

Concerning the Guardian, and Asking the Consent 
of the Woman 

It is related from AbulHurairah that, ‘ The Apostle of God 
said, “A widow shall not be married until she be consulted ; 
and a virgin shall not be married until her consent be asked.” 
They said, “O Apostle of God, how shall her permission (be 
understood)? ” He replied, “That she keep silence.” ’— Muslim , 
Al Bukhari ’. 

It is related from Khansai bint Khidham that, ‘ Her father 
gave her in marriage when a widow. And it was distasteful to 
her ; so she came to the Apostle of God. And he set aside the 
marriage.’ —Al Bukhdri. 

It is related from ‘Ayesha that, ‘ The Prophet married her 
when she was a girl of seven years. And she was taken to her 
husband’s house when a girl of nine years; and her playthings 


THE BOOK OF MARRIAGE 


165 


accompanied her. And the Prophet died and left her when she 
was a girl of eighteen/— Muslim . 

It is related from Abu Musa that, ‘ The Prophet said, 
“There is no marriage without a guardian.” *— Ahmad, At 
Tirmidhi, A bit Ddud , I bn Mdjah. 

It is related from Abu Hurairah that, ‘ The Apostle of God 
said, “ A female orphan shall be consulted (with regard to her 
marriage), and if she remain silent, that is her consent. But 
if she refuse, then no compulsion shall be put on her.” ’— At 
Tirmidhi, Abu Ddud , An Nasai. 

It is related from Jabir that, ‘The Prophet said, “ What¬ 
ever slave marries without the consent of his master is an 
adulterer.” *— At Tirmidhi, Abu Ddud . 

It is related from Ibn ‘Abbas that he said, * Verily a virgin 
came to the Apostle of God and informed him that her father 
had given her in marriage against her wish. Then the Prophet 
gave her her choice.’— Abd Ddud . 

It is related from Abu Sa‘id and Ibn ‘Abbas that, ‘The 
Apostle of God said, “ Whoever has a son born to him, let him 
give him a good name and teach him good mapnqrs ; and when 
he reaches puberty let him get him married. And if he 
reaches puberty, and he does not get him married, and he falls 
into sin, then the father only is responsible.” ’ 

It is related from ‘Omar binu’l-Khattab and Anas bin 
Malik that, ‘The Apostle of God said, “It is written in the 
Taurat, that he whose daughter reaches twelve years of age, 
and he has not given her in marriage, and she falls into sin, he 
is responsible for that sin.” ’— Al Baihaqi .. 

On Publishing Marriages, and the Conditions 
Governing Them 

It is related from Rubayyi‘bint Mu‘awwidh bin Afrai that 
she said, ‘ The Prophet came and entered when I was being 
taken to his house for the first time ; and he sat down on my 
bed as thou art sitting on it near me. And the slave girls 
began to beat the drums and to eulogize those of my ancestors 
who were killed on the day of (the battle of) Badr ; when one 
of them said, “ There is a Prophet amongst us who knows 
what will be on the morrow.” Then he said, “ Leave this* and 
say what you were saying before.” *— Al BukhdrU 


166 SELECTIONS FROM MUHAMMADAN traditions 

It is related from ‘Ayesha that she said, ‘The Apostle of 
God married me in (the month) Shawwal, and I was taken to 
his house as a bride in Shawwal. Then what wife of the 
Prophet has enjoyed greater favour from him than I ? *— 
Muslim . 

It is related from ‘AH that, ‘The Apostle of God prohi¬ 
bited the temporary marriage of women on the day of (the 
conquest of) Khaibar; and he prohibited the eating of the flesh 
of the domestic ass.’— Muslim , Al Bukhari. 

It is related from ‘Ayesha that, ‘The Apostle of God said, 
“ Publish this marriage and perform it in mosques and beat 
drums for it.” ' —Al Tinnidhi. 

It is related from ‘Ayesha that she said, ‘ I had a girl of 
the helpers, and I gave her in marriage. Then the Apostle of 
God said, “O Ayesha, will you not sing, for verily this tribe 
of the helpers loves singing.” ’ 

It is related from Ibn ‘Abbas that he .said, ‘ Temporary 
marriage was only at the beginning of Islam. A man would 
come to a town in which he had no acquaintances. Then he 
would marry a woman for the time it was seen he would stay 
there, and she would look after his effects for him and cook his 
food well for him, until the verse came down, “ (Who keep 
themselves from carnal knowledge of any women) except their 
wives or the captives which their right hands possess.” ’ 1 Ibn 
‘Abbas said, “ Every womb except these is unlawful.” ’—At 
Tirmidhi . 

It is related from Amir bin Sa‘d that he said, ‘ I entered in 
to Qarzah bin Ka‘b and Abu Ma‘sud, the helper, at a wedding 
feast, and behold! some girls were singing. So I said, “ O ye 
two companions of the Apostle of God and men of Badr, is this 
done in your presence ! ” They replied, “ Sit if thou wilt, 
and listen with us, and if thou wilt, depart; for verily enjoy¬ 
ment is permitted us at a wedding feast.” ’— A?i Nasai . 

Concerning Those Whom It is Unlawful to Marry 

It is related from ‘Ayesha that she said, ‘ My uncle from 
my wet-nurse 2 came to me and asked permission to enter where 
I was. But I refused to give him permission until I had asked 

1 Qur’an, Suratu’l-Mu’minun (xxiii) 6. 

2 That is, the brother of her wet-nurse’s husband. 


THE BOOK OF MARRIAGE 


167 


the Apostle of God. Then the Apostle of God came, and 
I asked him. He replied, “ Verily, he is thy uncle, therefore 
give him permission.” ’ She said, ‘ Then I said, “ O Apostle of 
God, only the woman nursed me, and not the man! ” The 
Apostle of God replied, “ He is thy uncle, therefore allow him 
to enter where thou art.” And that took place after the verse 
of veiling was promulgated.’— Muslim , Al Bukhari. 

It is related from ‘Uqbah binu’l-Hanth that, 4 He married a 
daughter of Abu Ihab bin ‘Aziz. Then a woman came and said, 

“ I nursed ‘Uqbah and the woman whom he has married.” 
‘Uqbah said to her, “ I did not know that thou hadst suckled 
me, and thou didst not inform me.” Then he sent to the 
family of Abu Ihab and asked them. They said, “We did 
not know that she had suckled our girl.” Then he rode to the 
Prophet at Madina and asked him. The Apostle of God 
replied, “ How (canst thou keep her) when it has been remarked 
(that you were both suckled by the same woman!)” Then 
‘Uqbah separated her; and she married another husband.*— 
Al Bukhari. 

It is related from Abu Sa‘idu’l-Khudri that, ‘On the day of 
(the battle of) Hunain, the Apostle of God sent an army to 
Awtas ; and they met the enemy, and fought with them, and 
won a victory over them, and they took them prisoners. And 
certain men of the companions of the Prophet withheld them¬ 
selves from co-habitation with the women (captives) on account 
of their husbands among the polytheists. Then God sent down 
respecting the matter (the revelation, “Ye are forbidden to 
take to wife) free women who are married, except those women 
whom your right hands shall possess as slaves.” 1 That is they 
are lawful for them when their stated time shall be fulfilled.’— 
Muslim. 

it is related from Al Barai bin ‘Azib that he said, 4 My 
uncle Abu Burdah bin Niyari passed by me; and he had with 
him a standard; And I said, “Where art thou going?” He 
replied, “The Prophet has sent me to a man who has married 
the wife of his father, in order to bring his head to him.” ’— 
At Tirmidhi , Abu Ddud. And in another tradition from An 
Nasai and Ibn Majah it runs, ‘ He has commanded me to cut 
off his head and take his property.’ 


1 Qu’ran, Surat u’n-Nisa’ (iv) 42. 


168 SELECTIONS FROM MUHAMMADAN TRADITIONS 

It is related from Ibn ‘Omar that Ghailan bin Salamahu’l- 
Shaqafi became a Muslim. And he had ten wives in the times 
of ignorance, and they became Muslims with him. Then the 
Prophet said, “ Keep four and send away the rest of them.” *— 
Ahmad , At Tirmidhi , Ibn Mdjah . 

Concerning Cohabitation 

(The traditions in this section are too obscene for translation.) 

It is related from ‘Urwah from ‘Ayesha that, ‘ The 
Apostle of God said to her with reference to Barirah, “ Take 
her and set her free.” And her husband was (also) a slave. 
Then the Apostle of God gave her her choice, and she chose 
herself (i.e. freedom from her husband.) But if he had been a 
free man, the Prophet would not have given her her choice.’— 
Muslim , Al Bukhari . 

It is related from Ibn ‘Abbas that he said, ‘ The husband 
of Barirah was a black slave called Mughith. And it is as if I 
could see him wandering round after her in the streets of 
Madina weeping and with his tears flowing over his beard. 
Then the Prophet said to ‘Abbas, “ O ‘Abbas, art thou not 
surprised at the love of Mughith for Barirah, and at the aversion 
of Barirah for Mughith!” After that the Prophet said, “If 
thou return to him (it will be better).” She said, “O Apostle 
of God, dost thou order me ? ” He said, “ I only plead for him.” 
She replied, “ I have no need of him. ” ’— Al Bukhari . 

Concerning Marriage Dowries 

It is related from Sahl bin Sa‘d that, ‘A woman came to 
the Apostle of God and said, “ O Apostle of God, verily I have 
given myself to thee.” And she stood up for a long time. 
Then a man rose up and said, “ O Apostle of God, marry her to 
me if thou hast no need of her.” He said, “ Hast thou anything 
with which to provide her a dowry ? ” He replied, “ I have 
nothing except these trowsers of mine.” He said, “Then 
search for something, although it be but an iron ring.” Then 
the man sought, but found nothing. Then the Apostle of God 
said, “ Hast thou anything of the Qur’an ? ” He replied, “ Yes, 
I have such-and-such a chapter.” He said, “ I wed her to thee 
by what thou hast of the Qur’an.” ’ And in another tradition it 
runs, ‘ He said, “ Depart, for I have wedded her .to thee ; and do 
thou teach her the Qur’an.” ’— Muslim , Al Bukhdri . 


THE BOOK OF MARRIAGE 


169 


It is related from Abu Salamah that he said, ‘ I asked 
‘Ayesha, “How much was the dowry of the Prophet?” She 
replied, “His dowry for his wives was twelve uqiyas and one 
nash .” She said, “ Dost thou know what a nash is ? ” I said, 
“No/ She replied, “It is half an uqiya , and that is five 
hundred dirhams .” *— Muslim. 

It is related from Jabir that, ‘The Prophet said, “Who¬ 
ever gives as a dowry for his wife two handsful of flour or dates 
has made her lawful for him.” ’— Abti Ddud . 

It is related from Anas that he said, ‘Abii Talhah married 
Umm Sulaim, and the dowry between them was Islam. Umm 
Sulaim embraced Islam before Abti Talhah, and he sued her in 
marriage. And she said, “ I have embraced Islam. If thou 
embrace Islam, I will wed thee/’ Then he embraced Islam, 
and that was the dower between them .’—An Nasai . 

Concerning the Marriage Feast 

It is related from Anas that he said, ‘ The Apostle of God 
did not make a marriage feast for any of his wives such as he 
made for Zainab, when he feasted them with a goat/— Muslim , 
Al Bukhari . 

It is related from Anas that he said, ‘ Verily the Apostle 
of God emancipated Safiyah and married her. And he made 
her emancipation her dowry ; and he made a marriage feast 
with (the sweetmeat) hais** — Muslim , Al Bukhdri. 

It is related from Abu Hurairah that, ‘ The Apostle of God 
said, “The worst of food is the food of a marriage feast to 
which the rich are invited and the poor left out, and whoever 
rejects an invitation has disobeyed God and His Apostle.” *— 
Muslim, Al Bukhdri . 

It is related from Safinah that, ‘ A man was the guest of 
‘All binu’l-Muttalib, and the latter prepared food for him. Then 
Fatfmah said, “If we invite the Apostle of God, and he eat with 
us (it will be better).” They then invited him. And he came 
and placed his hands on the sideposts of the door. And he saw 
a painted cloth which had been placed on the wall of the house; 
so he returned home. Fatimah said, “ Then I followed him and 
said, ‘ O Apostle of God, what turned thee back ? ’ He replied, 
It is not for me, or for any Prophet, to enter a house which 
has been ornamented ” '— Ahmad , Ibn Mdjah . 


22 


170 SELECTIONS FROM MUHAMMADAN TRADITIONS 


Concerning the Division of Time Between 
Different Wives 

It is related from Ibn ‘Abbas that, 1 The Apostle of God 
died leaving nine wives; and he used to divide (his time) 
amongst them as for eight persons.'— Muslim , Al Bukh&ri . 

It is related from ‘Ayesha that, ‘ When Saudah became old, 
she said, “ O Apostle of God, I have given my day with thee to 
‘Ayesha.” So the Apostle of God used to set aside two days 
for ‘Ayesha: her own and that of Saudah.'— Muslim , Al 
Bukhari . 

It is related from ‘Ayesha that, ‘ When the Apostle of God 
wished to go on a journey, he used to cast lots amongst his 
wives, and would depart taking her with him whose name came 
out.'— Muslim , Al Bukhari, 

It is related from Abu Hurairah that, ‘ The Prophet said, 
“ When a man has two wives, and does not treat them imparti¬ 
ally ; he will come on the day of resurrection with half his body 
fallen off.” ’— At Tirmidhi , Abu Baud , An Nasdi , Ibn Majalu 

On Intercourse with Women, and the Rights of Each 

It is related from ‘Abu Hurairah that, ‘ The Apostle of 
God said, “ If the Children of Israel had not lived, flesh 
would not have become putrid : and if Eve had not lived, no 
woman would ever have deceived her husband.”’— Muslim, Al 
Bukhari . 

It is related from ‘Ayesha that she said, ‘The Apostle of 
God said to me, “ I well know when thou art pleased with me, 
and when thou art angry with me.” I said, “ Whence dost thou 
know that ? ” He replied, “ When thou art pleased with me, 
thou sayest, ‘ No, by the Lord of Muhammad,’and when thou 
art angry with me, thou sayest, ‘ No, by the Lord of Abraham.' ” 
She said, “ Yes, by God! O Apostle of God, I abandon nothing 
but thy name.” ’ — Muslim , Al Bukhari . 

It is related from Anas that, ‘ The Apostle of God swore to 
abstain from his wives for a month ; and he had sprained his 
foot. And he remained in an upper room for twenty-nine 
nights. Then he came down. And they said, “ O Apostle of 
God, you swore to abstain for a month.” He replied, “ Verily 
this month is one of twenty-nine days.” '— Al Bukhdri . 


THE BOOK OF MARRIAGE 


171 


It is related from Jabir that he said, ‘ Abu Bakr came and 
asked permission of the Apostle of God to enter ; and he found 
other people sitting by his door, not one of whom was given 
permission.’ Jabir said, 4 Then Abu Bakr was given permission, 
and he entered. After that ‘Omar drew near and asked permi¬ 
ssion, and it was given him. And he found the Prophet sitting, 
sad and silent, with his wives around him. He said, “I shall 
certainly say something to make the Prophet laugh.” So he 
said, “ O Apostle of God, if thou couldst have seen Bint 
Kharijah asking me for money to spend, and I stood up to her 
and squeezed her neck ! ” Then the Apostle of God laughed 
and said, “ These women are around me, as thou seest, asking 
me for money to spend.” Then Abu Bakr rose up to ‘Ayesha 
(his daughter) and squeezed her neck ; and ‘Omar rose up to 
Hafsa (his daughter) and squeezed her neck. They both said, 
“ Dost thou ask of the Apostle of God what he has not got! ” 
They replied, “ By God! we never ask the Apostle of God for 
anything which he has not got.” After that the Prophet sepa¬ 
rated himself from them for a month or twenty-nine days. 
After that the verse came down, “O Prophet, say unto thy 
wives, 4 If ye seek this present life and the pomp thereof, come, 
and I will make a handsome provision for you, and I will dis¬ 
miss you with an honourable dismissal; but if ye seek God and 
His Apostle and the life to come, verily God hath prepared for 
such of you as work righteousness a great reward.’ ”* Jabir said, 
“He said this first to ‘Ayesha, and said, ‘O ‘Ayesha, I wish to 
bring a matter to thy notice, and I wish thee not to hurry in 
answering it until thou consult thy parents.’ She replied, 

4 And what is that, O Apostle of God ? ’ Then he recited to 
her the revelation. She said, * In regard to thee, O Apostle of 
God, must I consult my parents? Rather I choose God and 
His Apostle and the last home (in paradise). I ask thee not 
to inform any of thy wives of what thou hast said.’ He replied, 

1 None of my wives will ask me, but I will tell her of it. 
Verily God did not send me to cause people distress, but he 
sent me as a teacher and preacher of good tidings.’ ” ’— Muslim, 
It is related from ‘Ayesha that she said, 4 1 was reflecting on 
the women who had given themselves to the Apostle of God, 


Qu’ran, Suratu’l-Ahzab (xx*iii) 28, 


172 SELECTIONS FROM MUHAMMADAN TRADITIONS 

and I said, “ Does a woman give herself away ! ” Then when 
God Most High sent down (the revelation), “Thou mayest 
postpone the turn of such (of thy wives) as thou shalt please ; 
and thou mayest take unto thee her whom thou shalt please, 
and her whom thou shalt desire of those whom thou shalt have 
rejected ; and it shall be no crime in thee,” 1 I said, “ I do not 
see thy Lord except He hastens in (the fulfilment of) thy 
passionate desires.” *— Muslim , Al Bukhari . 

It is related from Abu Hurairah that, ‘ The Apostle of God 
said, “If I had ordered anyone to prostrate to another, I would 
certainly have ordered a woman to prostrate before her hus¬ 
band.” ’— At Tirmidhi . 

It is related from Hakim bin Mu‘awiyahu’l-Quthhairi, from 
his father, that he said, ‘1 said, “ O Apostle of God, what is the 
right of the wife of any one of 11 s from her husband?” He 
replied, “ That thou let her eat when thou eatest, and clothe her 
when thou clothest thyself; and that thou do not strike her 
face, or treat her with ignominy, or leave her, except in the 
house.” *— Ahmad , Abu Ddud. 

It is related from Iyas bin ‘Abdu’llah that, ‘ The Apostle of 
God said, “ Do not beat the female servants of God.” Then 
‘Omar came to the Apostle of God and said, “ The women are 
presuming over their husbands (in consequence of thy words.)” 
Then he gave permission to beat them. Then a large number 
of women assembled around the Apostle’s family complaining 
of their husbands. Then the Apostle of God said, “ Many 
women have collected around the family of Muhammad, com¬ 
plaining of their husbands. Those of you (who beat their 
wives) are not good.” ’— Abii Daud } Ibu Mdjah , Al Ddrimi . 

It is related from Jabir that, ‘The Apostle of God said, 
*“ There are three persons from whom prayer will not be 
accepted and for whom their good works will not be taken up 
(to God): a runaway slave until he returns to his masters and 
places his hand in theirs, a woman whose husband is angry 
with her, and a drunkard until he reforms.” *— Al Baihaqi . 

Concerning Divorce 

It is related from Ibn ‘Abbas that the wife of Thabit bin Qais 
came to the Prophet and said, “ O Apostle of God, I do not 


Qur’an, Suratu’l-Ahzab (xxxiii) 51. 


THE BOOK OF MARRIAGE 


173 


blame Thabit bin Qais with regard to his manners or his 
religion; but I am displeased with infidelity in Islam.” Then 
the Apostle of God said, “Wilt thou return his garden to 
Thabit? ” She replied, “Yes.” The Apostle of God said (to 
Thabit) “Take the garden, and divorce her with one divorce.” * 
—Al Bukhari\ 

It is related from ‘Ayesha that, ‘ The Prophet used to stay 
with Zainab bint Jahsh and drink honey with her. ThenHafsa 
and I determined together that to whomsoever of us the 
Prophet entered, she should say, “Verily I detect upon thee 
the smell of (the bad-smelling gum) maghaiir . Thou hast 
eaten maghdfir." After that he entered in to one of 
them, and she repeated that to him. He replied, “There is no 
harm ; I drank honey with Zainab bint Jahsh. I will never 
repeat it again. I have sworn. Tell no one of the matter.” 
(This he said) seeking to please his wives. Then came down 
(the revelation), “O Prophet, why holdest thou that to be 
prohibited, which God hath allowed thee, seeking to please thy 
wives ? ” ,l — Muslim , Al Bukhari. 

It is related from Ibn ‘Omar that, ‘ The Prophet said, 
“ The most hateful thing in the sight of God, of those things 
that are lawful, is divorce.” ’— Abii Ddud. 

It is related from Mahmud bin Labid that he said, * The 
Apostle of God was informed of a man who divorced his wife 
with three divorces all together. Then he arose in anger and 
after that said, “ Do ye play with the Book of God, the Exalted 
and Magnified, whilst I am still amongst you! ” till a man stood 
up and said, “ O Apostle of God, shall I kill him ? ” *— An Nasdi . 

On Mutual Cursing 

It is related from Ibn ‘Omar that, ‘The Prophet said to 
a man and his wife who had been called upon to swear (in 
a dispute) “Your account is with God. One of you is a liar.” 
(To the man he said) “Thou hast no claim over her.” He 
replied, “O Apostle of God (may I claim) my property?” 
He said, “There is no property for thee. If thou hast spoken 
the truth regarding her, then it is for the use thou hast had of 
her; and if thou hast lied, then it is still more remote from 
thee.” ’— Muslim , Al Bukhari. 

1 Qu’ran, Suratu’t-Tahrim (lxvi) 1. 


174 


SELECTIONS FROM MUHAMMADAN TRADITIONS 


It is related from ‘Ayesha that, ‘ The Apostle of God went 
out from her on a certain night. She said, “ And I was jealous 
of him ; and he came and saw what I was doing and said, 
‘ What is the matter with thee, O ‘Ayesha ; art thou jealous ? ’ ” 
I replied, “ What is the matter with me if such an one as I were 
not jealous of such an one as thee ? ” The Apostle of God said, 
“Thy Satan has certainly come to thee.” She said, “O 
Apostle of God, is there a Satan with me ? ” He said, “ Yes.” 
I said, “ And with thee, O Apostle of God ? ” He said, “ Yes, 
but God has aided me against him, so that I am safe.”’ — 
Muslim . 


Concerning the Period of Waiting for 
a Divorced Woman 

It is related from Abu Salamah from Fatimah bint Qais 
that, ‘Abu ‘Amru bin Hafs divorced her absolutely whilst he 
was absent. And his agent sent some barley to her ; and she 
was angry with him. Then he said, “By God! thou hast no 
claim upon us whatever.” And she came to the Apostle of 
God and mentioned the matter to him. He replied, “ There is 
no subsistence allowance for thee.” And he commanded her 
to spend her period of waiting in the house of Umm Shank. 
After that he said, “ That person is a woman whom my com¬ 
panions visit. Spend thy time of waiting with the son of Umm 
Makturn, for he is a blind man, and thou couldest take off thy 
clothes. Then when thy time has expired, inform me.” She 
said, “Then when the time had expired I mentioned to him 
that Mu‘awiya bin abu Sufyan and Abu’l-Jahm were seeking 
my hand in marriage.” He said, “ As for Abu’l-Jahm, he never 
lays down his stick from his shoulder (that is, he is a wife- 
beater), and as for Mu‘awiyah, he is a wretched beggar and 
has nothing. Marry Usamah bin Zaid.” But I disliked him. 
Again the Prophet said, “Marry Usamah.” Then I married 
him. And God has brought forth blessing out of it, and I have 
attained to a state of felicity.’ And in another tradition it 
runs, ‘ But as for Abu Jahm, he is a man who beats his 
wives.’— Muslim . And in another tradition it runs, ‘Verily 
her husband divorced her with a threefold divorce; and she 
came to the Prophet. And he said, “There is no subsistence 
allowance for thee, unless thou art pregnant,” 1 


THE BOOK OF MARRIAGE 


175 


It is related from Umm Salamah that she said, ‘ A woman 
came to the Prophet and said, “O Apostle of God, verily my 
daughter’s husband has died, and her eyes ache ; may she apply 
salve to them ? ” The Apostle of God said, “ No.” Twice or 
thrice (was he asked), and each time he said, “No.” After¬ 
wards he said, “ It is only four months and ten days, whereas 
in the times of ignorance one of you used to throw dung of 
animals (as a sign of the completion of the time of waiting) at 
the end of a year.” ’— Muslim , Al Bukhari . 

It is related from Umm Habibah and Zainab bint Jahsh 
that, * The Apostle of God said, “It is not lawful for a woman 
who believes in God and the last day to observe mourning for 
the dead more than three nights, except for her husband, which 
is four months and ten days.” * -l—Muslim, Al Bukhari . 

On Searching for the Signs of Pregnancy 
On Subsistence Allowances, and the Duty of Slaves 

It is related from ‘Ayesha that, ‘Hind bint ‘Utbah said, 
“ O Apostle of God, Abu Sufyan is a miserly fellow, and does 
not give me enough to suffice for me and my child, except 
what I take from him without his knowledge.” The Prophet 
said, “Take what will suffice for thee and thy child in a proper 
manner.” ’— Muslim , Al Bukhari . 

It is related from Abu Hurairah that, ‘ The Apostle of God 
said, “A slave has a right to his food and clothes; and he 
must not be distressed with work other than what he is able to 
perform.” ’— Muslim . 

It is related from Abu Dharr that, ‘ The Apostle of God 
said, “God has placed your brethren under your hands (as 
slaves); then let him, under whose hands God has placed his 
brother, feed him with what he eats himself, and clothe him 
with what he wears himself. And let him not give him distress 
by work which is too much for him. But if he does distress 
him with work which is too much for him, then let him help 
him.” ’— Muslim , Al Bukhdri . 

It is related from Abu Hurairah that he said, ‘ I heard the 
father of Qasim (i.e. Muhammad) say, “Whoever abuses his 
slave, when he is innocent of what he charges him with, will 
be scourged on the day of resurrection, unless it be as he has 
said.” 9 — Muslim , Al Bukhdri . 


176 


SELECTIONS PROM MUHAMMADAN TRADITIONS 


It is related from ‘Amru bin Shuaib, from his father, from 
his grandfather, that, ‘ A man came to the Prophet and said, 
“ Verily I have money, but my father is in need of my money.” 
He replied, “Thou and thy money belong to thy father. 
Verily your children are the best of your earnings. Eat of 
your children's earnings." Abu Ddud , Ibn Majah. 

It is related from Abu Bakr As $iddiq that, ‘The Prophet 
said, “The one who treats his slave badly will not enter 
paradise. ” ’— At Tirmidht , Ibn Mdjah . 

It is related from Abu Ayyub that he said, ‘ I heard the 
Apostle of God say, “ Whoever separates a mother and her 
child; God will separate him from his friends on the day of 
resurrection.” At Tirmidht , At Ddritni . 

It is related from ‘Abdu’llah bin ‘Omar that he said, 

‘ A man came to the Prophet and said, “ O Apostle of God, how 
often shall we forgive our servants ? ” But he remained silent. 
Afterwards he repeated the question, but he remained silent. 
Then when he asked the third time, he replied, “ Forgive him 
seventy times every day.” ’— Abu Ddud . 

It is related from Ibn ‘Abbas that, ‘ When the word of God 
Most High came down, “ Meddle not with the substance of the 
orphan, otherwise than for the improving thereof,” 1 and the 
word of God, “Surely they who devour the possessions of 
orphans unjustly shall swallow down nothing but fire into their 
bellies ”; 2 then the one who had an orphan living with him 
departed and separated his food from his own and his drink 
from his own. And when anything was left out from the 
food of the orphan, he kept it until the latter ate it or drank it, 
or it went bad. But that became distressing (to the orphans), 
and they mentioned it to the Apostle of God. Then God Most 
High sent down (the revelation), “ They will ask thee concern¬ 
ing orphans. Say, to deal righteously with them is best; and 
if ye mix your things with theirs, verily they are your 
brethren.” 3 Then they mixed their food with their own, and 
their drink with their own.'— Abu Ddud , An Nasdi. 

Qu’ran, SuratuTAn‘am (vi) 152. * Suratu’n-Nisa’ (iv) 10. 

Suratu’l-Baqara (ii) 219. 


THE BOOK OF MARRIAGE 


177 


Concerning the Young Arriving at Puberty, and 
on Their Up-bringing 

It is related from Ibn ‘Omar that he said, ‘I was brought 
before the Apostle of God in the year of (the battle of) Uhud, 
when I was fourteen years of age ; but he sent me back. After 
that I was presented to him in the year (of the battle) of the 
ditch, when I was fifteen years of age. Then he permitted me 
(to fight).' And ‘Omar bin ‘Abdu’l-Aziz said, 4 This (age) is 
the boundary between those who fight and children.'— Muslim , 
Al Bukhari . 

It is related from A1 Barai bin ‘Azib that he said, ‘The 
Prophet made peace on the day of Hudaibah on three con¬ 
ditions : that whoever came to him from the polytheists, he 
would send him back to them ; that whoever came to them 
from the Muslims, they would not send him back; and that he 
should enter Mecca the next year, and stay in it three days. 
Then when he entered it, and the time expired, he went out. 
And there followed him the daughter of Uamza, calling out, 
“O uncle, O uncle." And ‘AH stretched out his hand, and took 
her by the hand. And ‘AH and Zaid and Ja‘far disputed about 
her (as to who should become her guardian). ‘AH said, “ I took 
her because she is the daughter of my uncle." Ja‘far said, 
“She is the daughter of my uncle, and her aunt is my wife.” 
And Zaid said, “ She is the daughter of my brother." Then 
the Prophet passed judgement in favour of her mother's sister, 
and said, “A mother's sister is in the place of a mother." And 
he said to ‘AH, “ Thou belongest to me and I to thee." And he 
said to Ja‘far, “Thou dost resemble me in thy build and 
disposition." And he said to Zaid, “Thou art our brother and 
our friend." '— Muslim , Al Bukhari. . 


23 


XIV 


THE BOOK OF THE EMANCIPATION 
OF SLAVES 

It is related from Abu Hurairah that, 1 The Apostle of God 
said, “ Whoever emancipates a Muslim slave, God will emanci¬ 
pate every member of his body from the fire, in return for the 
members (of his slave).” ’— Muslim , Al Bukhari . 

It is related from ‘Amru bin ‘Abasah that, ‘ The Prophet 
said, “ Whoever builds a mosque in order that God may be 
remembered therein ; a house will be built for him in paradise. 
And whoever emancipates a person who is a Muslim, it will be 
his ransom from hell. And whoever grows grey in the way of 
God, it will be for him a light on the day of resurrection.” ’— 
In Sharhu s-Sunnah. 

On the Emancipation of a Slave Who is Jointly 

Owned 

It is related from ‘Imran bin IJu$ain that, ‘A man at his 
death freed six slaves which belonged to him. He had no other 
property besides them. Then the Apostle of God called them 
and divided them into three lots. After that 4ie cast lots 
amongst them and freed two of them and retained four in 
slavery. And he spoke severe words about the man.’— Muslim, 
And in another tradition from Nasai it runs, ‘ “ I certainly 
thought not to pray over him.” But he spake severe words of 
him instead/ And in another tradition from Abu Daud it runs, 
He said, “ Had I been present before he was buried, he would 
not have been buried in a Muslim cemetery/’ ’ 

It is related from Ibn ‘Abbas that, ‘ The Prophet said, “ If 
a female slave bears a son to her master, then she is free at 
his death or after it.” ’— Al Ddrimi . 

It is related from Jabir that he said, ‘ We used to sell the 
mothers of children in the time of the Apostle of God and in 
that of Abu Bakr ; but when ‘Omar (was KhalU) he forbade 
us doing it; therefore we brought the practice to an end/— 
Abu Ddud . 


THE BOOK OF THE EMANCIPATION OF SLAVES 


179 


Concerning Oaths and Vows 

It is related from Ibn ‘Omar that he said, ‘The oath which 
the Prophet used to use most was, “No, by the Turner of 
hearts! ” ’— Al Bukhdri . 

It is related from Ibn ‘Omar that, ‘ The Apostle of God 
said, “ Verily God has forbidden you to swear by your fathers, 
Whoever takes an oath, let him swear by God, or remain 
silent.” *— Muslim , Al Bukhari . 

It is related from ‘Imran bin Ilu$ain that, ‘ The Apostle of 
God said, “There is no performance of a vow requiring 
disobedience, or regarding anything which the servant does not 
own.” *— Muslim . 

It is related from Ibn ‘Abbas that he said, * Whilst the 
Prophet was making an address, behold! a man remained 
standing, and he asked about him. They replied, “ He is Abu 
Isra’il. He has vowed to stand, and to neither sit, nor go into 
the shade nor speak. And he has vowed to fast, and he is 
is fasting.” The Prophet said, “Order him to speak and go 
into the shade and sit down and end his fast.” Al Bukhdri\ 

It is related from Jabir bin ‘Abdu’llah that ‘ A man stood up 
on the day of the conquest of Mecca and said, “ O Apostle of God, 
verily I have vowed to God, the Exalted and Magnified, that 
if He gave thee conquest over Mecca, I would pray in two 
rak'ahs in Jerusalem.” The Prophet replied, “Pray here.” 
Then the man repeated what he had said. He replied, “ Pray 
here.” Then the man repeated his words- The Prophet said, 
“ Go your own way then ! ” 9 — Add Daud , Al Ddrimi . 

It is related from ‘Abdu’llah bin Malik that, ‘‘Uqbah bin 
‘Amir asked the Prophet about his sister who had vowed to 
perform the pilgrimage barefooted and unveiled. The Prophet 
said, “Order her to veil herself and ride, and to fast three 
days.” ’— Abu Daud , At Tirmidhi , An Nasdi , Ibn Majah . 

It is related from Muhammad binu’l-Muntashir that he 
said, ‘ Verily a man made a vow that if God saved him from his 
enemies, he would sacrifice himself. So he asked Ibn ‘Abbas 
about it. The latter said to him, “ Ask Masruq.” So he asked 
him. He replied, “ Do not sacrifice thyself, for if thou art a 
believer, then thou wilt kill a believer ; and if thou art an 
infidel, that will hasten thee to the fire. Therefore buy a ram 


180 SELECTIONS FROM MUHAMMADAN TRADITIONS 

and kill it for the poor ; for verily Isaac was better than thou, 
and he was ransomed by a ram.” Then he informed Ibn 
Abbas ; and he said, “ I wished to answer the question in this 
way.” *— Razin . 


XV 


THE BOOK OF RETALIATION 

It is related from A1 Miqdam binu’l-Aswad that he said, 

‘ O Apostle of God, tell me, if I meet a man who is an infidel, 
and we fight together, and he strikes one of my hands with a 
sword and cuts it off, and then takes refuge from me in a tree 
and says, “I become a Muslim,”—And in another tradition it 
runs, “And when I come down to kill him, he says, ‘ There is 
no God but Allah/—Should I kill him after he says that?” 
He replied, “ Do not kill him.” The man said, “ 0 Apostle of 
God, he has cut off one of my hands ! ” The Apostle of God 
said, u Do not kill him ; for if thou kill him, verily he was in 
the same rank as thyself (i.e., a believer) before thou killedst 
him, and then thou wilt be in the position he occupied before he 
uttered the words which he spoke.” ’— Muslim , AlBukhdri. 

It is related from Abu Hurairah that, ‘ The Apostle of God 
said, “ Whoever throws himself down from a mountain and 
kills himself is in the fire of hell, and he will be thrown into it, 
and will remain there for ever and ever. And whoever takes 
poison and kills himself, his poison will remain in his hand, and 
he will take it continually in the fire of hell, and he will remain 
therein for ever and ever. And whoever kills himself with 
any iron weapon, his weapon will remain in his hand, and he 
will continually stab himself in his belly in the fire of hell, and 
he will remain there for ever and ever.” ’— Muslim , Al Bukhdri . 

It is related from Anas that ‘a Jew pounded the head of a 
slave-girl between two stones. And it was said to her, “ Who 
did this to thee ? Was it so and so, or so and so ? ” until the 
Jew was named. Then she nodded her head. Then they 
brought the Jew, and he confessed. Then the Apostle of God 
gave orders concerning him ; and his head was pounded with a 
stone/— Muslim , Al Bukhdri . 

It is related from Anas that he said, ‘ Al Rubaiya, who was 
the aunt of Anas bin Malik, broke the front teeth.of a daughter 
of one of the Helpers. And they came to the Prophet ; and he 
ordered retaliation. Then Anas bin Na<?ar, the uncle of Anas 


182 SELECTIONS FROM MUHAMMADAN TRADITIONS 

bin Malik said, “ No by God! O Apostle of God, her front 
teeth shall not be broken.” The Apostle of God said, “ O 
Anas, the Book of God prescribes retaliation.” Then the 
parties came to an agreement, and they accepted money. Then 
the Apostle of God said, “Verily amongst the worshippers of 
God are some who, if they swear by God, He will certainly ful¬ 
fil it.” ’— Muslim , Al Bukhdri . 

It is related from Abu Juhaifah that he said, * I asked ‘All, 
“ Hast thou anything which is not in the Qur'an ? ” He replied, 
“By Him who cleft the grain and created man! We have 
nothing besides what is in the Qur’an, except understanding of 
what has been given in the Book of God, and what is in the 
volume.” I said, ‘‘And what is in the volume ? ” He replied, 
“ The rules regarding blood-money, and the emancipation of cap¬ 
tives, and that a Muslim should not be killed (in retaliation) for 
an infidel.” ’— Muslim , Al Bukhari . 

It is related from Abu Umamah bin Sahl bin Hunaif that, 

‘ ‘Othman bin ‘Affan looked down from a high place on the day 
of (the seige of) his house and said, “ I adjure you by God, 
whether you know that the Apostle of God said, ‘ The blood of 
a Muslim is not lawful except for one of three reasons: 
adultery after marriage with a chaste woman, or apostasy after 
Islam, or the murder of a soul which God has forbidden.’. Then 
for which of these are you killing me?.”’— At Tirmidht, An 
Nasdi , I bn Mdjalu 

It is related from Al Hasan from Samurah that, ‘The 
Apostle of God said, “Whoever kills his slave, we will kill 
him; and whoever mutilates his slave, we will mutilate 
him.”’— At Tirmidht , Abu Ddud , Ibn Mdjah. 

It is related from ‘Amru bin Shu’aib, from his father, from 
his grandfather, that, * The Apostle of God said, “ Whoever 
commits murder intentionally, he must be handed over to the 
relations of the murdered person. And if they wish, they may 
kill him ; and if they wish, they may take blood-money. And 
it is thirty camels in their fourth year, and thirty camels in 
their fifth year and forty camels with young. And it is for 
them to say which they will be reconciled with.” ’— At Tirmidht . 

It is related from Sa‘id binu’l-Musayyib that, ‘ ‘Omar 
binu’l-Khattab killed a party of five or seven men (in retab 


THE BOOK OF RETALIATION 


183 


iation) for one man whom they had treacherously murdered. 
‘Omar said, “If the people of $an‘a’ had attacked him, I 
would certainly have killed them all.” Malik . 

Concerning Various Kinds of Blood-Money 

It is related from ‘Amru bin Shu‘aib, from his father, 
from his grandfather, that he said, ‘ The price of blood-money 
in the time of the Apostle was eight hundred dinars or eight 
thousand dirhems; and the blood-money for the People of the 
Book was then half the blood-money of Muslims . 1 He said, 
‘And it remained thus until ‘ Omar became Khalil '. And he 
stood up and made a speech and said, “Verily camels have 
become very expensive.’' And he, ‘Omar, fixed the blood- 
money for the possessors of gold at one thousand dinars, and 
for the people who possessed silver at twelve thousand, 
and he fixed it for the people owning cattle at two hundred 
cows, and for those owning goats at two thousand goats ; 
and for those possessing clothes at two hundred garments. And 
he left the blood-money for Jews and Christians who were under 
the protection of Muslims (as it was). He did not raise it when 
he raised the blood-money.’— Abu Daud . 

It is related from ‘Amru bin Shu‘aib, from his father from 
his grandfather, that, ‘ The Apostle of God said, “ He who poses 
as a doctor when the science of medicine is not known to him, 
will be responsible.” ’— Abii Daud , A?i Nasai. 

Concerning Faults for which there is no 
Retaliation 

It is related from Abu Hurairah that, ‘ The Apostle of God 
said, “ Wounds from brute beasts, and from falling into mines, 
and from falling into wells do not entail responsibility (on the 
owner).” ’— Muslim , Al Bukhdri. 

It is related from Abu Hurairah that he said ‘ A man came 
and said, “ O Apostle of God, tell me, if a man comes and wishes 
to take my property, (what shall I do ?)” He replied, “ Do not 
give it to him.” He said, “ Tell me, if he fight me, (what shall 
I do?)” He replied, “ Fight him.” He said, “Tell me, if he 
kills me ?” He replied, “ Then thou art a martyr.” He said, 
“Tell me, if I kill him, (what then?)” He replied, “ He is in 
the fire.” ’— Muslim , Al Bukhdri . 


184 


SELECTIONS FROM MUHAMMADAN TRADITIONS 


It is related from Abu Hurairah that, 1 The Apostle of God 
said, “ When any one of you fights, then let him avoid the face; 
for verily God created Adam in His own likeness. ” *— Muslim . 

It is related from Sa’id bin Zaid that, ‘ The Apostle of God 
said, “ Whoever is killed in defence of his religion is a martyr ; 
and whoever is killed in defence of his own blood is a martyr ; 
and whoever is killed in defence of his property is a martyr; 
and whoever is killed in defence of his family is a martyr.” * 
—At Tirmidhi , Abu Ddud , An Nasdi . 

Concerning Oaths 

It is related from Rafi'a bin Khadij that he said, * A man 
of the Helpers was killed at Khaibar. Then his relations departed 
and came to the Prophet and mentioned the matter to him. He 
said, “ Have you two witnesses who are able to give evidence 
against the murderer of your friend?” They said, “O Apostle 
of God, there was no Muslim there, but only Jews ; and they 
venture to do much worse things than that.” He said, “ Choose 
fifty of them and make them swear.” But the Jews refused (to 
swear). Then the Apostle of God paid the blood-money him¬ 
self.’— Abu Ddud . 

On Killing Apostates and Those Who Hasten 
in Impiety 

It is related from ‘Ikrimah that he said, * Hypocrites were 
brought to ‘AH, and he burnt them. The news of that reached 
I bn ‘Abbas, and he said, “If it had been I, I would not have 
burnt them, because of the prohibition of the Apostle of God, 
“Do not punish with the punishment of God”; but I would 
certainly have killed them according to the word of the Apostle, 
“ Whosoever changes his religion, kill him.” ’— Al Bukhdru 

It is related from ‘All that he said, ‘ I heard the Apostle of 
God say, “ There will come forth a people at the end of time, 
young in age and foolish of vision, who will speak the best 
words in creation ; but their faith will not pass their throats. 
They will pass through religion as an arrow passes through the 
thing hit. Therefore, whenever ye meet them, kill them ; for 
verily for whoever kills them there is a reward on the day of 
resurrection.” ’— Muslim , Al Bukhdrt . 


THE BOOK OF RETALIATION 


185 


It is related from Anas that he said, 1 A band of men of 
the ‘Ukl tribe came to the Prophet and embraced Islam. But 
they fell ill at Madina, so the Prophet ordered them to go to the 
camels given in alms and drink their wine and milk. Then 
they did so and regained their health. After that they aposta¬ 
tized and killed the keepers of the camels and drove off the 
camels. Then (the Prophet) sent after them, and they were 
brought back. Then he cut off their hands and feet and put 
out their eyes. After that he did not staunch the bleeding 
until they died.’ And in another tradition it runs, ‘ He drove 
nails into their eyes.’ And in another tradition it runs, ‘He 
ordered nails, and they were made hot; and he pierced them 
with them. And he cast them out on to the stony plain. And 
they asked for a drink, but they were not given to drink, until 
they*died/— Muslim , Al Bukhari . 

It is related from Jarir bin ‘Abdu’llah that he said, ‘The 
Prophet sent an army to Khath‘am. And some of the people 
sought safety by prostrating (in Muslim prayer); but we hasten¬ 
ed their slaughter. Then news of the matter reached the 
Prophet, and he ordered on their behalf half the blood-money, 
and said, “ I am free from every Muslim who resides amongst 
polytheists. ,, They said, “O Apostle of God, why?” He 
replied, “ Let them not be able to see the fires of each other.” 
—Abu Ddud. 

It is related from ‘AH that ‘ A Jewess used to revile and 
insult the Prophet. Then a man strangled her until she died. 
And the Prophet annulled (payment for) her blood/— Abu 
Ddud . 

It is related from Jundub that, ‘The Apostle of God said, 
“ The punishment for a magician is killing by the sword.” ’— 
At Tirmidhi . 

It is related from Usamah bin Shank that, ‘ The Apostle 
of God said, “ Whatever man comes out to make divisions be¬ 
tween my followers, strike off his head.” '— An Nasdi. 


24 


XVI 


THE BOOK OF PUNISHMENTS 

It is related from Abu Hurairah and Zaid bin Khalid that, 
' Two men disputed before the Apostle of God. And one of 
them said, “ Judge between us by the Book of God.” And the 
other said, “Yes, 0 Apostle of God, judge between us by the 
Book of God, and give me permission to speak.” He replied, 
“ Say on.” He said, “ My son was a labourer with this man, 
and he committed adultery with his wife. And they told me 
that my son should be stoned. But I redeemed him therefrom 
by one hundred sheep and by a slave-girl which I had. After 
that I asked the learned, and they told me that my son must be 
given one hundred lashes, and must be banished the country for 
a year, and that stoning was only for this man’s wife.” The 
Apostle of God said, “ By Him in whose hand is my life ! I will 
certainly judge between you by the Book of God. As for thy 
sheep and thy slave-girl they must be returned to thee; and 
as for thy son, he must be given one hundred lashes and 
banished for a year. And as for thee, 0 Unais, come in the 
morning to this woman, and if she confesses, then stone her. 
Then she confessed, and they stoned her.” '—Muslim, Al 
Bukhdrt. 

It is related from ‘Omar that he said, ‘ Verily God sent 
Muljammad with truth, and He sent down on him the Book. 
And amongst what God Most High sent down was the verse 
of stoning. The Apostle of God stoned, and we stoned after him. 
And the stoning in the Book of God is proper for whoever 
commits adultery when married, whether men or women, when 
proofs are established, whether by pregnancy or confession.” ’ 
—Muslim, Al Bukhdrt, 

It is related from ‘Abdu’llah bin ‘Omar that some Jews 
came to the Apostle of God and told him that one of their men 
and a woman had committed adultery. The Apostle of God 
said to them, “ What do ye find in the Taurat in the matter of 
stoning ? ” They said, “ Their evil deeds are exposed, and' 


THE BOOK OF PUNISHMENTS 


187 


they are scourged/’ ‘Abdu’llah bin Salam said, “You lie! 
Verily in it is the command to stone.” Then they brought 
the Taurat and opened it out. But one of them placed his 
hand over the verse of stoning, and read what preceded it and 
what followed it. Then ‘Abdu’llah bin Salam said, “Lift up 
thy hand.” And he lifted it up, and behold in it wafc the verse 
of stoning. Then they said, “ He has spoken truly, O 
Muhammad, in it is the verse of stoning.” Then the Prophet 
gave orders concerning them both, and they were stoned.’— 
Muslim , Al Bukhari . 

It is related from'Amru bin Shu’aib, from his father, from his 
grandfather, ‘Abdu’llah bin ‘Amru binu’l-‘As that, 'The Apostle 
of God said, “ Remit punishments amongst yourselves ; for 
what reaches my knowledge, of (acts deserving) punishments, 
it is obligatory for me to carry them out.”’— Abu Ddud , An 
Nasdi. 

It is related from ‘Ayesha that she said, ‘When (the 
revelation containing) my exoneration (from the charge of 
adultery) came down, the Prophet stood up in the pulpit and 
repeated it. And when he came down from the pulpit he 
gave orders regarding the two men and the woman (who had 
accused me), and they were beaten according to the legal 
punishment.’— Abu Ddud . 

Concerning Amputation for Theft 

It is related from ‘Ayesha that, ‘The Prophet said, “The 
hand of a thief shall not be cut off, except for (theft of the 
value of) one-quarter of a dinar and over.” ’— Muslim , Al 
Bukhari . 

It is related from I bn ‘Omar that he said, ‘ The Prophet 
cut off a thief’s hand for (stealing) armour valued at three 
dirhams.’— Muslim , Al Bukhari . 

It is related from Abu Hurairah that, ‘ The Prophet said, 
“ God has cursed the thief who steals an egg, and his hand shall 
be cut off. And the hand of a thief who steals a rope shall be 
cut off.” ’— Muslim , Al Bukhari . 

It is related from Rafi‘ bin Khadij that, ‘The Prophet said, 
“ There is no amputation for (stealing) fruit or date-buds.” *— 
Malik* A l Tirin id hi, Abu Ddud , An Nasdi, 


188 SELECTIONS FROM MUHAMMADAN TRADITIONS 

It is related from Jabir that, ‘The Prophet said, “There 
is no amputation of the hand for one who betrays his trust or 
for taking from that which has been plundered, or for that 
which is snatched away clandestinely. ” 9 — At Tirmidhi , An 
Nasdi. And in the Sharhu’-s-Sunnah it is related that ‘$awfan 
bin Umayyah came to Madina and slept in the mosque. And he 
placed his cloak for a pillow ; and a thief came and took it. 
Then $afwan seized him and brought him to the Apostle of 
God. And he ordered that his hand should be cut off. Then 
Safwan said, “ Verily I did not desire this. I give it to him in 
alms.” But the Apostle of God said, “ Why didst thou not 
give it before thou broughtest him to me ! 

It is related from Abu Sal amah from Abu Hurairah that, 

‘ The Apostle of God said concerning the thief, “if he steal, 
cut off his hand.” After that, if he steal again, then cut off his 
foot. After that, if he steal again, cut off his other hand. After 
that, if he steal again, then cut off his other foot.” 1 — Sharhus - 
Sunnah. 

It is related from Jabir that he said, ‘A thief was brought 
to the Prophet, and he said, “ Cut off his hand.” And it was cut 
off. After that a second (thief) was brought to him, and he 
s aid, “ Cut off his hand.” And it was cutoff. Then a third was 
brought to him, and he said, “ Cut off his hand.” And it was cut 
off. After that a fourth was brought to him, and he said, “ Cut 
off his hand.” And it was done. Then a fifth was brought to 
him, and he said, “Kill him.” Then we took him away and 
killed him.” Afterwards we dragged him away and threw him 
into a well and cast stones upon him/— Abu Ddud, An Nasdi . 

It is related from Fatfalah bin ‘Ubaid that he said, ‘ A thief 
was brought to the Apostle of God ; and his hand was cut off. 
Then he gave orders regarding it, and it was hung on his neck/ 
—At Tirmidhi, Abu Ddud , An Nasdi , I bn Majah . 

On Intercession for Remission of Punishments 

It is related from ‘Ayesha that * The matter of a woman, 
whose nose was pierced for ornaments and who had stolen, had 
made the Quraish anxious. And they said, “ Who will speak 
to the Apostle of God on her behalf ? ” And they said, “ Who 
will dare to go to him but Usamah bin Zaid, the beloved of the 


THE BOOK OF PUNISHMENTS 


189 


Apostle of God.” Then Usamah spoke to him ; and the Apos¬ 
tle of God replied, “ Dost thou intercede in the matter of one 
of God’s punishments ? ” After that he stood up and gave an 
address and said, “ Those who lived before you were destroyed 
simply because, when any honourable person amongst them com¬ 
mitted theft, they used to let him off ; but when any insignificant 
one amongst them committed theft, they used to execute the full 
penalty of the law upon him. By God! Verily if Fatimah, the 
daughter of Muhammad, had committed theft, I would certainly 
have cut off her hand. ” *— Muslim , Al Bukhari . 

Concerning the Punishment for Drinking Intoxicants 
It is related from Anas that, ‘The Prophet of God beat one 
who drank wine with the branch of a palm-tree stripped of its 
leaves, and with shoes. And Abu Bakr scourged with forty 
stripes.’— Muslim , Al Bukhdri. And in another tradition from 
the same person it runs, ‘Verily the Prophet used to beat the 
one who drank wine, with forty blows of a shoe and a branch 
of a palm-tree stripped of its leaves.’ 

It is related from Ibn ‘Abbas that he said, ‘A man drank 
wine and became intoxicated. And he was met in the road 
staggering with unsteady gait, and he was taken to the Apostle 
of God. But when the man arrived opposite the house of 
‘Abbas he escaped and entered in to ‘Abbas and clung to him. 
Then the matter was mentioned to the Prophet. Then he 
laughed and said, “ Did he do that!” And he did not order 
anything concerning him.’— Abii Daud . 

Concerning What is not Allowed to be Said to 
Those Punished 

It is related from ‘AH that, ‘The Prophet said, ‘‘Whoever 
has violated the law, and his punishment is hastened in this 
world, then God is too just to repeat the punishment upon His 
servant a second time in the next world. And whoever 
violates the law, and God conceals it and forgives it, then He 
is too generous to return to anything which He has forgiven.’ — 
At Tirmidht , Ibn Mdjah . 

Concerning Punishments Undefined by Law 
It is related from ‘Abu Burdah bin Niyar that, The 
Prophet said, “A man shall not be scourged with more than 


190 


SELECTIONS FROM MUHAMMADAN TRADITIONS 


ten stripes, except in connexion with the punishments pre¬ 
scribed by God.” *— Muslim , Al Bukhari . 

It is related from Ibn ‘Abbas that, ‘The Prophet said, 
“When one man says to another, “ O Jew! ” then give him 
twenty stripes. And when he says, “O effeminate one!” 
then give him twenty stripes. “And whoever commits adultery 
with a forbidden woman, kill him.” '— At Tirmidhi . 

Concerning Intoxicants, and Threats to the 
Drinkers thereof 

It is related from Ibn ‘Omar that he said, ‘ Omar gave an 
address (standing) on the pulpit of the Apostle of God, and 
said, “Verily the revelation concerning the prohibition of 
intoxicants came down. And they are (produced) from five 
things: grapes, dates, wheat, barley and honey. And intoxi¬ 
cants are whatever affect the reason.” *— Al Bukhdri . 

It is related from Ibn ‘Omar that, ‘The Apostle of God 
said, “Everything which inebriates is an intoxicant; and 
every intoxicant is unlawful. And whoever drinks intoxicants 
in this world, and dies whilst still addicted to them, without 
repenting, will not drink them in the next world.” *— Muslim . 

It is related from Wa’ilu’l-Hadrami that, ‘Tariq bin 
Suwaid asked the Prophet concerning intoxicants. But he 
forbade them. Then Wa’il said, “I only make them as 
medicines.” He replied, “They are not medicine, but a 
disease.” ’— Muslim . 

It is related from Jabir that, ‘ The Apostle of God said, 
“ Even a little of what, when taken in quantity, produces in¬ 
toxication, is unlawful.” '— At Tirmidhi , Abu Ddud 5 Ibn Mdjah, 

It is related from Dailamu’l-Himyari that he said, ‘I said, 
“O Apostle of God, verily we live in a cold country, and we 
perform hard work therein; and we take wine with this wheat, 
and we are strengthened by it for our work and against the cold 
of our country.” He said, “Does it intoxicate?” I replied, 
“Yes.” He said, “Then avoid it.” I replied, “ The people 
will not give it up.” He said, “ If they do not give it up, 
then fight them.” *— Abu Ddud . 

It is related from ‘Abdu’llah bin ‘Omar that, ‘The Prophet 
forbade wine and lots and chess and (the liquor called) ghubaird. 
And he said, “ All intoxicants are unlawful.” *— Abu Ddud. 


THE BOOK OF PUNISHMENTS 


191 


It is related from ‘Abu Umamah that, 4 The Apostle of God 
Said, 44 Verily God Most High has sent me as a mercy to all the 
worlds, and as a guide to all the worlds. And my Lord, the 
Exalted and Glorious, has commanded me to do away with 
musical instruments and reed instruments and idols and crosses 
and the practices of the times of ignorance. Arid my Lord, 
the Exalted and Glorious, has sworn (saying) 44 By my 
Eminence! None of my servants shall drink a mouthful of 
wine, but I will make him drink pus like unto it. And none 
will forsake it out of fear of me, but I will give him to drink 
from the holy fountains (of paradise).” ’— Ahmad . 


XVII 


THE BOOK OF RULE AND JUDGEMENT 

It is related from Abu Hurairah that, ‘ The Apostle of God 
said, “ He who obeys me, has obeyed God ; and he who disobeys 
me, has disobeyed God. And whoever obeys the ruler, has 
obeyed me ; and whoever disobeys the ruler, has disobeyed me. 
And the ruler is only a shield behind whom men fight and 
through whom they are protected. Then if he orders the fear 
of God and just dealing, then verily he gains rewards thereby ; 
but if he says anything else, then on him will fall its penalty.” * 
— Muslim , Al Bukhdrt. 

It is related from Ummu'l-Husain that she said, ‘ The 
Apostle of God said, “If a mutilated slave be appointed over 
you as ruler, and he leads you according to the Book of God ; 
then give ear to him and obey him.” *— Muslim. 

It is related from Ibn ‘Abbas that, ‘ The Apostle of God 
said, “ Whoever sees in his ruler that which he dislikes; let 
him be patient. There is no one who divides a community by 
a span, and dies, but dies the death of one in the time of 
ignorance.” ’ — Muslim , Al Bukhdrt. 

It is related from ‘Awf bin Maliku’l-Ashjai that, ‘ The 
Apostle of God said, “ The best of your rulers are those whom 
ye love, and who love you ; and for whom ye pray, and who 
pray for you. And the worst of your rulers are those whom 
ye hate, and who hate you ; and whom ye curse, and who curse 
you.” ‘Awf said, “ We replied, ‘ O Apostle of God, under such 
circumstances should we not repudiate them ? ' He said, ‘ No, 
so long as they keep the observance of the prayers amongst 
you. No, so long as they keep the observance of the prayers 
amongst you. Beware ! whoever has a ruler placed over him, 
and sees him do something contrary to the law of God ; let him 
feel displeasure at what he does contrary to the law of God, but 
let him not withdraw a hand from obeying him/ ” ’— Muslim. 

It is related from Abu Hurairah that, ‘ The Prophet said, 
“The rulers of the Children of Israel were the Prophets. 


THE BOOK OP RULE AND JUDGEMENT 


m 


Whenever a Prophet died, another Prophet succeeded him; 
but there is no Prophet after me. But there will be Khaltfs , 
and they will be many.’' They said, “Then what dost thou 
order us?” He replied, “Give allegiance to the first and to 
the first (after him), and give them their rights, for verily God 
will ask them for an account of the souls over whom they have 
been appointed/* *— Muslim , Al Bukhari . 

It is related from ‘Abdu'llah bin ‘Omar that, ‘ The Apostle 
of God said, “Beware! Ye are all rulers, and ye will be all 
asked concerning your subjects. The Imdm who is placed as a 
ruler over men will be asked concerning his subjects ; and the 
man who is a ruler over his household will be asked concerning 
his subjects ; and the woman who rules over the house of her 
husband and his children will be asked about them; and a 
man's servant who is the keeper of his master's goods will be 
asked about them. Beware ! every one of you is a ruler, and 
every one of you will be asked concerning the things committed 
to his charge.” '— Muslim , Al Bukhari . 

It is related from Abu Bakr that he said, ‘ When news 
reached the Apostle of God that the people of Persia had madq 
a daughter of Kisra, queen over them, he said, “The people 
who make a woman their ruler will never prosper.”'— Al 
Bukh&ri . 

It is related from Abu Sa‘id that, ‘The Apostle of God 
said, “ The most beloved of men in the sight of God at the 
day of resurrection, and the one of them who will sit nearest to 
Him will be a just ruler: And the most hated of men in the 
sight of God on the day of resurrection and the one who will 
receive the severest punishment.”—And in another tradition it 
runs, “ The one who will sit farthest from him,”—will be a 
tyrannical ruler.” *— At Tirmidhi . 

It is related from Ibn ‘Omar that, ‘ The Prophet said, 
“ Verily the king is the shadow of God on earth. Every 
oppressed person from amongst his servants turns to him; and 
when he dispenses justice, then he receives a reward, and 
thanks are due from his subjects. But when he oppresses 
them, then on him lies the guilt, and the duty of his subjects is 
patience.” ' 


?5 


194 


SELHCTIONS FROM MUHAMMADAN TRADITIONS 


On the Duty of Rulers in the Matter of Clemency 

It is related from ‘Omar binu’l-Khattab that c When he used 
to send out his officers, he laid these conditions upon them. 
“ Do not ride on Turki horses, and do not eat flour, nor clothe 
yourselves in fine clothes. And do not close your doors at the 
time of the peoples’ needs. And if ye do anything of that, then 
punishment will be due to you.” After that he would bid fare¬ 
well to them.’— Al Baihaqi. 

On Acting in Judicial Affairs 

It is related from Abu Bakr that he said, ‘ I heard the 
Apostle of God say, “A judge must never judge between two 
litigants when he is angry.” ’— Muslim , Al Bukhdru 

It is related from Mu‘adh bin Jabal that, ‘When the 
Apostle of God sent him to Yeman he said, ‘‘How wilt thou 
execute judgement when a case for trial comes before thee ? ” 
He replied, ‘‘I will judge by the Book of God.” He said, ‘‘And 
if thou do not find (a judgement) in the Book of God ? ” He 
replied, “ Then (I will judge) according to the customary 
practice of the Apostle of God.” He said, ‘‘And if thou do 
not find (a similar case) in the customary practice of the 
Apostle of God ? ” He replied, “ I will do my best according 
to my own judgement and will not slacken effort.” ’ (Mu‘adh) 
said, 1 Then the Apostle of God smote upon his breast, and 
said, “ Praise be to God who has caused the messenger of the 
Apostle of God to agree with what the Apostle of God likes.” ’ 
—At Tirmid/u , Abu Daud . 

It is related from Sa‘id binu’l-Musayyib that, ‘ Verily a 
Muslim and a Jew disputed together before ‘Omar. And he 
saw that the right was with the Jew and gave judgement in his 
favour. Then the Jew said to him “ By God! thou hast certainly 
given judgement according to justice.” Then ‘Omar tapped 
him on the breast and said, “ Who told thee that ? ” The Jew 
replied, ‘‘ By God ! I have found in the Taurat that there is no 
judge who judges justly, but one angel stays on his right-hand 
and one on his left, who direct him and bring him into conform¬ 
ity with justice so long as he judges justly. But when he 
forsakes justice, then they rise up and leave him.” ’— Mdlik . 


THE BOOK OF RULE AND JUDGEMENT 


195 


On the Allowances and Presents of Rulers 

It is related from Khawlah, the Helper, that she said, 

* The Apostle of God said, 44 Verily there are men who unjustly 
appropriate part of God’s money. For them will be the fire on 
the day of resurrection.” *— Al Bukhdri . 

It is related from 4 Abdu’llah bin ‘Amr. that he said , 1 The 
Apostle of God cursed the giver of a bribe and the taker of it/ 
—Abu Ddud , Ibn Majah. 

On Judgements and Evidence 

It is related from Ibn ‘Abbas that, 4 The Prophet said, 
44 If men were given according to their claims, they would 
certainly lay claim to the blood of men as well as their pro¬ 
perty ; but an oath is incumbent upon the defendant.” ’— 
Muslim . 

It is related from Umm ^alamah that, 4 The Apostle of God 
said, 44 I am only a man, and ye dispute with one another before 
me. And it may be that some of you are cleverer in (present¬ 
ing) his proofs than others, and I give judgement in his favour 
according to what I hear from him. Then ye in whose favour I 
give judgement concerning any of the rights of his brother, let 
him not take it; for I only cut off for him a piece of the fire.” * 
— Muslim , Al Bukhdri . 

It is related from ‘Amru bin Shu‘aib from his father, from 
his grandfather, that, ‘ The Prophet said, 44 It is incumbent on 
the plaintiff to produce proofs ; and the defendant must take an 
oath.” *— At Tirmidhi . 

It is related from Abu Musaii 1-Ash‘ari that, 4 Two men 
laid claim to a camel in the time of the Apostle of God. And 
each one of them produced two witnesses. Then the Prophet 
divided it into two halves between the two of them.’ And in 
another tradition from An Nasai, Abu Daud and Ibn Majah it 
runs, 4 Two men laid claim to a camel, and neither of them had 
any proof; so the Prophet allotted it between the two of 
them.’ 

It is related from Al Ash 4 ath bin Qais that he said, 4 There 
was a piece of land in the joint ownership of a man of the Jews 
and myself; and he denied me my right. Then I took him to 
the Prophet. And the latter said, 44 Hast thou any proof ? ” I 


196. SELECTIONS FROM MUHAMMADAN TRADITIONS 

said, “ No.” He said to the Jew, “ Take thine oath.” I said, 
“ O Apostle of God, then he will swear and take away my pro¬ 
perty.” Then God Most High sent down (the revelation) 
‘ Verily those who sell God’s covenant and their oaths for a 
small price, they shall suffer a grievous punishment. 1 ” ’—Abd 
Ddud y I bn Mdjah. 

It is related from Khuraim bin Fatik that he said, 1 The 
Apostle of God prayed the morning prayer, and when he had 
finished he stood up and said, ” False evidence has been made 
equal to associating anything with God.” After that he recited 
(the verse),” Abstain from the pollution of idols, and abstain 
from falsehood, whilst inclining to God, and not associating any¬ 
thing with Him.” 2 

1 Qur’an, Suratu All ‘Imran (iii) 76. 

* Qur’an, Suratu’1-Hajj (xxii) 30. 


•XVIII 


THE BOOK OF RELIGIOUS WAR 

(JEHAD) 

It is related from Abu Hurairah that, ‘ The Apostle of God 
said, ‘‘By Him in whose hands is my life! If it were not that 
some of the men of the believers would be unhappy because 
they were separated from me, owing to the fact that I have not 
beasts upon which to mount them, I would never absent myself 
from the battle which they fight in the way of God. And by 
Hitn in whose hands in my life! I would certainly love to be 
killed in the way of God, and then brought to life, and then 
killed, and then brought to life, and then killed, and then brought 
to life. *— Muslim , Al Bukh&ri. 

It is related from Salmanu’l-Farsi that he said, ‘ I heard the 
Apostle of God say, “ To keep guard one day and one night in 
the way of God is better than a month’s fast and remaining 
awake at night therein. Then if he dies, (the rewards of) his 
actions which he used to perform flow to him, and his susten¬ 
ance is appointed for him, and he becomes safe from the 
seducer.” * — Muslim, 

It is related from Zaid bin Khalid that, ‘The Apostle of 
God said, “He who equips a warrior in the way of God, has 
fought himself; and he who takes the place of a warrior in 
his family, has fought himself.” ’— Muslim , Al Rukh&ru 

It is related from Jabir bin Samurah that; ‘ The Apostle 
of God said, “This religion will never cease to be in force. A 
band of Muslims will fight for it until the day of resurrection.” * 
— Muslim . 

It is related from Anas that, ‘ The Apostle of God said, 
“There is no one who enters paradise and wishes to return to 
the earth and what he possessed there, except the martyr who 
longs to return to the earth and be killed ten times by reason of 
what he sees of the liberal rewards.” ’— Muslim , Al Bukhdrt: 

It is related from Sahl bin punaif that, ‘ The Apostle of 
God said, “ Whoever supplicates God in truth for martyrdom, 


198 


SELECTIONS FROM MUHAMMADAN TKADITIONS 


God will bring to him the honour of martyrs, although he die 
upon his bed.” *— Muslim . 

It is related from Anas that he said, ‘The Apostle of 
God and his companions went on until they drew near to the 
polytheists at Bedr. And the polytheists advanced. And the 
Apostle of God said, “Rise up to paradise, the breadth of 
which is equal to the heavens and the earth.** Then ‘Umair 
binu’l-IJumam said, “Good! good! ” The Apostle of God 
said, “What led thee to say, Good! good! ** He replied, “By 
God! O Apostle of God, nothing but the hope that I might be 
amongst its people/’ He said, “Verily thou art amongst its 
people.” Anas said, ‘Then ‘Umair took out some dates from 
his horn and began to eat some of them. After that he said, 
“ If I live until I eat my dates, it will certainly be a long life.” 
Then he threw away what dates remained with him, and 
fought them until he was killed.*— Muslim . * 

It is related from ‘Imran bin Husain that, ‘The Apostle 
of God said, “A band of my people will continue to fight for 
the truth, and will overcome those that oppose them, until the 
last of them fights with the false Messiah.” ’— Abii Baud. 

It is related from Ibn ‘Abbas that, ‘The Apostle of God 
said, “ There are two eyes which the fire will not touch : the 
eye which weeps from fear of God, and the eye which remains 
awake keeping watch in the way of God.” At Tirmidhi . 

It is related from Abu Miqdam bin Ma‘dikarib that, ‘The 
Apostle of God said, “ The martyr has six privileges near God: 
he is forgiven his sins on (the shedding of) the first drop of 
blood, he is shown his resting-place in paradise, he is redeemed 
from the punishment of the grave, he is made secure from the 
great fear (of hell) and a crown of glory is placed on his head, 
one ruby of which is better than the world and all that is 
therein, and he will marry seventy-two wives of the huris 
with black eyes, and his intercession will be accepted for 
seventy of his relations.” *— Tirmidhi , Ibii Mdjah . 

It is related from ‘Abdu’llah bin ‘Omar that, ‘ The Apostle 
of God said, “ Do not ride on the sea except as a pilgrim, or as 
the performer of the lesser pilgrimage, or as a warrior in the 
way of God; for verily under the sea is a fire, and under the 
fire is a sea.*’ *— Abu Ddud . 


THE BOOK OF RELIGIOUS WAR 


199 


It is related from Umm IJaram that, ‘The Prophet said, 
“The traveller of the sea who is afflicted with vomiting will 
get the reward of a martyr, and the one who is drowned will 
receive the rewards of two martyrs.’’ ’— Abu Ddud . 

It is related from Abu Umamah that he said, ‘ We went out 
with the Apostle of God on a warlike expedition. And a man 
passed by a cavern in which were some water and some herbs. 
And he said to himself that he would stay therein and separate 
himself from the world. So he asked permission of the 
Apostle of God in the matter. The Apostle of God replied, 
“ I have not been sent with the Jewish religion or the Christian 
religion; but I have been sent with the Hanif religion, the 
easy one. By Him in whose hands is the life of Muhammad! 
the marching about in the early morning in the way of God is 
certainly better than the world and all that is therein. And 
the standing of one of you in the line of battle is better than 
his prayers for sixty years.” ’— Ahmad . 

It is related from Abu Musa that, ‘ The Apostle of God 
said, “ Verily the doors of paradise are under the shade of 
swords.” Then a man with worn-out clothes stood up and said, 
“O Abu Musa, didst thou hear the Apostle of God say this?” 
He replied, “Yes.”. Then the man returned to his companions 
and said, “I give you my salutations.” Then he broke the 
scabbard of his sword and threw it away, and then went with 
his sword towards the enemy and smote with it until he was 
killed.'— Muslim . 

It is related from IJasna’ bint Mu‘awiyah that she said, 
*My uncle said to us, “I said to the Prophet, Who is in 
paradise?” He replied, “A prophet is in paradise, and, 
a martyr is in paradise, and a new-born child is in paradise, 
and one buried alive is in paradise.” ’— Abd Ddud . 

It is related from Ibn‘Ayid that he said, ‘ The Apostle of 
God went out to attend the funeral of a certain man. And 
when he was placed (in the grave) ‘Omar binu’l-Khattab said, 
“O Apostle of God, do not pray over him, for verily he was 
a wioked man.” Then the Apostle of God turned to the people 
and said, “ Has any one of you seen him engaged in any work 
of Islam ? ” A man replied, “ Yes, O Apostle of God, he kept 
watch one night in the way of God.” Then the Apostle of God 


200 SELECTIONS FROM MUHAMMADAN TRADITIONS 

prayed over him and threw earth on him and said, “Thy 
companions imagine that thou art amongst the people of the 
fire; but I bear witness that thou art amongst the people of 
paradise.” And he said, “ O ‘Omar, verily thou wilt not be asked 
concerning the actions of men, but will be asked concerning 
their natural religion.” ’— Al Baihaqi. 

On Preparing Weapons of War 

It is related from Anas that he said, * Abu Talba used to 
defend himself and the Prophet with one shield. And Abu 
Talha was expert with the bow ; and when he used to shoot 
arrows, the Prophet would rise up and look towards the place 
(where he shot) his arrows.’— Al Bukhari. 

It is related from Abu Najihu’s-Sulahi that he said, ‘I 
heard the Apostle of God say, “ Whoever reaches the mark 
with an arrow in the way of God, it becomes for him high rank 
in paradise ; and whoever shoots an arrow in the way of God, 
it becomes for him equal to the emancipation of a slave ; and 
whoever grows old in the way of God, it will be for him a light 
on the day of resurrection.” ’— Al Baihaqi. 

It is related from Uqbah bin ‘abd Sulahi that he heard the 
Apostle of God say, ‘ Do not cut the forelocks of horses, or 
their manes, or their tails. For verily their tails keep off flies, 
and their manes keep them warm, and blessings are bound up 
in their forelocks.’— Abu Ddud. 

It is related from As Saib bin Yazid that, * There were two 
coats of mail on the Prophet on the day of (the battle of) 
Uhud. He wore one on top of the other.’— Abu Daud> I bn 
Mdjah. 

It is related from Anas that he said, ‘There was nothing 
more beloved of the Apostle of God after women than 
horses.’— An Nasai . 

Concerning the Rules of Travelling 

It is related from Ka‘b bin Malik that, * The Prophet went 
out to the battle of Tabuk on a Thursday ; and he used to like 
to go out on Thursdays.’— Al Bukhdri. 

It is related from Abu Hurairah that, ‘ The Apostle of God 
said, ‘‘The angels do not accompany that party in which is a 
dog or a bell.” ’— Muslim. 


THE BOOK OF RELIGIOUS WAR 201 

It is related from Abu Hurairah that, ‘ The Apostle of God 
said, “ The bell is Satan’s musical instrument/’ '— Muslim . 

It is related from ‘Abdu’llah bin Ja‘far that he said, 

‘ When the Apostle of God used to arrive from a journey, he 
used to be met by the children of the people of his house. 
And he arrived from a certain journey, and I was brought to 
him first, and he carried me in front of him (on his beast), after 
that one of the sons of Fafimah was brought; and he mounted 
him behind him.’ Abdu’llah said, ‘ Then he took us into 
Madina : three of us on the one beast.’— Muslim. 

It is related from Jabir that he said, ‘ The Apostle of God 
used to keep in the rear of a marching army, and help on the 
weak, and take them up behind him (on his beast); and he used 
to pray for them .’—Abu Dated, 

4 It is related from ‘Abdu’llah bin Ma'sud that he said, ‘On 
the day of (the battle of) Bedr, we were every three of us on 
one camel. And Abu Lubabah and ‘AH bin abu Talib and the 
Apostle of God were together. And when the turn of the 
Prophet came (to dismount and walk) we said, “ We will walk 
instead of thee.” He replied, ‘‘You are no stronger than I; 
nor am I more independent of rewards than you.” ’ 

Concerning Letters to Infidels and Inviting them 

to IslAm. 

It is related from Ibn ‘Abbas that, ‘ The Prophet wrote to 
the (Roman) Emperor, inviting him to Islam, and he sent the 
letter to him by Dihyahu’l-Kalbi, and commanded him to deliver 
it to the Governor of Busrah to hand over to the Emperor. 
And in it (was written) “ In the name of God the Merciful, the 
Compassionate. From Muhammad the servant of God and His 
Apostle to Heraclius the Ruler of the Roman Empire. Peace 
be on whoever follows the guidance. After this I invite thee 
with the invitation of Islam. Embrace Islam, and thou wilt be 
safe. Embrace Islam, and God will give thee thy reward twice 
over. But if thou turn away, then on thee will be the sin of 
thy subjects. O people of the Book, come to a doctrine equal 
between us and you, namely that ye do not worship any except 
God, and do not associate anything with Him ; and that some 
of us take not others as lords besides God. But if ye turn 

26 


202 SELECTIONS FROM MUHAMMADAN TRADITIONS 

away, then say, O believers, I bear witness that we are 
Muslims ." 9 — Muslim, Al Bukhdri . 

It is related from Ibn ‘Abbas that, ‘The Apostle of God 
sent a letter to Kisra (King of Persia) with ‘Abdu’llah bin Hudha- 
fahu's-Sahimi, and commanded him to deliver it to the 
Governor of Bahrain. And the Governor of Bahrain handed 
it over to Kisra. And when the latter read it, he tore it in 
pieces.’ Ibnu’l-Musayyib said, ‘Then the Apostle of God 
invoked a curse upon them (saying) “May they be torn into 
pieces ! M ’—Al Bukhdri . 

It is related from Sulaiman bin Buraidah, from his father, 
that he said, ‘ When the Apostle of God appointed a leader 
over any army or marauding band, he was in the habit of giving 
him orders regarding his special duties concerning the fear of 
God and good behaviour towards those Muslims who were with 
him. After that he would say, “ Go forth to war in the name 
of God in His road : fight with those who disbelieve in God. 
Go forth to war. Do not use deceit or break a covenant, or 
mutilate, or kill children. And when thou meetest thine enemy 
of the polytheists, then invite them to three things: the rights 
and privileges of Islam or defeat. Then whichever of the 
three they give an affirmative answer to, accept it from them 
and withdraw from them. After that invite them to Islam ; 
and if they give an affirmative answer to thee, then accept it 
from them and withdraw from them. After that invite them to 
remove themselves from their homes to the homes of the 
refugees, and inform them that if they do that, then for them is 
what is given to the refugees ; and their duties are the same 
as those of the refugees. But if they refuse to change 
from their homes, then inform them that they will remain as 
the desert Arabs who have embraced Islam. The commands 
of God will be obligatory upon them which are obligatory upon 
other believers; but they will get nothing of the plunder and 
spoils unless they go to fight along with the other Muslims. 
But if they refuse (to become Muslims) then ask from them 
the poll-tax. And if they answer thee in the affirmative, then 
accept it from them, and withdraw from them. But if they 
refuse (to pay), then seek help from God and fight them. And 
when thou besiege the people of a fortress, and they express 


THE BOOK OF RELIGIOUS WAR 


203 


a desire to thee that thou give them a pledge of security from 
God and His Prophet; then do not give them a pledge of 
security from God and His Prophet, but give them thine own 
pledge and the pledge of thy companions ; for if ye violate 
your pledge and the pledge of your companions, it will be 
easier than if ye violate the pledge of God and the pledge of 
His Apostle. And if thou besiege the people in a fortress, and 
they express to thee a desire that thou bring them down on the 
condition that they agree to the orders of God; then do not 
bring them down on the orders of God, but bring them down on 
(the condition that they agree to) thy orders; for verily thou 
dost not know whether thou wilt receive the orders of God 
regarding them or not.” ’— Muslim. 

It is related from Anas that, ‘ When the Prophet went with 
us £o fight any people, he would not fight with us until the 
dawn broke. And he would look towards them, and if he heard 
the call to prayer he would withdraw from them, but if he did 
not hear the call to prayer, he would attack them.’ Anas said, 
1 And we went out to Khaibar, and we reached them at night* 
Then when it dawned, and he did not hear the call to prayer, he 
mounted, and I mounted behind Abu Talha, and verily my 
feet touched the feet of the Prophet of God. And they came 
out towards us with their bags (for dates) and their instruments 
for irrigation. And when they saw the Prophet they said, 
“ Muhammad, by God! Muhammad and the army ! ” And they 
took refuge in the fortress. And when the Apostle of God saw 
them he said, “ God is great! God is great! Khaibar is 
ruined! Verily when we come down on the land of any tribe, 
then bad is the morning of those who have been warned.” ’— 
Muslim, Al Bukhari . 

It is related from Abu Wai’l that he said, ‘ Khalid binu’l- 
Walid wrote to the people of Persia: “In the name of God 
the Merciful, the Compassionate, Khalid binu’l-Walid to Rustam 
and Mihran the chiefs of Persia. Peace be to him who follows 
the guidance. After that we invite you to Islam; and if ye 
refuse, then give the poll-tax out of hand so that ye be rendered 
contemptible. But if ye refuse, then with me is a people who 
love death in the way of God, even as the Persians love wine. 
Then peace be on him who follows the guidance.” *—Sharhu s- 
Sunnah . 


204 SELECTIONS FROM MUHAMMADAN TRADITIONS 

On Fighting in Religious War 

It is related from Anas that he said, 4 The Apostle of God 
used to go to war taking with him Umm Sulaim and some 
women of the helpers. When he fought they would give water 
to drink and administer medicine to the wounded.’— Muslim . 

It is related from ‘Abdu’llah bin ‘Omar that he said, ‘ The 
Apostle of God forbade the killing of women and children.’— 
Muslim , Al Bukhdri . 

It is related from Ibn ‘Omar that, ‘ The Apostle of God 
cut down the date-trees of the Baniu’n-Nadir and burnt them. 
And in regard to this Husain said, “And the burning in Al 
Buwairah was easy for the leaders of the Bani Luwai. ’ And 
in regard to it the revelation came down, “What palm-trees 
ye cut down, or left standing on their roots, was by the 
permission of God.” n — Muslim , Al Bukhari . 

It is related from ‘Abdu’llah bin Awn that Nafi‘ wrote to 
him and informed him that Ibn ‘Omar informed him that, ‘The 
Prophet made a raid on the Baniu’l-Mustaliq in Muraisi when 
they were off their guard. And he killed those able to fight, 
and took into captivity those who were dependant upon them.’ 
— Muslim , Al Bukhari. 

It is related from Al Muhallab that, ‘The Apostle of God 
said, “ If the enemy make a night attack upon you, then let 
your watchward be ‘ By (the symbol) H.M., they’ll win ! ’ ” ’— 
At Tirmidhi . 

It is related from ‘Urwah that he said, 4 ‘Usamah related 
to me that the Apostle of God gave him a charge and said, 
“Attack Ubna at dawn, and burn it down.” ’— Abu Ddud. 

It is related from Thawban bin Yazid that, ‘The Prophet 
fixed up a catapult against the people of Taif ’— At Tirmidhi . 

On Orders regarding Prisoners 

It is related from Salamah binu’l-Akwa* that he said, 
‘A spy of the polytheists came to the Prophet when he was on 
a journey, and sat down near his companions and engaged in 
conversation. Afterwards he departed ; and the Prophet said, 
“ Search him out and kill him.” And I killed him, and the 


Qur’an, Suratu’l-Hashr (lix) 5. 


THE BOOK OF RELIGIOUS WAR 205 

Prophet made me a present of the man’s things.’— Muslim , Al 
Bukhari . 

It is related from Abu Sa‘idu’l-Khudri that he said, ‘ When 
the Bani Quraizah came down (from their fortress), agreeing 
to abide by the orders of Sa‘d bin Mu‘adh, the Apostle of God 
sent to the latter, and he came on an ass. And when he drew 
near, the Apostle of God said, “ Stand up to your master.” 
And he came and sat down. And the Apostle of God said, 
“ Verily these have come down (in capitulation) stipulating to 
abide by thy orders.” He replied, “ Verily, I give orders that 
those able to fight be killed, and their dependants taken into 
captivity.” The Prophet said, “Thou hast certainly ordered 
concerning them in conformity with the orders of the angel 
(Gabriel).” And in another tradition it runs, “ In conformity, 
with the orders of God.” ’— Muslim , Al Bukhari . 

It is related from Qatadah that he said, ‘ Anas men¬ 
tioned to us from Abu Talha that the Prophet gave orders on 
the day (of the battle) of Bedr concerning twenty-four who 
were leaders of the Quraish, and they were thrown into one of 
the wells of Bedr which was corrupted and corrupting. And 
when he conquered any tribe, he used to remain in the place 
conquered for three nights ; so when the third day arrived at 
Bedr he gave orders for his camel to be brought, and its saddle 
was placed on it. After that he went off, and his companions 
followed him, until he stood on the brink of the well. And he 
began to call (the dead men) by their names and the names of 
their fathers ; “O such-and-such a one, son of so-and-so, has it 
pleased you that ye obeyed God and His messenger? Verily we 
have received in truth what our Lord promised us. Have ye 
received in truth what your Lord promised you ? ” Then ‘Omar 
said, ” O Apostle of God, what art thou saying to bodies which 
have no souls! ” The Prophet replied, “ By Him in whose 
hand is the life of Muhammad ! Ye do not hear what I say 
better than they do.” And in another tradition it runs, “ Ye do 
not hear better than they do; but they do not answer.” ’— 
Muslim , Al Buklidri . 

It is related from ‘Ayesha that she said, ‘ When the people 
of Mecca sent ransoms for those of their number taken prison¬ 
ers (at Bedr), Zainab sent in ransom for Abdu’l~‘A§ some money 


206 


SELECTIONS FROM MUHAMMADAN TRADITIONS 


and she sent with it a necklace of hers which had belonged to 
Khadijah, which she put in with the money for AbuVA?. Then 
when the Apostle of God saw it, he was touched with a great 
compassion for her, and said (to his companions), “If ye think 
it right to release her captive for her, and return to her her 
ransom (it will be better).” They replied, “ Yes.” And the 
Prophet took a promise from Abu'l-As that he would leave a 
way open for Zainab to come to him. And the Apostle of God 
sent Zaid bin IJarith and a man of the Helpers and said, “ Re¬ 
main in Batu Yajij until Zainab comes to you ; and then accom¬ 
pany her until ye bring her here.” Ahmad , Abu Ddud . 

It is related from Ibn Ma‘sud that, ‘ When the Apostle of 
God wished to kill ‘Uqbali bin Abi Mu‘ait (after the battle of 
Bedr), the latter said, “Who will (care for my) children?” 
He replied, “ The fire.” ’ - Abii Ddud . 

It is related from ‘All from the Apostle of God that, “ Gab¬ 
riel came down to him and said to him, “ Give them (the com¬ 
panions of the Prophet) a choice regarding the captives of 
Bedr : either death, or ransom on this condition, that in the 
following year a number of you equal in number to those (ye 
release on ransom) will be killed.” They said, “ We choose 
the ransom, and that certain of us be slain.” *—At Tirm id hi. 

It is related from ‘All that he said, ‘Some slaves went out 
(from Mecca) to the Apostle of God on the day of IJudaibah, 
before the treaty was made. Then their masters wrote to 
him and said, “ O Muhammad, by God! they did not go out to 
thee out of a desire for thy religion, but they only went out in 
order to flee from slavery.” And the people said, “These 
speak truly, O Apostle of God, send the slaves back to them.” 
Then the Apostle of God became angry and said, “O people 
of the Quraish, I do not see for you (any hope) that you will 
abstain from meddling until God sends someone to you to cut 
off your heads.” And he refused to send them back, and said, 
“ They are the freedmen of God.” ’—Abu Ddud . 

Concerning giving Protection 

It is related from ‘Amru that he said, ‘ I heard the Apostle 
of God say, “ He who assures a man of safety from death, and 
afterwards kills him, will be given a standard of perfidy on the 
day of resurrection.” *—Stiarhu s-Sunnah. 


THE BOOK OF RELIGIOUS WAR 


207 


It is related from Abu Rafi‘ that he said, ‘TheQuraish 
sent me to the Apostle of God; and when I saw him (the 
desire for) Islam was kindled in my heart and I said, “ O Apostle 
of God, by God! I will not return to them at all. He 
replied, “Verily, I do not break a promise or detain ambassa¬ 
dors. Return, and if there still remain in thy heart (the 
desire) which is now there, then come back.” He said, “So 
I went, and afterwards came to the Prophet and embraced 
Islam.” ’— Abu Ddud . 

It is related from Nu‘aim bin Ma‘sud that, ‘The Apostle 
of God said to two men who had come from Musailamah, 
“Beware! by God! were it not that ambassadors are not 
killed, I would have struck off your heads.” '—Ahmad, Abti 
Ddud . 

Concerning the Division of Plunder, and 
Purloining therefrom 

It is related from Abu Hurairah that, ‘ The Apostle of God 
said, “ Plunder was not lawful for anyone before us. That (has 
been made so for us), because God saw our weakness and 
helplessness, and so He made it lawful for us.” ’— Muslim , 
Al Bukhdri . 

It is related from Yezid bin Hurmuz that he said, 
‘Jandahu’l-Haruriyah wrote to Ibn ‘Abbas to ask him concerning 
the slave and the woman who are present at the place where 
booty is obtained: whether the booty should be shared with 
them. He said to Yazid, “ Write to him that they should not 
receive any fixed share; but a little may be given to them.” ’ 
— Muslim . 

It is related from Abu Hurairah that a man presented the 
Apostle of God with a slave called Mid‘am. And whilst he 
was unsaddling the Prophet’s beast, behold a stray arrow 
struck him and killed him. Then the people said, “May it be 
well with him in paradise!” But the Apostle of God said, 
“ Never! by Him in whose hands is my life! verily the cloak 
which he took from the plunder on the day of (the conquest 
of) Khaibar, when ye had not yet divided it, will light a fire 
upon him.” When the people heard that, a man brought one 
or two thongs to the Prophet and said, “ This is a thong or two 
from the fire.” '— Muslim, Al Bukhdri . 


203 SELECTION'S FROM MUHAMMADAN TRADITIONS 

It is related from Abu Umamah, from the Prophet, that 
he said, “Verily God has given me pre-eminence over the 
Prophets.” Or he said, “He has given my people pre-emi¬ 
nence over other people, and has made plunder lawful for 
us.” ’— At Tumid hi. 

It is related from Anas that, ‘ The Apostle of God said on 
that day, namely the day of (the battle of) Punain, “ Whoever 
kills an infidel will get his goods.” And Abu Talhah that day 
killed twenty men and took their effects.” ’— At Tumid hi 

It is related from Mujammi‘ bin Jariyah that he said, 
‘ The spoils of Khaibar were divided amongst the people who 
were present at IJudaibah. And the Apostle of God divided 
it into eighteen portions. And the army consisted of fifteen 
hundred men, of whom three hundred were cavalry. Then he 
gave each horseman two shares and each footman one share.’— 
Abu Ddud. And he said, ‘ The tradition of I bn ‘Omar is more 
correct and the action taken on it, and an error has crept into 
the tradition of Mujammi* in that he said, “ Three hundred 
cavalry,” when there were only two hundred cavalry.’ 

It is related from ‘Abdu’llah bin ‘Amru that he said, 

1 When the Apostle of God obtained plunder he used to call 
Bilal, and he used to call the people ; and they used to bring 
their plunder. Then the Prophet used to take his fifth and 
divide the remainder. And there came a man on a certain day 
after that bringing a halter made of hair. And the man said, 
“ O Apostle of God, this is a part of that which we took in 
plunder.” He replied, “ Didst thou hear Bilal call three 
times?” He said, “Yes.” He said, “Then what prevented 
thee from bringing it then ? ” Then the man made some 
excuse for himself. The Prophet said, “ Let be now ; for thou 
wilt bring it on the day of resurrection ; for I will never accept 
it from thee.” ’— Abu Ddud. 

It is related from ‘Abdu’r-Rahtnan bin ‘Awf that he said, 
‘Verily I was standing in the ranks on the day of (the battle 
of) Bedr; and I looked on my right hand and on my left, and 
behold! I was between two youths of the Helpers who were 
young in years. And I wished to stand between men stronger 
than they. Then one of them signed to me and said, “O my 
uncle, dost thou know Abu Jahl ? ” I replied, “ Yes, what dost 


THE BOOK OF RELIGIOUS WAR 


209 


thou want with him, O son of my brother ? ” He replied, 

“ I have been told that he abused the Apostle of God, therefore, 
by Him in whose hands is my life ! if I see him my person 
shall not separate from his until the quickest of us die. 1 
Abdu’r-Rahman said, “Then I was astonished at that.” He 
said, “ Then the other youth made a sign to me in similar terms. 
And I did not delay to look for Abu Jahl moving round amongst 
the men. Then I said, ‘ Do ye not see him. This is your 
friend whom ye asked me about.’ Then they two ran towards 
him with their swords and smote him until they killed him. 
After that they went to the Apostle of God and informed him. 
He said, ‘Which of you killed him ? ’ Each one of them replied, 
‘I killed him.' He said, ‘Have you wiped your swords?’ 
They replied, ‘ No.’ Then the Apostle of God looked at the 
two swords and said, ‘You both killed him.’ Then the 
Apostle of God gave orders that the plunder obtained from 
Abu Jahl should be given to Mu‘adh bin ‘Amru binu’l-Jamuh. 
And the two men were Mu‘adh bin ‘Amru binu’l-Jamuh and 
Mu‘adh bin ‘Afra.’ ” ’— Muslim , Al Bukhdri . 

It is related from Anas that on the day of Badr, ‘The 
Apostle of God said, “ Who will see for us what Abu Jahl has 
done?” Then Ibn Ma‘sud departed and found that the two 
sons of ‘Afra’ had smitten him and he had become cold (with 
the approach of death). Anas said, “ Then Ibn Ma‘sud seized 
his beard and said, ‘Thou art Abu Jahl?’ He replied, 
‘Dost thou do this over (the death agony of) a man ye have 
stabbed to death!*”’ And in another tradition it runs, ‘ He 
said, “Would that some other than a cultivator had killed 
me !” ’— Muslim , Al Bukhdri. 

It is related from Abu Hurairah that,, ‘ The Prophet said, 
“One of the Prophets went out to fight; and he said to his 
people, ‘ Let no man follow me who has married a wife and 
wishes to take her to his house, but has not yet done so; nor 
the one who has built a house, but has not yet raised a roof over 
it; nor yet the man who has bought a sheep or a camel and is 
expecting its giving birth to young.’ Then he went forth to 
war. And he drew near to a certain village at the time of 
evening prayer or about that. Then he said to the sun, 
‘ Verily thou art under orders, and I am also under orders. 0 

27 


210 SELECTIONS FROM MUHAMMADAN TRADITIONS 

God, restrain it for us.’ Then it was restrained (from setting) 
until God gave him the victory. After that he gathered to¬ 
gether the plunder ; and a fire came to devour it, but it did not 
consume it. And he said, ‘ Verily there is deceit amongst you 
with regard to the plunder ; therefore let a man from each 
tribe pledge his oath/ Then the hand of a certain man stuck 
to his hand. He said, ‘ The deceit concerning the plunder is 
amongst you/ Then they brought a golden head like the head 
of a cow. Then he set it down and the fire came and devoured 
it/'* And the relater has added in another tradition, ‘And 
plunder was not lawful for any one before us. Afterwards 
God made plunder lawful for us. He saw our weakness and 
impotence and made it lawful for us/— Muslim , Al Bukhari . 

Concerning the Poll-tax 

It is related from Jabalah that he said, ‘1 was the secretary 
of Jaza’bin Mu‘wiyah the uncle of Ahnaf, and there came to us 
a letter from ‘Omar binu’l-Khattab a year before his death, 
(saying) “ Separate every person who is forbidden in marriage 
from amongst the fire-worshippers/’ And ‘Omar did not 
take the poll-tax from the fire-worshippers until ‘Abdu’r- 
Rahman bin ‘Awf bore witness that the Apostle of God took 
it from the fire-worshippers of Hajar /—Al Bukhari. 

It is related from Mu‘adh that when the Apostle of God 
sent him towards Yeman, he ordered him to take one dinar, or 
the cloth of Yeman ordered, called madfiri to the value of 
one dinar from every adult, that is from everyone who had 
reached puberty /—Abie Ddud . 

It is related from Anas that he said, ‘The Apostle of God 
sent Khalid binu’l-Walid to Ukaider (the Christian king) of 
Dumah; and they seized him and brought him. Then the 
Prophet spared his life and made peace with him on condition 
that he paid the poll-tax /—Abu Ddud . 

Concerning Peace 

It is related from Al Miswar bin Makhramah and Marwan 
binu’l-Hakam that they said, ‘ The Prophet went out in the 
year of Hudaibah with a band of a thousand of his companions. 
And when he came to Dhu’l-Hulaifah he garlanded the camel 
for sacrifice and branded it in token thereof. He there put on 


THE BOOK OF RELIGIOUS WAR 


211 


the ihrdm (the pilgrim garment) for the lesser pilgrimage 
and went on until when he came to A1 Thaniyah, from where 
they fall upon the people of Mecca, his camel knelt down. And 
the people said, “ Hal! hal! A1 Qa$wa has refused to go on! 
A1 Qa$wa has refused to go on! n Then the Prophet said, 14 A1 
Qa§wa has not refused to go on; nor is that natural to her ; 
but he who restrained the elephant has restrained her.” Then 
he said, “By Him in whose hand is my life ! they shall not 
supplicate me on any matter in which the honour of the sacred 
territories of God is concerned, but I will grant it/' After that 
he forbade ‘A1 Qaswa to remain sitting and she rose up. And 
he turned aside with them until he descended at the extreme 
limit of Hudaibah, at a place where there was a little water, 
from which the people were drawing sparingly. And the 
people did not delay until they had drawn the water and com¬ 
plained to the Apostle of God of thirst. Then he took out an 
arrow from his quiver, and ordered them to place it in the 
water ; and by God! it continued to llow over for them in abun¬ 
dance until they departed from it. And whilst they were in 
such circumstances, behold ! Budail bin WarqaVl-Khuza‘i 
came in a party of the Khuza‘h. After that came ‘Urwah bin 
Ma‘sud.’ And he related the tradition until he said, ‘ When 
Suhail bin ‘Amru came, the Prophet said, “ Write, This is what 
Muhammad, the Apostle of God, agrees upon.” Then Suhail said t 
“ By God! if we knew that thou wert the Apostle of God, we 
would not have repelled thee from the House (of God), nor have 
fought with thee ; but write, Muhammad the son of ‘Abdu’llah.” 
Then the Prophet said, “ By God! I am indeed the Apostle of 
God, although ye make me a liar. Write, Muhammad the son 
of ‘Abdu’llah.” Then Suhail said, “And on these conditions 
(write the treaty of peace), that no man, even though he follow 
thee, shall come to thee from us, but thou shalt send him back 
to us.” And when he had finished writing the treaty, the 
Apostle of God said to his companions, “Rise and slay the 
animals for sacrifice, and then shave your heads.” After that 
some women came (confessing themselves) believers. Then 
God Most High sent down the revelation, “O ye who believe, 
when there come to you women who believe as refugees (try 
them. God well knoweth their faith. And if yc know them 


212 SELECTIONS FROM MUHAMMADAN TRADITIONS 

to be true believers, send them not back to the infidels)/’ 1 
And God Most High forbade them to send them back; and He 
commanded therfi to send back their dowries. After that the 
Prophet returned to Madina. And Abu Basir, a man of the 
Quraish, came to him. And he was a Muslim. And they .sent 
two men in search of him ; and Muhammad handed him over 
to the two men, and they went out with him, until, when they 
arrived at Dhu’l-Hulaifah, they alighted in order to eat dates 
which they had. Then Abu Ba$ir said to one of the two men, 
“By God! O so-and-so, verily I perceive that this sword of 
thine is a good one. Show it me that I may examine it.” 
Then he allowed him. Then Abu Basir smote him till he 
became cold. And the other man fled until he arrived at 
Madina and entered running into the mosque. Then the 
Prophet said, “This man has certainly been terrified.” The 
man said, “ By God! my companion has been killed, and verily 
I am in danger of being killed also.” Then Abu Basir came, 
and the Prophet said, “ Alas his mother! he is a kindler of war 
if he had any one (to help him).” And when Abu Basir heard 
that, he knew that he would hand him back to them, and he went 
out until he came to the sea-shore. And Abu Jandal bin Suhail 
escaped and joined himself to Abu Basil*. And it came to pass 
that no man who had embraced Islam went out from the Quraish 
without joining himself to Abu Basir, until there was gathered 
together from them a troop of men. And by God! they never 
heard of a caravan of the Quraish going out to Syria without 
attacking it and killing them and taking their goods. Then the 
Quraish sent to the Prophet and adjured him by God and their 
family ties to remonstrate with Abu Basir, and his companions. 
And whoever came to him was safe. Then he sent to them.’— 
Al Bukhari. 

It is related from Al Barai bin ‘Azib that he said, * The 
Prophet made peace with the polytheists on the day of 
Hudaibah with three stipulations : that whoever came to him 
from the polytheists, he would send him back to them ; but 
whoever came to them from the Muslims, they would not send 
him back ; and that he (Muhammad) should enter Mecca the 
following year and remain in it three days. And he (agreed) 


Qur’an, Suratu’l-Mumtahma (lx) 10. 


THE BOOK OF KELIGIOUS WAR 


213 


that he would not enter it except with their arms, such as swords 
and bows and such like, in their sheaths. Then Abu Jandal 
came to him shackled with fetters on his legs, but he sent him 
back to them. , — Muslim , Al Bukhari . 

It is related from ‘Ayesha that she said with regard to the 
oath of fealty taken by .women, that, 'The Apostle of God used 
to test them by this verse of the Qu’ran, “ O Prophet, if there 
come to thee believing women to take the oath of obedience to 
thee (that they will not associate anything with God, nor steal, 
nor commit fornication, nor kill their children, nor come with a 
calumny which they have forged between their hands and 
their feet, nor be disobedient to thee).” Then whoever of 
them agreed to these conditions, he said to her, “ I have 
received thine oath of fealty,” by the words which he spoke 
to*her. By God! his hand never touched the hand of a 
woman in the action of accepting her oath of fealty/— 
Muslim , Al Bukhari . 

It is related from Al Miswar and Marwan that, 1 The 
Meccans agreed upon the cessation of war for ten years, and 
that the people should be secure during that period, on the 
condition that all cause of reproach should be abstained from, 
and that there should be no attacks by bandits and no 
treachery /—Abu Daud . 

Concerning the Exclusion of the Jews from Arabia 

It is related from Abu Hurairah that he said, ‘ Whilst we 
were in the mosque, the Prophet came out and said, “Go to the 
Jews.” So we went with him until we came to their school- 
house. Then the Prophet rose up and said, “O People of 
the Jews, embrace Islam, that ye may be secure. And know 
ye that the earth belongeth to God and His Apostle. And 
verily I wish to expel you from this land, therefore whoever of 
you has any of his property (unsold), let him sell it.” *— 
Muslim , Al Bukhari . 

It is related from Ibn ‘Omar that he said, ‘ ‘Omar stood up 
and gave the public address and said, “ Verily the Apostle of 
God employed the Jews of Khaibar over their property, and 
said, ‘ We will allow you to remain so long as God allows you to 
remain/ ” But ‘Omar deemed it expedient to expel them. Then 


214 SELECTIONS FROM MUHAMMADAN TRADITIONS 

when ‘Omar had resolved on that, one of the Bani abu’l- 
Huqaiq came to him and said, “ O Commander of the Faithful, 
dost thou turn us out, when Muhammad allowed us to stay and 
appointed us over the property ? ” Then ‘Omar replied, 
“ Dost thou imagine that I have forgotten the words of the 
Apostle of God, ‘ How will it be with thee when thou art 
turned out of Khaibar, and thy young she-camels run after 
thee night after night !’ ” The Jew replied, “ This was a jest of 
the father of Abu’l Qasim.” He replied, “ Thou best, O enemy 
of God! ” Then ‘Omar banished them ; and he gave them the 
price of what they possessed of fruits in money and camels and 
fittings of pack-saddles and ropes and other things. ’— Al Bukhdri . 

It is related from Ibn ‘Abbas that, ‘ The Apostle of God 
commanded three things. He said, “Turn the polytheists out 
of the Island of Arabia ; behave towards ambassadors as I was 
wont to behave towards them.” Ibn ‘Abbas said, “ And he 
remained silent regarding the third.” Or, he said, “ I have 
forgotten it.” '— Muslim , Al Bukhari . 

It is related from Jabir bin ‘Abdu’llah that he said, ‘ ‘ Omar 
binu'l-Khattab informed me that he heard the Apostle of God 
say, “ I will certainly turn the Jews and Christians out of the 
Island of Arabia, until I do not leave in it any but Muslims.” ’ — 
Muslim . And in another tradition it runs, ‘If I live, and God 
will, I will certainly turn the Jews and Christians out of the 
Island of Arabia/ 

Concerning Spoil taken from Infidels without 
Fighting 

It is related from Malik bin Aws binu’l-Hadathani that 
‘ ‘Omar binu’l Khatfab aid, “ Verily God has distinguished His 
Apostle in this spoil taken from infidels by something 
which He has not given to any besides him.” Then he recited 
the words, “And as to their spoils which God hath granted to 
His Apostle (ye did not push forward any horses or camels 
against the same ; but God giveth to His Apostles dominion over 
whom He pleaseth, for God is almighty.)” * And this was free 
to the Apostle of God. He used to spend from this money on 
his family for their subsistence for one year. Afterwards 
he used to take what remained and place it in the place where 
the property belonging to God was kept,’— Muslim , Al Bukhdri* 


XiX 


THE BOOK OF HUNTING AND KILLING 

It is related from Abu Tha‘labahu’l-Khushami that he said, 

‘ I said, “ O Prophet of God, verily we are in a land belonging 
to a nation, the People of the Book ; may we eat from their 
vessels ? And we are in a land of game ; and I hunt with bows 
and with dogs which have not been trained, as well as with 
those that have. Then what is the right course of conduct for 
me ? ” He replied, “ As to what thou didst mention of the 
vessels of the People of the Book; if thou find any others, then 
do not eat from them ; but if thou do not find others, then 
waslx them and eat from them. And what thou huntest with 
thy bow, and hast mentioned the name of God over, eat. And 
what thou hast hunted with thy trained dog and hast repeated 
the name of God over, eat. And what thou hast hunted with 
thy untrained dog, apd hast found it undefiled, eat.” ’— Muslim , 
Al Bukhdri . 

It is related from Abu Tnfail that he said, 1 ‘All was asked, 
“Has the Apostle of God distinguished thee by anything?” 
He replied, “ He did not distinguish us by anything which he 
did not make universal for all men, except what is in the 
scabbard of this sword of mine.” Then he brought out a paper 
on which was written, “God has cursed the one who kills 
without (repeating the name of) God ; and God has cursed the 
one who steals a land mark.”* And in another tradition it 
runs, 44 Whoever changes a land mark.” And, “ God has cursed 
whoever curses his father ; and God has cursed whoever gives 
shelter to an innovator / 9 9 — Muslim . 

It is related from ‘Adi bin Ilatim that he said, 4 I said, 
“ O Apostle of God, inform us, if one of us takes game, and he 
has no knife with him, may he kill it with a lump of stone or a 
piece of stick ?” He replied, “Cause the blood to flow with 
whatever ye like, and mention the name of God.” *—Abd Ddud , 
An Nasdi . 

Concerning Dogs 

It is related from Jabir that he said, ‘ The Apostle of God 
ordered us to kill dogs, until a certain woman came from the 


216 SELECTIONS I ROM MUHAMMADAN TRADITIONS 


desert with her dog, and \vc killed it. After that the Apostle 
of God forbade us to kill them, and said, “ It is your duty to 
kill that one which is black all over with two spots on it; for it 
is Satan/’ ’— Muslim. 

It is related from Ibn ‘Omar that, ‘ The Prophet command¬ 
ed the killing of all dogs, except dogs for hunting and sheep¬ 
dogs, or dogs for cattle/— Muslim , Al Bukhari . 

It is related from Ibn ‘Abbas that he said, ‘ The Apostle of 
God forbade fighting between four-footed animals/— Abu Ddud . 

On what is Lawful and Unlawful as Food 

It is related from Abu Hurairah that, ‘The Apostle of 
God said, “The eating of all rapacious animals having canine 
teeth is unlawful.” *— Muslim . 

It is related from Jabir that, ‘The Apostle of God, on the 
day of Khaibar, forbade (eating) the flesh of domestic asses, 
but he permitted the flesh of horses/— Muslim, Al Bukhdri . 

It is related from Ibn abu Awfi that he said, ‘ We went on 
seven warlike expeditions with the Apostle of God; and we 
used to eat locusts with him .'—Muslim, Al Bukhari . 

It is related from Abu Hurairah that, ‘The Apostle of 
God said, “When a fly falls into a vessel belonging to any 
one of you, then let him immerse the whole of it. Afterwards 
let him throw it out; for verily in one of its wings is healing, 
and in the other, disease.” ’— Al Bukhdri . 

It is related from Abu Hurairah that, ‘The Apostle of 
God said, “An ant bit a certain prophet. So he gave orders 
regarding the ant-hill, and it was burnt. Then God Most High 
sent a revelation to him (saying), ‘A single ant bit thee; 
and thou hast burnt a whole colony of peoples who praise 
God/ ” ’ 

It is related from Khalid binu’l-Walid that, ‘The Apostle 
of God forbade eating the flesh of the horse, the mule and the 
ass. ’— Abu Ddud, An Nasdi. 

It is related .from Ibn ‘Omar that, ‘ The Apostle of God 
said, “Two things which have died of themselves and two 
bloods have been made lawful for us. The two dead things are 
fishes and locusts, and the two bloods are the liver and spleen/’ ' 
— Ahmad , Ibn Mdjah . 


THE BOOK OF HUNTING AND KILLING 217 

It is related from ‘Abdu’r-Rahman bin abu Lailah, that 
Abu Lailah said, ‘The Apostle of God said, “When a snake 
appears in a dwelling, then say to it, ‘Verily we entreat thee 
by the covenant of Noah and by the covenant of Solomon, son 
of David, that thou molest us not.’ Then if it returns, kill it.’’ 1 — 
At Tirmidht % Abu Ddud . 

It is related from Abu Th‘alabahu’l-Khusharni that, ‘The 
Prophet said, “The genii are of three kinds: one kind has 
wings and flies in the heavens ; one kind is composed of snakes 
and dogs ; and one kind stays in places and goes on journeys.’* * 
—Sharhu ’ s-Simnah. 

Concerning the Ceremony called ‘Aqiqah 

It is related from Salman bin ‘Amiru’l-£)abbi that he said, 
‘ I heard the Apostle of God say, A With the birth of a boy 
‘ aqiqah must be observed. Then shed blood on his behalf, and 
remove evil from him.” ’— Al Bukhd?t. 

It is related from Umm Kurz that she said, ‘I heard the 
Apostle of God say, “ Leave birds alone in their places.” She 
said, “And I heard him say, ‘For a boy two sheep, and for 
a girl one sheep ; and it will not matter whether it be a male 
or a female.’ ” ’— Abu Ddud , At Tirmidht, An Nasai. 

It is related from Muhammad bin ‘All bin liusain from 
‘AH bin abu Talib that he said, ‘ The Apostle of God per¬ 
formed the ‘ aqiqah ceremony on behalf of Hasan with one sheep 
and said, “O Fatimah, shave his head, and give in alms silver 
equal to the weight of his hair.” Then we weighed it ; and its 
weight was one dirham or part of a dirham.’— At Tirmidht . 

It is related from Buraidah that he said, ‘ In the time of 
ignorance when a son was born to any one of us, we used to 
sacrifice a sheep,and sprinkle his head with its blood. And when 
Islam came, we used to sacrifice a sheep on the seventh day, 
and shave his head and sprinkle it with saffron.’— Abu Ddud . 
And Razin has added the words, ‘ And we used to name him.’ 


28 


XX 


THE BOOK OF FOODS 

It is related from Ibn ‘Omar that, ‘The Apostle of God 
said, “ When anyone of you eats, then let him eat with Iris 1 
right hand; and when he drinks let him drink with his right 
hand.” ’— Muslim. 

It is related from Jabir that he said, ‘ I heard the Apostle 
of God say, “ Verily Satan is present at everything which 
anyone of you does, even to being present at his taking' food. 
Then when a morsel falls from anyone of you, let him wipe off 
anything that may be on it, and afterwards let him eat it; and 
let him not leave it for Satan ; and when he has finished eating, 
then let him lick his fingers, for verily he does not know in 
what part of his food lies a blessing.” '—Muslim. 

It is related from ‘Amru bin Umayah that he saw the 
Prophet carving a shoulder of mutton which was in his hand, 
and he was called to prayers; and he threw it down together 
with the knife with which he was carving it. Then he stood up 
and said the prayers ; but he did not perform the ablutions.’— 
Muslim, Al Bukhari. 

It is related from ‘Ayesha that she said, ‘ The Apostle of 
God used to like sweetmeats and honey.*— Al Bukhari. 

It is related from Sa‘id bin Zaid that, ‘ The Prophet said, 
Mushrooms are of the manna, and their juice is medicine for 
the eyes .'"—Muslim, Al Bukhari . And in another tradition 
from Muslim it runs, ‘ Mushrooms are of the manna which God 
Most High sent down on Moses.’ 

It is related from Sa‘d that he said, 4 I heard the Apostle 
of God say, 4 Whoever begins the morning with seven ajwah 
dates, neither poison nor magic will hurt him for that day.” *— 
Muslim , Al Bukhari . 

It is related from ‘Ayesha that she' said, ‘A whole rponth 
used to pass with us in which we did not light a fire. There 
were only dates and water (for our food), unless we were 
given some meat.’— Muslim , Al Bukhdrt. 

It is related from Jabir that, ‘ The Prophet said, “ Who¬ 
ever has eaten garlic or onions, let him keep himself away 


THE BOOK OF FOODS 


219 


from us ” or he said, “ Let him keep himself away from our 
mosque/’ or “ Let him sit in his own house.” And a cooking-pot 
was brought to the Prophet in which were green herbs ; and he 
perceived that they had a smell. And he told them to take them 
to some of his companions, and said, “ Eat ; for I have secret 
communications with one with whom ye do not hold secret com¬ 
munications.” Muslim , Al Bukhari . 

It is related from Umamah bin Makhshi that he said, 1 A man 
was eating ; and he did not mention the name of God until 
there remained of his food but a mouthful. Then when he 
raised it to his mouth he said, “In the name of God, the first of 
it and the last of it.” And the Prophet laughed and then said, 
“ Satan continued eating with him ; and when he mentioned the 
namQ of God, he (that is, Satan) vomited up what was in his 
belly/’ ’—Ada Baud . 

It is related from Abu Sa‘idu’l-Khudri that he said, 1 When 
the Apostle of God finished his meals he used to say, “ Praise 
be to God who has given \\s food and drink, and made us 
Muslims.” ’—At Tirmidhi, Add Baud, Ibn Mdjah . 

It is related from Salman that he said, 1 1 read in the 
Taurat that the blessing of food is the ablution after it. And I 
repeated this to the Prophet. The Apostle of God said, “ The 
blessing of food is in the ablution before it and the ablution 
after it.” ’—At Tirmidht , Abu Baud . 

It is related from ‘Ayesha that she said, ‘ The Apostle of 
God said, “ Do not cut meat with a knife, for that is what is 
done by foreigners; but tear it with the teeth, for that is 
pleasanter and healthier.” ’—Abu Bdud . 

It is related from Nubaishah that, ‘ The Apostle of God 
said, “Whoever eats from a large dish and then licks it; the 
dish asks pardon for him.” Ahmad , At Tirmidht , Ibn Mdjah . 

It is related from Abu Ziyyad that he said, ‘ ‘Ayesha was 
asked about (the lawfulness of) onions. wShe replied, “Verily 
the last meal which the Apostle of God took was of food which 
had onions in it.” ’—Abu Bdud . 

It is related from Nubaishah that, ‘ The Apostle of God said, 
“Whoever eats from a large dish, and then licks it, the dish 
says to him, ‘ May God free thee from the fire as thou hast freed 
me from Satan/ ” ’— Razin % 


220 


SELECTIONS FROM MUHAMMADAN TRADITIONS 


Concerning Hospitality 

It is related from Abu Shuraihu’l-Ka‘bi that ‘ The Apostle of 
God said, 44 Whoever believes in God and the last day,* let him 
honour his guest. His right of courteous entertainment is one 
day and one night, and his right to hospitality extends to three 
days. And what is given after that is alms. And it is not 
right for (the guest) to take shelter with him so long that he 
put him into difficulties.” ’— Muslim , Al Bukhari . 

It is related from A1 Miqdam bin Ma 4 dikarib that he heard 
the Prophet say, 1 Whatever Muslim becomes the guest of a 
tribe, and he rises in the morning having been refused (food), 
it is the duty of every Muslim to help him to take for himself 
his entertainment from the money and grain of the host/— 
Abu Ddud , Al Darimi . And in another tradition from A1 
Miqdam it runs, 4 Whatever man becomes the guest of a tribe, 
and they do not entertain him ; he has the right to take from 
them an amount equal to his entertainment.’ 

It is related from Abu’l-Ahwasu’l-Jushami from his father, 
that he said, 4 1 said, 44 O Apostle of God, inform me, if I pass 
by a man, and he does not put food before me and does not 
extend hospitality to me, and afterwards he passes by me, shall 
I place food before him or requite him (as he treated me)? ” 
He replied, “ Rather entertain him with food.” ’— At Tirmidht . 

Concerning Drinks 

It is related from Anas that, 4 The Prophet forbade a man 
to drink in a standing attitude.’— Muslim. 

It is related from Ibn ‘Abbas that he said, 4 1 brought a 
bucket of Zemzem water to the Prophet, and he drank from it 
standing.’— Muslim , Al Bukhari . 

It is related from Hudhaifah that he said, ‘I heard the 
Apostle of God say, 44 Do not dress in silk or brocade, and do 
not drink from vessels of gold or silver, and do not eat from 
large plates of gold or silver ; for verily these are for them 
(the unbelievers) in this world, and for you in the next.”’— 
Muslim , Al Bukhdri. 

It is related from Ibn ‘Abbas that, 4 The Apostle of God 
said, “When anyone of you eats food, then let him say, ‘O 
God, bless us by this food, and give us food better than it.’ 
And when he is given milk to drink, then let him say, 4 O God, 


THE BOOK OF FOODS 


221 


bless us by this milk, and give us more than it,’ for verily 
there is nothing which suffices in place of both food and drink 
except milk.” ’—At Tirmidht , Abu Ddud . 

Concerning Infusions of Grapes and Dates 
It is related from ‘Ayesha that she said, * We used to 
make an infusion of grapes for the Apostle of God in a 
leathern bag, which was tied at the top and had a hole at the 
bottom. And we made the infusion of grapes in the morning, 
and he used to drink it in the evening. And we used to make 
the infusion in the evening, and he would drink it in the morn¬ 
ing. *— Muslim . 

It is related from Abu Maliku’l-Ash‘ari that he heard the 
Apostle of God say, ‘ Some people of my followers will 
certainly drink wine, calling it by a name not its own .'—Abu 
Baud' /bn Majah. 

On Covering Vessels and Other Things 
It is related from Jabir that, ‘The Apostle of God said, 
u When night falls, or ye reach the evening, then prevent your 
children (from going out); for verily Satan at that time spreads 
himself about. And when one hour of the night has passed, 
then let them go. And shut the doors, and mention the name 
of God, for verily Satan does not open a door which is shut (in 
the name of God). And tie the mouths of your leathern bags, 
and mention the name of God; and cover over your vessels, and 
mention the name of God, even though ye put something upon 
them ; and extinguish your lamps.” ’— Muslim, Al Bukhdri. 

It is related from Jabir that he said, ‘ I heard the Prophet 
say, “ When ye hear the bark of dogs, or the braying of asses 
at night, then take refuge with God from Satan the stoned; 
for verily they see what ye do not see. Therefore go out little 
when ye have to go on foot, for verily God the Exalted and 
Magnified spreads abroad certain of His creation at night such 
as He wishes. Therefore shut the doors, and mention the 
name of God over them; for verily Satan does not open a door 
when it is shut and the name of God has been mentioned over 
it. And immerse your water-jars in water, and turn your 
vessels upside down and tic the mouths of your leathern bags.” * 
—Sharhu ’ s-Sunnah . 


XXI 


THE BOOK OF CLOTHES 

It is related from Anas that he said, ‘ The clothes which 
the Prophet liked to wear most were of striped cotton of 
Yeman.’— Muslim, A / Bukhari. 

It is related from A1 Mughirah bin Shu‘bah that, ‘ The 
Prophet wore a Grecian coat with tight sleeves.’— Muslim, Al 
Bukhari. 

It is related from Abu Burdah that he said, 1 ‘Ayesha 
brought out to us a patched upper garment and a pair of coarse 
drawers and said, “The soul of the Apostle of God was taken 
(when he was) in these two garments .’’' —Muslim, Al Bukhari . 

It is related from Abu Hurairah that, ‘ The Apostle of God 
said, “On the day of resurrection, God will not look upon the 
person who lengthens his trousers from pride.” '—Muslim, 
Al Bukhari. 

It is related from Abu Hurairah that, 1 The Apostle of God 
said, “That part of the trousers which is below the two ankles 
is in the fire.” ' —Al Bukhari . 

It is related from Mu‘awiyah bin Qurrah, from his father, 
that he said, ‘ I came to the Prophet in a band of men of the 
Muzainah (tribe); and they took the oath of fealty to him. 
And the buttons (of his shirt) were undone, so I put my hand 
inside the opening of his shirt and touched the seal of pro¬ 
phecy.’— Abu Ddud. 

It is related from vSamurah that, ‘ The Prophet said, “ Dress 
in white clothes, for verily they are purest and best; and 
shroud your dead in them.” ’ — Abhad, An Nasdi . 

It is related from Abu Musau’l-Ash‘ari that, ‘ The Prophet 
said, “Gold and silk have been made lawful for the women of 
my followers, but unlawful for the men.” '—At Tirmidhi, An 
Nasdi . 

It is related from Mu‘adh bin Anas that, ‘ The Apostle of 
God said, “ Whoever, eats food, and afterwards says, ‘ Praise be 
to God, who has fed me with this food and given me sustenance 


Page 223, line 18, from the top : 

For, 4 There were two thick Qitra cloths upon the Prophet’ 
read, ‘ There were two striped cloths (Qitriah) upon the Prophet.’ 


THE BOOK OF CLOTHES 


223 


thereby, without (the exercise of) strength or power on my 
part, 1 all his former sins will be forgiven him.” ’— At 
firm id hi. And Abu Daud has added the words, ‘ Whoever 
puts on clothes and says, “ Praise be to God, who has arrayed 
me in these and provided me therewith, without (the exercise 
of) strength and power on my part; ” all his former sins and 
later ones will be forgiven him.’ 

• It is related from 4 AH that he said, ‘The Apostle of God 
forbade me (wearing) a gold signet-ring, and from wearing 
cloth from Qiss, and from (using) a red saddle-cloth/— At 
firmidhiy Abu Ddud , Ait Nasau 

It is related from Abu Rimthah of Taimah that he said, 

‘ L came to the Prophet when he was wearing two green cloths. 
And old age had reduced his hair ; and his grey hairs had been 
stained red.’— At Tirmidhi, And in another tradition from Abu 
Daud it runs, ‘ He was a man of dignity ; and his beard was 
stained with henna.’ 

It is related from ‘Ayesha that she said, ‘ There were two 
thick Qitra cloths upon the Prophet; and when he sat down he 
used to perspire ; and it was distressing for him. And there 
came some fine cotton from vSyria for a certain Jew ; and I said, 
“ If thou send to him and buy two cloths on promise of (future) 
payment, (it will be good).” Then he sent to him. The Jew 
replied, “ I know what thou desirest. Thou only desirest to 
take my property (without payment). The Apostle of God 
said, “ He has lied! He knows that I am the most God-fearing 
of them, and the most upright of them in respect of trust¬ 
worthiness.” ’— At Tirmidhi, An Nasdi. 

It is related from ‘Ubadah that, * The Apostle of God 
said, “ It is your duty to wear turbans, for they are the covering 
of the angels. And let them hang down behind your backs.” ’— 
At BaiJiaqi . 

It is related from Ibn ‘Abbas that he said, ‘ Eat what you 
like and wear what you like, so long as they do not drive you 
to two sins : extravagance and prideZ-r —AtBukhdri, 

' . •. - ‘' , ‘ • .1 •. i I: ; L 

t 

Concerning Signet-Rings 

It is related from Ibn ‘Omar that he said, ‘.The prophet 
took a golden ring.’ And in one tradition it runs, ‘ He put it on 


224 SELECTIONS FROM MUHAMMADAN TRADITIONS 

his right hand.’ ‘ Then he took it off. Then he took a ring 
made of silver, on which was engraved “ Muhammad, the 
Apostle of God.” And he said, “ No one must engrave like the 
engraving of this ring of mine.” And whenever he put it.on, 
he used to place the stone of the ring towards the palm of his 
hand.’— Muslim, Al Bukhari . 

It is related from Anas that, ‘ The Prophet wished to write 
to Kisra (King of Persia), and to the Emperor of Rome and 
the King of Abyssinia. And it was remarked that they would 
not receive a letter unless it was sealed. So the Apostle of 
God made a signet-ring of silver, on which was engraved, 
“ Muhammad, the Apostle of God.” Muslim . And in another 
tradition from Bukhari it runs, ‘ The engraving of the ring was 
in three lines: “Muhammad” in one line, “Apostle” in one 
line, and “ God ” in one line.’ 

It is related from Bunanah, the slave-girl of ‘Abdu’r- 
Rahman bin Hayyanu’l-Ansari, that she was with ‘Ayesha 
when someone came in to her with a girl upon whom was a 
string of little bells which tinkled. 1 hen ‘Ayesha said, “ Do not 
bring her in to me unless thou cut off her bells, for I heard the 
Apostle of God say, ‘The angels do not enter a house in which 
is a bell.” ’— Abu Ddud . 

Concerning Shoes 

It is related from Abu Hurairah that, ‘The Apostle of God 
said, “ When anyone of you puts on his shoes, then let him 
begin with the right one ; and when he takes them off, let him 
begin with the left. Let the right-hand side one be the first 
in the putting on and the last of them to be taken off.” , — 
Muslim , Al Bukhari . 

It is related from Ibn Buraidah from his father that, ‘ The 
King of Abyssinia sent a present to the Prophet of a pair of 
black shoes which were without embellishments ; and he put 
them on.*— Ibn Mdjalu And At Tirmidhi has added the words, 
from Ibn Buraidah from his father, ‘ After that he performed 
ablutions, and he wiped over them (without taking them off)/ 

On Combing the Hair 

It is related from Abu Hurairah that, ‘The Apostle of God 
said, “ Five things are obligatory : circumcision, removing the 


THE BOOK OF CLOTHES 


225 


hairs of the privates, shortening and clipping the moustache, 
paring the nails and plucking out the hairs of the armpit.” *— 
Muslim , Al Bukh&ri . 

It is related from Ibn ‘Omar that, ‘The Apostle of God 
said, “ Do the opposite of the polytheists. Let your beards grow 
long, and shorten your moustaches.”— Muslim, Al Bukh&ri . 

It is related from Abu Hurairah that, ‘The Prophet said, 
‘‘Verily the Jews and Christians do not dye (their hair). 
Then do ye the opposite to them.” ’— Muslim , Al Bukh&ri . 

It is related from Ibn‘Abbas that, ‘The Prophet used 
either to clip his moustache or take away a part of it. And 
Abraham, the Friend of the Merciful, used to do the same.’— 
At Tirmidhi . 

It is related from Ibn ‘Omar that, ‘ The Prophet used to 
wear shoes of tanned leather ; and he used to dye his beard 
yellow with (the dye called) wars and saffron. And Ibn ‘ Omar 
used to do the same/— A?i Nas&i. 

It is related from Ibn ‘Abbas that, ‘ The Prophet said, 
“ Paint your eyes with antimony because it brightens the sight 
and causes the hair to grow.” And he (Ibn‘Abbas) asserted 
that the Prophet had a vessel containing antimony from which 
he painted his eyes every night: three times on the one, and 
three times on the other/— At Tirmidhi . 

It is related from Abu’l-Malih that he said, ‘ Some women 
of Hems came to‘Ayesha. She said, ‘‘Whence come ye?” 
They replied, “From Syria.” She said, “Then probably ye 
are from the city the women of which go to baths ? ” They 
said, “Yes.” She said, “ Verily I heard the Apostle of God 
say, ‘ No woman takes off her clothes in any house except her 
husband’s, but she tears the veil between herself and her 
Lord.* ” ’— At Tirmidhi , Abu D&ud, 

It is related from Thabit that he said, ‘Anas was asked 
concerning the dye used by the Prophet. He replied, “ If I 
had wished to count the grey hairs which were in his head, I 
could have done so. He did not use dye.” *— Muslim , Al 
Bukh&ri . 

It is related from Ibn ‘ Omar that he used to dye his beard 
yellow with saffron, until his clothes became covered with 
saffron. And it was remarked to him, “Why dost thou dye 

29 


226 SELECTIONS FROM MUHAMMADAN TRADITIONS 

with saffron ? ** He replied, “ Verily I saw the Apostle of God 
dye with it; and there was nothing more pleasing to him than 
it. And he used to dye the whole of his clothes with it, even 
to his turban.” *—Abu Ddud , An Nasdi . 

It is related from A1 Walid bin ‘ Uqbah that he said, 
‘ When the Apostle of God conquered Mecca, the people of 
Mecca began to bring their children to him. And he prayed for 
a blessing for them, and stroked their heads. And I was 
brought to him when I was dyed with khaluq; and he did not 
touch me on account of the khaluq .** *—Abu Ddud . 

It is related from Yahya bin Sa‘id that he heard Sa‘id 
binu’l-Musayyib say, ‘ Abraham, the Friend of the Merciful, 
was the first man who entertained visitors, and he was the first 
man who was circumcised, and the first man who shortened his 
moustache, and the first man who saw grey hairs. And he 
said, “O Lord, what is this! ** The Lord Most High replied, 
“O Abraham, these are a sign of dignity/* Abraham said, 
“O my Lord, increase me in dignity.** ’— Malik . 

Concerning Pictures 

It is related from Abu Talhah that, ‘ The Prophet said, 
“ The angels do not enter the house in which there is a dog or 
pictures.’* *— Muslim , Al Bukhari. 

It is related from ‘Ayesha that, ‘ The Prophet never left 
anything in his house on which were pictures of a cross, but 
would break them.*'— Al Bukhari . 

It is related from ‘Ayesha that, ‘ The Apostle of God said, 
“The men who will be most severely punished on the day of 
resurrection are those who draw likenesses of God’s creation.” * 
— Muslim , Al Bukhari . 

It is related from Ibn ‘Abbas that he said, ‘ I heard the 
Apostle of God say, “Every maker of pictures is in the fire. 
God will appoint for him, for every picture which he has drawn, 
a person who will punish him in hell.” Ibn ‘Abbas said, “ Then 
if you must make pictures, make them of trees and things in 
which there is no life.” *— Muslim , Al Bukhdri . 

It is related from Buraidah that, 1 The Prophet said, “ Who¬ 
ever plays at backgammon, it is as if he had dipped his hand 
into the flesh of swine.” *— Muslim . 


THE BOOK OF CLOTHES 


227 


It is related from Abu Hurairah that, ‘ The Apostle of God 
said, “Gabriel came to me and said, * I came to thee yesterday, 
and nothing prevented me from entering except that there were 
figures upon the door, and in the house there was a coloured cloth 
with figures upon it. And there was a dog in the house. 
Therefore give orders regarding the head of the figure which is 
on the door of the house, and let it be cut off, and it will become 
like the figure of a tree. And give orders regarding the cloth, 
and let it be cut, and let there be made two cushions to recline 
upon. And give orders regarding the dog, and let it be put 
out.’” Then the Apostle of God did so.’— AtTirmidhi , Abu 
Ddud\ 

It is related from Abu Hurairah that, ‘ The Apostle of God 
saw a man following a dove ; and he said, “ A Satan following 
a Satan! ” ’—Ahmads Abfi Ddud , Ibn Majah. 

It is related from ‘Ayesha that she said, ‘ When the Pro¬ 
phet complained (of sickness) some of his wives mentioned 
a certain church called Mariyah. And Umm Salamah andUmm 
Habibah had been to the land of Abyssinia. And they mentioned 
the virtues of the church and the pictures within it. Then he 
raised his head and said, “ When any good man dies from 
amongst those people, they build a mosque over his grave, after 
which they paint within the church those pictures. Those 
people are the worst of God’s creation.” ’— Muslim, Al Bukhdri. 


XXII 


THE BOOK OF MEDICINE AND SPELLS 

It is related from Ibn ‘Abbas that, ‘ The Apostle of God 
said, “ Remedies for disease consist of three things : scarifica¬ 
tion with a cupping instrument, or the drinking of honey, or 
cauterising with fire. And I forbid my followers to practise 
cauterising.” ’— Al Bukhari . 

It is related from Jabir that he said, ‘ Ubayya was wounded 
in a vein of his arm by an arrow on the day of Ahzab. Then 
the Apostle of God cauterised it.’— Muslim . 

It is related from ‘Ayesha and Rafi‘ bin Khadij that, ‘The 
Prophet said, “ Fever is from the boiling heat of hell ; there¬ 
fore cool it with water.” ’— Muslim , Al Bukhdri . 

It is related from Anas that he said, ‘ The Apostle of God 
specially permitted the use of magic (to protect) from the evil 
eye and from the sting of poisonous reptiles and from the bite 
of an ant/— Muslim . 

It is related from ‘Umm Salamah that, ‘The Prophet saw a 
girl in her house in whose face there was a yellowness. And 
he said, “ Use magic for her, for verily it proceeds from a 
glance of the eye.” *— Muslim , Al Bukhari . 

It is related from Usamah bin Shank that they said, ‘O 
Apostle of God, shall we use medicine ?” He replied, “ Yes, O 
servants of God, use medicines, for verily God has not created 
any disease without creating a remedy for it—except one disease, 
namely, weakness from old age.” ’— Ahmad, AtTirmidhi, Abd 
Daud . 

It is related from Salma, the maid-servant of the Prophet, 
that she said, ‘ There was no one who complained to the Apostle 
of God of a pain in his head, but he replied, “ Bleed yourself.” 
And there was no one who complained of a pain in his feet, but 
he said, “ Dye them.” ’— Abu Daud. 

It is related from Asma’ bint ‘Umais that she said, ‘O 
Apostle of God, verily the sons of Ja‘far are soon affected by the 
evil eye. Shall I use a spell for them ?” He replied, “ Yes ; 
for verily if there be anything that can overcome fate, the evil 
eye will certainly do so,” *— Ahmad } At Tirmidbi , Ibn Mdjah • 


THE BOOK OF MEDICINE AND SPELLS 


229 


It is related from Abu Sa’idu’l-Khudri that he said, ‘ The 
Apostle of God used to take refuge (with God) from the genii 
and the evil eye of men, until there descended the two chapters 
of the Qur’an on taking refuge. 1 Then when they descended 
he used to take them and leave all others.’—/^ Tirmidhi , Ibii 
Mdjah . 

It is related from 'Othman bin ‘Abdu’llah bin Marhab that 
he said, ‘ My family sent me to Umm Salamah with a cup of 
water. And when anyone used to be affected by the evil eye 
or anything else, he used to send to her a water vessel; and she 
used to bring out a hair of the Apostle pf God which she used 
to keep in a silver bell. And she would rinse it for him (in the 
water), and he would drink from it. And I looked into the bell, 
and I saw some red hairs.’— Al Bukhari . 

It is related from Abu Kabshahu’l-Anmari that, 1 The Apostle 
of God was cupped on the top of his head on account of poisoned 
mutton. Ma‘mar said, “ I was cupped in the same way on the 
head for other reasons than poisoning, and the excellence of my 
memory went from me to such an extent that the opening chap¬ 
ter of the Book was dictated to me at the prayers.” ’— Razin . 

Concerning Omens and Auguries 

It is related from Abu Hurairah that ‘ The Apostle of God 
said, ‘‘There is no such thing as contagion, nor an omen, nor (a 
bad influence from) the owl, nor (special calamities in the 
month) Safar.” Then a desert Arab said, “ O Apostle of God, 
then what happens to a camel which was living in the 
sand (of the desert) like a gazelle (for cleanness), and when it 
is allowed to mix with a camel affficted with the itch, it gives 
it the itch.” The Apostle of God replied, “ Who infected the 
first one ?” ’— Al Bukhdri\ 

It is related from ‘Urwah bin ‘Amir that he said, ‘ Omens 
were mentioned to the Apostle of God, and he said, ‘‘The best* 
of them is a good omen; and do not turn back a Muslim (by an 
omen). And if any one of yoiwsee that which he dislikes, let 
him say, *0 God, no one can bring good but Thee, and no one 
can remove evil but Thee. And there is no power and no 
strength except in God.’ ” ’— Abu Ddud . 

» Namely SuratuTFalaq (exiii),and Suratu’n Nas (cxiv). 


230 SELECTIONS FROM MUHAMMADAN TRADITIONS 


Concerning Divination 

It is related from 'Ayesha that she said, 1 1 heard the 
Apostle of God say, “ Verily the angels come down in the clouds 
and mention the matters determined in heaven. And ‘ the 
satans steal a hearing, and hear it and relate it to the diviners ; 
and they repeat from it a hundred falsehoods from them¬ 
selves. “ *—Al Bukhdrt . 

It is related from Zaid bin Khalidu’l-Iluhanni that he said, 
‘The Apostle of God prayed for us (as leader) at the morning 
prayer at Hudaibah on marks of rain which had fallen in the 
night. And when he had finished, he turned to the people and 
said, “Do ye know what your Lord said?” They replied, 
“God and His Apostle know best.” He said, (God said) 
“There arose this morning of my servants some who believe 
in me, and some who are unbelievers. As for those who said, 

‘ Rain has been sent upon us by the bounty and mercy of God/ 
they are believers in me and disbelievers in the stars. But as 
for those who said, ‘ Rain has been sent upon us in such and 
such a way as the result of the moon being in a certain constel¬ 
lation,’ they are disbelievers in me and believers in the 
stars.” '— Muslim , Al Bukhdrt. 

It is related from Ibn ‘Abbas that he said, ‘A man of the 
Prophet’s companions, one of the Helpers, informed me that 
whilst they were sitting on a certain night with the Apostle of 
God, a star shot and emitted a light. Then the Apostle of God 
said to them, “ What used ye to say in the times of ignorance 
when a star shot in this way?” They replied, “God and His 
Apostle know best. We used to say, some great man has been 
born to-night and some great man has died. ” The Apostle of God 
said, “ Verily this has not shot on account of the death of 
anyone or the life of anyone ; but our Lord, blessed be His name, 
when He orders a matter, the bearers of the throne sing praises, 
after which the inhabitants of heaven who are near them sing 
praises, until the praises reach the inhabitants of this heaven 
of the world. Then those who are near the bearers of the 
throne say to them, ‘What did your Lord say’? And they 
inform them what He said. And some of the inhabitants of 
the heavens ask others for information, until it reaches this 
heaven of the world. Then the genii steal a hearing and pass 


THE BOOK OF MEDICINE AND SPELLS 231 

it on to their friends (the diviners). So they are shot at (by 
the stars). And what they bring is true, but they deceive 
therein and add thereto.” Muslim . 

Concerning Visions 

It is related from Abu Hurairah that, 1 The Prophet said, 
44 He who sees me in sleep, has certainly seen me ; for Satan 
cannot fashion himself into my likeness.” '—Muslim, Al 
Bukhari . 

It is related from Abu Qatadah that, 4 The Apostle of God 
said, 44 A good vision is from God, but a dream is from Satan, 
therefore when anyone of you sees in a vision something that 
he likes, let him not relate it to any but one whom he loves ; 
and when he sees what he dislikes, then let him take refuge 
with God from its evil and from the evil of Satan; and let him 
spit three times; and let him not tell it to anyone; then it 
will never harm him.” ’— Muslim , Al Bukhari . 

It is related from Abu Musa that, 1 The Prophet said, 
“I saw in a dream that I was being taken from Mecca to a 
land in which were date-trees. And my imagination went so 
far that it appeared to be Yamamah or Hejr, and behold! it 
was the city of Yathrib (i.e., Madina.) And I saw in this 
dream of mine that I was brandishing a sword, and the 
forepart of it was cut off ; and behold! it was what befel the 
believers on the day of (the battle of) ‘Uhud. After that I 
brandished it a second time, and it returned to me better than 
it was before ; and behold! it was the victory which God gave 
them, and the bringing together of the believers.” Muslim , 
Al Bukh&ri, 

It is related from ‘Ayesha that, 4 The Apostle of God was 
asked about Waraqah. Then Khadija said to him, 44 Verily he 
bore witness to the truth of thy mission. But he died before 
thou appeared (as a Prophet).” The Apostle of God said, 
44 He was shown to me in a dream. And there were white 
clothes on him; but if he had been one of the inhabitants of 
the fire, there would certainly have been upon him different 
clothes from that.” '—Ahmad, At Tirmidhu 


XXIII 


THE BOOK OF GOOD MANNERS 

On Salutations 

It is related from Abu Hurairah that, ‘ The Apostle of 
God said, “God created Adam in His own image. His height 
was sixty cubits ; and when He created him He said, 4 Go and 
salute those people—-and they were a band of angels who 
were sitting—and listen to what answer they return thee.; 
for verily it is an answer for thee and for thy progeny/ 
Then he went and said, ‘Peace be on you/ And they said, 
‘ Peace and the mercy of God be on thee/ ” (The Prophet) 
said, “They added to it the words, ‘And the mercy of God/ 
Everyone who enters paradise will do so in the image of 
Adam. His height will be sixty cubits; but the creation has 
continued to decrease after him until now/’ *— Muslim, Al 
Bukh&ri. 

It is related from Abu Hurairah that, ‘The Apostle of 
God said, “ Do not salute a Jew or a Christian first; and when 
ye meet one of them in the road, force him to the side of 
it.” ’— Muslim . 

It is related from Ibn ‘Omar that, ‘The Apostle of God 
said, “ When a Jew salutes you, he only says, ‘ As sdm ‘ alaika! x 
(‘ May death come upon thee ’). Then do ye say in response, 
Wa ‘alaika ' (‘ And upon thee ’).” '—Muslim, A! Bukhari . 

It is related from ‘ Ayesha that she said, ‘ A party of 
Jews asked permission (to interview) the Prophet. And they 
said, “ May death come upon you.” Then I said; “ Rather may 
death and a curse come upon you.” Then (the Apostle) said, 
O Ayesha, verily God is compassionate and loves compassion 
in all matters.” I said, “ Didst thou not hear what they said ?” 
He replied, “ I said, ‘And upon you ? ” '—Muslim, Al Bukhdri . 

It is related from ‘All that, ‘ The Apostle of God said, 
“There are six duties incumbent upon one Muslim toward 
another : that he should salute him when he meets him ; that he 
1 i.e. Instead of saying, ‘ As saldtn ‘ alaika 9 (‘ Peace be upon thee.’) 


THE BOOK OF GOOD MANNERS 


233 


should accept the invitation when he invites him ; that he 
should say “Praise be to God” when he sneezes; that he 
should visit him when he is ill ; that he should follow his bier 
when he dies ; and that he should love for him what he loves 
for himself.” ’— At Tirmidhf. 

It is related from ‘Amru bin shu‘aib, from his father, from 
his grandfather that, ‘ The Prophet of God said, “ He is not of 
us who makes himself like one who does not belong to us. Do 
not imitate the Jews and Christians. For the salutation of the 
Jews is a sign with the fingers, and the salutation of the Chris¬ 
tians is a sign with the palms of the hand.” *— At Tirmidhf. 

It is related from Zaid bin Thabit that he said, ‘ I entered 
into the Prophet when a writer was (sitting) in front of him ; 
and I heard him say, “ Put the pen upon your ear, for it helps 
one to remember the money.” ’— At Tirmidhf. 

It is related from Zaid bin Thabit that he said, ‘ The 
Apostle of God ordered me to learn Syriac/ And in another 
tradition it runs, ‘ He ordered me to learn the correspondence 
of the Jews; and said, “I put no reliance in the Jews in regard 
to correspondence.” Zaid said, “ Then not half a month had 
passed over me before I had learnt it. And so it came about 
that whenever he wrote to a Jew, I wrote (for him). And when 
they wrote to him, I read their letter to him.” ’— At Tirmidhf. 

It is related from Abu Hurairah that, ‘ The Apostle of God 
said, “ When God created Adam and blew a soul into him, he 
sneezed and said, ‘Praise be to God/ and he praised God by 
His permission. And his Lord said to him, * May God have 
mercy on thee. O Adam, go to those angels, to the party of 
them which is sitting down, and say, “ Peacie be upon you.” ’ So 
he said, ‘Peace be upon you/ They replied, ‘ Upon thee be 
the peace and mercy of God.’ After that he returned to his 
Lord and He said, ‘ Verily this is thy salutation and the saluta¬ 
tion of thy children amongst themselves/ And God said to 
him, His two hands being tightly closed, ‘ Choose which of the 
two thou wishest/ He replied, ‘I choose the right hand of 
my Lord ; but both the hands of my Lord are right and 
blessed/ Then He extended it, and behold! in it, Adam and 
his descendants. He said, ‘ O my Lord, what are these ? * He 
replied, ‘ These are thy descendants ; and behold ! the age of 

30 


234 


SELECTIONS FROM MUHAMMADAN TRADITIONS 


every man is written down between his two eyes. And behold ! 
amongst them is a man, the brightest of them all, or one of the 
brightest of them.’ He said, ‘ O Lord, who is this ? ’ He 
replied, ‘ This is thy son David, and I have written his age for 
him, forty years.’ He said, ‘O Lord, increase his age.’ He 
replied, ‘ That is what I have written for him.’ He said, ‘O 
my Lord, verily I put to his credit, sixty years of my own 
life.’ He said, 1 Do what thou wishest.’ ” (The Apostle) said, 
“After that Adam dwelt in paradise as long as God wished, 
and then he was cast down from it. And Adam was in 
the habit of counting up (his age) for himself. Then the 
angel of death came to him. And Adam said to him, 1 Thou 
hast come too soon. A thousand years have been written 
down for me.’ The angel replied, ‘That is so; but thou hast 
placed sixty years to the credit of thy son David.’ Then he 
denied; and his descendants have denied ; and he forgot, and 
his descendants have forgotten.*’ (The Prophet) said, “Then 
from that time it was ordered to be written down with 
witnesses.” ’—At Tirmidhu 

On Asking Permission (to Enter) 

It is related from Kaldah bin Hanbal that $afwan bin 
Umayyah sent some milk and a young deer and some cucumbers 
to the Prophet when he was at the higher part of the valley. 
Kaldah said,‘Then I entered into him, and I neither saluted 
nor asked permission.’ And the Prophet said, “ Go back ! and 
say, ‘ Peace be upon you. May I enter ? ’ ” ’—At Tirmidhi , Abu 
I) dud. 

On Shaking Hands and Embracing 
It is related from Qatadah that he said, ‘ I said to Anas, 
“ Was there shaking of hands amongst the companions of the 
Prophet of God ? ” He replied, “ Yes.” ’—Al Bukhdru 

It is related from Al Bara’ bin ‘Azib that, ‘ The Apostle of 
God said, “There are no two Muslims who meet and shake 
hands; but they are forgiven before they separate.” - Ahmad , 
At Tirmidhi . 

It is related from ‘Ayesha that she said, ‘ I never saw 
anyone resemble the Apostle of God more in manner and habits 
and good disposition ’—and in another tradition it runs ‘ in 


THE BOOK OF GOOD MANNERS 


235 


conversation and speech ’— 4 than F'atimah. When she entered 
where he was, he used to rise for her and take her by her hand 
and kiss her and sit her in his seat. And when he entered 
where she was, she used to rise for him and take him by his 
hand and kiss him and sit him in her seat .’—Abu Daud. 

It is related from 4 Afa’l-Kharasani that, ‘The Apostle of 
God said, “ Shake hands with one another in order to remove 
envy ; and give one another presents, and show love to one 
another, and so take away malice.” M&lik . 

On Rising Up 

It is related from Anas that he said, ‘ There was no man 
more beloved by them than the Apostle of God. And when 
they saw him, they used not to rise for him, because they were 
aware of his dislike of that .’—At Tirmidhu 

It is related from Abu Hurairah that he said, 4 The Apostle 
of God used to sit with us in the mosque conversing with us. 
And when he rose up, we used to rise and remain standing until 
we saw that he had entered into some of the houses of his 
wives.’ 


On Sitting and Sleeping and Walking 

It is related from ‘Abbas bin Tamim, from his .uncle, that 
he said, 4 1 saw the Apostle of God in the mosque lying on his 
back and placing one of his feet upon the other.’— Muslim , Al 
Bukhari. 

It is related from Jabir that he said, 4 The Apostle of God 
forbade a man from raising one of his legs upon the other 
whilst he was lying on his back.’— Muslim . 

It is related from Abu Hurairah that, 4 The Apostle of God 
said, 44 When any one of you sits in the shade ; and the shadow 
moves away from him, so that a part of him remains in 
the sun and a part in the shade, then let him get up.” ’—Abu 
Ddud. And in the Sharhu’s-Sunnah it runs : 4 He said, 4 ‘When 
anyone of you sits in the shade, and it moves away from him; 
then let him get up, for verily the sitting of Satan is of this 
kind.” ’ 

It is related from Ibn ‘Omar that, 4 The Prophet forbade a 
man to walk between two women.’— Abu Datid. 


236 


SELECTIONS PROM MUHAMMADAN TRADITIONS 


On Sneezing and Yawning 
It is related from Abu Hurairah that, 1 The Prophet said, 
“Verily God loves sneezing and hates yawning. Therefore 
when anyone of you sneezes and praises God, it is the duty of 
every Muslim who hears him to say to him, ‘ May God have 
mercy on thee.’ But as for yawning, it is only from Satan; 
therefore when anyone of you yawns, let him suppress it as far 
as he is able. For verily, when anyone of you yawns, Satan 
laughs at him.” ’— Al Bukhari . 

It is related from Abu Musa that he said, ‘ The Jews used 
to make themselves sneeze near the Prophet; hoping that he 
would say to them, “ May God have mercy on you but he 
used to say, 44 May God guide you and make good your hearts ! ” ’ 
—At Tirmidhi , Abu Ddud, 

On Laughing 

It is related from ‘Ayesha that she said, 4 I never saw the 
Prophet laugh heartily, so that I could see the palate of his 
mouth. He used only to smile/— Al Bukhari, 

It is related from "Abdu’llah binu’l-Harith bin Jazi’ that 
he said, 4 I never saw anyone smile more than the Apostle of 
God. ’— A t Tirm id hi. 

Concerning Names 

It is related from Anas that he said, 4 The Prophet was in 
a bazaar, and a man said, 44 O Abu’l-Qasim ! ” And the Prophet 
turned round to him. But the man said, 44 1 only called this 
man.” Then the Prophet said, 44 Give (your children) my 
name ; but do not designate them by my epithet (Abu’l- 
Qasim).” *— Muslim , Al Bukhdri . 

It is related from Ibn ‘Omar that, 4 The Apostle of God 
said, 44 Verily the most pleasing of your names in the sight of 
God are 4 ‘Abdu’llah 9 and 4 4 Abdu’r-Rahman.’ ”— Muslim, 

It is related from Abu Hurairah that, 4 The Apostle of God 
said, 44 No one of you must ever say, 4 My slave’ and 4 My 
female slave.’ All of you are slaves of God, and all your 
women are His female slaves.’ But let him say, 4 My boy,* 

4 My girl,’ 4 My young man,’ 4 My young woman/ And a slave 
must not say, 4 My Lord ’; but let him say, 4 My master.* *’ And 
in another tradition it runs, 44 Let not a slave say to his master* 

4 My Lord *; for verily your Lord is God.’’ *— Muslim . 


237 


- tjhe book of good manners 

It is related from Abu’l-Dardai’ that, 4 The Apostle of God 
said, “You will be called on the day of resurrection by your 
names and the names of your fathers. Therefore make your 
names good ones.” ’— Ahmad , Abu Ddud . 

It is related from ‘Ayesha that she said, 4 Verily the 
Prophet used to change bad names. *— At Tirmidhi . 

It is related from ‘Abdu’l-Hamid bin Jubair bin Shaibah 
that he said, 4 1 sat near Sa‘id binu’l-Musayyib, and he told me 
that his grandfather Hazn went to the Prophet. And the latter 
said, “ What is thy name ? ” He replied, 44 My name is IJazn.” 
He said, 44 Rather thou art Salil.” He replied, 44 1 will not 
change the name which my father gave me.” Ibnu’l-Musayyib 
said, 44 Ever since that stubbornness has remained amongst 
us.” ’—Al Bukhari . 

Concerning Rhetoric and Poetry 

It is related from Ibn ‘Omar that he said, 4 Two men from 
the East drew near and made speeches. And the people were 
astonished at their eloquence. Then the Apostle of God said, 
44 There is certainly magic in eloquence.” ’—Al Bukhari . 

It is related from Abu Hurairah that, 4 The Apostle of God 
said, 44 The truest word a poet has spoken is the word of Labid, 

4 Beware ! everything except God is vanity.’ ” ’— Muslim , Al 
Bukhari . 

It is related from Al Barai’ that, 4 The Prophet said to 
Hassan bin Thabit on the day of Quraizah, 44 Lampoon the 
polytheists, for verily Gabriel is with thee.” And the Apostle 
of God used to say to liassan, 44 Answer for me.” (And he 
prayed.) 44 O God, help him with the Holy Spirit.” ’— Muslim , 
Al Bukhari . 

It is related from ‘Ayesha that, 4 The Apostle of God said, 
44 Lampoon the Quraish, for it is more trying to them than the 
shooting of arrows.” ’— Muslim . 

It is related from Anas that, 4 The Apostle of God said, 
44 On the night on which I was taken (up to heaven) I passed 
by a people whose lips were being cut off with scissors of fire. 
And I said, 4 O Gabriel, who are these ? ’ He replied, 4 These 
are those of thy followers who delivered the public address at 
prayers, and who said what they did not perform.’ ” ’—At 
Tirmidhi . 


238 SELECTIONS FROM MUHAMMADAN TRADITIONS 

It is related from ‘Ayesha that she said, ‘The Apostle of 
God used to place a pulpit in the mosque for Hassan on which 
to stand. And he used to stand and magnify the Apostle of 
God or boast of his virtues. And the Apostle of God said, 
“Verily God assists Hassan with the Holy Spirit so long as 
he boasts concerning the Apostle of God.” *— Al Bukhari\ 

It is related from Abu Sa‘idu’l-Khudri that he said, ‘ When 
we were going with the Apostle of God to Al ‘Arj, behold! 
a poet appeared reciting verses of poetry. Then the Apostle 
of God said, “Take hold of Satan,” or “Seize Satan. It is 
certainly better that the belly of a man should be full of pus 
than of poetry.” ’ 

It is related from Jabir that, ‘ The Apostle of God said, 
“ Songs cause hypocrisy to arise in the heart, as water causes 
the crops to spring up.” ’— Al Baihaqi. 

It is related from Nafi‘ that he said, ‘ I was with Ibn 
‘Omar in a certain road. And he heard a reed instrument; and 
he placed his fingers in his ears, and turned off the road in 
another direction. Then, after going some distance, he said to 
me, “O Nafi‘ dost thou hear anything?” I replied, “No.” 
Then he took his fingers out of his ears and said, “ I was with 
the Apostle of God ; and he heard the sound of a reed 
instrument and did as I did.” Nafi‘ said, “ When that happened 
I was young.” *— Ahmad , Abu Ddud . 

On Keeping the Tongue, and on Calumny and Abuse 

It is related from ‘Abdu’lldh bin Ma‘sud that, ‘ The 
Apostle of God said, “ Abuse of a Muslim is disobedience to 
God, and fighting with him is infidelity.” *— Muslim , Al Bukhari . 

It is related from Abu Hurairah that, ‘ The Apostle of God 
said, “ It is not right for one who tells the truth that he should 
be a great curser.” ’— Muslim . 

It is related from Abu Hurairah that, ‘ The Apostle of God 
said, “ You will find that the worst men on the day of resurrect¬ 
ion will be those who are two-faced. Who come to some 
people in one attitude, and to others in another.” *— Muslim , Al 
Bukhdri. 

It is related from ‘Alxlu’llah bin Ma‘sud that, ‘ The Apostle 
of God said, “It is your duty to speak the truth ; for verily the 


THE BOOK OF GOOD MANNERS 


239 


truth leads to righteousness, and righteousness leads to para¬ 
dise. And a man will continue to speak the truth and hold it fast 
until he is written down with God as a truth-teller. Then 
beware of falsehood, for verily falsehood leads to foul deeds, 
and foul deeds lead to the fire. And a man will continue to lie 
and hold falsehood fast until he is written down with God as a 
great liar. '—Mu slim, Al Bukhari . 

It is related from A1 Miqdad binu’l-Aswad that, ‘ The 
Apostle of God said, 44 When ye see flatterers, then throw dust 
into their mouths.” *— Muslim . 

It is related from Bahz bin Ilakim, from his father, from 
his grandfather that, 1 The Apostle of God said, “ Woe to him 
who tells stories and lies in order to make people laugh 
thereby. Woe to him ! Woe to him ! ” ’— Ahmad, At Tirmidhl . 

It is related from ‘Uqbah bin ‘Amir that he said, 4 I met 
the Apostle of God ; and I said, 44 What is (the means of) 
salvation ? ” He replied, 44 Rule thy tongue, let thine house be 
a sufficient dwelling-place, and weep for thy sins.”’— Ahmad , 
At Tirmidln . 

It is related from Ibn ‘Omar that, ‘ The Apostle of God 
said, ‘‘When a servant (of God) tells a falsehood, the angel 
removes from him a mile on account of the bad odour which 
emanates from it.” ’— At Tirmidln. 

It is related from ‘Ammar that, 4 The Apostle of God said, 
‘‘ He who is two-faced in the world will have two tongues of 
fire on the day of resurrection.” ’— Abu Ddud . 

It is related from Anas that, ‘ The Apostle of God said, 
44 When a wicked man is praised, thy Lord Most High 
becomes angry, and the throne trembles on account of it.” ’— 
Al Baihaqi. 

It is related from Anas that, 4 The Apostle of God said, 
‘‘O Abu Dharr, shall I not point you to two good qualities, 
which will be light on the back, but heavy in the scales? ” I 
said, “Yes.” He replied, “ Length of silence, and goodness of 
disposition. By Him in whose hand is my life! there is no 
action of man like these two.” ’ 

It is related from 4 Ayesha that she said, 4 The Prophet 
passed by Abu Bakr when he was cursing some of his slaves. 
Then he turned to him and said, “ Cursers and confirmers of 


240 SELECTIONS FROM MUHAMMADAN TRADITIONS 

the truth! 1 Never by the Lord of the Ka‘bah ! ” Abu Bakr at 
once set free some of his slaves, and afterwards came to the 
Prophet and said, “ I will not do it again.” ’—Al Baihaqi .. 

It is related from ‘Ubadah binu’s-Samit that, ‘ The Prophet 
said, “ Be security for me for six things concerning yourselves ; 
and I will be security for paradise for you. Tell the truth 
when you speak ; perform when you promise ; be trustworthy 
when put in trust; keep your private parts ; turn away your 
eyes (from the forbidden); and withhold your hands (there¬ 
from).” * 

Concerning Promises 

It is related from Jabir that he said, ‘ When the Apostle of 
God died, some property came to Abu Bakr from A1 ‘Alai’ 
bimTl-Hadrami. Then Abu Bakr said, “ Whomsoever the 
Prophet owed anything, or to whomsoever he made a promise, 
let him come to us.” Jabir said, “ Then I said, ‘ The Apostle 
of God promised to give me such and such/ ” And he held out 
his hands three times. Jabir said, “ Then he filled my hands 
once. And I counted it, and behold! it was five hundred 
(dirhams). And he said, ‘ Take double the amount/ ” ’— Muslim , 
Al Bukhari . 

It is related from Zaid bin Arqam that, ‘ The Prophet said, 
“ When a man makes a promise to his brother, and intends to 
perform it, but does not do so. and does not come to the place 
appointed; then there is no fault upon him.” *—Abfi Daud , 
At Tirmidhi . 

Concerning Joking 

It is related from Anas that, ‘ The Prophet said to an old 
woman, “Verily no old woman will enter paradise.” She 
replied, “Then what will happen to them ?”—and she used to 
read the Qur’an. He said to her, “ Dost thou not read the 
Qur’an? ‘Verily we have created them in a certain fashion, 
and we will make them virgins.’ ” ’ 2 — Raztn . 

It is related from Anas that ‘ A man of the desert Arabs, 
whose name was Zahir bin IJaram, used to bring presents to 

1 Muhammad had previously conferred upon Abu $mkr the special 
title, ‘As Siddiq’ (‘Confirmer of the truth’). 
a Qur’an, Suratu*l-Waqi‘a (lvi) 35. 


THE BOOK OF GOOD MANNERS 241 

the Prophet from the desert. And the Apostle of God used to 
furnish him with all necessaries when he wished to go out (to 
his people). And the Prophet said, “ Verily Zahir provides us 
from the desert, and we give him something in return/* And 
the Prophet loved him, and Zahir was dgly. And on a certain 
day the Prophet came, when he was selling his goods, and 
caught him in his arms from behind, so that he was not able to 
see him. And (Zahir) said, “ Let me go! Who is this?” 
Then he turned round and recognized the Prophet. And he 
struck his back against the Prophets breast as a sign that he 
had detected him. Then the Prophet began to say, “ Who will 
buy this slave ? ” He replied, “ O Apostle of God, in that case, 
by God! you will find me goods not easy to sell! ” Then the 
Prophet said, “ But in the sight of God thou art not worthless 
goods. ’ * *—Sharhu s-Sunnah. 

It is related from Numan bin Bashir that he said, ‘ Abu 
Baler asked the Prophet permission (to enter his house); 1 and 
he heard ‘Ayesha’s voice raised (in anger). And when he 
entered, he seized her in order to box her ears, and said, “ Let 
me never see thee raising thy voice against the Apostle of 
God.” And the Prophet began to prevent him (from slapping 
‘Ayesha). Then Abu Bakr went out in anger. And when 
Abu Bakr went out, the Prophet said, “ Dost thou see how I 
saved thee from that man ? ” * She said, ‘ Then Abu Bakr 
stayed away for some days, and afterwards he asked permission 
(to enter) and found that the two of them had become recon¬ 
ciled. Then he said to them, “ Include me in your reconcilia¬ 
tion as ye included me in your quarrel.” The Prophet said, 
” We have done so. We have done so.” *—Abu Ddud . 

On Boasting and Partisanship 

It is related from A1 Barai' bin ‘Azib that he said, 1 On the 
day of (the battle of) Hunain Abu Sufyan binu’l-Harith was 
holding the reins of his mule, that is the mule of the Apostle 
of God ; and when the polytheists surrounded him, he alighted 
and began to say, “lam the Prophet, there is no falsehood ; I 
am the son of ‘Abdu’l-Muttalib/’ (A1 Barai') said, “ No man 
amongst the people was seen to be braver on that day than 
he.” Muslim , Al Bukhdri. 


31 


242 SELECTIONS FROM MUHAMMADAN TRADITIONS 

It is related from Anas that he said, ‘ A man came to the 
Prophet and said, u O best of creation/’ The Apostle of God 
replied, “ That was Abraham/’ ’— Muslim. 

It is related from # ‘Omar that, ‘ The Apostle of God said, 
“Do not give me exaggerated praise, as the Christians 
exaggerate in praising the Son of Mary, for I am only His 
servant. Therefore say, ‘The servant of God and His 
Apostle.” ’— Muslim , Al Bukhdrt. 

On Filial Piety and Charity 

It is related from Abu Hurairah that a man said, ‘O Apostle 
of God, who of my associates is most worthy of being treated 
well ? ” He replied, “ Thy mother.” He said, “ And who after 
that?” He replied, “ Thy mother.” He said, “Who after 
that?” He replied, “Thy mother.” He said, “Who after 
that ? ” He replied, “ Thy father.” ’— Muslim , Al Bukhdrt. 

It is related from A1 Mnghirah that, ‘The Apostle of God 
said, “ Verily God has forbidden bad behaviour towards mothers t 
and has forbidden burying daughters alive, and parsimony and 
begging. And He dislikes loquaciousness in you. And (He 
has forbidden) excessive questioning, and squandering of 
money.” '—Muslim, Al Bukhari. 

It is related from Ibn ‘Omar that, ‘ The Apostle of God 
said, “Doing one’s duty to one’s relations does not consist in 
making recompense for benefits received ; but the one who 
carries out his family duties is he who, when he is not treated 
well, still does his duty.” ’— Al Bukhdrt. 

* It is related from Abu Hurairah that, ‘A man said, “O 
Apostle of God, I have some relations whom I treat well, but 
they treat me badly. And I do good to them, but they do evil 
to me. And I am patient with them, but they are rude to me.” 
(The Prophet) said, “ If thou art as thou sayest, then it is as if 
thou wert casting coals of fire at them ; and thou wilt continue 
to receive assistance from God against them so long as thou 
behave thus.” ’— Muslim. 

It is related from Abu Usaid that he said, 4 When we were 
near the Apostle of God, behold a man of the Bani ’Salimah 
came to him and said, “O Apostle of God, is there anything 
remaining undone of duties towards my parents which I might 


THE BOOK OF GOOD MANNERS 


243 


do to them after their death ? ” He replied, “ Yes, prayer for 
them and asking forgiveness for them, and the execution of 
their promises after them, and good behaviour towards their 
relations, such as is not usually given except to them (the 
parents), and honouring their friends/’ ’— Abu Ddud , Ibn Mdjah . 

It is related from Ibn ‘Omar that he said, ‘ I had a woman 
as my wife whom I loved, but ‘ Omar disliked her and said to 
me, “ Divorce her.” But I refused. Then ‘Omar came to the 
Apostle of God and mentioned the matter to him. And the 
Apostle of God said to me, “ Divorce her.” ’— At Tirmidhi , Abu 
Ddud, 

It is related from Anas that, ‘ The Apostle of God said, 
“ Verily the servant whose parents die, or one of them dies, 
and he has certainly been disobedient to them, must continue to 
pra£ for them and ask pardon for them, until God writes him 
down as one who acts with filial piety.” ’ 

It is related from Sa‘id binuT‘As that, ‘ The Apostle of 
God said, “ The rights of an elder brother which he may claim 
from a younger brother are (the same as) the rights which a 
parent may claim from his child.” ’— Al Baihagi. 

On Compassion and Mercy towards the Creation 

It is related from Abu Hurairah that, ‘ The Apostle of God 
said, “ The one who takes care of widows and poor people, is 
like one who is active in the way of God.” And I imagine he 
said, “He is like one who stands up (in prayer) without inter¬ 
mission, and keeps the fast without breaking it.” ’— Muslim , Al 
Btikhari . 

It is related from Anas that, ‘ The Apostle of God said 
“ By him in whose hand is my life ! no servant believes until 
he loves for his brother what he loves for himself.” ’— Muslim , 
Al Bukhari . 

It is related from ‘Ayesha and Ibn ‘Omar that, ‘ The Prophet 
said, “ Gabriel continued to give me orders concerning (the 
rights of) neighbours, until I thought that he would make them 
heirs.” ’— Muslim , Al Bukhari, 

It is related from Ibn ‘Abbas that, ‘The Apostle of God 
said, “ He is not of us who is not kind to our little ones, and does 
not honour our elders, and does not command what is lawful and 
forbid what is unlawful.” At Tirmidhi . 


244 SELECTIONS FROM MUHAMMADAN TRADITIONS 

It is related from Abu Umamah that, * The Apostle of God 
said, “ He who strokes the head of an orphan for no other reason 
than for the sake of God, shall have a good deed (ascribed to 
him) for every hair which His hand passes over. And whoever 
does good to an orphan, male or female, who is in his care, he 
and I will be in paradise like these two”—and he joined his two 
fingers together/— At Tirmidhi . 

It is related from Ayyub bin Musa, from his father, from 
his grandfather, that, 4 The Apostle of God said, 44 No father has 
given his son a better present than good manners.”’— At 
Tirmidhi . 

It is related from Ibn Ma 4 sud that, 4 The Apostle 
of God said, 44 Verily God Most High has divided among 
you your natural dispositions, as He has apportioned among 
you your sustenance. Verily God Most High gives the 
earth to those whom He loves and to those whom He does 
not love ; but He does not give religion except to those 
whom He loves. And he to whom God gives religion, 
him He has certainly loved. And by Him in whose hand is my 
life! no servant becomes a Muslim until his heart and tongue 
do so. And he does not believe until his neighbour is safe from 
his injustices.” ’ 

Concerning Love in God and from God 

It is related from Abu Hurairah that, 4 The Apostle of 
God said, 44 Verily when God loves a servant, He calls Gabriel 
and says, 4 Verily I love such an one, therefore do thou love 
him.’ Then Gabriel loves him ; after which he makes proclama¬ 
tion in the heavens and says, 4 Verily God loves such an one, 
therefore do ye love him.’ Then the inhabitants of heaven 
love him. After that his acceptance is established upon the 
earth. And when God hates a servant, He calls Gabriel and 
says, 4 Verily I hate such an one, therefore do thou hate him.’ 
Then Gabriel hates him; after which he makes proclamation 
amongst the inhabitants of heaven and says, 4 Verily God hates 
such an one, therefore do ye hate him.’ Then they hate him. 
After that hatred for him is established in the earth.” ’— Muslim . 

It is related from Anas that, 4 A man said, 44 O Apostle of 
God, when will the hour (of resurrection) come ? ” He replied, 


THE BOOK OF GOOD MANNERS 


245 


“Woe to thee! what provision hast thou made for it?” He 
said, “ I have made no provision for it, except that I love God 
and His Apostle/’ He replied, “Thou wilt be with Him 
whom thou lovest.” Anas said, **‘1 never saw the Muslims 
rejoice more over anything, after Islam, than their joy at this 
(saying)/’ ’— Muslim , Al Bukkdri . 

It is related from ‘Omar that, ‘ The Apostle of God said, 
“ Verily amongst the servants of God there will certainly be 
some men who .were neither prophets nor martyrs, but whose 
felicity the prophets and martyrs will desire on the day of 
resurrection on account of their position near God.” They said, 
“O Apostle of God, inform us who they are.” He replied, 
“They are those who love one another in the spirit of God, 
and not on account of blood-relationships existing between 
them, or for property which they give and take amongst 
themselves. And by God! verily their faces will be light,, 
and they will certainly be upon (seats of) light. They will 
not fear when others fear, nor will they be sorrowful when 
others grieve.” Then he recited this verse of the Qur’an, 
“ Beware! verily the friends of God have no fear on them, nor 
do they grieve,” n — Abu Daud. 

It is related from Abu Sa‘id that he heard the Prophet say, 
4 Do not make friends of any, except a believer ; and let none 
eat of your food, but the pious.’— At Tirmidhi , Abii Daud\ 

On what is Forbidden regarding Breaking off 
Friendships, and Searching out Defects 

It is related from Abu Hurairah that, 4 The Apostle of God 
said, “The actions of men are reported twice every week: on 
Mondays and Thursdays. And every believing servant is 
forgiven except the servant between whom and his brother 
there is enmity. And it is said (to the angels), 4 Leave these 
two until they become reconciled.’ ” ’— Muslim . 

It is related from Asma’ bint Yazid that she said, 4 The 
Apostle of God said, 44 Falsehood is not lawful except in three 
cases: the falsehood of a man to his wife in order to please her ; 
falsehood in war; and falsehood in order to effect a reconcilia¬ 
tion between men.” ’— Ahmad , At Tirmidhi . 


1 Qur’an, Suratu Ytinas (*) 61. 


246 


SELECTIONS FROM MUHAMMADAN TRADITIONS 


It is related from Ibn ‘Omar that he said, ‘ The Apostle of 
God ascended the pulpit and cried with a loud voice and said, 
“O ye people, who have embraced Islam with the tongue, but 
whose hearts faith has not reached, distress not Muslims, nor 
reproach them, nor search out their defects ; for verily he who 
seeks out the defects of his brother Muslim, God will seek 
out his defects. And he whose defects God seeks out, He will 
expose them although they be (hidden) in the middle of his 
pack-saddle.” *— At Tirmidht . 

It is related from ‘Ayeshathat she said, ‘ Safiyah’s camel 
was sick. And Zainab had an excess of riding-camels. And the 
Apostle of God said to Zainab, “Give her a camel.'’ She 
replied, “Shall I give to that Jewess! ” Then the Apostle of 
God became angry, and he forsook her for (the months of) 
Dhu’l-Hajj and Muharram and part of $afar.” '—Abtl Daud . 

It is related from Abu Hurairah that, ‘ The Apostle of God 
said, “ Jesus, the Son of Mary saw a man stealing. Then Jesus, 
the Son of Mary, said to him, ‘Thou didst steal.’ He replied, 

‘ Never ! by Him besides whom there is no other God!’ Then 
Jesus said, ‘ I believed in God, but spoke falsely to myself.’ ’’ ’— 
Muslim . 

On Caution and Deliberation in Matters 
It is related from Sahl bin Sa‘du’l-Sa’id that, ‘ The Prophet 
said, “ Deliberation is from God, and haste is from Satan.’’’— 
At Tirmidht . 

It is related from Abu Hurairah that, ‘ The Prophet said to 
Abu’l-Haitam binu’l Tabbihan, “Hast thou a servant?” He 
replied, “ No.” He said, “ When captives come to us, do thou 
appear also.” Then two captives were brought to the Prophet, 
and Abu’l-Haitam came to him, and the Prophet said, “ Choose 
one of them.” He replied, “O Prophet of God, do thou choose 
for me.” Then the Prophet said, “ Verily a counsellor is one 
to be trusted in. Take this one ; for verily I saw him praying. 
And behave well towards him.” ’— At Tirmidht . 

On Kindness and Modesty and Good Dispositions 
It is related from ‘Imran bin Husain that, 1 The Apostle of 
God said, “ Modesty brings nothing but good.’* And in an- 


THE BOOK OF GOOD MANNERS 


247 


other tradition it runs, “All kinds of modesty are good.” ’— 
Muslim , Al Bukh&ri . 

It is related from Ibn Ma‘sud that, ‘The Apostle of God 
said, “ Verily one of the things which men have understood 
from the words of former prophecies is this : 4 When thou hast 
no shame, then do whatever thou wishest.” ’— Al Bukh&ri. 

It is related from Sahl bin Mu‘adh, from his father that, 
‘The Prophet said, “ He who suppresses his anger, when 
he has the power to give vent to it; God will call him to the 
chiefs of creation on the day of resurrection in order that He 
may let him choose which of the black-eyed virgins (Huris) 
of paradise he may wish.” ’— At Tirmidhi , Abu D&ud . 

It is related from Ibn ‘Omar that, ‘ The Prophet said, 
“Verily modestyand faith are joined together. When one of 
them is taken away, the other is taken also.” And in a tradi¬ 
tion from Ibn ‘Abbas it runs: “When one of them is stolen, 
the other follows it.” 1 — Al Baihaqi. 

On Anger and Pride 

It is related from Abii Hurairah that, ‘ The Apostle of God 
said, “ The strong is not he who throws men down. Only he is 
the strong who exercises the mastery over himself at the time 
of anger.” * — Muslim , Al Bukhari . 

It is related from Ibn Ma‘sud that, ‘The Apostle of God 
said, “ No one will enter the fire in whose heart is faith equal 
in weight to a single grain of mustard seed. And no one will 
enter paradise in whose heart is pride equal in weight to a 
single grain of mustard seed.” *— Muslim . 

It is related from Abu Dharr that, ‘ The Apostle of God 
said, “When anyone of you gets angry whilst he is standing, 
then let him sit down. Then if the anger leaves him (well); 
otherwise let him lie on his side.” ’— Ahmad , At Tirmidhi . 

It is related from Abu Hurairah that, ‘ The Apostle of God 
said, “Moses the son of ‘Imran said, ‘O my Lord^ who is the 
most highly esteemed in Thy sight of all Thy servants? 4 
(God) replied, ‘ He who, when he is able, forgives/ 

Concerning Oppression 

It is related from IJudhaifah that, ‘The Apostle of God 
said, “ Do not be partial in your behaviour and say, ‘ If people 


248 SELECTIONS FROM MUHAMMADAN TRADITIONS 

do good (to us), we will do good (to them); and if they oppress 
(us) we will oppress them.’ But determine within yourselves 
that if men do good, you will do good, but if they do evil, you 
will not oppress.” *— At Tirmidhu 

It is related from Ibn Ma'sud that he said, ‘ When the 
revelation came down, “ They who believe, and clothe not their 
faith with injustice, (they shall enjoy security, and they are 
rightly directed)” 1 that became grievous to the companions of 
the Apostle of God, and they said, “ O Apostle of God, who of 
us has not done injustice to his own soul!” The Apostle of 
God replied, “ It is not that. It only refers to attributing 
partners to God. Have you not heard the word of Luqman to 
his son, ‘ O my little son, do not attribute partners to God, for 
verily attributing partners to God is great injustice/ ” '— Mus¬ 
lim, Al Bukhari . 

Concerning Things which are Lawful 
It is related from Usamah bin Zaid that, ‘The Apostle of 
God said, “A man will be brought on the day of resurrection 
and cast into the fire. And his intestines will be poured out 
into the fire and will be ground to powder in it, like the grind¬ 
ing of a mill-stone by an ass. Then the inhabitants of the fire 
will gather together to him and say, ‘ Ho such an one ! what is 
the matter with thee ? Wast thou not in the habit of ordering 
us what was lawful, and forbidding us what was unlawful ? * 
He will reply, * I used to order you what was lawful, but did 
not do it myself; and I used to forbid you what was unlawful, 
but I did it myself/ ” ’— Muslim , Al Bukhdri. 

It is related from ‘Abdu’llah bin Ma‘sud that, ‘ The Apostle 
of God said, “ When the Children of Israel fell into dis¬ 
obedience, their learned men forbade them, but they did not 
prevent them. And they sat in company with them in their 
assemblies, and ate and drank with them. And God mixed the 
hearts of some of them with others ; and He cursed them by 
the tongues of David and Jesus, the Son of Mary. That He 
did because they disobeyed and transgressed.” (Ibn Ma‘sud) 
said, “ Then the Apostle of God sat down ; and he was reclining 
and he said, ‘ No, by Him in whose hand is my life! (ye will 


1 Qur’an, Suratu’l-An‘am (vi) 82. 


THE BOOK OF GOOD MANNERS 249 

not escape the curse) until ye prevent them (from disobey¬ 
ing).* ” ’—At Tirmidhiy Abd Ddud . 

It is related from ‘Ammar bin Yasir that, ‘The Apostle of 
God said, “A table descended from heaven with bread and 
meat (for the Children of Israel); and they were commanded 
to be faithful to their trust and to make no provision for the 
morrow ; but they abused their trust and made provision and 
took up food for the morrow; and they were transformed into 
apes and swine.” *—At Tirmidhu 

It is related from Jabir that, ‘The Apostle of God said, 
“God, the Exalted and Magnified, revealed to Gabriel that he 
should turn such and such cities upside down, together with 
their inhabitants. He replied, ‘ O my Lord, verily amongst 
them is Thy servant so and so, who has never disobeyed Thee 
for the twinkling of an eye.’ He said, ‘Turn it over upon 
him and upon them, for verily his face has never changed for 
a single hour.’ 


32 


XXIV 


THE BOOK OF KIND WORDS 

It is related from Jabir that, ‘The Apostle of God passed 
by a young goat, dead and with its ears cut off. He said, 
“Which of you wishes to have this for himself for one dir¬ 
ham ? ” They replied, “ We do not wish to have it for 
ourselves at any price.” He said, “By God! certainly the 
world is more contemptible in the sight of God than this is to 
to you.” ’— Muslim. 

It is related from Abu Hurairah that, ‘ The Apostle of God 
said, “The world is a prison for believers, but paradise for 
infidels.” ’— Muslim . 

It is related from ‘Amru bin ‘Awf that, ‘The Apostle of 
God said, “ By God! I do not fear poverty for you, but I fear 
lest the world should be made comfortable for you as it was 
made comfortable for those who were before you ; and ye seek 
after it as they sought after it; and it destroy you as it 
destroyed them.” ’— Muslim , Al Bukhari . 

It is related from Anas that, ‘ The Apostle of God said, 
“ Three things follow the dead. Two return, and one remains 
with him. His family and his goods and his works follow him. 
His family and his goods return, but his actions remain with 
him.” ’— Muslim , Al Bukhdri . 

It is related from Ibn Ma‘sud that, ‘The Apostle of God 
said, “ Do not enter into possession of lands, lest ye long for 
the world.” ’— At Tirmidhi . 

It is related from Abu Musa that, ‘The Apostle of God said, 
“ He who loves the world will be a loser in the next life ; and 
he who loves the next life, will be a loser in the world. There¬ 
fore choose that which will remain rather than that which will 
vanish away.” *— Ahmad. 

It is related from ‘Othman that, ‘ The Prophet said, “The 
son of Adam has no right to anything except these particular 
things : a house to live in, a cloth with which to cover his 
private parts, a crust of bread and some water.” *— At 
Tirmidhi . 


THE BOOK OF KIND WORDS 251 

It is related from Mu‘awiyah that, ‘ He entered in to his uncle 
Abu Hashim bin ‘Utbah to visit him in sickness. Then Abu 
Hashim wept. (Mu‘awiyah) said, “ What makes thee weep, O 
my uncle ? Is it pain that troubles thee, or a craving for the 
world ? ” He replied, “ No, but the Apostle of God imposed a 
condition upon us which I have not accepted.** He said, “ And 
what is that ? M He replied, “ I heard him say, ‘ Let it suffice 
thee to keep property consisting of one servant and one riding 
animal for (use in) the way of God* ; and verily it seems to 
me that I have accumulated (property).” * — Ahmad , At 
Tirmidht , An Nasdi , Ibn Mdjah . 

It is related from Hudhaifah that he said, ‘ I heard the 
Apostle of God say in his public address, “ Wine is the total of 
all sins, and women are the nets of Satan, and love of the world 
is the principal fault.** * He said, ‘And I heard him say, “ Put 
women behind where God has placed them.” ’— Razhi. 

It is related from Abu Hurairah that, ‘The Prophet said, 
“ When a man dies the angels say, ‘ What has he sent before 
(of good works)? * And the sons of Adam say, ‘ What has he 
left behind him (of property)? * ’* *— Al Baihaqi. 

It is related from Malik that he said, ‘ It was said to Loq- 
man, the Wise, “What caused thee to attain that which I see, 
namely eminence?’* He replied, “ Speaking tile truth, and 
keeping faith, and giving up what did not benefit me.” *— From 
Al Muwatta . 

It is related from‘Ayesha that she said,* We had a curtain, 
on which were pictures of birds. Then the Apostle of God 
said, “ O ‘Ayesha, change it, for verily when I see it I remem¬ 
ber the world.** * 

On the Excellence of Poverty, and Concerning the 
Prophet’s Manner of Life 

It is related from Usamah bin Zaid that, ‘The Apostle of 
God said, “ I will stand at the door of paradise, and the general¬ 
ity of those who will enter it will be the poor. And the 
owners of wealth will be held back, except that those who are 
destined for the fire will be ordered to the fire. And I will 
Stand at the door of hell, and behold! the generality of those 
who will enter will be women,** *— Muslim , Al Bukhdru 


252 SELECTIONS FROM MUHAMMADAN TRADITIONS 

It is related from ‘Ayesha that, 1 The family of Muhammad 
was never satisfied with barley bread for two days in success¬ 
ion until the Apostle of God was taken/— Muslim^ Al Bukhdrt . 

It is related from Anas that he took some barley loaves and 
some mutton-fat to the Prophet. And the Prophet had pawned 
his coat of mail in the city with a Jew, and had taken from 
him some barley for his family. And I heard him say, ‘There 
never remained in the evening with the family of Muhammad 
a single measure of wheat or a measure of grain although he 
had nine wives/— At Bukhari. 

% It is related from ‘Omar that he said, ‘ I went into the 
Apostle of God, and behold! he was lying on his side on a mat 
made of reeds. There was no bedding between him and it; 
and the mat had marked his side. And he was reclining on a 
pillow made of leather stuffed with the rind of dates. And I 
said, “ O Apostle of God, pray to God to give abundance to thy 
followers, for verily the Persians and the Greeks have been 
given abundance although they do not serve God.” He replied, 
“ Then art thou, O Ibn Khattab, still in this condition ! Those 
are a people whose good things have been given them quickly 
in the life of this world.” And in another tradition it runs, 
“ Art thou not satisfied that the world be for them, and the 
future life for us ?” 9 — Muslim , Al Bukhdri. 

It is related from Abu Hurairah that, ‘ The Apostle of God 
said, “The poor will enter paradise five hundred years before 
the rich, and that is half a day (with God)/ ,, — At Tirmidhu 

It is related from ‘Ayesha that she said, ‘ Three things of 
the world pleased the Apostle of God: food and women and 
perfumes. He obtained two of them, but not the third. He 
obtained women and perfumes, but he did not get food/— Ahmad . 

It is related from Anas that, ‘ The Apostle of God said, 
“ Perfumes and women have been made beloved of me, and my 
eye is refreshed in prayer.” ’— Ahmad , An Nasdi. 

On Hope and Avarice 

It is related from Abu Hurairah that, ‘ The Apostle of God 
said, “ The heart of the aged remains young in two respects : 
in love of the world and length of hope.” ’— Muslim , Al 
Bukhdrt . 


THE BOOK OF KIND WORDS 


253 


It is related from Ibn ‘Abbas that, 1 The Prophet said, 
“ If the son of Adam had two valleys full of money, he would 
certainly desire a third. And nothing will fill the belly of the 
son of Adam except the earth (of the grave). And God turns 
towards whoever repents.” *— Muslim , Al Bukhari . 

It is related from Ibn ‘Omar that he said, ‘ The Apostle of 
God took hold of a part of my body and said, ‘‘Be in the world 
as if thou wert a stranger and a passer along the road ; and 
reckon thyself as one of the inhabitants of the grave.” *— Al 
Bukhari . 

On the Desire for Wealth and Long Life in Order 
to Further Obedience 

It is related from a man of the companions of the Prophet 
that he said, ‘ We were in an assembly and the Apostle of God 
came to us with the marks of water on his head. And we said, 
“O Apostle of God, we perceive thee to be cheerful in mind.” 
He replied, “Yes.”’ (The man) said, ‘Then the people pro¬ 
pounded the question of riches. And the Apostle of God said, 
“ There is no harm in riches for him who fears God, the Exalted 
and Magnified ; but for him who fears (God) health is better 
than wealth, and happiness of soul is one of God's favours.” ’ 
Ahmad . 

It is related from Muhammad bin abu ‘Amirah, one of the 
companions of the Apostle of God, that he said, ‘ Verily if a 
servant were to fall on his face in the worship of God from the 
day he was born until he died in old age in obeying God, he 
would certainly despise such worship on that day (of resurrect¬ 
ion) and would desire that he be sent back to the world in order 
that he might increase (by his good actions) the compensations 
and rewards.’— Ahmad . 

On Reliance (on God) and Patience 

It is related from Ibn ‘Abbas that, * The Apostle of God 
said, “Seventy thousand of my followers will enter paradise 
without (rendering any) account. They are those who do not 
use spells or draw bad omens, and in their Lord put their 
trust.” ’— Muslim , Al Bukhari . 

It is related from Abu Hurairah that, ‘ The Apostle of God 
said, “ A God-fearing believer is better in the sight of God and 


254 


SELECTIONS FROM MUHAMMADAN TRADITIONS 


more beloved of him than the believer who is weak ; and there 
is good in everyone. Strive after that which will benefit 
thee ; and seek the aid of God, and be not weak. And if any¬ 
thing befalls thee, say not, 4 If I had done (so and soj.such and 
such would have happened,* but say, 4 God ordained it,* and ‘ He 
has done what He wished * ; for verily, ‘ if * introduces the work 
of Satan.” *— Muslim. 

It is related from ‘Omar binu’l-Khattab that he said, * I 
heard the Apostle of God say, “ If ye put your trust in God, in the 
way that He should be trusted, He will certainly provide for you 
as He provides for the birds. They begin the morning hungry, 
but reach the evening with full stomachs.” *— At Tirmidhi> Ibti 
Mdjah. 

It is related from I bn ‘Abbas that he said, ‘ I was behind the 
Apostle of God on a certain day, and he said, “ O boy, remem¬ 
ber God, and He will remember thee. Remember God, and thou 
wilt find Him before thee. And when thou prayest for anything, 
ask it of God ; and when thou seekest aid, seek it of Him. And 
know thou that if all the people were gathered together with 
the purpose of doing thee a benefit in any matter, they would 
not benefit thee except in that matter which God has already 
written down for thee. And if they came together with the 
purpose of doing thee an injury in some matter, they would 
not do thee any injury except in that matter which God has 
already written down. The pens have been lifted up, and the 
pages are dried.” ’—Ahmad , At Tirmidki . 

It is related from Jabir that he went with the Apostle of 
God on a military expedition in the direction of Nejd, and when 
the Apostle of God returned, he returned with him. And the 
noon overtook them in a valley having many trees. Then 
the Apostle of God alighted, and the people separated in order 
to seek the shade of the trees. And the Apostle of God 
Stopped beneath a samurah tree ; and he hung up his sword 
upon it; and we slept for awhile. And behold! The Apostle of 
God suddenly called us, and with him was a desert Arab. And 
(the Apostle) said, * Verily this man unsheathed my sword 
against me when I was sleeping. And I awoke whilst my 
sword was still in his hand. He said, “ Who will protect thee 
from me ? ” I replied, “ God.” This I said three times/ Aqd 


THE BOOK OF KIND WORDS 


255 


he did not punish him, and he sat down.— Muslim, Al Bukh&n . 
And in another tradition from Abu Bakr Al Isma‘ili it runs, 
‘He said, “Who will protect thee from me?” He replied, 
“God.” Then the sword fell from his hand; and the Apostle 
of God took the sword and said, “ Who will protect thee from 
me ?** And he replied, “ Be thou the best of takers.** He said, 
“ Dost thou bear witness that there is no God but Allah and 
and that I am the Apostle of Allah ? ’* He said, “ No. But 
I will make an agreement with thee to the effect that I will not 
fight against thee, nor will I stay with the people who fight 
against thee.” Then the Prophet let him go his way ; and he 
came to his companions and said, “ I have come to you from 
the best of men.’* *—Kitdbu l-Humaidi. 

It is related from Abu Hurairah that, ‘ A man came in to 
his family, and when he saw that they were in need, he went 
out to the desert. Then when his wife saw (what he had 
done) she stood up near the mill-stones and placed them in 
position, and went to the oven and heated it and then said, 
“O God, provide for our sustenance.” And she looked, and 
behold! the dish had become full.* (Abu Hurairah) said, 
‘Then she went to the oven and found it full. And her 
husband returned and said, “ Didst thou manage to procure 
something after my departure?” His wife replied, “Yes; 
from our Lord.” And he stood up near the mill-stones (and 
lifted one up to ascertain the cause). And that incident was 
mentioned to the Prophet. And he said, “If he had not lifted 
it up, it would have continued to revolve until the day of 
resurrection.** *— Ahmad . 

It is related from Ibn Ma‘sud that he said, ‘ It is as if I 
could see the Apostle of God relating the story of one of the 
prophets whose people beat him and caused the blood to flow. 
And he wiped the blood from his face and said, “O God, 
forgive my people, for verily they know not (what they do).** * 
— Muslim , Al Bukhari\ 

On Hypocrisy and Ostentation 

It is related from Abu Hurairah that, ‘The Apostle of God 
said, “ Verily, God does not look on your outward appearance or 
your possessions, but He looks at your hearts and your 


256 


SELECTIONS FROM MUHAMMADAN TRADITIONS 


It is related from Shaddad bin Aws that he said, 1 1 heard 
the Apostle of God say, “ He who prays with hypocrisy has 
associated another with God ; and he who fasts with hypocrisy 
has associated another with God ; and he who gives alms with 
hypocrisy has associated another with God.’* ’— Ahmad . 

It. is related from Abu Sa‘id that he said, ‘ The Apostle of 
God came out to us when we were talking about the Antichrist 
to one another. And he said, “ Shall I not tell you of something 
which I fear for you more than the Antichrist.” We said, 
“ Yes, O Apostle of God.” He said, “ It is the secret associa¬ 
tion with God of something else ; namely that a man stands up 
and says his prayers and lengthens them because he sees a man 
looking at him.” ’— I bn Mdjah . 

On Crying Aloud and Fear 

It is related from Abu Hurairah that, ‘ Abu’l-Qasim said* 
“ By Him in whose hand is my life ! if ye knew what I know, 
ye would certainly weep much and laugh little.” '—Al Bukhdri. 

It is related from Ummu’l-'Alai \ the Helper, that she said, 
1 The Apostle of God said,“ Although I am the Apostle of God, 
yet I do not know what will be done to me or to you.” ’— Al 
Bukhdri . 

It is related from Jabir that, ‘The Apostle of God said, 
‘‘The fire (of hell) was shown to me, and I saw therein a 
woman of the children of Israel who was being punished on 
account of a cat which she had possessed, and which she had 
tied up, and neither fed nor allowed to eat of the small birds 
and creeping things of the earth, until it died of hunger. And 
I saw ‘Amru bin ‘Amiru’l-Khuzai* dragging his intestines in 
the fire. And he was the first one to set free a female camel 
(in the name of idols).” ’— Muslim . 

It is related from Anas that, ‘The Prophet said, “God, 
great are His utterances! will say (at the last day), take out 
from the fire whoever has remembered me for one day, or 
feared me in one place.” ’— At Tirmidhi . 

It is related from Abu Sa‘id that he said, ‘The Prophet 
came out to prayers, and he saw the people as if they were 
laughing. And he said, “ Verily if ye had remembered often 
the cutter of delights, namely death, it would have diverted 
you from what I see. Therefore remember much the cutter of 


THE BOOK OF KIND WORDS 


257 


delights; for no day will come to the grave, but the latter will 
speak and say, ‘ I am the house of the stranger, and I am the 
solitary house, and I am the house of the clay, and I am the 
house of worms/ And when a believing servant is buried the 
grave says to him, ‘ Be welcome and at thine ease, for thou 
art certainly the most beloved to me of those who have walked 
over me. And since I rule over thee this day, and thou hast 
returned to me, thou shalt now see what I will do to thee.* 
Then the grave is made spacious for him as far as the eye can 
see, and a door of paradise is opened for him. And when a 
wicked servant or infidel is buried, the grave says to him, 

1 Thou art not welcome, and will not be at thine ease, for verily 
thou art certainly the most hateful to me of those who have 
walked over me. And since I rule over thee this day, and thou 
hast returned to me, thou shalt now see what I will do to thee. 
Then it will press on him until his ribs are displaced.” ' (Abu 
Sa'id) said, ‘ Then the Apostle of God mentioned with his 
fingers, and placed some of them between others, and said, 
“ And seventy serpents are ordered for him, one of which, if 
it breathed on the earth, nothing of what remained on the earth 
would grow ; and they bite him and lacerate him until he is 
taken to give his account.” And the Apostle of God said, 
“Verily the grave is only one of the gardens of paradise or 
one of the pits of hill-fire.” *— At Tirmidhi . 

It is related from Abu Hurairah that, 1 The Apostle of God 
said, “ My Lord has ordered me nine things : the fear of God 
in secret and in public ; speaking words of justice, whether in 
anger or in pleasure ; moderation in poverty and in affluence ; 
that I should give presents to those who are estranged from 
me ; that I should give to him who denies me ; that I should 
forgive him who oppresses me ; that my silence be spent in 
contemplation, and my speaking in mentioning God's name ; 
that my seeing be in being an example; and that I should 
command what is good.” ’— Razin . 

On the Mutability of Men 

It is related from Abu Sa‘id that, 1 The Apostle of God 
said, “You will certainly follow the customs of those who were 
before you, span by span, and cubit by cubit, until, if they 

33 


258 SELECTIONS FROM MUHAMMADAN TRADITIONS 

entered a lizard’s hQle, you would follow them.” It was said, 
“O Apostle of God, (dost thou speak of) the Jews and Chris¬ 
tians ? ” He replied, “ Who else ? ” ’— Muslim , Al Bukhdri . 

It is related from Hudhaifah that, * The Prophet said f 
“ The hour (of resurrection) will not come until you kill your 
religious leader, and flog one another with swords, and until the 
wicked amongst you inherit this world of yours.” ’—At 
Tirmidhi. 

It is related from Abu Hurairah that, c The Apostle of 
God said, “When your princes are the best of you, and your 
rich men the most liberal of you, and your affairs are dis¬ 
cussed amongst you, then the surface of the earth is better for 
you than its bosom . 1 But when your princes are the wicked 
amongst you, and your rich men the meanest of you, and your 
affairs relegated to your women, then the bosom of the earth is 
better for you than its surface.” ’—At Tirmidhi. 

It is related from Abii Hurairah that he said, ‘When the 
revelation descended, “And admonish thy near relations,” 
the Prophet called the Quraish, and they gathered together. 
And he addressed them collectively and individually and said, 
“O Bani Ka‘b bin Luwa, save yourselves from the fire; 
O Bani Murrah bin Ka‘b, save yourselves from the fire; O 
Bani ‘Abdu’s-Shams, save yourselves from the fire; O Bani 
‘Abdu Manaf, save yourselves from the fire ; O Bani Hashim, 
save yourselves from the fire; O Bani ‘Abdu’l-Muftalib, save 
yourselves from the fire ; O Fafimah, save thyself from the 
fire, for I cannot gain anything from God on thy behalf, 
except that I recognise, the right of blood-relationship, and 
will do what I can.” ’— Muslim. And in another tradition 
from Muslim and Al Bukhari it runs thus, ‘He said, “O 
people of the Quraish, redeem yourselves, for I cannot suffice 
you anything against (the punishments of) God; O Bani 
‘Abdu Manaf, I cannot suffice you anything against (the 
punishments of) God; O ‘Abbas bin ‘Abdu’l-Muttalib, I 
cannot suffice thee anything against (the punishments of) God ; O 
Safiyya, wife of the Apostle of God, F cannot suffice thee anything 
against (the punishments of) God; O Fatimah, daughter of 
Muhammad, ask me what thou wilt of my property, for I cannot 
suffice thee anything against (the punishments of) God.” 9 


1 That is, the grave. 


XXV 


THE BOOK OF SEDITIONS 

It is related from Abu Hurairah that, ‘The Apostle of 
God said, “By Him in whose hand is my life! the world will 
not pass away until there come a day to man in which the 
murderer (will not know why he killed, nor the murdered) 
why he was killed.” It was said, “How will that be?” He 
replied, “ On account of strife. The murderer and the murdered 
will both be in the fire.” 9 — Muslim. 

It is related from Thawban that, ‘The Apostle of God 
said, “I only fear for my people leaders who will lead men 
astray. And when once the sword is unsheathed amongst my 
people, it will not be taken away from them again until the 
day of resurrection.” At Tirmidhi , Abu Ddud. 

It is related from Safinah that he said, ‘ I heard the 
Prophet say, “The succession of Khalifs will be for thirty 
years. After that there will be kingships.” Then, said 
Safinah, “ I reckon the reign of Abu Bakr as Khalif at two years, 
and the reign of ‘ Omar as Khalif at ten years, and that of 
‘Othman at twelve years, and that of ‘All six years.” ’— 
Ahmad , At Tirmidhi . 

It is related from ‘Abdu’llah bin ‘Omar that, ‘The 
Apostle of God said, “There will be sedition involving the 
Arabs, the slain of which will be in the fire, and in which the 
(abuse of the) tongue will be worse than the fall of the 
sword.” ’— At Tirmidhi , Ibn Majah . 

It is related from Thawban that, ‘ The Apostle of God said, 
“ When the sword is unsheathed amongst my people, it will not 
be put back again until the day of resurrection ; and the hour 
(of resurrection) will not take place until some tribes of my 
people join themselves to the polytheists, and until some tribes 
of my people worship idols. And there will arise amongst my 
people thirty liars, each of whom will assert that he is a 
prophet of God ; whereas I am the seal of the prophets, and 
there will be no prophet after me. And a party of my people 
will certainly continue to victoriously follow the truth. None 


260 SELECTIONS FROM MUHAMMADAN TRADITIONS 

who oppose them will be able to hurt them until the command of 
God comes.” ’—Abd Ddtid , At Tirmidhi . 

It is related from Ibnu’l-Musayyib that he said, ‘ The first 
insurrection occurred, that is the murder of ‘Othman, and none 
of those who were present at (the battle of) Badr remained. 
Then the second insurrection took place, namely, that of 
IJarrah, and none of those who were present at pudaibah 
remained. After that the third insurrection took place, and did 
not come to an end so long as there remained any strength 
amongst the people .’—Al Bukhdri. 

Concerning Battles 

It is related from Abu Hurairah that, ‘ The Apostle of God 
said, “The hour of resurrection will not come until two great 
tribes shall fight, between whom there will be great battles. 
Their claims (in Islam) will be one. And the hour will not 
come until nearly thirty false Christs are sent, everyone of 
whom will assert that he is a prophet of God; and until 
knowledge is withheld, and earthquakes multiply, and the time 
approaches, and seditions appear and rebellions increase, and 
that is murder. (And the hour will not come) until wealth 
increases amongst you and abounds, so that the owner of 
wealth will be concerned as to who will accept his alms and 
until he pleads with him (to accept them). And he with whom 
he pleads will reply, *1 have no need of it,’ and until man is 
filled with pride in building houses, and until a man passes by 
the grave of another and says, 1 Would that I were in his place ! ’ 
and until the sun arises in the West. And when it rises, and 
men see it they will believe altogether. And that is (a day) 
when the faith of a soul will not benefit it, which has not 
believed before, or bestowed good in its faith. And the hour 
will certainly come when two men have spread out their cloths 
(for sale), but it will arrive before they have concluded a sale, 
or folded up the cloth. And the hour will certainly come when 
a man will have departed to milk his she-camel, but before he 
has drunk it. And the hour will certainly come when he has 
gone forth to water his camel at his cistern, but before it has 
drunk therefrom. And the hour will certainly come when 
a man has raised the food to his mouth, but before he has 
eaten it.” ’— Muslim , Al Bukhdri . 


THE BOOK OF SEDITIONS 


261 


It is related from Abu Hurairah that, 1 The Apostle 
of God said, The hour (of resurrection) will not come 
until ye fight a people whose shoes are of hair, and until ye 
fight the Turks whose eyes are small and faces red and noses 
flat, as if their faces were shields covered with leather.” 
Muslim , Al Bukhdri. 

It is related from Abu Hurairah that, ‘ The Apostle of God 
said, “The hour will not come until the Muslims fight the 
Jews. And the Muslims with kill them until the Jews hide 
themselves behind stones and trees. And the stones and trees 
will say, 4 O Muslim, O servant of God, this is a Jew behind 
me ; come and kill him. But the tree (called) gharqad will not 
say so, because it is one of the trees belonging to the Jews.” ’ 
— Muslim . 

It is related from Nafi 4 bin 4 Utbah that, 4 The Apostle of 
God said, 44 You will wage war in the Island of Arabia, and God 
will give you the victory. After that (you will fight with) 
Persia, and God will give you the victory over it. After that 
with Greece, and God will give you the victory over it. After 
that you will wage war with Antichrist, and God will give you 
the victory over him.” ’— Muslim . 

It is related from Abu Hurairah that, 4 The Apostle of God 
said, 44 The hour will not come until the Greeks come down in 
A1 4 Amaq or in Dayak. And an army of the best of the people 
of the earth will come out to them from Madina on that day ; 
and when they arrange themselves in ranks (for battle) the 
Greeks will say, 4 Leave vacant a space between us and those 
who made captive some of us that we may fight with them/ 
But the Muslims will say, 4 No, by God! we will not make 
vacant a space between you and our brethren.' And they 
will fight with them, and a third of them will be put to 
flight, and God will never forgive them. And a third of 
them will be killed: the best of martyrs in the sight of God; 
and a third of them will be victorious and will never create 
sedition. And they will conquer Constantinople. And whilst 
they are dividing the plunder, having hung up their swords on 
an olive tree, behold! Satan will cry out in their midst, 4 Verily 
the (false) Christ has come amongst your families in your 
absence/ Then they will go forth—and that will be false— 


262 SELECTIONS FROM MUHAMMADAN TRADITIONS 

and when they come to Syria he will come out. And whilst 
they are preparing for battle and dressing their ranks, when 
prayers begin, Jesus, Son of Mary, will descend and act as leader. 
And when the enemy of God sees him, he will melt away as salt 
melts in water. And if he leaves him alone, he would certainly 
melt away until he is destroyed. But God will kill him by the 
hand of Jesus ; and he will show them his blood upon his 
lance.’* ’— Muslim . 

It is related from Dhu Mikhbar that he said, ‘ I heard the 
Apostle of God say, “You will make a peace of safety with 
Greece and you and they will wage war with your enemies 
behind you. And you will be given the victory and will plunder 
and will dwell in safety. Afterwards you will return until you 
descend to a pasturage on high land. Then a man of the 
Christians will raise a cross and will say, ‘ The cross gave us the 
victory.’ Then a man of the Muslims will get angry and will 
beat him. And just then the Greeks will act treacherously and 
will gather together for battle.” And some of them have 
added to this, “ And the Muslims will rush to their weapons 
and fight. And God will honour that band of men with martyr¬ 
dom.” ’—Abu Baud . 

It is related from Abu Bakr that, ‘ The Apostle of God said, 
“ A people of my followers will come down to low land called 
Busrah, near the river called the Tigris, over which there will 
be a bridge. Its inhabitants will be numerous. It will be one 
of the great cities of the Muslims. And when the end of time 
comes, the Bani Qantura (namely the Turks) will come, broad¬ 
faced and small-eyed, until they come down to the bank of the 
river. And its inhabitants will be divided into three bands. 
One band will be employed with the tails of their cattle (i.e. in 
agriculture) and in the desert, and they will be destroyed ; and 
one band will be busy saving themselves and will be destroyed ; 
and one band will place their children behind their backs 
and will fight and will become martyrs.” ’—Abd Ddud . 

Concerning the Signs of the Hour of Resurrection 

It is related from Anas that he said, ‘ I heard the Apostle 
of God say, “ Verily amongst the signs of the hour is that 
knowledge will be taken away, and ignorance willbe increased, 
and adultery will abound, and the drinking of wine will 


THR BOOK OF SEDITIONS 


263 


increase, and men will decrease in numbers and women 
will increase, until there will be fifty women for one man.” *— 
Muslim , Al Bukhari . 

It is related from Abu Hurairah that, ‘The Apostle of 
God said, “ The hour will not come until the Euphrates shall 
show a mountain of gold, over which men will fight. And of 
every hundred of them, ninety-nine will be killed. And every 
man of them will say, it may be that I shall be he who will be 
saved.” *— Mtislim. 

It is related from Anas that, ‘ The Apostle of God said, 
“ The first sign of the hour will be a fire which will drive men 
from the East to the West.” Al Bukhari\ 

It is related from ‘Abdu’llah bin Hawalah that he said, 

1 The Apostle of God sent us on foot to get plunder; and we 
returned without having obtained any plunder. And he 
perceived the fatigue in our faces, and he stood up amongst us 
and said, “ O God! do not entrust their affairs to me, for I am 
unable to manage them ; and do not entrust their affairs 
to themselves, for they are impotent to carry them out; and do 
not entrust their affairs to men, for they will choose their own 
in preference to them.” Then he placed his hand upon my 
head, and afterwards said, “ O Ibn Hawalah, when thou seest 
that a Khalif has come down at the Holy Land, then earth¬ 
quakes and anxieties and severe happenings will be near at 
hand; and then the hour will be nearer to men than this hand 
of mine is to thy head.” * 

It is related from Ibn Ma’sud that, ‘The Apostle of God 
said, “The world will not come to an end until there reign 
over the Arabs a man of the people of my house whose name 
will agree with mine.” 9 —At Tirmidhi , Abu Ddud . 

It is related from Abu Qatadah that, ‘ The Apostle 
of God said, “The signs (of the day of resurrection) will 
come after two hundred (years).” 9 —Ibn M&jah . 

It is related from Thawban that, ‘The Apostle of God 
said, “ When ye see that black standards have come from the 
direction of Khorasan, then come to them; for verily with 
them will be the Khalif of God, Al Mahdi. ” ’— Ahmad . 

It is related from Abu Ishaq that, ‘ ‘All said, as he looked 
at his son, Al Hasan, “ Verily this son of mine is a Sayyad, as 


264 SELECTIONS FROM MUHAMMADAN TRADITIONS 

the Apostle of God named him ; and there will come out of his 
loins a man called by the name of your Prophet, resembling 
him in disposition, but not in outward appearance.” Then he 
repeated a story that (the promised one) would fill the earth 
with justice/— Abu Daud . 

On the Signs Preceding the Hour of Resurrection, 
and Accounts of Antichrist 

It is related from Hudhaifah bin Usaidu’l-Ghifari that he 
said, ‘The Prophet came to us when we were conversing 
together and said, “What were ye talking • about ? ” They 
said, “We were mentioning the hour of resurrection.” He 
said, “ It will never come until you see previous to it, ten 
signs.” Then he mentioned the smoke, and Antichrist, and the 
beast, and the rising of the sun in the West, and the descent of 
Jesus, Son of Mary, and Gog and Magog, and three eclipses : 
an eclipse in the East and an eclipse in the West and an eclipse 
in the Island of Arabia. And at the end of that a fire which 
will come out from Yeman, and which will drive men towards 
the place where they will be gathered together for judgment/ 
— Muslim . 

It is related from ‘Abdu’llah that, ‘ The Apostle of God 
said, “It is not hidden from you that God is not one-eyed. 
And verily the false Christ is blind in the right eye, as if his 
eye were a swollen grape.” ’— Muslim , Al Bukhari . 

It is related from An Nawwas bin San/an that he said* 
‘The Apostle of God mentioned Antichrist and said, “If he 
comes forth whilst I am among you, I will repel him without 
your help. But if he come forth when I am not in your midst, 
a man will defend himself; and God is my Khalif over every 
Muslim. Verily Antichrist is a young man with crisp hair and 
dull eyes, as if I were likening him to ‘Abdu’l-Uzza bin Qatan. 
Then whoever of you comes into contact with him, let him 
recite (as a protection) against him the opening verses of the 
Chapter of the Cave, for that will be a protection for you from 
his seditions. Verily he will come forth on a road mid-way 
between Syria and ‘Iraq and will act corruptly on the right 
hand and on the left. O servants of God, be firm! ” We said, 
“ O Apostle of God, how long will his stay be on the earth ”? 


THE BOOK OF SEDITIONS 265 

He replied, “ Forty days, one day being like one year, and one 
day like a month, and one day like a week, and the rest of his 
days will be like your days.” We said, “ O Apostle of God, 
then in that day which will be like a year, will one day's 
prayers be sufficient for us ? ” He replied, “ No. Compute its 
share of it for prayers." We said, “O Apostle of God, what 
is this hastening on the earth ? ” He replied, “ It is like rain 
followed by wind; and he will come to a people and call them, 
and they will believe in him, and he will command the heavens, 
and they will send rain. And he will order the earth, and 
it will bring forth herbs. And their herds will come to 
them in the evening longer in their humps than they were 
before, and with full udders and extended flanks. After¬ 
wards he will come to a people, and will call them, but they 
will return his words to him. Then he will depart from 
them, and they will rise in the morning to find their land 
smitten with barrenness, and with nothing of their possess¬ 
ions in their hands. And he will pass by ruins and will 
say to them, ‘Bring forth your treasures.’ Then their 
treasures will follow him like male bees follow the females. 
After that he will call a man of full youth and will smite 
him with a sword and will cut him into two pieces like the 
shooting of an arrow at its mark. After that he will call 
him and he will draw near with gladness of countenance and 
laughing. And whilst Antichrist is acting thus, God will send 
Jesus, Son of Mary, and he will descend near a white tower to 
the east of Damascus, between two cloths of red, placing the 
palms of his hands upon the wings of two angles. Y/hen he 
will lower his head, it will drop (perspiration), and when he 
will raise it up, there will fall from him beads like pearls. 
And it will not be permitted for any infidel touched by his 
breath to do aught but die. And his breath will reach as far as 
the eye can reach. And he will search for the Antichrist until 
he finds him at the gate of Ludd ; and he will kill him. After 
that a people will come to Jesus whom God has preserved; 
and he will stroke their faces in comfort, and will inform them 
of the degree of eminence they will attain in paradise. And 
whilst he is doing that, behold! God will send a revelation to 
Jesus (saying), ‘Verily I have brought out servants of mine, 

34 


266 


SELECTIONS FROM MUHAMMADAN TRADITIONS 


whom it is not possible for any to fight. Then give my 
servants a refuge in Mount Sinai.’ And God will send Gog and 
Magog, and they will come swiftly from every high land, and 
the first of them will pass over the Lake of Tiberias ; and they 
will drink up what is in it. Then the last of them will pass 
over and will say, 4 Verily there was at one time water in this 
lake.’ After that they will go on until they reach the mountain 
of Khamar, which is the mountain of Jerusalem. And they 
will say, 4 We have killed those who were on the earth, then 
come and let us kill all who are in the heavens.’ And they 
will cast their wooden arrows towards the sky ; but God will 
return them upon themselves dyed with blood. And the 
Prophet of God (Jesus) and his companions will be prevented 
(from descending the mount) until the head of an ox becomes 
better for one of them than one hundred dinars is this day to 
one of you. And Jesus, the Prophet of God, and his companions 
will pray, and God will send to them (Gog and Magog) worms 
in their necks ; and in the morning they will be as one dead 
person. After that Jesus, the Prophet of God, and his com¬ 
panions will go down to the earth, but they will not find in the 
earth the place of a span that their fat and stench have not 
filled. Then Jesus, the Prophet of God, and his companions 
will pray to God, and God will send birds like the necks of 
camels, and they will carry (the corpses) away and cast them 
where God wishes.” And in another tradition it runs, 44 They 
will cast them into Nahbal.” And the Muslims will make fires 
of their bows and wooden arrows and quivers for seven years. 
After that God will send a rain, and no dwelling of masonry or 
of hair will escape from it; and it will wash the earth clean 
until it leaves it like a slippery (surface). After that it will 
be said to the earth, 4 Bring forth thy fruits, and send back thy 
blessings!’ On that day a troop of men will eat from one 
pomegranate, and will shade themselves with its rind. And the 
earth will be blessed in the matter of milk until one female 
camel will suffice for a great multitude of men ; and a cow will 
suffice for a whole tribe of men; and one female sheep will 
suffice for one clan of a tribe. And whilst they are in this 
condition, behold ! God will send a pleasant wind; and it will take 
them under their armpits, and it will take the soul of every 


THE BOOK OF SEDITIONS 


267 


believer and every Muslim. And the wicked amongst men, who 
created discord on the earth like the quarrelling of asses, will 
remain, and the hour (of resurrection) will come upon them.” ! 
— Muslim . 

It is related from Anas that, ‘The Apostle of God said, 
“Seventy thousand Jews of Ispahan will follow Antichrist; 
and on them will be robes such as are worn by learned 
men.” Muslim . 

It is related from ‘Abdu’llah bin ‘Omar that, ‘ The Apostle 
of God said, “I saw myself to-night near the Ka‘bah ; and I 
saw a man the colour of wheat, like the best of any wheat- 
coloured man whom thou hast seen ; and he had a lock of hair 
like the best of the locks of hair which thou hast seen. He 
had dressed it, and it was dripping with water as he leaned on 
tfie shoulders of two men whilst going round the House (of 
God). Then I said, ‘Who is this?’ They replied, ‘This is 
the Messiah, the Son of Mary.’ He said, ‘ Then behold ! I saw 
a man with wrinkled and curly hair, blind in the right eye, as 
if his eye were a swollen grape, like as if he resembled a man 
whom ye have seen named Ibn Qatn. And he was placing his 
hands upon the shoulders of two men as he went round the 
house. Then I asked, ‘ Who is this ? ! They replied, ‘This is 
Antichrist.” ’— Muslim , Al Bukhari. And in another tradition 
it runs, 4 He said, with reference to the Antichrist, “ He was a 
man red and corpulent, with a head of curly hair, and blind in 
his right eye. The man most near to him in appearance is Ibn 
Qatn.” ’ 

It is related from Abu Sa‘idu’l-Khudri that, ‘ The Apostle 
of God said, “ Seventy thousand people of my followers will 
follow Antichrist, arrayed in black clothes.” ’— Sharhu's-Sunnafi. 

It is related from Abu Hurairah that, 4 The Prophet 
said, “Antichrist will come forth on an intensely white ass. 
The distance between its ears will be seventy cubits.” ’—Al 
Baihaqi . 

The Story of Ibn SayyAd 

It is related from Nafi‘ that Ibn ‘Omar used to say, “By 
God! I have no doubt that the Antichrist is Ibn $ayyad/’ ’— 
Abu Ddud . 


268 SELECTIONS FROM MUHAMMADAN TRADITIONS 

Concerning the Coming Down of Jesus 

It is related from Abu Hurairah that, ‘ The Apostle of God 
said, “ By Him in whose hand is my life ! it is certainly on the 
point of coming to pass that the Son of Mary will descend 
amongst you as a just judge. Aiid he will break the cross in 
pieces, and will kill the swine and will set aside the poll-tax. 
And wealth will abound to such an extent that no one will 
accept it; and one prostration in prayer will be better than the 
world and all that is therein.” Then Abu Hurairah said, “If you 
doubt this then (read the revelation), ‘There shall be none of 
the People of the Book, but will certainly believe on him before 
his death. ” 91 — Muslim , Al Bukhdrt. 

It is related from Jabir that, ‘The Apostle of God said, 
“ A party of my followers will continue to victoriously fight 
for the truth till the day of resurrection. And Jesus, the Son 
of Mary, will come down; and their prince will say, ‘ Come and 
say the prayers for us.’ And he will reply, ‘ No, verily some 
of you are princes over others, because of God’s honouring 
this people.” ’— Muslim . 

It is related from ‘Abdu’llah bin ‘Amru that, ‘The Apostle 
of God said, “ Jesus, Son of Mary, will descend to the earth, 
and will marry, and children will be born to him. And he will 
remain on the earth forty-five years. After that he will die 
and be buried with me in my grave. And Jesus, Son of Mary, 
and I will rise in one grave between Abu Bakr and ‘Omar.” ’— 
Ibnu l-Jawzi in Kildbti l- Wafdi ’. 

Concerning the Approach of the Hour of 
Resurrection 

It is related from ‘Ayesha that she said, ‘ Some men of the 
desert Arabs used to come to the Prophet and ask him about 
the hour of resurrection ; and he used to look at the youngest 
of them and say, “If this youth lives, the weakness of old age 
will not overtake him until your hour comes to you.”’— 
Muslim , Al Bukhdrt . 


Qur’an, Suratu’n-Nisa’ (iv) 159. 


THE BOOK OF SEDITIONS 


269 


The Hour of Resurrection will Not come Except on 

Wicked Men 

It is related from ‘Abdu’llah bin Ma’sud that, ‘The Apostle 
of God said, “ The hour will not come except upon the wicked 
of creation/ ’ *— Muslim . 

It is related from ‘Ayesha that she said, ‘ I heard the 
Apostle of God say, “ Day and night will not cease so long as 
A1 Lat and A1 Uzza are worshipped.” Then I said, “O 
Apostle of God, I certainly thought when God sent down the 
revelation, ‘ It is He who hath sent His Apostle with the 
direction and true religion, that He may cause it to appear 
superior to every religion, although the idolaters be averse 
thereto, 1 that idolatry would come to an end.” He replied, 
“Such will continue so long as God wills. Afterwards God 
will send a pleasant wind, and then everyone in whose heart is 
faith of the measure of a barley grain will be made to die; and 
those who have no good in them will remain, and will return to 
the religion of their fathers.” ’ — Muslim . 

Concerning the Blowing of the Trumpet 

It is related from ‘Ayesha that she said, ‘ I asked the Apostle 
of God concerning the revelation, “The day will come when 
the earth will be changed into another earth, and the heaven 
(into another heaven.)” 1 and said, “Where will men be on 
that day ?” He replied, ‘* On the bridge (over hell).” *— Muslim . 

It is related from Abu Hurairah that, ‘ The Apostle of God 
said, “The sun and the moon will be folded up like a turban on 
the day of resurrection.” '—Al Bukhdri . 

It is related from Abu Sa’id that he said, ‘ The Apostle of 
of God mentioned the blower of the trumpet and said, “On his 
right will be Gabriel and on his left Michael.” ’ 

Concerning the Gathering Together 

It is related from Ibn ‘Abbas that, ‘ The Prophet said, 
“Verily ye will be gathered together (at the resurrection) 
barefooted, naked and uncircumcised.” After that he recited 
the revelation, “As we made the first creature, so will we also 
reproduce it. This is a promise incumbent upon us. Mile will 


1 Qur’an, Stiratu Ibrahim (xiv) 48. 


270 SELECTIONS FROM MUHAMMADAN TRADITIONS 

surely perform it/’ 1 And the first who will be clothed on the 
day of resurrection will be Abraham. And verily some men 
of my companions will be taken to the left (for punishment). 
And I will say, “My companions! my companions! ” But 
he will say, “ Verily they are always turning back on their heels 
ever since thou separated from them.” Then I will say, as did 
the good servant (Jesus), “ I was a witness over them so long 
as I remained amongst them (but since thou hast taken me to 
thyself, thou hast been the watcher over them; for thou art 
witness of all things. If thou punish them, they are surely thy 
servants ; and if thou forgive them, thou art mighty and 
wise.)” ’ 2 — Muslim , Al Bukhari . 

It is related from Abii Hurairah that, ‘The Prophet said, 
“Abraham will meet his father Azar on the day of resurrect¬ 
ion ; and on the face of Azar will be blackness and dust. And 
Abraham will say to him, ‘ Did I not say to thee, disobey me 
not.’ And his father will say to him, ‘ To-day I will not disobey 
thee/ Then Abraham will say, ‘ O Lord, Thou didst promise me 
that thou wouldst not disgrace me on the day when men would 
be raised. Then what disgrace is greater than that my father 
is the farthest removed (from Thy mercy)?’ Then God Most 
High will reply, ‘ Verily I have made paradise forbidden for the 
infidels/ After that it will be said to Abraham, ‘ Look at what 
is beneath thy feet/ Then he will look and behold his father 
will become an animal smeared with mud ; and he will be taken 
by his feet and cast into the fire.” ’— Al Bukhari . 

It is related from Abu Sa‘idu’1 Khudri that, ‘The Prophet 
said, “ God Most High will say, ‘O Adam ! * He will reply, ‘Here 
I am at Thy service; and all good is in Thy hands/ God will 
say, ‘ Bring forth the army of the fire/ He will reply, ‘What is 
the army of the fire ? ’ He will say, ‘ From every thousand, nine 
hundred and ninety-nine/ At this time the little ones of the earth 
will become young men, and every pregnant woman will miscarry, 
and you will see men as drunkards, though in reality they are 
not drunkards; but the punishment of God will be severe.” 
They said, “ O Apostle of God, who of us is that one (amongst 
the thousand)?” He replied, “Rejoice, for verily from you 

0 1 Qur’an, Suratu’l*Anbiy&’ (xxi) 104. 

* Qur’an,Suratu’l-M£’ida (v) 120, 


THE BOOK OF SEDITIONS 


271 


will be one man, and from Gog and Magog a thousand.” 
Afterwards he said, “ By Him in whose hand is my life! I 
hope that you will be one-fourth of the inhabitants of 
paradise/’ Then we said, “God is great! ” And he said, “ I 
hope that you will be one-third of the inhabitants of paradise.” 
Then we said, “ God is great!” And he said, “ I hope that you 
will be one-half of the inhabitants of paradise.” And we said, 
“God is great! ” He said, “ You will be amongst men nothing 
else but as one black hair on the skin of a white ox, or like a 
white hair on the skin of a black ox.” ’— Muslim> Al Bukhdri. 

On the Reckoning, and the Retaliation, 
ani* the Scales 

4 It is related from Abu Musa that, ‘ The Apostle of God 
said, “When the day of resurrection arrives, God will hand 
over a Jew or a Christian to every Muslim, and will say, ‘This 
is thy redemption from the fire.’ ” ’— Muslim . 

It is related from Abu Sa‘idu’l-Khudri that, ‘The Apostle 
of God said, “ Noah will be brought on the day of resurrection; 
and it will be said to him, ‘ Didst thou make known (the 
message of God)? ’ He will reply, ‘Yes, O my Lord/ Then 
his people will be asked, ‘ Did he make known to you the 
message?’ They will say, ‘No warner came to us.’ And it 
will be said (to Noah), ‘Who are thy witnesses?’ He will 
reply, ‘Muhammad and his people.’” Then the Apostle of 
God said, “Then you will be brought, and will bear witness 
that he has made known the message (to mankind).” After 
that the Apostle of God recited (the words), “Thus have we 
placed you an intermediate nation, that ye may be witnesses 
against the rest of mankind, and that the Apostle may be a 
witness against you.” ’— Al Bukhdri . 

It is related from ‘Ayesha that, ‘ She remembered the fire 
(of hell) and wept. Then the Apostle of God said, “What 
makes thee weep ? ” She replied, “ I wept, remembering the 
fire. Wilt thou remember thy family on the day of resurrect¬ 
ion ? ” The Apostle of God replied, “There are three places 
at which one person will not remember another : at the scales, 
until he shall know whether his scales will be light or heavy; 
at the book, when it will be said, ‘ Come and read the records,* 


272 SELECTIONS FROM MUHAMMADAN TRADITIONS 

until he knows where his book will be put, whether in his right 
hand or in his left behind his back ; and at the bridge, when it 
will be placed over the midst of hell.” ’— Abu Ddud. 

It is related from ‘Ayesha that she said, ‘ I heard the 
Apostle of God saying in certain of his prayers, “ O God, take 
from me an easy account.” I said, “O Prophet of God, what 
is an easy account? ” He replied, “That He looks into His 
book and passes over it. Verily, O ‘Ayesha, he from whom 
an exact account will be taken on that day will perish.” *— 
Ahmad .. 

It is related from Asma * bint Yazid that, 1 The Apostle of 
God said, “ Men will be gathered together on one plain on 
the day of resurrection ; and a herald will cry and say, ‘ Where 
are those people whose sides removed themselves from the 
beds (in order to pray at night.)’ Then they will stand upi 
and they will be few in number, and will enter paradise without 
(giving an) account. After that the rest of men will be 
ordered to give an account.” Al Baihagi. 

Concerning the Pond and Intercession 
, It is related from Anas that, ‘ The Apostle of God said, 
“Whilst I was going through paradise, behold I came to a 
river, the two shores of which were domes made of hollow 
pearls. I said, ‘ O Gabriel, what is this ? ’ He replied, ‘ This 
is (the pond called) Kawthar which thy Lord hath given thee.’ 
And behold its clay was strong-smelling musk.” ’— Al Bukhdrt . 

It is related from Sahl bin Sa‘d that, ‘The Apostle of God 
said, “ Verily I will go before you to the pond. Whoever will 
pass by me will drink ; and he who drinks will never thirst for 
evermore. And certain peoples will certainly be brought back 
to me whom I will recognize ; and they will recognize me. 
After that something will be placed between them and me, and 
I will say, 1 Verily they are of my people.’ And it will be said, 

‘ Verily thou dost not know what innovations they made after 
thee.’ Then I will say, ‘ Begone ! begone ! those who changed 
(my religion) after me.” ’— Muslim , Al Bukhdrt\ 

It is related from Anas that, ‘ The Prophet said, “ The 
believers will be confined on the day of resurrection, so that 
they will be filled with anxiety and will say, ‘(Better would it 


THE BOOK OF SEDITIONS 273 

be) if we had sought the intercession (of some one) with our 
Lord, and He had taken us from this place of ours.* Then they 
will come to Adam and will say, ‘ Thou art Adam, the father of 
mankind. God created thee with His own hand and caused 
thee to dwell in His garden, and the angels prostrated before 
thee and taught thee the names of all things, therefore 
intercede for us with thy Lord, so that He take us from this 
place of ours.’ Then he will reply, 4 1 am not worthy * ; and he 
will remember his sin which he committed in eating of the tree 
when he had been forbidden it. But (he will say), ‘Come 
to Noah, the first prophet whom God sent to the people of the 
earth/ Then they will come to Noah, but he will say, ‘ I am 
not worthy’, and he will remember his sin which he committed in 
asking his Lord without knowledge ; but (he will say), ‘ Come 
to Abraham, the friend of the Merciful/ Then they will come 
to Abraham, and he will say, ‘I am not worthy/ and he will 
remember three falsehoods which he spoke ; but (he will say) t 
‘Come to Moses, a servant to whom God gave the Taurat and 
with whom He spake and caused him to draw near in order to 
impart secret communications to him/ Then they will come 
to Moses, but he will say, ‘ I am not worthy, * and he will remember 
his sin which he committed in killing a soul; but (he will say) 
‘Come to Jesus, the Servant of God and His Apostle, and the 
Spirit of God and His Word/ Then they will come to Jesus and 
He will say, ‘I am not worthy, but come to Muhammad, a 
servant whose former and latter sins God has forgiven/ Then 
they will come to me, and I will ask permission of my Lord 
to enter His house ; and permission will be given me for that. 
And when I shall see Him I will fall down in prostration. And 
God will leave me as long as He wishes to leave me, and 
will then say, ‘Raise (thy head) O Muhammad; and speak, and 
thou wilt be heard; intercede, and thy intercession will be 
accepted ; ask, and it will be given thee/ Then I will raise up 
my head, and will praise my Lord with praises and adorations 
which He will tell me. After that I will intercede, and a limit 
will be fixed for me, and I will go forth. And I will bring 
them out of the fire and take them into paradise. After that 
I will return a second time and ask permission of my Lord to 
enter His house. And permission will be given me for that. 

35 


274 SELECTIONS FROM MUHAMMADAN TRADITIONS 

And when I see Him I will fall down in prostration ; and God 
will leave me as long as He wishes to leave me. After that 
He will say, ‘ Raise up (thy head) O Muhammad, and speak, 
and thou wilt be heard; intercede, and thy intercession will be 
accepted; ask, and it will be given thee.’ Then I will raise 
my head and praise my Lord with praises and adorations which 
He will teach me. After that I will intercede, and a limit will 
be fixed for me, and I will go forth. And I will bring them out 
of the fire and take them into paradise. After that I will 
return a third time and ask permission of my Lord to enter His 
house, and permission will be given me for that. And when 
I see Him I will fall down in prostration; and God will leave 
me as long as He wishes to leave me. After that He will say, 
‘Raise (thy head) O Muhammad, and speak, and thou wilt be 
heard; intercede, and thine intercession will be accepted ; ask, 
and it will be given thee.’ Then I will raise my head, and will 
praise my Lord with praises and adorations which He will teach 
me. After that I will intercede, and a limit will be fixed for 
me, and I will go forth. And I will bring them out from the 
fire and take them into paradise, until there remain in the^fire 
none except him whom the Qur'an has restrained, that is he for 
whom eternal punishment is proper.” After that he recited 
this verse, “ Peradventure thy Lord raise thee to an honourable 
station.” n (Anas) said, ‘ And this is the honourable station 
which He promised your Prophet.’— Muslim , Al Bukhari . 

It is related from ‘Abdu’llah bin ‘Amru binu’l-‘As that, 
* The Prophet recited the words of God Most High concerning 
(the prayer of) Abraham, “My Lord, verily they have led 
many astray, therefore whoever follows me, he is of me.” 
And Jesus said, “If Thou punish them, verily they are Thy 
servants.” Then (the Prophet) raised his hands and said, “O 
God, my people ! my people ! ” and wept. Then God Most High 
said, “O Gabriel, go to Muhammad—and thy Lord knoweth— 
and ask him what makes him weep.” Then Gabriel came to 
him and asked him ; and the Apostle of God informed him what 
he had said. Then God said to Gabriel, “Go to Muhammad and 
say, ‘ Verily we will satisfy thee in the matter of thy people, 
and will not grieve thee.’ ” ’— Muslim . 

1 Qur'an, Suratu Bani Israel (xvii) 18. 


THE BOOK OF SEDITIONS 


275 


It is related from Abu Sa 4 idu 4 l-Khudri that, 4 Some men 
said, “O Apostle of God, shall we see our Lord on the day of 
resurrection ? ” The Apostle of God replied, “Yes. Do ye 
doubt concerning your seeing the sun at mid-day, when there is 
a clear sky and no clouds, and do ye doubt your seeing the 
moon on the night of full moon, when there is a clear sky and 
no cloud therein ? ” They replied, “No, O Apostle of God.” 
He said, “Ye will not doubt the vision of God on the day of 
resurrection any more than ye doubt the seeing of one of those 
two. When the day of resurrection arrives a herald will call, 
4 Let all people follow what they used to worship.’ Then no 
one will remain who worshipped idols and images instead of 
God, but they will, one after another, fall into the fire ; until 
when none remains except those who used to worship God, 
both the righteous and the wicked, the Lord of the worlds will 
come to them and say, * What are ye considering ? Every 
people follows that which it used to worship. ’ They will reply, 

‘ O our Lord ; we left the company of men in the world, though 
we needed many things of them ; and we did not company with 
them.’ ” ’ And in another tradition from Abu Hurairah it runs, 

4 They will say, “ This is our place until our Lord comes to us, 
and when our Lord comes, we will recognize Him.” ’ And in 
another tradition from Abu Sa‘id it runs, 4 He will say, “ Is 
there between you and Him a sign by which you will recognize 
Him?” And they will say, “Yes,” and they will be shown 
legs. And no one of those who used to worship with desire will 
remain, but God will give him permission to prostrate himself. 
And none of those who used to prostrate in fear and hypocrisy 
will remain, but God will make his back one layer (of bone) 
so that whenever he wishes to prostrate, he will fall down upon 
the back of his head. After that a bridge will be placed over hell, 
and intercession will take place. And they will say, 14 O God, 
give safety! give safety! ” And (some of) the believers will 
pass over like the twinkling of an eye, and (some) like lightning, 
and like the wind, and like birds, and like horses, and like 
camels. And they will be saved in peace. And some will 
be scratched and then sent off, and some will be cut with lances, 
until, when the believers are released from the fire, then by 
Him in whose hand is my life! there is not one of you more 


276 SELECTIONS FROM MUHAMMADAN TRADITIONS 

earnest in seeking the lost in truth. It has been confirmed for 
you from the believers in their prayer to God at the day of 
resurrection for their brethren who are in the fire. They will 
say (in their intercessory prayer), “O our Lord, they used to 
fast with us, and they used to pray and go on pilgrimage.** 
Then it will be said to them, “ Bring out whomsoever ye wish.** 
And their countenances will be forbidden the fire, and they will 
bring out many people. After that they will say, “Our Lord, 
not one remains in it of those concerning whom Thou com- 
mandedst us.” Then He will say, “ Return and bring out him 
in whose heart, ye find the measure of one dinar of good.** 
Then they will bring out many people. After that He will 
say, “Return, and bring out him in whose heart ye find the 
measure of half a dinar of good.” Then they will bring out 
many people. After that He will say, “ Return, and bring out 
him in whose heart ye find the measure of one atom of good.” 
Then they will bring out many people. After that they will 
say, “Our Lord, we have not left in it any good.’* Then God 
will say, “The angels have interceded, and the prophets have 
interceded, and the believers have interceded, and there is 
nothing left except the Most Merciful.” Then He will take a 
handful from the fire and will take out therefrom a people 
who have never done any good, and who had become like coals. 
And He will cast them into a river near the doors of paradise, 
called the river of life. And they will emerge therefrom as a 
kernel of grain comes out from the husk, and they will come 
out as pearls. On their necks will be seals. And the inhab¬ 
itants of paradise will say, “These are those who have been 
released by the Merciful. He has brought them into paradise 
without their doing any works or good actions which they had 
sent before them.” And it will be said to them, “The things 
ye see are for you, and with them are others like them.” *— 
Muslim , Al Bukhdrt . 

It is related from Anas that, ‘The Prophet said, “Verily 
the heat of the fire will afflict certain peoples as a punishment 
for the sins which they have committed. Afterwards God will 
bring them into paradise by the grace of His mercy ; and they 
will be called internals.” *—Al Bukhdrt . 

It is related from Abu Dharr that, ‘The Apostle of God 
said, “Verily I certainly know the last of the inhabitants of 


THE BOOK OF SEDITIONS 


277 


paradise who will enter therein, and the last of the inhabitants 
of the fire who will come out therefrom. (He will be) a man who 
will be brought on the day of resurrection, and it will be said, 
(to the angels), 4 Bring forth his small sins, and place them 
before him, and take away from him the great sins.* Then 
his small sins will be placed before him, and it will be said to 
him, 4 On such and such a day thou didst so and so, and on such 
and such a day thou didst so and so.’ And he will say, * Yes/ 
and will not be able to deny it, and during that time he will be 
in anxious dread concerning his greater sins, that they will be 
paraded before him. And it will be said to him, 4 Verily there 
will be (written down) for thee a virtue in the place of every 
sin/ Then he will say, 4 My Lord, I did things which I do not 
see here.' (Abu Dharr) said, 4 And I certainly saw the Apostle 
of God laugh until his front teeth appeared/ ” ’— M?islim. 

It is related from Anas that, 4 The Prophet said, 44 My 
intercession is for those of my followers who commit mortal 
sins.” *—At Tirmidhi, Abu Daud , I bn M&jah . 

It is related from Awf bin Malik that, 4 The Apostle of 
God said, 44 A messenger came to me from my Lord and gave 
me an option to choose between half of my people entering 
paradise, and my intercession (for the whole). And I chose 
intercession, which is for whoever dies without having associated 
anything with God.” ’—At Tirmidhi , Ib?i Mdjah. 

It is related from Abu Sa‘id that, 4 The Apostle of God 
said, 44 There are some of my followers who will intercede for 
a multitude, and there are some of them who will intercede for 
a tribe, and some of them who will intercede for a small 
number not exceeding forty, and some of them who will 
intercede for a single individual until they enter paradise.” 

At Tirmidhi\ 

It is related from 4 Othm4n bin 4 Affan that, ‘The Apostle 
of God said, 44 Three classes will intercede on the day of resur¬ 
rection : the prophets, then the learned, then the martyrs/* *— 
Ibn Mdjah . 

A Description of Paradise and the Inhabitants 
Thereof 

It is related from Abu Hurairah that, 4 The Apostle of 
God said, 44 God Most High said, 4 1 have prepared for my right- 


278 SELECTIONS FROM MUHAMMADAN TRADITIONS 

©ous servants what eye hath not seen, nor ear heard, nor what 
hath entered into the heart of man.* Then recite, if ye wish, 
(the words) 1 No soul knoweth the complete satisfaction which 
is secretly prepared for them (as a reward for that which they 
have wrought).’ ” ’ 1 — Muslim , Al Bukhari . 

It is related from Abu Musa that, ‘ The Apostle of God 
said, “ Verily there will be in paradise a tent for the believer 
made of one hollow pearl, the length of which will be sixty 
miles. In every corner of it there will be people. They will 
not see each other, and the believer will go round from one to 
the other. And there will be two paradises, the vessels of which 
and whatever is in them will be of silver. And there will be two 
paradises, the vessels of which and whatever is in them will be 
of gold. And there will be nothing between the people and 
their looking at their Lord except the mantle of majesty on His 
face in the garden of Eden.” *— Muslim , Al Bukhari . 

' It is related from Anas that, ‘ The Apostle of God said, 
li Verily in paradise there is a bazaar to which men come on 
every Friday. And the north wind blows and shakes musk on 
their faces and on their clothes; and they are increased in 
beauty and handsomeness. Then they return to their 
families being increased in beauty and handsomeness. And 
their families say to them, ‘ By God ! ye have been increased, 
since leaving us, in beauty and handsomeness.’ And they will 
say, 4 And ye also, by God! have been increased, since 
leaving us, in beauty and handsomeness.’ ” ’— Muslim . 

It is related from Abu Hurairah that, 4 The Apostle of God 
said, 44 Whoever enters paradise will live in ease and see no 
trouble. His clothes will not grow old, nor his youth fade 
away.” ’— Muslim . 

It is related from ‘Utbah bin Ghazwan that he said, 4 It 
was mentioned to us that a stone was cast from the edge of hell, 
and it fell into it for seventy years and did not reach the 
bottom. And by God ! it will certainly be filled. And it was 
mentioned to us that what is between the two halves of the 
door of paradise is a journey of forty years. And a day will 
certainly come to it when it will be filled with a pressing 
crowd. ’— Muslim . 

1 Qur’an, Surat u’s-Sajda (xxxii), 17. 


THE BOOK OF SEDITIONS 


279 


It is related from Buraidah that,* A man said, “O Apostle 
of God, are there horses in paradise ? ” He replied, “ Verily if 
God take thee to paradise, thou wilt not wish to be carried in it 
on a ruby horse which will fly with thee in paradise wherever 
thou wish, but thou wilt do so.” Then a man asked a question 
and said, “O Apostle of God, are there any camels in paradise ?” 
(Buraidah) said, “He did not say to him what he said to his 
companion. And he said, ‘ If God bring thee into paradise, 
there will be for thee therein whatever thy soul desires and 
whereby thine eye can be satisfied.’ ” ’— At Tirmidhu 

It is related from Abu Sa‘id that, 1 The Apostle of God 
.said, “The meanest of the inhabitants of paradise is he who 
will have eighty thousand servants and seventy-two wives. 
And he will have a dome made of pearls, chrysolite, and rubies, 
(in extent) like the distance between A1 Jabiya and San‘a’. 
And they who die, whether young or old, of those who go to 
paradise, will in paradise all return -to thirty years of. age. 
They will never exceed that age. And in like manner the 
inhabitants of the fire (will return to thirty years of age). And 
there will be crowns upon the inhabitants of paradise, the 
meanest pearl of which will certainly light up all that lies 
between the East and the West. And when a believer wishes 
for a son in paradise, then his conception and birth and full age 
will be accomplished in one hour as he wished/' And Ishaq 
bin Ibrahim said in this tradition, “ When a believer in paradise 
wishes for a son, it will be accomplished in an hour ; but he 
will not wish it.’’ ’— At Tirmidhu 

It is related from Hakim bip Mi/awiyah that, * The Apostle 
of God said, “ Verily in paradise there is a large river of water, 
and a large river of honey, and a large river of*milk, and a 
large river of wine. Afterwards they will divide up (into 
smaller rivers).” ’— At Tirmidht . 

It is related from Jabir that, ‘ A man asked the Apostle of 
God, “ Do the inhabitants of paradise sleep ? ” He replied, 
“ Sleep is the brother of death ; and the inhabitants of paradise 
do not die.” ’— Al Baihaqi .. 

Concerning the Vision of God Most High 
It is related from Suhaib that, ‘The Prophet said, “When 
the people destined for paradise* will enter therein, God Most 


280 SELECTIONS FROM MUHAMMADAN TRADITIONS 

High will say to them, ‘ Do ye wish for anything which I can 
add to you ? * They will say, 4 Hast thou not made our faces 
white ! hast thou not brought us into paradise and saved us from 
the fire ! * ” (The Prophet) said, 44 Then a veil will be raised, 
and they will look at the face of God Most High ; and nothing 
will be given them which will please them more than the look¬ 
ing at their Lord.” After that he recited (the words) “For 
those who do right shall be a most excellent (reward), and a 
superabundant addition.” n — Muslim . 

It is related from Abu Dharr that he said, 4 1 asked the 
Apostle of God, lt Didst thou see thy Lord ? ” He replied, 
“(He is) a Light; how should I see Him ! ” 1 — Muslim . 

It is related from A1 Sha‘bi that he said, 1 Ibn ‘Abbas met 
Ka‘b at ‘Arafat and asked him concerning a certain thing. 
Then he said, 44 God is great,” until the mountains returned the 
echo. Then Ibn ‘Abbas said, 44 We,belong to the Bani Hashim.” 
Ka‘b replied, “ Verily God Most High divided His vision and His 
conversation between Muhammad and Moses. He spoke to 
Moses twice ; and Muhammad saw Him twice.” Masriiq said, 
“Then I went into ‘Ayesha and said, ‘ Did Muhammad see his 
Lord ? * She replied, 4 Thou hast spoken of something on 
account of which my hair stands on end! ’ I said, ‘ Gently! ’ 
Then I recited (the words) 4 He certainly saw some of the great¬ 
est signs of his Lord.’ She said, 4 Where are the words taking 
thee ? It was only Gabriel. Whoever tells you that Muham¬ 
mad saw his Lord, or that he concealed anything of what he 
was commanded, or that he knew the five things of which God 
Most High spoke, that with him is the knowledge of the hour of 
resurrection, and he sends down the rain, etc., has told a great 
lie. But he saw Gabriel. He did not see him in his proper 
form except on two occasions : once near the tree $idrutu*l- 
Muntaha, and once in Ajyad. He had six hundred wings, and 
he had closed the extremities (of the heavens)/ ” ’—At Tirmidhi . 

A Description of the Fire and the Inhabitants 
Thereof 

It is related from An Nu‘man bin Bashir that, ‘The 
Apostle of God said, “ Verily the inhabitant of the fire who is 


Qur’an, Suratu Yunas (x) 26. 


THE BOOK OF SEDITIONS 


281 


least punished is he whose two shoes and their thongs are of 
fire. His brains boil therefrom as a copper cauldron boils. 
It will not seem to him as if anyone suffers more severe 
punishment than he ; and yet in reality he is the least punished 
of them.” 1 — Muslim , Al Bukhdrt . 

It is related from Samurah bin Jundub that, 1 The Prophet 
said, “ Amongst them will be those whom the fire will take up 
to the ankles, and those whom the fire will take up to the 
knees, and those whom the fire will take up to the waist, and 
those whom the fire will take up to the collar-bone/' *— Muslim . 

It is related from Abu Hurairah that, 1 The Prophet said, 
“The fire of hell burnt for one thousand years until it became 
red; then it burnt for a thousand years until it became white ; 
thpn it burnt for a thousand years until it became black. 
Therefore it is (now) black and dark.” ’— At Tirmidhi . 

It is related from Anas that, ‘ The Prophet said, “ O men, 
weep ; and if ye are not able to do so, then make yourselves 
weep. For verily the inhabitants of the fire weep in the fire 
until the tears flow down their faces as if they were rivulets, 
until the tears cease. Then blood flows, until the eyes become 
ulcers. Then had there been boats which could be placed 
therein, they would certainly float.” *—Sharhu s-Sunnah. 

It is related from Ibn ‘Omar that, ‘The Prophet said, 
“The inhabitants of the fire will be made of large proportions 
in the fire, so that between the lobe of the ear of any one of 
them to his .shoulder will be a journey of seven hundred years ; 
and the thickness of his skin will be seventy cubits ; and his 
molar tooth will be like (Mount) ‘Uhud.” * 

It is related from A1 Hasan that he said, ‘ Abu Hurairah 
informed us that the Apostle of God said, “The sun and the 
moon are two lights which will be bound and cast into the fire 
on the day of resurrection.” A1 Hasan said, “What was their 
sin ? ” He replied, “ I have related it to thee as I heard it 
from the Apostle of God.” Then A1 Hasan remained silent/— 
Al Baihaqi . 

Concerning the Creation of Paradise and the Fire 
It is related from Anas that, ‘The Prophet said, “(Men) 
will continue to be cast into hell; and it will say, ‘Are there 

36 


282 SELECTIONS FROM MUHAMMADAN TRADITIONS 

any more ? * until the Lord of Glory puts His foot in it. Then 
some parts of it will contract into others; and it will say, 
4 Enough! enough ! by Thy honour and Thy glory! ’ And 
abundance of room will continue in paradise, until God creates 
a creation for it and causes them to inhabit the superfluous 
parts of paradise.” ’— Muslim , Al Bukhari . 

Concerning the Beginning of Creation and Mention 
of the Prophets 

It is related from ‘Omar that he said, ‘ The Apostle of God 
stood up in our midst and related to us the beginning of 
creation until the people destined for paradise entered their 
abodes, and the people destined for the fire entered theirs. He 
who remembered it, remembered it; and he who forgot it, 
forgot it.’— Al Bukhari . 

It is related from Abu Hurairah that, ‘ The Apostle of God 
said, “ Abraham did not lie except on three occasions: two of 
them for the sake of God, when he said, 1 1 am sick,’ and when 
he said, ‘Rather, the largest one of them did it.’ ” And (the 
Prophet) said, “On a certain day when Abraham and Sarah 
came to a great tyrant, it was remarked to the latter, ‘ Verily 
there is a man here, accompanied by a most beautiful woman.’ 
Then he sent to Abraham and asked him concerning her 
(saying) ‘ Who is this woman ? ’ He replied, ‘ She is my sister.’ 
Then he came to Sarah and said to her, ‘ Verily if this tyrant 
knows that thou art my wife, he will overcome me in order to 
possess thee. Therefore if he ask thee, tell him that thou art 
my sister in Islam, for there is not on the face of the earth a 
single believer except thou and I.’ Then the tyrant sent to her, 
and she was brought. And Abraham stood up to pray. And 
when she entered in where the tyrant was, he went to put 
forth his hand to take her, but he was withheld. And it is 
recorded that he was made to snort (in distress), until his feet 
began to strike on the ground. Then he said, ‘ Call on God for 
me, and I will do thee no harm.’ Then she called on God, and 
he was released. Afterwards he attempted to take her a second 
time, but was withheld as at the first, or more severely. Then 
he said, ‘Call on God for me, and I will do thee no harm.’ So 
she called on God, and he was released. Then he called one 


THE BOOK OF SEDITIONS 


283 


of his attendants and said, ‘ Verily thou hast not brought me a 
human being ; thou hast only brought me a Satan.’ Then he 
gave her Hagar as a servant. And she came to Abraham when 
he was standing praying. Then he beckoned with his hand 
seeking to know her state. She replied, 4 God returned the 
stratagem of the infidel upon his own breast ; and he has made 
Hagar my servant. ’ ” ’ Abu Hurairah said , 4 That is your mother, 
O children of the water of heaven.’— Muslim , Al Bukhari . 

It is related from Abu Hurairah that he said, ‘ A man of the 
Muslims and a man of the Jews were abusing each other. And 
the Muslim said, “ By Him who preferred Muhammad over all 
the worlds! ” And the Jew said, “ By Him who preferred Moses 
over all the worlds! ” Then the Muslim raised his hand at that 
and struck the Jew’s face. Then the Jew went to the Prophet 
and informed him of what had passed between him and the 
Muslim. Then the Prophet called the Muslim and asked him 
about the matter. And he told him. Then the Prophet said, 
“ Do not give me precedence over Moses; for verily men will 
fall down senseless on the day of resurrection, and I will fall 
down senseless with them. And I will be the first of those who 
come to their senses, and behold! Moses will be standing near 
the side of the throne. And I will not know whether he was 
amongst those who swooned and came to his senses before me, 
or whether he was amongst those whom God exempted (from 
the swooning).” ’ 

It is related from Abu Hurairah that, ‘The Apostle of God 
said, “The angel of death came to Moses bin ‘Imran and said 
to him, ‘Accept the order of thy Lord (to die).’ Then Moses 
struck the angel of death in the eye and blinded it. Then the 
angel returned to God Most High and said, ‘ Verily Thou didst 
send me to one of Thy servants who does not wish for death, 
and he has blinded my eye.’ Then God returned his eye to 
him, and said, ‘ Return to my servant and say, “Is it life thou 
desirest ? If thoudesirest life, then place thy hand on the back 
of an ox, and thou wilt live in years equal to the number of 
hairs which thy hand covers.”’ Moses said, ‘And what after 
that?’ He replied, ‘After that thou wilt die.’ He said, 
‘Then (let me die) now. O Lord, bring me near to the Holy 
Land, or within a stone’s throw of it.’ ” The Apostle of God 


284 SELECTIONS FROM MUHAMMADAN TRADITIONS 

said, “ By God! If l had come near it, I would have shown you 
his grave on the side of the road near a red heap.” ’— Muslim , 
Al Bukhdri . 

It is related from Ibn ‘Abbas that, ‘The Prophet said, 
“ On the night on which I was taken to heaven, I saw Moses: a 
man of the colour of wheat, tall and of curly hair, as if he were 
one of the men of Shami’ah. And I saw Jesus: a man of 
medium stature, inclining to red and white, and with the hair of 
his head hanging down. And I saw Malik, the keeper of the 
fire, and (I saw) Antichrist.” (These were) amongst the signs 
which God showed to him. Therefore be not in doubt concern¬ 
ing his meeting them.’— Muslim , Al Bukhari . 

It is related from Abu Hurairah that, ‘ The Prophet said, 
“There were two women, each of whom had a son. And 
there came a wolf and took away the son of one of them. Then 
her companion said, ‘ It has only taken thy son.' But the other 
said, ‘ It only went off with thy son.’ Then they went to 
David for judgement. And he gave judgement in favour of the 
elder woman. Then they went out to Solomon, the son of 
David, and informed him. He said, ‘ Bring me a knife, and I 
will divide the remaining son between you.’ Then the younger 
woman said, ‘ Do not do so. May God have mercy on thee! 
He is her son.’ Then he gave judgement in favour of the 
younger woman.” ’— Muslim , Al Bukhdri . 

It is related from Abu Musa that, ‘ The Prophet said, 
“Many amongst men were perfect; but none amongst women 
were perfect except Mary, daughter of ‘ Imran, and Asiyah the 
wife of Pharaoh. And the excellence of ‘Ayesha over women 
is like the excellence of bread soup over all other food.” ’— 
Muslim , Al Bukhdri . 

It is related from Jabir bin ‘Abdu’llah that, ‘The Apostle 
of God said, “It has been permitted me to tell you about the 
one amongst the angels ot God who bears up the throne. 
Verily the distance between the lobe of his ears and his 
shoulder is a journey of seven hundred years.” '—Abu Dated. 

It is related from Abu Hurairah that he said, ‘ The Apostle 
of God took hold of my hand and said, “God created the earth 
on Saturday, and he created the mountains on it on Sunday, and 
He created the trees on Monday, and He created all unpleasant 


THE BOOK OF SEDITIONS 


285 


things on Tuesday, and He created the light on Wednesday, and 
he spread abroad the beasts therein on Thursday, and He created 
Adam after the afternoon of Friday at the end of the creation, 
and in the last hour of the day, that is, between the afternoon 
and nightfall. M ’— Muslim. 

It is related from Abu Hurairah that, ‘ The Apostle of God 
said, 44 The length of Adam was sixty cubits and his breadth 
seven cubits.” ’ 

It is related from Abu Dharr that he said, ‘I said, “ O 
Apostle of God, who of the prophets was the first?” He 
replied, 44 Adam,” I said, 44 O Apostle of God, and was he a 
prophet?” He replied, 44 Yes, he was a prophet who was 
spoken to (by God).” I said,* 44 O Apostle of God, how 
many apostles were there ? ” He replied, 44 Three hundred 
and a few more than ten—a great crowd.” ’ And in another 
tradition from Abu Umamah it runs, ‘I said, 44 O Apostle of 
God, what is the full number of the prophets ? ” He replied, 
44 One hundred and twenty-four thousand, of whom three 
hundred and fifteen were apostles—a great crowd.” ’ 

Concerning the Excellencies of the Prince 
of the Apostles 

It is related from Abii Hurairah that, 4 The Apostle of God 
said, 44 I shall be chief of the sons of Adam on the day of 
resurrection, and the first for whom the grave will split open, 
and the first to intercede, and the first whose intercession will 
be accepted.” ’— Muslim. 

It is related from Anas that, 4 The Apostle of God said, 44 I 
shall have more followers than any other prophet on the day 
of resurrection ; and I shall be the first to knock at the door of 
paradise.” ’— Muslim . 

It is related from Abii Hurairah that, 4 The Apostle of God 
said , 44 There is no prophet, but was given miracles suitable to 
his case, so that men believed on him. But that which was 
given to me was only revelation, which God revealed to me; 
and I hope that I shall have more followers than they on the 
day of resurrection.” ’ — Muslim , Al Bukhdn . 

It is related from Jabir that, 4 The Apostle of God said, 
“ I have been given five (qualities) which were not given to 


286 SELECTIONS FROM MUHAMMADAN TRADITIONS 


any before me. I have been given victory through fear 
(inspired by me) at a distance of a month’s journey; and the 
world has been made a pure place of prayer for me, so that 
wherever the time of prayer arrives for a man of my followers, 
let him pray there ; and plunder has been made lawful for me, 
and it was not made lawful for anyone before me ; and I have 
been given intercession ; and (formerly) a prophet was sent 
especially to his own nation, but I have been sent to all men 
generally.” ’— Muslim , Al Bukhari. 

It is related from Al ‘ Irbad bin Sariyah that, ‘ The Apostle 
of God said, “ Verily I was written down near God as the seal 
of the prophets when Adam was twisted up in his own clay ; 
and I shall inform you of the first matters connected with me, 
namely the prayer of Abraham (‘ Send an apostle from amongst 
themselves’), and the good news preached by Jesus (of the 
coming of one named Ahmad), and the vision of my mother 
which she saw when she gave birth to me, and there came forth 
a light for her by which the palaces of Syria shined forth.” ’— 
S harh us-Su n nah. 

It is related from Ibn ‘Abbas that he said, ‘Some men of the 
companions of the Apostle of God were sitting; and he came 
forth so that when he came near to them he heard them discuss¬ 
ing things with each other. And some of them said, “Verily 
God took Abraham as a friend”; and another said,” Moses talked 
with God”; another said, “Jesus was the Word of God and 
His Spirit”; another said, “God chose Adam”. And the 
Apostle of God came out to them and said, ” I have heard your 
words and your surprise that Abraham was the friend of God, 
and he was such ; and that Moses received secret communications 
from God, and it was so ; and that Jesus was His Spirit and His 
Word, and He was so ; and that God chose Adam, and it was so. 
Beware ! I am the Beloved of God, and there is no boasting, 
and I will be the bearer of the standard of praise on the day of 
resurrection, and under it will be Adam and all others besides 
him, and there is no boasting. And I shall be the first interces¬ 
sor, and the first whose intercession will be accepted on the day 
of resurrection, and there is no boasting. And I will be the 
first to shake the door of paradise, and God will open it for me 
and will take me inside, and with me will be indigent believers, 


THE BOOK OF SEDITIONS 


287 


and there is no boasting. And I am the most noble of the first 
and the last with God, and there is no boasting.’ * ’— At Tirmidhi . 

It is related from ‘Abdu’llah bin Ma‘sud that, ‘ The Apostle 
of God said, “ Verily for every prophet there will be a friend 
from amongst the prophets; and my friend will be my father 
and the friend of my Lord (Abraham).” After that he recited 
(the revelation) “Verily the men who are nearest of kin to 
Abraham are they who follow him, and this prophet, and they 
who believe ; and God is the friend of the believers.”’ 1 — At 
Tirmidhi . 

It is related from Ka‘b that when he was speaking of the 
Taurat he said, ‘ We found it written, “ Muhammad, the Apostle 
of God, my chosen servant, neither bad-tempered, nor rude, nor 
a crier in bazaars, nor one who returns evil for evil, but one 
who forgives and pardons. His birth-place Mecca, and his 
flight to (Madina) the pleasant. His kingdom in Syria, and his 
followers people who praise much, praising God in pleasure and 
in sorrow, and in every stopping-place, and extolling his great¬ 
ness in every high place. They observe the sun, and say their 
prayers when the time comes. They wear their trousers to 
their knees, and perform ablutions on their limbs. A crier of 
theirs calls aloud in the skies. Their ranks in battle and their 
ranks in prayer are the same. The murmur of their voices at 
night is like the buzz of bees.” ’ 

It is related from ‘Abdu’llah bin Salam that he said, ‘ A 
description of Muhammad is written in the Taurat; and it is 
(also written) that Jesus, the vSon of Mary, will be buried with 
him.’ Abu Mawdad said, ‘A place for a grave remains in the 
house (where Muhammad was buried).’— At Tirmidhi . 

On the Names of the Prophet, and His Attributes 
It is related from Jubair bin Mut'im that he said, ‘ I heard 
the Prophet say, “I have various names. I am Muhammad, 
and I am Ahmad, and I am A1 Mahi (the eraser), by whom God 
will erase infidelity, and I am A1 IJashir (the gatherer), to whose 
feet men will be gathered (on the day of resurrection), and I 
am A1 ‘Aqib (the last in succession) after whom there will be 
no prophet.” *— Muslim , Al Bukhdri . 

1 Qur’an, Suratu Ali ‘Imran (iii) 68. 


288 SELECTIONS FROM MUHAMMADAN TRADITIONS 

It is related from Anas that he said, ‘The Apostle of God 
was neither conspicuously tall nor short; nor was he very 
white or wheat-coloured; nor was he very curly-headed, nor 
was his hair very straight. God sent him at the end of his 
fortieth year, and he resided in Mel'ca (after his call) for ten 
years, and in Madina ten years. And God took him at the end 
of his sixtieth year. And there were not in his head and beard 
twenty white hairs.' 

It is related from Abu Hurairah that he said, ‘ I never saw 
anything more beautiful than the Apostle of God. It was as if 
the sun was moving in his face. And I never saw anyone 
move more quickly in his walking than the Apostle of God. 
It was as if the earth was folded up for him. Verily we used 
to exert ourselves (to keep up with him), whereas he was not 
in the least distressed.'— At Tirmidhu 

It is related from Anas that, ‘A Jewish boy used to wait 
upon the Prophet. And the boy fell ill. Then the Prophet 
came to visit him and found his father (sitting) by his head, 
reading the Taurat. And the Apostle of God said to him, “ O 
Jew, I ask thee by God who sent down the Taurat upon Moses, 
whether thou dost find a description of me and of my attributes, 
and the story of my coming out (from Mecca to Madina) in the 
Taurat ? " He replied, “ No." The boy exclaimed, “ Yes, by 
God ! O Apostle of God, we do find in the Taurat a description 
of thee and of thine attributes, and the story of thy going out 
(from Mecca to Madina); and I bear witness that there is no 
God but Allah, and that thou art the Apostle of God." Then 
the Prophet said to his companions, “ Make this (Jew) get up 
from near his head, and do ye come close to your brother." '— 
Al Baihaqi . 

On the Morals and Natural Disposition 
of the Prophet 

It is related from Anas that he said, ‘ I waited on the 
Prophet for ten years, and he never said, " Fie ! " to me, and 
never said," Why didst thou do (so and so)," or " Why didst thou 
not do (so and so)? " ’— My slim , Al Bukhdri. 

It is related from Abu Hurairah that he said, ‘ It was said, 
" O Apostle of God, call dow T n a curse upon the polytheists." 


THE BOOK OF SEDITIONS 


289 


He replied, “ I have not been sent as a curse, but I have only 
been sent as a mercy/’ ’— Muslim . 

It is related from ‘ Ayesha that she said, 4 The Apostle of 
God used to mend his own shoes and sew his clothes and work 
in his house as anyone of you works in his house. He was a 
man amongst men. He used to clean his clothes of vermin and 
milk his goats and wait upon himself /—At Tirmidhi . 

It is related from ‘Amru bin Sa'id from Anas that he said, 
‘ I never saw anyone more kind to his family than the Apostle 
of God. His son Abraham was put out to nurse in a high part 
of Madina, and the Prophet used to go, and we with him, and 
enter the house when it was full of smoke, his foster-father 
being a blacksmith, and the Apostle used to take the child and 
kiss him. After that he would return/ 'Amru said, ‘ And when 
Abraham died, the Apostle of God said, “Verily Abraham my 
son died whilst at the breast. He will certainly have two nurses 
in paradise to complete his weaning.” ’— Muslim . 

It is related from ‘ Ayesha that she said, 1 The Apostle of 
God said, “O 'Ayesha, if I wished I could certainly have 
mountains of gold. An angel came to me. whose waist 
certainly equals the Ka'bah, and said, ‘ Verily thy Lord sends 
His salutations to thee and says, if thou wishest to be a 
prophet who is (at the same time) a servant (then be so); or 
if thou wishest to be a prophet who is a king, (then be so)/ 
Then I looked towards Gabriel; and he beckoned to me that I 
should humble myself.” ’ And in another tradition from Ibn 
' Abbas it runs, ‘ The Apostle of God turned to Gabriel as if 
seeking a sign from him. Then Gabriel made a sign with his 
hand that he should humble himself. Then I said, “ I will be 
a prophet who is a servant.” (‘Ayesha) said, after that the 
Apostle of God would not eat reclining; but would say, “I 
will eat as a slave eats, and will sit as a slave sits.” ’— Skarku's- 
Sunnah. 

Concerning the Sending of the Prophet, and the 
Beginning of Inspiration 

It is related from Ibn ‘Abbas that, ‘ The Apostle of God 
was sent at his fortieth year ; and he remained in Mecca 
thirteen years, receiving revelations. After that he was 

37 


290 


SELECTIONS FROM MUHAMMADAN TRADITIONS 


commanded to flee ; and he fled and remained a fugitive 
(at Madina) for ten years. And he died when he was sixty- 
three years of age.’— Muslim , Al Bukhari . 

It is related from Ibn ‘ Abbas that he said, i The Apostle 
of God remained at Mecca for fifteen years. He heard a voice 
and saw a light for seven years, but saw nothing else. And 
for eight years he received revelations. And he lived in Madina 
ten years, and died when he was sixty-five years of age. — 
Muslim , Al Bukhari . 

It is related from Anas that, ‘God caused the Prophet to 
die when he had completed sixty years.’— Muslim , Al Bukhari . 

It is related from ‘Ayesha that, ‘The first revelations 
which came to the Apostle of God were true visions in sleep. 
And he never saw a vision, but it came like the dawn of the 
morning. After that solitary retirement became pleasing 
to him, and he used to retire to a cave of (Mount) Hira’ and 
worship therein. And he would worship the whole night 
before he returned to his family ; and he used to provide food 
for the purpose. After that he would return to Khadijah, and 
again provide himself with food as before, until the truth came 
to him when he was in the cave of Mount Hira’. An angel 
came to him and said, “Recite!” He replied, “I am not a 
reciter.” The Prophet said, “ Then he seized me and squeezed 
me until fatigue overtook me. Then he let me go, and said, 
‘ Recite! ’ and squeezed me a second time until fatigue over¬ 
took me. After that he said, ‘Recite!’ I replied, ‘I am not 
a reciter.’ Then he seized me and squeezed me a third time, 
until fatigue overtook me. After that he let me go and said, 
‘ Recite in the name of thy Lord who created, created man 
from a clot of blood. Recite! thy Lord is the most noble who 
taught by the pen: taught man what he did not know.’” 
Then the Apostle of God repeated these words, his heart 
trembling the while. And he entered in to Khadijah and said, 
“Wrap me up! wrap me up!” Then they wrapped him up 
until the fear went from him. Then he spoke to Khadijah and 
informed her of the matter, saying “ I certainly feared for my 
life.” Then Khadijah said, “Never by God! God will never 
bring thee to shame. Verily thou dost perform acts of mercy, 
and thou dost speak the truth, and bearest weariness, and dost 


THE BOOK OF SEDITIONS 


291 


earn that which is lacking, and thou art hospitable to visitors, 
and givest help to all men.” After that Khadijah took him to 
Waraqah bin Nawfal bin ‘Amm Khadijah and said to him, “O 
my nephew, listen to the son of thy brother.” Then Waraqah 
said to him, ”0 my nephew, what is the matter ?” Then the 
Apostle of God informed him of what he had seen. Waraqah 
said, “This is the namus which God sent down upon Moses. 
Would to God that I were young in its time ! Would to God 
that I were living when thy people will turn thee out.” Then 
the Apostle of God said, “Will they turn me out?” He 
replied, “Yes. No man ever came with what thou hast 
brought, but he was held in enmity. And if that day of thine 
should come in my time, I will aid thee greatly.” It was 
not long after that Waraqah died, and the revelations were 
suspended/— Muslim , Al Bukhdri . And A1 Bukhari has added 
the following, ‘ So much so that the Prophet grieved at what 
had reached us, so that many times in the morning he wished 
to throw himself from the summit of a high mountain ; but as 
often as he arrived at the summit of the mountain in order 
to cast himself down from it, Gabriel appeared to him and said, 
“O Muhammad, verily thou art the Apostle of God in truth.” 
At that his heart became at ease, and his soul was comforted/ 

It is related from ‘Ayesha that, ‘ Al Harith bin Hisham 
asked the Apostle of God and said, “O Apostle of God, how 
does inspiration come to thee ? ” The Apostle of God replied, 
“At times it comes to me like the sound of a bell, and that is 
the most difficult for me, and (Gabriel) would leave me when 
I had remembered what he said. And at times the angel 
appears to me like a man and speaks to me and I remember 
what he says.” ‘Ayesha said, “ I have certainly seen inspira¬ 
tion descend upon him on a very cold day, and then leave him 
with his forehead dripping beads of perspiration.” ’— Muslim , 
Al Bukhari . 

It is related from Anas that ‘ One of the teeth of the Apostle 
of God was broken on the day of (the battle of) ‘Uhud, and he 
was wounded in his head. And he began to wipe the blood 
from himself and to say, “ How will that people prosper who 
have wounded the head of their Prophet and broken his 
teeth! ” '—Muslim, 


292 


SELECTIONS FROM MUHAMMADAN TRADITIONS 


Concerning the Signs, of Prophecy 
It is related from Anas that 4 Gabriel came to the Apostle 
of God when he was playing with some boys, and he seized him 
and threw him on the ground, and split open his heart, and 
took out therefrom a clot of blood, and said, “This is Satan’s 
portion from thee.” After that he washed it in a golden vessel 
containing Zemzem water. Then he bound it up and put it in 
its place again. And the boys came running to his mother, 
that is to his wet-nurse, and said, “ Verily Muhammad has been 
killed.” Then they went near to him, and found that he had 
changed colour.’ Anas said, ‘I used to see the marks of the 
stitches on his breast.’— Muslim . 

It is related from Anas that, 4 The people of Mecca asked 
the Apostle of God to show them a sign. Then he showed 
them the moon split into two pieces, until they saw Mount 
IJira’ between the two.’— Muslim , Al Bukhdri . 

It is related from Abu Hurairah that, 4 Abu Jahl said, 
44 Does Muhammad smear his face with dust (in prostration) 
amongst you?” It was said, “Yes.” He said, 44 By Al Lat, 
and Al 4 Uzza! If I see him doing that, I will certainly trample 
on his neck.” Then he came to the Apostle of God when he 
was praying, intending to trample on his neck. But he did not 
come back to them from the Apostle except by retreating on 
his heels, and protecting himself with his hands. And it was 
said to him, “What is the matter with thee?” He replied, 
44 Verily between him and me there is certainly a pit of fire and 
fear and wings (of angels).” Then the Apostle of God said, 
44 If he had come near to me, the angels would certainly have 
plucked him away limb by limb.” ’— Muslim . 

Concerning the Night-Journey to Heaven 
It is related from Qatadah from Anas bin Malik from 
Malik bin $a 4 sa 4 h that, 4 The Prophet of God related to them 
concerning the night on which he was taken (to heaven, saying) 
44 When I was in Al Ha{im ”—and possibly he said, 44 I was 
lying down in Hijr—behold ! a certain one came to me and 
split open from here to here ”—that is from the opening of his 
upper chest to his lower hair—“and took out my heart. 
After that a golden vessel was brought to me filled with faith, 


THE BOOK OF SEDITIONS 


293 


and my heart was washed After that it was crammed full, and 
then it was put back in its place/’ ’ And in another tradition it 
runs, ‘ The belly was washed with water of Zemzem, and then 
filled with faith and knowledge. “ After that a beast was brought 
to me, inferior to a mule, but above an ass (in height). It was 
white, and was called A1 Buraq. It placed its steps at a 
distance as far as its sight reached. And I was carried on it, and 
Gabriel went with me, until it came to the heavens of the 
earth. Then Gabriel asked that the door might be opened. It 
was said, ‘ Who is this ?’ He replied, ‘ Gabriel It was said, 
‘ And who is with thee?’ He replied, ‘Muhammad.’ It was 
said, ‘Has he been sent too?’ He replied, ‘Yes.’ It was 
said, * Welcome to him ! His coming is well.’ Then the door 
was opened. And when 1 arrived (inside) behold therein 
Adam! Gabriel said, ‘ This is thy father Adam, therefore 
salute him.’ Then I saluted him, and he returned the salut¬ 
ation. After that he said, ‘ Welcome to the good son and good 
prophet.’ After that Gabriel ascended with me until he came to 
the second heaven and asked for the door to be opened. It 
was said, ‘Who is this?’ He replied, ‘Gabriel.’ It was 
said, ‘ And who is with thee ?’ He replied, ‘ Muhammad.’ 
It was said, ‘Has he been sent too? ’ He replied, ‘Yes.’ 
It was said, ‘ Welcome to him ! His coming is well.’ Then the 
door was opened. And when I arrived (inside) behold John 
and Jesus, who were sons of their respective maternal aunts. 
He said, ‘This is John and this is Jesus, therefore salute 
them.’ So I saluted them, and they returned the salutation. 

Then they said, ‘ Welcome to the good brother and good 

prophet!’ After that he ascended with me to the third 

heaven and asked for the door to be opened. It was spid, 

‘ Who is this ?’ He replied, ‘ Gabriel.’ It was said, * And who 
is with thee?’ He replied, ‘Muhammad.’ It was said, ‘Has 
he been sent too ?’ He replied, ‘Yes.’ It was said, ‘ Welcome 
to him! His coming is well.’ Then the door was opened. 
And when I arrived (inside), behold ! Joseph. Gabriel said, 
‘This is Joseph, therefore salute him.’ So I saluted him, and 
he returned the salutation. Then he said, ‘ Welcome to the 
good brother and good prophet !’ After that Gabriel ascended 
with me until he came to the fourth heaven; and he asked for 


294 SELECTIONS FROM MUHAMMADAN TRADITIONS 

the door to be opened. And it was §aid, ‘ Who is this ?' He 
replied, ‘ Gabriel.’ It was said, ‘ And who is with thee ?’ He 
replied, ‘Muhammad.’ It was said, ‘And has he been sent 
too ? ’ He replied, ‘Yes.’ It was said, ‘ Welcome to him ! His 
coming is well.’ Then the door was opened. And when 
I arrived (inside), behold! Enoch. Gabriel said, ‘This is 
Enoch, therefore salute him.’ So I saluted him ; and he 
returned the salutation. Then he said, * Welcome to the good 
brother and good prophet. ’ After that Gabriel ascended 
with me until he came to the fifth heaven. And he asked 
that the door might be opened. It was said, ‘Who is 
this ? ' He replied, ‘ Gabriel.’ It was said, ‘And who is with 
thee ?’ He replied, ‘ Muhammad.’ It was said, ‘ Has he 
been sent too ? ’ He replied, ‘ Yes.’ It was said, ‘ Welcome to 
him ! His coming is well.’ Then the door was opened. And 
when I arrived (inside), behold ! Aaron. Gabriel said, ‘ This 
is Aaron, therefore salute him.’ So I saluted him ; and he 
returned the salutation. Then he said, ‘ Welcome to the good 
brother and good prophet! ’ After that Gabriel ascended with 
me until he came to the sixth heaven. And he asked that the 
door might be opened. It was said, ‘ Who is this ? ’ He 
replied, ‘ Gabriel.’ It was said, ‘ And who is with thee ? ’ He 
replied, ‘ Muhammad.’ It was said, ‘ Has he been sent too ? ’ 
He replied, ‘Yes’ It was said, ‘Welcome to him! His 
coming is well.’ Then the door was opened. And when 
I arrived (inside), behold! Moses. Gabriel said, ‘This is 
Moses, therefore salute him.’ So I saluted him ; and he 
returned the salutation. Then he said, ‘ Welcome to the good 
brother and good prophet.’ And when I passed on, he wept. 
It was said to him, ‘ What makes thee weep ? ’ He replied, ‘ I 
weep because a boy has been sent after me, of whose followers 
more will enter paradise than will enter of mine.’ After that 
Gabriel ascended with me to the seventh heaven ; and he 
asked that the door might be opened. It was said, ‘ Who is 
this ? ’ He replied, ‘ Gabriel. It was said, ‘ And who is with 
thee ? ’ He replied, ‘ Muhammad.’ It was said, ‘ Has he been 
sent too?’ He replied, ‘Yes.’ It was said, ‘Welcome! his 
coming is well.’ Then when I arrived (inside), behold! 
Abraham. Gabriel said, ‘ This is Abraham, therefore salute 


THE BOOK OF SEDITIONS 


295 


him.’ So I saluted him ; # and he returned the salutation. Then 
he said, ‘ Welcome to the good son and good prophet/ 'After 
that I was taken up to the (tree called) Sidratu’l-Muntaha, and 
behold! its lotus fruit was like stone water-pots, and behold! 
its leaves were like elephants’ ears. Gabriel said, ‘ This is the 
Sidratu’l-Muntaha. And behold! tour rivers, two of them 
hidden and two of them manifest/ I said, ‘ What are these, O 
Gabriel ? ’ He replied, 4 As for the hidden ones, they are two 
rivers in paradise, but the two which are manifest are the Nile 
and the Euphrates.’ After that the house called Ma 4 mur was 
raised up for me; and after that a vessel of wine and a vessel 
of milk and a vessel of honey were brought to me. And I 
took the milk. He said, 4 This is religion. Thou and thy 
people (will act) on it.’ After that prayers were ordered for 
me : fifty prayers for every day. Then I returned and passed 
by Moses. He said, 4 What hast thou been ordered ? ’ I said, 

4 I have been ordered fifty prayers for every day.’ He said, 

* Verily thy followers will not be able to perform fifty prayers 
every day. By God ! I tried men previous to thee and 
contended with the children of Israel with severe strivings* 
Therefore return to thy Lord, and ask for some alleviation for 
thy people.’ Then I returned ; and He took ten prayers from 
me. And I returned to Moses ; and he spake as before. So 
I returned; and He took ten more from me. And I went 
back to Moses, and he spake as before. So I returned ; and He 
took ten more from me, and I was ordered to say ten prayers 
every day. After that I returned to Moses and he spake as 
before. So I returned, and I was ordered five prayers every 
day. Then I went back to Moses, and he said, 4 What hast thou 
been ordered ?’ I said, 4 I have been ordered five prayers every 
day.’ He said, 4 Verily thy followers are not able to perform five 
prayers every day ; for verily I have tried men before thee and 
have contended with the children of Israel with severe strivings; 
therefore return to thy Lord, and ask from Him some alleviation 
for thy followers.’ Muhammad said, 4 1 have asked my Lord 
until I have become ashamed. But I am satisfied, and I resign 
(all to Him).’ He said, 4 Then when I passed by, a herald 
cried, 4 1 have given my orders, and have provided alleviation 
for my servants’.” ’— Muslim , Al Bukhari . 


296 


SELECTIONS FROM MV1JAMMADAN TRADITIONS 

It is related from Thabitu‘l-Bunani from Anas that, ‘The 
Apostle of God said, “Buraq was brought to me. He was a 
white beast, longer and higher than an ass, but not so high as 
a mule. Its foot came down at a distance as far as its eye 
could reach. Then I rode on it until I came to the Holy House 
(at Jerusalem). And I tied him to the ring to which the 
prophets were wont to tie (their steeds). Then I entered the 
mosque, and prayed there in two rak'ahs . After that I came 
out and Gabriel brought me a vessel of wine and a vessel of 
milk; and I chose the milk. Then Gabriel said, 4 Thou hast 
chosen religion.’ After that he ascended with us to heaven.” 
After that Thabit related as in the former tradition.’ 

Concerning the Miracles of the Prophets 

It is related from Anas bin Malik that, ‘Abu Bakr U$- 
Siddiq said, “ I saw the feet of the polytheists above our heads 
when we were in the cave, and I said, ‘ O Apostle of God, if 
one of them looks towards his feet, he will see us.’ He replied, 

‘ O Abu Bakr, dost thou imagine there are but two, when God 
is the Third of them !” ’ — Muslim , Al Bukhari. 

It is related from Anas that he said, ‘ Verily the Apostle of 
God took counsel when the news reached us of the approach of 
Abu Sufyan (with a Meccan army). Then Sa‘d bin ‘ Ubadah 
stood up and said, “ O Apostle of God, by Him in whose hand 
is my life! if thou order us to drive them into the sea, we will 
certainly do it. And if thou order us to smite their livers to 
Baraku‘l-Ghima, we will certainly do it.” Then the Apostle of 
God exhorted the people. And they travelled until they came 
down to Badr. Then the Apostle of God said, '‘This is the 
place where so and so will be smitten to the ground,”—and he 
placed his hand upon the earth—” here and here.” ’ Anas said, 

4 Not one of them passed the place touched by the Apostle’s 
hand.’— Muslim . 

It is related from Sa‘d bin Abu Waqqas that he said, 

4 On the day (of the battle of)‘Uhud, I saw two men on the right 
and left sides of the Apostle of God, clothed in white clothes. 
They were fighting in a manner resembling the fiercest 
fighting. I never saw them before nor yet afterwards. I 
mean they were Gabriel and Michael.'— Muslim , Al Bukhdri . 


THE BOOK OF SEDITIONS 


297 


It is related from £1 Barai’ that he said, ‘The Prophet 
sent a small band of men to Abu Rah’ ; and (one of them) 
‘Abdu’llah bin ‘Atik entered in upon him in his house at night 
when he was sleeping and killed him. ‘Abdu’llah bin 
‘Atik said, “ I smote a sword into his belly until it reached his 
back, and I knew that I had killed him. And I began to open 
the doors until I reached a flight of steps, and I placed my foot 
on them and fell in the moonlight night, and my leg was 
broken. And I bound it up with a turban, and went to my 
companions. And 1 reached the Prophet and reported the 
affair. He said, ‘ Stretch out thy leg.’ Then I stretched out 
my leg ; and he rubbed his hand over it. And it was as if I had 
never complained of it.” ’— ,Al Bukhari. 

It is related from Jabir that he said, ‘The people became 
thirsty on the day of Hudaibah. And there was a small 
drinking-vessel before the Apostle of God, and he made his 
ablutions from it. After that the people drew near to him and 
said, “ We have no water with which to perform our ablutions 
and drink, except what is in the small drinking-vessel.” Then 
the Prophet put his hand into the drinking-vessel ; and the 
water began to flow from between his fingers like springs. 
Then we drank and performed the ablutions.’ It was said to 
Jabir, ‘ How many were you? ’ He replied, ‘ Had we been a 
hundred thousand, it would certainly have sufficed for us. We 
were one thousand five hundred.’— Muslim , Al Bukhdrt . 

It is related from ‘ Ayesha that she said, ‘The Apostle of 
God was bewitched until he was made to imagine that he did 
a certain thing, but he did not (really) do it. Until on a certain 
day when he was with me, he prayed to God and called on Him. 
Then he said, “ Dost thou know, O ‘Ayesha, that God has 
answered me what I asked Him ! There came to me two men ; 
one of them sat at my head, and the other at my feet. Then 
one of them said to his companion, ‘ What is the man’s pain ? ’ 
He replied, ‘He is bewitched.’ The other said, ‘Who has 
bewitched him ? ’ He replied, ’ Labid binu’l-‘A‘$am, the Jew.’ 
He said, ‘ By what did he do it ? ’ He replied, ‘ By a comb and 
by a hair which falls from it, and by the film of a male date 
bud.’ He asked, ‘Where is it?’ He replied, ‘In the well 
Dharwan.’” Then the Prophet went to the well with some 

38 


298 SELECTIONS FROM MUHAMMADAN TRADITIONS 

men of his companions and said, 44 Th;s is the well which was 
shown to me.” And it was as if its water was stained with 
hina y and as if its palm-trees (reflected in the water) were the 
heads of Satans. Then he took it out/— Muslim , Al Bukhari . 

It is related from Abu Hurairah that he said, 4 Verily ye 
say, 41 Abu Hurairah has related many (traditions) from the 
Prophet.” . By God! there is a time appointed (for the punish¬ 
ment of those who fabricate traditions). The fact is, my 
brethren fiom amongst those who flew from Mecca to Madina 
were kept busy bargaining in the bazaars ; and my brethren 
from amongst the helpers were kept busy by work connected 
with their property. But I was a poor man and kept close to 
the Apostle of God, content if only my belly were filled. 
And one day . the Prophet said, 44 No one of you who spreads out 
his cloth (for me to pray on) until I finish my words, and after¬ 
wards gathers it to his breast, will ever forget anything from my 
words.” Then I spread out a blanket, which was the only 
cloth I had on me, until the Prophet finished his prayer. After 
that I gathered it to my breast ; and by Him who sent him with 
the truth! I never forgot any of his words until this day.’ — 
Muslim , Al Bukhari . 

It is related from Anas that, 4 A famine afflicted the people 
in the time of the Apostle of God ; and whilst the Prophet 
was giving the public address on a certain Friday, a desert Arab 
stood up and said, 44 O Apostle of God, our properties^ are 
destroyed and our families are hungry ; therefore pray to Gcxl 
for us.” Then the Apostle raised his hands, and we did not 
see in the heavens a single speck of cloud, and by Him in 
whose hand is my life ! he had not taken them down before 
clouds appeared like mountains. After that he had not come 
down from his pulpit until I saw the rain falling on his beard. 
Then we were given rain on that day and on the morrow and 
on the next day until the next Friday. Then that desert Arab 
and others stood up and said, 44 O Apostle of God, our buildings 
are fallen into ruins and our property is submerged ; therefore 
pray to God for us.” Then he raised his hands and said, 44 O 
God, send down the rain around us, but not on us.” And he did 
not make a sign towards any quarter where there was cloud, 
but it ceased. And Madina became like an open space 


THE BOOK OF SEDITIONS 


299 


(surrounded by clouds). % And the valley of Qapah flowed for a 
month ; and no one came from any direction, but what he 
reported an abundance (of rain ).’—Muslim, Al Bukhdri. 

It is related from Abu Hurairah that, ‘On the day (of the 
battle) of Tabuq the people became hungry. Then ‘Omar 
said, “O Apostle of God, call them to bring the remains of 
their rations and then pray to God for them for a blessing upon 
it.” He replied, “ Yes.” Then he called for a piece of leather 
'and spread it out. After that he called for the remains of their 
rations. And some people began to bring handfuls of millet, 
others brought handfuls of dates, others brought small pieces 
of food until a small quantity of things was gathered together 
on the piece of leather. Then the Apostle of God prayed for a 
blessing, and afterwards he said, “Take it in your vessels.” 
(And they took it) until they did not leave amongst the soldiers 
a single vessel that was not filled.’ Abu Hurairah said, ‘And 
they ate until they were satisfied ; and there remained some 
over. And the Apostle of God .said, “ I bear witness that there 
is no God but Allah, and that I am the Apostle of Allah. There 
is no servant who will meet God with these two testimonies, 
free of doubt, who will be prevented from entering paradise.” ’ 
Muslim . 

It is related from Abu Musa that he said, ‘ Abu Talib went 
out to Syria; and the Prophet of God, (then a boy), went with 
him, together with some old men of the Quraish. And when 
they came near to a certain monk they alighted and opened 
their pack-saddles. Then the monk came out to them—and 
they used, before that, to pass by him ; neither was he in the 
habit of coming out to them—as they were opening their 
pack-saddles. And the monk began to pass amongst them 
until he came to and seized the hand of the Apostle of God. 
And he said, “ This is the master of all the worlds ; this is the 
Apostle of the Lord of all the worlds. God has sent him as a 
mercy to all the worlds.” Then the old men of the Quraish 
said to him, “What knowledge hast thou?” He replied, 
“ When ye drew near to A1 ‘Aqabah there remained neither 
tree nor stone that did not bow down in prostration ; but these 
do not prostrate to any, but prophets. And I recognize him by 
the seal of prophecy which is beneath the cartilage of his 


300 SELECTIONS FROM MUHAMMADAN TRADITIONS 

shoulder, like an apple.” After that lie returned and prepared 
food for them. And when he brought it to them, (the Apostle) 
was amongst the flock of camels. Then the monk said, “ Send 
for him.” And he drew near ; and above him was a cloud shading 
him. And when he came near to the people, he found that 
they had preceded him to the shade of a tree. And when he 
sat down the shade of the tree inclined towards him. Then 
(the monk) said, “Look at the shade of the tree inclining to¬ 
wards him! ” And he said, “ I adjure you by God, who of yon 
is his guardian ? ” They said, “ Abu Talib.” And he continued 
to adjure him until Abu Talib sent him (i.e. Muhammad) back. 
And Abu Bakr sent Bilal with him. And the monk provided 
cakes and olives for his journey.’— At Tirmid/u . 

It is related from Buraidah that, * The Apostle of God said, 
“When we arrived at the Holy House (at Jerusalem), Gabriel 
made a sign with his finger and therewith perforated a stone. 
And he tied up Buraq to the stone.” ’— At Tinnidhu 

It is related from Ibn ‘Abbas that, ‘A woman brought her 
son to the Apostle of God and said, “ O Apostle of God, verily my 
son is mad. And it seizes him morning and evening.” Then 
the Apostle of God rubbed his hand on the boy’s breast and 
prayed. And he vomited, and there came forth out of his belly 
a thing like a black puppy running about.’— AI Ddrimi . 

It is related from Ibn ‘Abbas that, ‘ A desert Arab came to 
the Apostle of God and said, “ By what means may I know that 
thou art a prophet ? ” He replied, “ That I call this cluster of 
dates from this date-tree to bear witness that I am the Apostle 
of God.” Then the Apostle of God called ; and it began to come 
down from the date-tree until it fell beside the Prophet. Then 
he said, “ Return.” And it returned to its place ; and the desert 
Arab embraced Islam.’— At Tirntidhu 

It is related from Jabir that a Jewish woman of the inhabit¬ 
ants of Khaibar poisoned some roasted mutton and then present¬ 
ed it to the Apostle of God. Then the Apostle of God took a 
fore-leg and ate of it; and a small number of his companions ate 
of it with him. Then the Apostle of God said, “ Withhold your 
hands! ” And he sent to the Jewess and called her and said, 
“ Didst thou poison this mutton ? ” She replied, “ Who infor¬ 
med thee ? ” He said, “ This piece of fore-leg which is in my 


THE BOOK OF SEDITIONS 


301 


hand informed me.” Slje said, “Yes (I poisoned it). I said 
‘ If he be a prophet, then it will never hurt him; but if he be 
not a prophet, then we shall be rid of him.’ ’’ Then the Apostle 
of God forgave her, and did not punish her. But his companions 
who ate of the mutton died. And the Apostle of God was 
cupped on the shoulder on account of what he had eaten of the 
mutton. Abu Hind cupped him with a horn and a knife. And 
he was a freedman of the Bani Bayadah of the Helpers.*— Abu 
Daud . 

It is related from Ibn ‘Abbas that, ‘ The Quraish conspired 
together on a certain night in Mecca. Some of them, referring 
to the Prophet, said, “ When day dawns, then bind him with 
fetters.” Others of them said, “Rather kill him.” Others of 
them said, “Rather turn him out (of the city).” But God 
disclosed the matter to His Prophet; and ‘All spent that night 
on the Prophet’s bed. And the Prophet went forth until he 
reached a cave. And the polytheists passed the night watching 
‘ AH, thinking that he was the Prophet. Then when the 
morning dawned, they rushed upon him ; and when they saw 
‘AH, God defeated their plans. Then they said, “Where is 
this friend of thine ? ” He replied, “ I know not.” Then they 
followed (the Apostle’s) tracks ; and when they reached the 
mountain they were confounded. And they ascended the 
mountain and passed by the cave. And they saw a spider's 
web across the entrance, and said, “ If he had entered here, the 
spider’s web would not be across its entrance.” And he 
remained in it three nights.’— Ahmad . 

It is related from Usamah bin Zaid that, ‘ The Apostle of 
God said, “ He who pretends that I have said what I did 
not say, let him make his resting-place in the fire.” And that 
was because he sent a man, and he lied about him. Then the 
Apostle of God invoked a curse upon him. And he was found 
dead with his belly split open ; and the earth would not receive 
him.’— Al Baihaqi . 

Concerning the Miracles of Holy Men 

It is related from ‘Ayesha that, ‘ When the King of 
Abyssinia died, we were remarking to one another that a light 
continued to be seen over his grave.’— Abu Daud . 

It is related from Ibnu’l-Miinkadir that, ‘ Safinah, a freed- 

39 


302 


SELECTIONS FROM MUHAMMADAN TRADITIONS 


man of the Apostle of God, lost trace of the army in the land 
of Greece, 1 or was taken prisoner. And he fled seeking the 
(Muslim) army. And behold! a lion met him. And he said, 
“ O Abu’l-I^arith, I am a freedman of the Apostle of God. 
Such and such happened to me.” And the lion drew near to 
him wagging its tail until it stood at his side. Whenever it 
heard a sound (of danger) it went towards it; and afterwards 
it came near and walked by his side until they reached the 
army. Then the lion returned /—Sharhu s-Sunnah. 

Concerning the Death of the Prophet 

It is related from ‘Ayesha that she said, ‘ One of the 
benefits of God towards me is this, that the Apostle of God died 
in my room and on my day (reposing) between my breast and 
collarbone. And God united my saliva with his near his death. 
‘ Abdu’r-Rahman bin Abu Bakr entered in where I was, whilst 
I was acting as a pillow for the Apostle of God to rest upon, 
and he had in his hand a stick for cleaning the teeth. And I 
saw the Prophet looking at the tooth-cleaner, and I under¬ 
stood that he would like it. So I said, “Shall I get it for 
thee ? ” And he made a sign with his head in the affirmative. 
Then I took it; but it was hard for him, so I said, “Shall I 
make it soft for thee ? “ Then he made a sign with his head 
in the affirmative. Then I made it soft; and he rubbed it 
over his teeth. And there was a small drinking-vessel before 
him in which was water. And he began to put his hands into 
the water and wipe his face with them and to say, “There is 
no God but Allah ; verily in death there are agonies/’ After 
that he raised his hand and began to say, “ (Give me a place) 
with the highest companions,” until he was taken, and his hand 
fell down/— Al Bukhdri . 

It is related from Anas that, 1 When the Prophet was 
oppressed (with pain) his distress caused him to swoon. And 
Fatimah said, “ What agony, O my father ! ” He said to her, 
“There will be no agony on thy father after to-day.” Then 
when he died, she said, “O my father! he has responded to 
the Lord who called him. O my father! whose place is the 
garden of paradise! O my father ! to Gabriel give we the 


1 The word Greece is here used for the Roman Empire. 


THK BOpK OF SEDITIONS 


303 


news of thy death!” , Afterwards, when he was buried, 
Fatimah said, 44 O Anas, are ye happy in throwing dirt upon 
the Apostle of God ! ” 9 —Al Bukhdru 

It is related from 4 Ayesha that, 4 When the Apostle of God 
died, they disagreed about (the place of) his burial. Then Abu 
Bakr said, 14 1 heard something (relating to this) from the 
Apostle of God. He said, 4 God takes no prophet, but in the 
place in which he loves to be buried/ Bury him therefore in 
the place where his bed is.” *—At Tirmidhi 

It is related from 4 Ayesha that she said, 4 The Apostle of 
God, in the illness in which he died, was saying, 44 O ‘Ayesha, 
I continue to feel the pain from the (poisoned) food which I 
ate at Khaibar ; and this is the hour in which I feel the cutting 
of my arteries from that poison.” *—Al BukhdrL 

It is related from Ibn 4 Abbas that, 4 When the Apostle of 
God was approached by death, there were some men in the 
house, amongst whom was 4 Omar binu’l-Khattab. And the 
Prophet said, 44 Come, and I will write for you a writing after 
which ye will never go astray.” Then 4 Omar said, 44 The 
pain has overcome him, and ye have the Qur’an; the Word of 
God is sufficient for you.” But the people of the house differed 
about the matter and squabbled. And some of them said, 
44 Bring near (writing materials), so that the Apostle of God 
may write for you.” And some amongst them said what 
‘Omar had said. And when the clamour and dissension increas-* 
ed, the Apostle of God said, “ Get up from me.” ‘Ubaidu’llah 
said that Ibn‘Abbas used to say, 44 Verily the misfortunes, all 
the misfortunes which have come to us, between the Apostle and 
his writing for them that writing, have come on account of their 
disagreement and clamour.’— Muslim , Al Bukhdru 

It is related from ‘Ayesha that she said, 4 The Apostle, of 
God returned to me on a certain day from a funeral in Baqi‘a ; 
and he found me suffering from a headache. And I said, 44 O 
my headache! ” He said, 44 Rather, O ‘Ayesha, I say, O my 
headache! What harm is it to thee, if thou die before me, for 
I will wash thee and shroud thee and pray over thee and bury 
thee.” I said, 44 1 fancy I see thee ! by God ! if thou didst that, 
thou wouldst certainly return to my house and co-habit therein 
with some of thy wives.” Then the Apostle of God smiled. 
After that the pains began from which he died.’— Al Ddrimi . 

40 


304 SELECTIONS FROM MUHAMMADAN TRADITIONS 

It is related from ‘Ayesha that sjie said, ‘The Apostle of 
God never left a single dinar, or a single dirham, or a goat, or 
a camel; nor did he leave anything by will.’— Muslim . 

Concerning the Virtues of the Quraish 

It is related from Ibn ‘Omar that, ‘ The Prophet said, 
‘‘This office (of the Khalifate) will continue in the Quraish so 
long as there remain amongst them two persons .” 1 — Muslim , 
Al Bukhari . 

It is related from Jabir bin Samurah that he said, ‘ I heard 
the Apostle of God say, “Islam will continue powerful up to 
twelve Khalifs, all of whom will be from the Quraish.” ’— 
Muslim , Al Bukhari . 

It is related from vSa‘d that, ‘ The Prophet said, “ Whoever 
wishes for the humiliation of the Quraish, him will God 
humiliate. ,, ’—At Tirmidhi . 

It is related from Abu Hurairah that, ‘ The Apostle of God 
said, “The sovereignty is in the Quraish, and the judiciary 
power in the Helpers (of Madina), and the office of calling to 
prayer in the Abyssinians, and faithfulness is in the Azd, 
namely in Ye man.” * — At Tirmidhi. 

It is related from Abu Hurairah that, ‘ Tufail bin ‘AmruP- 
Dawsi came to the Apostle of God and said, “ Verily the (tribe 
of) Daws are ruined and have become rebellious, therefore call 
down the curse of God upon them.” And the people thought 
that he would curse them; but he said, “ O'God, guide the 
Daws to the right path and bring them back.”’— Muslim , Al 
Bukhdrt . 

It is related from Ibn ‘Abbas that, ‘ The Apostle of God 
said, “Love the Arabs on account of three things: because 
I am an Arab, and the Qur’an is Arabic, and the speech of the 
inhabitants of paradise is Arabic.” ’— Al Baihaqi . 

On the Virtues of Abu Bakr 

It is related from Abu Sa‘idu’l-Khudri that, ‘The Prophet 
said, “Verily the one of most benefit,to me amongst men in 
his companionship and his goods is Abu Bakr. If I had taken 
a friend, I would certainly have taken Abu Bakr as a friend; 
but the brotherhood of Islam and its love (is established). 


THE BOOK OF SEDITIONS 


305 


Let there not remain in t*he mosque any window except that of 
Abu Bakr.” ’ And in another tradition it runs, 1 If I had taken 
a friend besides my Lord, I would certainly have taken Abu 
Bakr as that friend.’— Muslim , Al Bukhdri. 

• It is related from ‘Ayesha that she said, ‘The Apostle of 
God said to me in his illness, “ Call Abu Bakr, thy father, and 
thy brother to me, so that I may write a writing; for I fear 
that some may desire (the succession) and say, I (am more 
worthy); but such will not be so. And God and the believers 
will refuse any but Abu Bakr.” Muslim . 

On the Virtues of ‘Omar 

It is related from Ibn ‘Omar that, ‘The Apostle of God 
said, “ Verily God has placed the truth on the tongue and heart 
of ‘Omar.” ’— At Tirmidhi . 

It is related from ‘Uqbah bin ‘Amir that, ‘The Prophet 
said, “ Had there been a prophet after me, it would certainly 
have been ‘Omar binu’l-Khattab.” ’— At Tirmidhi. 

It is related from Anas and Ibn ‘Omar that, ‘ ‘Omar said, 
“ I agreed with my Lord in three things. I said, ‘ O Apostle 
of God, if we had taken the place of Abraham as a place of 
prayer, (it would have been better).’' Then the revelation 
descended, ‘ Take the place of Abraham as a place of prayer.’ 
And I said, ‘ O Apostle of God, good and bad men go in where 
thy wives are ; if thou hadst ordered the latter to veil them¬ 
selves (it would have been better).’ And then descended the 
verse of the veil. And the wives of the Prophet were agreed 
together in a matter of jealousy. So I said to them, ‘ It may 
be that if he divorce you, his Lord will bring in place of you 
other wives better than you.’ Then the revelation came down 
thus.”’— Muslim, Al Bukhdri. # 

On the Virtues of ‘OthmAn 

It is related from Talhah bin ‘Ubaidu’llah that, ‘ The 
Apostle of God said, “ There is a companion for every prophet; 
and my companion in paradise will be ‘Othman.” ’— At Tir¬ 
midhi. 

It is related from ‘Omar that ‘ The Apostle of God mentioned 
an insurrection and said, “This man will be killed in it 
unjustly.” (This he said) alluding to ‘Othman.’— At Tirmidhi . 


^ SELECTIONS EROM MUHAMMADAN TRADITIONS 
On the Virtues «f ‘Ali 

It is related from Sa‘d bin abu Waqqas that, ‘The Apostle 
of God said to ‘All, “Thou art to me in the relation that 
Aaron was to Moses, except that there will be no Prophet after 
me.” ’— Muslim , Al Bukhari . 

It is related from Ibn ‘Omar that he said, ‘The Apostle 
of God established a bond of brotherhood between his various 
companions. Then ‘All came, his eyes shedding tears, and 
said, “ Thou hast made a bond of brotherhood between thy 
companions ; but thou hast not established such a bond between 
me and anyone.” Then the Apostle of God said, “Thou art 
my brother in this world and in the next.” ’— At Tirmidhi . 

It is related from ‘All that, ‘ The Apostle of God said, 
“ I am the house of Knowledge, and ‘Ali is the door.” ’— At 
Tirmidhi. 

It is related from ‘All that, ‘ The Apostle of God said, 
“There is in thee a resemblance to Jesus. The Jews hated 
him until they calumniated his mother. And the Christians 
loved him so much that they placed him in a position which 
was not his.”’ After that, ‘All said, ‘Two people will be 
destroyed on my accountone who loves me, and one who 
acts unjustly towards me. The one will laud me with regard 
to things which are not in me ; and the one who hates me will 
be led through his hatred of me to calumniate me.’— Ahmad . 

On the Virtues of the Ten with Whom God 
was Pleased 

It is related from ‘ Ayesha that, ‘ The Apostle of God 
remained awake on a certain night on his arrival at Madina. 
And he said, “ Would that there was a good man to keep watch 
over me! ” And behold! we hfcard a sound of arms ; and he 
said, “ Who is this? ” He said, “ It is I, Sa‘d.” The Prophet 
said, “What brought thee?” He replied, “Fear fell into my 
soul on account of the Apostle of God, and I came to keep watch 
over him.” Then the Apostle of God prayed for him, and after 
that went to sleep.’— Muslim , Al Bukhdri . 

It is related from Anas that, ‘The Prophet said, “The 
kindest of my followers to my (other) followers is Abu Bakr; 
and the most strenuous of them in the matters of God is 


THE BOOK OF SEDITIONS 


307 


‘ Omar ; and the truest it? shame is 4 Othman ; and the one most 
skilled in the law of inheritance is Zaid bin Thabit; and the 
best reader amongst them is Ubai bin Ka‘b; and the most 
learned of them in matters lawful and unlawful is Mu 4 adh 
bin Jabal. For every religious sect there is a faithful guardian *» 
and the faithful guardian of this sect is Abu ‘Ubaidah binu’l- 
Jarrah.” ’— Ahmad y At Tirmidhi . 

It is related from 4 All that, 4 It was said, 44 O Apostle of 
God, whom shall we appoint as prince after thee ?” He 
replied, 44 If ye make Abu Bakr your prince, ye will find him 
faithful, indifferent to this world, and eager for the next. And 
if ye make 4 Omar prince, ye will find him strong and faithful, 
not fearing the blame of detractors in the matters of God. 
And if ye make ‘AH prince—though I cannot imagine your 
doing so—ye will find him a guide who is rightly directed, and 
one who will lead you into the straight path.” ’— Ah?nad. 

On the Virtues of the People of the Prophet’s Family 

It is related from Abu Hurairah that he said, 4 1 went out 
with the Apostle of God in a certain part of the day, until we 
came to Fafimah’s house. And he said, 44 Is the boy there ? Is 
the boy there ? ” meaning Hasan. And he did not delay, but 
came running until each of them embraced his companion. And 
the Apostle of God said, 44 O God, verily I love him ; then do 
Thou love him and those who love him.”’— Muslim , Al 
Bukh&ri . 

It is related from Buraidah that he said, 4 The Apostle of 
God was giving the public address (in the mosque) when liasan 
and Husain came, wearing red shirts. And they were walking 
and stumbling along. Then the Apostle of God descended 
from the pulpit and picked them up and placed them in front of 
him. Then he said, “God spoke truly. 4 Your goods and your 
children are only a temptation.’ 1 I looked at these two children 
walking and stumbling along, and I could no longer contain 
myself, so much so that I cut short my words and took them 
up.” *— At Tirtitidht , Abu Ddud . 

It is related from Anas that, 4 The head of Husain was 
brought to ‘Ubaidu’llah bin Ziyad, and it was placed in a basin. 

1 Qur’an,Suratu’l-Anfal (viii) 28. 


308 SELECTIONS FROM MUHAMMADAN TRADITIONS 

And he began to violate it, and said something concerning its 
beauty. I said, “By God! he most resembled the Apostle of 
God of them all.*’ And the head was dyed with indigo/— Al 
Bukhdrt . And in another tradition from At Tirmidhi, he said, ‘ I 
was near I bn Ziyad, and they brought the head of Ilusain. And 
he began to strike it with a stick on its nose, and say, “ I have 
never seen anything so beautiful as this.” I said, “Beware! 
verily he resembled the Apostle of God more than they all.” ’ 

On the Virtues of the Wives of the Prophet 

It is related from ‘AH that he said, 1 1 heard the Apostle of 
God say, “The best of the women of her time was Mary, the 
daughter of ‘Imran ; and the best of the women of her time 
was Khadijah, the daughter of Khuwailid.” ’— Muslim , Al 
Bukhdrt. 

It is related from ‘Ayesha that, ‘ Gabriel brought her 
likeness to the Apostle of God on a green, silk cloth and said, 
“ This is thy wife in this world and the next/'*— At Tirmidhi. 

It is related from ‘Ayesha that she said, ‘ I was never so 
jealous of any of the Prophet’s wives as I was of Khadijah, 
although I had never seen her. But he used to mention her 
frequently ; and often he would slay a goat and cut it up into 
pieces and then send them to Khadijah’s friends. And often 
I said to him, “ It seems as though there was no woman in the 
world except Khadijah ! ” And he would say, “ She was so and 
so ; and I had children by her.” ’— Muslim , Al Bukhdrt . 

It is related from Abu Musa, that he said, ‘ No tradition 
was ever difficult for us, the companions of the Apostle of God, 
and we asked ‘Ayesha, but we found a knowledge of it with 
her.’— At Tirmidhi. 

It is related from Musa bin Talhah that he said, 1 I never 
saw anyone more eloquent than ‘Ayesha.’— At Tirmidhi. 

It is related from Anas that he said, ‘ When God gave booty 
to His Apostle from the property of the Hawazin, and he in turn 
began to give each man of the Quraish a hundred camels, then 
some men of the Helpers said, “ May God forgive the Apostle 
of God ! he gives to the Quraish, and he omits ns, though it was 
our swords which shed their blood.” Then their words were 
reported to the Apostle of God. So he sent to the Helpers and 


THE BOOK OF SEDITIONS 


309 


gathered them together 4 in a leathern tent, and he allowed no 
one else in with them except them. And when they were 
gathered together the Apostle of God came to them and said, 
“ What is this story which reaches me about you ? ” Then the 
wise amongst them said, “As for the sensible among us, O 
Apostle of God, they have not said anything, but as for certain 
young men amongst us they did indeed say, ‘ May God forgive 
the Apostle of God! he gives to the Quraish, and omits the 
Helpers; and it was our swords which shed their blood.’ ” Then 
the Apostle of God said, It is true I give to the men who are new 
in the covenant concerning infidelity in order to attach them 
firmly (to us). Are ye not content that the men might take the 
property and that ye may return to your camps with the Apostle 
of God ? ” They replied, “ O Apostle of God, we are content.” ’ 
Muslim, Al Bukhari . 

Concerning the Rewards of this People 

It is related from I bn ‘Omar that, ‘ The Apostle of God 
said, “Verily your appointed time is no more in comparison 
with the time of the peoples who were before you than what is 
between the afternoon prayer and the setting of the sun. 
And the likeness of yourselves and that of the Jews and 
Christians is like a man who engages workmen and says, * Who 
will work for me till mid-day for one qirdt ? ’ Then the Jews 
worked till mid-day for one qirdi . After that he said, ‘ Who 
will work for me from mid-day till the afternoon prayer for 
one qirdt ? 1 Then the Christians worked from mid-day until 
the afternoon prayer for one qirdt . After that he said, ‘ Who 
will work for me from the evening prayer till the setting of the 
sun for two qirdts ? Are not ye those who work from the 
evening prayer until the setting of the sun! Are not wages 
for you twice over ! ’ Then the Jews and Christians became 
angry and said, * We have worked more, and yet have received 
less/ God Most High will say, 1 Have I dealt unjustly with 
you in anything in the matter of your rights ? * They will say, 
‘No.’ God Most High will say, ‘Verily this is my favour. I 
bestow it on whoun I will/ ” ’— Al Bukhdru 


Printed at the Wesleyan Mission Press, 
Mysore City. 


SHOT SRTRHT SPPTCHt, 3*^5^ 

L.B.S. National Academy of Administration, Library 


MUSSOORIE /oJCha 

^ mft^r ?pp *nfasr 11 

This book is to be returned on the date last stamped 


fearer 

^TTT^TTf 


^ HOT 


apt H®TT 

Date 

Borrower’s 

Date 

Borrower 

i 

No. 


No. 

i ?/'/?/ 

I r / 5 /'" 

! 

j 

/ l 

- - .. 

I 


i 1 

1 


I 


QL 297.124 
SEL 


102640 


297.124 

Sel 


a. 

Class No 


ACC. No.. 


19784 


Book No 


Author 


f rrw Muham rn ~ 


I B R A R Y W^naT ^ 

LAL BAHADUR SHASTRI 

National Academy of Administration 


MUSSOORIE 


Accession No. _ / 

1. Books are issued for 15 days only but 
may have to be recalled earlier if urgen¬ 
tly required. 

2. An over-due charge of 25 Paise per day per 
volume will be charged. 

3. Books may be renewed on request, at the 
discretion of the Librarian. 

4. Periodicals, Rare and Reference books may 
not be issued and may be consulted only 
in the Library. 

5. Books lost, defaced or injured in any way 
shall have to be replaced or its double 
price shall be paid by the borrower. 

Help to keep this book fresh, clean & moving
