The Golden Bough (3rd ed.), Vol. 9: The Scapegoat (James George Frazer, 1913)
==========================================================
Vol. 9 of the Golden Bough 3rd edition. Public domain. Source: Internet Archive.

7 sy ys 


: 5 ie: 6: as ee 
a PE Br pane ee : eS ee 
po 9, ap Hegel ah i Oe 2 é Ka gatas Sete aa a> ee my - hs 
2 sd = ee e's 48,7 2s. ee ea > Aaa > i : ** a Bes, 
=, ea ata S Ph ee’ ee = Ss Ge bg ae La 
> ats’ ese “i4 : Cee ee SS oe 


oo 


ae PS ge 2 wD it’ Bee ee . om Se tat o aa es ; 4 
ease oe aes ree: ey oe eis ee —, se 
lett ee ee Oe ee ee 
eres tet eee oe ee te he . 
ie ae = 8S aoe eae aio ee 22 
REOeeerS 35 
a a Oe = 
Ra =e YS Be - o—5 


-#: 
ay ™~; 


ee ee: . 
i a 
i ¥ eo , a ea ee + : ; “3 = wt =~ ae 5: && oe et 
OP Ae ne? os Se ee ea Re ee es FAS. aha ee Fle 
4 pe: ar ie S s . ae 8: a 3 < — ee oy é 
as : = im a - ve es ee it by. 


see 2 = 7 Sigs <1 Ses na 
ein: 7 aii a Fae: Rte ate 


ME! EL debe: — ae Se Bee 
ee SARE ix 
en oe a 


<=, 


12686900 19L1 € 


l 


Digitized by the Internet Archive 
in 2009 with funding from 
Ontario Council of University Libraries 


http:/www.archive.org/details/goldenboughstudy09fraz 


Ny '< or 


az 


—. 


THE GOLDEN BOUGH 


=a + 
oe A STUDY IN MAGIC AND RELIGION 


THIRD EDITION 


PART VI 
iHE SCAPEGOAT 


MACMILLAN AND CO., LimiTEpD 
LONDON + BOMBAY « CALCUTTA 
MELBOURNE 
THE MACMILLAN COMPANY 


NEW YORK + BOSTON » CHICAGO 
DALLAS + SAN FRANCISCO 


THE MACMILLAN CO. OF CANADA, LTp. 
TORONTO 


THE SCAPEGOAT 


BY 


J; G. FRAZER, D.C.L., LL.D.\\Crrr:D. 


FELLOW OF TRINITY COLLEGE, CAMBRIDGE 
PROFESSOR OF SOCIAL ANTHROPOLOGY IN THE UNIVERSITY OF LIVERPOOL 


MACMILLAN AND CO., LIMITED 
Si MARTIN'S SEREET, LONDON 


1913 


COPYRIGHT 


BL 
Sho 
id 
IFIa@ 
ee 


PREPACE 


WITH The Scapegoat our general discussion of the theory 
and practice of the Dying God is brought to a conclusion. 
The aspect of the subject with which we are here chiefly 
concerned is the use of the Dying God as a scapegoat to free 
his worshippers from the troubles of all sorts with which 
life on earth is beset. I have sought to trace this curious 
usage to its origin, to decompose the idea of the Divine 
Scapegoat into the elements out of which it appears to be 
compounded. If I am right, the idea resolves itself into a 
simple confusion between the material and the immaterial, 
between the real possibility of transferring a physical load 
to other shoulders and the supposed possibility of trans- 
ferring our bodily and mental ailments to another who will 
bear them for us. When we survey the history of this 
pathetic fallacy from its crude inception in savagery to its 
full development in the speculative theology of civilized 
nations, we cannot but wonder at the singular power which 
the human mind possesses of transmuting the leaden dross 
of superstition into a glittering semblance of gold. Cer- 
tainly in nothing is this alchemy of thought more conspicu- 
ous than in the process which has refined the base and 
foolish custom of the scapegoat into the sublime conception 
of a God who dies to take away the sins of the world. 
Along with the discussion of the Scapegoat I have 
included in this volume an account of the remarkable re- 


ligious ritual of the Aztecs, in which the theory of the 
V 


vi PREPAGE 


Dying God found its most systematic and most tragic 
expression. There is nothing, so far as I am aware, to 
shew that the men and women, who in Mexico died cruel 
deaths in the character of gods and goddesses, were regarded 
as scapegoats by their worshippers and executioners; the 
intention of slaying them seems rather to have been to 
reinforce by a river of human blood the tide of life which 
might else grow stagnant and stale in the veins of the 
deities. Hence the Aztec ritual, which prescribed the 
slaughter, the roasting alive, and the flaying of men and 
women in order that the gods might remain for ever young 
and strong, conforms to the general theory of deicide which 
I have offered. in this work. On that theory death is a 
portal through which gods and men alike must pass to 
escape the decrepitude of age and to attain the vigour of 
eternal youth. The conception may be said to culminate 
in the Brahmanical doctrine that in the daily sacrifice the 
body of the Creator is broken anew for the salvation of the 
world. 


J. G. FRAgE 


CAMBRIDGE, 
21st June, 1913. 


CONTENTS 


PREFACE : ; : : : : . Ppavevi 


CHAPTER I.—THE TRANSFERENCE OF EVIL. Pp. I-71 


§ 1. The Transference to Inanimate Objects, pp. 1-8.—The principle of vicarious 
suffering, I sg. ; the transference of evil to things, 2-5; evils transferred 
to other persons through the medium of things, 5-7 ; evils transferred to 
images, 7; Mongol transference of evil to things, 7 sg. 


§ 2. The Transference to Stones and Sticks, pp. 8-30.—Fatigue transferred to 
stones, sticks, or leaves, 8 sg. ; heaps of stones or sticks in America and 
Africa, 9-11; heaps of stones or sticks on the top of mountains or passes, 
II sg. 3; fatigue let out with the blood, 12 sg. ; heaps of stones or sticks 
on the scene of crimes, 13 sg. ; heaps of stones, sticks, or leaves on scenes 
of murder and on graves, 15-17; stones and sticks hurled at dangerous 
ghosts and demons, 17-20; other uses of stones and sticks thrown on 
heaps, 20 sg.; cairns raised in honour of Moslem saints, 21 ; stones as 
channels of communication with saints, 21 sg. ; the rite of throwing stones 
or sticks a mode of purification, 23 sg. ; this interpretation confirmed by 
Greek and Indian tradition and custom, 24 sg. ; the throwing of stones 
and sticks as an offering, 25-29; the throwing of stones and sticks accom- 
panied by prayers, 29 sg. ; transformation of a magical ceremony into a 
religious rite, 30. 


§ 3. The Transference to Animals, pp. 31-37.—Evils transferred to animals in 
Africa and other parts of the world, 31-34; evils transferred to birds, 34- 
36; evils transferred to animals in India, 36 sg. 


§4. The Transference to Men, pp. 38-46.—Evils transferred to human beings in 
India, Scotland, Borneo, and New Zealand, 38 sg. ; evils transferred to 
annual eponymous magistrates, 39-41; Indian story of the transference of 
evils to a saint, 41 sg.; transference of evils to human scapegoats in 
Uganda and Travancore, 42 sg.; transference of sins to sin-eater in 
England and India, 43-45; transference of sins in Tahiti, 45 sg. 


vil 


vill CONTENTS 


§ 5. Zhe Transference of Evil in Europe, pp. 47-59.—Transference of evils in 
ancient Greece, 47 sg.3; transference of warts, 48 sg. ; transference of 
sickness, 49 ; sickness transferred to animals, 49-53; sickness and ill-luck 
transferred to inanimate objects, 53 sg. ; sickness and trouble transferred 
to trees and bushes, 54-59. 


§ 6. The Nailing of Evils, pp. 59-71.—Sickness and pain pegged or nailed into 
trees, 59 sg. ; gods, ghosts, and demons bunged up or nailed down, 60- 
62; evils and devils nailed into stones, walls, doorposts, and so on, 62-64 ; 
plague and civil discord nailed into a wall in ancient Rome, 64-66 ; 
annual ceremony of knocking a nail in Rome probably a purificatory 
rite, 66-69 ; nails knocked into idols to attract the attention of the gods or 
spirits, 69-71. 


CHAPTER Ti, THE OMNIPRESENCE OF 
DEMONS. : ; ; : . .- Pp. 72aes 


Attempts to get rid of the accumulated sorrows of a whole people, 72 ; sorrows 
conceived of as the work of demons, 72 sg.; primitive belief in the omni- 
presence of demons, 73 sg. ; demons in Australia, 74 ; demons in Africa, 
74-78; demons in South America, 78 sg. ; demons in Labrador, 79 sg. ; 
demons in Polynesia, 80 sg. ; demons in New Zealand, 81; demons in 
the Pelew Islands and the Philippines, 81 sg. ; demons in Melanesia, 
82 sg. ; demons in New Guinea, 83-85 ; demons in Timor, 85 ; demons 
in Celebes, 85 sg. ; demons in Bali and Java, 86 sg. ; demons in Borneo, 
87; demons in Sumatra, 87 sg. ; demons in the Nicobars, 88 ; demons in 
the Malay Peninsula, 88 sg. ; demons in Kamtchatka, 89; the perma- 
nence of demons compared with the transience of the high gods, 89 sg. ; 
demons in ancient India, 90 sg.; demons in modern India, 91-94 ; demons 
in Ceylon, 94 sg.; demons in Burma, 95 sg. ; demons in Siam, 97 ; 
demons in Indo-China, 97-99; demons in China, 99 ; demons in Corea, 
99 sg.; demons among the Koryaks, 100 sg. ; demons among the Gilyaks, 
IOI sg.; demons in ancient Babylonia and Assyria, 102 sg. ; demons in 
ancient Egypt, 103 sg.; demons in modern Egypt, 104; demons in 
ancient Greece, 104 sg. ; demons in mediaeval Europe, 105 sg. ; demons 
in modern Europe, 106 sg. ; demons in modern Armenia, 107 sg. ; 


CHAPTER III.—THE PUBLIC EXPULSION OF 
EVILS q . Pp: 1regaGe 


§ 1. Zhe Occasional Expulsion of Evils, pp. 109-123.—General clearances of 
evils take the form of expulsions of demons, 109; expulsions of demons 
in Melanesia, 109 sg., in Australia and South Africa, 110 sg., in Mina- 
hassa, Halmahera, and the Kei Islands, 111-113, in Nias, 113-116, in 
the Solomon Islands, 116, in Burma, 116 sg., in India and China, 117 sg., 


CONTENTS 1X 


in Japan, 118 sg., in Corea and Tonquin, 119, in Africa, 120 sg., in 
America, 121; flight from the demons of sickness, 122 sg. 


§ 2. The Periodic Expulsion of Evils, pp. 123-169.—Annual expulsion of ghosts 
in Australia, 123 sg. ; annual expulsions of Tufia and Sedna among the 
Esquimaux, 124-126 ; annual expulsion of demons among the Koryaks, 
126 sg., among the Iroquois, 127 ; annual expulsion of evils among the 
Cherokees, 128, among the Incas, 128-130; annual expulsion of demons 
in West Africa, 131-133, in Abyssinia, 133 sg.; annual expulsion of 
demons at harvest in New Guinea, 134, among the Hos of West Africa, 
134-136, among the Hos of North-Eastern India, 136 sg., among the 
Hindoo Koosh tribes, 137 ; annual expulsion of demons at sowing among 
the Khonds, 138 sg. ; annual expulsion of disease in Chota Nagpur, 139 ; 
annual expulsion of demons among the Mossos of China, 139 sg. 3 peri- 
odical expulsion of demons in Bali, 140 sg. ; annual expulsion of the fire- 
spirit among the Shans, 141 ; annual ceremony in Fiji, 141 sg. ; annual 
ceremony in Tumleo, 142 sg.; annual expulsion of demons in Japan, 
143 sg. ; annual expulsion of poverty and demons in China, India, and 
Persia, 144 sg. ; annual expulsion of demons at end of the year in China, 
145-147; annual expulsion of demons in Tonquin, 147 sg., in Cam- 
bodia, 149, in Siam, 149-151; annual reception and expulsion of the 
spirits of the dead in Japan, 151-152, in ancient Greece, 152-154, in 
ancient Rome, 154 sg. ; annual expulsion of Satan among the Wotyaks 
and Cheremiss of Russia, 155 sg. ; annual expulsion of witches and other 
powers of evil in Christian Europe, 157; widespread fear of witches and 
wizards in Europe, 157 sg. ; annual expulsion and burning of witches on 
Walpurgis Night, 158-164 ; annual expulsion of witches during the Twelve 
Days from Christmas to Epiphany, 164-167 ; annual expulsion of Trows 
in Shetland on Antinmas, 167-169. 


CHAPTER IV.—PUBLIC SCAPEGOATS -.Ppyn7os223 


, §1. The Expulsion of Embodied Evils, pp. 170-184.—Expulsion of demons per- 
sonified by men among the American Indians, 170 sg. ; expulsion of a 
demon embodied in an image among the Mayas of Yucatan, 171; expul- 
sion of a demon personified by a man in Queensland, 172; expulsion of 
demons embodied in effigies in India and Russia, 172 sg. ; expulsion of 
demons embodied in animals in Esthonia, 173; expulsion of demons 
embodied in boys in Spain, 173; annual expulsion of demon of plague 
among the Khasis of Assam, 173 sg. ; the Tug of War probably a contest 
with demons represented by human beings, 174 ; the Tug of War in Chit- 
tagong, 174 sg., in Burma, 175 sg., in the Timor-laut Islands, 176, in the 
East Indies, Assam, Corea, Kamtchatka, and New Guinea, 177 sg., in 
Morocco, 178-180, in French Guiana, 181, in North-Western India, 
181 sg., in Morocco, 182, in Shropshire and Radnorshire, 182 sg. ; con- 
tests of ball in Morocco, 179 sg., in Normandy, 183 sg. ; annual sham 
fights may represent contests with demons, 184. 


me CONTENTS 


§ 2. The Occasional Expulsion of Evils in a Material Vehicle, pp. 185-198.— 
Demons of sickness expelled in a small ship in the Malay Archipelago, 
185-187, in Selangor, 187 sg., in New Guinea, the Philippines, Tikopia, 
and the Nicobar Islands, 188-190; demons of sickness expelled in the 
form of animals in India, 190-193, in Africa and America, 193 ; goddess 
of disease expelled in a toy chariot in India, 193 sg. ; human scapegoats 
in Uganda, 194 sg., in China and India, 196; sliding down a rope in 
Kumaon, 196 sg., in Tibet at the New Year, 197 sq. 


§ 3. Zhe Periodic Expulsion of Evils tn a Material Vehicle, pp. 198-223.— 
Periodic expulsion of spirits in rafts from Perak, 198 sg. ; annual expul- 
sion of evils in small ships in the Indian Archipelago, 199-201, in the 
Nicobar Islands, 201 sg. ; annual expulsion of embodied evils in India, 
China, Corea, and Tibet, 202 sg.; biennial expulsion of demons em- 
bodied in effigies at Old Calabar, 203 sg. ; annual expulsion of demons 
embodied in effigies at Porto Novo, 205 sg.; annual expulsion of em- 
bodied evils among the Hos of Togoland, 206 sg., among the gypsies, 
207 sg.; annual expulsion of evils in an animal scapegoat among the 
Garos of Assam, 208 sg. ; dogs as annual scapegoats in India, Scotland, 
and America, 209 sg. ; the annual Jewish scapegoat, 210; annual human 
scapegoats put to death in Africa, 210-212, formerly in Siam, 212; 
annual human scapegoats in Japan, 212 sg., in Sumatra, 213, in medi- 
aeval Europe, 2143; annual expulsion of Posterli in Switzerland, 214; 
annual expulsion of the devil, personified by a man, from Munich on 
Ascension Day, 214 sg. ; the criminal annually pardoned at Rouen on 
Ascension Day perhaps a public scapegoat, 215 sg. ; divine animals as 
scapegoats in India and ancient Egypt, 216 sg. ; divine men as scape- 
goats among the Gonds of India and the Albanians of the Caucasus, 
217 sg.; annual human scapegoats in Tibet, 218-2213; the original 
Tibetan scapegoat perhaps the Grand Lama, 221-223. 


CHAPTER V.—ON SCAPEGOATS IN GENERAL 
Pp. 224-228 


The immediate and the mediate expulsions of evil identical in intention, 224 ; 
annual expulsion of evil generally coincides with a change of season, 
224 sg.; annual expulsion of evil preceded or followed by a period of 
general license, 225 sg. ; remarkable use of a divine animal or man as a 
scapegoat, 226 sg. ; why a dying god should serve as a scapegoat, 227 ; 
the use of a divinity as a scapegoat explains an ambiguity in the ‘‘ Carry- 
ing out of Death,” 227 sg. 


CHAPTER VI.—HUMAN SCAPEGOATS IN 
CLASSICAL ANTIQUITY , : . Pp. 220-274 


§ 1. The Human Scapegoat in Ancient Rome, pp. 229-252.—Annual expulsion 
of ‘the Old Mars” in March, 229-231; ‘‘the Old Mars” beaten by the 


CONTENTS xl 


Salii, the dancing priests of Mars, 231 sg.; the dances of the Salii in 
spring and autumn perhaps intended to quicken the growth of the 
corn then sown, 232; the armed processions of the Salii perhaps 
intended to expel demons, 233 sg.; demons of blight and infertility 
expelled by dancers in Africa, 236-238; masked dances to promote the 
growth of the crops in Borneo and Brazil, 236 ; dances for the crops in 
Aracan and among the Tarahumare and Cora Indians of Mexico, 236- 
238%; dances and leaps of European peasants to make the corn grow tall, 
238 sg. ; dances of mummers called Perchten in Austria for the good of 
the crops, 240-246; the bells worn by the Perchten perhaps intended to 
ban demons, 246 sg. ; bells rung to make the grass and the flax grow, 
247 sg. ; whips cracked to make the flax grow, 248 sg. ; in these pro- 
cessions the mummers seem to personate spirits of fertility both vegetable 
and human, 249 sg. ; the view of W. Mannhardt, 250; the use of bells 
and swords in these ceremonies, 250 sg. ; these masquerades intended to 
stimulate vegetation in spring and to expel demons, 251 sg. ; application 
of these conclusions to the expulsion of ‘‘the Old Mars” in ancient 
Rome, 252. 


§ 2. The Human Scapegoat in Ancient Greece, pp. 252-274.—The ‘‘ Expulsion 
of Hunger” at Chaeronea, 252; human scapegoats at Marseilles, 253 ; 
human scapegoats put to death at Athens and Abdera, 253 sg. ; annual 
human scapegoats in Leucadia, 254; human scapegoats annually put to 
death at the festival of the Thargelia in Asia Minor, 255; the custom of 
beating the human scapegoats probably intended to increase their pro- 
ductive energy, 255-257; W. R. Paton’s view that the human victims at 
the Thargelia personated fig-trees and simulated the artificial fertilization 
of the fig, 257 sg.; the view confirmed by a comparison of the Roman 
rites of the Wonae Caprotinae, 258 sg. ; beating as a mode of dispelling 
evil influences, 259 sg.; beating people to rid them of clinging ghosts, 
260-262; beating practised by South American Indians and others as a 
mode of conveying good qualities, 262-265 ; beating people in Morocco 
with the skins of sacrificed sheep or goats, 265 sg. ; European custom of 
beating cattle with branches to make them healthy or drive away witches, 
266 sg.; European custom of beating people with fresh green branches 
at Easter and Christmas to make them “‘ fresh and green,” 268-272 ; 
hence the beating of the human victims at the Thargelia with fig-branches 
and squills was probably intended to increase their reproductive energies, 
272 sg.; parallel between the human sacrifices at the Thargelia and the 
bloody ritual of the Arician grove, 273 sg. 


. 


SHAPTER VII.—- KILLING ‘THE GOD IN 
MEXxIco . : ; : ; . Pp. 275-305 


Aztec custom of annually sacrificing human representatives of gods, 275 sg. 5 
sacrifice of a man in the character of the great god Tezcatlipoca in the 
fifth Aztec month, 276-279; sacrifice of a man in the character of the 
great god Vitzilopochtli (Huitzilopochtli) in the month of May, 280 sq. ; 


xil CONTENTS 


sacrifice of a man in the character of the great god Quetzalcoatl in 
February, 281-283; sacrifice of a woman in the character of the Goddess 
of Salt in the month of June, 283 sg. ; sacrifice of a woman in the char- 
acter of the Goddess of the Young Maize about Midsummer, 285 sg. ; 
sacrifice of a woman in the character of the goddess ‘‘ Our Mother” on 
Christmas Day, 287 sg. ; sacrifice of a woman in the character of the 
Mother of the Gods in August or September, 288-291 ; sacrifice of a 
young girl in the character of the Goddess of the Maize in the month of 
September, 291-295 ; identification of the human victim with the Goddess 
of the Maize whom she personated, 295 sg.; resurrection of the Maize 
Goddess set forth by the wearing of the flayed skin of her human repre- 
sentative, 296; Xipe the Flayed God and the festival of the Flaying of 
Men, 296-298 ; the skins of the flayed human victims worn by holy 
beggars and representatives of gods, 298-300; men and women roasted 
alive as representatives of the Fire-god, 300 sg. ; women flayed in honour 
of the Fire-god and their skins worn by men who personated gods, 
301 sg. ; the divine resurrection set forth by men wearing the flayed skins 
of human representatives of gods, 302; the idea of resurrection suggested 
by the observation of snakes and other creatures that cast their skins, 
302-304; hence the attempt of the Aztecs to renew their own skins by 
putting on those of other people, 304 sg. 


CHAPTER VIII.—THE SATURNALIA AND 
KINDRED FESTIVALS ‘ : . Pp. 306-418 


§ 1. Zhe Roman Saturnalia, pp. 306-312.—Saturn and the Saturnalia, 306 sg. ; 
license granted to slaves at the Saturnalia, 307 sg. ; mock King of the 
Saturnalia, 308; personation of Saturn at the Saturnalia by a man who 
afterwards suffered death, 308 sg.; the martyrdom and tomb of St. * 
Dasius, 309 sg. ; the mock King of the Saturnalia probably the successor 
of temporary kings who personated Saturn at the Saturnalia and suffered 
death in the character of the god, 311 sg. ; the modern Carnival perhaps 
the equivalent of the ancient Saturnalia, 312. 


§ 2. The King of the Bean and the Festival of Fools, pp. 313-345.—The 
King of the Bean on Twelfth Night, 313-315; serious significance of 
the King of the Bean and Twelfth Night, 315 sg.; fires on the Eve 
of Twelfth Night for the sake of the fruit and the crops in France and 
England, 316-321; candles on the Eve of Twelfth Night in Ireland, 
321 sg. ; the weather of the twelve months determined by the weather 
of the Twelve Days, 322-324; the Twelve Days in ancient India, 
324 sg.; the Twelve Days probably an ancient intercalary period 
introduced to equate twelve lunar months to the solar year, 325 sg. ; 
the superstitions attaching to the Twelve Days not of Christian origin, 
326-328 ; superstitions attaching to intercalary periods, 328 sg.; the 
Three Kings of Twelfth Night, 329-331; the Lord of Misrule in 
England, 331-334; the Festival of Fools in France, 334-336; Festival 


CONTENTS xill 


of the Innocents and the Boy Bishop in France, 336 sg.; the Boy 
Bishop in England, 337 sg.; the superstitions associated with the 
Twelve Days probably relics of an old intercalary period at midwinter, 
338 sg.; superstitions associated with the intercalary periods among 
the Aztecs and Mayas, 339 sg.; the five supplementary days of the 
year in ancient Egypt, 340-342; early attempts of Aryan peoples to 
substitute an intercalary month at longer intervals for the annual 
Twelve Days, 342-345. 


§ 3. Zhe Saturnalia and Lent, pp. 345-350.—The modern Carnival perhaps 
the equivalent of the ancient Saturnalia, 345 sg.; the Saturnalia, a 
festival of sowing, may have originally fallen at the time of the spring 
sowing, 346 sg. ; the Lenten fast in spring may be an old heathen period 
of abstinence intended to promote the growth of the seed, 347 sg. ; the 
forty days’ mourning for Persephone, the Greek goddess of corn, 348 sg. ; 
the Buddhist Lent, 349 sg. 


§ 4. Saturnalia in Ancient Greece, pp. 350-354.—Inversion of social ranks 
at ancient Greek festivals in Crete, Troezen, and Thessaly, 350 sg. ; 
festival of the Cronia compared to the Saturnalia, 351 sg. ; the Olympian 
Cronia held at the spring equinox, 352; one of the kings at the Olympian 
Cronia perhaps put to death in the character of King Cronus, 352 sg. ; 
sacrifice of a man at the Cronia in Rhodes, 353 sg. 


5. Saturnalia in Western Asia, pp. 354-407.—The Babylonian festival 
of the Sacaea, 354 sg.; the Sacaea probably identical with Zakmuk 
or Zagmuk, the Babylonian festival of New Year in March, 355- 
358; apparent discrepancy in the dates of the festivals, 358 sg. ; 
identity of the two festivals Sacaea and Zakmuk confirmed by the con- 
nexion of both with the Jewish Purim, 359-364; origin of Purim 
according to the book of Esther, 364 sg. ; the rival pairs Mordecai and 
Esther on the one side, Haman and Vashti on the other, 365; Jensen’s 
theory of their opposition, 366 sg. ; the mock King of the Sacaea prob- 
ably personated a god and paired with a woman who personated a 
goddess, 368 sg. ; reminiscence of such pairs in the legend of Semiramis 
(Ishtar, Astarte) and her lovers, 369-372; the sacred drama acted at 
Zela in Pontus, 372 sg. ; such sacred dramas are magical rites intended 
to influence the course of nature, 373 sg. ; magical intention of sacred 
dramas and masked dances among the savages of America, New 
Guinea, and Borneo, 374-384; religious origin of the drama in Greece 
and India, 384 sg. ; suggested reconciliation of Euhemerism with a rival 
school of mythology, 385 sg.; the widespread Oriental myth of the 
loving goddess and the dying god probably acted every year by a 
human couple, 386 sg. ; Sardanapalus and Ashurbanapal, 387 sg.; the 
burning of Sandan, 388-390; death in the fire of human representatives 
of gods, 390-392; traces of human sacrifices at Purim, effigies of Haman 
burnt, 392-394 ; accusations of ritual murder brought against the Jews, 
394-396; mitigated form of human sacrifice, 396 sg.; the ‘‘fast of 
Esther” before Purim compared with the mourning for Tammuz, 397- 


XIV CONTENTS 


400; the resurrection of the dead god, 400; the divine death enacted 
by Haman and Vashti, the divine resurrection by Mordecai and Esther, 
400 sg.; the Persian ceremony of ‘‘the Ride of the Beardless One” 
compared to the triumphal ride of Mordecai, 401-404; the ‘‘ Ride 
of the Beardless One” a ceremonial expulsion of winter, 404 sg. ; the 
opposition of Haman and Vashti to Mordecai and Esther a contrast 
between the annual death of nature in winter and its revival in spring, 


405-407. 


§ 6. Conclusion, pp. 407-411.—Wide prevalence of festivals like the Saturn- 
alia in antiquity, 407; the social and political conditions implied by 
such festivals, 407 sg.; the decline and fall of the festivals, 408 sg. ; 
probable homogeneity of civilization over a great part of the old world 
in antiquity, 409 ; possible influence of the sacrifice of deified men on 
cosmogonical theories, 409-411. 


~ Note.—The Crucifixion of Christ . .. Pp. 412-454 


INDEX... : : : : . Pp. 425-458 


CHAPTER I 
THE TRANSFERENCE OF EVIL _ 
§ 1. The Transference to Inanimate Objects 


IN the preceding parts of this work we have traced the 
practice of killing a god among peoples in the hunting, 
pastoral, and agricultural stages of society; and I have 
attempted to explain the motives which led men to adopt 
so curious a custom. One aspect of the custom still 
remains to be noticed. The accumulated misfortunes and 
sins of. the whole people are sometimes laid upon the dying 
god, who is supposed to bear them away for ever, leaving 
the people innocent and happy. The notion that we can 
transfer our guilt and sufferings to some other being who 
will bear them for us is familiar to the savage mind. It 
arises from a very obvious confusion between the physical 
and the mental, between the material and the immaterial. 
Because it is possible to shift a load of wood, stones, or 
what not, from our own back to the back of another, the 
savage fancies that it is equally possible to shift the burden 
of his pains and sorrows to another, who will suffer them in 
his stead. Upon this idea he acts, and the result is an 
endless number of very unamiable devices for palming off 
upon some one else the trouble which a man shrinks from 
bearing himself. In short, the principle of vicarious suffer- 
ing is commonly understood and practised by races who 
stand on a low level of social and intellectual culture. In 
the following pages I shall illustrate the theory and the 
practice as they are found among savages in all their naked 
Pr. VI ) B 


The 
principle 

of vicarious 
suffering. 


Transfer- 
ence of evil 
to things. 


2 THE TRANSFERENCE OF EVIL CHAP. 


simplicity, undisguised by the refinements of metaphysics 
and the subtleties of theology. 

The devices to which the cunning and selfish savage 
resorts for the sake of easing himself at the expense of his 
neighbour are manifold ; only a few typical examples out of 
a multitude can be cited. At the outset it is to be observed 
that the evil of which a man seeks to rid himself need not 
be transferred to a person; it may equally well be trans- 
ferred to an animal or a thing, though in the last case the 
thing is often only a vehicle to convey the trouble to the 
first person who touches it. In some of the East Indian 
islands they think that epilepsy can be cured by striking 
the patient on the face with the leaves of certain trees and 
then throwing them away. The disease is believed to have 
passed into the leaves, and to have been thrown away with 
them.’ In the Warramunga and Tiingilli tribes of Central 
Australia men who suffered from headache have often been 
seen wearing women’s head-rings. “This was connected 
with the belief that the pain in the head would pass into 
the rings, and that then it could be thrown away with them 
into the bush, and so got rid of effectually. The natives 
have a very firm belief in the efficacy of this treatment. In 
the same way when a man suffers from internal pain, usually 
brought on by overeating, his wife’s head-rings are placed 
on his stomach; the evil magic which is causing all the 
trouble passes into them, and they are then thrown away 
into the bushes, where the magic is supposed to leave them. 
After a time they are searched for by the woman, who 
brings them back, and again wears them in the ordinary 
way.”” Among the Sihanaka of Madagascar, when a man 
is very sick, his relatives are sometimes bidden by the 
diviner to cast out the evil by means of a variety of things, 
such as a stick of a particular sort of tree, a rag, a pinch of 
earth from an ant’s nest, a little money, or what not. What- 
ever they may be, they are brought to the patient’s house | 
and held by a man near the door, while an exorcist stands _ 


1j. G. F. Riedel, De sluzk- em 141, 340. 
hroesharige rassen tusschen Selebes en 2 Baldwin Spencer and F. J. Gillen, 
Papua (The Hague, 1886), pp. 266 Zhe Northern Tribes of Central | 
59-5 305, 357 5g.3 compare zd@., pp. Azstralia (London, 1904), p. 474. 


tm 2HE TRANSFERENCE TO INANIMATE OBJECTS 3 


in the house and pronounces the formula necessary for cast- 
ing out the disease. When he has done, the things are 
thrown away in a southward direction, and all the people in 
the house, including the sick man, if he has strength enough, 
shake their loose robes and spit towards the door in order 
to expedite the departure of the malady.’ When an Atkhan 
of the Aleutian Islands had committed a grave sin and 
desired to unburden himself of his guilt, he proceeded as 
follows. Having chosen a time when the sun was clear and 
unclouded, he picked up certain weeds and carried them 
about his person. Then he laid them down, and calling 
the sun to witness, cast his sins upon them, after which, 
having eased his heart of all that weighed upon it, he threw 
the weeds into the fire, and fancied that thus he cleansed 
himself of his guilt.” In Vedic times a younger brother Evils swept 


who married before his elder brother was thought to have I By. 


A 


sinned in so doing, but there was a ceremony by which he an 
could purge himself of his sin. Fetters of reed-grass were 

laid on him in token of his guilt, and when they had been lo 
washed and sprinkled they were flung into a foaming torrent, 
which swept them away, while the evil was bidden to vanish 
with the foam of the stream. The Matse negroes of Togo- 
land think that the river Awo has power to carry away the 
sorrows of mankind. So when one of their friends has died, 
and their hearts are heavy, they go to the river with leaves 
of the raphia palm tied round their necks and drums in 
their hands. Standing on the bank they beat the drums 
and cast the leaves into the stream. As the leaves float 
away out of sight to the sound of the rippling water and 
the roll of the drums, they fancy that their sorrow too is 
lifted from them.* Similarly, the ancient Greeks imagined 
that the pangs of love might be healed by bathing in& 
the river Selemnus.° The Indians of Peru sought to 
purify themselves from their sins by plunging their heads 


Cc 


d 


1 J. Pearse, ‘*Customs connected ‘zon, Industries, and Resources of 
with Death and Burial among the A/aska, p. 158. 
Sihanaka,” Zhe Antananarivo Annual 3H. Oldenberg, Dze Religion des 
and Madagascar Magazine, vol. ii., Veda (Berlin, 1894), p. 322. 
Reprint of the Second four Numbers 4 J. Spieth, Dze Awe-Stamme (Ber- 
(Antananarivo, 1896), pp. 146 sg. lin, 1906), p. 800. 

2 Ivan Petroff, Report on the Popula- 5 Pausanias, vil. 23. 3. 


Transfer- 
ence of evil 
to things. 


4 THE TRANSFERENCE OF EVIL CHAP. 


in a river; they said that the river washed their sins 
away.’ 

An Arab cure for melancholy or madness caused by love 
is to put a dish of water on the sufferer’s head, drop melted 
lead into it, and then bury the lead in an open field; thus 
the mischief that was in the man goes away.” Amongst the 
Miotse of China, when the eldest son of the house attains 
the age of seven years, a ceremony called “driving away the 
devil” takes place. The father makes a kite of straw and 
lets it fly away in the desert, bearing away all evil with it? 
When an Indian of Santiago Tepehuacan is ill, he will 
sometimes attempt to rid himself of the malady by baking 
thrice seven cakes; of these he places seven in the top of 
the highest pine-tree of the forest, seven he lays at the foot 
of the tree, and seven he casts into a well, with the water of 
which he then washes himself. By this means he transfers 
the sickness to the water of the well and so is made whole.* 
The Baganda believed that plague was caused by the god 
Kaumpuli, who resided in a deep hole in his temple. To 
prevent him from escaping and devastating the country, they 
battened him down in the hole by covering the top with 
plantain-stems and piling wild-cat-skins over them; there 
was nothing like wild-cat-skins to keep him down, so 
hundreds of wild cats were hunted and killed every year 
to supply the necessary skins. However, sometimes in spite 
of these precautions the god contrived to escape, and then 
the people died. When a garden or house was plague- 
stricken, the priests purified it by transferring the disease to 
a plantain-tree and then carrying away the tree to a piece 
of waste land. The way in which they effected the trans- 
ference of the disease was this. They first made a number 
of little shields and spears out of plantain fibre and reeds 
and placed them at intervals along the path leading from 


the garden to the main road. 


1 Pp. J. de Arriaga, Extirpacion de 
la Idolatria del Piru (Lima, 1621), 
p- 29. 

2 This I learned from my friend W. 
Robertson Smith, who mentioned as 
his authority David of Antioch, Zazyzz, 
in the story ‘‘ Orwa.” 

3 R. Andree, Lthnographische Paral- 


A young plantain-tree, about 


lele und Vergleiche (Stuttgart, 1878), 
pp. 29 sg. 

4 «Lettre du curé de Santiago Tepe- 
huacan a son évéque sur les mceurs 
et coutumes des Indiens soumis a ses 
soins,” Bulletin de la Société de Géo- 
graphte (Paris), Deuxiéme Série, ii. 
(1834) p. 182. 


I THE TRANSFERENCE TO INANIMATE OBJECTS 5 


to bear fruit, was then cut down, the stem was laid in the 
path leading to one of the plague-stricken huts, and it was 
speared with not less than twenty reed spears, which were 
left sticking in it, while some of the plantain-fibre shields 
were also fastened to it. This tree was then carried down 
the path to the waste land and left there. It went by the 
name of the Scapegoat (Ayonzzre). To make quite sure that the 
plague, after being thus deposited in the wilderness, should 
not return by the way it went, the priests raised an arch, 
covered with barkcloth, over the path at the point where it 
diverged from the main road. This arch was thought to inter- 
pose an insurmountable barrier to the return of the plague.’ 

Dyak priestesses expel ill-luck from a house by hew- 
ing and slashing the air in every corner of it with wooden 
swords, which they afterwards wash in the river, to let the 
ill-luck float away down stream. Sometimes they sweep 
misfortune out of the house with brooms made of the 
leaves of certain plants and sprinkled with rice-water and 
blood. Having swept it clean out of every room and into 
a toy-house made of bamboo, they set the little house with 
its load of bad luck adrift on the river. The current carries 
it away out to sea, where it shifts its baleful cargo to a 
certain kettle-shaped ship, which floats in mid-ocean and 
receives in its capacious hold all the ills that flesh is heir 
to. Well would it be with mankind if the evils remained 
for ever tossing far away on the billows; but, alas, they are 
dispersed from the ship to the four winds, and settle again, 
and yet again, on the weary Dyak world. On Dyak rivers 
you may see many of the miniature houses, laden with 
manifold misfortunes, bobbing up and down on the current, 
or sticking fast in the thickets that line the banks.’ 

These examples illustrate the purely beneficent side of 
the transference of evil; they shew how men seek to 
alleviate human sufferings by diverting them to material 
objects, which are then thrown away or otherwise disposed 
of so as to render them innocuous. Often, however, the 

1 Rev. J. Roscoe, Zhe Baganda  Dajakkers,” 77dschrift voor Neérlands 
(London, 1911), pp. 309 sg. Indié, 1846, dl. iii. pp. 149 sg.; F. 
Grabowsky, ‘‘ Die Theogonie der Daja- 


2C. Hupe, ‘‘Korte Verhandeling kenauf Borneo,” /uternationales Archiv 
over de Godsdienst, Zeden enz. der fir Ethnographie, v. (1892) p. 131. 


Dyak 
transfer- 
ence of evil 
to things. 


Evils trans- 
ferred 

to other 
persons 
through the 
medium of 
things. 


6 THE TRANSFERENCE OF EVIL CHAP. 


transference of evil to a material object is only a step 
towards foisting it upon a living person. This is the 
maleficent side of such transferences. It is exemplified 
in the following cases. To cure toothache some of the 
Australian blacks apply a heated spear-thrower to the cheek. 
The spear-thrower is then cast away, and the toothache goes 
with it in the shape of a black stone called karriztch. Stones 
of this kind are found in old mounds and sandhills. They 
are carefully collected and thrown in the direction of enemies 
in order to give them toothache. In Mirzapur a mode of 
transferring disease is to fill a pot with flowers and rice and 
bury it in a pathway covered up with a flat stone. Who- 
ever touches this is supposed to contract the disease. The 
practice is called chalauwa, or “passing on” the malady. 
This sort of thing goes on daily in Upper India. Often 
while walking of a morning in the bazaar you will see a little 
pile of earth adorned with flowers in the middle of the road. 
Such a pile usually contains some scabs or scales from the 
body of a smallpox patient, which are placed there in the 
hope that some one may touch them, and by catching the 
disease may relieve the sufferer.” The Bahima, a pastoral 
people of the Uganda Protectorate, often suffer from deep- 
seated abscesses: “their cure for this is to transfer the 
disease to some other person by obtaining herbs from the 
medicine- man, rubbing them over the place where the 
swelling is, and burying them in the road where people 
continually pass; the first person who steps over these 
buried herbs contracts the disease, and the original patient 
recovers.”® The practice of the Wagogo of German East 
Africa is similar. When a man is ill, the native doctor will 
take him to a cross-road, where he prepares his medicines, 
uttering at the same time the incantations which are neces- 
sary to give the drugs their medical virtue. Part of the 
dose is then administered to the patient, and part is buried 
under a pot turned upside down at the cross-road. It is 
hoped that somebody will step over the pot, and catching 


1 J. Dawson, Australian Aborigines minster, 1896), i. 164 sg. 
(Melbourne, Sydney, and Adelaide, 3 Rev. J. Roscoe, ‘‘The Bahima, 
1881), p. 59. a Cow Tribe of Enkole,” Journal of the 


2 W. Crooke, Popular Religion and Royal Anthropological Institute, xxxvii. 
Folk-lore of Northern India (West- (1907) p. 103. 


I THE TRANSFERENCE TO INANIMATE OBJECTS 7 


the disease, which lurks in the pot, will thereby relieve the 
original sufferer. A variation of this cure is to plaster some 
of the medicine, or a little of the patient’s blood, on a 
wooden peg and to drive the peg into a tree ; any one who 
passes the tree and is so imprudent as to draw out the peg, 
will carry away with it the disease.’ 

Sometimes in case of sickness the malady is transferred 
to an effigy as a preliminary to passing it on to a human 
being. Thus among the Baganda the medicine-man would 
sometimes make a model of his patient in clay ; then a 
relative of the sick man would rub the image over the 
sufferer’s body and either bury it in the road or hide it in 
the grass by the wayside. The first person who stepped 
over the image or passed by it would catch the disease. 
Sometimes the effigy was made out of a plantain-flower tied 
up so as to look like a person ; it was used in the same way 
as the clay figure. But the use of images for this maleficent 
purpose was a capital crime ; any person caught in the act 
of burying one of them in the public road would surely have 
been put to death.” Among the Sena-speaking people to 
the north of the Zambesi, when any one is ill, the doctor 
makes a little pig of straw to which he transfers the sickness. 
The little pig is then set on the ground where two paths 
meet, and any passer-by who chances to kick it over is sure 
to absorb the illness and to draw it away from the patient.’ 
Among the Korkus, a forest tribe of the Central Provinces 
in India, when a person wishes to transfer his sickness to 
another, he contrives to obtain the loin-cloth of his intended 
victim and paints two figures on it in lamp black, one 
upright and the other upside down. As soon as the owner 
of the loin-cloth puts it on, he falls a victim to the ailment 
which afflicted the artist who drew the figures Every nine 
years a Mongol celebrates a memorial festival of his birth 
for the purpose of ensuring the continuance of his life and 
welfare. At this solemn ceremony two lambskins, one 


emisev. J. Cole, ‘** Notes on the 3 Dudley Kidd, Zhe Essential Kafir 
Wagogo of German East Africa,” (London, 1904), p. 146. 
Journal of the Anthropological Institute, 
XXXIi, (1902) p. 313. 4 Central Provinces, Ethnographic 
2 Rev. J. Roscoe, Zhe Baganda Survey, iii., Draft Articles on Forest 
(London, 1911), pp. 343 sg. Tribes (Allahabad, 1907), p. 63. 


Evils trans- 
ferred to 
images, 


Mongol 
transfer- 
ence of evil 
to things. 


Fatigue 
transferred 
to stones, 
sticks, or 
leaves. 


8 THE TRANSFERENCE OF EVIL CHAP. 


black and the other white, are spread on the floor of the hut, 
which is further. covered with a felt carpet, and on the 
carpet are made nine little ridges of earth brought from nine 
mountains, the bottom of a river, and a sepulchral mound. 
The owner of the hut, for whose benefit the rite is per- 
formed, next seats himself on the black lambskin, and 
opposite him is set an effigy of himself made of dough by a 
lama. The priest then throws a black stone at the effigy, 
praying that the black arrow of death may pierce it, after 
which he throws a white stone at the master of the hut, 
praying that the bright beam of life may endow him with 
wondrous strength. After that the Mongol gets up, steps 
over one of the ridges of earth and says, “I have overcome 
a mishap, I have escaped a death.” This ceremony he 
performs nine times, stepping over all the ridges, one after 
the other. Then he sits down on the white lambskin, and 
the lama takes the dough effigy, swings it thrice round the 
man whom it represents, spits on it thrice, and hands it to 
attendants who carry it away into the steppe. Ai little 
holy water sprinkled over the Mongol now completes his 
protection against perils and dangers.’ This last is a case 
of the beneficent transference of evil; for in it no attempt 
seems to be made to shift the burden of misfortune to any- 
body else. 


§ 2. The Transference to Stones and Sticks 


In the western district of the island of Timor, when men 
or women are making long and tiring journeys, they fan 
themselves with leafy branches, which they afterwards throw 
away on particular spots where their forefathers did the 
same before them. The fatigue which they felt is thus 
supposed to have passed into the leaves and to be left 
behind. Others use stones instead of leaves.? Similarly in 
the Babar Archipelago tired people will strike them- 
selves with stones, believing that they thus transfer to the 
stones the weariness which they felt in their own bodies. 
They then throw away the stones in places which are 

1 M. v. Beguelin, ‘‘ Religidse Volks- 2 J. G. F. Riedel, ‘* Die Landschaft 


brauche der Mongolen,” G/odus, vii. Dawan oder West- Timor,” Deztsche 
(1890) pp. 209 sg. geographische Blatter, x. 231. 


| 
Valeae 


I THE TRANSFERENCE TO STONES AND STICKS 9 


specially set apart for the purpose." A like belief and 
practice in many distant parts of the world have given 
rise to those cairns or heaps of sticks and leaves which 
travellers often observe beside the path, and to which 
every passing native adds his contribution in the shape 
of a stone, or stick, or leaf. Thus in the Solomon and 
Banks’ Islands the natives are wont to throw sticks, 
stones, or leaves upon a heap at a place of steep descent, 
or where a difficult path begins, saying, “There goes my 
fatigue.” The act is not a religious rite, for the thing 
thrown on the heap is not an offering to spiritual powers, 
and the words which accompany the act are not a prayer. 
It is nothing but a magical ceremony for getting rid of 
fatigue, which the simple savage fancies he can embody in a 
stick, leaf, or stone, and so cast it from him.” 

An early Spanish missionary to Nicaragua, observing 
that along the paths there were heaps of stones on which 
the Indians as they passed threw grass, asked them why 
they did so. “Because we think,” was the answer, “that 
thereby we are kept from weariness and hunger, or at least 
that we suffer less from them.’* When the Peruvian 
Indians were climbing steep mountains and felt weary, they 
used to halt by the way at certain points where there were 
heaps of stones, which they called apachitas. On these 
heaps the weary men would place other stones, and they 
said that when they did so, their weariness left them. In the 
passes of the eastern Andes, on the borders of Argentina 
and Bolivia, “large cairns are constantly found, and every 
Puna Indian, on passing, adds a stone and a coca leaf, so 
that neither he nor his beast of burden may tire on the way.” ® 


1jJ. G. F. Riedel, De sluik- en 
kroesharuge rassen tusschen Selebes en 
Papua (The Hague, 1886), p. 340. 


2, R. H. Codrington, D.D., Zhe 
Melanestans (Oxford, 1891), p. 186. 


3G. F. de Oviedo, Aistotre du 
Nicaragua (Paris, 1840), pp. 42 sg. 
(Ternaux-Compans, Voyages, Relations 
et Mémoires originaux, pour servir 
@ Histoire de la Découverte de 
PAmérique). 

4 P. J. de Arriaga, Extirpacion de 


la ILdolatria del Piru (Lima, 1621), 
pp. 37, 130. As to the custom com- 
pare J. J.. von Tschudi, 4e7wz (St: 
GallenyiS4G) yells 77s as eee 
Weddell, Voyage dans le Nord de la 
Bolitwia et dans les parties voisines du 
Pérou (Paris and London, 1853), pp. 
74 sq. These latter writers interpret 
the stones as offerings. 

5 Baron E, Nordenskidld, ‘‘ Travels 
on the Boundaries of Bolivia and 
Argentina,” The Geographical Journal, 


xxi. (1903) p. 518. 


Heaps of 
stones or 
sticks 
among the 
American 
Indians. 


Heaps of 
stones or 
sticks 
among the 
natives of 
Africa. 


Ke) THE TRANSFERENCE OF EVIL CHAP, 


the country of the Tarahumares and Tepehuanes 

Mexico heaps of stones and sticks may be observed 
on high points, where the track leads over a ridge between 
two or more valleys. “Every Indian who passes such a pile 
adds a stone or a stick to it in order to gain strength for his 
journey. Among the Tarahumares only the old men observe 
this custom. Whenever the Tepehuanes carry a corpse, they 
rest it for some fifteen minutes on such a heap by the 
wayside that the deceased may not be fatigued but strong 
enough to finish his long journey to the land of the dead. 
One of my Huichol companions stopped on reaching this 
pile, pulled up some grass from the ground and picked up a 
stone as big as his fist. Holding both together he spat on 
the grass and on the stone and then rubbed them quickly 
over his knees. He also made a couple of passes with them 
over his chest and shoulders, exclaiming ‘ Kewest/quaz |’ 
(May I not get tired!) and then put the grass on the heap 
and the stone on top of the grass.” In Guatemala also 
piles of stones may be seen at the partings of ways and on the 
tops of cliffs and mountains. Every passing Indian used to 
cather a handful of grass, rub his legs with it, spit on it, and 
deposit it with a small stone on the pile, firmly persuaded 
that by so doing he would restore their flagging vigour to 
his weary limbs.” Here the rubbing of the limbs with the 
grass, like the Babar custom of striking the body with a 
stone, was doubtless a mode of extracting the fatigue from 
them as a preliminary to throwing it away. 

Similarly on the plateau between Lakes Tanganyika and 
Nyassa the native carriers, before they ascend a steep hill with 
their loads, will pick up a stone, spit on it, rub the calves of 
their legs with it, and then deposit it on one of those small 
piles of stones which are commonly to be found at such spots 
in this part of Africa. A recent English traveller, who noticed 
the custom, was informed that the carriers practise it “to 


In 
in 


1 C, Lumholtz, Unknown Mexico a pass for the first time, still commonly 


add a stone to the cairn which marks 


(London, 1903), 11. 282. 

2 Brasseur de Bourbourg, AZstozre 
des Nations civilisées du Mexique et de 
2 Amérique - Centrale (Paris, 1857— 
1859), ii. 564; compare iii. 486. 
Indians of Guatemala, when they cross 


the spot.. See C. Sapper, ‘“* Die 
Gebrauche und religidsen Anschauun- 
gen der Kekchi-Indianer,”  n/er- 
nationales Archiv fiir Ethnographie, 


vill, (1895) p. 197. 


I THE TRANSFERENCE TO STONES AND STICKS 11 


make their legs light,” in other words, to extract the fatigue 
from them. On the banks of the Kei river in Southern 
Africa another English traveller noticed some heaps of 
stones. On enquiring what they meant, he was told by his 
guides that when a Caffre felt weary he had but to add a 
stone to the heap to regain fresh vigour. In some parts of 
South Africa, particularly on the Zambesi, piles of sticks 
take the place of cairns. “Sometimes the natives will rub 
their leg with a stick, and throw the stick on the heap, ‘to 
get rid of fatigue, they avow. Others say that throwing 
a stone on the heap gives one fresh vigour for the 
journey.” * 

From other accounts of the Caffre custom we learn that 
these cairns are generally on the sides or tops of mountains, 
-and that before a native deposits his stone on the pile he 
spits on it.* The practice of spitting on the stone which the 
weary wayfarer lays on the pile is probably a mode of trans- 
ferring his fatigue the more effectually to the material 
vehicle which is to rid him of it. We have seen that the 
practice prevails among the Indians of Guatemala and the 
natives of the Tanganyika plateau, and it appears to be 
observed also under similar circumstances in Corea, where 
the cairns are to be found especially on the tops of passes.° 
From the primitive point of view nothing can be more 


1¥. F. R. Boileau, ‘‘ The Nyasa- 
Tanganyika Plateau,” Zhe Geographical 
Journal, xiii. (1899) p. 589. In the 
same region Mr. L. Decle observed 
Many trees or rocks on which were 
placed little heaps of stones or bits of 
wood, to which in passing each of his 
men added a fresh stone or bit of wood 
or a tuft of grass. ‘‘ This,” says Mr. 
L. Decle, ‘‘is a tribute to the spirits, 
the general precaution to ensure a safe 
return” (Zhree Years in Savage Africa, 
London, 1898, p. 289). A similar 
practice prevails among the Wanyam- 
wezi (zézd. p. 345). Compare J. A. 
Grant, 4 Walk across Africa (Edin- 
burgh and London, 1864), pp. 133 sg. 


2 Cowper Rose, Four Years in. 
3 


Southern Africa (London, 1829), p. 
147. 
3 Dudley Kidd, Zhe Essential Kafir 
(London, 1904), p. 264. 


4S. Kay, Travels and Researches in 
Caffraria (London, 1833), pp. 211 sg.; 
Rev. H. Callaway, Religious System of 
the Amazulu, i.66; D. Leslie, Among 
the Zulus and Amatongas (Edinburgh, 
1875), pp. 146 sg. Compare H. 
Lichtenstein, Rezsex zm  stidlichen 
Africa (Berlin, 1811-1812), i. 411. 

5 W. Gowland, ‘‘Dolmens and other 
Antiquities of Corea,” /Journal of the 
Anthropological Institute, xxiv. (1895) 
pp. 328 sg. ; Mrs. Bishop, Korea and 
her Neighbours (London, 1898), i. 
147, ii. 223. Both writers speak as 
if the practice were to spit on the 
cairn rather than on the particular 
stone which the traveller adds to it ; 
indeed, Mrs. Bishop omits to notice 
the custom of adding to the cairns. 
Mr. Gowland says that almost every 
traveller carries up at least one stone 
from the valley and lays it on the pile. 


The heaps 
of stones 
or sticks 
generally 
on the 
tops of 
mountains 
or passes. 


Fatigue let 
out with 
the blood. 


12 THE TRANSFERENCE OF EVIL CHAP. 


natural than that the cairns or the heaps of sticks and leaves | 
to which the tired traveller adds his contribution should — 
stand at the top of passes and, in general, on the highest — 
The wayfarer who has toiled, with 


points of the road. 
aching limbs and throbbing temples, up a long and steep 
ascent, is aware of a sudden alleviation as soon as he has 
reached the summit; he feels as if a weight had been lifted 


from him, and to the savage, with his concrete mode of — 
thought, it seems natural and easy to cast the weight from ~ 


him in the shape of a stone or stick, or a bunch of leaves or 
of grass. Hence it is that the piles which represent the 
accumulated weariness of many foot-sore and heavy-laden 


travellers are to be seen wherever the road runs highest in — 
in | 


the lofty regions of Bolivia, Tibet, Bhootan, and Burma,’ 
the passes of the Andes and the Himalayas, as well as in 
Corea, Caffraria, Guatemala, and Melanesia. 

While the mountaineer Indians of South America 


imagine that they can rid themselves of their fatigue in © 


the shape of a stick or a stone, other or the same aborigines 
of that continent believe that they can let it out with their 
blood. A French explorer, who had seen much of the 
South American Indians, tells us that “ they explain every- 
thing that they experience by attributing it to sorcery, to 
the influence of maleficent beings. Thus an Indian on the 
march, when he feels weary, never fails to ascribe his weari- 
ness to the evil spirit ; and if he has no diviner at hand, he 
wounds himself in the knees, the shoulders, and on the arms 
in order to let out the evil with the blood. That is why 
many Indians, especially the Aucas [Araucanians], have 
always their arms covered with scars. This custom, 
differently applied, is almost general in America; for I 


1D. Forbes, ‘*On the Aymara 


and the Dooars (Calcutta, 1894), pp. 


Indians of Peru and Bolivia,” /ournal 
of the Ethnological Society of London, 
li. (1870) pp. 237 sg.; G. C. Musters, 
‘‘Notes on Bolivia,” Journal of the 
Royal Geographical Society,  x\vii. 
(1877) p. 211; T. T. Cooper, Zravels 
of a Pioneer of Commerce (London, 
AO ok PIS B fp WNa Jee Weis, W722 
Gates of Thibet, a Bird's Eye View of 
Independent Sikkhim, British Bhootan, 


111 sg.; A. Bastian, Die Volker des 
Ostlichen Asien, ii. (Leipsic, 1866) p. 
483. So among the Mrus of Aracan, 
every man who crosses a hill, on reach- 
ing the crest, plucks a fresh young 
shoot of grass and lays it ona pile of the 
withered deposits of former travellers 
(T. H. Lewin, Weld Races of South- 
Eastern India, London, 1870, pp. 


232 5g.). 


I nae TRANSPERENCE TO STONES AND STICKS 13 


found it up to the foot of the Andes, in Bolivia, among the 
Chiriguana and Yuracares nations.” * 

But it is not mere bodily fatigue which the savage fancies 
he can rid himself of by the simple expedient of throwing a 
stick or a stone. Unable clearly to distinguish the im- 
material from the material, the abstract from the concrete, 
he is assailed by vague terrors, he feels himself exposed to 
some ill-defined danger on the scene of any great crime or 
great misfortune. The place to him seems haunted ground. 
The thronging memories that crowd upon his mind, if they 
are not mistaken by him for goblins and phantoms, oppress 
his fancy with a leaden weight. His impulse is to flee from 
the dreadful spot, to shake off the burden that seems to cling 
to him like a nightmare. This, in his simple sensuous way, 
he thinks he can do by casting something at the horrid place 
and hurrying by. For will not the contagion of misfortune, 
the horror that clutched at his heart-strings, be diverted from 
himself into the thing? will it not gather up in itself all the 
evil influences that threatened him, and so leave him to 
pursue his journey in safety and peace? Some such train 
of thought, if these gropings and fumblings of a mind in 
darkness deserve the name of thought, seems to explain the 
custom, observed by wayfarers in many lands, of throwing 
sticks or stones on places where something horrible has 
happened or evil deeds have been done. When Sir Francis 
Younghusband was travelling across the great desert of Gobi 
his caravan descended, towards dusk on a June evening, into 
a long depression between the hills, which was notorious as 
a haunt of robbers. His guide, with a terror-stricken face, 
told how not long before nine men out of a single caravan 
had been murdered, and the rest left in a pitiable state to 
continue their journey on foot across the awful desert. A 
horseman, too, had just been seen riding towards the hills. 
“We had accordingly to keep a sharp look-out, and when 
we reached the foot of the hills, halted, and, taking the loads 
off the camels, wrapped ourselves up in our sheepskins and 
watched through the long hours of the night. Day broke at 
last, and then we silently advanced and entered the hills. 


1 A. d@Orbigny, Voyage dans [Amérique Méridionale, ii. (Paris and Stras- 
burg, 1839-1843) pp. 92 59. 


Piles of 

stones or 
sticks on 
the scene 
of crimes. 


The Liar’s 
Heap. 


THE TRANSFERENCE OF EVIL 


14 CHAP, © 


Very weird and fantastic in their rugged outline were they, 
and here and there a cairn of stones marked where some 
caravan had been attacked, and as we passed these each man — 
threw one more stone on the heap.”’ In the Norwegian 
district of Tellemarken a cairn is piled up wherever anything 
fearful has happened, and every passer-by must throw 
another stone on it, or some evil will befall him. In Sweden 
and the Esthonian island of Oesel the same custom is prac- 
tised on scenes of clandestine or illicit love, with the strange © 
addition in Oesel that when a man has lost his cattle he will 
go to such a spot, and, while he flings a stick or stone on it, 
will say, “I bring thee wood. Let me soon find my lost 
cattle.” ® Far from these northern lands, the Dyaks of 
Batang Lupar keep up an observance of the same sort in the 
forests of Borneo. Beside their paths may be seen heaps of 
sticks or stones which are called “lying heaps.” Each heap 
is in memory of some man who told a stupendous lie or dis- 
gracefully failed in carrying out an engagement, and every- 
body who passes adds a stick or stone to the pile, saying as 
he does so, “For So-and-so’s lying heap.”* The Dyaks 
think it a sacred duty to add to every such “ liar’s mound” 
(tugong bula) which they pass ; they imagine that the omission 
of the duty would draw down on them a supernatural punish- 
ment. Hence, however pressed a Dyak may be for time, he 
will always stop to throw on the pile some branches or 
twigs. The person to start such a heap is one of the men 
who has suffered by a malicious lie. He takes a stick, throws 
it down on some spot where people are constantly passing, 
and says, “ Let any one who does not add to this liar’s heap 
suffer from pains in the head.” Others then do likewise, and 
every passer-by throws a stick on the spot lest he should suffer 
pains. In this way the heap often grows to a large size, and — 
the liar by whose name it is known is greatly ashamed.® 


1 (Sir) F. E. Younghusband, ‘‘A 
Journey across Central Asia,” Proceed- 


Gesellschaft zu Dorpat, vii. (1872) p. 


ings of the Royal Geographical Society, 4 Spenser St. John, Lzfe im the 
x. (1888) p. 494. Forests of the Far East? (London, 
2 F. Liebrecht, Zur Volkskunde 1863), i. 88. 


(Heilbronn, 1879), pp. 274 sg. 

3 F. Liebrecht, Zur Volkskunde, p. 
274; J. B. Holzmayer, ‘‘ Osiliana,” 
Verhandlungen der gelehrten Estnischen 


5 E. H. Gomes, Seventeen Years 
among the Sea Dyaks of Borneo(London, 


HOUt); pp- 66 sg. 
Ch. Hose and W. eS 


I THE TRANSFERENCE TO STONES AND STICKS 15 


But it is on scenes of murder and sudden death that this 
rude method of averting evil is most commonly practised. The 
custom that every passer-by must cast a stone or stick on 
the spot where some one has come to a violent end, whether 
by murder or otherwise, has been observed in practically the 
same form in such many and diverse parts of the world as 
Ireland, France, Spain, Sweden, Germany, Bohemia, Lesbos, 
Morocco, Armenia, Palestine, Arabia, India, North America, 
Venezuela, Bolivia, Celebes, and New Zealand.’ In Fiji, for 
example, it was the practice for every passer-by to throw a leaf 
on the spot where a man had been clubbed to death ; “ this 
was considered as an offering of respect to him, and, if not 
performed, they have a notion they will soon be killed them- 
selves.” Sometimes the scene of the murder or death may 
also be the grave of the victim, but it need not always be 
so, and in Europe, where the dead are buried in consecrated 
ground, the two places would seldom coincide. However, 
the custom of throwing stones or sticks on a grave has 
undoubtedly been observed by passers-by in many parts 


The Pagan Tribes of Borneo (London, 
1912), 1. 123. 

1 A. C. Haddon, ‘‘A Batch of Irish 
Folk-lore,” Fodk-lore, iv. (1893) pp. 
357, 360; Laisnel de la Salle, Croyances 
et Légendes du Centre de la France 
(Paris, 1875), ii. 75, 773; J. Brand, 
Popular Antiquities, ii. 309; Hylten- 
Cavallius, quoted by F. Liebrecht, Za 
Volkskunde, p. 274; K. Haupt, Sagen- 
buch der Lausitz (Leipsic, 1862-1863), 
ii. 65; K. Miillenhoff, Sagen, Marchen 
und Lieder der Herzogthtimer Schleswig, 
Flolstein und Lauenburg (Kiel, 1845), 
p- 125; A. Kuhn, Markische Sagen 
und Marchen (Berlin, 1843), p. 1133 
A. Kuhn und W. Schwartz, Word- 
deutsche Sagen, Miérchen und Ge- 
bréuche (Leipsic, 1848), p. 853; A. 
Treichel, ‘‘ Reisighaufung und Stein- 
haufung an Mordstellen,” Amz Ur- 
Quelle, vi. (1896) p. 220; Georgeakis 
et Pineau, Folk-lore de Lesbos, p. 3233 
A. Leared, Morocco and the Moors 
(London, 1876), pp. 105 sg.; E. 
Doutté, “Figuig,” Za Géographie, 
Bulletin de la Société de Géographie 
(Paris), vii. (1903) p. 197; za., Magze 
et Religion dans [ Afrique du Nord 


(Algiers, 1908), pp. 424 sg.; A. von 
Haxthausen, Zyranskaukasia (Leipsic, 
1856), i. 222; C. T. Wilson, Peasant 
Life in the Holy Land (London, 
1906), p. 285; W. Crooke, Popular 
Religion and Folk-lore of Northern 
India (Westminster, 1896), i. 267 sg. ; 
J. Bricknell, Zhe Natural History of 
North Carolina (Dublin, 1737), p. 380; 
J. Adair, History of the American 
Indians (London, 1775), p. 184; K. 
Martin, Bericht tiber ezne Reise nach 
Nederlandsch West-Indien, Exster Theil 
(Leyden, 1887), p. 166; G. C. Musters, 
“Notes on Bolivia,” /ournal of the 
Royal Geographical Society, x\vii. 
(S77) petits ee eh emen\latuess 
Einige Eigenthtimlichketten im den 
Festen und Gewohnherten der Makas- 
saren und Biiginesen, p. 25 (separate 
reprint from 7ravaux de la 6e Session 
au Congrés International des Orien- 
talistes a Leide, vol. ii.); R. A. Cruise, 
Journal of a Ten Months’ Residence in 
New Zealand (London, 1823), p. 186. 

2 Ch. Wilkes, Varrative of the 
United States Exploring Expedztion, 
New Edition (New York, 1851), iii. 
50. 


Heaps of 
stones, 
sticks, or 
leaves on 
scenes of 
murder. 


Heaps of 
stones or 
sticks on 
graves. 


16 THE TRANSFERENCE OF EVIL CHAP. 


of the world, and that, too, even when the graves are not 
those of persons who have come to a violent end. Thus 
we are told that the people of Unalashka, one of the 
Aleutian Islands, bury their dead on the summits of hills 
and raise a little hillock over the grave. “In a walk into 
the country, one of the natives, who attended me, pointed 
out several of these receptacles of the dead. There was one 
of them, by the side of the road leading from the harbour to 
the village, over which was raised a heap of stones. It was 
observed, that every one who passed it, added one to it.”? 
The Roumanians of Transylvania think that a dying man 
should have a burning candle in his hand, and that any one 
who dies without a light has no right to the ordinary funeral 
ceremonies. The body of such an unfortunate is not laid in 
holy ground, but is buried wherever it may be found. His 
grave is marked only by a heap of dry branches, to which 
each passer-by is expected to add a handful of twigs or a 
thorny bough.” The Hottentot god or hero Heitsi-eibib 
died several times and came to life again. When the 
Hottentots pass one of his numerous graves they throw a 
stone, a bush, or a fresh branch on it for good luck? Near 
the former mission-station of Blydeuitzigt in Cape Colony 
there was a spot called Devil’s Neck where, in the opinion 
of the Bushmen, the devil was interred. To hinder his 
resurrection stones were piled in heaps about the place. 
When a Bushmazn, travelling in the company of a missionary, 
came. in sight of the spot he seized a stone and hurled it at 
the grave, remarking that if he did not do so his neck would 
be twisted round so that he would have to look backwards 
for the term of his natural lifes Stones are cast by passers- 
by on the graves of murderers insome parts of Senegambia.’ 


Bleek, Reynard the Fox in South Africa — 
(London, 1864), p. 76; Th. Hahn, 


1 Captain James Cook, 
(London, 1809), vi. 479. 


Voyages 


2 E. Gerard, The Land beyond the 
Forest (Edinburgh and London, 1888), 
ty ULES Bey 

3-H. Lichtenstein, Rezsex zm Szid- 
lichen Africa (Berlin, 1811-1812), i. 
349 sg. ; Sir James E. Alexander, £x- 
pedition of Discovery into the Interior 
of Africa (London, 1838), i. 166; C. J. 
Andersson, Lake Vgamz, Second Edition 
(London, 1856), p. 327; W. H. I. 


Tsunt-\|Goam, the Supreme Being of 
the Khot-Khot (London, 1881), p. 56. 
Compare Zhe Dying God, p. 3. 

4 Th. Hahn, ‘‘ Die Buschmanner,” 
Globus, xviii. 141. 

5 Th. Waitz, Anthropologie der 
Naturvolker, ii. (Leipsic, 1860) p. 
195, referring to Raffenel, (Vouveau 
Voyage dans le pays des ndgres (Paris, 
1856), i. 93 sg. 


I THE TRANSFERENCE TO STONES AND STICKS 17 


In Syria deceased robbers are not buried like honest folk, 
but left to rot where they lie ; and a pile of stones is raised 
over the mouldering corpse. Every one who passes such a 
_ pile must fling a stone at it, on pain of incurring God’s 

malison.' Between sixty and seventy years ago an English- 
_man was travelling from Sidon to Tyre with a couple of 
Musalmans. When he drew near Tyre his companions 
picked up some small stones, armed him in the same fashion, 
and requested him to be so kind as to follow their example. 
Soon afterwards they came in sight of a conical heap of 
pebbles and stones standing in the road, at which the two 
_Musalmans hurled stones and curses with great vehemence 
and remarkable volubility. When they had discharged this 
pious duty to their satisfaction, they explained that the 
missiles and maledictions were directed at a celebrated 
robber and murderer, who had been knocked on the head 
and buried there some half a century before.” 

In these latter cases it may perhaps be thought that the Stones 
sticks and stones serve no other purpose than to keep off a oe 
the angry and dangerous ghost who might be supposed missiles at 
to haunt either the place of death or the grave. This en 
interpretation seems certainly to apply to some cases of the demons. 
custom. For example, in Pomerania and West Prussia the 
ghosts of suicides are much feared. Such persons are 
buried, not in the churchyard, but at the place where they 
took their lives, and every passer-by must cast a stone or a 
stick on the spot, or the ghost of the suicide will haunt him 
by night and give him no rest. Hence the piles of sticks or 
‘stones accumulated on the graves of these poor wretches 
sometimes attain a considerable size.* Similarly the Baganda 
of Central Africa used to stand in great fear of the ghosts of 


1 Fijib Abéla, ‘‘ Beitrage zur Kennt- Syrian Folklore Notes,” Fo/k-lore, ix. 
niss aberglaubischer Gebriiuche in (1898) p. 15; A. Jaussen, Coztumes 
Syrien,” Zeztschrift des Deutschen des Arabes au pays de Moab (Paris, 
| Palaestina-Vereins, vii. (1884) p. 102. 1908), p. 336. 

2 Note by G. P. Badger, on Zhe 3 A. Treichel, ‘‘ Reisig- und Stein- 
| Travels of Ludovico di Varthema,trans- haufung bei Ermordeten oder Selbst- 
lated by J. W. Jones (Hakluyt Society, mérdern,” Verhandlungen der Berliner 

1863), p. 45. For more evidence of Gesellschaft ftir Anthropologie, Ethno- 
| the custom in Syria see W. M. Thom- = ogte und Urgeschichte, 1888, p. (569) 
» son, The Land and the Book (London, (bound up with Zedtschrift fiir Ethno- 
1859), p. 490; F. Sessions, ‘Some  ogze, xx. 1888). 


PT. V1 (S 


18 THE TRANSFERENCE OF EVIL CHAP. | 


suicides and they took many precautions to disarm or even’ 
destroy these dangerous spirits. For this purpose the bodies 
of suicides were removed to waste land or cross-roads and 
burned there, together with the wood of the house in which 
the deed had been done or of the tree on which the person 
had hanged himself. By these means they imagined that 
they destroyed the ghost so that he could not come and 
lure others to follow his bad example. Lest, however, the 
ghost should survive the destruction of his body by fire, the 
Baganda, in passing any place where a suicide had been 
burnt, always threw grass or sticks on the spot to prevent 
the ghost from catching them. And they did the same, for | 
the same reason, whenever they passed the places on waste | 
ground where persons accused of witchcraft and found guilty 

by the poison ordeal had been burnt to death. Baganda | 
women had a special reason for dreading all graves which — 
were believed to be haunted by dangerous ghosts; for, | 
imagining that they could conceive children without inter- | 
course with the other sex, they feared to be impregnated by 
the entrance into them of the ghosts of suicides and other 
unfortunate or uncanny people, such as persons with a light 
complexion, twins, and particularly all who had the mishap 
to be born feet foremost. For that reason Baganda women 
were at pains, whenever they passed the graves of any such | 
persons, to throw sticks or grass upon them ; “for by SO” 
doing they thought that they could prevent the ghost of the | 
dead from entering into them, and being reborn.” Hence 
the mounds which accumulated over these graves became 
in course of time large enough to deflect the path and to 
attract the attention of travellers. It was not merely 
matrons who thus took care not to become mothers unaware ; 
the same fears were entertained and the same precautions 
were adopted by all women, whether old or young, whether 
married or single; since they thought that there was no 
woman, whatever her age or condition, who might not be- 
impregnated by the entrance into her of a spirit.’ In these 


1 Rev. J. Roscoe, Zhe Baganda hurled at ghosts, probably because! 
(London, 1911), pp. 20 sg., 46 sg., stones are scarce in Uganda. See’ 
124 5g., 126 sg., 289 sg. Stones are J. Roscoe, of. cé¢. p. 5. 
not mentioned among the missiles 


I THE TRANSFERENCE TO STONES AND STICKS 19 


cases, therefore, the throwing of sticks or grass at graves is Missiles to 
a purely defensive measure ; the missiles are intended to Sauer 
ward off the assaults of dangerous ghosts. Similarly we ghosts. 
are told that in Madagascar solitary graves by the wayside 
have a sinister reputation, and that passers-by, without 
looking back, will throw stones or clods at them “to prevent 
the evil spirits from following them.” The Maraves of 
South Africa, like the Baganda, used to burn witches alive 
and to throw stones on the places of execution whenever 
they passed them, so that in time regular cairns gradually 
rose on these spots.”, No doubt with these Maraves, as with 
_ the Baganda, the motive for throwing missiles at such places 
is to protect themselves against the ghosts. A protective 
motive is also assigned for a similar custom observed in 
Chota Nagpur, a region of India which is the home of 
many primitive tribes. There heaps of stones or of leaves 
and branches may often be seen beside the path ; they are 
supposed to mark the places where people have been killed 
by wild beasts, and the natives think that any passer-by who 
failed to add a stone or a stick to the pile would himself be 
seized and devoured by a wild animal.’ Here, though the 
ghost is not explicitly mentioned, we may perhaps suppose 
that out of spite he is instrumental in causing others to 
perish by the same untimely death by which he was himself 
carried off. The Kayans of Borneo imagine that they can 
put evil spirits to flight by hurling sticks or stones at them ; 
sO on a journey they will let fly volleys of such missiles 
at the rocks and dens where demons are known to reside.* 
Hence, whenever the throwing of stones at a grave is 
regarded as an insult to the dead, we may suppose that 
the missiles are intended to hit and hurt the ghost. 
Thus Euripides represents the murderer Aegisthus as leap- 
ing on the tomb of his victim Agamemnon and pelting it 
with stones ;° and Propertius invites all lovers to discharge 


™ 


1 Father Finaz, S.J., in Zes A/¢ssions 3 Journal of the Astatic Society of 


Catholiques, vii. (1875) p. 328. Bengal, \xxii. Part ui. (Calcutta, 1904) 
| 2 Der Muata Cazembe und die pp. 87. 
' Volkerstamme der Maraves, Chevas, aA Wai Nicuweuhuicte en Gen reae 


' Muembas, Lundas, und andere von d : 6 
|“ Siid- Afrika,” Zectschrift fiir aligemeine Borg Tey ano) eas 
Erdkunde, vi. (1856) p. 287. 5 Euripides, Zvectra, 327 sg. 


But the 
stones 
and sticks 
thrown 

on heaps 
cannot 
always be 
explained 
as missiles 
discharged 
at spiritual 
foes. 


20 THE TRANSFERENCE OF EVIL CHAP. 


stones and curses at the dishonoured grave of an old — 


bawd.’ 

But if this theory seems adequately to account for some 
cases of the custom with which we are concerned, it appar- 
ently fails to explain others. The view that the sticks and 
stones hurled at certain places are weapons turned against 
dangerous or malignant spirits is plausible in cases where 
such spirits are believed to be in the neighbourhood ; but in 
cases where no such spirits are thought to be lurking, we 
must, it would seem, cast about for some other explanation. 
For example, we have seen that it has been customary to 
throw sticks or stones on spots which have been defiled by 
deeds of moral turpitude without any shedding of blood, 
and again on spots where weary travellers stop to rest. It 
is difficult to suppose that in these latter cases the evil deeds 
or the sensations of fatigue are conceived in the concrete 
shape of demons whom it is necessary to repel by missiles, 
though many South American Indians, as we saw, do attri- 
bute fatigue toa demon. Still more difficult is it to apply 
the purely defensive theory to cases where beneficent spirits 
are imagined to be hovering somewhere near, and where the 
throwing of the stones or sticks is apparently regarded by 
those who practise it as a token of respect rather than of 
hostility. Thus amongst the Masai, when any one dies away 
from the kraal, his body is left lying on the spot where he 
died, and all persons present throw bunches of grass or 
leaves on the corpse. Afterwards every passer-by casts a 
stone or a handful of grass on the place, and the more the 
dead man was respected, the longer is the usage observed.’ 
It is especially the graves of Masai medicine-men that are 
honoured in this way.* In the forest near Avestad, in 
Sweden, the traveller, Clarke, observed “several heaps made 
with sticks and stones; upon which the natives, as they 
pass, cast either a stone, or a little earth, or the bough of a 


tree ; deeming it an uncharitable act to omit this tribute, in | 
their journeys to and fro. As this custom appeared closely — 
allied to the pious practice in the Highlands of Scotland, of 


1 Propertius, v. 5. 77 sg. 3 A. C. Hollis, The Masai (Oxford, — 


2M. Merker, Die Masai (Berlin, 1905), pp. 305 sg. 
1904), p. 193. 


; 
| 
| 
/ 


= 


I THE TRANSFERENCE TO STONES AND STICKS 21 


casting a stone upon the cairn of a deceased person, we, of 
course, concluded these heaps were places of sepulture.” 
They were said to be the graves of a band of robbers, who 
had plundered merchants on their passage through the 
forest, but had afterwards been killed and buried where they 
fell.’ However, in all these cases the practice of throwing 
stones on the grave, though interpreted as a mark of respect 
and charity, may really be based on the fear of the ghosts, 
so that the motive for observing the custom may be merely 
that of self-defence against a dangerous spirit. Yet this 
explanation can hardly apply to certain other cases. Thus 
in Syria it is a common practice with pious Moslems, when 


| they first come in sight of a very sacred place, such as 


Hebron or the tomb of Moses, to make a little heap of 
stones or to add a stone to a heap which has been already 
made. Hence every here and there the traveller passes a 
whole series of such heaps by the side of the track.” In 
Northern Africa the usage is similar. Cairns are commonly 
erected on spots from which the devout pilgrim first discerns 
the shrine of a saint afar off; hence they are generally to 
be seen on the top of passes. For example, in Morocco, at 
the point of the road from Casablanca to Azemmour, where 
you first come in sight of the white city of the saint gleam- 
ing in the distance, there rises an enormous cairn of stones 
shaped like a pyramid several hundreds of feet high, and 
beyond it on both sides of the road there is a sort of 
avalanche of stones, either standing singly or arranged in 
little pyramids. Every pious Mohammedan whose eyes are 
gladdened by the blessed sight of the sacred town adds his 
stone to one of the piles or builds a little pile for himself.* 
Such a custom can hardly be explained as a precaution 
adopted against a dangerous influence supposed to emanate 
from the saint and to communicate itself even to people at 
a distance. On the contrary, it points rather to a desire 


_of communion with the holy man than to a wish to keep 


1 E. D. Clarke, Zravels im various Folklore Notes, gathered on Mount 


— Countries of Europe and Asia, vi. Lebanon,” folk-lore, ix. (1898) p. 
_ (London, 1823) p. 165. I 
2 WwW. 


5. 
H. D. Rouse, ‘‘ Notes from 3 E. Doutté, Wagie et Religion dans 


| Syria,” Folk-lore, vi. (1895) p. 173. 7Afrigue du Nord (Algiers, 1908), pp. 
_ Compare F. Sessions, ‘‘Some Syrian 420-422. 


Cairns 
raised in 
honour of 
Moslem 
saints, 


Stones as 
channels 
of com- 
munication 
with saints, 
living or 
dead. 


22 THE TRANSFERENCE OF EVIL CHAP. 


him at bay. The mode of communion adopted, however 
strange it may seem to us, is apparently quite in harmony Mf 
with the methods by which good Mohammedans in Northern 
Africa attempt to appropriate to themselves the blessed 
influence (4araka) which is supposed to radiate on all sides 
from the person of a living saint. “It is impossible to — 
imagine,” we are told, “the extremity to which the belief in — 
the blessed influence of saints is carried in North Africa, 
To form an exact idea of it you must see a great saint _ 
in the midst of the faithful. ‘The people fling themselves — 
down on his path to kiss the skirt of his robe, to kiss his | 
stirrup if he is on horseback, to kiss even his footprint if he ~ 
is on foot. Those who are too far from him to be able © 
to touch his hand touch him with their staff, or fling a stone 
at him which they have marked previously so as to be able 
to find it afterwards and to embrace it devoutly.””! Thus 
through the channel of the stone or the stick, which has 
been in bodily contact with the living saint, his blessed 
influence flows to the devotee who has wielded the stick or 
hurled the stone. In like manner we may perhaps suppose 
that the man who adds a stone to a cairn in honour of a 
dead saint hopes to benefit by the saintly effluence which 
distils in a mysterious fashion through the stone to him.’ 


1 E, Doutté, MWagze et Religion dans 
P Afrique du Nord, p. 440, quoting De 
Ségonzac, Voyage au Maroc, p. 82. 

2, I follow the exposition of E. 
Doutté, whose account of the sanctity 
or magical influence (6araka) ascribed 
to the persons of living Mohammedan 
saints (marabouts) is very instructive. 
See his Magie et Religion dans 
? Afrique du Nord, pp. 438 sgqg. Mr. 
E.S. Hartland had previously explained 
the custom of throwing stones and 
sticks on cairns as acts of ceremonial 
union with the spirit who is supposed 
to reside in the cairn. See his Legend 
of Perseus, ii. (London, 1895) p. 128. 
While this theory offers a plausible ex- 
planation of some cases of the custom, 
I do not think that it will cover them 
all. M. René Dussaud argues that the 
stones deposited at shrines of holy men 


suppliants address to the saints; and ~ 
he holds that the practice of depositing 
stones at such places rests on a prin- 
ciple entirely different from that of 
throwing stones for the purpose of re- 
pelling evil spirits. See René Dussaud, 
“La matérialisation de la priére en 
Orient,” Azzdlletins et Mémotres de la 
Société d Anthropologie de Paris, V. 
Série, vii. (1906) pp. 213-220. If I 
am right, the fundamental idea in these 
customs is neither that the stones or 
sticks are offerings presented to good 
spirits nor that they are missiles hurled 
at bad ones, but that they embody the 
evil, whether disease, misfortune, fear, 
horror, or what not, of which the per- 
son attempts to rid himself by trans- 
ferring it to a material vehicle. But I 
am far from confident that this explana- 
tion applies to all cases. In particular 


are simply material embodiments of the 
prayers which at the same time the 


it is difficult to reconcile it with the 
custom, described in the text, of throw- 


I THE TRANSFERENCE TO STONES AND STICKS 23 


- 


When we survey the many different cases in which 
passing travellers are accustomed to add stones or sticks 
to existing piles, it seems difficult, if not impossible, to 
explain them all on one principle; different and even 
opposite motives appear, at least at first sight, to have 
operated in different cases to produce customs superficially 
alike. Sometimes the motive for throwing the stone is to 
ward off a dangerous spirit ; sometimes it is to cast away an 
evil ; sometimes it is to acquire a good. Yet, perhaps, if we 
could trace them back to their origin in the mind of primi- 
tive man, we might find that they all resolve themselves 
more or less exactly into the principle of the transference of 
evil. For to rid ourselves of an evil and to acquire a good 
are often merely opposite sides of one and the same opera- 
tion ; for example, a convalescent regains health in exactly 
the same proportion as he shakes off his malady. And 
though the practice of throwing stones at dangerous spirits, 
especially at mischievous and malignant ghosts of the dead, 
appears to spring from a different motive, yet it may be 
questioned whether the difference is really as great to the 
savage as it seems to us. To primitive man the idea of 
spiritual and ghostly powers is still more indefinite than it is 
to his civilized brother: it fills him with a vague uneasiness 
and alarm; and this sentiment of dread and horror he, in 
accordance with his habitual modes of thought, conceives in 
a concrete form as something material which either surrounds 
and oppresses him like a fog, or has entered into and taken 
temporary possession of his body. In either case he imagines 
that he can rid himself of the uncanny thing by stripping it 
from his skin or wrenching it out of his body and transferring 
it to some material substance, whether a stick, a stone, or 
what not, which he can cast from him, and so, being eased 


ing a marked stone at a holy man and 
then recovering it. Are we to suppose 
that the stone carries away the evil to 
the good man and brings back his 
blessing instead? The idea is perhaps 
too subtle and far-fetched. 

The word éaraka, which in North 
Africa describes the powerful and in 
general beneficent, yet dangerous, in- 
fluence which emanates from holy per- 


sons and things, is no doubt identi- 
cal with the Hebrew dévakhah (7373) 
“blessing.” The importance which the 
ancient Hebrews ascribed to the bless- 
ing or the curse of a holy man is 
familiar to us from many passages in 
the Old Testament. See, for example, 
Genesis xxvii., xlvili. 8 sgg.; Deuter- 
onomy xxvil. II sgg., xxviii. I sgq. 


The rite 
of throwing 
sticks or 
stones is 
perhaps 
best ex- 
plained as 
a mode of 
purifica- 
tion, the 
evil being 
thought 
to be 
embodied 
in the 
missile 
which is 
thrown 
away. 


24 THE TRANSFERENCE OF EVIL CHAP. 


of his burden, can hasten away from the dreadful spot with 4 
a lighter heart. . Thus the throwing of the sticks or stones 
would be a form of ceremonial purification, which among 
primitive peoples is commonly conceived as a sort of 
physical rather than moral purgation, a mode of sweeping : 
or scouring away the morbid matter by which the polluted 
person is supposed to be infected. This notion perhaps 
explains the rite of stone-throwing observed by pilgrims at 
Mecca; on the day of sacrifice every pilgrim has to cast 
seven stones on a cairn, and the rite is repeated thrice on © 
the three following days. The traditional explanation of — 
the custom is that Mohammed here drove away the devil 
with a shower of stones ;* but the original idea may perhaps 
have been that the pilgrims cleanse themselves by trans- 
ferring their ceremonial impurity to the stones which they 
fling on the heap. 

This inter- The theory that the throwing of stones is practised in 

pretation Certain circumstances as a mode of purification tallies very 


of stone- 

throwing well with the tradition as to the origin of those cairns which 

aha were to be seen by wayside images of Hermes in ancient 

aie and Greece, and to which every passer-by added a stone. It 

tradition was said that when Hermes was tried by the gods for the 

a murder of Argus all the gods flung stones at him as a 
custom. x 2 

means of freeing themselves from the pollution contracted 

by bloodshed ; the stones thus thrown made a great heap, 

and the custom of rearing such heaps at wayside images of 

Hermes continued ever afterwards.” Similarly Plato recom- 

mended that if any man had murdered his father or mother, 

his brother or sister, his son or daughter, he should be 

put to death, and that his body should be cast forth 

naked at a cross-road outside of the city. There the 

1 E. Doutté, Wagie et Religion dans Homer, Odyssey, xvi. 471. As to the 

P Afrique du Nord (Algiers, 1908), heaps of stones see Cornutus, Zheologzae 

pp. 430 sg.; J. Wellhausen, este  Graecae Compendium, 163; Babrius, 

arabischen Heidentums? (Berlin, 1897),  abulae, x\vili. I sg.3 Suidas, s.v. 

p- 111. The explanation given in the ‘Epyatov; Scholiast on Nicander, 

text is regarded as probable by Pro- Ther. 150; M. P. Nilsson, Grae- 


fessor M. J. de Goeje (Zuternationales chische Feste (Leipsic, 1906), pp. 388 
Archiv fiir Ethnographie, xvi. (1904) sgg. The method of execution by 


Pp. 42. stoning may perhaps have been resorted 
to in order to avoid the pollution ~ 
2 Etymologicum Magnum,  s.v. which would be entailed by contact | 


‘Epuatov, pp. 375 sg.; Eustathius on with the guilty and dying man. 


I THE TRANSFERENCE TO STONES AND STICKS 25 


magistrates should assemble on behalf of the city, each 
carrying in his hand a stone, which he was to cast at 
the head of the corpse by way of purifying the city from 
the pollution it had contracted by the crime. After that 
the corpse was to be carried away and flung outside 
the boundaries.’ In these cases it would seem that the 
pollution incurred by the vicinity of a murderer is thought 
to be gathered up in the stones as a material vehicle and 
to be thrown away with them. AA sacrificial custom of the 
Brahmans, prescribed in one of their sacred books, is suscep- 
tible of a like interpretation. At a certain stage of the 
ritual the sacrificer is directed to put a stone into a water- 
pot and to throw it away in a south-westerly direction, 
because that is the region of Nirriti, the goddess of Evil or 
Destruction. With the stone and the pitcher he is supposed 
to cast away his pain and evil; and he can transfer the pain 
to another by saying, as he throws away the stone and the 
pitcher, “Let thy pain enter him whom we hate,” or “ Let 
thy pain enter so-and-so,” naming his enemy ; but in order 
to ensure the transference of the pain to his enemy he must 
take care that the stone or the pitcher is broken.” 

This mode of interpreting the custom of throwing sticks 
and stones on piles appears preferable to the one which has 
generally found favour with European travellers and writers. 
Imperfectly acquainted for the most part with the notions 
which underlie primitive magic, but very familiar with the 
religious conception of a deity who requires sacrifice of his 
worshippers, they are apt to interpret the missiles in ques- 
tion as cheap and easy offerings presented by pious but 
frugal worshippers to ghosts or spirits whose favour they 
desire to win.*? Whether a likely mode of conciliating a 


1 Plato, Zaws, ix. 12, p. 873 A-c Durch Massailand zur Nilquelle 


Gov Exacros pépwv Eri Thy kepadhy Tod 
vekpov Bad\wv ddociovTw Thy mow SAyY. 

* Satapatha Brahmana, ix. 1. 2. 
9-12, Part iv. p. 171 of J. Eggeling’s 
translation (Sacred Books of the East, 
vol. xliii., Oxford, 1897). As to Nirriti, 
the Goddess of Destruction, see H. 
Oldenberg, Dze Religion des Veda 
an, 1894), pp. 323, 351, 354, 489 
note 3, 


3 See, for example, O. Baumann, 


(Berlin, 1894), p. 214 ; G. M. Dawson, 
“Notes on the Shuswap People of 
British Columbia,” Zvansactions of the 
Royal Society of Canada, ix. (1891) 
section ii. p. 38; F. Liebrecht, Zzr 
Volkskunde (Heilbronn, 1879), pp. 267 
59.) 273 Sg., 276, 278 sg. ; R. Andree, 
LEthnographische Parallelen und Ver- 
gleiche (Stuttgart, 1878), p. 48; Catat, 
in Le Tour du Monde, \xv. (1893), p 
40. Some of these writers have made 


The 
throwing 
of sticks 
or stones 
on piles is 
sometimes 
explained 
asa 
sacrifice. 


26 THE TRANSFERENCE OF EVIL CHAP. 


t 


ghost or spirit is to throw sticks and stones at him is a ques- 
tion about which opinions might perhaps differ. It is difficult 
to speak with confidence about the tastes of spiritual beings, 
but as a rule they bear a remarkable likeness to those of 
mere ordinary mortals, and it may be said without fear of 
contradiction that few of the latter would be gratified by 
being set up as a common target to be aimed at with sticks 
and stones by everybody who passed within range.’ Yet it 
is quite possible that a ceremony, which at first was purely 
magical, may in time have a religious gloss or interpretation 
put on it even by those who practise it; and this seems in 
fact to have sometimes happened to the particular custom 


ee 2 


Certainly under consideration. Certainly some people accompany the 
a a throwing of the stone on the pile with the presentation of 
stones is useful articles, which can hardly serve any other purpose 
sor. than that of propitiating some local spirits. Thus travellers 
pues by in Sikhim and Bhootan offer flour and wine, as well as stones, 
Sacrinces. 


at the cairns ; and they also burn incense and recite incanta- 
tions or prayers,” or they tear strips from their garments, tie 
them to twigs or stones, and then lay them on the cairn, calling 
out to the spirit of the mountain, ‘“ Pray accept our offering! 
The spirits are victorious! The devils are defeated!”® 
Indians of Guatemala offered, according to their means, a 
little cotton, salt, cacao, or chili.‘ They now burn copal 
and sometimes dance on the tops of the passes where the 
cairns are to be seen, but perhaps these devotions may be 
paid to the crosses which at the present day are generally 


set up in such situations.° 


a special study of the practices in ques- 
tion. See F. Liebrecht, ‘‘ Die gewor- 
fenen Steine,” Zur Volkskunde, pp. 
267-284; R. Andree, ‘‘ Steinhaufen,” 
Ethnographische Parallelen und Ver- 
gleiche, pp. 46-58; E. S. Hartland, 
The Legend of Perseus, ii. (London, 
1895) pp. 204 sgg.; E. Doutté, 
Magie et Religion dans [Afrique du 
Nord (Algiers, 1908), pp. 419 sgq. 
With the views of the last of these 
writers I am in general agreement. 

1 However, at the waterfall of Kriml, 
in the Tyrol, it is customary for every 
passer-by to throw a stone into the 
water; and this attention is said to 


The Indian of Bolivia will 


put the water-spirits in high good 
humour; for they follow the wayfarer 
who has complied with the custom and 
guard him from all the perils of the 
dangerous path. See F. Panzer, Bez- 
trag sur deutschen Mythologie (Munich, 
1848-1855), ii. 236 sg. 

2j. A. H. Louis, Zhe Gates ap 
Thibet, Second Edition (Calcutta, 
1894), pp. III sg. 

3L. A. Waddell, Among the Hima- 
Jayas (Westminster, 1899), pp. 115, 188. 

4 Brasseur de Bourbourg, A7stozre 
des nations civilisées du Mexique et de 
2 Amérigue-Centrale, ii. 564. 

5 C. Sapper, ‘* Die Gebrauche und 


I fHE TRANSFERENCE TO STONES AND STICKS 27 


squirt out the juice of his coca-quid, or throw the quid itself 
on the cairn, to which he adds a stone; occasionally he 
goes so far as to stick feathers or a leathern sandal or two 
on the pile. In passing the cairns he will sometimes pull a 
hair or two out of his eyebrows or eyelashes and puff them 
away towards the sun. Peruvian Indians used similarly to 
make cheap offerings of chewed coca or maize, old shoes, 
and so forth, on the cairns.2, In Sweden and Corea a little 
money is sometimes thrown on a cairn instead of a stick 
or stone.» The shrine of the Jungle Mother in Northern 
India is usually a pile of stones and branches to which 
every passer-by contributes. When she is displeased, she 
lets a tiger or leopard kill her negligent votary. She is the 
great goddess of the herdsmen and other dwellers in the 
forest, and they vow to her a cock and a goat, or a young 
pig, if she saves them and their cattle from beasts of prey.* 
In the jungles of Mirzapur the cairn which marks the spot 
where a man has been killed by a tiger, and to which each 
passer-by contributes a stone, is commonly in charge of a 
Baiga or aboriginal priest, who offers upon it a cock, a pig, 
or some spirits, and occasionally lights a little lamp at the 
shrine Amongst the Baganda members of the Bean clan 
worshipped the spirit of the river Nakiza. ‘There was no 
temple, but they had two large heaps of sticks and grass, 
one on either side of the river by the ford; to these heaps 
the members went, when they wished to make an offering to 


religidsen Anschauungen der Kekchf- 
Indianer,” Jnternatzonales Archiv fiir 
Ethnographie, viii. (1895) pp. 197 sg. 

1D. Forbes, ‘‘On the Aymara 
Indians of Bolivia and Peru,” /ournal 
of the Ethnological Society of London, 
ii. (1870) pp. 237 sg. ; G. C. Musters, 
‘Notes on Bolivia,” Journal of the 
Royal Geographical Soctety, x\lvii. 
(1877) p. 211; Baron E. Nordens- 
kidld, ‘‘ Travels on the Boundaries of 
Bolivia and Argentina,” Zhe Geographi- 
cal Journal, xxi. (1903) p. 518. 

2 P. J. de Arriaga, Lxtirpacion de 
la Idolatria del Piru (Lima, 1621), pp. 
37, 130. 

3 F. Liebrecht, Zur Volkskunde, p. 
274; Brett, ‘Dans la Corée Septen- 
trionale,” Les Missions Catholiques, 


Xxxi. (1899) p. 237. 

4 W. Crooke, Popular Religion and 
folk-lore of Northern India (Westmin- 
ster, 1896), i. 115. ‘*In some parts 
of Bilaspore there may be seen heaps 
of stones, which are known as huriyd, 
from the word kurhond, meaning to 
heap or pile-up. Just how and why 
the practice was started the people 
cannot explain; but to this day every 
one who passes a Aurzyd will take up 
a stone and throw it on the pile. 
This, they say, has been done as long 
as they can remember” (E. M. Gordon, 
Lndian Folk Tales, London, 1908, p. 
14). 
5 W. Crooke, Popular Religion and 
Folk-lore of Northern India (Westmin- 
ster, 1896), i. 267 sg. 


Heaps of 
sticks at 
the fords 
of rivers in 
Africa, 


28 THE TRANSFERENCE OF EVIL CHAP. 


the spirit, or to seek his assistance. The offerings were 
usually goats, beer, barkcloth, and fowls. When people 
crossed the river they threw a little grass or some sticks on 
to the heap before crossing, and again a little more on to 
the second heap after crossing ; this was their offering to the 
spirit for a safe crossing.” * There is a ford on the Calabar 
river in West Africa which has an ill repute, for the stream 
is broad, the current rapid, and there are crocodiles in the 
deep places. Beside the ford is a large oval-shaped stone 
which the Ekoi regard as an altar of Nimm, a powerful 
goddess, who dwells in the depth of the river Kwa and 
manifests herself in the likeness now of a crocodile and now 
of a snake. In order to ensure a safe passage through the 
river it is customary to pluck a leaf, rub it on the forehead 
over the pineal gland, and throw it on a heap of leaves in 
front of the stone. As he rubs the leaf on his forehead, the 
person who is about to plunge into the river prays, “ May I 
be free from danger! May I go through the water to the 
other side! May I see noevil!” And when he throws the 
leaf on the heap he prays again, saying, “I am coming 
across the river, may the crocodile lay down his head!”? 
Here the leaves appear to be a propitiatory offering presented 
to the dread goddess in the hope that she will suffer her 
worshipper to pass the ford unmolested. At another but 
smaller stream, called the River of Good Fortune, the Ekoi 
similarly rub leaves on their foreheads, praying for luck, and 
throw them on a heap before they pass through the water. 
They think that he who complies with this custom will have 
good luck throughout the year. Again, when the Ekoi kill 
a chameleon on the road, they do not throw the body away 
in the forest, but lay it by the wayside, and all who pass by 
pluck a few leaves and drop them on the dead animal, 
saying, “Look! Here is your mat.” In this way heaps of 
leaves accumulate over the carcases of chameleons. The 
custom is intended to appease the shade of the chameleon, 
who, if he were not pacified, would go to the Earth-god 
Obassi Nsi and pray for vengeance on the race of those who 

1 Rev. J. Roscoe, Zhe Baganda of the Bush (London, 1912), p. 242. 


(London, 191I), p. 163. As to the goddess Nimm, see zd., pp. 
2 P. Amaury Talbot, Jz the Shadow 2 5g. 


‘ | 


I THE TRANSFERENCE TO STONES AND STICKS 29 


had caused his death. The Washamba of German East 
Africa believe that certain stony and dangerous places in the 
paths are the abodes of spirits; hence at any such spot a 
_ traveller who would have a prosperous journey must dance a 
little and deposit a few small stones. The dance and the 
stones are presumably intended to soften the heart of the 
spirits and induce them to look favourably on the dancer. 
In Papa Westray, one of the Orkney Islands, there is a 
ruined chapel called St. Tredwels, “at the door of which 
there is a heap of stones ; which was the superstition of the 
common people, who have such a veneration for this chapel 
above any other, that they never fail, at their coming to it, to 
throw a stone as an offering before the door: and this they 
reckon an indispensable duty enjoined by their ancestors.” ® 

Prayers, too, as we have seen, are sometimes offered 
at these piles. In Laos heaps of stones may be seen 
beside the path, on which the passenger will deposit a 
pebble, a branch, or a leaf, while he beseeches the Lord 
of the Diamond to bestow on him good luck and long 
life* In the Himalayan districts of the North-Western 
Provinces of India heaps of stones and sticks are often 
to be seen on hills or at cross-roads. They are formed 
by the contributions of passing travellers, each of whom 
in adding his stone or stick to the pile prays, saying, 
“Thou goddess whose home is on the ridge, eater of wood 
and stone, preserve me.”° ‘Tibetan traveilers mutter a 
prayer at the cairns on the tops of passes to which they add 
a few stones gathered by them on the ascent.® A native of 
South-Eastern Africa who places a small stone on a cairn is 
wont to say as he does so, “Cairn, grant me strength and 
prosperity.”" In the same circumstances the Hottentot 


1 P. Amaury Talbot, of. czt. p. 91. 

2 A. Karasek, “‘ Beitrage zur Kennt- 
niss der Waschambaa,”  Saess/er- 
Archiv, i. (1911) p. 194. 

3 M. Martin, ‘* A Description of the 
Western Islands of Scotland,” in John 
Pinkerton’s Voyages and Travels 
(London, 1808-1814), iii. 691. 

4 E. Aymonier, Notes sur le Laos 
(Saigon, 1885), p. 198. 

5 KE. T. Atkinson, Zhe Himalayan 
Districts of the North-Western Pro- 


vinces of India, ii. (Allahabad, 1884) 
p- 832. 

6 T. T. Cooper, Zravels of a Pioneer 
of Commerce (London, 1871), p. 275. 
Compare W. W. Rockhill, Zze Land 
of the Lamas (London, 1891), pp. 
126 sq. 

7 Rev. J. Macdonald, ‘* Manners, 
Customs, Superstitions, and Religions 
of South African Tribes,” Journal of 
the Anthropological Institute, xx. (1891) 
p. 126. 


The 
throwing of 
stones and 
sticks is 
sometimes 
accom- 
panied by 
prayers. 


Gradual 
transform- 
ation of 
an old 
magical 
ceremony 
into a re- 
ligious rite. 


THE TRANSFERENCE OF EVIL CHAP, 


30 


prays for plenty of cattle,’ and the Caffre that his journey 
may be prosperous, that he may have strength to accomplish _ 
it, and that he may obtain an abundant supply of food by 
the way.” It is said that sick Bushmen used to go on © 
pilgrimage to the cairn called the Devil’s Neck, and pray to 
the spirit of the place to heal them, while they rubbed the 
sick part of their body and cried, “Woe! woe!” On 
special occasions, too, they resorted thither and implored 
the spirit’s help.2 Such customs seem to indicate the 
eradual transformation of an old magical ceremony into 
a religious rite with its characteristic features of prayer and 
sacrifice. Yet behind these later accretions, as we may 
perhaps regard them, it seems possible in many, if not in 
all, cases to discern the nucleus to which they have attached 
themselves, the original idea which they tend to conceal 
and in time to transmute. That idea is the transference of 
evil from man to a material substance which he can cast 


from him like an outworn garment. 


1 Sir James E, Alexander, Euxpedi- 
tion of Discovery into the Interior of 
Africa (London, 1838), i. 166. 

2S. Kay, Zravels and Researches in 
Caffraria (London, 1833), pp. 211 sg. 
When the Bishop of Capetown once 
passed a heap of stones on the top of 
a mountain in the Amapondo country 
he was told that ‘‘it was customary 
for every traveller to add one to the 
heap that it might have a favourable 
influence on his journey, and enable 
him to arrive at some kraal while the 
pot is yet boiling” (J. Shooter, Zhe 
Kaffirs of Natal, London, 1857, p. 
217). Here there is no mention of 
a prayer. Similarly a Basuto on a 
journey, when he fears that the friend 
with whom he is going to stay may 
have eaten up all the food before his 
guest’s arrival, places a stone on a 
cairn to avert the danger (E. Casalis, 
Lhe Basutos, London, 1861, p. 272). 
The reason alleged for the practice in 
these cases is perhaps equivalent to 
the one assigned by the Melanesians 
and others ; by ridding the traveller of 
his fatigue it enables him to journey 
faster and so to reach his destination 
before supper is over. But sometimes 


a travelling Mowenda will place a 
stone, not on a cairn, but in the fork 
of atree, saying, ‘* May the sun not set 
before I reach my destination.” See 
Rev. E. Gottschling, ‘*‘ The Bawenda,” 
Journal of the Anthropological Insti- 
tute, XxXxv. (1905) p. 381. This last 
custom is a charm to prevent the sun 
from setting. See Zhe Magic Art and 
the Evolution of Kings, i. 318. In 
Senegal the custom of throwing stones 
on cairns by the wayside is said to be 
observed ‘‘in order to ensure a speedy 
and prosperous return.” See Dr. Bel- 
lamy, ‘‘ Notes ethnographiques recuei- 
llies dans le Haut-Sénégal,” Revue 
@ Ethnographie, v. (1886) p. 83. In the 


Fan country of West Africa the custom 


of adding a leafy branch to a heap of 
such branches in the forest was ex- 
plained by a native, who said that it 
was done to prevent the trees and 
branches from falling on the traveller’s 
head, and their roots from wounding 
his feet. See Father Trilles, ‘‘ Mille 
lieues dans Vinconnu,” Les Azsstons 
Catholiques, Xxxiv. (1902) p. 142. 

3 Th. Hahn, ‘‘ Die Buschmanner,” 
Globus, xviii. 141. As to the cairn in 
question, see above, p. 16. 


I THE TRANSFERENCE TO ANIMALS 31 


§ 3. The Transference to Animals 


Animals are often employed as a vehicle for carrying 
away or transferring the evil, A Guinea negro who happens 
to be unwell will sometimes tie a live chicken round his neck, 
so that it lies on his breast. When the bird flaps its wings 
or cheeps the man thinks it a good sign, supposing the 
chicken to be afflicted with the very pain from which he 
hopes soon to be released, or which he would otherwise have 
to endure.” Whena Moor has a headache he will sometimes 
take a lamb or a goat and beat it till it falls down, believing 
that the headache will thus be transferred to the animal.? In 
Morocco most wealthy Moors keep a wild boar in their 
stables, in order that the jinn and evil spirits may be 
diverted from the horses and enter into the boar. In some 
parts of Algeria people think that typhoid fever can be cured 
by taking a tortoise, putting it on its back in the road, and 
covering it over with a pot. The patient recovers, but who- 
ever upsets the pot catches the fever. In Tlemcen a pregnant 
woman is protected against jinn by means of a black fowl 
which is kept in the house from the seventh month of her 
pregnancy till her delivery. Finally, the oldest woman in 
the house releases the fowl in the Jews’ quarter ; the bird is 
supposed to carry the jinn away with it. Amongst the 
Caffres of South Africa, when other remedies have failed, 
“natives sometimes adopt the custom of taking a goat into 
the presence of a sick man, and confess the sins of the kraal 
over the animal. Sometimes a few drops of blood from the 
sick man are allowed to fall on the head of the goat, which 
is turned out into an uninhabited part of the veldt. The 
sickness is supposed to be transferred to the animal, and to 
become lost in the desert.”® After an illness a Bechuana 
king seated himself upon an ox which lay stretched on the 


1 J. Smith, Zrade and Travels in 
the Gulph of Guinea (London, 1851), 


P- 77- 
20. Dapper, Description de 
P Afrique (Amsterdam, 1686), p. 
117. 


3 A, Leared, MWorocco and the Moors 


(London, 1876), p. 301. Compare 
E. Doutté, MJagie e¢ Relivton dans 
lL’ Afrique du Nord (Algiers, 1908), 
Pp. 454- 

4 E. Doutté, of. cet. pp. 454 5g. 

5 Dudley Kidd, Zhe Essential 
Kajir (London, 1904), p. 261. 


Evils 
transferred 
to animals 
in Africa. 


32 THE TRANSFERENCE OF EVIL CHAP, | 


eround. The native doctor next poured water on the king’s 
head till it ran down over his body. Then the head of the 
ox was held in a vessel of water till the animal expired ; 
whereupon the doctor declared, and the people believed, 
that the ox died of the king’s disease, which had been trans- 
ferred from him to it... The Baganda of Central Africa also 
attempted to transfer illness from a person to an animal. 
“ The medicine-man would take the animal, pass some herbs 
over the sick man, tie these to the animal, and then drive it 
away to some waste land, where he would kill it, taking the 
meat as his perquisite. The sick man would be expected to 
recover.”” The Akikuyu of East Africa think that a man 
can transfer the guilt of incest by means of “an ignoble 
ceremony ” to a goat, which is then killed; this saves the 
life of the culprit, who otherwise must die.? When disease 
breaks out among the cattle of the Bahima, a pastoral people 
of Central Africa, the priest “collects herbs and other 
remedies to attract the disease from the cattle. An animal 
is chosen from the herd in the evening, which is to be the 
scapegoat for the herd ; the herbs, etc., are tied round its 
neck, with certain fetiches to ensure the illness leaving the 
other animals ; the cow is driven round the outside of the 
kraal several times, and afterwards placed inside with the 
herd for the night. Early the following morning the animal 
is taken out and again driven round the kraal; the priest 
then kills it in the gateway, and some of the blood is 
sprinkled over the people belonging to the kraal, and also 
over the herd. The people next file out, each one jumping 
over the carcase of the cow, and all the animals are driven 
over it in the same way. The disease is thus transferred to 
the scapegoat and the herd is saved. All the fetiches and 
herbs, which were upon the scapegoat, are fastened upon the 
door-posts and lintel of the kraal to prevent the disease from 
entering again.” * 
When the cattle of the Huzuls, a pastoral people of the 
1 Rev. John Campbell, 7ravels in Kikuyu,” <Anthropos, v. (1910) p. 
South Africa (London, 1822), ii. 207 311. 
5g. 4 Rev. J. Roscoe, ‘* The Bahima, a 
2 Rev. J. Roscoe, Zhe Baganda Cow Tribe of Enkole,” Journal of the 
(London, 1911), pp. 342 sg. Royal Anthropological Institute, xxxvii. 
3 P. Cayzac, ‘‘La religion des (1907) p. III. 


"i THE TRANSFERENCE TO ANIMALS 33 


Carpathians, are sick and the owner attributes the sickness 
} to witchcraft, he throws glowing coals into a vessel of 
J} water and then pours the water on a black dog; thus 
the sickness passes into the dog and the cattle are made 
} whole! In Arabia, when the plague is raging, the people 
will sometimes lead a camel through all the quarters of 
the town in order that the animal may take the pestilence 
on itself. Then they strangle it in a sacred place and 
imagine that they have rid themselves of the camel and of 
the plague at one blow.” In Annam, when sickness is 
'caused by the presence of a demon in the body of the 
sufferer, a skilful exorcist will decoy the unwary devil into 
) a fowl and then, quick as thought, decapitate the bird and 
) throw it out of the door. But lest the fiend should survive 
this severe operation, cabalistic figures are posted on the 
outside of the door, which preclude him from entering the 
premises and assaulting the patient afresh.’ It is said that 
when smallpox is raging the savages of Formosa will drive the 
demon of disease into a sow, then cut off the animal’s ears 
and burn them or it, believing that in this way they rid them- 
selves of the plague. When a Kabyle child is pining for 
jealousy of a younger brother or sister, the parents imagine 
that they can cure it as follows. They take fifteen grains of 
wheat, wrap them up in a packet, and leave the packet all 
night under the head of the jealous child. Then in the 
morning they throw the grains into an ant-hill, saying, 
“Salutation to you, oh beautiful beings clad in black ; 
} salutation to you who dig the earth so well without the aid 
}‘of any hoe by the help of God and the angels! May each 
} of you take his share of the jealousy attached to these 
grains!” ° 
| Amongst the Malagasy the vehicle for carrying away 
) evils is called a faditra. “The faditra is anything selected 
| by the sikidy [divining board] for the purpose of taking 


| 1 Dr. R. F. Kaindl, ‘‘ Zauber- 4 W. Miiller, ‘Uber die Wilden- 
|) glaube bei den MHuzulen,” Globus, stimme der Insel Formosa,” Zeztschri/t 
| Ixxvi. (1899) p. 254. fiir Ethnologie, x\il. (1910) p. 237. 


2J. Goldziher, Muhammedanische The writer’s use of the pronoun (sz) is 
Studien (Halle a. S., 1888-1890), i. ambiguous. 
34. 5 Father E. Amat, in Aznales de 
8 E. Diguet, Zes Annamites (Paris, Ja Propagation de la Foi, \xx. (1898) 
1906), pp. 283 sg. pp. 266 sg. 
Pr. Vi D 


Evils 
transferred 
to animals 
in various 
parts of 
the world. 


Vehicles 
for the 
transfer- 
ence of 
evils in 
Mada- 
gascar, 


Extraction 
of klepto- 
mania by 
spiders 
and crabs. 


THE TRANSFERENCE OF EVIL CHAP. 


34 


away any hurtful evils or diseases that might prove injurious 
to an individual’s happiness, peace, or prosperity. The 
faditra may be either ashes, cut money, a sheep, a pumpkin, 
or anything else the sikidy may choose to direct. After the 
particular article is appointed, the priest counts upon it all | 
the evils that may prove injurious to the person for whom it | 
is made, and which he then charges the faditra to take away © 
for ever. If the faditra be ashes, it is blown, to be carried | 
away by the wind. If it be cut money, it is thrown to the © 
bottom of deep water, or where it can never be found. If it 
be a sheep, it is carried away to a distance on the shoulders _ 
of a man, who runs with all his might, mumbling as he goes, | 
as if in the greatest rage against the faditra, for the evils it 
is bearing away. If it be a pumpkin, it is carried on the 
shoulders to a little distance, and there dashed upon the 
ground with every appearance of fury and indignation.”’ A | 
Malagasy was informed by a diviner that he was doomed tae 
a bloody death, but that possibly he might avert his fate by 
performing a certain rite. Carrying a small vessel full of | 
blood upon his head, he was to mount upon the back of ag 
bullock ; while thus mounted, he was to spill the blood upon — 
the bullock’s head, and then send the animal away into the 
wilderness, whence it might never return.” 4 
Among the Toradjas of Central Celebes a chief’s daughter, 
who suffered from kleptomania, was healed by a wise woman, | 
who placed a bag containing spiders and crabs on the patient’s 
hands. The physician calculated that the prehensile claws 
of these creatures, so suggestive of a thief’s hands in the act | 
of closing on his prey, would lay hold of the vicious pro‘ 
pensity in the young woman’s mind and extract it as neatly 
as a pair of forceps nips out a thorn from the flesh? 
The Battas of Sumatra have a ceremony which they call 
1 Rev. W. Ellis, History of Mada- 
gascar (London, N.D.), i. 422 sg. 3 
compare zd., pp. 232, 435, 436 sg. ; 
Rey. J. Sibree, Zhe Great African 


Island (London, 1880), pp. 303 sg. 
As to divination by the szkdy, see 


The Great Afri zcan Island, 304 5 
J. Cameron, in Antananarivo 
and Madagascar Magazine, Reprint of 
the First Four Numbers (Antananarivo, 
1885), p. 263. 


J. Sibree, ‘‘ Divination among the 3°N. Adriani en Alb. C. Kruiji) 
Malagasy,” /olk-lore, iii. (1892) pp. De Bare’e- sprekende Toradja’s van 
193-2206. Midden-Celebes, i. (Batavia, 1912) p. 


2 W. Ellis, of. cit. i. 374; J. Sibree, 


399- 


I THE TRANSFERENCE TO ANIMALS 35 


“making the curse to fly away.” When a woman is child- 
less, a sacrifice is offered to the gods of three grasshoppers, 
representing a head of cattle, a buffalo, and a horse. Then 
a swallow is set free, with a prayer that the curse may fall 
upon the bird and fly away with it.’ “ The entrance into a 
house of an animal which does not generally seek to share 
the abode of man is regarded by the Malays as ominous of 
misfortune. If a wild bird flies into a house, it must be 
carefully caught and smeared with oil, and must then be 
released in the open air, a formula being recited in which it 
is bidden to fly away with all the ill-luck and misfortunes 
(stal jambalang) of the occupier.” * In antiquity Greek 
women seem to have done the same with swallows which 
they caught in the house: they poured oil on them and let 
them fly away, apparently for the purpose of removing ill- 
luck from the household. The Huzuls of the Carpathians 
imagine that they can transfer freckles to the first swallow 
they see in spring by washing their face in flowing water and 
saying, “ Swallow, swallow, take my freckles, and give me 
rosy cheeks.” * At the cleansing of a leper and of a house 
suspected of being tainted with leprosy among the Hebrews 
the priest used to let a living bird fly away into the open 
field,’ no doubt in order to carry away the leprosy with it. 
Similarly among the ancient Arabs a widow was expected 
to live secluded in a small tent fora year after her husband’s 
death ; then a bird ora sheep was brought to her, she made 
the creature touch her person, and let it go. It was believed 
that the bird or the sheep would not live long thereafter ; 
‘doubtless it was supposed to suffer from the unclean- 


1 W. Kédding, ‘‘Die Batakschen 
Gotter,” Allgemeine Missions - Zeit- 


1857). Compare Plato, Republic, iil. 
9, p- 398A, who ironically proposes to 


aefirze, Xi. (1885) p. 478; Dr. R. 
Romer, ‘‘ Bijdrage tot de Geneeskunst 
der Karo-Batak’s,” 777dschrift voor In- 
dische Taal- Land- en Volkenkunde, |. 
(1908) p. 223. 

2 W. E. Maxwell, ‘‘The Folklore 
of the Malays,” Jowrnal of the Straits 
Branch of the Royal Asiatic Society, 
No. 7 (June, 1881), p. 27; W. W. 
Skeat, Malay Magic (London, 1900), 

PP: 534 Sg. 

» 8 Dio Chrysostom, Orat. liii. vol. 
ii. pp. 164 sg. ed. L. Dindorf (Leipsic, 


dismiss poets from his ideal state in 
the same manner. These passages of 
Plato and Dio Chrysostom were pointed 
out to me by my friend Professor Henry 
Jackson. There was a Greek saying, 
attributed to Pythagoras, that swallows 
should not be allowed to enter a house 
(Plutarch, Qzaest. Conviv. viii. 7, 1). 


4 Dr. R. F. Kaindl, ‘‘ Zauberglaube 
bei den Huzulen,” G/odzs, Ixxvi. (1899) 
pp. 255 Sg: 

5 Leviticus xiv. 7, 53. 


Evils 
transferred 
to birds, 
which fly 
away with 
them. 


Evils 
transferred 
to animals 
in India. 


36 THE TRANSFERENCE OF EVIL CHAP. — 
é 
ness or taint of death which the widow had transferred : 
to it.’ | 
Among the Majhwar, a Dravidian race of South — 
Mirzapur, if a man has died of a contagious disease, such as — 
cholera, the village priest walks in front of the funeral pro- — 
cession with a chicken in his hands, which he lets loose in 
the direction of some other village as a scapegoat to carry 
the infection away. None but another very experienced 
priest would afterwards dare to touch or eat such a chicken.” 
Among the Badagas of the Neilgherry Hills in Southern © 
India, when a death has taken place, the sins of the deceased 
are laid upon a buffalo calf. For this purpose the people 
gather round the corpse and carry it outside of the village. 
There an elder of the tribe, standing at the head of the 
corpse, recites or chants a long list of sins such as any | 
Badaga may commit, and the people repeat the last words of © 
each line after him.’ The confession of sins is thrice repeated. 
“ By a conventional mode of expression, the sum total of | 
sins a man may do is said to be thirteen hundred. Admitting — 
that the deceased has committed them all, the performer © 
cries aloud, ‘Stay not their flight to God’s pure feet”? As 
he closes, the whole assembly chants aloud ‘Stay not their | 
flight’ Again the performer enters into details, and cries, — 
‘He killed the crawling snake. It is a sin.” In a moment | 
the last word is caught up, and all the people cry ‘It is a- 
sin. As they shout, the performer lays his hand upon the | 
calf. The sin is transferred to the calf. Thus the whole | 
catalogue is gone through in this impressive way. But this 
is not enough. As the last shout ‘ Let all be well’ dies | 
away, the performer gives place to another, and again con- | 
fession is made, and all the people shout ‘It isa sin” A 
third time it is done. Then, still in solemn silence, the calf 
is let loose. Like the Jewish scapegoat, it may never be 
used for secular work.” Ata Badaga funeral witnessed by 
the Rev. A. C. Clayton the buffalo calf was led thrice round | 
the bier, and the dead man’s hand was laid on its head. | 


1 J. Wellhausen, este arabischen PP. 422, 428. 
Heidentumes (Berlin, 1887), p. 1563 2 W. Crooke, Zribes and Castes of! 
W. Robertson Smith, Religion of the the North-Western Provinces and Oudh 
Semites, New Edition (London, 1894), (Calcutta, 1896), iii. 434. 


the deceased. 


animal.” 4 


mas laid on it. 


and that it is never after heard of.” ? 


I THE TRANSFERENCE TO ANIMALS 37 


“ By this act, the calf was supposed to receive all the sins of 
It was then driven away to a great distance, 
that it might contaminate no one, and it was said that it 
would never be sold, but looked on as a dedicated sacred 
“The idea of this ceremony is, that the sins of 
the deceased enter the calf, or that the task of his absolution 
They say that the calf very soon disappears, 


Some of the Todas of 


the Neilgherry Hills in like manner let loose a calf as a 
funeral ceremony ; the intention may be to transfer the sins 


of the deceased to the animal. 
borrowed the ceremony from the Badagas.’ 


Perhaps the Todas have 
In Kumaon, 


a district of North-Western India, the custom of letting loose 
a bullock as a scapegoat at a funeral is occasionally observed. 
A bell is hung on the bullock’s neck, and bells are tied to its 
feet, and the animal is told that it is to be let go in order to 
save the spirit of the deceased from the torments of hell. 
Sometimes the bullock’s right quarter is branded with -a 


trident and the left with a discus.* 


Perhaps the original 


intention of such customs was to banish the contagion of 
death by means of the animal, which carried it away and so 


ensured the life of the survivors. 


primitive. 


1 E. Thurston, Castes and Tribes of 
Southern India (Madras, 1909), i. 113- 
117; 7a., Ethnographic Notes in 
Southern India (Madras, 1906), pp. 
192-196; Captain H. Harkness, 
Description of a Singular Aboriginal 
Race inhabiting the Summit of the 
Neilgherry Hills (London, 1832), p. 
133; F. Metz, Zhe Tribes inhabiting 
the Neilgherry Hills, Second Edition 
(Mangalore, 1864), p. 78; Jagor, 
“Ueber die Badagas im Nilgiri- 
Gebirge,” Verhandlungen der Berliner 
Gesellschaft fiir Anthropologie (1876), 
pp. 196 sg. At the Badaga funerals 
witnessed by Mr. E. Thurston ‘‘no 
ealf was brought near the corpse, and 
the celebrants of the rites were satisfied 
with the mere mention by name of a 
calf, which is male or female according 
to the sex of the deceased.” 

2 H. Harkness, Z.c. 


The idea of sin is not 


3 J. W. Breeks, Az Account of the 
Primitive Tribes and Monuments of 
the Nilagiris (London, 1873), pp. 23 
sgy.; W. H. R. Rivers, Zhe Todas (Lon- 
don, 1906), pp. 376 sg. 

4 E. T. Atkinson, 7he Himalayan 
Districts of the North- Western Provinces 
of India, ii. (Allahabad, 1884) pp. 
927 sg. In other parts of North- 
Western India on the eleventh day after 
a death a bull calf is let loose with a 
trident branded on its shoulder or 
quarter ‘‘ to becomea pest.” See (Sir) 
Denzil C. J. Ibbetson, Report on the 
Revision of Settlement of the Panipat 
Tahsil and Karnal Parganah of the 
Karnal District (A\lahabad, 1883), p. 
137. In Behar, a district of Bengal, 
a bullock is also let loose on the eleventh 
day of mourning for a near relative. 
See G. A. Grierson, Azhar Peasant 
Life (Calcutta, 1885), p. 409. 


Evils 
transferred 
to human 
beings in 
India and 
elsewhere. 


38 THE TRANSFERENCE OF EVIL CHAP. 


§ 4. The Transference to Men 


Again, men sometimes play the part of scapegoat by 


diverting to themselves the evils that threaten others. An — 


ancient Hindoo ritual describes how the pangs of thirst may ~ 
be transferred from a sick man to another. The operator — 
seats the pair on branches, back to back, the sufferer with — 
his face to the east, and the whole man with his face to the 
west. Then he stirs some gruel in a vessel placed on the 
patient’s head and hands the stir-about to the other man to 
drink. In this way he transfers the pangs of thirst from 
the thirsty soul to the other, who obligingly receives them in 
his stead." There is a painful Telugu remedy for a fever : 


it is to embrace a bald-headed Brahman widow at the earliest | 


streak of dawn. By doing so you get rid of the fever, and no | 
doubt (though this is not Sanh affirmed) you at the same 
time transfer it to the bald-headed widow.” When a Cin-~ 
ghalese is dangerously ill, and the physicians can do ne 
a devil-dancer is called in, who by making offerings to the — 
devils, and dancing in the masks appropriate to them, conjures — 
these demons of disease, one after the other, out of the sick 
man’s body and into his own. Having thus successfully ex- | 
tracted the cause of the malady, the artful dancer lies down 3 
on a bier, and shamming death, is carried to an open place | 
outside the village. Here, being left to himself, he soon | 
comes to life again, and hastens back to claim his reward. 
In 1590 a Scotch witch of the name of Agnes Sampson 
was convicted of curing a certain Robert Kers of a disease — 
“laid upon him by a westland warlock when he was at — 
Dumfries, whilk sickness she took upon herself, and kept the 
same with great groaning and torment till the morn, at whilk 
time there was a great din heard in the house.” The noise | 
was made by the witch in her efforts to shift the disease, by — 
means of clothes, from herself to a cat ordog. Unfortunately 


1 W. Caland, Altindisches Zauber- 2M. N. Venketswami, ‘Telugu 
vitual (Amsterdam, 1900), p. 833; Superstitions,” Zhe /idian Antiquary, 
Hymns of the Atharva-Veda, trans- xxiv. (1895) p. 359. 
lated by Maurice Bloomfield (Oxford, 8. A. Griinwedel, ‘‘ Sinhalesische 
1897), pp. 308 sg. (Sacred Books of | Masken,” Internationales Archiv fur 
the East, vol. xlii.). Ethnographie, vi. (1893) pp. 85 59. 


1 THE TRANSFERENCE TO MEN 39 


the attempt partly miscarried. The disease missed the animal 
and hit Alexander Douglas of Dalkeith, who dwined and 
died of it, while the original patient, Robert Kers, was made 
whole.' The Dyaks believe that certain men possess in 
themselves the power of neutralizing bad omens. So, when 
evil omens have alarmed a farmer for the safety of his crops, 
he takes a small portion of his farm produce to one of these 
wise men, who eats it raw for a small consideration, “and 
thereby appropriates to himself the evil omen, which in him 
becomes innocuous, and thus delivers the other from the ban 
of the pemalz or taboo.” * 
. “In one part of New Zealand an expiation for sin 
was felt to be necessary ; a service was performed over 
an individual, by which all the sins of the tribe were 
supposed to be transferred to him, a fern stalk was 
previously tied to his person, with which he jumped into 
the river, and there unbinding, allowed it to float away to 
the sea, bearing their sins with it.”* In great emergencies 
the sins of the Rajah of Manipur used to be transferred 
to somebody else, usually to a criminal, who earned his 
pardon by his vicarious sufferings. To effect the trans- 
ference the Rajah and his wife, clad in fine robes, bathed 
on a scaffold erected in the bazaar, while the criminal 
crouched beneath it. With the water which dripped 
from them on him their sins also were washed away and fell 
on the human scapegoat. To complete the transference the 
Rajah and his wife made over their fine robes to their 
' substitute, while they themselves, clad in new raiment, mixed 
with the people till evening. But at the close of the day 
they entered into retreat and remained in seclusion for about 
a week, during which they were esteemed sacred or tabooed.* 
Further, in Manipur “they have a noteworthy system of 
keeping count of the years. Each year is named after some 
man, who—for a consideration—undertakes to bear the for- 
1j. G. Dalyell, Darker Superstitions 


of Scotland (Edinburgh, 1834), pp. 104 
sg. I have modernised the spelling. 


Maut, or New Zealand and its In- 
habitants, Second Edition (London, 
1870), p. IOL. 


2 J. Perham, ‘‘ Sea Dyak Religion,” 
Journal of the Straits Branch of the 
Royal Asiatic Society, No. 10 (December 
1882), p. 232. 

3 Rev. Richard Taylor, Ze /ka A 


4 T. C. Hodson, ‘‘ The Native Tribes 
of Manipur,” /ouwrnal of the Anthro- 
pological Institute, xxxi. (IQOI) p. 302; 
zd., The Metthets (London, 1908), pp. 
106 sq. 


Sins and 
misfortunes 
transferred 
to human 
scape- 
goats in 
New 
Zealand 
and 
Manipur. 


Annual 
eponyms in 
Manipur. 


Eponym- 


ous magis- 


trates as 
public 
scape- 
goats. 


4o THE TRANSFERENCE OF EVIL CHAP, | 


tune good or bad of the year. If the year be good, if there 
be no pestilence and a good harvest, he gets presents from 
all sorts of people, and I remember hearing that in 1898, 
when the cholera was at its worst, a deputation came to the 
Political Agent and asked him to punish the name-giver, as 
it was obvious that he was responsible for the epidemic. In 
former times he would have got into trouble.” The nomina- 
tion of the eponym, or man who is to give his name to the 
year, takes place at a festival called Chirouba, which falls 
about the middle of April. It is the priests who nominate 
the eponym, after comparing his horoscope with that of the 
Rajah and of the State generally. The retiring official, who 
gave his name to the past year, addresses his successor as 
follows: “ My friend, I bore and took away all evil spirits 
and sins from the Rajah and his people during the last year, 
Do thou likewise from to-morrow until the next Chzrouba.” 
Then the incoming official, who is to give his name to the 
New Year, addresses the Rajah in these words: “O son of 
heaven, Ruler of the Kings, great and ancient Lord, Incar- 
nation of God, the great Lord Pakhangba, Master of the 
bright Sun, Lord of the Plain and Despot of the Hills, 
whose kingdom is from the hills on the east to the moun- 
tains on the west, the old year perishes, the new cometh. 
New is the sun of the new year, and bright as the new sun 
shalt thou be, and mild withal as the moon. May thy beauty 
and thy strength grow with the growth of the new year. 
From to-day will I bear on my head all thy sins, diseases, 
misfortunes, shame, mischief, all that is aimed in battle 
against thee, all that threatens thee, all that is bad and hurt- 
ful for thee and thy kingdom.” For these important services 
the eponym or vicar receives from the Rajah a number of — 
gifts, including a basket of salt, and his grateful country 
rewards his self-sacrificing devotion by bestowing many 
privileges on him.? Elsewhere, perhaps, if we knew more 
about the matter, we might find that eponymous magistrates 
who give their names to the year have been similarly 
regarded as public scapegoats, who bore on their devoted 


1 T. C. Hodson, ‘‘The Native Tribes 2 T. C. Hodson, The Mezthezs (Lon- 
of Manipur,” Journal of the Anthro- don, 1908), pp. 104-106. 
Pological Institute, xxxi. (1901) p. 302. 


I THE TRANSFERENCE TO MEN 41 


heads the misfortunes, the sins, and the sorrows of the 
whole people.’ 

In the /ataka, or collection of Indian stories which 
narrate the many transmigrations of the Buddha, there is an 
instructive tale, which sets forth how sins and misfortunes 
can be transferred by means of spittle to a holy ascetic. A 
lady of easy virtue, we are told, had lost the favour of King 
Dandaki and bethought herself how she could recover it. 
As she walked in the park revolving these things in her 
mind, she spied a devout ascetic named Kisavaccha. A 
thought struck her. “Surely,” said she to herself, “this 
must be Ill Luck. I will get rid of my sin on his person 
and then go and bathe.’ No sooner said than done. 
Chewing her toothpick, she collected a large clot of spittle 
in her mouth with which she beslavered the matted locks of 
the venerable man, and having hurled her toothpick at his 
head into the bargain she departed with a mind at peace 
and bathed. The stratagem was entirely successful ; for the 
king took her into his good graces again. Not long after 
it chanced that the king deposed his domestic chaplain from 
his office. Naturally chagrined at this loss of royal favour, 
the clergyman repaired to the king’s light o’ love and 
enquired how she had contrived to recapture the monarch’s 
affection. She told him frankly how she had got rid of 
her sin and emerged without a stain on her character by 
simply spitting on the head of IJ] Luck in the royal park. 
The chaplain took the hint, and hastening to the park 
bespattered in like manner the sacred locks of the holy 
man; and in consequence he was soon reinstated in office. 
It would have been well if the thing had stopped there, but 
unfortunately it did not. By and bye it happened that 
there was a disturbance on the king’s frontier, and the king 
put himself at the head of his army to go forth and fight. 
An unhappy idea occurred to his domestic chaplain. Elated 
by the success of the expedient which had restored him to 
royal favour, he asked the king, “Sire, do you wish for 
victory or defeat?” “Why for victory, of course,” replied 
the king. “Then you take my advice,” said the chaplain ; 
“just go and spit on the head of Il] Luck, who dwells in the 

1 Compare Zhe Dying God, pp. 116 sg. 


Indian 
story of the 
transfer- 
ence of 
sins toa 
holy man. 


Transfer- 
ence of 
evils to 
human 
scapegoats 
in Uganda. 


42 THE TRANSFERENCE OF EVIL CHAP. — 


royal park ; you will thus transfer all your sin to his person.” 

It seemed to the king a capital idea and he improved on it 
by proposing that the whole army should accompany him 
and get rid of their sins in like manner. They all did so, 
beginning with the king, and the state of the holy man’s 
head when they had all done is something frightful to con- 
template. But even this was not the worst. For after the 
king had gone, up came the commander-in-chief and seeing 
the sad plight of the pious ascetic, he took pity on him and 
had his poor bedabbled hair thoroughly washed. The fatal 
consequences of this kindly-meant but most injudicious 
shampoo may easily be anticipated. The sins which had 


been transferred with the saliva to the person of the devotee 


were now restored to their respective owners ; and to punish 
them for their guilt fire fell from heaven and destroyed the 
whole kingdom for sixty leagues round about." 

A less harmless way of relieving an army from guilt or 
misfortune used in former times to be actually practised by 
the Baganda. When an army had returned from war, and 
the gods warned the king by their oracles that some evil 
had attached itself to the soldiers, it was customary to pick 
out a woman slave from the captives, together with a cow, 
a goat, a fowl, and a dog from the booty, and to send them 
back under a strong guard to the borders of the country 
from which they had come. There their limbs were broken 
and they were left to die; for they were too crippled to 
crawl back to Uganda. In order to ensure the transference 
of the evil to these substitutes, bunches of grass were rubbed 
over the people and cattle and then tied to the victims. 
After that the army was pronounced clean and was allowed 
to return to the capital. A similar mode of transferring 
evil to human and animal victims was practised by the 
Baganda whenever the gods warned the king that his 
hereditary foes the Banyoro were working magic against 
him and his people.” 

In Travancore, when a rajah is near his end, they seek 
out a holy Brahman, who consents to take upon himself the 


1 The Jataka or Stories of the 1905), pp. 71 sg. 
Buddha's former Births, vol. v., trans- 2 Rev. J. Roscoe, Zhe Baganda 
lated by H. T. Francis (Cambridge, (London, 1911), p. 342. 


 f 


I THE TRANSFERENCE TO MEN 43 


sins of the dying man in consideration of the sum of ten 
thousand rupees. Thus prepared to immolate himself on the 
altar of duty as a vicarious sacrifice for sin, the saint is intro- 
duced into the chamber of death, and closely embraces the 
dying rajah, saying to him, “O King, I undertake to bear 
all your sins and diseases. May your Highness live long 
and reign happily.” Having thus, with a noble devotion, 
taken to himself the sins of the sufferer, and likewise the 
rupees, he is sent away from the country and never more 
allowed to return.’ Closely akin to this is the old Welsh 
custom known as “sin-eating.” According to Aubrey, “In 
the County of Hereford was an old Custome at funeralls to 
hire poor people, who were to take upon them all the sinnes 
of the party deceased. One of them I remember lived in a 
cottage on Rosse-high way. (He was a long, leane, ugly, 
lamentable poor raskal.) The manner was that when the 
Corps was brought out of the house and layd on the Biere ; 
a Loafe of bread was brought out, and delivered to the 
Sinne-eater over the corps, as also a Mazar-bowle of maple 
(Gossips bowle) full of beer, which he was to drinke up, and 
sixpence in money, in consideration whereof he took upon 
him (ipso facto) all the Sinnes of the Defunct, and freed him 
(or her) from walking after they were dead... . This 
Custome (though rarely used in our dayes) yet by some 
people was observed even in the strictest time of ye Presby- 
terian government: as at Dynder, volens nolens the Parson 
of ye Parish, the kinred of a woman deceased there had this 
ceremonie punctually performed according to her Will: and 
also the like was donne at ye City of Hereford in these times, 
when a woman kept many yeares before her death a Mazard- 
bowle for the Sinne-eater ; and the like in other places in 
this Countie ; as also in Brecon, e.g. at Llangors, where Mr. 
Gwin the minister about 1640 could no hinder ye performing 
of this ancient custome. I believe this custom was hereto- 
fore used over all Wales. . . . In North Wales the Sinne- 
eaters are frequently made use of; but there, instead of a 
Bowle of Beere, they have a bowle of Milke.”? According 


1 Rev. S. Mateer, JVatzve Life 2 J. Aubrey, Remaznes of Gentilisme 
in Travancore (London, 1883), p. and_/Judaisme (Folk-lore Society, Lon- 
136. don, 1881), pp. 35 sg. 


Transfer- 
ence of 
sins toa 
Brahman 
in Travan- 
core. 


Transfer- 
ence of 
sins toa 
Sin-eater in 
England. 


Transfer- 
ence of 
sins toa 
sin-eater 
in India. 


THE TRANSFERENCE OF EVIL CHAP. | 


44 


. 
o 


> a 


to a letter dated February I, 1714-15, “within the memory 
of our fathers, in Shropshire, in those villages adjoyning to 
Wales, when a person dyed, there was notice given to an 


old sire (for so they called him), who presently repaired © 


to the place where the deceased lay, and stood before the 
door of the house, when some of the family came out and 


furnished him with a cricket, on which he sat down facing | 


the door. Then they gave him a groat, which he put in his 


pocket ; a crust of bread, which he eat; and a full bowle of © 
After this he got up | 


ale, which he drank off at a draught. 
from the cricket and pronounced, with a composed gesture, 
the ease and rest of the soul departed for which he would 
pawn his own soul. This I had from the ingenious John 
Aubrey, Esq.”* In modern times some doubt has been 
thrown on Aubrey’s account of the custom.? The practice, 
however, is reported to have prevailed in a valley not far 
from Llandebie to a recent period. 
to have occurred about sixty years ago.° 

Aubrey’s statement is moreover supported by the analogy 
of similar customs in India. When the Rajah of Tanjore 
died in 1801, some of his bones and the bones of the two 
wives, who were burned with his corpse, were ground to 
powder and eaten, mixed with boiled rice, by twelve 
Brahmans. It was believed that the sins of the deceased 
passed into the bodies of the Brahmans, who were paid for 
the service.* A Brahman, resident in a village near Raipur, 
stated that he had eaten food (rice and milk) out of the hand 
of the dead Rajah of Bilaspur, and that in consequence he 
had been placed on the throne for the space of a year. At 


1 Bagford’s letter in Leland’s Collec- 330. But Mr. Moggridge did not 


tanea, i. 76, quoted by J. Brand, 
Popular Antiquities, ii. 246 sg., Bohn’s 
edition (London, 1882-1883). 

2 In The Academy, 13th Nov. 1875, 
p- 505, Mr. D. Silvan Evans stated 
that he knew of no such custom any- 
where in Wales ; and the custom seems 
to be now quite unknown in Shrop- 
shire. See C. S. Burne and G. F. 
Jackson, Shropshire Folk-lore (London, 
1883), pp. 307 sg. 

3 The authority for the statement is 
a Mr. Moggridge, reported in Archaeo- 
logia Cambremsts, second series, iii. 


speak from personal knowledge, and as 
he appears to have taken it for granted 
that the practice of placing bread and 
salt upon the breast of a corpse was a 
survival of the custom of ‘‘sin-eating,” 
his evidence must be received with 
caution. He repeated his statement, in 
somewhat vaguer terms, at a meeting 
of the Anthropological Institute, 14th 
December 1875. See Journal of the 
Anthropological Institute, v. (1876) 
PP. 423 59. 

4 J. A. Dubois, Meurs des Peuples de 
? Inde (Paris, 1825), li. 32 sg. 


c 


An instance was said — 


I THE TRANSFERENCE TO MEN 45 


the end of the year he had been given presents and then 
turned out of the territory and forbidden apparently to 
return. He was an outcast among his fellows for having 
eaten out of a dead man’s hand.’ A similar custom is 
believed to obtain in the hill states about Kangra, and 
to have given rise to a caste of “outcaste” Brahmans. At 
the funeral of a Rani of Chamba rice and ghee were eaten out 
of the hands of the corpse by a Brahman paid for the purpose. 
Afterwards a stranger, who had been caught outside the 
Chamba territory, was given the costly wrappings of the 
corpse, then told to depart and never shew his face in the 
country again.” In Oude when an infant was killed it used 
to be buried in the room where it had been born. On the 
thirteenth day afterwards the priest had to cook and eat his 
food in that room. By doing so he was supposed to take 
the whole sin upon himself and to cleanse the family from 
it? At Utch Kurgan in Turkestan Mr. Schuyler saw an old 
man who was said to get his living by taking on himself the 
sins of the dead, and thenceforth devoting his life to prayer 
for their souls.‘ 

In Tahiti, where the bodies of chiefs and persons of rank 
were embalmed and preserved above ground in special sheds 
or houses erected for them, a priest was employed at the 
funeral rites who bore the title of the “ corpse-praying 
priest.” His office was singular. When the house for the 
dead had been prepared, and the corpse placed on the plat- 
form or bier, the priest ordered a hole to be made in the 
floor, near the foot of the platform. Over this he prayed to 
the god by whom it was supposed that the soul of the 


deceased had been called away. The purport of his prayer 


1 R. Richardson, in Panjab Notes 
and Queries, i. p. 86, § 674 (May, 
1884). 

2 Panjab Notes and Queries, i. p. 86, 
§ 674, ii. p. 93, § 559 (March, 1885). 
Some of these customs have been 
already referred to in a different con- 
nexion. See Zhe Dying God, p. 154. 
In Uganda the eldest son used to 
perform a funeral ceremony, which 
consisted in chewing some seeds which 
he took with his lips from the hand of 
his dead father; some of these seeds 


he then blew over the corpse and the 
rest over one of the childless widows 
who thereafter became his wife. The 
meaning of the ceremony is obscure. 
The eldest son in Uganda never in- 
herited his father’s property. See the 
Rev. J. Roscoe, Zhe Baganda (Lon- 
don sion) js paelaliy 

3 Panjab Notes and Queries, iii. p. 
179, § 745 (July, 1886). 


4 E. Schuyler, ZurZzstan (London, 
1876), li. 28. 


Transfer- 
ence of sins 
in Tahiti. 


46 THE TRANSFERENCE OF EVIL CHAP. | 


was that all the dead man’s sins, especially the one for which © 
his soul had been required of him, might be deposited there, 
that they might not attach in any degree to the survivors, 
and that the anger of the god might be appeased. He next 
addressed the corpse, usually saying, “ With you let the guilt 
now remain.” The pillar or post of the corpse, as it was 
called, was then planted in the hole, and the hole filled up. 
As soon as the ceremony of depositing the sins in the hole 
was over, all who had touched the body or the garments of 
the deceased, which were buried or destroyed, fled precipi- 
tately into the sea, to cleanse themselves from the pollution 
which they had contracted by touching the corpse. They 
also cast into the sea the garments they had worn while they 
were performing the last offices to the dead. Having finished 
their ablutions, they gathered a few pieces of coral from the 
bottom of the sea, and returning with them to the house 
addressed the corpse, saying, “ With you may the pollution 
be.” So saying they threw down the coral on the top of 
the hole which had been dug to receive the sins and the 
defilement of the dead." In this instance the sins of the 
departed, as well as the pollution which the primitive mind 
commonly associates with death, are not borne by a living 
person, but buried in a hole. Yet the fundamental idea— 
that of the transference of sins—is the same in the Tahitian 
as in the Welsh and Indian customs; whether the vehicle 
or receptacle destined to catch and draw off the evil be a 
person, an animal, or a thing, is for the purpose in hand 
a matter of little moment.” 


1W. Ellis, Polynestan Researches, 
Second Edition (London, 1832-1836), 
i. 401 sqq. 


2 The Welsh custom of “ sin-eating ” 
has been interpreted by Mr. E. S. 
Hartland as a modification of an older 
custom of eating the corpse. See his 
article, ‘‘ The Sin-eater,” 7olk-lore, iii. 
(1892) 145-157; Zhe Legend of Per- 
Seus, ll. 291 sgg., ili. p. ix. I cannot 
think his interpretation probable or 
borne out by the evidence. The 
Badaga custom of transferring the sins 
of the dead to a calf which is then let 


loose and never used again (above, pp. 
36 sg.), the Tahitian custom of burying 


the sins of a person whose body is care- — 


fully preserved by being embalmed, and 


the Manipur and Travancore customs of ~~ 


transferring the sins of a Rajah before his 
death (pp. 39, 42 sg.) establish the 
practice of transferring sins in cases 
where there can be no question of eating 
the corpse. The original intention of 
such practices was perhaps not so much 
to take away the sins of the deceased 
as to rid the survivors of the dangerous 
pollution of death. This comes out to 
some extent in the Tahitian custom. 


I THE TRANSFERENCE OF EVIL IN EUROPE 47 


§ 5. Lhe Transference of Evil in Europe 


The examples of the transference of evil hitherto adduced 
have been mostly drawn from the customs of savage or 
barbarous peoples. But similar attempts to shift the burden 
of disease, misfortune, and sin from one’s self to another 
person, or to an animal or thing, have been common also 
among the civilized nations of Europe, both in ancient and 
modern times. A Roman cure for fever was to pare the 
patient’s nails, and stick the parings with wax on a neigh- 
bour’s door before sunrise; the fever then passed from the 
sick man to his neighbour.’ Similar devices must have been 
resorted to by the Greeks ; for in laying down laws for his 
ideal state, Plato thinks it too much to expect that men 
should not be alarmed at finding certain wax figures adhering 
to their doors or to the tombstones of their parents, or lying 
at cross-roads.”. Among the ruins of the great sanctuary of 
Aesculapius, which were excavated not very long ago in an 
open valley among the mountains of Epidaurus, inscriptions 
have been found recording the miraculous cures which the 
god of healing performed for his faithful worshippers. One 
of them tells how a certain Pandarus, a Thessalian, was freed 
from the letters which, as a former slave or prisoner of war, 
he bore tattooed or branded on his brow. He slept in the 
sanctuary with a fillet round his head, and in the morning 
he discovered to his joy that the marks of shame—the blue 
or scarlet letters—had been transferred from his brow to the 
fillet. By and by there came to the sanctuary a wicked 
man, also with brands or tattoo marks on his face, who had 
been charged by Pandarus to pay his debt of gratitude to 
the god, and had received the cash for the purpose. But the 
cunning fellow thought to cheat the god and keep the money 
all to himself. So when the god appeared to him in a 
dream and asked anxiously after the money, he boldly denied 
that he had it, and impudently prayed the god to remove the 
ugly marks from his own brazen brow. He was told to tie 
the fillet of Pandarus about his head, then to take it off, and 
look at his face in the water of the sacred well. He did so, 

1 Pliny, Wat. Hist. xxviii. 86. 2 Plato; Lacs, <b 2101 O35.8: 


Transfer- 
ence of 
evils in 
ancient 
Greece. 


The trans- 
ference of 
warts. 


48 THE TRANSFERENCE OF EVIL CHAP. 


and sure enough he saw on his forehead the marks of Pan- 
darus in addition to his own.’ In the fourth century of our 
era Marcellus of Bordeaux prescribed a cure for warts, which 
has still a great vogue among the superstitious in various 
parts of Europe. Doubtless it was an old traditional remedy 
in the fourth, and will long survive the expiry of the twen- 
tieth, century. You are to touch your warts with as many 
little stones as you have warts ; then wrap the stones in-an 
ivy leaf, and throw them away in a thoroughfare. Whoever 
picks them up will get the warts, and you will be rid of 
them.” A similar cure for warts, with such trifling variations 
as the substitution of peas or barley for pebbles, and a rag 
or a piece of paper for an ivy leaf, has been prescribed in 
modern times in Italy, France, Austria, England, and Scot- 
land. Another favourite way of passing on your warts to 
somebody else is to make as many knots in a string as you 
have warts ; then throw the string away or place it under a 
stone. 
will get the warts instead of you; sometimes to complete 
the transference it is thought necessary that he should undo 


Whoever treads on the stone or picks up the thread © 


the knots.* 


Or you need only place the knotted thread 


before sunrise in the spout of a pump; the next person who 


works the pump will be sure to get your warts.’ 


1 -E@nuepts dpxaodoyixy, 1883, col. 
213, 214; G. Dittenberger, Sy//oge [n- 
scriptionum Graecarum,* No. 802, lines 
48 sqq. (vol. ii. pp. 652 sg.). 

2 Marcellus, De medicamentis, Xxxiv. 
102. A similar cure is described by 
Pliny (Wat. Hist. xxii. 149); you are 
to touch the warts with chick-peas on 
the first day of the moon, wrap the 
peas in a cloth, and throw them away 
behind you. But Pliny does not say 
that the warts will be transferred to 
the person who picks up the peas. 
On this subject see further J. Hardy, 
‘“*Wart and Wen Cures,” Folk-lore 
Record, i. (1878) pp. 216-228. 

3 Z. Zanetti, La Medicina delle nostre 
donne (Citta di Castello, 1892), pp. 
224 sg.; J. B. Thiers, Zvazté des 
Superstitions (Paris, 1679), p. 3213 
B. Souché, Croyances, présages et tradt- 
tions diverses (Niort, 1880), p. 193 
J. W. Wolf, Geztrage sur deutschen 


Equally 


Mythologie (Gottingen, 1852-1857), i. 
248, § 576; Dr. R. F. Kaindl, ‘‘ Aus 
dem Volksglauben der Rutenen in 
Galizien,” Globus, lxiv. (1893) p. 93: 
J. Harland and T. T. Wilkinson, 
Lancashire Folk-lore (Manchester and 
London, 1882), p. 157; G. W. Black, 
Folk-medicine (London, 1883), p. 41; 
W. Gregor, Folk-lore of the North-East 
of Scotland (London, 1881), p. 493 
J. G. Campbell, Wztchcraft and Second 


Sight in the Highlands and Islands of — 


Scotland (Glasgow, 1902), pp. 94 sg. 

4 L. Strackerjan, Aderglaube und 
Sagen aus dem Herzogthum Oldenburg 
(Oldenburg, 1867), ii. 71, § 85; E. 
Monseur, Le Folklore Wallon (Brussels, 
N.D.), p. 29; H. Zahler, Die Krank- 
heit im Volksglauben des Simmenthals 
(Bern, 1898), p. 93; R. Andree, 
Braunschweiger Volkskunde (Bruns- 
wick, 1896), p. 306. 


5 A. Birlinger, Volksthiimliches aus 


I THE TRANSFERENCE OF EVIL IN EUROPE 49 


effective methods are to rub the troublesome excrescences 
with down or fat, or to bleed them on a rag, and then throw 
away the down, the fat, or the bloody rag. The person 
who picks up one or other of these things will be sure to 
release you from your warts by involuntarily transferring 
them to himself." People in the Orkney Islands will some- 
times wash a sick man, and then throw the water down at a 
gateway, in the belief that the sickness will leave the patient 
and be transferred to the first person who passes through 
the gate.” A Bavarian cure for fever is to write upon a 
piece of paper, “ Fever, stay away, I am not at home,” and 
to put the paper in somebody’s pocket. The latter then 
Batches the fever, and the patient is rid of it Or the 
sufferer may cure himself by sticking a twig of the elder- 
tree in the ground without speaking. The fever then ad- 
heres to the twig, and whoever pulls up the twig will catch 
the disease.* A Bohemian prescription for the same malady 
is this. Take an empty pot, go with it to a cross-road, 
throw it down, and run away. The first person who kicks 
against the pot will catch your fever, and you will be cured.® 
In Oldenburg they say that when a person lies sweating 
with fever, he should take a piece of money to himself in 
bed. The money is afterwards thrown away on the street, 
and whoever picks it up will catch the fever, but the original 
patient will be rid of it.® 

Often in Europe, as among savages, an attempt is made 
to transfer a pain or malady from a man to an animal. 
Grave writers of antiquity recommended that, if a man 
be stung by a scorpion, he should sit upon an ass with 
his face to the tail, or whisper in the animal’s ear, “A 
scorpion has stung me”; in either case, they thought, 
the pain would be transferred from the man to the 


Schwaben (Freiburg im Breisgau, 1861- mediztntscher Aberglaube in Bayern 


1862), i. 483. 

1 Thiers, Souché, Strackerjan, Mon- 
sevr, //.cc.; J. G. Campbell, Witch- 
craft and Second Sight in the Highlands 
and Islands of Scotland (Glasgow, 
1902), p. 95. 

2 Ch. Rogers, Soctal Life in Scot- 
land (Edinburgh, 1884-1886), iii. 226. 

3G. Lammert, Volksmedizin und 

Pr VI 


(Wiirzburg, 1869), p. 264. 

4 bid. p. 263. 

5 J. V. Grohmann, Aderelauben und 
Gebrauche aus Bohmen und Mihren 
(Prague and Leipsic, 1864), p. 167, 
§ 1180. 

6 L. Strackerjan, Aberglaube und 
Sagen aus dem Herzogthum Oldenburg 
(Oldenburg, 1867), i. 71, § 85. 

E 


Transfer- 
ence of 
sickness in 
Scotland, 
Germany, 
and 
Austria. 


Sickness 
transferred 
to asses, 
frogs, dogs, 
and other 
animals. 


50 THE TRANSFERENCE OF EVIL CHAP. | 


ass.| Many cures of this sort are recorded by Marcellus.) 
For example, he tells us that the following is a remedy for) 
toothache. Standing booted under the open sky on the’ 
ground, you catch a frog by the head, spit into its mouth, | 
ask it to carry away the ache, and then let it go. But the) 
ceremony must be performed on a lucky day and at a) 
lucky hour. In Cheshire the ailment known as aphtha or i 
thrush, which affects the mouth or throat of infants, is not | 
uncommonly treated in much the same manner. A young) 
frog is held for a few moments with its head inside the} 
mouth of the sufferer, whom it is supposed 2 relieve by} 
taking the malady to itself. “I assure you,” said an old} 
woman who had often superintended such a cure, “we used 
to hear the poor frog whooping and coughing, mortal bad, 
for days after ; it would have made your heart ache to hear 
the poor creature coughing as it did about the garden.” * 
Again Marcellus tells us that if the foam from a mule’s | 
mouth, mixed with warm water, be drunk by an asthmatic 
patient, he will at once recover, but the mule will die* An) 
ancient cure for the gripes, recorded both by Pliny and | 
Marcellus, was to put a live duck to the belly of the} 
sufferer ; the pains passed from the man into the bird, to 
which ey proved fatal. According to the same writers a | 
stomachic complaint of which the cause was unknown might 
be cured by applying a blind puppy to the suffering part 
for three days. The secret disorder thus passed into the | 
puppy ; it died, and a post-mortem examination of its little} 
body revealed the cause of the disease from which the man; 
had suffered and of which the dog had died. Once more, | 
Marcellus advises that when a man was afflicted with a_ 
disorder of the intestines the physician should catch a live 


hare, take the huckle-bone from one of its feet and the down 


1 Geoponica, xiii. 9, xv. 1; Pliny, 
Nat. Hest. xxvili. 155. The authori- 
ties for these cures are respectively 
Apuleius and Democritus. The latter 
is probably not the atomic philosopher. 
See J. G. Frazer, ‘‘ The Language of 
Animals,” Zhe Archeological Review, 
vol. i. (May, 1888) p. 180, note 2, 

2 Marcellus, De medicaments, xii. 
24. 

3 °W. G. Black, Folk-medicine (Lon- 


cellus, De medicamentis, xxvill. 132. 


don, 1883), pp. 35 sg. 
4 Marcellus, De medicamentis, xvii. 
18. } 
5 Pliny, Wat. Hist. xxx. 61; Mar- | 
cellus, De medicamentis, xxvil. 33. 
The latter writer mentions (of. cét. 
xxviii. 123) that the same malady 
might similarly be transferred to a — 
live frog. 
6 Pliny, Wat. Hist. xxx. 64; Mar- 


an THE TRANSFERENCE OF EVIL IN EUROPE 


away with you the intestine pain.” 


. 


51 


from the belly, then let the hare go, pronouncing as he did 
so the words, “Run away, run away, little hare, and take 
Further, the doctor was 
to fashion the down into thread, with which he was to tie 
the huckle-bone to the patient’s body, taking great care that 
the thread should not be touched by any woman.’ A North- 
amptonshire, Devonshire, and Welsh cure for a cough is to put 
a hair of the patient’s head between two slices of buttered 
bread and give the sandwich to a dog. The animal will 
thereupon catch the cough and the patient will lose it. 
Sometimes an ailment is transferred to an animal by sharing 
food with it. Thus in Oldenburg, if you are sick of a fever 
you set a bowl of sweet milk before a dog and say, “ Good 
luck, you hound! may you be sick and I be sound!” 
Then when the dog has lapped some of the milk, you take 
a swig at the bowl; and then the dog must lap again, and 
then you must swig again ; and when you and the deg have 
done it the third time, he will have the fever and you will be 
quit of it. A peasant woman in Abbehausen told her pastor 
that she suffered from fever for a whole year and found no 
relief. At last somebody advised her to give some of her 
food to a dog and a cat. She did so and the fever passed 
from her into the animals. But when she saw the poor sick 
beasts always before her, she wished it undone. Then the 
fever left the cat and the dog and returned to her.’ 

A Bohemian cure for fever is to go out into the forest 
before the sun is up and look for a snipe’s nest. When you 
have found it, take out one of the young birds and keep it 
beside you for three days. Then go back into the wood and 
Set the snipe free. The fever will leave you at once. The 
snipe has taken it away. Soin Vedic times the Hindoos of old 
sent consumption away with a blue jay. They said, “ O con- 
sumption, fly away, fly away with the blue jay! With the 
wild rush of the storm and the whirlwind, oh, vanish away !”* 


1 Marcellus, De medicamentis, xxix. 
35 

2, W. Henderson, Fo/k-lore of the 
Northern Counties (London, 1879), 
p- 143; W. G. Black, Folk-medicine, 
p- 35; Marie Trevelyan, Folk-lore and 
folk-stories of Wales (London, 1909), 
p. 226. 


3 L. Strackerjan, <Aderglaube und 
Sagen aus dem Herzogthum Oldenburg 
(Oldenburg, 1867), i. 72, § 86. 

4 J. V. Grohmann, Aéderglauben 
und Gebrauche aus Bihmen und 
Mahren (Prague and Leipsic, 1864), 
p- 166, § 1173, quoting Kuhn’s trans- 
lation of Azg-veda, x. 97. 13. A 


Sickness 
transferred 
to birds, 
snails, fish, 
and fowls. 


52 THE TRANSFERENCE OF EVIL 


CHAP. | 


In Oldenburg they sometimes hang up a goldfinch or | 
a turtle-dove in the room of a consumptive patient, | 
hoping that the bird may draw away the malady from | 
the sufferer to itself. A prescription for a cough in Sunder-— 
land is to shave the patient’s head and hang the hair } 
on a bush. When the birds carry the hair to their nests, 
they will carry the cough with it” In the Mark of} 
Brandenburg a cure for headache is to tie a thread thrice 
round your head and then hang it in a loop from a tree; | 
if a bird flies through the loop, it will take your head- § 
ache away with it® A Saxon remedy for rupture in a } 
child is to take a snail, thrust it at sunset into a hollow 
tree, and stop up the hole with clay. Then as the snail 
perishes the child recovers. But this cure must be accom- 
panied by the recitation of a proper form of words ; other- | 
wise it has no effect. A Bohemian remedy for jaundice | 
is as follows. Take a living tench, tie it to your bare] 
back and carry it about with you for a whole day. The | 
tench will turn quite yellow and die. Then throw it 
into running water, and your jaundice will depart with it?) 
In the village of Llandegla in Wales there is a church | 
dedicated to the virgin martyr St. Tecla, where the falling — 
sickness is, or used to be, cured by being transferred to 
a fowl. The patient first washed his limbs in a sacred well | 
. hard by, dropped fourpence into it as an offering, walked | 
thrice round the well, and thrice repeated the Lord’s prayer. 
Then the fowl, which was a cock or a hen according as the | 
patient was a man or a woman, was put into a basket and { 
carried round first the well and afterwards the church, | 


Next the sufferer entered the church and lay down under 


slightly different translation of the 
verse is given by H. Grassmann, who 
here follows R. Roth (Xig-veda tiber- 
Sel22,) Vly ll pen 3/79) Compare 
Hymns of the Rigveda, translated by 
R. T. H. Griffith (Benares, 1889- 
1892), iv. 312. 

Vibs Seeks, Oh Gs wh of 
§ 87. 
2 W. Henderson, Folk-lore of the 
Northern Counties (London, 1879), p. 


143. 


3 J. D. H. Temme, Die Volkssagen 
der Altmark (Berlin, 1839), p. 833 | 
A. Kuhn, Jlarkische Sagen und | 
Marchen (Berlin, 1843), p. 384, § 62. | 

4 R. Wuttke, Sdchszsche Volks- 
kunde* (Dresden, 1901), p. 372. j 

5 J. V. Grohmann, of. czt. p. 2305 } 
§ 1663. A similar remedy is pre- 
scribed in Bavaria. See G. Lammert, © 
Volksmedizin und medizinischer Aber- 
glaube in Bayern (Wiirzburg, 1869), 
p- 249. 


I THE TRANSFERENCE OF EVIL [N EUROPE 53 


the communion table till break of day. After that he 
offered sixpence and departed, leaving the fowl in the 
church. If the bird died, the sickness was supposed to 
have been transferred to it from the man or woman, who 
was now rid of the disorder. As late as 1855 the old 
parish clerk of the village remembered quite well to have 
seen the birds staggering about from the effects of the fits 
which had been transferred to them.’ In South Glamorgan 
and West Pembrokeshire it is thought possible to get rid of 
warts by means of a snail. You take a snail with a black 
shell, you rub it on each wart and say, 


“‘ Wart, wart, on the snails shell black, 
Go away soon, and never come back.” 


Then you put the snail on the branch of a tree or bramble 
and you nail it down with as many thorns as you have 
warts. When the snail has rotted away on the bough, your 
warts will have vanished. Another Welsh cure for warts is 
to impale a frog ona stick and then to rub the warts on the 
creature. The warts disappear as the frog expires.” In both 
these cases we may assume that the warts are transferred 
from the human sufferer to the suffering animal. 

Often the sufferer seeks to shift his burden of sickness or 
ill-luck to some inanimate object. In Athens there is a 
little chapel of St. John the Baptist built against an ancient 
column. Fever patients resort thither, and by attaching a 
waxed thread to the inner side of the column believe that 
they transfer the fever from themselves to the pillar? In 
the Mark of Brandenburg they say that if you suffer from 
giddiness you should strip yourself naked and run thrice 
round a flax-field after sunset ; in that way the flax will get 
the giddiness and you will be rid of it.* Sometimes an 
attempt is made to transfer the mischief, whatever it may be, 
to the moon. In Oldenburg a peasant related how he rid 
himself of a bony excrescence by stroking it thrice crosswise 
in the name of the Trinity, and then making a gesture as if 

1 J. Brand, Popular Antiquities, ii. pp. 229 sg. 
375; W. G. Black, Folk-medicine, p. 3B. Schmidt, Das Volksleben der 
46 Neugriechen (Leipsic, 1871), p. 82. 


2 Marie Trevelyan, (olk-lore and 4 A. Kuhn, Markische Sagen und 
Folk-stories of Wales (London, 1909),  A¢archen (Berlin, 1843), p. 386. 


Sickness 
and ill-luck 
transferred 
to inani- 
mate 
objects. 


Sickness 
and trouble 
transferred 
to trees 
and bushes, 


54 THE TRANSFERENCE OF EVIL CHAP, 


he were seizing the deformity and hurling it towards the 
moon. In the same part of Germany a cure for warts is to 
stand in the light of a waxing moon so that you cannot see 
your own shadow, then hold the disfigured hand towards 
the moon, and stroke it with the other hand in the direction 
of the luminary. Some say that in doing this you should 
pronounce these words, “ Moon, free me from these vermin.” ? 

But perhaps the thing most commonly employed in 
Europe as a receptacle for sickness and trouble of all 
sorts is a tree or bush. The modes of transferring the 
mischief to it are many. For example, the Esthonians 
say that you ought not to go out of the house on a 


spring morning before you have eaten or drunk; for if | 


you do, you may chance to hear one of “the sounds 
which are not heard in winter,” such as the song of a 
bird, and that would be unlucky. They think that if 
you thus let yourself be deceived or outwitted, as they 
call it, by a bird, you will be visited by all sorts of ill- 
luck during the year; indeed it may very well happen 
that you will fall sick and die before another spring 
comes round. However, there is a way of averting the 
evil. You have merely to embrace a tree or go thrice 
round it, biting into the bark each time or tearing away 
a strip of the bark with your teeth. Thus the bad luck 
passes from you to the tree, which accordingly withers 
away.” In Sicily it is believed that all kinds of marvellous 
cures can be effected on the night which precedes Ascension 
Day. For example, people who suffer from goitre bite 
the bark of a peach-tree just at the moment when the 
clocks are striking midnight. Thus the malady is trans- 
ferred to the sap of the tree, and its leaves wither away 


in exact proportion as the patient recovers. But in order 


that the cure may be successful it is absolutely essential 
that the bark should be bitten at midnight precisely ; a bite 
before or after that witching hour is labour thrown away.’ 
On St. George’s Day, South Slavonian lads and lasses 
1L. Strackerjan, <Aderglaube und (St. Petersburg, 1876), pp. 451 5g. 
Sagen aus dem Herzogthum Oldenburg 
(Oldenburg, 1867), i. 74, § 91. 3 Le Tour du Monde, \xvii. (1894) 
2 F. J. Wiedemann, Aus dem in- p. 308; za., Nouvelle Série, v. (1899) 
neren und aussern Leben der Ehsten pp. 521. 


| 


I THE TRANSFERENCE OF EVIL IN EUROPE 55 


_ climb thrice up and down a cornel-tree, saying, “ My lazi- 
ness and sleepiness to you, cornel-tree, but health and 
_ booty (?) to me.” Then as they wend homewards they 
turn once more towards the tree and call out, “Cornel- 
tree! cornel tree! I leave you my laziness and sleepiness.”! 
_ The same people attempt to cure fever by transferring it to 
a dwarf elder-bush. Having found such a bush with three 
shoots springing from the root, the patient grasps the 
points of the three shoots in his hand, bends them down 
to the ground, and fastens them there with a stone. 
Under the arch thus formed he creeps thrice; then he 
cuts off or digs up the three shoots, saying, “In three 
_ shoots I cut three sicknesses out. When these three shoots 
grow young again, may the fever come back.”? A Bulgarian 
cure for fever is to run thrice round a willow-tree at sun- 
rise, crying, “ The fever shall shake thee, and the sun shall 
warm me.”® In the Greek island of Karpathos the priest 
ties a red thread round the neck of a sick person. Next 
morning the friends of the patient remove the thread and 
go out to the hillside, where they tie the thread to a tree, 
thinking that they thus transfer the sickness to the tree.* 
Italians attempt to cure fever in like manner by fastening it 
to a tree. The sufferer ties a thread round his left wrist at 
night, and hangs the thread on a tree next morning. The 
fever is thus believed to be tied up to the tree, and the patient 
to be rid of it; but he must be careful not to pass by that 
tree again, otherwise the fever would break loose from its 
bonds and attack him afresh.° An old French remedy for 
fever was to bind the patient himself to a tree and leave him 
there for a time; some said that the ceremony should be 
performed fasting and early in the morning, that the cord or 
straw rope with which the person was bound to the tree 
should be left there to rot, and that the sufferer should bite 
the bark of the tree before returning home. In Bohemia 
the friends of a fever patient will sometimes carry him head 


1F. S. Krauss, Volksglaube und 4 Blackwood’s Magazine, February 
religioser Brauch der Stidslaven (Miin- 1886, p. 239. 


ster i. W., 1890), pp. 35 sg. 5 Z. Zanetti, La medicina delle nostre 
2 ¥. S. Krauss, of. czt. p. 39. donne (Citta di Castello, 1892), p. 73. 
3 A. Strausz, Dze Bulgaren (Leipsic, 6 J. B. Thiers, Zrazté des Supersti- 


1898), p. 400, compare p. 401. tions (Paris, 1679), pp. 323 sg. 


é 


Sickness 
transferred 
to trees by 
means of 
knots. 


56 THE TRANSFERENCE OF EVIL CHAP. | 


foremost, by means of straw ropes, to a bush, on which they © 
dump him down. Then he must jump up and run home. — 
The friends who carried him also flee, leaving the straw 
ropes and likewise the fever behind them on the bush.’ 
Sometimes the sickness is transferred to the tree by ~ 
making a knot in one of its boughs. Thus in Mecklenburg © 
a remedy for fever is to go before sunrise to a willow- 
tree and tie as many knots in one of its branches as 
the fever has lasted days; but going and coming you must 
be careful not to speak a word.” A Flemish cure for 
the ague is to go early in the morning to an old willow, tie 
three knots in one of its branches, say, “ Good-morrow, Old 
One, I give thee the cold; good-morrow, Old One,’ then 
turn and run away without looking round.? In Rhenish 
Bavaria the cure for gout is similar. The patient recites a 
spell or prayer while he stands at a willow-bush holding one 
of its boughs. When the mystic words have been spoken, 
he ties a knot in the bough and departs cured. But all his © 
life long he must never go near that willow-bush again, — 
or the gout will come back to him. In Sonnenberg, if you — 
would rid yourself of gout you should go to a young fir-tree ~ 
and tie a knot in one of its twigs, saying, “God greet thee, © 
noble fir. I bring thee my gout. Here will I tiea knot and — 
bind my gout into it. In the name,” etc.® Not far from ~ 
Marburg, at a place called Neuhof, there is a wood of 
birches. Thither on a morning before sunrise, in the last 
quarter of the moon, bands of gouty people may often 
be seen hobbling in silence. Each of them takes his stand 
before a separate tree and pronounces these solemn words: 
“ Here stand I before the judgment bar of God and tie up all 
my gout. All the disease in my body shall remain tied up 
in this birch-tree.” Meanwhile the good physician ties a 


1 J. V. Grohmann, Aéerglauben und 
Gebraiuche aus Bihmen und Mahren 
(Prague and Leipsic, 1864), p. 167, 
§ 1178. <A Belgian cure of the same 
sort is reported by J. W. Wolf (Bez- 
trage sur deutschen Mythologie (GOttin- 
gen, 1852-1857, i. 223 (wrongly 
numbered 219), § 256). 

2 L. Strackerjan, <Aderglaube und 
Sagen aus dem Herzogthum Oldenburg 


(Oldenburg, 1867), i. 74, § 90. 


3 J. Grimm, Deutsche Mythologie* — 
(Berlin, 1875-1878), ii. 979. 


4 Bavaria, Landes- und Volkskunde 
des Kinigreichs Bayern, iv. 2 (Munich, 
1867), p. 406. 


5 A. Schleicher, Volkstiimliches aus 
Sonnenberg (Weimar, 1858), p. 1505 
A. Witschel, Sager, Sztten und Ge- 
brauche aus Thiiringen (Vienna, 1878), 
p: 283, § 82. 


I THE TRANSFERENCE OF EVIL IN EUROPE 57 


knot in a birch-twig, repeating thrice, “In the name of the 
Father,” etc.’ 

Another way of transferring gout from a man to a tree 
is this. Pare the nails of the sufferer’s fingers and clip some 
hairs from his legs. Bore a hole in an oak, stuff the 
nails and hair in the hole, stop up the hole again, 
and smear it with cow’s dung. If, for three months there- 
after, the patient is free of gout, you may be sure the oak 
has it in his stead.” A German cure for toothache is to 
bore a hole in a tree and cram some of the sufferer’s hair 
into it In these cases, though no doubt the tree suffers 
the pangs of gout or toothache respectively, it does so 
with a sort of stoical equanimity, giving no outward and 
visible sign of the pains that rack it inwardly. It is not 
always so, however. The tree cannot invariably suppress 
every symptom of its suffering. It may hide its tooth- 
ache, but it cannot so easily hide its warts. In Cheshire 
if you would be rid of warts, you have only to rub them 
with a piece of bacon, cut a slit in the bark of an ash- 
tree, and slip the bacon under the bark. Soon the warts 
will disappear from your hand, only however to reappear 
in the shape of rough excrescences or knobs on the bark of 
the tree.* Again in Beauce and Perche, two provinces of 
France, fever may be transferred to a young aspen by insert- 
ing the parings of the patient’s nails in the tree and then 
plastering up the hole to prevent the fever from getting 
out. But the operation must be performed by night. 
How subject an aspen is to fever must be obvious to the 
meanest capacity from the trembling of its leaves in every 
breath of wind; nothing therefore can be easier or more 
natural than to transfer the malady, with its fits of shaking, 
to the tree. At Berkhampstead, in Hertfordshire, there used 
to be certain oak-trees which were long celebrated for the 
cure of ague. The transference of the malady to the tree 
was simple but painful. A lock of the sufferer’s hair was 


1 W. Kolbe, Hesszsche Volks-Sitten  Volksglauben des Simmenthals (Bern, 
und -Gebrauche” (Marburg, 1888), pp. 1898), p. 94. 


88 sg. 4 W. G. Black, Folk-medicine, p. 38. 
2C. Meyer, Der Aberglaube des 5 F, Chapiseau, Le Folk-lore de la 
Mittelalters (Bale, 1884), p. 104. Beauce et du Perche (Paris, 1902), i. 


3H. Zahler, Die Avankhectt tm 213. 


Sickness 
transferred 
to trees 
by means 
of the 
patient's 
hair or 
nails. 


Toothache, 
headache, 
and fevers 
plugged up 
in trees. 


58 THE TRANSFERENCE OF EVIL CHAP. 


pegged into an oak; then by a sudden wrench he left his 
hair and his ague behind him in the tree.’ 

It seems clear that, though you may stow away your 
pain or sickness in a tree, there is a considerable risk of its 
coming out again. To obviate this danger common prudence 
suggests that you should plug or bung up the hole as tight 
as you can. And this, as we should naturally expect, is 
often done. A German cure for toothache or headache is to 
wrap some of the sufferer’s cut hair and nails in paper, make 
a hole in the tree, stuff the parcel into it, and stop up the 
hole with a plug made from a tree which has been struck by 
lightning.” In Bohemia they say that, if you feel the fever 
coming on, you should pull out some of your hair, tear off a 
strip of a garment you are wearing, and bore a hole in 
a willow-tree. Having done so, you put the hair and 
the rag in the hole and stop it up with a wedge of hawthorn. 
Then go home without looking back, and if a voice calls to 
you, be sure not to answer. When you have complied with 
this prescription, the fever will cease.2 In Oldenburg a 
common remedy for fever is to bore a hole in a tree, breathe 
thrice into the hole, and then plug it up. Once a man who 
had thus shut up his fever in a tree was jeered at by a scep- 
tical acquaintance for his credulity. So he went secretly to, 
the tree and drew the stopper, and out came that fever and 
attacked the sceptic.* Sometimes they say that the tree 
into which you thus breathe your fever or ague should be a 
hollow willow, and that in going to the tree you should be 
careful not to utter a word, and not to cross water.? Again, 
we read of a man who suffered acute pains in his arm. So 
“they beat up red corals with oaken leaves, and having kept 
them on the part affected till suppuration, they did in the 
morning put this mixture into an hole bored with an auger in 
the root of an oak, respecting the east, and stop up this hole 
with a peg made of the same tree; from thenceforth the 
pain did altogether cease, and when they took out the 


1 W. G. Black, Folk-medicine, p.39. 165, § 1160. 


2 A. Wuttke, Der deutsche Volks- 4 L. Strackerjan, Aberglaube und 
aberglaube* (Berlin, 1869), p. 310,  Sagen aus dem Herzogthum Oldenburg, 
§ 490. li. 74 57., § 89. 


3 J. V. Grohmann, Aderglauben und 5 J. Grimm, Deztsche Mythologie,* 
Gebrauche aus Bohmen und Mahren, p. ii. 979. 


4 
{ 
| 


‘ 


I THE NAILING OF EVILS 59 


amulet immediately the torments returned sharper than 
before.”’ These facts seem to put it) beyond the reach of 
reasonable doubt that the pain or malady is actually in the 
tree and waiting to pop out, if only it gets the chance. 


§ 6. The Nazing of Evils 


Often the patient, without troubling to bore a hole in 
the tree, merely knocks a wedge, a peg, or a nail into it, 
believing that he thus pegs or nails the sickness or pain into 
the wood. Thusa Bohemian cure for fever is to go toa tree 
and hammer a wedge into it with the words “ There, I knock 
you in, that you may come no more out to me.”” A German 
way of getting rid of toothache is to go in silence before sun- 
rise to a tree, especially a willow-tree, make a slit in the 
bark on the north side of the tree, or on the side that looks 
towards the sunrise, cut out a splinter from the place thus 
laid bare, poke the splinter into the aching tooth till blood 
comes, then put back the splinter in the tree, fold down the 
bark over it, and tie a string round the trunk, that the 
splinter may grow into the trunk as before. As it does so, 
your pain will vanish ; but you must be careful not to go 
near the tree afterwards, or you will get the toothache again. 
And any one who pulls the splinter out will also get the 
toothache. He has in fact uncorked the toothache which 
was safely bottled up in the tree, and he must take the 
natural consequence of his rash act.? A simpler plan, 
practised in Persia as well as in France and Germany, is 
merely to scrape the aching tooth with a nail or a twig till 
it bleeds, and then hammer the nail or the twig into a tree. 
In the Vosges, in Voigtland, and probably elsewhere, it is 
believed that any person who should draw out such a nail 
or twig would get the toothache.* An old lime-tree at 


1T. J. Pettigrew, On Superstitions 
connected with the History and Practice 
of Medicine and Surgery (London, 
1844), p. 77; W. G. Black, Folk- 
medicine, p. 37. 

2 J. V. Grohmann, Adergliauben und 
Gebrauche aus Boihmen und Mahren, 
p- 167, § 1182. 

3 L. Strackerjan, Aderglaube und 


Sagen aus dem Herzogthum Oldenburg, 
i. 73, § 89; A. Wuttke, Der deutsche 
Volksaberglaube,” pp. 309 sg., § 490. 
4L. F. Sauvé, Le Folk-lore des 
Hlautes- Vosges (Paris, 1859), p. 40; 


A. Meyrac, Traditions, Coutumes, 
Légendes et Contes des Ardennes 
(Charleville, 1890), p. 174; A. 


Schleicher, Volkstiimliches aus Sonnen- 


Sickness 
and pain 
pegged or 
nailed into 
trees. 


Ghosts 
and gods 
bunged up 
in India. 


{ 


THE TRANSFERENCE OF EVIL CHAP. 


60 


Evessen, in Brunswick, is studded with nails of various 
shapes, including screw-nails, which have been driven into it 
by persons who suffered from aching teeth. In the Mark 
of Brandenburg they say that the ceremony should be per- 
formed when the moon is on the wane, and that the bloody 
nail should be knocked, without a word being spoken, into 
the north side of an oak-tree, where the sun cannot shine 
on it; after that the person will have no more toothache so 
long as the tree remains standing.” Here it is plainly 
implied that the toothache is bottled up in the tree. If 
further proof were needed that in such cases the malady 
is actually transferred to the tree and stowed away in its 
trunk, it would be afforded by the belief that if the tree is 
cut down the toothache will return to the original sufferer.’ 
Rupture as well as toothache can be nailed to an oak. For 
that purpose all that need be done is to take a coffin-nail 
and touch with it the injured part of the patient; then set 
the sufferer barefoot before an oak-tree, and knock the nail 
into the trunk above his head. That transfers the rupture — 
to the tree, and that is why you may often see the boles of © 
ancient oaks studded with nails.‘ 

Such remedies are not confined to Europe. At Bilda 
in Algeria, there is a sacred old olive-tree, in which 
pilgrims, especially women, knock nails for the purpose 
of ridding themselves of their ailments and troubles.’ 
Again, the Majhwars, a Dravidian tribe in the hill country 
of South Mirzapur, believe that all disease is due to 
ghosts, but that ghosts, when they become troublesome, can 
be shut up in a certain tree, which grows on a little 
islet in a very deep pool of the Sukandar, a tributary 
of the Kanhar river. Accordingly, when the country is 
infested by ghosts, in other words when disease is raging, a 


berg (Weimer, 1858), p. 149; J. A. E. 
Kohler, Volksbrauch, <Aberglauben, 
Sagen und andre alte Ueberlieferungen 
wm Votgtlande (Leipsic, 1867), p. 414 5 
A. Witzschel, Sage, Sitten und Ge- 
briuche aus Thiiringen (Vienna, 1878), 
p- 283, § 79; H. Zahler, Die Krank- 
heit im Volksglauben des Simmenthals 
(Bern, 1898), p. 93. 

1 R. Andree, Braunschweiger Volks- 


kunde (Brunswick, 1896), p. 307. 

2 A. Kuhn, MWarkische Sagen und 
Marchen (Berlin, 1843), p. 384, § 66. 

3 H. Zahler, Joc. czt. 

4 P. Wagler, Die Eiche in alter und 
neuer Zert, 1. (Wurzen, N.D.) p. 23. 

5 E. Doutté, Mage et Religion dans 
Afrique du Nord (Algiers, 1908), 
Pp. 4306. 


I THE NAILING OF EVILS 61 


skilful wizard seeks for a piece of deer-horn in the jungle. 
When he has found it, he hammers it with a stone into the 


| tree and thus shuts up the ghost. The tree is covered with 


hundreds of such pieces of horn.’ Again, when a new 
settlement is being made in some parts of the North-Western 
Provinces of India, it is deemed necessary to apprehend and 
lay by the heels the local deities, who might otherwise do 
a deal of mischief to the intruders on their domain. A 
sorcerer is called in to do the business. For days he 
marches about the place mustering the gods to the tuck of 
drum. When they are all assembled, two men known as 
the Earthman and the Leafman, who represent the gods of 
the earth and of the trees respectively, become full of the 
spirit, being taken possession of bodily by the local deities. 
In this exalted state they shout and caper about in a fine 
frenzy, and their seemingly disjointed ejaculations, which 
are really the divine voice speaking through them, are 
interpreted by the sorcerer. When the critical moment has 
come, the wizard rushes in between the two incarnations of 
divinity, clutches at the spirits which are hovering about 
them in the air, and pours grains of sesame through their 
hands into a perforated piece of the wood of the sacred fig-tree. 
Then without a moment’s delay he plasters up the hole with 
a mixture of clay and cow-dung, and carefully buries the 
piece of wood on the spot which is to be the shrine of the 
local deities. Needless to say that the gods themselves are 
bunged up in the wood and are quite incapable of doing 
further mischief, provided always that the usual offerings are 
made to them at the shrine where they live in durance vile.’ 
In this case the source of mischief is imprisoned, not in a 
tree, but in a piece of one; but the principle is clearly the 
same. Similarly in Corea an English lady observed at a 
cross-road a small log with several holes like those of a 
mouse-trap, one of which was plugged up doubly with bungs 
of wood. She was told that a demon, whose ravages spread 


1 W. Crooke, The Tribes and Castes E. Thurston, Ethnographic Notes in 
of the North-Western Provinces and Southern India (Madras, 1906), pp. 
Oud (Calcutta, 1806), i. 436 s7.3 313, 331- 
compare 7z@., Popular Religion and 2 W. Crooke, Popular Religion and 
fFolk-lore of Northern India (West- Folk-lore of Northern India (West- 
minster, 1896), i. 43, 162. Compare minster, 1896), i. 102 sg. 


Demon 
plugged up 
and ghost 
nailed 
down. 


Evils 
nailed into 
stones, 
walls, 
door-posts, 
and so on. 


62 THE TRANSFERENCE OF EVIL CHAP. 


sickness in a family, had been inveigled by a sorceress into © 
that hole and securely bunged up. It was thought proper 
for all passers-by to step over the incarcerated devil, whether 
to express their scorn and abhorrence of him, or more 
probably as a means of keeping him forcibly down.’ In 
Cochinchina a troublesome ghost can be confined to the 
grave by the simple process of knocking a nail or thrusting 
a bar of iron into the earth at the point where the head of 
the corpse may be presumed to repose.” 

From knocking the mischief into a tree or a log it is 
only a step to knocking it into a stone, a door-post, a wall, 
or such like. At the head of Glen Mor, near Port Charlotte, 
in Islay, there may be seen a large boulder, and it is said 
that whoever drives a nail into this stone will thereafter be 
secure from attacks of toothache. A farmer in Islay told an 
enquirer some years ago how a passing stranger once cured 
his grandmother of toothache by driving a horse-nail into 
the lintel of the kitchen door, warning her at the same time 
to keep the nail there, and if it should come loose just to 
tap it with a hammer till it had a grip again. She had no 
more toothache for the rest of her life.® In Brunswick it is 
open to any one to nail his toothache either into a wall or 
into a tree, as he thinks fit; the pain is cured quite as well 
in the one way asin the other. So in Beauce and Perche 
a healer has been known to place a new nail on the aching 
tooth of a sufferer and then knock the nail into a door, a 
beam, or a joist.2. The procedure in North Africa is similar. 
You write certain Arabic letters and numbers on the wall ; 
then, while the patient puts a finger on the aching tooth, 
you knock a nail, with a light tap of a hammer, into the 
first letter on the wall, reciting a verse of the Coran as you 


do so. Next you ask the sufferer whether the pain is now | 


abated, and if he says “ Yes” you draw out the nail entirely. 
But if he says “ No,” you shift the nail to the next letter in 
the wall, and so on, till the pain goes away, which it always 


1 Mrs. Bishop, Korea and her Folk-lore, vi. (1895) p. 158. 


Neighbours (London, 1898), il. 143 sg. 4 R. Andree, Braunschwetger Volks- 
2 Pp. Giran, Mage et Religion kunde (Brunswick, 1896), p. 307. 
Annamites (Paris, 1912), pp. 132 sg. 5 F. Chapiseau, Ze Folk-lore de la 


3 R. C. Maclagan, ‘‘ Notes on folk- Beauce et du Perche (Paris, 1902), i. 
lore Objects collected in Argyleshire,” 170. 


I THE NAILING OF EVILS 63 


does, sooner or later." A Bohemian who fears he is about 
to have an attack of fever will snatch up the first thing that 
comes to hand and nail it to the wall. That keeps the 
fever from him.’ 

As in Europe we nail toothache or fever to a wall, so 
in Morocco they nail devils. A house in Mogador having 
been infested with devils, who threw stones about it in 
a way that made life a burden to the inmates, a holy man 
was called in to exorcise them, which he did effectually 
by pronouncing an incantation and driving a nail into the 
wall; at every stroke of the hammer a hissing sound 
announced that another devil had received his quietus.’ 
Among the modern Arabs the soul of a murdered man must 
be nailed down. Thus if a man be murdered in Egypt, his 
ghost will rise from the ground where his blood was shed : 
but it can be prevented from doing so by driving a new nail, 
which has never been used, into the earth at the spot where 
the murder was committed. In Tripoli the practice is 
similar. Some years ago a native was murdered close to 
the door of a little Italian inn. Immediately the Arabs of 
the neighbourhood thronged thither and effectually laid the 
ghost with hammer and nail. When the innkeeper rashly 
attempted to remove the nail, he was warned that to do so 
would be to set the ghost free.* In modern Egypt numbers 
of people afflicted with headache used to knock a nail into 
the great wooden door of the old south gate of Cairo, for the 
purpose of charming away the pain; others who suffered 
from toothache used to extract a tooth and insert it in a 
crevice of the door, or fix it in some other way, in order to 
be rid of toothache for the future. A holy and miraculous 
personage, invisible to mortal eyes, was supposed to have 


1 E. Doutté, Wagie et Religion dans 
P Afrique du Nord (Algiers, 1908), pp. 
228 sq. 

2 J. V. Grohmann, Aderglauben und 
Gebriuche aus Bihmen und Mahren, 
pail, § 1172. 

3 A. Leared, Morocco and the Moors 
(London, 1876), pp. 275 599. 


4 R. C. Thompson, Semitic Magic 
(London, 1908), p. 17. It would seem 


that in Macedonia demons and ghosts 
can be hammered into walls. See G. 
F. Abbott, AZacedonian Folklore (Cam- 
bridge, 1903), p. 221. In Chittagong, 
as soon as a coffin has been carried out 
of the house, a nail is knocked into the 
threshold ‘‘to prevent death from 
entering the dwelling, at least for a 
fime-s7)) See) Dh: Bérengier, Sues 
funérailles a Chittagong,” Les Missions 
Catholigues, xiii. (1881) p. 504. 


Devils and 
ghosts 
nailed 
down in 
Morocco, 
Tunis, and 


Egypt. 


Headache 
nailed into 
a door or 
a wall. 


Plague 
pegged 
into a hole. 


Plague 
nailed 
down in 
ancient 
Rome. 


64 THE TRANSFERENCE OF EVIL CHAP. | 


one of his stations at this gate.’ In Mosul also a 
sheikh can cure headache by first laying his hands on the } 
sufferer’s head and then hammering a nail into a wall.? | 
Not far from Neuenkirchen, in Oldenburg, there is a farm- 
house to which, while the Thirty Years’ War was raging, 
the plague came lounging along from the neighbouring town | 
in the shape of a bluish vapour. Entering the house it 
popped into a hole in the door-post of one of the rooms. 
The farmer saw his chance, and quick as thought he seized | 
a peg and hammered it into the hole, so that the plague | 
could not possibly get out. After a time, however, thinking | 
the danger was past, he drew out the peg. Alas! with the . 
peg came creeping and curling out of the hole the blue | 
vapour once more. The plague thus let loose seized on 
every member of the family in that unhappy house and left 
not one of them alive? Again, the great plague which devas- 
tated the ancient world in the reign of Marcus Antoninus is | 
said to have originated in the curiosity and greed of some | 
Roman soldiers, who, pillaging the city of Seleucia, came | 
upon a narrow hole in a temple and incautiously enlarged 
the opening in the expectation of discovering treasure. But 
that which came forth from the hole was not treasure but | 
the plague. It had been pent up in a secret chamber by | 
the magic art of the Chaldeans ; but now, released from its | 
prison by the rash act of the spoilers, it stalked abroad and .j 
spread death and destruction from the Euphrates to the | 
Nile and the Atlantic.’ 

The simple ceremony, in which to this day the super- 
stition of European peasants sees a sovereign remedy for | 
plague and fever and toothache, has come down to us from | 
a remote antiquity; for in days when as yet Paris and 
London were not, when France still revered the Druids as 
the masters of all knowledge, human and divine, and when | 
our own country was still covered with virgin forests, the | 
home of savage beasts and savage men, the same ceremony | 


1 FE. W. Lane, Manners and Customs Sagen aus dem Herzogthum Oldenburg, | 
of the Modern Egyptians (Paisley and ii. 120, § 428a. A similar story is | 
London, 1895), ch. x. p. 240. told of a house in Neuenburg (of. céd. | 

2 R. C. Thompson, Semitic Magic ii. 182, § 512c). 

(London, 1908), p. 18. 4 Ammianus Marcellinus, xxiii. 6. 

3-L. Strackerjan, Aderglaube und 24. 


ie 


was solemnly performed from time to time by the highest 
magistrate at Rome, to stay the ravages of pestilence or re- 
_ trieve disaster that threatened the foundations of the national 
life. In the fourth century before our era the city of Rome 
was desolated by a great plague which raged for three years, 
carrying off some of the highest dignitaries and a great 
multitude of common folk. The historian who records the 
calamity informs us that when a banquet had been offered 
_to the gods in vain, and neither human counsels nor divine 
help availed to mitigate the violence of the disease, it was 
‘resolved for the first time in Roman history to institute 
_dramatical performances as an appropriate means of ap- 
| peasing the wrath of the celestial powers. Accordingly 
actors were fetched from Etruria, who danced certain simple 
‘and decorous dances to the music of a flute. But even this 
novel spectacle failed to amuse or touch, to move to tears 
or laughter the sullen gods. The plague still raged, and at 
the very moment when the actors were playing their best in 
the circus beside the Tiber, the yellow river rose in angry 
flood and drove players and spectators, wading and splash- 
ing through the fast-deepening waters, away from the show. 
It was clear that the gods spurned plays as well as prayers 
and banquets ; and in the general consternation it was felt 
that some more effectual measure should be taken to put an 
end to the scourge. Old men remembered that a plague 
had once been stayed by the knocking of a nail into a wall ; 
and accordingly the Senate resolved that now in their ex- 
jtremity, when all other means had failed, a supreme magistrate 
should be appointed for the sole purpose of performing this 
solemn ceremony. The appointment was made, the nail was 
‘knocked, and the plague ceased, sooner or later.’ What 
‘better proof could be given of the saving virtue of a nail? 

Twice more within the same century the Roman people 
)had recourse to the same venerable ceremony as a cure for 
|} public calamities with which the ordinary remedies, civil and 
religious, seemed unable to cope. One of these occasions 
)was a pestilence ;” the other was a strange mortality among 


THE NAILING OF EVILS 65 


1 Livy, vii. 1-3. The plague raged in the text. 
#from 365 to 363 B.c., when it was 2 Livy, ix. 28. This happened in 
happily stayed in the manner described the year 313 B.C. 


Et. Vi F 


Pestilence 
and civil 
discord 
nailed into 
a wall in 
Rome. 


The annual 
ceremony 
ofknocking 
in a nail 

at Rome. 


66 THE TRANSFERENCE OF EVIL CHAP. 


the leading men, which public opinion traced, rightly or 
wrongly, to a series of nefarious crimes perpetrated by noble 
matrons, who took their husbands off by poison. The 
crimes, real or imaginary, were set down to frenzy, and 
nothing could be thought of so likely to minister to minds 
diseased as the knocking of a nail into a wall. Search 
among the annals of the city proved that in a season of civil 


discord, when the state had been rent by party feud, the ‘| 
same time-honoured remedy, the same soothing balm, had | 


been applied with the happiest results to the jarring interests 
and heated passions of the disputants. Accordingly the old 
nostrum was tried once more, and again success appeared to 
justify the experiment.’ 

If the Romans in the fourth century before Christ thus 
deemed it possible to rid themselves of pestilence, frenzy, 
and sedition by hammering them into a wall, even as French 
and German peasants still rid themselves of fever and tooth- 
ache by knocking them into a tree, their prudent ancestors 
appear to have determined that so salutary a measure should 
not be restricted in its scope to meeting special and urgent 
emergencies as they arose, but should regularly diffuse its 
benefits over the community by anticipating and, as it were, 
nipping in the bud evils which, left unchecked, might grow 
to dangerous proportions. This, we may conjecture, was 
the original intention of an ancient Roman law which 
ordained that the highest magistrate of the republic should 
knock in a nail every year on the thirteenth day of Sep- 
tember. The law might be seen, couched in old-fashioned 
language, engraved on a tablet which was fastened to a wall 
of the temple of Capitoline Jupiter ; and although the place 
where the nails were driven in is nowhere definitely stated 
by classical writers, there are some grounds for thinking that 
it may have been the same wall on which the law that 
sanctioned the custom was exhibited. Livy tells us that the 
duty of affixing the nail, at one time discharged by the 
consuls, was afterwards committed to dictators, whose higher 
rank consorted better with the dignity and importance of the 
function. Ata later time the custom fell into abeyance, and 
the ancient ceremony was revived only from time to time in 


1 Livy, viii. 18. These events took place in 331 B.C. 


2 


I THE NAILING OF EVILS 67 


seasons of grave peril or extraordinary calamity, which 
} seemed to attest the displeasure of the gods at modern ways, 
and disposed men to bethink them of ancestral lore and to 
walk in the old paths.’ 

In antiquity the annual practice of hammering a nail 
into a wall was not confined to Rome. It was observed also 
at Vulsinii, in Etruria, where the nails thus fixed in the 
“temple of the goddess Nortia served as a convenient means 
of recording and numbering the years.” To Roman anti- 
quaries of a later period it seemed, naturally enough, that 
such a practice had indeed no other object than that of 
marking the flight of time in ages when writing was but 
little used. Yet a little reflection will probably convince us 
“that this, though it was doubtless a useful consequence of the 
custom, can hardly have been its original intention. For it 
will scarcely be disputed that the annual observance of the 
custom cannot be wholly dissociated from its occasional 
observance in seasons of great danger or calamity, and that 
whatever explanation we give of the one ought to apply to 
“the other also. Now it is plain that if we start from the 
annual observance and regard it as no more than a time- 
keeper or mode of recording the years, we shall never reach 
an adequate explanation of the occasional observance. If 
the nails were merely ready reckoners of the years, how 
could they come to be used as supreme remedies for pesti- 


+ 


Dio Cassius, lv. 10, #Ady re abr@ vd 


rs 


1 Livy, vii. 3. Livy says nothing 


Pas to the place where the nails were 
affixed; but from Festus (p. 56 ed. 
C. O. Miiller) we learn that it was the 
wall of a temple, and as the date of the 
ceremony was also the date of the dedi- 
cation of the temple of Jupiter on the 

» Capitol (Plutarch, Publicola, 14), we 
may fairly conjecture that this temple 
was the scene of the rite. It is the 
more necessary to call attention to the 
uncertainty which exists on this point 
because modern writers, perhaps mis- 
understanding the words of Livy, have 
commonly stated as a fact what is at 

Va only a more or less probable 
hypothesis. Octavian seems to have 
provided for the knocking of a nail 
sinto the temple of Mars by men who 
had held the office of censor. See 


TOV TLULNTEVTAVYTWY TpooTHyvucOa. 

2 Livy, vii. 3. Festus speaks (p. 56 
ed. C. O. Miiller) of ‘‘ the annual nail, 
which was fixed in the walls of temples 
for the purpose of numbering the 
years,” as if the practice were common, 
From Cicero’s passing reference to the 
custom (‘‘ 2x hoc die clavum anni 
movebts,” Epist. ad Atticum, v. 15. 1) 
we see that it was matter of notoriety. 
Hence we may safely reject Momm- 
sen’s theory, which Mr. W. Warde 
Fowler is disposed to accept (Zhe 
Roman Festivals of the period of the 
Republic, London, 1899, pp. 234 5¢.), 
that the supposed annual custom never 
existed except in the brains of Roman 
Dryasdusts. 

3 See Livy and Festus, //.cc. 


The cere- 
mony was 
probably 

a purifi- 
catory rite 
designed 
to disarm 
and disable 
all evils 
that might 
threaten 
the Roman 
state in the 
course of 
the year. 


Roman 
cure for 


epilepsy. 


68 THE TRANSFERENCE OF EVIL CHAP. | 


desperate emergencies when all the ordinary resources of 
policy and religion had failed? On the other hand, if we 
start from the occasional observance and view it, in accord- };, 
ance with modern analogies, as a rude attempt to dispose of 
intangible evils as if they were things that could be handled 
and put away out of sight, we can readily understand how | 
such an attempt, from being made occasionally, might come 
to be repeated annually for the sake of wiping out all 
the old troubles and misfortunes of the past year and 
enabling the community to start afresh, unencumbered by 
a fardel of ills, at the beginning of a new year. Fortunately 
we can shew that the analogy which is thus assumed to 
exist between the Roman custom and modern superstition is 
not a merely fanciful one; in other words, it can be proved | 
that the Romans, like modern clowns, did believe in the 
possibility of nailing down trouble, in a literal and physical 
sense, into a material substance. Pliny tells us that an — 
alleged cure for epilepsy, or the falling sickness, was to drive | 
an iron nail into the ground on the spot which was first 
struck by the patient’s head as he fell.’ In the light | 
of the modern instances which have come before us, we | 
can hardly doubt that the cure was supposed to consist 
in actually nailing the disease into the earth in such a 
way that it could not get up and attack the sufferer again. 
Precisely parallel is a Suffolk cure for ague. You must go 
by night alone to a cross-road, and just as the clock strikes 
the midnight hour you must turn yourself about thrice and 
drive a tenpenny nail up to the head into the ground. | 
Then walk away backwards from the spot before the clock | 
is done striking twelve, and you will miss the ague ; but the 
next person who passes over the nail will catch the malady 
in your stead.” _ Here it is plainly assumed that the ague of 


1 Pliny, Wat. Hist. xxviii. 63. and a lock of his hair. See (Sir) | 

2 County Folk-lore, Suffolk, edited Arthur Mitchell, On varzous Superste- 
by Lady E. C. Gurdon (London,  ¢zons zx the North-West Highlands and 
1893), p- 14. In the north-west Jslands of Scotland (Edinburgh, 1862), 
Highlands of Scotland it used to be p. 26; J. G. Campbell, Witchcraft 
customary to bury a black cock alive and Second Sight in the Highlands ana 
on the spot where an epileptic patient  /s/ands of Scotland (Glasgow, 1902), 
fell down. Along with the cock were p. 97. Probably the disease was 4 
buried parings of the patient’s nails supposed to be buried with the cock 


I THE NAILING OF EVILS 69 


which the patient is relieved has been left by him nailed 
down into the earth at the cross-road,and we may fairly 
| suppose that a similar assumption underlay the Roman cure 
for epilepsy. Further, we seem to be now justified in hold- 
ing that originally, when a Roman dictator sought to stay a 
plague, to restore concord, or to terminate an epidemic 
of madness by knocking a nail into a wall, he was doing for 
the commonwealth exactly what any private man might do 
‘for an epileptic patient by knocking a nail into the ground 
on the spot where his poor friend had collapsed. In other 
‘words, he was hammering the plague, the discord, or the 
madness into a hole from which it could not get out to 
afflict the community again.’ 

Different in principle from the foregoing customs appears 
to be the Loango practice of sticking nails into wooden idols or 


Knocking 
nails into 


fetishes. The intention of knocking a nail into a worshipful eae 
image is said to be simply to attract the notice of the deity fe ana: 
in a forcible manner to the request of his worshipper ; it is like tion of the 
pinching a man or running a pin into his leg asa hint that you oe 


desire to speak with him. Hence in order to be quite sure of 
riveting the god’s attention the nails are sometimes made 
red-hot.2,_ Even the most absent-minded deity could hardly 
overlook a petition urged in so importunate a fashion. The 
practice is resorted to in many emergencies. For example, 
when a man has been robbed, he will go and get a priest to 


in the ground. The ancient Hindoos 296sg.; zd. Part ii. (Oxford, 1892) pp. 


imagined that epilepsy was caused by 
a dog-demon. When a boy fell down 
in a fit, his father or other competent 
person used to wrap the sufferer in a 
net, and carry him into the hall, not 
through the door, but through an 
opening made for the purpose in the 
roof. Then taking up some earth in 
the middle of the hall, at the place 
where people gambled, he sprinkled 
the spot with water, cast dice on it, 
and laid the boy on his back on the 
dice. After that he prayed to the 
dog-demon, saying, ‘‘ Doggy, let him 
loose! Reverence be to thee, barker, 
bender! Doggy, let him loose! Rever- 
ence be to thee, barker, bender!” See 
The Grihya Sutras, translated by H. 
Oldenberg, Part i. (Oxford, 1886) pp. 


219 sg., 286 sg. (Sacred Books of the 
Last, vols. xxix. and xxx.). Apparently 
the place where people gambled was 
for some reason supposed to be a spot 
where an epileptic could divest himself 
most readily of his malady. But the 
connexion of thought is obscure. 

1 The analogy of the Roman custom 
to modern superstitious practices has 
been rightly pointed out by Mr. E. S. 
Hartland (folk-lore, iv. (1893) pp. 
457,464; Legend of Perseus, ii. 188), 
but I am unable to accept his general 
explanation of these and some other 
practices as modes of communion with 
a divinity. 

2 A. Bastian, De deutsche Expedt- 
tzon an der Loango- Kziste (Jena, 1874— 
1875), ii. 176. 


70 THE TRANSFERENCE OF EVIL CHAP. 


knock a nail into an idol. The sharp pang naturally exas- 
perates the deity and he seeks to wreak his wrath on the! 
thief, who is the real occasion of his suffering. So when the 
thief hears of what has been done, he brings back the stolen 
goods in fear and trembling. Similarly a nail may be ~ 
knocked into an idol for the purpose of making somebody | 
fall ill; and if a sick man fancies that his illness is due to 
an enemy who has played him this trick, he will send to the 
priest of the idol and pay him to remove the nail.’ This 
mode of refreshing the memory and stimulating the activity 
of a supernatural being is not confined to the negroes of 
Loango; it is practised also by French Catholics, as we 
learn from Sir John Rhys. “Some years ago,” he writes, 
“when I was on a visit at the late Ernest Renan’s house at 
Rosmapamon, near Perros-Guirec on the north coast of 
Brittany, our genial host took his friends one day to see some 
of the sights of that neighbourhood. Among other things 
which he showed us was a statue of St. Guirec standing at the 
head of an opencreek. It was of wood, and altogether a very 
rude work of art, if such it might be called ; but what attracted 
our attention most was the fact that it had innumerable pins 
stuck into it. Weasked M. Renan what the pins meant, 
and his explanation was exceedingly quaint. He said that 
when any young woman in the neighbourhood made up her 
mind that she should marry, she came there and asked the 
saint to provide her with a husband, and to do so without 
undue delay. She had every confidence in the willingness 
and ability of the saint to oblige her, but she was haunted by 
the fear that he might be otherwise engaged and forget her 
request. So she would stick pins into him, and thus goad 
him, as she fancied, to exert himself on her behalf. This is 


Back Black Man's Mind 


1 A. Bastian, of. cz. ii. 175-178. 
Compare Father Campana, ‘‘ Congo, 
Mission Catholique de Landana,” Zes 
Missions Catholiques, xxvii. (1895) p. 
93; Notes Analytigues sur les Collec- 
tions Ethnographiques du Musée du 
Congo, i. (Brussels, 1902—1906) pp. 
153, 246; B. H. Mullen, ‘‘ Fetishes 
from Landana, South-West Africa,” 
Man, v. (1905) pp. 102-104; R. E. 
Dennett, ‘‘ Bavili Notes,” Folk-lore, 
xvi. (1905) pp. 382 sgg.; z@., At the 


of the 
(London, 1906), pp. 85 sgg., 91 sgq. 
The Ethnological Museum at Berlin 
possesses a number of rude images 
from Loango and Congo, which are 
thickly studded with nails hammered 
into their bodies. The intention of 
the custom, as explained to me by Pro- 
fessor von Luschan, is to pain the 
fetish and so to refresh his memory, 
lest he should forget to do his duty. 


I THE NAILING OF EVILS 71 


why the saint’s statue was full of pins.”* Similarly in Japan 
sufferers from toothache sometimes stick needles into a 
willow-tree, “believing that the pain caused to the tree- 
spirit will force it to exercise its power to cure.”?” 

Thus it would seem that we must distinguish at least 
two uses of nails or pins in their application to spirits and 
spiritual influences. In one set of cases the nails act as 
corks or bungs to bottle up and imprison a troublesome 
spirit ; in the other set of cases they act as spurs or goads to 
refresh his memory and stimulate his activity. But so far 
as the evidence which I have cited allows us to judge, the 
use of nails as spiritual bungs appears to be commoner than 
their use as mental refreshers. 

1 Sir John Rhys, ‘Celtae and 2 Lafcadio Hearn, Glimpses of Un- 


Galli,” Proceedings of the British familiar Japan (London, 1894), il. 
Academy, ii. (1905-1906) pp. 114 sg. 598 sg., note. 


Two 
different 
spiritual 
applica- 
tions of 
nails or 
pins, 


Attempts 
to get rid 
of the accu- 
mulated 
sorrows 

of a whole 
people. 


Sorrows 
conceived 
of as the 
work of 
demons. 


CHAPTER Il 
THE OMNIPRESENCE OF DEMONS 


IN the foregoing chapter the primitive principle of the 
transference of ills to another person, animal, or thing was 
explained and illustrated. A consideration of the means 
taken, in accordance with this principle, to rid individuals of 
their troubles and distresses led us to believe that at Rome 
similar means had been adopted to free the whole com- 
munity, at a single blow of the hammer, from diverse evils 
that afflicted it. I now propose to shew that such attempts 
to dismiss at once the accumulated sorrows of a people are 
by no means rare or exceptional, but that on the contrary 
they have been made in many lands, and that from being 
occasional they tend to become periodic and annual. 

It needs some effort on our part to realise the frame of 
mind which prompts these attempts. Bred in a philosophy 
which strips nature of personality and reduces it to the 
unknown cause of an orderly series of impressions on our 
senses, we find it hard to put ourselves in the place of the 
savage, to whom the same impressions appear in the guise 
of spirits or the handiwork of spirits. For ages the army of 
spirits, once so near, has been receding further and further 
from us, banished by the magic wand of science from hearth 
and home, from ruined cell and ivied tower, from haunted 
glade and lonely mere, from the riven murky cloud that 
belches forth the lightning, and from those fairer clouds that 
pillow the silver moon or fret with flakes of burning red the 
golden eve. The spirits are gone even from their last 
stronghold in the sky, whose blue arch no longer passes, 
except with children, for the screen that hides from mortal 


72 


CHAP. II THE OMNIPRESENCE OF DEMONS 73 


eyes the glories of the celestial world. Only in poets’ 
dreams or impassioned flights of oratory is it given to 
catch a glimpse of the last flutter of the standards of 
the retreating host, to hear the beat of their invisible wings, 
the sound of their mocking laughter, or the swell of angel 
music dying away in the distance, Far otherwise is it with 
the savage. To his imagination the world still teems with 
those motley beings whom a more sober philosophy has 
discarded. Fairies and goblins, ghosts and demons, still 
hover about him both waking and sleeping. They dog his 
footsteps, dazzle his senses, enter into him, harass and 
deceive and torment him in a thousand freakish and mis- 
chievous ways. The mishaps that befall him, the losses he 
sustains, the pains he has to endure, he commonly sets 
down, if not to the magic of his enemies, to the spite or 
anger or caprice of the spirits. Their constant presence 
wearies him, their sleepless malignity exasperates him ; he 
longs with an unspeakable longing to be rid of them alto- 
gether, and from time to time, driven to bay, his patience 
utterly exhausted, he turns fiercely on his persecutors and 
makes a desperate effort to chase the whole pack of them 
from the land, to clear the air of their swarming multitudes, 
that he may breathe more freely and go on his way un- 
molested, at least for a time. Thus it comes about that the 
endeavour of primitive people to make a clean sweep of all 
their troubles generally takes the form of a grand hunting 
out and expulsion of devils or ghosts. They think that 
if they can only shake off these their accursed tormentors, 
they will make a fresh start in life, happy and innocent ; 
the tales of Eden and the old poetic golden age will come 
true again. 

Hence, before we review some examples of these spirit- 
hunts, it may be well to adduce evidence of the deep hold 
which a belief in the omnipresence and malignity of spirits 
has upon the primitive mind. The reader will be better 
able to understand the savage remedy when he has an ink- 
ling of the nature of the evil which it is designed to combat. 
In citing the evidence I shall for the most part reproduce 
the exact words of my authorities lest I should incur the sus- 
picion of deepening unduly the shadows in a gloomy picture. 


Primitive 
belief in 
the omni- 
presence of 
demons. 


Demons in 
Australia. 


Demons 
in West 
Africa. 


74 THE OMNIPRESENCE OF DEMONS CHAP. 


Thus in regard to the aborigines of Australia we are 
told that “the number of supernatural beings, feared if not 
loved, that they acknowledge is exceedingly great ; for not 
only are the heavens peopled with such, but the whole face 
of the country swarms with them ; every thicket, most water- 
ing-places, and all rocky places abound with evil spirits. 
In like manner, every natural phenomenon is believed to be 
the work of demons, none of which seem of a benign nature, 
one and all apparently striving to do all imaginable mischief 
to the poor blackfellow.”* “The negro,” says another writer, 
“is wont to regard the whole world around him as peopled 
with invisible beings, to whom he imputes every misfortune 
that happens to him, and from whose harmful influence he 
seeks to protect himself by all kinds of magic means.” ? 
The Bantu negroes of Western Africa “regard their god as 
the creator of man, plants, animals, and the earth, and they 
hold that having made them, he takes no further interest in 
the affair. But not so the crowd of spirits with which the- 
universe is peopled, they take only too much interest, and 
the Bantu wishes they would not and is perpetually saying 
so in his prayers, a large percentage whereof amounts to, 
‘Go away, we don’t want you. ‘Come not into this house, 
this village, or its plantations.” Almost all these subordin- 
ate spirits are malevolent.2 A similar but fuller account of 
the West African creed is given by a German writer, whose 
statements apply particularly to the Ewe-speaking negroes 
of the Slave Coast. He says: “Thus the term fetishism 
denotes the attitude of the Ewes, or of West African negro 
tribes in general, towards magic; it forms one of the prin- 
cipal constituents of their religion. The other main con- 
stituent is their attitude to the gods, which is properly 
demonolatry. The Ewe names the gods dvowo, that is, 
intermediaries, namely, between a Supreme Being, whom he 
calls Jawu (‘the Unsurpassable’), and mankind. The 
drowo with whom the Ewe has to do, to whom his offerings 


1 A. Oldfield, ‘‘The Aborigines of ¢zonales Archiv fiir Ethnographie, i. 
Australia,” Zvansactions of the Ethno- (1888) p. 85. 
logical Society of London, N.S., iii. 
(1865) p. 228. 3 Mary H. Kingsley, Zvavels in 
2 J. Biittikoffer, ‘‘Einiges tiber die West Africa (London, 1897) pp. 442 
Eingebornen von Liberia,” Jxterna- 59. 


11 THE OMNIPRESENCE OF DEMONS 75 


and his respects are paid, are thus subordinate deities, who 
according to the etymological meaning of the word dro are 
conceived as judging, composing disputes, and mediating 
among men. The existence of a Supreme Being is by no 
means unfamiliar to the Ewe; he has his Mazz often in 
his mouth, especially in talking with the missionary, and he 
willingly acknowledges that Mawwz created him and the 
gods. But he can only conceive of this Supreme Being on 
the analogy of his own personality and not as omnipresent and 
so forth. It is impossible that this Mawu can trouble himself 
about details in the creation or even about every individual 
man and his petty affairs; what would be the use of the 
many higher and lower spirits with which the world is filled 
before his eyes? The West African perhaps conceives of 
God as transcendant, but not as immanent; a creation he 
possibly apprehends, but not an omnipresent government of 
the world by the Supreme Being. That government is 
carried on by Mawu at a distance by means of the many 
spirits or subordinate gods whom he has created for the 
purpose. .. . A portion of the gods fills the air, wherefore 
the forces and the phenomena of nature are deified as their 
manifestations. The elements are thought to be moved by 
the gods of the air. In the storm and the wind, in thunder 
and lightning the Ewe sees the manifestation of particularly 
powerful gods. In the mysterious roll and roar of the deep 
sea the Ewe, like the negro in general, beholds the sway of 
a very mighty god or of a whole host of gods. Further, the 
earth itself is also the abode of a multitude of spirits or 
gods, who have in it their sphere of activity. They inhabit 
certain great mountains, great hollow trees, caves, rivers, and 
especially woods. In such woods of the gods no timber 
may be felled. Thus the gods fill not only the air and the 
sea, they also walk on earth, on all paths; they lurk under 
the trees, they terrify the lonely wayfarer, they disquiet and 
plague even the sleeper. When the negro rises from the 
stool on which he has been sitting, he never fails to turn it 
upside down, to prevent a spirit from sitting down on it.... 
The spirit-world falls into two main classes: there are 
good and kindly spirits, whose help is eagerly sought by 
offerings ; but there are also gloomy and revengeful spirits, 


Demons on 
the Congo. 


THE OMNIPRESENCE OF DEMONS CHAP. 


76 


whose approach and influence people eagerly endeavour to 
avert, and against whom all possible means are employed to 
ban them from the houses and villages. The people are 
much more zealous in their devotion to the evil spirits than 
in their devotion to the good. The reason is that the feel- 
ing of fear and the consciousness of guilt are much stronger 
than the emotions of love and gratitude for benefits received. 
Hence the worship of the false gods or spirits among this 
people, and among the West African negro tribes in general, 
is properly speaking a worship of demons or devils.” ? 
Again, a missionary who spent fifteen years among 
the Boloki of the Upper Congo River tells us that “the 
religion of the Boloki has its basis in their fear of those 
numerous invisible spirits which surround them on every 
side, and are constantly trying to compass their sickness, 
misfortune and death; and the Boloki’s sole object in 
practising their religion is to cajole, or appease, cheat, or 
conquer and kill those spirits that trouble them—hence their 
nganga [medicine-men], their rites, their ceremonies and their 
charms. If there were no evil spirits to be circumvented 
there would be no need of their medicine men and their 
charms.”? “The Boloki folk believe they are surrounded by 
spirits which try to thwart them at every twist and turn, and 
to harm them every hour of the day and night. The rivers 
and creeks are crowded with the spirits of their ancestors, 
and the forests and bush are full also of spirits, ever seeking 
to injure the living who are overtaken by night when 
travelling by road or canoe. I never met among them a 
man daring enough to go at night through the forest that 
divided Monsembe from the upper villages, even though a 
large reward was offered. Their invariable reply was: ‘ There 


1 G, Ziindel, ‘‘ Land und Volk der 
Eweer auf der Sclavenkiiste in West- 
afrika,” Zeetschrift der Gesellschaft fiir 
Erdkunde su Berlin, xii. (1877) pp. 
412-414. Full details as to the re- 
ligious creed of the Ewes, including 
their beliefin a Supreme Being (JZawz), 
are given, to a great extent in the 
words of the natives themselves, by 
the German missionary Jakob Spieth 
in his elaborate and valuable works 
Die Ewe-Stimme (Berlin, 1906) and 


Die Religion der Eweer in Siid-Togo 
(Leipsic, 1911). As to A/awe in 
particular, the meaning of whose name 
is somewhat uncertain, see J. Spieth, 
Die Ewe-Stdmme, pp. 421 sgq.; Die 
Religion der Eweer in Stid-Togo, pp. 
15 sgg. 

2 Rev. J. H. Weeks, ‘‘ Anthropo- 
logical Notes on the Bangala of the 
Upper Congo River,” /ournal of the 
Royal Anthropological Institute, x. 


(1910) p. 377. 


II THE OMNIPRESENCE OF DEMONS 77 


a1 


are too many spirits in the bush and forest. The spirits 
which these people dread so much are the m7ngolz or 
disembodied souls of the dead; the life of the Boloki is 
described as “one long drawn out fear of what the mzngold 
may next do to them.” These dangerous beings dwell 
everywhere, land and water are full of them; they are ever 
ready to pounce on the living and carry them away or to 
smite them with disease and kill them. Though they are 
invisible to common eyes, the medicine-man can see them, 
and can cork them up in calabashes or cover them up with 
saucepans ; indeed, if it is made worth his while, he can 
even destroy them altogether.” Again, of the Bantu tribes 
of South Africa we read that “nearer than the spirits of 
deceased chiefs or of their own ancestors was a whole host 
of hobgoblins, water sprites, and malevolent demons, who 
met the Bantu turn which way they would. There was no 
beautiful fairyland for them, for all the beings who haunted 
the mountains, the plains, and the rivers were ministers of 
evil. The most feared of these was a large bird that made 
love to women and incited those who returned its affection 
to cause the death of those who did not, and a little mis- 


1 Rev. John H. Weeks, Among 
Congo Cannzbals (London, 1913), p. 
261. 

2 Rev. J. H. Weeks, ‘‘ Anthropo- 
logical Notes on the Bangala of the 
Upper Congo River,” Journal of the 
Royal Anthropological Institute, xl. 
(1910) pp. 368, 370. The singular 
form of mzngolz is mongolt, ‘‘a disem- 
bodied spirit.” Compare zd., Among 
Congo Cannibals (London, 1913), p. 
252; and again zézd. p. 275. But great 
as is the fear of evil spirits among the 
natives of the Congo, their dread of 
witchcraft seems to be still more in- 
tense. See Rev. J. H. Weeks, ‘‘ Notes 
on some Customs of the Lower Congo 
People,” Folk-lore, xx. (1909) pp. 51 
sg.: ** The belief in witchcraft affects 
their lives in a vast number of ways, 
and touches them socially at a hundred 
different points. It regulates their 
actions, modifies their mode of thought 
and speech, controls their conduct to- 
wards each other, causes cruelty and 
callousness in a people not naturally 
cruel, and sets the various members of 


a family against each other. A man 
may believe any theory he likes about 
creation, about God, and about the 
abode of departed spirits, but he must 
believe in witches and their influence 
for evil, and must in unmistakable 
terms give expression to that belief, or 
be accused of witchcraft himself. .. . 
But for witchcraft no one would die, 
and the earnest longing of all right- 
minded men and women is to clear it 
out of the country by killing every 
discovered witch. It is an act of self- 
preservation. . . . Belief in witches 
is interwoved into the very fibre of 
every Bantu-speaking man and woman, 
and the person who does not believe 
in them is a monster, a witch, to be 
killed as soon as possible.” Could we 
weigh against each other the two great 
terrors which beset the minds of savages 
all over the world, it seems probable 
that the dread of witches would be 
found far to outweigh the dread of evil 
spirits. However, it is the fear of evil 
spirits with which we are at present 
concerned. 


Demons 
in South 
Africa. 


Demons 
in South 
America. 


78 THE OMNIPRESENCE OF DEMONS CHAP, 


chievous imp who was also amorously inclined. Many 
instances could be gathered from the records of magistrates’ 
courts in recent years of demented women having admitted 
their acquaintance with these fabulous creatures, as well as 
of whole communities living in terror of them.’’ However, 
it would be no doubt a great mistake to imagine that the 
minds of the Bantu, or indeed of any savages, are perpetu- 
ally occupied by a dread of evil spirits;* the savage and 
indeed the civilized man is incapable, at least in his normal 
state, of such excessive preoccupation with a single idea, 
which, if prolonged, could hardly fail to end in insanity. 
Speaking of the spirits which the Indians of Guiana 
attribute to all objects in nature, Sir Everard F. im Thurn 
observes that “the whole world of the Indian swarms with 
these beings. If by a mighty mental effort we could for a 
moment revert to a similar mental position, we should find 
ourselves everywhere surrounded by a host of possibly hurt- 
ful beings, so many in number that to describe them as 
innumerable would fall ridiculously short of the truth. It is 
not therefore wonderful that the Indian fears to move beyond 
the light of his camp-fire after dark, or, if he is obliged to do 
so, carries a fire-brand with him that he may at least see 
among what enemies he walks; nor is it wonderful that 
occasionally the air round the settlement seems to the Indian 
to grow so full of beings, that a peaiman [sorcerer], who is 
supposed to have the power of temporarily driving them 
away, is employed to effect a general clearance of these 
beings, if only for a time. That is the main belief, of 
the kind that is generally called religious, of the Indians 
of Guiana.”* The Lengua Indians of the Paraguayan 
Chaco believe in certain demons which they call kzlyzk- 
hama. “The kilyikhama are confined to no particular 


1 G. McCall Theal, Records of South- to find. 
Eastern Africa, vii. (1901) pp. 405 
Sq. 
2 On this subject Mr. Dudley Kidd 
has made some judicious observations 
(Savage Childhood, London, 1906, pp. 
131 sg.). He says: ‘* The Kafirs cer- 
tainly do not live in everlasting dread 
of spirits, for the chief part of their 
life is not spent in thinking at all. A 
merrier set of people it would be hard 


They are so easy-going that 
it would seem to them too much burden 
to be for ever thinking of spirits.” 


3 (Sir) E. F. im Thurn, Among the 
Indians of Guiana, (London, 1883), 
pp. 356 sg. As to the dread which 
the Brazilian Indians entertain of 
demons, see J. B. von Spix and C. 
F. Ph. von Martius, Rese 27 Brasilien 
(Munich, 1823-1831), iii. 1108-1111. 


II THE OMNIPRESENCE OF DEMONS 79 


place. Time and distance do not seem to affect them in 
the least. They are held in great awe by the Indian, and 
whithersoever he turns, whether by day or night, but par- 
ticularly at night, he is subject to their malign influences. 
... They live in constant dread of these supernatural beings, 
and if nothing else contributed to make their life miserable, 
this ever-present dread of the &z/yzkhama would be in itself 
quite sufficient to rob it of most of its joy.”? 

Very different from the life of these Indians of the South 
American forests and prairies is the life of the Esquimaux 
on the desolate shores of Labrador; yet they too live in 
like bondage to the evil creatures of their own imagination. 
“ All the affairs of life are supposed to be under the control 
of spirits, each of which rules over a certain element, and all 
of which are under the direction of a greater spirit. Each 
person is supposed to be attended by a special guardian 
who is malignant in character, ever ready to seize upon the 
least occasion to work harm upon the individual whom it 
accompanies. As this is an evil spirit, its good offices and 
assistance can be obtained by propitiation only. The person 
strives to keep the good-will of the evil spirit by offerings of 
food, water, and clothing.” “Besides this class of spirits, 
there are the spirits of the sea, the land, the sky (for be it 
understood that the Eskimo know nothing of the air), the 
winds, the clouds, and everything in nature. Every cove of 
the sea-shore, every point, island, and prominent rock has its 
guardian spirit. All are of the malignant type, and to be 
propitiated only by acceptable offerings from persons who 
desire to visit the locality where it is supposed to reside. 
Of course some of the spirits are more powerful than others, 
and these are more to be dreaded than those able to inflict 
less harm. These minor spirits are under the control of the 
great spirit, whose name is Tung ak. This one great spirit 
is more powerful than all the rest besides. The lesser spirits 
are immediately under his control and ever ready to obey 
his command. The shaman (or conjuror) alone is supposed 
to be able to deal with the Tung ak. While the shaman 
does not profess to be superior to the Tung ak, he is able to 


1 'W. Barbrooke Grubb, 4x Unknown People in an Unknown Land (London, 
IQI1), pp. 118, 119. 


Demons in 
Labrado , 


Demons in 
Polynesia. 


80 THE OMNIPRESENCE OF DEMONS CHAP. 


enlist his assistance and thus be able to control all the 
undertakings his profession may call for. This Tung ak is 
nothing more or less than death, which ever seeks to torment 
and harass the lives of people that their spirits may go to 
dwell with him.”? 

Brighter at first sight and more pleasing is the mythology 
of the islanders of the Pacific, as the picture of it is drawn 
for us by one who seems to have felt the charm of those 
beliefs which it was his mission to destroy. “ By their rude 
mythology,” he says, “each lovely island was made a sort of | 
fairy-land, and the spells of enchantment were thrown over 
its varied scenes. The sentiment of the poet that 


‘ Millions of spiritual creatures walk the earth, 
Unseen, both when we wake, and when we sleep,’ 


was one familiar to their minds; and it is impossible not to 
feel interested in a people who were accustomed to consider 
themselves surrounded by invisible intelligences, and who 
recognized in the rising sun—the mild and silver moon— 
the shooting star—the meteor’s transient flame—the ocean’s 
roar—the tempest’s blast, or the evening breeze—the move- 
ments of mighty spirits. The mountain’s summit, and the 
fleecy mists that hang upon its brows—the rocky defile— 
the foaming cataract—and the lonely dell—were all regarded 
as the abode or resort of these invisible beings.”” Vet the 
spiritual powers which compassed the life of the islanders on 
every side appear to have been far from friendly to man. 
Speaking of their beliefs touching the souls of the dead, the 
same writer says that the Polynesians “imagined they lived 
in a world of spirits, which surrounded them night and day, 
watching every action of their lives, and ready to avenge the 
slightest neglect or the least disobedience to their injunc- 
tions, as proclaimed by their priests. These dreaded beings 
were seldom thought to resort to the habitations of men on 
errands of benevolence.”? The Tahitians, when they were 
visited by Captain Cook, believed that “sudden deaths and 
all other accidents are effected by the immediate action of 


1 L. M. Turner, “ Ethnology of the 2W. Ellis, Polynesian Researches, 
Ungava District, Hudson Bay Terri- Second Edition (London, 1832-1836), 
tory,” Eleventh Annual Report of the 1. 331. 

Bureau of Ethnology (Washington, 
1894), pp. 193 sg. 3 W. Ellis, op. czt. i. 406. 


II THE OMNIPRESENCE OF DEMONS 81 


some divinity. If a man only stumble against a stone and 
hurt his toe, they impute it to an Hatooa; so that they may 
be literally said, agreeably to their system, to tread enchanted 
ground.”* “The Maori gods,” says a well-informed writer, 
“were demons, whose evil designs could only be counter- 
acted by powerful spells and charms ; these proving effectual, 
sacrifices and offerings were made to soothe the vanquished 
spirits and appease their wrath.” “The gods in general 
appeared in the whirlwind and lightning, answering their 
votaries in the clap of thunder. The inferior beings made 
themselves visible in the form of lizards, moths, butterflies, 
spiders, and even flies; when they spoke it was in a low 
whistling tone. They were supposed to be so numerous as 
to surround the living in crowds, kez te muta nga wairua 
penet nga wairoa, ‘the spirits throng like mosquitoes,’ ever 
watching to inflict evil.” ° 

Again, we are informed that the popular religion of the 
Pelew Islanders “has reference to the gods (kalzths) who 
may be useful or harmful to men in all their doings. Their 
imagination peoples the sea, the wood, the earth with numer- 
ous gods, and whatever a man undertakes, be it to catch 
fish or fell a tree, he must first propitiate the deities, or 
rather guard himself against their spiteful anger, which can 
only be done by means of certain spells and incantations. 
The knowledge of these incantations is limited to a very 
few persons, and forms in fact the secret of the arts and 
industries which are plied in the islands. A master of his 
craft is not he who can build a good house or a faultless 
canoe, but he who possesses the go/ay or magic power to 
ban the tree-gods, that they may not prove hurtful to the 
workmen and to the people who afterwards use the things. 
All these gods of the earth, the woods, the mountains, the 
brooks are very mischievous and dangerous, and most dis- 
eases are caused by them. JHence the persons who possess 
the magic power are dreaded, frequently employed, and well 
paid ; but in extreme cases they are regarded as sorcerers 


1 The Voyages of Captain James New Zealand and its Inhabitants, 
Cook round the World (London, 1809), Second Edition (London, 1870), p. 
Wie Mees 104. 

2, R. Taylor, Ze Jka a Maut, or 

TA Ae G 


Demons 
in New 
Zealand. 


Demons in 
the Pelew 
Islands. 


Demons 
in the 
Philippines. 


Demons in 
Melanesia. 


82 THE OMNIPRESENCE OF DEMONS CHAP. 


and treated accordingly. If one of them builds a house for 
somebody and is dissatisfied with his remuneration, he stirs 
up the tree-god to avenge him. So the inhabitants of the 
house he has built fall sick, and if help is not forthcoming 
they die.””* Of the Mortlock Islanders we are told that 
“their imagination peopled the whole of nature with spirits 
and deities, of whom the number was past finding out.”? 
Speaking of the natives of the Philippine Islands a 
writer observes that “the basis of all the superstitious beliefs 
of the Negritos, what might else be termed their religion, is 
the constant presence of the spirits of the dead near where 
they lived when alive. All places are inhabited by the 
spirits. All adverse circumstances, sickness, failure of crops, 
unsuccessful hunts, are attributed to them.” As to the 
Melanesians of New Britain we read that “another deeply 
rooted belief which exercises an extraordinary influence on the 
life and customs of these people is a belief in demons. To 
their thinking the demons, tambaran (a word synonymous 
with ‘poor wretch, ‘sufferer’) are spirits entirely perverse, 
deceitful, maleficent, and ceaselessly occupied in injuring us. 
Diseases, death, the perturbations of nature, all unfortunate 
events are imputed to them. The demons exist in legions ; 
they live everywhere, especially in the forests, desert places, 
and the depths of the sea.”* The beliefs and customs of one 
particular tribe of this great island—the Livuans, who 
occupy the eastern coast of the Gazelle Peninsula in New 
Britain—have been described by a Catholic missionary in 
similar terms. “The distrustful natives,” he tells us, “ have 
not attained to a belief in a beneficent, compassionate deity. 
All the more numerous, however, are the evil spirits with 
which they people the universe. These are legion. The 
power which the natives ascribe to these spirits extends not 
merely to the property of mankind but also to life and death. 
The Livuan always believes that he can trace the pernicious 


1 J. Kubary, ‘‘Die Religion der 
Pelauer,” in A. Bastian’s Adlerlec aus 
Volks- und Menschenkunde (Berlin, 
1888), i. 46. 

2 J. Kubary, ‘‘ Die Bewohner der 
Mortlock-Inseln,” A%ttthetlungen der 
Seographischen Gesellschaft in Hamburg, 


1878-79, p. 36. 

3 W. A. Reed, Wegritos of Zambales 
(Manilla, 1904), p. 65 (£thnological 
Survey Publications, vol. ii. Part i.). 

4 Mgr. Couppé, ‘“‘En Nouvelle- 
Poméranie,” Zes AZissions Catholigues, 
Xxlil. (1891) pp. 355 sg. 


II THE OMNIPRESENCE OF DEMONS 83 


influence of these tambaran (devils) on his actions. In his 
conviction, the whole thoughts and endeavours of the evil 
spirits have no other object than to injure men in every 
possible way. This dismal, comfortless superstition weighs 
heavy on the native.”’ Again, another writer who lived 
for thirty years among the Melanesians of the Bismarck 
Archipelago, of which New Britain forms part, observes 
that “ we often find the view expressed that the native is a 
being who lives only for the day, without cares of any kind. 
The view is very erroneous, for in fact he leads a life which is 
plagued by cares of all sorts. Amongst the greatest plagues 
of his life is his bottomless superstition. He sees himself 
surrounded at every step by evil spirits and their influences. 
He trusts nobody, for who knows whether his nearest neigh- 
-bour, his professedly best friend, is not plotting to bring 
trouble, sickness, and even death on him by means of magic? 
Everywhere he sees snares set for him, everywhere he scents 
treachery and guile. We need not wonder, therefore, that 
mistrust is a leading feature in the character not only of the 
New Britons, but of the Melanesians generally. . . . The 
native is simply not accessible to rational motives. The 
only motive he understands is sorcery on the part of malicious 
men or the influence of evil spirits.” ” 

A Dutch missionary, who spent twenty-five years among 
the natives of Dutch New Guinea, tells us that “in their 
ignorance of a living God the Papuans people earth and 
air, land and sea with mysterious malignant powers, which 
take up their abode in stones and trees or in men and 
cause all kinds of misfortunes, especially sickness and death.” ? 
Again, speaking of the Bukaua, a tribe of German New 
Guinea, a German missionary writes that “the Bukaua knows 
himself to be surrounded by spirits (da/wm) at every step. 
An insight into the life and mode of thought of the natives, 


1 Pp. A. Kleintitschen, Dze Kvisten- der Siidsee (Stuttgart, 1907), pp. 120, 
bewohner der Gazellehalbinsel (Hiltrup 121. : 
bei Miinster, preface dated 1906), pp. 3 J. L. van Hasselt, ‘‘ Die Papua- 
336 sg. Compare Joachim Graf Pfeil, stamme an der Geelvinkbai (Neu- 
Studien und Leobachtungen aus der guinea),” Mittetlungen der Geographt- 
Stidsee (Brunswick, 1899), p. 159; 7d@., schen Gesellschaft zu Jena, ix. (1891) 
in Journal of the Anthropological yp. 98. As to Mr. van Hasselt’s twenty- 
Institute, xxvii. (1898) pp. 183 sg. five years’ residence among these sav- 

2 R. Parkinson, Dvezssig Jahre in ages, see zd., p. 22. 


Demons 
in Dutch 
New 
Guinea. 


Demons 
in German 
New 
Guinea, 


Demons 
in British 
New 
Guinea. 


84 THE OMNIPRESENCE OF DEMONS CHAP. 


as the latter is expressed especially in their stories, confirms 
this view completely. What wonder that the fear of spirits 
dominates the whole existence of the Bukaua and causes 
him to tremble even in the hour of death? Thereare spirits 
of the beach, the water, the fields, the forests, spirits that 
reside in the villages and particular places, and a sort of 
vagabonds, who can take up their abode even in lifeless 
things.” Then after describing the demons of the beach, the 
water, and the field, the writer proceeds as follows: “ Of 
forest spirits the number is infinite ; for it is above allin the 
mysterious darkness, the tangled wildernesses of the virgin 
forest that the spirits love to dwell. They hold their meet- 
ings in what are called evil places. They are never bent on 
good. Especially at nightfall the native fancies he hears 
the voice of the spirits in the hum and chirping of the insects 
in the forest. They lure hunting dogs from the trail. They 
make wild boars rabid; in the form of snakes they make 
inroads into human dwellings ; they drive men crazy or into 
fits ; they play roguish tricks of all sorts.” * 

Among the tribes who inhabit the south-eastern coasts 
of New Guinea “a death in a village is the occasion of 
bringing plenty of ghosts to escort their new companion, 
and perhaps fetch some one else. All night the friends of 
the deceased sit up and keep the drums going to drive away 
the spirits. When I was sleeping one night at Hood Bay, 
a party of young men and boys came round with sticks, 
striking the fences and posts of houses all through the 
village. This I found was always done when any one died, 
to drive back the spirits to their own quarters on the 
adjacent mountain tops. But it is the spirits of the inland 
tribes, the aborigines of the country, that the coast tribes 
most fear. The road from the interior to Port Moresby 
passed close to our house, and the natives told us that the 
barking of our English dog at night had frightened the evil 
spirits so effectually that they had had no ghostly visitors 
since we came. I was camping out one night in the bush 
with some coast natives, at a time when a number of the 
natives of the interior were hunting in the neighbourhood ; 


1 Stefan Lehner, ‘“‘ Bukaua,” in R. Neuhauss’s Deutsch Neu-Guinea, iii. 
(Berlin, 1911) pp. 414-416. 


II THE OMNIPRESENCE OF DEMONS 85 


noticing that the men with me did not go to sleep, I asked 
if they were afraid of the mountain men. ‘No, they replied, 
‘but the whole plain is full of the spirits who come with 
them. All calamities are attributed to the power and 
malice of these evil spirits. Drought and famine, storm and 
flood, disease and death are all supposed to be brought by 
‘Vata’ and his hosts.” ? 

The inhabitants of Timor, an island to the south-west of 
New Guinea, revere the lord of heaven, the sun, the mistress 
of the earth, and the spirits of the dead. “These last dwell, 
some with the mistress of the earth under ground, others on 
graves, others in stones and springs and woods, some on 
mountains and some in the habitations of their kinsfolk, 
where they take up their abode in the middle of the principal 
post of the house or in copper cymbals, in swords and pikes. 
Others again assume the shape of pigs and deer and bees; 
men who have fallen in battle love especially to turn into 
bees, that they may roam over the earth at will. The 
ghosts who reside with the mistress of the earth are male 
and female, and their offspring swarm by myriads in the 
air, so that the people think you cannot stir without striking 
against one of them. According to their whim of the 
moment the ghosts are good or bad.” “All diseases which 
are not due to infection or transmitted by inheritance are 
ascribed to the mistress of the earth, to the ghosts, and to 
their wicked offspring, who inflict them as punishments for 
insults and injuries, for insufficient food, for the killing of 
deer and of wild pigs, in which the ghosts take up their 
abode temporarily, and also for the sale of cymbals, swords 
and pikes, in which a ghost had settled.”” The natives of 
Amboyna think that “woods, mountains, trees, stones, 
indeed the whole universe, is inhabited by a multitude of 
spirits, of whom many are the souls of the dead.”* In 
Bolang Mongondo, a district of Celebes, “all calamities, great 
and small, of whatever kind, and by whatever name they are 
called, that befall men and animals, villages, gardens and so 

1 W. G. Lawes, ‘‘ Notes on New Dawan oder West-Timor,” Deutsche 
Guinea and its Inhabitants,” Proceed-  geographische Blitter, x. 278 sq. 
ings of the Royal Geographical Society, 3G. W. W. C. Baron van Hoévell, 


1880, p. 615. Ambon en meer bepaaldelizk de Oeliasers 
2 J. G. F. Riedel, ‘‘ Die Landschaft (Dordrecht, 1875), p. 148. 


Demons 
in Timor. 


Demons 
in Celebes, 


Demons in 
Bali and 
Java. 


86 THE OMNIPRESENCE OF DEMONS CHAP. 


forth, are attributed to evil or angry spirits. The superstition 
is indescribably great. The smallest wound, the least indis- 
position, the most trifling adversity in the field, at the fish- 
ing, on a journey or what not, is believed by the natives to 
be traceable to the anger of their ancestors. The super- 
stition cripples every effort to remedy the calamities except 
by sacrifice. There is perhaps no country the inhabitants of 
which know so little about simples as Bolang Mongondo. 
What a native of Bolang Mongondo calls medicine is nothing 
but sacrifice, magic, and talismans. And the method of 
curing a sick man always consists in the use of magic, or in 
the propitiation of angry ancestral spirits by means of 
offerings, or in the banishment of evil spirits. The applica- 
tion of one or other of these three methods depends again 
on the decision of the sorcerer, who plays a great part in 
every case of sickness.” ? 

In the island of Bali “all the attention paid to the sick 
has its root solely in the excessive superstition of these 
islanders, which leads them to impute every unpleasantness 
in life, every adversity to the influence of evil spirits or of 
men who are in some way in league with them. The belief 
in witches and wizards is everywhere great in the Indies, but 
perhaps nowhere is it so universal and so strong as in Bali.” ? 
In Java, we are told, it is not merely great shady trees that 
are believed to be the abode of spirits. “In other places also, 
where the vital energy of nature manifests itself strikingly 
and impressively, a feeling of veneration is stirred, as on the 
sea-shore, in deep woods, on steep mountain sides. All such 
spots are supposed to be the abode of spirits of various 
kinds, whose mighty power is regarded with reverence and 
awe, whose anger is dreaded, and whose favour is hoped for. 
But wherever they dwell, whether in scenes of loveliness 
that move the heart, or in spots that affect the mind with 
fright and horror, the nature and disposition of these spirits 
appear not to differ. They are a source of fear and anxiety 
in the one case just as much asin the other. To none of them 


1 N. P. Wilken en J. A. Schwarz, genootschap, xi. (1867) p. 259. 
“Het heidendom en de Islam in 2 R. van Eck, ‘‘ Schetsen van het 
Bolaang Mongondou,” MWZededeelingen  eiland Bali,” Zzjdschrift voor Neder- 
van wege het Nederlandsche Zendeling-  landsch Indié, August, 1880, p. 83. 


II THE OMNIPRESENCE OF DEMONS 87 


did I ever hear moral qualities ascribed. They are mighty, 
they are potentates, and therefore it is well with him who has 
their favour and ill with him who has it not ; this holds true 
of them all.” “The number of the spirits is innumerable 
and inconceivable. All the phenomena of nature, which we 
trace to fixed laws and constant forces, are supposed by the 
Javanese to be wrought by spirits.” ? 

The natives of the valley of the Barito in Borneo hold 
that “the air is filled with countless haztoes (spirits). Every 
object has such a spirit which watches over it and seeks to 
defend it from danger. It is these spirits especially that 
bring sickness and misfortune on men, and for that reason 
offerings are often made to them and also to the powerful 
Sangsangs (angels), whereas the supreme God, the original 
fountain of all good, is neglected.”* Of the Battas or Bataks 
of Sumatra we are told that “the key-note of their religious 
mood is fear of the unknown powers, a childish feeling of 
dependence, the outcome of a belief in supernatural influences 
to which man is constantly exposed, in wonders and witch- 
craft, which hamper his free action. They feel themselves 
continually surrounded by unseen beings and dependent on 
them for everything.” “Every misfortune bespeaks the ill- 
will of the hostile spirits. The whole world is a meeting- 
place of demons, and most of the phenomena of nature 
are an expression of their power. The only means of 
remedying or counteracting their baleful influence is to 
drive away the spirits by means of certain words, as well 
as by the use of amulets and the offering of sacrifices 
to the guardian spirits.””* To the same effect another 
authority on the religion of the Battas remarks that “the 
common man has only a very dim and misty notion of 
his triune god, and troubles himself far more about the 
legions of spirits which people the whole world around 
him, and against which he must always be protected by 

1S. E. Harthoorn, ‘‘De Zending 176. 
op Java en meer bepaald die van 3 J. B. Neumann, ‘‘ Het Pane- en 
Malang,” MMededeelingen van wege het Bila-stroomgebied,” 777dschrift van het 
Nederlandsche  Zendelinggenootschap,  Nederlandsch Aardrijkskundig Genoot- 
iv. (1860) pp. 116 sg. schap, Tweede Serie, iii. Afdeeling, 
2C. A. L. M. Schwaner, Borneo, meer uitgebreide artikelen, No, 2 


Beschrijving van het stroomgebied van (Amsterdam, 1886), p. 287. 
den Barito (Amsterdam, 1853-54), i. 


Demons in 
Borneo. 


Demons in 
Sumatra. 


Demons 
in the 
Nicobars. 


_ that possesses the Nicobarese. 


Demons in 
the Malay 
Peninsula. 


88 THE OMNIPRESENCE OF DEMONS CHAP. 


magic spells.”’ Again, speaking of the same people, 
a Dutch missionary observes that “if there is still any 
adherent of Rousseau’s superficial theories about the idyllic- 
ally happy and careless life of people ‘in a state of nature,’ 
he ought to come and spend a little time among the Bataks 
and keep his eyes and ears open. He would soon be con- 
vinced of the hollowness and falsehood of these phrases and 
would learn to feel a deep compassion for human beings 
living in perpetual fear of evil spirits.” ? 

The religion of the Nicobar Islanders “is an undisguised 
animism, and the whole of their very frequent and elaborate 
ceremonies and festivals are aimed at exorcising and scaring 
spirits (‘devils, as they have been taught to call them). 
Fear of spirits and ghosts (zw2) is the guide to all ceremonies, 
and the life of the people is very largely taken up with 
ceremonials and feasts of all kinds. These are usually held 
at night, and whether directly religious or merely convivial, 
seem all to have an origin in the overmastering fear of spirits 
It has so far proved ineradic- 
able, for two centuries of varied and almost continuous 
missionary effort has had no appreciable effect on it.”® 
The Mantras, an aboriginal race of the Malay Peninsula, 
“find or put a spirit everywhere, in the air they breathe, in 
the land they cultivate, in the forests they inhabit, in the 
trees they cut down, in the caves of the rocks. According 
to them, the demon is the cause of everything that turns out 
ill. If they are sick, a demon is at the bottom of it; if an 
accident happens, it is still the spirit who is at work ; there- 
upon the demon takes the name of the particular evil of 
which he is supposed to be the cause. Hence the demon 
being assumed as the author of every ill, all their supersti- 
tions resolve themselves into enchantments and spells to 


1 B. Hagen, ‘‘ Beitrige zur Kennt- 
niss der Battareligion,” 77dschrift voor 
Lndische Taal- Land- en Volkenkunde, 
xxvill. (1883) p. 508. The persons 
of the Batta Trinity are Bataraguru, 
Sori, and Balabulan. The most funda- 
mental distinction between the persons 
of the Trinity appears to be that one of 
them is allowed to eat pork, while the 
others are not (2b¢d. p. 505). 


2 M. Joustra, ‘‘ Het leven, de zeden 
en gewoonten der Bataks,” J/ededee- 
lingen van wege het Nederlandsche 
Zendelinggenootschap, xlvi. (1902) p. 
412. 


3 The Census of India, 1901, vol. iii. 
The Andaman and Nicobar Islands, 
by Lieut.-Colonel Sir Richard C. 
Temple (Calcutta, 1903), p. 206. 


II THE OMNIPRESENCE OF DEMONS 89 


appease the evil spirit, to render mild and tractable the 
fiercest beasts.”’ To the mind of the Kamtchatkan every 
corner of earth and heaven seemed full of spirits, whom he 
revered and dreaded more than God. 

In India from the earliest times down to the present day 
the real religion of the common folk appears always to have 
been a belief in a vast multitude of spirits, of whom many, 
if not most, are mischievous and harmful. As in Europe 
beneath a superficial layer of Christianity a faith in magic 
and witchcraft, in ghosts and goblins has always survived 
and even flourished among the weak and ignorant, so it has 
been and so it is in the East. Brahmanism, Buddhism, 
Islam may come and go, but the belief in magic and demons 
remains unshaken through them all, and, if we may judge 
of the future from the past, is likely to survive the rise 
and fall of other historical religions. For the great faiths 
of the world, just in so far as they are the outcome of 
superior intelligence, of purer morality, of extraordinary 
fervour of aspiration after the ideal, fail to touch and move 
the common man. They make claims upon his intellect 
and his heart to which neither the one nor the other is 
capable of responding. The philosophy they teach is too 
abstract, the morality they inculcate too exalted for him. 
The keener minds embrace the new philosophy, the more 
generous spirits are fired by the new morality ; and as the 
world is led by such men, their faith sooner or later becomes 
the professed faith of the multitude. Yet with the common 
herd, who compose the great bulk of every people, the new 
religion is accepted only in outward show, because it is 
impressed upon them by their natural leaders whom they 
cannot choose but follow. They yield a dull assent to 
it with their lips, but in their heart they never really 
abandon their old superstitions; in these they cherish a 
faith such as they cannot repose in the creed which they 
nominally profess; and to these, in the trials and emer- 
gencies of life, they have recourse as to infallible remedies, 


1 Borie, ‘‘ Notice sur les Mantras, 2 S. Krascheninnikow, Beschretbung 
tribu sauvage de la péninsule Malaise,” des Landes Kamtschatka (Lemgo, 1766), 
Tijdschrift voor Indische Taal- Land- pp. 215. 
en Volkenkunde, x. (1860) p. 434. 


Demons 
in Kamt- 
chatka. 


Demons 
in India. 


The high 
gods come 
and go, but 
demons 
remain. 


Demons 
in ancient 
India. 


go THE OMNIPRESENCE OF DEMONS CHAP. 


when the promises of the higher faith have failed them, 
as indeed such promises are apt to do.’ 

To establish for India in particular the truth of the pro- 
positions which I have just advanced, it may be enough to 
cite the evidence of two writers of high authority, one 
of whom deals with the most ancient form of Indian religion 
known to us, while the other describes the popular religion 
of the Hindoos at the present day. “ According to the 
creed of the Vedic ages,” says Professor Oldenberg, “the 
whole world in which man lives is animated. Sky and 
earth, mountain, forest, trees and beasts, the earthly water 
and the heavenly water of the clouds,—all is filled with 
living spiritual beings, who are either friendly or hostile to 
mankind. Unseen or embodied in visible form, hosts of 
spirits surround and hover about human _habitations,— 
bestial or misshapen goblins, souls of dead friends and souls 
of foes, sometimes as kindly guardians, oftener as mischief- 
makers, bringing disease and misfortune, sucking the blood 
and strength of the living. A soul is attributed even to the 
object fashioned by human hands, whose functions are felt 
to be friendly or hostile. The warrior pays his devotion to 
the divine war-chariot, the divine arrow, the drum; the 
ploughman to the ploughshare; the gambler to the dice; 
the sacrificer, about whom naturally we have the most exact 
information, reveres the stone that presses out the juice of 
the Soma, the straw on which the gods recline, the post to 


which the sacrificial victim is 


1 We may compare the instructive 
remarks made by Mr. W. E. Maxwell 
on the stratification of religious beliefs 
among the Malays (‘‘ The Folk-lore of 
the Malays,” /ournal of the Straits 
Branch of the Royal Asiatic Soctety, 
No: 97; June; 1881.) pp. BL s7.)sas Ete 
says: ‘‘ Two successive religious changes 
have taken place among them, and when 
we have succeeded in identifying the 
vestiges of Brahmanism which underly 
the external forms of the faith of Mu- 
hammed, long established in all Malay 
kingdoms, we are only half-way through 
our task. There yet remain the power- 
ful influences of the still earlier indi- 
genous faith to be noted and accounted 


bound, and the divine doors 


for. Just as the Buddhists of Ceylon 
turn, in times of sickness and danger, 
not to the consolations offered by the 
creed of Buddha, but to the propitia- 
tion of the demons feared and reyer- 
enced by their early progenitors, and 
just as the Burmese and Talaings, 
though Buddhists, retain in full force 
the whole of the Vaz superstition, so 
among the Malays, in spite of centuries 
which have passed since the establish- 
ment of an alien worship, the Muham- 
medan peasant may be found invoking 
the protection of Hindu gods against 
the spirits of evil with which his primi- 
tive faith has peopled all natural 
objects.” 


II THE OMNIPRESENCE OF DEMONS gI 


through which the gods come forth to enjoy the sacrifice. 
At one time the beings in whose presence man feels himself 
are regarded by him as really endowed with souls; at 
another time, in harmony with a more advanced conception 
of the world, they are imagined as substances or fluids 
invested with beneficent or maleficent properties: belief 
oscillates to and fro between the one mode of thought and 
the other. The art of turning to account the operations of 
these animated beings, the play of these substances and 
forces, is magic rather than worship in the proper sense 
of the word. The foundations of this faith and of this 
magic are an inheritance from the remotest past, from a 
period, to put it shortly, of shamanistic faith in spirits 
and souls, of shamanistic magic. Such a period has been 
passed through by the forefathers of the Indo-Germanic race 
as well as by other peoples.” 

Coming down to the Hindoos of the present day, we 
find that their attitude towards the spiritual world is 
described as follows by Professor Monier Williams. “The 
plain fact undoubtedly is that the great majority of the 
inhabitants of India are, from the cradle to the burning- 
ground, victims of a form of mental disease which is best 
expressed by the term demonophobia. They are haunted 
and oppressed by a perpetual dread of demons. They are 
firmly convinced that evil spirits of all kinds, from malignant 
fiends to merely mischievous imps and elves, are ever on the 
watch to harm, harass, and torment them, to cause plague, 
sickness, famine, and disaster, to impede, injure, and mar 
every good work.”” Elsewhere the same writer has ex- 
pressed the same view somewhat more fully. “In fact,” he 
says, “a belief in every kind of demoniacal influence has 
always been from the earliest times an essential ingredient in 
Hindu religious thought. The idea probably had its origin 
in the supposed peopling of the air by spiritual beings— 
the personifications or companions of storm and tempest. 
Certainly no one who has ever been brought into close 
contact with the Hindus in their own country can doubt the 


1H. Oldenberg, Dze Religion des and Life in India (London, 1883), pp. 
Veda (Berlin, 1894), pp. 39 sg. 210 sq. 
2 MonierWilliams, Religious Thought 


Demons 
in modern 
India. 


Demons 
in Bengal. 


92 THE OMNIPRESENCE OF DEMONS CHAP. 


fact that the worship of at least ninety per cent. of the 
people of India in the present day is a worship of fear. 
Not that the existence of good deities presided over by one 
Supreme Being is doubted; but that these deities are 
believed to be too absolutely good to need propitiation ; 
just as in ancient histories of the Slav races, we are told 
that they believed in a white god and a black god, but paid 
adoration to the last alone, having, as they supposed, 
nothing to apprehend from the beneficence of the first 
or white deity.. The simple truth is that evil ofall 
kinds, difficulties, dangers and disasters, famines, diseases, 
pestilences and death, are thought by an ordinary Hindu 
to proceed from demons, or, more properly speaking, from 
devils, and from devils alone. These malignant beings 
are held, as we have seen, to possess varying degrees of 
rank, power, and malevolence. Some aim at destroying 
the entire world, and threaten the sovereignty of the 
gods themselves. Some delight in killing men, women, 
and children, out of a mere thirst for human blood. Some 
take a mere mischievous pleasure in tormenting, or revel in 
the infliction of sickness, injury, and misfortune. All make 
it their business to mar or impede the progress of good 
works and useful undertakings.” 1 

It would be easy but tedious to illustrate in detail this 
general account of the dread of demons which prevails 
among the inhabitants of India at the present day. A very 
few particular statements must suffice. Thus, we are told 
that the Oraons, a Dravidian race in Bengal, “acknowledge 
a Supreme God, adored as Dharmi or Dharmesh, the Holy 
One, who is manifest in the sun, and they regard Dharmesh 
as a perfectly pure, beneficent being, who created us and 
would in his goodness and mercy preserve us, but that his 
benevolent designs are thwarted by malignant spirits whom 
mortals must propitiate, as Dharmesh cannot or does not 
interfere, if the spirit of evil once fastens upon us. It 
is, therefore, of no use to pray to Dharmesh or to offer 


1 Monier Williams, of. czt. pp. 230 by Mr. E. T. Atkinson, Zhe Hzma- 
sq. The views here expressed by the J/ayan Districts of the North-Western 
late Professor Monier Williams are Pyrovinces of India, ii. (Allahabad, 
confirmed from personal knowledge 1884) p. 840. 


II THE OMNIPRESENCE OF DEMONS 93 


sacrifices to him; so though acknowledged, recognised, and 
reverenced, he is neglected, whilst the malignant spirits are 
adored.” Again, it is said of these Oraons that, “as the 
sole object of their religious ceremonies is the propitiation of 
the demons who are ever thwarting the benevolent intentions 
of Dharmesh, they have no notion of a service of thanks- 
giving.” Once more, after giving a list of Oraon demons, 
the same writer goes on: “ Besides this superstitious dread 
of the spirits above named, the Oraon’s imagination trem- 


_blingly wanders in a world of ghosts. Every rock, road, 


river, and grove is haunted.”* Again, a missionary who 
spent many years among the Kacharis of Assam tells 
us that “the religion of the Kachari race is distinctly of the 
type commonly known as ‘animistic’ and its underlying prin- 
ciple is characteristically one of fear or dread. The statement 
Timor fectt deos certainly holds good of this people in its widest 
and strictest sense; and their religion thus stands in very 
marked, not to say violent, contrast with the teaching of the 
Faith in Christ. In the typical Kachari village as a rule 
neither idol nor place of worship is to be found; but to the 
Kachari mind and imagination earth, air, and sky are alike 
peopled with a vast number of invisible spiritual beings, 
known usually as JZodaz, all possessing powers and faculties 
far greater than those of man, and almost invariably inclined 
to use these powers for malignant and malevolent, rather 
than benevolent, purposes. In a certain stage of moral and 
spiritual development men are undoubtedly influenced far 
more by what they fear than by what they love; and this 
truth certainly applies to the Kachari race in the most 
unqualified way.”* Again, the Siyins, who inhabit the Chin 
Hills of north-eastern India, on the borders of Burma, 
“say that there is no Supreme God and no other world save 
this, which is full of evil spirits who inhabit the fields, infest 
the houses, and haunt the jungles. These spirits must be 
propitiated or bribed to refrain from doing the particular harm 
of which each is capable, for one can destroy crops, another 
can make women barren, and a third cause a lizard to enter 


1 E. T. Dalton, Descriptive Ethno- 2 Rev. S. Endle, Zhe Kacharis 
logy of Bengal (Calcutta, 1872), pp. (London, 1911), p. 33. 
256, 257, 258. 


Demons 
in Assam. 


Demons 
in the 
Chin Hills. 


Demons 

in Sikhim, 
Tibet, and 
Assam. 


Demons 
in Travan- 
core, 


Demons 
in Ceylon. 


94 THE OMNIPRESENCE OF DEMONS CHAP. 


the stomach and devour the bowels.”! “Like most moun- 


taineers, the people of Sikhim and the Tibetans are thorough- 
going demon-worshippers. In every nook, path, big tree, 
rock, spring, waterfall and lake there lurks a devil ; for which 
reason few individuals will venture out alone after dark. 
The sky, the ground, the house, the field, the country have 
each their special demons, and sickness is always attributed 
to malign demoniacal influence.”” “Even the purest of all 
the Lamaist sects—the Ge-lug-pa—are thorough-paced 
devil-worshippers, and value Buddhism chiefly because it 
gives them the whip-hand over the devils which everywhere 
vex humanity with disease and disaster, and whose ferocity 
weighs heavily on all.”* The Lushais of Assam believe in 
a beneficent spirit named Pathian, who made everything but 
troubles himself very little about men. Far more important 
in ordinary life are the numerous demons (waz), who inhabit 
every stream, mountain, and forest, and are all malignant. 
To their agency are ascribed all the illnesses and misfortunes 
that afflict humanity, and a Lushai’s whole life is spent in 
propitiating them. It is the sorcerer (uzthzam) who knows 
what demon is causing any particular trouble, and it is he 
who can prescribe the sort of sacrifice which will appease 
the wrath of the fiend. Every form of sickness is set down 
to the influence of some demon or other, and all the tales 
about these spiritual foes begin or end with the recurrent 
phrase, “There was much sickness in our village.”* In 
Travancore “the minor superstitions connected with demon- 
worship are well-nigh innumerable ; they enter into all the 
feelings, and are associated with the whole life of these people. 
Every disease, accident, or misfortune is attributed to the 
agency of the devils, and great caution is exercised to avoid 
arousing their fury.” * 

With regard to the inhabitants of Ceylon we are told 
that “the fiends which they conceive to be hovering around 


1 Bertram S. Carey and H. N. 7vzdet (London, 1895), p. 152. 
Tuck, Zhe Chin Hills, i. (Rangoon, 4 Lt.-Colonel J. Shakespear, Zwhe 
ey 
x30) pa le p Lushet Kuki Clans (London, 7912), 
2 -L. A. Waddell, ‘* Demonolatry in apa GI Gn 7G 
Sikhim Lamaism,” Zhe Jndian Antzi- PP- SA STE 
guary, xxiii. (1894) p. 197. 6 Rev. S. Mateer, Zhe Land of 
3 LL. A. Waddell, Zhe Buddhism of Charity (London, 1883), p. 207. 


ir THE OMNIPRESENCE OF DEMONS 95 


them are without number. Every disease or trouble that 
assails them is produced by the immediate agency of the 
demons sent to punish them: while, on the other hand, 
every blessing or success comes directly from the hands 
of the beneficent and supreme God. To screen themselves 
from the power of the inferior deities, who are all repre- 
sented as wicked spirits, and whose power is by no means 
irresistible, they wear amulets of various descriptions ; and 
employ a variety of charms and spells to ward off the 
influence of witchcraft and enchantments by. which they 
think themselves beset on all sides.” “It is probable that, 
by degrees, intercourse with Europeans will entirely do away 
these superstitious fears, as the Cinglese of the towns 
have already made considerable progress in subduing their 
gloomy apprehensions. Not so the poor wretched peasants 
who inhabit the more mountainous parts of the country, and 
live at a distance from our settlements. These unhappy 
people have never for a moment their minds free from 
the terror of those demons who seem perpetually to hover 
around them. Their imaginations are so disturbed by such 
ideas that it is not uncommon to see many driven to mad- 
ness from this cause. Several Cinglese lunatics have fallen 
under my own observation; and upon inquiring into the 
circumstances which had deprived them of their reason, 
I universally found that their wretched state was to be 
traced solely to the excess of their superstitious fears. The 
spirits of the wicked subordinate demons are the chief 
objects of fear among the Ceylonese; and impress their 
minds with much more awe than the more powerful divini- 
ties who dispense blessings among them. They indeed 
think that their country is in a particular manner delivered 
over to the dominion of evil spirits.” 

In Eastern as well as Southern Asia the same view 
of nature as pervaded by a multitude of spirits, mostly 
mischievous and malignant, has survived the nominal 
establishment of a higher faith. “In spite of their long 
conversion, their sincere belief in, and their pure form of, 
Buddhism, which expressly repudiates and forbids such 


1 R. Percival, Account of the Island of Ceylon, Second Edition (London, 
1805), pp. 211-213. 


Demons 
in Burma. 


96 THE OMNIPRESENCE OF DEMONS CHAP. 


worship, the Burmans and Taleins (or Mons) have in a 
great measure kept their ancient spirit or demon worship. 
With the Taleins this is more especially the case. Indeed, 
with the country population of Pegu the worship, or it 
should rather be said the propitiation, of the ‘nats’ or 
spirits, enters into every act of their ordinary life, and 
Buddha’s doctrine seems kept for sacred days and their 
visits to the kyoung (monastery) or to the pagoda.”? Or, 
as another writer puts it, “the propitiating of the nats is 
a question of daily concern to the lower class Burman, 
while the worship at the pagoda is only thought of once 
a week. For the nat may prove destructive and hostile at 
any time, whereas the acquisition of oothoh [merit] at the 
pagoda is a thing which may be set about in a business-like 
way, and at proper and convenient seasons.”* But the term 
worship, we are informed, hardly conveys a proper notion of 
the attitude of the Burmese towards the nats or spirits. 
“Even the Karens and Kachins, who have no other form of 
belief, do not regard them otherwise than as malevolent 
beings who must be looked up to with fear, and propitiated 
by regular offerings. They do not want to have anything 
to do with the nats; all they seek is to be let alone. The 
bamboo pipes of spirit, the bones of sacrificial animals, 
the hatchets, swords, spears, bows and arrows that line 
the way to a Kachin village, are placed there not with 
the idea of attracting the spirits, but of preventing them 
from coming right among the houses in search of their 
requirements. If they want to drink, the rice spirit has 
been poured out, and the bamboo stoup is there in evidence 
of the libation; the blood-stained skulls of oxen, pigs, 
and the feathers of fowls show that there has been no 
stint of meat offerings; should the nats wax quarrelsome, 
and wish to fight, there are the axes and dahs with which to 
commence the fray. Only let them be grateful, and leave 
their trembling worshippers in peace and quietness.” * 


1 C.J. F. S. Forbes, British Burma 3 Shway Yoe, of. cz. 1. 276. )So 

(London, 1878), pp. 221 sg. the Burman,” says A. Bastian, ‘‘ the 

whole world is filled with nats. 

2 Shway Yoe, Zhe Burman, his Mountains, rivers, waters, the earth, 

Life and Notions (London, 1882), i.  etc., have all their nat” (Dze Volker 
276 sg. des Ostlichen Asien, ii. 497). 


II THE OMNIPRESENCE OF DEMONS 07 


Similarly the Lao or Laosians of Siam, though they are 
nominally Buddhists, and have monks and pagodas with 
images of Buddha, are said to pay more respect to spirits or 
demons than to these idols." “The desire to propitiate the 
good spirits and to exorcise the bad ones is the prevailing 
influence upon the life of a Laosian. With pvsees [evil 
spirits] to right of him, to left of him, in front of him, 
behind him, all round him, his mind is haunted with a 
perpetual desire to make terms with them, and to ensure 
the assistance of the great Buddha, so that he may pre- 
serve both body and soul from the hands of the spirits.” ” 
“Independently of the demons who are in hell, the 
Siamese recognise another sort of devils diffused in the 
air: they call them pz; these are, they say, the demons 
who do harm to men and who appear sometimes in horrible 
shapes. They put down to the account of these malign 
spirits all the calamities which happen in the world. If a 
mother has lost a child, it is a 42 who has done the ill turn ; 
if a sick man is given over, it is a p#z that is at the bottom 
of it. To appease him, they invoke him and make him 
offerings which they hang up in desert places.”* As to the 
Thay, a widely spread race of Indo-China,* a French 
missionary writes as follows: “It may be said that the 
Thay lives in constant intercourse with the invisible world. 
There is hardly an act of his life which is not regulated by 
some religious belief. There are two worships, the worship 
of the spirits and the worship of the dead, which, however, 
are scarcely distinguishable from each other, since the dead 
become spirits by the mere fact of their death. His simple 
imagination represents to him the world of spirits as a sort 
of double of the state of things here below. At the summit 
is Po Then, the father of the empyrean. Below him are the 
Then—Then Bun, Then Kum, Then Kom, of whom the 
chief is Then Luong, ‘the great Then.’ The dead go and 
cultivate his rice-fields in heaven and clear his mountains, 
just as they did their own in their life on earth. He has to 


1 Mer. Pallegoix, Description du 3 Mer. Bruguiére, in Aznales de 
royaume That ou Stam (Paris, 1854), Association de la Propagation de la 
eA 2. Fot, v. (1831) p. 128. 

2 C. Bock, Temples and Elephants 4 J. Deniker, Zhe Races of Man 
(London, 1884), p. 198. (London, 1900), pp. 400 sgg. 


PT. VI H 


Demons 
in Siam. 


Demons 
in Indo- 
China. 


98 THE OMNIPRESENCE OF DEMONS CHAP. 


wife a goddess Me Bau. Besides these heavenly spirits, the 
Thay reckons a multitude of others under the name of fhz. 
His science being not very extensive, many things seem 
extraordinary to him. If he cannot explain a certain natural 
phenomenon, his perplexity does not last long. It is the 
work of a pz, he says, and his priests take care not to 
dissuade him. Hence he sees spirits everywhere. There 
are pi on the steep mountains, in the deep woods, the phz 
bai who, by night on the mountain, imitate the rain and the 
storms and leave no trace of their passage. If they shew 
themselves, they appear in the form of gigantic animals and 
cause terrible stomach troubles, such as diarrhoea, dysentery, 
and so on. ... The large animals of the forest, wild oxen 
and buffaloes, rhinoceroses, elephants, and so on, have their 
guardian spirits. Hence the prudent hunter learns at the 
outset to exorcise them in order that, when he has killed 
these animals, he may be able to cut them up and eat their 
flesh without having to fear the vengeance of their invisible 
guardian. Spirits also guard the clearings whither the deer 
come by night to drink. The hunter should sacrifice a fowl 
to them from time to time, if he would bring down his game 
with ease. The gun itself has a spirit who looks to it that 
the powder explodes. In short, the Thay cannot take a 
single step without meeting a spirit on the path.”* “Thus 
the life of the Thay seems regulated down to its smallest 
details by custom founded on his belief in the spirits. Spirits 
perpetually watch him, ready to punish his negligences, and 
he is afraid. Fear is not only for him the beginning of 
wisdom, it is the whole of his wisdom. Love has only 
a very moderate place in it. Even the respect in which he 
holds his dead, and the honours which he pays them on 
various occasions, seem to be dominated by a superstitious 
fear. It seems that the sacrifices which he offers to them 
aim rather at averting from himself the evils which he 
dreads than at honouring worthily the memory of his 
deceased kinsfolk and at paying them the tribute of his 
affection and gratitude. Once they sleep their last sleep 
yonder in the shadow of the great trees of the forest, none” 
goes to shed a tear and murmur a prayer on their grave. 
1 A. Bourlet, ‘‘ Les Thay,” Azthropos, ii. (1907) p. 619. 


81 THE OMNIPRESENCE OF DEMONS 99 


Nothing but calamity suffices to rescue them from the 
oblivion into which they had fallen in the memory of the 
living.” ? 

“The dogma, prevailing in China from the earliest times, 
that the universe is filled in all its parts with sen and kwez, 
naturally implies that devils and demons must also swarm 
about the homes of men in numbers inestimable. It is, in 
fact, an axiom which constantly comes out in conversing 
with the people, that they haunt every frequented and lonely 
spot, and that no place exists where man is safe from 
them.”? “The worship and propitiation of the gods, which 
is the main part of China’s religion, has no higher purpose 
than that of inducing the gods to protect man against the 
world of evil, or, by descending among men, to drive spectres 
away by their intimidating presence. This cult implies in- 
vocation of happiness; but as happiness merely means 
absence of misfortune which the spectres cause, such a cult 
is tantamount to the disarming of spectres by means of the 
gods. . . . Taoism may then actually be defined as Exorcis- 
ing Polytheism, a cult of the gods with which Eastern 
Asiatic imagination has filled the universe, connected with 
a highly developed system of magic, consisting for a great 
part in exorcism. This cult and magic is, of course, prin- 
cipally in the hands of priests. But, besides, the lay world, 
enslaved to the intense belief in the perilous omnipresence 
of spectres, is engaged every day in a restless defensive and 
offensive war against those beings.” ® 

In Corea, “among the reasons which render the shaman 
a necessity are these. In Korean belief, earth, air, and sea 
are peopled by demons. They haunt every umbrageous 
tree, shady ravine, crystal spring, and miountain crest. On 
green hill-slopes, in peaceful agricultural valleys, in grassy 
dells, on wooded uplands, by lake and stream, by road and 
river, in north, south, east, and west, they abound, making 


1 A. Bourlet, of. cit. p. 632. 
2 J. J. M. de Groot, Zhe Religious 
System of China, v. (Leyden, 1907) 


a7 Oo: 

3 J. J. M. de Groot, of. ctt. vi. 
(Leyden, 1910) pp. 930-932. This 
sixth volume of Professor de Groot’s 
great work is mainly devoted to an 


account of the ceaseless war waged by 
the Chinese people on demons or 
spectres (£wez). A more summary 
notice of this curious national delusion 
will be found in his work The 
Religion of the Chinese (New York, 
1910), chapter ii, ‘‘The Struggle 
against Spectres,” pp. 33-61. 


Demons 
in China. 


Demons 
in Corea. 


Demons 
among the 
Koryaks. 


100 THE OMNIPRESENCE OF DEMONS CHAP. 


malignant sport of human destinies. They are on every 
roof, ceiling, fireplace, kang and beam. They fill the 
chimney, the shed, the living-room, the kitchen—they are 
on every shelf and jar. In thousands they waylay the 
traveller as he leaves his home, beside him, behind him, 
dancing in front of him, whirring over his head, crying out 
upon him from earth, air, and water. They are numbered 
by thousands of billions, and it has been well said that their 
ubiquity is an unholy travesty of the Divine Omnipresence. 
This belief, and it seems to be the only one he has, keeps 
the Korean in a perpetual state of nervous apprehension, it 
surrounds him with indefinite terrors, and it may truly be 
said of him that he ‘ passes the time of his sojourning here 
in fear. Every Korean home is subject to demons, here, 
there, and everywhere. They touch the Korean at every 
point in life, making his well-being depend on a continual 
series of acts of propitiation, and they avenge every omission 
with merciless severity, keeping him under this yoke of 
bondage from birth to death.” “Koreans attribute every 
ill by which they are afflicted to demoniacal influence. Bad 
luck in any transaction, official malevolence, illness, whether 
sudden or prolonged, pecuniary misfortune, and loss of 
power or position, are due to the malignity of demons. It 
is over such evils that the Pan-su [shaman] is supposed to 
have power, and to be able to terminate them by magical 
rites, he being possessed by a powerful demon, whose 
strength he is able to wield.” ? 

Of the nomadic Koryaks of north-eastern Asia it is said 
that “all their religious customs have only reference to the 
evil spirits of the earth. Their religion is thus a cunning 
diplomacy or negotiation with these spirits in order, as far 
as possible, to deter them from actions which would be 
injurious to men. Everywhere, on every mountain, in the 
sea, by the rivers, in the forest, and on the plains their 
fancy sees demons lurking, whom they picture to themselves 
as purely malignant and very greedy. Hence the frequent 
offerings by which they seek to satisfy the greed of these 


1 Mrs. Bishop (Isabella L. Bird), the liberty of changing the writer’s 
Korea and her Neighbours (London, ‘‘daemon” and ‘“ daemoniacal” into 
1898), ii. 227 sg., 229. Ihavetaken ‘‘demon” and ‘‘ demoniacal,” 


II THE OMNIPRESENCE OF DEMONS IOI 


insatiable beings, and to redeem that which they value and 
hold dear. Those of the people who are believed to be able 
to divine most easily the wishes of the evil ones and who 
enjoy their favour to a certain extent are called shamans, 
and the religious ceremonies which they perform are 
shamanism. In every case the shamans must give their 
advice as to how the devils are to be got rid of, and must 
reveal the wishes of the demons.”* As to these demons of 
the earth, who infest the Koryaks, we are told that “when 
visiting the houses to cause diseases and to kill people, they 
enter from under ground, through the hearth-fire, and return 
the same way. It happens at times that they steal people, 
and carry them away. They are invisible to human beings, 
and are capable of changing their size. They are sometimes 
so numerous in houses, that they sit on the people, and fill 
up all corners. With hammers and axes they knock people 
over their heads, thus causing headaches. They bite, and 
cause swellings. They shoot invisible arrows, which stick 
in the body, causing death, if a shaman does not pull them 
out in time. The 4a/au [demons] tear out pieces of flesh 
from people, thus causing sores and wounds to form on their 
bodies.” ” 

The Gilyaks of the Amoor valley in eastern Asia believe 
that besides the gods “there are evil supernatural beings 
who do him harm. They are devils, called mmz?k, kznr. 
These beings appear in the most varied forms and are dis- 
tinguished according to the degree of their harmfulness. 
They appear now in the form of a Gilyak, now in the form 
of an animal, from a bear down to a toad and a lizard. 
They exist on the land and in the sea, under the earth 
and in the sky. Some of them form special tribes of 
treacherous beings whose essential nature it is to be 
destructive. Others are isolated individuals, ruined beings, 


‘lost sons’ of families of 
exceptional in their hostility 


1C. von Dittmar, ‘‘ Uber die 
Koriken und die ihnen sehr nahe 
verwandten Tschuktschen,” Szlletzn 
de la Classe Historico-philologique de 
P Académie Impériale des Sciences de 
St. Péersbourg, xiii. (1856) coll. 123 


beneficent beings, who are 
to man. The former class 


Sq. 
2 W. Jochelson, Ze Koryak (Ley- 
den and New York, 1908), p. 28 
(The Jesup North Pacific Expedt- 
tion, Memoir of the American Museum 
of Natural History). 


Demons 
among the 
Gilyaks. 


Demons 
in ancient 
Babylonia 
and 
Assyria. 


102 THE OMNIPRESENCE OF DEMONS CHAP. 


are naturally the most dangerous. Some are wholly 
occupied in robbing the Gilyak on the road (the spirits of 
loss—gerniwuch-en) ; others empty his barns, his traps, his 
pitfalls, and so on; lastly there are such also, the most 
dreadful of all, who lie in wait for his life and bring sickness 
and death. Were there no such beings, men would not die. 
A natural death is impossible. Death is the result of the 
wiles of these treacherous beings.” * 

In the more westerly parts of the old world “the same 
belief in the omnipresence and mischievous power of spirits 
has prevailed from antiquity to the present day. If we may 
judge from the fragments of their literature which have been 
deciphered, few people seem to have suffered more from the 
persistent assaults of demons than the ancient Babylonians 
and Assyrians, and the evil spirits that preyed on them were 
of a peculiarly cruel and malignant sort; even the gods 
themselves were not exempt from their attacks. These 
baleful beings lurked in solitary places, in graves, in the 
shadow of ruins and on the tops of mountains. They dwelt 
in the wilderness, in the holes and dens of the earth, they 
issued from the lower parts of the ground. Nothing could 
resist them in heaven above, nothing could withstand them 
on earth below. They roamed the streets, they leaped from 
house to house. The high and thick fences they penetrated 
like a flood, the door could not stay them, nor the bolt make 
them turn back. They glided through the door like a 
serpent, they pierced through the planks like the wind. 
There was no place, however small, which they could not 
invade, none so large that they could not fill. And their 
wickedness was equal to their power. “They are wicked, 
they are wicked,” says an incantation. No prayers could 
move them, no supplications could make them relent; for 
they knew no pity, they hearkened not to reason, they knew 
no troth. To them all manner of evil was ascribed. Their 
presence was felt not only in the terrible winds that swept 
the land, in the fevers bred of the marshes, and in the 
diseases engendered by the damp heat of summer. All 
the petty annoyances of life—a sudden fall, an unlucky 


1 L. Sternberg, ‘‘ Die Religion der Giljaken,” Archiv ftir Religionswis- 
senschaft, viii. (1905) pp. 460 sg. 


II THE OMNIPRESENCE OF DEMONS 103 


word, a headache, a paltry quarrel—were set down to the 
agency of fiends; and all the fierce emotions that rend the 
mind—love, hate, jealousy, and madness—were equally 
the work of these invisible tormentors. Men and women 
stood in constant danger of them. They tore the wife from 
the bosom of her husband, the son from the knees of his 
father. They ate the flesh and drank the blood of men, 
they prevented them from sleeping or taking food, and to 
adopt a metaphor from one of the texts, “they ground the 
country like flour.” Almost every part of the human frame 
was menaced by a special fiend. One demon assailed the 
head, another the neck, another the hips, and so on. They 
bound a man’s hands, they fettered his feet, they spat poison 
and gall on him. Day and night must he wander without 
rest ; sighs and lamentations were his food. They attacked 
even the animals. They drove doves from their dovecotes, 
and swallows from their nests; they smote the bull and the 
ass. They pursued the cattle to their stalls: they lodged 
with the horses in the stable: they caused the she-ass to 
miscarry, and the young ass at its mother’s dugs to pine 
away. Even lifeless things could be possessed by them ; for 
there were demons that rushed against houses and took 
walls by storm, that shut themselves up in doors, and hid 
themselves under bolts. Indeed they threatened the whole 
world with destruction, and there was none that could deliver 
from them save only the mighty god Marduk.’ 

In the opinion of the ancient Egyptians “there were 
good spirits as well as bad, but the Book of the Dead 
practically ignores the former, and its magical formulae were 
directed entirely against the operations of evil spirits. Though 
naturally of a gay and light-hearted disposition, the Egyptian 
must have lived in a perpetual state of fear of spirits of all 
kinds, spirits of calamity, disease, and sickness, spirits of 
angry gods and ancestors, and above all the spirit of Death. 
His imagination filled the world with spirits, whose acts 


1M. Jastrow, Zhe Religion of 27-30, 343; E. Schrader, Die Keil- 
Babylonia and Assyria (Boston, 1898),  znschriften und das Alte Testament, 
pp- 260 sgg. ; zd., Die Religion Baby-  Dritte Auflage, neu bearbeitet von 
loniens und Assyriens, i. (Giessen, H. Zimmern und H. Winckler (Berlin, 
1905) pp. 278 sgg.; C. Fossey, Za 1902), pp. 458 s¢q. 
Magie Assyrienne (Paris, 1902), pp. 


Demons 
in ancient 
Egypt. 


Demons 
in modern 


Egypt. 


Demons 
in ancient 
Greece. 


104 THE OMNIPRESENCE OF DEMONS CHAP. 


seemed to him to be generally malevolent, and his magical 
and religious literature and his amulets testify to the very 
real terror with which he regarded his future existence in the 
world of spirits. Escape from such spirits was impossible, 
for they could not die.”’ In modern Egypt the jinn, a 
class of spiritual beings intermediate between angels and 
men, are believed to pervade the solid matter of the earth as 
well as the firmament, and they inhabit rivers, ruined houses, 
wells, baths, ovens, and so forth. So thickly do they swarm 
that in pouring water or other liquids on the ground an 
Egyptian will commonly exclaim or mutter “ Destoor!” 
thereby asking the permission or craving the pardon of any 
jinn who might chance to be there, and who might other- 
wise resent being suddenly soused with water or unsavoury 
fluids. So too when people light a fire, let down a bucket 
into a well, or perform other necessary functions, they will 
say “ Permission!” or “Permission, ye blessed!”? Again, 
in Egypt it is not considered proper to sweep out a house 
at night, lest in doing so you should knock against a jinnee, 
who might avenge the insult.’ 

The earliest of the Greek philosophers, Thales, held that 
the world is full of gods or spirits ;* and the same primitive 
creed was expounded by one of the latest pagan thinkers of 
antiquity. Porphyry declared that demons appeared in the 
likeness of animals, that every house and every body was 
full of them, and that forms of ceremonial purification, such 
as beating the air and so forth, had no other object but that 
of driving away the importunate swarms of these invisible 
but dangerous beings. He explained that evil spirits de- 
lighted in food, especially in blood and impurities, that they 
settled like flies on us at meals, and that they could only be 
kept at a distance by ceremonial observances, which were 
directed, not to pleasing the gods, but simply and solely to 
beating off devils.” His theory of religious purification seems 


der Wrwiste und dem 


1 E. A. Wallis Budge, Osirvzs and 
the Egyptian Resurrection (London, 


IQI1), ii. 150. 
2 E. W. Lane, Janners and 
Customs of the Modern Egyptians 


(Paisley and London, 1895), chap. x. 
PP. 231 59. 


3-C. B. Klunzinger, Bz/der aus 


Oberagypten, 
Rothen Meere (Stuttgart, 1877), p. 
382 ; compare zézd. pp. 374 sg. 


4 Aristotle, De anima, i. 5. 173 
Diogenes Laertius, i. I. 27. 
5 Porphyry, quoted by Eusebius, 


Praeparatio Evangeliz, iv. 23. 


1I THE OMNIPRESENCE OF DEMONS 105 


faithfully to reflect the creed of the savage on this subject,’ 
but a philosopher is perhaps the last person whom we should 
expect to find acting as a mirror of savagery. It is less 
surprising to meet with the same venerable doctrine, the 
same world-wide superstition in the mouth of a mediaeval 
abbot ; for we know that a belief in devils has the authority 
of the founder of Christianity and is sanctioned by the 
teaching of the church. No Esquimau on the frozen shores 
of Labrador, no Indian in the sweltering forests of Guiana, 
no cowering Hindoo in the jungles of Bengal, could well 
have a more constant and abiding sense of the presence 
of malignant demons everywhere about him than had Abbot 
Richalm, who ruled over the Cistercian monastery of 
Schénthal in the first half of the thirteenth century. In 
the curious work to which he gave the name of Aeve/atzons, 
he set forth how he was daily and hourly infested by devils, 
whom, though he could not see, he heard, and to whom he 
imputed all the ailments of his flesh and all the frailties 
of his spirit. If he felt squeamish, he was sure that the 
feeling was wrought in him by demoniacal agency. If 
puckers appeared on his nose, if his lower lip drooped, 
the devils had again to answer for it; a cough, a cold 
in the head, a hawking and spitting, could have none 
but a supernatural and devilish origin. If, pacing in his 
orchard on a sunny autumn morning, the portly abbot 
stooped to pick up the mellow fruit that had fallen in 
the night, the blood that mounted to his purple face was 
sent coursing thither by his invisible foes. If the abbot 
tossed on his sleepless couch, while the moonlight, streaming 
in at the window, cast the shadows of the stanchions like 
black bars on the floor of his cell, it was not the fleas and so 
forth that kept him awake—oh no! “ Vermin,” said he sagely, 
“do not really bite”; they seem to bite indeed, but it is 
all the work of devils. If a monk snored in the dormitory, 
the unseemly noise proceeded not from him, but from a 
demon lurking in his person. Especially dangerous were 

1 Elsewhere I have attempted to (‘‘On certain Burial Customs as illus- 
shew that a particular class of purifica- _ trative of the Primitive Theory of the 
tions—those observed by mourners— Soul,” Journal of the Anthropological 


is intended to protect the living from  Jnstztufe, xv. (1886) pp. 64 sg¢.). 
the disembodied spirits of the dead 


Demons in 
mediaeval 
Europe. 


Demons 
in modern 
Europe. 


106 THE OMNIPRESENCE OF DEMONS CHAP. 


the demons of intoxication. These subtle fiends commonly 
lodged at the taverns in the neighbouring town, but on feast 
days they were apt to slip through the monastery gates and 
elide unseen among the monks seated at the refectory table, 
or gathered round the roaring fire on the hearth, while the 
bleak wind whistled in the abbey towers, and a more gener- 
ous vintage than usual glowed and sparkled in the flagons. 
If at such times a jolly, rosy-faced brother appeared to the 
carnal eye and ear to grow obstreperous or maudlin, to 
speak thick or to reel and stagger in his gait, be sure it 
was not the fiery spirit of the grape that moved the holy 
man; it was a spirit of quite a different order. Holding 
such views on the source of all bodily and mental indisposi- 
tion, it was natural enough that the abbot should prescribe 
remedies which are not to be found in the pharmacopeeia, 
and which would be asked for in vain at an apothecary’s. 
They consisted. chiefly of holy water and the sign of the 
cross; this last he recommended particularly as a specific 
for flea-bites.’ 

It is easy to suggest that the abbot’s wits were un- 
settled, that he suffered from hallucinations, and so forth. 
This may have been so; yet a mode of thought like his 
seems to be too common over a great part of the world 
to allow us to attribute it purely to mental derangement. 
In the Middle Ages, when the general level of knowledge 
was low, a state of mind like Richalm’s may have been 
shared by multitudes even of educated people, who have 
not, however, like him, left a monument of their folly to 
posterity. At the present day, through the advance and 
spread of knowledge, it might be difficult to find any person 
of acknowledged sanity holding the abbot’s opinions on the 
subject of demons; but in remote parts of Europe a little 
research might shew that the creed of Porphyry and Richalm 
is still held, with but little variation, by the mass of the 
people. Thus we are told that the Roumanians of Transyl- 
vania “believe themselves to be surrounded on all sides 
by whole legions of evil spirits. These devils are further- 
more assisted by zssejus (another sort of dragon), witches, 


1 C. Meyer, Der Aberglaube des Mittelalters (Bale, 1884), pp. 109-111, 
IQI sq. 


II THE OMNIPRESENCE OF DEMONS 107 


and goblins, and to each of these dangerous beings are 
ascribed particular powers on particular days and at certain 
places. Many and curious are therefore the means by 
which the Roumanians endeavour to counteract these bale- 
ful influences; and a whole complicated study, about as 
laborious as the mastering of an unknown language, is 
required in order to teach an unfortunate peasant to steer 
clear of the dangers by which he supposes himself to be 
beset on all sides.” * 

Similar beliefs are held to this day by the Armenians, 
who, though they are not a European people, have basked in 
the light of Christianity from a time when Central and 
Northern Europe was still plunged in heathen darkness. 
All the activities, we are told, of these professing Christians 
“are paralyzed after sunset, because at every step they 
quake with fear, believing that the evil demons are every- 
where present in the air, in the water, on the earth. By 
day the evil ones are under the earth, therefore boiling hot 
water may not be poured on the ground, because it sinks 
into the earth and burns the feet of the children of the evil 
spirits. But in the evening the superstitious Armenian will 
pour no water at all on the earth, because the evil ones are 
everywhere present on the earth. Some of them are walking 
about, others are sitting at table and feasting, so that they 
might be disturbed by the pouring out of water, and they 
would take vengeance for it. Also by night you should not 
smite the ground with a stick, nor sweep out the house, nor 
remove the dung from the stable, because without knowing 
it you might hit the evil spirits. But if you are compelled 
to sweep by night, you singe the tip of the broom so as to 
frighten the evil ones away in time. You must not go out at 
night bareheaded, for the evil ones would smite you on the 
head. It is also dangerous to drink water out of a vessel in 
the dark, especially when the water is drawn from a brook 
or river; for the evil ones in the water hit out, or they pass 
with the water into a man. Therefore in drinking you 


1 E. Gerard, Zhe Land beyond the been collected by W. Schmidt in his 
Forest (Edinburgh and London, 1888), tract Das Jahr und seine Tage in 
i. 328. The superstitions of the  Meznung und Brauch der Romdnen 
.Roumanians of Transylvania have  Svebendiirgens (Hermannstadt, 1866). 


Demons 
in modern 
Armenia. 


108 THE OMNIPRESENCE OF DEMONS CHAP II. 


should hold a knife with three blades or a piece of iron in 
the water. The baleful influence of the nocturnal demons 
extends also to useful objects; hence after sunset people do 
not lend salt or fire and do not shake out the tablecloth, 
because thereby the salt would lose its savour and the 
welfare of the house would depart.” ? 


1 Manuk Abeghian, Der armenische Volksglaube (Leipsic, 1899), pp. 31 sg. _ 


CHAP TER QI 
THE PUBLIC EXPULSION OF EVILS 


§ 1. The Occasional Expulsion of Evils 


WE can now understand why those general clearances of General 
evil, to which from time to time the savage resorts, should igen 
commonly take the form of a forcible expulsion of devils, take the 
In these evil spirits primitive man sees the cause of many if Es 
not of most of his troubles, and he fancies that if he can only of demons. 
deliver himself from them, things will go better with him. 

The public attempts to expel the accumulated ills of a 

whole community may be divided into two classes, accord- 

ing as the expelled evils are immaterial and invisible or are 
embodied in a material vehicle or scapegoat. The former 

may be called the direct or immediate expulsion of evils; 

the latter the indirect or mediate expulsion, or the expulsion 

by scapegoat. We begin with examples of the former. 

In the island of Rook, between New Guinea and New Generalex- 
Britain, when any misfortune has happened, all the people esata 
run together, scream, curse, howl, and beat the air with Melanesia. 
sticks to drive away the devil (JZarsaba), who is supposed to 
be the author of the mishap. From the spot where the 
mishap took place they drive him step by step to the sea, 
and on reaching the shore they redouble their shouts and 
blows in order to expel him from the island. He generally 
retires to the sea or to the island of Lottin.1 The natives 
of New Britain ascribe sickness, drought, the failure of 
crops, and in short all misfortunes, to the influence of 


1 Paul Reina, ‘‘ Uber die Bewohner gemeine Erdkunde, N.F., iv. (1858) 
der Insel Rook,” Zeztschrift fiir all-  p. 356. 


109 


Expulsions 
of demons 
in Australia 
and.South 
Africa. 


IIO THE PUBLIC EXPULSION OF EVILS CHAP. 


wicked spirits. So at times when many people sicken and 
die, as at the beginning of the rainy season, all the inhabit- 
ants of a district, armed with branches and clubs, go out by 
moonlight to the fields, where they beat and stamp on the 
ground with wild howls till morning, believing that this 
drives away the devils; and for the same purpose they rush 
through the village with burning torches.’ The natives of New 
Caledonia are said to believe that all evils are caused by a 
powerful and malignant spirit ; hence in order to rid themselves 
of him they will from time to time dig a great pit, round 
which the whole tribe gathers. After cursing the demon, 
they fill up the pit with earth, and trample on the top with 
loud shouts. This they call burying the evil spirit? 
Among the Dieri tribe of Central Australia, when a serious 
illness occurs, the medicine-men expel Cootchie or the devil 
by beating the ground in and outside of the camp with the 
stuffed tail of a kangaroo, until they have chased the demon 
away to some distance from the camp. In some South 
African tribes it is a general rule that no common man may 
meddle with spirits, whether good or bad, except to offer 
the customary sacrifices. Demons may haunt him and 
make his life a burden to him, but he must submit to their 
machinations until the matter is taken up by the proper 
authorities. A baboon may be sent by evil spirits and 
perch on a tree within gunshot, or regale itself in his maize- 
field ; but to fire at the beast would be worse than suicide. 
So long as a man remains a solitary sufferer, he has little 
chance of redress. It is supposed that he has committed 
some crime, and that the ancestors in their wrath have sent 
a demon to torment him. But should his neighbours also 
suffer ; should the baboon from choice or necessity (for men 
do sometimes pluck up courage to scare the brutes) select a 
fresh field for its depredations, or the roof of another man’s 
barn for its perch, the case begins to wear a different com- 
plexion. The magicians now deal with the matter seriously. 
One man may be haunted for his sins by a demon, but a 

1 R. Parkinson, J Bismarck-Ar- la Nouvelle-Calédonie,” Bulletin de 
chipfel (Leipsic, 1887), p. 142; zd., Ja Société de Géographie (Paris), VII. 
Dreissig Jahre in der Siidsee (Stutt- Série, vii. (1886) p. 443. 


gart, 1907), p. I19. 3S. Gason, in Journal of the Anthro- 
2 O. Opigez, ‘‘Apercu général sur pological Institute, xxiv. (1895) p. 170. 


III OCCASIONAL EXPULSION OF EVILS III 


whole community infested by devils is another matter. To 
shoot the baboon, however, would be useless; it would 
merely enrage the demon and increase the danger. The 


first thing to do is to ascertain the permanent abode of the 
devil. It is generally a deep pool with overhanging banks 
and dark recesses, There the villagers assemble with the 
priests and magicians at their head, and set about pelting 
the demon with stones, men, women, and children all joining 
in the assault, while they load the object of their fear and 
hate with the foulest abuse. Drums too are beaten, and 
horns blown at intervals, and when everybody has been 
worked up to such a frenzy of excitement that some even 
fancy they see the imp dodging the missiles, he suddenly 
takes to flight, and the village is rid of him for a time. 
After that, the crops may be protected and baboons killed 
with impunity.’ 

When a village has been visited by a series of disasters 
or a severe epidemic, the inhabitants of Minahassa in 
Celebes lay the blame upon the devils who are infesting 
the village and who must be expelled from it. Accord- 
ingly, early one morning all the people, men, women, and 
children, quit their homes, carrying their household goods 
with them, and take up their quarters in temporary huts 
which have been erected outside the village. Here they 
spend several days, offering sacrifices and preparing for the 
final ceremony. At last the men, some wearing masks, 
others with their faces blackened, and so on, but all armed 
with swords, guns, pikes, or brooms, steal cautiously and 
silently back to the deserted village. Then, at a signal 
from the priest, they rush furiously up and down the streets 
and into and under the houses (which are raised on piles 
above the ground), yelling and striking on walls, doors, and 
windows, to drive away the devils. Next, the priests and 
the rest of the people come with the holy fire and march 


nine times round each house 


1 Rev. James Macdonald, fe/zgion 
and Myth (London, 1893), pp. 100-102. 
The writer, who describes the ceremony 
at first hand, remarks that ‘‘ there is 
no periodic purging of devils, nor are 
more spirits than one expelled at a 


and thrice round the ladder 


time.” He adds: ‘I have noticed 
frequently a connection between the 
quantity of grain that could be spared 
for making beer, and the frequency of 
gatherings for the purging of evils.” 


Generalex- 
pulsion of 
demons in 
Minahassa, 
Halma- 
hera, and 
the Kei 
Islands. 


112 THE PUBLIC EXPULSION OF EVILS CHAP. 


that leads up to it, carrying the fire with them. Then they 
take the fire into the kitchen, where it must burn for three 
days continuously. The devils are now driven away, and 
great and general is the joy... The Alfoors of Halmahera 
attribute epidemics to the devil who comes from other 
villages to carry them off. So, in order to rid the village of 
the disease, the sorcerer drives away the devil. From all 
the villagers he receives a costly garment and places it on 
four vessels, which he takes to the forest and leaves at 
the spot where the devil is supposed to be. Then 
with mocking words he bids the demon abandon the 
place.” In the Kei Islands to the south-west of New 
Guinea, the evil spirits, who are quite distinct from the 
souls of the dead, form a mighty host. Almost every tree 
and every cave is the lodging-place of one of these fiends, 
who are moreover extremely irascible and apt to fly out on 
the smallest provocation. To speak loudly in passing their 
abode, to ease nature near a haunted tree or cave, is enough 
to bring down their wrath on the offender, and he must 
either appease them by an offering or burn the scrapings of 
a buffalo’s horn or the hair of a Papuan slave, in order that 
the smell may drive the foul fiends away. The spirits 
manifest their displeasure by sending sickness and other 
calamities. Hence in times of public misfortune, as when 
an epidemic is raging, and all other remedies have failed, 


1 [P. N. Wilken], ‘‘ De godsdienst 2j. G. F. Riedel, ‘Galela und 


en godsdienstplegtigheden der Alfoeren 
in de Menahassa op het eiland Celebes,” 
Tijdschrift voor Nederlandsch Indié, 
December 1849, pp. 392-394; 2d., 
‘‘Bijdragen tot de kennis van de 
zeden en gewoonten der Alfoeren in 
de Minahassa,” Jededeelingen van wege 
het Nederlandsche Zendelinggenootschap, 
vil. (1863) pp: 149) sgq-5) J. |G. Be 
Riedel, ‘‘De Minahasa in 1825,” 
Tijdschrift voor Indische Taal- Land- 
en Volkenkunde, xviii. (1872) pp. 521 
sg. Wilken’s first and fuller account 
is reprinted in N. Graafland’s De 
Minahassa (Rotterdam, 1869), i. 117- 
120. A German translation of Wil- 
ken’s earlier article is printed in Zez¢- 
schrift fiir allgemeine Erdkunde, N.F., 
x. (1861) pp. 43-61. 


Tobeloresen,” Zeztschrift fiir Ethno- 
logie, xvii. (1885) “py (625 Gaeeee 
Wilken, ‘‘Het Shamanisme bij de 
Volken van de Indischen Archipel,” 
Bi dragen tot de Taal- Land- en Volken- 
kunde van Nederlandsch Indie, xxxvi. 
(1887) p. 484; za., Verspretde Ge- 
schriften (The Hague, 1912), ili. 383. 
When smallpox is raging, the Tor- 
adjas of Central Celebes abandon the 
village and live in the bush for seven 
days in order to make the spirit of 
smallpox believe that they are all 
dead. But it does not appear that they 
forcibly expel him from the village. 
See N. Adriani en Alb. C. Kruijt, De 
Bare'e-sprekende Toradja’s van Midden- 
Celebes, i. (Batavia, 1912) p. 417. 


11 OCCASIONAL EXPULSION OF EVILS 113 


the whole population go forth with the priest at their head 
to a place at some distance from the village. Here at sun- 
set they erect a couple of poles with a cross-bar between 
them, to which they attach bags of rice, wooden models 
of pivot-guns, gongs, bracelets, and so on. Then, when 
everybody has taken his place at the poles and a 
death-like silence reigns, the priest lifts up his voice and 
addresses the spirits in their own language as follows: 
“Ho! ho! ho! ye evil spirits who dwell in the trees, ye 
evil spirits who live in the grottoes, ye evil spirits who 
lodge in the earth, we give you these pivot-guns, these 
gongs, etc. Let the sickness cease and not so many people 
die of it.” Then everybody runs home as fast as their legs 
can carry them.' 

In the island of Nias, when a man is seriously ill and 
other remedies have been tried in vain, the sorcerer proceeds 
to exorcise the devil who is causing the illness. A pole is 
set up in front of the house, and from the top of the pole a 
rope of palm-leaves is stretched to the roof of the house. 
Then the sorcerer mounts the roof with a pig, which he kills 
and allows to roll from the roof to the ground. The devil, 
anxious to get the pig, lets himself down hastily from the 
roof by the rope of palm-leaves, and a good spirit, invoked 
by the sorcerer, prevents him from climbing up again, If 
this remedy fails, it is believed that other devils must still be 
lurking in the house. Soa general hunt is made after them. 
All the doors and windows in the house are closed, except a 
single dormer-window in the roof. The men, shut up in the 
house, hew and slash with their swords right and left to the 
clash of gongs and the rub-a-dub of drums. Terrified at 
this onslaught, the devils escape by the dormer-window, and 
sliding down the rope of palm-leaves take themselves off. 
As all the doors and windows, except the one in the roof, 
are shut, the devils cannot get into the house again. In the 
case of an epidemic, the proceedings are similar. All the 
gates of the village, except one, are closed ; every voice is 

1C. M. Pleyte, ‘‘Ethnographische account of the custom had previously 
Beschrijving der Kei-eilanden,” been given by J. G. F. Riedel (De 
Tijdschrift van het Nederlandsch Aard-  sluik- en kroesharige rassen tusschen 
rizkskundig Genootschap, Tweede Serie,  Selebes en Papua, The Hague, 1886, 
X. (1893) pp. 834 sg. A briefer  p. 239). 
PT. VI I 


Demons 
of sickness 
expelled in 
Nias. 


Spiritual 
quarantine 
against 
demons of 
sickness in 
Nias. 


THE PUBLIC EXPULSION OF EVILS CHAP. 


114 


raised, every gong and drum beaten, every sword brandished. 
Thus the devils are driven out and the last gate is shut 
behind them. For eight days thereafter the village is in a 
state of siege, no one being allowed to enter it." 

The means adopted in Nias to exclude an epidemic from 
a village which has not yet been infected by it are somewhat 
similar; but as they exhibit an interesting combination of 
religious ritual with the purely magical ceremony of exorcism, 
it may be worth while to describe them. When it is known 
that a village is suffering from the ravages of a dangerous 
malady, the other villages in the neighbourhood take what 
they regard as effective measures for securing immunity 
from the disease. Some of these measures commend them- 
selves to us as rational and others do not. In the first 
place, quarantine is established in each village, not only 
against the inhabitants of the infected village, but against 
all strangers; no person from outside is allowed to enter. 
In the second place, a feast is made by the people for one 
of their idols who goes by the name of Hangeroe wéchd, or 
Protector from sickness. All the people of the village must 
participate in the sacrifice and bear a share of the cost. The 
principal idol, crowned with palm-leaves, is set up in front 
of the chief’s house, and all the inhabitants who can do so 
gather about it. The names of those who cannot attend 
are mentioned, apparently as a substitute for their attendance 
in person. While the priest is reciting the spells for the 
banishment of the evil spirits, all persons present come 
forward and touch the image. A pig is then killed and 
its flesh furnishes a common meal. The mouth of the idol 
is smeared with the bloody heart of the pig, and a dishful 
of the cooked pork is set before him. Of the flesh thus 
consecrated to the idol none but priests and chiefs may 


1 J. T. Nieuwenhuisen en H. C. B. 
von Rosenberg, ‘‘ Verslag omtrent het 


Taal- Land- en Volkenkunde, xxvi. 
(1880) p. 139; E. Modigliani, Uz 


eiland Nias,” Verhandelingen van het 
Bataviaasch Genootschap van Kunsten 
en Wetenschapen, xxx. (Batavia, 1863) 
pp. 116 sg.; H. von Rosenberg, Der 
Malayische Archipel (Leipsic, 1878), 
Ppp. 174 sg. Compare L. N. H. A. 
Chatelin, ‘‘Godsdienst en Bijgeloof 
der Niassers,” 7ijdschrift voor Indische 


Viaggio a Nias (Milan, 1890), pp. 195, 
382. The Dyaks also drive the devil 
at the point of the sword from a house 
where there is sickness. See C. Hupe, 
“* Korte verhandeling over de gods- 
dienst, zeden, enz. der Dajakkers,” 
Tiyadschrift voor Netrlands Indié, 1846, 
dl. ili. p. 149. 


II OCCASIONAL EXPULSION OF EVILS II5 


partake. Idols called daha, or branches of the principal idol, 
are also set up in front of all the other houses in the village. 
Moreover, bogies made of black wood with white eyes, to 
which the broken crockery of the inhabitants has freely con- 
tributed, are placed at the entrances of the village to scare 
the demon and prevent him from entering. All sorts of 
objects whitened with chalk are also hung up in front of the 
houses to keep the devil out. When eight days have elapsed, 
it is thought that the sacrifice has taken effect, and the 
priest puts an end to the quarantine. All boys and men 
now assemble for the purpose of expelling the evil spirit. 
Led by the priest, they march four times, with a prodigious 
noise and uproar, from one end of the village to the other, 
slashing the air with their knives and stabbing it with their 
spears to frighten the devil away. If all these efforts prove 
vain, and the dreaded sickness breaks out, the people think 
it must be because they have departed from the ways of 
their fathers by raising the price of victuals and pigs too 
high or by enriching themselves with unjust gain. Accord- 
ingly a new idol is made and set up in front of the chief’s 
house ; and while the priest engages in prayer, the chief and 
the magnates of the village touch the image, vowing as they 
do so to return to the old ways and cursing all such as may 
refuse their consent or violate the new law thus solemnly 
enacted. Then all present betake themselves to the river 
and erect another idol on the bank. In presence of this 
latter idol the weights and measures are compared, and any 
that exceed the lawful standard are at once reduced to it. 
When this has been done, they rock the image to and fro to 
signify, or perhaps rather to ensure, thereby that he who 
does not keep the new law shall suffer misfortune, or fall 
sick, or be thwarted in some way or other. Then a pig is 
killed and eaten on the bank of the river. The feast being 
over, each family contributes a certain sum in token that 
they make restitution of their unlawful gains. The money 
thus collected is tied in a bundle, and the priest holds the 
bundle up towards the sky and down towards the earth to 
satisfy the god of the upper and the god of the nether world 
that justice has now been done. After that he either flings 
the bag of money into the river or:buries it in the ground 


116 THE PUBLIC EXPULSION OF EVILS CHAP. 


beside the idol. In the latter case the money naturally 
disappears, and the people explain its disappearance by 
saying that the evil spirit has come and fetched it* A 
method like that which at the present day the people of 
Nias adopt for the sake of conjuring the demon of disease 
was employed in antiquity by the Caunians of Asia Minor 
to banish certain foreign gods whom they had imprudently 
established in their country. All the men of military age 
assembled under arms, and with spear-thrusts in the air 
drove the strange gods step by step from the land and 
across the boundaries.” 


Demons The Solomon Islanders of Bougainville Straits believe 
a that epidemics are always, or nearly always, caused by evil 
ee spirits ; and accordingly when the people of a village have 
Islands, | been suffering generally from colds, they have been known 

to blow conch-shells, beat tins, shout, and knock on the 

houses for the purpose of expelling the demons and so curing 
Demons their colds.* When cholera has broken out in a Burmese 
ae village the able-bodied men scramble on the roofs and lay 
in Burma. about them with bamboos and billets of wood, while all the 


rest of the population, old and young, stand below and thump 
drums, blow trumpets, yell, scream, beat floors, walls, tin 
pans, everything to make a din. This uproar, repeated on 
three successive nights, is thought to be very effective in 
driving away the cholera demons.* The Shans of Kengtung, 
a province of Upper Burma, imagine that epidemics are 
brought about by the prowling ghosts of wicked men, such 
as thieves and murderers, who cannot rest but go about 
doing all the harm they can to the living. Hence when 
sickness is rife, the people take steps to expel these danger- 
ous spirits. The Buddhist priests exert themselves actively 
in the beneficent enterprise. They assemble in a body at 
the Town Court and read the scriptures. Guns are fired 


1 Fr. Kramer, ‘‘ Der Gotzendienst 
der Niasser,” Z7jdschrift voor Indische 
Taal- Land- en Volkenkunde, xxxiii. 
(1890) pp. 486-488. 

2 Herodotus, i. 172. 

3G. C. Wheeler, ‘Sketch of the 
Totemism and Religion of the People 
of the Islands in the Bougainville 
Straits (Western Solomon Islands),”’ 


Archiv fiir Religionswissenschaft, xv. 
(1912) pp. 49, 51 59. 

4 C.J. F.S. Forbes, British Burma 
(London, 1878), p. 233; Shway Yoe, 
The Burman, his Life and Notions 
(London, 1882), i. 282, ii. 105 sgg. ; 
A. Bastian, Dze Volker des dstlichen 
Asien, ii. 98 ; Max and Bertha Ferrars, 
Burma (London, 1900), p. 128. 


Ul OCCASIONAL EXPULSION OF EVILS 117 


and processions march to the city gates, by which the fiends 
are supposed to take their departure. There small trays of 
food are left for them, but the larger offerings are deposited 
in the middle of the town.' When smallpox first appeared 
amongst the Kumis of South-Eastern India, they thought it 
was a devil come from Aracan. The villages were placed 
in a state of siege, no one being allowed to leave or enter 
them. A monkey was killed by being dashed on the 
ground, and its body was hung at the village gate. Its 
blood, mixed with small river pebbles, was sprinkled on the 
houses, the threshold of every house was swept with the 
monkey’s tail, and the fiend was adjured to depart.2. During 
the hot summer cholera is endemic in Southern China, and 
from time to time, when the mortality is great, vigorous 
attempts are made to expel the demons who do all the 
mischief. For this salutary purpose processions parade the 
streets by night; images of the gods are borne in them, 
torches waved, gongs beaten, guns fired, crackers popped, 
swords brandished, demon-dispelling trumpets blown, and 
priests in full canonicals trot up and down jingling hand- 
bells, winding blasts on buffalo horns, and reciting exorcisms. 
Sometimes the deities are represented in these processions 
by living men, who are believed to be possessed by the divine 
spirit. Such a man-god may be seen naked to the waist with 
his dishevelled hair streaming down his back; long daggers 
are stuck in his cheeks and arms, so that the blood drips 
from them. In his hand he carries a two-edged sword, with 
which he deals doughty blows at the invisible foes in the 
air; but sometimes he inflicts bloody wounds on his own 
back with the weapon or with a ball which is studded with 
long sharp nails. Other inspired men are carried in arm- 
chairs, of which the seat, back, arms, and foot-rest are set 
with nails or composed of rows of parallel sword-blades, that 
cut into the flesh of the wretches seated on them: others 
are stretched at full length on beds of nails. For hours 
these bleeding votaries are carried about the city. Again, 


1 (Sir) J. George Scott and J. P. 2 T.- H; Lewin; Wild Tribes of 
Hardiman, Gazetteer of Upper Burma South-Eastern India (London, 1870), 
and the Shan States, Part ii. vol. i.  p. 226. 


(Rangoon, 1901) p. 440. 


Demons 
of sickness 
expelled in 
India and 
China. 


Demons 
of sickness 
expelled in 
Japan. 


118 THE PUBLIC EXPULSION, OFGEVLES CHAP. 


it is not uncommon to see in the procession a medium or 
man-god with a thick needle thrust through his tongue. 
His bloody spittle drips on sheets of paper, which the crowd 
eagerly scrambles for, knowing that with the blood they 
have absorbed the devil-dispelling power inherent in the 
man-god. The bloody papers, pasted on the lintel, walls, 
or beds of a house or on the bodies of the family, are 
supposed to afford complete protection against cholera. 
Such are the methods by which in Southern China the 
demons of disease are banished the city.’ 

In Japan the old-fashioned method of staying an 
epidemic is to expel the demon of the plague from every 
house into which he has entered. The treatment begins 
with the house in which the malady has appeared in the 
mildest form. First of all a Shinto priest makes a pre- 
liminary visit to the sick-room and extracts from the demon 
a promise that he will depart with him at his next visit. 
The day after he comes again, and, seating himself near the 
patient, beseeches the evil spirit to come away with him. 
Meanwhile red rice, which is used only on special occasions, 
has been placed at the sufferer’s head, a closed litter made 
of pine boughs has been brought in, and four men equipped 
with flags or weapons have taken post in the four corners of 
the room to prevent the demon from seeking refuge there. 
All are silent but the priest. The prayer being over, the 
sick man’s pillow is hastily thrown into the litter, and the 
priest cries, “ All right now!” At that the bearers double 
with it into the street, the people within and without beat 
the air with swords, sticks, or anything that comes to hand, 
while others assist in the cure by banging away at drums 
and gongs. A procession is now formed in which only men 
take part, some of them carrying banners, others provided 
with a drum, a bell, a flute, a horn, and all of them wearing 
fillets and horns of twisted straw to keep the demon away 
from themselves. As the procession starts an old man 
chants, “ What god are you bearing away?” To which the 
others respond in chorus, “ The god of the pest we are bear- 
ing away!” Then to the music of the drum, the bell, the 


1 J. J. M. de Groot, The Religious pp. 981 sgg.; zd., The Religion of the 
System of China, vi. (Leyden, 1910) Chznese (New York, 1910), pp. 40 sgg. 


III OCCASIONAL EXPULSION OF EVILS 1I9 


flute, and the horn the litter is borne through the streets. 
During its passage all the people in the town who are not 
taking part in the ceremony remain indoors, every house 
along the route of the procession is carefully closed, and at 
the cross-roads swordsmen are stationed, who guard the 
street by hewing the air to right and left with their blades, 
lest the demon should escape by that way. The litter is 
thus carried to a retired spot between two towns and left 
there, while all who escorted it thither run away. Only the 
priest remains behind for half an hour to complete the exor- 
cism and the cure. The bearers of the litter spend the 
night praying in a temple. Next day they return home, 
but not until they have plunged into a cold bath in the 
open air to prevent the demon from following them. The 
same litter serves to convey the evil spirit from every house 
in the town.’ In Corea, when a patient is recovering from 
the smallpox, a farewell dinner is given in honour of the 
departing spirit of the disease. Friends and relations are 
invited, and the spirit’s share of the good things is packed 
on the back of a hobby-horse and despatched to the bound- 
ary of the town or village, while respectful farewells are 
spoken and hearty good wishes uttered for his prosperous 
journey to his own place.” In Tonquin also a banquet is 
sometimes given to the demon of sickness to induce him to 
go quietly away from the house. The most honourable 
place at the festive board is reserved for the fiend ; prayers, 
caresses, and presents are lavished on him; but if he proves 
obdurate, they assail him with coarse abuse and drive him 
from the house with musket-shots.’ 


1 This description is taken from a 
newspaper-cutting, which was sent to 
me from the west of Scotland in Oc- 
tober 1890, but without the name or 
date of the paper. The account, which 
is headed ‘‘ Exorcism of the Pest Demon 
in Japan,” purports to be derived from 
a series of notes on medical customs of 
the Japanese, which were contributed 
bye OnmeC) HH EH. Hall; of the U.s: 
Navy, to the Sez-2 Awaz Medical 
Journal. Compare Lafcadio Hearn, 
Glimpses of Unfamiliar Japan (London, 
1894), i. 147. 

2 Masanao Koike, ‘‘Zwei Jahren in 


Korea,” Jnternationales Archiv fiir 
LEthnographie, iv. (1891) p. 10; Mrs. 
Bishop, orea and her Neighbours 
(London, 1898), ii. 240. 


3 Lettres édifiantes et curteuses, Nou- 
velle Edition (Paris, 1780-1783), xvi. 
206. It will be noticed that in this 
and the preceding case the principle 
of expulsion is applied for the benefit 
of an individual, not of a whole com- 
munity. Yet the method of procedure 
in both is so similar to that adopted in 
the cases under consideration that I have 
allowed myself to cite them. 


Demons 
of sickness 
expelled in 
Corea and 
Tonquin. 


Demons 
of sickness 
expelled in 
Africa. 


120 THE PUBLIC EXPULSION OF EVILS CHAP. 


When an epidemic is raging on the Gold Coast of West 
Africa, the people will sometimes turn out, armed with clubs 
and torches, to drive the evil spirits away. At a given 
signal the whole population begin with frightful yells to beat 
in every corner of the houses, then rush like mad into the 
streets waving torches and striking frantically in the empty 
air. The uproar goes on till somebody reports that the 
cowed and daunted demons have made good their escape 
by a gate of the town or village; the people stream out 
after them, pursue them for some distance into the forest, 
and warn them never to return. The expulsion of the 
devils is followed by a general massacre of all the cocks in 
the village or town, lest by their unseasonable crowing they 
should betray to the banished demons the direction they 
must take to return to their old homes. For in that country 
the forest grows so thick or the grass so high that you can 
seldom see a village till you are close upon it; and the first 
warning of your approach to human habitations is the crow- 
ing of the cocks." At Great Bassam, in Guinea, the French 
traveller Hecquard witnessed the exorcism of the evil spirit 
who was believed to make women barren. The women who 
wished to become mothers offered to the fetish wine-vessels 
or statuettes representing women suckling children. Then 
being assembled in the fetish hut, they were sprinkled with 
rum by the priest, while young men fired guns and brand- 
ished swords to drive away the demon.? When smallpox 
breaks out in a village of the Cameroons, in West Africa, the 
spirit of the disease is driven out of the village by a “ bush- 
man” or member of the oppressed Bassa tribe, the members 
of which are reputed to possess high magical powers. The 
mode of expulsion consists in drumming and dancing for 
several days. Then the village is enclosed by ropes made 
of creepers in order that the disease may not return. Over 
the principal paths arches of bent poles are made, and fowls 
are buried as sacrifices. Plants of various sorts and the 
mushroom-shaped nests of termite ants are hung from the 


1G. Ziindel, ‘‘Land und Volk der 414 59. 
Eweer auf der Sclavenkiiste in West- 2 H. Hecquard, Rerse an die Kiiste 
afrika,” Zettschrift der Gesellschaft fiir und in das Innere von West- Afrika 
Erdkunde zu Berlin, xii. (1877) pp. (Leipsic, 1854), p. 43- 


I OCCASIONAL EXPULSION OF EVILS 12] 


arches, and a dog, freshly killed, is suspended over the 
middle of the entrance.' The Gallas try to drive away 
fever by firing guns, shouting, and lighting great fires.” 
When sickness was prevalent in a Huron village, and all 
other remedies had been tried in vain, the Indians had 
recourse to the ceremony called Lonouyroya, “which is the 
principal invention and most proper means, so they say, to 
expel from the town or village the devils and evil spirits 
which cause, induce, and import all the maladies and infir- 
mities which they suffer in body and mind.” Accordingly, 
one evening the men would begin to rush like madmen 
about the village, breaking and upsetting whatever they came 
across in thewigwams. They threw fire and burning brands 
about the streets, and all night long they ran howling and 
singing without cessation. Then they all dreamed of some- 
thing, a knife, dog, skin, or whatever it might be, and when 
morning came they went from wigwam to wigwam asking 
for presents. These they received silently, till the particular 
thing was given them which they had dreamed about. On 
receiving it they uttered a cry of joy and rushed from the 
hut, amid the congratulations of all present. The health of 
those who received what they had dreamed of was believed 
to be assured ; whereas those who did not get what they had 
set their hearts upon regarded their fate as sealed.’ 


1 Dr. A. Plehn, ‘‘ Beobachtungen 
in Kamerun, iiber die Anschauungen 
und Gebrauche einiger Negerstimme,” 
Zeitschrift fiir LEthnologie, xxxvi. 
(1904) pp. 717 sq. 

2-Ph. Paulitschke, Z¢thnographie 
Nordost-Afrikas : die materielle Cultur 
der Dan@kil, Galla und Somal (Berlin, 
1893), p. 177. 

3 F. Gabriel Sagard, Le Grand 
Voyage du Pays des Hurons, pp. 279 
sqg. (195 sg. of the reprint, Paris, 
Libraire Tross, 1865). Compare 
Relations des Jésuites, 1639, pp. 88-92 
(Canadian reprint, Quebec, 1858), 
from which it appears that each man 
demanded the subject of his dream in 
the form of a riddle, which the hearers 
tried to solve. The custom of asking 
riddles at certain seasons or on certain 
special occasions is curious and has not 
yet, so far as I know, been explained. 


Perhaps enigmas were originally cir- 
cumlocutions adopted at times when 
for certains reasons the speaker was 
forbidden the use of direct terms. 
They appear to be especially employed 
in the neighbourhood of a dead body. 
Thus in Bolang Mongendo (Celebes) 
riddles may never be asked except 
when there is a corpse in the village. 
See N. P. Wilken en J. A. Schwarz, 
** Allerlei over het land en volk van 
Bolaing Mongondou,” JZededeelingen 
van wege het Nederlandsche Zendeling- 
genootschap, xi. (1867) p. 357. In 
the Aru archipelago, while a corpse is 
uncoffined, the watchers propound 
riddles to each other, or rather they 
think of things which the others have 
to guess, see J) G: Ea Riedely Ye 
slutk- en kroesharige rassen tusschen 
Selebes en Papua, pp. 267 sg. In 
Brittany after a burial, when the rest 


Demons 
of sickness 
expelled in 
America. 


Flight 
from the 
demons of 
sickness. 


THE PUBLIC EXPULSION OF EVIES. CHAP, 


122 


Sometimes, instead of chasing the demon of disease from 
their homes, savages prefer to leave him in peaceable pos- 
session, while they themselves take to flight and attempt to 
prevent him from following in their tracks, Thus when the 
Patagonians were attacked by smallpox, which they attributed 
to the machinations of an evil spirit, they used to abandon 
their sick and flee, slashing the air with their weapons and 
throwing water about in order to keep off the dreadful 
pursuer ; and when after several days’ march they reached 
a place where they hoped to be beyond his reach, they used 
by way of precaution to plant all their cutting weapons with 
the sharp edges turned towards the quarter from which they 
had come, as if they were repelling a charge of cavalry.’ 
Similarly, when the Lules or Tonocotes Indians of the Gran 
Chaco were attacked by an epidemic, they regularly sought 


to evade it by flight, but in so doing they always followed a 


have gone to partake of the funeral 
banquet, old men remain behind in the 
graveyard, and having seated them- 
selves on mallows, ask each other 
riddles. See A. de Nore, Coutumes, 
Mythes et Traditions des Provinces de 
France (Paris and Lyons, 1846), p. 
199. Among the Akamba of British 
East Africa boys and girls at circum- 
cision have to interpret certain picto- 
graphs cut on sticks: these pictographs 
are called ‘‘riddles.” See €. W. 
Hobley, “£¢thnology of A-Kamba and 
other East African Tribes (Cambridge, 
1910), pp. 71 sg. In Vedic times the 
priests proposed enigmas to each other 
at the great sacrifice of a horse. See 
The Satapatha Brahmana, translated 
by J. Eggeling, Part v. (Oxford, 
1900), pp. 314-316 (Sacred Books of 
the East,vol. xliv.); H. Oldenberg, Dze 
Religion des Veda (Berlin, 1894), p. 
475. Compare O. Schrader, /eal- 
lextkon der indogermanischen Alter- 
tumskunde (Strasburg, 1901), pp. 647 
sg. Among Turkish tribes of Central 
Asia girls publicly propound riddles to 
their wooers, who are punished if they 
cannot read them. See H. Vambery, 
Das Ttirkenvolk (Leipsic, 1885), pp. 
232 5g. Among the Alfoors of Central 
Celebes riddles may only be asked 
during the season when the fields are 


being tilled and the crops are growing. 
People meeting together at this time 
occupy themselves with asking riddles 
and telling stories. As soon as some 
one has found the answer to a 
riddle, they all cry out, ‘‘ Make our 
rice to grow, make fat ears to grow 
both in the valleys and on the heights.” 
But during the months which elapse 
between harvest and the preparation 
of new land for tillage the propounding 
of enigmas is strictly forbidden. The 
writer who reports the custom con- 
jectures that the cry ‘‘ Make our rice 
to grow ” is addressed to the souls of 
the ancestors. See A. C. Kruijt, 
‘*Fen en ander aangaande het geestelijk 
en maatschappelijk leven van den Poso- 
Alfoer,” AZededeelingen van wege het 
Nederlandsche  Zendelinggenootschap, 
xxxix. (1895) pp. 142 sg. Amongst 
the Toboongkoo of Central Celebes 
riddles are propounded at harvest and 
by watchers over a corpse. See A. 
C. Kruijt, ‘‘ Eenige ethnografische 
aanteekeningen omtrent de Toboengkoe 
en de Tomori,” J/ededeelingen van 
het Nederlandsche 


weve Zendeling- 
genootschap, xliv. (1900) pp. 223, 
228. 

1A. dWOrbigny, Voyage dans 


Tl Amérique Méridionale, ii. (Paris and 
Strasburg, 1839-1843) p. 190. 


MI OCCASIONAL EXPULSION OF EVILS 123 


sinuous, not a straight, course ; because they said that when 
the disease made after them he would be so exhausted by 
the turnings and windings of the route that he would never 
be able to come up with them.! When the Indians of New 
Mexico were decimated by smallpox or other infectious 
disease, they used to shift their quarters every day, retreating 
into the most sequestered parts of the mountains and choos- 
ing the thorniest thickets they could find, in the hope that 
the smallpox would be too afraid of scratching himself on 
the thorns to follow them.?, When some Chins on a visit to 
Rangoon were attacked by cholera, they went about with 
drawn swords to scare away the demon, and they spent the 
day hiding under bushes so that he might not be able to 
find them.* 


§ 2. The Periodic Expulsion of Evils 


The expulsion of evils, from being occasional, tends 
to become periodic. It comes to be thought desirable 
to have a general riddance of evil spirits at fixed times, 
usually once a year, in order that the people may make a 
fresh start in life, freed from all the malignant influences 
which have been long accumulating about them. Some of 
the Australian blacks annually expelled the ghosts of the 
dead from their territory. The ceremony was witnessed by 
the Rev. W. Ridley on the banks of the River Barwan. “A 
chorus of twenty, old and young, were singing and beating 
time with boomerangs. . . . Suddenly, from under a sheet of 
bark darted a man with his body whitened by pipeclay, his 
head and face coloured with lines of red and yellow, and a 
tuft of feathers fixed by means of a stick two feet above the 
crown of his head. He stood twenty minutes perfectly still, 
gazing upwards. An aboriginal who stood by told me he 
was looking for the ghosts of dead men. At last he began 
to move very slowly, and soon rushed to and fro at full 


1 Pedro Lozano, Descripcion Choro- the Pacific States (London, 1875-1876), 
graphica del Terreno, Rios, Arboles, y i. 589 note *°9, quoting Arlegui, Chvén. 
Animales de las dilatadisstmas Pro- de Zacatecas, pp. 152-3, 182. 
vinctas del Gran Chaco, Gualamba, etc. 3 Bertram S. Carey and H. N. 
ie 1733) p. 100. Tuck, The Chin Hills, i, (Rangoon, 

. H. Bancroft, Natzves Races of 1896) p. 198. 


The 
periodic 
expulsion 
of evils, 


Annual 
expulsion 
of ghosts in 
Australia, 


124 THE PUBLIC EXPULSION OF EVILS CHAP. , ) 
speed, flourishing a branch as if to drive away some foes 
invisible to us.: When I thought this pantomime must be 
almost over, ten more, similarly adorned, suddenly appeared 
from behind the trees, and the whole party joined in a brisk 
conflict with their mysterious assailants. . . . At last, after 
some rapid evolutions in which they put forth all their 
strength, they rested from the exciting toil which they had 
kept up all night and for some hours after sunrise; they 
seemed satisfied that the ghosts were driven away for 
twelve months. They were performing the same ceremony 
at every station along the river, and I am told it is an 
annual custom.” * 

Annual Certain seasons of the year mark themselves naturally 

ec out as appropriate moments for a general expulsion of devils. 

among the Such a moment occurs towards the close of an Arctic winter, 
requ" when the sun reappears on the horizon after an absence of 
weeks or months. Accordingly, at Point Barrow, the most 
northerly extremity of Alaska, and nearly of America, the 
Esquimaux choose the moment of the sun’s reappearance to 
hunt the mischievous spirit Tufia from every house. The 
ceremony was witnessed by the members of the United 
States Polar Expedition, who wintered at Point Barrow. A 
fire was built in front of the council-house, and an old woman 
was posted at the entrance to every house. The men 
cathered round the council-house, while the young women and 
girls drove the spirits out of every house with their knives, 
stabbing viciously under the bunk and deer-skins, and calling 
upon Tufia to be gone. When they thought he had been 
driven out of every hole and corner, they thrust him down 
through the hole in the floor and chased him into the open 
air with loud cries and frantic gestures. Meanwhile the old 
woman at the entrance of the house made passes witha long 
knife in the air to keep him from returning. Each party 
drove the spirit towards the fire and invited him to go into 
it. All were by this time drawn up in a semicircle round 
the fire, when several of the leading men made specific 
charges against the spirit; and each after his speech 
brushed his clothes violently, calling on the spirit to leave 


—S 


1 Rev. W. Ridley, in J. D. Lang’s Compare Rev. W. Ridley, Kamzlarot 
Queensland (London, 1861), p. 441. (Sydney, 1875), p. 149. 


III PERIODIC EXPULSION OF EVILS 125 


him and go into the fire. Two men now stepped forward 
with rifles loaded with blank cartridges, while a third 
brought a vessel of urine and flung it on the flames. At 
the same time one of the men fired a shot into the fire; and as 
the cloud of steam rose it received the other shot, which was 
supposed to finish Tufia for the time being.’ 

In late autumn, when storms rage over the land and 
break the icy fetters by which the frozen sea is as yet but 
slightly bound, when the loosened floes are driven against 
each other and break with loud crashes, and when the cakes 
of ice are piled in wild disorder one upon another, the 
Esquimaux of Baffin Land fancy they hear the voices of the 
spirits who people the mischief-laden air. Then the ghosts 
of the dead knock wildly at the huts, which they cannot 
enter, and woe to the hapless wight whom they catch ; he 
soon sickens and dies. Then the phantom of a huge hairless 
dog pursues the real dogs, which expire in convulsions and 
cramps at sight of him. All the countless spirits of evil are 
abroad, striving to bring sickness and death, foul weather 
and failure in hunting on the Esquimaux. Most dreaded 
of all these spectral visitants are Sedna, mistress of the 
nether world, and her father, to whose share dead Esquimaux 
fall. While the other spirits fill the air and the water, she 
rises from under ground. It is then a busy season for 
the wizards. In every house you may hear them singing 
and praying, while they conjure the spirits, seated in a 
mystic gloom at the back of the hut, which is dimly lit by a 
lamp burning low. The hardest task of all is to drive away 
Sedna, and this is reserved for the most powerful enchanter. 
A rope is coiled on the floor of a large hut in such a way 
as to leave a small opening at the top, which represents the 
breathing hole of a seal. Two enchanters stand beside it, 
one of them grasping a spearas if he were watching a seal- 
hole in winter, the other holding the harpoon-line. A third 


b) 


1 Report of the International Polar reappeared. ‘‘It seems to me,” says 


Expedition to Point Barrow, Alaska 
(Washington, 1885), pp. 42 sg. It is 
said that in Thule, where the sun dis- 
appeared below the horizon for forty 
days every winter, the greatest festival 
of the year was held when the luminary 


Procopius, who records the fact, ‘‘ that 
though the same thing happens every 
year, these islanders are very much 
afraid lest the sun should fail them 
altogether.” See Procopius, De ée//o 
Gothico, li. 15. 


Annual 
expulsion 
of Sedna 
among the 
Esquimaux 
of Baffin 
Land. 


Annual 
expulsion 
of demons 
among the 
Koryaks. 


126 THE PUBLIC EXPULSION OF TV 2i5s' CHAP, 


sorcerer sits at the back of the hut chanting a magic song to 
lure Sedna to the spot. Now she is heard approaching 
under the floor of the hut, breathing heavily ; now she 
emerges at the hole ; now she is harpooned and sinks away 
in angry haste, dragging the harpoon with her, while the 
two men hold on to the line with all their might. The 
struggle is severe, but at last by a desperate wrench she 
tears herself away and returns to her dwelling in Adlivun. 
When the harpoon is drawn up out of the hole it is found 
to be splashed with blood, which the enchanters proudly 
exhibit as a proof of their prowess. Thus Sedna and the 
other evil spirits are at last driven away, and next day a 
sreat festival is celebrated by old and young in honour of 
the event. But they must still be cautious, for the wounded 
Sedna is furious and will seize any one she may find outside 
of his hut ; so they all wear amulets on the top of their 
hoods to protect themselves against her. These amulets 
consist of pieces of the first garments that they wore after 
birth." 

The Koryaks of the Taigonos Peninsula, in north-eastern 
Asia, celebrate annually a festival after the winter solstice. 
Rich men invite all their neighbours to the festival, offer a 
sacrifice to “ The-One-on-High,” and slaughter many rein- 
deer for their guests. If there is a shaman present he goes 
all round the interior of the house, beating the drum and 
driving away the demons (Aa/au). He searches all the 
people in the house, and if he finds a demon’s arrow sticking 
in the body of one of them, he pulls it out, though naturally 
the arrow is invisible to common eyes. In this way he 
protects them against disease and death. If there is no 


an ill omen. 


1 Fr. Boas, ‘‘The Eskimo,” Proceed- 
ings and Transactions of the Royal 
Soctety of Canada for 1887, vol. v. 
(Montreal, 1888) sect. ii. 36 sg. 3 zd., 
‘©The Central Eskimo,” Szxth Annual 
Report of the Bureau of Ethnology 
(Washington, 1888), pp. 603 sg. Else- 
where, however, the writer mentions a 
different explanation of the custom of 
harpooning Sedna. He says: ‘Sedna 
feels kindly towards the people if they 
have succeeded in cutting her. If 
there is no blood on the knife, it is 


As to the reason why 
Sedna must be cut, the people say 
that it is an old custom, and that it 
makes her feel better, that it is the 
same as giving a thirsty person drink.” 
See Fr. Boas, ‘‘The Eskimo of Baffin 
Land and Hudson Bay,” Axlletin of 
the American Museum of Natural 
History, xv. (New York, 1901) p. 139. 
However, this explanation may well be 
an afterthought devised to throw light 
on an old custom of which the original 
meaning had been forgotten. 


lI PERIODIC EXPULSION OF EVILS 127 


shaman present, the demons may be expelled by the host or 
by a woman skilled in incantations.! 

The Iroquois inaugurated the new year in January, 
February, or March (the time varied) with a “ festival of 
dreams” like that which the Hurons observed on special 
occasions.” The whole ceremonies lasted several days, or 
even weeks, and formed a kind of saturnalia. Men and 
women, variously disguised, went from wigwam to wigwam 
smashing and throwing down whatever they came across. 
It was a time of general license ; the people were supposed 
to be out of their senses, and therefore not to be responsible 
for what they did. Accordingly, many seized the oppor- 
tunity of paying off old scores by belabouring obnoxious 
persons, drenching them with ice-cold water, and covering 
them with filth or hot ashes. Others seized burning brands 
or coals and flung them at the heads of the first persons 
they met. The only way of escaping from these persecutors 
was to guess what they had dreamed of. On one day of the 
festival the ceremony of driving away evil spirits from the 
village took place. Men clothed in the skins of wild beasts, 
their faces covered with hideous masks, and their hands 
with the shell of the tortoise, went from hut to hut making 
frightful noises ; in every hut they took the fuel from the fire 
and scattered the embers and ashes about the floor with their 
hands. The general confession of sins which preceded the 
festival was probably a preparation for the public expulsion 
of evil influences ; it was a way of stripping the people of 
their moral burdens, that these might be collected and cast 
out. This New Year festival is still celebrated by some of 
the heathen Iroquois, though it has been shorn of its former 
turbulence. A conspicuous feature in the ceremony is now 
the sacrifice of the White Dog, but this appears to have been 
added to the festival in comparatively modern times, and 
does not figure in the oldest descriptions of the ceremonies. 
We shall return to it later on.? A great annual festival of 


1 W. Jochelson, Zhe Koryak (Ley- 3 Relations des Jésuttes, 1656, pp. 
den and New York, 1908), p. 88 (7z%e 26-28 (Canadian reprint, Quebec, 
Jesup North Pacific Expedition, vol. vi., 1858); J. F. Lafitau, Jleurs des 
Memoir of the American Museum of  Sauvages Ameriguaims (Paris, 1724), 
Natural History). i. 367-369 ; Charlevoix, Wistotre de Ja 


2 Above, p. 121. Nouvelle France, vi, 82 sgg. ; Timothy 


Annual 
expulsion 
of demons 
among the 
Iroquois. 


Annual 
expulsion 
of evils 
among the 
Cherokees. 


Annual 
expulsion 
of evils 
among the 
Incas of 
Peru. 


THE PUBLIC EXPULSION OF FEVIES CHAP. 


128 


the Cherokee Indians was the Propitiation, “ Cementation,” 
or Purification festival. “It was celebrated shortly after the 
first new moon of autumn, and consisted of a multiplicity of 
rigorous rites, fastings, ablutions, and purifications. Among 
the most important functionaries on the occasion were seven 
exorcisers or cleansers, whose duty it was, at a certain stage 
of the proceedings, to drive away evil and purify the town. 
Each one bore in his hand a white rod of sycamore. ‘ The 
leader, followed by the others, walked around the national 
heptagon, and coming to the treasure or store-house to the 
west of it, they lashed the eaves of the roofs with their rods. 
The leader then went to another house, followed by the 
others, singing, and repeated the same ceremony until every 
house was purified” This ceremony was repeated daily 
during the continuance of the festival. In performing their 
ablutions they went into the water, and allowed their old 
clothes to be carried away by the stream, by which means 
they supposed their impurities removed.” ? 

In September the Incas of Peru celebrated a festival 
called Situa, the object of which was to banish from the 
capital and its vicinity all disease and trouble. The festival 
fell in September because the rains begin about this time, 
and with the first rains there was generally much sickness. 
And the melancholy begotten by the inclemency of the 
weather and the sickliness of the season may well have been 
heightened by the sternness of a landscape which at all 
times is fitted to oppress the mind with a sense of desolation 
and gloom. For Cuzco, the capital of the Incas and the 


Dwight, Zravels in New England and 
New York (London, 1823), iv. 201 sg.; 
L. H. Morgan, League of the Lroquozs 
(Rochester, 1851), pp. 207 sgg.3 Mrs. 
E. A. Smith, ‘* Myths of the Iroquois,” 
Second Annual Report of the Bureau 
of Ethnology (Washington, 1883), pp. 
I12 sgg.; Horatio Hale, ‘‘ Iroquois 
Sacrifice of the White Dog,” American 
Antiquarian, vil. (1885) pp. 7 sqqg.; 
W. M. Beauchamp, ‘Iroquois White 
Dog Feast,” zézd. pp. 235 sgg. ‘* They 
had one day in the year which might 
be called the Festival of Fools ; for in 
fact they pretended to be mad, rushing 


from hut to hut, so that if they ill- 
treated any one or carried off anything, 
they would say next day, ‘I was mad ; 
I had not my senses about me.’ And 
the others would accept this explanation 
and exact no vengeance” (L. Hennepin, 
Description de la Louisiane, Paris, 
1683, pp. 71 5q.). 

1 J. H. Payne, quoted in ‘* Observa- 
tions on the Creek and Cherokee 
Indians, by W. Bartram, 1789, with 
prefatory and supplementary notes by 
E. G. Squier,” Zransactions of the 
American Ethnological Society, vol. iii. 


Part i. (1853) p. 78. 


lll PERTODIC EXPULSION OF EVIES 129 


scene of the ceremony, lies in a high upland valley, bare and 
treeless, shut in on every side by the most arid and for- 
bidding mountains." As a preparation for the festival the 
people fasted on the first day of the moon after the 
autumnal equinox. Having fasted during the day, and 
the night being come, they baked a coarse paste of 
maize. This paste was made of two sorts. One was 
kneaded with the blood of children aged from five to ten 
years, the blood being obtained by bleeding the children 
between the eyebrows. These two kinds of paste were 
baked separately, because they were for different uses. Each 
family assembled at the house of the eldest brother to 
celebrate the feast; and those who had no elder brother 
went to the house of their next relation of greater age. On 
the same night all who had fasted during the day washed 
their bodies, and taking a little of the blood-kneaded paste, 
rubbed it over their head, face, breast, shoulders, arms, and 
legs. They did this in order that the paste might take away 
all their infirmities. After this the head of the family 
anointed the threshold with the same paste, and left it there 
as a token that the inmates of the house had performed their 
ablutions and cleansed their bodies. Meantime the High 
Priest performed the same ceremonies in the temple of the 
Sun. As soon as the Sun rose, all the people worshipped 
and besought him to drive all evils out of the city, and then 
they broke their fast with the paste that had been kneaded 
without blood. When they had paid their worship and 
broken their fast, which they did at a stated hour, in order 
that all might adore the Sun as one man, an Inca of the 
blood royal came forth from the fortress, as a messenger of 
the Sun, richly dressed, with his mantle girded round his 
body, and a lance in his hand. The lance was decked with 
feathers of many hues, extending from the blade to the 
socket, and fastened with rings of gold. He ran down the 
hill from the fortress brandishing his lance, till he reached 
the centre of the great square, where stood the golden urn, 
like a fountain, that was used for the sacrifice of the fermented 


1 C, Gay, ‘“‘Fragment d’un voyage de Géographie (Paris), ii. Série, xix. 
dans le Chili et au Cusco patrie des (1843) pp. 295g. 
anciens Incas,” Bulletin de la Société 
Pre Vii K 


130 THE PUBLIC EXPULSION OF BVIES. CHAP. 


juice of the maize. Here four other Incas of the blood 
royal awaited him, each with a lance in his hand, and his 
mantle girded up to run. The messenger touched their four 
lances with his lance, and told them that the Sun bade them, 
as his messengers, drive the evils out of the city. The four 
Incas then separated and ran down the four royal roads 
which led out of the city to the four quarters of the world. 
While they ran, all the people, great and small, came to the 
doors of their houses, and with great shouts of joy and glad- 
ness shook their clothes, as if they were shaking off dust, 
while they cried, “Let the evils be gone. How greatly 
desired has this festival been by us. O Creator of all things, 
permit us to reach another year, that we may see another 
feast like this.” After they had shaken their clothes, they 
passed their hands over their heads, faces, arms, and legs, as 
if in the act of washing. All this was done to drive the 
evils out of their houses, that the messengers of the Sun 
might banish them from the city ; and it was done not only 
in the streets through which the Incas ran, but generally in 
all quarters of the city. Moreover, they all danced, the Inca 
himself amongst them, and bathed in the rivers and 
fountains, saying that their maladies would come out of 
them. Then they took great torches of straw, bound round 
with cords. These they lighted, and passed from one to the 
other, striking each other with them, and saying, “ Let all 
harm go away.” Meanwhile the runners ran with their 
lances for a quarter of a league outside the city, where they 
found four other Incas ready, who received the lances from 
their hands and ran with them. Thus the lances were 
carried by relays of runners for a distance of five or six 
leagues, at the end of which the runners washed themselves 
and their weapons in rivers, and set up the lances, in sign of 
a boundary within which the banished evils might not 
return.) 


1 Garcilasso de la Vega, Royal Com- 
mentartes of the Yncas, translated by 
(Sir) Clements R. Markham (Hakluyt 
Society, London, 1869-1871), Part i. 
bk. vii. ch. 6, vol. ii. pp. 228 sgg. ; 
Molina, ‘‘Fables and Rites of the 
Yncas,” in Aztes and Laws of the 
Yncas (Hakluyt Society, 1873), pp. 20 


sqq.; J. de Acosta, History of the 
Indies, bk. v. ch. 28, vol. ii. pp. 375 
sg. (Hakluyt Society, London, 1880). 
The accounts of Garcilasso and Molina 
are somewhat discrepant, but this may 
be explained by the statement of the 
latter that ‘‘in one year they added, 
and in another they reduced the number 


Il PERIODIC EXPULSION OF EVILS 131 


The negroes of Guinea annually banish the devil from 
all their towns with much ceremony at a time set apart for the 
purpose. At Axim, on the Gold Coast,this annual expulsion 
is preceded by a feast of eight days, during which mirth and 
jollity, skipping, dancing, and singing prevail, and “a perfect 
lampooning liberty is allowed, and scandal so highly exalted, 
that they may freely sing of all the faults, villanies, and 
frauds of their superiors as well as inferiors, without punish- 
ment, or so much as the least interruption.” On the eighth 
day they hunt out the devil with a dismal cry, running after 
him and pelting him with sticks, stones, and whatever comes 
to hand. When they have driven him far enough out of 
the town, they all return. In this way he is expelled from 
more than a hundred towns at the same time. To make 
sure that he does not return to their houses, the women 
wash and scour all their wooden and earthen vessels, 
“to free them from all uncleanness and the devil.”? <A 
later writer tells us that “on the Gold Coast there are 
stated occasions, when the people turn out ez masse (gener- 
ally at night) with clubs and torches to drive away the evil 
spirits from their towns. At a given signal, the whole 
community start up, commence a most hideous howling, 
beat about in every nook and corner of their dwellings, then 
rush into the streets, with their torches and clubs, like so 
many frantic maniacs, beat the air, and scream at the top 
of their voices, until some one announces the departure of 
the spirits through some gate of the town, when they are 
pursued several miles into the woods, and warned not to 
come back. After this the people breathe easier, sleep more 
quietly, have better health, and the town is once more 
cheered by an abundance of food.” ” 

The ceremony as it is practised at Gatto, in Benin, has 
been described by an English traveller. He says: “It was 


of ceremonies, according to circum- 
stances.” Molina places the festival 
in August, Garcilasso and Acosta in 
September. According to Garcilasso 
there were only four runners in Cuzco ; 
according to Molina there were four 
hundred. Acosta’s account is very 
brief. In the description given in the 
text features have been borrowed from 


all three accounts, where these seemed 
consistent with each other. 

1 W. Bosman, ‘‘ Description of the 
Coast of Guinea,” in J. Pinkerton’s 
Voyages and Travels, xvi. (London, 
1814) p. 402; Pierre Bouche, Za 
Cote des Esclaves (Paris, 1885), p. 395. 

2 Rev. J. Leighton Wilson, Western 
Africa (London, 1856), p. 217. 


Annual 
expulsion 
of demons 
among the 
negroes of 
Guinea. 


Annual 
expulsion 
of demons 
in Benin. 


Annual 
expulsion 
of demons 
at Cape 
Coast 
Castle. 


132 THE PUBLIC EXPULSION OF AVIS. CHAP. 


about this time that I witnessed a strange ceremony, peculiar 
to this people, called the time of the ‘grand devils.” Eight 
men were dressed in a most curious manner, having a dress 
made of bamboo about their bodies, and a cap on the head, 
of various colours and ornamented with red feathers taken 
from the parrot’s tail; round the legs were twisted strings of 
shells, which made a clattering noise as they walked, and the 
face and hands of each individual were covered with a net. 
These strange beings go about the town, by day and by 
night, for the term of one month, uttering the most dis- 
cordant and frightful noises; no one durst venture out at 
night for fear of being killed or seriously maltreated by these 
fellows, who are then especially engaged in driving the evil 
spirits from the town. They go round to all the chief's 
houses, and in addition to the noise they make, perform 
some extraordinary feats in tumbling and gymnastics, for 
which they receive a few cowries.” 

At Cape Coast Castle, on the Gold Coast, the ceremony 
was witnessed on the ninth of October 1844 by an 
Englishman, who has described it as follows: “To-night the 
annual custom of driving the evil spirit, Abonsam, out of 
the town has taken place. As soon as the eight o’clock gun 
fired in the fort the people began firing muskets in their 
houses, turning all their furniture out of doors, beating about 
in every corner of the rooms with sticks. etc., and screaming 
as loudly as possible, in order to frighten the devil. Being 
driven out of the houses, as they imagine, they sallied forth 
into the streets, throwing lighted torches about, shouting, 
screaming, beating sticks together, rattling old pans, making 
the most horrid noise, in order to drive him out of the town 
into the sea. The custom is preceded by four weeks’ dead 
silence ; no gun is allowed to be fired, no drum to be beaten, 
no palaver to be made between man and man. If, during 
these weeks, two natives should disagree and make a noise 
in the town, they are immediately taken before the king and 
fined heavily. If a dog or pig, sheep or goat be found at 
large in the street, it may be killed, or taken by anyone, the 
former owner not being allowed to demand any compensation, 


1 Narrative of Captain James Benin, West Africa (London, 1837), 
Fawckner’s Travels on the Coast of pp. 102 sg. 


ul PERIODIC EXPULSION OF LEVIES 133 


This silence is designed to deceive Abonsam, that, being off 
his guard, he may be taken by surprise, and frightened out 
of the place. If anyone die during the silence, his relatives 
are not allowed to weep until the four weeks have been 
completed.” * 

At Onitsha, on the Niger, Mr. J. C. Taylor witnessed 
the celebration of New Year’s Day by the negroes. It fell 
on the twentieth of December 1858. Every family brought 
a firebrand out into the street, threw it away, and exclaimed 
as they returned, “ The gods of the new year! New Year 
has come round again.” Mr. Taylor adds, “The meaning 
of the custom seems to be that the fire is to drive away the 
old year with its sorrows and evils, and to embrace the new 
year with hearty reception.”” Of all Abyssinian festivals 
that of Mascal or the Cross is celebrated with the greatest 
pomp. During the whole of the interval between St. John’s 
day and the feast a desultory warfare is waged betwixt the 
youth of opposite sexes in the towns. They all sally out in 
the evenings, the boys armed with nettles or thistles and 
the girls with gourds containing a filthy solution of all sorts 
of abominations. When any of the hostile parties meet, 
they begin by reviling each other in the foulest language, 
from which they proceed to personal violence, the boys 
stinging the girls with their nettles, while the girls discharge 
their stink-pots in the faces of their adversaries. These 
hostilities may perhaps be regarded as a preparation for the 
festival of the Cross. The eve of the festival witnesses a 
ceremony which doubtless belongs to the world-wide class of 
customs we are dealing with. At sunset a discharge of fire- 
arms takes place from all the principal houses. ‘“ Then 
every one provides himself with a torch, and during the 
early part of the night bonfires are kindled, and the people 
parade the town, carrying their lighted torches in their 
hands. They go through their houses, too, poking a light 
into every dark corner in the hall, under the couches, in the 
stables, kitchen, etc. as if looking for something lost, and 

1 «Extracts from Diary of the Zhe Yatled Head-hunters of Nigeria 
late Rey. John Martin, Wesleyan (London, 1912), pp. 202 sg. 
Missionary in West Africa, 1843- 2S. Crowther and J. C. Taylor, 


1848,” Man, xii. (1912) pp. 138 sg. The Gospel on the Banks of the Niger 
Compare Major A. J. N. Tremearne, (London, 1859), p. 320. 


Annual 
expulsion 
of evils 
on the 
Niger 
and in 
Abyssinia. 


Annual 
expulsion 
of spirits 
at the yam 
harvest in 
New 
Guinea. 


Annual 
expulsion 
of demons 
among the 
Hos of 
West 
Africa 
before 
eating the 
new yams. 


134 THE PUBLIC EXPULSION OF -EVIES CHAP. 


calling out, ‘Akho, akhoky! turn out the spinage, and 
bring in the porridge; Mascal is come!’ ... After this 
they play, and poke fun and torches at each other.” Next 
morning, while it is still dark, bonfires are kindled on the 
heights near the towns, and people rise early to see them. 
The rising sun of Mascal finds the whole population of 
Abyssinia awake.’ 

Sometimes the date of the annual expulsion of devils is 
fixed with reference to the agricultural seasons. Thus at 
Kiriwina, in South-Eastern New Guinea, when the new yams 
had been harvested, the people feasted and danced for many 
days, and a great deal of property, such as armlets, native 
money, and so forth, was displayed conspicuously on a plat- 
form erected for the purpose. When the festivities were 
over, all the people gathered together and expelled the spirits 
from the village by shouting, beating the posts of the houses, 
and overturning everything under which a wily spirit might 
be supposed to lurk. The explanation which the people 
gave to a missionary was that they had entertained and 
feasted the spirits and provided them with riches, and it was 
now time for them to take their departure. Had they not 
seen the dances, and heard the songs, and gorged themselves 
on the souls of the yams, and appropriated the souls of the 
money and all the other fine things set out on the platform ? 
What more could the spirits want? So out they must go.” 
Among the Hos of Togoland in West Africa the expulsion of 
evils is performed annually before the people eat the new 
yams.» The chiefs meet together and summon the priests 
and magicians. They tell them that the people are now to eat 
the new yams and to be merry, therefore they must cleanse 
the town and remove the evils. For that purpose they take 
leaves of the adzw and wo trees, together with creepers and 
ashes. The leaves and creepers they bind fast to a pole of 
an adzu tree, while they pray that the evil spirits, the witches, 
and all the ills in the town may pass into the bundle and 
be bound. Then they make a paste out of the ashes and 


1 Mansfield Parkyns, JZzfe m 413 59g. 


Abyssinia, Second Edition (London, 3 As to the ceremony of eating the 
1868), pp. 285 sg. new yams, see Sfzrits of the Corn and 
2 George Brown, D.D., Melanesians of the Weld, ii. 58 sgq. é 


and Polynestan (London, 1910), pp. 


Ill PERIODIC EXPULSION OF EVILS 135 


smear it on the bundle, saying, “We smear it on the face of 
all the evil ones who are in this bundle, in order that they 
may not be able to see.” With that they throw the bundle, 
that is, the pole wrapt in leaves and creepers, on the ground 
and they all mock at it. Then they prepare a medicine 
and take the various leaf-wrapt poles, into which they have 
conjured and bound up all mischief, carry them out of the 
town, and set them up in the earth on various roads leading 
into the town. When they have done this, they say that 
they have banished the evils from the town and shut the 
door in their face. With the medicine, which the elders 
have prepared, all men, women, children and chiefs wash 
their faces. After that everybody goes home to sweep out 
his house and homestead. The ground in front of the 
homesteads is also swept, so that the town is thoroughly 
cleansed. All the stalks of grass and refuse of stock yams 
that have been swept together they cast out of the town, 
and they rail at the stock yams. In the course of the 
night the elders assemble and bind a toad to a young palm- 
leaf. They say that they will now sweep out the town and 
end the ceremony. For that purpose they drag the toad 
through the whole town in the direction of Mount Adaklu. 
When that has been done, the priests say that they will now 
remove the sicknesses. In the evening they give public 
notice that they are about to go on the road, and that 
therefore no one may light a fire on the hearth or eat food. 
Next morning the women of the town sweep out their 
houses and hearths and deposit the sweepings on broken 
wooden plates. Many wrap themselves in torn mats and 
tattered clothes; others swathe themselves in grass and 
creepers. While they do so, they pray, saying, “All ye 
sicknesses that are in our body and plague us, we are come 
to-day to throw you out.” When they start to do so, the 
priest gives orders that everybody is to scream once and at 
the same time to smite his mouth. In a moment they all 
scream, smite their mouths, and run as fast as they can in 
the direction of Mount Adaklu. As they run, they say, 
“Out to-day! Out to-day! That which kills anybody, out 
to-day! Ye evil spirits, out to-day! and all that causes our 
heads to ache, out to-day! Anlo and Adaklu are the places 


Annual 
expulsion 
of demons 
among the 
Hos of 
North- 
Eastern 
India at 
harvest. 


136 THE: PUBLIC EXPULSION OP PE VGTES: CHAP. 


whither all ill shall betake itself!” Now on Mount Adaklu 
there grows a #/o tree, and when the people have come to 
the tree they throw everything away and return home. On 
their return they wash themselves with the medicine which 
is set forth in the streets ; then they enter their houses.’ 
Among the Hos of North-Eastern India the great festival 
of the year is the harvest home, held in January, when the 
eranaries are full of grain, and the people, to use their own 
expression, are full of devilry. “They have a strange notion 
that at this period, men and women are so overcharged with 
vicious propensities, that it is absolutely necessary for the 
safety of the person to let off steam by allowing for a time 
full vent to the passions.” The ceremonies open with a 
sacrifice to the village god of three fowls, a cock and 
two hens, one of which must be black. Along with them 
are offered flowers of the Palas tree (Lutea frondosa), bread 
made from rice-flour, and sesamum seeds. These offerings 
are presented by the village priest, who prays that during 
the year about to begin they and their children may 
be preserved from all misfortune and sickness, and that they 
may have seasonable rain and good crops. Prayer is also 
made in some places for the souls of the dead. At this 
time an evil spirit is supposed to infest the place, and to get 
rid of it men, women, and children go in procession round 
and through every part of the village with sticks in their 
hands, as if beating for game, singing a wild chant, and 
shouting vociferously, till they feel assured that the evil 
spirit must have fled. Then they give themselves up to 
feasting and drinking rice-beer, till they are in a fit state for 
the wild debauch which follows. The festival now “ becomes 
a saturnale, during which servants forget their duty to their 
masters, children their reverence for parents, men their 


1 J. Spieth, Die Ewe - Stimme 


wooden beak of a bird. He gathered 
(Berlin, 1906), pp. .305-307. At 


that the ceremony takes place at the 


Kotedougou a French officer saw a 
number of disguised men called dou 
dancing and performing various antics 
about the houses, under the trees, and in 
the fields. Hemp and palm leaves were 
sewn on their garments and they wore 
caps of hemp surmounted by a crest of 
red-ochred wood, sometimes by a 


beginning of winter, and he thought 
that the processions ‘‘are perhaps 
intended to drive away the evil spirits 
at the season of tillage or perhaps also 
to procure rain.” See Le Capitaine 
Binger, Du Niger au Golfe de Guinée 
par le pays de Kong et le Mossi (Paris, 
1892), pp. 378-380. 


II PERIODIC EXPULSION OF EVILS 137 


respect for women, and women all notions of modesty, 
delicacy, and gentleness; they become raging bacchantes.” 
Usually the Hos are quiet and reserved in manner, decorous 
and gentle to women. But during this festival “ their natures 
appear to undergo a temporary change. Sons and daughters 
revile their parents in gross language, and parents their 
children ; men and women become almost like animals in 
the indulgence of their amorous propensities.” The festival 
is not held simultaneously in all the villages. The time 
during which it is celebrated in the different villages of a 
district may be from a month to six weeks, and by a pre- 
concerted arrangement the celebration begins at each village 
on a different date and lasts three or four days; so the 
inhabitants of each may take part in a long series of orgies. 
On these occasions the utmost liberty is given to the girls, 
who may absent themselves for days with the young men 
of another village; parents at such times never attempt to 
lay their daughters under any restraint. The Mundaris, 
kinsmen and neighbours of the Hos, keep the festival in 
much the same manner. “The resemblance to a Saturnale 
is very complete, as at this festival the farm labourers are 
feasted by their masters, and allowed the utmost freedom of 
speech in addressing them. It is the festival of the harvest 
home; the termination of one year’s toil, and a slight respite 
from it before they commence again.” ? 

Amongst some of the Hindoo Koosh tribes, as among 
the Hos and Mundaris, the expulsion of devils takes place 
after harvest. When the last crop of autumn has been got 
in, it is thought necessary to drive away evil spirits from 
the granaries. A kind of porridge called ool is eaten, and 
the head of the family takes his matchlock and fires it into 
the floor. Then, going outside, he sets to work loading and 
firing till his powder-horn is exhausted, while all his neigh- 
bours are similarly employed. The next day is spent in 
rejoicings. In Chitral this festival is called “ devil-driving.”” 


1 E.T. Dalton, Descriptive Ethnology Spirits of the Corn and of the Wild, 
of Bengal (Calcutta, 1872), pp. 196 sg. ii. 66 sg. 
We have seen that among the Pondos 
of South Africa the harvest festival of 2 Major J. Biddulph, 77zbes of the 
first-fruits is in like manner a period Aindoo Koosh (Calcutta, 1880), p. 
of licence and debauchery. See 103. 


Annual 
expulsion 
of demons 
among the 
Hindoo 
Koosh 
tribes at 
harvest. 


Annual 
expulsion 
of demons 
among the 
Khonds at 
sowing. 


138 THE PUBLIC EXPULSION OF VE VIES. CHAP. 


On the other hand the Khonds of India expel the devils at 
seed-time instead of at harvest. At this time they worship 
Pitteri Pennu, the god of increase and of gain in every shape. 
On the first day of the festival a rude car is made of a 
basket set upon a few sticks, tied upon bamboo rollers for 
wheels. The priest takes this car first to the house of the 
lineal head of the tribe, to whom precedence is given in all 
ceremonies connected with agriculture. Here he receives a 
little of each kind of seed and some feathers. He then 
takes the car to all the other houses in the village, each of 
which contributes the same things. Lastly, the car is 
conducted to a field without the village, attended by all 
the young men, who beat each other and strike the air 
violently with long sticks. The seed thus carried out is 
called the share of the “evil spirits, spoilers of the seed.” 
“These are considered to be driven out with the car; and 
when it and its contents are abandoned to them, they are 
held to have no excuse for interfering with the rest of the 
seed-corn.” Next day each household kills a hog over the 
seed for the year, and prays to Pitteri Pennu, saying, “O 
Pitteri Pennu! this seed we shall sow to-morrow. Some 
of us, your suppliants, will have a great return, some a 
small return. Let the least favoured have a full basket, 
let the most favoured have many baskets. Give not this 
seed to ant, or rat, or hog. Let the stems which shall 
spring from it be so stout that the earth shall tremble 
under them. Let the rain find no hole or outlet whereby 
to escape from our fields. Make the earth soft like the 
ashes of cow-dung. To him who has no iron wherewith to 
shoe his plough, make the wood of the dof-tree like iron. 
Provide other food than our seed for the parrot, the crow, 
and all the fowls and beasts of the jungle. Let not the 
white ant destroy the roots, nor the wild hog crush the 
stem to get at the fruit; and make our crops of all 
kinds have a better flavour than that of those of any 
other country.” The elders then feast upon the hogs. 
The young men are excluded from the repast, but 
enjoy the privilege of waylaying and pelting with 
jungle - fruit their elders as they return from the feast. 
Upon the third day the lineal head of the tribe goes 


MI PERIODIC EXPULSION OF EVILS 


139 


out and sows his seed, after which all the 
do so.’ 

In Ranchi, a district of Chota Nagpur in Bengal, a 
ceremony is performed every year by one of the clans to 
drive away disease. Should it prove ineffectual, all the 
villagers assemble by night and walk about the village in a 
body armed with clubs, searching for the disease. Everything 
they find outside of the houses they smash. Hence on that 
day the people throw out their chipped crockery, old pots 
and pans, and other trash into the courtyard, so that when 
the search party comes along they may belabour the heap 
of rubbish to their heart’s content; the crash of shattered 
crockery and the clatter of shivered pans indicates, we are 
told, that the disease has departed; perhaps it might be 
more strictly accurate to say that they have frightened it 
away. At all events a very loud noise is made “so that 
the disease may not remain hidden anywhere.”” In a 
village of the Mossos, an aboriginal tribe of south-western 
China, a French traveller witnessed the annual ceremony of 
the expulsion of devils. Two magicians, wearing mitres of 
red pasteboard, went from house to house, attended by a 
troop of children, their faces smeared with flour, some of 
whom carried torches and others cymbals, while all made 
a deafening noise. After dancing a wild dance in the 
courtyard of the house, they entered the principal room, 
where the performers were regaled with a draught of 
ardent spirits, of which they sprinkled a few drops on the 
floor. Then the magicians recited their spells to oblige 
the evil spirits to quit the chamber and the good spirits 
to enter it. At the end of each phrase, the children, speak- 
ing for the spirits, answered with a shout, “ We go” or 


rest may 


“We come.” 


1 W. Macpherson, JJemorials of 
Service in India from the Corresponda- 
ence of the late Major S. C. Mac- 
pherson (London, 1865), pp. 357 
sg. Possibly this case belongs more 
strictly to the class of mediate ex- 
pulsions, the devils being driven out 
upon the car. Perhaps, however, the 
car with its contents is regarded rather 
as a bribe to induce them to go than 


That concluded the ceremony in the house, 


as a vehicle in which they are actually 
carted away. Anyhow it is convenient 
to take this case along with those 
other expulsions of demons which are 
the accompaniment of an agricultural 
festival. 

2H. (G. eStreathelds) )<*Sikanchi,7 
Journal of the Astatic Society of 
Bengal, \xxii. Part ili. (Calcutta, 
1904) p. 36. 


Annual 
expulsion 
of disease 
in Chota 
Nagpur. 


Annual 
expulsion 
of demons 
among the 
Mossos of 
China. 


Periodical 
expulsion 
of demons 
in Bali. 


140 THE PUBLIC EXPULSION OF EVIES CHAP. 


and the noisy procession filed out to repeat it in the 
next. 

The people of Bali, an island to the east of Java, have 
periodical expulsions of devils upon a great scale. Generally 
the time chosen for the expulsion is the day of the “ dark 
moon” in the ninth month. When the demons have been 
long unmolested the country is said to be “warm,” and the 
priest issues orders to expel them by force, lest the whole of 
Bali should be rendered uninhabitable. On the day appointed 
the people of the village or district assemble at the principal 
temple. Here at a cross-road offerings are set out for the 
devils. After prayers have been recited by the priests, the 
blast of a horn summons the devils to partake of the meal 
which has been prepared for them. At the same time a 
number of men step forward and light their torches at 
the holy lamp which burns before the chief priest. Im- 
mediately afterwards, followed by the bystanders, they 
spread in all directions and march through the streets 
and lanes crying, “Depart! go away!” Wherever they 
pass, the people who have stayed at home hasten, by a 
deafening clatter on doors, beams, rice-blocks, and so 
forth, to take their share in the expulsion of devils. Thus 
chased from the houses, the fiends flee to the banquet 
which has been set out for them; but here the priest 
receives them with curses which finally drive them from 
the district. When the last devil has taken his departure, 
the uproar is succeeded by a dead silence, which lasts 
during the next day also. The devils, it is thought, are 
anxious to return to their old homes, and in order to make 
them think that Bali is not Bali but some desert island, no 
one may stir from his own abode for twenty-four hours. 
Even ordinary household work, including cooking, is dis- 
continued. Only the watchmen may shew themselves in 
the streets. Wreaths of thorns and leaves are hung at all 
the entrances to warn strangers from entering. Not till the 
third day is this state of siege raised, and even then it is 
forbidden to work at the rice-fields or to buy and sell 


1 Le Tour du Monde, iii. (Paris, Calcutta par terre, par M. E. Roux, 
1897) pp. 227 sg., quoting dAwx  Troisieme Partie. 
sources de UlIrraouaddai, a@ Hanoi 2 


} 


| 
( 


WI PERIODIC EXPULSION OF EVILS 141 


in the market. Most people still stay at home, striving 
to while away the time with cards and dice. 

The Shans of Southern China annually expel the fire- 
spirit. The ceremony was witnessed by the English Mission 
under Colonel Sladen on the thirteenth of August 1868. 
Bullocks and cows were slaughtered in the market-place ; 
the meat was all sold, part of it was cooked and eaten, 
while the rest was fired out of guns at sundown. The 
pieces of flesh which fell on the land were supposed to 
become mosquitoes, those which fell in the water were 
believed to turn into leeches. In the evening the chief's 
retainers beat gongs and blew trumpets ; and when dark- 
ness had set in, torches were lit, and a party, preceded by 
the musicians, searched the central court for the fire-spirit, 
who is supposed to lurk about at this season with evil intent. 
They then ransacked all the rooms and the gardens, throw- 
ing the light of the torches into every nook and corner 
where the evil spirit might find a hiding-place. In some 
parts of Fiji an annual ceremony took place which has 
much the aspect of an expulsion of devils. The time of 
its celebration was determined by the appearance of a 
certain fish or sea-slug (a/o/o) which swarms out in dense 
shoals from the coral reefs on a single day of the 
year, usually in the last quarter of the moon in November. 
The appearance of the sea-slugs was the signal for a general 


feast at those places where they were taken. 


1 R. van Eck, ‘‘ Schetsen van het 
eiland Bali,” Z7dschrift voor Neder- 
landsch Indzé, N.S., viii. (1879) pp. 
58-60. Van Eck’s account is reprinted 
in J. Jacobs’s Henzgen tijd onder de 
Baliérs (Batavia, 1883), pp. 190 sgg. 
According to another writer, each 
village may choose its own day for 
expelling the devils, but the ceremony 
must always be performed at the new 
moon. A necessary preliminary is to 
mark exactly the boundaries of the 
village territory, and this is done by 
stretching the leaves of a certain palm 
across the roads at the boundaries. 
See F. A. Liefrinck, ‘‘ Bijdrage tot 
de kennis van het eiland Bali,” Z7d- 
Schrift voor Indische Taal- Land- en 
Volkenkunde, xxxiii. (1890) pp. 246 


An influential 


sg. As to the “dark moon” it is to 
be observed that some eastern nations, 
particularly the Hindoos and the 
Burmese, divide the monthly cycle of 
the moon into two parts, which they 
call the light moon and the dark moon 
respectively. The light moon is the 
first half of the month, when the 
luminary is waxing; the dark moon 
is the second half of the month, when 
the luminary is waning. See Francis 
Buchanan, ‘‘On the Religion and 
Literature of the Burmas,” Aszatick 
Researches, vi. (London, 1801) p. 171. 
The Balinese have no doubt derived 
the distinction, like much else, from 
the Hindoos. 

2 J. Anderson, Wandalay to Momien 
(London, 1876), p. 308. 


Annual 
expulsion 
of the 
fire-spirit 
among 

the Shans. 


Annual 
ceremony 
in Fiji. 


142 THE PUBLIC EXPULSION OF EVILS CHAP. 


man ascended a tree and prayed to the spirit of the sky 
for good crops, fair winds, and so on. Thereupon a 
tremendous clatter, with drumming and shouting, was raised 
by all the people in their houses for about half an hour. 
This was followed by a dead quiet for four days, during 
which the people feasted on the sea-slug. All this time no 
work of any kind might be done, not even a leaf plucked 
nor the offal removed from the houses. If a noise was made 
in any house, as by a child crying, a forfeit was at once 
exacted by the chief. At daylight on the expiry of the 
fourth night the whole town was in an uproar; men and 
boys scampered about, knocking with clubs and _ sticks 


at the doors of the houses and crying “ Sinariba !” 


concluded the ceremony.’ 


1 United States Exploring Expedi- 
tion, Ethnography and Philology, by 
H. Hale (Philadelphia, 1846), pp. 67 
sg.; Ch. Wilkes, Varrative of the U.S. 
Exploring Expedition, New Edition 
(New York, 1851), ili, 90 5g., 342. 
According to the latter writer, the sea- 
slug was eaten by the men alone, who 
lived during the four days in the 
temple, while the women and boys 
remained shut up in their houses. As 
to the annual appearance and catch of 
the sea-slug in the seas of Fiji, see 
further B. Seeman, Vztz, an Account 
of a Government Mission to the Vitian 
or Fijian Islands in the Years 1&S60- 
17862 (Cambridge, 1862), pp. 59-61 ; 
Basil Thomson, Zhe Fzjzans (London, 
1908), pp. 324-327. A somewhat 
different account of the appearance of 
the slug (Palolo veridis) in the Samoan 
Sea is given from personal observation 
by Dr. George Brown. He says: 
‘©This annelid, as far as I can re- 
member, is about 8 or 12 inches long, 
and somewhat thicker than ordinary 
piping-cord. It is found only on two 
mornings in the year, and the time 
when it will appear and disappear can 
be accurately predicted. As a general 
rule only a few fa/olo are found on the 
first day, though occasionally the large 
quantity may appear first; but, as a 
rule, the large quantity appears on the 
second morning. And it is only found 
on these mornings for a very limited 


This 


The natives of Tumleo, a small 


period, viz. from early dawn to about 
seven o’clock, z.e. for about two hours. 
It then disappears until the following 
year, except in some rare instances, 
when it is found for the same limited 
period in the following month after its 
first appearance, I kept records of the 
time, and of the state of the moon, for 
some years, with the following result : 
that it always appeared on two out or 
the following three days, viz. the day 
before, the day of, and the day after 
the last quarter of the October moon.” 
See George Brown, D.D., Melanesians 
and Polynestans (London, 1910), pp. 
135 sg. The slug is also caught in 
the sea off Samoa, according to one 
account, at intervals of six months. 
One of its appearances takes place on 
the eighth day after the new moon of 
October. So regular are the appear- 
ances of the creature that the Samoans 
reckon their time by them. See E. 
Boisse, *‘ Les fles Samoa, Nukunono, 
Fakaafo, Wallis et Hoorn,” Azdletin 
de la Soctété de Géographie (Paris), vi. 
Serie, x. (1875)! pp: 430 s7enueela 
antiquity every year vast shoals of 
a small fish used to ascend the river 
Olynthiac from the lake of Bolbe in 
Macedonia, and all the people of 
the neighbourhood caught and salted 
great store of them. They thought 
that the fish were sent to them by 
Bolbe, the mother of Olynthus, and 
they noted it as a curious fact that 


Il PERIODIC EXPULSION OF EVILS 


143 


island off German New Guinea, also catch the sea-slug 
in the month of November, and at this season they observe 
a curious ceremony, which may perhaps be explained 
as an expulsion of evils or demons. The lads, and 
sometimes grown men with them, go in troops into the 
forest to search for grass-arrows (raug). When they have 
collected a store of these arrows, they take sides and, armed 
with little bows, engage in a regular battle. The arrows fly 
as thick as hail, and though no one is killed, many receive skin 
wounds and are covered with blood. The Catholic mission- 
ary who reports the custom could not ascertain the reasons 
for observing it. Perhaps one set of combatants represents 
the demons or embodied evils of the year, who are defeated 
and driven away by the champions of the people. The 
month in which these combats take place (November 
and the beginning of December) is sometimes named after 
the grass-arrows and sometimes after the sea-slug.’ 

On the last night of the year there is observed in most 
Japanese houses a ceremony called “the exorcism of the 
evil spirit.’ It is performed by the head of the family. 
Clad in his finest robes, with a sword, if he has the right of 
bearing one, at his waist, he goes through all the rooms at 
the hour of midnight, carrying in his left hand a box of 
roasted beans on a lacquered stand. From time to time he 
dips his right hand into the box and scatters a handful 
of beans on a mat, pronouncing a cabalistic form of words 
of which the meaning is, “Go forth, demons! Enter 
tiches!”* According to another account, the ceremony 
takes place on the night before the beginning of spring, and 
the roasted beans are flung against the walls as well as on 
the floors of the houses.* While the duty of expelling the 


the fish never swam higher up than time on purpose. See Athenaeus, 


the tomb of Olynthus, which stood 
on the bank of the river Olynthiac. 
The shoals always made their appear- 
ance in the months of Anthesterion 
and Elaphebolion, and as the people of 
Apollonia (a city on the bank of the 
lake) celebrated their festival of the 
dead at that season, formerly in the 
month of Elaphebolion, but afterwards 
in the month of Anthesterion, they 
imagined that the fish came at that 


Yet, lig oh SiZyAl io 

1 M. J. Erdweg, ‘‘ Die Bewohner der 
Insel Tumleo Berlinhafen, Deutsch- 
New-Guinea,” JMetthezlungen der an- 
thropologischen Gesellschaft in Ween, 
XXXxll. (1902) pp. 329 sg. 

2 A. Humbert, Ze Japon tllustré 
(Paris, 1870), ii. 326. 

3 A. Bastian, Dze Volker des ostlichen 
Asien, v. (Jena, 1869) p. 367. 


Annual 
ceremony 
in Tumleo. 


Annual 
expulsion 
of demons 
in Japan. 


Annual 
expulsion 
of poverty 
and 
demons 

in China, 
India, and 
Persia. 


144 THE PUBLIC EXPULSION OF FVTES. CHAP. 


devils should, strictly speaking, be discharged by the head of 
the house, it is often delegated to a servant. Whether 
master or servant, the performer goes by the name of year- 
man (doshz-otoko), the rite being properly performed on the 
last day of the year. The words “Out with the devils” 
(Ont ha soto) are pronounced by him in a loud voice, but 
the words “In with the luck” (fuku ha uchz) in a low tone. 
In the Shogun’s palace the ceremony was performed by a 
year-man specially appointed for the purpose, who scattered 
parched beans in all the principal rooms. These beans were 
picked up by the women of the palace, who wrapped as 
many of them in paper as they themselves were years old, 
and then flung them backwards out of doors. Sometimes 
people who had reached an unlucky year would gather these 
beans, one for each year of their life and one over, and wrap 
them in paper together with a small copper coin which had 
been rubbed over their body to transfer the ill-luck. The 
packet was afterwards thrown away at a cross-road. This was 
called “flinging away ill-luck” (yaku sute).* According to 
Lafcadio Hearn, the casting-out of devils from the houses is 
performed by a professional exorciser for a small fee, and 
the peas which he scatters about the house are afterwards 
swept up and carefully kept until the first peal of thunder is 
heard in spring, when it is customary to cook and eat some 
of them. After the demons have been thoroughly expelled 
from a house, a charm is set up over the door to prevent them 
from returning: it consists of a wooden skewer with a holly 

leaf and the dried head of a fish like a sardine stuck on it.” 
On the third day of the tenth month in every year the 
Hak-Ka, a native race in the province of Canton, sweep 
their houses and turn the accumulated filth out of doors, 
together with three sticks of incense and some mock money 
made of paper. At the same time they call out, “Let the 
devil of poverty depart! Let the devil of poverty depart!” 
By performing this ceremony they hope to preserve their 
homes from penury.? Among some of the Hindoos of the 
1 WwW. G. Aston, Skzzto (London, Aston as to the formula of exorcism— 


1905), p. 300. “Ont wa soto! fuku wa uchi, ‘*Devils 
* Lafcadio Hearn, Glimpses of Un- out! Good fortune in!” 


Jamiliar Japan (London, 1894), ii. 3 Eitel, ‘‘ Les Hak-ka,” ZL’ Anthro- 


498 sg. The writer agrees with Mr. ologie, iv. (1893) pp. 175 Sg. 


ul PERIODIC EXPULSION OF EVILS 145 


Punjaub on the morning after Diwali or the festival of 
lamps, at which the souls of ancestors are believed to visit 
the house, the oldest woman of the family takes a corn-sieve 
or winnowing basket and a broom, to both of which magical 
virtues are ascribed, and beats them in every corner of the 
house, exclaiming, “ God abide, and poverty depart!” The 
sieve is then carried out of the village, generally to the east 
or north, and being thrown away is supposed to bear away 
with it the poverty and distress of the household. Or the 
woman flings all the sweepings and rubbish out of doors, 
saying, “Let all dirt and wretchedness depart from here, 
and all good fortune come in.”’ The Persians used annually 
to expel the demons or goblins (Dzves) from their houses in 
the month of December. For this purpose the Magi wrote 
certain words with saffron on a piece of parchment or paper 
and then held the writing over a fire into which they threw 
cotton, garlic, grapes, wild rue, and the horn of an animal 
that had been killed on the sixteenth of September. The 
spell thus prepared was nailed or glued to the inside of the 
door, and the door was painted red. Next the priest took 
some sand and spread it out with a knife, while he muttered 
certain prayers. After that he strewed the sand on the 
floor, and the enchantment was complete. The demons now 
immediately vanished, or at least were deprived of all their 
malignant power.” 

For ages it has been customary in China to expel the 
demons from house and home, from towns and cities, at the 
end of every year. Such general expulsions of devils go by 
the name of zo. They are often mentioned and described 
in Chinese literature. For example, under the Han dynasty, 
in the second century of our era, “it was ordered that /fang- 
stang shi with four eyes of gold, masked with bearskins, and 
wearing black coats with red skirts, bearing lances and 
brandishing shields, should always perform at the end of the 
year in the twelfth month the wo of the season, in the rear of 
hundreds of official servants and boys, and search the interior 

1 Panjab Notes and Queries, ii. pp. lore of Northern India (Westminster, 
146 sg., § 792 (June, 1885); D.C. J. 1896), ii. 188, 295 sg. 
Ibbetson, Oudclines of Panjab Ethno- 2 John Richardson, Déctéonary of 
graphy (Calcutta, 1883), p. 119; W. Persian, Arabic, and English, New 
Crooke, Popular Religion and Folk- Edition (London, 1829), p. liii. 
PT. VI 18 


Annual 
expulsion 
of demons 
in China at 
the end of 
the year. 


146 THE PUBLIC EXPULSION OF EVILS. CHAP. 


of the palace, in order to expel the demons of plague. 
With bows of peach wood and arrows of the thorny jujube 
they shoot at the spectres, and with porcelain drums they 
drum at them; moreover they throw red balls and cereals at 
them, in order to remove disease and calamity.”* Again, in 
a poem of the same period we read that “at the end of the 
year the great zo takes place for the purpose of driving off 
all spectres. The fang-szang carry their spears, wu and hzh 
hold their bundles of reed. Ten thousand lads with red 
heads and black clothes, with bows of peach wood and 
arrows of thorny jujube shoot at random all around. 
Showers of potsherds and pebbles come down like rain, 
infallibly killing strong spectres as well as the weak. 
Flaming torches run after these beings, so that a sparkling 
and streaming glare chases the red plague to all sides; 
thereupon they destroy them in the imperial moats and 
break down the suspension bridges (to prevent their 
return).”* At a later period Chinese historians inform 
us that the house of Tsi caused the annual expulsion of 
demons to be performed on the last day of the year by two 
groups, each of one hundred and twenty lads, and twelve 
animals headed by drums and wind instruments. The gates 
of the wards and of the city walls were flung open, and the 
emperor witnessed the ceremony seated on his throne in the 
midst of his officers. With rolling drums the procession 
entered the palace through the western gate, and passed 
through all parts of it in two divisions, even ascending the 
towers, while they hopped, jumped and shrieked; and on 
quitting the palace they spread out in six directions till 
they reached the city walls? At the present time it is 
customary in every part of China to fire off crackers on 
the last day and night of the year for the purpose of 
terrifying and expelling the devils: enormous quantities 
of the explosives are consumed at this season: the people 
seem to vie with one another as to who shall let off 
the most crackers and make the most noise. Sometimes 


long strings of these fireworks hang from balconies and | 


1 J. J. M. de Groot, Zhe Religious  % J. J. M. de Groot, of. cit. vi. 978. | 


System of China, vi. (Leyden, 1910) 


PP- 977 5g. 3 J.J. M. de Groot, of. czt. vi. 979. | 


I PERIODIC EXPULSION OF EVILS 147 


eaves and keep up a continuous crackling for half an hour 
together or more; in great cities the prolonged and ear- 
splitting din is very annoying to foreigners. To the ears of 
the Chinese the noise appears to be agreeable, if not for its 
own sake, at least for the beneficial effect it is supposed 
to produce by driving demons away. Indeed they seem to 
be of opinion that any noise, provided it be sufficiently harsh 
and loud, serves this useful purpose. The sound of brass 
instruments is particularly terrifying to devils; hence the 
great use which the Chinese make of gongs in rites of 
exorcism. Theclash of gongs, we are told, resounds through 
the Chinese empire daily, especially in summer, when a 
rise in the death-rate, which ignorant Europeans attribute 
to mere climatic influences, stimulates the people to redouble 
their efforts for the banishment of the fiends, who are the 
real cause of all the mischief. At such times you may see 
and hear groups of benevolent and public-spirited men and 
women banging gongs, clashing cymbals, and drubbing 
drums for hours together. No protest is made by their 
neighbours, no complaint that they disturb the night’s rest 
of the sick and the tired. People listen with resignation or 
rather with gratitude and complacency to the deafening 
uproar raised by these generous philanthropists, who thus 
devote their services gratuitously to the cause of the public 
health... In Corea, also, the devils are driven out of the 
towns on New Year’s Eve by the firing of guns and the 
popping of crackers. 

In Tonquin a ¢heckydaw or general expulsion of malevolent 
spirits commonly took place once a year, especially if there 
was a great mortality amongst men, the elephants or horses 
of the general’s stable, or the cattle of the country, “the cause 
of which they attribute to the malicious spirits of such men 
as have been put to death for treason, rebellion, and conspir- 
ing the death of the king, general, or princes, and that in 


coho) 
revenge of the punishment they have suffered, they are bent 


to destroy everything and commit horrible violence. To 


1 Jj. J. M. de Groot, Zhe Religious 2 W. Woodville Rockhill, ‘‘ Notes 


| System of China, vi. 944 sgg.3; td., on some of the Laws, Customs, and 


The Religion of China (New York, Superstitions of Korea,” The American 
1910), pp. 38 sg.; J. H. Gray, China Anthropologist, iv. (1891) p. 185. 
(London, 1878), i. 251 sg. 


Annual 
expulsion 
of demons 
in Tonquin. 


148 


THE PUBLIC EXPULSION OF EVILS 


CHAP. 


prevent which their superstition has suggested to them the 
institution of this ¢eckydaw, as a proper means to drive the | 


devil away, and purge the country of evil spirits.” 


The day 


appointed for the ceremony was generally the twenty-fifth of 
February, one month after the beginning of the new year, 
which fell on the twenty-fifth of January. The intermediate 
month was a season of feasting, merry-making of all kinds, 


and general licence. 


During the whole month the great seal 


was kept shut up in a box, face downwards, and the law was, 


as it were, laid asleep. 


All courts of justice were closed ; 


debtors could not be seized; small crimes, such as petty 
larceny, fighting, and assault, escaped with impunity ; only 
treason and murder were taken account of and the male- 
factors detained till the great seal should come into operation 


again. 
were driven away. 


At the close of the saturnalia the wicked spirits 
Great masses of troops and artillery 


having been drawn up with flying colours and all the pomp 


of war, “the general beginneth then to offer meat offerings © 
to the criminal devils and malevolent spirits (for it is usual 
and customary likewise amongst them to feast the condemned 
before their execution), inviting them to eat and drink, when 
in a strange language, by 
characters and figures, etc, of many offences and crimes 
committed by them, as to their having disquieted the land, 
killed his elephants and horses, etc. for all which they | 
justly deserve to be chastised and banished the country. | 
Whereupon three great guns are fired as the last signal ; 
upon which all the artillery and musquets are discharged, 
that, by their most terrible noise the devils may be driven | 
away ; and they are so blind as to believe for certain, that 
they really and effectually put them to flight. 


presently he accuses them 


1S. Baron, ‘Description of the 
Kingdom of Tonqueen,” in J. Pinker- 
ton’s Voyages and Travels, ix. (London, 
I8II) pp. 673, 695 sg.; compare 
Richard, ** History of Tonquin,” zézd. 
p- 746. The account of the ceremony by 
Tavernier (whom Baron criticises very 
unfavourably) is somewhat different. 
According to him, the expulsion of 
wicked souls at the New Year is 
combined with sacrifice to the honoured 
dead. ‘‘At the beginning of every 


y1 


year they have a great solemnity in | 
honour of the dead, who were in their 
lives renowned for their noble actions 
and valour, reckoning rebels among 
them. They set up several altars, 
some for sacrifices, others for the | 
names of the persons they design to: 
honour; and the king, princes, and~ 
mandarins are present at them, and - 
make three profound reverences to the 
altars when the sacrifices are finished 5 _ 
but the king shoots five times against’ 


III PERIODIC EXPULSION OF EVILS 149 


In Cambodia the expulsion of evil spirits took place in 
March. Bits of broken statues and stones, considered as 
the abode of the demons, were collected and brought to the 
capital. Here as many elephants were collected as could be 
got together. On the evening of the full moon volleys of 
musketry were fired and the elephants charged furiously to 
put the devils to flight. The ceremony was performed on 
three successive days." In Siam the banishment of demons 
is annually carried into effect on the last day of the old 
year. A signal gun is fired from the palace; it is answered 
from the next station, and so on from station to station, 
till the firing has reached the outer gate of the city. Thus 
the demons are driven out step by step. As soon as this 
is done a consecrated rope is fastened round the circuit 


of the city walls to 
returning. The rope 
painted in alternate 
According to a more 


prevent the banished demons from 
is made of tough couch-grass and is 
stripes of red, yellow, and blue? 
recent account, the Siamese ceremony 


takes place at the New Year holidays, which are three in 


number, beginning with the first of April. 


For the feasting 


which accompanies these holidays a special kind of cake 


the altars where the rebels’ names are ; 
then the great guns are let off, and the 
soldiers give vollies of small shot, to 
put the souls to flight. The altars and 
papers made use of at the sacrifices are 
burnt, and the bonzes and sages go to 
eat the meat made use of at the 
sacrifice’ (Tavernier, in John Harris’s 
Collection of Voyages and Travels, 
vol. i. (London, 1744) p. 823). The 
translation is somewhat abridged. For 
the French original, see J. B. Taver- 
nier, Voyages en Turguze, en Perse, et 
aux Indes (The Hague, 1718), iii. 
230 sg. 


1B, Aymonier, Wotice sur le Cam- 
bodge (Paris, 1875), p. 62. 


2 A. Bastian, Dze Volker des dstlichen 
Asien, iii. (Jena, 1867) pp. 237, 298, 
314, 529 sg.; Mer. Pallegoix, De- 
scription du Royaume Thai ou Siam 
(Paris, 1854), i. 252. Bastian (p. 
314), with whom Pallegoix seems 
to agree, distinctly states that the 


expulsion takes place on the last 
day of the year. Yet both say 
that it occurs in the fourth month 
of the year. According to Pallegoix 
(i. 253) the Siamese year is composed 
of twelve lunar months, and the first 
month usually begins in December. 
Hence the expulsion of devils would 
commonly take place in March, as in 
Cambodia. In Laos the year begins 
in the fifth month and it ends in the 
fifth month of the following year. See 
Lieutenant-Colonel Tournier, JVofzce 
sur le Laos Francais (Hanoi, 1900), 
p- 187. According to Professor E. 
Seler the festival of Toxcatl, celebrated 
in the fifth month, was the old Mexi- 
can festival of the New Year. See 
E. Seler, Altmextkanische Studien, ii. 
(Berlin, 1899) pp. 153, 166 sg. (Ver- 
Offentlichungen aus dem koniglchen 
Museum fiir Volkerkunde, vi. Heft 
2/4). Hence it appears that in some 
calendars the year is not reckoned to 
begin with the first month. 


Annual 
expulsion 
of demons 
in Cam- 
bodia. 


Annual 
expulsion 
of demons 
in Siam. 


150 THE PUBLIC EXPULSION OF EVILS CHAP. 


is made, “which is as much in demand as our own Shrove- 
Tuesday pancakes or our Good-Friday hot cross-buns. The 
temples are thronged with women and children making 
offerings to Buddha and his priests. The people inaugurate 
their New Year with numerous charitable and religious 
deeds. The rich entertain the monks, who recite appropri- 
ate prayers and chants. Every departed soul returns to the 
bosom of his family during these three days, freed from any 
fetters that may have bound him in the regions of indefin- 
able locality. On the third day the religious observances 
terminate, and the remaining hours are devoted to ‘the 
world, the flesh, and the devil. Gambling is not confined 
to the licensed houses, but may be indulged in anywhere. 
Games of chance hold powerful sway in every house as long 
as the licence to participate in them lasts. Priests in small 
companies occupy posts at regular intervals round the city 
wall, and spend their time in chanting away the evil spirits. 
On the evening of the second day, the ghostly visitors from 
the lower realms lose the luxury of being exorcised with 
psalms. Every person who has a gun may fire it as often 
as he pleases, and the noise thus made is undoubtedly fear- 
ful enough in its intensity to cause any wandering traveller 
from the far-off fiery land to retrace his steps with speed. 
The bang and rattle of pistols, muskets, shot-guns, and rifles 
cease not till the break of day, by which time the city is 
effectually cleared of all its infernal visitors.”* From this 
account we learn that among the spirits thus banished are 
the souls of the dead, who revisit their living friends once a 
year. To the same effect, apparently, Bishop Bruguiére, 
writing from Bangkok in 1829, tells us that “the three first 
days of the moon of April are days of solemn festivity for 
the pious Siamese. That day Lucifer opens all the gates of 
the abyss, the souls of the dead, which are shut up there, 
come forth and partake of a repast in the bosom of their 
family. They are treated splendidly. One of these three 
days a monk repairs to the palace to preach before the 
king. At the end of the sermon a preconcerted signal is 
given, and in a moment the cannons are fired in all the 


1 Ernest Young, Zhe Kingdom of the Yellow Rove (Westminster, 1898), pp. 
135 59. 


ul PERIODIC EXPULSION OF EVILS I51 


quarters of the city to chase the devil out of the walls or to 
kill him, if he dares to resist. On the first day a temporary 
king is named, who bears the title of phaja-phollathep ; 
during these three days he enjoys all the royal prerogatives, 
the real king remaining shut up in his palace.” ? 

A similar belief and a similar custom prevail in Japan. 
There, too, the souls of the departed return to their old 


Annual 
reception 
and expul- 


-homes once a year, and a festival called the Feast of sion of the 


Lanterns is made to welcome them. They come at evening 
on the thirteenth day of the seventh month of the old 
calendar, which falls towards the end of August. It is 
needful to light them on their way. Accordingly bamboos 
with pretty coloured lanterns attached to them are fastened 
on the tombs, and being thickly set they make an illumina- 
tion on the hills, where the burying-grounds are generally 
situated. Lamps of many hues or rows of tapers are also 
lit and set out in front of the houses and in the gardens, 
and small fires are kindled in the streets, so that the whole 
city is in a blaze of light. After the sun has set, a great 
multitude issues from the town, for every family goes forth 
to meet its returning dead. When they come to the spot 
where they believe the souls to be, they welcome the unseen 
visiters and invite them to rest after their journey, and to 
partake of refreshments which they offer to them. Having 
allowed the souls time enough to satisfy their hunger and 
recover from their fatigue, they escort them by torchlight, 
chatting gaily with them, into the city and to the houses 
where they lived and died. These are also illuminated with 
brilliant lanterns; a banquet is spread on the tables; and 
the places of the dead, who are supposed to absorb the 
ethereal essence of the food, are laid for them as if they 
were alive. After the repast the living go from house to 
house to visit the souls of their dead friends and neighbours ; 
and thus they spend the night running about the town. On 
the evening of the third day of the festival, which is the 
fifteenth day of the month, the time has come for the souls 

1 «Lettre de Mgr. Bruguiére, évéque to the temporary king of Siam, his 
de Capse, 4 M. Bousquet, vicaire- privileges and the ceremony of plough- 
général d’Aire,” Annales de 1’ Assocta- ing which he performs, see Zhe Dying 


tion de la Propagation de la Foi, v. God, pp. 149-151. 
(Paris and Lyons, 1831) p. 188. As 


spirits of 
the dead 
in Japan. 


Annual 
reception 
and expul- 
sion of the 
spirits of 
the dead 
in ancient 
Greece. 


152 THE PUBLIC EXPULSION OF FVILES CHAP. 


to return to their own place. Fires again blaze in the 
streets to light them on the road; the people again escort 
them ceremoniously to the spot where they met them two 
days before; and in some places they send the lanterns 
floating away on rivers or the sea in miniature boats, which 
are laden with provisions for the spirits on their way to 
their long home. But there is still a fear that some poor 
souls may have lagged behind, or even concealed themselves 
in a nook or corner, loth to part from the scenes of their 
former life and from those they love. Accordingly steps 
are taken to hunt out these laggards and send them packing 
after their fellow-ghosts. With this intention the people 
throw stones on the roofs of their houses in great profusion ; 
and going through every room armed with sticks they deal 
swashing blows all about them in the empty air to chase 
away the lingering souls. This they do, we are told, out of 
a regard for their own comfort quite as much as from the 
affection they bear to the dead; for they fear to be dis- 
turbed by unseasonable apparitions if they suffered the airy 
visiters to remain in the house." 

Thus in spite of the kindly welcome given to the souls, 
the fear which they inspire comes out plainly in the pains 
taken to ensure their departure ; and this fear justifies us in 
including such forced departures among the ceremonies for 
the expulsion of evils with which we are here concerned. 
It may be remembered that the annual banishment of ghosts 
has been practised by savages so low in the scale of humanity 
as the Australian aborigines.? At the other end of the 
scale it was observed in classical antiquity by the civilized 
Greeks and Romans. The Athenians believed that at the 
festival of the Anthesteria the souls of the dead came back 
from the nether world and went about the city. Accord- 
ingly ropes were fastened round the temples to keep out 


1 Charlevoix, Westotre et description 
generale du Japon (Paris, 1736), i. 
128 sg.; C. P. Thunberg, Voyages au 
Japon (Paris, 1796), iv. 18-20; A. 
Bastian, Dze Volker des dstlichen Asien, 
v. (Jena, 1869) p. 364; Beaufort, in 
Journal of the Anthropological Instt- 
tute, xv. (1886) p. 102; A. Morgan, 
in Journal of American Folk-lore, x. 


(1897) pp. 244 sg.; Lafcadio Hearn, 
Glimpses of Unfamiliar Japan (Lon- 
don, 1894), 1. 106-110, ii. 504 sg. 
The custom of welcoming the souls of 
the dead back to their old homes once 
a year has been observed in many 
lands. See Adonis, Attis, Osiris, 
Second Edition, pp. 301 sgg. 
2 Above, pp. 123 sg. 


Il PERIODIC EXPULSION OF EVILS 


153 


the wandering ghosts ; and with a like intention the people 
chewed buckthorn in the morning and smeared the doors 
of their houses with pitch, apparently thinking that any 
rash spirits who might attempt to enter would stick fast 
in the pitch and be glued, like so many flies, to the door. 
But at the end of the festival the souls were bidden to 
depart in these words: “Out of the door with you, souls. 


The Anthesteria is over.’ ? 


1 Hesychius, s.v. pucapal juépac’ Toi 
"AvOcornpi@vos pnvds, ev als Tas Wuxas 
Tay KaTorxouévwy avidvac €ddKour. 
Photius, Lexicon, s.vv. Ovpage Kapes* 
ovKér ’AvOeorypia . . . Twes O€ otTws 
Tiv mapoyulay pact’ OUpage Kijpes ovxér’ 
*AvOeoTHpia® ws KaTa THY mow Tots 
"Avdeornplas Tay Wuxay meprepxomevan. 
Id., s.vv. papa nuépa* év Tois Xovoly 
’"AvOcoTnpravos unvds, ev @ Soxodow ai 
puxal Tay TedeuTQTdYT WW aviéval, pauyy 
€wOev éuacGvto kal witty Tas Ovpas 
éxpiov. Pollux, vili. 141: mepirxouloar 
Ta lep& eheyov év rais amoppdor Kal TO 
mapappdéa. As to the closing of the 
temples, see further Athenaeus, x. 49, 
p- 447 c. As to the Anthesteria in 
general, see E. Rohde, Psyche* (Tiib- 
ingen and Leipsic, 1903), i. 236 sgg., 
who rightly adopts Hesychius’s second 
explanation of Kjpes. The reasons 
given by August Mommsen for reject- 
ing that explanation betray an imper- 
fect acquaintance with popular super- 
stition (este der Stadt Athen itm 
Altertum, Leipsic, 1898, p. 386, note 
1). Compare Miss J. E. Harrison, 
Prolegomena to the Study of Greek 
Religion, Second Edition (Cambridge, 
1908), pp. 32 sgg. The Greeks 
thought that branches of buckthorn 
(vhamnus) fastened to doors or windows 
kept out witches (Dioscorides, De 
materia medica, i. 119). A similar 
virtue was attributed to buckthorn or 
hawthorn by the ancient Romans and 
modern European peasants. See A. 
Kuhn, Die Herabkunft des Feuers 
und des Gottertranks* (Giitersloh, 
1886), pp. 209 sg.; J. Murr, Pi#anzen- 
welt in der griechischen Mythologze 
(Innsbruck, 1890), pp. 104-106; Zhe 
Magic Art and the Evolution of Kings, 
ji. 54 5g., I91. According to Mr. 


Yet for the entertainment of 


Murr, rhamnus is Lyetum europaeum 
L. I learn from Miss J. E. Harrison 
that Sir Francis Darwin believes it to 
be buckthorn (Ramnus catharticus). 
In some parts of Bosnia, when peasant 
women go to pay a visit in a house 
where a death has occurred they put 
a little hawthorn (Wezssdorn) behind 
their headcloth, and on returning from 
the house they throw it away on the 
street. They think that if the deceased 
has turned into a vampyre, he will be 
so occupied in picking up the haw- 
thorn, that he will not be able to 
follow them to their homes. See F, 
S. Krauss, ‘‘ Vampyre im siidslavischen 
Volksglauben,” Glodws, |xi. (1892) p. 
326. At childbirth also the Greeks 
smeared pitch on their houses to keep 
out the demons (els dmé\acw Tv dat- 
uévwv) who attack women at such 
times (Photius, Lexicon, s.v. pdpwos). 
To this day the Bulgarians try to keep 
wandering ghosts from their houses by 
painting crosses with tar on the out- 
side of their doors, while on the inside 
they hang a tangled skein composed of 
countless broken threads. The ghost 
cannot enter until he has counted all 
the threads, and before he has done 
the sum the cock crows and the poor 
soul must return to the grave. See A. 
Strausz, Die Bulgaren (Leipsic, 1898), 
p- 454. The Servians paint crosses 
with tar on the doors of houses and 
barns to keep out vampyres. See F. 
S. Krauss, ‘* Vampyre im siidslavischen 
Volksglauben,” Globus, 1xi. (1892) p. 
326. In the Highlands of Scotland it 
was believed that tar put on a door 
kept witches away. See J. G. Camp- 
bell, Witchcraft and Second Sight in 
the Highlands and Islands of Scot- 
land (Glasgow, 1902), p. 13. The 


Annual 
reception 
and expul- 
sion of the 
spirits of 
the dead 
in ancient 
Rome. 


THE PUBLIC EXPULSION OF EVILS CHAP. 


154 


the unseen guests during their short stay earthenware pots 
full of boiled food appear to have been everywhere pre- 
pared throughout the city ; but probably these were placed 
in the street outside the houses, in order to give the ghosts 
no excuse for entering and disturbing the inmates. No 
priest would eat of the food thus offered to the dead,’ but 
prowling beggars probably had no such scruples. Similarly 
when the Sea Dyaks of Sarawak celebrate their great Festival 
of Departed Spirits at intervals which vary from one to 
three or four years, food is prepared for the dead and they 
are summoned from their far-off home to partake of it; 
but it is put outside at the entrance of the house. And 
before the general arrival of the souls, while the people 
are busy brewing the drink for the feast, each family takes 
care to hang an earthenware pot full of the liquor outside 
of the single room which it occupies in the large common 
house, lest some thirsty soul should arrive prematurely from 
the other world, and, forcing his way into the domestic 
circle, should not merely slake his thirst but carry off one 
of the living. During three days in May the Romans 
held a festival in honour of the ghosts. The temples were 
shut, doubtless to keep out the ghostly swarms ; but, as in 
Japan, every house seems to have been thrown open to 
receive the spirits of its own departed. When the recep- 


of the city at the New Year (above, 


Thompson Indians of British Columbia 
149). Ropes of rice-straw, which 


used to bar their houses against ghosts ___p. 


by means not unlike those adopted 
by the Athenians at the Anthesteria. 
When a death had happened, they 
hung a string of deer-hoofs across the 
inside of the house, and an old woman 
often pulled at the string to make the 
hoofs rattle. This kept the ghost out. 
They also placed branches of juniper 
at the door or burned them in the fire 
for the same purpose. See James 
Teit, ‘‘The Thompson Indians of 
British Columbia” (April 1900), p. 
332 (The Jesup North Pacific Ex- 
pedition, Memoir of the American 
Museum of Natural History). With 
the Athenian use of ropes to keep 
ghosts out of the temples at the 
Anthesteria we may compare the 
Siamese custom of roping demons out 


are supposed to repel demoniacal and 
evil influences, are hung by the Japan- 
ese in front of shrines, and at the New 
Year they hang them also before ordin- 
ary houses. See W. G. Aston, Shzz¢o 
(London, 1905), pp. 335 sg. Some 
of the Kayans of Borneo stretch ropes 
round their houses to keep out demons 
of disease; in order to do so more 
effectually leaves of a certain plant or 
tree are fastened to the rope. See 
A. W. Nieuwenhuis, Quer durch 
Borneo, i. (Leyden, 1904) p. 448. 

1 Scholiast on Aristophanes, /7ags, 
218. 

2 J. Perham, ‘‘ Sea Dyak Religion,” 
Journal of the Straits Branch of the 
Royal Asiatic Society, No. 14, Decem- 
ber 1884, pp. 296-298. 


III PERIODIC EXPULSION OF EVILS 155 


tion was over, each head of a family arose at dead of night, 
washed his hands, and having made with fingers and thumb 
certain magic signs to ward off ghosts, he proceeded to 
throw black beans over his shoulder without looking behind 
him. As he did so, he said nine times, “ With these beans 
I redeem me and mine”; and the ghosts, following unseen 
at his heels, picked up the beans and left him and his alone. 
Then he dipped his hands again in water, clashed bronze 
vessels together to make a din, and begged the ghosts to 
depart from his house, saying nine times, “ Go forth, paternal 
shades!” After that he looked behind him, and the cere- 
mony was over: the ghosts had taken their leave for 
another year.’ 

Annual expulsions of demons, witches, or evil influences 
appear to have been common among the heathen of Europe, 
if we may judge from the relics of such customs among their 
descendants at the present day. Thus among the heathen 
Wotyaks, a Finnish people of Eastern Russia, all the young 
girls of the village assemble on the last day of the year 
or on New Year’s Day, armed with sticks, the ends of which 
are split in nine places. With these they beat every corner 
of the house and yard, saying, “We are driving Satan out of 
the village.” Afterwards the sticks are thrown into the 
river below the village, and as they float down stream Satan 
goes with them to the next village, from which he must be 
driven out in turn. In some villages the expulsion is 
managed otherwise. The unmarried men receive from every 
house in the village groats, flesh, and brandy. These they 
take to the fields, light a fire under a fir-tree, boil the groats, 
and eat of the food they have brought with them, after 
pronouncing the words, “Go away into the wilderness, come 
not into the house.” Then they return to the village and 
enter every house where there are young women. They 
take hold of the young women and throw them into the 
- snow, saying, “ May the spirits of disease leave you.” The 


e 

1 Ovid, Fasti, v. 419-486; Varro, — if the festival lasted only one day (the 
quoted by Nonius Marcellus, p. 135 (p. ninthof May). But we know from the 
142 ed. Quicherat), s.v. ‘‘Lemures”; inscribed calendars that it lasted three 
Festus, p. 87 ed. C. O. Miiller, s.v. days. See W. Warde Fowler, Zv%e 
*‘Fabam.” Ovid, who is our chief Roman Festivals of the period of the 
authority for the ceremony, speaks as Republic (London, 1899), pp. 106 sgg. 


Annual 
expulsion 
of Satan 
among the 
Wotyaks of 
Russia. 


Annual 
expulsion 
of Satan 
among the 
Cheremiss 
of Russia. 


156 THE PUBLIC EXPULSION (OP EVILS, CHAP. 


remains of the groats and the other food are then distributed 
among all the houses in proportion to the amount that each 
contributed, and each family consumes its share. According 
to a Wotyak of the Malmyz district the young men throw 
into the snow whomever they find in the houses, and this is 
called “driving out Satan”; moreover, some of the boiled 
croats are cast into the fire with the words, “O god, afflict 
us not with sickness and pestilence, give us not up as a prey 
to the spirits of the wood.” But the most antique form of 
the ceremony is that observed by the Wotyaks of the Kasan 
Government. First of all a sacrifice is offered to the Devil 
at noon. Then all the men assemble on horseback in the 
centre of the village, and decide with which house they shall 
begin. When this question, which often gives rise to hot 
disputes, is settled, they tether their horses to the paling, and 
arm themselves with whips, clubs of lime-wood, and bundles 
of lighted twigs. The lighted twigs are believed to have the 
greatest terrors for Satan. Thus armed, they proceed with 
frightful cries to beat every corner of the house and yard, 
then shut the door, and spit at the ejected fiend. So they 
go from house to house, till the Devil has been driven from 
every one. Then they mount their horses and ride out 
of the village, yelling wildly and brandishing their clubs 
in every direction. Outside of the village they fling away 
the clubs and spit once more at the Devil. The Cheremiss, 
another Finnish people of Eastern Russia, chase Satan from 
their dwellings by beating the walls with cudgels of lime- 
wood. For the same purpose they fire guns, stab the 
ground with knives, and insert burning chips of wood in the 
crevices. Also they leap over bonfires, shaking out their 
garments as they do so; and in some districts they blow 
on long trumpets of lime-tree bark to frighten him away. 
When he has fled to the wood, they pelt the trees with 
some of the cheese-cakes and eggs which furnished the 
feast.” 

In Christian Europe the old heathen custom of expelling 


1 Max Buch, Die Wotjaken (Stutt- Geschichte (Leipsic, 1860), ii. 94; P. v. 
gart, 1882), pp. 153 sg. Stenin, ‘‘ Ein neuer Beitrag zur Ethno- 
graphie der Tscheremissen,” G/odzs, 

2 A. Bastian, Der Mensch in der  Wwiii. (1890) p. 204. 


III PERIODIC EXPULSION OF EVILS 157 


the powers of evil at certain times of the year has survived 
to modern times. Thus in some villages of Calabria the 
month of March is inaugurated with the expulsion of the 
witches. It takes place at night to the sound of the church 
bells, the people running about the streets and crying, 
“March is come.” They say that the witches roam about 
in March, and the ceremony is repeated every Friday even- 
ing during the month.’ Often, as might have been anticipated, 
the ancient pagan rite has attached itself to church festivals. 
For example, in Calabria at Eastertide every family provides 
itself in time with a supply of holy water, and when the 
church bells proclaim the resurrection of Christ the people 
sprinkle the house with the water, saying in a loud voice, 
“Fscitt fora strict uorvt, escttt fora tentaztunt, esca u malu 
ed entrz u bene.’ At the same time they knock on doors and 
windows, on chests and other articles of furniture.” Again, 
in Albania on Easter Eve the young people light torches 
of resinous wood and march in procession, swinging them, 
through the village. At last they throw the torches into the 
river, crying, “Ha, Kore! we throw you into the river, like 
these torches, that you may never return.”* Silesian peasants 
believe that on Good Friday the witches go their rounds and 
have great power for mischief. Hence about Oels, near 
Strehlitz, the people on that day arm themselves with old 
brooms and drive the witches from house and home, from 
farmyard and cattle-stall, making a great uproar and clatter 
as they do so.* 

The belief in the maleficent power and activity of 
witches and wizards would seem to have weighed almost 
as heavily on the heathen of Central and Northern Europe in 
prehistoric times as it still weighs on the minds of African 
negroes and other savages in many parts of the world. 
But while these unhallowed beings were always with our 
forefathers, there were times and seasons of the year when 


3J. G. von Hahn, Albanesische 


160;, ) Com-= 


1 Vincenzo Dorsa, Za fradiztone 


greco-latina negli ust e nelle credenze 
popolart della Calabria Citertore (Co- 
senza, 1884), pp. 42 sg. 

2 Vincenzo Dorsa, La tradzzione 
greco-latina negli ust e nelle credenze 
popolari della Calabria Citeriore, p. 48. 


Studien (Jena, 1854), 1. 
pare Zhe Dying God, pp. 264 sq. 


4 P. Drechsler, Sztte, Brauch und 
Volksglaube tin Schlesten (Leipsic, 1903— 
1906), i. 86. 


Annual 
expulsion 
of witches 
and other 
powers of 
evil in 
Christian 
Europe. 


Wide- 
spread fear 
of witches 
and wizards 
in Europe. 


Annual 
expulsion 
of witches 
on Wal- 
purgis 
Night (the 
Eve of 
May Day). 


Annual 
expulsion 
of witches 
on May 
Day in the 
Tyrol. 


158 THE PUBLIC EXPULSION OF EVIE CHAP. 


they were supposed to be particularly mischievous, and 
when accordingly special precautions had to be taken against 
them. Among such times were the twelve days from 
Christmas to Twelfth Night, the Eve of St. George, the 
Eve of May Day (Walpurgis Night), and Midsummer 
Eve.’ 

In Central Europe it was apparently on Walpurgis Night, 
the Eve of May Day, above all other times that the baleful 
powers of the witches were exerted to the fullest extent ; 
nothing therefore could be more natural than that men 
should be on their guard against them at that season, and 
that, not content with merely standing on their defence, they 
should boldly have sought to carry the war into the enemy’s 
quarters by attacking and forcibly expelling the uncanny 
crew. Amongst the weapons with which they fought their 
invisible adversaries in these grim encounters were holy 
water, the fumes of incense or other combustibles, and loud 
noises of all kinds, particularly the clashing of metal instru- 
ments, amongst which the ringing of church bells was per- 
haps the most effectual.” Some of these strong measures 
are still in use among the peasantry, or were so down 
to recent years, and there seems no reason to suppose 
that their magical virtue has been at all impaired by 
lapse of time. In the Tyrol, as in other places, the ex- 
pulsion of the powers of evil at this season goes by the 
name of “Burning out the Witches.” It takes place on May 
Day, but people have been busy with their preparations 
for days before. On a Thursday at midnight bundles are 
made up of resinous splinters, black and red spotted hemlock, 
caperspurge, rosemary, and twigs of the sloe. These are 
kept and burned on May Day by men who must first 
have received plenary absolution from the Church. On the 
last three days of April all the houses are cleansed and 
fumigated with juniper berries and rue. On May Day, 
when the evening bell has rung and the twilight is falling, 


1 As to the activity of the evil powers summer Eve, see The Magic Art and 
on the twelve days from Christmas to ‘the Evolution of Kings, il. 52 5g9., 
Twelfth Night, see Gustav Bilfinger, 127, 334 sgq. 

Das germanische /ulfest (Stuttgart, 
1901), pp. 74 sgg.3; as to witches on 2G. Bilfinger, Das germanische 
St. George’s Eve, May Eve, and Mid- _/u//es¢ (Stuttgart, 1901), p. 76. 


111 PERIODIC EXPULSION OF EVILS 


159 


the ceremony of “Burning out the Witches” begins. Men 
and boys make a racket with whips, bells, pots, and pans ; 
the women carry censers; the dogs are unchained and run 
barking and yelping about. As soon as the church bells 
begin to ring, the bundles of twigs, fastened on poles, are 
set on fire and the incense is ignited. Then all the house- 
bells and dinner-bells are rung, pots and pans are clashed, 
dogs bark, every one must make a noise. And amid this 
hubbub all scream at the pitch of their voices, 


“Witch flee, flee from here, 
Or it will go tll with thee.” 


Then they run seven times round the houses, the yards, and 
the village. So the witches are smoked out of their lurking- 
places and driven away." 

The custom of expelling the witches on Walpurgis Night 
is still, or was down to thirty or forty years ago, observed 
in many parts of Bavaria and among the Germans of 
Bohemia. Thus in the BOhmerwald Mountains, which divide 
Bavaria from Bohemia, all the young fellows of the village 
assemble after sunset on some height, especially at a cross- 
road, and crack whips for a while in unison with all their 
strength. This drives away the witches; for so far as the 
sound of the whips is heard, these maleficent beings can 
do no harm. The peasants believe firmly in the efficacy of 


1j. M. Ritter von Alpenburg, 
Mythen und Sagen Trrols (Zurich, 


is thought that various misfortunes 
will be the consequence. The house 


_ 1857), pp. 260 sg. Compare J. E. Wald- 

freund, ‘‘ Volksgebrauche und Aber- 
glauben,” Zeztschrift fir deutsche 
Mythologie und Sittenkunde, iii. (1855) 
p- 339: A Westphalian form of the 
expulsion of evil is the driving out the 
Stintevogel, Sunnenvogel, or Sommer- 
vogel, that is, the butterfly. On St. 
Peter’s Day, 22nd February, children 
go from house to house knocking on 
them with hammers and _ singing 
doggerel rhymes in which they bid the 
Sommervigel to depart. Presents are 
given to them at every house. Or the 
people of the house themselves go 
through all the rooms, knocking on all 
the doors, to drive away the Szzen- 
vogel, If this ceremony is omitted, it 


will swarm with rats, mice, and other 
vermin, the cattle will be sick, the 
butterflies will multiply at the milk- 
bowls, etc. See J. F. L. Woeste, 
Volksiiberlieferungen in der Grafschaft 
Mark (Iserlohn, 1848), p. 24; J. W. 
Wolf, Lectrage zurdeutschen Mythologie, 
i. (Gottingen and Leipsic, 1852) p. 87; 
A. Kuhn, Westfalische Sagen, Ge- 
brauche und Marchen (Leipsic, 1859), 
li. pp. I19-121, §§ 366-374; Mon- 
tanus, Dze deutschen Volksfeste, Volks- 
brduche, und deutscher Volksglaube 
(Iserlohn, N.D.), pp. 21 sg. ; U. Jahn, 
Die deutschen Opfergebraiuche bet 
Ackerbau und Viehzucht (Breslau, 


1884), pp. 94-96. 


Annual 
expulsion 
of witches 
on Wal- 
purgis 
Night in 
Bavaria. 


Annual 
expulsion 
of witches 
on Wal- 
purgis 
Night in 


Voigtland. 


160 THE PUBLIC. EXPULSION OF 2VIES, CHAP. 


this remedy. A yokel will tell his sons to be sure to crack 
their whips loudly and hit the witches hard; and to give 
more sting to every blow the whip-lashes are knotted. On 
returning to the village the lads often sing songs and collect 
contributions of eggs, lard, bread, and butter. In some 
places, while the young fellows are cracking their whips, the 
herdsmen wind their horns, and the long-drawn notes, heard 
far-off in the silence of night, are very effectual for banning 
the witches. In other places, again, the youth blow upon 
so-called shawms made of peeled willow-wood in front of 
every house, especially in front of such houses as are 
suspected of harbouring a witch.’ In Voigtland, a bleak 
mountainous region of Central Germany” bordering on the 
Frankenwald Mountains, the belief in witchcraft is still 
widely spread. The time when the witches are particularly 
dreaded is Walpurgis Night, but they play their pranks 
also on Midsummer Eve, St. Thomas’s Eve, and Christmas 
Eve. On these days they try to make their way into a 
neighbour’s house and to borrow or steal something from 
it; and woe betide the man in whose house they have 
succeeded in their nefarious errand! It is on Walpurgis 
Night and Midsummer Eve that they ride through the air 
astride of pitchforks and churn-dashers. They also be- 
witch the cattle; so to protect the poor beasts from their 
hellish machinations the people on these days chalk up 
three crosses on the doors of the cattle-stalls or hang up St. 
John’s wort, marjoram, and so forth. Very often, too, the 
village youth turn out in a body and drive the witches away 
with the cracking of whips, the firing of guns, and the 
waving of burning besoms through the air, not to mention 
shouts and noises of all sorts.» Such customs appear 


to be observed generally in Thiiringen, of which Voigt- 


land is a part. The people think that the blows of the 
whip actually fall on the witches hovering unseen in the 
air, and that so far as the cracking of the whips is heard, 
the crops will be good and nothing will be struck by 


1 Bavaria, Landes- und Volkskunde 137 


des Konigreichs Bayern (Munich, 1860— 2 Encyclopaedia Britannica, Ninth | 


1866), ii. 272, ill. 302 sg., 934; O. Edition, xx. 493. 
Freiherr von Reinsberg- Diiringsfeld, 3 R. Eisel, Sagenbuch des Voigtiandes 
Das festliche Jahr (Leipsic, 1863), p. (Gera, 1871), p. 210. 


II PERIODIC EXPULSION OF EVILS 161 


lightning,’ no doubt because the witches have been banished 


by the sound. 

In Bohemia many are the precautions taken by the 
peasantry, both German and Czech, to guard themselves 
and their cattle against the witches on Walpurgis Night. 
Thorny branches are laid on the thresholds of cow-houses 
and dwellings to keep out the infernal crew, and after sun- 
set boys armed with whips and guns drive them from the 
villages with a prodigious uproar and burn them in bonfires 
on the neighbouring heights. It is true that the witches 
themselves are not seen, though effigies of them are some- 
times consumed in the bonfires. This “Burning of the 
Witches,” as it is calied, protects the crops from their 
ravages. German lads also employ goats’ horns as a means 
of driving away the witches at the moment when they issue 
forth from kitchen-chimneys on their way to the witches’ 
Sabbath.” Some minor variations in the mode of expel- 
ling the witches on Walpurgis Night have been noted in 
the German villages of Western Bohemia. Thus in Absrot 
the village youth go out to cross-roads and there beat 
the ground with boards, no doubt for the purpose of thrash- 
ing the witches who are commonly supposed to assemble 
at such spots. In Deslawen, after the evening bells have 
rung, people go through the houses beating the walls or 
floors with boards; then they issue forth into the roads, 
headed by a boy who carries the effigy of a witch made up 
of rags. Thereupon grown-up folk crack whips and fire 
shots. In Schénwert the young people go in bands through 
the village and the meadows, making a great noise with 
bells, flutes, and whips, for the more noise they make the 
more effectual is the ceremony supposed to be. Mean- 
time the older men are busy firing shots over the fields 
and the dungheaps. In Hochofen troops of children go 
from house to house on Walpurgis Evening, making a 
Sreat clatter with tin cans and kettles, while they scream, 
“Witch, go out, your house is burning.” This is called 

1 August Witzschel, Szttex, Sagen (Prague, preface dated 1861), pp. 210- 
und Gebrauche aus Thiiringen (Vienna, 212; zda., Das festliche Jahr (Leipsic, 
1878), pp. 262 sg. 1863), p- 1373 Alois John, Sztte, 
20, Freiherr von Reinsberg-Dii- Brauch und Volksglaube im deutschen 
ringsfeld, Fest- Kalender aus Bohmen Westbohmen (Prague, 1905), pp. 70-73. 
PT. VI M 


Annual 

‘« Burning 
of the 
Witches ”’ 
on Wal- 
purgis 
Night in 
Bohemia. 


Annual 

«« Burning 
of the 
Witches” 
on Wal- 
purgis 
Night in 
Silesia. 


162 THE PUBLIC EXP UCESION OF EVIES CHAP. 


“Driving out the Witches.”* The German peasants of 
Moravia, also, universally believe that on Walpurgis Night 
the witches ride through the air on broomsticks and _ pitch- 
forks in order to revel with Satan, their master, at the old 
heathen places of sacrifice, which are commonly on heights. 
To guard the cattle and horses from their insidious attacks 
it is usual to put knives under the thresholds and to stick 
sprigs of birch in the dungheaps. Formerly lads used to 
gather on the heights where the witches were believed to 
assemble; and by hurling besoms, dipped in pitch and 
ignited, they attempted to banish the invisible foe.” 

In Silesia also, we are told, the belief in witchcraft still 


occupies a large space in the minds of the people. It is 


on Walpurgis Night that the witches are let loose and all 
the powers of magic have full sway. At that time the 
cottagers not uncommonly see a witch astride a hayfork 
or broomstick emerging from the chimney. Hence people 
are careful to remove all utensils from the fireplace, or the 


witches would ride on them, when they go with the Evil | 


One to a cross-road or a gallows-hill, there to dance wild 


dances in a circle on the snow or to cut capers on the corn- | 


fields. Steps are taken to guard village, house, and farm- 
yard against their incursions. Three crosses are chalked 


up on every door, and little birch-trees fastened over the _ 
house-door, because the witches must count every leaf on | 


the tree before they can cross the threshold, and while they 


are still counting, the day breaks and their power is gone. 
On that evening the cattle are especially exposed to the | 
attacks of the witches, and prudent farmers resort to | 
many expedients for the sake of protecting the animals from 


the wiles of these malignant beings. No wise man would 
sell milk or butter on Walpurgis Night; if he did, his 
cows would certainly be bewitched. And all the work of the 
byres should be finished and the cattle fed before sundown, 


which is the time when the witches begin to swarm in the_ 


air. Besides the usual crosses chalked on the door of the 


byre, it is customary to fasten over it three horse-shoes, or a 
holed flint, or a goat’s horns with four branches ; it is well, 


1 Alois John, of. cé¢. p. 71. Volkskunde der Deutschen in Miahren 
2 Willibald Miiller, Bectra@ge zur (Vienna and Olmutz, 1893), p. 324. 


II LERAODIC EXPULSION OF EVILS 163 


too, to nail bits of buckthorn crosswise over every entrance, 
and to lean pitchforks and harrows against the doors with 
the sharp. points turned outwards. A sod freshly cut from 


.a meadow and sprinkled with marsh-marigolds has likewise 


a very good effect when it is placed before a threshold. 
Moreover in the Griinberg district young men go clanking 
chains through the village and farmyards, for iron scares 
the witches ; also they knock at the doors and they prance 
through the yards astride on pitchforks and broomsticks, all 
to drive away the witches, but in doing so they must be sure 
not to speak a word. A very powerful means of keeping 
witches at bay are the Walpurgis bonfires, which are still 
kindled in the Hoyerswerda district and the Iser Mountains. 
The fires are fed with the stumps of old brooms, and the 
people dance round them and wave burning besoms, just as 
they do at the Midsummer bonfires. About Hoyerswerda 
they call these fires, as usual, “ Burning the Witches.” ! 

The Wends of Saxony adopt very similar precautions 
against witches on the evening of Walpurgis Day. Any one 
who has been in Lusatia on the last day of April must 
remember the fires which he saw blazing on the mountains 
and in the valleys and the plains. That is the Witch- 
burning (kuzlarnice palic). For weeks before that the boys 
and lads have been collecting old brooms, and when the 
time comes they sally forth and dance with the burning 
besoms on the fields; the fire is thought to ban the witches 
and foul fiends. Also on that day people march about the 
fields and meadows clinking stones on scythes ; for the noise 
is also deemed effectual in driving the witches away.” At 
Penzance in Cornwall boys run about blowing horns on the 
thirtieth of April (Walpurgis Day), and when questioned why 
they do so they say that they are “scaring away the devil.” 


1 P. Drechsler, Sztte, Brauch und Sagen, Marchen und Gebrauche (Leip- 
Volksglaube in Schlesten (Leipsic, sic, 1848), p. 376. At Dabelow in 
1903-1906), i. 108-110. Withregard Mecklenburg all utensils are removed 
to the dance of the witches in the from the fireplace on Walpurgis Night, 
snow, it is a common saying in the lest the witches should ride on them to 
northern district of the Harz Moun- the Blocksberg. See A. Kuhn and 
tains that the witches must dance the W. Schwartz, Zc. 
snow away on the top of the Blocks- 
berg on the first of May. See A. 2 R. Wuttke, Sachsische Volkskunde 
Kuhn und W. Schwartz, Morddeutsche (Dresden, 1901), p. 359. 


Annual 

“ Burning 
of the 
Witches” 
on Wal- 
purgis 
Night 
among the 
Wends of 
Saxony. 


Annual 
expulsion 
of witches 
during the 
Twelve 
Days from 
Christmas 
to Epiph- 
any. 


164 THE PUBLIC EXPULSION OPE) TIES: CHAP. 


The horns used for this purpose are made of tin and shaped 
like a herald’s trumpet ; they vary in length from a foot to 
a yard and can give forth a very loud blast... The custom 
is probably a relic of a general expulsion of witches and 
demons on that day. 

Another witching time is the period of twelve days 
between Christmas (the twenty-fifth of December) and 
Epiphany (the sixth of January). A thousand quaint 
superstitions cluster round that mystic season. It is then 
that the Wild Huntsman sweeps through the air, the powers 
of evil are let loose, werewolves are prowling round, and 
the witches work their wicked will. Hence in some parts of 
Silesia the people burn pine-resin all night long between 
Christmas and the New Year in order that the pungent 
smoke may drive witches and evil spirits far away from 
house and homestead; and on Christmas Eve and New 
Year's Eve they fire shots over fields and meadows, into 
shrubs and trees, and wrap straw round the fruit-trees, to 
prevent the spirits from doing them harm. On New 
Year’s Eve, which is Saint Sylvester’s Day, Bohemian lads, 
armed with guns, form themselves into circles and fire 
thrice into the air. This is called ‘Shooting the Witches” 
and is supposed to frighten the witches away. While the 
young fellows are rendering this service to the community, 
the housewives go about their houses sprinkling holy water 


1 Lady Agnes Macdonell, in Zhe 
Times, May 3rd, 1913, p. 6. Ina 
letter to me (dated 31, Kensington Park 
Gardens, May 5th [1913]) Lady Mac- 
donell was kind enough to give me 
some further particulars as to the cus- 
tom. It seems that the boys use their 
horns on May Day as well as on the 
thirtieth of April. Processions of boys 
and girls decorated with flowers and 
leaves, and carrying flags and horns, 
went about Penzance on May Day of 
the present year (1913). The horns 
are straight ; some of them terminate 
in a bell-shaped opening, others have 
no such appendage. The latter and 
plainer are the older pattern. 

2 P. Drechsler, S7tte, Brauch und 
Volksglaube in Schlesien (Leipsic, 1903— 
1906), i. 15-18. With regard to the 


superstitions attached to these twelve 
days or twelve nights, as the Germans 
call them, see further A. Kuhn und 
W. Schwartz, Morddeutsche Sagen, 
Mirchen und Gebriuche (Leipsic, 
1848), pp. 408-418; A. Kuhn, Sagen, 
Gebrauche und Marchen aus Westfalen 


(Leipsic, 1859), ii. 111-117; L. Strac- 


kerjan, Aderglaube und Sagen aus dem 
flerzogthum Oldenburg (Oldenburg, 
1867), 1. 28 sgg.; M. Toeppen, Ader- 
glauben aus Masuren® (Danzig, 1867), 


pp. 61 sgg.; A. Wuttke, Der deutsche | 


Volksaberglaube? (Berlin, 1869), pp. 61 


sqq., § 743 E. Mogk, Mythologie,” in_| 
H. Paul’s Grandriss der germanischen ° 


Philologte,* iii, (Strasburg, 1900) pp. 
260 sq. ; 
und Volksglaube im deutschen West- 
bohmen (Prague, 1905), pp. II sgg. 


Alois John, Sv/te, Brauch — 


III PERIODIC EXPULSION OF EVILS 


165 


in all the rooms and chalking three crosses on every door,’ 
no doubt to accelerate the departure of the witches, and to 
fevent their return. At Trieste on St. Sylvester's Eve 
people form processions and drive the evil spirits with sticks 
and brooms out of the houses, while they invite the good 
spirits and good luck to come and dwell there.” In the 
town of Biggar, in Lanarkshire, it has been customary from 
time immemorial to celebrate a custom called “ burning out 
the Old Year” on the thirty-first of December. A large 
bonfire, to which all the onlookers think it their duty to 
contribute fuel, is kindled in the evening at the town cross, 
and fires are also lighted on the adjacent hills. When we 
remember how common it is in Central Europe to kindle 
fires at critical seasons for the purpose of burning the 
witches, we may suspect that what the good people of 
Biggar originally intended to burn on the last night of the 
year was not the Old Year but the witches. It would have 
been well for Scotland and for Europe if the practice of 
burning witches had always been carried out in this harm- 
less fashion. A visitor to Scotland in 1644 saw nine 
witches of flesh and blood burned at one time on Leith 
Links.* 

The last of the mystic twelve days is Epiphany or 
Twelfth Night, and it has been selected as a proper season 
for the expulsion of the powers of evil in various parts of 
Europe. Thus at Brunnen on the Lake of Lucerne the boys 
go about in procession on Twelfth Night, carrying torches 
and lanterns, and making a great noise with horns, cow- 
bells, whips, and so torth. This is said to frighten away 
the two female spirits of the wood, Strudeli and Stratteli. 
Of these two names Strudeli seems to mean “witch” and 
Stratteli “nightmare.” The people believe that if they do 
not make enough noise, there will be little fruit that year. 


1 ©. Freiherr von Reinsberg- Diirings- 
feld, Fest-Kalender aus Bihmen (Prague, 
preface dated 1861), p. 602. 

2W. G. Aston, Shzzfo (London, 
1905), p. 312, referring to Lady 
Burton’s life of her husband. 

3 T. Thiselton Dyer, British Popu- 
lary Customs (London, 1876), p. 506. 

4 J. G. Dalyell, Zhe Darker Super- 


stitzons of Scotland (Edinburgh, 1834), 
p. 670. 

5 H. Usener, ‘‘Italische Mythen,” 
Rheinisches Museum, N.F., xxx.(1875) 
p- 198; zd., Kleine Schriften, iv. 
(Leipzic and Berlin, 1913), p. 109; 
E. Hoffmann-Krayer, este und 
Brauche des Schwetzervolkes (Zurich, 
1913), p. IOI. 


‘« Burning 
out the 

Old Year”’ 
at Biggar. 


Annual 
expulsion 
of witches 
and 
demons in 
Switzer- 
land and 
France. 


3efana in 

ihe Piazza 
Navona at 
Rome. 


166 THE PUBLIC EXPUESION OF LEVIES: CHAP. 


On the same day the inhabitants of the Muota Valley, immedi- 
ately to the east of Brunnen, used to make a similar racket, 
no doubt for a similar purpose. They collected chains, pots 
and pans, cow-bells, horns, and such like musical instruments. 
He who could borrow a number of horse’s bells and wear them 
on his person so that the jangling sounded afar off was 
deemed uncommonly lucky. Thus equipped parties of people 
marched about making all the din they could ; sometimes 
they would meet and joining all their efforts in one 
concerted burst of harmony or discord would raise such 
a hubbub that the surrounding rocks rang again with 
the sound. In Labruguiére, also, a canton of Southern 
France, the evil spirits are expelled at the same season. 
The canton lies in the picturesque and little-known region 
of the Black Mountains, which form a sort of link between 
the Pyrenees and the Cevennes, and have preserved in their 
remote recesses certain types of life which have long dis- 
appeared elsewhere. On the eve of Twelfth Day the 
inhabitants rush through the streets jangling bells, clattering 
kettles, and doing everything to make a discordant noise. 
Then by the light of torches and blazing faggots they set 
up a prodigious hue and cry, an ear-splitting uproar, hoping 
thereby to chase all the wandering ghosts and devils from 
the town.” 

With this noisy ceremony we may compare a similar 
custom which is still observed year by year at the same 
season in the long and spacious Piazza Navona at Rome. 
There on the night before Epiphany a dense crowd assembles 
and diverts itself by raising a hideous uproar. Soon after 
supper troops of young folk and others march through the 
streets, preceded by puppets or pasteboard figures and all 


making the utmost possible din. They converge from 


different quarters on the Piazza Navona, there to unite in 
one prolonged and deafening outburst of clangorous discord. 
The favourite musical instruments employed in this cats’ 
concert are penny trumpets, of which, together with tam- 
bourines, bells, and so forth, the shops take care to provide 


1H. Herzog, Schweizerische Volks- 2 A. de Nore, Coutumes, Mythes, 
Jeste, Sitten und Gebrduche (Aaran, et Traditions des Provinces de France 
1884), pp. 212 sq. (Paris and Lyons, 1846), pp. 81, 85. 


ll PERIODIC EXPULSION OF EVILS 167 


a large stock as a preparation for the pandemonium of the 
evening. *The ceremony is supposed to be in honour of a 
certain mythical old hag called Befana, effigies of whom, 
made of rags, are put by women and children in the windows 
on Twelfth Night. Her name Befana is clearly a popular 
corruption of Epiphany, the ecclesiastical name of the 
festival ; but viewed in connexion with the popular celebra- 
tions which we have examined she may be suspected to be 
of heathen rather than Christian origin. In fact we may 
conjecture that she was of old a witch, and that the noisy 
rite in the Piazza Navona is nothing but a relic of an annual 
expulsion of witches at this season." A ceremony of the 
same sort is annually observed on the same evening, the Eve 
of Epiphany, by the peasantry who inhabit the mountains 
of the Tuscan Romagna. A troop of lads parade the streets 
of the village making a fiendish noise by means of bells and 
kitchen utensils of tin and brass, while others blow blasts on 
horns and reed-pipes. They drag about a cart containing 
an effigy of an old woman made up of rags and tow, which 
represents Befana (Epiphany). When they come to the 
village square they put fire to the effigy, which soon vanishes 
in smoke and flames amid a chorus of cries, shrieks, and other 
forms of rustic melody.” Similar ceremonies are probably 
observed on the same evening in other parts of Italy. 

In the Shetland Islands the Yule or Christmas holidays 
begin, or used to begin, seven days before Christmas and last 
till Antinmas, that is, the twenty-fourth day after Christmas. 


1 As to Befana and her connexion 
with Epiphany, see J. Grimm, Dezésche 
Mythologie,* i. 234. The personified 
Befana, an ugly but good-natured old 
woman, is known in Sicily as well as 
Italy. See G. Pitré, Spettacoli e Feste 
Popolari Siciliane (Palermo, 1881), p. 
167. As to the ceremony in the Piazza 
Navona, see H. Usener, ‘‘Italische 
Mythen,” AVezne Schriften, iv. (Leipsic 
and Berlin, 1913) pp. 108 sgg., who 
rightly compares it to the Swiss cere- 
monies observed at and near Brunnen 
on Twelfth Night. I witnessed the 
noisy scene in the Piazza Navona in 
January, 1901. 


2 P. Fabbri, ‘‘Canti popolari raccolti 


sui monti della Komagna-Toscana,” 
Archivio per lo Studio delle Tradiziont 
Popolart, xxii. (1903) pp. 356 59.3 
H. Usener, Avene Schriften, iv. 108 
note®*, Inthe Abruzzi, on the evening 
before Epiphany, musicians go from 
house to house serenading the inmates 
with songs and the strains of fiddles, 
guitars, organs, and so forth. They are 
accompanied by others carrying lanterns, 
torches, or burning branches of juniper. 
See Antonio de Nino, Usz e Costumz 
Abruzzest (Florence, 1879-1883), i. 
178-180; G. Finamore, Credenze, Ust 
e Costumt Abruzzest (Palermo, 1890), 
pp. 88 sg. Such house to house visita- 
tions may be a relic of an old expulsion 
of witches and demons. 


Befana 

in the 
Tuscan 
Romagna. 


Expulsion 
of the 
Trows in 
Shetland 


on Up- 
helly-a’, 
the twenty- 
fourth day 
after 
Christmas. 


168 THE PUBLIC EXPULSION OF EVILS CHAP. 


In the Shetland parlance these holidays are known as “the 
Yules.” On the first night, called Tul-ya’s e’en, Seven days 
before Christmas, certain mischievous elves, whom the 
Shetlanders name Trows, “ received permission to leave their 
homes in the heart of the earth and dwell, if it so pleased 
them, above ground. There seemed to have been no doubt 
that those creatures preferred disporting themselves among 
the dwellings of men to residing in their own subterranean 
abodes, for they availed themselves of every permission 
given, and created no little disturbance among the mortals 
whom they visited. One of the most important of all Yule- 
tide observances was the ‘saining’ required to guard life or 
property from the Trows. If the proper observances were 
omitted, the ‘ grey-folk’ were sure to take advantage of the 
opportunity.”’ On the last day of the holidays, the twenty- 
fourth day after Christmas, which in Shetland goes by the 
name of Up-helly-a’, Uphellia, or Uphaliday, “the doors 
were all opened, and a great deal of pantomimic chasing 
and driving and dispersing of unseen creatures took place. 
Many pious ejaculations were uttered, and iron was 
ostentatiously displayed, ‘for Trows can never abide the 
sight o’ iron. The Bible was read and quoted. People 
moved about in groups or couples, never singly, and infants 
were carefully guarded as well as sained by vigilant and 
learned ‘wise women,’ Alas, the poor Trows! their time of 
frolic and liberty was ended, and on Twenty-fourth night 
they retired to their gloomy abodes beneath the sod, seldom 
finding opportunity to reappear again, and never with the 
same licence, until the Yules returned. All that pantomime, 
all that invoking of holier Powers, were but methods of 
‘speeding the parting guest,’ and mortals were rejoicing that 
the unbidden, unwelcome grey-folk must depart. When day 

1 Rev. Biot Edmondston and Jessie 


M. E. Saxby, Zhe Home of a Naturalist 
(London, 1888), p. 136. Compare 


John Jamieson, Ztymological Dictionary 
of the Scottish Language, New Edition, 
edited by J. Longmuir and D. Donald- 


County Folk-lore, vol. iti. Orkney and 
Shetland Islands, collected by G. F. 
Black (London, 1903), p. 196. As to 
the Trows, whose name is doubtless 
identical with the Norse Trolls (Swedish 
troll, Norwegian ¢vo/d), see Edmond- 
ston and Saxby, of. cz¢. pp. 189 sg9. ; 


son (Paisley, 1879-1882), iv. 630 s@., 
who observes that ‘‘ while the Fairies 
are uniformly represented as social, 
cheerful, and benevolent beings, the 
Trows are described as gloomy and 
malignant, ever prone to injure men.” 


lil PERIODIC EXPULSION OF EVILS 


169 


dawned after Twenty-fourth night the Trows had vanished 
and the Yules were ended.”* Of late years Up-helly-a’ has 
been celebrated in Lerwick with pompous and elaborate 
masquerades. The chief event of the evening is a torch- 
light procession of maskers or “ guizers,” as they are called, 
who escort the model of a Norse galley through the streets, 
and finally set it on fire by throwing their torches into it. 
But in this form the celebration seems to date only from the 
latter part of the nineteenth century ; in former times an old 
boat filled with tar and ignited was dragged about and 
blazing tar-barrels were drawn or kicked through the streets.” 
The fire, however procured, was probably in origin intended 
to chase away the lingering Trows from the town at the end 


of the holidays. 


Thus it would seem that the custom of annually ban- 
ishing witches and demons on a day or night set apart for 
the purpose has not been confined to Central Europe, but 
can be traced from Calabria and Rome in the south to the 
Shetland Islands in the far north. 


1 Rev. Biot Edmondston and Jessie 
M. E. Saxby, 7e Home of a Naturalist 
(London, 1888), p. 146. Compare 
County Folk-lore, vol. iii. Orkney and 
Shetland Islands, collected by G. F. 
Black (London, 1903), pp. 202 sg. 

2 The Shetland News, February Ist, 
1913, p. 5. As January 5th is reckoned 
Christmas in Shetland, the celebration 
of Up-helly-a’ falls on January 29th. 
See J. Nicolson, in Zhe Worla’s Work 
and Play, February, 1906, pp. 283 sg. 
For further information relating to the 
ceremony I am indebted to the kind- 
ness of Sheriff-Substitute David J. 
Mackenzie (formerly of Lerwick, now 
of Kilmarnock). According to one of 
his correspondents, the Rev. Dr. J. 
Willcock of Lerwick, the present 
elaborate form of the ceremony dates 
only from 1882, when the Duke of 
Edinburgh visited Lerwick on naval 
business, and Up-helly-a’ was celebrated 
in his honour on a grander scale than 
ever before. Yet Dr. Willcock ap- 
parently does not deny the antiquity 
of the festival in a simpler form, for in 
his letter he says: ‘‘In former times 


an old boat filled with tar was set on 
fire and dragged about, as were also 
lighted tar-barrels.” Another authority 
on Shetland antiquities, Mr. Gilbert 
Goudie, writes to Sheriff Mackenzie 
that ‘*the kicking about and burning 
a tar-barrel is very old in Lerwick.” 
Compare County Folk-lore, iii. Orkney 
and Shetland Islands, collected by G. 
F. Black (London, 1903), p. 205: 
**Formerly, blazing tar-barrels were 
dragged about the town, and _after- 
wards, with the first break of morning, 
dashed over the knab into the sea.” 
Up-helly-a’, the Shetland name for 
Antinmas, is no doubt the same with 
Uphalyday, which Dr, J. Jamieson 
(Dictionary of the Scottish Language, 
New Edition, iv. 676) defines as ‘‘ the 
first day after the termination of the 
Christmas holidays,” quoting two 
official documents of A.D. 1494 and 
1541 respectively. 

I have to thank my friend Miss 
Anderson of Barskimming, Mauchline, 
Ayrshire, for kindly calling my attention 
to this interesting relic of the past. 


Annual 
expulsion 
of witches 
and 
demons in 
Europe. 


The ex- 
pulsion of 
- embodied 
evils. 


Expulsion 
of demons 
personified 
by men 
among the 
American 
Indians. 


CHAPTER. ly 


PUBLIC SCAPEGOATS 


§ 1. The Expulsion of Embodied Evils 


TuHus far we have dealt with that class of the general 
expulsion of evils which I have called direct or immediate. 
In this class the evils are invisible, at least to common eyes, 
and the mode of deliverance consists for the most part in 
beating the empty air and raising such a hubbub as may 
scare the mischievous spirits and put them to flight. It 
remains to illustrate the second class of expulsions, in which 
the evil influences are embodied in a visible form or are 
at least supposed to be loaded. upon a material medium, 
which acts as a vehicle to draw them off from the people, 
village, or town. 

The Pomos of California celebrate an expulsion of devils 
every seven years, at which the devils are represented by dis- 
cuised men. “Twenty or thirty men array themselves in 
harlequin rig and barbaric paint, and put vessels of pitch on 
their heads ; then they secretly go out into the surrounding 
mountains. These are to personify the devils. A herald goes 
up to the top of the assembly-house, and makes a speech to 
the multitude. At a signal agreed upon in the evening the 
masqueraders come in from the mountains, with the vessels of 
pitch flaming on their heads, and with all the frightful acces- 
sories of noise, motion, and costume which the savage mind can 


devise in representation of demons. The terrified women and 


children flee for life, the men huddle them inside a circle, and, 
on the principle of fighting the devil with fire, they swing 
170 


prs 


CHAP. IV EXPULSION OF EMBODIED EVILS 178 


blazing firebrands in the air, yell, whoop, and make frantic 
dashes at the marauding and bloodthirsty devils, so creating 
a terrific spectacle, and striking great fear into the hearts of 
the assembled hundreds of women, who are screaming and 
fainting and clinging to their valorous protectors. Finally 
the devils succeed in getting into the assembly-house, and 
the bravest of the men enter and hold a parley with them. 
As a conclusion of the whole farce, the men summon 
courage, the devils are expelled from the assembly-house, 
and with a prodigious row and racket of sham fighting are 
chased away into the mountains.”' In spring, as soon as 
the willow-leaves were full grown on the banks of the river, 
the Mandan Indians celebrated their great annual festival, 
one of the features of which was the expulsion of the devil. 
A man, painted black to represent the devil, entered the 
village from the prairie, chased and frightened the women, 
and acted the part of a buffalo bull in the buffalo dance, the 
object of which was to ensure a plentiful supply of buffaloes 
during the ensuing year. Finally he was chased from the 
village, the women pursuing him with hisses and gibes, 
beating him with sticks, and pelting him with dirt? The 
Mayas of Yucatan divided the year into eighteen months of 
twenty days each, and they added five supplementary days 
at the end of the: year in order to make a total of three 
hundred and sixty-five days. These five supplementary 
days were deemed unlucky. In the course of them the 
people banished the evils that might threaten them in the 
year on which they were about to enter. For that purpose 
they made a clay image of the demon of evil Uuayayab, 
that is u-wayab-haab, “He by whom the year is poisoned,” 
confronted it with the deity who had supreme power over 
the coming year, and then carried it out of the village in the 
direction of that cardinal point to which, on the system of 
the Mayan calendar, the particular year was supposed to 
belong. Having thus rid themselves of the demon, they 
looked forward to a happy New Year.’ 

1 Stephen Powers, Z7zbes of Cali- mony, and other Customs of the 
fornia (Washington, 1877), p. 159. Mandans (London, 1867). 

2 G. Catlin, Worth American Indians, 3 Diego de Landa, Relation des 


Fourth Edition (London, 1844), i. 166 Choses de Yucatan (Paris, 1864), pp. 
5qg.; td., O-kee-pa, a Religious Cere- 203-205, 211-215; E. Seler, ‘‘ The 


Expulsion 
of a demon 
embodied 
in an image 
among the 
Mayas of 
Yucatan. 


Expulsion 
of a demon 
personified 
by a man 
among the 
aborigines 
of Queens- 
land. 


Expulsion 
of demons 
embodied 
in effigies 
in India 
and Russia. 


172 PUBLIC SCAPEGOAGS CHAP. 


Some of the native tribes of Central Queensland believe 
in a noxious being called Molonga, who prowls unseen and 
would kill men and violate women if certain ceremonies 
were not performed. These ceremonies last for five nights 
and consist of dances, in which only men, fantastically 
painted and adorned, take part. On the fifth night Molonga 
himself, personified by a man tricked out with red ochre and 
feathers and carrying a long feather-tipped spear, rushes 
forth from the darkness at the spectators and makes as if 
he would run them through. Great is the excitement, loud 
are the shrieks and shouts, but after another feigned attack 
the demon vanishes in the gloom.’ On the last night of 
the year the palace of the Kings of Cambodia is purged 
of devils. Men painted as fiends are chased by elephants 
about the palace courts. When they have been expelled, 
a consecrated thread of cotton is stretched round the 
palace to keep them out.” In Munzerabad, a district 
of Mysore in Southern India, when cholera or small- 
pox has broken out in a parish, the inhabitants assemble 
and conjure the demon of the disease into a wooden 
image, which they carry, generally at midnight, into the 
next parish. The inhabitants of that parish in like manner 
pass the image on to their neighbours, and thus the 
demon is expelled from one village after another, until he 
comes to the bank of a river into which he is finally thrown.’ 
Russian villagers seek to protect themselves against epidemics, 
whether of man or beast, by drawing a furrow with a plough 
right round the village. The plough is dragged by four 
widows and the ceremony is performed at night ; all fires and 
lights must be extinguished while the plough is going the 
round. The people think that no unclean spirit can pass 
the furrow which has thus been traced. In the village of 


Mexican Chronology,” Szrveau of land Aborigines (Brisbane and London, 
American Ethnology, Bulletin 28 1897), pp. 120-125. 
(Washington, 1904), p. 17. As to 
the Maya calendar see further Cyrus 
Thomas, Zhe Maya Year (Washing- 
ton, 1894), pp. 19 sgg. (Smithsonian 
Institution, Bureau of Ethnology). 3 R. H. Elliot, Experiences of a 
1 W. E. Roth, Z¢thnological Studies Planter in the Jungles of Mysore 
among the North-West-Central Queens- (London, 1871), i. 60 sg. 


2 J. Moura, Le Royaume du Cam- 
bodge (Paris, 1883), i. 172. Compare 
above, p. 149. 


iv ANPOLSION OF EMBODIED EVILS 173 


Dubrowitschi a puppet is carried before the plough with the 
cry, “Out of the village with the unclean spirit!” and at 
the end of the ceremony it is torn in pieces and the fragments 
scattered about.’ No doubt the demon of the disease is 
supposed to be in the puppet and to be destroyed with it. 
Sometimes in an Esthonian village a rumour will get about 
that the Evil One himself has been seen in the place. 
Instantly the whole village is in an uproar, and the entire 
population, armed with sticks, flails, and scythes, turns out 
to give him chase. They generally expel him in the shape 
of a wolf or a cat, occasionally they brag that they have 
beaten the devil to death.2. At Carmona, in Andalusia, on 
one day of the year, boys are stripped naked and smeared 
with glue in which feathers are stuck. Thus disguised, they 
run from house to house, the people trying to avoid them 
and to bar their houses against them.’ The ceremony is 
probably a relic of an annual expulsion of devils. 

Some of the Khasis of Assam annually expel the demon 
of plague. The ceremony is called Beh-dieng-khlam, that is 
“ Driving away (de/) the plague (£//am) with sticks (dzeng) ” ; 
it takes place in the Deep-water month (June). On the day 
fixed for the expulsion the men rise early and beat the roof 
with sticks, calling upon the demon of the plague to leave 
the house. Later in the day they go down to the stream 
where the goddess Aitan dwells. Then long poles or 
bamboos, newly cut, are laid across the stream and the 
people jump on them, trying to break them; when they 
succeed, they give a great shout. Next a very large pole 
or bamboo is similarly laid across the stream, and the people 
divide themselves into two parties, one on each side of the 
stream, and pull against each other at opposite ends of the 
pole. According to one account the party which succeeds 
in dragging the pole to their side of the stream is supposed 
to gain health and prosperity during the coming year, 


1 A. C. Winter, ‘‘ Russische Volks- 
brauche bei Seuchen,” Globus, |xxix. 
(1901) p. 302. For the Russian 
ceremony of drawing a plough round 
a village to keep out the cattle plague, 
see also W. R. S. Ralston, Songs of 
the Russian People, Second Edition 


(London, 1872), pp. 396 sgq. 

2 J. G. Kohl, Die deutsch-russischen 
Ostseeprovinzen (Dresden and Leipsic, 
1841), ii. 278. 

3 Folk -lore Journal, 
Pp. 174. 


Vii. 


(1889) 


Expulsion 
of demons 
embodied 

in animals 
or boys in 
Esthonia 

and Spain. 


Annual 
expulsion 
of the 
demon of 
plague 
among the 
Khasis of 
Assam. 


The Tug 
of War 
probably 

a contest 
with 
demons 
represented 
by human 
beings. 


The Tug 
of War at 
funerals in 
Chittagong 
and 
Burma. 


174 PUBLIC SCAPE GOATS CHAP. 


According to another account, if the people on the east bank 
win in the contest or “ tug-of-war,” good luck and prosperity 
are assured ; but if the people on the west bank are victorious, 
then everything will go wrong. On this occasion the people 
disguise themselves as giants and wild beasts, and they 
parade images of serpents, elephants, tigers, peacocks, and 
so on. The men dance with enthusiasm, and the girls, 
dressed in their best, look on. Before the assembly breaks 
up, the men play a sort of game of hockey with wooden 
balls.’ In this ceremonial contest or “tug of war” between 
two parties of the people, we may conjecture that the one 
party represents the expelled demons of the plague ; and if 
that is so, we may perhaps assume that in the struggle the 
representatives of the demons generally allow themselves to 
be overcome by their adversaries, in order that the village 
may be free from pestilence in the coming yeare Similarly 
in autumn the Central Esquimaux divide themselves into two 
parties, representing summer and winter respectively, which 
pull at opposite ends of a rope; and they draw omens of 
the weather to be expected in the coming winter according 
as the party of summer or of winter prevails in the struggle.” 
That in such contests, resembling our English game of 
“French and English” or the “ Tug of War,’ the one side 
may represent demons is proved by a custom observed by 
the Chukmas, a tribe of the Chittagong Hill Tracts in 
South-Eastern India. “On the death of a Dewan or of a 
priest a curious sport is customary at the funeral. The 
corpse is conveyed to the place of cremation on a car; to 
this car ropes are attached, and the persons attending the 
ceremony are divided into two equal bodies and set to work 
to pull in opposite directions. One side represents the good 
spirits ; the other, the powers of evil. The contest is so 
arranged that the former are victorious. Sometimes, how- 
ever, the young men representing the demons are inclined to 
pull too vigorously, but a stick generally quells this un- 


1 Major P. R. T. Gurdon, Zhe Khasts lin, 1883), pp. 6 sg. 
(London, 1907), p. 157; A. Bastian, 
in Verhandlungen der Berliner Gesell- 2 Fr. Boas, ‘‘ The Central Eskimo,” 
schaft fiir Anthropologie, Ethnologie, Sixth Annual Report of the Bureau of 
und Urgeschichte, 1881, p. 151; za., Ethnology (Washington, 1888), p. 605. 
Volkerstimme am Brahmaputra (Ber- See The Dying God, p. 259. 


IV EXPULSION OF EMBODIED EVILS 175 


seemly ardour in the cause of evil.” The contest is like that 
between the angels and devils depicted in the frescoes of the 
Campo Santo at Pisa. In Burma a similar struggle takes 
place at the funeral of a Buddhist monk who passed for a 
saint in the popular estimation: ropes are attached to 
opposite ends of the car on which the coffin is placed, all 
the able-bodied men of the neighbourhood hold on to one or 
other of the two ends and pull as if for dear life against 
each other ; even the women and girls sometimes join in the 
tug of war, and policemen have been seen, in a state of 
frantic excitement, waving their batons to encourage the 
combatants and dragging back shirkers by main force into 
the fighting line. The struggle is sometimes prolonged for 
hours or even days.” With the example of the Chukmas 
before us, we may conjecture that the original motive of this 
internecine strife was a persuasion that the eternal happiness 
or misery of the departed saint depended on the issue of this 
contest between the powers of good and evil for the posses- 
sion of his mortal remains. 

But in Burma the tug of war has been employed for 
more secular purposes than the salvation or perdition of 
souls. “ The inhabitants,” we are told, “still have a custom 
of pulling a rope to produce rain. A rain party and a 
drought party tug against each other, the rain party being 
allowed the victory, which in the popular notion is generally 
followed by rain.”* The mode in which this salutary result 
follows from tugging at a rope is explained by the Burmese 
doctrine of za¢s or spirits who cause rain. But it is only 
when these spirits sport in the air that rain falls ; when they 
shut themselves up in their houses there is drought. Now 
in some Burmese writings “it is said, that when the sun is 
in the path of the goat, these at do not chuse to leave 
their houses on account of the great heat, whence there is 
then no rain. For this reason, the inhabitants of the Burma 


1 Capt. T. H. Lewin, Wild Races 216 sg.; Shway Yoe, Zhe Burman, 
of South-Eastern India (London, 42s Life and Notions (London, 1882), 


1870), p. 185. li. 334 59.) 342. 
2 Father Sangermano, Description of 
the Burmese Empire (Rangoon, 1885), 3 F. E. Sawyer, ‘‘S. Swithin and 


p- 98; Capt. C. J. F. S. Forbes, Rainmakers,” Zhe Folk-lore Journal, i, 
British Burma (London, 1878), pp. (1883) p. 214. 


The Tug. 
of War as 
a rain- 
making 
ceremony 
in Burma 
and else 
where. 


176 PUBLIC SCAPEGOARS CHAP. 


empire, in times of drought, are wont to assemble in great 
numbers, with drums and a long cable. Dividing themselves 
into two parties, with a vast shouting and noise, they drag 
the cable contrary ways, the one party endeavouring to get 
the better of the other: and they think, by this means, to 
invite the Vat to come out from their houses, and to sport 
in the air. The thunder and lightning, which frequently 
precede rain, are the clashing and shining of the arms of 
these Vaz, who sometimes sport in mock battles.”* Appar- 
ently, therefore, in the tug of war, practised as a rain-charm, 
the one party represent the spirits who have to be dragged 
reluctantly from their houses in order to make rain in the 
sky. Similarly in the Timor-laut Islands, when the people 
want a rainy wind from the west, the population of the 
village, men, women, and children divide into two parties 
and pull against each other at the end of a long bamboo, 
But the party at the eastern end must pull the harder, in 
order to draw the desired wind out of the west.2 We can 
now perhaps understand why among the Khasis the victory 
of the eastern side in the tug of war is thought to prognosticate 
good luck and prosperity, and why the victory of the western 
side is believed to portend the contrary ; the distinction is 
at once intelligible when we remember that in the country 
of the Khasis the rainy wind is the monsoon which blows 
from the south-west, whereas the wind which blows from 
the south-east is hot and dry. Thus a victory of the 
eastern party in the tug of war means that they have drawn 
rain and consequently fertility into the country from the 
west ; whereas a victory of the western party signifies that 
they have dragged drought and consequently dearth into the 
country from the east. 

However, a somewhat different turn is given to the 


1 Francis Buchanan, ‘‘On_ the 
Religion and Literature of the Burmas,” 
Asiatick Researches, vi. (London, 1801) 
pp- 193 sg. Compare Lieut.-General 
A. Fytche, Burma Past and Present 
(London, 1878), i. 248 note!; Max 
and Bertha Ferrars, zrma (London, 
1900), p. 1843 (Sir) J. G. Scott and J. 
P. Hardiman, Gazetteer of Upper Burma 
and the Shan States (Rangoon, 1900-— 


1901), Part ii. vol. il. pp. 95, 279. 
2j. G. F. Riedel, De sluck- en 


kroesharige rassen tusschen Celebes en 


Papua (The Hague, 1886), p. 282. 


3 For particulars as to the winds of 
Assam I am indebted to my friend Mr. 
J. D. Anderson, formerly of the Indian 
Civil Service, who resided many years 
in that country. 


: 
| 


IV EXPULSION OF EMBODIED EVILS 


177 


ceremony of rope-pulling in the East Indies by another The Tug 
writer, who informs us, that while the contest only takes nora 
place in some of these islands when rain is wanted, it is closely the sexes. 
connected with those licentious rites performed for the 
fertilization of the ground which have been described in 
another part of this work." According to this account the 

men and women appear to take opposite sides in the tug of 

war, and in pulling against each other they imitate by their 
“movements the union of the sexes.” _If that is so, it would 

seem that the rite is a magical ceremony designed to promote 

the fertility of the ground by means of homoeopathic or 
imitative magic. The same may perhaps be the intention of 

the tug of war as it is practised for the benefit of the crops 

by some of the Naga tribes of Assam, and this is the more 

likely because in the case of these tribes we are definitely 

told that the sexes take opposite sides, the women and girls 
tugging against the men and boys. This is done by the 
Tangkhuls of Assam a month after the rice has been sown ; 
the ceremony is performed “in order to take the omens for 

the future of the crops,” and it “is followed by considerable 
license.” The tug of war between the sexes with its 
attendant license is repeated before the first-fruits are cut 

by the sacred headman.? In Corea about the fifteenth day 

of the first month villages engage in the same kind of 
contest with each other, and it is thought that the village 
which wins will have a good harvest. The rope which they 

pull is made of straw, two feet in diameter, with its ends 
divided into branches. The men lay hold of the main stem, 
while the women grasp the branches, and they often tug 
harder than the men, for they load their skirts with stones, 


1 The Magic Art and the Evolution 
of Kings, ii. 98 sq. 

2 G. W. W. C. Baron van Hoevell, 
*Leti-eilanden,” 7zjdschrift voor 
Indische Taal- Land- en Volkenkunde, 
Xxxill. (1890) p. 207. However, it is 
not quite clear from the writer’s words 
‘(“Inmers de mannen en vrouwen tn 
twee partieen verdeelt en elk cen stuk 
van de roten in de hande houdende 
bootsen toch ook door’t voor- en achter- 
werbuigen vant lichaam de bewegingen 


| 


distributed between the two. 

3 T. C. Hodson, The Naga Tribes 
of Manipur (London, 1911), p. 168; 
compare 64. ‘*The Chirus have six 
crop festivals, one of which, that before 
the crops are cut, is marked by a rope- 
pulling ceremony of the same nature as 
that observed among the Tangkhuls” 
(op. cet. p. 172). The headman 
(khullakpa) ‘* is a sacrosanct person, the 
representative of the village in all 
religious rites, and surrounded by 


van cohabitie na”) whether the men 
and women take opposite sides or are 


Pr. VI 


special alimentary, social and conjugal 
gennas’’ or taboos (of. cz¢. p. 110). 


N 


The Tug 
of War in 
Kamt- 
chatka 
and New 
Guinea. 


The Tug 
of War in 
Morocco 
to procure 
rain or 
sunshine, 


178 PUBLIC SCAPEGOATS CHAP. 


which adds weight to the force of their muscles! In 
Kamtchatka, when the fishing season is over, the people 
used to divide into two parties, one of which tried to pull a 
birch-tree by a strap through the smoke-hole into their 
subterranean winter dwelling, while the other party outside, 
pulling at the end of the tree, endeavoured to hinder them. 
If the party in the house succeeded, they raised shouts of 
joy and set up a grass effigy of a wolf, which they preserved 
carefully throughout the year, believing that it espoused 
their young women and prevented them from giving birth to 
twins. For they deem the birth of twins a dreadful mis- 
fortune and a horrible sin ; they put it down to the wolf in 
the forest, and all who chance to be in the house at the 
time shew a clean pair of heels, leaving the mother and her 
infants to shift for themselves. Should the twins be both 
girls, the calamity is even greater.” In the village of Doreh, 
in Dutch New Guinea, when some of the inhabitants have 
gone on a long journey, the people who stay at home 
engage in a Tug of War among themselves to determine 
whether the journey will be prosperous or not. One side 
represents the voyagers and the other side those who are | 
left behind. They pull at opposite ends of a long bamboo, 
and if the bamboo breaks or the side which represents the | 
people at home is obliged to let go, the omen is favourable.* 
In Morocco, also, the Tug of War is resorted to as a 
means of influencing the weather, sometimes in order to | 
procure rain and sometimes to procure sunshine ; and here 
men and women appear usually to take opposite sides in 
the contest. For example, among the Igliwa, a Berber 
people of the Great Atlas, when rain is wanted, they take a 
rope and the men pull at one end and women at the other. | 
While they are tugging away, a man suddenly cuts the rope 
and the women fall down. The same device for procuring 
rain in time of drought is practised by the Ait Warain, | 
another Berber tribe of Morocco; but among them in the! 
heat of the contest the women as well as the men will some- 


1 Stewart Culin, Xovean Games dem Lande Kamtschatka (Frankfort 
(Philadelphia, 1895), p. 35; A.C. and Leipsic, 1774), pp. 327 sg. 
Haddon, Zhe Study of Man (London j 
and New York, 1898), p. 274. 3 H. von Rosenberg, Der malaytschi 

2G. W. Steller, Beschreibung von  Archipel (Leipsic, 1878), p. 462. 


IV EXPULSION OF EMBODIED EVILS 179 


times let go the rope and allow the opposite party to fall on 
their backs. However, the Tsfil, another Berber tribe of 
Morocco, employ the Tug of War for the opposite purpose 
of ensuring a supply of sunshine and heat in autumn, when 
they wish to dry their figs and grapes; the contest takes 
place at night by the light of the moon.’ The apparent 
contradiction of employing the same procedure for opposite 
purposes vanishes if we suppose that, as the Assamese 
custom seems to indicate, the intention is to draw either a 
rainy or a dry wind out of the quarters from which the 
breezes that bring rain or sunshine usually blow, and which 
will usually be on opposite sides of the sky. Hence in order 
fully to understand the Tug of War, when it is practised for 
the purpose of influencing the weather, we should know, first, 
the directions from which the rainy and the dry winds 
respectively come in the country under consideration, and 
second, the direction in which the rope is stretched between 
the contending parties. If, for example, as happens in 
Assam, the rainy wind blows from the west, and a victory of 
the eastern party in the Tug of War is an omen of prosperity, 
we may conclude with a fair degree of probability that the 
intention of the contest is to draw the rain from the quarter 
of the sky in which it is lingering. But these niceties of 
observation have usually escaped the attention of those who 
have described the Tug of War. 

In various parts of Morocco games of ball are played for 
the sake now of procuring rain and now of procuring dry 
weather ; the ball is sometimes propelled with sticks and 
sometimes with the feet of the competitors. An Arab 
questioned as to why a game of ball should bring on rain 
explained that the ball is dark like a rain-cloud.2 Perhaps 
the answer furnishes the clue to the meaning of the rite. 
If in such games played to influence the weather the ball 
represents a rain-cloud, the success or failure of the charm 


1 Edward Westermarck, ‘‘ The 
‘Popular Ritual of the Great Feast in 
Morocco,” Folk-lore, xxii. (1911) pp. 
158 sg.; za., Ceremonies and Beliefs 
connected with Agriculture, Certain 
Dates of the Solar Year, and the 
Weather in Morocco (Helsingfors, 


EOES) sep 22. 

2 E. Westermarck, Ceremonies and 
Beliefs connected with Agriculture, 
Certain Dates of the Solar Vear, and 
the Weather in Morocco (Helsingfors, 


1913), pp. I21 sg. 


Games of 
ball in 
Morocco 
to procure 
rain or 
sunshine. 


The Tug 
of War in 
Morocco 
to ensure 
prosperity. 


Spiritual 
significance 
of the Tug 
of War. 


180 PUBLIC SCAPEGOATS CHAP. 


will depend on which side contrives to get the ball home in 
the enemy’s quarters. For example, if rain is desired and the 
rainy wind blows in Morocco, as may perhaps be assumed, 
from the west, then should the western side succeed in 
driving the ball through the eastern goal, there will be rain ; 
but if the eastern party wins, then the rain is driven away 
and the drought will continue. Thus a game of ball would 
in theory and practice answer exactly to the Tug of War 
practised for the same purposes. 

In Morocco, however, the Tug of War is apparently used 
also for the purpose of ensuring prosperity in general without 
any special reference to the weather. Dr. Westermarck was 
informed by an old Arab from the Hiaina that the Tug of 
War “is no longer practised at the Great Feast, as it was in 
his childhood, but that it is performed in the autumn when 
the threshing is going on and the fruits are ripe. Then 
men and women have a tug of war by moonlight so that the — 
bdés, or evil, shall go away, that the year shall be good, and 
that the people shall live in peace. Some man secretly cuts 
two of the three cords of which the rope is made, with the 
result that both parties tumble down.”’ In this contest one 
party perhaps represents the powers of good and the other the | 
powers of evil in general. But why in these Moroccan cases | 
of the Tug of War the rope should be so often cut and one 
or both sides laid on their backs, is not manifest. Perhaps 
the simple device of suddenly slacking the rope in order to 
make the opposite side lose their footing, and so to haul the | 
rope away from them before they can recover themselves, | 
may have led to the more trenchant measure of cutting it 
with a knife for the same purpose. 

These examples make it probable that wherever the 
Tug of War is played only at certain definite seasons | 
or on certain particular occasions, it was originally per-| 
formed, not as a mere pastime, but as a magical ceremony 
designed to work some good for the community. Further, 
we may surmise that in many cases the two contending 
parties represent respectively the powers of good and 
evil struggling against each other for the mastery, and, 


1 EK. Westermarck, ‘‘ The Popular Ritual of the Great Feast in Morocco,” 
Folk-lore, xxii. (IQI1) p. 159. 


Iv EXPULSION OF EMBODIED EVILS 181 


as the community has always an interest in the preva- 
lence of the powers of good, it may well happen that the 
powers of evil do not always get fair play in these conflicts ; 
though no doubt when it comes to be “pull devil, pull 
baker,” the devil is apt, in the spirit of a true sportsman, 
to tug with as hearty good will as his far more deserving 
adversary the baker. To take cases in which the game is 
played without any alleged practical motive, the Roocooyen 
Indians of French Guiana engage in the Tug of War as a 
sort of interlude during the ceremonial tortures of the youth." 
Among the Cingalese the game “is connected with the 
superstitious worship of the goddess Patiné; and is more 
intended for a propitiation to that deity, than considered 
as an’ indulgence, or pursued as an exercise. Two opposite 
parties procure two sticks of the strongest and toughest 
wood, and so crooked as to hook into one another without 
slipping ; they then attach strong cords or cable-rattans of 
sufficient length to allow of every one laying hold of them. 
The contending parties then pull until one of the sticks 
gives way.’ The victorious piece of wood is gaily decor- 
ated, placed in a palanquin, and borne through the village 
amid noisy rejoicings, often accompanied with coarse and 
obscene expressions.” The use of foul language on this 
Occasion suggests that the ceremony is here, as elsewhere, 
observed for the purpose of ensuring fertility. In the 
North-Western provinces of India the game is played on 
the fourteenth day of the light half of the month Kuar. 
“The rope (Jarra) is made of the grass called makra, and 
‘is thicker than a man’s arm. The various quarters of a 
village pull against each other, and the one which is 
victorious keeps possession of the rope during the ensuing 
year. It is chiefly in the east of these provinces that the 
game is played; in the west it is unknown.? Sometimes 
the contest is between the inhabitants of neighbouring 
villages, and the rope is stretched across the boundary ; 


- 1H. Coudreau, Chez nos Indiens, 3 Sir Henry M. Elliot, Memoirs on 
Quatre Années dans la Guayane Fran- the History, Folk-lore, and Distribu- 
‘gaise (Paris, 1895), p. 234. tion of the Races of the North-Western 


Provinces of India, edited, revised, 
2 Major Forbes, Zvevex Years in and re-arranged by John Beames (Lon- 
Ceylon (London, 1840), i. 358. don, 1869), i. 235. 


The Tug 
of War in 
French 
Guiana. 


The Tug 
of War 
in North- 
Western 
India. 


The Tug 
of War in 
Shropshire 
and Rad- 
norshire, 


182 PUBLIC SCAPEGOAT S CHAP. 


plenty is supposed to attend the victorious side” At 
the Great Feast, a yearly sacrificial festival of the Moham- 
medan world, some tribes in Morocco practise a Tug of 
War. Thus among the Ait Sadden it is observed on the 
first day of the festival before the sacrifice ; among the Ait 
Yusi it is performed either before the religious service or in 
the afternoon of the same day, and also in the morning of 
the Little Feast. Both sexes generally take part in the 
contest, the men tugging at one end of the rope and the 
women at the other, and sometimes the weaker party applies 
for help to persons of the same sex in a neighbouring village. 
When they are all hard at it, the men may suddenly let go 
the rope and so send the women sprawling on their backs.’ 
At Ludlow in Shropshire a grand Tug of War used to take 
place on Shrove Tuesday between the inhabitants of Broad — 
Street Ward on the one side and of Corve Street Ward on 
the other. The rope was three inches thick and thirty-six 
yards long, with a red knob at one end and a blue knob 
at the other. The rope was paid out by the Mayor in 
person from a window in the Market Hall at four o’clock 
in the afternoon. The shops then put up their shutters, — 
and the population engaged in the struggle with enthusiasm, 
gentle and simple, lawyers and parsons bearing a hand on | 
one side or the other, till their clothes were torn to tatters | 
on their backs. The injured were carried into the neigh-_ 
bouring houses, where their hurts were attended to. If 
the party of the Red Knob won, they carried the rope in 
triumph to the River Leme and dipped it in the water. ‘ 
Finally, the rope was sold, the money which it brought in 
was devoted to the purchase of beer, and drinking, squab-— 
bling, and fighting ended the happy day. This ancient and, 
highly popular pastime was suppressed in 1851 on the’ 
frivolous pretext that it gave rise to disorderly scenes and 
dangerous accidents.* A similar custom has long been’ 
observed on Shrove Tuesday at Presteign in Radnorshire.’ 


1 W. Crooke, Populav Religion and 
Folk-lore of Northern India (West- 
minster, 1896), ii. 321. 

* E. Westermarck, ‘‘The Popular 
Ritual of the Great Feast in Morocco,” 
Folk-lore, xxii. (1911) p. 158. 


3 John Brand, Popular Antiquities” 
of Great Britain, New Edition (Lon- 
don, 1883), i. 92; Miss C. S. Burne | 
and Miss G. F. Jackson, Shropshire 
Folk-lore (London, 1883), pp. 319- 
325. 


IV EXPULSION OF EMBODIED EVILS 183 
The rope is pulled by two parties representing the upper 
and the lower portions of the town, who strive to drag it 


either to a point in the west wall or to another point in 
Broad Street, where the River Lugg is reached.’ In the 
Bocage of Normandy most desperate struggles used to take 
place between neighbouring parishes on Shrove Tuesday for 
the possession of a large leathern ball stuffed with bran and 
called a soule. The ball was launched on the village green 
and contended for by representatives of different parishes, 
who sometimes numbered seven or eight hundred, while five 
or six thousand people might assemble to witness the com- 
bat; for indeed it was a fight rather than a game. The 
conflict was maintained with the utmost fury; old scores 
were paid off between personal enemies ; there were always 
many wounded, and sometimes there were deaths. The aim 
of each side was to drive the ball over a stream and to 
lodge it in a house of their own parish. It was thought 
that the parish which was victorious in the struggle would 
have a better crop of apples that year than its neighbours. 
At Lande-Patry the ball was provided by the bride who had 
been last married, and she had the honour of throwing it 
into the arena. The scene of the fiercest battles was 
St. Pierre d’Entremont, on the highroad between Condé and 
Tinchebray. After several unsuccessful attempts the custom 
was suppressed at that village in 1852 with the help of four 
or five brigades of police. It is now everywhere extinct.’ 
The belief that the parish which succeeded in carrying the 
ball home would have a better crop of apples that year 
raises a presumption that these conflicts were originally 
practised as magical rites to ensure fertility. The local 
custom of Lande-Patry, which required that the ball should 
be provided and thrown by the last bride,’ points in the 


1C, S. Burne and G. F. Jackson, 
Gp. cu. p. 321. 

2 Jules Lecceur, Lsgzzsses du Bo- 
cage Normand (Condé-sur- Noireau, 
1883-1887), i. 13, ii. 153-165. Com- 
pare Laisnel de la Salle, Croyances et 
Légendes du Centre de la France (Paris, 
1875), i. 86 sgg. ; and as to the game 
of sowle, see Guerry, in A/émozres des 
Antiquaires de France, viii. (1829) pp. 


459-461. 

3-In the parish of Vieux-Pont, in 
the department of Orne, the man who 
is last married before the first Sunday 
in Lent must throw a ball from the 
foot of the cross. The village lads 
compete with each other for its posses- 
sion. To win it the lad must carry 
it through three parishes without being 
overtaken by his rivals. See A. de 


Contests 
for a ball 
(soze) in 
Normandy. 


Annual 
sham fights 
may repre- 
sent con- 
tests with 
demons, 


184 POBINC SCARTEG OATES: CHAP. 


same direction. It is possible that the popular English, or 
rather Scotch, game of football had a similar origin: the 
winning side may have imagined that they secured good 
crops, good weather, or other substantial advantages to their 
village or ward. 

In like manner, wherever a sham or a real conflict 
takes place between two parties annually, above all at the 
New Year, we may suspect that the old intention was 
to ensure prosperity in some form for the people throughout 
the following year, whether by obtaining possession of a 
material object in which the luck of the year was supposed 
to be embodied, or by defeating and driving away a band 
of men who personated the powers of evil. For example, 
among the Tenggerese of eastern Java the New Year festival 
regularly includes a sham fight fought between two bands 
of men, who are armed with spears and swords and advance 
against each other again and again at a dancing step, thrust- 
ing at their adversaries with their spears, but always taking 
care to miss their aim! Again, in Ferghana, a province of 
Turkestan, it is or used to be customary on the first day 
of the year for the king and chiefs to divide into two parties, 
each of which chose a champion. Then the two champions, 
clad in armour, engaged in a combat with each other, while 
the crowd joined in with bricks and stones. When one of 
them was slain the scrimmage stopped, and omens were 
drawn as to whether the year on which they had entered 
would be prosperous or the reverse.” In these combats it 
seems probable that one side represents the demons or other 
powers of evil whom the people hope to vanquish and expel 
at the beginning of the New Year. 

Oftener, however, the expelled demons are not repre- 
sented at all, but are understood to be present invisibly in 
the material and visible vehicle which conveys them away. 
Here, again, it will be convenient to distinguish between occa- 
sional and periodical expulsions. We begin with the former. 


Nore, Coutumes, Mythes, et Traditions Land- en Volkenkunde van Neder- 
des Provinces de France (Paris and Jandsch-Jndié, lil. (1901) pp. 140 
Lyons, 1846), pp. 244 sq. Sq. 

Us iss aed Kohlbrugge, ‘‘ Die 2 Edouard Chavannes, Documents 
Tenggeresen, ein alter Javanischer sz les Tou-Kiue (Zurcs) Occidentaux 
Volksstamm,” Bijdragen tot de Taal- (St. Petersburg, 1903), p. 148. 


IV OCCASIONAL EXPULSION OF EVILS 185 


§ 2. The Occasional Expulsion of Evils in a Material Vehicle 


The vehicle which conveys away the demons may be of Demons 


various kinds. A common one is a little ship or boat. 
Thus, in the southern district of the island of Ceram, when 
a whole village suffers from sickness, a small ship is made 
and filled with rice, tobacco, eggs, and so forth, which have 
been contributed by all the people. AQ little sail is hoisted 
on the ship. When all is ready, a man calls out in a very 
loud voice, “O all ye sicknesses, ye smallpoxes, agues, 
measles, etc., who have visited us so long and wasted us 
so sorely, but who now cease to plague us, we have made 
ready this ship for you and we have furnished you with 
provender sufficient for the voyage. Ye shall have no lack 
of food nor of betel-leaves nor of areca nuts nor of tobacco. 
Depart, and sail away from us directly ; never come near us 
again; but go to a land which is far from here. Let all 
the tides and winds waft you speedily thither, and so convey 
you thither that for the time to come we may live sound 
and well, and that we may never see the sun rise on you 
again.” Then ten or twelve men carry the vessel to the 
shore, and let it drift away with the land-breeze, feeling con- 
vinced that they are free from sickness for ever, or at least 
till the next time. If sickness attacks them again, they are 
sure it is not the same sickness, but a different one, which 
in due time they dismiss in the same manner. When the 
demon-laden bark is lost to sight, the bearers return to the 
village, whereupon a man cries out, “ The sicknesses are now 
gone, vanished, expelled, and sailed away.” At this all the 
people come running out of their houses, passing the word 
from one to the other with great joy, beating on gongs and 
on tinkling instruments.’ 

Similar ceremonies are commonly resorted to in other 
East Indian islands. Thus in Timor-laut, to mislead the 
demons who are causing sickness, a small proa, containing 
the image of a man and provisioned for a long voyage, is 
allowed to drift away with wind and tide. As it is being 

1 Francois Valentyn, Oud-en nieuw Backer (L’ Archipel Indien, Paris, 1874, 


Ost-Indién (Dordrecht and Amster- pp. 377 sg.) copies from Valentyn. 
dam, 1724-1726), i. 14. L. de 


of sickness 
expelled in 
asmall ship 
in Ceram. 


Demons of 
sickness 
expelled in 
a small ship 
in Timor- 
laut. 


Demons of 
sickness 
expelled in 
a ship in 
Buru. 


Demons of 
sickness 
removed 
from the 
persons of 
the suf- 
ferers. 


186 PUBLIC SCAPEGOATS CHAP. 


launched, the people cry, “ O sickness, go from here ; turn 
back; what do you here in this poor land?” ‘Three days 
after this ceremony a pig is killed, and part of the flesh is 
offered to Dudilaa, who lives in the sun. One of the oldest 
men says, “ Old sir, I beseech you make well the grand- 
children, children, women, and men, that we may be able to 
eat pork and rice and to drink palm-wine. I will keep my 
promise. Eat your share, and make all the people in the 
village well.” If the proa is stranded at any inhabited spot, 
the sickness will break out there. Hence a stranded proa 
excites much alarm amongst the coast population, and they 
immediately burn it, because demons fly from fire.’ In the 
island of Buru the proa which carries away the demons of 


disease is about twenty feet long, rigged out with sails, oars, ° 


anchor, and so on, and well stocked with provisions. For a 
day and a night the people beat gongs and drums, and rush 
about to frighten the demons. Next morning ten stalwart 
young men strike the people with branches, which have been 
previously dipped in an earthen pot of water. As soon as 
they have done so, they run down to the beach, put the 
branches on board the proa, launch another boat in great 
haste, and tow the disease-burdened bark far out to sea. 
There they cast it off, and one of them calls out, “ Grand- 
father Smallpox, go away—go willingly away— go visit 
another land ; we have made you food ready for the voyage, 
we have now nothing more to give.” When they have 
landed, all the people bathe together in the sea.” In this 
ceremony the reason for striking the people with the branches 
is clearly to rid them of the disease-demons, which are then 
supposed to be transferred to the branches. Hence the 
haste with which the branches are deposited in the proa and 
towed away to sea. So in the inland districts of Ceram, 
when smallpox or other sickness is raging, the priest strikes 
all the houses with consecrated branches, which are then 
thrown into the river, to be carried down to the sea ;* exactly 
as amongst the Wotyaks of Russia the sticks which have 
been used for expelling the devils from the village are thrown 


1j. G. F. Riedel, De sluzk- en 2 J. G. F. Riedel, of. cit. pp. 25 
kroesharige rassen tusschen Selebes en sq. 


Papua (The Hague, 1886), pp. 304 sg. 3 bid. p. 141. 


yaa 


IV OCCASIONAL EXPULSION OF EVILS 187 


into the river, that the current may sweep the baleful burden 
away.. In Amboyna, for a similar purpose, the whole body 
of the patient is rubbed with a live white cock, which is then 
placed on a little proa and committed to the waves ;* and 
in the Babar archipelago the bark which is to carry away to 
sea the sickness of a whole village contains a bowl of ashes 
taken from every kitchen in the village, and another bowl 
into which all the sick people have spat. The plan of 
putting puppets in the boat to represent sick persons, in 
order to lure the demons after them, is not uncommon.* For 
example, most of the pagan tribes on the coast of Borneo 
seek to drive away epidemic disease as follows. They carve 
one or more rough human images from the pith of the sago 
palm and place them on a small raft or boat or full-rigged 
Malay ship together with rice and other food.. The boat is 
decked with blossoms of the areca palm and with ribbons 
made from its leaves, and thus adorned the little craft is 
allowed to float out to sea with the ebb-tide, bearing, as the 
people fondly think or hope, the sickness away with it.’ 

In Selangor, one of the native states in the Malay 
Peninsula, the ship employed in the export of disease is, or 
used to be, a model of a special kind of Malay craft called a 
lanchang. This was a two-masted vessel with galleries fore and 
aft, armed with cannon, and used by Malay rajahs on the coast 
of Sumatra. So gallant a ship wouid be highly acceptable 
to the spirits, and to make it still more beautiful in their 
eyes it was not uncommonly stained yellow with turmeric 
or saffron, for among the Malays yellow is the royal colour. 
Some years ago a very fine model of a /anchang, with its 
cargo of sickness, was towed down the river to sea by the 
Government steam launch. A common spell uttered at the 
launching of one of these ships runs as follows :-— 


“ Ho, elders of the upper reaches, 
Elders of the lower reaches, 
Elders of the dry land, 


1 See above, p. 155. and British North Borneo (London, 
2 J. G. F. Riedel, of. czt. p. 78. 1896), i. 284. 
3 bid. p. 357. 5 Ch. Hose and W. McDougall, Zhe 


4 [bid. pp. 266, 304 5g., 327, 3573 Pagan Tribes of Borneo (London,1912), 
H. Ling Roth, Wateves of Sarawak ii. 122 sg. 


Demons 
of disease 
expelled in 
a ship in 
Selangor. 


Demons 
of sickness 
expelled in 
small ships 
in New 
Guinea, 
the Philip- 
pines, 
Tikopia, 
and the 
Nicobar 
Islands. 


PUBLIC SCAPEGOATS CHAP. 


188 


Elders of the river-flats, 

Assemble ye, O people, lords of hill and hill-foot, 
Lords of cavern and hill-locked basin, 

Lords of the deep primeval forest, 

Lords of the river-bends, 

Come on board this \anchang, assembling tn your multitudes. 
So may ye depart with the ebbing stream, 
Depart on the passing breeze, 

Depart in the yawning earth, 

Depart in the red-dyed earth. 

Go ye to the ocean which has no wave, 

And the plain where no green herb grows, 

And never return hither. 

But tf ye return hither, 

Ye shall be consumed by the curse. 

At sea ye shall get no drink, 

Ashore ye shall get no food, 

But gape in vain about the world.” \ 


The practice of sending away diseases in boats is known 
outside the limits of the Malay region. Thus when small- 
pox raged among the Yabim of German New Guinea, they 
used to make a little model of a canoe with mast, sail, 
and rudder. Then they said to the small vessel, on which 
the spirit of smallpox was supposed to have taken his 
passage, “Bear him away to another village. When the 
people come forth to draw you ashore, give them ‘the 
thing’ and do to them what you have done to us.” Lest 
the spirit should be hungry on the voyage, they put some 
taro on board, and to make sure of getting rid of the disease, 
they wiped their hands on the tiny canoe, after which they 
let it drift away. It often happened that the wind or 


1 W.W. Skeat, Malay Magic (London, 
1900), pp- 433-435. Forotherexamples 
of sending away plague-laden boatsinthe 
Malay region see J. G. F. Riedel, of. c2z. 
pp. 181, 210; R. van Eck, ‘* Schetsen 
van het eiland Bali,” Zzjdschrift voor 
Nederlandsch Indié, N.S., viii. (1879) 
p. 104; A. Bastian, /rzdoneszen, 1. 147 5 
C. Hupe, ‘‘ Korte verhandeling over 
de godsdienst, zeden, enz. der Dajak- 
kers,” Z77jdschrift voor Neérlands Indié, 
1846, dl. iii. 150; C. F. H. Campen, 
**De godsdienstbegrippen der Halma- 
herasche Alfoeren,” 7Zzdschraft voor 
Lndische Taal. Land- en Volkenkunde, 
xxvil. (1882) p. 441; Journal of the 


Straits Branch of the Royal Astatic 
Soczety, No. 12, pp. 229-231; A. L, 
van Hasselt, Volksbeschrijving van 
Midden-Sumatra (Leyden, 1882), p. 
98; C. M. Pleyte, ‘‘ Ethnographische 
Beschrijving der Kei-Eilanden,” 7Z77d- 
schrift van het Nederlandsch Aardrijks- 
kundig Genootschap, Tweede Serie, x. 
(1893) p. 8353 Ho Ling) sRoth 
“* Low’s Natives of Sarawak,” /ournal 
of the Anthropological Institute, xxii, 
(1893) p. 25; C. Snouck Hurgronje, 
De Atjehers (Batavia and Leyden, 1893— 
1894),1. 461 sg.; J. A. Jacobsen, Rezsez 
in der Inselwelt des Banda- Meeres 
(Berlin, 1896), p. 110. 


i CS ID te 


Iv OCCASIONAL EXPULSION OF EVILS 189 


tide drove the vessel back to the place from which it 
started. Then there would be a deafening rub-a-dub of 
drums and blowing of shell-trumpets ; and the little ship, or 
rather its invisible passenger, would be again apostrophized, 
“Do go away, you have already raged among us so that the 
air is poisoned with the stench of corpses.” If this time it 
sailed away, they would stand on the shore and watch it 
with glad hearts disappearing ; then they would climb the 
trees to get a last glimpse of it till it vanished in the dis- 
tance. After that they came down joyfully and said to each 
other, “ We have had enough of it. The sickness has happily 
gone away.” > When the Tagbanuas and other tribes of the 
Philippines suffered from epidemics, they used to make little 
models of ships, supply them with rice and fresh drinking 
water, and launch them on the sea, in order that the evil 
spirits might sail away in them.2 When the people of 
Tikopia, a small island in the Pacific, to the north of the 
New Hebrides, were attacked by an epidemic cough, they 
made a little canoe and adorned it with flowers. Four sons 
of the principal chiefs carried it on their shoulders all round 
the island, accompanied by the whole population, some 
of whom beat the bushes, while others uttered loud cries. 
On returning to the spot from which they had set out, they 
launched the canoe on the sea.2> In the Nicobar Islands, in 
the Bay of Bengal, when there is much sickness in a village 
or no fish are caught, the blame is laid upon the spirits. 
They must be propitiated with offerings. All relations and 
friends are invited, a huge pig is roasted, and the best of it 
is eaten, but some parts are offered to the shades. The 
heap of offerings remains in front of the house till it is carried 
away by the rising tide. Then the priests, their faces reddened 
with paint and swine’s blood, pretend to catch the demon of 
disease, and after a hand-to-hand tussle, force him into a 
model boat, made of leaves and decked with garlands, which 
is then towed so far to sea that neither wind nor tide is 


1H. Zahn, ‘‘Die Jabim,” in R. (1891) p. 183. 


~ Neuhauss’s Deutsch Neu-Guinea, iii. 3J.Dumont D’Urville, Voyage autour 

(1911) pp. 329 sg. du monde et &@ la recherche de La 

2 F, Blumentritt, “ Uber die Einge- Perouse, sur la corvette Astrolabe (Paris, 
borenen der Insel Palawan und derIn- 1832-1833), v. 311. 


selgruppe der Talamianen,” G/odus, lix. 


Demons 
of sickness 
expelled in 
the form of 
animals in 
India. 


190 PUBLIC SCAPEGOATS CHAP. 


likely to drive it back to the shore.' In Annam, when the 
population of a village has been decimated by cholera, they 
make a raft and lade it with offerings of money and food, 
such as a sucking pig, bananas, and oranges. Sticks of 
incense also smoke on the floating altar; and when all is 
ready and earnest prayers have been uttered, the raft is 
abandoned to the current of the river. The people hope 
that the demon of cholera, allured and gratified by these 
offerings, will float away on the raft and trouble them no 
more.” 

Often the vehicle which carries away the collected demons 
or ills of a whole community is an animal or scapegoat. 
In the Central Provinces of India, when cholera breaks out 
in a village, every one retires after sunset to his house. The 
priests then parade the streets, taking from the roof of each 
house a straw, which is burnt with an offering of rice, ghee, 
and turmeric, at some shrine to the east of the village. 
Chickens daubed with vermilion are driven away in the 
direction of the smoke, and are believed to carry the disease 
with them. If they fail, goats are tried, and last of all pigs.* 
When cholera rages among the Bhars, Mallans, and Kurmis 
of India, they take a goat or a buffalo—in either case the 
animal must be a female, and as black as possible—then 
having tied some grain, cloves, and red lead in a yellow cloth on 
its back they turn it out of the village. The animal is con- 
ducted beyond the boundary and not allowed to return.‘ 
Sometimes the buffalo is marked with a red pigment and 
driven to the next village, where he carries the plague with 
him.’ The people of the city and cantonments of Sagar being 


1 Roepstorff, ‘‘ Ein Geisterboot der 
Nicobaresen,” Verhandlungen der Ber- 
liner Gesellschaft fiir Anthropologie, 
Ethnologie und Urgeschichte (1881), p. 
401; W. Svoboda, ‘‘ Die Bewohner 
des Nikobaren-Archipels,”  z¢er- 
nationales Archiv fiir Ethnographie, 
vi. (1893) pp. 10 sg. 


9 


2 P. Denjoy, ‘‘An-nam, Médecins 
et Sorciers, Remédes et Superstitions,” 
etc., Bulletins de la Soctété d’ Anthro- 
pologte de Paris, v. (1894) pp. 409 sg. 
Compare E. Aymonier, Voyage dans 
le Laos (Paris, 1895-1897), i. 121. 
For Siamese applications of the same 


principle to the cure of individuals, 
see A. Bastian, Die Volker des dstlichen 
Asien, iii. (Jena, 1867) pp. 295 sg., 
485 sq. 

3 Panjab Notes and Queries, i. p. 48, 
§ 418 (January, 1884). 


4 7d, iii. p. 81, § 373 (February 
1886). 


5 W. Crooke, Popular Religion and 
Folk-lore of Northern India (West- 
minster, 1896), i. 142. Bulls are 
used as scapegoats for cholera in 
Cashmeer (H. G. M. Murray-Aynsley, 
in Folk-lore, iv. (1893) pp. 398 sg-). 


| 
| 


IV OCCASIONAL EXPULSION OF EVILS IQI 


afflicted with a violent influenza, General Sir William Slee- 
man received a request from the old Queen Dowager of 
Sagar “ to allow of a noisy religious procession for the purpose 
of imploring deliverance from this great calamity. Men, 
women, and children in this procession were to do their 
utmost to add to the noise by ‘raising their voices in 
psalmody, beating upon their brass pots and pans with all 
their might, and discharging firearms where they could get 
them; and before the noisy crowd was to be driven a 
buffalo, which had been purchased by general subscription, 
in order that every family might participate in the merit. 
They were to follow it out for eight miles, where it was to be 
turned loose for any man who would take it. If the animal 
returned, the disease, it was said, must return with it, and 
the ceremony be performed over again. ... It was, how- 
ever, subsequently determined that the animal should be a 
goat, and he was driven before the crowd accordingly. I 
have on several occasions been requested to allow of such 
noisy piajas in cases of epidemics.”' Once, when influenza 
was raging in Pithoria, a village to the north-west of Sagar, 
a man had a small carriage made, after a plan of his own, 
for a pair of scapegoats, which were harnessed to it and 
driven to a wood at some distance, where they were let loose. 
From that hour the disease entirely ceased in the town. The 
goats never returned ; had they done so, it was affirmed that 
the disease must have come back with them.’ 

The use of a scapegoat is not uncommon in the hills of the 
Eastern Ghats. In 1886, during a severe outbreak of small- 
pox, the people of Jepur did reverence to a goat, marched it to 
the Ghats, and let it loose on the plains.* In Southern 
Konkan, on the appearance of cholera, the villagers went in 
procession from the temple to the extreme boundaries of the 
village, carrying a basket of cooked rice covered with red 
powder, a wooden doll representing the pestilence, and a 
cock. The head of the cock was cut off at the village 


1 Major-General Sir W. H. Slee- 3 F. Fawcett, ‘‘On the Saoras (or 
mann, Rambles and Recollections of — Savaras), an Aboriginal Hill People of 
Indian Official, New Edition (West- the Eastern Ghats,” /ournal of the 
minster, 1893), 1. 203. Anthropological Society of Bombay, i. 

2 Major-General Sir W. H. Slee- 213, note. 
man, op. czt. 1. 198. 


Goats and 
cocks em- 
ployed as 
scapegoats 
in various 
parts of 
India. 


192 PUBLIC SCAPE GOATS. CHAP. 


boundary, and the body was thrown away. When cholera 
had thus been transferred from one village to another, the 
second village observed the same ceremony and passed 
on the scourge to its neighbours, and so on through a 
number of villages. Among the Korwas of Mirzapur, 
when cholera has broken out, the priest offers a black 
cock or, if the disease is very malignant, a black goat, at 
the shrine of the local deity, and then drives the animal 
away in the direction of some other village. But it has 
not gone far before he overtakes it, kills it, and eats it; 
which he may do with perfect safety in virtue of his 
sacred office. Again, when cholera is raging among the 
Pataris, an aboriginal Dravidian race of South Mirzapur, 
the wizard and the village elders feed a black cock with 
srain and drive it beyond the boundaries, ordering the fowl 
to take the disease away with it. A little oil, red lead, and 
a spangle worn by a woman on her forehead are usually 
fastened to the bird’s head before it is let loose. The cost 
of purchasing the cock is defrayed by public subscription. 
When such a bird of ill-omen appears in a village, the priest 
takes it to the shrine of the local deity and sacrifices it there ; 
but sometimes he merely bows before it at the shrine and 
passes it on to some other village. If a murrain attacks their 
cattle, the Kharwars of Northern India take a black cock 
and put red lead on its head, antimony on its eyes, a spangle 
on its forehead, and a pewter bangle on its leg ; thus arrayed 
they let it loose, calling out to the disease, “ Mount on the 
fowl and go elsewhere into the ravines and thickets ; destroy 
the sin.” Perhaps, as has been suggested, this tricking out 
of the bird with women’s ornaments may be a relic of some 
grosser form of expiation in which a human being was 
sacrificed or banished.2 Charms of this sort in India no 
doubt date from a remote antiquity. An ancient Indian 
book of magic, known as the Kauszka Sutra, describes a 
ceremony of letting loose against a hostile army a white- 
footed ewe in which the power of disease was believed to be 

1 Mr. Y. V. Athalye, in Journal of Folk-lore of Northern India (West- 
the Anthropological Society of Bombay, minster, 1896), i. 169 sg.; 2za., Tribes 
Lesye and Castes of the North-Western Pro- 


vinces and Oudh (Calcutta, 1896}, iii. 
2 W. Crooke, Popular Religion and 445. 


IV OCCASIONAL EXPULSION OF EVILS 


193 


incarnate.’ In the same treatise we read of a mode of 
getting rid of ill-luck by fastening a hook to the left leg of 
a crow, attaching a sacrificial cake to the hook, and then 
letting the bird fly away in a south-westerly direction, while 
the priest or magician recites as usual the appropriate 
formula.” 

Amongst the Dinkas, a pastoral people of the White 
Nile, each family possesses a sacred cow. When the 
country is threatened with war, famine, or any other public 
calamity, the chiefs of the village require a particular family 
to surrender their sacred cow to serve as a scapegoat. The 
animal is driven by the women to the brink of the river and 
across it to the other bank, there to wander in the wilder- 
ness and fall a prey to ravening beasts. Then the women 
return in silence and without looking behind them; were 
they to cast a backward glance, they imagine that the 
ceremony would have no effect. When influenza broke 
out in a virulent form among the negroes of Togoland 
during the winter of 1892, the natives set the trouble down 
to the machinations of evil spirits, who must be expelled the 
country. The principal instrument of expulsion was a fat 
toad, which was dragged through the streets of every town 
or village, followed by an elder who sprinkled holy water to 
right and left. All the evil was thus concentrated in the 
toad, which was finally thrown away into the forest. Thus 
the natives expected to rid the village of the influenza. In 
1857; when the Aymara Indians of Bolivia and Peru were 
suffering from a plague, they loaded a black llama with the 
clothes of the plague-stricken people, sprinkled brandy on the 
clothes, and then turned the animal loose on the mountains, 
hoping that it would carry the pest away with it. 


In some parts of India a 


1 Kausitka Sutra, xiv. 22 (W. 
Caland, Altindisches Zauberritual, 
Amsterdam, 1900, p. 29); H. Olden- 
berg, Die Religion des Veda (Berlin, 
1894), p. 498. 

2 Kaustkha Sutra, xviii. 16 (W. 
Caland, A/tindisches Zauberritual, pp. 
44 sg.). 

3 Dom Daniel Sour Dharim Dena 
(a Dinka convert), in Annales de la 


Pi V1 


principal means of expelling 


Propagation de la Fot, \x. (1888) pp. 
57 Sg. 

4 H. Seidel, ‘‘ Krankheit, Tod, und 
Begrabnis bei den Togonegern,” Globus, 
Ixxil. (1897) p. 24. 

5 D. Forbes, ‘*On the Aymara 
Indians of Bolivia and Peru,” Journal 
of the Ethnological Society of London, 
vol. ii, No. 3 (October, 1870), p. 237. 

O 


Cows, 
toads, and 
llamas as 
scapegoats 
in Africa 
and 
America. 


Goddess of 
disease ex- 
pelled in a 
toy chariot. 


Human 
scapegoats 
in Uganda. 


194 PUBLIC SCAPEGOATS CHAP. 


an epidemic is a little toy chariot called a vatha or rath, in 
which the goddess of the disease is supposed to be carted 
away. It is carried or drawn in procession to the next 
village, the inhabitants of which pass it on in like manner, 
with great alacrity, to their neighbours. Thus the goddess 
and the plague are transferred from village to village, until 
at last they come to one which is so far away from its 
next neighbour that the people do not care to undertake 
the long weary journey. In that case they content them- 
selves with conveying the chariot to a place:so shut in by 
hills that the disease cannot possibly escape, and there they 
leave it to die. Or if the village is near the sea, they drown 
the sickness by throwing the chariot into the water. How- 
ever, in Central India the real home of the goddess of 
cholera is at Unkareshwar ; and accordingly the chariot in 
which she is politely escorted out of a village is finally 
deposited at or near that place. It is usual and proper for 
the people of a village to give a friendly notice to their 
neighbours that they are going to cart the cholera, small- 
pox, or whatever it may be, to their village, so that the in- 
habitants may be ready to receive the goddess with due 
honour and to escort her on her progress. But some un- 
neighbourly folk, without giving notice, go by night and 
stealthily deposit the chariot on the outskirts of the next 
village. If the inhabitants are not on the watch, and suffer 
the fatal little vehicle to remain there, the disease will 
naturally cleave to them. Sometimes, perhaps generally, the 
procession with the chariot is accompanied by a goat, a 
cock, and a pot of native beer or wine, which serve as 
additional attractions to the goddess to set out on her 
travels.’ 


Occasionally the scapegoat is a man. For example, ~ 


from time to time the gods used to warn the King of 
Uganda that his foes the Banyoro were working magic 
against him and his people to make them die of disease. 
To avert such a catastrophe the king would send a scape- 

1 Jivangi Jimshedji Modi, B.A., (Bombay, 1899), pp. 420-424; Captain 
*©On the Chariot of the Goddess, a CC. Eckford Luard, in Census of Zndia, 
Supposed Remedy for driving out an  zgoz, vol. xix., Central India (Luck- 


Epidemic,” /ournal of the Anthropo- now, 1902), p. 78. 
logical Society of Bombay, vol. iv. No. 8 


Iv OCCASIONAL EXPULSION OF EVILS 195 


goat to the frontier of Bunyoro, the land of the enemy. 
The scapegoat consisted of either a man and a boy or a 
woman and her child, chosen because of some mark or 
bodily defect, which the gods had noted and by which the 
victims were to be recognized. With the human victims were 
sent a cow,a goat,a fowl,and a dog; and a strong guardescorted 
them to the land which the god had indicated. There the 
limbs of the victims were broken and they were left to die 
a lingering death in the enemy’s country, being too crippled 
to crawl back to Uganda. The disease or plague was 
thought to have been thus transferred to the victims and to 
have been conveyed back in their persons to the land from 
which it came. So, too, after a war the gods sometimes 
advised the king to send back a scapegoat in order to free 
the warriors from some evil that had attached itself to the 
army. One of the women slaves, a cow, a goat, a fowl, and 
a dog would be chosen from among the captives and sent 
back to the borders of the country whence they had come; 
there they were maimed and left to die. After that the 
army would be pronounced clean and allowed to return to 
the capital. In each case a bundle of herbs would be rubbed 
over the people and the cattle, and would then be tied to the 
victims, who would thus carry back the evil with them.’ A 
similar use of scapegoats, human and animal, was regularly 
made after a King of Uganda had been crowned. Two men 
were brought to the king ; one of them he wounded slightly 
with an arrow shot from a bow. The man was then sent 
away, under a strong guard, as a scapegoat to Bunyoro, the 
enemy’s country, and with him were sent a cow, a goat, and 
a dog. On his sad journey he took with him the dust and 
ashes of the sacred fire, which had burned day and night 
at the entrance to the late king’s enclosure and had been 
extinguished, as usual, at his death. Arrived at their 
destination, the man and the animals were maimed and 
left to die. They were believed to bear away with them 
any uncleanness that might cleave to the new King or 
Queen.’ 


1 Rey. J. Roscoe, Zhe Laganda 109, 200. As to the perpetual fire at 
(London, 1911), p. 342. the entrance to a king’s enclosure, see 
2 Rev. J. Roscoe, 7he Baganda, pp. zd. pp. 103, 197, 202 sg. 


Human 
scapegoats 
in China 
and India. 


Indian 
ceremony 
of sliding 
down a 
rope. 


196 PUBLIC SCAPEGOALS CHAP. 


Some of the aboriginal tribes of China, as a protection 
against pestilence, select a man of great muscular strength 
to act the part of scapegoat. Having besmeared his face 
with paint, he performs many antics with the view of 


enticing all pestilential and noxious influences to attach ~ 


themselves to him only. He is assisted by a priest. Finally 
the scapegoat, hotly pursued by men and women beating 
gongs and tom-toms, is driven with great haste out of the 


town or village.’ In the Punjaub a cure for the murrain is 


to hire a man of the Chamar caste, turn his face away from — 


the village, brand him with a red-hot sickle, and let him go out 
into the jungle taking the murrain with him. He must not 
look back.? When disease breaks out among a herd, the 
Oraons take the herdsman himself, tie a wooden bell from one 
of the cows round his neck, beat him with sticks, and drive 
him out of the village to a cross-road, where the bell and 
sticks are deposited.’ In the territory of Kumaon, lying on 
the southern slopes of the Western Himalayas, the custom 
of employing a human scapegoat appears to have taken 
a somewhat peculiar form in the ceremony known as Barat. 
First of all a thick rope of grass is stretched from the top of 
a cliff to the valley beneath, where it is made fast to posts 
driven into the ground. Next a wooden saddle, with a very 
sharp ridge and unpadded, is attached by thongs to the 
cable, along which it runs in a‘deep groove. 


bags or heavy stones are suspended from his feet to secure 
his balance. Then, after various ceremonies have been per- 
formed and a kid sacrificed, he throws himself as far back in 


the saddle as he can go, and is started off to slide down the © 


rope into the valley. Away he shoots at an ever-increasing 
speed ; the saddle under him, however well greased, emits 
volumes of smoke during the greater part of his progress ; 
and he is nearly senseless when he reaches the bottom, 


! J. H. Gray, Chzwa (London, 1878), i. 170. 


A man now | 
seats himself on the saddle and is strapped to it, while sand- | 


1. 300. 


2 Panjab Notes and Queries,i. p. 75, 
§ 598 (April, 1884); W. Crooke, 
Popular Religion and Folk-lore of 
Northern India (Westminster, 1896), 


1904) p. 
field, zbzd. p. 37. : 


3 Rey. F. Hahn, ‘Some Notes on _ 
the Religion and Superstitions of the — 
Oraés,” Journal of the Asiatic Society | 
of Bengal, \xxii. Part iii. (Calcutta, | 
17; compare H. C. Streat- © 


Iv OCCASIONAL EXPULSION OF EVILS 197 


Here men are waiting to catch him and run forward with 
him some distance in order to break gradually the force of 
his descent. This ceremony, regarded as a propitiation 
of Mahadeva, is performed as a means of delivering a com- 
munity from present or impending calamity. Thus, for 
example, it was performed when cholera was raging at 
Almora, and the people traced the immunity they enjoyed 
to the due observance of the rite. Each district has its 
hereditary Badi, as the performer is called ; he is supported 
by annual contributions in grain from the inhabitants, as well 
as by special payments for each performance. When the 
ceremony is over, the grass rope is cut up and distributed 
among the villagers, who hang the pieces as charms at the 
eaves of their houses; and they preserve the hair of the Badi 
for a similar purpose. Yet while his severed locks bring 
fertility to other people’s lands, he entails sterility on his 
own ; and it is firmly believed that no seed sown by his hand 
could ever sprout. Formerly the rule prevailed that, if 
a Badi had the misfortune to fall from the rope in the course 
of his flying descent, he was immediately despatched with 
a sword by the spectators. The rule has naturally been 
abolished by the English Government; but its former ob- 
servance seems to indicate that the custom of letting a man 
slide down a rope as a charm to avert calamity is only 
a mitigation of an older custom of putting him to death.’ 

A somewhat similar ceremony is annually performed at Tibetan 
Lhasa a few days after the beginning of the Tibetan New pes 
Year, which falls in spring. The scene of the performance ore 
is Potala Hill, on the summit and slope of which is built the rope, 
superb castle of the Grand Lama of Tibet, a massive and 
imposing pile of buildings which attracts the eye and 
dominates the landscape from afar. On the day in question 
a rope of hide is stretched from the top to the bottom of the 
steep hill, and men from a distant province of Tibet climb 
up it with the agility of monkeys. They are called Flying 

l North Indian Notes and Queries, Provinces of Hindustan and the Panjab, 
i.-pp. 55, 74 sg-, 77, §§ 417, 499, i. 175g. Compare E. T. Atkinson, 
516 (July and August, 1891), quot- The Himalayan Districts of the North- 
ing G. W. Traill, Statistical Sketch of Western Provinces of India, ii. (Alla- 
Kumaun, pp. 68 sg., and Moorcroft habad, 1884), pp. 834 sg. 
and Trebeck, 77avels 21 the Himalayan 


Periodic 
expulsion 
of evils in 
a material 
vehicle. 


Periodic 
expulsion 
of spirits 
in rafts 
from Perak, 


198 PUBLIC SCAPEGOATS CHAP. 


Spirits. Arrived at the top, each of them places a piece of 
wood on his breast, stretches out his hands and feet, and 
letting himself go shoots down the rope (in the words of a 
Chinese writer) “like the bolt flying from the bow, or the 
swallow skimming the water. ’Tis a wondrous sight!” 
Considering that these performers are called Spirits, and that 
the performance takes place a few days after the New Year, 
a season so commonly selected for the expulsion of demons, 
we may conjecture that the Flying Spirits represent the 
powers of evil who are thus shot out of the Tibetan pope’s 
palace at the beginning of the year.' 


§ 3. The Periodic Expulsion of Evils in a Matertal Vehacle 


In this last case the expulsion of evils, if I am right in 
so interpreting the ceremony, is periodic, not occasional, 
being repeated every spring at the beginning of a new year. 
It brings us accordingly to the consideration of a whole 
class of such cases, for the mediate expulsion of evils by 
means of a scapegoat or other material vehicle, like the 
immediate expulsion of them in invisible form, tends to 
become periodic, and for a like reason. Thus in Perak, a 
state on the west coast of the Malay Peninsula, it was in 
ancient times the custom to perform periodically a ceremony 
intended to ensure the prosperity of the country by the 
propitiation of friendly spirits and the expulsion of evil 
influences. The writer who records the custom is uncertain 
as to the period which elapsed between two successive 
celebrations ; he suggests with hesitation that the rite was 
performed once in seven years or once in a Rajah’s reign. 
The name of the ceremony was pé/as negrz, which means 
“the cleansing of the country from evils.” When the time 
came, the Rajah, the chiefs, and a great following of people 
assembled at a point as far up the river as possible, but 
short of the rapids which further up impede navigation. 


1 W. Woodville Rockhill, ‘* Tibet, 
A Geographical, Ethnographical, and 
Historical Sketch, derived from Chinese 
Sources,” Journal of the Royal Astatic 
Society for 18gr (London, 1891), p. 
209. Compare Huc, Souvenirs wun 


Voyage dans la Tartarée et le Thibet, 
Sixiéme Edition (Paris, 1878), iil. 379 
sg. Fora description of Potala Hill 
and its grand palace, see L. Austine 
Waddell, Lhasa and its Mystertes 
(London, 1905), pp. 330 599-, 387 599. 


IV PERIODIC EXPULSION OF EVILS 199 


There a number of rafts were prepared, some of them 
elaborately built with houses on them. Four of them were 
devoted to the four great classes of spirits which are found 
in Perak, namely the Hantu Blan or “ Tiger-spirits,” the 
Hantu Sungkez, the Hantu Malayu, and the /zx Raja. In 
each of these rafts a number of wizards (fawangs) took up 
their post, according to the particular class of demon which 
they affected. The procession was headed by the raft 
devoted to the Tiger-spirits; and in it was set up a prak 
tree with all its branches, kept erect by stays. It was 
followed by the three rafts dedicated to the other three 
classes of spirits, and behind them came a train of other 
rafts bearing mere common mortals, the royal bandsmen, the 
Rajah himself, the chiefs, and the people. As the long 
procession floated down the river with the current, the 
wizards, standing on sheets of tin, waved white cloths and 
shouted invocations to the spirits and demons who inhabited 
the country through which the rafts were drifting seaward. 
The burden of the invocations was to invite the spirits and 
demons to come aboard the rafts and partake of the food 
which had been considerately made ready for them. At 
every village on the bank large enough to possess a mosque 
(for the Malays of Perak are professing Mohammedans) 
the procession halted; a buffalo, subscribed for by the 
inhabitants, was slaughtered, and its head placed on one of 
the spirit-barks, while people feasted on the flesh. The 
ceremony ended at Bras Basah, a village on the left bank of 
the Perak river, not far from its mouth. There the rafts 
were abandoned to the current, which swept them out to sea,’ 
doubtless bearing with them the hapless demons who had 
been lured by the tempting viands to embark and were now 
left to toss forlorn on the great deep at the mercy of the 
waves and the winds. 

Again, every year, generally in March, the people 
of Leti, Moa, and Lakor, islands of the Indian Archi- 
pelago, send away all their diseases to sea. They make 
a proa about six feet long, rig it with sails, oars, rudder, 
and other gear, and every family deposits in it some rice, 


1 Straits Branch of the Royal Asiatic Society, Notes and Queries, No. 3 
(Singapore, 1886), pp. 80 sg. 


Annual 
expulsion 
of evils in 
small ships 
in the 
Indian 
Archi- 
pelago. 


200 PUBLIC *SCAPE GOATS, CHAP. 


fruit, a fowl, two eggs, insects that ravage the fields, and 
soon. Then they let it drift away to sea, saying, “ Take 
away from here all kinds of sickness, take them to other 
islands, to other lands, distribute them in places that lie 
eastward, where the sun rises.” The Biajas of Borneo 
annually send to sea a little bark laden with the sins and 
misfortunes of the people. The crew of any ship that falls 
in with the ill-omened bark at sea will suffer all the sorrows 
with which it is laden.2 A like custom is annually observed 
by the Dusuns of the Tuaran district in British North Borneo. 
The ceremony is the most important of the’whole year. Its 
aim is to bring good luck to the village during the ensuing 
year by solemnly expelling all the evil spirits that may 
have collected in or about the houses throughout the last 
twelve months. The task of routing out the demons and 
banishing them devolves chiefly on women, who indeed play 
the principal part in all religious ceremonies among the 
Dusuns, while the humble duty of beating drums and 
banging gongs is discharged by members of the inferior sex. 
On this momentous occasion a procession of women, in full 
ceremonial dress, goes from house to house, stopping at each 
to go through their performances. At the head of the 
procession marches a boy carrying a spear on which is 
impaled a bundle of palm leaves containing rice. He is 
followed by two men, who carry a large gong and a drum 
slung on a pole between them. Then come the women. 
One of them carries a small sucking pig in a basket on her 
back ; and all of them bear wands, with which they belabour 
the little pig at the appropriate moment; its squeals help 
to attract the vagrant spirits. At every house the women 
dance and sing, clashing castanets or cymbals of brass and 
jingling bunches of little brass bells in both hands, When 
the performance has been repeated at every house in the 
village, the procession defiles down to the river and all the 
evil spirits, which the performers have chased from the 
houses, follow them to the edge of the water. There a raft 
has been made ready and moored to the bank. It contains 

1 ].G. F. Riedel, De sluzk- en kroes- 2 A, Bastian, Der Alensch in der 


hartge rassen tusschen Selebesen Papua Geschichte (Leipsic, 1860), ii. 93. 
(The Hague, 1886), p. 393. 


IV PERIODIC EXPULSION OF EVILS 201 


offerings of food, cloth, cooking-pots, and swords; and the 
deck is crowded with figures of men, women, animals, and 
birds, all made out of the leaves of the sago palm. The 
evil spirits now embark on the raft, and when they are all 
aboard, it is pushed off and allowed to float down with the 
current, carrying the demons with it. Should the raft run 
aground near the village, it is shoved off with all speed, lest 
the invisible passengers should seize the opportunity of 
landing and returning to the village. Finally, the sufferings 
of the little pig, whose squeals served to decoy the demons 
from their lurking-places, are terminated by death, for it is 
killed and its carcase thrown away.’ 

Every year, at the beginning of the dry season, the 
Nicobar Islanders carry the model of a ship through their 
villages. The devils are chased out of the huts, and driven 
on board the little ship, which is then launched and suffered 
to sail away with the wind.” The ceremony has been de- 
scribed by a catechist, who witnessed it at Car Nicobar in 
July 1897. For three days the people were busy prepar- 
ing two very large floating cars, shaped like canoes, fitted 
with sails, and loaded with certain leaves, which possessed 
the valuable property of expelling devils. While the young 
people were thus engaged, the exorcists and the elders sat 
in a house singing songs by turns; but often they would 
come forth, pace the beach armed with rods, and forbid 
the devil to enter the village. The fourth day of the 
solemnity bore the name of /xtd-nga-Siya, which means 
“Expelling the Devil by Sails.” In the evening all the 
villagers assembled, the women bringing baskets of ashes 
and bunches of devil-expelling leaves. These leaves were 
then distributed to everybody, old and young. When all 
was ready, a band of robust men, attended by a guard of 
exorcists, carried one of the cars down to the sea on the 
right side of the village graveyard, and set it floating in the 
water. As soon as they had returned, another band of men 
carried the other car to the beach and floated it similarly in 
the sea to the left of the graveyard. The demon-laden 


1 Ivor H. N. Evans, ‘‘ Notes on the — British North Borneo,” /owrnal of the 
Religious Beliefs, Superstitions, Cere- Aoyal Anthropological Institute, xlil. 
monies and Tabus of the Dusuns of (1912) pp. 382-384. 
the Tuaran and Tempassuk Districts, 2 A. Bastian, of. cé¢. ii. QT. 


Annual 
expulsion 
of demons 
in little 
ships in 
the Nico- 
bar Islands. 


Annual 
expulsion 
of em- 
bodied 
evils in 
India, 
China, and 
Corea. 


202 PUBLIC SCAPEGOATS CHAP. 


barks being now launched, the women threw ashes from the 
shore, and the whole crowd shouted, saying, “Fly away, 
devil, fly away, never come again!” The wind and the tide 
being favourable, the canoes sailed quickly away ; and that 
night all the people feasted together with great joy, because 
the devil had departed in the direction of Chowra. A 
similar expulsion of devils takes place once a year in other 
Nicobar villages ; but the ceremonies are held at different 
times in different places.’ 

At Sucla-Tirtha, in India, an earthen pot containing the 
accumulated sins of the people is (annually ?) set adrift on 
the river. Legend says that the custom originated with a 
wicked priest who, after atoning for his guilt by a course of 
austerities and expiatory ceremonies, was directed to sail 
upon the river in a boat with white sails. If the white sails 
turned black, it would be a sign that his sins were forgiven 
him. They did so, and he joyfully allowed the boat to drift 
with his sins to sea.2X. Amongst many of the aboriginal 
tribes of China, a great festival is celebrated in the third 
month of every year. It is held by way of a general rejoic- 
ing over what the people believe to be a total annihilation ~ 
of the ills of the past twelve months. The destruction is 
supposed to be effected in the following way. A large 
earthenware jar filled with gunpowder, stones, and bits of 
iron is buried intheearth. A train of gunpowder, communi- 
cating with the jar, is then laid ; and a match being applied, 
the jar and its contents are blown up. The stones and bits 
of iron represent the ills and disasters of the past year, and 
the dispersion of them by the explosion is believed to remove 
the ills and disasters themselves. The festival is attended 
with much revelling and drunkenness.* On New Year’s 
Day people in Corea seek-to rid themselves of all their 
distresses by painting images on paper, writing against them 
their troubles of body or mind, and afterwards giving the 
papers to a boy to burn. Another method of effecting the 
same object at the same season is to make rude dolls of 

1/V. Solomon, ‘‘ Extracts from on the Sacred Isles in the West,” 
Diaries kept in Car Nicobar,” Journal  Astatic Researches, ix. (London, 1809) 
of the Anthropological Institute, xxxii. pp. 96 sg. 


(1902) pp. 228 sg. 3 J. H. Gray, China (London, 1878), 
4 Captain F. Wilford, ‘‘An Essay ii. 306 sg. 


IV PERIODIC EXPULSION (OF LVILS 203 


straw, stuff them with a few copper coins, and throw them 
into the street. Whoever picks up such an effigy gets all 
the troubles and thereby relieves the original sufferer.’ 
Again, on the fourteenth day of the first month the Coreans 
fly paper kites inscribed with a wish that all the ills of the 
year may fly away with them.” Mr. George Bogle, the English 
envoy sent to Tibet by Warren Hastings, witnessed the 
celebration of the Tibetan New Year’s Day at Teshu Lumbo, 
the capital of the Teshu Lama. Monks walked in procession 
round the court to the music of cymbals, tabors, trumpets, 
hautboys and drums. Then others, clad in masquerade dress 
and wearing masks which represented the heads of animals, 
mostly wild beasts, danced with antic motions. “ After this, 
the figure of a man, chalked upon paper, was laid upon the 
ground. Many strange ceremonies, which to me who did not 
understand them appeared whimsical, were performed about 
it; and a great fire being kindled in a corner of the court, it 
was at length held over it, and being formed of combustibles, 
vanished with much smoke and explosion. I was told it 
was a figure of the devil.”* Another Tibetan mode of 
expelling demons from a dwelling is to make a paste image, 
into which the lamas by their incantations conjure all the 
evil spirits that may be lurking in the house. This image 
is carried to a distance by a runner and thrown away. He 
is attended by men, who shout at the top of their voices, 
brandish swords, and fire guns, all to frighten the demons 
and drive them far from human habitations.* 

At Old Calabar on the coast of Guinea, the devils and 
ghosts are, or used to be, publicly expelled once in two 
years. Among the spirits thus driven from their haunts are 
the souls of all the people who died since the last lustration 
of the town. About three weeks or a month before the 
expulsion, which according to one account takes place in 


1 W. Woodville Rockhill, ‘‘ Notes 
on some of the Laws, Customs, and 
Superstitions of Corea,” Zhe American 
Anthropologist, iv. (1891) p. 1853 
Mrs. Bishop, Korea and her Neighbours 
(London, 1898), ii. 56. 

2 Stewart Culin, <orean 
(Philadelphia, 1895), p. 12. 

3 Narratives of the Mission of George 


Games 


Bogle to Tibet and of the Journey of 
Thomas Manning to Lhasa, edited by 
(Sir) Clements R. Markham (London, 
1876), pp. 106 sg. Compare Sarat 
Chandra Das, Journey to Lhasa and 
Central Tibet (London, 1902), p. 116. 

4 Missionary Fage, in Aznales de la 
Propagation de la Fot, xxix. (1857) 
p- 321. 


Annual 
expulsion 
or destruc- 
tion of 
demons 
embodied 
in images 
in Tibet. 


Biennial 
expulsion 
of demons 
embodied 
in effigies 
at Old 
Calabar. 


PUBLIC SCAPEGOATS CHAP. 


204 


the month of November, rude effigies representing men and 
animals, such as crocodiles, leopards, elephants, bullocks, and 
birds, are made of wicker-work or wood, and being hung 
with strips of cloth and bedizened with gew-gaws, are set 
before the door of every house. About three o’clock in the 
morning of the day appointed for the ceremony the whole 
population turns out into the streets, and proceeds with a 
deafening uproar and in a state of the wildest excitement 
to drive all lurking devils and ghosts into the effigies, in 
order that they may be banished with them from the abodes 
of men. For this purpose bands of people roam through 
the streets knocking on doors, firing guns, beating drums, 
blowing on horns, ringing bells, clattering pots and pans, 
shouting and hallooing with might and main, in short 
making all the noise it is possible for them to raise. The 
hubbub goes on till the approach of dawn, when it gradually 
subsides and ceases altogether at sunrise. By this time the 
houses have been thoroughly swept, and all the frightened 
spirits are supposed to have huddled into the effigies or their 
fluttering drapery. In these wicker figures are also deposited 
the sweepings of the houses and the ashes of yesterday’s 
fires. Then the demon-laden images are hastily snatched 
up, carried in tumultuous procession down to the brink of 
the river, and thrown into the water to the tuck of drums. 
The ebb-tide bears them away seaward, and thus the town 
is swept clean of ghosts and devils for another two years. This 
biennial expulsion of spirits goes by the name of Vdok, and the 
effigies by which it is effected are called Nabékem or Nabikim." 


1 T. J. Hutchinson, Zpressions of 
Western Africa (London, 1858), p. 
162; Rev. J. Macdonald, feligzon 
and Myth (London, 1893), pp. 105- 
107; Hugh Goldie, Calabar and its 
Mission, New Edition (Edinburgh and 
London, 1901), pp. 49 sg.; Miss Mary 
H. Kingsley, Zravels in West Africa 
(London, 1897), p. 495; Major A. G. 
Leonard, Zhe Lower Niger and its 
Tribes (London, 1906), pp. 449-451. 
The ceremony takes place both in 
Creek Town and Duke Town. The 
date of it, according to Miss Kingsley, 
is either every November or every 
second November; but with the ex- 


ception of Mr. Macdonald, who does 
not mention the period, the other 
authorities agree in describing the 
ceremony as biennial. According to 
Major Leonard it is celebrated usually 
towards the end of the year. Miss 
Kingsley speaks of the effigies being 
set up in the houses themselves ; but 
all the other writers say or imply that 
they are set up at the doors of the 
houses in the streets. According to 
Mr. Goldie the spirits expelled are 
‘*all the ghosts of those who have died 
since the last lustration.” He makes 
no mention of devils. 


4 


Iv PERIODIC EXPULSION OF EVILS 205 


Further to the west similar ceremonies are or were till 
recently enacted at Porto Novo, the seaport of Dahomey. 
One of them has been described by an eye-witness, a 
Catholic missionary, who interpreted the rites as a Funeral 
of Death. He says: “Some time ago a curious event took 
place: the King had commanded to celebrate the funeral 
opeWeath: Every year, at the season of the rains, the 
predecessors of his sable Majesty, in order to preserve the 
life of their dear subjects, had caused the fetish of that 
terrible and pitiless enemy, who spares not even kings, to 
be drowned in the lagoon. Toffa wished to comply with 
the traditions of his ancestors.” However, the ceremony 
as described by the missionary seems to conform closely to 
the type of the expulsion of ghosts and demons. ‘Two days 
before the crowning act of the celebration the streets were 
carefully swept and all the filth which usually encumbered 
them was removed, “lest Death should there find a refuge.” 
All the people from the neighbouring villages assembled ; their 
fetishes, daubed with red paint, were carried in great pomp 
through the streets of the capital attended by noisy pro- 
cessions of mummers. A great multitude passed the night 
in the public square, drinking, singing, and shouting. Finally, 
a number of rude and hideous effigies were escorted by a 
noisy crowd to the shore of the lagoon; there canoes were 
waiting to receive them and paddle them out to deep water, 
where they were flung overboard. These effigies the 
missionary regarded as so many images of Death, who thus 
received his passport and was dismissed from the territory of 
Porto Novo. But more probably they represented the hosts 
of demons and ghosts who were believed to lurk about the 
town and to massacre people under the form of sickness and 
disease. Having made a clean sweep of the whole baleful 
crew the inhabitants no doubt thought that they had 
removed the principal, if not the only, cause of death, and 
that accordingly they had taken out a new lease of life.’ It 
is not without interest to observe that in cleansing their 
streets the people did actually retrench one of the most fruitful 
sources of disease and death, especially in the sweltering 


1 Missionary F. Terrien, in Anmales de la Propagation de la Fo?, liv. (1882) 
PP 375-377. 


Annual 
expulsion 
of demons 
embodied 
in effigies 
at Porto 
Novo. 


Annual 
expulsion 
of em- 
bodied 
evils 
among the 
Hos of 
Togoland. 


206 PUBLICS CAPEGOARS CHAP. 


heat of a damp tropical climate ; hence the measures they 
took for the prolongation of their lives were really to a 
certain extent effectual, though they did not accomplish 
their object in the precise way they imagined. So curiously 
does it often happen that the savage reaches the goal of his 
wishes by a road which to civilized man might appear at 
first sight to lead far away from it. 

Before the Hos of Togoland, to the west of Dahomey, 
celebrate their festival of the new yams, which has been 
described in another part of this work,’ they say that it is 
necessary to clean the town and to put it in order. The 
way in which they do so is this. They take leaves of two 
particular sorts of trees (the adzw and the wo), together with 
creepers and ashes, and bind all the leaves fast to a pole of 
the adzu tree. As they do so they pray or command the 
evil spirits, the witches, and all other evils in the town to 
enter into the band and be bound with it. Then they make 
a paste out of the ashes mixed with urine and smear it on 
the bundle of leaves, saying, “ We smear it on the face of the 
Evil Ones who are in this bundle, in order that they may 
not be able to see any more.” Then they throw the bundle 
on the ground and mock at it. Next they take all the 
similar poles, wrapt in creepers, in which they have bound 
up all the evil powers, and carry them out of the town and 
stick them in the ground on the various roads leading into 
the town. When they have done this, they say that they 
have driven the evils out of the town and shut the door 
against them. After that they wash the faces of all the 
people with a medicine which has been prepared by the 
oldest men. Thereupon they all return home to sweep out 
their houses and yards; they sweep even the ground in 
front of the yards, so that the whole town is thoroughly 
clean. All the grass-stalks and refuse of stock-yams which 
have been swept together are carried out of the town, and 
the people rail at the stock-yams. In the course of the 
night the oldest men assemble and tie a toad to a young 
palm-leaf. They say that they wish now to sweep the town 
and finish the ceremony. So they drag the toad behind 
them through the whole town in the direction of Mount 

1 Spirits of the Corn and of the Wild, ii. 58 sqq. 


| 
| 
i 


IV PERIODIC BXPULSION OF EVILS 207 


Adaklu. When that has been done, the priests say that 
they will now remove the sicknesses. In the evening they 
give public notice that they are about to take to the road, 
so nobody may light a fire on the hearth or eat. At dead 
of night, when people are asleep, three men go through the 
town. One of them drags behind them a toad fastened to 
a bunch of herbs ; another carries a calabash of holy herbs 
and water, with which he sprinkles the streets; and the 
third whistles softly. As soon as they have thus passed 
through the whole town, they throw away the toad and the 
holy herbs in the direction of Mount Adaklu. Next 
morning the women sweep out their houses and hearths and 
set the sweepings on broken wooden plates. Many put on 
torn mats or torn clothes; others tie grasses and creepers 
about them. While they do so, they pray, saying, “ All ye 
sicknesses which are in our body and plague us, we are 
come this day to cast you out!” When they set out so to 
do, the priest commands every man to cry out thrice and 
thereby to smite himself on the mouth. In a moment they 
all cry out, smite themselves on the mouth, and run as fast 
as their legs can carry them in the direction of Mount 
Adaklu. As they run, they say, “Out to-day! Out to-day! 
What kills anybody, out to-day! Ye evil spirits, out 
to-day! And all that makes our heads to ache, out to-day ! 
Anlo and Adaklu are the places whither all evil ought 
to go.” Now on Mount Adaklu there stands a £/o tree ; 
and when they have come thither they throw everything 
away and return home. After their return every man 
washes himself with the medicine which is set forth for that 
purpose in the public street ; then he goes into his house. 
Such is the ceremony by which the Hos prepare themselves 
to eat the new yams.’ Thus among the Hos the public 
expulsion of evils is definitely connected with the crops and 
therefore takes place every year, not every two years, as at 
Old Calabar. 

Similar annual expulsions of embodied evils are not 
unknown in Europe. On the evening of Easter Sunday 


1 Jakob Spieth, Dée Hwe-Stamme people used a toad as a scapegoat to 
(Berlin, 1906), pp. 305-307. We free them from the influenza. 
have seen (above, p. 193) that these 


Annual 
expulsion 
of em- 
bodied 
evils 
among the 
gypsies. 


Annual 
expulsion 
of evils in 
an animal 
scapegoat 
among the 
Garos of 
Assam. 


Ban PUBLIC SCAPEGOATS CHAP. 


the gypsies of Southern Europe take a wooden vessel like 
a band-box, which rests cradle-wise on two cross pieces 
of wood. In this they place herbs and simples, together 
with the dried carcase of a snake, or lizard, which every 
person present must first have touched with his fingers. The 
vessel is then wrapt in white and red wool, carried by the 
oldest man from tent to tent, and finally thrown into running 
water, not, however, before every member of the band has 
spat into it once, and the sorceress has uttered some spells 
over it. They believe that by performing this ceremony they 
dispel all the illnesses that would otherwise have afflicted 
them in the course of the year; and that if any one finds 
the vessel and opens it out of curiosity, he and his will be 
visited by all the maladies which the others have escaped." 
The scapegoat by means of which the accumulated ills of 
a whole year are publicly expelled is sometimes an animal. 
For example, among the Garos of Assam, “besides the 
sacrifices for individual cases of illness, there are certain 
ceremonies which are observed once a year by a whole 
community or village, and are intended to safeguard its 
members from dangers of the forest, and from sickness and 
mishap during the coming twelve months. The principal of 
these is the Asongtata ceremony. Close to the outskirts of 
every big village a number of stones may be noticed stuck 
into the ground, apparently without order or method. These 
are known by the name of asozg, and on them is offered the 
sacrifice which the Asongtata demands. The sacrifice of a 
goat takes place, and a month later, that of a dangur 
(Entellus monkey) or a bamboo-rat is considered necessary. 
The animal chosen has a rope fastened round its neck and is 
led by two men, one on each side of it, to every house in the 
village. It is taken inside each house in turn, the assembled 
villagers, meanwhile, beating the walls from the outside, to 
frighten and drive out any evil spirits which may have taken 
up their residence within. The round of the village having 
been made in this manner, the monkey or rat is led to the 
outskirts of the village, killed by a blow of a dao, which 
disembowels it, and then crucified on bamboos set up in the 


1 H. von Wlislocki, Volksglaube und religioser Brauch der Zigeuner (Miinster 
i. W., 1891), pp. 65 sg. 


IV PERIODIC EXPULSION OF EVILS 209 


ground. Round the crucified animal long, sharp bamboo 
stakes are placed, which form chevaux de frise round about it. 
These commemorate the days when such defences surrounded 
the villages on all sides to keep off human enemies, and they 
are now a symbol to ward off sickness and dangers to life 
from the wild animals of the forest. The /angur required 
for the purpose is hunted down some days before, but should 
it be found impossible to catch one, a brown monkey may 
take its place; a hulock may not be used.”’ Here the 
crucified ape or rat is the public scapegoat, which by its 
vicarious sufferings and death relieves the people from all 
sickness and mishap in the coming year. 

Again, on one day of the year the Bhotiyas of Juhar, in the 
Western Himalayas, take a dog, intoxicate him with spirits 
and bhang or hemp, and having fed him with sweetmeats, 
lead him round the village and let him loose. They then 
chase and kill him with sticks and stones, and believe that, 
when they have done so, no disease or misfortune will visit 
the village during the year.” In some parts of Breadalbane 


it was formerly the custom on New Year’s Day to take a 
_dog to the door, give him a bit of bread, and drive him out, 


saying, “Get away, you dog! Whatever death of men or 
loss of cattle would happen in this house to the end of the 
present year, may it all light on your head!”* It appears 
that the white dogs annually sacrificed by the Iroquois 
at their New Year Festival are, or have been, regarded 
as scapegoats. According to: Mr..J. V. H. Clark, who 
witnessed the ceremony in January 1841, on the first day 


‘of the festival all the fires in the village were extinguished, 


the ashes scattered to the winds, anda new fire kindled 
with flint and steel. Ona subsequent day, men dressed in 
fantastic costumes went round the village, gathering the sins 
of the people. When the morning of the last day of the 
festival was come, two white dogs, decorated with red paint, 


1 Major A. Playfair, Zhe Garos Districts of the North-Western Prov- 


(London, 1909), p. 92. ences of India, ii. (Allahabad, 1884) p. 
2 E. T. Atkinson,: ‘‘ Notes on the 871. 

History of Religion in the Himalaya of 3 Scotland and Scotsmen in the Eigh- 

the North-West Provinces,” Journal of teenth Century, from the MSS. of John 

the Asiatic Society of Bengal, lili. Pt.i. Ramsay of Ochtertyre, edited by Alex. 


(1884) p. 62; 7z., Zhe Himalayan Allardyce (Edinburgh, 1888), ii. 439. 
Pty Vil Ie 


Dogs as 
scapegoats 
in India, 
Scotland 
and 
America. 


The Jewish 
scapegoat. 


Human 
scapegoats 
formerly 
put to 
death every 
year in 
Africa. 


210 PUBLIC SCAPEGOATS CHAP. 


wampum, feathers, and ribbons, were led out. They were soon 
strangled, and hung on a ladder. Firing and yelling 
succeeded, and half an hour later the animals were taken into 
a house, “ where the people’s sins were transferred to them.” 
The carcases were afterwards burnt on a pyre of wood.’ 
According to the Rev. Mr. Kirkland, who wrote in the 
eighteenth century, the ashes of the pyre upon which one of 
the white dogs was burnt were carried through the village 
and sprinkled at the door of every house.” Formerly, 
however, as we have seen, the Iroquois expulsion of evils 
was immediate and not by scapegoat.” On the Day of. 
Atonement, which was the tenth day of the seventh month, 


the Jewish high-priest laid both his hands on the head of a — 


live goat, confessed over it all the iniquities of the Children 


of Israel, and, having thereby transferred the sins of the 


people to the beast, sent it away into the wilderness.* 
The scapegoat upon whom the sins of the people are 
periodically laid, may also be a human being. At Onitsha, 


sacrificed to take away the sins of the land. The victims 
were purchased by public subscription. All persons who, ~ 
during the past year, had fallen into gross sins, such as 


* ’ 


on the Niger, two human beings used to be annually — 


| 


1 W. M. Beauchamp, ‘‘ The Iroquois 
White Dog Feast,” American <An- 
tiquartan, vii. (1885) p. 237. 

2 Tbid. p. 236; T. Dwight, Zravels 
in New England and New York 
(London, 1823), iv. 202. 


3 Above, p. 127. 


4 Leviticus xvi. The word trans- 
lated ‘‘scapegoat ” in the Authorised 
Version is Azazel, which appears rather 
to be the name of a bad angel or demon, 
to whom the goat was sent away. 
‘‘In later Jewish literature (Book of 
Enoch) Azazel appears as the prince of 
the fallen angels, the offspring of the 
unions described in Gen. vi. 1 ff. The 
familiar rendering ‘scapegoat,’ z.e. the 
goat which is allowed to escape, goes 
back to the caper emissarius of the 
Vulgate, and is based on an untenable 


etymology” (Professor A. R. S. 
Kennedy, in his commentary on 
Leviticus xvi. 8, in the Century 


Bible). There is some ground for 
thinking that the animal was killed by 
being thrown over a certain crag that 
overhangs a rocky chasm not far from 
Jerusalem. See Lxcyclopedia Biblica, 
ed. T: K. Cheyne and J. S. Black 
vol. i. (London, 1899) coll. 394 sgg., 
s.v. ** Azazel.” Modern Jews sacrifice 


a white cock on the eve of the Day of © 


Atonement, nine days after the begin- 
ing of their New Year. 
the family knocks the cock thrice 
against his own head, saying, ‘‘ Let — 
this cock be a substitute for me, let it 
take my place, let death be laid upon 


this cock, but a happy life bestowed on | 


me and on all Israel.” Then he cuts 
its throat and dashes the bird violently 
on the ground. The intestines are 
thrown on the roof of the house. 


the poor. 
Judaica (Bale, 1661), ch. xxv. pp. 


508 sgq. 


The father of | 


The : 
flesh of the cock was formerly given to © 
See J. Buxtorf, Synagoga | 


Iv PERIODIC EXPULSION OF EVILS 211 


incendiarism, theft, adultery, witchcraft, and so forth, were 
expected tocontribute 28 xgugas, or a little over £2. The 
money thus collected was taken into the interior of the 
country and expended in the purchase of two sickly persons 
“to be offered as a sacrifice for all these abominable crimes 
—one for the land and one for the river.” A man from a 
neighbouring town was hired to put them to death. On the 
twenty-seventh of February 1858 the Rev. J. C. Taylor 
witnessed the sacrifice of one of these victims. The sufferer 
was a woman, about nineteen or twenty years ofage. They 
dragged her alive along the ground, face downwards, from 
the king’s house to the river, a distance of two miles, the 
crowds who accompanied her crying, “ Wickedness ! wicked- 
ness!” The intention was “to take away the iniquities of 
the land. The body was dragged along in a merciless 
manner, as if the weight of all their wickedness was thus 
carried away.”! Similar customsare said to be still secretly 
practised every year by many tribes on the delta of the 
Niger in spite of the vigilance of the British Government. 
Among the Yoruba negroes of West Africa “the human 
victim chosen for sacrifice,and who may be either a free- 
born or a slave, a person of noble or wealthy parentage, or 
one of humble birth, is, after he has been chosen and marked 
out for the purpose, called an Oluwo. He is always well fed 
and nourished and supplied with whatever he should desire 
during the period of his confinement. When the occasion 
arrives for him to be sacrificed and offered up, he is com- 
monly led about and paraded through the streets of the 
town or city of the Sovereign who would sacrifice him for 
the well-being of his government and of every family and 
individual under it, in order that he might carry off the sin, 
guilt, misfortune and death of all without exception. Ashes 
and chalk would be employed to hide his identity by the one 
being freely thrown over his head, and his face painted with 
the latter, whilst individuals would often rush out of their 


1S. Crowther and J. C. Taylor, Zhe 
Gospel on the Banks of the Niger (Lon- 


don, 1859), pp. 343-345. Compare 


_J. F. Schon and S. Crowther, Journals 


(London, 1848), pp. 48 sg. The 
account of the custom by J. Africanus 


B. Horton (West African Countries and 
Peoples, pp. 185 sg.) is taken entirely 
from Taylor. 

2 Major A. G. Leonard, Zhe Lower 
Niger and its Tribes (London, 1906), 
pp. 446 sgg. 


Human 
scapegoats 
formerly 
put to 
death 
every year 
in Siam. 


Annual 
human 
scapegoats 
in Japan. 


212 PUBELG IS CAPE GOALS CHAP. 


houses to lay their hands upon him that they might thus 
transfer to him their sin, guilt, trouble, and death. This 
parading done, he is taken through a temporary sacred shed 
of palm and other tree branches, and especially of the former, 
the Igbodu’ and to its first division, where many persons 
might follow him, and through a second where only the 
chiefs and other very important persons might escort and 
accompany him to, and to a third where only the Babalawo 
[priest] and his official assistant, the Ajigbona, are permitted 
to enter with him. Here, after he himself has given out or 
started his last song, which is to be taken up by the large 
assembly of people who will have been waiting to hear his 
last word or his last groan, his head is taken off and his 
blood offered to the gods. The announcement of his last 
word or his last groan heard and taken up by the people, 
would be a signal for joy, gladness, and thanksgiving, and 
for drum beating and dancing, as an expression of their 
gratification because their sacrifice has been accepted, the 
divine wrath is appeased, and the prospect of prosperity or 
increased prosperity assured.” * 

In Siam it used to be the custom on one day of the 
year to single out a woman broken down by debauchery, 
and carry her on a litter through all the streets to the music 
of drums and hautboys. The mob insulted her and pelted 


her with dirt; and after having carried her through the | 
whole city, they threw her on a dunghill or a hedge of | 


thorns outside the ramparts, forbidding her ever to enter the 
walls again. They believed that the woman thus drew upon 


herself all the malign influences of the air and of evil spirits. | 
In Japan the “ ¢suzza or ont-yarahi, that is to say, demon — 


expelling, is a sort of drama in which disease, or more gener- 
ally ill-luck, is personified, and driven away with threats 


1 An Igbodu is asacred grove in of the Black Man’s Mind (London, 


which oracles are given. Itis divided 1906), p. 254. 

into three compartments by fences of Base F 

palm branches and the omz shrub. Se? Joees USCS opi 
263. Bishop Johnson is a_ native © 


Into the first compartment women and 
uninitiated men may enter; into the 
other two only priestly officials are 
permitted, according to their rank in 
the hierarchy, to enter. See Bishop 
James Johnson, ‘‘ Yoruba Heathenism,” 
quoted by R. E. Dennett, 4¢ the Back 


African. 
the sacrifice which he 
occasional or periodical, 


3 Turpin, ‘‘ History of Siam,” in 
J. Pinkerton’s 


(London, 1808-1814), ix. 579. 


It does not appear whether ~ 
describes is - 


Voyages and Travels 


IV PERIODIC EXPULSION OF EVILS 


213 


and a show of violence. Like the oko-harahi,' it was per- 
formed on the last day of the year. This association is 
only natural. The demons of the ¢suzza are personified 
wintry influences, with the diseases which they bring with 
them, while the o/o-harahz is intended to cleanse the people 
from sin and uncleanness, things closely related to disease, 
as well as from disease itself. Though probably of Chinese 
origin, the ¢swzva isa tolerably ancient rite. It is alluded to 
in the Vz/ongz under the date A.D. 689. It was at one time 
performed at Court on an imposing scale. Four bands of 
twenty youths, each wearing a four-eyed mask, and each 
carrying a halberd in the left hand, marched simultaneously 
from the four gates of the palace, driving the devils before 
them. Another account of this ceremony says that a man 
disguised himself as the demon of pestilence, in which garb 
he was shot at and driven off by the courtiers armed with 
peach-wood bows and arrows of reed. Peach-wood staves 
were used for the same purpose. There was formerly a 
practice at Asakusa in Tokio on the last day of the year for 
a man got up as a devil to be chased round the pagoda 
there by another wearing a mask. After this 3,000 tickets 
were scrambled for by the spectators. These were carried 
away and pasted up over the doors as a charm against pesti- 
lence.”* The Battas of Sumatra offer either a red horse or a 
buffalo as a public sacrifice to purify the land and obtain the 
favour of the gods. Formerly, it is said, a man was bound 
to the same stake as the buffalo, and when they killed the 
animal, the man was driven away; no one might receive 


him, converse with him, or give him food? 


1 The oho-harahi or ‘‘ Great Puri- 
fication ” is a ceremony, which used to 
be performed in the Japanese capital 
twice every year, namely on the 
last days of the sixth and _ twelfth 
month. It included a_ preliminary 
lustration, expiatory offerings, and the 
recital of a zorzto or formula (not a 
prayer), in which the Mikado, by 
virtue of an authority transmitted to 
him from the Sun-goddess, pronounced 
to his ministers and people the absolu- 
tion and remission of their sins. See 
W. G. Aston, Sizzto (London, 1905), 
pp. 294 sgg. The writer adds (p. 


Doubtless he 


295): ‘*The Chinese had an oho- 
harahi, defined by Mr. Giles in his 
Chinese Dictionary as ‘a_ religious 
ceremony of purification performed in 
spring and autumn, with a view to 
secure divine protection for agricultural 
interests.?” The popular celebrations 
of the first of May and the first of 
November in Europe seem to be relics 
of similar biennial purifications. 

2,W. G. Aston, Shzz/0, pp. 308 sg. 

3 W. Ké6dding, ‘‘Die Batakschen 
Gotter und ihr Verhaltnis zum Brah- 
manismus,” Allgemeine Missions-Zezt- 


schrifi, xii. (1885) pp. 476, 478. 


Human 
scapegoats 
in 
Sumatra, 


Annual 
human 
scapegoats 
in Europe. 


The 
expulsion 
of Posterli 
in Switzer- 
land. 


Annual ex- 
pulsion of 
the devil, 
personified 
by a man, 
from 
Munich on 
Ascension 
Day. 


214 ) VPOBEIG SCAPEGOATS: CHAP. 


was supposed to carry away the sins and misfortunes of the 
people. 

Human scapegoats, as we shall see presently, were well 
known in classical antiquity, and even in medieval Europe 
the custom seems not to have been wholly extinct. In the 
town of Halberstadt, in Thiiringen, there was a church said to 
have been founded by Charlemagne. In this church every 
year they chose a man, who was believed to be stained with 
heinous sins. On the first day of Lent he was brought to 
the church, dressed in mourning garb, with his head muffled 
up. At the close of the service he was turned out of the 
church. During the forty days of Lent he perambulated 
the city barefoot, neither entering the churches nor speaking 
to any one. The canons took it in turn to feed him. After 
midnight he was allowed to sleep in the streets. On the 
day before Good Friday, after the consecration of the holy 
oil, he was readmitted to the church and absolved from his 
sins. The people gave him money. He was called Adam, 
and was now believed to be in a state of innocence.’ At 
Entlebuch, in Switzerland, down to the close of the eighteenth 
century, the custom of annually expelling a scapegoat was 
preserved in the ceremony of driving “ Posterli” from the 
village into the lands of the neighbouring village. ‘“ Posterli” 
was represented by a lad disguised as an old witch or as a 
goat or an ass. Amida deafening noise of horns, clarionets, 
bells, whips, and so forth, he was driven out. Sometimes 
“ Posterli” was represented by a puppet, which was drawn 
on a sledge and left in a corner of the neighbouring village. 
The ceremony took place on the Thursday evening of the 
last week but one before Christmas.” 

In Munich down to about a hundred years ago the 
expulsion of the devil from the city used to be annually 
enacted on Ascension Day. On the Eve of Ascension Day 
a man disguised as a devil was chased through the streets, 


1 Aeneas Sylvius, Oferva (Bale,1571), revived in the latter part of the 
PP. 423 sg. nineteenth century ; perhaps it may 
still be observed. See H. Herzog, 
2 H. Usener, “‘Italische Mythen,”  Schwedzerische Volksfeste, Sitten und 
KRhetnisches Museum, N.¥.,xxx. (1875)  Gebraduche (Aarau, 1884), pp. 293 
p- 198; 7zd., Klecne Schriften, iv.  sg.; E. Hoffmann-Krayer, Feste und 
(Leipsic and Berlin, 1913) pp. 109  Brduche des Schwetzervolkes (Zurich, 
sg. The custom seems to have been 1913), p. IOI. 


IV PERIODIC EXPOLSION- OR EVILS 215 


which were then narrow and dirty in contrast to the broad, 
well-kept thoroughfares, lined with imposing buildings, which 
now distinguish the capital of Bavaria. His pursuers were 
dressed as witches and wizards and provided with the 
indispensable crutches, brooms, and pitchforks which make 
up the outfit of these uncanny beings. While the devil fled 
before them, the troop of maskers made after him with wild 
whoops and halloos, and when they overtook him they 
ducked him in puddles or rolled him on dunghills. In this 
way the demon at last succeeded in reaching the palace, 
where he put off his hideous and now filthy disguise and was 
rewarded for his vicarious sufferings by a copious meal. The 
devilish costume which he had thrown off was then stuffed 
with hay and straw and conveyed to a particular church (the 
Frauenkirche), where it was kept over night, being hung by 
a rope from a window in the tower. On the afternoon of 
Ascension Day, before the Vesper service began, an image 
of the Saviour was drawn up to the roof of the church, no 
doubt to symbolize the event which the day commemorates, 
Then burning tow and wafers were thrown on the people. 
Meantime the effigy of the devil, painted black, with a pair 
of horns and a lolling red tongue, had been dangling from 
the church tower, to the delight of a gaping crowd of 
spectators gathered before the church. It was now flung 
down into their midst, and a fierce struggle for possession of 
it took place among the rabble. Finally, it was carried out 
of the town by the Isar gate and burned on a neighbouring 
height, “in order that the foul fiend might do no harm to 
the city.” The custom died out at Munich towards the end 
of the eighteenth century; but it is said that similar 
ceremonies are observed to this day in some villages of 
Upper Bavaria." 

This quaint ceremony suggests that the pardoned 
criminal who used to play the principal part in a solemn 
religious procession on Ascension Day at Rouen? may in 
like manner have originally served, if not as a representative 


17. Curtius, ‘‘ Christi Himmel- 235, May 21st, 1909. 
fahrt,” <Archev fiir Religionswessen- 
schaft, xiv. (1911) p. 307, quoting the 2 The Magic Art and the Evolution 
Miinchener Neuesten Nachrichten, No. of Kings, ii. 164 sgq. 


The 
pardoned 
criminal at 
Rouen on 
Ascension 
Day may 
have been 
a public 
scapegoat. 


Divine 
animals as 
scapegoats 
in India 
and ancient 
Egypt. 


216 PUBLIC SCAPEGOATS CHAP, 


of the devil, at least as a public scapegoat, who relieved the 
whole people of their sins and sorrows for a year by taking 
them upon himself. This would explain why the gaol had 
to be raked in order to furnish one who would parade with 
the highest ecclesiastical dignitaries in their gorgeous vest- 
ments through the streets of Rouen, while the church bells 
pealed out, the clergy chanted, banners waved, and every 
circumstance combined to enhance the pomp and splendour 
of the pageant. It would add a pathetic significance to the 
crowning act of the ceremony, when on a lofty platform in 
the public square, with the eyes of a great and silent 
multitude turned upon him, the condemned malefactor 
received from the Church the absolution and remission of his 
sins ; for if the rite is to be interpreted in the way here 
suggested, the sins which were thus forgiven were those not 
of one man only but of the whole people. No wonder, then, 
that when the sinner, now a sinner no more, rose from his 
knees and thrice lifted the silver shrine of St. Romain in his 
arms, the whole vast assembly in the square broke out into 
joyous cries of “ Noel! Noel! Noel!” which they understood 
to signify, “God be with us!” In Christian countries no 
more appropriate season could be selected for the ceremony 
of the human scapegoat than Ascension Day, which com- 
memorates the departure from earth of Him who, in the 
belief of millions, took away the sins of the world.t 
Sometimes the scapegoat is a divine animal. The 
people of Malabar share the Hindoo reverence for the cow, 
to kill and eat which “ they esteem to be a crime as heinous 
as homicide or wilful murder.” Nevertheless the “ Bramans 
transfer the sins of the people into one or more Cows, which 
are then carry’d away, both the Cows and the Sins where- 
with these Beasts are charged, to what place the Braman 
shall appoint.”* When the ancient Egyptians sacrificed a 
bull, they invoked upon its head all the evils that might 
otherwise befall themselves and the land of Egypt, and 
thereupon they either sold the bull’s head to the Greeks or 
cast it into the river.2 Now, it cannot be said that in the 


1 On the use of eponymous magis- eligion, Manners, and Learning of the 
trates as annual scapegoats see above, /ofple of Malabar (London, 1717), pp. 
pp: 39-41. Oy A Mp 


2 J. Thomas Phillips, Accoznt of the 3 Herodotus, ii. 39. 


IV PERIODIC LXPULSION OF 2, VILS: 217 


times known to us the Egyptians worshipped bulls in 
general, for they seem to have commonly killed and eaten 
them.’ But a good many circumstances point to the 
conclusion that originally all cattle, bulls as well as cows, 
were held sacred by the Egyptians. For not only were all 
cows esteemed holy by them and never sacrificed, but even 
bulls might not be sacrificed unless they had certain natural 
marks ; a priest examined every bull before it was sacrificed ; 
if it had the proper marks, he put his seal on the animal in 
token that it might be sacrificed ; and if a man sacrificed a 
bull which had not been sealed, he was put to death. More- 
over, the worship of the black bulls Apis and Mnevis, 
especially the former, played an important part in Egyptian 
religion ; all bulls that died a natural death were carefully 
buried in the suburbs of the cities, and their bones were 
afterwards collected from all parts of Egypt and interred in 
a single spot; and at the sacrifice of a bull in the great 
rites of Isis all the worshippers beat their breasts and 
mourned.” On the whole, then, we are perhaps entitled to 
infer that bulls were originally, as cows were always, 
esteemed sacred by the Egyptians, and that the slain bull 
upon whose head they laid the misfortunes of the people 
was once a divine scapegoat. It seems not improbable that 
the lamb annually slain by the Madis of Central Africa is a 
divine scapegoat, and the same supposition may partly 
explain the Zuni sacrifice of the turtle.® 

Lastly, the scapegoat may be a divine man. Thus, in 
November the Gonds of India worship Ghansyam Deo, the 
protector of the crops,and at the festival the god himself is 
said to descend on the head of one of the worshippers, who 
is suddenly seized with a kind of fit and, after staggering 
about, rushes off into the jungle, where it is believed that, if 
left to himself, he would die mad. However, they bring him 
back, but he does not recover his senses for one or two days. 
The people think that one man is thus singled out as a scape- 


1 Herodotus, ii. 38-41 ; Sir J. Gard- of sacred bulls in ancient Egypt, see 
ner Wilkinson, Manners and Customs further Sfzrets of the Corn and of the 
of the Ancient Egyptians, New Edition Wéld, ii. 34 sgq. 

(London, 1878), iii. 403 sgg. 3 Spirits of the Corn and of the 

2 Herodotus, 7c. Astotheworship Wéld, ii. 175 sgg., 314 59. 


Divine men 
as scape- 
goats 
among the 
Gonds of 
India 

and the 
Albanians 
of the 
Caucasus. 


Annual 
human 
scapegoats 
in Tibet. 


The Jalno, 
the tem- 
porary 
ruler of 
Lhasa. 


218 PUBLIC SCAPEGOATS CHAP. 


goat for the sins of the rest of the village." In the temple 
of the Moon the Albanians of the Eastern Caucasus kept a 
number of sacred slaves, of whom many were inspired and 
prophesied. When one of these men exhibited more than 
usual symptoms of inspiration or insanity, and wandered 
solitary up and down the woods, like the Gond in the jungle, 
the high priest had him bound with a sacred chain and 
maintained him in luxury for a year. At the end of the 
year he was anointed with unguents and led forth to be 
sacrificed. A man whose business it was to slay these 
human victims and to whom practice had given dexterity, 
advanced from the crowd and thrust a sacred spear into the 
victim’s side, piercing his heart. From the manner in which 
the slain man fell, omens were drawn as to the welfare of 
the commonwealth. Then the body was carried to a certain 
spot where all the people stood upon it as a purificatory 
ceremony.” This last circumstance clearly indicates that 
the sins of the people were transferred to the victim, just as 
the Jewish priest transferred the sins of the people to the 
scapegoat by laying his hands on the animal’s head; and 
since the man was believed to be possessed by the divine 
spirit, we have here an undoubted example of a man- 
god slain to take away the sins and misfortunes of the 
people. 

In Tibet the ceremony of the scapegoat presents some 
remarkable features. The Tibetan new year begins with the 
new moon which appears about the fifteenth of February. 
For twenty-three days afterwards the government of Lhasa, 
the capital, is taken out of the hands of the ordinary rulers 
and entrusted to the monk of the Debang monastery who 
offers to pay the highest sum for the privilege. The 
successful bidder is called the Jalno, and he announces 
his accession to power in person, going through the streets 
of Lhasa with a silver stick in his hand. Monks from all 
the neighbouring monasteries and temples assemble to pay 
him homage. The Jalno exercises his authority in the most 
arbitrary manner for his own benefit, as all the fines which 


1 Panjab Notes and Queries, ii. p. the custom of standing upon a sacrificed 
54, § 335 (December, 1884). victim, compare Demosthenes, O7. 
xxiii, 68, p. 642; Pausanias, iii. 

2 Strabo, xi. 4. 7, p.-503;. Hor. 20m0: 


Iv PERIODIC EXPULSION OF EVILS 219 


he exacts are his by purchase. The profit he makes is 
about ten times the amount of the purchase money. His 
men go about the streets in order to discover any conduct 
on the part of the inhabitants that can be found fault with. 
Every house in Lhasa is taxed at this time, and the slightest 
offence is punished with unsparing rigour by fines. This 
severity of the Jalno drives all working classes out of the 
city till the twenty-three days are over. But if the laity 
go out, the clergy come in. All the Buddhist monasteries 
of the country for miles round about open their gates and 
disgorge their inmates. All the roads that lead down into 
Lhasa from the neighbouring mountains are full of monks 
hurrying to the capital, some on foot, some on horseback, 
some riding asses or lowing oxen, all carrying their prayer- 
books and culinary utensils. In such multitudes do they 
come that the streets and squares of the city are encumbered 
with their swarms, and incarnadined with their red cloaks. 
The disorder and confusion are indescribable. Bands of the 
holy men traverse the streets chanting prayers or uttering 
wild cries. They meet, they jostle, they quarrel, they fight ; 
bloody noses, black eyes, and broken heads are freely given 
and received. All day long, too, from before the peep of 
dawn till after darkness has fallen, these red-cloaked monks 
hold services in the dim incense-laden air of the great 
Machindranath temple, the cathedral of Lhasa ; and thither 
they crowd thrice a day to receive their doles of tea and 
soup and money. The cathedral is a vast building, standing 
in the centre of the city, and surrounded by bazaars and 
shops. The idols in it are richly inlaid with gold and 
precious stones. 

Twenty-four days after the Jalno has ceased to have 
authority, he assumes it again, and for ten days acts in 
the same arbitrary manner as before. On the first of the 
ten days the priests again assemble at the cathedral, 
pray to the gods to prevent sickness and other evils 
among the people, “and, as a peace-offering, sacrifice one 
man. The man is not killed purposely, but the ceremony 
he undergoes often proves fatal." Grain is thrown against 


1 The ceremony referred to is perhaps the one performed on the tenth day, 
as described in the text. 


The Jalno 
and the 
King of the 
Years. 


Expulsion 
of the King 
of the 
Years. 


220 PUBLIC SCAPEGOATS CHAP. 


his head, and his face is painted half white, half black.” 
Thus grotesquely disguised, and carrying a coat of skin on 
his arm, he is called the King of the Years, and sits daily in 
the market-place, where he helps himself to whatever he 
likes and goes about shaking a black yak’s tail over the 
people, who thus transfer their bad luck to him. On the 
tenth day, all the troops in Lhasa march to the great 
temple and form in line before it. The King of the Years 
is brought forth from the temple and receives small 
donations from the assembled multitude. He then ridicules 
the Jalno, saying to him, “What we perceive through the 
five senses is no illusion. All you teach is untrue,’ and 
the like. The Jalno, who represents the Grand Lama 
for the time being, contests these heretical opinions; the 
dispute waxes warm, and at last both agree to decide 
the questions at issue by a cast of the dice, the Jalno 
offering to change places with the scapegoat should the 
throw be against him. If the King of the Years wins, 
much evil is prognosticated ; but if the Jalno wins, there 
is great rejoicing, for it proves that his adversary has 
been accepted by the gods as a victim to bear all the 
sins of the people of Lhasa. Fortune, however, always 
favours the Jalno, who throws sixes with unvarying success, 
while his opponent turns up only ones. Nor is this so 
extraordinary as at first sight it might appear; for the 
Jalno’s dice are marked with nothing but sixes and his 
adversary’s with nothing but ones. When he sees the finger 
of Providence thus plainly pointed against him, the King of 
the Years is terrified and flees away upon a white horse, with 
a white dog, a white bird, salt, and so forth, which have all 
been provided for him by the government. His face is still 
painted half white and half black, and he still wears his 
leathern coat. The whole populace pursues him, hooting, 
yelling, and firing blank shots in volleys after him. Thus 
driven out of the city, he is detained for seven days in the 
great chamber of horrors at the Samyas monastery, sur- 
rounded by monstrous and terrific images of devils and skins 
of huge serpents and wild beasts. Thence he goes away 
into the mountains of Chetang, where he has to remain 
an outcast for several months or a year in a narrow den. 


OR: we ne 


IV PERIODIC EXPULSION OF EVILS 221 


If he dies before the time is out, the people say it is an 
auspicious omen ; but if he survives, he may return to Lhasa 
and play the part of scapegoat over again the following 
year. 

This quaint ceremonial, still annually observed in the 
secluded capital of Buddhism—the Rome of Asia—is 
interesting because it exhibits, in a clearly marked religious 
stratification, a series of divine redeemers themselves 
redeemed, of vicarious sacrifices vicariously atoned for, of 
gods undergoing a process of fossilization, who, while they 
retain the privileges, have disburdened themselves of the 
pains and penalties of divinity. In the Jalno we may 
without undue straining discern a successor of those 
temporary kings, those mortal gods, who purchase a short 
lease of power and glory at the price of their lives. That 
he is the temporary substitute of the Grand Lama is 
certain ; that he is, or was once, liable to act as scapegoat 
for the people is made nearly certain by his offer to change 
places with the real scapegoat—the King of the Years—if 
the arbitrament of the dice should go against him. It is 
true that the conditions under which the question is now put 
to the hazard have reduced the offer to an idle form. But 
such forms are no mere mushroom growths, springing up of 


Rockhill’s account, which is drawn 
from Chinese sources, at one point of 
the ceremonies the troops march thrice 


1 <¢Report of a Route Survey by 
Pundit — from Nepal to Lhasa,” etc., 
Journal of the Royal Geographical 


Society, xxxvili. (1868) pp. 167, 170 
sqg.; ‘‘ Four Years*Journeying through 
Great Tibet, by one of the Trans- 
Himalayan Explorers,” Proceedings of 
the Royal Geographical Soctety, N.S. 
vii. (1885) pp. 67 sg. ; W. Woodville 
Rockhill, ‘* Tibet, a Geographical, 
Ethnographical, and Historical Sketch, 
derived from Chinese Sources,” Journal 
of the Royal Asiatic Society for 1891 
(London, 1891), pp. 211 sg.; L. A. 
Waddell, Zhe Buddhism of Tibet 
(London, 1895), pp. 504 sgg., 512 
sg. ; J. L. Dutreuil de Rhins, JZsszon 
Scientifique dans la Haute Aste 18Q0- 
1895: Récit du Voyage (Paris, 1897), 
pp- 257 sg. The accounts supplement 
each other, though they differ in some 
particulars. I have endeavoured to 
combine them. According to Mr. 


round the temple and fire volleys of 
musketry to drive away the devil. 
With the like intent they discharge a 
great old cannon, which bears the 
inscription, ‘‘My power breaks up 
and destroys rebellion.” The same 
account speaks of a fencing with battle- 
axes by a troop of boy-dancers, a 
great illumination of the cathedral with 
lanterns, and its decoration with figures 
made out of butter and flour to re- 
present men, animals, dragons, etc. ; 
also it makes mention of a horse-race 
and a foot-race, both run by boys. 
The clerical invasion of the capital at 
this season is graphically described by 
an eye-witness. See Huc, Souvenirs 
aun Voyage dans la Tartarie et le 
Thibet, Sixieme Edition (Paris, 1878), 
ii. 380 sg. 


The Grand 
Lama, the 
Jalno, and 
the King of 
the Years 
in their 
relations to 
each other. 


Probability 
that of old 
the Tibetan 
scapegoat 
was put to 
death as a 
substitute 
for the 
Grand 
Lama. 


222 PUBLIC SCAPEGOATS CHAP. 


themselves in a night. If they are now lifeless formalities, 
empty husks devoid of significance, we may be sure that 
they once had a life and a meaning; if at the present day 
they are blind alleys leading nowhere, we may be certain 
that in former days they were paths that led somewhere, if 
only to death. That death was the goal to which of old the 
Tibetan scapegoat passed after his brief period of licence in 
the market-place, is a conjecture that has much to commend 
it. Analogy suggests it; the blank shots fired after him, 
the statement that the ceremony often proves fatal, the 
belief that his death is a happy omen, all confirm it. We 
need not wonder then that the Jalno, after paying so dear to 
act as deputy-deity for a few weeks, should have preferred to 
die by deputy rather than in his own person when his time 
was up. The painful but necessary duty was accordingly 
laid on some poor devil, some social outcast, some wretch 
with whom the world had gone hard, who readily agreed to 
throw away his life at the end of a few days if only he 
might have his fling in the meantime. For observe that 
while the time allowed to the original deputy—the Jalno— 
was measured by weeks, the time allowed to the deputy’s 
deputy was cut down to days, ten days according to one 
authority, seven days according to another. So short a rope 
was doubtless thought a long enough tether for so black or 
sickly a sheep; so few sands in the hour-glass, slipping so 
fast away, sufficed for one who had wasted so many precious 
years. Hence in the jack-pudding who now masquerades 
with motley countenance in the market-place of Lhasa, 
sweeping up misfortune with a black yak’s tail, we may 
fairly see the substitute of a substitute, the vicar of a vicar, 
the proxy on whose back the heavy burden was laid when 
it had been lifted from nobler shoulders. But the clue, if 
we have followed it aright, does not stop at the Jalno; it 
leads straight back to the pope of Lhasa himself, the Grand 
Lama, of whom the Jalno is merely the temporary vicar. 
The analogy of many customs in many lands points to the 
conclusion that, if this human divinity stoops to resign his’ 
ghostly power for a time into the hands of a substitute, it is, 
or rather was once, for no other reason than that the sub- 
stitute might die in his stead. Thus through the mist of 


IV PERIODIC EXPULSION OF EVILS 223 


ages unillumined by the lamp of history, the tragic figure 
of the pope of Buddhism—God’s vicar on earth for Asia— 
looms dim and sad as the man-god who bore his people’s 
sorrows, the Good Shepherd who laid down his life for 
the sheep. 


General 
remarks. 


First, the 
immediate 
and the 
mediate 
expulsions 
of evil are 
identical in 
intention. 


Second, 
the annual 
expulsion 
of evil 
generally 
coincides 
with some 
well- 
marked 
change of 
season, 
such as the 
beginning 
or end of 
winter, the 
beginning 


CEPA PT Rei 
ON SCAPEGOATS IN GENERAL 


THE foregoing survey of the custom of publicly expelling 
the accumulated evils of a village or town or country suggests 
a few general observations. 

In the first place, it will not be disputed that what 
I have called the immediate and the mediate expulsions 
of evil are identical in intention; in other words, that 
whether the evils are conceived of as invisible or as 
embodied in a material form, is a circumstance entirely 
subordinate to the main object of the ceremony, which 
is simply to effect a total clearance of all the ills that 
have been infesting a people. If any link were wanting to 
connect the two kinds of expulsion, it would be furnished by 
such a practice as that of sending the evils away in a litter 
or a boat. For here, on the one hand, the evils are invisible 
and intangible; and, on the other hand, there is a visible 
and tangible vehicle to convey them away. And a scape- 
goat is nothing more than such a vehicle. 

In the second place, when a general clearance of evils is 
resorted to periodically, the interval between the celebrations 
of the ceremony is commonly a year, and the time of year 
when the ceremony takes place usually coincides with some 
well-marked change of season, such as the beginning or end 
of winter in the arctic and temperate zones, and the beginning 
or end of the rainy season in the tropics. The increased 
mortality which such climatic changes are apt to produce, 
especially amongst ill-fed, ill-clothed, and ill-housed savages, 
is set down by primitive man to the agency of demons, who 
must accordingly be expelled. Hence, in the tropical regions 

224 


| 


CHAP. V ON SCAPEGOATS IN GENERAL 225 


of New Britain and Peru, the devils are or were driven out 
at the beginning of the rainy season ; hence, on the dreary 
coasts of Baffin Land, they are banished at the approach of 
the bitter arctic winter. When a tribe has taken to hus- 
bandry, the time for the general expulsion of devils. is 
naturally made to agree with one of the great epochs of the 
agricultural year, as sowing, or harvest ; but, as these epochs 
themselves naturally coincide with changes of season, it does 
not follow that the transition from the hunting or pastoral 
to the agricultural life involves any alteration in the time of 
celebrating this great annual rite. Some of the agricultural 
communities of India and the Hindoo Koosh, as we have 
seen, hold their general clearance of demons at harvest, 
others at sowing-time. But, at whatever season of the year 
it is held, the general expulsion of devils commonly marks 
the beginning of the new year. For, before entering on a 
new year, people are anxious to rid themselves of the troubles 
that have harassed them in the past ; hence it comes about 
that in so many communities the beginning of the new year 
is inaugurated with a solemn and public banishment of evil 
spirits. 

In the third place, it is to be observed that this public 
and periodic expulsion of devils is commonly preceded or 
followed by a period of general license, during which the 
ordinary restraints of society are thrown aside, and all 
offences, short of the gravest, are allowed to pass unpunished. 
In Guinea and Tonquin the period of license precedes the 
public expulsion of demons; and the suspension of the 
ordinary government in Lhasa previous to the expulsion of 
the scapegoat is perhaps a relic of a similar period of universal 
license. Amongst the Hos of India the period of license 
follows the expulsion of the devil. Amongst the Iroquois it 
hardly appears whether it preceded or followed the banish- 
ment of evils. In any case, the extraordinary relaxation of 
all ordinary rules of conduct on such occasions is doubtless 
to be explained by the general clearance of evils which pre- 
cedes or follows it. On the one hand, when a general rid- 
dance of evil and absolution from all sin is in immediate 
prospect, men are encouraged to give the rein to their 
passions, trusting that the coming ceremony will wipe out 

PT. VI Q 


or end of 
the rainy 
season, etc, 


Third, 

the annual 
expulsion 
of evil is 
commonly 
preceded or 
followed by 
a period of 
general 
license. 


Fourth, 

the use of a 
divine man 
or animal 
as a scape- 
goat is re- 
markable. 


ON SCAPEGOATS IN GENERAL CHAP. 


226 


the score which they are running up so fast. On the other 
hand, when the ceremony has just taken place, men’s minds 
are freed from the oppressive sense, under which they 
generally labour, of an atmosphere surcharged with devils ; 
and in the first revulsion of joy they overleap the limits 
commonly imposed by custom and morality. When the 
ceremony takes place at harvest-time, the elation of feeling 
which it excites is further stimulated by the state of physical 
wellbeing produced by an abundant supply of food.’ 
Fourthly, the employment of a divine man or animal as 
a scapegoat is especially to be noted; indeed, we are here 
directly concerned with the custom of banishing evils only in 
so far as these evils are believed to be transferred to a god who 


1 In the Dassera festival, as cele- 
brated in Nepaul, we seem to have 
another instance of the annual expul- 
sion of demons preceded by a time of 
license. The festival occurs at the 
beginning of October and lasts ten 
days. ‘‘ During its continuance there 
is a general holiday among all classes 
of the people. The city of Kathmandu 
at this time is required to be purified, 
but the purification is effected rather by 
prayer than by water-cleansing. All 
the courts of law are closed, and all 
prisoners in jail are removed from 
them precincts sof thercityanc mes une 
Kalendar is cleared, or there is a jail- 
delivery always at the Dassera of all 
prisoners.” This seems a trace of a 
period of license. At this time ‘‘it is 
a general custom for masters to make 
an annual present, either of money, 
clothes, buffaloes, goats, etc., to such 
servants as have given satisfaction 
during the past year. It is in this 
respect, as well as in the feasting and 
drinking which goes on, something like 
our ‘ boxing-time’ at Christmas.” On 
the seventh day at sunset there is a 
parade of all the troops in the capital, 
including the artillery. At a given 
signal the regiments begin to fire, the 
artillery takes it up, and a general 
firing goes on for about twenty minutes, 
when it suddenly ceases. This prob- 
ably represents the expulsion of the 
demons. ‘‘ The grand cutting of the 
rice-crops is always postponed till the 


Dassera is over, and commences all 
over the valley the very day afterwards.” 
See the description of the festival in 
H. A. Oldfield’s Sketches from Nipal 
(London, 1880), ii. 342-351. On the 
Dassera in India, see J. A. Dubois, 
Meurs, Institutions et Cérémonies des 
Peuples de [ Inde (Paris, 1825), ii. 329 
sgg. The Besisi of the Malay Penin- 
sula hold a regular carnival at the end 
of the rice-harvest, when they are said 
to be allowed to exchange wives. See 
W. W. Skeat and C. O. Blagden, 
Pagan Races of the Malay Peninsula 
(London, 1906), ii. 70, 76, 145, com- 
pare 120 sg. Amongst the Swahili 
of East Africa New Year’s Day was 
formerly a day of general license, 
‘‘every man did as he pleased. Old 
quarrels were settled, men were found 
dead on the following day, and no in- 
quiry was instituted about the matter.” 
See Ch. New, Life, Wanderings, and 
Labours in Eastern Africa (London, 
1873), p.65; and Zhe Golden Bough,? 
ili. 250. 
and license, lasting three days, is re- 
ported by Borelli to be observed by 
some of the Gallas. See Ph. Paulit- 
schke, Ethnographie Nordost-Afrikas : 
die getstige Cultur der Dandkil, Galla 
und Somal (Berlin, 1896), p. 158. In 
Ashantee the annual festival of the new 
yams is a time of general license. See 
Spirits of the Corn and of the Weld, 
ii. 62. 


An annual period of anarchy ~ 


ee 


v ON SCAPEGOATS IN GENERAL 227 


is afterwards slain. It may be suspected that the custom of 
employing a divine man or animal asa public scapegoat is 
much more widely diffused than appears from the examples 
cited. For, as has already been pointed out, the custom of 
killing a god dates from so early a period of human history 
that in later ages, even when the custom continues to be 
practised, it is liable to be misinterpreted. The divine 
character of the animal or man is forgotten, and he comes 
to be regarded merely as an ordinary victim. This is 
especially likely to be the case when it is a divine man who 
is killed. For when a nation becomes civilized, if it does 
not drop human sacrifices altogether, it at least selects as 
victims only such wretches as would be put to death at 
any rate. Thus the killing of a god may sometimes come 
to be confounded with the execution of a criminal. 

If we ask why a dying god should be chosen to take 
upon himself and carry away the sins and sorrows of the 
people, it may be suggested that in the practice of using the 
divinity as a scapegoat we have a combination of two 
customs which were at one time distinct and independent. 
On the one hand we have seen that it has been customary 
to kill the human or animal god in order to save his divine 
life from being weakened by the inroads of age. On the 
other hand we have seen that it has been customary to have 
a general expulsion of evils and sins once a year. Now, if 
it occurred to people to combine these two. customs, the 
result would be the employment of the dying god as a scape- 
goat. He was killed, not originally to take away sin, but to 
save the divine life from the degeneracy of old age; but, 
since he had to be killed at any rate, people may have 
thought that they might as well seize the opportunity to lay 
upon him the burden of their sufferings and sins, in order 
that he might bear it away with him to the unknown world 
beyond the grave. 

The use of the divinity as a scapegoat clears up the 
ambiguity which, as we saw, appears to hang about the 
European folk-custom of “carrying out Death.”’ Grounds 
have been shewn for believing that in this ceremony the 
so-called Death was originally the spirit of vegetation, who 

1 See Zhe Dying God, pp. 233 sqq., 264. 


Why a 
dying god 
should 
serve as a 
scapegoat. 


The use of 
a divinity as 
scapegoat 
explains an 
ambiguity 
in the 
ceremony 


of ‘‘ Carry- 
ing out 
Death.”’ 


228 ON SCAPEGOATS IN GENERAL CHAP. V 


was annually slain in spring, in order that he might come to 
life again with all the vigour of youth. But, as I pointed 
out, there are certain features in the ceremony which are not 
explicable on this hypothesis alone. Such are the marks of 
joy with which the effigy of Death is carried out to be buried 
or burnt, and the fear and abhorrence of it manifested by the 
bearers. But these features become at once intelligible if we 
suppose that the Death was not merely the dying god of 
vegetation, but also a public scapegoat, upon whom were 
laid all the evils that had afflicted the people during the past 
year. Joy on such an occasion is natural and appropriate ; 
and if the dying god appears to be the object of that fear 
and abhorrence which are properly due not to himself, but to 
the sins and misfortunes with which he is laden, this arises 
merely from the difficulty of distinguishing, or at least of 
marking the distinction, between the bearer and the burden. 
When the burden is of a baleful character, the bearer of it 
will be feared and shunned just as much as if he were him- 
self instinct with those dangerous properties of which, as it 
happens, he is only the vehicle. Similarly we have seen that 
disease-laden and sin-laden boats are dreaded and shunned 
by East Indian peoples. Again, the view that in these 
popular customs the Death is a scapegoat as well as a repre- 
sentative of the divine spirit of vegetation derives some 
support from the circumstance that its expulsion is always 
celebrated in spring and chiefly by Slavonic peoples. For 
the Slavonic year began in spring ;* and thus, in one of its 
aspects, the ceremony of “carrying out Death” would be 
an example of the widespread custom of expelling the 
accumulated evils of the old year before entering on a 
new one. 

1 Above, pp. 186, 189, 201. Rheinisches Museum, N.F. (1875) 


xxx. 194; 7d., Kleine Schriften, ww. 
2 I]. Usener, ‘‘Italische Mythen,” (Leipsic and Berlin, 1913) p. 105. 


CHAP PER el 


HUMAN SCAPEGOATS IN CLASSICAL ANTIQUITY 


§ 1. The Human Scapegoat in Ancient Rome 


WE are now prepared to notice the use of the human scape- Annual 


goat in classical antiquity. 


Every year on the fourteenth of 


March a man clad in skins was led in procession through the 
streets of Rome, beaten with long white rods, and driven out 
of the city. He was called Mamurius Veturius,' that is, “the 
old Mars,”? and as the ceremony took place on the day preced- 
ing the first full moon of the old Roman year (which began on 
the first of March), the skin-clad man must have represented 
the Mars of the past year, who was driven out at the begin- 


ning of a new one. 
war but of vegetation. 


Now Mars was originally not a god of 
For it was to Mars that the Roman 


husbandman prayed for the prosperity of his corn and his 
vines, his fruit-trees and his copses ;* it was to Mars that the 


1 Joannes Lydus, De mensibus, iil. 
29, iv. 36. Lydus places the expul- 
sion on the Ides of March, that is 15th 
March. But this seems to be a mis- 
take. See H. Usener, ‘‘Italische 
Mythen,” heintsches Museum, xxx. 
(1875) pp. 209 sgg.; zd., Kleine 
Schriften, iv. (Leipsic and Berlin, 1913) 
pp. 122 sgg. Again, Lydus does not 
expressly say that Mamurius Veturius 
was driven out of the city, but he 
implies it by mentioning the legend 
that his mythical prototype was beaten 
with rods and expelled the city. 
Lastly, Lydus only mentions the name 
Mamurius. But the full name Mamu- 
rius Veturius is preserved by Varro, 
De lingua latina, vi. 45; Festus, 
ed. C. O. Miiller, p. 131; Plutarch, 
Numa, 13. Mr. W. Warde Fowler 


is disposed to be sceptical as to the 
antiquity of the ceremony of expelling 
Mamurius. See his Roman Festivals 
of the period of the Republic (London, 
1899), pp. 44-50. 

2 H. Usener, ‘‘ Italische Mythen,” 
pp. 212 sg. ; 2d., Kleine Schriften, iv. 
125 sg.; W. H. Roscher, Apollon una 
Mars (Leipsic, 1873), p. 27; L. Preller, 
Réomische Mythologie® (Berlin, 1881- 
1883), i. 360; A. Vanicek, Griechisch- 
lateinisches etymologisches Worterbuch 
(Leipsic, 1877), p. 715. The three 
latter scholars take Veturius as = 
annuus, because vets is etymologically 
equivalent to éros. But, as Usener 
argues, it seems quite unallowable to 
take the Greek meaning of the word 
instead of the Latin. 

3 Cato, De agri cultura, 141. 


229 


expulsion 
of ‘‘ the 
Old Mars” 
in the 
month of 
March in 
ancient 
Rome, 


230 SCAPEGOATS IN CLASSICAL ANTIQUITY Veuse: 


priestly college of the Arval Brothers, whose business it was 
to sacrifice for the growth of the crops,’ addressed their 
petitions almost exclusively ;7 and it was to Mars, as we 
saw, that a horse was sacrificed in October to secure an 
abundant harvest. Moreover, it was to Mars, under his title 
of “ Mars of the woods” (Mars Silvanus), that farmers offered 
sacrifice for the welfare of their cattle* We have already 
seen that cattle are commonly supposed to be under the 
special patronage of tree-gods.? Once more, the consecration 
of the vernal month of March to Mars seems to point him 
out as the deity of the sprouting vegetation. Thus the 
Roman custom of expelling the old Mars at the beginning 
of the new year in spring is identical with the Slavonic 
custom of “carrying out Death,” if the view here taken of the 
latter custom is correct. The similarity of the Roman and 
Slavonic customs has been already remarked by scholars, 
who appear, however, to have taken Mamurius Veturius and 
the corresponding figures in the Slavonic ceremonies to be 
representatives of the old year rather than of the old god of 
vegetation.® It is possible that ceremonies of this kind may 
have come to be thus interpreted in later times even by the 
people who practised them. But the personification of a 
period of time is too abstract an idea to be primitive.’ 


1 Varro, De lingua latina, v. 85. 

2 See the song of the Arval Brothers 
in Acta Fratrum Arvalium, ed. G. 
Henzen (Berlin, 1874), pp. 26 sg. ; 
J. Wordsworth, ragments and Speci- 
mens of Early Latin (Oxford, 1874), 


p- 158; H. Dessau, Jnscripteones 
Latinae Selectae, ii. Pars i. (Berlin, 
1902) p. 276. 


3 Spirits of the Corn and of the Wild, 
li. 42 sgq. 

4 Cato, De agri cultura, 83. 

5 The Magic Art and the Evolution 
of Kings, il. 50 sg., 55, 124 Sg. 

68 L. Preller, Rémische Mythologie? 
i. 360; W. H. Roscher, Apollon und 
Mars, p. 49; zad., Lexikon der griech. 
und rim. Mythologie, i. 2408 sg.; H. 
Usener, of. czt. The ceremony also 
closely resembles the Highland New 
Year ceremony already described. See 
Spirits of the Corn and of the Wild, ii. 


322 sqq. 


7 But the Biyars, a mixed tribe of 
North-Western India, observe an an- 
nual ceremony which they call ‘‘ burn- 
ing the old year.” The old year is 
represented by a stake of the wood of 
the cotton-tree, which is planted in the 
ground at an appointed place outside 
of the village, and then burned on the 
day of the full moon in the month of 
Pis. Fire is first put to it by the village 
priest, and then all the people follow 
his example, parch stalks of barley 
in the fire, and afterwards eat them. 
Next day they throw the ashes of the 
burnt wood in the air; and on the 
morrow the festival ends with a regular 
saturnalia, at which decency and order 
are forgotten. See W. Crooke, 77zes 
and Castes of the North-Western Pro- 
vinces and Oudh (Calcutta, 1896), ii. 

37 sg. Compare zd., Popular Religion 
and Folk-lore of Northern India (West- 
minster, 1896), ii. 319. 


VI THE HUMAN SCAPEGOAT IN ANCIENT ROME 231 


However, in the Roman, as in the Slavonic, ceremony, the 
representative of the god appears to have been treated not 
only as a deity of vegetation but also as a scapegoat. His 
expulsion implies this; for there is no reason why the god 
of vegetation, as such, should be expelled the city. But it is 
otherwise if he is also a scapegoat; it then becomes neces- 
sary to drive him beyond the boundaries, that he may carry 
his sorrowful burden away to other lands. And, in fact, 
Mamurius Veturius appears to have been driven away to 
the land of the Oscans, the enemies of Rome." 

The blows with which the “old Mars” was expelled the 
city seem to have been administered by the dancing priests 
of Mars, the Salii. At least we know that in their songs 
these priests made mention of Mamurius Veturius ;” and we 
are told that on a day dedicated to him they beat a hide 
with rods. It is therefore highly probable that the hide 
which they drubbed on that day was the one worn by the 
representative of the deity whose name they simultaneously 
chanted. Thus on the fourteenth day of March every year 
Rome witnessed the curious spectacle of the human incarna- 
tion of a god chased by the god’s own priests with blows 
from the city. The rite becomes at least intelligible on the 
theory that the man so beaten and expelled stood for the 
outworn deity of vegetation, who had to be replaced by a 
fresh and vigorous young divinity at the beginning of a 
New Year, when everywhere around in field and meadow, in 
wood and thicket the vernal flowers, the sprouting grass, and 
the opening buds and blossoms testified to the stirring of 
new life in nature after the long torpor and stagnation of 


1 Propertius, v. 2. 61 sg.; H. caedunt.” Neither Servius nor Minucius 


Usener, ‘‘Italische Mythen,” p. 210; 
id., Kleine Schriften, iv. 123. 


2 Varro, De lingua latina, vi. 45 
ed. C. O. Miiller ; Festus, s.v. ‘* Ma- 
muri Veturi,” p. 131 ed. C. O. Miiller; 
Ovid, Fastz, iil. 389 sgg.; Plutarch, 
Numa, 13. 


3 Servius, on Virgil, dev. vii. 188, 
Cuz [sctl. Mamurio| et diem conse- 
crarunt, quo pellem virgis fertunt” ; 
Minucius Felix, Octavius, 24, ‘‘ Nudi 
cruda hieme dtiscurrunt, alit incedunt 
pilleati, scutavetera circumfperunt, pelles 


Felix expressly mentions the Salii, but 
the description given by the latter writer 
(<‘ pelleatt, scuta vetera circumferunt”’) 
proves that he alludes to them. The 
expression of Minucius Felix edles 
caedunt is conclusive in favour of 
pellem in the passage of Servius, where 
some would wrongly substitute fe/tamz, 
the reading of a single MS. That the 
beating of the skin-clad representative 
of Mamurius was done by the Salii was 
long ago rightly pointed out by Dr. 
W. H. Roscher (Ajollon und Mars, 


p. 49). 


‘The 

Old Mars” 
seems to 
have been 
beaten 

by the 
Salii, the 
dancing 
priests of 
Mars. 


The 
dances of 
the Salii in 
spring and 
autumn 
were 
perhaps 
intended to 
quicken 
the growth 
of the 
corn sown 
at these 
seasons. 


232 SCAPEGOATS IN CLASSICAL ANTIQUITY \>tuae 


winter. The dancing priests of the god derived their 
name of Salii from the leaps or dances which they were 
bound to execute as a solemn religious ceremony every 
year in the Comitium, the centre of Roman political life.’ 
Twice a year, in the spring month of March and the autumn 
month of October, they discharged this sacred duty ;* and 
as they did so they invoked Saturn, the Roman god of 
sowing. As the Romans sowed the corn both in spring 
and autumn,’ and as down to the present time in Europe 
superstitious rustics are wont to dance and leap high in 
spring for the purpose of making the crops grow high,° we 
may conjecture that the leaps and dances performed by the 
Salii, the priests of the old Italian god of vegetation, were 
similarly supposed to quicken the growth of the corn by 
homoeopathic or imitative magic. The Salii were not limited 
to Rome; similar colleges of dancing priests are known to 
have existed in many towns of ancient Italy ;° everywhere, 
we may conjecture, they were supposed to contribute to the 
fertility of the earth by their leaps and dances. At Rome 
they were divided into two colleges, each composed of twelve 
members ; and it is not impossible that the number twelve 
was fixed with reference to the twelve months of the old 
lunar year ;’ the ratres Arvales, or “Brethren of the Ploughed 
Fields,” another Roman college of priests, whose functions 
were purely agricultural, and who wore as a badge of their 
office a wreath of corn-ears, were also twelve in number, 


1 Varro, De lingua latina, v. 85, for Saturnus. The best MSS. of the 


‘* Sale a salitando, quod facere in comitio 
zm sacris guotannis et solent et debent.”’ 
Compare Ovid, /astz, ii. 387, ‘*‘ lam 
dederat Saltts a saltu nomina dicta” ; 
Plutarch, uma, 13; Dionysius Hali- 
carnasensis, Antiguztates Romanae, ii. 
70. 
2 J. Marquardt, Rémesche Staatsver- 
waltung, iii.” (Leipsic, 1885) p. 4313 
G. Wissowa, Religion und Kultus der 
Romer*® (Munich, 1912), p. 1443; W. 
Warde Fowler, Zhe Religious Expert- 
ence of the Roman People (London, 
IQII), pp. 96 sg. 

a Hestus; eda CO. Miullersapas2 5s 
“ Out deus in saliaribus Saturnus 
nomenatur, videlicet a sationibus,” In 
this passage Ritschl reads Saetesnzus 


epitome read Sateurnus. See J. Words- 
worth, fragments and Specimens of 
Early Latin (Oxford, 1884), p. 405. 
As to Saturn in this capacity see below, 

306. 

* Columella, De ve rustica, ii. 9. 
6 sg. 

5 The Magic Art and the Evolution 
of Kings, i. 137 sqgq. 

6 J. Marquardt, Rémésche Staatsver- 
waltung, iii.? (Leipsic, 1885) pp. 427 
Qs 
TL. Preller, Rémische Mythologie? 
(Berlin, 1881-1883), i. 359. Asto the 
lunar year of the old Roman Calendar 
see L. Ideler, Handbuch der mathe- 
matischen und technischen Chronologie 
(Berlin, 1825-1826), il. 38 sgg. 


vi THE HUMAN SCAPEGOAT IN ANCIENT ROME 


233 


perhaps for a similar reason.’ Nor was the martial equip- 
ment of the Salii so alien to this peaceful function as a 
modern reader might naturally suppose. Each of them 
wore on his head a peaked helmet of bronze, and at his side 
a sword ; on his left arm he carried a shield of a peculiar 
shape, and in his right hand he wielded a staff with which 
he smote on the shield till it rang again.2>, Such weapons in 
priestly hands may be turned against spiritual foes; in the 
preceding pages we have met with many examples of the 
use of material arms to rout the host of demons who oppress 
the imagination of primitive man, and we have seen that the 
clash and clangour of metal is often deemed particularly 
effective in putting these baleful beings to flight.* May it 
not have been so with the martial priests of Mars? We 
know that they paraded the city for days together in a 
regular order, taking up their quarters for the night at a 
different place each day ; and as they went they danced in 
triple time, singing and clashing on their shields and taking 
their time from a fugleman, who skipped and postured at 
their head.* We may conjecture that in so doing they were 
supposed to be expelling the powers of evil which had 
accumulated during the preceding year or six months, and 
which the people pictured to themselves in the form of 
demons lurking in the houses, temples, and the other edifices 
of the city. In savage communities such tumultuous and 
noisy processions often parade the village for a similar pur- 
pose. Similarly, we have seen that among the Iroquois men 
in fantastic costume used to go about collecting the sins of 
the people as a preliminary to transferring them to the 
scapegoat dogs; and we have met with many examples of 


1 As to their number and badge see 
Aulus Gellius, vi. (vii., ed. M. Hertz) 
7. 8; as to their function see Varro, 
De lingua latina, v. 85, ‘‘ Fratres 
Arvales dicti sunt, quiz sacra publica 
faciunt propterea ut fruges ferant arva, 
a ferendo et arvis fratres arvales dictt.” 

2 Livy, i. 20. 4; Plutarch, Vuma, 
13; Dionysius Halicarnasensis, Az- 
tiguitates Romanae, ii. 70. Livy only 
mentions the shields. From an ancient 
relief we learn that the staves of the 
Salii terminated in a knob at each end. 
Hence we may correct the statement 


of Dionysius, who describes the weapon 
doubtfully as Adyxnv 7 paBdov 4 Te 
To.ovd’ erepov. See J. Marquardt, 
Roimische Staatsverwaltung, iii." 432, 
note ©, 

3 See above, pp. 113, 116, 117, 132, 
139, 141, 147, 158, 159, 161, 163, 
165, 166, 186, I91, 196, 200, 204, 
214. 

4 Livy, i. 20. 43; J. Marquardt, of. 
cit. iii.? 432 sg.3 W. Smith, Dzctzon- 
ary of Greek and Roman Antiquities, 
Third Edition (London, 1891), vol. ii. 
p- 590, s.v. ‘*Salii.” 


The armed 
processions 
of the Salii 
may have 
been in- 
tended to 
rout out 
and expel 
the demons 
lurking in 
the city. 


The 
demons 
expelled 
by the Salii 
may have 
been above 
all the 
demons of 
blight and 
infertility. 
This con- 
jecture is 
supported 
by ana- 
logous 
ceremonies 
performed 
by savages 
for the pur- 
pose of 
driving off 
the demons 
that would 
harm the 
crops. 


234 SCAPEGOATS IN CLEASSICAL ANTIQUITY) eae 


armed men rushing about the streets and houses to drive 
out demons and evils of all kinds." Why should it not have 
been so also in ancient Rome? The religion of the old 
Romans is full of relics of savagery. 

If there is any truth in this conjecture, we may suppose 
that, as priests of a god who manifested his power in the 
vegetation of spring, the Salii turned their attention above 
all to the demons of blight and infertility, who might be 
thought by their maleficent activity to counteract the genial 
influence of the kindly god and to endanger the farmer’s 
prospects in the coming summer or winter. The conjecture 
may be supported by analogies drawn from the customs of 
modern European peasants as well as of savages. Thus, to 
begin with savages, we have seen that at the time of sowing 
the Khonds drive out the “evil spirits, spoilers of the seed” 
from every house in the village, the expulsion being effected 
by young men who beat each other and strike the air 
violently with long sticks.? If I am right in connecting the 
vernal and the autumnal processions of the Salii with the 
vernal and the autumnal sowing, the analogy between the 
Khond and the Roman customs would be very close. In 
West Africa the fields of the King of Whydah, according to 
an old French traveller, ““are hoed and sowed before any of 
his subjects has leave to hoe and sow a foot of his own 
lands. These labours are performed thrice a year. The 
chiefs lead their people before the king’s palace at daybreak, 
and there they sing and dance for a full quarter of an hour. 
Half of these people are armed as in a day of battle, the 
other half have only their farm tools. They go all together 
singing and dancing to the scene of their labours, and there, 
keeping time to the sound of the instruments, they work 
with such speed and neatness that it is a pleasure to behold. 
At the end of the day they return and dance before the 
king’s palace. This exercise refreshes them and does them 
more good than all the repose they could take.”* From 
this account we might infer that the dancing was merely a 
recreation of the field-labourers, and that the music of the 


1 See above, pp. III sqq. Marchais en Guinée, Isles votsines, et 
2 See above, p. 138. a Cayenne (Amsterdam, 1731), ii. 80 
3 Labat, Voyage du Chevalier Des  (p. 99 of the Paris edition). 


VI THE HUMAN SCAPEGOAT IN ANCIENT ROME 235 


band had no other object than to animate them in their 
work by enabling them to ply their mattocks in time to its 
stirring strains. But this inference, though it seems to have 
been drawn by the traveller who has furnished the account, 
would probably be erroneous. For if half of the men were 
armed as for war, what were they doing in the fields all the 
time that the others were digging? A clue to unravel the 
mystery is furnished by the description which a later French 
traveller gives of a similar scene witnessed by him near 
Timbo in French Guinea. He saw some natives at work 
preparing the ground for sowing. “It is a very curious 
spectacle: fifty or sixty blacks in a line, with bent backs, are 
smiting the earth simultaneously with their little iron tools, 
which gleam in the sun. Ten paces in front of them, march- 
ing backwards, the women sing a well marked air, clapping 
their hands as for a dance, and the hoes keep time to the 
song. Between the workers and the singers a man runs and 
dances, crouching on his hams like a clown, while he whirls 
about his musket and performs other manceuvres with it. 
Two others dance, also pirouetting and smiting the earth 
here and there with their little hoe. All that is necessary 
for exorcising the spirits and causing the grain to sprout.” ! 
Here, while the song of the women gives the time to the 
strokes of the hoes, the dances and other antics of the armed 
man and his colleagues are intended to exorcise or ward off 
the spirits who might interfere with the diggers and so 
prevent the grain from sprouting. 

Again, an old traveller in southern India tells us that 
“the men of Calicut, when they wish to sow rice, observe 
this practice. First, they plough the land with oxen as we 
do, and when they sow the rice in the field they have all the 
instruments of the city continually sounding and making 
merry. They also have ten or twelve men clothed like 
devils, and these unite in making great rejoicing with the 
players on the instruments, in order that the devil may 
make that rice very productive.”* We may suspect that the 

1 Olivier de Sanderval, De 7’ Adlan- — esprits.” 
tigue au Niger par le Foutah-Djallon 2 Ludovico di Varthema, Zyavels in 
(Paris, 1883), p. 230. The phrase Lgyft, Syria, etc., translated by J. W. 


which I have translated ‘‘ for exorcising Jones(Hakluyt Society, London, 1863), 
the spirits” is ‘‘ pour conjurer les pp. 166 sg. 


Dances 

of masked 
men in 
India, 
Borneo, 
and South 
America to 
promote 
the growth 
of the 
crops. 


Dances in 
Aracan for 
the sake of 
the crops. 


Dances of 
the Tara- 
humare 
Indians of 
Mexico to 
procure 
rain for 
their crops. 


236 SCAPEGOATS IN CLASSICAL ANTIQUITY CHAP. 


noisy music is played and the mummers cut their capers for 
the purpose rather of repelling demons than of inducing 
them to favour the growth of the rice. However, where our 
information is so scanty it would be rash to dogmatize. 
Perhaps the old traveller was right in thinking that the 
mummers personated devils. Among the Kayans of Central 
Borneo men disguised in wooden masks and great masses of 
green foliage certainly play the part of demons for the pur- 
pose of promoting the growth of the rice just before the seed 
is committed to the ground; and it is notable that among 
the performances which they give on this occasion are war 
dances." Again, among the Kaua and Kobeua Indians of 
North-Western Brazil masked men who represent spirits or 
demons of fertility perform dances or rather pantomimes for 
the purpose of stimulating the growth of plants, quickening 
the wombs of women, and promoting the multiplication of 
animals.” 

Further, we are told that “the natives of Aracan dance 
in order to render propitious the spirits whom they believe 
to preside over the sowing and over the harvest. There are 
definite times for doing it, and we may say that in their eyes 
it is, as it were, an act of religion.”* Another people who 
dance diligently to obtain good crops are the Tarahumare 
Indians of Mexico. They subsist by agriculture and their 
thoughts accordingly turn much on the supply of rain, which 
is needed for their fields. According to them, “the favour 
of the gods may be won by what for want of a better term 
may be called dancing, but what in reality is a series of 
monotonous movements, a kind of rhythmical exercise, kept 
up sometimes for two nights. By dint of such hard work 
they think to prevail upon the gods to grant their prayers. 
The dancing is accompanied by the song of the shaman, in 
which he communicates his wishes to the unseen world, 
describing the beautiful effect of the rain, the fog, and the 
mist on the vegetable world. He invokes the aid of all the 
animals, mentioning each by name, and also calls on them, 
especially the deer and the rabbit, to multiply that the people 


1 Spirits of the Corn and of the Wild, i. 111 sg. 
Wild, i. 95, 186 sg. 3 Annales de la Propagation de la 
2 Spirits of the Corn and of the oi, liii. (1881) p. 178. 


Ww 8 SHE HUMAN SCAPEGOAT IN ANCIENT ROME 237 


may have plenty to eat. As a matter of fact, the Tara- 
humares assert that the dances have been taught them by 
the animals. Like all primitive people, they are close 
observers of nature. To them the animals are by no means 
inferior creatures ; they understand magic and are possessed 
of much knowledge, and may assist the Tarahumares in 
making rain. In spring, the singing of the birds, the cooing 
of the dove, the croaking of the frog, the chirping of the 
cricket, all the sounds uttered by the denizens of the green- 
sward, are to the Indian appeals to the deities for rain. For 
what other reason should they sing or call? For the strange 
behaviour of many animals in the early spring the Tara- 
humares can find no other explanation but that these 
creatures, too, are interested in rain. And as the gods grant 
the prayers of the deer expressed in its antics and dances, 
and of the turkey in its curious playing, by sending the rain, 
they easily infer that to please the gods they, too, must 
dance as the deer and play as the turkey. From this it will 
be understood that dance with these people is a very serious 
and ceremonious matter, a kind of worship and incantation 
rather than amusement.” * 

The two principal dances of these Indians, the rutuburz 
and the yumarz, are supposed to have been taught them by 
the turkey and the deer respectively. They are danced by 
numbers of men and women, the two sexes keeping apart 
from each other in the dance, while the shaman sings and 
shakes his rattle. But “a large gathering is not necessary in 
order to pray to the gods by dancing. Sometimes the family 
dances alone, the father teaching the boys. While doing 
agricultural work, the Indians often depute one man to dance 
yumari near the house, while the others attend to the work 
in the fields. It is a curious sight to see a lone man taking 
his devotional exercise to the tune of his rattle in front of 
an apparently deserted dwelling. The lonely worshipper is 
doing his share of the general work by bringing down the 
fructifying rain and by warding off disaster, while the rest of 
the family and their friends plant, hoe, weed, or harvest. In 
the evening, when they return from the field, they may join 
him for a little while; but often he goes on alone, dancing 

1C. Lumholtz, Unknown Mexico (London, 1993), i. 330 sg. 


Dances of 
the Tara- 
humare 
Indians to 
cause rain 
to fall, corn 
to sprout, 
grass to 
grow, and 
animals to 
multiply. 


Dance of 
the Cora 
Indians at 
the sowing 
festival. 


Dancesand 
leaps of 
European 
peasants to 
make the 
corn grow 
tall. 


238 SCAPEGOATS IN CLASSICAL ANTIQUITY Veane 


all night, and singing himself hoarse, and the Indians told 
me that this is the very hardest kind of work, and exhausting 
even to them. Solitary worship is also observed by men 
who go out hunting deer or squirrels for a communal feast. 
Every one of them dances yumarz alone in front of his house 
for two hours to insure success on the hunt ; and when put- 
ting corn to sprout for the making of ¢esvzmo the owner of 
the house dances for a while, that the corn may sprout well.” 
Another dance is thought to cause the grass and funguses to 
grow, and the deer and rabbits to multiply ; and another is 
supposed to draw the clouds together from the north and 
south, so that they clash and descend in rain.’ 

The Cora Indians of Mexico celebrate a festival of sow- 
ing shortly before they commit the seed of the maize to 
the ground. The festival falls in June, because that is the 
month when the rainy season sets in, supplying the moisture 
needed for the growth of the maize. At the festival two 
old women, who represent the goddesses of sowing, dance 
side by side and imitate the process of sowing by digging 
holes in the earth with long sticks and inserting the seed of 
the maize in the holes ; whereupon a man who represents the 
Morning Star pours water on the buried seeds. This solemn 
dance is accompanied by the singing of an appropriate 
hymn, which may be compared to the song of the Arval 
Brothers in ancient Rome.” 

We have seen that in many parts of Germany, Austria, 
and France the peasants are still, or were till lately, ac- 
customed to dance and leap high in order that the crops 
may grow tall. Such leaps and dances are sometimes 
performed by the sower immediately before or after he 
sows the seed ; but often they are executed by the people 
on a fixed day of the year, which in some places is Twelfth 
Night (the sixth of January), or Candlemas (the second of 
February) or Walpurgis Night, that is, the Eve of May 
Day; but apparently the favourite season for these per- 


1 C. Lumholtz, Unknown Mexico ofthe Mexican Indians, compare K. Th. 
(London, 1903), i. 335 599., 352 5g. Preuss, ‘‘ Die religidsen Gesange und 

2K. Th. Preuss, Dze Nayarit- Mythen einiger Stamme der mexika- 
Expedition, 1. Die Religion der Cora-  nischen Sierra Madre,” Archiv ftir Re- 
Indianer (Leipsic, 1912), pp. xcvili.  “gionswissenschaft, xi. (1908) pp. 
sg., 61-63. As to the sowing festival 374 sgq. 


VI THE HUMAN SCAPEGOAT IN ANCIENT ROME 239 


formances is the last day of the Carnival, namely Shrove 
Tuesday.’ In such cases the leaps and dances are performed 
_by every man for his own behoof; he skips and jumps 
merely in order that his own corn, or flax, or hemp may 
spring up and thrive. But sometimes in modern Europe, as 
(if I am right) in ancient Rome, the duty of dancing for the 
crops was committed to bands or troops of men, who cut 
their capers for the benefit of the whole community. For 
example, at Grub, in the Swiss canton of the Grisons (Grau- 
biinden), the practice used to be as follows. “ The peasants of 
_ Grub,” we are informed, “have still some hereditary customs, 
in that they assembled in some years, mostly at the time of 
the summer solstice, disguised themselves as maskers so as 
to be unrecognizable, armed themselves with weapons defen- 
sive and offensive, took every man a great club or cudgel, 
marched in a troop together from one village to another, 
and executed high leaps and strange antics. They ran full 
tilt at each other, struck every man his fellow with all his 
might, so that the blow resounded, and clashed their great 
staves and cudgels. Hence they were called by the country 
folk the Stopfer. These foolish pranks they played from a 
superstitious notion that their corn would thrive the better ; 
but now they have left off, and these Szopfer are no longer 
inany repute.” Another authority, after describing the cus- 
tom, remarks: “ With this custom was formerly connected 
the belief that its observance brought a fruitful year.” ” 


1 The Magic Art and the Evolution 
of Kings, i. 137-139. 

2 Dr. F. J. Vonbun, Beztrage zur 
deutschen Mythologie gesammelt in 
Churrhaetien (Chur, 1862), p. 21, 
quoting J. Stumpf and Ulr. Campell. 
As the passage is curious and the work 
probably rare, I will quote the original 
in full: §* Stcherlich auch im 2usammen- 
hange mit Donarcultus war etn brauch 
der leute in der Grub (in Graubiinden). 
* Die landleute in der Grub haben noch 
etwas anererbte briuche, tndem dass 
Ste stch zu etlichen jahren (meztstens zur 
seit der sonnenwende) besammelten, ver- 
buizten (stch als masken vermummten) 
und einander unbekannt machten, 
legten harnisch und geweer an, und 
nahm jeder ein grossen kolben oder 
kniittel, zugen in etner rott mit einander 


von einem dorf zum andern, triben hohe 
spriinge und seltsame abentheur.—Sie 
luffen gestracks laufs aneinander, 
stiessen mit kraften je einer den andern, 
dass es erhtillt, stiessen laut mitt thren 
grossen sticken und kniitteln, deswegen 
sie vom landvolk genannt werden die 
Stopfer. Diese thorechte abentheuer trt- 
ben ste zum aberglauben, dassthnen das 
korn destobas gerathen solle, haben 
aber anjetzo abgelassen, und sind diese 
Stopfer in keiner achtung mehr. 
(Joh. Stumpf). Auch Ulr. Campell 
erwahnt dieses volksbrauch (s. 11) und 
bemerkt: ‘mit diesem gebrauche hing 
Jriher der slaube zusammen, dass 
dessen austibung ein fruchtbares 
jakhr bringe.’” The word Stopffer 
means “‘ stopper,” ‘* rammer,” ‘‘ cram- 
mer,” etc. 


Dances of 
mummers 
called 
Perchten 
in Austria 
for the 
good of 
the crops. 
The 
mythical 
old woman 
called 
Perchta. 


In the Austrian provinces of Salzburg and Tyrol bands 


of mummers wearing grotesque masks, with bells Jingling on 
their persons, and carrying long sticks or poles in their 
hands, used formerly to run and leap about on certain days 
of the year for the purpose of procuring good crops. They 
were called Perchten, a name derived from Perchta, Berchta, 
or Percht, a mythical old woman, whether goddess or elf, who 
is well known all over South Germany ; Mrs. Perchta (Frau 


| 


240 SCAPEGOATS IN CLASSICAL ANTIQUITY cuHar. gy 
} 


Perchta), as they call her, is to be met with in Elsace, 9} 


Swabia, Bavaria, Austria, and Switzerland, but nowhere, 
perhaps, so commonly as in Salzburg and the Tyrol. In 
the Tyrol she appears as a little old woman with a very 
wrinkled face, bright lively eyes, and a long hooked nose ; 
her hair is dishevelled, her garments tattered and torn. 
Hence they say to a slatternly wench, “ You are a regular 
Perchta.” She goes about especially during the twelve 
days from Christmas to Twelfth Night (Epiphany), above 
all on the Eve of Twelfth Night, which is often called 
Perchta’s Day. Many precautions must be observed during 
these mystic days in order not to incur her displeasure, for 
she is mischievous to man and beast. If she appears in the 
byre, a distemper breaks out among the cows. That is why 
during these days the byres must be kept very clean and 
straw laid on the threshold; otherwise you will find bald 
patches on your sheep and goats next morning, and next 
summer the hair which has been filched from the animals 
will descend in hail-stones from the sky. Old Mrs. Perchta 
also keeps a very sharp eye on spinners during the twelve 
days ; she inspects all distaffs and spinning-wheels in the 
houses, and if she finds any flax or tow unspun on them, she 
tears it to bits, and she does not spare the lazy spinner, for 
she scratches her and smacks her fingers so that they bear 
the marks of it for the rest of her life. Indeed she some- 
times does much more; for she rips up the belly of the 
sluggard and stuffs it with flax. That is the punishment 
with which a Bavarian mother will threaten an idle jade of 
a girl who has left some flax on her distaff on New Year’s 
Eve. However, they say in Bavaria that if you only eat 
plenty of the rich juicy cakes which are baked for Mrs. 
Perchta on her day, the old woman’s knife will glance off 


VI THE HUMAN SCAPEGOAT IN ANCIENT ROME 241 


your body without making any impression on it. Perchta 
often comes not alone but attended by many little children, 
who follow her as chickens waddle after the mother hen ; 
and if you should see any little child lagging behind the rest 
and blubbering, you may be quite sure that that child has 
been baptized. On the Eve of Twelfth Night everybody 
should eat pancakes baked of meal and milk or water. If 
anybody does not do so, old Mrs. Perchta comes and slits 
up his stomach, takes out the other food, fills up the vacuity 
so created with a tangled skein and bricks, and then sews 
up the orifice neatly, using, singularly enough, a plough- 
share for a needle and an iron chain for thread. In 
other or the same places she does the same thing to any- 
body who does not eat herrings and dumplings on Twelfth 
Night. Some say that she rides on the storm like the Wild 
Huntsman, followed by a boisterous noisy pack, and carry- 
ing off people into far countries. Yet withal old Mrs. 
Perchta has her redeeming qualities. Good children who 
spin diligently and learn their lessons she rewards with nuts 
and sugar plums. It has even been affirmed that she makes 
the ploughed land fruitful and causes the cattle to thrive. 
When a mist floats over the fields, the peasants see her 
figure gliding along in a white mantle. On the Eve of 
Twelfth Night good people leave the remains of their supper 
for her on the table, and when they have gone to bed and 
all is quiet in the house, she comes in the likeness of an 
old wizened little woman, with all the children about her, 
, and partakes of the broken victuals. But woe to the prying 
wight who peeps at her through the key-hole! Many a 
man has been blinded by her for a whole year as a punish- 
ment for his ill-timed curiosity.’ 

1 J. Grimm, Deutsche Mythologie* 


(Berlin, 1875-1878), i. 226 sgg., iii. 
8 sg; Fr. Panzer, Beitrag zur 


(Ziirich, 1857), PP: 46-51, 63-65 ; 
Bavaria, Landes- und Volkskunde des 
Konigreichs Bayern (Munich, 1860- 


deutschen Mythologie (Munich, 1848— 
Bey) 247 so., U. 391; I. V. 
Zingerle, ‘‘ Perahta in Tirol,” Zezt- 
Schrift fiir deutsche Mythologie, iii. 
(Gottingen, 1855), pp. 203-206 ; za., 


| Sttten, Briuche und Meinungen des 
Tiroler Volkes ® (Innsbruck, 1871), pp. 


128 sg., 138 sg. ; J. M. Ritter von Al- 
penburg, MZythen und Sagen Tirols 


Pre VI 


1867), i. 365; A. Wuttke, Der deutsche 
Volksaberglaube* (Berlin, 1869), § 25, 
pp. 25-27; W. Mannhardt, Der Baum- 
kultus der Germanen und threr Nach- 
barstimme (Berlin, 1875), pp. 542 sg. ; 
Karl Weinhold, Weznacht-Spiele und 
Lieder aus Stiddeutschland und Schlesten 
(Vienna, 1875), pp. 19 sgg.; E. Mogk, 
in H. Paul’s Grundriss der germani- 
R 


The run- 
ning and 
leaping 

of the 
Perchten 
mummers 
on Twelfth 
Night. 


The 
Beautiful 
Perchten 
and the 
Ugly 
Perchten. 


242 SCAPEGOATS IN CLASSICAL ANTIQUITY ~ Vente: 


The processions of maskers who took their name of 
Perchten from this quaint creation of the popular fancy were 
known as Perchten-running or Perchten-leaping from the 
runs and leaps which the men took in their wild headlong 
course through the streets and over the fields. They appear 
to have been held in all the Alpine regions of Germany, but 
are best known to us in the Tyrol and Salzburg. The 
appropriate season for the celebration of the rite was 
Perchta’s Day, that is, Twelfth Night or Epiphany, the sixth 
of January, but in some places it was held on Shrove 
Tuesday, the last day of the Carnival, the very day when 
many farmers of Central Europe jump to make the crops 
grow tall. Corresponding to the double character of Perchta 
as a power for good and evil, the maskers are divided into 
two sets known respectively as the Beautiful and the Ugly 
Perchten. At Lienz in the Tyrol, where the maskers made 
their appearance on Shrove Tuesday, the Beautiful Perchten 
were decked with ribbons, galloons, and so forth, while the 
ugly Perchten made themselves as hideous as they could by 
hanging rats and mice, chains and bells about their persons. 
All wore on their heads tall pointed caps with bells attached 
to them ; their faces were concealed by masks, and in their 
hands they all carried long sticks. 
Beautiful Perchten were adorned with ribbons; those of the 
Usly Perchten ended in the heads of devils. Thus equipped 
they leaped and ran about the streets and went into the 
houses. Amongst them was a clown who blew ashes and 
soot in people’s faces through a blow-pipe. It was all very 
merry and frolicsome, except when “ the wild Perchta ” her- 
self came, invisible to ordinary eyes, upon the scene. Then 
her namesakes the Perchten grew wild and furious too ; they 


The sticks of the — 


scattered and fled for their lives to the nearest house, for as | 


soon as they got under the gutter of a roof they were safe. 
But if she caught them, she tore them in pieces. To this 


schen Philologie,? iii. (Strasburg, 1900), (Leipsic, 1906), pp. 303 sgg.; M. 


pp. 280 sg. (where it is said that 
Perchta ‘‘ spendet dem Acker Frucht- 
barkewt und lasst das Vieh gedethen’’) ; 
E. H. Meyer, Mythologie der Germanen 
(Strasburg, 1903), pp. 424 sgg.3 
P. Herrmann, Deutsche ALythologie 


Andree-Eysen, Volkskundliches aus dem 
bayrisch - osterreichischen 
(Brunswick, 1910), pp. 156 sgg.; E. 
Hoffmann-Krayer, Feste und Bréauche 
des Schwetzervolkes (Ziirich, 
pp. 118 sgq. 


Alpengebiet | 


1913), ! 


ae FI 


VI THE HUMAN SCAPEGOAT IN ANCIENT ROME 243 


day you may see the graves where the mangled bodies of 
her victims lie buried. When no such interruption took 
place, the noisy rout of maskers rushed madly about, with 
jingling bells and resounding cracks of whips, entering the 
houses, dancing here, drinking there, teasing wayfarers, 
or racing from village to village like the Wild Hunt itself in 
the sky ; till at the close of the winter day the church bells 
rang the Ave Marza. Then at last the wild uproar died 
away into silence. Such tumultuous masquerades were 
thought to be very beneficial to the crops ; a bad harvest 
would be set down to the omission of the Perchten to skip 
and jump about in their usual fashion." 

In the province of Salzburg the Perchten mummers are 
also divided into two sets, the Beautiful Perchten and the 
Ugly Perchten. The Ugly Perchten are properly speaking 
twelve young men dressed in black sheepskins and wearing 
hoods of badger-skins and grotesque wooden masks, which 
represent either coarse human features with long teeth and 
horns, or else the features of fabulous animals with beaks 
and bristles or movable jaws. They all carry bells, both 
large and small, fastened to broad leathern girdles, The pro- 
cession was headed by a man with a big drum, and after 
him came lads bearing huge torches and lanterns fastened to 
tall poles ; for in Salzburg or some parts of it these mum- 
mers played their pranks by night. Behind the torch- 
bearers came two Fools, a male and a female, the latter 
acted by a lad in woman’s clothes. The male Fool carried 


_a sausage-like roll, with which he struck at all women or 


girls of his acquaintance when they shewed themselves at 
the open doors or windows. Along with the Perchten 
themselves went a train of young fellows cracking whips, 
blowing horns, or jingling bells. The ways might be 
miry and the night pitch dark, but with flaring lights 
the procession swept rapidly by, the men leaping along 
with the help of their long sticks and waking the echoes 
of the slumbering valley by their loud uproar. From 

1 J. Grimm, Deutsche Mythologie,» J. M. Ritter von Alpenburg, MZythen 
i, 231; I. V. Zingerle, Sztten, Brauche und Sagen Tirols (Ziirich, 1857), pp. 
und Meinungen des Tiroler Volkes* 50 sg. ; K. Weinhold, Weinacht-Spiele 


(Innsbruck, 1871), pp. 138 sg.; W. wd Lieder aus Stiddeutschland und 
Mannhardt, Bawmkultus, pp. 542 sg.:  Schlesten (Vienna, 1875), pp. 21 sgq. 


The Ugly 
Perchten in 
Salzburg. 


The 
Beautiful 
Perchten in 
Salzburg. 


244 SCAPEGOATS IN CLASSICAL ANTIQUITY CHAE 


time to time they stopped at a farm, danced and cut their 
capers before the house, for which they were rewarded by 
presents of food and strong drink; to offer them money 
would have been an insult. By midnight the performance 
came to an end, and the tired maskers dispersed to their 
homes. 

The Beautiful Perchten in Salzburg are attired very 
differently from the Ugly Perchten, but their costume varies 
with the district. Thus in the Pongau district the distinctive 
feature of their costume is a tall and heavy framework covered 
with bright red cloth and decorated with a profusion of silver 
jewelry and filagree work. This framework is sometimes 
nine or ten feet high and forty or fifty pounds in weight. 
The performer carries it above his head by means of iron 
supports resting on his shoulders or his back. To run or 
jump under the weight of such an encumbrance is impos- 
sible ; the dancer has to content himself with turning round > 
and round slowly and clumsily. Very different is the head- 
dress of the Beautiful Perchten in the Pinzgau district of 
Salzburg. There the performers are dressed in scarlet and 
wear straw hats, from which bunches of white feathers, | 
arranged like fans, nod and flutter in the wind. Red shoes | 
and white stockings complete their attire. Thus lightly | 
equipped they hop and jump and stamp briskly in the 
dance. Unlike their Ugly namesakes, who seem now to be | 
extinct, the Beautiful Perchten still parade from time to time | 
among the peasantry of the Salzburg highlands; but the 
intervals between their appearances are irregular, varying 
from four to seven years or more. Unlike the Ugly) 
Perchten, they wear no masks and appear in full daylight, 
always on Perchta’s Day (Twelfth Night, the sixth of 
January) and the two following Sundays. They are attended 
by a train of followers who make a great din with bells, 
whips, pipes, horns, rattles, and chains. Amongst them one 
or two clowns, clothed in white and wearing tall pointed 
hats of white felt with many jingling bells attached to them, 
play a conspicuous part. They carry each a sausage- 
shaped roll stuffed with tow, and with this instrument they 
strike lightly such women and girls among the spectators 
as they desire particularly to favour. Another attendant 


vi THE HUMAN SCAPEGOAT IN ANCIENT ROME 245 


carries the effigy of a baby in swaddling bands, made of 
linen rags, and fastened to a string ; this effigy he throws at 
women and girls and then pulls back again, but he does 
this only to women and girls whom he respects and to whom 
he wishes well. At St. Johann the Perchten carry drawn 
swords ; each is attended by a lad dressed as a woman; and 
they are followed by men clad in black sheepskins, wearing 
the masks of devils, and holding chains in their hands.’ 

What is the meaning of the quaint performances still 
enacted by the Perchten and their attendants in the Austrian 
highlands? The subject has been carefully investigated 
by a highly competent enquirer, Mrs. Andree-Eysn. She 
has visited the districts, witnessed the performances, 
collected information, and studied the costumes. It may 
be well to quote her conclusion: “If we enquire into 
the inner meaning which underlies the Perchten-race and 
kindred processions, we must confess that it is not at 
first sight obvious, and that the original meaning appears 
blurred and indistinct. Nevertheless from many features 
which they present in common it can be demonstrated that 
the processions were held for the purpose of driving away 
demons and had for their object to promote fertility. 
In favour of this view it may be urged, first of all, that 
their appearance is everywhere greeted with joy, because it 
promises fertility and a good harvest. ‘It is a good year, 
they say in Salzburg. If the processions are prevented from 
taking place, dearth and a bad harvest are to be apprehended. 
The peasants of the Tyrol still believe that the more Perchten 
run about, the better will the year be, and therefore they 
treat them to brandy and cakes. In Lienz, when the 
harvest turns out ill, they say that they omitted to let the 
Perchten run over the fields, and for that reason the peasant 
in the Sarn valley gets the Perchten to leap about on his 
fields, for then there will be a good year. 

“Tf fertility and blessing are to be poured out on field, 
house, and homestead, it is obvious that everything that 
could hinder or harm must be averted and driven away. 
When we consider how even at the present time, and still 


1 Marie Andree-Eysn, Volkskund-  Alpengebiet (Brunswick, 1910), pp. 
liches aus dem bayrisch-osterreichischen 156-175. 


Mrs. 
Andree- 
Eysn onthe 
Perchten ; 
according 
to her, the 
processions 
of Perchten 
are in- 
tended to 
promote 
fertility by 
banishing 
the demons 
that would 
thwart it. 


The 

bells worn 
by the 
Perchten 
mummers 
may be 
intended 
to ban 
demons. 


246 SCAPEGOATS IN CLASSICAL ANTIQUITY “cue 


more in times gone by, much that is harmful is attributed to 
the malevolence of invisible powers, we can readily under- 
stand why people should resort to measures which they deem 
effective for the purpose of disarming these malevolent beings. 
Now it is a common belief that certain masks possess the 
virtue of banning demons, and that loud noise and din are a 
means of keeping off evil spirits or hindering their activity. 
In the procession of the Perchten we see the principle of the 
banishment of evil carried out in practice. The people attack 
the evil spirits and seek to chase them away by putting on 
frightful masks, with which they confront the demon. For 
one sort of malevolent spirits one kind of mask appears suit- 
able, and for another another ; this spirit is daunted by this 
mask, and that spirit by that; and so they came to dis- 
criminate. Originally, particular masks may have been used 
against particular evil spirits, but in course of time they were 
confused, the individual taste of the maker of the mask 
counted for something, and so gradually it resulted in carving 
all kinds of horrible, fantastic, and hideous masks which had 
nothing in common but their general tendency to frighten 
away all evil spirits.” ? 

In support of her view that the procession of the Perchten 
aims chiefly at banishing demons who might otherwise blight 
the crops, Mrs. Andree-Eysn lays stress on the bells which 
figure so prominently in the costume of these maskers ; for 
the sound of bells, as she reminds us, is commonly believed 
to be a potent means of driving evil spirits away. The 
notion is too familiar to call for proof,’ but a single case from 
Central Africa may be cited as an illustration. The Teso 
people, who inhabit a land of rolling plains between Mount 
Elgon and Lake Kioga, “make use of bells to exorcise the 
storm fiend ; a person who has been injured by a flash or in 
the resulting fire wears bells round his ankles for weeks 


1 Marie Andree-Eysn, Volkskund- 2 See P. Sartori, ‘‘ Glockensagen 


liches aus dem bayrisch-osterreichischen 
Alpengebiet (Brunswick, 1910), pp. 179 
sg. The authoress kindly presented 
me witha copy of her valuable work in 
May 1910, when I had the pleasure 
of visiting her and her husband, the 
eminent anthropologist, the late Dr. 
Richard Andree, in their home at 
Munich, 


und Glockenaberglaube,” Zeztschrift 
des Vereins fiir Volkskunde, vii. (1897) 
pp. 360 sgg. The use in classical 
antiquity of bells, gongs, and the clash 
of bronze generally to ban the demon 
host has been learnedly illustrated by 
Mr. A. B. Cook in his article, ‘‘ The 
Gong at Dodona,” Journal of Hellenic 
Studies, xxil. (1902) pp. 14 sgq. 


vi THE HUMAN SCAPEGOAT IN ANCIENT ROME 247 


afterwards. Whenever rain threatens, and rain in Uganda 
almost always comes in company with thunder and lightning, 
_ this person will parade the village for an hour, with the 
jingling bells upon his legs and a wand of papyrus in his 
hand, attended by as many of his family as may happen to 
be at hand and not employed in necessary duties.”* The 
resemblance of such men, with their bells and wands, to the 
Austrian Perchten with their bells and wands is, on the 
theory in question, fairly close; both of them go about 
to dispel demons by the sound of their bells and probably 
also by the blows of their rods. Whatever may be thought 
of their efficacy in banning fiends, certain it is that in the 


Bells rung 
to make 
the grass 


Tyrol, where the Perchten play their pranks, the chime of grow in 


bells is used for the express purpose of causing the grass to 
grow in spring. Thus in the lower valley of the Inn, 
especially at Schwaz, on the twenty-fourth of April (there 
reckoned St. George’s Day) troops of young fellows go about 
ringing bells, some of which they hold in their hands, while 
others are attached to their persons ; and the peasants say, 
“Wherever the Grass-ringers come, there the grass grows well, 
and the corn bears abundant fruit.” Hence the bell-ringers 
are welcomed and treated wherever they go. Formerly, it is 
said, they wore masks, like the Perchten, but afterwards they 
contented themselves with blackening their faces with soot.’ 
In other parts of the Tyrol the bell-ringing processions take 
place at the Carnival, but their object is the same; for “it 
is believed that by this noisy procession growth in general, 
but especially the growth of the meadows, is promoted.” * 
Again, at Bergell, in the Swiss canton of the Grisons, 
children go in procession on the first of March ringing bells, 
“in order that the grass may grow.”* So in Hildesheim, 
on the afternoon of Ascension Day, young girls ascend 
the church tower and ring all the church bells, “in order 
that they may get a good harvest of flax; the girl who, 
hanging on to the bell-rope, is swung highest by the swing 


1 Rev. A. L. Kitching, Oz fhe ing-out the grass,” see further W. 


Backwaters of the Nile (London, 1912), 
p. 264. As to the country of the Teso 
people, who do not belong to the Bantu 
stock, see zd@., pp. 26 sg. 

2 Marie Andree-Eysn, of. cz¢. pp. 
180-182. As to the custom of ‘‘ ring- 


Mannhardt, Baumkultus, p. 540; The 
Magic Art and the Evolution of Kings, 
ll. 343 sq. 

3 Marie Andree-Eysn, of. cét. p. 
182. 

4 Marie Andree-Eysn, /.c. 


spring. 


Bells rung 
to make 
the flax 
grow. 


Whips 
cracked 
to make 
the flax 
grow. 


248 SCAPEGOATS IN CLASSICAL ANTIQUITY Guar. 


of the bell, will get the longest flax.”’ Here the sound of 
the bells as a means of promoting the growth of the flax is 
reinforced by the upward swing of the bell, which, carrying 
with it the bell-ringer at the end of the rope, naturally causes 
the flax in like manner to rise high in the air. It is a simple 
piece of imitative magic, like the leaps and bounds which 
the peasants of Central Europe often execute for precisely 
the same purpose. Once more, in various parts of the 
Tyrol on Senseless Thursday, which is the last Thursday in 
Carnival, young men in motley attire, with whips and brooms, 
run about cracking their whips and making believe to sweep 
away the onlookers with their brooms. They are called 
Huttler or Huddler. The people say that if these fellows do 
not run about, the flax will not thrive, and that on the con- 
trary the more of them run about, the better will the flax 
crow. And where there are many of them, there will be 
much maize.2 In this custom the cracking of the whips may 
be supposed to serve the same purpose as the ringing of the 
bells by frightening and banishing the demons of infertility 
and dearth. About Hall, in the northern Tyrol, the cere- 
mony of the /Yzde/-running, as it is called, is or used to be 
as follows. A peasant-farmer, generally well-to-do and re- 
spected, rigs himself out in motley and hides his face under 
a mask; round his waist he wears a girdle crammed with 
rolls, while in his hand he wields a long whip, from which 
more than fifty cracknels dangle on a string. Thus 
arrayed he suddenly bursts from the ale-house door 
into the public view, solicited thereto by the cries of the 
street urchins, who have been anxiously waiting for his 
appearance. He throws amongst them the string of cracknels, 
and while they are scrambling for these dainties, he lays on 
to them most liberally with his whip. Having faithfully 
discharged this public duty, he marches down between rows 
of peasants, who have meantime taken up their position in a 
long street. Amongst them he picks out one who is to run 


1K. Seifart, Sagen, Miarchen, des Vereins fiir Volkskunde, vii. (1897) 
Schwinke und Gebriiuche aus Stadt pp. 363 sq. , 
und Stift Hildesheim* (Hildesheim, 
1889), p. 180. For more evidence of 21. V. Zingerle, Sitten, Braiuche und 


the supposed fertilizing influence of  A/eimungen des Tiroler Volkes* (Inns- - 


bells, see P. Sartori, ‘‘Glockensagen _bruck, 1871), pp. 135 sg., 139, § 1196, 
und Glockenaberglaube,” Zeztschrift 1211, 1212. 


/ 


VI THE HUMAN SCAPEGOAT IN ANCIENT ROME 249 


before him. The man selected for the honour accordingly 
takes to his heels, hotly pursued by the other with the whip, 
who lashes the feet of the fugitive till he comes up with him. 
Having run him down, he leads him back to the alehouse, 
where he treats him to a roll anda glass of wine. After 
that the masker runs a similar race with another man; and 
so it goes on, one race after another, till the sun sets. Then 
the mummer doffs his mask and leads the dance in the ale- 
house. The object of these races is said to be to ensure a 
good crop of flax and maize.’ 

In these races of mummers, whether known as Perchten or 
Huttler, there are certain features which it is difficult to 
explain on the theory that the aim of the performers is 
simply to drive away demons, and that the hideous masks 


Certain 
features 

in these 
processions 
or races of 
mummers 


which they assume have no other intention than that of seem to 


frightening these uncanny beings. For observe that in the 
last example the blows of the whip fall not on the airy 
swarms of invisible spirits, but on the solid persons of street 
urchins and sturdy yokels, who can hardly be supposed to 
receive the chastisement vicariously for the demons. Again, 
what are we to make of the rolls and cracknels with which 
in this case the mummer is laden, and which he distributes 
among his victims, as if to console them in one part of their 
person for the pain which he has inflicted on another? 
Surely this bounty seems to invest him with something more 
than the purely negative character of an exorciser of evil ; 
it appears to raise him to the positive character of a dispenser 
of good. The same remark applies to the action of the 
Perchten who strike women lightly, as a mark of friendship 
and regard, with the sausage-like rolls which they carry in 
their hands, or throw them, as a mark of favour, the effigy 
of a baby. The only probable explanation of these practices, 
as Mrs. Andree-Eysn rightly points out, is that the mummers 
thereby intend to fertilize the women whom they honour by 
these attentions.” Here, again, therefore the maskers appear 
as the actual dispensers of good, the bestowers of fruitful- 
ness, not merely the averters of evil. If that is so, we 
seem bound to infer that these masked men represent or 


1 W. Mannhardt, Baumkultus, pp. 2 Marie Andree-Eysn, of. cé¢. pp. 
268 sg. 182 sq. 


shew 

that the 
mummers 
represent 
beneficent 
spirits of 
fertility, 
who 
quicken 
the seed 
in the 
ground and 
offspring 
in the 
wombs of 
women. 


The 

view of 
W. Mann- 
hardt. 


Confirma- 
tions of 
this view. 


250 SCAPEGOATS IN CLASSICAL ANTIQUITY  cuap. 


a 


embody the spirits who quicken the seed both in the earth 
and in the wombs of women. That was the view of W. 
Mannhardt, the highest authority on the agricultural super- 
stitions of European peasantry. After reviewing these and 
many more similar processions, he concludes that if the 
comparison which he has instituted between them holds 
good, all these various mummers “were intended by the 
original founders of the processions to represent demons of 
vegetation, who by their mere appearance and cries drove 
away the powers that hinder growth and woke to new life 
the slumbering spirits of the grasses and corn-stalks.”' Thus 
Mannhardt admitted that these noisy processions of masked 
men are really supposed to dispel the evil spirits of blight 
and infertility, while at the same time he held that the men 
themselves originally personated vegetation-spirits. And he 
thought it probable that the original significance of these 
performances was in later times misunderstood and inter- 
preted as a simple expulsion of witches and other uncanny 
beings that haunt the fields.” 

On the whole this conclusion of an enquirer remarkable 
for a rare combination of learning, sobriety, and insight, is 
perhaps the most probable that can now be reached with the 
evidence at our disposal. It is confirmed by some of the 
savage masquerades in which the maskers definitely represent 
spirits of fertility in order to promote the fruitfulness of the 
earth and of women ;* and it is supported by the evidence 
of many other rustic mummeries in Europe, for example, by 
the English rites of Plough Monday, in which the dancers, 
or rather jumpers, who wore bunches of corn in their hats 
as they leaped into the air, are most naturally interpreted as 
agents or representatives of the corn-spirit.* It is, therefore, 
worth observing that in some places the dancers of Plough 
Monday, who attended the plough in its peregrinations 
through the streets and fields, are described as morris- 
dancers.’ If the description is correct, it implies that they 


1 W. Mannhardt, Baumkultus, p. 6 T. F. Thiselton Dyer, A7ztzsk 
548. Popular Customs (London, 1876), p. 
2 W. Mannhardt, Z.c. 32; County Folk-lore, Printed Extracts, 
3 See above, p. 236. No. 3, Leicestershire and Rutlandshire, 


4 Spirits of the Corn and of the collected and edited by C. J. Billson 
Wild, ii. 325 sq. (London, 1895), pp. 93 sg. 


vi THE HUMAN SCAPEGOAT IN ANCIENT ROME 251 


had bells attached to their costume, which would further 
assimilate them to the Perchten and other masqueraders of 


Central Europe ; for the chief characteristic of the morris- 


dance is that the performers wear bells fastened to their legs 
which jingle at every step... We may suppose that if the 
men who ran and capered beside the plough on Plough 
Monday really wore bells, the original intention of this 
appendage to their costume was either to dispel the demons 
who might hinder the growth of the corn, or to waken the 
spirits of vegetation from their long winter sleep. In favour 
of the view which sees in all these dances and mummeries 
rather the banishment of what is evil than the direct promo- 
tion of what is good, it may be urged that some of the 
dancers wear swords,” a weapon which certainly seems better 
fitted to combat demons than to prune fruit-trees or turn up 
the sod. Further, it deserves to be noted that many of the 
performances take place either on Twelfth Day or, like the 
celebration of Plough Monday, very shortly after it; and 
that in the Lord of Misrule, who reigned from Christmas to 
Twelfth Day,® we have a clear trace of one of those periods 
of general licence and suspension of ordinary government, 
which so commonly occur at the end of the old year or the 
beginning of the new one in connexion with a general 
expulsion of evils. 

Surveying these masquerades and processions, as they 
have been or still are celebrated in modern Europe, we may 
say in general that they appear to have been originally 
intended both to stimulate the growth of vegetation in spring 
and to expel the demoniac or other evil influences which 
were thought to have accumulated during the preceding 
winter or year; and that these two motives of stimulation 
and expulsion, blended and perhaps confused together, appear 
to explain the quaint costumes of the mummers, the multi- 


1 Mrs. LillyGrove(Mrs.J.G. Frazer), 1883), i. 505. As to the sword-dance 
Dancing (London, 1895), pp. 147 sgg.; in general, see K. Miillenhoff, “ Uber 
E. K. Chambers, Zhe Mediaeval Stage den Schwerttanz,” in Festgaben fiir 
(Oxford, 1903), i. 195 sgg. Gustav Homeyer (Berlin, 1871), pp. 

2 As to the swords carried by the 111-147 (who compares the dances of 
Perchten see above, p. 245; astothose the Salii); Mrs. Lilly Grove, of. cz. 
carried by the dancers on Plough  pp.189sgg.,211sgg.; E. K. Chambers, 
Monday, see J. Brand, Popular Anti- op. cit.i. 182 sgq. 
guittes of Great Britain (London, 1882— 3 See below, pp. 331 5¢¢. 


The use 
of bells in 
these cere- 
monies. 


The use of 
swords in 
these cere- 
monies. 


These mas- 
querades 
originally 
intended 
both to 
stimulate 
vegetation 
in spring 
and to 
expel 
demons, 


Applica- 
tion of 
these con- 
clusions 

to the 
expulsion 
of ‘‘the 
Old Mars”’ 
in ancient 
Rome. 


Human 
scapegoats 
in ancient 
Greece, 
The ‘‘ Ex- 
pulsion of 
Hunger’”’ 
at Chaer- 
onea. 


252 SCAPEGOATS IN CLASSICAL ANTIQUITY CHAP: 


tudinous noises which they make, and the blows which they 
direct either at invisible foes or at the visible and tangible 
persons of their fellows. In the latter case the beating 
may be supposed to serve as a means of forcibly freeing the 
sufferers from the demons or other evil things that cling to 
them unseen. 

To apply these conclusions to the Roman custom of 
expelling Mamurius Veturius or “the Old Mars” every year 
in spring, we may say that they lend some support to the 
theory which sees in “the Old Mars” the outworn deity of 
vegetation driven away to make room, either for a younger 
and more vigorous personification of vernal life, or perhaps 
for the return of the same deity refreshed and renovated by 
the treatment to which he had been subjected, and particu- 
larly by the vigorous application of the rod to his sacred 
person. For, as we shall see presently, King Solomon was 
by no means singular in his opinion of the refreshing 
influence of a sound thrashing. So far as “the Old Mars” 
was supposed to carry away with him the accumulated 
weaknesses and other evils of the past year, so far would he 
serve as a public scapegoat, like the effigy in the Slavonic 
custom of “ Carrying out Death,” which appears not only to 
represent the vegetation-spirit of the past year, but also to 
act as a scapegoat, carrying away with it a heavy load 
of suffering, misfortune, and death. 


§ 2. The Human Scapegoat in Ancient Greece 


The ancient Greeks were also familiar with the use of a 
human scapegoat. In Plutarch’s native town of Chaeroneaa 
ceremony of this kind was performed by the chief magistrate 
at the Town Hall, and by each householder at his own home. 
It was called the “expulsion of hunger.” A slave was beaten 
with rods of the aguus castus, and turned out of doors with 
the words, “ Out with hunger, and in with wealth and health.” 
When Plutarch held the office of chief magistrate of his 
native town he performed this ceremony at the Town Hall, 
and he has recorded the discussion to which the custom 
afterwards gave rise. The ceremony closely resembles 


1 Plutarch, Quaest. conviv. vi. 8. 


VI HUMAN SCAPEGOAT IN ANCIENT GREECE 


253 


the Japanese, Hindoo, and Highland customs already 
described." 

But in civilized Greece the custom of the scapegoat took 
darker forms than the innocent rite over which the amiable 
and pious Plutarch presided. Whenever Marseilles, one of the 
busiest and most brilliant of Greek colonies, was ravaged by 
a plague, a man of the poorer classes used to offer himself 
as a scapegoat. For a whole year he was maintained at 
the public expense, being fed on choice and pure food. At 
the expiry of the year he was dressed in sacred garments, 
decked with holy branches, and led through the whole city, 
while prayers were uttered that all the evils of the people 
might fall on his head. He was then cast out of the city 
or stoned to death by the people outside of the walls.2. The 
Athenians regularly maintained a number of degraded and 
useless beings at the public expense ; and when any calamity, 
such as plague, drought, or famine, befell the city, they sacrificed 
two of these outcasts as scapegoats. One of the victims was 
sacrificed for the men and the other for the women. The 
former wore round his neck a string of black, the latter a 
string of white figs. Sometimes, it seems, the victim slain 
on behalf of the women was a woman. They were led about 
the city and then sacrificed, apparently by being stoned to 
death outside the city.* But such sacrifices were not con- 
fined to extraordinary occasions of public calamity; it 


1 See above, pp. 143 sgg., 209. 

2 Servius on Virgil, Aen. iii, 57, 
following Petronius; Lactantius Pla- 
cidius, Commentariz in Stati Thebaida 
xX. 793, p. 452, ed. R. Jahnke (Leipsic, 
1898). According to the former writer, 
the scapegoat was cast out (‘‘ prozzcze- 
batur”’); according to the latter, he was 
stoned to death by the people outside 
of the walls (‘‘extra pomeria saxts 
occidebatur a populo”). ‘The statement 
of some modern writers that he was 
killed by being hurled from a height 
rests on a reading (‘‘ praeczpztabatur” 
for ‘‘projiczebatur”) in the text of 
Servius, which appears to have no 
manuscript authority and to be merely 
a conjecture of R. Stephan’s. Yet the 
conjecture has been inserted in the text 
by F. Buecheler in his edition of 


Petronius (Third Edition, Berlin, 1882, 
p- 109) without any intimation that all 
the MSS. present a different reading. 
See the critical edition of Servius edited 
by G. Thilo and H. Hagen, vol. i. 
(Leipsic, 1881), p. 346. 


3 Helladius, in Photius, Bzb/otheca, 
p- 534 A, ed. Im. Bekker (Berlin, 1824) ; 
Scholiast on Aristophanes, /7ogs, 734, 
and on Anzghts, 1136; Hesychius, 
Lexicon,s.v. pappaxol; compare Suidas, 
Lexicon, s.vv. kdbappa, pappaxds, and 
gpapuakovs ; Lysias, Orat. vi. 53. That 
they were stoned is an inference from 
Harpocration. See next note. When 
the people of Cyrene sacrificed to Saturn 
(Cronus), they wore crowns of fresh 
figs on their heads. See Macrobius, 
Saturn. i. 7. 25. 


Human 
scapegoats 
at Mar- 
seilles. 


Human 
scapegoats 
put to 
death at 
Athens, 


Human 
scapegoats 
annually 
stoned to 
death at 
Abdera. 


Annual 
human 
scapegoats 
in Leu- 
cadia. 


254 SCAPEGOATS IN CLASSICAL ANTIQUITY ere 


appears that every year, at the festival of the Thargelia in 
May, two victims, one for the men and one for the women, 
were led out of Athens and stoned to death.’ The city of 
Abdera in Thrace was publicly purified once a year, and one 
of the burghers, set apart for the purpose, was stoned to death 
as a scapegoat or vicarious sacrifice for the life of all the 
others ; six days before his execution he was excommuni- 
cated, “in order that he alone might bear the sins of all the 
people.” ” 

From the Lover’s Leap, a white bluff at the southern 
end of their island, the Leucadians used annually to hurl a 
criminal into the sea as a scapegoat. But to lighten his 
fall they fastened live birds and feathers to him, and a 
flotilla of small boats waited below to catch him and convey 
him beyond the boundary. Probably these humane pre- 
cautions were a mitigation of an earlier custom of flinging 
the scapegoat into the sea to drown, just as in Kumaon the 
custom of letting a man slide down a rope from the top of 
a cliff appears to be a modification of an older practice of 
putting him to death. The Leucadian ceremony took place 
at the time of a sacrifice to Apollo, who had a temple or 
sanctuary on the spot. Elsewhere it was customary to cast 

1 Harpocration, Lexzcon, s.v. pappa- 
kés, who says 6Uo dvdpas "AOnynow 
éEjyov Kabdpo.a écouévous THs TOAEws Ev 
Tots OapynNlots, éva wey brrep TAY avdpay, 
éva O¢ brép TOav yuvark@v. He does not 
expressly state that they were put to 
death ; but as he says that the cere- 
mony was an imitation of the execu- 


tion of a mythical Pharmacus who was 
stoned to death, we may infer that the 


Nilsson, Gvrechische Feste (Leipsic, 
1906), pp. 105 sgg.; W. R. Paton, 
“©The dapuaxol and the Story of the 
Fall,” Revue Archéologigue, iv. Série ix. 
(1907) pp. 51-57. 
2 Ovid, /bzs, 467 sq. : 
“© Aut te devoveat certis Abdera diebus 
Saxaque devotum grandine plura 
petant,” 


victims were killed by being stoned. 
Suidas (s.v, papuaxds) copies Harpocra- 
tion. As to the human scapegoats 
employed by the Greeks at the Thar- 
gelia and on other occasions see W. 
Mannhardt, ALythologische Forschungen 
(Strasburg, 1884), pp. 124 sgg.; J. 
Topffer, Bettrage zur griechischen 
Altertumswissenschaft (Berlin, 1897), 
pp. 130 sgg.; August Mommsen, este 
der Stadt Athen im Altertum (Leipsic, 
1898), pp. 468 sgg.; Miss J. E. 
Harrison, Prolegomena to the Study of 
Greek Religion, Second Edition (Cam- 
bridge, 1908), pp. 95 sgg.; M. P. 


with the two scholia quoted respect- 
ively by M. P. Nilsson, Grdechesche 
Festé, p. 108 note®) and @ibya@: 
Schneider, in his Cal/¢machea (Leipsic, 
1870-1873), ii. 684. The scholiast 
refers to Callimachus as his authority. 

3 Strabo, x. 2. 9, p. 542; Photius, 
Lexicon, s.v. Aevxarns; Li, Ampelius, 
Liber Memorialis, viii. 4; Servius, on 
Virgil, Aen. il. 279; Ptolemaeus 
Hephaest., Mov. Histor. in Photius, 
Bibliotheca, cod. 190, p. 153, ed. Im. 
Bekker ; ALythographi Graect, ed. A. 
Westermann (Brunswick, 1843), pp. 
198 sg. According to the manuscript 


VI HUMAN SCAPEGOAT IN ANCIENT GREECE 255 


a young man every year into the sea, with the prayer, “ Be 
thou our offscouring.” This ceremony was supposed to rid 
the people of the evils by which they were beset, or accord- 
ing to a somewhat different interpretation it redeemed them 
by paying the debt they owed to the sea-god.' As practised 
by the Greeks of Asia Minor in the sixth century before our 
era, the custom of the scapegoat was as follows. When a 
city suffered from plague, famine, or other public calamity, 
an ugly or deformed person was chosen to take upon himself 
all the evils which afflicted the community. He was brought 
to a suitable place, where dried figs, a barley loaf, and cheese 
were put into his hand. These he ate. Then he was beaten 
seven times upon his genital organs with squills and 
branches of the wild fig and other wild trees, while the flutes 
played a particular tune. Afterwards he was burned on a 
pyre built of the wood of forest trees; and his ashes were 
cast into the sea.” A similar custom appears to have been 
annually celebrated by the Asiatic Greeks at the harvest 
festival of the Thargelia.* 

In the ritual just described the scourging of the victim 
with squills, branches of the wild fig, and so forth, cannot 
have been intended to aggravate his sufferings, otherwise any 
stick would have been good enough to beat him with. The 
true meaning of this part of the ceremony has been ex- 
plained by W. Mannhardt.* He points out that the ancients 
attributed to squills a magical power of averting evil influ- 
ences, and that accordingly they hung them up at the doors 
of their houses and made use of them in purificatory rites.° 


by the flutes while the man was being 
beaten is mentioned by Hesychius, 
5.v. Kpadins vouos. Compare 2d., S.v. 


reading in Photius, /.c., the priests 
flung themselves into the sea ; but the 
reading has been altered by the editors. 


As to the Kumaon ceremony see above, 
pp. 196 sg. 

1 Suidas and Photius, Zexzcon, s.v. 
meplnua. The word which I have 
translated ‘‘ offscouring” (7epinua) 
occurs in I Corinthians iv. 13, where 
it is similarly translated in the English 
version. It means properly that on 
which something is wiped off, like a 
sponge or a duster. 

2 J. Tzetzes, Chiliades, v. 726-761 
(ed. Th. Kiesseling, Leipsic, 1826). 
Tzetzes’s authority is the satirical poet 
Hipponax. The tune which was played 


Kpadnotrns ; Plutarch, De musica, 8. 

3 This may be inferred from the verse 
of Hipponax, quoted by Athenaeus, ix. 
9, p. 3708, where for gapudkov we 
should perhaps read gapyaxod with 
Schneidewin (Poetae lyrict Graect,? ed. 
Th. Bergk, ii. 763). 

4 W. Mannhardt, AZythologische For- 
schungen (Strasburg, 1884), pp. 113 
5gq., especially 123 sg., 133. 

Sy Plinyoe Wacs -Lizs’.. exx. eles 
Dioscorides, De materia medica, il. 202 ; 
Lucian, WVecyom. 7; td., Alexander, 
47; Theophrastus, Szferstztious Man. 


Human 
scapegoats 
annually 
put to 
death at 
the festival 
of the 
Thargelia 
in Asia 
Minor. 


Mann- 
hardt’s 
interpreta- 
tion of the 
custom of 
beating 
the human 
scapegoat 
on the 
genitals : 
it was 
intended 
to free 

his repro- 


ductive 
energies 
from any 
restraint 
laid on 
them by 
demoniacal 
or other 
malignant 
agency. 


256 SCAPEGOATS IN CLASSICAL. ANTIQUITY  cCHap. 


Hence the Arcadian custom of whipping the image of Pan 
with squills at a festival, or whenever the hunters returned 
empty-handed, must have been meant, not to punish the 
god, but to purify him from the harmful influences which 
were impeding him in the exercise of his divine functions 
as a god who should supply the hunter with game. 
Similarly the object of beating the human scapegoat on the 
genital organs with squills and so on, must have been to 
release his reproductive energies from any restraint or spell 
under which they might be laid by demoniacal or other 
malignant agency ; and as the Thargelia at which he was 
annually sacrificed was an early harvest festival celebrated 
in May,” we must recognize in him a representative of the 
creative and fertilizing god of vegetation. The representative 
of the god was annually slain for the purpose I have indi- 
cated, that of maintaining the divine life in perpetual vigour, 
untainted by the weakness of age; and before he was put 
to death it was:‘not unnatural to stimulate his reproductive 
powers in order that these might be transmitted in full 
activity to his successor, the new god or new embodiment of 
the old god, who was doubtless supposed immediately to 
take the place of the one slain.* Similar reasoning would 
lead to a similar treatment of the scapegoat on special 
occasions, such as drought or famine. If the crops did not 
answer to the expectation of the husbandman, this would be 
attributed to some failure in the generative powers of the 
god whose function it was to produce the fruits of the earth. 
It might be thought that he was under a spell or was grow- 
ing old and feeble. Accordingly he was slain in the person 
of his representative, with all the ceremonies already described, 
in order that, born young again, he might infuse his own 
youthful vigour into the stagnant energies of nature. On the 


1 Theocritus, vil. 106 sgg. with the 
scholiast. 


2 Compare Aug. Mommsen, /eorto- 
logie (Leipsic, 1864), pp. 414 sg¢., 
id., Feste der Stadt Athen im Altertum 
(Leipsic, 1898), pp. 468 sg., 479 sqq. ; 
M. P. Nilsson, Gvrtechzsche Feste 
(Leipsic, 1906), pp. 105, III sgq@. ; 
W. Mannhardt, Aztike Wald- und 
Feldkulte (Berlin, 1877), p. 215. 


3 At certain sacrifices in Yucatan 
blood was drawn from the genitals of a 
human victim and smeared on the face 
of the idol. See Diego de Landa, 
Relation des choses de Yucatan, texte 
espagnol et traduction frangaise par 
VAbbé Brasseur de Bourbourg (Paris, 
1864), p. 167. Was the original in- 
tention of this rite to transfuse into 
the god a fresh supply of reproductive 
energy ? 


VI HUMAN SCAPEGOAT IN ANCIENT GREECE 257 


same principle we can understand why Mamurius Veturius 
was beaten with rods, why the slave at the Chaeronean 
ceremony was beaten with the aguus castus (a tree to which 
magical properties were ascribed),’ why the effigy of Death 
in some parts of Europe is assailed with sticks and 
stones,’ and why at Babylon the criminal who played the 
god was scourged before he was crucified.? The purpose of 
the scourging was not to intensify the agony of the divine 
sufferer, but on the contrary to dispel any malignant in- 
fluences by which at the supreme moment he might con- 
ceivably be beset. 

Thus far I have assumed that the human victims at the 
Thargelia represented the spirits of vegetation in general,* 
but it has been well remarked by Mr. W. R. Paton that 
these poor wretches seem to have masqueraded as the 
spirits of fig-trees in particular. He points out that the 
process of caprification, as it is called, that is, the artificial 
fertilization of the cultivated fig-trees by hanging strings of 
wild figs among the boughs, takes place in Greece and 
Asia Minor in June about a month after the date of the 
Thargelia, and he suggests that the hanging of the black 
and white figs round the necks of the two human victims, 
one of whom represented the men and the other the women, 
may have been a direct imitation of the process of capri- 
fication designed, on the principle of imitative magic, to 
assist the fertilization of the fig-trees. And since capri- 
fication is in fact a marriage of the male fig-tree with the 
female fig-tree, Mr. Paton further supposes that the loves of 
the trees may, on the same principle of imitative magic, have 
been simulated by a mock or even a real marriage between 
the two human victims, one of whom appears sometimes to 
have been a woman. On this view the practice of beating 
the human victims on their genitals with branches of wild 
fig-trees and with squills was a charm intended to stimulate 
the generative powers of the man and woman who for the 
time being personated the male and the female fig-trees 


1 Aelian, Wat. Anim. ix. 26. demons of infertility, dearth, and sick- 
2 The Dying God, pp. 239 59. ness, who in the persons of their repre- 
3 The Dying God, p. 114. sentatives were thus hounded with blows 


# On the other hand, W. Mannhardt out of the city. See his AZythologische 
regarded the victims as representing the orschungen, p. 129. 


PT. VI Ss 


W. R. 
Paton’s 
view that 
the human 
scapegoats 
at the 
Thargelia 
personated 
the spirits 
of fig-trees, 
and that 
the cere- 
mony was 
a magical 
rite for the 
fertilization 
of fig-trees, 
being 
copied 
from the 
process of 
caprifica- 
tion. 


This 
theory is 
confirmed 
by a com- 
parison 
with the 
Roman 
rites of the 
Nonae 
Caprotinae. 


258 SCAPEGOATS IN CLASSICAL ANTIQUITY CHAR: | 


respectively, and who by their union in marriage, whether | 
real or pretended, were believed to help the trees to bear | 
fruit. 
The theory is ingenious and attractive; and to some 
extent it is borne out by the Roman celebration of the 
Nonae Caprotinae, which I have described in an earlier part — 
of this work? For on the Monae Caprotinae, the ninth of © 
July, the female slaves, in the attire of free women, feasted © 
under a wild fig-tree, cut a rod from the tree, beat each other, 
perhaps with the rod, and offered the milky juice of the tree 
to the goddess Juno Caprotina, whose surname seems to point 
her out as the goddess of the wild fig-tree (caprzficus). Here 
the rites performed in July by women under the wild fig- 
tree, which the ancients rightly regarded as a male and 
employed to fertilize the cultivated female fig-tree, can hardly 
be dissociated from the caprification or artificial marriage of 
the fig-trees which, according to Columella, was best per-_ 
formed in July; and if the blows which the women gave 
each other on this occasion were administered, as seems 
highly probable, by the rod which they cut from the wild 
fig-tree, the parallel between the Roman and the Greek | 
ceremony would be still closer; since the Greeks, as we saw, 
beat the genitals of the human victims with branches of wild 
fig-trees. It is true that the human sacrifices, which formed | 
so prominent a feature in the Greek celebration of the 
Thargelia, do not figure in the Roman celebration of the Vonae | 
Caprotinae within historical times ; yet a trace of them may 
perhaps be detected in the tradition that Romulus himself 
mysteriously disappeared on that very day in the midst of 
a tremendous thunder-storm, while he was reviewing his 
army outside the walls of Rome at the Goat’s Marsh (“ad 
Caprae paludem”), a name which suggests that the place was 
not far distant from the wild fig-tree or the goat-fig (capra- 
ficus), as the Romans called it, where the slave women per- 
formed their curious ceremonies. The legend that he was 
cut in pieces by the patricians, who carried away the morsels 
of his body under their robes and buried them in the earth,* 
1 W. R. Paton, ‘‘The ¢apuaxoland tion of Kings, il. 313 599. 
the Story of the Fall,” Revue Archéo- 3 Dionysius Halicarnasensis, A7zzf2- 


logique, iv. Série, ix. (1907) pp. 51 sgg.  guztates Romanae, ii. 56. 4. Compare 
2 The Magic Art and the Evolu- Livy, i. 16. 4; Plutarch, Romulus, 27. 


HUMAN SCAPEGOAT IN ANCIENT GREECE 259 


VI 
* 
exactly describes the treatment which the Khonds used to 
accord to the bodies of the human victims for the purpose of 
fertilizing their fields." Can the king have played at Rome 
_the same fatal part in the fertilization of fig-trees which, if 
Mr. Paton is right, was played in Greece by the male victim ? 
The traditionary time, place, and manner of his death all 
suggest it. So many coincidences between the Greek and 
Roman ceremonies and traditions can hardly be wholly 
accidental ; and accordingly I incline to think that there 
‘may well be an element of truth in Mr. Paton’s theory, 
though it must be confessed that the ancient writers who 
describe the Greek custom appear to regard it merely as a 
purification of the city and not at all as a mode of fertilizing 
fig-trees.” In similar ceremonies, which combine the elements 
of purification and fertilization, the notion of purification 
apparently tends gradually to overshadow the notion of 
fertilization in the minds of those who practise the rites. 
HE seems to have been so in the case of the annual 
expulsion of Mamurius Veturius from ancient Rome and in 
the parallel processions of the Perchten in modern Europe ; 
it may have been so also in the case of the human sacrifices 
at the Thargelia.® 

The interpretation which I have adopted of the custom of 
beating the human scapegoat with certain plants is supported 
by many analogies. We have already met with examples of 
a practice of beating sick people with the leaves of certain 
plants or with branches in order to rid them of noxious 
‘influences.* Some of the Dravidian tribes of Northern India, 


1 Spirits of the Corn and of the 
Wild, i. 248. Compare Adonis, Attis, 
Osiris, Second Edition, pp. 331 sgq. 

2 See, for example, Helladius, cited 
by Photius, Szb/iotheca, p. 5344, ed. 
Im. Bekker, kal éxpdrec 7d 60s del 
KaGalpev ryv mbdw Tots Papyaxois ; 
Harpocration, s.v. gapuaxds (vol. i. 
p- 298, ed. G. Dindorf), dv0 dvdpas 
"AOnvnow ekiyov Kabdpova écouévous Tis 
moXews ; Scholiast on Aristophanes, 
Knights, 1136, OSyuoclovs dé, rods 
Aeyouevous papuakov’s, olrep Kabatpovor 
Tas Toes TH EauvToy ddvy. 

3 Mr. Paton ingeniously suggests 
that in the Biblical narrative of 
Adam and Eve, who for eating a 


particular fruit were condemned to death 
and driven out of the happy garden 
with aprons of fig-leaves about their 
loins (Genesis iii.), we have a re- 
miniscence of a custom of fertilizing 
fig-trees by a pair of human scapegoats, 
who, like the victims at the Thargelia, 
assimilated themselves to the tree by 
wearing its foliage or fruit. See W. R. 
Paton, ‘‘The ¢apyaxot and the Story 
of the Fall,” Revue Archéologique, iv. 
Série, ix. (1907) pp. 55 sg. 

4 Above, pp. 2, 186. Compare 
Plutarch, Parallela, 35, where a woman 
is represented as going from house to 
house striking sick people withahammer 
and bidding them be whole. 


Beating 
as a mode 
of dispel- 
ling evil 
influences. 


Beating 
people to 
rid them 
of clinging 
ghosts. 


CHAP. 


260 SCAPEGOATS IN CLASSICAL ANTIQUITY 


who attribute epilepsy, hysteria, and similar maladies to 
demoniacal possession, endeavour to cure the sufferer by 
thrashing him soundly with a sacred iron chain, which is 
believed to have the effect of immediately expelling the 
demon.!' When a herd of camels refuses to drink, the Arabs 
will sometimes beat the male beasts on the back to drive 
away the jinn who are riding them and frightening the 
females.” In Bikol, the south-western part of Luzon, it was 
generally believed that if the evil spirit Aswang were not 
properly exorcised he took possession of the bodies of the 
dead and tormented them. Hence to deliver a corpse from 
his clutches the native priestesses used to beat it with a 
brush or whisk made of the leaves of the aromatic China 
orange, while they chanted a certain song, throwing their 


bodies into contortions and uttering shrill cries, as if the evil 
The soul of the deceased, 


spirit had entered into themselves. 


— 


ae Oe OE i 


Cline 


~i 


thus delivered from the cruel tyranny of Aswang, was then — 


free to roam at pleasure along the charming lanes or in the 
thick shade of the forest.’ 

Sometimes it appears that a beating is administered for 
the purpose of ridding people of a ghost who may be cling- 
ing too closely to their persons; in such cases the blows, 


though they descend on the bodies of the living, are really | 
aimed at the spirit of the dead, and have no other object | 
than to drive it away, just as a coachman will flick the back | 


of a horse with his whip to rid the beast of a fly. Ata 
funeral in the island of Halmahera, before the coffin is 


lowered into the grave, all the relations whip themselves on | 
the head and shoulders with wands made of plants which | 


1 W. Crooke, Popular Religion and 
Folk-lore of Northern India (West- 
minster, 1896), i. 99, 1553 za@., Tribes 


sg. The Spanish authority is Father 
José Castafio. An ancient Egyptian 
relief from Saqqarah represents a 


and Castes of the North-Western Pro- 
vinces and Oudh (Calcutta, 1896), iil. 
333, 441, 445. 

2 A. Certeux et E. H. Carnoy, 
LAlgérie Traditionnelle (Paris and 
Algiers, 1884), p. 189. 


3 H. Kern, ‘‘ Een Spanisch schrijver 
over den godsdienst der heidensche 
Bikollers,” Szjdragen tot de Taal- 
Land- en Volkenkunde van Neder- 
landsch-Indié, xlvii. (1897) pp. 232 


mummy at the entrance of the tomb, 
while the women tear out their hair 
and the men wave palm-branches, | 
apparently to drive evil spirits away. 
The custom has been inherited by the 
modern Arabs, who similarly beat off © 
the invisible foes with palm-branches, © 
See A. Wiedemann, Herodots Zweztes 
Buch (Leipsic, 1890), p. 347. How. | 
ever, in these cases the blows seem to 
be administered to the demons and not | 
to the corpse. 


VI HUMAN SCAPEGOAT IN ANCIENT GREECE 261 


are believed to possess the power of keeping off evil spirits. 
The intention of the custom is said to be to bring back their 
own spectres or souls and to prevent them from following 
the ghost; but this may fairly be interpreted to mean that 
the blows are directed to brushing off the ghost, who would 
otherwise abstract the soul of the person on whose body he 
was allowed to settle. This interpretation is strongly con- 
firmed by the practice, observed by the same people on the 
same occasion, of throwing the trunk of a banana-tree into 
the grave, and telling the dead man that it is a companion 
for him; for this practice is expressly intended to prevent 
the deceased from feeling lonely, and so coming back to 
fetch away a friend... When Mr. Batchelor returned to a 
hut after visiting the grave of an old Aino woman, her 
relations brought him a bowl of water to the door and 
requested him to wash his face and hands. While he did 
so, the women beat him and brushed him down with sacred 
whittled sticks (zzao). On enquiring into the meaning of 
this treatment, he discovered that it was intended to purify 
him from all uncleanness contracted at the grave through 
contact with the ghost of the deceased, and that the beating 
and brushing with the whittled sticks had for its object to 
drive away all evil influences and diseases with which the 
ghost of the old woman might have attempted to infect him 
out of spite for his trespassing on her domain.?. The Ban- 
manas of Senegambia think that the soul of a dead infant 
becomes for a time a wandering and maleficent spirit. 
Accordingly when a baby dies, all the uncircumcised children 
of the same sex in the village run about the streets in a 
band, each armed with three or four supple rods. Some of 
them enter every house to beg, and while they are doing so, 
one of the troop, propping himself against the wall with his 
hands, is lashed by another of the children on his back or 
legs till the blood flows. Each of the children takes it in 
turn to be thus whipped. The object of the whipping, we 
are told, “appears to be to preserve the uncircumcised child 


1 J. M. van Baarda, ‘“‘Ile de Hal- _ banana-trunk into the grave, see Spzvts 
maheira,” Bulletins de la Sociétéd’ An- of the Corn and of the Wild, ii. 97. 
thropologie de Parts, Quatriéme Série, 2 Rev. J. Batchelor, 7he Aznu and 
iii, (1892) p. 545. As to throwing a their Lolk-lore (London, 1901), p. 550. 


Exorcism 
of ghosts 
by means 
of leaves 
and pig’s 
blood. 


Beating 
practised 
by South 
American 
Indians 
and others 
as a mode 
of convey- 
ing good 
qualities. 


CHAP, 


262 SCAPEGOATS IN CLASSICAL ANTIOUIZY. 


from being carried off by its comrade who has just died.” 
The severe scourgings inflicted on each other by some South 
American Indians at ceremonies connected with the dead 
may be similarly intended to chase away the dangerous 
ghost, who is conceived as sticking like a leech or a bur 
to the skin of the living? The ancient Greeks employed 
the laurel very commonly as an instrument of ceremonial 
purification ;* and from the monuments which represent the 
purgation of Orestes from the guilt of matricide* it seems 
probable that the regular rite of cleansing a homicide con- 
sisted essentially in sprinkling him with pig’s blood and 
beating him with a laurel bough, for the purpose, as we may 
conjecture, of whisking away the wrathful ghost of his victim, 
who was thought to buzz about him like an angry wasp 
in summer. If that was so, the Greek ritual of purification 
singularly resembles the Nicobarese ceremony of exorcism ; 
for when a man is supposed to be possessed by devils, the 
Nicobarese rub him al! over with pig’s blood and beat him 
with bunches of certain leaves, to which a special power of 
exorcising demons is attributed. As fast as each devil is 
thus disengaged from his person, it is carefully folded up 
in leaves, to be afterwards thrown into the sea at daybreak. 

At the autumn festival in Peru people used to strike 
each other with torches, saying, “Let all» harm ee 
away.” ® Every year when the Pleiades reappeared in the 
sky, the Guaycurus, an Indian nation of the Gran Chaco, 
held a festival of rejoicing, at which men, women, and 
children all thrashed each other, expecting thereby to pro- 


cure health, abundance, and ‘ 


1 Revue a’ Ethnographie, iii. (1885) 
PP: 395 59. 

2-R.  Schomburgk, Reisen in 
Lritisch-Guiana (Leipsic, 1847-1848), 
Ii 457) sggusn eves ile Bema, 
Missionary Labours in British Guiana 
(London, 1847), p. 52; C. F. Ph. von 
Martius, Zur Ethnographie Amerika’s, 
sumal Brastlens (Leipsic, 1867), pp. 
694 sg.; J. Crevaux, Voyages dans 
2 Amérique du Sud (Paris, 1883), p. 
548. 

3 Servius, on Virgil, Ae. i. 329. 
For more evidence see C. Boetticher, 
Der Laumkultus der Hellenen (Berlin, 


victory over their enemies. 


1856), pp. 369 599. 

4 See my note on Pausanias, ii. 31. 
8, vol. ii. pp. 276 sgq. 

5 V. Solomon, ‘Extracts from 
Diaries kept in Car Nicobar,” /ournal 
of the Anthropological Institute, xxxii. 
(1902) p. 227. 

6 J. de Acosta, History of the Indies, 
vol. ii. p. 375 (Hakluyt Society, Lon- 
don, 1880). See above, pp. 128 sgg. 

7 P. Lozano, Descripcion Choro- 
graphica del terreno, rios, arboles, y 
animales de las dilatadissimas pro- 
vinctas del Gran Chaco, Gualaméba, 
ete. (Cordova, 1733);) p2 sO7 een 


VI HUMAN SCAPEGOAT IN ANCIENT GREECE 263 


Indians of the Quixos, in South America, before they set 
out on a long hunting expedition, cause their wives to whip 
them with nettles, believing that this renders them fleeter, 
and helps them to overtake the peccaries. They resort to 
the same proceeding as a cure for sickness," The Roocooyen 
Indians of French Guiana train up young people in the way 
they should go by causing them to be stung by ants and 
wasps; and at the ceremony held for this purpose the 
grown-up people improve the occasion by allowing them- 
selves to be whacked by the chief with a stick over the arms, 
the legs, and the chest. They appear to labour under an 
impression that this conveys to them all sorts of moral and 
physical excellences. One of the tribe, ambitious of acquiring 
the European virtues, begged a French traveller to be so 
kind as to give him a good hiding. The traveller obligingly 
did his best to gratify him, and the face of the Indian 
beamed with gratitude as the blows fell on his naked back.’ 
The Delaware Indians had two sovereign remedies for sin ; 
one was an emetic, the other a thrashing. In the latter case, 
the remedy was administered by means of twelve different 
sticks, with which the sinner was belaboured from the soles 
of his feet up to his neck. In both cases the sins were 
supposed to be expelled from the body, and to pass out 
through the throat. At the inauguration of a king in 
ancient India it was customary for the priests to strike him 
lightly on the back with sticks. “By beating him with 
sticks,” it was said, “they guide him safely over judicial 
punishment; whence the king is exempt from punishment, 
because they guide him safely over judicial punishment.” * 
On the thirtieth of December the heathen of Harran used to 
receive three, five, or seven blows apiece from a priest with a 
tamarisk branch. After the beating had been duly admin- 


reappearance of the Pleiades probably 
marked the beginning of the year for 
these people. See Spzrzts of the Corn 
and of the Wild, i. 307 sqq. 

1G. Osculati, splorazione delle 
regtont equatorial lungo zl Napo ed wl 
fiume delle Amazzont (Milan, 1850), 
p- 118. 

2 H. Coudreau, Chez nos Indiens : 
quatre années dans la Guyane Fran- 


¢atse (Paris, 1895), p. 544. 

3G. H. Loskiel, History of the 
Mission of the United Brethren among 
the Indians tn North America (London, 
E794), bart 1. Pp 3i7- 


4 The Satapatha Brahmana, v. 4. 
4. 7, translated by J. Eggeling, Part 
iii. (Oxford, 1894) p. 108 (Sacred 
Books of the East, vol. xli.). 


Beating 
people 

with in- 
struments 
which 
possess 
and impart 
special 
virtues. 


264 SCAPEGOATS IN CLASSICAL ANTIQUITY CHAP. 


istered the priest on behalf of the whole community prayed 
for long life, much offspring, power and glory over all peoples, 
and the restoration of their ancient kingdom.' 

Sometimes, in the opinion of those who resort to it, 
the effect of a beating is not merely the negative one 
of dispelling demoniac or other baneful influences; it 
confers positive benefits by virtue of certain useful pro- 
perties supposed to inhere in the instrument with which 
the beating is administered.” Thus among the Kai of 
German New Guinea, when a man wishes to make his 
banana shoots bear fruit quickly, he beats them with 
a stick cut from a banana-tree which has already borne 
fruit? Here it is obvious that fruitfulness is believed 
to inhere in a stick cut from a fruitful tree and to be 
imparted by contact to the young banana plants. Simi- 
larly in New Caledonia a man will beat his taro plants 
lightly with a branch, saying as he does so, “I beat this 
taro that it may grow,” after which he plants the branch in 
the ground at the end of the field* Among the Indians of 
Brazil at the mouth of the Amazon, when a man wishes to 
increase the size of his generative organ, he strikes it with 
the fruit of a white aquatic plant called an anznga, which 
grows luxuriantly on the banks of the river. The fruit, 
which is inedible, resembles a banana, and is clearly chosen 
for this purpose on account of its shape. The ceremony 
should be performed three days before or after the new 
moon. In the county of Bekes, in Hungary, barren women 
are fertilized by being struck with a stick which has first 
been used to separate pairing dogs. Here a fertilizing virtue 


1 PD. Chwolsohn, Die Ssabter und 
der Ssabismus (St. Petersburg, 1856), 
ii. 34. 

2 On the positive benefits supposed 
in certain cases to flow from a beating 
compare S. Reinach, ‘‘ La flagellation 
rituelle,” Czultes, Mythes et Religions, 
i. (Paris, 1905) pp. 180 sgg.; E. S. 
Hartland, Primitive Paternity (Lon- 
don, 1909-1910), i. 102 sgq. 

3 Ch. Keysser, ‘‘ Aus dern Leben 
der Kaileute,” in R. Neuhauss’s Deutsch 
Neu-Guinea, iii..(Berlin, 1911) p. 124. 

4 Father Lambert, ‘* Mceurs et 


Superstitions de la tribu Bélep,” Les 
Missions Catholique, xii. (1880) p. 
2733 7tad., Meurs et Superstitions des 
WVéo-Calédoniens (Nouméa, 1900), p. 
218. 


5 F. J. de Santa-Anna Nery, Fo/k- 
lore Brésilien (Paris, 1889), p. 253. 


6 R. Temesvary, Volksbrauche und 
Aberglauben in der Geburtshilfe und 
der Pflege des Neugeborenen in Ungarn 
(Leipsic, 1900), p. 8. Compare E. S. 
Hartland, Primitive Paternity (London, 
I909-I9QIO), i, 106, 


VI HUMAN SCAPEGOAT IN ANCIENT GREECE 265 


is clearly supposed to be inherent in the stick and to be 
conveyed by contact to the women. The Toradjas of Central 
Celebes think that the plant Dracaena terminalis has a 
strong soul, because when it is lopped, it soon grows up 
again. Hence when a man is ill, his friends will sometimes 
beat him on the crown of the head with Dracaena leaves in 
order to strengthen his weak soul with the strong soul of the 
plant." At Mowat in British New Guinea small boys are 
beaten lightly with sticks during December “to make them 
grow strong and hardy.” ” 

Among the Arabs of Morocco the Great Feast, which is 
the annual sacrificial festival of Mohammedan peoples, is the 
occasion when men go about beating people with the kindly 
intention of healing or preventing sickness and benefiting 
the sufferers generally. In some tribes the operator is 
muffled in the bloody skins of sacrificed sheep, and he strikes 
everybody within reach of him with a flap of the skin or a 
foot of the sheep which dangles loose from his arm; sick 
people present themselves to him in order to receive the 
health-giving blows, and mothers bring their little children 
to him for the same purpose. Anybody whom he hits on 
the head will be free from headache. Nor does he confine 
his attention to people; he goes about striking the tents 
also, in order that they too may receive their share of the 
blessed influence (daraka) that radiates like sunshine from a 
bloody sheepskin. From the costume which he wears the 
masker is known as the “ Lion with Sheepskins”; and he 
himself participates in the blessings which he diffuses so 
liberally around him. Hence in at least one tribe he is 
generally a person who suffers from some illness, because he 
expects to be healed by the magic virtue or holiness of the 
bloody skins.* Similarly, as we shall see presently, in 
ancient Mexico the men who masqueraded in the skins of 
the human victims were commonly persons who suffered 


1 A.C. Kruyt, ‘‘ Het koppensnellen 2 E. Beardmore, ‘‘The Natives of 
der Toradja’s van Midden-Celebes, en Mowat, Daudai, New Guinea,” /owr- 
zijne beteekenis,” Verslagen en Mede- nal of the Anthropological Instztute, 
deelingen der Koninklijke Akademie xix. (1890) p. 464. 
van Wetenschappen, Afdeeling Letter- 3 E. Westermarck, ‘‘ The Popular 
kunde, iv. Reeks, ili. (Amsterdam, Ritual of the Great Feast in Morocco,” 
1899) p. 199. Folk-lore, xxii. (I911) pp. 163-165. 


Custom in 
Morocco 
of beating 
people 
with the 
skins of 
sacrificed 
sheep or 
goats. 


European 
custom 

of beating 
cattle with 
branches 
to make 
them 
healthy 
or drive 
away the 
witches 


from them. 


266 SCAPEGOATS IN CLASSICAL ANTIQUITY 


CHAP. 


from skin disease, because they thought that the bleeding 
skin of a man who had been killed in the character of a god 
must surely possess a sovereign virtue for the healing of 
disease." In Morocco the skin-clad mummer sometimes 
operates with sticks instead of a flap of the skin, and some- 
times the skins in which he is muffled are those of goats 
instead of sheep, but in all cases the effect, or at least the 
intention, is probably the same.” 

In some parts of Eastern and Central Europe a similar 
custom is very commonly observed in spring. On the first 
of March the Albanians strike men and beast with cornel 
branches, believing that this is very good for their health.* 
In March the Greek peasants of Cos switch their cattle, 
saying, “It is March, and up with your tail!” They think 
that the ceremony benefits the animals, and brings good 
luck. It is never observed at any other time of the year.* 
In some parts of Mecklenburg it is customary to beat the 
cattle before sunrise on the morning of Good Friday with 
rods of buckthorn, which are afterwards concealed in some 
secret place where neither sun nor moon can shine on them. 
The belief is that though the blows light upon the animals, 
the pain of them is felt by the witches who are riding the 
beasts.” In the neighbourhood of Iserlohn, in Westphalia, 
the herdsman rises at peep of dawn on May morning, climbs 
a hill, and cuts down the young rowan-tree which is the first 
to catch the beams of the rising sun. With this he returns 
to the farm-yard. The heifer which the farmer desires to 
“quicken” is then led to the dunghill, and the herdsman 
strikes it over the hind-quarters, the haunches, and the 
udders with a branch of the rowan-tree, saying, 

““ Quick, quick, quick / 
Bring milk into the dugs. 


The sap ts in the birches. 
The heifer receives a name. 


1 See below, pp. 298, 302, 304. 4 W.H.D. Rouse, ‘‘ Folk-lore from 


2 E. Westermarck, of. cz¢. pp. 165 
sg., 170, 178. The _ purificatory 
character of the rite is duly recognised 
by Dr. Westermarck (of. cz¢. p. 178). 

3 J. G.v. Hahn, Albanestsche Studien 
(Jena, 1854), i. 155. 


the Southern Sporades,” Folk-lore, x. 
(1899) p. 179. 


5 K. Bartsch, Sagen, Marchen und 
Gebriuche aus Mecklenburg (Vienna, 
1879-1880), ii. p. 258, § 1348. 


VI HUMAN SCAPEGOAT IN ANCIENT GREECE 267 


“ Quick, quick, quick / 
Bring milk into the dugs. 
The sap comes in the beeches, 
The leaf comes on the oak. 


“ Quick, quick, quick / 
Bring milk into the dugs. 
In the name of the sainted Greta, 
Goldflower shall be thy name,” 


and so on.’ The intention of the ceremony appears to be 
to make sure that the heifer shall in due time yield a 
plentiful supply of milk; and this is perhaps supposed to 
be brought about by driving away the witches, who are 
particularly apt, as we have seen,” to rob the cows of their 
milk on the morning of May Day. Certainly in the north- 
east of Scotland pieces of rowan-tree and woodbine used to 
be placed over the doors of the byres on May Day to keep 
the witches from the cows ; sometimes a single rod of rowan, 
covered with notches, was found to answer the purpose. 
An even more effectual guard against witchcraft was to tie 
a small cross of rowan-wood by a scarlet thread to each 
beast’s tail ; hence people said, 


“ Rawn-tree in red-threed 
Pits the witches t’ their speed.” * 


In Germany also the rowan-tree is a protection against 
witchcraft ;* and Norwegian sailors and fishermen carry a 
piece of it in their boats for good luck.? Thus the benefit 
to young cows of beating them with rowan appears to be 
not so much the positive one of pouring milk into their 
udders, as merely the negative one of averting evil influence ; 
and the same may perhaps be said of most of the beatings 
with which we are here concerned. 


1j. F. L. Woeste, Volkstiberiie- 3 Rev. W. Gregor, Votes on the 
ferungen in der Grafschaft Mark  Folk-lore of the North-east of Scotland 
(Iserlohn, 1848), pp. 25 5g.; A. Kuhn, (London, 1881), p. 188. 
Die Herabkunft des Feuers und des 4 A. Wuttke, Der deutsche Volks- 
Gottertranks® (Giitersloh, 1886), pp. aberglaube* (Berlin, 1869), p. 106, 
261 sgg. The ceremony takes its § 145. 
name of ‘‘ quickening ” from Quzeke or 5 J. F. L. Woeste, Volkstberlie- 
Quickenbaum, a German name for the (jerungen in der Grafschaft Mark 
rowan-tree. Quicken-tree is also an  (Iserlohn, 1848), p. 26. Compare 
English name for the rowan. A. Kuhn, Dze Herabkunft des Feuers 
2 The Magic Art and the Evolution und des Gottertranks*(Giitersloh, 1886), 


of Kings, ii. 52 sgq. p- 179. 


The 
rowan-tree 
as a pro- 
tection 
against 
witchcraft. 


European 
custom of 
beating 
people with 
branches 
at Easter 
to do them 
good : 

‘« Faster 
Smacks.” 


268 SCAPEGOATS IN CLASSICAL ANTIQUITY  cuap. 


On Good Friday and the two previous days people in 
Croatia and Slavonia take rods with them to church, and 
when the service is over they beat each other “fresh and 
healthy.”' In some parts of Russia people returning from 
the church on Palm Sunday beat the children and servants 
who have stayed at home with palm branches, saying, “ Sick- 
ness into the forest, health into the bones.”” A similar 
custom is widely known under the name of Schmeckostern or 
“Easter Smacks” in some parts of Germany and Austria. 
The regions in which the practice prevails are for the most 
part districts in which the people either are or once were 
predominantly of Slavonic blood, such as East and West 
Prussia, Voigtland, Silesia, Bohemia, and Moravia. While 
the German population call the custom Schmeckostern, the 
Slavonic inhabitants give it, according to their particular 
language or dialect, a variety of names which signify to beat 
or scourge. It is usually observed on Easter Monday, less 
frequently on Easter Saturday or Easter Sunday. Troops 
of boys or lads go from house to house on the morning of 
Easter Monday beating every girl or woman whom they 
meet ; they even make their way into the bedrooms, and if 
they find any girls or women still abed, they compel them 
with blows to get up. Even grown-up men indulge them- 
selves in the pastime of going to the houses of friends and 
relations to inflict the “ Easter Smacks.” In some places, 
for example in the Leobschiitz district of Silesia, the boys 
and men further claim and exercise the right of drenching 
all the girls and women with water on Easter Monday; and 
for this purpose they generally go about armed with squirts, 
which are not always charged with eau de Cologne. Next 
day, Easter Tuesday, the women have the right to retaliate 
on the men; however, they do not as a rule go about the 
streets but confine their operations to their own houses, 
beating and chasing from their beds any lads or men they 
can find lying inthem. Children are less discriminating in 
their “ Easter Smacks,” which they bestow impartially on 
parents and relations, friends and strangers, without observing 
the subtle distinction of sex. In many places it is only 


1F, S. Krauss, <Xvroatien und 2 W. Mannhardt, Baumkultus, p. 
Slavonien (Vienna, 1889), p. 108. 257- 


‘VI HUMAN SCAPEGOAT IN ANCIENT GREECE 269 


the women who are privileged to receive the smacks. The 
instrument with which the beating is administered is in some 
districts, such as Lithuania, Samland, and Neumark, a twig 
or branch of birch on which the fresh green leaves have just 
sprouted. If the birch-trees have not budded in time, it is 
customary to keep the rods in pickle for days or even weeks, 
nursing them tenderly in warm water; and if that measure 
also fails, they are heated in the stove-pipe. But more 
commonly the instrument of torture is a branch of willow 
with catkins on it, which has also been nursed in warm water 
or the chimney so as to be ripe for execution on Easter 
Monday. A number of these birch or willow twigs are 
usually tied together into a switch, and ornamented with 
motley ribbons and pieces of silk paper, so that they present 
the appearance of a nosegay ; indeed, in northern Bohemia 
spring flowers form part of the decoration. In some places, 
particularly in Silesia and Moravia, pieces of licorice root are 
substituted for willow twigs; or again in the vine-growing 
districts of Bohemia vine-branches are used for the same 
purpose. Sometimes a scourge made of leather straps of 
various colours takes the place of a green bough. The 
blows are commonly inflicted on the hands and feet; and 
in some places, particularly in Bohemia, the victims are 
expected to reward their tormentors with a present of red 
Easter eggs ; nay sometimes a woman is bound to give an 
egg for every blow she receives. In the afternoon the lads 
carry their eggs to high ground and let them roll down the 
slope ; he whose egg reaches the bottom first, wins all the 
rest. The beating is supposed to bring good luck to the 
beaten, or to warrant them against flies and vermin during 
the summer, or to save them from pains in their back 
throughout the whole year. At Gilgenburg in Masuren the 
rods or bundles of twigs are afterwards laid by and used to 
drive the cattle out to pasture for the first time after their 
winter confinement.' 


1 Th. Vernaleken, JJythen und Peter, Volksthiimliches aus  Oster- 
Bréuche des Volkes in Osterreich  reichisch-Schlesien (Troppau, 1865— 
(Vienna, 1859), pp. 300 sg.; O. 1867), ii. 285; J. A. E. Kohler, Volks- 
Freiherr von Reinsberg- Diiringsfeld, dvauch, Aberglauben, Sagen und andre 
Fest-Kalender aus Bohmen (Prague, alte Uberlieferungen im Voigtlande 
preface dated 1861), pp. 163-167; A. (Leipsic, 1867), pp. 173 sg.; M. 


European 
custom of 
beating 
people with 
branches 
in the 
Christmas 
holidays 
(Holy 
Innocents’ 
Day, etc.) 
to do them 
good. 


270 SCAPEGOATS IN CLASSICAL ANTIQUITY | (cHAR 


In some parts of Germany and Austria a custom like 
that of “Easter Smacks” is observed at the Christmas 
holidays, especially on Holy Innocents’ Day, the twenty- 
eighth of December. Young men and women beat each 
other mutually, but on different days, with branches of 
fresh green, whether birch, willow, or fir. Thus, for 
example, among the Germans of western Bohemia it is 
customary on St. Barbara’s Day (the fourth of December) 
to cut twigs or branches of birch and to steep them in 
water in order that they may put out leaves or buds. They 
are afterwards used by each sex to beat the other on 
subsequent days of the Christmas holidays. In some 
villages branches of willow or cherry-trees or rosemary are 
employed for the same purpose. With these green boughs, 
sometimes tied in bundles with red or green ribbons, the 
young men go about beating the young women on the 
morning of St. Stephen’s Day (the twenty-sixth of Decem- 
ber) and also on Holy Innocents’ Day (the twenty-eighth of 
December). The beating is inflicted on the hands, feet, and 
face ; and in Neugramatin it is said that she who is not thus 
beaten with fresh green will not herself be fresh and green. 
As the blows descend, the young men recite verses importing 
that the beating is administered as a compliment and in 
order to benefit the health of the victim. For the service 


Toeppen, Aderglauben aus Masuren® 
(Danzig, 1867), pp. 69 sg.; A. Wuttke, 
Der deutsche Volksaberglaube® (Ber- 
lin, 1869), p. 70, § 83; W. Mann- 
hardt, Der Baumkultus (Berlin, 1875), 
pp. 258-263; W. Miiller, Beztravce 
zur Volkskunde der Deutschen in 
Méhren (Vienna and Olmiitz, 1893), 
PO 32250 SOON 7Gn Dinh metzner, 
“‘Die Tschechen und Maéahrer in 
Schlesien,” Globus, \xxviii. (1900) p. 
340; P. Drechsler, Sztte, Brauch und 
Volksglaube in Schlesten  (Leipsic, 
1903-1906), pp. 100 sg.; Alois John, 
Sitte, Brauche und Volksglaube im 
deutschen Westbohmen (Prague, 1905), 
pp. 67 sg. Mannhardt’s whole dis- 
cussion of what he calls ‘‘the Blow 
with the Rod of Life” (‘* Der Schlag 
mit der Lebensrute”) deserves to be 
studied. See his Saumkultus, pp. 


251-303; and compare his treatment 
of the same theme, ‘‘ Der Schlag mit 
dem Februum,” JZythologische For- 
schungen (Strasburg, 1884), pp. 113- 
153. Thecustom of ‘‘Easter Smacks” 
can be traced back to the twelfth 
century, when the practice was for 
women to beat their husbands on 
Easter Monday and for husbands to 
retaliate on their wives on Easter 
Tuesday. See J. Belethus, Ratzonale 
Divinorum Offictorum, cap. 120, ap- 
pended to G. Durandus’s Rationale 
Divinorum Offictorum (Lyons, 1584), 
p- 546 recto: ‘‘ Motandum quogue est 
in plerisque regionzbus secundo aie post 
Pascha mulieres maritos suos verberare, 
ac vicissim viros eas tertio die guemad- 
modum licebat servis tn Decembré 
dominos suos impune accusare.” 


a II ti Pig SM A ee ew “- ——————— 


—— 


VI HUMAN SCAPEGOAT IN ANCIENT GREECE 271 


which they thus render the damsels they are rewarded by 
them with cakes, brandy, or money. Early in the morning 
of New Year’s Day the lasses pay off the lads in the same 
kind.’ A similar custom is also observed in central and 
south-west Germany, especially in Voigtland. Thus in 
Voigtland and the whole of the Saxon Erz-gebirge the lads 
beat the lasses and women on the second day of the Christ- 
mas holidays with something green, such as rosemary or 
juniper ; and if possible the beating is inflicted on the women 
as they lie in bed. As they beat them, the lads say 


Fresh and green! Pretty and fine / 
Gingerbread and brandy-wine !” 


The last words refer to the present of gingerbread and brandy 
which the lads expect to receive from the lasses for the 
trouble of thrashing them. Next day the lasses and women 
retaliate on the lads and men. In Thiiringen on Holy 
Innocents’ Day (the twenty-eighth of December) children 
armed with rods and green boughs go about the streets 
beating passers-by and demanding a present in return; they 
even make their way into the houses and beat the maid- 
servants. In Orlagau the custom is called “whipping with 
fresh green.” On the second day of the Christmas holidays 
the girls go to their parents, godparents, relations, and 
friends, and beat them with fresh green branches of fir ; next 
day the boys and lads do the same. The words spoken 
while the beating is being administered are “Good morning ! 
fresh green! Long life! You must give us a bright 
thaler,” and so on.* 

In these European customs the intention of beating 
persons, especially of the other sex, with fresh green leaves 
appears unquestionably to be the beneficent one of renewing 


1 Alois John, Sztte, Brauch und kultus, pp. 264 sq. 
Volksglaube im deutschen Westbohmen 
(Prague, 1905), pp. 5, 23 5g7., 25, 28. 3 August Witzschel, Sager, Sitten 
Compare Th. Vernaleken, JZythen und und Gebriuche aus Thiiringen (Vienna, 
Briiuche des Volkes in Osterreich 1878), pp. 181 sg.; W. Mannhardt, 
(Vienna, 1859), pp. 301 sg. Baumkultus, p. 265. Compare G. 
2 J. A.E. Kohler, Volksbrauch, Aber- Bilfinger, Unterschungen tiber die 
glauben, Sagen und andre alte Uber- Lettrechnung der alten Germanen, ii., 
lieferungen im Voigtlande (Leipsic, Das Germanische /Julfest (Stuttgart, 
1867), p. 174; W. Mannhardt, Bawm- 1901), pp. 85 sg. 


The 
intention 
of beating 
people with 


fresh green 
leaves is 
to renew 
their life 
and vigour, 


Hence the 
custom of 
beating 
the human 
victims 

at the 
Thargelia 
with fig- 
branches 
and squills 
was prob- 
ably a 
charm to 
increase 
their re- 
productive 
energies. 


272 SCAPEGOATS IN CLASSICAL ANTIQUITY \ ieuue 


their life and vigour, whether the purpose is supposed to be 
accomplished directly and positively by imparting the vital 
energy of the fresh green to the persons, or negatively and 
indirectly by dispelling any injurious influences, such as the 
machinations of witches and demons, by which the persons 
may be supposed to be beset. The application of the blows 
by the one sex to the other, especially by young men to 
young women, suggests that the beating is or was originally 
intended above all to stimulate the reproductive powers of 
the men or women who received it; and the pains taken 
to ensure that the branches with which the strokes are 
given should have budded or blossomed out just before their 
services are wanted speak strongly in favour of the view that 
in these customs we have a deliberate attempt to transfuse a 
store of vital energy from the vegetable to the animal world. 

These analogies, accordingly, support the interpretation 
which, following my predecessors W. Mannhardt and Mr. 
W. R. Paton, I have given of the beating inflicted on the 
human victims at the Greek harvest festival of the Thargelia. 
That beating, being administered to the generative organs of 
the victims by fresh green plants and branches, is most 
naturally explained as a charm to increase the reproductive 
energies of the men or women either by communicating to 
them the fruitfulness of the plants and branches, or by ridding 
them of maleficent influences ; and this interpretation is con- 
firmed by the observation that the two victims represented 
the two sexes, one of them standing for the men in general 
and the other for the women. The season of the year when 
the ceremony was performed, namely the time of the corn 
harvest, tallies well with the theory that the rite had an 
agricultural significance. Further, that it was above all 
intended to fertilize the fig-trees is strongly suggested by the 
strings of black and white figs which were hung round the 
necks of the victims, as well as by the blows which were 
siven their genital organs with the branches of a wild fig- 
tree ; since this procedure closely resembles the procedure 
which ancient and modern husbandmen in Greek lands have 
regularly resorted to for the purpose of actually fertilizing 
their fig-trees. When we remember what an important 
part the artificial fertilization of the date palm-tree appears 


VI HUMAN SCAPEGOAT IN ANCIENT GREECE 273 


to have played of old not only in the husbandry but in the 
religion of Mesopotamia,! there seems no reason to doubt 
that the artificial fertilization of the fig-tree may in like 
manner have vindicated for itself a place in the solemn 
ritual of Greek religion. 

If these considerations are just, we must apparently 
conclude that while the human victims at the Thargelia 
certainly appear in later classical times to have figured 
chiefly as public scapegoats, who carried away with them 
the sins, misfortunes, and sorrows of the whole people, at an 
earlier time they may have been looked on as embodiments 
of vegetation, perhaps of the corn but particularly of the fig- 


trees; and that the beating which they received and the 


death which they died were intended primarily to brace and 
refresh the powers of vegetation then beginning to droop 


and languish under the torrid heat of the Greek summer. 


The view here taken of the Greek scapegoat, if it is correct, 


obviates an objection which might otherwise be brought 


tion of Kings, ii. 24 sq. 


against the main argument of this book. To the theory 
that the priest of Aricia was slain as a representative of the 
spirit of the grove,” it might have been objected that such a 
custom has no analogy in classical antiquity. But reasons 
have now been given for believing that the human being 
periodically and occasionally slain by the Asiatic Greeks was 
regularly treated as an embodiment of a divinity of vegetation. 
Probably the persons whom the Athenians kept to be sacri- 
ficed were similarly treated as divine. That they were 
social outcasts did not matter. On the primitive view a 
man is not chosen to be the mouth-piece or embodiment of 
a god on account of his high moral qualities or social rank. 
The divine afflatus descends equally on the good and the 


bad, the lofty and the lowly. 


1 The Magic Art and the Evolu- 
It is highly 
significant that the heathen of Harran 


celebrated the marriage festival of all 


the gods and goddesses in the very 

month (March) in which the artificial 

fertilization of the date-palm was 

effected (D. Chwolsohn, Dze Ssabcer 

und der Ssabismus, St. Petersburg, 

1856, ii, 36, 251). The frequency 
ASE 


If then the civilized Greeks 


with which the artificial fertilization of 
the palm-tree by a mythical winged 
figure is represented on Assyrian 
monuments furnishes strong evidence 
of the religious and economic import- 
ance of the ceremony. 


2 The Magic Art and the Evolu- 
tzon of) Kengs, 1. 40 sgqg-, Ue 370 
5S9Q- 

T 


Hence 

the human 
victims 

at the 
Thargelia 
may have 
primarily 
represented 
spirits of 
vegetation. 


Parallel 
between 
the human 
sacrifices 
at the 
Thargelia 
and the 
bloody 
ritual of 
the Arician 
Grove. 


274 SCAPEGOATS IN CLASSICAL ANTIQUITY Curae 


of Asia and Athens habitually sacrificed men whom they 
regarded as incarnate gods, there can be no inherent im-— 
probability in the supposition that at the dawn of history 
a similar custom was observed by the semi-barbarous Latins 
in the Arician Grove. 


CHAPTER VIt 


KILLING THE GOD IN MEXICO 


By no people does the custom of sacrificing the human The 


ENE EE ee 


representative of a god appear to have been observed so 
commonly and with so much solemnity as by the Aztecs of human 


ancient Mexico. With the ritual of these remarkable 
sacrifices we are well acquainted, for it has been fully 
described by the Spaniards who conquered Mexico in the 
sixteenth century, and whose curiosity was naturally excited 
by the discovery in this distant region of a barbarous and 
cruel religion which presented many curious points of 
analogy to the doctrine and ritual of their own church. 
“They took a captive,” says the Jesuit Acosta, “such as 
they thought good ; and afore they did sacrifice him unto 
their idols, they gave him the name of the idol, to whom he 
should be sacrificed, and apparelled him with the same 
ornaments like their idol, saying, that he did represent the 
same idol. And during the time that this representation 
lasted, which was for a year in some feasts, in others six 
months, and in others less, they reverenced and worshipped 
him in the same manner as the proper idol; and in the 
meantime he did eat, drink, and was merry. When he 
went through the streets, the people came forth to worship 
him, and every one brought him an alms, with children and 
sick folks, that he might cure them, and bless them, suffering 
him to do all things at his pleasure, only he was accompanied 
with ten or twelve men lest he should fly. And he (to the 
end he might be reverenced as he passed) sometimes sounded 
upon a small flute, that the people might prepare to worship 
him. The feast being come, and he grown fat, they killed 


275 


custom of 
sacrificing 


represent- 
atives of 
the gods 
among the 
Aztecs of 
Mexico. 


Sacrifice 
of a man 
in the 
character 
of the 
great god 
Tezcat- 
lipoca at 
the festival 
of Toxcatl 
in the 
fifth Aztec 
month. 


276 


him, opened him, and ate him, making a solemn sacrifice of © 


hin. 


This general description of the custom may now be > 
illustrated by particular examples. | 
called Toxcatl, the greatest festival of the Mexican year, a | 
young man was annually sacrificed in the character of | 
Tezcatlipoca, “ the god of gods,” 
and worshipped as that great deity in person for a whole | 
According to the old Franciscan monk Sahagun, our 
best authority on the Aztec religion, the sacrifice of the human 
god fell at Easter or a few days later, so that, if he is right, 
it would correspond in date as well as in character to the . 
death and resurrection of the 
More exactly he tells us that the sacrifice took 
place on the first day of the fifth Aztec month, which | 
according to him began on the twenty-third or twenty- | 
However, | 
Spanish authorities of the sixteenth century the festival | 
lasted from the ninth to the nineteenth day of May, and | 
the sacrifice of the human victim in the character of the | 


year. 


Christian festival of the 
Redeemer.” 


seventh day of April.’ 


1 J. de Acosta, Zhe Natural and 
Moral History of the Indzes (London, 
Hakluyt Society, 1880), 11. 323. I 
have modernized the spelling of the 
old English translator, whose version 
was originally published in 1604. 
Acosta resided both in Peru and 
Mexico, and published his work at 
Seville in 1590. It was reprinted in a 
convenient form at Madrid in 1894. 
Compare A. de Herrera, General H2s- 
tory of the Vast Continent and Islands 
of America, translated by Captain 
John Stevens (London, 1725-1726), 
ii. 207 Sq. 

2B. de Sahagun, Histotre Générale 
des Choses de la Nouvelle - Espagne, 
traduite par D. Jourdanet et R. 
Siméon (Paris, 1880), pp. 61 sg. : 
“On appelait le cinguieéme mot tox- 
catl Au premier jour on faisait une 
grande féte en Phonneur du dieu appelé 
Titlacauan, autrement dit Tezcatlipoca, 
gue Lon croyatt étre le dieu des dieux. 
C’était en son honneur que Pon tuazt, le 
jour de sa fete, un jeune homme chotst. 

. . Cette féte était la principale de 


KILLING THE GOD IN MEXICO 


CHAP. 


Thus at the festival 


after having been maintained 


according to other 


toutes, comme qui dirait la Pégue, et, 
en réalité, elle se célébratt aux en- 
virons de la Pique de TOUTE ou 
quelques jours apres.” Compare J. | 
de Torquemada, Monarquia Lndiana, | 
lib. x. cap. 14, vol. ii. p. 256 (Madrid, | 
1723). As to Tezcatlipoca, the greatest | 
of the Mexican gods, see J. G. Miiller, 
Geschichte der amerikanischen Ur-' 
reltgionen (Bale, 1867), pp. 613 sgg. ; 
H. H. Bancroft, Zhe Matzve Races of 
the Pacific States (London, 1875-) 
1876), ili. 199 sgg., 237 sqg.; Hen 
Seler, Altmextkanische Studien, ii. | 
(Berlin, 1899) pp. 125 sgg. ( Veréffent- 
lichungen aus dem kiniglichen Museum 
jiir Volkerkunde, vol. vi. Heft 2/4). 


3 On the twenty-third of April ac-) 
cording to the Spanish text of Saha-|/7 
gun’s work as translated in French by 
D. Jourdanet and R. Simeon (p. 52); J} 
the twenty-seventh of April according: 
to the Aztec text of Sahagun’s work) 
as translated into German by Professor 
E. Seler (Altmexithkanische Studien, ii. 
194). 


! . 
y 


VII KILLING THE GOD IN MEXICO 27) 


god was performed on the last of these days." An eminent 
modern authority, Professor E. Seler, is of opinion that the 
festival originally celebrated the beginning of the year, and 
that it fell on the day when the sun on his passage north- 
ward to the tropic of Cancer stood in the zenith over the 
city of Mexico, which in the early part of the sixteenth 
century would be the ninth or tenth day of May (old style) 
or the nineteenth or twentieth day of May (new style). 
Whatever the exact date of the celebration may have been, 
we are told that the “feast was not made to any other end, 
but to demand rain, in the same manner that we solemnize 
the Rogations ; and this feast was always in May, which is 
the time that they have most need of rain in those countries.” ® 

At this festival the great god died in the person of one 
human representative and came to life again in the person 
of another, who was destined to enjoy the fatal honour of 
divinity for a year and to perish, like all his predecessors, at 
the end of it. The young man singled out for this high dignity 
was carefully chosen from among the captives on the ground 
of his personal beauty. He had to be of unblemished body, 
slim as a reed and straight as a pillar, neither too tall nor 
too short. If through high living he grew too fat, he was 
obliged to reduce himself by drinking salt water. And in 
order that he might behave in his lofty station with 
becoming grace and dignity he was carefully trained to 
comport himself like a gentleman of the first quality, to 
speak correctly and elegantly, to play the flute, to smoke 


s 


1 J.de Acosta, Matural and Moral 
Flistory of the Indies (Hakluyt Society, 
London, 1880), ii. 378, 380; Diego 
Duran, Astoria de las Indias de 
Nueva Espafia (Mexico, 1867-1880), 
ii. 99, 101 3 Manuscrit Ramirez, Hts- 
toire de l’Origine des Indiens qui 
habitent la Nouvelle Espagne selon 
leurs traditions, publié par D, Charnay 
(Paris, 1903), pp. 159, 160 sg. Ac- 
1 cording to Clavigero, the fifth Mexican 
month, in which the sacrifice of the 
human representative of Tezcatlipoca 
took place, began on the 17th of May 
(History of Mexico, translated by C. 
' Cullen, London, 1807, i. 299); but 
this must be an error. 


2 E. Seler, Altmextkanische Studien, 
ii. (Berlin, 1899) pp. 117 note,! r121- 
125, 153 sg., 166 sg. (Veroffent- 
lichungen aus dem koniglichen Museum 
fiir Volkerkunde, vol. vi. Heft 2/4). 


Suede Acostass of sucz7.n ee SON; 
Diego Duran, of. cet. ii. 101 ; Manu- 
scrit Ramtrez, Histoire de Origine 
des Indiens quit habitent la Nouvelle 
Espagne selon leurs traditions, publié 
par D. Charnay (Paris, 1903), p. 160; 
J. de Torquemada, Monarguia Indiana, 
lib. x. cap. 14, vol. ii. p. 257 (Madrid, 
1723). Ihave modernized the spelling 
of Acosta’s old translator (Edward 
Grimston). 


The train- 
ing and 
equipment 
of the 
human 
god. 


278 KILLING THE GOD IN MEXICO CHAP. 


cigars and to snuff at flowers with a dandified air. He was 
honourably lodged in the temple where the nobles waited on 
him and paid him homage, bringing him meat and serving 
like a prince. The king himself saw to it that he was 
apparelled in gorgeous attire, “for already he esteemed him — 
as a god.” Eagle down was gummed to his head and white © 
cock’s feathers were stuck in his hair, which drooped to his — 
girdle. A wreath of flowers like roasted maize crowned ~ 
his brows, and a garland of the same flowers passed over 
his shoulders and under his arm-pits. Golden ornaments 
hung from his nose, golden armlets adorned his arms, 
golden bells jingled on his legs at every step he took; 
earrings of turquoise dangled from his ears, bracelets 
of turquoise bedecked his wrists; necklaces of shells 
encircled his neck and depended on his breast; he wore | 
a mantle of network, and round his middle a rich waist-_ 
cloth. When this bejewelled exquisite lounged through the | 
streets playing on his flute, puffing at a cigar, and smell-— 
ing at a nosegay, the people whom he met threw them- 
selves on the earth before him and prayed to him with 
sighs and tears, taking up the dust in their hands and 
putting it in their mouths in token of the deepest humilia- 
tion and subjection. Women came forth with children in 
their arms and presented them to him, saluting him as a) 
god. For “he passed for our Lord God; the people 
acknowledged him as the Lord.” All who thus worshipped | 
him on his passage he saluted gravely and courteously. 
Lest he should flee, he was everywhere attended by a guard of 
eight pages in the royal livery, four of them with shaven crowns 
like the palace-slaves, and four of them with the flowing 
locks of warriors ; and if he contrived to escape, the captain | 
of the guard had to take his place as the representative of 
the god and to die in his stead. Twenty days before he} 
was to die, his costume was changed, and four damsels, | 
delicately nurtured and bearing the names of four goddesses | 
—the Goddess of Flowers, the Goddess of the Young Maize, 
the Goddess “Our Mother among the Water,’ and the: 
Goddess of Salt—were given him to be his brides, and with 
them he consorted. During the last five days divine 
honours were showered on the destined victim. The king’ 


vil KILLING THE GOD IN MEXICO 279 


remained in his palace while the whole court went after the 
human god. Solemn banquets and «dances followed each 
other in regular succession and at appointed places. On 
the last day the young man, attended by his wives and 
pages, embarked in a canoe covered with a royal canopy 
and was ferried across the lake to a spot where a little hill 
rose from the edge of the water. It was called the Moun- 
tain of Parting, because here his wives bade him a last 
farewell. Then, accompanied only by his pages, be repaired 
to a small and lonely temple by the wayside. Like the 
Mexican temples in general, it was built in the form of a 
‘pyramid; and as the young man ascended the stairs he 
broke at every step one of the flutes on which he had 
played in the days of his glory. On reaching the summit 
he was seized and held down by the priests on his back 
upon a block of stone, while one of them cut open his breast, 
thrust his hand into the wound, and wrenching out his 
heart held it up in sacrifice to the sun. The body of the 
dead god was not, like the bodies of common victims, sent 
rolling down the steps of the temple, but was carried down 
to the foot, where the head was cut off and spitted on a pike. 
Such was the regular end of the man who personated the 
greatest god of the Mexican pantheon.’ 

But he was not the only man who played the part of a 


1 B. de Sahagun, Hestotre Générale 
des Choses de la Nouvelle Espagne, 
traduite par D, Jourdanet, et R. Siméon 
(Paris, 1880), pp. 61 sg., 96-99, 103 ; 
E. Seler, Altmextkanische Studten, ii. 
(Berlin, 1899), pp. 116-165, 194-209 
(the latter passage contains the Aztec 
text of Sahagun’s account with a 
German translation); J. de Acosta, 
The Natural and Moral History of the 
Indies (Wakluyt Society, London, 
1880), pp. 350 sg.; Manuscrit 
Ramirez, Histoire de [Origine des 
Indiens gui habitent la Nouvelle 
Espagne selon leurs traditions, publié 
par D. Charnay (Paris, 1903), pp. 157 
£9g., 180 sg.; Diego Duran, Hstorza 
de las Indias de Nueva Esparia (Mexico, 
1867-1880), ii. 98-105; J. de Torque- 
mada, Monarguia Indiana, lib. x. cap. 
14, vol. ii. pp. 256 sgg. (Madrid, 
1723); F. S. Clavigero, History of 


Mexico, translated by Charles Cullen, 
Second Edition (London, 1807), i. 
300; Brasseur de Bourbourg, Azstozve 
des Nations civilisées du Mexigue et 
de l’ Amérique-Centrale (Paris, 1857— 
1859), iil, 510-512; H. H. Bancroft, 
The Native Races of the Pacific States 
(London, 1875-1876), iii. 319 sg. 
According to Torquemada the flesh 
of the human victim was eaten by the 
elders ‘‘ asa sacred and divine flesh ” ; 
but this is not mentioned by the other 
authorities of the sixteenth century 
cited above. Elsewhere (Spzrzts of 
the Corn and of the Wild, ii. 92 sq.) 
I cited this cannibal banquet as an 
example of a sacramental communion 
with the deity ; but the silence of most 
early writers on the point makes it 
doubtful whether the custom has been 
correctly reported by Torquemada and 
later writers. 


The 
manner 
of the 
sacrifice. 


Sacrifice 
of a man 
in the 
character 
of the great 
Mexican 
god Vitzilo- 
pochtli 
(Huitzilo- 
pochtli) 

in the 
month of 
May. 


280 KILLING THE GOD IN MEXICO CHAP. 


god and was sacrificed as such in the month of May. The 
great god Vitzilopochtli or Huitzilopochtli was also wor- 
shipped at the same season. An image of him was made 
out of dough in human shape, arrayed in all the ornaments 
of the deity, and set up in his temple. But the god had 
also his living representative in the person of a young man, 
who, like the human representative of Tezcatlipoca, per- 
sonated the divinity for a whole year and was sacrificed at 
the end. In the month of May it was the duty of the 
divine man, destined so soon to die, to lead the dances 
which formed a conspicuous feature of the festivities. 
Courtiers and warriors, old and young, danced in winding 
figures, holding each other by the hand; and with them 
danced young women, who had taken a vow to dance with 
roasted maize. On their heads these damsels wore crowns 
of roasted maize ; festoons of maize hung from their shoulders 
and crossed on their breasts ; their faces were painted, and 
their arms and legs were covered with red feathers. Dancing 
in this attire the damsels were said to hold the god Vitzilo- 
pochtli in their arms ; but they conducted themselves with 
the utmost gravity and decorum. If any man so far forgot 
himself as to toy with one of the maidens, the elder warriors 
dealt with him promptly and severely, reproaching him for 
the sacrilege of which he had been guilty. Sahagun compares 
these May dances to the dances of peasant men and women 
in old Castile, and the crowns of maize worn by the girls he 
compares to the garlands of flowers worn by rustic Castilian 
maidens in the month of May. So they danced till night- 
fall. Next morning they danced again, and in the course 
of the day the man who represented the god Vitzilopochtli 
was put to death. He had the privilege of choosing the 
hour when he was to die. When the fatal moment drew 
near, they clothed him in a curious dress of paper painted 
all over with black circles ; on his head they clapped a paper 
mitre decked with eagle feathers and nodding plumes, among 
which was fastened a blood-stained obsidian knife. Thus 
attired, with golden bells jingling at his ankles, he led the 
dance at all the balls of the festival, and thus attired he went 
to his death. The priests seized him, stretched him out, 
gripped him tight, cut out his heart, and held it up to the 


VII KILLING THE GOD IN MEXICO 281 


sun. His head was severed from the trunk and spiked 
beside the head of the other human god, who had been 
sacrificed not long before." 

In Cholula, a wealthy trading city of Mexico, the 
merchants worshipped a god named Quetzalcoatl. His 
image, set upon a richly decorated altar or pedestal in a 
spacious temple, had the body of a man but the head of a 
bird, with a red beak surmounted ‘by a crest, the face 
dyed yellow, with a black band running from the eyes to 
below the beak, and the tongue lolling out. On its head 
was a paper mitre painted black, white, and red ; on its 
neck a large golden jewel in the shape of butterfly wings ; 
about its body a feather mantle, black, red, and white ; 
golden socks and golden sandals encased its legs and feet. 
In the right hand the image wielded a wooden instrument 
like a sickle, and in the left a buckler covered with the 
black and white plumage of sea-birds.? The festival of this 
god was celebrated on the third day of February. Forty 
days before the festival “the merchants bought a slave well 
proportioned, without any fault or blemish, either of sick- 
ness or of hurt, whom they did attire with the ornaments of 
the idol, that he might represent it forty days. Before his 
clothing they did cleanse him, washing him twice in a lake, 
which they called the lake of the gods ; and being purified, 
they attired him like the idol. During these forty days, he 


was much respected for his sake whom he represented. By 
1 B. de Sahagun, Hzstotre Générale Moral History of the Indies (Hakluyt 
des Choses de la Nouvelle Espagne, Society, London, 1880), ii. 321; 


traduite par D. Jourdanet et R. Siméon 
(Paris, 1880), pp. 99-104; E. Seler, 
Altmextkanische Studien, ii. (Berlin, 
1899) pp. 159-165, 202-209; F. S. 
Clavigero, History of Mexico, translated 
by Ch. Cullen, Second Edition (London, 
1807), i. 301-303; Brasseur de Bour- 
bourg, Azstotre des Nations civilisées 
du Mexigque et de [ Amérique-Centrale, 
iii. 512-516; H. H. Bancroft, Zhe 
Native Races of the Pacific States, i. 
321-324. As to the dances of the 
maidens wearing garlands of maize, 
see also J. de Acosta, Watural and 
Moral History of the Indies (London, 
1880), ii. 380. 

2 J. de Acosta, Zhe Natural and 


Diego Duran, “storia de las Indias 
de Nueva Espafia(Mexico, 1867-1880), 
li. 118-120; Manuscrit Ramirez, His- 
toire de LOrigine des Indiens qué 
habitent la Nouvelle Espagne selon leurs 
traditions, publié par D. Charnay 
(Paris, 1903), pp. 182 sg. Acosta’s 
description of the idol is abridged. 
As to the Mexican god Quetzalcoatl, 
worshipped especially by the people of 
Cholula, see J. G. Miiller, Geschichte 
der  amertkanischen  Urreligionen 
(Bale, 1867), pp. 577 sgg.; H. H. 
Bancroft, Zhe ative Races of the 
Pacific States (London, 1875-1876), 
iii. 248 sqq. 


Sacrifice 
of a man 
in the 
character 
of the great 
Mexican 
god Quet- 
zalcoatl 
in the 
month of 
February. 


282 KILLING THE GOD IN MEXICO CHAP. 


night they did imprison him (as hath been said) lest he 
should fly, and in the morning they took him out of prison, 
setting him upon an eminent place, where they served him, 
siving him exquisite meats to eat. After he had eaten, they 
put a chain of flowers about his neck, and many nosegays 
in his hands. He had a well-appointed guard, with much 
people to accompany him. When he went through the city, 
he went dancing and singing through all the streets, that he 
might be known for the resemblance of their god, and when 
he began to sing, the women and little children came forth 
of their houses to salute him, and to offer unto him as to 
their god. Two old men of the ancients of the temple came 
unto him nine days before the feast, and humbling them- 
selves before him, they said with a low and submissive voice, 
‘Sir, you must understand that nine days hence the exercise 
of dancing and singing doth end, and thou must then die’ ; 
and then he must answer, ‘In a good hour. They call this 
ceremony Weydlo Maxilt Ileztl’, which is to say, the adver- 
tisement ; and when they did thus advertise him, they took 
very careful heed whether he were sad, or if he danced as 
joyfully as he was accustomed, the which if he did not as 
cheerfully as they desired, they made a foolish superstition 
in this manner. They presently took the sacrifizing razors, 
the which they washed and cleansed from the blood of men 
which remained of the former sacrifices. Of this washing 
they made a drink mingled with another liquor made of 
cacao, giving it him to drink ; they said that this would 
make him forget what had been said unto him, and would 
make him in a manner insensible, returning to his former 
dancing and mirth. They said, moreover, that he would 
offer himself cheerfully to death, being enchanted with this 
drink. The cause why they sought to take from him this 
heaviness, was, for that they held it for an ill augury, and a 
fore-telling of some great harm. The day of the feast 
being come, after they had done him much honour, sung, 
and given him incense, the sacrificers took him about mid- 
night and did sacrifice him, as hath been said, offering his 
heart unto the Moon, the which they did afterwards cast 
against the idol, letting the body fall to the bottom of the 
stairs of the temple, where such as had offered him took him 


VII KILLING THE GOD IN MEXICO 283 


up, which were the merchants, whose feast it was. 
having carried him into the chiefest man’s house amongst 
them, the body was drest with diverse sauces, to celebrate 
(at the break of day) the banquet and dinner of the feast, 
having first bid the idol good morrow, with a small dance, 
which they made whilst the day did break, and that they 
prepared the sacrifice. Then did all the merchants assemble 
at this banquet, especially those which made it a trafick to 
buy and sell slaves, who were bound every year to offer one, 
for the resemblance of their god. This idol was one of the 
most honoured in all the land; and therefore the temple 
where he was, was of great authority.” ’ 

The honour of living for a short time in the character 
of a god and dying a violent death in the same capacity 
was not restricted to men in Mexico; women were allowed, 
or rather compelled, to enjoy the glory and to share the 
doom as representatives of goddesses. Thus in the seventh 
month of their year, which corresponded roughly to June, the 
Aztecs celebrated a festival in honour of Huixtocihuatl, the 
Goddess of Salt. She was said to be a sister of the Rain 
Gods, but having quarrelled with them she was banished and 
driven to take up her abode in the salt water. Being of 
an ingenious turn of mind, she invented the process of 
extracting salt by means of pans ; hence she was worshipped 
by all salt-makers as their patron goddess. Her garments 
were yellow ; on her head she wore a mitre surmounted by 
bunches of waving green plumes, which shone with greenish 
iridescent hues in the sun. MHer robe and petticoats were 
embroidered with patterns simulating the waves of the sea. 


1 J. de Acosta, Zhe Natural and 
Moral Hestory of the Indies (Hakluyt 


Manuscrit Ramirez, Hustotre de 
POrigine des Indiens quit habitent 


Then | 


Society, London, 1880), ii. 384-386. 
I have modernized the old translator’s 
spelling. The accounts of Duran and 
the anonymous author of the Ramirez 
manuscript agree verbally with that of 
Acosta. It is plain that Acosta and 
Duran drew on the same source, which 
may be the Ramirez manuscript. How- 
ever, Duran is the only one of the three 
who gives the date of the festival (the 
third of February), See Diego Duran, 
fiistoria de las Indias de Nueva Espana 
(Mexico, 1867-1880), ii. 120 sg. 3 


la Nouvelle Espagne selon leurs tradz- 
tions, publié par de Charnay (Paris, 
1903), pp. 182 sgg. Compare A. de 
Herrera, Zhe General History of the 
Vast Continent and Islands of America, 
translated by Captain John Stevens 
(London, 1725-1726), iii. 218 sg. ; 
J. G. Miiller, Geschichte der amerz- 
kanischen Urreligtonen (Bale, 1867), 
pp. 589 sg.; H. H. Bancroft, Zhe 
Native Races of the Pacific States 
(London, 1875-1876), iii. 286. 


Sacrifice 
of a woman 
in the 
character 
of the 
Mexican 
Goddess of 
Salt in the 
month of 
June. 


284 KILLING THE GOD IN MEXICO CHAP. 


Golden ear-rings in the form of flowers dangled at her ears ; 
golden bells jingled at her ankles. In one hand she carried 
a round shield painted with the leaves of a certain plant and 
adorned with drooping fringes of parrots’ feathers; in the 
other hand she carried a stout baton ending in a knob and 
bedecked with paper, artificial flowers, and feathers. For 
ten days before her festival a woman personated the goddess 
and wore her gorgeous costume. It was her duty during 
these days to lead the dances which at this season were 
danced by the women and girls of the salt-makers. They 
danced, young, old, and children, in a ring, all holding a 
cord, their heads crowned with garlands of a fragrant flower 
(Artemisia laciniata) and singing airs in a shrill soprano. In 
the middle of the ring danced the woman who represented 
the goddess, with her golden bells jingling at every step, 
brandishing her shield, and marking the time of the dance 
and song with her baton. On the last day, the eve of the 
festival, she had to dance all night without resting till break 
of day, when she was to die. Old women supported her in 
the weary task, and they all danced together, arm in arm. 
With her, too, danced the slaves who were to die with her in 
the morning. When the hour was come, they led her, still 
personating the goddess, up the steps of the temple of 
Tlaloc, followed by the doomed captives. Arrived at the 
summit of the pyramid, the butchery began with the captives, 
while the woman stood looking on. Her turn being come, 
they threw her on her back on the block, and while five men 
held her down and two others compressed her throat with 
a billet of wood or the sword of a sword-fish to prevent her 
from screaming, the priest cut open her breast with his knife, 
and thrusting his hand into the wound tore out her heart 
and flung it intoa bowl. When all was over, the salt-makers 
who had witnessed the sacrifice went home to drink and 
make merry.’ 


1 B. de Sahagun, AWstoire Générale 
des Choses de la Nouvelle Espagne, 


History of Mexico, translated by 
C. Cullen (London, 1807), i. 3053 


traduite par D. Jourdanet et R. Siméon 
(Paris, -1880);, pp: 64, T05-117 5) J: 
de Torquemada, Monarguia Indiana 
(Madrid, 1723), lib. x. cap. 18, vol. 
ii. p. 268. Compare F. S. Clavigero, 


Brasseur de Bourbourg, Hestozre des 
Nations Civilisées du Mexique et de 
P Amérique-Centrale, iii. 517 59.3 
H. H. Bancroft, Zhe Native Races of 
the Pacific States, ii. 325-327. 


VII KILLING THE GOD IN MEXICO 285 


Again, in the eighth month of the Mexican year, which 
answered to the latter end of June and the early part of 
July, the Aztecs sacrificed a woman who personated Xilonen, 
the goddess of the young maize-cobs (az/o//). The festival 
at which the sacrifice took place was held on the tenth day 
of the month about the time when the maize is nearly ripe, 
and when fibres shooting forth from the green ear shew that 
the grain is fully formed. For eight days before the festival 
men and women, clad in rich garments and decked with 
jewels, danced and sang together in the courts of the temples, 
which were brilliantly illuminated for the purpose. Rows of 
tall braziers sent up a flickering blaze, and torchbearers held 
aloft huge torches of pinewood. Some of the dancers 
themselves carried heavy torches, which flared and spluttered 
as they danced. The dances began at sundown and lasted 
till about nine o’clock. None but tried and distinguished 
warriors might take part in them. The women wore their 
long hair hanging loose on their back and shoulders, in 
order that the tassels of the maize might likewise grow long 
and loose, for the more tassels the more grain in the ear. 
Men and women danced holding each other by the hand or 
with their arms round each other’s waists, marking time 
exactly with their feet to the music of the drums and moving 
out and in among the flaming braziers and torches. The 
dances were strictly decorous. If any man was detected 
making love to one of the women dancers, he was publicly 
disgraced, severely punished, and never allowed to dance and 
sing in public again. On the eve of the festival the woman 
who was to die in the character of the Goddess of the Young 
Maize was arrayed in the rich robes and splendid jewels of 
the divinity whom she personated. The upper part of her 
face was painted red and the lower part yellow, probably to 
assimilate her to the ruddy and orange hues of the ripe 
maize. Her legs and arms were covered with red feathers. 
She wore a paper crown decked with a bunch of feathers ; 
necklaces of gems and gold encircled her neck ; her garments 
were embroidered with quaint figures; her shoes were 
striped with red. In her left hand she held a round shield, 
in her right a crimson baton. Thus arrayed, she was led by 
other women to offer incense in four different places. All 


Sacrifice of 
a woman 
in the 
character 
of the 
Mexican 
Goddess of 
the Young 
Maize 
about Mid- 
summer, 


286 KILLING THE GOD IN MEXICO CHAP. 


the rest of the night she and they danced and sang in front 
of the temple of the goddess Xilonen, whose living image 
she was supposed to be. In the morning the nobles danced 
a solemn dance by themselves, leaning, or making believe to 
lean, on stalks of maize. The women, pranked with garlands 
and festoons of yellow flowers, danced also by themselves 
along with the victim. Among the priests the one who was 
to act as executioner wore a fine bunch of feathers on his 
back. Another shook a rattle before the doomed woman as 
she mounted up the steps of the temple of Cinteotl, the 
Goddess of the Maize. On reaching the summit she was 
seized by a priest, who threw her on his back, while the 
sacrificer severed her head from her body, tore out her heart, 
and threw it in a saucer. When this sacrifice had been 
performed in honour of Xilonen, the Goddess of the Young 
Maize, the people were free to eat the green ears of maize 


and the bread that was baked of it. 


No one would have 


dared to eat of these things before the sacrifice.’ 


1 B. de Sahagun, Aistozre Générale 
des Choses de la Nouvelle Espagne, 
traduite par D. Jourdanet et R. Siméon 
(Paris, 1880), pp. 65 sg., 118-126; 
J. de Torquemada, Monarguia Indiana 
(Madrid, 1723), lib. x. cap. 19, vol. 
li. pp. 269-271; E. J. Payne, Azstory 
of the New World called America, i. 
(Oxford, 1892) pp. 421-423. Com- 
pare Brasseur de Bourbourg, Wzstozre 
des Nations ctvilisées du Mexique et 
de T Amérique-Centrale, iii. 518-520; 
H. H. Bancroft, Zhe Native Races of 
the Pacific States, ii. 326 sg. I have 
followed Torquemada (vol. ii. p. 269) 
and the French translators of Sahagun 
(p. 65, note #) in deriving the name of 
Xilonen from -xz/o¢/ in the sense of 
“‘young cobs of maize.” But accord- 
ing to E, J. Payne, the word xzlotl 
means ‘‘hair,” and Xilonen is ‘‘ Hairy 
Mother” (JZater comata) with reference 
to the hair-like fibres or tassels that 
shoot from the maize-cobs. See E. J. 
Payne, of.) c72. 1. An7.) One either 
interpretation the goddess is a personi- 
fication of the young maize. The 
goddess of the maize in general was 
called Cinteotl or Centeotl (Centeutl), 
a name which, according to Torque- 


mada, is derived from cenftiz, ‘* maize- 
cob” (Monarguia Indiana, lib. vi. 
eap. 25, vol. il. p. 52). But Eaje 
Payne, while he regards Cinteotl as the 
maize-goddess, explains her name 
differently. He says (of. cet. i. 416 
sg.): ‘©The Totonacs worshipped the 
corn-spirit under names which were 
translated into Mexican as Tzinteotl 
(goddess of beginning or origin) and 
Tonacayohua (provider of our food). 
They considered her to be the wife of 
the sun, their supreme god. Theoretic- 
ally subordinated to him, the maize- 
goddess was in practice the chief deity 
of the Totonacs : it was to her service 
that the principal warriors, quitting 
their wives and children, dedicated 
themselves in their oldage.” Similarly 
Clavigero, who lived many years in 
Mexico and learned the Mexican 
language, explains Cinteotl (Tzinteotl) 
to mean ‘‘ original goddess” ; he adds 
that the Maize Goddess changed her 
name ‘‘ according to the different states 
of the grain in the progress of its 
growth” (Azstory of Mexico, translated 
by C. Cullen, i. 253 mnotewemy 
Another name applied to the Maize 
Goddess Cinteotl was Chicomecohuatl 


—_—— ee 


VII KILLING THE GOD IN MEXICO 287 


Again, in the seventeenth month of the Mexican year,' 
which corresponded to the latter part of December and the 
early part of January, the Aztecs sacrificed a woman, who 
personated the goddess Ilamatecutli or Tonan, which means 
“Our Mother.” Her festival fell on Christmas Day, the 
twenty-fifth of December. The image of the goddess wore 
a two-faced mask with large mouths and protruding eyes. 
The woman who represented her was dressed in white robes 
and shod with white sandals. Over her white mantle she 
wore a leathern jerkin, the lower edge of which was cut into 
a fringe of straps, and to the end of each strap was fastened 
a small shell. As she walked, the shells clashed together 
and made a noise which was heard afar off. The upper 
half of her face was painted yellow and the lower half black ; 
and she wore a wig. In her hand she carried a round 
whitewashed shield decorated in the middle with a circle of 
eagle feathers, while white heron plumes, ending in eagle 
feathers, drooped from it. Thus arrayed and personating 
the goddess, the woman danced alone to music played by old 
men, and as she danced she sighed and wept at the thought 
of the death that was so near. At noon or a little later the 
dance ceased; and when the sun was declining in the west, 
they led her up the long ascent to the summit of Huitzilo- 
pochtli’s temple. Behind her marched the priests clad in 
the trappings of all the gods, with masks on their faces. 
One of them wore the costume and the mask of the goddess 
Ilamatecutli, whom the victim also represented. On 
reaching the lofty platform which crowned the pyramidal 
temple, they slew her in the usual fashion, wrenched out her 
heart, and cut off her head. The dripping head was given 


or ‘‘Seven Snakes.” See J. de and sixty-five days was divided into 
Torquemada, Monarguia Indiana, lib. eighteen months of twenty days each, 
x. cap. 13, vol. ii. p. 255; J. G. with five supplementary days over. 
Miiller, Geschichte der amerikanischen See J. de Torquemada, Monarguza 
Urreligionen (Bale, 1867), pp. 491 Jndiana, lib. x. cap. 36, vol. ii. p. 300 
sqq.; E. Seler, AltmexikanitscheStudien, (Madrid, 1723); B. de Sahagun, 
ii, (Berlin, 1899) pp. 108 sg., 112.  ¢stotre Générale des Choses de la 
Some have held that Cinteotl was a Nouvelle Espagne, traduite par D. 
Maize God rather than a Maize Jourdanet et R. Simeon (Paris, 1880), 
Goddess. See H. H. Bancroft, The op. Ixvii.; F. S. Clavigero, Hestory 
Native Races of the Pacific States, iii. of Mexico, translated by C. Cullen 
349 599. (London, 1807), i. 290 sg. 
} The Mexican year of three hundred 


Sacrifice of 
a woman 
in the 
character 
of the 
Mexican 
goddess 
‘Our 
Mother” 
on Christ- 
mas Day. 


Sacrifice of 
a woman 
in the 
character 
of the 
Mexican 
goddess 
the Mother 
of the Gods 
at the end 
of August 
or begin- 
ning of 
September. 


288 KILLING THE GOD IN MEXICO CHAP. 


to the priest who wore the costume and mask of the goddess 
and waving it up and down he danced round the platform, 
followed by all the other priests in the attire and masks of 
the gods. When the dance had lasted a certain time, the 
leader gave the signal, and they all trooped down the long 
flight of stairs to disrobe themselves and deposit the masks 
and costumes in the chapels where they were usually kept. 
Next day the people indulged in a certain pastime. Men 
and boys furnished themselves with little bags or nets stuffed 
with paper, flowers of galingale, or green leaves of maize, 
which they tied to strings, and used them as instruments to 
strike any girl or woman they might meet in the streets. 
Sometimes three or four urchins would gather round one 
girl, beating her till she cried; but some shrewd wenches 
went about that day armed with sticks, with which they 
retaliated smartly on their assailants. It was a penal offence 
to put stones or anything else that could hurt in the bags.’ 
In the preceding custom, what are we to make of the 
sacrifice of a woman, who personated the goddess, by a man 
who also wore the costume and mask of the goddess, and 
who immediately after the sacrifice danced with the bleeding 
head of the victim? Perhaps the intention of the strange 
rite was to represent the resurrection of the slain goddess in 
the person of the priest who wore her costume and mask 
and dangled the severed head of her slaughtered representa- 
tive. If that was so, it would explain another and still 
chastlier rite, in which the Mexicans seem to have set forth 
the doctrine of the divine resurrection. This was to skin 
the slain woman who had personated the goddess and then 
to clothe in the bloody skin a man, who pranced about in it, 
as if he were the dead woman or rather goddess come to 
life again. Thus in the eleventh Mexican month, which 
corresponded to the latter part of August and the early part 
of September, they celebrated a festival in honour of a 


Mexico, C. Cullen 


1 B. deSahagun, Westoire Générale des 
Choses de la Nouvelle Espagne, traduite 
par D. Jourdanet et R. Simeon (Paris, 
1880), pp. 75, 158-160; J. de Torque- 
mada, Monarguia Indiana, lib. x. cap. 
29, vol. li. pp. 284 sg. (Madrid, 1723). 
Compare F. S. Clavigero, Hzstory of 


translated by 
(London, 1807), i. 312; Brasseur de 
Bourbourg, zstotre des Nations 
Civilisées du Mexigue et de ? Amérique- 
Centrale, iil, 535 sg. ; H. H. Bancroft, 
The Native Races of the Pacific States, 


0h Sey Se 


VII KILLING THE GOD IN MEXICO 289 


goddess called the Mother of the Gods (7Teteo zunan) or 
Our Ancestress (Zocz), or the Heart of the Earth, and they 
sacrificed a woman clad in the costume and ornaments of 
the goddess. She was a slave bought for the purpose by 
the guilds of physicians, surgeons, blood-letters, midwives, 
and fortune-tellers, who particularly worshipped this deity. 
When the poor wretch came forth decked in all the 
trappings of the goddess, the people, we are told, looked on 
her as equivalent to the Mother of the Gods herself and 
paid her as much honour and reverence as if she had indeed 
been that great divinity. For eight days they danced 
silently in four rows, if dance it could be called in which the 
dancers scarcely stirred their legs and bodies, but contented 
themselves with moving their hands, in which they held 
branches of blossoms, up and down in time to the tuck of 
drum. These dances began in the afternoon and lasted till 
the sun went down. No one might speak during their 
performance ; only some lively youths mimicked by a 
booming murmur of the lips the rub-a-dub of the drums. 
When the dances were over, the medical women, young and 
old, divided themselves into two parties and engaged in a 
sham fight before the woman who acted the part of the 
Mother of the Gods. This they did to divert her and keep 
her from being sad and shedding tears ; for if she wept, they 
deemed it an omen that many men would die in battle and 
many women in childbed. The fight between the women 
consisted in throwing balls of moss, leaves, or flowers at each 
other ; and she who personated the goddess led one of the 
parties to the attack. These mock battles lasted four days. 
After that they led the woman who was to die to the 
market-place, that she might bid it farewell ; and by way of 
doing so she scattered the flour of maize wherever she went. 
The priests then attended her to a building near the temple 
in which she was to be sacrificed. The knowledge of her 
doom was kept from her as far as possible. The medical 
women and the midwives comforted her, saying, “Be not 
cast down, sweetheart ; this night thou shalt sleep with the 
king ; therefore rejoice.” Then they put on her the orna- 
ments of the goddess, and at midnight led her to the temple 
where she was to die. On the passage not a word was 
PT. VI U 


The 
farewell 
to the 
market. 


The skin 
of the 
sacrificed 
woman 
flayed and 
worn by a 
man who 
personated 
the god- 
dess. 


290 KILLING THE GOD IN MEXICO CHAP. 


spoken, not a cough was heard; crowds were gathered to 
see her pass, but all kept a profound silence. Arrived at the 
summit of the temple she was hoisted on to the back of one 
priest, while another adroitly cut off her head. The body, 
still warm, was skinned, and a tall robust young man clothed 
himself in the bleeding skin and so became in turn a living 
image of the goddess. One of the woman’s thighs was 
flayed separately, and the skin carried to another temple, 
where a young man put it over his face as a mask and so 
personated the maize-goddess Cinteotl, daughter of the 
Mother of the Gods. Meantime the other, clad in the rest 
of the woman’s skin, hurried down the steps of the temple. 
The nobles and warriors fled before him, carrying blood- 
stained besoms of couchgrass, but turned to look back at 
him from time to time and smote upon their shields as if to 
bid him come on. He followed hard after them and all who 
saw that flight and pursuit quaked with fear. On arriving 
at the foot of the temple of Huitzilopochtli, the man who 
wore the skin of the dead woman and personated the Mother 
of the Gods, lifted up his arms and stood like a cross before 
the image of the god; this action he repeated four times. 
Then he joined the man who personated the maize-goddess 
Cinteotl, and together they went slowly to the temple of the 
Mother of the Gods, where the woman had been sacrificed. 
All this time it was night. Next morning at break of day 
the man who personated the Mother of the Gods took up 
his post on the highest point of the temple; there they 
decked him in all the gorgeous trappings of the goddess and 
set a splendid crown on his head. Then the captives were 
set in a row before him, and arrayed in all his finery he 
slaughtered four of them with his own hand: the rest he 
left to be butchered by the priests. A variety of ceremonies 
and dances followed. Amongst others, the blood of the 
human victims was collected in a bowl and set before the 
man who personated the Mother of the Gods. He dipped 
his finger into the blood and then sucked his bloody finger ; 
and when he had sucked it he bowed his head and uttered a 
dolorous groan, whereat the Indians believed the earth itself 
shook and trembled, as did all who heard it. Finally the 
skin of the slain woman and the skin of her thigh were 


vil KILLING THE GOD IN MEXICO 291 


carried away and deposited separately at two towers, one of 
which stood on the border of the enemy’s country.’ 

This remarkable festival in honour of the Mother of the 
Gods is said to have been immediately preceded by a similar 
festival in honour of the Maize Goddess Chicomecohuatl.? 
The image of this goddess was of wood and represented her 
as a girl of about twelve years of age wearing feminine 
ornaments painted in gay colours. On her head was a 
pasteboard mitre; her long hair fell on her shoulders; in her 
ears she had golden earrings; round her neck she wore a 
necklace of golden maize-cobs strung on a blue ribbon, and’ 
in her hands she held the likeness of maize-cobs made of 
feathers and garnished with gold. Her festival, which was 
observed throughout the whole country with great dtvotion 
on the fifteenth day of September, was preceded by a strict 
fast of seven days, during which old and young, sick and 


1 B. de Sahagun, Aistozre Générale 
des Choses de la Nouvelle Espagne, 
traduite par D. Jourdanet et R. Simeon 
(Paris, 1880), pp. 18 sg., 68 sg., 133- 
139: J. de Torquemada, Monarguza 
Indiana (Madrid, 1723), lib. x. cap. 
23, vol. il. pp. 275 sg. ; Diego Duran, 
fTistoria de las Indias de Nueva Espana 
(Mexico, 1867-1880), ii. 185-191. 
Compare Brasseur de Bourbourg, 
fTistotre des Nations civilisées du 
Mexique et de lAmérique-Centrale, 
Miee523-525; H. H. Bancroft, Zhe 
Native Races of the Pacific States, iii. 
353-359; E. J. Payne, Hestory of the 
New World called America, i. (Oxford, 
1892), pp. 470 sg. A statue of basalt, 
about half the size of life, said to have 
come from Tezcuco, represents a man 
clothed in a human skin which he 
wears on his body, his arms, and his 
face; his own skin is painted bright 
red, the other skin a dirty white. See 
iemidemebancroit, of. cit. Iv. 522); 
Marquis de Nadaillac, L’ Amérique 
Préhistorique (Paris, 1883), p. 295, 
fig. 119. Inthe Art Museum (Azzst- 
Museum) at Bale there is a statuette 
of the same sort. It is labelled: 
“ Xipe. Der in einer Menschenhaut 
gekleidete Gott. Gesch. v. H. Luk. 
Vischer (1828—1837).” The figure is 
about eighteen inches high and appears 


to be made of a porous stone. It re- 
presents a man seated on his haunches 
with his feet crossed in front of him 
and his hands resting on his knees. 
His own skin, of which the legs, feet, 
hands, wrists, neck and part of the face 
are visible, is coloured a terra-cotta 
red. The rest of his body is covered 
by the representation of the skin of a 
human victim, of a greyish colour, 
quite distinct from that of the wearer, 
and this skin is also worn like a mask 
on his face. At his back the jacket of 
human skin only partially meets, dis- 
playing the wearer’s red skin under it 
for some distance ; it is as if the skin 
of the human victim had been split up 
the back and then drawn together and 
fastened at the back of the wearer like 
an ill-fitting and imperfectly buttoned 
coat. The hands of the human victim 
are represented dangling at the wrists 
of the seated figure. I saw this re- 
markable statuette in the Museum at 
Bale on July 25th,’ 1912, but I was 
not able to remove it from the case for 
closer examination. As to Xipe, the 
Mexican god clad in a human skin, 
whom the statuette represents, see 
below, pp. 296 sqq. 


2 As to this name for the Maize 
Goddess, see above, p. 286, note}, 


Young 

girl chosen 
to per- 
sonate the 
Mexican 
Goddess of 
the Maize, 
Chicome- 
cohuatl, 


Adoration 
of the girl 
who per- 
sonated the 
Goddess of 
the Maize. 


292 KILLING THE GOD IN MEXICO CHAP. 


whole, ate nothing but broken victuals and dry bread and 
drank nothing but water, and did penance by drawing blood 
from their ears. The blood so drawn was kept in vessels, 
which were not scoured, so that a dry crust formed over it. 
On the day before the fast began the people ate and drank 
to their heart’s content, and they sanctified a woman to re- 
present Atlatatonan, the Goddess of Lepers, dressing her up 
in an appropriate costume. When the fast was over, the 
high priest of the temple of Tlaloc sacrificed the woman in 


the usual way by tearing out her heart and holding it up as 


an offering to the sun. Her body, with all the robes and 
ornaments she had worn, was cast into a well or vault in the 
temple, and along with the corpse were thrown in all the 
plates and dishes out of which the people had eaten, and all 
the mats on which they had sat or slept during the fast, as 
if, says the historian, they had been infected with the plague 
of leprosy. After that the people were free to eat bread, 
salt, and tomatoes; and immediately after the sacrifice of 
the woman who personated the Goddess of Leprosy they 
sanctified a young slave girl of twelve or thirteen years, the 
prettiest they could find, to represent the Maize Goddess 
Chicomecohuatl. They invested her with the ornaments of 
the goddess, putting the mitre on her head and the maize- 
cobs round her neck and in her hands, and fastening a green 
feather upright on the crown of her head to imitate an ear 
of maize. This they did, we are told, in order to signify 
that the maize was almost ripe at the time of the festival, 
but because it was still tender they chose a girl of tender 
years to play the part of the Maize Goddess. The whole long 
day they led the poor child in all her finery, with the green | 
plume nodding on her head, from house to house dancing | 
merrily to cheer people after the dulness and privations of 
the fast. 

In the evening all the people assembled at the temple, 
the courts of which they lit up by a multitude of lanterns 
and candles. There they passed the night without sleeping, 
and at midnight, while the trumpets, flutes, and horns dis- 
coursed solemn music, a portable framework or palanquin 
was brought forth, bedecked with festoons of maize-cobs and 
peppers and filled with seeds of all sorts. This the bearers 


VII KILLING THE GOD IN MEXICO 293 


set down at the door of the chamber in which the wooden 
image of the goddess stood. Now the chamber was adorned 
and wreathed, both outside and inside, with wreaths of 
maize-cobs, peppers, pumpkins, roses, and seeds of every 
kind, a wonder to behold; the whole floor was covered 
deep with these verdant offerings of the pious. When the 
music ceased, a solemn procession came forth of priests and 
dignitaries, with flaring lights and smoking censers, leading 
in their midst the girl who played the part of the goddess. 
Then they made her mount the framework, where she stood 
upright on the maize and peppers and pumpkins with which 
it was strewed, her hands resting on two bannisters to keep 
her from falling. Then the priests swung the smoking 
censers round her; the music struck up again, and while it 
played, a great dignitary of the temple suddenly stepped up 
to her with a razor in his hand and adroitly shore off the 
green feather she wore on her head, together with the hair 
in which it was fastened, snipping the lock off by the root. 
The feather and the hair he then presented to the wooden 
image of the goddess with great solemnity and elaborate 
ceremonies, weeping and giving her thanks for the fruits of 
the earth and the abundant crops which she had bestowed 
on the people that year ; and as he wept and prayed, all the 
people, standing in the courts of the temple, wept and prayed 
with him. When that ceremony was over, the girl descended 
from the framework and was escorted to the place where she 
was to spend the rest of the night. But all the people kept 
watch in the courts of the temple by the light of torches till 
break of day. 

The morning being come, and the courts of the temple 
being still crowded by the multitude, who would have 
deemed it sacrilege to quit the precincts, the priests again 
brought forth the damsel attired in the costume of the 
goddess, with the mitre on her head and the cobs of maize 
about her neck. Again she mounted the portable frame- 
work or palanquin and stood on it, supporting herself by her 
hands on the bannisters. Then the elders of the temple 
lifted it on their shoulders, and while some swung burning 
censers and others played on instruments or sang, they 
carried it in procession through the great courtyard to the 


The girl 
who per- 
sonated the 
Goddess of 
the Maize 
carried in 
procession 
and wor- 
shipped 
with offer- 
ings of 
human 
blood. 


The 
human 
repre- 
sentative of 
the Maize 
Goddess 
put to 
death on 
a heap of 
corn and 
her skin 
flayed and 
worn by a 
priest. 


294 KILLING THE GOD IN MEXICO CHAP. 


hall of the god Huitzilopochtli and then back to the 
chamber, where stood the wooden image of the Maize God- 
dess, whom the girl personated. There they caused the 
damsel to descend from the palanquin and to stand on the 
heaps of corn and vegetables that had been spread in pro- 
fusion on the floor of the sacred chamber. While she stood 
there all the elders and nobles came in a line, one behind the 
other, carrying the saucers of dry and clotted blood which 
they had drawn from their ears by way of penance during 
the seven days’ fast. One by one they squatted on their 
haunches before her, which was the equivalent of falling on 
their knees with us, and scraping the crust of blood from the 
saucer cast it down before her as an offering in return for 
the benefits which she, as the embodiment of the Maize 
Goddess, had conferred upon them. When the men had 
thus humbly offered their blood to the human representative 
of the goddess, the women, forming a long line, did so like- 
wise, each of them dropping on her hams before the girl and 
scraping her blood from the saucer. The ceremony lasted 
a long time, for great and small, young and old, all without 
exception had to pass before the incarnate deity and make 
their offering. When it was over, the people returned home 
with glad hearts to feast on flesh and viands of every sort as 
merrily, we are told, as good Christians at Easter partake of 
meat and other carnal mercies after the long abstinence of 
Lent. And when they had eaten and drunk their fill and 
rested after the night watch, they returned quite refreshed to 
the temple to see the end of the festival And the end of 
the festival was this. The multitude being assembled, the 
priests solemnly incensed the girl who personated the god- 
dess ; then they threw her on her back on the heap of corn 
and seeds, cut off her head, caught the gushing blood in a 
tub, and sprinkled the blood on the wooden image of the 
goddess, the walls of the chamber, and the offerings of corn, 
peppers, pumpkins, seeds, and vegetables which cumbered 
the floor. After that they flayed the headless trunk, and one 
of the priests made shift to squeeze himself into the bloody 
skin. Having done so they clad him in all the robes which 
the girl had worn; they put the mitre on his head, the 
necklace of golden maize-cobs about his neck, the maize- 


VII KILLING THE GOD IN MEXICO 295 


cobs of feathers and gold in his hamds; and thus arrayed 
they led him forth in public, all of them dancing to the tuck 
of drum, while he acted as fugleman, skipping and posturing 
at the head of the procession as briskly as he could be ex- 
pected to do, incommoded as he was by the tight and 
clammy skin of the girl and by her clothes, which must have 
been much too small for a grown man.’ 

In the foregoing custom the identification of the young 
girl with the Maize Goddess appears to be complete. The 
golden maize cobs which she wore round her neck, the arti- 
ficial maize cobs which she carried in her hands, the green 
feather which was stuck in her hair in imitation (we are told) 
of a green ear of maize, all set her forth as a personification 
of the corn-spirit ; and we are expressly informed that she 
was specially chosen as a young girl to represent the young 
maize, which at the time of the festival had not yet fully 
ripened. Further, her identification with the corn and the 
corn-goddess was clearly announced by making her stand on 
the heaps of maize and there receive the homage and blood- 
offerings of the whole people, who thereby returned her 
thanks for the benefits which in her character of a divinity 
she was supposed to have conferred upon them. Once 
more, the practice of beheading her on a heap of corn and 
seeds and sprinkling her blood, not only on the image of 
the Maize Goddess, but on the piles of maize, peppers, 
pumpkins, seeds, and vegetables, can seemingly have had no 
other object but to quicken and strengthen the crops of corn 


1 Diego Duran, Historia de las their dates the fifteenth and sixteenth 


Indias de Nueva Espana (Mexico, 
1867-1880), ii. 179-184. This re- 
markable festival appears not to be 
noticed by the other early Spanish 
writers such as Sahagun, Acosta, and 
Torquemada, who have given us de- 
tailed descriptions of the Mexican 
festivals. It might perhaps have been 
conjectured that Duran was here de- 
scribing the similar festival of the 
Mother of the Gods (see above, pp. 288 
$sqq.), which fell about the same time of 
the year. But the conjecture is ex- 
cluded by the simple fact that Duran 
describes both festivals, the one im- 
mediately after the other, assigning as 


of September respectively (of. cé#. 11. 
180, 185 sg.). Almost nothing is 
known about Duran except that he 
was a Spanish monk, apparently a 
native of Mexico, who had weak health 
and died in 1588. His work remained 
in manuscript till it was edited at 
Mexico in 1867-1880 by José F. 
Ramirez. The original manuscript is 
preserved in the National Library at 
Madrid. The accounts contained in 
his history bear internal marks of 
authenticity and are in general sup- 
ported by the independent testimony of 
the other early Spanish authorities. 


Identifi- 
cation of 
the human 
victim 
with the 
Goddess 
of Maize 
whom she 
personated. 


The resur- 
rection of 
the Maize 
Goddess 
set forth 
by the 
wearing of 
the skin of 
her human 
represent- 
ative. 


Xipe, 

the Flayed 
God, 

and the 
Mexican 
festival of 
the Flaying 
of Men. 


296 KILLING THE GOD IN MEXICO CHAP. 


and the fruits of the earth in general by infusing into their 
representatives the blood of the Corn Goddess herself. The 
analogy of this Mexican sacrifice, the meaning of which 
appears to be indisputable, may be allowed to strengthen 
the interpretation which I have given of other human 
sacrifices offered for the crops." If the Mexican girl, whose 
blood was sprinkled on the maize, indeed personated the 
Maize Goddess, it becomes more than ever probable that the 
girl whose blood the Pawnees similarly sprinkled on the seed 
corn personated in like manner the female Spirit of the 
Corn; and so with the other human beings whom other 
races have slaughtered for the sake of promoting the growth 
of the crops. 

Lastly, the concluding act of the sacred drama, in which 
the body of the dead Maize Goddess was flayed and her skin 
worn, together with all her sacred insignia, by a man who 
danced before the people in this grim attire, seems to be 
best explained on the hypothesis that it was intended 
to ensure that the divine death should be immediately 
followed by the divine resurrection. If that was so, we 
may infer with some degree of probability that the practice 
of killing a human representative of a deity has commonly, 
perhaps always, been regarded merely as a means of per- 
petuating the divine energies in the fulness of youthful 
vigour, untainted by the weakness and frailty of age, from 
which they must have suffered if the deity had been allowed 
to die a natural death. 

This interpretation of the Mexican custom of flaying 
human beings and permitting or requiring other persons 
to parade publicly in the skins of the victims may perhaps 
be confirmed by a consideration of the festival at which this 
strange rite was observed on the largest scale, and which 
accordingly went by the name of the Festival of the Flaying 
of Men (7lacaxtpeualiztl:). It was celebrated in the second 
month of the Aztec year, which corresponded to the last 
days of February and the early part of March. The exact 
day of the festival was the twentieth of March, accord- 
ing to one pious chronicler, who notes with unction that the 
bloody rite fell only one day later than the feast which 

1 Spirits of the Corn and of the Wild, i. 236 sqq. 


vil KILLING THE GOD IN MEXICO 297 


Holy Church solemnizes in honour of the glorious St. 
Joseph. The god whom the Aztecs worshipped in this 
strange fashion was named Xipe, “ the Flayed One,” or 
Motec, “Our Lord.” On this occasion he also bore the 
solemn name of Youallauan, “ He who drinks in the Night.” 
His image was of stone and represented him in human 
form with his mouth open as if in the act of speaking ; his 
body was painted yellow on the one side and drab on the 
other ; he wore the skin of a flayed man over his own, with 
the hands of the victim dangling at his wrists. On his 
head he had a hood of various colours, and about his loins 
a green petticoat reaching to his knees with a fringe of 
small shells. In his two hands he grasped a rattle like the 
head of a poppy with the seeds in it ; while on his left arm 
he supported a yellow shield with a red rim. At his festival 
the Mexicans killed all the prisoners they had taken in war, 
men, women, and children. The number of the victims was 
very great. A Spanish historian of the sixteenth century 
estimated that in Mexico more people used to be sacrificed 
on the altar than died a natural death. All who were 
sacrificed to Xipe, “the Flayed God,’ were themselves 
flayed, and men who had made a special vow to the god put 
on the skins of the human victims and went about the city 
in that guise for twenty days, being everywhere welcomed 
and revered as living images of the deity. Forty days 
before the festival, according to the historian Duran, they 
chose a man to personate the god, clothed him in all the 
insignia of the divinity, and led him about in public, doing 
him as much reverence all these days as if he had really 
been what he pretended to be. Moreover, every parish of 
the capital did the same; each of them had its own temple 
and appointed its own human representative of the deity, 
who received the homage and worship of the parishioners 
for the forty days. 

On the day of the festival these mortal gods and all the 
other prisoners, with the exception of a few who were 
reserved for a different death, were killed in the usual way. 
The scene of the slaughter was the platform on the summit 
of the god Huitzilopochtli’s temple. Some of the poor 
wretches fainted when they came to the foot of the steps 


The 
human 
shambles. 


The holy 
beggars 
clad in the 
skins of 
the flayed 
human 
victims. 


298 KILLING THE GOD IN MEXICO CHAP. 


and had to be dragged up the long staircase by the hair of 
their heads. Arrived at the summit they were slaughtered 
one by one on the sacrificial stone by the high priest, who 
cut open their breasts, tore out their hearts, and held them 
up to the sun, in order to feed the great luminary with these 
bleeding relics. Then the bodies were sent rolling down the 
staircase, clattering and turning over and over like gourds 
as they bumped from step to step till they reached the 
bottom. There they were received by other priests, or rather 
human butchers, who with a dexterity acquired by practice 
slit the back of each body from the nape of the neck to the 
heels and peeled off the whole skin in a single piece as neatly 
as if it had been a sheepskin. The skinless body was then 
fetched away by its owner, that is, by the man who had 
captured the prisoner in war. He took it home with him, 
carved it, sent one of the thighs to the king, and other joints 
to friends, or invited them to come and feast on the carcase 
in his house.. The skins of the human victims were also a 
perquisite of their captors, and were lent or hired out by 
them to men who had made a vow of going about clad in 
the hides for twenty days. Such men clothed in the 
reeking skins of the butchered prisoners were called 
Xixipeme or Tototectin after the god Xipe or Totec, whose 
living image they were esteemed and whose costume they 
wore. Among the devotees who bound themselves to this 
pious exercise were persons who suffered from loathsome 
skin diseases, such as smallpox, abscesses, and the itch ; and 
among them there was a fair sprinkling of debauchees, who 
had drunk themselves nearly blind and hoped to recover the 
use of their precious eyes by parading for a month in this 
curious mantle. Thus arrayed, they went from house to house 
throughout the city, entering everywhere and asking alms for 
the love of God. On entering a house each of these reverend 
palmers was made to sit on a heap of leaves ; festoons of maize 
and wreaths of flowers were placed round his body; and he 
was given wine to drink and cakes to eat. And when a 
mother saw one of these filthy but sanctified ruffians passing 
along the street, she would run to him with her infant and 
put it in his arms that he might bless it, which he. did with 
unction, receiving an alms from the happy mother in return. 


vu KILLING THE GOD IN MEXICO 299 


Theearnings of these begging-friars on their rounds were some- 
times considerable, for the rich people rewarded them hand- 
~ somely. Whatever they were, the collectors paid them in to 
the owners of the skins, who thus made a profit by hiring out 
these valuable articles of property. Every night the wearers 
of the skins deposited them in the temple and fetched them 
again next morning when they set out on their rounds, At 
the end of the twenty days the skins were dry, hard, 
shrivelled and shrunken, and they smelt so villainously that 
people held their noses when they met the holy beggars 
arrayed in their fetid mantles. The time being come to 
rid themselves of these encumbrances, the devotees walked 
in solemn procession, wearing the rotten skins and stinking 
like dead dogs, to the temple called Yopico, where they 
stripped themselves of the hides and plunged them into a 
tub or vat, after which they washed and scrubbed themselves 
thoroughly, while their friends smacked their bare bodies loudly 
with wet hands in order to squeeze out the human grease 
with which they were saturated. Finally, the skins were 
solemnly buried, as holy relics, in a vault of the temple. 
The burial service was accompanied by chanting and 
attended by the whole people ; and when it was over, one of 
the high dignitaries preached a sermon to the assembled 
congregation, in which he, dwelt with pathetic eloquence on 
the meanness and misery of human existence and exhorted 
his hearers to lead a sober and quiet life, to cultivate the 
virtues of reverence, modesty, humility and obedience, to be 
kind and charitable to the poor and to strangers ; he warned 
them against the sins of robbery, fornication, adultery, and 
covetousness ; and kindling with the glow of his oratory, he 
passionately admonished, entreated, and implored all who 
heard him to choose the good and shun the evil, drawing 
a dreadful picture of the ills that would overtake the wicked 
here and hereafter, while he painted in alluring colours the 
bliss in store for the righteous and the rewards they might 
expect to receive at the hands of the deity in the life to 
come. 

While most of the men who masqueraded in the skins 
of the human victims appear to have personated the Flayed 
God Xipe, whose name they bore in the form Xixipeme, 


Various 
Mexican 
gods per- 
sonated by 


the men 
clad in the 
skins of 
the human 
victims. 


Men 
roasted 
alive as 
images of 
the Fire- 
ged. 


CHAP. 


300 KILLING THE GOD [IN MEXICO 


others assumed the ornaments and bore the names of other 
Mexican deities; such as Huitzilopochtli and Quetzalcoatl; the 
ceremony of investing them with the skins and the insignia 
of divinity was called xetcotoguzliztiz, which means “to think 
themselves gods.” Amongst the gods thus personated was 
Totec. His human representative wore, over the skin of the 
flayed man, all the splendid trappings of the deity. On his 
head was placed a curious crown decorated with rich feathers. 
A golden crescent dangled from his nose, golden earrings 
from his ears, and a necklace of hammered gold encircled 
his neck. His feet were shod in red shoes decorated with 
quail’s feathers ; his loins were begirt with a petticoat of 
sorgeous plumage ; and on his back three small paper flags 
fluttered and rustled in the wind. In his left hand he carried 
a golden shield and in his right a rattle, which he shook and 
rattled as he walked with a majestic dancing step. Seats 
were always prepared for this human god; and when he sat 
down, they offered him a paste made of uncooked maize- 
flour. Also they presented to him little bunches of cobs of 
maize chosen from the seed-corn ; and he received as offerings 
the first fruits and the first flowers of the season.’ 

In the eighteenth and last month of their year, which 
fell in January, the Mexicans held a festival in honour of the 
god of fire. Every fourth year the festival was celebrated 
on a grand scale by the sacrifice ‘of a great many men and 
women, husbands and wives, who were dressed in the 


1 B. de Sahagun, Histoire Générale 
des Choses de la Nouvelle Espagne, 
traduite par D. Jourdanet et R. Simeon 
(Paris, 1880), pp. 375g., 58-60, 87- 
94, 584.59."; E. Seler, Altmextkanische 
Studien, ii. (Berlin, 1899) pp. 76- 
100, 171-188 (the latter passage gives 
the Aztec text of Sahagun’s account 
with a German translation); Diego 
Duran, Historza de las Indias de 
Nueva Espafia (Mexico, 1867-1880), 
li. 147-155; J. de Torquemada, 
Monarguia Indiana, lib. x. cap. II, 
vol. ii. pp. 252 sg. (Madrid, 1723). 
Compare F. S. Clavigero, Azstory of 
Mexico, translated by C. Cullen, 
Second Edition (London, 1807), 1. 
297 sg.; Brasseur de Bourbourg, /7/zs- 
totre des Nations crvilisées du Mexigque 


et de 1? Amérique-Centrale (Paris, 1857— 
1859), ili. 503 sg.; H. H. Bancroft, 
The Native Races of the Pacific States 
(London, 1875-1876), li. 306 sgq. 
According to Torquemada, the prisoners 
were flayed alive, but this statement is 


not, so far as I know, supported by the _ 


other early Spanish authorities. It is 
Duran who gives the 20th of March as 
the date of the festival at which the 
captives were killed and skinned ; but 
this is inconsistent with the evidence 
of Sahagun, according to whom the 
second Aztec month, in which the 
festival fell, ended with the 13th of 
March. See B. de Sahagun, Aestozve 
Générale des Choses de la Nouvelle 
Espagne, p. 51. 


VII KILLING THE GOD IN MEXICO 301 


trappings of the fire-god and regarded as his living images. 
Bound hand and foot, they were thrown alive into a great 
furnace, and after roasting in it for a little were raked 
out of the fire before they were dead in order to allow the 
priest to cut the hearts out of their scorched, blistered, and 
still writhing bodies in the usual way.’ The intention of the 
sacrifice probably was to maintain the Fire-god in full 
vigour, lest he should grow decrepit or even die of old age, 
and mankind should thus be deprived of his valuable ser- 
vices. This important object was attained by feeding the 
fire with live men and women, who thus as it were poured 
a fresh stock of vital energy into the veins of the Fire-god 
and perhaps of his wife also. But they had to be raked out 
of the flames before they were dead; for clearly it would 
never do to let them die in the fire, else the Fire-god whom 
they personated would die also. For the same reason their 
hearts had to be torn from their bodies while they were still 
palpitating ; what use could the Fire-god make of human 
hearts that were burnt to cinders ? 

This was the ordinary mode of sacrificing the human 
representatives of the Fire-god every fourth year. But in 
Quauhtitlan, a city distant four leagues from the city of 
Mexico, the custom was different. On the eve of the festival 
two women were beheaded on the altar of the temple and 
afterwards flayed, faces and all, and their thigh bones 
extracted. Next morning two men of high rank clothed 
themselves in the skins, including the skins of the women’s 
faces, which they put over their own; and thus arrayed 
and carrying in their hands the thigh bones of the victims 
they came down the steps of the temple roaring like wild 
beasts. A vast crowd of people had assembled to witness 
the spectacle, and when they saw the two men coming 


1 J. de Torquemada, Monarguia 
Indiana, lib. x. cap. 30, vol. ii. pp. 
285 sg. (Mexico, 1723); B. de Saha- 
gun, Histoire Générale des Choses de la 
Nouvelle Espagne, traduite par D. 
Jourdanet et R. Simeon (Paris, 1880), 
pp. 164 sg. The latter writer does 
not describe the mode in which the 
victims were sacrificed at this quadri- 
ennial festival ; but he describes as in 


the text the annual sacrifice of victims 
in honour of the fire-god in the tenth 
month of the Mexican year (of. czt. 
pp- 67 sg., 129 sgg.). Compare F. S. 
Clavigero, Azstory of Mexico, trans- 
lated by C. Cullen, Second Edition 
(London, 1807), i. 306 sg.; H. H. 
Bancroft, Zhe Native Races of the 
Pacific States, ii. 329 sg. 


Women 
flayed in 
honour of 
the Fire- 
god and 
their skins 
worn by 
men who 
personated 
gods. 


The per- 
sonation 
of a god 
by a man 
wearing 
the skin 

of a human 
victim is 
probably 
intended to 
represent 
and ensure 
the resur- 
rection of 
the deity. 


The idea 
of resurrec- 
tion from 
the dead 
is sug- 
gested by 
the ob- 
servation 
of snakes 
and other 
creatures 
that cast 
their skins. 


302 KILLING THE GOD IN MEXICO CHAP. 


down the steps in the dripping skins, brandishing the 
bones, and bellowing like beasts, they were filled with 
fear and said, “There come our gods!”  Atriveqiiem 
the foot of the staircase these human gods engaged in 
a dance, which they kept up for the rest of the day, never 
divesting themselves of the bloody skins till the festival was 
over. 

The theory that the custom of wearing the skin of a 
flayed man or woman and personating a god in that 
costume is intended to represent the resurrection of the 
deity derives some support from the class of persons who 
made a vow to masquerade in the skins. They were, as we 
have seen, especially men who suffered from diseases of the 
skin and the eyes: they hoped, we are told, by wearing the 
skins to be cured of their ailments, and the old Spanish 
monk who records the belief adds dryly that some were 
cured and some were not.” We may conjecture that by 
donning the skins of men who had acted the part of gods 
they expected to slough off their own diseased old skins 
and to acquire new and healthy skins, like those of the 
deities. This notion may have been suggested to them by 
the observation of certain animals, such as serpents and 
lizards, which seem to renew their youth by casting their 
skins and appear refreshed and renovated in new integu- 
ments. That many savages have noticed such transforma- 
tions in the animal world is proved by the tales which some 
of them tell to account for the origin of death among man- 
kind. For example, the Arawaks of British Guiana say 
that man was created by a good being whom they call 
Kururumany. Once on a time this kindly creator came to 
earth to see how his creature man was getting on. But 
men were so ungrateful that they tried to kill their Maker. — 
Hence he took from them the gift of immortality and 
bestowed it upon animals that change their skins, such as 


1 J. de Torquemada, JMJonarguia 
Indiana, lib. x. cap. 30, vol. ii. p. 
286 (Madrid, 1723). Compare F. S. 
Clavigero, History of Mexico, trans- 
lated by C. Cullen, Second Edition 
(London, 1807), i. 283 5g. ; Brasseur 
de Bourbourg, Astotre des Nations 
cwvilistes du Mexique et de ? Amérique- 


Centrale, iil. 539 5g. 

2 B. de Sahagun, Hestocre Générale 
des Choses de la Nouvelle Espagne, 
traduite par D. Jourdanet et R. 
Simeon, pp. 37, 93; E. Seler, 4/z- 
mexthanische Studien, i. (Berlin, 1889) 
pp- 96, 185 (quoting the Aztec text of 
Sahagun). 


Vil KILLING THE GOD IN MEXICO 303 
snakes, lizards, and beetles.1 Again, the Tamanachiers, an 
Indian tribe of the Orinoco, tell how the creator kindly 
intended to make men immortal by telling them that they 
should change their skins. He meant to say that by so doing 
they should renew their youth like serpents and beetles. 
But the glad tidings were received with such incredulity by 
an old woman that the creator in a huff changed his tune 
and said very curtly, “Ye shall die.” ” 

In Annam they say that Ngoc hoang sent a messenger 
from heaven to inform men that when they reached old age 
_ they should change their skins and live for ever, but that 
when serpents grew old, they must die. Unfortunately for 
_ the human race the message was perverted in the transmis- 
sion, so that men do not change their skins and are there- 
fore mortal, whereas serpents do cast their old skins and 
accordingly live for ever. According to the natives of Nias 
the personage who was charged by the creator with the duty 
of putting the last touches to man broke his fast on bananas 
instead of on river-crabs, as he should have done; for had 
he only eaten river-crabs, men would have changed their 
skins like crabs, and like crabs would have never died. 
But the serpents, wiser in their generation than men, ate 
the crabs, and that is why they too are immortal.* Stories 
of the same sort are current among the Melanesians. 
Thus the natives of the Gazelle Peninsula in New Britain 
account for the origin of death by a tale very like that told 
in Annam. The Good Spirit, they say, loved men and 
wished to make them immortal, but he hated serpents and 
‘wished to kill them. So he despatched his brother to man- 
kind with this cheering message: “ Go to men and take them 
the secret of immortality. Tell them to cast their skin every 
year. So will they be protected from death, for their life 


1 R. Schomburgk, Rezsen in Britisch- 
Guiana (Leipsic, 1847-1848), ii. 319. 
I have already noticed this and the 


(Saigon, 1886), pp. 108 sg. 
4H. Sundermann, ‘Die Insel 
Nias und die Mission daselbst,” A//ge- 


following stories of the origin of death 
in The Belief in Immortality, i. 69 
599. 
2 R. Schomburgk, of. cet. ii. 320. 
3 A. Landes, ‘‘ Contes et Légendes 
Annamites,” Cochinchine francaise, 
Excursions et Reconnatssances, No. 25 


metne Musstons-Zettschrifi, xi. (1884) 
p- 451; z@., Die Insel Nias und die 
Mission daselbst (Barmen, 1905), p. 
68; E. Modigliani, Um Viaggio a Nias 
(Milan, 1890), p. 295; A. Fehr, Der 
Niasser im Leben und Sterben (Bar- 
men, 1901), p. 8. 


Savage 
notion that 
men would 
have been 
immortal, 
if only they 
could have 
cast their 
skins like 
serpents 
and crabs. 


Hence the 
Mexicans 
apparently 
thought 
that they 
could 
renew their 
own skins 
by putting 
on those 
of other 
people. 


304 KILLING THE GOD IN MEXICO 


will be constantly renewed. But tell the serpents that they 
must henceforth die.” 
of the messenger this message was reversed ; so that now, 
as we all know, men die and serpents live for ever by 
annually casting their skins.’ Again, if we can trust the 
traditions of the Banks’ Islanders and New Hebrideans, 
there was a time when men did really cast their skins and 
renew their youth. The melancholy change to mortality 
was brought about by an old woman, who most unfortunately 
resumed her old cast-off skin to please an infant, which 
squalled at seeing her in her new integument.” The Gallas 


of East Africa say that God sent a certain bird (holawaka, ] 


“the sheep of God”) to tell men that they would not die, 
but that when they grew old they would slough their 
skins and so renew their youth. But the bird foolishly or 
maliciously delivered the message to serpents instead of to 
men, and that is why ever since men have been mortal and 
serpents immortal. For that evil deed God punished the 
bird with a painful malady from which it suffers to this 
day, and it sits on the tops of trees and moans and wails 
perpetually.’ 

Thus it appears that some peoples have not only 
observed the curious transformations which certain animals 
undergo, but have imagined that by means of such transfor- 
mations the animals periodically renew their youth and live 
for ever. From such observations and fancies it is an easy 
step to the conclusion that man might similarly take a fresh 
lease of life and renew the lease indefinitely, if only he could 
contrive like the animals to get a new skin. This desirable 
object the Mexicans apparently sought to accomplish by 


1 Pp, Kleintitschen, Dze Avisten- unter den Kannibalen der Salomo- 


bewohner der Gazellehalbinsel (Hiltrup 
bei Miinster, preface dated Christmas, 
1906), p. 334: 

2, R. H. Codrington, Zhe Melan- 
estams (Oxford, 1891), pp. 260, 265 ; 
W. Gray, ‘‘Some Notes on the Tan- 
nese,” Internationales Archiv fiir 
Ethnographie, vii. (1894) p. 232. The 
same story of the origin of death has 
been recorded in the Shortlands Islands 
and among the Kai of German New 
Guinea. See C. Ribbe, Zwez Jahre 


Inseln (Dresden-Blasowitz, 1903), p. 
148; Ch. Keysser, ‘‘ Aus dem Leben 
der Kaileute,” in R. Neuhauss’s Deutsch 
Neu-Guinea, iii. (Berlin, 1911) pp. 
161 sg. It is also told with some 
variations by the natives of the Ad- 
miralty Islands. See Josef Meier, 
«« Mythen und Sagen der Admiralitats- 
insulaner,” Azthropos, iii. (1908) p. 
193. 

3 Miss A. Werner, ‘‘Two Galla 
Legends,” AZan, xiii. (1913) pp. 90 sg. 


CHAP. 


Through the carelessness or treachery 


VII KILLING THE GOD IN MEXICO 305 


flaying men and wearing their bleeding skins like garments 
thrown over their own. By so doing persons who suffered 
from cutaneous diseases hoped to acquire a new and healthy 
skin; and by so doing the priests attempted not merely to 
revive the gods whom they had just slain in the persons of 
their human representatives, but also to restore to their wasting 
and decaying frames all the vigour and energy of youth. 

The rites described in the preceding pages suffice to 
prove that human sacrifices of the sort I suppose to have 
prevailed at Aricia’ were, as a matter of fact, system- 
atically offered on a large scale by a people whose level 
of culture was probably not inferior, if indeed it was not 
distinctly superior, to that occupied by the Italian races 
at the early period to which the origin of the Arician 
priesthood must be referred. The positive and indubitable 
evidence of the prevalence of such sacrifices in one part of 
the world may reasonably be allowed to strengthen the 
probability of their prevalence in places for which the 
evidence is less full and trustworthy. Taken all together, 
the facts which we have passed in review seem to shew that 
the custom of killing men whom their worshippers regard 
as divine has prevailed in many parts of the world. But 
to clinch the argument, it is clearly desirable to prove that 
the custom of putting to death a human representative of 
a god was known and practised in ancient Italy elsewhere 
than in the Arician Grove. This proof I now propose to 
adduce. 


1 The Magic Art and the Evolution of Kings, i. 40 sqy., il. 376 sgq. 


i al Xx 


General 
conclusion: 
the custom 
of putting 
human 
beings to 
death in 
the char- 
acter of 
gods has 
prevailed 
in many 
parts of 
the world. 


Annual 
periods of 
license. 


The 
Roman 
Saturnalia. 


CHAPTER Vili 
THE SATURNALIA AND KINDRED FESTIVALS 


§ 1. Zhe Roman Saturnalia 


IN an earlier part of this book we saw that many peoples 
have been used to observe an annual period of license, 
when the customary restraints of law and morality are 
thrown aside, when the whole population give themselves 
up to extravagant mirth and jollity, and when the darker 
passions find a vent which would never be allowed them 
in the more staid and sober course of ordinary life. Such 


outbursts of the pent-up forces of human nature, too often | 
degenerating into wild orgies of lust and crime, occur most © 


commonly at the end of the year, and are frequently asso- 


ciated, as I have had occasion to point out, with one or | 


other of the agricultural seasons, especially with the time of 
sowing or of harvest. Now, of all these periods of license 


the one which is best known and which in modern lan- | 


guages has given its name to the rest, is the Saturnalia. 
This famous festival fell in December, the last month of the 


Roman year, and was popularly supposed to commemorate | 


the merry reign of Saturn, the god of sowing and of 
husbandry, who lived on earth long ago as a righteous 
and beneficent king of Italy, drew the rude and scattered 
dwellers on the mountains together, taught them to till the 


ground, gave them laws, and ruled in peace. His reign was | 


the fabled Golden Age: the earth brought forth abundantly: 


no sound of war or discord troubled the happy world: no- 
baleful love of lucre worked like poison in the blood of the 


industrious and contented peasantry. Slavery and private 


property were alike unknown: all men had all things in | 


306 


CHAP. VIII THE ROMAN SATURNALIA 307 


common. At last the good god, the kindly king, vanished 
suddenly ; but his memory was cherished to distant ages, 
shrines were reared in his honour, and many hills and high 
places in Italy bore his name.’ Yet the bright tradition of 
his reign was crossed by a dark shadow: his altars are said 
to have been stained with the blood of human victims, for 
whom a more merciful age afterwards substituted effigies.” 
Of this gloomy side of the god’s religion there is little or no 
trace in the descriptions which ancient writers have left us 
of the Saturnalia. Feasting and revelry and all the mad 
pursuit of pleasure are the features that seem to have 
especially marked this carnival of antiquity, as it went on 
for seven days in the streets and public squares and houses 
of ancient Rome from the seventeenth to the twenty-third of 
December.’ 

But no feature of the festival is more remarkable, nothing 
in it seems to have struck the ancients themselves more 
than the license granted to slaves at this time. The 
distinction between the free and the servile classes was 
temporarily abolished. The slave might rail at his master, 
intoxicate himself like his betters, sit down at table with them, 


‘*a sowing ” or ‘‘ planting.” Compare 


1 Virgil, Georg. ii. 536-540, Aen. 
Varro, De lingua Latina, v. 64, 


vill. 319-327, with the comments of 


Servius ; Tibullus, i. 3. 35-48; Ovid, 
Fasti, i. 233 sqgg. ; Lucian, Saturnalia, 
7; Macrobius, Saturn. i. 7. 21-26; 
Justin, xliii. 1. 3-5; Aurelius Victor, 
Origo gentis Romanae, 33; Dionysius 
Halicarnasensis, Aztiguzt. Rom. i. 34. 
On Saturn and the Saturnalia see 
especially L. Preller, Rémdsche Mytho- 
logie,® ii. 10 sgg. Compare J. Mar- 
quardt, Romische Staatsverwaltung, 
lii.? (Leipsic, 1885) pp. 586 sgg.; W. 
Warde Fowler, Zhe Roman Festivals 
of the Period of the Republic (London, 
1899), pp. 268-273; G. Wissowa, 
Religion und Kultus der Rimer* 
(Munich, 1912), pp. 204 sgg.; id., 
in W. H. Roscher’s Ausfihrliches 
Lexikon der griech. und rim. Mytho- 
logie, iv. 427 sgg. A good account of 
the Saturnalia, based on the texts of the 
classical writers, is given by Dezobry 
(Rome au siecle @ Auguste,® iii. 143 
sqgg.). The name Saturn seems to be 
etymologically akin to sa¢es and satzo, 


* Ab satu est dictus Saturnus” ; Festus, 
s.v. ‘*Opima spolia,” p. 186 ed. C. 
O. Miiller: ‘‘ zpse [Saturnus] agrorum 
cultor habetur, nominatus a satu, 
tenensque falcem effingittur, quae est 
tnsigne agricolae.” Compare Tertullian, 
Ad Nattones, ii. 12; Arnobius, Adver- 
sus IVationes, iv. 9; Augustine, De 
CLUULALE PD E24 Vil. 2s 3 3 5, Lose LO: 
The god’s name appears in the form 
Saeturnus inscribed on an ancient bowl 


(H. Dessau, Jnscriptiones Latinae 
ELECiaes | VOls dls) Pars) 1) ps2, NO: 
2966). 


2 Dionysius Halicarnasensis, Azz. 
Rom. i. 38; Macrobius, Sazzrn. i. 7. 
Bi leactantiusse eczezelses re ie Ti 
Arnobius, Adversus Nationes, ii. 68. 


3 For the general dissipation of the 
Saturnalia see Seneca, Zfzs¢. 18 ; for 
the seven days of the popular festival 
see Martial, xiv. 72. 2; Macrobius, 
Sat. i. 10. 2; Lucian, Saturnalia, 21. 


The license 
granted to 
slaves at 
the Saturn- 
alia. 


The mock 
King of the 
Saturnalia. 


Persona- 
tion of 
Saturn at 
the Saturn- 
alia by a 
soldier who 
afterwards 
suffered 
death. 


308 SATURNALIA AND KINDRED FESTIVALS  cuap. 


and not even a word of reproof would be administered to 
him for conduct which at any other season might have been 
punished with stripes, imprisonment, or death.’ Nay, more, 
masters actually changed places with their slaves and waited 
on them at table; and not till the serf had done eating and 
drinking was the board cleared and dinner set for his 
master.” So far was this inversion of ranks carried, that 
each household became for a time a mimic republic in which 
the high offices of state were discharged by the slaves, who 
gave their orders and laid down the law as if they were 
indeed invested with all the dignity of the consulship, the 
praetorship, and the bench.? Like the pale reflection of 
power thus accorded to bondsmen at the Saturnalia was the 
mock kingship for which freemen cast lots at the same 
season. ‘The personon whom the lot fell enjoyed the title 
of king, and issued commands of a playful and ludicrous 
nature to his temporary subjects. One of them he might 
order to mix the wine, another to drink, another to sing, 
another to dance, another to speak in his own dispraise, 
another to carry a flute-girl on his back round the house.’ 
Now, when we remember that the liberty allowed to 
slaves at this festive season was supposed to be an imitation 
of the state of society in Saturn’s time, and that in general 
the Saturnalia passed for nothing more or less than a 
temporary revival or restoration of the reign of that merry 
monarch, we are tempted to surmise that the mock king 
who presided over the revels may have originally represented 
Saturn himself. 
established, by a very curious and interesting account of the 
way in which the Saturnalia was celebrated by the Roman 
soldiers stationed on the Danube in the reign of Maximian 
and ‘Diocletian. 
the martyrdom of St. Dasius, which was unearthed from a 
Greek manuscript in the Paris library, and published by 


The conjecture is strongly confirmed, if not — 


{ 


i 
) 


The account is preserved in a narrative of — 


1 Horace, Sat. ii. 7. 4 sg. 3; Macro- 
bius, Saturn. 1. 7. 26; Justin, xliii. 1. 
45) Plutarchy 3S7//2)) Sic) eucians 
Saturnalia, 5, 7; Porphyry, De antro 
nympharum, 23. 

2 Macrobius, Saturn. i, 12. 7,1. 24. 
23; Solinus, i. 35; Joannes Lydus, 


De mensibus, i. 15 ; Athenaeus, xiv. 
44, p. 639 B; Dio Cassius, Ix. 19. 

3 Seneca, Zpzst. 47. 14. Compare 
Porphyry, De abstenentia, ii. 23. 

4 Tacitus, Anmals, xiii. 15 ; Arrian, 
Lepicteti Dissert. i. 25. 83 Lucian, 
Saturnalia, 4. 


VIII THE ROMAN SATURNALIA 


309 


Professor Franz Cumont of Ghent. ,Two briefer descriptions 
of the event and of the custom are contained in manuscripts 
at Milan and Berlin; one of them had already seen the light 
in an obscure volume printed at Urbino in 1727, but its 
importance for the history of the Roman religion, both 
ancient and modern, appears to have been overlooked until 
Professor Cumont drew the attention of scholars to all three 
narratives by publishing them together some years ago." 
According to these narratives, which have all the appearance 
of being authentic, and of which the longest is probably 
based on official documents, the Roman soldiers at Duro- 
storum in Lower Moesia celebrated the Saturnalia year by 
year in the following manner. Thirty days before the 
festival they chose by lot from amongst themselves a young 
and handsome man, who was then clothed in royal attire to 
resemble Saturn. Thus arrayed and attended by a multi- 
tude of soldiers he went about in public with full license to 
indulge his passions and to taste of every pleasure, however 
base and shameful. But if his reign was merry, it was short 
and ended tragically ; for when the thirty days were up and 
the festival of Saturn had come, he cut his own throat on 
the altar of the god whom he personated.? In the year 
303 A.D. the lot fell upon the Christian soldier Dasius, but he 
refused to play the part of the heathen god and soil his last 
days by debauchery. The threats and arguments of his 
commanding officer Bassus failed to shake his constancy, 
and accordingly he was beheaded, as the Christian martyr- 
ologist records with minute accuracy, at Durostorum by 
the soldier John on Friday the twentieth day of November, 
being the twenty-fourth day of the moon, at the fourth 


hour. 
Since this narrative was published by Professor Cumont, 


1 ««Tes Actes de S. Dasius,” Axa- 
lecta Bollandiana, xvi. (1897) pp. 5- 
16. I have to thank Prof. Cumont 
for courteously sending me a copy of 
this important paper. The bearing of 
the new evidence on the Saturnalia 
has been further discussed by Messrs. 
Parmentier and Cumont (‘‘ Le roi des 
Saturnales,” Revue de Philologie, xxi. 


(1897) pp. 143-153)- 


2 The phrase of the Paris MS. is 
ambiguous (rots avwvtmos Kal pvoapots 
eldwdors mpogekdurvevy EeauvTdv omovd7jy, 
avatpevmevos bd paxalpas); but the 
other two versions say plainly that the 
mock king perished by his own hand 
(wé\ovra éaurov emia pdéat TE Bw Tod 
Kpdévov, Berlin MS. ; é€avrov émirgpatae 
avroxelpws 7 Kpévw, Milan MS.). 


The sarco- 
phagus of 
St. Dasius, 
the martyr 
on whom 
the lot fell 
to play the 
part of 
Saturn. 


310 SATURNALIA AND KINDRED FESTIVALS  cnap. 


its historical character, which had been doubted or denied, 
has received strong confirmation from an interesting dis- 
covery. In the crypt of the cathedral which crowns the 
promontory of Ancona there is preserved, among other 
remarkable antiquities, a white marble sarcophagus bearing 
a Greek inscription, in characters of the age of Justinian, to 
the following effect: “Here lies the holy martyr Dasius, 
brought from Durostorum.” The sarcophagus was trans- 
ferred to the crypt of the cathedral in 1848 from the church 
of San Pellegrino, under the high altar of which, as we learn 
from a Latin inscription let into the masonry, the martyr’s 
bones still repose with those of two other saints. How long 
the sarcophagus was deposited in the church of San Pelle- 
crino, we do not know ; but it is recorded to have been there 
in the year 1650. We may suppose that the saint’s relics 
were transferred for safety to Ancona at some time in the 
troubled centuries which followed his martyrdom, when 
Moesia was occupied and ravaged by successive hordes of 
barbarian invaders.’ At all events it appears certain from 
the independent and mutually confirmatory evidence of the 
martyrology and the monuments that Dasius was no 
mythical saint, but a real man, who suffered death for his 
faith at Durostorum in one of the early centuries of the 
Christian era. Finding the narrative of the nameless martyr- 
ologist thus established as to the principal fact recorded, 
namely, the martyrdom of St. Dasius, we may reasonably 
accept his testimony as to the manner and cause of the 
martyrdom, all the more because his narrative is precise, 
circumstantial, and entirely free from the miraculous element. 
Accordingly I conclude that the account which he gives of 
the celebration of the Saturnalia among the Roman soldiers 
is trustworthy. 

This account sets in a new and lurid light the office of 


1 Franz Cumont, ‘‘Le tombeau de extruxerunt subtler qua sanctorum 


S. Dasiusde Durostorum,” Azalecta Bol- 
landiana, xxvii. (Brussels, 1908) pp. 369- 
372. The inscription on the sarco- 
phagus runs thus: “Evrat0a karaxetrau 
6 dytos pdprus Adowos évexdels amd 
Awpoorddov. The inscription on the 
altar runs thus: ‘* Vetere diruta nobtl- 
orem FF. Karmelitani excalciatt aram 


martyrum Peregrint Flaviant Dasit 
corpora et infantium ab HHerode neca- 
torum ossa minus decenter antiquitus 
recondita honorificentius et populo 
spectanda repont curaverunt die 
vergint et matrt Theresiae sacre anno 
MDCCCIV.” 


VIII THE ROMAN SATURNALIA 311 


the King of the Saturnalia, the ancient Lord of Misrule, 
who presided over the winter revels at Rome in the time of 
Horace and of Tacitus. It seems to prove that his business 
had not always been that of a mere harlequin or merry- 
andrew whose only care was that the revelry should run 
high and the fun grow fast and furious, while the fire blazed 
and crackled on the hearth, while the streets swarmed with 
festive crowds, and through the clear frosty air, far away to 
the north, Soracte shewed his coronal of snow. When we 
compare this comic monarch of the gay, the civilized 
metropolis with his grim counterpart of the rude camp on 
the Danube, and when we remember the long array of 
similar figures, ludicrous yet tragic, who in other ages and 
in other lands, wearing mock crowns and wrapped in sceptred 
palls, have played their little pranks for a few brief hours or 
days, then passed before their time to a violent death, we 
can hardly doubt that in the King of the Saturnalia at 
Rome, as he is depicted by classical writers, we see only a 
feeble emasculated copy of that original, whose strong 
features have been fortunately preserved for us by the 
obscure author of the Martyrdom of St. Dasius. In other 
words, the martyrologist’s account of the Saturnalia agrees 
so closely with the accounts of similar rites elsewhere, which 
could not possibly have been known to him, that the 
substantial accuracy of his description may be regarded as 
established ; and further, since the custom of putting a mock 
king to death as a representative of a god cannot have 
grown out of a practice of appointing him to preside over a 
holiday revel, whereas the reverse may very well have 
happened, we are justified in assuming that in an earlier 
and more barbarous age it was the universal practice in 
ancient Italy, wherever the worship of Saturn prevailed, to 
choose a man who played the part and enjoyed all the 
traditionary privileges of Saturn for a season, and then died, 
whether by his own or another’s hand, whether by the knife 
or the fire or on the gallows-tree, in the character of the 
good god who gave his life for the world. In Rome itself 
and other great towns the growth of civilization had prob- 
ably mitigated this cruel custom long before the Augustan 
age, and transformed it into the innocent shape it wears in 


The mock 
King of the 
Saturnalia 
may have 
been the 
degenerate 
successor 
of aseries of 
temporary 
kings who 
personated 
Saturn 

at the 
Saturnalia 
and were 
put to 
death 

in the 
character 
of the god, 


The 
modern 
Carnival 
perhaps the 
equivalent 
of the 
ancient 
Saturnalia. 


312 SATURNALIA AND KINDRED FESTIVALS  cHap. 


the writings of the few classical writers who bestow a 
passing notice on the holiday King of the Saturnalia. But 
in remoter districts the older and sterner practice may long 
have survived ; and even if after the unification of Italy the 
barbarous usage was suppressed by the Roman government, 
the memory of it would be handed down by the peasants 
and would tend from time to time, as still happens with the 
lowest forms of superstition among ourselves, to lead to a 
recrudescence of the practice, especially among the rude 
soldiery on the outskirts of the empire over whom the 
once iron hand of Rome was beginning to relax its grasp." 

The resemblance between the Saturnalia of ancient 
and the Carnival of modern Italy has often been re- 
marked ; but in the light of all the facts that have come 
before us, we may well ask whether the resemblance does 
not amount to identity. We have seen that in Italy, Spain, 
and France, that is, in the countries where the influence of 
Rome has been deepest and most lasting, a conspicuous 
feature of the Carnival is a burlesque figure personifying the 
festive season, which after a short career of glory and dis- 
sipation is publicly shot, burnt, or otherwise destroyed, to 
the feigned grief or genuine delight of the populace.” If 
the view here suggested of the Carnival is correct, this 
grotesque personage is no other than a direct successor of 
the old King of the Saturnalia, the master of the revels, the 
real man who personated Saturn and, when the revels were 
over, suffered a real death in his assumed character. The 
King of the Bean on Twelfth Night and the mediaeval 
Bishop of Fools, Abbot of Unreason, or Lord of Misrule 
are figures of the same sort and may perhaps have had a 
similar origin. We will consider them in the following 
section. 


1 The opinion that at Rome a man 
used to be sacrificed at the Saturnalia 
cannot be regarded as in itself im- 
probable, when we remember that 


sticos Scorpiace, 7; Minucius Felix, 
Octavius, 22 and 30; Lactantius, 
Divin. Instit. i. 21; Porphyry, De 
abstinentia, ii. 56. We may conjecture 


down apparently to the establishment 
of Christianity a human victim was 
slaughtered every year at Rome in 
honour of Latian Jupiter. See Ter- 
tullian, Apologeticus, 9, Contra Gio- 


that at first the sacrifice took place on 
the top of the Alban Mountain, and 
was offered to Saturn, to whom, as we 
have seen, high places were sacred. 

2 The Dying God, pp. 220 sgq. 


\ vil KJNG OF THE BEAN AND FESTIVAL OF FOOLS 313 


§ 2. The King of the Bean and the Festival of Fools 


The custom of electing by lot a King and often also The King 

a Queen of the Bean on Twelfth Night (Epiphany, the Serpe 
sixth of January) or on the eve of that festival used to Twelfth 
prevail in France, Belgium, Germany, and England, and “’S** 
it is still kept up in some parts of France. It may be 
traced back to the first half of the sixteenth century at 
least, and no doubt dates from a very much more remote 
antiquity. At the French court the Kings themselves 
did not disdain to countenance the mock royalty, and 
Louis XIV. even supported with courtly grace the shadowy 
dignity in his own person. Every family as a rule elected 
its own King. On the eve of the festival a great cake was 
baked with a bean in it; the cake was divided in portions, 
one for each member of the family, together with one for 
God, one for the Virgin, and sometimes one also for the 
poor. The person who obtained the portion containing the 
bean was proclaimed King of the Bean. Where a Queen 
of the Bean was elected as well as a King, a second bean 
was sometimes baked in the cake for the Queen. Thus at 
Blankenheim, near Neuerburg, in the Eifel, a black and a 
white bean were baked in the cake; he who drew the 
piece with the black bean was King, and she who drew the 
white bean was Queen. In Franche-Comté, at the be- 
ginning of the nineteenth century, they used to put as many 
white haricot beans in a hat as there were persons present, 
and two coloured beans were added; the beans were drawn 
at haphazard from the hat by a child, and they who got the 
coloured beans were King and Queen. In England and 

_ perhaps elsewhere the practice was to put a bean in the 

_ cake for the King and a pea for the Queen. But in some 
places only the King was elected by lot, and after his 
election he chose his Queen for himself. Sometimes a coin 
was substituted for the bean in the cake; but though this 
usage was followed in southern Germany as early as the 
first half of the sixteenth century, it is probably an innova- 
tion on the older custom of employing a bean as the lot. 
In France the distribution of the pieces of the cake among 


Crosses 
made by 
the King 
of the 
Bean to 
protect 
the house 
against 
demons 
and 


witchcraft. 


314 SATURNALIA AND KINDRED FESTIVALS  Cuap. 


the persons present was made in accordance with the 
directions of a child, the youngest boy present, who was 
placed under or on the table and addressed by the name of 
“ Phoebe” or “ Tébé” ; he answered in Latin “ Domzne.” The 
master of the house, holding a piece of the cake in his hand, 
asked the child to whom he should give it, and the child 
named any person he pleased. Sometimes the first slice of 
cake was regularly assigned to “the good God” and set 
aside for the poor. In the name “ Phoebe” or “ Tébé,” by 
which the child was addressed, learned antiquaries have 
detected a reference to the oracle of Apollo; but more 
probably the name is a simple corruption of the Latin or 
French word for bean (Latin fava, French féve). Immediately 
on his election the King of the Bean was enthroned, saluted 
by all, and thrice lifted up, while he made crosses with chalk 
on the beams and rafters of the ceiling. Great virtue was 
attributed to these white crosses. They were supposed to 
protect the house for the whole year against 


“all injuryes and harmes 
Of cursed devils, sprites, and bugges, of conjurings and charmes.” 


Then feasting and revelry began and were kept up merrily 
without respect of persons. Every time the King or Queen 
drank, the whole company was expected to cry, “ The King 
drinks!” or “ The Queen drinks!” Any person who failed 
to join in the cry was punished by having his face blackened 
with soot or a burned cork or smeared with the lees of 
wine. In some parts of the Ardennes the custom was to 
fasten great horns of paper in the hair of the delinquent and 
to put a huge pair of spectacles on his nose; and he had to 
wear these badges of infamy till the end of the festival.’ 


1 Joannes Boemus, JJores, Leges, et 
Ritus Omnium Gentium (Lyons, 1541), 
p- 122; Zhe Popish Kingdome or 
reigne of Antichrist, written in Latin 
verse by Thomas Naogeorgus and 
Englyshed by Barnabe Googe, 1570, 
edited by R. C. Hope (London, 1880), 
pp- 45 sg.3 E. Pasquier, Recherches de la 
France (Paris, 1633), pp. 375 59-3 
R. Herrick, ‘“‘ Twelfth Night, or King 
and Queene,” Zhe Works of Robert 
Herrick (Edinburgh, 1823), ii. 171 sg.; 


J. Brand, Popular Antiquities of Great 


Britain (London, 1883), i. 21 sgg. ; 
T. F. Thiselton Dyer, Brztish Popular 
Customs (London, 1876), pp. 24-28; R. 
Chambers, 7e Book of Days (London 
and Edinburgh, 1886), i. 61 sgg. ; 
Desgranges, ‘‘ Usages du Canton de 
Bonneval,” Jémotres de la Soctété 
Royale des Antiquatres de France, i. 
(Paris, 1817) pp. 233-236; L. 
Beaulieu, Archéologie de la Lorraine 
(Paris, 1840-1843), i. 255 sg.; Reins- 


—— 


ee 


wil KING OF THE BEAN AND FESTIVAL OF FOOLS 315 


The custom of electing a King and Queen of the Bean on 
Twelfth Day is still kept up all over the north of France. 
A miniature porcelain figure of a child is sometimes sub- 
stituted for the bean in the cake. If the lot, whether bean 
or doll, falls to a boy he becomes King and chooses his 
Queen; if it falls to a girl she becomes Queen and chooses 
her King." 

So far, apart from the crosses chalked up to ban hob- 
goblins, witches, and bugs, the King and Queen of the Bean 
might seem to be merely playful personages appointed at a 
season of festivity to lead the revels. However, a more 
serious significance was sometimes attached to the office 
and to the ceremonies of Twelfth Day in general. Thus in 
Lorraine the height of the hemp crop in the coming year 
was prognosticated from the height of the King and Queen ; 
if the King was the taller of the two, it was supposed that 
the male hemp would be higher than the female, but that 
the contrary would happen if the Queen were taller than the 
King.” Again, in the Vosges Mountains, on the borders of 
Franche-Comté, it is customary on Twelfth Day for people 
to dance on the roofs in order to make the hemp grow tall? 


berg - Diiringsfeld, Calendrier Belge 
(Brussels, 1861-1862), i. 23 sg@. ; 
id., Das festliche Jahr (Leipsic, 1863), 
pp- 20-23; E. Cortet, Hssaz sur les 
Fétes religieuses (Paris, 1867), pp. 29- 
50; J. H. Schmitz, Sztten wnd Sagen, 
Lieder, Spriichworter und Rathsel des 
Eifler Volkes (Tréves, 1856-1858), i. 
6; Laisnel de la Salle, Croyances et 
Légendes du Centre de la France 
(Paris, 1875), 1. 19-29; J. Lecceur, 
Esquisses du Bocage Normand (Condé- 
sur- Noireau, 1883-1887), ii. 125; 
L. Bonnemére, ‘‘Le Jour des Rois 
en Normandie,” Revue des Traditions 
populaires, ii. (1887) pp. 55 sg.3 P. 
Sébillot, ‘‘ La Féte des Rois,” Revue 
des Traditions populaires, ii. (1888) 
pp. 7-12; A. Meyrac, TZvraditions, 
Coutumes, Légendes et Contes des 
Ardennes (Charleville, 1890), pp. 74. 59.3 
J. L. M. Nogues, Zes Meurs @ autrefots 
en Saintonge et en Aunis (Saintes, 
1891), pp. 49 sgg.; L. F. Sauvé, Ze 
Folk-lore des Hautes - Vosges (Paris, 
1889), pp. 16 sg.; Ch. Beauquier, 


Les Mois en Franche-Comté (Paris, 
1900), pp. 16 sg.; F. Chapiseau, Le 
folk-lore de la Beauce et du Perche 
(Paris, 1902), i. 312-315; Anatole 
France, ‘* Le roy boit,” Azzales Polt- 
tigues et Littératres, 5 Janvier, 1902, 
pp. 4 sg.; La Lresse Louhannazse, 
Janvier, 1906, pp. 42-46. The 
custom of making white crosses on 
the ceiling is reported for Germany 
and Switzerland, but apparently 
not for France. It is mentioned 
in the earliest of the works cited 
above, namely that of Joannes Boemus, 
whose description applies especially to 
Franconia (Franken). 

1 This I learn from my friend M. 
Léon Chouville of Rouen and Cam- 
bridge. The custom is also kept 
up in Bresse (La Bresse Louhannaise, 
Janvier, 1906, pp. 44-46). 

2L. Beaulieu, Archéologce de la 
Lorraine (Paris, 1840-1843), i. 256 
note!; E. Cortet, Assaz sur les Fétes 
religteuses (Paris, 1867), p. 43. 

3 L. F. Sauvé, of. cz¢. pp. 17 sg. 


Serious 
significance 
of the King 
of the Bean 
and 
Twelfth 
Night. 


Divination 
on Twelfth 
Night. 


Bonfires 
on the Eve 
of Twelfth 
Night. 


Fire 
applied to 
the fruit- 
trees on 
the Eve of 
Twelfth 
Night in 
Normandy 
and the 
Ardennes. 


316 SATURNALIA AND KINDRED FESTIVALS CHAP. 


Further, in many places the beans used in the cake were 
carried to the church to be blessed by the clergy, and people 
drew omens from the cake as to the good or ill that would 
befall them throughout the year. Moreover, certain forms 
of divination were resorted to on Twelfth Night for the 
purpose of ascertaining in which month of the year wheat 
would be dearest.’ 

In Franche-Comté, particularly in the Montagne du 
Doubs, it is still the custom on the Eve of Twelfth Night 
(the fifth of January) to light bonfires, which appear to 
have, in the popular mind, some reference to the crops. 
The whole population takes part in the festivity. In 
the afternoon the young folk draw a cart about the street 
collecting fuel. Some people contribute faggots, others 
bundles of straw or of dry hemp stalks. Towards evening 
the whole of the fuel thus collected is piled up a little way 
from the houses and set on fire. While it blazes, the people 
dance round it, crying, “Good year, come back! Bread 
and wine, come back!” In the district of Pontarlier the 
young folk carry lighted torches about the fields, shaking 
sparks over the sowed lands and shouting, “ Cowazlle, couaille, 
blanconnie !”—-words of which the meaning has been for- 
gotten.” A similar custom is commonly observed on the 
same day (the Eve of Twelfth Night, the fifth of January) 
in the Bocage of Normandy, except that it is the fruit-trees 
rather than the sowed fields to which the fire is applied. 
When the evening shadows have fallen on the landscape, 
the darkness begins to be illuminated here and there by 
twinkling points of fire, which multiply as the night grows 
late, till they appear as numerous on earth as the stars in 
the sky. About every village, in the fields and orchards, 
on the crests of the hills, wandering lights may be discerned, 
vanishing and suddenly reappearing, gathering together and 


1 Anatole France, ‘‘ Le roy boit,” 
Annales Politiques et Littératres, 5 
Janvier, 1902, p. 5. In some parts of 
France divination was practised for this 
purpose on Christmas Day. Twelve 
grains of wheat, each representing a 
month of the year, were placed, one 
after the other, on a hot fire-shovel ; 
if the grain bounced up from the 


shovel, wheat would be dear in the 
corresponding month, but it would be 
cheap if the grain remained still. See 
J. B. Thiers, Zvazté des Superstitions 
(Paris, 1679), p. 268. See further 
P. Sébillot, Ze Felk-lore de France, 
ili. (Paris, 1906) pp. 510 sg. 
2 Ch. Beauquier, Les Mois 

franche-Comté (Paris, 1900), p. 12. 


ent 


vil KJNG OF THE BEAN AND FESTIVAL OF FOOLS 317 


then dispersing, pursuing each other capriciously, and tracing 
broken lines, sparkling arabesques of fire in the gloom of 
night. The peasants are observing the ceremony of the 
“ Moles and Field-mice” (7aupes et Mulots); and that evening 
there is not a hamlet, not a farm, hardly a solitary cottage 
that does not contribute its flame to the general illumination, 
till the whole horizon seems in a blaze, and houses, woods, 
and hills stand out in dark relief against the glow of the 
sky. The villages vie with each other in the number and 
brilliancy of the fires they can exhibit on this occasion. 
Woods and hedges are scoured to provide the materials for 
the blaze. Torches of straw wound about poles are pro- 
vided in abundance ; and armed with them men and women, 
lads and lasses, boys and girls, pour forth from the houses at 
nightfall into the fields and orchards. There they run about 
among the trees, waving the lighted torches under the 
branches and striking the trunks with them so that the 
sparks fly out in showers. And as they do so’ they sing or 
scream at the top of their voices certain traditional curses 
against the animals and insects that injure the fruit-trees. 
They bid the moles and field-mice to depart from their 
orchards, threatening to break their bones and burn their 
beards if they tarry. The more they do this, the larger, 
they believe, will be the crop of fruit in the following autumn. 
When everybody has rushed about his own orchard, meadow 
or pasture in this fashion, they all assemble on a height or 
crest of a hill, where they picnic, each bringing his share 
of provisions, cider, or brandy to the feast. There, too, 
they kindle a huge bonfire, and dance round it, capering 
and brandishing their torches in wild enthusiasm.’ Customs 
of the same sort used to be observed on the same day (the 
Eve of Epiphany, the fifth of January) in the Ardennes. 
People ran about with burning torches, commanding the 
moles and field-mice to go forth. Then they threw the 
torches on the ground, and believed that by this proceeding 
they purified the earth and made it fruitful.’ 

1 J. Lecceur, Hsguisses du Bocage pp. 295 sg.; W. Mannhardt, Der 
Normand (Condé-sur-Noireau, 1883—  Saumkultus(Berlin,1875), pp. 536 s¢q. 
1887), ii. 126-129. Compare Amélie 2 A. Meyrac, Traditions, Coutumes, 


Bosquet, La Normandie Romanesque Légendes et Contes des Ardennes 
et Mervetlleuse(Parisand Rouen, 1845), (Charleville, 1890), pp. 75 sg. 


Fires 
kindled 

on Twelfth 
Night or 
the Eve of 
Twelfth 
Night in 
England 
for the 
sake of 
the crops. 


318 SATURNALIA AND KINDRED FESTIVALS  cuap. 


This ceremony appears to be intended to ensure a good 
crop of fruit by burning out the animals and insects that 
harm the fruit-trees. In some parts of England it used to 
be customary to light fires at the same season for the 
purpose, apparently, of procuring a plentiful crop of wheat 
in the ensuing autumn. Thus, “in the parish of Pauntley, 
a village on the borders of the county of Gloucester, next 
Worcestershire, and in the neighbourhood, a custom prevails, 
which is intended to prevent the smut in wheat. On the 
Eve of Twelfth-day, all the servants of every farmer assemble 
together in one of the fields that has been sown with wheat. 
At the end of twelve lands, they make twelve fires in a 
row with straw, around one of which, much larger than the 
rest, they drink a cheerful glass of cider to their master’s 
health, and success to the future harvest; then, returning 
home, they feast on cakes soaked in cider, which they claim 
as a reward for their past labours in sowing the grain.” 
Similarly in Herefordshire, “on the Eve of Twelfth Day, at 
the approach of evening, the farmers, their friends, servants, 
etc., all assemble, and, near six o’clock, all walk together 
to a field where wheat is growing. The highest part of the 
ground is always chosen, where twelve small fires, and one 
large one are lighted up. The attendants, headed by the 
master of the family, pledge the company in old cyder, 
which circulates freely on these occasions. A circle is 
formed round the large fire, when a general shout and 
hallooing takes place, which you hear answered from all 
the villages and fields near; as I have myself counted fifty 
or sixty fires burning at the same time, which are generally 
placed on some eminence. This being finished, the company 
all return to the house, where the good housewife and her 
maids are preparing a good supper, which on this occasion 
is very plentiful. A large cake is always provided, with a 
hole in the middle. After supper, the company all attend the 
bailiff (or head of the oxen) to the wain-house, where the 
following particulars are observed. The master, at the head 
of his friends, fills the cup (generally of strong ale), and 


1 J. Brand, Popular Antiquities of ary on Twelfth Day to light twelve 
Great Britain, New Edition (London, small fires and one large one (J. Brand, 
1883), i. 33. In many parishes of of. cét. i. 28). 

Gloucestershire it used to be custom- 


“al 


vil K/JNG OF THE BEAN AND FESTIVAL OF FOOLS 319 


stands opposite the first or finest of the oxen (twenty- 
four of which I have often seen tied up in their stalls 
together); he then pledges him in a curious toast; the 
company then follow his example with all the other oxen, 
addressing each by their name. This being over, the large 
cake is produced, and is, with much ceremony, put on the 
horn of the first ox, through the hole in the cake; he is 
then tickled to make him toss his head: if he throws the 
cake behind, it is the mistress’s perquisite ; if before (in what 
is termed the Jdoosy), the bailiff claims this prize. This 
ended, the company all return to the house, the doors of 
which are in the meantime locked, and not opened till some 
joyous songs are sung. On entering, a scene of mirth and 
jollity commences, and reigns thro’ the house till a late, or 
rather an early, hour, the next morning.” ? 

The custom was known as Wassailing and it was 
believed to have a beneficial effect on the crops.? Accord- 
ing to one Herefordshire informant, “on Twelfth Day they 
make twelve fires of straw and one large one to burn the 
old witch; they sing, drink, and dance round it; without 
this festival they think they should have no crop.”* This 
explanation of the large fire on Twelfth Day is remarkable 
and may supply the key to the whole custom of kindling 
fires on the fields or in the orchards on that day. We have 
seen that witches and fiends of various sorts are believed to 
be let loose during the Twelve Days and that in some places 
they are formally driven away on Twelfth Night* It may 
well be that the fires lighted on that day were everywhere 
primarily intended to burn the witches and other maleficent 


- beings swarming invisible in the mischief-laden air, and that 


the benefit supposed to be conferred by the fires on the crops 
was not so much the positive one of quickening the growth 
of vegetation by genial warmth as the negative one of 
destroying the baleful influences which would otherwise 


1 The Gentleman's Magazine, vol. 
Ixi., February, 1791, p. 116. The 
article is signed J. W. and dated 
** Hereford, Jan. 24.” The passage 
is quoted, correctly in substance, but 
with many verbal changes, by J. Brand, 
Popular Antiquities of Great Britain, 
i. 30 sg., and by (Mrs.) E. M. Leather, 


The Folk-lore of Herefordshire (Here- 
ford and London, 1912), p. 93. 

2 (Mrs.) Ella Mary Leather, Zhe 
Folk-lore of Herefordshire (Hereford 
and London, 1912), pp. 93 sg. 

3 (Mrs.) E. M. Leather, of. ez¢. pp. 
94 59. 

4 See above, pp. 164 sqq. 


One of 

the fires on 
Twelfth 
Day said 
to be in- 
tended ‘‘to 
burn the 
old witch.” 


Parallel 
custom 
observed 
in Mace- 
donia on 
the Eve of 
Twelfth 
Night. 


320 SATURNALIA AND KINDRED FESTIVALS  cuHapr. % 


blast the fruits of the earth and of the trees. This inter- 
pretation of the English and French custom of lighting fires 
in fields and orchards on Twelfth Night is confirmed by a 
parallel custom observed by Macedonian peasants for the 
express purpose of burning up certain malicious fiends, who 
are believed to be abroad at this season. These noxious 
beings are known as Karkantzarit or Skatsantzari<. They are 
thought to be living people, whether men or women, who during 
the Twelve Days are transformed into horrible monsters, 
with long nails, red faces, bloodshot eyes, snottering noses, 
and slobbering mouths. In this hideous guise they roam 
about by night haunting houses and making the peasant’s 
life well-nigh unbearable ; they knock at the doors and 
should they be refused admittance they will scramble down 
the chimney and pinch, worry, and defile the sleepers in 
their beds. The only way to escape from these tormenters 
is to seize and bind them fast with a straw rope. If you 
have no such rope or your heart fails you, there is nothing 
for it but to shut yourself up in the house before dark, fasten 
the door tight, block up the chimney, and wait for daylight ; 
for it is only at night that the monsters are on the prowl, 
during the day they resume their ordinary human shape. 
However, in some places strenuous efforts are made during 
the Twelve Days to destroy these hateful nocturnal goblins 
by fire. For example, on Christmas Eve some people 
burn the Karkantzart by lighting faggots of holm-oak 
and throwing them out into the streets at early dawn. In 
other places, notably at Melenik, they scald the fiends to 
death on New Year's Eve by means of pancakes frizzling 
and hissing in a pan. While the goodwife is baking 
the cakes, the goodman disguises himself as one of the 
fiends in a fur coat turned inside out,and in his assumed 
character dances and sings outside the door, while he invites 
his wife to join him in the dance. In other districts people 
collect faggots during the whole of the Twelve Days and 
lay them up on the hearth. Then on the Eve of Twelfth 
Night they set fire to the pile in order that the gob- 
lins, who are supposed to be lurking under the ashes, 
may utterly perish... Thus the view that the large fire in 
1G. F. Abbott, Wacedonian Folk-lore (Cambridge, 1903), pp. 73-75. 


wii KJNG OF THE BEAN AND FESTIVAL OF FOOLS 321 


Herefordshire on Twelfth Night is intended “to burn the 
old witch” is far more probable than the opinion that it 
represents the Virgin Mary, and that the other twelve fires 
stand for the twelve apostles.'. This latter interpretation is 
in all probability nothing more than a Christian gloss put 
upon an old heathen custom of which the meaning was 
forgotten. 

The Gloucestershire custom was described by the 
English traveller Thomas Pennant in the latter part of the 
eighteenth century. He says: “A custom savouring of 
the Scotch Bel-tien prevales in Gloucestershire, particularly 
about Newent and the neighbouring parishes, on the 
twelfth day, or on the Epiphany, in the evening. All 
the servants of every particular farmer assemble together 
in one of the fields that has been sown with wheat; on 
the border of which, in the most conspicuous or most 
elevated place, they make twelve fires of straw, in a 
row; around one of which, made larger than the rest, 
they drink a cheerful glass of cyder to their master’s 
health, success to the future harvest, and then returning 
home, they feast on cakes made of carraways, etc., soaked 
in cyder, which they claim as a reward for their past 
labours in sowing the grain.”* In Shropshire also it used 
to be customary to kindle festal fires on the tops of hills and 
other high places on Twelfth Night.2 Again, in Ireland “on 
Twelfth-Eve in Christmas, they use to set up as high as 
they can a sieve of oats, and in it a dozen of candles set 
\ round, and in the centre one larger, all lighted. This in 
memory of our Saviour and his Apostles, lights of the 
world.”* Down to the present time, apparently, in the 
county of Roscommon, “Twelfth Night, which is Old 
Christmas Day, is a greater day than Christmas Day itself. 
Thirteen rushlights are made in remembrance of the numbers 
at the Last Supper, and each is named after some member 


} 1 This opinion is mentioned by 3 Thomas Hyde, Wistoria religionis 
(Mrs.) E. M. Leather, Zhe Folk-lore  veterum Persarum (Oxford, 1700), p. 
of Herefordshire, p. 95. 257. 

2 Thomas Pennant, “‘A Tour in 4 Sir Henry Piers, Description of 


_ Scotland, 1769,” in John Pinkerton’s the County of Westmeath, quoted by 

| Voyages and Travels (London, 1808— J. Brand, Popular Antiquities of 

1814), iii. 49. Great Britain (London, 1883), i. 25. 
vel hs WA Yi 


Other 
accounts 
of the fires 
on Twelfth 
Night in 
England 
and 
Ireland. 


322 


SATURNALIA AND KINDRED FESTIVALS  cuap. 


of the family. 


Belief In these English and Irish customs observed on 
par Twelfth Night the twelve fires or candles probably refer 
peoples either to the twelve days from Christmas to Epiphany or 
eae to the twelve months of the year. In favour of this 
cas view it may be said that according to a popular opinion, 
months of Which has been reported in England? and is widely 


the year is 
determined 


by the the weather of the twelve days in question determines 
antl the weather of the twelve following months, so that 
Twelve from the weather on each of these days it is possible 
Days. 


If there are not enough in the household | 
other relations’. names are added. 


' The candles are stuck in 


a cake of cow-dung and lighted, and as each burns out, so 


will be the length of each person’s life. 


used for this occasion.” ? 


diffused in Germany and the German provinces of Austria, 


to predict the weather of the corresponding month in the 
Hence in Swabia the days are called “the - 
Twelve Lot Days”; and many people seek to pry into the 
future with scientific precision by means of twelve circles, © 
each subdivided into four quadrants, which they chalk up — 
over the parlour door or inscribe on paper. 
represents a month, and each quadrant represents a quarter 


= 3 
ensuing year. 


1 H. J. Byrne, ‘‘ All Hallows Eve 
and other Festivals in Connaught,” 
folk-lore, xvii. (1907) p. 439. 

2C. S. Burne and G. F. Jackson, 
Shropshire Folk-lore (London, 1883), 
p- 408. 

3 The Popish Kingdome or reigne of 
Antichrist, written in Latin verse by 
Thomas Naogeorgus and Englyshed by 
Barnabe Googe, 1570, edited by R. C. 
Hope (London, 1880), p. 46; E. 
Meier, Deutsche Sagen, Sitten und 
Gebrauche aus Schwaben (Stuttgart, 
1852), p- 473, § 237; A. Birlinger, 
Volksthiimliches aus Schwaben (Frei- 
burg im Breisgau, 1861-1862), i. 468, 
§ 696; A. Kuhn und W. Schwartz, 
Norddeutsche Sagen, Marchen und 
Gebrduche (Leipsic, 1848), p. 411; A. 
Kuhn, Sagex, Gebrauche und Marchen 
aus Westfalen (Leipsic, 1859), ii. 115, 
§ 354; A. Wuttke, Der deutsche Volks- 
aberglaube? (Berlin, 1869), p. 61, § 743 
Montanus, De deutschen Volksfeste, 


Rushlights are only — 


Each circle | 


Volksbrauche und deutscher Volksglaube 
(Iserlohn, N.D.), p. 18; M. Toeppen, 
Aberglauben aus Masuren? (Danzig, 
1867), p. 61; L. Strackerjan, Ader- 
glaube und Sagen aus dem Herzogthum 
Oldenburg (Oldenburg, 1867), ii. 29, 
§ 294 ; August Witzschel, Sagen, Sitten 
und Gebriuche aus Thtringen (Vienna, 
1878), p. 1753; K. Bartsch, Sagem, 
Miarchenund Gebriucheaus Mecklenburg 
(Vienna, 1880), p.250, § 1292; Christian 
Schneller, J/archen und Sagen aus 
Wealschtirol (Innsbruck, 1867), p. 2313— 
J. Haltrich, Zs Volkskunde der Sieben- 
biirger Sachsen (Vienna, 1885), p. 2825 
Willibald Miiller, Beztrage zur Voiks- 
kunde der Deutschen in Miéahren 
(Vienna and Olmutz, 1893), p. 3173 
Alois John, Sztte, Brauch und Volks- 
glaube im deutschen Westbohmen 
(Prague, 1905), p. 12; P. Drechsler, 
Sitte, Brauch und Volksglaube in 
Schlesien (Leipsic, 1903-1906), i. 16 
Ss 


wil KING OF THE BEAN AND FESTIVAL OF FOOLS 323 


of a month; and according as the sky is overcast or clear 
during each quarter of a day from Christmas to Epiphany, 
you shade the corresponding ‘quadrant of a circle or 
leave it a blank. By this contrivance, as simple as it 
is ingenious, you may forecast the weather for the whole 
year with more or less of accuracy... At Hosskirch in 
Swabia they say that you can predict the weather for the 
twelve months from the weather of the twelve hours of 
Twelfth Day alone.” A somewhat different system of 
meteorology is adopted in various parts of Switzerland, 
Germany, and Austria. On Christmas, New Year’s Day, 
or another of the twelve days you take an onion, slice it in 
two, peel off twelve coats, and sprinkle a pinch of salt in 
each of them. The twelve coats of the onion stand for the 
twelve months of the year, and from the amount of moisture 
which has gathered in each of them next morning you may 
foretell the amount of rain that will fall in the correspond- 
ing month.’ 

| But the belief that the weather of the twelve months can 
be predicted from the weather of the twelve days is not 
‘confined to the Germanic peoples. It occurs also in France 
and among the Celts of Brittany and Scotland. Thus in 
the Bocage of Normandy “ the village old wives have a very 
simple means of divining the general temperature of the 
coming season. According to them, the twelve days between 
Christmas and Epiphany, including Epiphany, represent the 
twelve months of the year. So the thing to do is to mark 
the temperature of each of these days, for the temperature 
of the corresponding month will be relatively the same. 
Some people say that this experience is rarely at fault, and 
more trust is put in it than in the predictions of the Dowdle- 
Liégois.’* In Cornouaille, Brittany, it is popularly believed 
that the weather of the last six days of December and the 
first six of January prognosticates the weather of the twelve 


1 FE. Meier, Deutsche Sagen, Sitten 
und Gebrauche aus Schwaben (Stuttgart, 
1552), p- 473, § 2373; A. Birlinger, 
Volksthiimliches aus Schwaben (Frei- 
burg im Breisgau, 1861-1862), i. 468, 
§ 696. 

2 A. Birlinger, of. cit. i. 470. 

* F. J. Vonbun, Beztrdge zur deut- 


schen Mythologie (Chur, 1862), p. 1313 
A. Birlinger, Volksthiimliches aus 
Schwaben, i. 469; Chr. Schneller, 
Mirchen und Sagen aus Wealschtirol 
(Innsbruck, 1867), p. 231. 

4 Jules Lecoeur, Zsguzsses du Bocage 
Normand (Condé-sur-Noireau, 1883— 
1887), ii. 20 sg. 


Belief of 
the Celtic 
peoples 
that the 
weather for 
the twelve 
months of 
the year is 
determined 
by the 
weather of 
the Twelve 
Days. 


SATURNALIA AND KINDRED FESTIVALS  cuap. | 


324 


months; but in other parts of Brittany it is the first twelve 
days of January that are supposed to be ominous of the | 
weather for the year. These days are called gour-deziou, 
which is commonly interpreted “male days,” but is said to 
mean properly “ additional or supplementary days.”* Again, 
in the Highlands of Scotland the twelve days of Christmas | 
(Da latha dheug na Nollazg) “were the twelve days com- | 
mencing from the Nativity or Big JVol/azg, and were deemed 
to represent, in respect of weather, the twelve months of the 
year. Some say the days should be calculated from New 
Year’s Day.”* Others again reckon the Twelve Days from 
the thirty-first of December. Thus Pennant tells us that | 
“the Highlanders form a sort of almanack or presage of the 
weather of the ensuing year in the following manner: they 
make observation on twelve days, beginning at the last of 
December, and hold as an infallible rule, that whatsoever 
weather happens on each of those days, the same will prove 
to agree in the correspondent months. Thus, January is to 
answer to the weather of December 31st; February to that 
of January Ist; and so with the rest. Old people still pay 
great attention to this augury.”* It is interesting to 
observe that in the Celtic regions of Scotland and France 
popular opinion hesitates as to the exact date of the twelve 
days, some people dating them from Christmas, others from) 
the New Year, and others again from the thirty-first of 
December. This hesitation has an important bearing on, 
the question of the origin of the twelve days’ period, as I 
shall point out immediately. 


The Thus in the popular mind the twelve days from Christmas. 
a) to Epiph ived ini f the whol | 
Nights Oo Epiphany are conceived as a miniature of the whole year, 
SOR the character of each particular day answering to the character 
meee oe of a particular month. The conception appears to be very 
India. 


ancient, for it meets us again among the Aryans of the 
Vedic age in India. They, too, appear to have invested 


‘ 
} 


1 J. Loth, ‘‘ Les douze jours supplé- 
mentaires (gowrdeztou) des Bretons et 
les douze jours des Germains et des 
Indous,” Revue Celtigue, xxiv. (1903) 
pp. 310 sg. 

2 J. G. Campbell, Witchcraft and 
Second Sight in the Highlands and 


Islands of Scotland (Glasgow, 1902), 
Pp. 243. 

3’ Thomas Pennant, ‘*A Tour in’ 
Scotland and Voyage to the Hebrides” 
in 1772,” in John Pinkerton’s Voyages 
and Travels (London, 1808-1814), iii. 
384. 


me KING OF THE BEAN AND FESTIVAL OF FOOLS 325 


twelve days in midwinter with a sacred character as a time 
when the three Ribhus or genii of the seasons rested from 
their labours in the home of the sun-god ; and these twelve 
rest-days they called “an image or copy of the year.” ! 

This curious coincidence, if such it is, between the winter 
festivals of the ancient Aryans of India and their modern 
kinsfolk in Europe seems to be best explained on the theory 
that the twelve days in question derive their sanctity from the 
position which they occupied in the calendar of the primitive 
Aryans. The coincidence of the name for month with the 
-name for moon in the various Aryan languages” points to the 
conclusion that the year of our remote ancestors was primarily 
based on observation of the moon rather than of the sun; 
but as a year of twelve lunar months or three hundred and 
fifty-four days (reckoning the months at twenty-nine and 
thirty days alternately) falls short of the solar year of three 
hundred and sixty-five and a quarter days by roundly twelve 
days, the discrepancy could not fail to attract the attention 
of an intelligent people, such as the primitive Aryans must 
be supposed to have been, who had made some progress in 
the arts of life; and the most obvious way of removing the 
discrepancy and equating the lunar with the solar year is to 
add twelve days at the end of each period of twelve lunar 
months so as to bring the total days of the year up to three 
hundred and sixty-six. The equation is not indeed perfectly 
exact, but it may well have been sufficiently so for the 
rudimentary science of the primitive Aryans. As many 


tumskunde (Strasburg, 1901), p. 
547; zd., Sprachvergleichung und Ur- 
geschichte * (Jena, 1906-1907), ii. 228. 


1 The Hymns of the Rigveda, trans- 
lated by R. T. H. Griffith (Benares, 
1889-1892), book iv. hymn 33, vol. ii. 


pp. 150 sgg.; H. Zimmer, A/tzndzsches 
Leben (Berlin, 1879), pp. 365-367 ; A. 
Hillebrandt, Rztwal-Litteratur, Vedische 
Opfer und Zauber (Strasburg, 1897), 
pp- 5 sg. However, the Ribhus are 
very obscure figures in Vedic myth- 
ology. Compare H. Oldenberg, Dze 
Religion des Veda (Berlin, 1894), pp. 
235 sg.; A. A. Macdonnell, Vedic 
Mythology (Strasburg, 1897), pp. 131 
599. 

4, F. Max Miiller, Lectures on the 
Science of Language, Sixth Edition 
(London, 1871), i.6sgg. ; O. Schrader, 
Reallexikon der indogermanischen A lter- 


3 This explanation of the sacredness 
of the twelve days among the Indo- 
European peoples of the East and West 
is due to A. Weber. See O. Schrader, 
Reallextkon der indosermanischen Alter- 
tumskunde (Strasburg, 1901), pp. 39I- 
3904; 2a., Sprachvergleichung und 
Urgeschichte? (Jena, 1906-1907), ii. 2. 
pp. 228-234. It is accepted by J. 
Loth (in Revue Celtigue, xxiv. 1903, 
pp. 311 sg.), Professor H. Hirt (Dee 
Lndogermanen, Strasburg, 1905-1907, 
li. 537, 544), Professor J. H. Moulton 
(Zwo Lectures on the Sctence of Lan- 
guage, Cambridge, 1903, pp. 47 5g.),and 


The 
Twelve 
Nights are 
probably 
an ancient 
intercalary 
period 
introduced 
to equate 
twelve 
lunar 
months to 
the solar 
year. 


The super- 
stitions 
attaching 
to the 
Twelve 
Nights 

are not of 
Christian 
origin. 


SATURNALIA AND KINDRED FESTIVALS  CuHap, | 


326 


savage races in modern times have observed the discrepancy | 
between solar and lunar time and have essayed to correct it } 
by observations of the sun or the constellations, especially | 
the Pleiades,! there seems no reason to doubt that the 
ancestors of the Indo-European peoples in prehistoric times 
were able to make similar observations, and that they 
were not, as has been suggested, reduced to the necessity | 
of borrowing the knowledge of such simple and obvious ” 
facts from the star-gazers of ancient Babylonia. Learned | 
men who make little use of their eyes except to read | 
books are too apt to underrate the observational powers 
of the savage, who lives under totally different conditions | 
from us, spending most of his time in the open air and 
depending for his very existence on the accuracy with which | 
he notes the varied and changing aspects of nature. 

It has been proposed to explain the manifold supersti- 


| 


tions which cluster round the Twelve Days, or rather the 
Twelve Nights, as theyare more popularly called,” by reference 
to the place which they occupy in the Christian calendar, | 
beginning as they do immediately after Christmas and ending 
with Epiphany.’ But, in the first place, it is difficult to see | 
why the interval between these two particular festivals should | 
have attracted to itself a greater mass of superstitious belief | 
and custom than the interval between any other two Christian | 


J. A. MacCulloch (in Dr. J. Hastings’s ancient Aryan custom of counting by | 


Encyclopaedia of Religion and Ethics, 
ili. 81 sg.), but is rejected on what 
seem to me insufficient grounds by 
Professor O. Schrader (¢/.cc.). 

1 Spirits of the Corn and of the 
Wild, i. 307 sqq. 

2 Die gestriegelte Rockenphilosophie 
(Chemnitz, 1759), pp. 860, 861; 
Bavaria, Landes- und Volkskunde des 
Konigreichs Bayern (Munich, 1860— 
1867), i. 365; A. Wuttke, Der deutsche 
Volksaberglaube? (Berlin, 1869), p. 61; 
P. Drechsler, Sztte, Brauch und Volks- 
glaube in Schlesten (Leipsic, 1903- 
1906), i. 15; A. John, Sztte, Brauch 
und Volksglaube tm deutschen West- 
bohmen (Prague, 1905), p. I1. The 
phrase ‘‘the Twelve Nights” in the 
sense of ‘‘the Twelve Days and 
Nights” is doubtless derived from the 


nights instead of by days and of regard- 
ing the period of the earth’s revolution } 
on its axis as beginning with the night ; 
rather than with the day. See Caesar, 
De bello Galltico, vi. 183; Tacitus, } 
Germania, 11; O. Schrader, Real- | 
lextkon der indogermanischen Alter- } 
tumskunde (Strasburg, 1901), pp. 844 | 
sgg.; J. Loth, “*L’Année celtique,” | 
Revue Celtigue, xxv. (1904) pp. 115 
sgg- The Athenians reckoned a day % 
from sunset to sunset, and the Romans © 
reckoned it from midnight to midnight 
(Censorinus, De de natali, xxiii. 3). 

3 A. Tille, Dze Geschichte der deut- © 
schen Wethnacht (Leipsic, preface dated ~ 
1893), pp. 3 5g., 281 sgg.; O. Schrader, § 
Reallexikon der  indogermanischen | 
Altertumskunde (Strasburg, 1901), p. 
392. 


vil KING OF THE BEAN AND FESTIVAL OF FOOLS 327 


festivals in the calendar; if it really did so, the ground of 
its special attraction is still to seek, and on this essential 
point the advocates of the Christian origin of the Twelve 
Nights throw no light. In the second place, the superstitious 
beliefs and customs themselves appear to have no relation to 
Christianity but to be purely pagan in character. Lastly, a 
fatal objection to the theory in question is that the place 
of the Twelve Days in the calendar is not uniformly fixed 
to the interval between Christmas and Epiphany ; it varies 
considerably in popular opinion in different places, but it is 
significant that the variations never exceed certain com- 
paratively narrow limits. The twelve-days’ festival, so to 
speak, oscillates to and fro about a fixed point, which is 
either the end of the year or the winter solstice. Thus in 
Silesia the Twelve Days are usually reckoned to fall before 
Christmas instead of after it ; though in the Polish districts 
and the mountainous region of the country the ordinary 
German opinion prevails that the days immediately follow 
Christmas.’ In some parts of Bavaria the Twelve Days are 
counted from St. Thomas’s Day (the twenty-first of December) 
to New Year’s Day; while in parts of Mecklenburg they 
begin with New Year’s Day and so coincide with the first 
twelve days of January,’ and this last mode of reckoning 
finds favour, as we saw, with some Celts of Brittany and 
Scotland? These variations in the dating of the Twelve 
Days seem irreconcilable with the theory that they derive 
their superstitious character purely from the accident that 
they fall between Christmas and Epiphany ; accordingly we 
may safely dismiss the theory of their Christian origin and 
recognize, with many good authorities,* in the Twelve Days 
the relics of a purely pagan festival, which was probably 


1 P. Drechsler, Sztte, Brauch und 
Volksglaube in Schlesten (Leipsic, 1903- 
1906), i. 15. 

2 A, Wuttke, Der deutsche Volks- 
aberglaube* (Berlin, 1869), p. 61, § 74. 
As to the varying dates of the Twelve 
Nights see further E. Mogk, ‘‘ Mytho- 
logie,” in H. Paul’s Grundriss der 
germanischen Philologie, iii.2 (Stras- 
burg, 1900), p. 260. 

3 See above, p. 324. 

4 Thus A. Wuttke observes that by 


far the greater part of the superstitions 
attaching to the Twelve Nights are of 
purely heathen origin (Der deutsche 
Volksaberglaube,? p. 61); and K. 
Weinhold similarly remarks that the 
superstitions in question cannot have 
originated in Christian dogmas, and 
that they point to the sacredness of 
the winter solstice among the heathen 
tribes of Germany (Weznacht-Spiele 
und Lieder aus Siiddeutschland und 
Schlesten, Vienna, 1875, p. 4). 


An 
intercalary 
period a 
natural 
subject of 
supersti- 
tion to 
primitive 
peoples. 


328 SATURNALIA AND KINDRED FESTIVALS  cuapr. 


celebrated long before the foundation of Christianity. In 
truth the hypothesis of the Christian derivation of the 
Twelve Days in all probability exactly inverts the historical 
order of the facts. On the whole the evidence goes to shew 
that the great Christian festivals were arbitrarily timed by 
the church so as to coincide with previously existing pagan 
festivals for the sake of weaning the heathen from their old 
faith and bringing them over to the new religion. To make 
the transition as easy as possible the ecclesiastical authorities, 
in abolishing the ancient rites, appointed ceremonies of some- 
what similar character on the same days, or nearly so, thus 
filling up the spiritual void by a new creation which the 
worshipper might accept as an adequate substitute for what 
he had lost. Christmas and Easter, the two pivots on which 
the Christian calendar revolves, appear both to have been 
instituted with this intention: the one superseded a mid- 
winter festival of the birth of the sun-god, the other super- 
seded a vernal festival of the death and resurrection of the 
vegetation-god.’ 

If the twelve days from Christmas to Epiphany were 
indeed an ancient intercalary period inserted for the purpose 
of equating the lunar to the solar year, we can better under- 
stand the curious superstitions that have clustered round 
them and the quaint customs that have been annually observed 
during their continuance. To the primitive mind it might 
well seem that an intercalary period stands outside of the 
regular order of things, forming part neither of the lunar nor 
of the solar system; it is an excrescence, inevitable but 
unaccountable, which breaks the smooth surface of ordinary 
existence, an eddy which interrupts the even flow of months 
and years. Hence it may be inferred that the ordinary rules 
of conduct do not apply to such extraordinary periods, and 
that accordingly men may do in them what they would never 
dream of doing at other times. Thus intercalary days tend 
to degenerate into seasons of unbridled license ; they form 
an interregnum during which the customary restraints of law 


1 See Adonzs, Attis, Ostris, Second January 4th, 1908, pp. 19 sg.; Franz 
Edition, pp. 254 sgg.; and for Easter Cumont, Zes Religtons orientales dans 
in particular see my letter *‘Attis and le Paganisme romain? (Paris, 1909), 
Christ,” Zhe Athenaeum, No. 4184, pp. 106 59., 333 sg. 


wii KING OF THE BEAN AND FESTIVAL OF FOOLS 329 


and morality are suspended and the ordinary rulers abdicate 
their authority in favour of a temporary regent, a sort of 
puppet king, who bears a more or less indefinite, capricious, 
and precarious sway over a community given up for a time 
to riot, turbulence, and disorder. If that is so—though it 
must be confessed that the view here suggested is to a great 
extent conjectural—we may perhaps detect the last surviving 
representatives of such puppet kings in the King of the Bean 
and other grotesque figures of the same sort who used to 
parade with the mimic pomp of sovereignty on one or 
other of the twelve days between Christmas and Epiphany. 
For the King of the Bean was by no means the only such 
ruler of the festive season, nor was Twelfth Night the only 
day on which he and his colleagues played their pranks. 
We will conclude this part of our subject with a brief notice 
of some of these mummers. 

In the first place it deserves to be noticed that in many 
parts of the continent, such as France, Spain, Belgium, 
Germany, and Austria, Twelfth Day is regularly associated 
with three mythical kings named Caspar, Melchior, and 
Balthasar, and derives its popular appellation from them, 
being known in Germany and Austria as the Day of the 
Three Kings (Drezkénigstag) and in France as the Festival 
of the Kings (Féte des Rozs). Further, it has been customary 
in many places to represent the three kings by mummers, 
who go about arrayed in royal costume from door to door, 
singing songs and collecting contributions from the house- 
holds which they visit." The custom may very well be older 
than Christianity, though it has received a Christian colour- 
ing ; for the mythical kings are commonly identified with 
the wise men of the East, who are said to have been attracted 


1 J. Brand, Popular Antiquzties of 
Great Britain (London, 1883), i. 21 
sqg.; E. Cortet, Zssaz sur les Fétes 
religteuses (Paris, 1867), pp. 32, 38, 
39-42; Reinsberg-Diiringsfeld, Ca/en- 
drier Belge (Brussels, 1861-1862), 1. 
21 sg., 30 sg.; td., Pest-Kalender aus 
Biéhmen (Prague, N.D.), p. 183 2d., 
Das festliche Jahr (Leipsic, 1863), pp. 
23-26; Bavaria, Landes- und Volks- 
kunde des Konigreichs Bayern (Munich, 
1860-1867), ii. 262 sg.; L. F. Sauvé, 


Le Folk-lore des Hautes- Vosges (Paris, 
1889), pp. 15-18; Ch. Beauquier, Les 
Mots en Franche-Comté (Paris, 1900), 
pp. 13-15; La Bresse Louhannatse, 
Janvier, 1906, p. 42; P. Drechsler, 
Sitte, Brauch und Volksglaube im 
Schlesten (Leipsic, 1903-1906), i. 51 5 
A. John, Sztte, Brauch und Volksglaube 
7m deutschen Westbohmen (Prague, 
1905), pp. 32-34; FE. Hoffmann- 
Krayer, Feste und Briuche des Schwet- 
servolkes (Ziirich, 1913), pp. 104, 121. 


The Three 
Kings of 
Twelfth 
Night. 


330 SATURNALIA AND KINDRED FESTIVALS  cuap. 


to the infant Christ at Bethlehem by the sight of his star in 
the sky.’ Yet there is no Biblical authority tor regarding 
these wise men as kings or for fixing their number at three. 
In Franche-Comté the old custom is still observed, or at all 
events it was so down to recent years. The Three Kings are 
personated by three boys dressed in long white shirts with 
coloured sashes round their waists ; on their heads they wear 
pointed mitres of pasteboard decorated with a gilt star and 
floating ribbons. Each carries a long wand topped by a 
star, which he keeps constantly turning. The one who 
personates Melchior has his face blackened with soot, because 
Melchior is supposed to have been a negro king. When 
they enter a house, they sing a song, setting forth that they 
are three kings who have come from three different countries, 
led by a star, to adore the infant Jesus at Bethlehem. After 
the song the negro king solicits contributions by shaking his 
money-box or holding out a basket, in which the inmates of 
the house deposit eggs, nuts, apples and so forth. By way 
of thanks for this liberality the three kings chant a stave in 
which they call down the blessing of God on the household.” 
The custom is similar in the Vosges Mountains, where the 
Three Kings are held in great veneration and invoked by 
hedge doctors to effect various cures. For example, if a 
man drops to the ground with the falling sickness, you need 
only whisper in his right ear, “ Gaspard fert myrrham, thus 
Melchior, Balthasar aurum,” and he will get up at once. But 
to make the cure complete you must knock three nails into 
the earth on the precise spot where he fell; each nail must 
be exactly of the length of the patient’s little finger, and as 
you knock it in you must take care to utter the sufferer’s 
name.* In many Czech villages of Bohemia the children 
who play the part of the Three Kings assimilate themselves 
to the wise men of the East in the gospel by carrying gilt 
paper, incense, and myrrh with them on their rounds, which 
they distribute as gifts in the houses they visit, receiving in 
return money or presents in kind. Moreover they fumigate 


1 Matthew ii. 1-12. 3 L. F. Sauvé, Le Folk-lore des 
fTautes- Vosges (Paris, 1889), pp. 15- 
2 Ch. Beauquier, Les Motsen Franche- 17. Compare the old Roman cure for 


Comté (Paris, 1900), pp. 13-16. the falling sickness (above, p. 68). 


vit KING OF THE BEAN AND FESTIVAL OF FOOLS 331 


and sprinkle the houses and describe crosses and letters on 
the doors. Amongst the Germans of West Bohemia it is 
the schoolmaster who, accompanied by some boys, goes the 
round of the village on Twelfth Day. He chalks up the 
letters C. M. B. (the initials of Caspar, Melchior, and Balthasar), 
together with three crosses, on every door, and fumigates the 
house with a burning censer in order to guard it from evil 
influences and infectious diseases.. Some people used to 
wear as an amulet a picture representing the adoration of 
the Three Kings with a Latin inscription to the following 
effect: “ Holy three kings, Caspar, Melchior, Balthasar, pray 
for us, now and in the hour of our death.” The picture was 
thought to protect the wearer not only from epilepsy, head- 
ache, and fever, but also from the perils of the roads, from 
the bite of mad dogs, from sudden death, from sorcery and 
witchcraft.” Whatever its origin, the festival of the Three 
Kings goes back to the middle ages, for it is known to have 
been celebrated with great pomp at Milan in 1336. On that 
occasion the Three Kings appeared wearing crowns, riding 
richly caparisoned horses, and surrounded by pages, body- 
guards, and a great retinue of followers. Before them was 
carried a golden star, and they offered gifts of gold, frankin- 
cense, and myrrh to the infant Christ cradled in a manger 
beside the high altar of the church of St. Eustorgius.* 

In our own country a popular figure during the Christmas 
holidays used to be the Lord of Misrule, or, as he was called 
in Scotland, the Abbot of Unreason, who led the revels at 
that merry season in the halls of colleges, the Inns of Court, 
the palace of the king, and the mansions of nobles.* Writing 
at the end of the sixteenth century, the antiquary John Stow 
tells us that, “in the feast of Christmas, there was in the 
King’s house, wheresoever he was lodged, a Lord of Misrule, 
or Master of Merry Disports; and the like had ye in the 


1 ©. Freiherr von Reinsberg- Dii- 
ringsfeld, Fest-Kalender aus Béhmen 
(Prague, N.D.), pp. 17 sg. 

2 Reinsberg-Diiringsfeld, Calendrier 
Belge (Brussels, 1861-1862), i. 22. 
_ The mere names of the three kings 
worn on the person were believed to be 
a cure for epilepsy. See J. B. Thiers, 
Traité des Superstitions (Paris, 1679), 


Pp. 350 Sg. 

3 R. Chambers, Zhe Book of Days 
(London and Edinburgh, 1886), i. 62, 
referring to Warton’s Hzstory of English 
Poetry. 

4 J. Brand, Popular Antiquities of 
Great Britain (London, 1883), i. 497 
sgq. ; E. K. Chambers, Zhe Wediaeval 
Stage (Oxford, 1903), i. 403 sg¢. 


The Lord 
of Misrule 
inEngland. 


Reign of 
the Lord 
of Misrule 
during the 
Twelve 
Days. 


332 SATURNALIA AND KINDRED FESTIVALS  cuap. 


house of every nobleman of honour or good worship, were he 
spiritual or temporal. Amongst the which the Mayor of 
London, and either of the Sheriffs, had their several Lords of 
Misrule, ever contending, without quarrel or offence, who 
should make the rarest pastimes to delight the beholders. 
These Lords beginning their rule on Alhollon eve, continued 
the same til the morrow after the Feast of the Purification, 
commonly called Candlemas day. In all which space there 
were fine and subtle disguisings, masks and mummeries, 
with playing at cards for counters, nails, and points, in 
every house, more for pastime than for gain.”’ Again, 
in the seventeenth century the ardent royalist Sir Thomas 
Urquhart wrote that “they may be likewise said to use their 
king . .. as about Christmas we do the King of Misrule ; 
whom we invest with that title to no other end, but to 
countenance the Bacchanalian riots and preposterous disorders 
of the family, where he is installed.”” From the former 
passage it appears that the Lords of Misrule often or even 
generally reigned for more than three months in winter, 
namely from Allhallow Even (the thirty-first of October, the 
Eve of All Saints’ Day) till Candlemas (the second of 
February). Sometimes, however, their reign seems to have 
been restricted to the Twelve Nights. Thus we are told 
that George Ferrers of Lincoln’s Inn was Lord of Misrule 
for twelve days one year when King Edward VI. kept his 
Christmas with open house at Greenwich.? At Trinity 
College, Cambridge, a Master of Arts used to be appointed 
to this honourable office, which he held for the twelve days 
from Christmas to Twelfth Day, and he resumed office on 
Candlemas Day. His duty was to regulate the games and 
diversions of the students, particularly the plays which were 
acted in the college hall. Similar masters of the revels were 
commonly instituted in the colleges at Oxford ; for example, 
at Merton College the fellows annually elected about St. 
Edmund’s Day, in November a Lord of Misrule or, as he 
was called in the registers, a King of the Bean (Rex Fabarum), 

1 John Stow, A Survey of London, covery of a most Exquisite Jewel, more 
wretten in the year 1598, edited by precious than Diamonds inchased in 


William J. Thoms (London, 1876), Gold (Edinburgh, 1774), p. 146. 


Pp. 37- 
2 Sir Thomas Urquhart, Zhe Diés- 3 J. Brand, of. cz#. i. 499. 


war KING OF THE BEAN AND FESTIVAL OF FOOLS 333 


who held office till Candlemas and sometimes assumed a 


number of ridiculous titles. In the Inner Temple a Lord of Lord of 


Misrule used to be appointed on St. Stephen’s Day (the 
twenty-sixth of December) ; surrounded by his courtiers, who 
were dubbed by various derogatory or ribald names, he 
presided at the dancing, feasting, and minstrelsy in the hall. 
Of the mock monarch who in the Christmas holidays of 1635 
held office in the Middle Temple the jurisdiction, privileges, 
and parade have been minutely described. He was attended 
by his lord keeper, lord treasurer, with eight white staves, 
a band of gentleman pensioners with poleaxes, and two 
chaplains. He dined under a canopy of state both in the 
hall and in his own chambers. He received many petitions, 
which he passed on in regal style to his Master of Requests ; 
and he attended service in the Temple church, where his 
chaplains preached before him and did him reverence. His 
expenses, defrayed from his own purse, amounted to no 
less than two thousand pounds.t “I remember to have 
heard a Bencher of the Temple tell a story of a tradition in 
their house, where they had formerly a custom of choosing 
kings for such a season, and allowing him his expences at 
the charge of the society: One of our kings, said my friend, 
carried his royal inclination a little too far, and there was a 
committee ordered to look into the management of his 
treasury. Among other things it appeared, that his Majesty 
walking zzcog. in the cloister, had overheard a poor man say 
to another, Such a small sum would make me the happiest 
man in the world. The king out of his royal compassion 
privately inquired into his character, and finding him a 
proper object of charity, sent him the money. When the 
committee read the report, the house passed his accounts 
with a plaudite without further examination, upon the 
recital of this article in them, ‘For making a man happy, 
ao. 0:0.” 

At the English court the annual Lord of Misrule is not 
to be confounded with the Master of the Revels, who was a 


1 J. Brand, Popular Antiquities of EE. K. Chambers, The Mediaeval Stage, 
Great Britain (London, 1883), i. 497 1. 407 sgq. 
sqgqg- As to the Lords of Misrule in col- 2 Sir Richard Steele, in Zhe Sfec- 
leges and the Inns of Court see further ¢afor, Friday, 14th December 1711. 


Misrule in 
the Temple. 


Lord of 
Misrule 
at the 
English 
Court. 


The 
Festival 
of Fools 
in France. 


334 SATURNALIA AND KINDRED FESTIVALS  cuap. 


permanent official and probably despised the temporary Lord 
as an upstart rival and intruder. Certainly there seems to 
have been at times bad blood between them. Some corre- 
spondence which passed between the two merry monarchs 
in the reign of Edward VI. has been preserved, and from it 
we learn that on one occasion the Lord of Misrule had much 
difficulty in extracting from the. Master of the Revels the 
fool’s coat, hobby-horses, and other trumpery paraphernalia 
which he required for the proper support of his dignity. 
Indeed the costumes furnished by his rival were so shabby 
that his lordship returned them with a note, in which he 
informed the Master of the Revels that the gentlemen of 
rank and position who were to wear these liveries stood too 
much on their dignity to be seen prancing about the streets 
of London rigged out in such old slops. The Lords of Council 
had actually to interpose in the petty squabble between the 
two potentates.’ 

In France the counterparts of these English Lords of 
Misrule masqueraded in clerical attire as mock Bishops, 
Archbishops, Popes, or Abbots. The festival at which they 
disported themselves was known as the Festival of Fools 
(Féte des Fous), which fell in different places at different 
dates, sometimes on Christmas Day, sometimes on St. 
Stephen’s Day (the twenty-sixth of December), sometimes 
on New Year’s Day, and sometimes on Twelfth Day. 
According to one account “on the first day, which was the 
festival of Christmas, the lower orders of clergy and monks 
cried in unison JVoél (Christmas) and gave themselves up 
to jollity. On the morrow, St. Stephen’s Day, the deacons 
held a council to elect a Pope or Patriarch of Fools, a Bishop 
or Archbishop of Innocents, an Abbot of Ninnies; next day, 
the festival of St. John, the subdeacons began the dance in 
his honour ; afterwards, on the fourth day, the festival of the 
Holy Innocents, the choristers and minor clergy claimed the 
Pope or Bishop or Abbot elect, who made his triumphal 
entry into the church on Circumcision Day (the first of 
January) and sat enthroned pontifically till the evening of 
Epiphany. It was then the joyous reign of this Pope or 
this Bishop or this Abbot of Folly which constituted the 

1 E. K. Chambers, Zhe Mediaeval Stage, i. 405-407. 


vu KING OF THE BEAN AND FESTIVAL OF FOOLS 335 


Festival of Fools and dominated its whimsical phases, the 
grotesque and sometimes impious masquerades, the merry 
and often disgusting scenes, the furious orgies, the dances, 
the games, the profane songs, the impudent parodies of the 
catholic liturgy.”' At these parodies of the most solemn 
rites of the church the priests, wearing grotesque masks and 
sometimes dressed as women, danced in the choir and sang 
obscene chants: laymen disguised as monks and nuns 
mingled with the clergy: the altar was transformed into a 
tavern, where the deacons and subdeacons ate sausages and 
black-puddings or played at dice and cards under the nose 
of the celebrant ; and the censers smoked with bits of old 
shoes instead of incense, filling the church with a foul stench. 
After playing these pranks and running, leaping, and cutting 
capers through the whole church, they rode about the town 
in mean carts, exchanging scurrilities with the crowds of 
laughing and jeering spectators.” 

Amongst the buffooneries of the Festival of Fools one of 
the most remarkable was the introduction of an ass into the 
church, where various pranks were played with the animal. 
At Autun the ass was led with great ceremony to the church 
under a cloth of gold, the corners of which were held by 
four canons ; and on entering the sacred edifice the animal 
was wrapt in a rich cope, while a parody of the mass was 
performed. A regular Latin liturgy in glorification of the 
ass was chanted on these occasions, and the celebrant priest 
imitated the braying of an ass. At Beauvais the ceremony 


1 L, J. B. Bérenger-Feraud, Szer- 
stitions et Survivances, iv. (Paris, 1896) 
pp: 4 sg., quoting Jacob, Meurs et 
Coutumes du Moyen-Age. Compare E. 
Cortet, Zssaz sur les Fétes religteuses 
(Paris, 1867), pp. 50 sgg. In some 
places the festival was held on the 
Octave of Epiphany. See BE. K. 
Chambers, Zhe Mediaeval Stage 
(Oxford, 1903), i. 323. 


#°E. Cortet, of. cz¢. p. 51; Papon, 
ffistotre Générale de la Provence, iii. 
p- 212, quoted by L. J. B. Bérenger- 
eraud, of: cit. iv. 9 sg.; E. K. 
Chambers, 7 he AZediaeval Stage (Oxford, 
1903), 1. 293 sg., quoting a circular 


letter which was addressed by the 
Faculty of Theology at Paris to the 
bishops and chapters of France on 
March 12th, 1445. Many details as to 
the mode of celebrating the Festival of 
Fools in different parts of France are 
on record. See A.de Nore, Coutumes, 
Mythes, et Traditions des Provinces de 
France (Paris and Lyons, 1846), pp. 
293-295; E. Cortet, of. czt. pp. 52 
sgq.; L. J. B. Beérenger-Feraud, of. 
cit. iv. 5 sgg.; G. Bilfinger, Unter- 
suchungen tiber die Lettrechnung der 
alten Germanen, il. Das germanische 
Julfest (Stuttgart, 1901), pp. 72 sg. ; 
and especially E. K. Chambers, Zhe 
Mediaeval Stage, 1. 274 sqq. 


Buffoon- 
eries in the 
churches 
at the . 
Festival 
of Fools. 


Festival of 
the Inno- 
cents and 
the Boy 
Bishop in 
France. 


SATURNALIA AND KINDRED FESTIVALS  cuap. 


336 


was performed every year on the fourteenth of January. A 
young girl with a child in her arms rode on the back of the 
ass in imitation of the Flight into Egypt. Escorted by the 
clergy and the people she was led in triumph from the 
cathedral to the parish church of St. Stephen. There she and 
her ass were introduced into the chancel and stationed on the 
left side of the altar ; and a long mass was performed which 
consisted of scraps borrowed indiscriminately from the services 
of many church festivals throughout the year. In the intervals 
the singers quenched their thirst: the congregation imitated 
their example; and the ass was fed and watered. The 
services over, the animal was brought from the chancel into 
the nave, where the whole congregation, clergy and laity 
mixed up together, danced round the animal and brayed 
like asses. Finally, after vespers and compline, the merry 
procession, led by the precentor and preceded by a huge 
lantern, defiled through the streets to wind up the day with 
indecent farces in a great theatre erected opposite the 
church." 

A pale reflection or diminutive copy of the Festival of 
Fools was the Festival of the Innocents, which was celebrated 
on Childermas or Holy Innocents’ Day, the twenty-eighth 
of December. The custom was widely observed both in 
France and England. In France on Childermas or the eve 
of the festival the choristers assembled in the church and 
chose one of their number to be a Boy Bishop, who officiated 
in that character with mock solemnity. Such burlesques of 
ecclesiastical ritual appear to have been common on that day 
in monasteries and convents, where the offices performed by 
the clergy and laity were inverted for the occasion. At the 
Franciscan monastery of Antibes, for example, the lay 


1E. Cortet, Zssaz sur les Fétes took part in these mummeries. The 


religteuses (Paris, 1867), pp. 53-563 
L. J. B. Bérenger-Feraud, Szperstzteons 
et Survivances, iv. 28-41; E. K. 
Chambers, Zhe Mediaeval Stage (Ox- 
ford, 1903), i. 330-334. While the 
Festival of Fools appears to have been 
most popular in France, it is known to 
have been celebrated also in Germany, 
Bohemia, and England. See E, K. 
Chambers, of. czt. i. 318 sgg. In his 
youth the Bohemian reformerJohn Huss 


revellers wore masks. ‘* A clerk, gro- 
tesquely vested, was dubbed ‘ bishop,’ 
set on an ass with his face to the tail, 
and led to mass in the church. He 
was regaled on a platter of broth and 
a bowl of beer, and Huss recalls the 
unseemly revel which took place. 
Torches were borne instead of candles, 
and the clergy turned their garments in- 
side out and danced ” (E. K. Chambers, 
Op itt 1a BZONSAa)s 


vial KING OF THE BEAN AND FESTIVAL OF FOOLS 337 


brothers, who usually worked in the kitchen and the 
garden, took the place of the priests on Childermas and 
celebrated mass in church, clad in tattered sacerdotal vest- 
ments turned inside out, holding the books upside down, 
wearing spectacles made of orange peel, mumbling an un- 
intelligible jargon, and uttering frightful cries. | These 
buffooneries were kept up certainly as late as the eighteenth 
century, and probably later. In the great convent of the 
Congrégation de Notre Dame at Paris down to the latter 
part of the nineteenth century the nuns and their girl pupils 
regularly exchanged parts on Holy Innocents’ Day. The 
pupils pretended to be nuns and a select few of them were 
attired as such, while the nuns made believe to be pupils, 
without however changing their dress.” 

In England the Boy Bishop was widely popular during 
the later Middle Ages and only succumbed to the austerity 
of the Reformation. He is known, for example, to have 
officiated in St. Paul’s, London, in the cathedrals of Salisbury, 
Exeter, Hereford, Gloucester, Lichfield, Norwich, Lincoln, 
and York, in great collegiate churches such as Beverley 
minster, St. Peter’s, Canterbury, and Ottery St. Mary’s, in 
college chapels such as Magdalen and All Souls’ at Oxford, 
in the private chapels of the king, and in many parish 
churches throughout the country. The election was usually 
made on St. Nicholas’s Day (the sixth of December), but 
the office and authority lasted till Holy Innocents’ Day (the 
twenty-eighth of December). Both days were appropriate, 
for St. Nicholas was the patron saint of school children, and 
Holy Innocents’ Day commemorates the slaughter of the 
young children by Herod. In cathedrals the Bishop was 
chosen from among the choir boys. After his election he 
was completely apparelled in the episcopal vestments, with 
a mitre and crosier, bore the title and displayed the state of 


1 E. Cortet, Zssaz sur les Fétes than Childermas. At Alencon the 


religteuses, p» 58; E. K. Chambers, 
The Mediaeval Stage (Oxford, 1903), i. 
317 59., 336 sgg. Compare L. J. B. 
Bérenger-Feraud, Superstitions et Sur- 
vivances, iv. 25-28. From the evidence 
collected by the latter writer it appears 
that in some places the election of the 
Boy Bishop took place on other days 


PT. VI 


election took place on the sixth of 
December ; at Vienne, in Dauphiné, on 
the fifteenth, and at Soissons on St. 
Thomas’s Day (the twenty-first of 
December). 


2 This I learn from my wife, who as 
a girl was educated in the convent. 


Z 


The Boy 
Bishop in 
England. 


338 SATURNALIA AND KINDRED FESTIVALS  cuap. 


a Bishop, and exacted ceremonial obedience from his fellows, 
who were dressed like priests. They took possession of the 
church and, with the exception of mass, performed all the 
ceremonies and offices. The Boy Bishop preached from 
the pulpit. At Salisbury the ceremonies at which he pre- 
sided are elaborately regulated by the statutes of Roger de 
Mortival, enacted in 1319; and two of the great service- 
books of the Sarum use, the Breviary and the Processional, 
furnish full details of the ministrations of the Boy Bishop and 
his fellows. He is even said to have enjoyed the right of dis- 
posing of such prebends as happened to fall vacant during 
the days of his episcopacy. But the pranks of the mock 
bishop were not confined to the church. Arrayed in full 
canonicals he was led about with songs and dances from 
house to house, blessing the grinning people and collecting | 
money in return for his benedictions. At York in the year 
1396 the Boy Bishop is known to have gone on his rounds | 
to places so far distant as Bridlington, Leeds, Beverley, | 
Fountains Abbey, and Allerton; and the profits which he | 
made were considerable. William of Wykeham ordained in | 
1400 that a Boy Bishop should he chosen at Winchester } 
College and another at New College, Oxford, and that he 
should recite the office at the Feast of the Innocents. His | 
example was followed some forty years afterwards in the | 
statutes of the royal foundations of Eton College and of | 
King’s College, Cambridge. From being elected on St. | 
Nicholas’s Day the Boy Bishop was sometimes called a 7 
Nicholas Bishop (Epzscopus Nicholatensis)." In Spanish ; 
cathedrals, also, it appears to have been customary on St. | 
Nicholas’s Day to elect a chorister to the office of Bishop. | 
He exercised a certain jurisdiction till Holy Innocents’ Day, 
and his prebendaries took secular offices, acting in the capacity 7 
of alguazils, catchpoles, dog-whippers, and sweepers.” 

On the whole it seems difficult to suppose that the | 
curious superstitions and quaint ceremonies, the outbursts | 


1 J. Brand, Popular Antiquities of London, 1912), pp. 138 59. 3 County } 
Great Britain (London, 1883), i. 421- Folk-lore, 11. North Riding of Vork-'% 
431; E. Kk. Chambers, Zhe Avediaeval shire, York and the Ainsty, edited by | : 
Stage (Oxford, 1903), i. 352 sgg.; Mrs. Gutch (London, 1901), pp. 352% 
(Mrs.) Ella Mary Leather, Zhe Folk- sg. 
lore of Herefordshire (Hereford and 2 J. Brand, of. czt. i. 426. 


wir AJNVG OF THE BEAN AND FESTIVAL OF FOOLS 339 


of profanity and the inversions of ranks, which characterize 
the popular celebration of the twelve days from Christmas 
to Epiphany, have any connexion with the episodes of 
Christian history believed to be commemorated by these 
two festivals. More probably they are relics of an old 
heathen festival celebrated during the twelve intercalary 
days which our forefathers annually inserted in their 
calendar at midwinter in order to equalize the short lunar 
year of twelve months with the longer solar year of three 
hundred and sixty-five or sixty-six days. We need not 
assume that the license and buffooneries of the festive season 
were borrowed from the Roman Saturnalia; both celebrations 
may well have been parallel and independent deductions from 
a like primitive philosophy of nature. There is not indeed, 
so far as I am aware, any direct evidence that the Saturnalia 
at Rome was an intercalary festival ; but the license which 
characterized it, and the temporary reign of a mock king, 
who personated Saturn, suggest that it may have been so. 
If we were better acquainted with the intercalary periods 
of peoples at a comparatively low level of culture, we might 
find that they are commonly marked by similar outbreaks 
of lawlessness and similar reigns of more or less nominal 
and farcical rulers. But unfortunately we know too little 
about the observance of such periods among primitive 
peoples to be warranted in making any positive affirmation 
on the subject. 

However, there are grounds for thinking that intercalary 
periods have commonly been esteemed unlucky. The Aztecs 
certainly regarded as very unlucky the five supplementary 
days which they added at the end of every year in order to 
make up a total of three hundred and sixty-five days.’ These 
five supplementary days, corresponding to the last four of 
January and the first of February, were called nemontemz, 
which means “vacant,” “superfluous,” or “useless.” Being 
dedicated to no god, they were deemed inauspicious, equally 
unfit for the services of religion and the transaction of civil 
business. During their continuance no sacrifices were 
Offered by the priests and no worshippers frequented the 
temples. No cases were tried in the courts of justice. The 


1 As to the Aztec year see above, p. 287 note}, 


The 
customs 
and super- 
stitions 
associated 
with the 
Twelve 
Days or 
Nights are 
probably 
relics of 
an old 
heathen 
festival of 
intercala- 
tion at 
midwinter. 


Super- 
stitions 
associated 
with 
intercalary 
periods 
among the 
Aztecs of 
Mexico 
and the 
Mayas of 
Yucatan, 


The five 
supple- 
mentary 
days of the 
year in 
ancient 


Egypt. 


SATURNALIA AND KINDRED FESTIVALS  cuapr. 


340 


houses were not swept. People abstained from all actions of | 
importance and confined themselves to performing such as 
could not be avoided, or spent the time in paying visits to each 
other. In particular they were careful during these fatal days 
not to fall asleep in the daytime, not to quarrel, and not to 
stumble ; because they thought that if they did such things 
at that time they would continue to do so for ever. Persons 
born on any of these days were deemed unfortunate, destined 
to fail in their undertakings and to live in wretchedness and 
poverty all their time on earth. The Mayas of Yucatan 
employed a calendar like that of the Aztecs, and they too 
looked upon the five supplementary days at the end of the 
year as unlucky and of evil omen; hence they gave no 
names to these days, and while they lasted the people stayed 
for the most part at home; they neither washed themselves, 
nor combed their hair, nor loused each other; and they did 
no servile or fatiguing work lest some evil should befall them.? — 

The ancient Egyptians like the Aztecs considered a year — 
to consist of three hundred and sixty ordinary days divided 
into months and eked out with five supplementary days so | 
as to bring the total number of days in the year up to three © 
hundred and sixty-five ; but whereas the Aztecs divided the | 
three hundred and sixty ordinary days into eighteen arbitrary | 
divisions or months of twenty days each,the Egyptians, keep- 
ing much closer to the natural periods marked by the phases 
of the moon, divided these days into twelve months of thirty | 
dayseach.? This mode of regulating the calendar appears to | 
be exceedingly ancient in Egypt and may even date from 
the prehistoric period ; for the five days over and above the | 
year (haru duait hiru ronpit) are expressly mentioned in the 
texts of the pyramids. The myth told to explain their 


1 B. de Sahagun, Wistozve Générale 2 Diego de 


Landa, Relation des @ 


des Choses de la Nouvelle Espagne, 
traduite par D. Jourdanet et R. Simeon 
(Paris, 1880), pp. 77, 283; E. Seler, 
‘© The Mexican Chronology,” in Bureau 
of American Ethnology, Bulletin No. 
28 (Washington, 1904), p. 16 (where 
some extracts from the Aztec text of 
Sahagun are quoted and translated) ; 
J. de Acosta, Natural and Moral His- 
tory of the Indies (Hakluyt Society, 
London, 1880), ii. 392. 


Choses de Yucatan (Paris, 1864), pp. | 
204 sg., 276 sq. ] 

3 Geminus, Elementa Astronomiae, | 
viii, 18, p. 106, ed. C. Manitius | 
(Leipsic, 1898). ' 

4G. Foucart, in Dr. J. Hastings’s | 
Encyclopaedia of Religion and Ethics, 
lil. (1910) p. 93. Professor Ed. Meyer 
adduces astronomical and other grounds 
for thinking that the ancient Egyptian © 
calendar, as we know it, began on the | 


. 


vii KING OF THE BEAN AND FESTIVAL OF FOOLS 341 


origin was as follows. Once on a time the earth-god Keb 
lay secretly with the sky-goddess Nut, and the sun-god Ra 
in his anger cursed the goddess, saying that she should give 
birth to her offspring neither in any month nor in any year. 
He thought, no doubt, by this imprecation to prevent her 
from bringing forth the fruit of her womb. But he was out- 
witted by the wily Thoth, who engaged the goddess of the 
moon in a game of draughts and having won the game took 
as a forfeit from her the seventieth part of every day in the 
year, and out of the fractions thus abstracted he made up 
five new days, which he added to the old year of three 
hundred and sixty days. As these days formed no part 
either of a month or of a year, the goddess Nut might be 
delivered in them without rendering the sun-god’s curse void 
and of no effect. Accordingly she bore Osiris on the first 
of the days, Horus on the second, Set or Typhon on the 
third, Isis on the fourth, and Nephthys on the fifth. Of these 
five supplementary or intercalary days the third, as the birth- 
day of the evil deity Set or Typhon, was deemed unlucky, 
and the Egyptian kings neither transacted business on it nor 
attended to their persons till nightfall... Thus it appears 
that the ancient Egyptians regarded the five supplementary or 
intercalary days as belonging neither to a month nor toa year, 
but as standing outside of both and forming an extraordinary 
period quite apart and distinct from the ordinary course of 
time. It is probable, though we cannot prove it, that in all 
countries intercalary days or months have been so considered 


19th of July, 4241 B.C., which accord- 
ingly he calls ‘‘ the oldest sure date in 
the history of the world.” See Ed. 
Meyer, Geschichte des Altertums?, i. 2. 
(Stuttgart and Berlin, 1909), pp. 101 
sg. § 197 ; and against this view C. F. 
Lehmann-Haupt, in the Zzglish His- 
torical Review, April 1913, p. 348. 

1 Plutarch, Jszs et Oszris, 12. 
Compare Diodorus Siculus, i. 13. 4 
sg. As to Keb and Nut, the 
parents of Osiris, Isis, and the rest, see 
A. Erman, Die deyptische Religion 
(Berlin, 1905), p. 29. The Egyptian 
deities Keb, Nut, and Thoth are called 
by Plutarch by the Greek names of 
Cronus, Rhea, and Hermes. On 
account of these Greek names the 


myth was long thought to be of 
comparatively recent date; ‘‘but the 
Leyden Papyrus (i. 346) has shown 
that the legend existed in its essential 
features in the time of the Thebans, 
and the Texts of the Pyramids have 
carried it back to the very beginnings 
of Egyptian mythology ” (G. Foucart, 
Z.c.). As five days are the seventy- 
second, not the seventieth, part of 
three hundred and sixty days, it was 
proposed by Wyttenbach to read 76 
EBdounkoorov devtepov instead of 76 
éBdounkoorov in Plutarch’s text. See 
D. Wyttenbachius, Azzmadversiones 
tn Plutarcht Moralia (Leipsic, 1820- 


1834), lll. 143 sg. 


Early 
attempts 
of the 
Aryan 
peoples to 
correct the 
lunar year 
by inter- 
calating a 
month at 
intervals 
of several 
years in- 
stead of 
intercalat- 
ing twelve 
days in 
every year. 


342 SATURNALIA AND KINDRED FESTIVALS CHAP. 


by the primitive astronomers who first observed the dis- 
crepancy between solar and lunar time and attempted to 
reconcile it by the expedient of intercalation. 

Thus we infer with some probability that the sacred 
Twelve Days or Nights at midwinter derive their peculiar 
character in popular custom and superstition from the cir- 
cumstance that they were originally an intercalary period 
inserted annually at the end of a lunar year of three hundred 
and fifty-four days for the purpose of equating it to a solar 
year reckoned at three hundred and sixty-six days. However, 
there are grounds for thinking that at a very early time the 
Aryan peoples sought to correct their lunar year, not by 
inserting twelve supplementary days every year, but by 
allowing the annual deficiency to accumulate for several years 
and then supplying it by a whole intercalary month. In 
India the Aryans of the Vedic age appear to have adopted 
a year of three hundred and sixty days, divided into twelve 
months of thirty days each, and to have rerhedied the annual 
deficiency of five days by intercalating a whole month of | 
thirty days every fifth year, thus regulating their calendar 
according to a five years’ cycle.’ The Celts of Gaul, as we 
learn from the Coligny calendar, also adopted a five years’ 
cycle, but they managed it differently. They retained the 
old lunar year of three hundred and fifty-four days divided ~ 
into twelve months, six of thirty days and six of twenty-nine 
days ; but instead of intercalating twelve days every year to 
restore the balance between lunar and solar time they inter- 
calated a month of thirty days every two and a half years, 
so that in each cycle of five years the total number of 
intercalary days was sixty, which was equivalent to intercalat- 
ing twelve days annually. Thus the result at the end of | 
each cycle of five years was precisely the same as it would 
have been if they had followed the old system of annual 
intercalation.” Why they abandoned the simple and obvious | 

1H. Zimmer, <Altindisches Leben 2 J. A. Mac@ulloch) anor. 
(Berlin, 1879), pp. 365-370. Com-  Hastings’s Hcyclopaedia of Religion and | 
pare The Hymns of the Rigveda, trans- Ethics, iii. (Edinburgh, 1910) pp. 78 
lated by R. T. H. Griffith (Benares, sgg. Compare S. de Ricci, ‘* Ley 
1889-1892), Book i. Hymn 164,  calendrier Gaulois de Coligny,” Revue 
stanza 48 (vol. i. p. 293), Book iii.  Ce/¢égue, xix. (1898) pp. 213-223; zd., 


Hymn 55, stanza 18 (vol. ii, pp. ‘*Le calendrier Celtique de Coligny,” 
76 sg.). Revue Celtigue, xxi.(1900)pp. 10-275 2@., 


wit KING OF THE BEAN AND FESTIVAL OF FOOLS 343 


expedient of annually intercalating twelve days, and adopted 
instead the more recondite system of intercalating a month of 
thirty days every two and a half years, is not plain. It may 
be that religious or political motives unknown to us concurred 
with practical considerations to recommend the change. One 
result of the reform would be the abolition of the temporary 
king who, if I am right, used to bear a somewhat tumultuary 
sway over the community during the saturnalia of the Twelve 
Days. Perhaps the annually recurring disorders which 
attended that period of license were not the least urgent of 
the reasons which moved the rulers to strike the twelve 
intercalary days out of the year and to replace them by an 
intercalary month at longer intervals. 

However that may be, the equivalence of the new inter- 
calary month to the old intercalary Twelve Days multiplied 
by two and a half is strongly suggested by a remarkable 
feature of the Coligny calendar ; for in it the thirty days of 
the intercalary month, which bore the name of Ciallos, are 
named after the ordinary twelve months of the year. Thus 
the first day of the intercalary month is called Samon, which 
is the name of the first month of the year; the second day 
of the month is called Dumannos, which is the name of the 
second month of the year; the third day of the month is 
called Rivros, which is the name of the third month of the 
year ; the fourth day of the month is called Anacan, which 
is the name of the fourth month of the year ; and so on with 


“< Un passage remarquable du calendrier 
de Coligny,” Revue Celtigue, xxiv. 
(1903) pp. 313-316; J. Loth, ‘‘L’année 
Celtique,” Revwe Celtigue, xxv. (1904) 
pp. 113-162; Sir John Rhys, ‘‘ The 
Coligny Calendar, Proceedings of the 
British Academy, 1909-1910, pp. 207 
sgg. As the calendar stands, the number 
of days in the ordinary year is 355, 
not 354, seven of the months having 
thirty days and five of them twenty- 
nine days. But the month Equos has 
attached to it the sign ANM, which is 
attached to all the months of twenty- 
nine days but to none of the months of 
thirty days except Equos, all of which, 
except Equos, are marked with the sign 
MAT. Hence, following a suggestion 


of M. S. de Ricci (Revue Celtigue, xxi. 
25), [suppose that the month Equos had 
regularly twenty-nine days instead of 
thirty, and that the attribution of thirty 
days to it is an error of the scribe or 
mason who engraved the calendar. 

In the Coligny calendar the summer 
solstice seems to be marked by the word 
trinouxtion affixed to the seventeenth 
day of the first month (Samonios, 
nearly equivalent to our June). As 
interpreted by Sir John Rhys (of. czz. 
p- 217), the word means ‘‘a period of 
three nights of equal length.” Ifhe 
is right, it follows that the Celts who 
constructed the calendar had observed 
the summer solstice. 


Equiva- 
lence of 
the new 
intercalary 
month to 
the old 
intercalary 
Twelve 
Days 
multiplied 
by two and 
a half. 


The 
intercalary 
month may 
have been 
a period 
of license, 
during 
which the 
reins of 
govern- 
ment were 
held by a 
temporary 
king. 


344 SATURNALIA AND KINDRED FESTIVALS  cuap. 


all the rest, so that the thirty days of the intercalary month 
bear the names of the twelve months of the year repeated 
two and a half times.’ This seems to shew that, just as our 
modern peasants regard the Twelve Days as representing 
each a month of the year in their chronological order, so the 
old Celts of Gaul who drew up the Coligny calendar regarded 
the thirty days of the intercalary month as representing the 
thirty ordinary months which were to follow it till the next 
intercalation took place. And we may conjecture that just 
as our modern peasants still draw omens from the Twelve 
Days for the twelve succeeding months, so the old Celts 
drew omens from the thirty days of the intercalary month 
for the thirty months of the two and a half succeeding years. 
Indeed we may suppose that the reformers of the calendar 
transferred, or attempted to transfer, to the new intercalary 
month the whole of the quaint customs and superstitions 
which from time immemorial had clustered round the twelve 
intercalary days of the old year. Thus, like the old Twelve 
Days of midwinter, the thirty days of the new intercalary 
month may have formed an interregnum or break in the 
ordinary course of government, a tumultuary period of general 
license, during which the ordinary rules of law and morality 
were suspended and the direction of affairs committed to a 
temporary and more or less farcical ruler or King of the 
Bean, who may possibly have had to pay with his life for 
his brief reign of thirty days. The floating traditions of 
such merry monarchs and of the careless happy-go-lucky life 
under them may have crystallized in after ages into the 
legend of Saturn and the Golden Age. If that was so— 
and I put forward the hypothesis for no more than a web 
of conjectures woven from the gossamer threads of popular 
superstition—we can understand why the Twelve Days, 
intercalated every year in the old calendar, should have 
survived to the present day in the memory of the people, 
whereas the thirty days, intercalated every two and a half 
years in the new calendar, have long been forgotten. It is 
the simplest ideas that live longest in the simple minds 


1 J. A. MacCulloch, in Dr. J. Rhys, ‘*The Coligny Calendar,” Pro- 
Hastings’s Encyclopaedia of Religion ceedings of the British Academy’, 1909. 
and Ethics, iii. 79. Compare Sir J. sgrzo, pp. 292 sg. 


vil KJNG OF THE BEAN AND FESTIVAL OF FOOLS 345 


of the peasantry; and since the intercalation of twelve 
days in every year to allow the lagging moon to keep 
pace with the longer stride of the sun is certainly an easier 
and more obvious expedient than to wait for two and 
a half years till he has outrun her by thirty days, we need 
not wonder that this ancient mode of harmonizing lunar and 
solar time should have lingered in the recollection and in 
the usages of the people ages after the more roundabout 
method, which reflective minds had devised for accomplishing 
the same end, had faded alike from the memory of the 
peasant and the page of the historian. 


§ 3. The Saturnalia and Lent 


As the Carnival is always held on the last three days 
before the beginning of Lent, its date shifts somewhat from 
year to year, but it invariably falls either in February or 
March. Hence it does not coincide with the date of the 
Saturnalia, which within historical times seems to have been 
always celebrated in December even in the old days, before 
Caesar’s reform of the calendar, when the Roman year ended 
with February instead of December.' Yet if the Saturnalia, 
like many other seasons of license, was originally celebrated 
as a sort of public purification at the end of the old year or 
the beginning of the new one, it may at a still more remote 
period, when the Roman year began with March, have been 
regularly held either in February or March and therefore at 
approximately the same date as the modern Carnival. So 
strong and persistent are the conservative instincts of the 
peasantry in respect to old custom, that it would be no 
matter for surprise if, in rural districts of Italy, the ancient 
festival continued to be celebrated at the ancient time long 


1 We know from Livy (xxii. I. 19 217 B.C. that he supposed the festival 


sg.) that the Saturnalia was celebrated 
in December as early as the year 217 
B.c.; and in his learned discussion 
of the proper date of the festival the 
antiquary Macrobius gives no hint that 
it ever fell at any other time than in 
December (Sazznal. i. 10). It would 
be a mistake to infer from Livy’s 
account of the Saturnalia in the year 


to have been first instituted in that 
year ; for elsewhere (ii. 21. 1) he tells 
us that it was established at the time 
when the temple of Saturn was dedi- 
cated, namely in the year 497 B.C. 
Macrobius (Sazurn. i. 8. 1) refers the 
institution of the Saturnalia to King 
Tullus Hostilius. More probably the 
festival was of immemorial antiquity. 


The 
modern 
Carnival is 
perhaps the 
equivalent 
of the 
ancient 
Saturnalia. 


The 
Saturnalia 
may have 
originally 
fallen at 
the end of 
February, 
which 
would 

be an 
appropriate 
time for a 
festival of 
sowing. 


SATURNALIA AND KINDRED FESTIVALS ~ "Cmam 


346 


after the official celebration of the Saturnalia in the towns 
had been shifted from February to December. Latin 
Christianity, which struck at the root of official or civic 
paganism, has always been tolerant of its rustic cousins, the 
popular festivals and ceremonies which, unaffected by political 
and religious revolutions, by the passing of empires and of 
gods, have been carried on by the people with but little 
change from time immemorial, and represent in fact the 
original stock from which the state religions of classical 
antiquity were comparatively late offshoots. Thus it may 
very well have come about that while the new faith stamped 
out the Saturnalia in the towns, it suffered the original 
festival, disguised by a difference of date, to linger unmolested 
in the country ; and so the old feast of Saturn, under the 
modern name of the Carnival, has reconquered the cities, 
and goes on merrily under the eye and with the sanction of 
the Catholic Church. 

The opinion that the Saturnalia originally fell in February 
or the beginning of March receives some support from the 
circumstance that the festival of the Matronalia, at which 
mistresses feasted their slaves just as masters did theirs at 
the Saturnalia, always continued to be held on the first of 
March, even when the Roman year began with January.’ 
It is further not a little recommended by the consideration 
that this date would be eminently appropriate for the festival 
of Saturn, the old Italian god of sowing and planting. It 
has always been a puzzle to explain why such a festival 
should have been held at midwinter; but on the present 
hypothesis the mystery vanishes. With the Italian farmer 
February and March were the great season of the spring 
sowing and planting ;” nothing could be more natural than 
that the husbandman should inaugurate the season with the 
worship of the deity to whom he ascribed the function of 


1 Macrobius, Saf. i. 12. 7; Solinus, bius, Saturn, i. 12. 6, compared with 


i. 35, p- 13 ed. Th. Mommsen (Berlin, 
1864); Joannes Lydus, De Mensibus, 
iii. 15. On the other hand, we know 
that the ceremony of renewing the 
laurels, which originally took place on 
the first of March, was long afterwards 
transferred to the first of January. See 
Ovid, /astz, iii. 135 sgg., and Macro- 


Geoponica, xi. 2. 6, where the note of 
the commentator Niclas may be con- 
sulted. This transference is strictly 
analogous to the change which I con- 
jecture to have been made in the date 
of celebrating the Saturnalia. 

2 Palladius, De ve rustica, books iii. 
and iv. passzne. 


VIII THE SATURNALIA AND LENT 347 


quickening the seed. It is no small confirmation of this 
theory that the last day of the Carnival, namely Shrove 
Tuesday, is still, or was down to recent times, the customary 
season in Central Europe for promoting the growth of the 
crops by means of leaps and dances." The custom fits in 
very well with the view which derives the Carnival from 
an old festival of sowing such as the Saturnalia probably 
was in its origin. Further, the orgiastic character of the 
festival is readily explained by the help of facts which met 
us in a former part of our investigation. We have seen 
that between the sower and the seed there is commonly 
supposed to exist a sympathetic connexion of such a nature 
that his conduct directly affects and can promote or retard 
the growth of the crops.” What wonder then if the simple 
husbandman imagined that by cramming his belly, by 
swilling and guzzling just before he proceeded to sow his 
fields, he thereby imparted additional vigour to the seed ?® 
But while his crude philosophy may thus have painted 
gluttony and intoxication in the agreeable colours of duties 
which he owed to himself, to his family, and to the common- 
wealth, it is possible that the zest with which he acquitted 
himself of his obligations may have been whetted by a less 
comfortable reflection. In modern times the indulgence of 
the Carnival is immediately followed by the abstinence of 
Lent; and if the Carnival is the direct descendant of the 
Saturnalia, may not Lent in like manner be merely the con- 
tinuation, under a thin disguise, of a period of temperance 
which was annually observed, from superstitious motives, 
by Italian farmers long before the Christian era? Direct 
evidence of this, so far as I am aware, is not forthcoming ; 
but we have seen that a practice of abstinence from fleshly 
lusts has been observed by various peoples as a sympathetic 
charm to foster the growth of the seed;* and such an 


1 The Magic Art and the Evolution 
of Kings, i. 137-139. 

2 The Magic Art and the Evolution 
of Kings, i. 136-144, il. 97 sgq. 

3 Compare C. Lumholtz, Uskrown 
Mexico (London, 1903), ii. 268: ‘‘ To 
the Huichol so closely are corn, deer, 
and hikuli associated that by consuming 
the broth of the deer-meat and the 


hikuli they think the same effect is 
produced—namely, making the corn 
grow. Therefore when clearing the 
fields they eat hikuli before starting the 
day’s work.” 

4 The Magic Art and the Evolu- 
tion of Kings, ii. 104 sgg. The Indians 
of Santiago Tepehuacan abstain from 
flesh, eggs, and grease while they are 


The 
Lenten 
fast in 
spring may 
be an old 
heathen 
period of 
abstinence 
intended 
to promote™ 
the growth 
of the seed, 


348 SATURNALIA AND KINDRED FESTIVALS CHAP. 
observance would be an appropriate sequel to the Saturnalia, 
if that festival was indeed, as I conjecture it to have been, 
originally held in spring as a religious or magical preparation 
for sowing and planting. When we consider how widely 
diffused is the belief in the sympathetic influence which 
human conduct, and especially the intercourse of the sexes, 
exerts on the fruits of the earth, we may be allowed to 
conjecture that the Lenten fast, with the rule of continence 
which is recommended, if not strictly enjoined, by the 
Catholic and Coptic churches during that season,’ was in its 
origin intended, not so much to commemorate the sufferings 
of a dying god, as to foster the growth of the seed, which in 
the bleak days of early spring the husbandman commits 
with anxious care and misgiving to the bosom of the naked 
earth. Ecclesiastical historians. have been puzzled to say 
why after much hesitation and great diversity of usage in 
different places the Christian church finally adopted forty 
days as the proper period for the mournful celebration of 
Lent.” Perhaps in coming to this decision the authorities 
were guided, as so often, by a regard for an existing pagan 
celebration of similar character and duration which they 
hoped by a change of name to convert into a Christian 
solemnity. Such a heathen Lent they may have found to 
hand in the rites of Persephone, the Greek goddess of the corn, 
whose image, carved out of a tree, was annually brought into 
the cities and mourned for forty nights, after which it was 


engaged in sowing cotton and chilis, 
because they believe that were they to 
partake of these viands at that time, the 
blossoms would fall and the crop would 
suffer. See ‘‘ Lettre du curé de Santiago 
Tepehuacan a son évéque sur les moeurs 
et coutumes des Indiens,” Azdletin 
de la Société de Géographie (Paris), 
Deuxiéme Série, ii. (1834) p. 181. 

1 In Franche-Comté not only 
husbands and wives were expected to 
be continent from the first Sunday of 
Lent to the first Sunday after Easter, 
but even sweethearts separated during 
that time, bidding each other a formal 
farewell on the first of these days and 
meeting again with similar formality on 
the last. See C. Beauquier, Les Aozs 
en Franche-Comté (Paris, 1900), p. 35. 


Iam informed that the observance of 
chastity during Lent is enjoined gener- 
ally by the Catholic church. As to its 
injunction by the Coptic church see 
F. Wiistenfeld, AZacrzz2’s Geschichte der 
Copien (Gottingen, 1845), p. 84; 7 
Fetha Nagast, 0 Legislaztone det Re, 
codice ecclestastico e ctvile di Abissinia, 
tradotto e annotato da Ignazio Guidi 
(Rome, 1899), p. 164. 

2 Socrates, Azstoria Lccleszastica, 
v. 22; Sozomenus, AZstoria Lcclest- 
astica, vii. 19 (Migne, Patrologia 
Graeca, \xvii. coll. 632-636, 1477); 
W. Smith and S. Cheetham, Dzctzonery 
of Christian Antiquities, s.v. <* Lent,” 
vol. ii. pp. 972 sg. ; Mgr. L. Duchesne, 
Origines du Culte Chrétien (Paris, 


1903), Pp. 241-243. 


VII THE SATURNALIA AND LENT 349 


burned.! The time of year when these lamentations took 

place is not mentioned by the old Christian writer who 

records them ; but they would fall most appropriately at the 

season when the seed was sown or, in mythical language, 

when the corn-goddess was buried, which in ancient Italy, as 

we saw, was done above all in the months of February and 

March. We know that at the time of the autumnal sowing Autumnal 
Greek women held a sad and serious festival because the Seer 
| Corn-goddess Persephone or the Maiden, as they called and fasting 
her, then went down into the earth with the sown grain, ()jhesake 
and Demeter fondly mourned her daughter’s absence ; 

hence in sympathy with the sorrowful mother the women 
likewise mourned and observed a solemn fast and abstained 

from the marriage bed.? It is reasonable, therefore, to 
suppose that they practised similar rules of mourning 

and abstinence for a like reason at the time of the 

spring sowing, and that the ancient ritual survives in the 

modern Lent, which preserves the memory of the ater 
Dolorosa, though it has substituted a dead Son for a dead 
Daughter. 

Be that as it may, it is worthy of note that in The 
Burma a similar fast, which English writers call the ante 
Buddhist Lent, is observed for three months every year 
while the ploughing and sowing of the fields go forward ; 
and the custom is believed to be far older than Buddhism, 
which has merely given it a superficial tinge like the 
veneer of Christianity which, if I am right, has over- 
laid an old heathen observance in Lent. This Burmese 
Lent, we are told, covers the rainy season from the full 
moon of July to the full moon of October. “This is the 
time to plough, this is the time to sow; on the villagers’ 
exertions in these months depends all their maintenance for 
the rest of the year. Every man, every woman, every child, 
has hard work of some kind or another. And so, what with 


1 Firmicus Maternus, De errore rhv ris Képns xadodov ev axe Ths 
profanarum religionum, 27. Anjpnrpos otons. “Hate 6€ 6 phy odros 
mepl whecdda omdpunos, dv’ AOVp Aiyvmrcot, 
2 Plutarch, Zsés e¢ Osiris, 69: Kat Tvaveprdva & ’APnvaio, Bowwrol é 
yap “A@nvnot vnorevovow ai yuvatkes év Aaparpiov kadovou. As to the festival 
Gecuopoplors xapat KaOnuevan, Kat Bowwrol and the rule of chastity observed at it, 
Ta TAS Axaas weyapa Kwotow, érax0y see further Spzrzts of the Corn and of 
Thy éoprhv éxelvnv dvoudgovtes, ws dia the Weld, i. 116, il. 17 sg. 


Inversion 
of social 
ranks at 
ancient 
Greek 
festivals 
held in 
Crete, 
Troezen, 
and 
Thessaly. 


350 SATURNALIA AND KINDRED FESTIVALS  cuHap. 


the difficulties of travelling, what with the work there is 
to do, and what with the custom of Lent, every one stays at 
home. It is the time for prayer, for fasting, for improving 
the soul. Many men during these months will live even as 
the monks live, will eat but before midday, will abstain from 
tobacco. There are no plays during Lent, and there are no 
marriages. It is the time for preparing the land for the 
crop; it is the time for preparing the soul for eternity. The 
congregations on the Sundays will be far greater at this time 
than at any other; there will be more thought of the serious 
things of life.” * 


§ 4. Saturnalia in Ancient Greece 


Beyond the limits of Italy festivals of the same general 
character as the Saturnalia appear to have been held over a 
considerable area of the ancient world. A characteristic 
feature of the Saturnalia, as we saw, was an inversion of 
social ranks, masters changing places with their slaves and 
waiting upon them, while slaves were indulged with a 
semblance not merely of freedom but even of power and 
office. In various parts of Greece the same hollow show of 
granting liberty to slaves was made at certain festivals. 
Thus at a Cretan festival of Hermes the servants feasted 
and their masters waited upon them. In the month of 
Geraestius the Troezenians observed a certain solemnity 
lasting many days, on one of which the slaves played at 
dice with the citizens and were treated to a banquet by their 
lords. The Thessalians held a great festival called Peloria, 
which Baton of Sinope identified with the Saturnalia, and of 
which the antiquity is vouched for by a tradition that it 
originated with the Pelasgians. At this festival sacrifices 
were offered to Pelorian Zeus, tables splendidly adorned 
were set out, all strangers were invited to the feast, all 
prisoners released, and the slaves sat down to the banquet, 

1H. Fielding, Zhe Soul of a People it arose. Its origin is lost in the mists 
(London, 1898), pp. 172 sg. The of far-awaytime.” Compare C.J. F. S. 
orthodox explanation of the custom is Forbes, 4rztésh Burma (London, 
that during these three months the 1878), pp. 170 sg.; Shway Yoe, Zhe 
Buddha retired to a monastery. But Burman, his Life and Notions 


**the custom was far older even than (London, 1882), i. 257, 262 sgg. 
that—so old that we do not know how 


VIII SATURNALIA IN ANCIENT GREECE 


351 


enjoyed full freedom of speech, and were served by their 
masters.’ 

But the Greek festival which appears to have corre- 
sponded most closely to the Italian Saturnalia was the 
Cronia or festival of Cronus, a god whose barbarous myth 
and cruel ritual clearly belong to a very early stratum of 
Greek religion, and who was by the unanimous voice of 
antiquity identified with Saturn. We are told that his 
festival was celebrated in most parts of Greece, but especially 
at Athens, where the old god and his wife Rhea had a shrine 
near the stately, but far more modern, temple of Olympian 
Zeus. A joyous feast, at which masters and slaves sat down 
together, formed a leading feature of the solemnity. At Athens 
the festival fell in the height of summer, on the twelfth day of 
the month Hecatombaeon, formerly called the month of 
Cronus, which answered nearly to July ; and tradition ran that 
Cecrops, the first king of Attica, had founded an altar in 
honour of Cronus and Rhea, and had ordained that master 
and man should share a common meal when the harvest 
was got in.” Yet there are indications that at Athens the 
Cronia may once have been a spring festival. For a cake 
with twelve knobs, which perhaps referred to the twelve 
months of the year, was offered to Cronus by the Athenians 
on the fifteenth day of the month Elaphebolion, which 
corresponded roughly to March,? and there are traces of a 


1 Athenaeus, xiv. 44 sg., pp. 639 B- Phzlologie, vii. (1884) p. 400. At 


640 A. 

2 Macrobius, Saturn. i. 7. 37 and i. 
10. 22; Demosthenes, Ov. xxiv. 26, p. 
708. As to the temple of Cronus and 
Rhea, see Pausanias, i. 18. 73; Im. 
Bekker’s Avnecdota Graeca (Berlin, 
1814-1821), i. p. 273, lines 20 sg. 
That the Attic month Hecatombaeon 
was formerly called Cronius is men- 
tioned by Plutarch( 7%eseus, 12). Other 
Greek states, including Samos, Amorgos, 
Perinthus, and Patmos, had a month 
called Cronion, that is, the month of 
Cronus, which seems to have coin- 


cided with June or July. See G. 
Dittenberger, Sylloge IJnscriptionum 
Graecarum* (Leipsic, 1898—1901), 
Nos. 644 and 645; E. Bischoff, 


“‘De fastis Graecorum antiquioribus,” 
Leipziger Studien fiir  classischen 


Magnesia on the Maeander the month 
of Cronion was the time of sowing 
(Dittenberger, op. czt. No. 553, lines 
15 sg.), which cannot have fallen in the 
height of summer. Compare Sfzrits 
of the Corn and of the Wild, ii. 8. 

3 Corpus Inscriptionum Atticarum, 
ii. No. 77; Ch. Michel, Aecauezl ad In- 
scriptions Grecques (Brussels, 1900), 
No. 692, pp. 595 sg.; I. de Prott 
et L. Ziehen, Leges Graecorum Sacrae, 
i, (Leipsic, 1896), No. 3, pp. 7 sg. 3 
E. S. Roberts and E. A. Gardner, 
Introduction to Greck Epigraphy, Part 
II. (Cambridge, 1905), No. 142, pp. 
387 sg. From the same inscription 
we learn that cakes with twelve knobs 
were offered to other deities, including 
Apollo and Artemis, Zeus, Poseidon, 
and Hercules. 


The 
Greek 
festival of 
the Cronia 
compared 
to the 
Roman 
Saturnalia, 


The 
Olympian 
Cronia 
held at 
the spring 
equinox. 


The 
magistrates 
called 
Kings who 
celebrated 
the Cronia 
at Olympia 
may have 
personated 
King 
Cronus 
himself. 


352 SATURNALIA AND KINDRED FESTIVALS  cHap. 


license accorded to slaves at the Dionysiac festival of the 
opening of the wine-jars, which fell on the eleventh day of 
the preceding month Anthesterion.’ At Olympia the festival 
of Cronus undoubtedly occurred in spring; for here a low 
but steep hill, now covered with a tangled growth of dark 
holly-oaks and firs, was sacred to him, and on its top certain 
magistrates, who bore the title of kings, offered sacrifice to the 
old god at the vernal equinox in the Elean month Elaphius.” 

In this last ceremony, which probably went on year by 
year long before the upstart Zeus had a temple built for 
himself at the foot of the hill, there are two points of special 
interest, first the date of the ceremony, and second the title 
of the celebrants. First, as to the date, the spring equinox, 
or the twenty-first of March, must have fallen so near the 
fifteenth day of the Athenian month Elaphebolion, that 
we may fairly ask whether the Athenian custom of offering 
a cake to Cronus on that day may not also have been an 
equinoctial ceremony. In the second place, the title of 
kings borne by the magistrates who sacrificed to Cronus 
renders it probable that, like magistrates with similar high- 
sounding titles elsewhere in republican Greece, they were 
the lineal descendants of sacred kings whom the supersti- 
tion of their subjects invested with the attributes of divinity.® 
If that was so, it would be natural enough that one of these 


1 Scholiast on Hesiod, Works and 
Days, 370 (p. 170 ed. E. Vollbehr, 
Kiel, 1844): Kat éy rots rarpios éoriv 
€opT IiBovyla, Kab? fv ot're oixérny 


Feste der Stadt Athen, p. 402). 


2 Pausanias, vi. 20. I. Compare 
Dionysius Halicarnasensis, Azzegzit. 
Rom. i. 34. 


ote pwicbwrov elpyew THs damo\atcews 
Tov oivov OeuiTtov Fv, add\a OdicavTas 
Tact weTadddvat Tod Swpov Tov Acovicov. 
As to the festival of the opening of the 
wine-jars see August Mommsen, eor- 
tologie (Leipsic, 1864), pp. 349 sgg. 3 
td., Feste der Stadt Athen im Altertum 
(Leipsic, 1898), pp. 384 sgg. ‘* When 
the slaves,” says Plutarch, “feast at 
the Cronia or go about celebrating the 
festival of Dionysus in the country, the 
shouts they raise and the tumult they 
make in their rude merriment are in- 
tolerable” (Mon posse suaviter vivi 
secundum Epicurum, 26). That the 
original festival of Cronus fell at Athens 
in Anthesterion is the view of Aug. 
Mommsen (eortologie, pp. 793 


22 


“=<; 


The magistrates called 
“kings” (Saci\a) by Pausanias are 
doubtless identical with ‘‘the kings” 
(rot BactAGes) mentioned in a law of 
Elis, which was found inscribed on a 
bronze plate at Olympia. See H. 
Roehl, Jzscriptiones Graecae Antiguts- 
stmae (Berlin, 1882), No. 112, p. 393 
C. Cauer, Delectus ILnscriptionum 
Graecarum propter dialectum memora- 
bilium*® (Leipsic, 1883), No. 253, p. 
175; H. Collitz, Sammlung der 
griechischen Dialekt-Inschriften, No. 
1152 (vol. i. Gottingen, 1884, p. 321); 
Ch. Michel, Recauecl a Inscriptions 
Grecques, No. 195, p. 179. 


3 See The Magic Art and the Evolu- 
tion of Kings, i. 44 Sgq., li. 177, 361. 


VIII SATURNALIA IN ANCIENT GREECE 


353 


nominal kings should pose as the god Cronus in person. 
For, like his Italian counterpart Saturn, the Greek Cronus 
was believed to have been a king who reigned in heaven or 
on earth during the blissful Golden Age, when men passed 
their days like gods without toil or sorrow, when life was a 
long round of festivity, and death came like sleep, sudden 
but gentle, announced by none of his sad forerunners, the 
ailments and infirmities of age.’ Thus the analogy of the 
Olympian Cronia, probably one of the oldest of Greek 
festivals, to the Italian Saturnalia would be very close if 
originally, as I conjecture, the Saturnalia fell in spring and 
Saturn was personated at it, as we have good reason to 
believe, by a man dressed as a king. May we go a step 
further and suppose that, just as the man who acted King 
Saturn at the Saturnalia was formerly slain in that character, 
so one of the kings who celebrated the Cronia at Olympia 
not only played the part of Cronus, but was sacrificed, as 
god and victim in one, on the top of the hill? Cronus 
certainly bore a sinister reputation in antiquity. He passed 
for an unnatural parent who had devoured his own offspring, 
and he was regularly identified by the Greeks with the cruel 
Semitic Baals who delighted in the sacrifice of human 
victims, especially of children.2 A legend which savours 
strongly of infant sacrifice is reported of a shrine that stood 
at the very foot of the god’s own hill at Olympia ;* and a 
quite unambiguous story was told of the sacrifice of a babe 
to Lycaean Zeus on Mount Lycaeus in Arcadia, where the 
worship of Zeus was probably nothing but a continuation, 
under a new name, of the old worship of Cronus, and where 
human victims appear to have been regularly offered down 
to the Christian era. The Rhodians annually sacrificed a 


1 Hesiod, Works and Days, 111, 2 See M. Mayer, of. cé¢. ii. 1501 
mGO);, Plato, Lolztzcus, p. 269 A; sag. 
Diodorus Siculus, iii. 61, v. 66; 3 Pausanias, vi. 20. 4 sg. 


Julian, Zf¢stola ad Themistium, p. 
258 C (pp. 334 sg., ed. F. C. Hertlein, 
Leipsic, 1875-1876); ‘* Anonymi 
Chronologica,” printed in L. Dindorf’s 
edition of J. Malalas (Bonn, 1831), p. 
17. See further M. Mayer’s article 
“Kronos,” in W. H. Roscher’s Lex7- 
kon der griech. und rim. Mythologie, ii. 
(Leipsic, 1890-1897) col. 1458. 
Pas VI 


4 Plato, Republic, ix. p. 565 DE; 
pseudo-Plato, AZzzos, p. 315 C; Pliny, 
Nat. Ast. viti. 81; Pausanias, viii. 2 
and 38; Porphyry, De adbstinentia, ii. 
27; Augustine, De czvitate Det, xviii. 
17. The suggestion that Lycaean 
Zeus may have been merely a successor 
of Cronus is due to my friend Professor 
W. Ridgeway. 

2A 


Perhaps 
the man 
who 
annually 
personated 
King 
Cronus 
was put to 
death. 


A man 
annually 
sacrificed 
to Cronus 
at the 
Cronia in 
Rhodes. 


The 
Babylonian 
festival of 
the Sacaea, 


354 SATURNALIA AND KINDRED FESTIVALS  Cuap. 


man to Cronus in the month Metageitnion; at a later time 
they kept a condemned criminal in prison till the festival of 
the Cronia was come, then led him forth outside the gates, 
made him drunk with wine, and cut his throat With the 
parallel of the Saturnalia before our eyes, we may surmise 
that the victim who thus ended his life in a state of 
intoxication at the Cronia perhaps personated King Cronus 
himself, the god who reigned in the happy days of old 
when men had nothing to do but to eat and drink and 
make merry. At least the Rhodian custom lends some 
countenance to the conjecture that formerly a human victim 
may have figured at the sacrifice which the so-called kings 
offered to Cronus on his hill at Olympia. In this con- 
nexion it is to be remembered that we have already found 
well-attested examples of a custom of sacrificing the scions 
of royal houses in ancient Greece.” If the god to whom, or 
perhaps rather in whose character, the princes were sacri- 
ficed, was Cronus, it would be natural that the Greeks of a 
later age should identify him with Baal or Moloch, to whom 
in like manner Semitic kings offered up their children. The 
Laphystian Zeus of Thessaly and Boeotia, whom tradition 
associated with these human sacrifices, was probably, like 
the Lycaean Zeus of Arcadia, nothing but the aboriginal 
deity, commonly known as Cronus, whose gloomy rites the 
Greek invaders suffered the priests of the vanquished race to 
continue after the ancient manner, while they quieted their 
scruples of conscience or satisfied their pride as conquerors 
by investing the bloodthirsty old savage with the name, if 
not with the character, of their own milder deity, the humane 
and gracious Zeus. 


§ 5. Saturnalia in Western Asta 


When we pass from Europe to western Asia, from 
ancient Greece to ancient Babylon and the regions where 
Babylonian influence penetrated, we are still met with festi- 
vals which bear the closest resemblance to the oldest form 
of the Italian Saturnalia. The reader may remember the 
festival of the Sacaea, on which I had occasion to touch in 


1 Porphyry, De abstinentéa, ii. 54. 2 The Dying God, pp. 161 sgq. 


vill SATURNALIA IN WESTERN ASIA 355 


an earlier part of this work.’ It was held at Babylon 
during five days: of the month Lous, beginning with the 
sixteenth day of the month. During its continuance, just 
as at the Saturnalia, masters and servants changed places, 
the servants issuing orders and the masters obeying them ; 
and in each house one of the servants, dressed as a king 
and bearing the title of Zoganes, bore rule over the house- 
hold. Further, just as at the Saturnalia in its original form 
a man was dressed as King Saturn in royal robes, allowed 
to indulge his passions and caprices to the full, and then 
put to death, so at the Sacaea a condemned prisoner, who 
probably also bore for the time being the title of Zoganes, was 
arrayed in the king’s attire and suffered to play the despot, 
to use the king’s concubines, and to give himself up to 
feasting and debauchery without restraint, only however in 
the end to be stript of his borrowed finery, scourged, and 
hanged or crucified.” From Strabo we learn that this Asiatic 
counterpart of the Saturnalia was celebrated in Asia Minor 
wherever the worship of the Persian goddess Anaitis had 
established itself. He describes it as a Bacchic orgy, at 
which the revellers were disguised as Scythians, and men 
and women drank and dallied together by day and night.’ 
As the worship of Anaitis, though of Persian origin, 
appears to have ‘been deeply leavened with coarse elements 
which it derived from the religion of Babylon,* we may 
perhaps regard Mesopotamia as the original home from 
which the Sacaean festival spread westward into other parts 
of Asia Minor. Now the Sacaean festival, described by the 
Babylonian priest Berosus in the first book of his history 
of Babylon, has been plausibly identified’ with the great 


1 The Dying God, pp. 113 sqg. 


2 Athenaeus, xiv. 44, p. 639 C3; 
Dio Chrysostom, Or. iv. 69 sg. (vol. 
i. p. 76 ed. L. Dindorf, Leipsic, 1857). 
From Athenaeus we learn that the 
festival was described or mentioned by 
Berosus in his first book and by Ctesias 
in his second, 

2 Strabo, xi. 8. 5, p- 512. 

* Strabo, xi. 14. 16, pp. 532 59.3 
Ed. Meyer’s article ‘‘ Anaitis,” in 
W. H. Roscher’s Lexzkon der griech. 
und rom. Mythologie, i. (Leipsic, 1884— 


1890) pp. 33° 599. 

5 By A. H. Sayce, Relégion of the 
Ancient Babylonians (London and 
Edinburgh, 1887), p. 68; Bruno 
Meissner, ‘‘ Zur Entstehungsgeschichte 
des Purimfestes,” Zeztschrift der deut- 
schen morgenlandischen Geselischaft, |. 
(1896) pp. 296-301; H. Winckler, 
Altorientalische Forschungen, Zweite 
Reihe, ii. Heft 3 (Leipsic, 1900), p. 
345; C. Brockelmann, ‘‘ Wesen und 
Ursprung des Eponymats in Assyrien,” 
Zeitschrift fiir Assyriologie, xvi. (1902) 
pp. 391 5g. 


The Sacaea 
by some 
identified 
with Zak- 
muk or 
Zagmuk, 
the 
Babylonian 
festival of 
the New 
Year, which 
was held 


about the 
spring 
equinox in 
March, 


Annual 
renewal of 
the king of 
Babylon's 
power at 
the Zakmuk 
festival. 


356 SATURNALIA AND KINDRED FESTIVALS  CHapP. 


Babylonian festival of the New year called Zakmuk, Zag- 
muk, Zakmuku, or Zagmuku, which has become known to us 
in recent times through inscriptions. The Babylonian year 
began with the spring month of Nisan, which seems to have 
covered the second half of March and the first half of April. 
Thus the New Year festival, which occupied at least the first 
eleven days of Nisan, probably included the spring equinox. 
It was held in honour of Marduk or Merodach, the chief god 
of Babylon, whose great temple of Esagila in the city formed 
the religious centre of the solemnity. For here, in a splendid 
chamber of the vast edifice, all the gods were believed to 
assemble at this season under the presidency of Marduk for 
the purpose of determining the fates for the new year, 
especially the fate of the king’s life. On this occasion the 
king of Babylon was bound annually to renew his regal 
power by grasping the hands of the image of Marduk in his 
temple, as if to signify that he received the kingdom directly 
from the deity and was unable without the divine assistance 
and authority to retain it for more than a year. Unless 
he thus formally reinstated himself on the throne once 
a year, the king ceased to reign legitimately. When 
Babylonia was conquered by Assyria, the Assyrian monarchs 
themselves used to come to Babylon and perform the 
ceremony of grasping the god’s hands in order to establish 
by this solemn act their title to the kingdom which they 
had won for themselves by the sword; until they had done 
so, they were not recognized as kings by their Babylonian 
subjects. Some of them indeed found the ceremony either 
so burdensome or so humiliating to their pride as conquerors, 
that rather than perform it they renounced the title of king 
of Babylon altogether and contented themselves with the 
more modest title of regent. Another notable feature of the 
Babylonian festival of the New Year appears to have been a 
ceremonial marriage of the god Marduk; for in a hymn 
relating to the solemnity it is said of the deity that “he 
hastened to his bridal.” The festival was of hoar antiquity, 
for it was known to Gudea, an old king of Southern 
Babylonia who flourished between two and three thou- 
sand years before the beginning of our era, and it is 
mentioned in an early account of the Great Flood. At 


SATURNALIA IN WESTERN ASIA 357 


Vill 


a much later period it is repeatedly referred to by King 

Nebuchadnezzar and his successors. Nebuchadnezzar records 

how he built of bricks and bitumen a chapel or altar, “a 

thing of joy and rejoicing,” for the great festival of Marduk, 

the lord of the gods ; and we read of the rich and abundant 

offerings which were made by the high priest at this time.’ 
Unfortunately the notices of this Babylonian festival of Reasonsfor 

the New Year which have come down to us deal chiefly pas 

with its mythical aspect and throw little light on the mode with 

of its celebration. Hence its identity with the Sacaea must “*™* 

remain for the present a more or less probable hypothesis. 

In favour of the hypothesis may be alleged in the first place 

the resemblance of the names Sacaea and Zoganes to 

Zakmuk or Zagmuku, if that was the real pronunciation 

of the name,’ and in the second Iplace the very signi- 

ficant statement that the fate of the king’s life was sup- 

posed to be determined by the gods, under the presidency 


of Marduk, at the Zakmuk or New Year’s festival? When 
1 P. Jensen, Dze Kosmologie der  Altertunts,? i. 2. (Stuttgart and Ber- 
Babylonier (Strasburg, 1890), pp. 84 lin, 1909) pp. 488 sg. As to the 


sgg.; H. Zimmern, ‘‘ Zur Frage nach 
dem Ursprunge des Purimfestes,” Zezt- 
schrift fiir die alttestamentliche Wissen- 
schaft, xi. (1891) pp. 159 sgg.; 
A, Jeremias, s.v. ‘‘ Marduk,” in W. H. 
Roscher’s Lexicon der griech. und rom. 
Mythologie, ii. 2347 sg.; M. Jastrow, 
Religion of Babylonia and Assyria 
(Boston, U.S.A., 1898), pp. 186, 677 
sqg.; R. F. Harper, Assyrian and 
Babylonian Literature (New York, 
1901), pp. 136 sg., 137, 140, 149; 
C. Brocklemann, ‘‘Wesen und Ur- 
sprung des Eponymats in Assyrien,” 
Zeitschrift fiir Assyriologte, xvi. (1902) 
pp39n)sq7.; HH. Zimmern, in E- 
Schrader’s Die Ketlinschriften und das 
Alte Testament? (Berlin, 1902), pp. 
379 59., 374, 384 2.*, 402, 514 599.3 
zd., ‘Zum Babylonischen Neujahrs- 
fest,” Berichte tiber die Verhandlungen 
der kiniglich Stchsischen Gesellschaft 
der Wissenschaften zu Leipzig, Philo- 
logisch-historische Klasse, lviii. (1906) 
pp- 126-156; M. J. Lagrange, Etudes 
sur les Religions Sémitigues® (Paris, 
1905), pp. 285 sgg. King Gudea is 
thought to have flourished about 2340 
B.C. See Ed. Meyer, Geschichte des 


ceremony of grasping the hands of 
Marduk’s image, see also C. F. 
Lehmann (-Haupt), Samaxiumukin, 
Konig von Babylonien (Leipsic, 1892), 
pp. 50 sgg.; Sir G. Maspero, Hzstozre 
Ancienne des Feuples de [Orient 
Classique, iii. Les Empires (Paris, 
1899), pp. 381 s¢. 

2 On this subject the Master of St. 
Catharine’s College, Cambridge (the 
Rey. C. H. W. Johns), has kindly 
furnished me with the following note : 
‘“*ZAG is the name of the ideogram 
meaning ‘head or beginning. MU 
is the sign for ‘ year.” When put to- 
gether ZAG-MU means ‘beginning of 
year.’ But ZAG-MU-KU means ZAG 
MU-d, z.e. ZAG with MU suffixed. 
Therefore it is the name of the ideo- 
gram, and there is as yet no fvoof that 
it was ever read Zakmuk. Hence any 
similarity of sound with either Sacaea 
or Zoganes is precarious. I cannot 
prove that the signs were ever read 
Zakmuku, but that is not a Semitic 
word nor a Sumerian word.” 

3 The statement occurs in an in- 
scription of Nebuchadnezzar. See P. 
Jensen, Die Kosmologie der Babylonier, 


A difficulty 
in identify- 
ing the 
Sacaea 
with Zak- 
muk is that 
the two 
festivals 
seem to 
have been 
celebrated 
at different 
times of 
the year, 
Zakmuk 
falling in 
March and 
the Sacaea 
in July. 


358 SATURNALIA AND KINDRED FESTIVALS  cuap. 


we remember that the central feature of the Sacaea appears 
to have been the saving of the king’s life for another year 
by the vicarious sacrifice of a criminal on the cross or the 
gallows, we can understand that the season was a critical 
one for the king, and that it may well have been regarded 
as determining his fate for the ensuing twelve months. The 
annual ceremony of renewing the king’s power by con- 
tact with the god’s image, which formed a leading feature 
of the Zakmuk festival, would be very appropriately 
performed immediately after the execution or sacrifice of 
the temporary king who died in the room of the real 
monarch. 

A difficulty, however, in the way of identifying the Sacaea 
with the Zakmuk arises from the statement of Berosus that 
the Sacaea fell on the sixteenth day of Lous, which was the 
tenth month of the Syro-Macedonian calendar and appears 
to have nearly coincided with July. Thus if the Sacaea 
occurred in July and the Zakmuk in March, the theory 
of their identity could not be maintained. But the dating 
of the months of the Syro-Macedonian calendar is a 
matter of some uncertainty; the month of Lous in par- 
ticular appears to have fallen at different times of the year 
in different places,’ and until we have ascertained beyond 
the reach of doubt when Lous fell at Babylon in the time of 
Berosus, it would be premature to allow much weight to the 
seeming discrepancy in the dates of the two festivals. At 
all events, whether the festivals were the same or different, 
we are confronted with difficulties which in the present state 
of our knowledge may be pronounced insoluble. If the 
festivals were the same, we cannot explain their apparent 
difference of date: if they were different, we cannot explain 
their apparent similarity of character. In what follows I 


p. 85; H. Zimmern, in E. Schrader’s 
Die Ketlinschriften und das Alte Testa- 
ment® (Berlin, 1902), p. 402. The 
title of the president of the divine synod, 
‘< king of the gods of heaven and earth,” 
is believed by Professor Zimmern to have 
originally referred to the god Nabu, 
though at a later time it was applied to 
Marduk. 

1 See The Dying God, p. 116 note}, 


In Egypt the Macedonian calendar 
seems to have fallen into great confu- 
sion. See W. Dittenberger, Ovzentis 
Graect Inscriptiones Selectae (Leipsic, 
1903-1905), ii. pp. 649 sg. I would 
remind the reader that while the dates 
of the Syro-Macedonian months varied 
in different places, their ovdex was the 
same everywhere. 


VII SATURNALIA IN WESTERN ASIA 


359 


shall, with some eminent Oriental scholars,’ provisionally 
assume the identity of Zakmuk and Sacaea, but I would ask 
the reader to bear clearly in mind that the hypothesis leaves 
the apparent discrepancy of their dates unexplained. Towards 
a solution of the problem I can only suggest conjecturally 
either that the date of the festival had been for some reason 
shifted in the time of Berosus, or that two different festivals 
of the same type may have been held at different seasons of 
the year, one in spring and one in summer, perhaps by two 
distinct but kindred tribes, who retained their separate 
religious rites after they had coalesced in the Babylonian 
empire. Both conjectures might be supported by analogies. 
On the one hand, for example, in the Jewish calendar New 
Year’s Day was shifted under Babylonian influence from 
autumn to spring,” and in a later part of this work we shall 
see that the Chinese festival of new fire, at first celebrated in 
spring, was afterwards shifted to the summer solstice, only 
however to be brought back at a later time -to its original 
date. On the other hand, the popular festivals of our 
European peasantry afford many examples of rites which 
appear to be similar in character, though they fall at different 
times of the year; such, for instance, are the ceremonies 
concerned with vegetation on May Day, Whitsuntide, and 
Midsummer Day,’ and the fire festivals which are distributed 
at still wider intervals throughout the months* Similarly 
in ancient Italy the agricultural festival of the Ambarvalia 
was celebrated by Italian farmers at different dates in 
different places.° These cases may warn us against the 
danger of hastily inferring an essential difference between 
Zakmuk and Sacaea on the ground of a real or apparent 
difference in their dates. 

A fresh and powerful argument in favour of the identity 


1 See above, p. 355, note®, Onthe 
other hand Prof. H. Zimmern prefers 
to suppose that the Sacaea was quite 
distinct from Zakmuk, and that it 
fell in July at the time of the heliacal 
rising of Sirius, which seems to have 
been associated with the goddess Ishtar. 
See H. Zimmern, in E. Schrader’s 
Die Keilinschriften und das Alte Testa- 
ment* (Berlin, 1902), pp. 426 sg. 


2 Encyclopaedia Biblica, s.v.**Year,” 
vol, iv. (London, 1903) coll. 5365 sgg. 

3 The Magic Art and the Evolu- 
tion of Kings, ii. 59 sqq. 

4 The Golden Bough, Second Edi- 
tion, ili. 237 sgq. 

5 J. Marquardt, Rémische Staats- 
verwaltung* (Leipsic, 1855), pp. 200 
5G. 


Suggested 
ways of 
meeting 
the diffi- 
culty. 


An argu- 
ment for 
identifying 
Sacaea and 
Zakmuk 
is the 
apparent 
connexion 
of both 
with the 
Jewish 
festival 

of Purim. 


360 SATURNALIA AND KINDRED FESTIVALS  cuap. 


of the two festivals is furnished by the connexion which has 
been traced between both of them and the Jewish feast of 
Purim.! There are good grounds for believing that Purim 
was unknown to the Jews until after the exile, and that they 
learned to observe it during their captivity in the East. 
The festival is first mentioned in the book of Esther, which 
by the majority of critics is assigned to the fourth or third 
century B.C.,” and which certainly cannot be older than the 
Persian period, since the scene of the narrative is laid in Susa 
at the court of a Persian king Ahasuerus, whose name appears 
to be the Hebrew equivalent of Xerxes. The next reference 
to Purim occurs in the second book of Maccabees, a work 
written probably about the beginning of our era.” Thus 
from the absence of all notice of Purim in the older books 
of the Bible, we may fairly conclude that the festival was 
instituted or imported at a comparatively late date among 
the Jews. The same conclusion is supported by the book 
of Esther itself, which was manifestly written to explain the 
origin of the feast and to suggest motives for its observance. 
For, according to the author of the book, the festival was 
established to commemorate the deliverance of the Jews 
from a great danger which threatened them in Persia under 
the reign of King Xerxes. Thus the opinion of modern 
scholars that the feast of Purim, as celebrated by the Jews, 
was of late date and oriental origin, is borne out by the 
tradition of the Jews themselves. An examination of that 
tradition and the mode of celebrating the feast renders 


1H. Zimmern, ‘‘ Zur Frage nach 
dem Ursprunge des Purimfestes,” Zez¢- 
schrift fiir die alttestamentliche Wessen- 
schaft, xi. (1891) pp. 157-169; W. 
Nowack, Lehrbuch der hebraischen 
Archdologie (Freiburg i. B. and Leip- 


his Commentary on the Book of Esther 
(Edinburgh, 1908), pp. 77-94. See 
also Encyclopaedia biblica, s.v.*‘Purim,” 
vol. iii. (London, 1902) coll. 3976 
59q- 


sic, 1894), ii. 198 sgg.; Br. Meissner, 
“Zur Entstehungsgeschichte des Purim- 
festes,” Zeztschrift der deutschen morgen- 
landischen Gesellschaft, \. (1896) pp. 
296-301; Fr. Cumont, ‘‘Le roi des 
Saturnales,” Revue de Philologie, xxi. 
(1897) p. 150; P. Haupt, Purim 
(Leipsic, 1906). The various theories 
which have been propounded as to 
the origin of Purim are stated and 
discussed by Prof. L. B. Paton in 


2S. R. Driver, Zutroduction to the 
Literature of the Old Testament§ 
(Edinburgh, 1909), p. 484. Professor 
T. Witton Davies would date the book 
about 130 B.c. See Lzra, Nehemiah 
and Esther, edited by Rev. T. Witton 
Davies (Edinburgh and London, N.D.), 
pp. 299-301 (Zhe Century Bible). 


3 2 Maccabees xv. 36. As to the 
date of this book, see S. R. Driver, 
op. ctt. p. 481. 


. 


VIII SATURNALIA IN WESTERN ASIA 361 


it probable that Purim is nothing but a more or less 
disguised form of the Babylonian festival of the Sacaea or 
Zakmuk. 

In the first place, the feast of Purim was and is held on 
the fourteenth and fifteenth days of Adar, the last month 
of the Jewish year, which corresponds roughly to March.’ 
Thus the date agrees nearly, though not exactly, with the 
date of the Babylonian Zakmuk, which fell a fortnight later 
in the early days of the following month Nisan. A trace 
of the original celebration of Purim in Nisan may perhaps 
be found in the statement that “they cast Pur, that is, the 
lot, before Haman” in Nisan, the first month of the year. 
It has been suggested with some plausibility that the Jews 
may have shifted the date of Purim in order that the new 
and foreign festival might not clash with their own old 
festival of the Passover, which began on the fourteenth day 
of Nisan. Another circumstance which speaks at once for 
the alien origin of Purim and for its identity with Zakmuk 
is its name. The author of the book of Esther derives the 
name Purim from pur, “a lot,’?® but no such word with 
this signification exists in Hebrew, and hence we are driven 
to look for the meaning and etymology of Purim in some 
other language. A specious theory is that the name was 
derived from an Assyrian word pufru, “an assembly,” and 
referred primarily to the great assembly of the gods which, 
as we have seen, formed a chief feature of the festival of 


» Zakmuk, and was held annually in the temple of Marduk 


at Babylon for the purpose of determining the fates or 
lots of the new year;* the august assembly appears to 
have been occasionally, if not regularly, designated by the 
very name fuhru.2 On this hypothesis the traditional 
Jewish explanation of the name Purim preserved a genuine 


1 We know from Josephus(Amtéguzt. 
iii. 10. 5) that in the month Nisan, 
the first month of the Jewish year, the 
sun was in Aries. Now the sun is in 
Aries from March 2oth or 2Ist to 
April 19th or 20th; hence Nisan 
answers approximately to April, and 
Adar to March. 


2 Esther iii. 7. 
3 Esther iii. 7, ix. 26. 


4 This is the view of H. Zimmern 
(Zectschrift fiir die alttestamentliche 
Wrassenschaft, xi. (1891) pp. 157 sgq.), 
and it is favoured by W. Nowack 
(Lehrbuch der hebraischen Archaologie, 
il. 198 sg.). Compare H. Zimmern, 
in E. Schrader’s Dee Ketlinschriften 
und das Alte Testament? (Berlin, 
1902), p. 518. 

5 P. Jensen, Die Kosmologie der 
Babylonier, pp. 240 sq. 


The 
Jewish 
festival 

of Purim 
seems to 
be derived 
from the 
Babylonian 
festival of 
Zakmuk. 


Connexion 
of Purim 
with the 
Sacaea. 


362 SATURNALIA AND KINDRED FESTIVALS  cHuap. 


kernel of historical truth, or at least of mythical fancy, under 
the husk of a verbal error; for the name, if this derivation 
of it is correct, really signified, not “the lots,” but the 
assembly for drawing or otherwise determining the lots. 
Another explanation which has been offered is “that par 
or dur seems to be an old Assyrian word for ‘stone, and 
that therefore it is possible that the word was also used to 
signify ‘lot, like the Hebrew O73 ‘lot, which originally, no 
doubt, meant ‘little stone.’”* Either of these explanations 
of the name Purim, by tracing it back to the New Year 
assembly of the gods at Babylon for settling the lots, 
furnishes an adequate explanation of the traditional associa- 
tion of Purim with the casting of lots—an association all 
the more remarkable and all the more likely to be ancient 
because there is nothing to justify it either in the Hebrew 
language or in the Jewish mode of celebrating the festival. 
When to this we add the joyous, nay, extravagant festivity 
which has always been characteristic of Purim, and is entirely 
in keeping with a New Year celebration, we may perhaps 
be thought to have made out a fairly probable case for 
holding that the Jewish feast is derived from the Babylonian 
New Year festival of Zakmuk. Whether the Jews borrowed 
the feast directly from the Babylonians or indirectly through 
the Persian conquerors of Babylon is a question which 
deserves to be considered; but the Persian colouring of 
the book of Esther speaks strongly for the view that Purim 
came to Israel by way of Persia, or at all events from 
Babylon under Persian rule, and this view is confirmed by 
other evidence, to which I shall have to ask the reader’s 
attention a little later on. 

If the links which bind Purim to Zakmuk are reason- 
ably strong, the chain of evidence which connects the Jewish 
festival with the Sacaea is much stronger. Nor is this 
surprising when we remember that, while the popular mode 
of celebrating Zakmuk is unknown, we possess important 
and trustworthy details as to the manner of holding the 

1 The explanation is that of P. word for ‘‘pebble” and “vote” is 
Jensen, quoted by Th. Noldeke in identical (Wijdos). As to this etymology 
Encyclopaedia Biblica, s.v. ‘* Esther,” seealsoC. H. W. Johns, s.v. ‘* Purim,” 


vol. ii. (London, 1901) col. 1404 note1. Hxcyclopaedia Biblica, iii. (London, 
In Greek, for a similar reason, the 1902) coll. 3979 sg. 


vu SATURNALIA IN WESTERN ASIA 363 


Sacaea. We have seen that the Sacaea was a wild Bac- 
chanalian revel at which men and women disguised them- 
selves and drank and played together in a fashion that was 
more gay than modest. Now this is, or used to be, pre- 
cisely the nature of Purim. The two days of the festival, 
according to the author of the book of Esther, were to be 
kept for ever as “ days of feasting and gladness, and of send- 
ing portions one to another, and gifts to the poor.”* And 
this joyous character the festival seems always to have 
retained. The author of a tract in the Talmud lays it down 
asa rule that at the feast of Purim every Jew is bound to 
drink until he cannot distinguish between the words “ Cursed 
be Haman” and “ Blessed be Mordecai”; and he tells how 
on one occasion a certain Rabba drank so deep at Purim 
that he murdered a rabbi without knowing what he was 
about. Indeed Purim has been described as the Jewish 
Bacchanalia, and we are told that at this season every- 
thing is lawful which can contribute to the mirth and 
gaiety of the festival.* Writers of the seventeenth century 
assert that during the two days, and especially on the even- 
ing of the second day, the Jews did nothing but feast and 
drink to repletion, play, dance, sing, and make merry; in 
particular they disguised themselves, men and women ex- 
changing clothes, and thus attired ran about like mad, in 
open defiance of the Mosaic law, which expressly forbids 
men to dress as women and women as men.’ Among the 
Jews of Frankfort, who inhabited the squalid but quaint and 
picturesque old street known as the Judengasse, which many 
of us still remember, the revelry at Purim ran as high as 
ever in the eighteenth century. The gluttony and intoxi- 
cation began punctually at three o’clock in the afternoon of 
the first day and went on until the whole community seemed 
to have taken leave of their senses. They ate and drank, 
they frolicked and cut capers, they reeled and staggered 


1 Esther x. 22. der Wissenschaften 2u Gottingen, 

2 P ; xxxiv. (1887) pp. 54 sg. Compare J. 

a ; jee Roe 5 re alia Chr. G. Bodenschatz, Azrchliche Ver- 

; Teil af ; fassung der heutigen Juden (Erlangen, 

3 J. Buxtorf, of. cet. p. 559; Schick- 1748), ii. 256. For the rule for- 

ard, quoted by Lagarde, ‘‘ Purim,” bidding men and women to exchange 
Abhandlungen der kin. Gesellschaft garments, see Deuteronomy xxii. 5. 


The joyous 
nature of 
Purim. 


The origin 
of Purim 
according 
to the book 
of Esther. 


364 SATURNALIA AND KINDRED FESTIVALS  cnap. 


about, they shrieked, yelled, stamped, clattered, and broke 
each other’s heads with wooden hammers till the blood 
flowed. On the evening of the first day the women were 
allowed, as a special favour, to open their latticed window 
and look into the men’s synagogue, because the great 
deliverance of the Jews from their enemies in the time of 
King Ahasuerus was said to have been effected by a woman. 
A feature of the festival which should not be overlooked 
was the acting of the story of Esther as a comedy, in which 
Esther, Ahasuerus, Haman, Mordecai, and others played 
their parts after a fashion that sometimes degenerated from 
farce into ribaldry.. Thus on the whole we may take it 
that Purim has always been a Saturnalia, and therefore 
corresponds in character to the Sacaea as that festival has 
been described for us by Strabo. 

But further, when we examine the narrative which pro- 
fesses to account for the institution of Purim, we discover in 
it not only the strongest traces of Babylonian origin, but 
also certain singular analogies to those very features of the 
Sacaean festival with which we are here more immediately 
concerned. The book of Esther turns upon the fortunes of 
two men, the vizier Haman and the despised Jew Mordecai, 
at the court of a Persian king. Mordecai, we are told, had 
given mortal offence to the vizier, who accordingly prepares 
a tall gallows on which he hopes to see his enemy hanged, 
while he himself expects to receive the highest mark of the 
king’s favour by being allowed to wear the royal crown and 
the royal robes, and thus attired to parade the streets 
mounted on the king’s own horse and attended by one of 
the noblest princes, who should proclaim to the multitude 
his temporary exaltation and glory. But the artful intrigues 
of the wicked vizier miscarried and resulted in precisely the 
opposite of what he had hoped and expected ; for the royal 
honours which he had looked for fell to his rival Mordecai, 
and he himself was hanged on the gallows which he had made 
ready for his foe. In this story we seem to detect a reminis- 

1 J. J. Schudt, Jtidische Merkwiir- Ages (London, 1896), pp. 261 sgg. 
digkecten (Frankfort and Leipsic, 1714), I have to thank my learned friend Dr. 
ii. Theil, pp. *309, *314, *316, iv. S. Schechter for bringing both these 


Theiles die ii. Continuation, p. 347; works to my notice. 
I. Abrahams, Jew7sh Life in the Middle 


VuI SATURNALIA IN WESTERN ASIA 365 


cence, more or less confused, of the Zoganes of the Sacaea, 
in other words, of the custom of investing a private man with 
the insignia of royalty for a few days and then putting him 
to death on the gallows or the cross. It is true that in the 
narrative the part of the Zoganes is divided between two 
actors, one of whom hopes to play the king but is hanged 
instead, while the other acts the royal part and escapes the 
gallows to which he was destined by his enemy. But this 
bisection, so to say, of the Zoganes may have been deliber- 
ately invented by the Jewish author of the book of Esther 
for the sake of setting the origin of Purim, which it was his 
purpose to explain, in a light that should reflect glory on 
his own nation. Or, perhaps more probably, it points back 
to a custom of appointing two mock kings at the Sacaea, 
one of whom was put to death at the end of the festival, 
while the other was allowed to go free, at least for a time. 
We shall be the more inclined to adopt the latter hypothesis 
when we observe that corresponding to the two rival aspir- 
ants to the temporary kingship there appear in the Jewish 
narrative two rival queens, Vashti and Esther, one of whom 
succeeds to the high estate from which the other has fallen. 
Further, it is to be noted that Mordecai, the successful 
candidate for the mock kingship, and Esther, the successful 
candidate for the queenship, are linked together by close 
ties both of interest and blood, the two being said to be 
cousins. This suggests that in the original story or the 
original custom there may have figured two pairs of kings 
and queens, of whom one pair is represented in the Jewish 
narrative by Mordecai and Esther and the other by Haman 
and Vashti. 

Some confirmation of this view is furnished by the 
names of two at least out of the four personages. It seems 
to be now generally recognized by Biblical scholars that 
the name Mordecai, which has no meaning in Hebrew, is 
nothing but a slightly altered form of Marduk or Mero- 
dach, the name of the chief god of Babylon, whose 
great festival was the Zakmuk; and further, it is generally 
admitted that Esther in like manner is equivalent to 
Ishtar, the great Babylonian goddess whom the Greeks 
called Astarte, and who is more familiar to English readers 


The 

rival pairs 
Mordecai 
and Esther 
on the 

one side, 
Haman 
and Vashti 
on the 
other. 


Analysis of 
the names 
Mordecai 
and Esther, 
Haman 
and Vashti. 


Jensen's 
theory that 
Haman 
and Vashti 
were 
Elamite 
deities in 
opposition 
to the 
Babylonian 
deities 
Mordecai 
(Marduk) 
and Esther 
(Ishtar). 


366 SATURNALIA AND KINDRED FESTIVALS  cuapr. 


as Ashtaroth. The derivation of the names of Haman and 
Vashti is less certain, but some high authorities are disposed 
to accept the view of Jensen that Haman is identical with 
Humman or Homman, the national god of the Elamites, 
and that Vashti is in like manner an Elamite goddess whose 
name Jensen read as Mashti in inscriptions. Now, when we 
consider that the Elamites were from time immemorial the 
hereditary foes of the Babylonians and had their capital at 
Susa, the very place in which the scene of the book of Esther 
is laid, we can hardly deny the plausibility of the theory that 
Haman and Vashti on the one side and Mordecai and Esther 
on the other represent the antagonism between the gods of 
Elam and the gods of Babylon, and the final victory of the 
Babylonian deities in the very capital of their rivals.’ “It is 
therefore possible,” says Professor Noldeke, “ that we here have 
to do with a feast whereby the Babylonians commemorated 
a victory gained by their gods over the gods of their neigh- 
bours the Elamites, against whom they had so often waged 
war. The Jewish feast of Purim is an annual merrymaking of 
a wholly secular kind, and it is known that there were similar 
feasts among the Babylonians. That the Jews in Babylonia 
should have adopted a festival of this sort cannot be deemed 
improbable, since in modern Germany, to cite an analogous 


1 P. Jensen, ‘‘Elamitische Eigen- 
namen,” Wiener Zeitschrift fiir die 
Kunde des Morgenlandes, vi. (1892) pp. 
47-70; compare 2). pp. 209-212. All 
Jensen’s etymologies are accepted by 
W. Nowack (Lehrbuch der hebraz- 
schen Archaologie, Freiburg i. Baden 
and Leipsic, 1894, ii. 199 sg.); H. 
Gunkel (Schopfung und Chaos, Gottin- 
gen, 1895, pp. 310 sg.) ; D. G. Wilde- 
boer (in his commentary on Esther, pp. 
173 sgg., forming part of K. Marti’s 
Kurzer Hand-Commentar zum alten 
Testament, Freiburg i. B. 1898); 
Th. Noldeke (s.v. ‘‘ Esther,” Ezcyclo- 
paedia Biblica, vol. ii. coll. 1404 sg.) ; 
and H. Zimmern (in E. Schrader’s 
Die Keilinschriften und das Alte Testa- 
ment,® Berlin, 1902, pp. 485, 516 sg.). 
On the other hand, Br. Meissner (Zez¢- 
schrift der deutschen morgenlandischen 
Gesellschaft, |. (1896) p. 301) and M. 
Jastrow (The Religion of Babylonia 


and Assyria, p. 686, note 2) suspend 
their judgment as to the identification 
of Haman and Vashti with Elamite 
deities, though they apparently regard 
the identification of Mordecai and 
Esther with Marduk and Ishtar as 
quite certain. The doubt which these 
scholars felt as to the derivation of 
one at least of these names (Vashti) 
is now known to be well founded. 
See below, p. 367, note’. 

It deserves to be noted that on 
the twenty-seventh day of the month 
Tammuz the heathen of Harran used 
to sacrifice nine male lambs to 
Haman, ‘‘ the supreme God, the father 
of the gods,” and they ate and drank 
on that day. Chwolsohn suggests a 
comparison of the festival with the 
Athenian Cronia.- See D. Chwolsohn, 
Die Ssabier und der Ssabismus (St. 
Petersburg, 1856); 1. 275sNg-suomn 
S9q- 


Vill SATURNALIA IN WESTERN ASIA 367 


case, many Jews celebrate Christmas after the manner of 
their Christian fellow-countrymen, in so far at least as it is 
a secular institution. It is true that hitherto no Babylonian 
feast coinciding, like Purim, with the full moon of the twelfth 
month has been discovered ; but our knowledge of the Baby- 
lonian feasts is derived from documents of an earlier period. 
Possibly the calendar may have undergone some change by 
the time when the Jewish feast of Purim was established. 
Or it may be that the Jews intentionally shifted the date of 
the festival which they borrowed from the heathen.” ? 
However, the theory of an opposition between the gods 
of Babylon and the gods of Elam at the festival appears to 
break down at a crucial point; for the latest and most 
accurate reading of the Elamite inscriptions proves, I am 
informed, that the name of the goddess which Jensen read 
as Mashti, and which on that assumption he legitimately 
compared to the Hebrew Vashti,” must really be read as 
Parti, between which and Vashti there is no connexion. 
Accordingly, in a discussion of the origin of Purim it is 
safer at present to lay no weight on the supposed religious 
antagonism between the deities of Babylon and Elam.’ 


1 Th. Noldeke, s.v. ‘* Esther,” in 
Encyclopaedia Brblica, vol. ii. (London, 
1901) coll. 1405. But in a letter, 
written to me (20th May 1901) since 
the publication of the last edition of 
this book, Professor Noldeke expresses 
a doubt whether he has not followed 
Jensen’s mythological identifications in 
the book of Esther too far. 

2 <The change of m to w or v 
(the Hebrew j=waw) is frequent and 
certain” (the Rev. C. H. W. Johns 
in a letter to me, May roth, 1913). 
The change is vouched for also by 
my friend Professor A. A. Bevan, 
who cites as an instance the name of 
the Babylonian king Amel- Marduk, 
which in Hebrew is changed into 
Evil-Merodach (2 Kings xxv. 27; 
Jeremiah lii. 31). See E. Schrader, 
Die Ketlinschriften und das Alte 
Testament? (Berlin, 1902), p. 396. 

3 The name of the Elamite god- 
dess is read as Parti by the Rev. 
Father Scheil. See E. Cosquin, Ze 
Prologue-cadre des Mille et Une Nutts, 


les Légendes FPerses, et le Livre 
a’ Esther (Paris, 1909), p. 68 (extract 
from the Revue Bzbligue Inter- 
nationale, Janvier et Avril, 1900, 
published by the Dominicans of Jeru- 
salem). The Master of St. Catharine’s 
College, Cambridge (the Rev. C. H. 
W. Johns), has kindly examined the 
facsimile of the inscriptions for me. 
He informs me that Father Scheil’s 
reading is correct and that the read- 
ing Mashti is quite wrong. He further 
tells me that Jensen was misled by an 
incorrect edition of the inscriptions to 
which alone he hadaccess. Thesigns for 
par (or 6ar) and wash in the inscriptions 
resemble each other and_ therefore 
might easily be confused by a copyist. 
All Jensen’s etymologies, except that 
of Mordecai, are adversely criticized 
by M. Emile Cosquin in the work 
to which I have referred (pp. 67 sgg.). 
He prefers with Oppert to derive all 
the names except Mordecai (the identity 
of which with Marduk he does not dis- 
pute) from the old Persian. However, 


But the 
proposed 
etymology 
of Vashti 
is unten- 
able. 


The mock 
king of the 
Sacaea 
seems 

to have 
personated 
a god. 


The 
view of 
Movers. 


368 SATURNALIA AND KINDRED FESTIVALS CHAP. 


If we are right in tracing the origin of Purim to 
the Babylonian Sacaea and in finding the counterpart 
of the Zoganes in Haman and Mordecai, it would appear 
that the Zoganes during his five days of office personated 
not merely a king but a god, whether that god was the 
Babylonian Marduk or some other deity not yet identi- 
fied. The union of the divine and royal characters in a single 
person is so common that we need not be surprised at meet- 
ing with it in ancient Babylon. And the view that the mock 
king of the Sacaea died as a god on the cross or the gallows 
is no novelty. The acute and learned Movers long ago 
observed that “we should be overlooking the religious signi- 
ficance of oriental festivals and the connexion of the Sacaea 
with the worship of Anaitis, if we were to treat as a mere 
jest the custom of disguising a slave as a king. We may 
take it for certain that with the royal dignity the king of the 
Sacaea assumed also the character of an oriental ruler as 
representative of the divinity, and that when he took 
his pleasure among the women of the king’s harem, he 
played the part of Sandan or Sardanapalus himself. For 
according to ancient oriental ideas the use of the king’s 
concubines constituted a claim to the throne, and we know 
from Dio that the five-days’ king received full power over 
the harem. Perhaps he began his reign by publicly cohabit- 
ing with the king’s concubines, just as Absalom went in to 
his father’s concubines in a tent spread on the roof of the 
palace before all Israel, for the purpose of thereby making 
known and strengthening his claim to the throne.” ? 

Whatever may be thought of this latter conjecture, there 


these derivations from the Persian are 
rejected by Professor Th. Noldeke, 
whose opinion on such a point is 


and rulers. See C. F. Lehmann 
(-Haupt), Samastumukin Konig von 


entitled to carry great weight. See 
Encyclopaedia Biblica, ii. (London, 
1901) col. 1402, s.v. ‘* Esther.” 


1 F. C. Movers, Dze Phoenzszier, i. 
(Bonn, 1841) pp. 490 sg.; 2 Samuel 
Xvi. 2I sg., compare xii. 8. It was a 
well-attested custom of the Assyrian 
kings, when they had conquered a 
city, to take into their harem the 
daughters of the vanquished princes 


Babylonien (Leipsic, 1892), p. 31. 
The Persian and Scythian kings seem 
also to have married the wives of 
their predecessors. See Herodotus, 
ili. 68 and 88, iv. 78; K. Neumann, 
Die Hellenen im Skythenlande, i. (Ber- 
lin, 1855) p. 301. Such a custom 
points to an old system of mother-kin 
under which the royal dignity was 
transmitted through women. See Zhe 
Magic Art and the Evolution of Kings, 
li. 268 sg. 


. 


Vil SATURNALIA IN WESTERN ASIA 


369 


can be no doubt that Movers is right in laying great stress 
both on the permission given to the mock king to invade the 
real king’s harem, and on the intimate connexion of the Sacaea 
with the worship of Anaitis. That connexion is vouched for 
by Strabo, and when we consider that in Strabo’s time the 
cult of the old Persian goddess Anaitis was thoroughly 
saturated with Babylonian elements and had practically 
merged in the sensual worship of the Babylonian Ishtar or 
Astarte,! we shall incline to view with favour Movers’s further 
conjecture, that a female slave may have been appointed 
to play the divine queen to the part of the divine king 
supported by the Zoganes, and that reminiscences of such a 
queen have survived in the myth or legend of Semiramis. 
According to tradition, Semiramis was a fair courtesan be- 
loved by the king of Assyria, who took her to wife. She 
won the king’s heart so far that she persuaded him to yield 
up to her the kingdom for five days, and having assumed 
the sceptre and the royal robes she made a great banquet on 
the first day, but on the second day she shut up her husband 
in prison or put him to death and thenceforward reigned 
alone.” Taken with Strabo’s evidence as to the association 
of the Sacaea with the worship of Anaitis, this tradition 
seems clearly to point to a custom of giving the Zoganes, 
during his five days’ reign, a queen who represented the 
goddess Anaitis or Semiramis or Astarte, in short the great 
Asiatic goddess of love and fertility, by whatever name she 
was called. For that in Eastern legend Semiramis was a 
real queen of Assyria, who had absorbed many of the attri- 
butes of the goddess Astarte, appears to be established by the 
researches of modern scholars ; in particular it has been shewn 
by Robertson Smith that the worship of Anaitis is not only 


1 Ed. Meyer, s.v. ‘* Anaitis,” in W. 
H. Roscher’s Lexzkon der griech. und 
vom. Mythologie, i. (Leipsic, 1884— 
1890) coll. 352 sg. At the temple 
of Anaitis in Acilisena, a city of 
Armenia, the daughters of the noblest 
families regularly prostituted them- 
selves for a long time before marriage 
(Strabo, xi. 14. 16, p. 532). Agathias 
identified Anaitis with Aphrodite (7st. 
ii. 24), and when the Greeks spoke of 
the Oriental Aphrodite, they meant 


PT. VI 


Astarte or one of her equivalents. 
Jensen proposes to identify Anaitis with 
an Elamite goddess Nahuntf, whom he 
takes to have been equivalent to Ishtar 
or Astarte, especially in her quality of 
the Evening Star. See his article, 
<‘Elamitische Eigennamen,” Weezer 
Leitschrift fiir die Kunde des Morgen- 
landes, vi. (1892) pp. 64-67, 70. 


2 Diodorus Siculus, ii. 20; Aelian, 
Var, Hist. vii. 1. 


2B 


The mock 
king of 

the Sacaea 
may have 
mated with 
a woman 
who played 
the part 
ofa 
goddess, 
whether 
Anaitis, 
Astarte, or 
Semiramis. 


Identity 
of the 
mythical 
Semiramis 
with 
Astarte. 


SATURNALIA AND KINDRED FESTIVALS  cuapr. 


370 


modelled on Astarte worship in general, but corresponds to | 


that particular type of it which was specially associated with 
the name of Semiramis.’ The identity of Anaitis and the 


mythical Semiramis is clearly proved by the circumstance — 
that the great sanctuary of Anaitis at Zela in Pontus was 


actually built upon a mound of Semiramis ;? probably the 


old worship of the Semitic goddess always continued there 
even after her Semitic name of Semiramis or Astarte had | 
been exchanged for the Persian name of Anaitis, perhaps — 


in obedience to a decree of the Persian king Artaxerxes IL, 
who first spread the worship of Anaitis in the west of Asia. 
It is highly significant, not only that the Sacaean festival 
was annually held at this ancient seat of the worship of 


Semiramis or Astarte; but further, that the whole city of 


Zela was formerly inhabited by sacred slaves and harlots, 
ruled over by a supreme pontiff, who administered it as a 


sanctuary rather than as a city.* Formerly, we may suppose, © 


this priestly king himself died a violent death at the Sacaea 


1 W. Robertson Smith, ‘*‘ Ctesias 
and the Semiramis Legend,” Auzglish 
Historical Review, ii. (1887) pp. 303- 
317. Amongst other evidence, Smith 
refers to Diodorus Siculus, from whose 
account (ii. 4) of the birth of Semiramis 
he infers that she ‘‘is the daughter of 
Derceto, the fish goddess of Ascalon, 
and is herself the Astarte whose sacred 
doves were honoured at Ascalon and 
throughout Syria.” It seems probable 
that the legendary Semiramis is to 
be identified with Shammuramat, the 
“‘palace wife” of Samsi-Adad, king 
of Assyria, and mother of King Adad- 
Nirari; she lived towards the end of 
the ninth century B.c., and is known 
to us from Assyrian inscriptions. See 
C. F. Lehmann-Haupt, Dze historische 
Semiramis und thre Zett (Tiibingen, 
ONO) jd, UL Sb D Heh, Siok OSS 
ramis,”’in W. H. Roscher’s Lexzcon der 
griech. und rim. Mythologie, iv. coll. 
678 sqq. 

2) Strabo; xis 9320375) P2115 595) com- 
pare xd. 83/45 ps 502. Zela ise the 
modern Zileh, a town of about 20,000 
inhabitants clustered at the foot of the 
so-called mound of Semiramis, which 
is an inconsiderable protuberance of 
natural rock crowned by the walls of 


an old citadel. 


a fair is held in the town, to which 


merchants come not only from the | 


whole of Asia Minor, but also from the 
Caucasus, Armenia, and Persia. This 
fair may very well be a direct descend- 
ant of a great festival held in honour 
of Anaitis or Astarte. See G. Perrot 
et Ch. Chipiez, //zstotrve de 2 Art dans 
? Antiquité, iv. (Paris, 1887) p. 649; 
F. Cumont et E. Cumont, Voyage 


@ Exploration archéologique dans le | 
Pont et la Petite Arménze (Brussels, | 


1906), pp. 188 sgq. 


3 Berosus, 
Alexandria, Protrept. v. 65, p. 57 ed. 
Potter (where for Tavatéos we should 
read ’Avairidos, as is done by C. Miiller, 


Fragmenta Historicorum Graecorum, | 


ii. 509). 

4 Strabo, xi. 8. 4, p. 512, xl. 35.375 
P- 559- a 0 : 
at Zela is indicated by Strabo in a 
passage (xii. 3. 36) where he describes 
a similar state of things at Comana, a 
city not far from Zela. His words are 
TARV0s yuvackav Tov épyafouévwv amo 
Tov owmaros, av ai wXelous cic iepal. 


The place is singularly © 
destitute of ancient remains, but every — 
year in the first fortnight of December | 


| 
| 


cited by Clement of | 


The nature of the tepddoudor © 


VIII SATURNALIA IN WESTERN ASIA 371 


in the character of the divine lover of Semiramis, while the 
part of the goddess was played by one of the sacred prosti- 
tutes. The probability of this is greatly strengthened by 
the existence of the so-called mound of Semiramis under the 
sanctuary. For the mounds of Semiramis, which were 
pointed out all over Western Asia,’ were said to have been 
the graves of her lovers whom she buried alive.2 The 
tradition ran that the great and lustful queen Semiramis, 


_ fearing to contract a lawful marriage lest her husband should 


deprive her of power, admitted to her bed the handsomest of 
her soldiers, only, however, to destroy them all afterwards.’ 
Now this tradition is one of the surest indications of the 
identity of the mythical Semiramis with the Babylonian 
goddess Ishtar or Astarte. For the famous Babylonian epic 
which recounts the deeds of the hero Gilgamesh tells how, 
when he clothed himself in royal robes and put his crown on 
his head, the goddess Ishtar was smitten with love of him 
and wooed him to be her mate. But Gilgamesh rejected her 
insidious advances, for he knew the sad fate that had over- 
taken all her lovers, and he reproached the cruel goddess, 
saying :— 
“ Tammuz, the lover of thy youth, 

Thou causest to weep every year. 

The bright-coloured allallu bird thou didst love. 

Thou didst crush him and break his pintons. 

In the woods he stands and laments, ‘O my pinions !? 

Thou didst love the lion of perfect strength, 

Seven and seven times thou didst dig pitfalls for him. 

Thou didst love the horse that joyed in the fray, 

With whip and spur and lash thou didst urge him on. 

Thou didst force him on for seven double hours, 

Thou didst force him on when wearied and thirsty ; 

His mother the goddess Silili thou madest weep. 

Thou didst also love a shepherd of the flock, 

Who continually poured out for thee the libation, 

And daily slaughtered kids for thee ; 

But thou didst smite him, and didst change him into a wolf, 

So that his own sheep-boys hunted him, 

And his own hounds tore him to pieces.” 


1 Herodotus, i. 184; Strabo, xvi. Graecorum, iv. 539. 
i. 2, p. 7373 Diodorus Siculus, ii. 3 Diodorus Siculus, ii. 13. Note 
14 that the first husband of Semiramis is 


2 Ctesias, cited by John of Antioch, said to have hanged himself (Diodorus 
in C, Miiller’s Fragmenta Historicorum  Siculus, ii. 6). 


The 

lovers of 
Semiramis 
and Ishtar 
(Astarte). 


The 
sacred 
harlots 
of Ishtar. 


The myth 
of Ishtar 
(Astarte) 
and her 
lovers acted 
at the 
Sacaea in 
Zela, 


SATURNALIA AND KINDRED FESTIVALS  cuap. 


372 

The hero also tells the miserable end of a gardener in 
the service of the goddess’s father. The hapless swain had 
once been honoured with the love of the goddess, but when 
she tired of him she changed him into a cripple so that he 
could not rise from his bed. Therefore Gilgamesh fears to 
share the fate of all her former lovers and spurns her 
proffered favours.’ But it is not merely that the myth of 
Ishtar thus tallies with the legend of Semiramis; the worship 
of the goddess was marked by a profligacy which has found 
its echo in the loose character ascribed by tradition to the 
queen. Inscriptions, which confirm and supplement the 
evidence of Herodotus, inform us that Ishtar was served by 
harlots of three different classes all dedicated to her worship. 
Indeed, there is reason to think that these women personated 
the goddess herself, since one of the names given to them is 
applied also to her.” 

Thus we can hardly doubt that the mythical Semiramis 
is substantially a form of Ishtar or Astarte, the great Semitic 
goddess of love and fertility; and if this is so, we may 
assume with at least a fair degree of probability that the 
high pontiff of Zela or his deputy, who played the king of © 
the Sacaea at the sanctuary of Semiramis, perished as one 


1 A. Jeremias, Jzdubar- Nimrod, 
(Leipsic, 1891), pp. 23 sgg.; M. 
Jastrow, Zhe Religion of Babylonia 
and Assyria (Boston, U.S.A., 1898), 
p- 482; L. W. King, Babylonian Re- 
ligion and Mythology (London, 1899), 
pp- 159 sgg.3; P. Jensen, Assyresch- 
Babylonische Mythen und Epen (Berlin, 
1900), pp. 169, 171; R. F. Harper, 
Assyrian and Babylonian Literature 
(New York, 1901), pp. 338 sg.; Das 
Gilgamesch-Epos, neu tibersetzt von 
Arthur Ungnad wzd gemeinverstindlich 
erklirt von Hugo Gressmann (Got- 
tingen, I9I1), pp.31sg. The true name 
of the Babylonian hero, which used to 
be read as Izdubar, has been found to 
be Gilgamesh. See M. Jastrow, of. 
cit. pp. 468 sg.; H. Zimmern, in E. 
Schrader’s Die Ketlinschriften und das 
Alte Testament* (Berlin, 1902), p. 566 
note*; A. Ungnad, Das Gzlgamesch- 
Epos, pp. 76 sg. Aelian mentions (De 
natura animalium, xii. 21) a Baby- 
lonian king, Gilgamus, whose name is 


doubtless identical with that of the 
hero. 


2 A. Jeremias, of. czt. pp. 59 sg.3 
M. Jastrow, of. ctt. pp. 475 sg., 484 
sqg.; Herodotus, i. 199. The name 
which Herodotus gives to the goddess 
is Mylitta, but this is only a corruption 
of one of her Semitic titles, whether 
Baalath (Hebrew n>y3), ‘* mistress,” or 
perhaps rather A7/udittu, from JL al- 
lidtu (Hebrew np"), ‘*she who helps 
to the birth.” See E. Meyer, s.v. 
‘© Astarte,” in W. H. Roscher’s Lexzcon 
der griech. und rim. Mythologie, i. 648; 
H. Zimmern, in E. Schrader’s Déze 
Ketlinschriften und das Alte Testa- 
ment® (Berlin, 1902), p. 423 note’. 
The female ‘‘ votaries of Marduk ” are 
repeatedly mentioned in the code of 
Hammurabi. See C. H. W. Johns, 
Babylonian and Assyrian Laws, Con- 
tracts, and Letters (Edinburgh, 1904), 
PP. 54, 55, 59, 60, 61; Adonis, Atizs, 
Ostrts, Second Edition, p. 63. 


Vil SATURNALIA IN WESTERN ASIA 373 


of the unhappy lovers of the goddess, perhaps as Tammuz, 
whom she caused “to weep every year.” When he had run 
his brief meteoric career of pleasure and glory, his bones 
would be laid in the great mound which covered the moulder- 
ing remains of many mortal gods, his predecessors, whom the 
goddess had honoured with her fatal love.’ 

Here then at the great sanctuary of the goddess in Zela 
it appears that her myth was regularly translated into action ; 
the story of her love and the death of her divine lover was 
performed year by year as a sort of mystery-play by men 
and women who lived for a season and sometimes died in 
the character of the visionary beings whom they personated. 


The intention of these sacred 


1 Along with Anaitis at Zela there 
were worshipped two deities named 
Omanos and Anadates; Strabo says 
that they were Persian divinities, and 
certainly their ritual as described by him 
was purely Persian. See Strabo, xi. 
Peeps 512, XV. 3. 15, Pp. 7333 
Franz Cumont, Les Religions ortentales 
dans le Paganisme romain? (Paris, 
1909), pp. 214 sg. It has been pro- 
posed to identify their names, first, 
with those of the two Persian arch- 
angels (Amshaspands), Vohumano or 
Vohu Manah (‘‘Good Thought”) and 
Ameretat (‘‘ Immortality”), and, second, 
with those of Haman and his father 
Hammedatha in the book of Esther 
(iii. 1). In order to support the iden- 
tification of Anadates with Ameretat 
and Hammedatha it has been further 
proposed to alter Anadates into Ama- 
dates or Amardates in the text of 
Strabo, which would assimilate the 
name to Amurdad, a late form of 
Ameretat. See P. Jensen, /2¢tzter 


und Armenier (Strasburg, 1898), p. 


181; Franz Cumont, Zexzes e¢ Monu- 
ments figurés relatifs aux Mystéres de 
Mithra, i. (Brussels, 1899) pp. 130, 
131; H. Winckler, <A/torientalische 
Forschungen, Dritte Reihe, i. (Leipsic, 
1901) p. 4; H. Zimmern, in E. 
Schrader’s Die Keclinschriften und das 
Alie Testament? (Berlin, 1902), p. 516 
note?; P. Haupt, /Pzrzm (Leipsic, 
1906), p. 26; L. B. Paton, Crztzcal and 
Exegetical Commentary on the Book of 
£sther (Edinburgh, 1908), pp. 88, 92. 


dramas, we may be sure, was 


As to the Persian archangels (Amshas- 
pands) see C. P. Tiele, Geschzchte der 
Religion im Altertum (Gotha, 1896— 
1903), ii. 200 sgg.; L. H. Gray, 
‘©The Double Nature of the Iranian 
Archangels,” <Archiv fir Religions- 
wissenschaft, vil. (1904) pp. 345 5gg.3 J. 
H. Moulton, Zarly Religious Poetry of 
Persta (Cambridge, 1911), pp. 58 sgg. 
But apart from the philological diffi- 
culty created by the forcible alteration 
of Strabo’s text in order to bring it 
into conformity with the theory, it is 


Such 
sacred 
dramas 
are magical 
rites in- 
tended to 
influence 
the course 
of nature. 


difficult to see how the highly abstract - 


conceptions of the archangels ‘‘ Good 
Thought” and ‘‘ Immortality” could 
have passed into the highly concrete 
and by no means angelic figures of 
Haman and Hammedatha. This latter 
difficulty has been pointed out to me 
ina letter (Sth June, 1901) by my friend 
the Rev. Professor J. H. Moulton, 
who further informs me that in Persian 
religion Vohu Manah is never linked 
with Ameretat, whereas Ameretat is 
constantly linked with another arch- 
angel Haurvatat (‘‘ Health”). Pro- 
fessor Theodor Noldeke in a letter to 
me (20th May, 1901) also expresses 
himself sceptical as to the proposed 
identifications ; he tells me that the 
name of a Persian god cannot end in 
data, just as the name of a Greek god 
cannot end in -dwpos or -doros. On the 
whole it seems better to leave Omanos 
and Anadates out of the present dis- 
cussion, 


374 SATURNALIA AND KINDRED FESTIVALS CHAP. 


neither to amuse nor to instruct an idle audience, and as 
little were they designed to gratify the actors, to whose baser 
passions they gave the reins for a time. They were solemn 
rites which mimicked the doings of divine beings, because 
man fancied that by such mimicry he was able to arrogate 
to himself the divine functions and to exercise them for 
the good of his fellows. The operations of nature, to his 


. thinking, were carried on by mythical personages very like 


Magical 
intention 
of sacred 
dramasand 
masked 
dances 
among 
savages. 


himself; and if he could only assimilate himself to them 
completely he would be able to wield all their powers. 
This is probably the original motive of most religious dramas 
or mysteries among rude peoples. The dramas are played, 


the mysteries are performed, not to teach the spectators the | 
doctrines of their creed, still less to entertain them, but for — 


the purpose of bringing about those natural effects which 


they represent in mythical disguise; in a word, they are © 
magical ceremonies and their mode of operation is mimicry | 
or sympathy. We shall probably not err in assuming that © 


many myths, which we now know only as myths, had once 


their counterpart in magic; in other words, that they used © 
to be acted as a means of producing in fact the events — 
which they describe in figurative language. Ceremonies | 


often die out while myths survive, and thus we are left to 
infer the dead ceremony from the living myth. If myths 
are, in a sense, the reflections or shadows of men cast upon 
the clouds, we may say that these reflections continue to be 
visible in the sky and to inform us of the doings of the men 


who cast them, long after the men themselves are not only | 


beyond our range of vision but sunk beneath the horizon. 
The principle of mimicry is implanted so deep in human 

nature and has exerted so far-reaching an influence on the 

development of religion as well as of the arts that it may 


be well, even at the cost of a short digression, to illustrate | 


by example some of the modes in which primitive man has 


attempted to apply it to the satisfaction of his wants by | 
means of religious or magical dramas. For it seems probable | 
that the masked dances and ceremonies, which have played — 
a great part in the social life of savages in many quarters of — 
the world, were primarily designed to subserve practical — 
purposes rather than simply to stir the emotions of the © 


Vul SATURNALIA IN WESTERN ASIA 375 


spectators and to while away the languor and tedium of 
idle hours. The actors sought to draw down blessings on 
the community by mimicking certain powerful superhuman 
beings and in their assumed character working those benefi- 
cent miracles which in the capacity of mere men they would 
have confessed themselves powerless to effect. In fact the 
aim of these elementary dramas, which contain in germ the 
tragedy and comedy of civilized nations, was the acquisition 
of superhuman power for the public good. That this is the 
real intention of at least many of these dramatic perform- 
ances will appear from the following accounts, which for 
the sake of accuracy I will quote for the most part in the 
words of the original observers. 

A conspicuous feature in the social life of the Indian 
tribes of North-Western America are the elaborate masked 
dances or pantomimes in which the actors personate spirits 
or legendary animals. Most of them appear designed to 
bring before the eyes of the people the guardian spirits of 
the clans. “Owing to the fact that these spirits are 
hereditary, their gifts are always contained in the legend 
detailing their acquisition by the ancestor of a clan. The 
principal gifts in these tales are the magic harpoon which 
insures success in sea-otter hunting; the death bringer 
which, when pointed against enemies, kills them ; the water 
of life which resuscitates the dead; the burning fire which, 
when pointed against an object, burns it; and a dance, a 
song, and cries which are peculiar to the spirit. The gift of 
this dance means that the protégé of the spirit is to perform 
the same dances which have been shown to him. In these 
dances he personates the spirit. He wears his mask and his 
ornaments. Thus the dance must be considered a dramatic 
performance of the myth relating to the acquisition of the 
spirit, and shows to the people that the performer by his 
visit to the spirit has obtained his powers and desires. 
When nowadays a spirit appears to a young Indian, he 
gives him the same dance, and the youth also returns 
from the initiation filled with the powers and desires 
of the spirit. He authenticates his initiation by his 
dance in the same way as his mythical ancestor did. 
The obtaining of the magical gifts from these spirits is 


Masked 
dances 
among 

the Indians 
of North- 
West 
America. 


‘These 
masked 
dances 
represent 
mythical 
incidents 
and are 
supposed 
to have 
been 
revealed 
to the 
Indians 
by their 
guardian 
spirits. 


376 SATURNALIA AND KINDRED FESTIVALS  CHaAy. 


called /okoala, while the person who has obtained them 
becomes xaualaku, supernatural, which is also the quality of 
the spirit himself. The ornaments of all these spirits are 
described as made of cedar bark, which is dyed red in the 
juice of alder bark. They appear to their devotees only in 
winter, and therefore the dances are also performed only in 
winter.”’ In some of the dances the performers imitate 
animals, and the explanation which the Indians give of 
these dances is that “the ceremonial was instituted at the 
time when men had still the form of animals; before the 
transformer had put everything into its present shape. The 
present ceremonial is a repetition of the ceremonial performed 
by the man animals or, as we may say, a dramatization of 
the myth. Therefore the people who do not represent 
spirits, represent these animals.” ? 

Another observer of these Indians writes on the same 
subject as follows: “The dukwally (ze. lokoala) and other 
tamanawas * performances are exhibitions intended to repre- 
sent incidents connected with their mythological legends. 
There are a great variety, and they seem to take the place, 
in a measure, of theatrical performances or games during 
the season of the religious festivals. There are no persons 
especially set apart as priests for the performance of these 
ceremonies, although some, who seem more expert than 
others, are usually hired to give life to the scenes, but these 
performers are quite as often found among the slaves or 
common people as among the chiefs, and excepting during 
the continuance of the festivities are not looked on as of any 
particular importance. On inquiring the origin of these 
ceremonies, I was informed that they did not originate with 
the Indians, but were revelations of the guardian spirits, who 
made known what they wished to be performed. An Indian, 


1 Franz Boas, ‘‘ The Social Organiza- 
tion and the Secret Societies of the 
Kwakiutl Indians,” Report of the 
United States National Museum for 
1595 (Washington, 1897), p. 396. 

2 Franz Boas, of. cét. pp. 420 sg. 
The description applies specially to 
the masked dances of the Kwakiutl 
tribe, but probably it holds good for 
the similar dances of the other Indian 
tribes on the same coast. Thus among 


the Bella Coola Indians ‘‘ the masks 
used in the dances represent mythical 
personages, and the dances are panto- 
mimic representationsof myths. Among 
others, the thunder bird and his servant 
. . . appear in the dances” (F. Boas, 
op. cet. p. 651). 

3 Tamanawas or tamanous is a 
Chinook term signifying ‘ guardian 
spirits.” See Zotemism and Exogamy, 
ill, 405 sgq. 


VIII SATURNALIA IN WESTERN ASIA a7) 


3 


for instance, who has been consulting with his guardian 
spirit, which is done by going through the washing and 
fasting process before described, will imagine or think he is 
called upon to represent the owl. He arranges in his mind 
the style of dress, the number of performers, the songs and 
dances or other movements, and, having the plan perfected, 
announces at a famanawas meeting that he has had a revela- 
tion which he will impart to a select few. These are then 
taught and drilled in strict secrecy, and when they have 
perfected themselves, will suddenly make their appearance 
and perform before the astonished tribe. Another Indian 
gets up the representation of the whale, others do the same 
of birds, and in fact of everything that they can think of. 
If any performance is a success, it is repeated, and gradually 
comes to be looked upon as one of the regular order in the 
ceremonies ; if it does not satisfy the audience, it is laid 


. aside. Thus they have performances that have been handed 


down from remote ages, while others are of a more recent 
date.” * 

Another writer, who travelled among the Indians of 
North-Western America, has expressed himself on this 
subject as follows: “The task of representing the gods is 
undertaken in every tribe by some intelligent and, according 
to their own account, inspired men; they form the Secret 
Societies, in order that their secret arts and doctrines, their 
mummeries and masquerades may not be revealed to the 
uninitiated and to the public. The intention of these exhibi- 
tions is to confirm the faith of the young people and the 
women in the ancient traditions as to the intercourse of the 
gods with men and as to their own intimate relations to the 
gods. In order to convince possible doubters, the members 
of the Secret Societies have had recourse to all kinds of 
mysterious means, which to a civilized man must appear the 
height of savagery ; for example, they mutilate their bodies, 
rend corpses in pieces and devour them, tear pieces out of 
the bodies of living men, and so on. Further, the almost 
morbid vanity of the North-Western Indians and their 
desire to win fame, respect, and distinction may have served 


1 James G. Swan, Zhe Jndians of Cape Flattery, p. 66, quoted by Franz 
Boas, of. cz¢. pp. 637 sg. 


Gods or 
spirits 
personated 
by the 
actors in 
the masked 
dances. 


The 
dances ac- 
companied 
by songs. 


378 SATURNALIA AND KINDRED FESTIVALS  cnav. | 


as a motive for joining the Secret Societies; since every 
member of them enjoys great respect. 

“There were and still are hundreds of masks in use, 
every one of which represents a spirit who occurs in their 
legends. In the exhibitions they appear singly or in groups, 
according as the legend to be represented requires, and the 
masked men are then looked upon by the astonished crowd, 
not only as actors representing the gods, but as the very 
gods themselves who have come down from heaven to earth. 
Hence every such representative must do exactly what 
legend says the spirit did. If the representative wears no 
mask, as often happens with the Hametzes (the Cannibals or 
Biters) or the Pakwalla (Medicine-men), then the spirit 
whom he represents has passed into his body, and accord- 
ingly the man possessed by the spirit is not responsible for 
what he does amiss in this condition. As the use of masks 
throws a sort of mysterious glamour over the performance 
and at the same time allows the actor to remain unknown, 
the peculiarly sacred festivals are much oftener celebrated 
with masks than without them. In every Secret Society 
there are definite rules as to how often and how long a mask 
may be used. Amongst the Kwakiutl the masks may not, 
under the heaviest penalties, be disposed of for four winters, 
the season when such festivals are usually celebrated. After 
that time they may be destroyed or hidden in the forest, 
that no uninitiated person may find them, or they may be 
finally sold. The masks are made only in secret, generally 
in the deep solitude of the woods, in order that no uninitiated 
person may detect the maker at work... . 

“The dance is accompanied by a song which celebrates 
in boastful words the power of the gods and the mighty 
deeds represented in the performance. At the main part of 
the performance all present join in the song, for it is generally 
known to everybody and is repeated in recitative again and 
again. It seems that new songs and new performances are 
constantly springing up in one or other of the villages 
through the agency of some intelligent young man, hitherto 
without a song of his own, who treats in a poetical fashion 
some legend which has been handed down orally from their 
forefathers. For every man who takes part in the perform- 


vill SATURNALIA IN WESTERN ASIA 379 


ances and festivals must make his début with a song composed 
by himself. In this way new songs and dances are constantly 
originating, the material for them being, of course, always 
taken from the tribal deities of the particular singer and 
poet.” 1 

Similar masquerades are in vogue among the neighbours 
of these Indians, the Esquimaux of Bering Strait, and from 
the following account it will appear that the performances 
are based on similar ideas and beliefs. “Shamans make 
masks representing grotesque faces of supernatural beings 
which they claim to have seen. These may be yw-d, which 
are the spirits of the elements, of places, and of inanimate 
things in general; the ¢anghat, or wandering genii, or the 
shades of people and animals. The first-named are seen in 
lonely places, on the plains and mountains or at sea, and 
more rarely about the villages, by the clairvoyant vision of 
the shamans. They are usually invisible to common eyes, 
but sometimes render themselves visible to the people for 
various purposes. 

“Many of them, especially among the ¢unghdt, are of 
evil character, bringing sickness and misfortune upon people 
from mere wantonness or for some fancied injury. The 
Eskimo believe that everything, animate or inanimate, is 
possessed of a shade, having semihuman form and features, 
enjoying more or less freedom of motion ; the shamans give 
form to their ideas of them in masks, as well as of others 
which they claim inhabit the moon and the sky-land. In 
their daily life, if the people witness some strange occurrence, 
are curiously affected, or have a remarkable adventure, 
during which they seem to be influenced or aided in a 
supernatural manner, the shamans interpret the meaning and 
describe the appearance of the being that exerted its power. 

“Curious mythological beasts are also said to inhabit 
both land and sea, but to become visible only on special 
occasions. These ideas furnish material upon which their 
fancy works, conjuring up strange forms that are usually 
modifications of known creatures. It is also believed that 

1 Jj. Adrian Jacobsen, ‘‘Geheim- Jogze und Urgeschichte (1891), pp. 384 
biinde der Kiistenbewohner Nordwest- sg. The passage has been already 


America’s,” Verhandlungender berliner quoted by me in Zotemism and LE xo- 
Gesellschaft fiir Anthropologie, Ethno- gamy, i. 500-502. 


Spirits 
personated 
by masked 
performers 
among the 
Esquimaux 
of Bering 
Strait. 


The 
animal 
masks 
worn by 
the actors. 


Identifica- 
tion of the 
masked 
actor 

with the 
mythical 
being 
whom he 


represents. 


380 SATURNALIA AND KINDRED FESTIVALS  cnap. 


in early days all animate beings had a dual existence, 
becoming at will either like man or the animal forms they 
now wear. In those early days there were but few people ; 
if an animal wished to assume its human form, the forearm, 
wing, or other limb was raised and pushed up the muzzle or 
beak as if it were a mask, and the creature became manlike in 
form and features. This idea is still held, and it is believed 
that many animals now possess this power. The manlike 
form thus appearing is called the zzwa, and is supposed to 
represent the thinking part of the creature, and at death 
becomes its shade. Shamans are believed to have the 
power of seeing through the animal mask to the manlike 
features behind. The ideas held on this subject are well 
illustrated in the Raven legends, where the changes are 
made repeatedly from one form to another. 

“Masks may also represent totemic animals, and the 
wearers during the festivals are believed actually to become 
the creature represented or at least to be endowed with its 
spiritual essence. Some of the masks of the lower Yukon 
and the adjacent territory to the Kuskokwim are made with 
double faces. This is done by having the muzzle of the 
animal fitted over and concealing the face of the zzua below, 
the outer mask being held,in place by pegs so arranged that 
it can be removed quickly at a certain time in the ceremony, 
thus symbolizing the transformation. Another style of mask 
from the lower Kuskokwim has the under face concealed by 
a small hinged door on each side, which opens out at the 
proper time in a ceremony, indicating the metamorphosis. 
When the mask represents a totemic animal, the wearer 
needs no double face, since he represents in person the 
shade of the totemic animal. 

“When worn in any ceremonial, either as a totem mask 
or as representing the shade, ya-d or tunghdk, the wearer is 
believed to become mysteriously and unconsciously imbued 
with the spirit of the being which his mask represents, just 
as the namesakes are entered into and possessed by the 
shades at certain parts of the Festival to the Dead.’ ... 


1 As to the belief of these Esquimaux animate their human namesakes, see 
that at the Festival of the Dead the TZaboo and the Perils of the Soul, 
spirits of the departed enter into and p. 371. 


VII SATURNALIA IN WESTERN ASIA 381 


“ Mask festivals are usually held as a species of thanks- 
giving to the shades and powers of earth, air, and water for 
giving the hunter success. The zzwas or shades of the 
powers and creatures of the earth are represented that they 
may be propitiated, thus insuring further success.” * 

The religious ritual of the Cora Indians of Mexico 
comprises elaborate dramatic ceremonies or dances, in 
which the actors or dancers identify themselves with the 
gods, such as the god of the Morning Star, the goddess of 
the Moon, and the divinities of the Rain. These dances 
form the principal part of the Cora festivals and are ac- 
companied by liturgical songs, the words of which the 
Indians believe to have been revealed to their forefathers 
by the gods and to exercise a direct magical influence 
upon the deities themselves and through them upon nature.” 
The Kobeua and Kaua Indians of North-Western Brazil 
perform masked dances at their festivals in honour of the 
dead. The maskers imitate the actions and the habits of 
birds, beasts, and insects. For example, there is a large 
azure- blue butterfly which delights the eye with the 
splendour of its colour, like a fallen fragment of the sky ; 
and in the butterfly dance two men represent the play of 
these brilliant insects in the sunshine, fluttering on the 
wing and settling on sandbanks and rocks. Again, the 
sloth is acted by a masker who holds on to a cross-beam 
of the house by means of a hooked stick, in imitation of the 
sluggish creature which will hang by its claws from the bough 
of a tree for hours together without stirring. Again, the 
darting of swallows, as they flit to and fro across a river, 
is mimicked by masked men dancing side by side: the 
swarming of sandflies in the air is acted by a swarm of 
maskers ; and so with the movements of the black vulture, 
the owl, the jaguar, the avacu fish, the house-spider, and the 
dung-beetle. Yet these representations are not simple 
dramas designed to amuse and divert the mourners in their 
hour of sorrow ; the Indian attributes to them a much deeper 

1 E. W. Nelson, ‘‘The Eskimo about 2K. Th. Preuss, Die Nayarit Ex- 
Bering Strait,” zghteenth Annual fpedition, 1. Die Religion der Cora 


Report of the Bureau of American Indianer (Leipsic, 1912), pp. xcii. 
Ethnology, Part i. (Washington, 1899) sqg., xcv. sqq. 


PP 394 52. 


Dramatic 
ceremonies 
of the Cora 
Indians 

of Mexico 
in which 
the actors 
personate 
gods. 


Masked 
dances 

of the 
Brazilian 
Indians 

to ensure 
fertility and 
abundance. 


Masked 
dances 

of the 
Monumbo 
in German 
New 
Guinea, 


Masked 
dances 

of the 
Kayans 

of Borneo. 


382 SATURNALIA AND KINDRED FESTIVALS  cnapr. ¥ 


significance, for under the outer husk of beasts and birds and 
insects he believes that there lurk foul fiends and powerful © 
spirits. “ All these mimicries are based on an idea of magical ~ 
efficiency. They are intended to bring blessing and fertility 
to the village and its inhabitants, to the plantations, and to 
the whole of surrounding nature, thereby compensating, as it 
were, for the loss of the dead man in whose honour the 
festival is held. By copying as faithfully as possible the 
movements and actions of the being whom he personates, 
the actor identifies himself with him. The mysterious force 
which resides in the mask passes into the dancer, turns the 
man himself into a mighty demon, and endows him with the 
power of banning demons or earning their favour. Especially 
is it the intention by means of mimicry to obtain for man 
control over the demons of growth and the spirits of game 
and fish.” When the festival is over, the masks are burned, 
and the demons, which are thought to have animated them, 
take flight to their own place, it may be to the other world 
or to a mountain top, or to the side of a thundering cascade.’ 
The Monumbo of German New Guinea perform masked 
dances in which the dancers personate supernatural beings 
or animals, such as kangaroos, dogs, and cassowaries. They 
consecrate the masks by fumigating them with the smoke of 
a certain creeper, and believe that by doing so they put life 
intothem. Accordingly they afterwards treat the masks with 
respect, talk to them as if they were alive, and refuse to 
part with them to Europeans. Certain of the masks they 
even regard as guardian spirits and appeal to them for fine 
weather, help in the chase or in war, and so forth. Every 
clan owns some masks and the head man of the clan makes 
all the arrangements for a masquerade. The dances are 
accompanied by songs of which the words are unintelligible 
even to the natives themselves.” Again, the Kayans of 
Central Borneo perform masked dances for the purpose of 
ensuring abundant crops of rice. The actors personate 
demons, wearing grotesque masks on their faces, their bodies 
1 Th. Koch-Griinberg, Zwez Jahre 2 F, Vormann, ‘* Tanze und Tanz- 
unter den Indianern (Berlin, 1909—  festlichkeiten der Monumbo - Papua 
I9I0), i. 130-140, li. 169-201. The  (Deutsch-Neuguinea),” Azthropos, vi. 


passage translated in the text occurs in (I9II) pp. 415 sg., 418 sgg., 426 
vol. li, p. 196. SJ. 


VIIl SATURNALIA IN WESTERN ASIA 383 


swathed in cumbrous masses of green leaves. “In accord- 
ance with their belief that the spirits are more powerful than 
men, the Kayans assume that when they imitate the form of 
spirits and play their part, they acquire superhuman power. 
Hence just as their spirits can fetch back the souls of men, 
so they imagine that they can lure to themselves the souls 
of the rice.” ? 

When the Sea Dyaks of Borneo have taken a human 
head, they hold a Head-feast (Gawé Pala) in honour 
of the war-god or bird-chief Singalang Burong, who lives 
far away above the sky. At this festival a long liturgy 
called szengap is chanted, the god is invoked, and is believed 
to be present in the person of an actor, who poses as the 
deity and blesses the people in his name. “ But the invoca- 
tion is not made by the human performer in the manner of 
a prayer direct to this great being; it takes the form of a 
story, setting forth how the mythical hero Kling or Klieng 
made a head-feast and fetched Singalang Burong to it. 
This Kling, about whom there are many fables, is a spirit, 
and is supposed to live somewhere or other not far from 
mankind, and to be able to confer benefits upon them. 
The Dyak performer or performers then, as they walk up 
and down the long verandah of the house singing the 
mengap, in reality describe Kling’s Gawe Pala [head-feast], 
and how Singalang Burong was invited and came. In 
thought the Dyaks identify themselves with Kling, and the 
resultant signification is that the recitation of this story is 
an invocation to Singalang Burong, who is supposed to 
come not to Kling’s house only, but to the actual Dyak 
house where the feast is celebrated ; and he is received by a 
particular ceremony, and is offered food or sacrifice.’ At 
the close of the ceremony “the performer goes along the 
house, beginning with the head man, touches each person 
in it, and pronounces an invocation upon him. In this he 
is supposed to personate Singalang Burong and his sons-in- 
law, who are believed to be the real actors. Singalang 
Burong himself xexjangs the headmen, and his sons-in-law, 


1 A. W. Nieuwenhuis, Quer durch see Spirits of the Corn and of the Wild, 
Borneo (Leyden, 1904-1907), i. 324. i. 95 sg., 186 sg. 
As to these masquerades of the Kayans 


Dramatic 
perform- 
ances 

of the 

Sea Dyaks 
of Borneo, 
in which 
the actor 
personates 
a god. 


Religious 
or magical 
origin of 
the drama. 


384 SATURNALIA AND KINDRED FESTIVALS  cuap. 


the birds, bless the rest. The touch of the human performer, 
and the accompanying invocation are thought to effect a 
communication between these bird-spirits from the skies and 
each individual being. The great bird-chief and his depend- — 
ants come from above to give men their charms and their 
blessings. Upon the men the performer invokes physical 
strength and bravery in war; and upon the women luck 
with paddy, cleverness in Dyak feminine accomplishments, 
and beauty in form and complexion.” 
Thus the dramatic performances of these primitive peoples 
are in fact religious or oftener perhaps magical ceremonies, and 
the songs or recitations which accompany them are spells or — 
incantations, though the real character of both is apt to be 
overlooked by civilized man, accustomed as he is to see in 
the drama nothing more than an agreeable pastime or at best 
a vehicle of moral instruction. Yet if we could trace the drama 
of the civilized nations back to its origin, we might find that 
it had its roots in magical or religious ideas like those which © 
still mould and direct the masked dances of many savages. 
Certainly the Athenians in the heyday of their brilliant 
civilization retained a lively sense of the religious import of | 
dramatic performances ; for they associated them directly 
with the worship of Dionysus and allowed them to be 


enacted only during the festivals of the god. 


1 Rey. J. Perham, ‘‘Mengap, the 
Song of the Dyak Sea Feast,” Journal 
of the Straits Branch of the Royal 
Asiatic Society, No. 2 (Singapore, 
December, 1878), pp. 123 s9., 1343 
H. Ling Roth, Zhe Natives of Sarawak 
and British North Borneo (London, 
1896), ii. 174 sg., 183. Compare E. 
H. Gomes, Seventeen Years among the 
Sea Dyaks of Borneo (London, 1911), 
pp. 213 sg.: ‘* This song of the head 
feast takes the form of a story setting 
forth how the mythical hero Klieng 
held a head feast on his return from 
the warpath, and invited the god of 
war, Singalang Burong, to attend it. 
It describes at great length all that 
happened on that occasion. The 
singing of this song takes up the whole 
night. It begins before $ P.M., and 
lasts till next morning. Except for a 
short interval for rest in the middle of 


In India, 


the night, the performers are marching 
and singing all the time.” On the 
third day of the festival the people go 
out on the open-air platform in front 
of the house and sacrificea pig. ‘‘ The 
people shout together (manjong) at 
short intervals until a hawk is seen 
flying in the heavens. That hawk is 
Singalang Burong, who has taken that 
form to manifest himself to them. He 
has accepted their offerings and has 
heard their cry” (E. H. Gomes, of. 
cit. p. 214). 


2 A. E. Haigh, The Attic Theatre 
(Oxford, 1889), pp. 4 sgg- The re- 
ligious’ origin of Greek tragedy is 
maintained by Professor W. Ridgeway 
(The Origin of Tragedy, Cambridge, 
1910), but he finds its immediate 
inspiration in the worship of the dead 
rather than in the worship of Dionysus. 


VIII SATURNALIA IN WESTERN ASIA 385 


also, the drama appears to have been developed out of 
religious dances or pantomimes, in which the actors recited 
_ the deeds and played the parts of national gods and heroes.’ 
Hence it is at least a legitimate hypothesis that the criminal, 
who masqueraded as a king and perished in that character 
at the Bacchanalian festival of the Sacaea, was only one of 
a company of actors, who figured on that occasion in a 
sacred drama of which the substance has been preserved to 
us in the book of Esther. 

When once we perceive that the gods and goddesses, 
_ the heroes and heroines of mythology have been represented 
officially, so to say, by a long succession of living men and 
women who bore the names and were supposed to exercise 
the functions of these fabulous creatures, we have attained 
a point of vantage from which it seems possible to propose 
terms of peace between two rival schools of mythologists 
who have been waging fierce war on each other for ages. On 
the one hand it has been argued that mythical beings are 
nothing but personifications of natural objects and natural 
processes ; on the other hand, it has been maintained that 
they are nothing but notable men and women who in their 
lifetime, for one reason or another, made a great impression 
on their fellows, but whose doings have been distorted and 
exaggerated by a false and credulous tradition. These two 
views, it is now easy to see, are not so mutually exclusive 
as their supporters have imagined. The personages about 
‘whom all the marvels of mythology have been told may 
have been real human beings, as the Euhemerists allege ; 
and yet they may have been at the same time personifica- 
tions of natural objects or processes, as the adversaries of 
Euhemerism assert. The doctrine of incarnation supplies 
the missing link that was needed to unite the two seemingly 
inconsistent theories. If the powers of nature or a certain 
department of nature be conceived as personified in a deity, 
and that deity can become incarnate in a man or woman, it 
is obvious that the incarnate deity is at the same time a real 
hwman being and a personification of nature. To take the 


1 H. Oldenberg, Die Literatur des berg holds that the evolution of the 
alten Indien (Stuttgart and Berlin, Indian drama was probably not in- 
1903), pp. 236 sgg. Professor Olden- _ fluenced by that of Greece. 


PT. VI 2 ¢ 


The repre- 
sentation 
of mythical 
beings by 
living men 
and women 
may furnish 
a common 
ground 
where 

two rival 
schools of 
mythology 
can meet 
and be 
reconciled. 


The 
legend of 
Semiramis 
and her 
lovers a 
duplicate 
of the 
myth of 
Aphrodite 
and 
Adonis, 
of Cybele 
and Attis, 
of Isis 


and Osiris. 


386 SATURNALIA AND KINDRED FESTIVALS CHAP. 


instance with which we are here concerned, Semiramis may © 
have been the great Semitic goddess of love, Ishtar or Astarte, — 
and yet she may be supposed to have been incarnate in a ~ 
woman or even in a series of real women, whether queens or ~ 
harlots, whose memory survives in ancient history. Saturn, 
again, may have been the god of sowing and planting, and 
yet may have been represented on earth by a succession or | 
dynasty of sacred kings, whose gay but short lives may have | 
contributed to build up the legend of the Golden Age. The 
longer the series of such human divinities, the greater, obvi- 
ously, the chance of their myth or legend surviving; and © 
when moreover a deity of a uniform type was represented, 
whether under the same name or not, over a great extent of © 
country by many local dynasties of divine men or women, it 
is clear that the stories about him would tend still further to 
persist and be stereotyped. 

The conclusions which we have reached in regard to the ~ 
legend of Semiramis and her lovers probably holds good of 
all the similar tales that were current in antiquity throughout 
the East ; in particular, it may be assumed to apply to the 
myths of Aphrodite and Adonis in Syria, of Cybele and 
Attis in Phrygia, and of Isis and Osiris in Egypt. If we 
could trace these stories back to their origin, we might find 
that in every case a human couple acted year by year the | 
parts of the loving goddess and the dying god. We know | 
that down to Roman times Attis was personated by priests 
who bore his name ;' and if within the period of which we | 
have knowledge the dead Attis and the dead Adonis were } 
represented only by effigies, we may surmise that it had not 
always been so, and that in both cases the dead god was 
once represented by a dead man. Further, the license 
accorded to the man who played the dying god at the 
Sacaea speaks strongly in favour of the hypothesis that 
before the incarnate deity was put to a public death he was 
in all cases allowed, or rather required, to enjoy the embraces 
of a woman who played the goddess of love., The reason 
for such an enforced union of the human god and goddess | 
is not hard to divine. If primitive man believes that the 
growth of the crops can be stimulated by the intercourse of | 


1 Adonis, Attis, Osiris, Second Edition, pp. 239 sg. 


VU SATURNALIA IN WESTERN ASIA 387 


common men and women,’ what showers of blessings will 
he not anticipate from the commerce of a pair whom his 
_ fancy invests with all the dignity and powers of deities of 
|. fertility ? 

Thus the theory of Movers, that at the Sacaea the 
_Zoganes represented a god and paired with a woman who 
personated a goddess, turns out to rest on deeper and wider 
foundations than that able scholar was aware of. He 
_thought that the divine couple who figured by deputy at 
the ceremony were Semiramis and Sandan or Sardanapalus. 
It now appears that he was substantially right as to the 
goddess ; but we have still to enquire into the god. There 
seems to be no doubt that the name Sardanapalus is only 
the Greek way of representing Ashurbanapal, the name of 
the greatest and nearly the last king of Assyria. But the 
records of the real monarch which have come to light within 
recent years give little support to the fables that attached to 
his name in classical tradition. For they prove that, far 
from being the effeminate weakling he seemed to the Greeks 
of a later age, he was a warlike and enlightened monarch, 
who carried the arms of Assyria to distant lands and fostered 
at home the growth of science and letters.” Still, though 
the historical reality of King Ashurbanapal is as well attested 
as that of Alexander or Charlemagne, it would be no wonder 
if myths gathered, like clouds, round the great figure that 
loomed large in the stormy sunset of Assyrian glory. Now 
‘the two features that stand out most prominently in the 
legends of Sardanapalus are his extravagant debauchery 
and his violent death in the flames of a great pyre, on 
which he burned himself and his concubines to save them 
from falling into the hands of his victorious enemies. It is 
said that the womanish king, with painted face and arrayed 
in female attire, passed his days in the seclusion of the 
harem, spinning purple wool among his concubines and 
wallowing in sensual delights; and that in the epitaph 


1 The Magic Art and the Evolu- (Boston, U.S.A., 1898), p. 43; Sir G. 
tion of Kings, ii. 97 sqq. Maspero, Histotre Ancienne des Peuples 

2C. P. Tiele, Babylonisch-As- de [Orient Classique, iii. Les Empires 
syrische Geschichte (Gotha, 1886-  (Paris,1899), pp.378sgy.; C.F. Harper, 
1888), pp. 351 sgg.; M. Jastrow, Assyrian and Babylonian Literature 
Religion of Babylonia and Assyria (New York, 1901), pp. 94 599. 


Sardana- 
palus and 
Ashur- 
banapal. 


The 
legendary 
death of 
Sardana- 
palus in 
the fire. 


The 
burning 
of Sandan, 
a mythical 
god or 
hero of 
Western 
Asia, 


388 SATURNALIA AND KINDRED FESTIVALS  cHaAp. 


which he caused to be carved on his tomb he recorded that — 
all the days of his life he ate and drank and toyed, remember- ° | 
ing that life is short and full of trouble, that fortune is 
uncertain, and that others would soon enjoy the good things ~ 
which he must leave behind.’' These traits bear little | 
resemblance to the portrait of Ashurbanapal either in life or | 
in death ; for after a brilliant career of conquest the Assyrian — 
king died in old age, at the height of human ambition, with — 
peace at home and triumph abroad, the admiration of his 
subjects and the terror of his foes. But if the traditional 
characteristics of Sardanapalus harmonize but ill with what 
we know of the real monarch of that name, they fit well — 
enough with all that we know or can conjecture of the mock | 
kings who led a short life and a merry during the revelry 
of the Sacaea, the Asiatic equivalent of the Saturnalia. } 
We can hardly doubt that for the most part such men, with 
death staring them in the face at the end of a few days, | 
sought to drown care and deaden fear by plunging madly into | 
all the fleeting joys that still offered themselves under the | 
sun. When their brief pleasures and sharp sufferings were 
over, and their bones or ashes mingled with the dust, what 
more natural that on their tomb—those mounds in which 
the people saw, not untruly, the graves of the lovers of 
Semiramis—there should be carved some such lines as those | 
which tradition placed in the mouth of the great Assyrian 
king, to remind the heedless passer-by of the shortness and | 
vanity of life ? 
When we turn to Sandan, the other legendary or mythical | 
being whom Movers thought that the Zoganes may have per- § 
sonated, we find the arguments in support of his theory still 
stronger. The city of Tarsus in Cilicia is said to have been 9 
founded by a certain Sandan whom the Greeks identified 9 
with Hercules; and at the festival of this god or hero an § 
effigy of him was burned on a great pyre.2 This Sandan is | 


barrow at Nineveh. 


1 Athenaeus, xii. 38 sg., pp. 528 F— 
530C3 Diodorus Siculus, ii. 23 and 27; 
Justin, i. 3. Several different versions 
of the king’s epitaph have come down 
tous. I have followed the version of 
Choerilus, the original of which is said 
to have been carved in Chaldean letters 
on a tombstone that surmounted a 


great 


of Semiramis. 


2 Ammianus Marcellinus, xiv.8; Dio @ 


Chrysostom, Ov. xxxiii. p. 408 (vol. ii. p. | 
16ed. L. Dindorf, Leipsic, 1857). Coins 
of Tarsus exhibit the effigy on the pyre, | 


This § 
barrow may, as I suggest in the text, 9 
have been one of the so-called mounds § 


VIII SATURNALIA IN WESTERN ASIA 389 


doubtless the same with the Sandes whom Agathias calls the 
old Persian Hercules. Professing to give a list of the gods 
whom the Persians worshipped before the days of Zoroaster, 
the Byzantine historian mentions Bel, Sandes, and Anaitis, 
whom he identifies with Zeus, Hercules, and Aphrodite 
respectively... As we know that Bel was a Babylonian, not 
a Persian deity, and that in later times Anaitis was practi- 
cally equivalent to the Babylonian Ishtar or Astarte, a strong 
‘presumption is raised that Sandes also was a Babylonian or 
at all events Semitic deity, and that in speaking of him as 
Persian the historian confused the ancient Persians with the 
Babylonians and perhaps other stocks of Western Asia. The 
presumption is strengthened when we find that in Lydia the 
surname of Sandon, doubtless equivalent to Sandan, is said 
to have been borne by Hercules because he wore a woman’s 
garment called a sandyx, fine and diaphanous as gossamer, 
at the bidding of Queen Omphale, whom the hero served 
for three years in the guise of a female slave, clad in 
purple, humbly carding wool and submitting to be slapped 
by the saucy queen with her golden slipper? The familiar 
legend that Hercules burned himself alive on a great 
pyre completes the parallel between the effeminate Hercules 
Sandon of Lydia and the Assyrian Sardanapalus. So exact 
a parallel must surely rest on a common base of custom as 
well as of myth. That base, according to the conjecture of 
the admirable scholar K. O. Miiller, may have been a 
custom of dressing up an effigy of an effeminate Asiatic 
deity in the semblance of a reveller, and then publicly 
burning it on a pyre. Such a custom appears to have pre- 
vailed not only at Tarsus in Cilicia, but also in Lydia; for 
a coin of the Lydian Philadelphia, a city which lay not far 
from the old royal capital Sardes, exhibits a device like that 
-on coins of Tarsus, consisting of a figure stretched on a 
pyre. “We may suppose,” says Miiller, “that in the old 
Assyrian mythology a certain being called Sandan, or per- 


which seems to be composed of a pyra- details see Adonis, Attzs, Osiris, 


mid of great beams resting on a cubical 
base. See K. O. Miiller, ‘*Sandon 
und Sardanapal,” Awmnstarchdologische 
Werke (Berlin, 1873), iii. 8 sgg., whose 
valuable essay I follow. For fuller 


Second Edition, pp. 91 sgg., 139 sqq. 
1 Agathias, H7zst. il. 24. 
2 Joannes Lydus, De magistratibus, 
iii. 64; Apollodorus, Szb/otheca, ii. 6. 
2 sg.; Lucian, Dzal. deorum, xiii. 2. 


KS (GE 
Miiller’s 
description 
of the 
burning of 
Sandan. 


Death 

in the fire 
of men who 
personate 
gods or 
heroes, 


390 SATURNALIA AND KINDRED FESTIVALS 


CHAP. — 


haps Sardan, figured beside Baal and Mylitta or Astarte. 
The character of this mythical personage is one which often 
meets us in oriental religion—the extreme of voluptuousness 
and sensuality combined with miraculous force and heroic 
strength, We may imagine that at the great festivals of | 
Nineveh this Sandan or Sardan was exhibited as a buxom ~ 
figure with womanish features, the pale face painted with ! 
white lead, the eyebrows and eyelashes blackened with kohl, 
his person loaded with golden chains, rings, and earrings, 
arrayed in a bright red transparent garment, grasping a © 
goblet in one hand and perhaps, as a symbol of strength, a — 
double axe in the other, while he sat cross-legged and sur- | 
rounded by women on a splendidly adorned couch under a | 
purple canopy, altogether not unlike the figure of Adonis at 
the court festivals of Alexandria. Then the people of ‘mad — 
Nineveh,’ as the poet Phocylides called it, ‘the well-favoured 
harlot, as the prophet Nahum has it, would rejoice and 
make merry with this their darling hero. Afterwards there | 
may have been another show, when this gorgeous Sandan or 
Sardan was to be seen on a huge pyre of precious wood, 
draped in gold-embroidered tapestry and laden with incense | 
and spices of every sort, which being set on fire, to the 
howling of a countless multitude and the deafening din 
of shrill music, sent up a monstrous pillar of fire whirling 
towards heaven and flooded half Nineveh with smoke and | 
smell.” ? 

The distinguished scholar whom I have just quoted does | 
not fail to recognize the part which imagination plays in the | 
picture he has set before us ; but he reminds us very properly 
that in historical enquiries imagination must always supply 
the cement that binds together the broken fragments of tradi- 
tion. One thing, he thinks,emerges clearly from the present 
investigation: the worship and legend of an effeminate hero 
like Sandan appear to have spread, by means of an early | 
diffusion of the Semitic stock, first to the neighbourhood of 


1 K. O. Miller, ‘* Sandon und Sar- 
danapal,” Awnstarchdologische Werke 
(Berlin, 1873), iii. 16 sg. The writer 
adds that there is authority for every 
stroke in the picture. His principal 
source is the sixty-second speech of 


Dio Chrysostom (vol. ii. p. 202 ed. | 
L. Dindorf), where the unmanly Sar- 
danapalus, seated cross-legged on a 
gilded couch with purple hangings, is 
compared to ‘‘the Adonis for whom 
the women wail.” 


VIII SATURNALIA IN WESTERN ASIA 391 


Tarsus in Cilicia and afterwards to Sardes in Lydia. In 
favour of the former prevalence of the rite in Lydia it may 
be added that the oldest dynasty of Lydian kings traced 
their descent, not only from the mythical Assyrian hero 
Ninus, but also from the Greek hero Hercules,! whose 
legendary death in the fire finds at least a curious echo in 
the story that Croesus, the last king of Lydia, was laid by 
his Persian conqueror Cyrus on a great pyre of wood, and 
was only saved at the last moment from being consumed in 
the flames.” May not this story embody a reminiscence of 
the manner in which the ancient kings of Lydia, as living 
embodiments of their god, formerly met their end? It was 
thus, as we have seen, that the old Prussian rulers used to 
burn themselves alive in front of the sacred oak ;* and by 
an odd coincidence, if it is nothing more, the Greek Hercules 
directed that the pyre on which he was to be consumed 
should be made of the wood of the oak and the wild olive.* 
Some grounds have also been shewn for thinking that in 
certain South African tribes the chiefs may formerly have 
been burnt alive as a religious or magical ceremony.’ All 
these facts and indications tend to support the view of 
Movers that at the Sacaea also the man who played the god 
for five days was originally burnt at the end of them.® 
Death by hanging or crucifixion may have been a later 
mitigation of his sufferings, though it is quite possible that 


of wood (in this case the wild olive) 
was regarded as male and the other (the 
oak) as female. On this hypothesis, 


1 Herodotus, i. 7. 
2 Herodotus, i. 86 sg., with J. C. 
F. Bahr’s note. According to another 


and perhaps more probable tradition 
the king sought a voluntary death in 
the flames. See Bacchylides, ii. 24- 
62; Adonis, Attis, Osiris, Second 
Edition, pp. 141 sgg. 

3 The Dying God, pp. 41 sg. 

4 Sophocles, 7rachiniae, 1195 sgq.: 
moANnv pev UXnv THs Babupplfou dpvos 
kelpavta moN\ov 6 dpoev éexreuovd’ 600 
dypiov aov, cGua Tovmoy euBareiv. 


The passage was pointed out to me by 
my friend the late Dr. A. W. Verrall. 
The poet’s language suggests that of old 
a sacred fire was kindled by the friction 
of oak and wild olive wood, and that 
in accordance with a notion common 
among rude peoples, one of the pieces 


the fire was kindled by drilling a hole 
in a piece of oak with a stick of wild 
olive. As to the different sorts of wood 
used by the ancients in making fire by 
friction, see A. Kuhn, Dze Herabkunft 
des Feuers und des Gottertranks * (Giiter- 
sloh, 1886), pp. 35 sgg.; The Magic Art 
and the Evolution of Kings, ii. 249 
sgg.- In South Africa a special fire is 
procured for sacrifices by the friction 
of two pieces of the Uzwatz tree, 
which are known respectively as hus- 
band and wife. See Spzrzts of the Corn 
and of the Wild, ii. 65. 

5 Sperits of the Corn and of the 
Wild, ii. 68. 

6 F. C. Movers, Dze Phoenizier, i. 
(Bonn, 1841) p. 496. 


Traces 

of human 
sacrifice in 
the Jewish 
festival of 
Purim ; 
effigies of 
Haman 
burnt. 


392 SATURNALIA AND KINDRED FESTIVALS  cuap. 


both forms of execution or rather of sacrifice may have been 
combined by hanging or crucifying the victim first and © 
burning him afterwards,’ much as our forefathers used to — 
disembowel traitors after suspending them for a few minutes — 
on a gibbet. At Tarsus apparently the custom was still 
further softened by burning an effigy instead of a man; but 
on this point the evidence is not explicit. It is worth 
observing that as late as Lucian’s time the principal festival — 
of the year at Hierapolis—the great seat of the worship of 
Astarte—fell at the beginning of spring and took its name 
of the Pyre or the Torch from the tall masts which were 
burnt in the court of the temple with sheep, goats, and 
other animals hanging from them.? Here the season, the 
fire, and the gallows-tree all fit our hypothesis; only the 
man-god is wanting. 

If the Jewish festival of Purim was, as I have attempted 
to shew, directly descended either from the Sacaea or from 
some other Semitic festival, of which the central feature was 
the sacrifice of a man in the character of a god, we should 
expect to find traces of human sacrifice lingering about it in 
one or other of those mitigated forms to which I have just 
referred. This expectation is fully borne out by the facts. 
For from an early time it has been customary with the Jews 
at the feast of Purim to burn or otherwise destroy effigies of 
Haman. The practice was well known under the Roman 
empire, for in the year 408 A.D. the emperors Honorius and 
Theodosius issued a decree commanding the governors of the 
provinces to take care that the Jews should not burn effigies of 
Haman on a cross at one of their festivals.? We learn from 
the decree that the custom gave great offence to the Christians, 
who regarded it as a blasphemous parody of the central 
mystery of their own religion, little suspecting that it was 


1 This suggestion was made by F. 
Liebrecht, Zur Volkskunde (Heilbronn, 
1879), p. 9. It occurred to me inde- 
pendently. 


2 Lucian, De dea Syria, 49. 


3 Codex Theodosianus, Lib. xXvI. 
Tit. viii. § 18: ‘‘ Judaeos guodam fes- 
tivitatis suae soilent Aman ad poenae 
quondam recordationem incendere, et 
sanctae cructs adsimulatam speciem in 


contemptu Christianae fidet sacrilega 
mente exurere provinciarum rectores 
prohibeant: ne locts suis fidet nostrae 
signum tmmisceant, sed ritus suos infra 
contemptum Christianae legis retineant : 
amissurt sine dubio permissa hactenus, 
nest ab inlicitis temperaverint.” The 
decree is dated at Constantinople, in 
the consulship of Bassus and Philip. 
For /octs we should probably read joczs 
with Mommsen. 


VIII SATURNALIA IN WESTERN ASIA 393 


nothing but a continuation, in a milder form, of a rite that 
had probably been celebrated in the East long ages before 
the birth of Christ. Apparently the custom long survived 
the publication of the edict, for in a form of abjuration which 
the Greek church imposed on Jewish converts and which 
seems to date from the tenth century, the renegade is made 
to speak as follows: “I curse also those who celebrate the 
festival of the so-called Mordecai on the first Sabbath 
(Saturday) of the Christian fast, and who nail Haman for- 
sooth to the tree, attaching to it the symbol of the cross and 
burning him along with it, while they heap all sorts of 
imprecations and curses on the Christians.”* A Jewish 
account of the custom as it was observed in Babylonia 
and Persia in the tenth century of our era runs as follows: 
“Tt is customary in Babylonia and Elam for boys to make 
an effigy resembling Haman; this they suspend on their 
roofs, four or five days before Purim. On Purim day they 
erect a bonfire, and cast the effigy into its midst, while the 
boys stand round about it jesting and singing. And they 
have a ring suspended in the midst of the fire, which (ring) 
they hold and wave from one side of the fire to the other.” ” 
Again, the Arab historian Albirfini, who wrote in the year 
1000 A.D., informs us that at Purim the Jews of his time 
rejoiced greatly over the death of Haman, and that they made 
figures which they beat and burned, “imitating the burning 
of Haman.” Hence one name for the festival was Haman- 
Str Another Arabic writer, Makrizi, who died in 1442 A.D., 


1 Fr. Cumont, ‘‘ Une formule grecque 
de renonciation au judaisme,” Wzener 
Studien, xxiv. (1902) p. 468. The 
‘*Christian fast” referred to in the 
formula is no doubt Lent. The men- 
tion of the Jewish Sabbath (the Chris- 
tian Saturday) raises a difficulty, which 
has been pointed out by the editor, 
Franz Cumont, in a note (p. 470): 
“* The festival of Purim was celebrated 
on the 14th of Adar, that is, in Febru- 
ary or March, about the beginning of 
the Christian Lent; but that festival, 
the date of which is fixed in the Jewish 
calendar, does not always fall on a 
Saturday. Either the author made a 
mistake or the civil authority obliged 


the Jews to transfer their rejoicings to 
a Sabbath ” (Saturday). 


2 Israel Abrahams, Zhe Book of 
Delight and other Papers (Philadelphia, 
1912), pp. 266 sg. Mr. Abrahams 
ingeniously suggests (of. cz¢. pp. 267 
sg.) that the ring waved over the fire 
was an emblem of the sun, and that 
the kindling of the Purim fires was 
originally a ceremony of imitative 
magic to ensure a supply of solar 
light and heat. 


3 Albirini, 7e Chronology of Ancient 
Nations, translated and edited by Dr. 
C. Edward Sachau (London, 1879), 


Pp. 273 59. 


Accusa- 
tions of 
ritual 
murder 
brought 
against the 
Jews. 


394 SATURNALIA AND KINDRED FESTIVALS  cuar. 


says that at the feast of Purim, which fell on the fifteenth 
day of the month Adar, some of the Jews used to make 
effigies of Haman which they first played with and then 
threw into the fire’ During the Middle Ages the Italian 
Jews celebrated Purim in a lively fashion which has been 
compared by their own historians to that of the Carnival. 
The children used to range themselves in rows opposite 
each other and pelt one another with nuts, while grown-up 
people rode on horseback through the streets with pine 
branches in their hands or blew trumpets and made merry 
round a puppet representing Haman, which was set on a 
platform or scaffold and then solemnly burnt on a pyre 
In the eighteenth century the Jews of Frankfort used at 
Purim to make pyramids of thin wax candles, which they 
set on fire; also they fashioned images of Haman and his 
wife out of candles and burned them on the reading-desk in 
the synagogue.” 

Now, when we consider the close correspondence in 
character as well as in date between the Jewish Purim and 
the Christian Carnival, and remember further that the effigy 
of Carnival, which is now destroyed at this merry season, 
had probably its prototype in a living man who was put to 
a violent death in the character of Saturn at the Saturnalia, 
analogy of itself would suggest that in former times the 
Jews, like the Babylonians, from whom they appear to have 
derived their Purim, may at one time have burned, hanged, 
or crucified a real man in the character of Haman. There 
are some positive grounds for thinking that this was so. 
The early church historian Socrates informs us that at 
Inmestar, a town in Syria, the Jews were wont to observe 
certain sports among themselves, in the course of which 
they played many foolish pranks. In the year 416 A.D., 
being heated with wine, they carried these sports further 
than usual and began deriding Christians and even Christ 


1 Quoted by Lagarde, ‘‘ Purim,” 
p. 13 (Abhandlungen der kiniglichen 
Gesellschaft der Waossenschaften 22 
Gottingen, xxxiv. 1887). 


2M. Giidemann, Geschichte des 


Lerziehungswesens und der Cultur der 


abendlindischen Juden (Vienna, 1880-— 


1888), ii. 211 sg. ; I. Abrahams, Jew- 
ish Life in the Middle Ages (London, 
1896), pp. 260 sg. 


3 J. J. Schudt, /sidische Merkwiir- 
digkeiten (Frankfort and Leipsic, 1714), 
ii. Theil, p. *309. 


VIII SATURNALIA' IN WESTERN ASIA 


395 


himself, and to give the more zest to their mockery they 
seized a Christian child, bound him to a cross, and hung 
him up. At first they only laughed and jeered at him, but 
soon, their passions getting the better of them, they ill- 
treated the child so that he died under their hands. The 
thing got noised abroad, and resulted in a serious brawl 
between the Jews and their Christian neighbours. The 
authorities then stepped in, and the Jews had to pay dear 
for the crime they had perpetrated in sport.' The Christian 
historian does not mention, and perhaps did not know, the 
name of the drunken and jovial festival which ended so 
tragically ; but we can hardly doubt that it was Purim, and 
that the boy who died on the cross represented Haman.’ 
In medieval and modern times many accusations of ritual 
murders, as they are called, have been brought against the 
Jews, and the arguments for and against the charge have 
been discussed on both sides with a heat which, however 
natural, has tended rather to inflame the passions of the 
disputants than to elicit the truth. Into this troubled arena 
I prefer not to enter; I will only observe that, so far as I 
have looked into the alleged cases, and these are reported 
in sufficient detail, the majority of the victims are said to 
have been children and to have met their fate in spring, 
often in the week before Easter. This last circumstance 
points, if there is any truth in the accusations, to a con- 
nexion of the human sacrifice with the Passover, which falls 
in this week, rather than with Purim, which falls a month 
earlier. Indeed it has often been made a part of the accusa- 
tion that the blood of the youthful victims was intended to 


1 Socrates, Azstorta LEcclestastica, 
vii. 16; Theophanes, Chronographia, 
ed. J. Classen (Bonn, 1839-1841), 
vol. i. p. 129. Theophanes places the 
event in the year 408 A.D. From 
a note in Migne’s edition of Socra- 
tes, I learn that in the Alexandrian 
calendar, which Theophanes used, the 
year 408 corresponded to the year 
which in our reckoning began on the 
first of September 415. Hence if the 
murder was perpetrated in spring at 
Purim it must have taken place in 416. 

2 This is the view of H. Graetz 


(Geschichte der Juden,? iv. Leipsic, 
1866, pp. 393 sg-) and Dr. M. R. 
James (Life and Miracles of St. William 
of Norwich (Cambridge, 1896), by A. 
Jessopp and M. R. James, pp. Ixiii. 
5q.). 

3 For an examination of some of 
these reported murders, see M. R. 
James, of. cit. pp. Ixii. sgg.; H. L. 
Strack, Das Blut im Glauben und 
Aberglauben der Menschhett (Munich, 
1900), pp. 121 sgg. Both writers 
incline to dismiss the charges as 
groundless. 


The 
accusations 
probably 
false. 


Mitigation 
of human 
sacrifice 
by the 
substitu- 
tion of a 
criminal 
for the 
victim. 


396 SATURNALIA AND KINDRED FESTIVALS  cuap. 


be used at the Passover. If all the charges of ritual murder 
which have been brought against the Jews in modern times are 
not, as seems most probable, mere idle calumnies, the baneful 
fruit of bigotry, ignorance, and malice, the extraordinary 
tenacity of life exhibited by the lowest forms of superstition 
in the minds of ignorant people, whether they are Jews or 
Gentiles, would suffice to account for an occasional recrud- 
escence of primitive barbarity among the most degraded part 
of the Jewish community. To make the Jews as a nation 
responsible for outrages which, if they occur at all, are 
doubtless quite as repugnant to them as they are to every 
humane mind, would be a monstrous injustice; it would be 
as fair to charge Christians in general with complicity in 
the incalculably greater number of massacres and atrocities 
of every kind that have been perpetrated by Christians in 
the name of Christianity, not merely on Jews and heathen, 
but on men and women and children who professed—and 
died for—the same faith as their torturers and murderers. 
If deeds of the sort alleged have been really done by Jews— 
a question on which I must decline to pronounce an opinion - 
—they would interest the student of custom as isolated 
instances of reversion to an old and barbarous ritual which 
once flourished commonly enough among the ancestors both 
of Jews and Gentiles, but on which, as on a noxious monster, 
an enlightened humanity has long set its heel. Such 
customs die hard; it is not the fault of society as a whole 
if sometimes the reptile has strength enough left to lift 
its venomous head and sting. 

But between the stage when human sacrifice goes on 
unabashed in the light of common day, and the stage when 
it has been driven out of sight into dark holes and corners, 
there intervenes a period during which the custom is slowly 
dwindling away under the growing light of knowledge and 
philanthropy. In this middle period many subterfuges are 
resorted to for the sake of preserving the old ritual in a 
form which will not offend the new morality. A common 
and successful device is to consummate the sacrifice on the 
person of a malefactor, whose death at the altar or else- 
where is little likely to excite pity or indignation, since it 
partakes of the character of a punishment, and people recog- 


VIII SATURNALIA IN WESTERN ASIA 397 


nize that if the miscreant had not been dealt with by the 
priest, it would have been needful in the public interest to 
hand him over to the executioner. We have seen that in 
the Rhodian sacrifices to Cronus a condemned criminal was 
after a time substituted for an innocent victim ;' and there 
can be little doubt that at Babylon the criminals, who 
perished in the character of gods at the Sacaea, enjoyed an 
honour which, at an earlier period, had been reserved for 
more respectable persons. It seems therefore by no means 
impossible that the Jews, in borrowing the Sacaea from 
Babylon under the new name of Purim, should have borrowed 
along with it the custom of putting to death a malefactor 
who, after masquerading as Mordecai in a crown and royal 
robe, was hanged or crucified in the character of Haman. 
There are some grounds for thinking that this or something 
of this sort was done; but a consideration of them had 
better be deferred till we have cleared up some points which 
still remain obscure in Purim, and in the account which the 
Jews give of its origin. 

In the first place, then, it deserves to be remarked that 
the joyous festival of Purim on the fourteenth and fifteenth 
days of the month Adar is invariably preceded by a fast, 
known as the fast of Esther, on the thirteenth ; indeed, some 
Jews fast for several days before Purim.” In the book of 
Esther the fast is traditionally explained as a commemora- 
tion of the mourning and lamentation excited among the 
Jews by the decree of King Ahasuerus that they should all 
be massacred on the thirteenth day of the month Adar ; for 
“in every province, whithersoever the king’s commandment 
and his decree came, there was great mourning among the 
Jews, and fasting, and weeping, and wailing ; and many lay in 
sackcloth and ashes.” And Esther, before she went into the 
presence of the king to plead for the lives of her people, 
“bade them return answer unto Mordecai, Go, gather together 
all the Jews that are present in Shushan, and fast ye for me, 
and neither eat nor drink three days, night or day: I also 
and my maidens will fast in like manner.” Hence fasting 


1 Above, pp. 353 sg. Bodenschatz, Azrchliche Verfassung der 
2 J. Buxtorf, Synagoga Judaica (Bale,  heutigen Juden (Erlangen, 1748), ii. 
MOON) secap, xxix. p. 5545 J. Chr. G 253 s7. 


The ‘‘ fast 
of Esther ’ 
before 
Purim. 


Jensen’s 
theory 
that the 
‘«fast of 
Esther” 
was origin- 
ally a 
mourning 
for the 
annual 
death of a 
deity like 
Tammuz. 


398 SATURNALIA AND KINDRED FESTIVALS  cuap. 


and lamentation were ordained as the proper preparation for 
the happy feast of Purim which commemorated the great de- 
liverance of the Jews from the destruction that had threatened 
them on the thirteenth day of Adar.' Now we have seen 
that, in the opinion of some eminent modern scholars, the 
basis of the book of Esther is not history but a Babylonian 
myth, which celebrated the triumphs and sufferings of 
deities rather than of men. On this hypothesis, how is 
the fast that precedes Purim to be explained? The best 
solution appears to be that of Jensen, that the fasting and 
mourning were originally for the supposed annual death 
of a Semitic god or hero of the type of Tammuz or 
Adonis, whose resurrection on the following day occasioned 
that outburst of joy and gladness which is characteristic of 
Purim. The particular god or hero, whose death and resur- 
rection thus touched with sorrow and filled with joy the hearts 
of his worshippers, may have been, according to Jensen, either 
the great hero Gilgamesh, or his comrade and friend Eabani.” 
The doughty deeds and adventures of this mighty pair are 
the theme of the longest Babylonian poem that has been as 
yet discovered. It is recorded on twelve tablets, and this cir- 
cumstance has suggested to some scholars the view that the 


-story may be a solar myth, descriptive of the sun’s annual 


course through the twelve months or the twelve signs of the 
zodiac. However that may be, the scene of the poem is 
laid chiefly at the very ancient Babylonian city of Erech, the 
chief seat of the worship of the goddess Ishtar or Astarte, who 
plays animportant partinthe story. For the goddess is said 
to have been smitten with the charms of Gilgamesh, and to 
have made love to him ; but he spurned her proffered favours, 
and thereafter fell into a sore sickness, probably through the 
wrath of the offended goddess. His comrade Eabani also 


Commentar zum 


1 Esther iv. 3 and 16, ix. 31. 
' 2 So far as I know, Professor Jensen 
has not yet published his theory, but 
he has stated it in letters to corre- 
spondents. See W. Nowack, Lehrbuch 
der hebraischen Archaologie (Freiburg 
i. Baden and Leipsic, 1894), ii. 200; 
H. Giinkel, Schdpfung und Chaos 
(Gottingen, 1895), pp. 311 sgg.; D. G. 
Wildeboer, in his commentary on 
Esther, pp. 174 sg. (Kurser Hana- 


Alten Testament, 
herausgegeben von D. K. Marti, Lie- 
ferung 6, Freiburg i. B., 1898). In 
the Babylonian calendar the 13th of 
Adar was so far a fast day that on it 
no fish or fowl might be eaten. In 
one tablet the 13th of Adar is marked 
*‘not good,” while the 14th and 15th 
are marked ‘‘good.” See C. H. W. 
Johns, s.v. ‘‘ Purim,” Zvcyclopaedia 
Biblica, iii. (London, 1902) col. 3980, 


ED i Pend.» al +A eter 


VIII 


roused the fury of Ishtar, and was wounded to death. 


SATURNALIA IN WESTERN ASIA 


399 
For 


twelve days he lingered on a bed of pain, and, when he died, 
his friend Gilgamesh mourned and lamented for him, and 
rested not until he had prevailed on the god of the dead to 


suffer the spirit of Eabani to return to the upper world. 


The 


resurrection of Eabani, recorded on the twelfth tablet, forms 


the conclusion of the long poem." 


Jensen’s theory is that 


the death and resurrection of a mythical being, who com- 
bined in himself the features of a solar god and an ancient 
king of Erech, were celebrated at the Babylonian Zakmuk or 
festival of the New Year, and that the transference of the 
drama from Erech, its original seat, to Babylon led naturally 
to the substitution of Marduk, the great god of Babylon, for 


Gilgamesh or Eabani in the part of the hero. 


Although 


Jensen apparently does not identify the Zakmuk with the 
Sacaea, a little consideration will shew how well his general 
theory of Zakmuk fits in with those features of the Sacaean 
festival which have emerged in the course of our enquiry. 
At the Sacaean festival, if Iam right, a man, who personated 
a god or hero of the type of Tammuz or Adonis, enjoyed 
the favours of a woman, probably a sacred harlot, who re- 
presented the great Semitic goddess Ishtar or Astarte ; and 
after he had thus done his part towards securing, by means 
of sympathetic magic, the revival of plant life in spring, he 


was put to death. 


We may suppose that the death of this 


divine man was mourned over by his worshippers, and espe- 
cially by women, in much the same fashion as the women of 


1 M. Jastrow, Zhe Religion of Baby- 
lonia and Assyria (Boston, U.S.A., 
1898), pp. 471 5g7., 475 5g., 481-486, 
510-512; L. W. King, Sadbylonian Re- 
ligion and Mythology (London, 1899), 
pp. 146 sgg.; P. Jensen, Assyrisch- 
Babylonische Mythen und Epen (Berlin, 
1900), pp. 116-273; R. F. Harper, 
Assyrian and Babylonian Literature 
(New York, 1901), pp. 324-368; H. 
Zimmern, in E. Schrader’s Dze Kez/- 
inmschriften und das Alte Testament * 
(Berlin, 1902), pp. 566-582; Das Gii- 
gamesch-Epos, neu tibersetzt von Arthur 
Ungnad wud gemeinverstindlich erklart 
von Hugo Gressmann (Gottingen, 1911). 
Professor Jastrow points out that though 
a relation cannot be traced between 


each of the tablets of the poem and the 
corresponding month of the year, such 
a relation appears undoubtedly to exist 
between some of the tablets and the 
months. Thus, for example, the sixth 
tablet describes the affection of Ishtar 
for Gilgamesh, and the visit which she 
paid to Anu, her father in heaven, to 
complain of the hero’s contemptuous 
rejection of her love. Now the sixth 
Babylonian month was called the ‘‘ Mis- 
sion of Ishtar,” and in it was held the 
festival of Tammuz, the hapless lover 
of the goddess. Again, the story of the 
great flood is told in the eleventh tablet, 
and the eleventh month was called the 
‘*month of rain.” See M. Jastrow, of. 


cit. pp. 484, 510. 


The resur- 
rection of 
the dead 
god per- 
haps repre- 
sented by 
a living 
man who 
afterwards 
died in 
earnest 

in the 
character 
of the god. 


This would 
explain the 
apparent 
duplication 
of the 
principal 
characters 
in the 
book of 
Esther : 


400 SATURNALIA AND KINDRED FESTIVALS  cuap. 


Jerusalem wept for Tammuz at the gate of the temple,’ and 
as Syrian damsels mourned the dead Adonis, while the river 
ran red with his blood. Such rites appear, in fact, to have 
been common all over Western Asia ; the particular name of 
the dying god varied in different places, but in substance the 
ritual was the same. Fundamentally, the custom was a re- 
ligious or rather magical ceremony intended to ensure the 
revival and reproduction of life in spring. 

Now, if this interpretation of the Sacaea is correct, it is 
obvious that one important feature of the ceremony is wanting 
in the brief notices of the festival that have come down to us. 
The death of the man-god at the festival is recorded, but 
nothing is said of his resurrection. Yet if he really personated 
a being of the Adonis or Attis type, we may feel pretty sure 
that his dramatic death was followed at a shorter or longer 
interval by his dramatic revival, just as at the festivals of 
Attis and Adonis the resurrection of the dead god quickly 
succeeded to his mimic death.? Here, however, a difficulty 
presents itself. At the Sacaea the man-god died a real, not 
a mere mimic death ; and in ordinary life the resurrection 
even of a man-god is at least not an everyday occurrence. 
What was to be done? The man, or rather the god, was 
undoubtedly dead. How was he to come to life again? 
Obviously the best, if not the only way, was to set another and 
living man to support the character of the reviving god, and 
we may conjecture that this was done. We may suppose 
that the insignia of royalty which had adorned the dead 
man were transferred to his successor, who, arrayed in them, 
would be presented to his rejoicing worshippers as their god 
come to life again; and by his side would probably be 
displayed a woman in the character of his divine consort, 
the goddess Ishtar or Astarte. In favour of this hypothesis 
it may be observed that it at once furnishes a clear and 
intelligible explanation of a remarkable feature in the book 
of Esther which has not yet, so far as I am aware, been 
adequately elucidated ; I mean that apparent duplication of 
the principal characters to which I have already directed 
the reader’s attention. If I am right, Haman represents 


1 Ezekiel viii. 14. 
2 Adonis, Attis, Ostris, Second Edition, pp. 183 sg., 227. 


VIII SATURNALIA IN WESTERN ASIA 4oI 


the temporary king or mortal god who was put to death at 
the Sacaea; and his rival Mordecai represents the other 
temporary king who, on the death of his predecessor, was 
invested with his royal insignia, and exhibited to the 
people as the god come to life again. Similarly Vashti, 
the deposed queen in the narrative, corresponds to the 
woman who played the part of queen and goddess to 
the first mock king, the Haman; and her successful rival, 
Esther or Ishtar, answers to the woman who figured as the 
divine consort of the second mock king, the Mordecai or 
Marduk. A trace of the sexual license accorded to the 
mock king of the festival seems to be preserved in the 
statement that King Ahasuerus found Haman fallen on the 
bed with Esther and asked, “ Will he even force the queen 
before me in the house?” We have seen that the mock 
king of the Sacaea did actually possess the right of using 
the real king’s concubines, and there is much to be said for 
the view of Movers that he began his short reign by exer- 
cising the right in public.” In the parallel ritual of Adonis 
the marriage of the goddess with her ill-fated lover was 
publicly celebrated the day before his mimic death. <A 
clear reminiscence of the time when the relation between 
Esther and Mordecai was conceived as much more intimate 
than mere cousinship appears to be preserved in some of 
the Jewish plays acted at Purim, in which Mordecai appears 
as the lover of Esther; and this significant indication is 
confirmed by the teaching of the rabbis that King Ahasuerus 
never really knew Esther, but that a phantom in her likeness 
lay with him while the real Esther sat on the lap of 
Mordecai.* 

The Persian setting, in which the Hebrew author of the 
book of Esther has framed his highly-coloured picture, 
naturally suggests that the Jews derived their feast of 
Purim not directly from the old Babylonians, but from their 
Persian conquerors. Even if this could be demonstrated, it 
would in no way invalidate the theory that Purim originated 


1 Esther vii. 8. Edition, p. 183. 

4 J. J.Schudt, /cidische Merkwiirdig- 
ketten (Frankfort and Leipsic, 1714), 
8 Adonis, Attis, Osiris, Second ii. Theil, p. *316. 

Pr VI 2D 


2 See above, p. 368. 


Haman 
and Vashti 
would 
represent 
the gods 
dying, 
while 
Mordecai 
and Esther 
would 
represent 
the gods 
rising from 
the dead. 


The 
Persian 
setting of 
the book 
of Esther. 


The 
Persian 
ceremony 
of the 

“« Ride of 
the Beard- 
less One” 
in spring. 


402 SATURNALIA AND KINDRED FESTIVALS CHAP. 


in the Babylonian festival of the Sacaea, since we know 
that the Sacaea was celebrated by the Persians.’ Hence it 
becomes worth while to enquire whether in the Persian 
religion we can detect any traces of a festival akin to the 
Sacaea or Purim. Here Lagarde has shewn the way by 
directing attention to the old Persian ceremony known as 
the “Ride of the Beardless One.”” This was a rite per- 
formed both in Persia and Babylonia at the beginning of 
spring, on the first day of the first month, which in the 
most ancient Persian calendar corresponded to March, so 
that the date of the ceremony agrees with that of the 
Babylonian New Year festival of Zakmuk. A _ beardless 
and, if possible, one-eyed buffoon was set naked on an ass, 
a horse, or a mule, and conducted ina sort of mock triumph 
through the streets of the city. In one hand he held a 
crow and in the other a fan, with which he fanned himself, 
complaining of the heat, while the people pelted him with 
ice and snow and drenched him with cold water. He was 
supposed to drive away the cold, and to aid him perhaps in 
discharging this useful function he was fed with hot food, 
and hot stuffs were smeared on his body. Riding on his 
ass and attended by all the king’s household, if the city 
happened to be the capital, or, if it was not, by all the 
retainers of the governor, who were also mounted, he 
paraded the streets and extorted contributions. He stopped. 
at the doors of the rich, and if they did not give him what 
he asked for, he befouled their garments with mud or a 
mixture of red ochre and water, which he carried in an 
earthenware pot. If a shopkeeper hesitated a moment to 
respond to his demands, the importunate beggar had the 
right to confiscate all the goods in the shop ; so the trades- 
men who saw him bearing down on them, not unnaturally 
hastened to anticipate his wants by contributing of their 
substance before he could board them. Everything that he 


1 Dio Chrysostom makes Diogenes 
say to Alexander the Great, ovx 
évvevdnkxas Thy TOv Lakaiwy €oprhy, iv 
Ilépoa dyouow (Or. iv. vol. 1. p. 76 ed. 
L. Dindorf). The festival was men- 
tioned by Ctesias in the second book of 
his Persian history (Athenaeus, xiv. 44 
p- 639C); and down to the time of 


Strabo it was associated with the 
nominal worship of the Persian god- 
dess Anaitis (Strabo, xi. 8. 4 and 5, p. 
512). 

2 Lagarde, ‘“‘ Purim,” pp. 51 sg. 
(Abhandlungen der kinigl. Gesellschaft 
der Wissenschaften 2u Gottingen, Xxxiv. 
1887). 


Vill SATURNALIA IN WESTERN ASIA 403 


thus collected from break of day to the time of morning 
prayers belonged to the king or governor of the city ; but 
everything that he laid hands on between the first and the 
second hour of prayer he kept for himself. After the 
second prayers he disappeared, and if the people caught 
him later in the day they were free to beat him to their 
heart’s content. “In like manner,” proceeds one of the 
native writers who has described the custom, “ people at the 
present time appoint a New Year Lord and make merry. 
And this they do because the season, which is the beginning 
of Azur or March, coincides with the sun’s entry into Aries, 
for on that day they disport themselves and rejoice because 
the winter is over.” ? 

Now in this harlequin, who rode through the streets 
attended by all the king’s men, and levying contributions 
which went either to the royal treasury or to the pocket of 
the collector, we recognize the familiar features of the mock 
or temporary king, who is invested for a short time with the 
pomp and privileges of royalty for reasons which have been 
already explained”. The abrupt disappearance of the 
Persian clown at a certain hour of the day, coupled with 
the leave given to the populace to thrash him if they found 
him afterwards, points plainly enough to the harder fate 
that probably awaited him in former days, when he paid 
with his life for his brief tenure of a kingly crown. The 
resemblance between his burlesque progress and that of 
Mordecai through the streets of Susa is obvious; though 
the Jewish author of Esther has depicted in brighter colours 
the pomp of his hero “in royal apparel of blue and white, 
and with a great crown of gold, and with a robe of fine 
linen and purple,” riding the king’s own charger, and led 
through the city by one of the king’s most noble princes.’ 
- The difference between the two scenes is probably not to 
be explained simply by the desire of the Jewish writer to 
shed a halo of glory round the personage whom he regarded 
as the deliverer of his people. So long as the temporary 


1 Th. Hyde, Astoria religionts ve- edited by Dr. C. Edward Sachau 
terum Persarum: (Oxford, 1700), pp. (London, 1879), p. 211. 
183, 249-251; Albirtini, Zhe Chron- 2 The Dying God, pp. 148 sqq. 
ology of Ancient Nations, translated and 3 Esther vi. 8 sg., viii. 15. ~° 


The 
‘«Beardless 
One”’ in 
the Persian 
ceremony is 
apparently 
the de- 
generate 
successor 
of a 
temporary 
king. 


The ‘‘ Ride 
of the 
Beardless 
One”’ 
seems to be 
a magical 
ceremony 
for the 
expulsion 
of winter. 


404 SATURNALIA AND KINDRED FESTIVALS  cuHap. 


king was a real substitute for the reigning monarch, and had 
to die sooner or later in his stead, it was natural that he 
should be treated with a greater show of deference, and 
should simulate his royal brother more closely than a clown 
who had nothing worse than a beating to fear when he laid 
down his office. In short, after the serious meaning of the 
custom had been forgotten, and the substitute was allowed 
to escape with his life, the high tragedy of the ancient cere- 
mony would rapidly degenerate into farce. 

But while the “Ride of the Beardless One” is, from 
one point of view, a degenerate copy of the original, 
regarded from another point of view, it preserves some 
features which are almost certainly primitive, though they 
do not appear in the kindred Babylonian and Jewish festivals. 
The Persian custom bears the stamp of a popular festivity 
rather than of a state ceremonial, and everywhere it seems 
as if popular festivals, when left to propagate themselves 
freely among the folk, reveal their old meaning and inten- 
tion more transparently than when they have been adopted 
into the official religion and enshrined in a ritual. The 
simple thoughts of our simple forefathers are better under- 
stood by their unlettered descendants than by the majority 
of educated people; their rude rites are more faithfully pre- 
served and more truly interpreted by a rude peasantry than 
by the priest, who wraps up their nakedness in the gorgeous 
pall of religious pomp, or by the philosopher, who dissolves 
their crudities into the thin air of allegory. In the present 
instance the purpose of the “Ride of the Beardless One” 
at the beginning of spring is sufficiently obvious; it was 
meant to hasten the departure of winter and the approach 
of summer. We are expressly told that the clown who 
went about fanning himself and complaining of the heat, 
while the populace snowballed him, was supposed to dispel 
the cold; and even without any such assurance we should 
be justified in inferring as much from his behaviour. On 
the principles of homoeopathic or imitative magic, which is 
little more than an elaborate system of make-believe, you 
can make the weather warm by pretending that it is so; or 
if you cannot, you may be sure that there is some person 
wiser than yourself who can. Such a wizard, in the estima- 


VIII SATURNALIA IN WESTERN ASIA 405 


tion of the Persians, was the beardless one-eyed man who 
went through the performance I have described; and no 
doubt his physical defects were believed to contribute in 
some occult manner to the success of the rite. The cere- 
mony was thus, as Lagarde acutely perceived, the oriental 
equivalent of those popular European customs which celebrate 
the advent of spring by representing in a dramatic form the 
expulsion or defeat of winter by the victorious summer.’ But 
whereas in Europe the two rival seasons are often, if not 
regularly, personated by two actors or two effigies, in Persia 
a single actor sufficed. Whether he definitely represented 
winter or summer is not quite clear; but his pretence of 
suffering from heat and his final disappearance suggest that, 
if he personified either of the seasons, it was the departing 
winter rather than the coming summer. 

If there is any truth in the connexion thus traced 
between Purim and the “Ride of the Beardless One,” we 
are now in a position finally to unmask the leading person- 
ages in the book of Esther. I have attempted to shew that 
Haman and Vashti are little more than doubles of Mordecai 
and Esther, who in turn conceal under a thin disguise the 
features of Marduk and Ishtar, the great god and goddess 
of Babylon. But why, the reader may ask, should the 
divine pair be thus duplicated and the two pairs set in 
opposition to each other? The answer is suggested by 
the popular European celebrations of spring to which I have 
just adverted. If my interpretation of these customs is right, 
the contrast between the summer and winter, or between 
the life and death, which figure in effigy or in the persons 
of living representatives at the spring ceremonies of our 
peasantry, is fundamentally a contrast between the dying or 
dead vegetation of the old and the sprouting vegetation 
of the new year—a contrast which would lose nothing of 
its point when, as in ancient Rome and Babylon and 
Persia, the beginning of spring was also the beginning of 
the new year. In these and in all the ceremonies we 
have been examining the antagonism is not between powers 
of a different order, but between the same power viewed in 
different aspects as old and young; it is, in short, nothing 

1 The Dying God, pp. 254 5qq. 


The 
opposition 
of Haman 
and Vashti 
to Mor- 
decai and 
Esther 
seems to be 
a contrast 
between 
the annual 
death of 
nature in 
winter and 
its revival 
in spring. 


406 SATURNALIA AND KINDRED FESTIVALS CHAP. 


but the eternal and pathetic contrast between youth and 
age. And as the power or spirit of vegetation is repre- 
sented in religious ritual and popular custom by a human 
pair, whether they be called Ishtar and Tammuz, or Venus 
and Adonis, or the Queen and King of May, so we may 
expect to find the old decrepit spirit of the past year per- 
sonated by one pair, and the fresh young spirit of the new 
year by:another. This, if my hypothesis is right, is the 
ultimate explanation of the struggle between Haman and 
Vashti on the one side, and their doubles Mordecai and 
Esther on the other. In the last analysis both pairs stood 
for the powers that make for the fertility of plants and 
perhaps also of animals;' but the one pair embodied the 
failing energies of the past, and the other the vigorous and 
srowing energies of the coming year.” Both powers, on 
my hypothesis, were personified not merely in myth, but in 
custom; for year by year a human couple undertook to 
quicken the life of nature by a union in which, as in a 
microcosm, the loves of tree and plant, of herb and flower, 
of bird and beast were supposed in some mystic fashion to 
be summed up.’ Originally, we may conjecture, such couples 
exercised their functions for a whole year, on the conclusion 
of which the male partner—the divine king—vwas put to 
death ; but in historical times it seems that, as a rule, the 
human god—the Saturn, Zoganes, Tammuz, or whatever he 
was called—enjoyed his divine privileges, and discharged 


1 The goddess Ishtar certainly seems 
to have embodied the principle of fer- 
tility in animals as well as in plants ; 
for in the poem which describes her 
descent into the world of the dead it 
is said that 


“* After the mistress Ishtar had de- 
scended to the land of No-keturn, 

The bull did not mount the cow, nor 
did the ass leap upon the she-ass, 

The man did not approach the maid 
zz the strect, 

The man lay down to sleep upon his 
own couch, 


While the maid slept by herself.” 


See C. F. Harper, Assyrzan and Baby- 
lonian Literature (New York, 1901), 
pp. 410 sg.; P. Jensen, Assyrisch- 


Babylonische Mythen und Epen (Bee 
lin, 1900), p. 87. 


2 The interpretation here given of 
the four principal personages in the 
book of Esther was suggested by me in 
the second edition of this book (1900). 
It agrees substantially with the one 
which has since been adopted by Pro- 
fessor H. Zimmern (in E. Schrader’s 
Die Ketlinschriften und das Alte Testa- 
ment,® Berlin, 1902, p. 519), and by 
Professor P. Haupt (Purim, Leipsic, 
1906, pp. 21 sg.). 

3 In this connexion it deserves to 
be noted that among the ancient 
Persians marriages are said to have 
been usually celebrated at the vernal 
equinox (Strabo, xv. 3. 17, p. 733)- 


VI SATURNALIA IN WESTERN ASIA 


407 


his divine duties only for a short part of the year. This 
curtailment of his reign on earth was probably introduced 
at the time when the old hereditary divinities or deified 
kings contrived to shift the most painful part of their 
duties to a substitute, whether that substitute was a son or 
a slave or a malefactor. Having to die as a king, it was 
necessary that the substitute should also live as a king for 
a season; but the real monarch would naturally restrict 
within the narrowest limits both of time and of power a 
reign which, so long as it lasted, necessarily encroached 
upon and indeed superseded his own.’ What became of 
the divine king’s female partner, the human goddess who 
shared his bed and transmitted his beneficent energies to 
the rest of nature, we cannot say. So far as I am aware, 
there is little or no evidence that she like him suffered 
death when her primary function was discharged.” The 
nature of maternity suggests an obvious reason for sparing 
her a little longer, till that mysterious law, which links 
together woman’s life with the changing aspects of the 
nightly sky, had been fulfilled by the birth of an infant 
god, who should in his turn, reared perhaps by her tender 
care, grow up to live and die for the world. 


§ 6. Conclusion 


We may now sum up the general results of the enquiry 
which we have pursued in the present chapter. We have 
found evidence that festivals of the type of the Saturnalia, 
characterized by an inversion of social ranks and the sacrifice 
of a man in the character of a god, were at one time held 
all over the ancient world from Italy to Babylon. Such 
festivals seem to date from an early age in the history of 


1 The five days’ duration of the 
mock king’s reign may possibly have 
been an intercalary period introduced, 
as in ancient Egypt and Mexico, for 
the purpose of equalizing a year of 
360 days (twelve months of 30 days 
each) to a solar year reckoned at 365 
days. See above, pp. 339 sgq. 

2 However, the legend that Semi- 
ramis burned herself on a pyre in 
Babylon for grief at the loss of a 


favourite horse (Hyginus, /ad. 243; 
compare Pliny, at. H7s¢. viii. 155) 
may perhaps point to an old custom 
of compelling the human representative 
of the goddess to perish in the flames. 
We have seen (above, p. 371) that one 
of the lovers of Ishtar had the form of 
a horse. Hence the legend recorded 
by Hyginus is a fresh link in the chain 
of evidence which binds Semiramis to 
Ishtar. 


Wide 
prevalence 
of festivals 
like the 
Saturnalia 
in an- 
tiquity. 


Such 
festivals 
seem to 
have been 
held by 
agricultural 
communi- 
ties for the 
good of the 
crops, and 
at them 
the king 
or his 
substitute 
appears 

to have 
personated 
the god of 
fertility, 
and to 
have been 
put to 
death in 
that char- 
acter in 
order to 
ensure that 
the god 
should rise 
from the 
dead with 
renewed 
youth and 
vigour. 


408 SATURNALIA AND KINDRED FESTIVALS  cHap. 


agriculture, when people lived in small communities, each 
presided over by a sacred or divine king, whose primary 
duty was to secure the orderly succession of the seasons, 
the fertility of the earth, and the fecundity both of cattle 
and of women. Associated with him was his wife or other 
female consort, with whom he performed some of the 
necessary ceremonies, and who therefore shared his divine 
character. Originally his term of office appears to have 
been limited to a year, on the conclusion of which he was 
put to death; but in time he contrived by force or craft to 
extend his reign and sometimes to procure a substitute, who 
after a short and more or less nominal tenure of the crown 
was slain in his stead. At first the substitute for the divine 
father was probably the divine son, but afterwards this rule 
was no longer insisted on, and still later the growth of a 
humane feeling demanded that the victim should always be 
a condemned criminal. In this advanced stage of degenera- 
tion it is no wonder if the light of divinity suffered eclipse, 
and many should fail to detect the god in the malefactor. 
Yet the downward career of fallen deity does not stop here ; 
even a criminal comes to be thought too good to personate a 
god on the gallows or in the fire; and then there is nothing 
left but to make up a more or less grotesque effigy, and so 
to hang, burn, or otherwise destroy the god in the person of 
this sorry representative. By this time the original meaning 
of the ceremony may be so completely forgotten that the 
puppet is supposed to represent some historical personage, 
who earned the hatred and contempt of his fellows in his 
life) and whose memory has ever since been held up to 
eternal execration by the annual destruction of his effigy. 
The figures of Haman, of the Carnival, and of Winter or 
Death which are or used to be annually destroyed in spring 
by Jews, Catholics, and the peasants of Central Europe 
respectively, appear to be all lineal descendants of those 
human incarnations of the powers of nature whose life and 
death were deemed essential to the welfare of mankind. But 
of the three the only one which has preserved a clear trace 
of its original meaning is the effigy of Winter or Death. In 
the others the ancient significance of the custom as a magical 
ceremony designed to direct the course of nature has been 


vil CONCLUSION 409 


almost wholly obscured by a thick aftergrowth of legend and 
myth. The cause of this distinction is that, whereas the 
practice of destroying an effigy of Winter or Death has 
been handed down from time immemorial through genera- 
tions of simple peasants, the festivals of Purim and the 
Carnival, as well as their Babylonian and Italian prototypes, 
the Sacaea and the Saturnalia, were for centuries domesti- 
cated in cities, where they were necessarily exposed to those 
thousand transforming and disintegrating currents of specula- 
_ tion and enquiry, of priestcraft and policy, which roll their 
_ turbid waters through the busy haunts of men, but leave 
undefiled the limpid springs of mythic fancy in the country. 

If there is any truth in the analysis of the Saturnalia 
and kindred festivals which I have now brought to a close, 
it seems to point to a remarkable homogeneity of civilization 
throughout Southern Europe and Western Asia in prehistoric 
times. How far such homogeneity of civilization may be 
taken as evidence of homogeneity of race is a question for 
the ethnologist ; it does not concern us here. But without 
discussing it, I may remind the reader that in the far east of 
Asia we have met with temporary kings whose magical 
functions and intimate relation to agriculture stand out in 
the clearest light ;* while India furnishes examples of kings 
who have regularly been obliged to sacrifice themselves at 
the end of a term of years.” All these things appear to 
hang together; all of them may, perhaps, be regarded as 
the shattered remnants of a uniform zone of religion and 
society which at a remote era belted the Old World from 
the Mediterranean to the Pacific. Whether that was so or 
not, I may at least claim to have made it probable that if 
the King of the Wood at Aricia lived and died as an incar- 
nation of a sylvan deity, the functions he thus discharged 
were by no means singular, and that for the nearest parallel 
to them we need not go beyond the bounds of Italy, where 
the divine king Saturn—the god of the sown and sprouting 
seed—was annually slain in the person of a human repre- 
sentative at his ancient festival of the Saturnalia. 

It is possible that such sacrifices of deified men, per- 
formed for the salvation of the world, may have helped to 


1 The Dying God, pp. 148 sqq. 2 The Dying God, pp. 46 sq. 


The 
festivals 
point toa 
remarkable 
homo- 
geneity of 
civilization 
over a 
great part 
of the Old 
World in 
antiquity. 


The 
periodical 
sacrifice of 
deified men 
for the 
sake of 
maintain- 
ing the 
course of 
nature 
perhaps 
helps to 
explain 
traditions 
which 
represent 
the world 
or parts 
of it as 
created 
out of the 
bodies of 
gods. 


410 SATURNALIA AND KINDRED FESTIVALS  cHap. 


beget the notion that the universe or some part of it 
was originally created out of the bodies of gods offered 
up in sacrifice. Certainly it is curious that notions of this 
sort meet us precisely in parts of the world where such 
sacrifices appear to have been regularly accomplished. Thus 
in ancient Mexico, where the sacrifice of human beings in 
the character of gods formed a conspicuous feature of the 
national religion, it is said that in the beginning, when as yet 
the light of day was not, the gods created the sun to illumine 
the earth by voluntarily burning themselves in the fire, leap- 
ing one after the other into the flames of a great furnace.’ 
Again, in the Babylonian Genesis the great god Bel created 
the world by cleaving the female monster Tiamat in twain 
and using the severed halves of her body to form the heaven 
and the earth. Afterwards, perceiving that the earth was 
waste and void, he obligingly ordered one of the gods to 
cut off his, the Creator’s, head, and with the flowing blood 
mixed with clay he kneaded a paste out of which he moulded 
men and animals.’ Similarly in a hymn of the Rig 
Veda we read how the gods created the world out of the 
dismembered body of the great primordial giant Purushu. 
The sky was made out of his head, the earth out of his 
feet, the sun out of his eye, and the moon out of his 
mind; animals and men were also engendered from his 
dripping fat or his limbs, and the great gods Indra and Agni 
sprang from his mouth.’ The crude, nay savage, account of 
creation thus set forth by the poet was retained by the Brah- 


1 B. de Sahagun, HWestotre Générale 
des Choses de la Nouvelle Espagne, 
traduite par D. Jourdanet et R. Simeon 
(Paris, 1880), pp. 478-480. . Compare 
E. Seler, Altmexikanische Studien, ii. 
(Berlin, 1899) p. 117. 

2 Berosus, quoted by Eusebius, 
Chronicorum liber prior, ed. A. Schoene 
(Berlin, 1875), coll. 14-18; zd., in 
Fragmenta Histortcorum Graecorum, 
ed. C. Muller, ii. 497 sg.; P. Jensen, 
Assyriscth - Babylonische Mythen und 
Epen (Berlin, 1900), pp. 2 sgg.; L. 
W. King, Sadbylonian Religion and 
Mythology (London, 1899), pp. 54. 599-3 
M. Jastrow, Zhe Religion of Babylonia 
and Assyria (Boston, U.S.A., 1898), 
pp. 408 sgg.; H. Zimmern, in E. 


Schrader’s Dze Keelinschraften und das 
Alte Testament® (Berlin, 1902), pp. 
488 sgg.; M. J. Lagrange, Atudes sur 
les Religions Sémitiques® (Paris, 1905), 
pp. 366 sgg.; R. W. Rogers, Cumez- 


Jorm Parallels to the Old Testament 


(Oxford, preface dated 1911), pp. 
31 sg., 36. In the Hebrew account 
of the creation (Genesis i. 2) ‘*the deep” 
(pinn ¢zéhom) is a reminiscence of the 


Babylonian mythical monster Tiamat. 


3 Hymns of the Rig Veda, x. 90 
(vol. iv. pp. 289-293 of R. T. H. 
Griffith’s translation, Benares, 1889- 
1892). Compare A. A. Macdonell, 
Vedic Mythology (Strasburg, 1897), pp. 
12 sg. 


VIII CONCLUSION 4II 


man doctors of a later age and refined by them into a subtle 
_ theory of sacrifice in general. According to them the world 


The 
Brahmani- 
cal theory 


was not only created in the beginning by the sacrifice of of the 


_ the creator Prajapati, the Lord of Creatures ; to this day it is 
renewed and preserved solely by a repetition of that mystic 
sacrifice in the daily sacrificial ritual celebrated by the 
Brahmans. Every day the body of the Creator and Saviour 
is broken anew, and every day it is pieced together for the 
| restoration and conservation of a universe which otherwise 
_ must dissolve and be shattered into fragments. Thus is the 
world continually created afresh by the self-sacrifice of the 
_ deity ; and, wonderful to relate, the priest who offers the 
sacrifice identifies himself with the Creator, and so by the 
very act of sacrificing renews the universe and keeps up 
uninterrupted the revolution of time and matter. All things 
depend on his beneficent, nay divine activity, from the 
heaven above to the earth beneath, from the greatest god to 
the meanest worm, from the sun and moon to the humblest 
blade of grass and the minutest particle of dust. Happily 
this grandiose theory of sacrifice as a process essential to the 
salvation of the world does not oblige the priest to imitate 
his glorious prototype by dismembering his own body and 
shedding his blood on the altar; on the contrary a comfort- 
able corollary deduced from it holds out to him the pleasing 
prospect of living for the unspeakable benefit of society to a 
good old age, indeed of stretching out the brief span of 
human existence to a full hundred years." Well is it, not 
only for the priest but for mankind, when with the slow 
progress of civilization and humanity the hard facts of a 
cruel ritual have thus been softened and diluted into the 
nebulous abstractions of a mystical theology. 


1 The Satapatha Bréhmana, trans- Compare Sylvain Lévi, La doctrine du 
lated by Julius Eggeling, Part iv. sacrifice dans les Brahmanas (Paris, 
(Oxford, 1897) pp. xiv.-xxiv. (Zhe 1898), pp. 13 599. 

Sacred Books of the East, vol. xliii.). 


perpetual 
renewal 
of the 
creation in 
the daily 
sacrifice. 


The 
mockery 
of Christ 
compared 
to the 
mockery 
of the 
King of the 
Saturnalia. 


NOTE 


THE CRUCIFIXION OF CHRIST! 


AN eminent scholar has recently pointed out the remarkable re- 
semblance between the treatment of Christ by the Roman soldiers 


at Jerusalem and the treatment of the mock king of the Saturnalia | 


by the Roman soldiers at Durostorum ; and he would explain the 


similarity by supposing that the soldiers ridiculed the claims of © 
Christ to a divine kingdom by arraying him in the familiar garb of | 


old King Saturn, whose quaint person figured so prominently at the 


1 [The following Note formed part 
of the text in the Second Edition of 
The Golden Bough (London, 1900), 
vol. ili. pp. 186-198. The hypothesis 
which it sets forth has not been con- 
firmed by subsequent research, and is 
admittedly in a high degree specula- 
tive and uncertain. Hence I have re- 
moved it from the text but preserved 
it as an appendix on the chance that, 
under a pile of conjectures, it contains 
some grains of truth which may ulti- 
mately contribute to a solution of the 
problem. As my views on this sub- 
ject appear to have been strangely 
misunderstood, I desire to point out 
explicitly that my theory assumes the 
historical reality of Jesus of Nazareth 
as a great religious and moral teacher, 
who founded Christianity and was 
crucified at Jerusalem under the 
governorship of Pontius Pilate. The 
testimony of the Gospels, confirmed by 
the hostile evidence of Tacitus (Azzzals, 
xv. 44) and the younger Pliny (Z7zsz. 
x. 96), appears amply sufficient to 
establish these facts to the satisfaction 
of all unprejudiced enquirers. It is 
only the details of the life and death 


of Christ that remain, and will prob- 
ably always remain, shrouded in the 
mists of uncertainty. The doubts 
which have been cast on the historical 
reality of Jesus are in my judgment 
unworthy of serious attention. Quite 
apart from the positive evidence of 
history and tradition, the origin of a 
great religious and moral reform is in- 
explicable without the personal exist- 
ence of a great reformer. To dissolve 
the founder of Christianity into a myth, 


= 


as some would do, is hardly less 


absurd than it would be to do the 
same for Mohammed, Luther, and 
Calvin. Such dissolving views are for 
the most part the dreams of students 
who know the great world chiefly 
through its pale reflection in books. 
These extravagances of scepticism 


have been well exposed by Pro- 
fessor C. F. Lehmann- Haupt in 
his Jsvael, seine Entwicklung im 


Rahmen der Weiltgeschichte (Tiibingen, 
IQII), pp. 275-285. 
the statement of my theory I have 
added a few notes, which are dis- 
tinguished by being enclosed in square 
brackets. ] 


412 


In reprinting — 


NOTE tute CRUCIFIXION OF CHRIST 413 
winter revels.1_ Even if the theory should prove to be right, we can 
hardly suppose that Christ played the part of the regular Saturn of 
the year, since at the beginning of our era the Saturnalia fell at mid- 
winter, whereas Christ was crucified at the Passover in spring. 
There is, indeed, as I have pointed out, some reason to think that 
when the Roman year began in March the Saturnalia was held in 
spring, and that in remote districts the festival always continued to 
be celebrated at the ancient date. If the Roman garrison of Jeru- 
salem conformed to the old fashion in this respect, it seems not 
quite impossible that their celebration of the Saturnalia may have 
coincided with the Passover ; and that thus Christ, as a condemned 
criminal, may have been given up to them to make sport with as 
the Saturn of the year. But on the other hand it is rather unlikely 
that the officers, as representatives of the State, would have allowed 
their men to hold the festival at any but the official date; even in 
the distant town of Durostorum we saw that the Roman soldiers 
celebrated the Saturnalia in December. Thus if the legionaries at 
Jerusalem really intended to mock Christ by treating him like the 
burlesque king of the Saturnalia, they probably did so only by way 
of a jest which was in more senses than one unseasonable. 

But closely as the passion of Christ resembles the treatment of 
the mock king of the Saturnalia, it resembles still more closely the 
treatment of the mock king of the Sacaea.2. The description of the 
mockery by St. Matthew is the fullest. It runs thus: “Then re- 
leased he Barabbas unto them: and when he had scourged Jesus, 
he delivered him to be crucified. Then the soldiers of the governor 
took Jesus into the common hall, and gathered unto him the whole 
band of soldiers. And they stripped him, and put on him a scarlet 
tobe. And when they had platted a crown of thorns, they put it 
upon his head, and a reed in his right hand: and they bowed the 
knee before him, and mocked him, saying, Hail, King of the Jews! 
And they spit upon him, and took the reed, and smote him on the 


1 P, Wendland, ‘‘Jesus als Satur- 
nalien-K6nig,” Hermes, xxxiii. (1898) 
Pp- 175-179. 

2 The resemblance had struck me 
when I wrote this book originally 
[1889-1890], but as I could not 
definitely explain it I preferred to 
leave it unnoticed. [The first in 
recent years to call attention to the 
resemblance seems to have been Mr. 
W. R. Paton, who further conjectured 
that the crucifixion of Christ between 
two malefactors was not accidental, 
but had a ritual significance ‘‘as 
an expiatory sacrifice to a triple 
god.” See F. C. Conybeare, Zhe 


Apology and Acts of Apollonius and 
other Monuments of Early Christz- 
anity (London, 1894), pp. 257 sggq. ; 
W. R. Paton, ‘Die Kreuzigung 
Jesu,” Zettschrift fiir die neutesta- 
mentliche Wissenschaft, ii. (1901) pp. 
339-341. The grounds for the con- 
jecture are somewhat slender. It is 
true that a Persian martyr, S. Hizti- 
bouzit, is said to have been crucified 
between two malefactors on a hill top, 
opposite the sun (F. C. Conybeare, of. 
cet, p. 270), but the narrator of the 
martyrdom gives no hint of any sacred 
significance attaching to the triple 
crucifixion. ] 


The 
mockery 
of Christ 
compared 
to the 
mockery 
of the 
King of 
the Sacaea. 


At Purim 
the Jews 
may have 
annually 
put to 
death a 
man in the 
character 
of Haman, 
and Christ 
may have 
perished 
in that 
character, 


3ut the 
Passover, 
at which 
Christ was 


414 THE CRUCIFIXION OF CHRIST NOTE 


head. And after that they had mocked him, they took the robe | 
off from him, and put his own raiment on him, and led him away — 
to crucify him.”! Compare with this the treatment of the mock 
king of the Sacaea, as it is described by Dio Chrysostom: ‘ They 
take one of the prisoners condemned to death and seat him upon ~ 
the king’s throne, and give him the king’s raiment, and let him lord 
it and drink and run riot and use the king’s concubines during | 
these days, and no man prevents him from doing just what he likes. 
But afterwards they strip and scourge and crucify him.”? Now it — 
is quite possible that this remarkable resemblance is after all a mere } 
coincidence, and that Christ was executed in the ordinary way as a | 
common malefactor; but on the other hand there are so many i 
scattered hints and indications of something unusual, so many f 
broken lines seemingly converging towards the cross on Calvary, i 
that it is worth while to follow them up and see where they lead us. | 
In attempting to draw these fragmentary data together, to bridge | 
the chasms, and to restore the shattered whole, we must beware of | 
mistaking hypothesis for the facts which it only professes to cement; | 
yet even if our hypothesis should be thought to bear a somewhat — 
undue proportion to the facts, the excess may perhaps be over- i 
looked in consideration of the obscurity and the importance of the © 
enquiry. | 

We have seen reason to think that the Jewish festival of Purim | 
is a continuation, under a changed name, of the Babylonian Sacaea, | 
and that in celebrating it by the destruction of an effigy of Haman | 
the modern Jews have kept up a reminiscence of the ancient — 
custom of crucifying or hanging a man in the character of a god at © 
the festival. Is it not possible that at an earlier time they may, like © 
the Babylonians themselves, have regularly compelled a condemned 
criminal to play the tragic part, and that Christ thus perished in 
the character of Haman? ‘The resemblance between the hanged 
Haman and the crucified Christ struck the early Christians them- 
selves ; and whenever the Jews destroyed an effigy of Haman they — 
were accused by their Christian neighbours of deriding the most 
sacred mystery of the new faith.? It is probable that on this | 
painful subject the Christians were too sensitive ; remembering the 
manner of their Founder’s death it was natural that they should 
wince at any pointed allusion to a cross, a gallows, or a public 
execution, even when the shaft was not aimed at them. An objec- 
tion to supposing that Christ died as the Haman of the year is that 
according to the Gospel narrative the crucifixion occurred at the 


1 Matthew xxvii. 26-31. Mark’s mentioned, the Greek word which 
description (xv. 15-20) is nearly describes the execution (éxpéuacay) 
identical. leaves it uncertain whetier the man 

2 Dio Chrysostom, Ov. iv. vol. i. p. was crucified or hanged. 
76ed. L. Dindorf. As I have already 3 See above, p. 392. a 


NOTE THE CRUCIFIXION. OF CHRIST 415 


Passover, on the fourteenth day of the month Nisan, whereas the 


feast of Purim, at which the hanging of Haman would naturally 


take place, fell exactly a month earlier, namely, on the fourteenth 
day of the month Adar. I have no wish to blink or extenuate the 
serious nature of the difficulty arising from this discrepancy of dates, 
but I would suggest some considerations which may make us 
hesitate to decide that the discrepancy is fatal. In the first place, 
it is possible, though perhaps not probable, that Christian tradition 
shifted the date of the crucifixion by a month in order to make the 


_ great sacrifice of the Lamb of God coincide with that annual sacri- 


fice of the Passover lamb which in the belief of pious hearts had so 
long foreshadowed it and was thenceforth to cease.! Instances of 
gentle pressure brought to bear, for purposes of edification, on 
stubborn facts are perhaps not wholly unknown in the annals of re- 
ligion. But the express testimony of history is never to be lightly 
set aside ; and in the investigation of its problems a solution which 
assumes the veracity and accuracy of the historian is, on an even 
balance of probabilities, always to be preferred to one which im- 
pugns them both. Now in the present case we have seen reason 
to think that the Babylonian New Year festival, of which Purim was 
a continuation, did fall in Nisan at or near the time of the Passover, 
and that when the Jews borrowed the festival they altered the date 
from Nisan to Adar in order to prevent the new feast from clashing 
with the old Passover. A reminiscence of the original date of 
Purim perhaps survives, as I have already pointed out, in the state- 
ment in the book of Esther that Haman caused fur or lots to be 
cast before him from the month of Nisan onward.” It thus seems 
not impossible that occasionally, for some special reason, the Jews 
should have celebrated the feast of Purim, or at least the death of 
Haman, at or about the time of the Passover. But there is another 
possibility which, remote and fanciful as it may appear, deserves at 
least to be mentioned. The mock king of the Saturnalia, whose 
resemblance to the dying Christ was first pointed out by Mr. Wend- 
land, was allowed a period of license of thirty days before he was 
put to death. If we could suppose that in like manner the Jews 
spared the human representative of Haman for one month from 


1 [The extreme improbability in- 
volved in the suggested transference of 
the date of the Crucifixion is rightly 
emphasized by my colleague and friend 
Professor C. F, Lehmann-Haupt in 
some observations and criticisms with 
which he has favoured me. He 
writes: ‘*I regard it as out of the 
question that ‘Christian tradition 
shifted the date of the Crucifixion by a 
month.’ You yourself regard it as 


improbable; but in my opinion it is 
impossible. All that we hear of the 
Passion is only explicable by the Pass- 
over festival and by the circumstance 
that at that time every believing Jew 
had to make a pilgrimage to Jerusalem. 
Without the background of the festival 
all that we know of the Crucifixion 
and of what led up to it is totally unin- 
telligible.’”] 
2 Esther ili. 7. 


crucified, 
fella 
monthafter 
Purim. 


Perhaps 
the annual 
Haman, 
like the 
annual 
Saturn, was 
allowed a 
month’s 
license be- 
fore being 
put to 
death, 


The part 
taken by 
the soldiers 
in the 
mockery 
of Christ. 


The theory 
that Christ 
died, not 
as a male- 
factor, but 
in the 
character 
of Haman 
helps to 
explain 
both 
Pilate’s 
reluctance 
to put him 


416 THE CRUCIFIXION OF CHRIST NOTE | 


Purim, the date of his execution would fall exactly on the Passover. 
Which, if any, of these conjectural solutions of the difficulty is the 
true one, I will not undertake to say. Iam fully conscious of the 
doubt and uncertainty that hang round the whole subject; and if 
in this and what follows I throw out some hints and suggestions, it 
is more in the hope of stimulating and directing further enquiry 
than with any expectation of reaching definite conclusions. 

It may be objected that the mockery of Christ was done, not by 
the Jews, but by the Roman soldiers, who knew and cared nothing 
about Haman ; how then can we suppose that the purple or scarlet 
robe, the sceptre of reed, and the crown of thorns, which the 
soldiers thrust upon Christ, were the regular insignia of the Haman 
of the year? ‘To this we may reply, in the first place, that even if 
the legions stationed in Syria were not recruited in the country, 
they may have contracted some of the native superstitions and have 
fallen in with the local customs. This is not an idle conjecture. 
We know that the third legion during its stay in Syria learned the 
Syrian custom of saluting the rising sun, and that this formal salute, 
performed by the whole regiment as one man at a critical moment 
of the great battle of Bedriacum, actually helped to turn the scale 
when the fortune of empire hung trembling in the balance. 
But it is not necessary to suppose that the garrison of Jerusalem 
really shared the beliefs and prejudices of the mob whom they 
overawed ; soldiers everywhere are ready to go with a crowd bent 
on sport, without asking any curious questions as to the history or 
quality of the entertainment, and we should probably do the 
humanity of Roman soldiers too much honour if we imagined that 
they would be deterred by any qualm of conscience from joining in 
the pastime, which is still so popular, of baiting a Jew to death. 
But in the second place it should be observed that, according to 
one of the Evangelists, it was not the soldiers of Pilate who mocked 
Jesus, but the soldiers of Herod,? and we may fairly assume that 
Herod’s guards were Jews. 

The hypothesis that the crucifixion with all its cruel mockery 
was not a punishment specially devised for Christ, but was merely 
the fate that annually befell the malefactor who played Haman, 
appears to go some way towards relieving the Gospel narrative of 
certain difficulties which otherwise beset it. If, as we read in the 
Gospels, Pilate was really anxious to save the innocent man whose 
fine bearing seems to have struck him, what was to hinder him 
from doing so? He had the power of life and death ; why should 
he not have exercised it on the side of mercy, if his own 
judgment inclined that way? His reluctant acquiescence in the 
importunate demand of the rabble becomes easier to understand 


1 Tacitus, W7st. iii. 24 sg., compared with ii. 74. 
2 Luke xxiii. 11. 


NOTE PHE CRUCIFIXION OF CHRIST AI? 


if we assume that custom obliged him annually at this season to to death, 
give up to them a prisoner on whom they might play their cruel pre it also 
pranks. On this assumption Pilate had no power to prevent the chee 
sacrifice ; the most he could do was to choose the victim. able super- 
Again, consider the remarkable statement of the Evangelists scription 
that Pilate set up over the cross a superscription stating that the cane 
man who hung on it was king of the Jews.! Is it likely that in the 
reign of Tiberius a Roman governor, with the fear of the jealous 
and suspicious old emperor before his eyes, would have ventured, 
even in mockery, to blazon forth a seditious claim of this sort unless 
it were the regular formula employed on such occasions, recognized 
by custom, and therefore not liable to be misconstrued into treason 
by the malignity of informers and the fears of a tyrant ? 
But if the tragedy of the ill-fated aspirant after royal honours 
was annually enacted at Jerusalem by a prisoner who perished on 
the cross, it becomes probable that the part of his successful rival 
was also played by another actor who paraded in the same kingly 
trappings but did not share the same fate. If Jesus was the Haman 
of the year, where was the Mordecai? Perhaps we may find him 
in Barabbas. 
We are told by the Evangelists that at the feast which witnessed The 
the crucifixion of Christ it was the custom for the Roman governor Pi" a 
to release one prisoner, whomsoever the people desired, and that jn the 
Pilate, convinced of the innocence of Jesus, attempted to persuade annual 
the multitude to choose him as the man who should go free. But, arene an 
hounded on by the priests and elders who had marked out Jesus Chet died 
for destruction, the rabble would not hear of this, and clamoured as Haman 
for the blood of Jesus, while they demanded the release of a certain i ee 
miscreant, by name Barabbas, who lay in gaol for murder and sige oy 
sedition. Accordingly Pilate had to give way: Christ was crucified Barabbas. 
and Barabbas set at liberty.2 Now what, we may ask, was the 
reason for setting free a prisoner at this festival? In the absence 
of positive information, we may conjecture that the gaol-bird whose 
cage was thrown open at this time had to purchase his freedom by 
performing some service from which decent people would shrink. 
Such a service may very well have been that of going about the 
streets, rigged out in tawdry splendour with a tinsel crown on his 
head and a sham sceptre in his hand, preceded and followed by all 
the tag-rag and bobtail of the town hooting, jeering, and breaking 
coarse jests at his expense, while some pretended to salaam his 
mock majesty, and others belaboured the donkey on which he rode. 
It was in this fashion, probably, that in Persia the beardless and 
one-eyed man made his undignified progress through the town, to 


1 Matthew xxvii. 37; Mark xv. 26; 6-153; Luke xxiii. 16-25; John xviii. 
Luke xxiii. 38 ; John xix. 19. 38-40. 
2 Matthew xxvii. 15-26; Mark xv. 
Pe VI 2E 


The 

mock King 
Carabas 

in Egypt. 


418 THE CRUCIFIXION OF CHRIST NOTE 


the delight of ragamuffins and the terror of shopkeepers, whose 
goods he unceremoniously confiscated if they did not hasten to lay 
their peace-offerings at his feet. So, perhaps, the ruffian Barabbas, 
when his irons were knocked off and the prison door had grated on 
its hinges to let him forth, tasted the first sweets of liberty in this 
public manner, even if he was not suffered, like his one-eyed 
brother, to make raids with impunity on the stalls of the merchants 
and the tables of the money-changers. A curious confirmation of 
this conjecture is supplied by a passage in the writings of Philo the 
Jew, who lived at Alexandria in the time of Christ. He tells us 
that when Agrippa, the grandson of Herod, had received the crown 
of Judaea from Caligula at Rome, the new king passed through 
Alexandria on his way to his own country. The disorderly popu- 
lace of that great city, animated by a hearty dislike of his nation, 
seized the opportunity of venting their spite by publicly defaming 
and ridiculing the Jewish monarch. Among other things they laid 
hold of a certain harmless lunatic named Carabas, who used to 
roam the streets stark naked, the butt and laughing-stock of urchins 
and idlers. This poor wretch they set up in a public place, clapped 
a paper crown on his head, thrust a broken reed into his hand by 
way of a sceptre, and having huddled a mat instead of a royal robe 
about his naked body, and surrounded him with a guard of bludgeon- 
men, they did obeisance to him as to a king and made a show of 
taking his opinion on questions of law and policy. To point the 
jest unmistakably at the Syrian king Agrippa, the bystanders raised 
cries of “ Marin! Marin!” which they understood to be the Syrian 
word for ‘“lord.”! This mockery of the Jewish king closely 
resembles the mockery of Christ; and the joke, such as it was, 
would receive a keener edge if we could suppose that the riff-raff 
of Alexandria were familiar with the Jewish practice of setting up 
a sham king on certain occasions, and that they meant by implica- 
tion to ridicule the real King Agrippa by comparing him to his 
holiday counterfeit. May we go a step further and conjecture that 
one at least of the titles of the mock king of the Jews was regularly 


Barabbas? The poor imbecile who masqueraded in a paper crown ~ 


at Alexandria was probably a Jew, otherwise the jest would have 
lost much of its point; and his name, according to the Greek 
manuscripts of Philo, was Carabas. But Carabas is meaningless in 


Hebrew, whereas Barabbas is a 


1 Philo Judaeus, Adversus Flaccum, 
vol. ii. pp. 520-523 ed. Th. Mangey 
(London, 1742). The first to call 
attention to this passage was Mr. 
P. Wendland (‘‘Jesus als Satur- 
nalien-Konig,” Hermes, xxxiii. (1898) 
Pps 275 87-)s i Mianemas secs Our, 
Lord,” was the title of a Philistine 


regularly formed Hebrew word 


deity worshipped at Gaza and else- 
where. See C. P. Tiele, Geschichte 
der Religion im Altertum (Gotha, 
1896-1903), i. 258. Compare Hebrew 
and English Lexicon, edited by F. 
Brown, S. R. Driver, and Ch. A. 
Briggs (Oxford, 1906), p. I10I.] 


NOTE THE CRUCIFIXION OF CHRIST 419 


meaning “Son of the Father.” The palaeographic difference 
between the two forms is slight, and perhaps we shall hardly be 
deemed very rash if we conjecture that in the passage in question 
Philo himself wrote Barabbas, which a Greek copyist, ignorant of 
Hebrew, afterwards corrupted into Carabas. If this were granted, 
we should still have to assume that both Philo and the authors of 
the Gospels fell into the mistake of treating as the name of an 
individual what in fact was a title of office. 

Thus the hypothesis which, with great diffidence, I would put 
forward for consideration is this. It was customary, we may suppose, 
with the Jews at Purim, or perhaps occasionally at Passover, to 
employ two prisoners to act the parts respectively of Haman and 
Mordecai in the passion-play which formed a central feature of the 
festival, Both men paraded for a short time in the insignia of 
royalty, but their fates were different ; for while at the end of the 
performance the one who played Haman was hanged or crucified, 
the one who personated Mordecai and bore in popular parlance the 
title of Barabbas was allowed to go free. Pilate, perceiving the 
trumpery nature of the charges brought against Jesus, tried to 
persuade the Jews to let him play the part of Barabbas, which 
would have saved his life ; but the merciful attempt failed and Jesus 
perished on the cross in the character of Haman. The description 
of his last triumphal ride into Jerusalem reads almost like an echo 
of that brilliant progress through the streets of Susa which Haman 
aspired to and Mordecai accomplished; and the account of the 
raid which he immediately afterwards made upon the stalls of the 
hucksters and money-changers in the temple, may raise a question 
whether we have not here a trace of those arbitrary rights over 
property which it has been customary on such occasions to accord 
to the temporary king.? 

If it be asked why one of these temporary kings should bear 
the remarkable title of Barabbas or “Son of the Father,” I can 
only surmise that the title may perhaps be a relic of the time when 
the real king, the deified man, used to redeem his own life by 
deputing his son to reign for a short time and to die in his stead. 
We have seen that the custom of sacrificing the son for the father 
was common, if not universal, among Semitic peoples; and if we 
are right in our interpretation of the Passover, that festival—the 
traditional date of the crucifixion—was the very season when the 
dreadful sacrifice of the first-born was consummated.2 Hence 
Barabbas or the “Son of the Father” would be a natural enough 
title for the man or child who reigned and died as a substitute for 
his royal sire. Even in later times, when the father provided a less 


"1 Matthew xxi. 1-13; Mark xi. temporary kings, see 7he Dying God, 
P07; WLuke xix. 28-46 5 John xii. pp. 56 s5g., 148 sgq.] 
12-15. [As to the license accorded to 2 [The Dying God, pp. 166 sq. | 


Hypothesis 
that every 
spring at 
Purim or 
Passover 
the Jews 
paraded 
two 
prisoners 
in the 
characters 
of Haman 
and Mor- 
decai, of 
whom one 
was put to 
death and 
the other 
released. 


Barabbas 
(‘‘Son 
of the 
Father ’’) 
may have 
been the 
regular 
title of the 
prisoner 
who was 
released 
in the 
character 
of Mor- 
decai. 


420 THE CROGIHAXION OF ICERIST NOTE — 


precious substitute than his own offspring, it would be quite in 
accordance with the formal conservatism of religion that the old 
title should be retained after it had ceased to be appropriate ; 
indeed the efficacy of the sacrifice might be thought to require and 
justify the pious fiction that the substitute was the very son of that 
divine father who should have died, but who preferred to live, for 
the good of his people. If in the time of Christ, as I have con- 
jectured, the title of Barabbas or Son of the Father was bestowed 
on the. Mordecai, the mock king who lived, rather than on the 
Haman, the mock king who died at the festival, this distinction 
can hardly have been original; for at first, we may suppose, the 
same man served in both capacities at different times, as the 
Mordecai of one year and the Haman of the next. The two 
characters, as I have attempted to shew, are probably nothing but 


- two different aspects of the same deity considered at one time as 


The theory 
that Christ 
was put 

to death, 
not asa 
criminal, 
but as the 
annual 
representa- 
tive of a 
god, whose 
counter- 
parts were 


dead and at another as risen; hence the human being who per- 
sonated the risen god would in due time, after he had enjoyed his 
divine honours for a season, act the dead god by dying in good 
earnest in his own person ; for it would be unreasonable to expect 
of the ordinary man-god that he should play the two parts in the 
reverse order by dying first and coming to life afterwards. In both 
parts the substitute would still be, whether in sober fact or in pious 
fiction, the Barabbas or Son of that divine Father who generously 
gave his own son to die for the world. 

To conclude this speculation, into which I have perhaps been 
led by the interest and importance of the subject somewhat deeper 
than the evidence warrants, I venture to urge in its favour that it 
seems to shed fresh light on some of the causes which contributed 
to the remarkably rapid diffusion of Christianity in Asia Minor. 
We know from a famous letter of the younger Pliny addressed to 
the Emperor Trajan in the year 112 A.D, that by the beginning of 
our era, less than a hundred years after the Founder’s death, 
Christianity had made such strides in Bithynia and Pontus that not 
only cities but villages and rural districts were affected by it, and 


1 (In favour of the theory in the text, 
which supposes that in the tragic drama 
of the crucifixion Jesus and Barabbas 
played parts which were the comple- 
ments, if not the duplicates, of each 
other, it might, as M. Salomon Reinach 
has pointed out, be alleged that in the 
Armenian and old Syriac versions of 
Matthew xxvii. 16 and 17, as well asin 
some Greek cursive manuscripts, the 
name of the prisoner whom Pilate 
proposed to release is given as Jesus 
Barabbas, a reading which was also 
known to Origen and was not abso- 


lutely rejected by him. See Axcyclo-— 
paedia Biblica (London, 1899-1903), 
s.v, “* Barabbas,” vol. a. colusaayae 
Evangelion da- Mepharreshe, edited 
by F. C. Burkitt (Cambridge, 1904), 
i, 165, 11. 277 sg. ‘In the amen 
passage Prof. Burkitt argues that 
Jesus Barabbas was probably the 
original reading in the Greek text, 
though the name Jesus is omitted in 
nearly all our existing manuscripts. 
Compare S. Reinach, ‘‘ Le roi sup- 
plicié,” Czltes, ALythes, et Religions, 
i, (Paris, 1905) pp. 339 59-] 


NOTE TE. CRUCIFIXION OF CALRIST 


421 


that multitudes of both sexes and of every age and every rank 
professed its tenets ; indeed things had gone so far that the temples 
were almost deserted, the sacred rites of the public religion dis- 
continued, and hardly a purchaser could be found for the sacrificia 
victims.t It is obvious, therefore, that the new faith had elements 
in it which appealed powerfully to the Asiatic mind. What 
these elements were, the present investigation has. perhaps to 
some extent disclosed. We have seen that the conception of the 
dying and risen god was no new one in these regions. All over 
Western Asia from time immemorial the mournful death and happy 
resurrection of a divine being appear to have been annually 
celebrated with alternate rites of bitter lamentation and exultant 
joy; and through the veil which mythic fancy has woven round 
this tragic figure we can still detect the features of those great 
yearly changes in earth and sky which, under all distinctions of race 
and religion, must always touch the natural human heart with 
alternate emotions of gladness and regret, because they exhibit on 
the vastest scale open to our observation the mysterious struggle 
between life and death. But man has not always been willing to 
watch passively this momentous conflict; he has felt that he has 
too great a stake in its issue to stand by with folded hands while it 
is being fought out ; he has taken sides against the forces of death 
and decay—has flung into the trembling scale all the weight of his 
puny person, and has exulted in his fancied strength when the 
great balance has slowly inclined towards the side of life, little 
knowing that for all his strenuous efforts he can as little stir that 
balance by a hair’s-breadth as can the primrose on a mossy bank in 
spring or the dead leaf blown by the chilly breath of autumn. 
Nowhere do these efforts, vain and pitiful, yet pathetic, appear to 
have been made more persistently and systematically than in 


1 Pliny, Zfzst. x. 96. The province oaths at this shrine. Inthe same dis- 


which Pliny governed was known 
officially as Bithynia and Pontus, and 
extended from the river Rhyndacos on 
the west to beyond Aniisus on the east. 
See Professor [Sir] W. M. Ramsay, 
The Church in the Roman Empire 
(London, 1893), p. 224. Professor 
Ramsay is of opinion ‘‘that the de- 
scription of the great power acquired 
by the new religion in the province 
applies to Eastern Pontus at least.” 
The chief religious centre of this dis- 
trict appears to have been the great 
sanctuary of Anaitis or Semiramis at 
Zela, to which I have already had 
occasion to call the reader’s attention. 
Strabo tells us (xii. 3. 37) that all the 
people of Pontus took their most solemn 


trict there was another very popular 
sanctuary of a similar type at Co- 
mana, where the worship of a native 
goddess called Ma was carried on bya 
host of sacred harlots and by a high 
priest, who wore a diadem and was 
second only to the king in rank. At 
the festivals of the goddess crowds of 
men and women flocked into Comana 
from all the region round about, from 
the country as well as from the cities. 
The luxury and debauchery of this holy 
town suggest to Strabo a comparison 
with the famous or rather infamous 
Corinth. See Strabo, xii. 3. 32 and 36, 
compared with xii. 2. 3. Such were 
some of the hot-beds in which the 
seeds of Christianity first struck root. 


well known 
all over 
Western 
Asia, may 
help to 
explain 
his early 
deification 
and the 
rapid 
spread of 
his wor- 
ship. 


422 THE CRUCIFIXION OF CHRIST NOTE 


Western Asia. In name they varied from place to place, but in 
substance they were all alike. A man, whom the fond imagina- 
tion of his worshippers invested with the attributes of a god, gave 
his life for the life of the world; after infusing from his own body 
a fresh current of vital energy into the stagnant veins of nature, he 
was cut off from among the living before his failing strength should 
initiate a universal decay, and his place was taken by another who 
played, like all his predecessors, the ever-recurring drama of the 
divine resurrection and death. Such a drama, if our interpretation 
of it is right, was the original story of Esther and Mordecai or, to 
give them their older names, of Ishtar and Marduk. It was played 
in Babylonia, and from Babylonia the returning captives brought it 
to Judaea, where it was acted, rather as an historical than a 
mythical piece, by players who, having to die in grim earnest on a 
cross or gallows, were naturally drawn rather from the gaol than 
the green-room. A chain of causes which, because we cannot 
follow them, might in the loose language of daily life be called an 
accident, determined that the part of the dying god in this annual 
play should be thrust upon Jesus of Nazareth, whom the enemies 
he had made in high places by his outspoken strictures were 
resolved to put out of the way. ‘They succeeded in ridding them- 
selves of the popular and troublesome preacher; but the very step 
by which they fancied they had simultaneously stamped out his 
revolutionary doctrines contributed more than anything else they 
could have done to scatter them broadcast not only over Judaea 
but over Asia; for it impressed upon what had been hitherto 
mainly an ethical mission the character of a divine revelation 
culminating in the passion and death of the incarnate Son of a 
heavenly Father. In this form the story of the life and death of 
Jesus exerted an influence which it could never have had if the 
great teacher had died, as is commonly supposed, the death of a 
vulgar malefactor. It shed round the cross on Calvary a halo of 
divinity which multitudes saw and worshipped afar off; the blow 
struck on Golgotha set a thousand expectant strings vibrating in 
unison wherever men had heard the old, old story of the dying and 
risen god. Every year, as another spring bloomed and another . 
autumn faded across the earth, the field had been ploughed and 
sown and borne fruit of a kind till it received that seed which was 
destined to spring up and overshadow the world. In the great 
army of martyrs who in many ages and in many lands, not in Asia 
only, have died a cruel death in the character of gods, the devout 
Christian will doubtless discern types and forerunners of the coming 
Saviour—stars that heralded in the morning sky the advent of the 
Sun of Righteousness—earthen vessels wherein it pleased the 
divine wisdom to set before hungering souls the bread of heaven. 
The sceptic, on the other hand, with equal confidence, will reduce 


NOTE LHE CRUCIFIXION OF CHRIST 423 


Jesus of Nazareth to the level of a multitude of other victims of a 
barbarous superstition, and will see in him no more than a moral 
teacher, whom the fortunate accident of his execution invested with 
the crown, not merely of a martyr, but of a god. The divergence 
between these views is wide and deep. Which of them is the truer 
and will in the end prevail? Time will decide the question of 
prevalence, if not of truth. Yet we would fain believe that in this 
and in all things the old maxim will hold good—Magua est veritas 
et praevalebit. 


INDEX 


Abbot of Folly in France, 334 

of Unreason in Scotland, 331 

Abdera, human scapegoats at, 254 

Abeghian, Manuk, quoted, 107 sg. 

Abjuration, form of, imposed on Jewish 
converts, 393 

Abonsam, an evil spirit on the Gold 
Coast, 132 

Abrahams, Israel, 393 2.2 

Abruzzi, Epiphany in the, 167 7.2 

Absalom, his intercourse with his father’s 
concubines, 368 

Absrot, village of Bohemia, 161 

Abstinence as a charm to promote the 
growth of the seed, 347 sgg. 

Abyssinian festival of Mascal or the 
Cross, 133 5g. 

Accusations of ritual murders brought 
against the Jews, 394 sqq. 

Acilisena, in Armenia, the worship of 
Anaitis at, 369 7.1 

Acosta, J. de, quoted, 275 sg., 277 

Adaklu, Mount, in West Africa, 135 sg., 
206 sg. 

Adam and Eve, 259 2.3 

Adar, a Jewish month, 361, 394, 397, 
398, 415 

Adonis at Alexandria, 390 ; annual death 
and resurrection of, 398 ; his marriage 
with Ishtar (Aphrodite), 4o1. See also 
Tammuz 

and Aphrodite, 386 

Aegisthus and Agamemnon, 19 

Aesculapius at Epidaurus, 47 

Africa, Northern, cairns in, 21 ; popular 
cure for toothache in, 62; South, 
dread of demons in, 77 sg. ; tribes of, 
their expulsion of demons, 110 sg.; 
West, demons in, 74 sgq. 

Agamemnon and Aegisthus, 19 

Agathias on Sandes, 389 

Agni, creation of the great god, 410 

Agnus castus, used in ceremony of beat- 
ing, 252, 257 

Agricultural year, expulsions of demons 
timed to coincide with seasons of the, 225 


425 


Agrippa, King of Judaea, his mockery at 
Alexandria, 418 

Ague, popular cures for, 56, 57 sg.; 
Suffolk cure for, 68 

Ahasuerus, King, 397, 401; the Hebrew 
equivalent of Xerxes, 360 

Ait Sadden, the, of Morocco, 182 

Warain, a Berber tribe, 178 

Aitan, a goddess, 173 

Akamba, the, of British East Africa, 
riddles among the, 122 7, 

Akikuyu of East Africa, 32 

Alaska, the Esquimaux of, 124 

Albania, expulsion of Kore on Easter 
Eve in, 157 

Albanian custom of beating men and 
beasts in March, 266 

Albanians of the Caucasus, their use of 
human scapegoats, 218 

Albirini, Arab historian, 393 

Alengon, the Boy Bishop at, 337 7.1 

Aleutian Islands, 3, 16 

Alexandria, Adonis at, 390; mockery of 
King Agrippa at, 418 

Alexandrian calendar, 395 2.} 

Alfoors of Central Celebes, riddles among 
the, 122 2. 

of Halmahera, their expulsion of 
the devil, 112 

Algeria, 31; popular cure in, 60 

All Souls’ College, Oxford, the Boy 
Bishop at, 337 

Allallu bird beloved by Ishtar, 371 

Allhallow Even, 332 

Almora, in Kumaon, 197 

Altars, bloodless, 307 

Ambarvalia, the, 359 

Amboyna, belief in spirits in, 85; disease- 
transference in, 187 

Ameretat, a Persian archangel, 373 7.1 

America, Indian tribes of North-Western, 
their masked dances, 375 sgq. 

Amoor, Gilyaks of the, 1o1 

Amshaspands, Persian archangels, 373 
ni 

Amulets against demons, 95 


426 


Anacan, a month of the Gallic calendar, 
343 

Anadates, at Zela, 373 2.1 

Anaitis, a Persian goddess, 355: 368, 
369, 370, 389, 402 7.1, 421 7. 

Ancestral spirits, propitiation of, 86 

Ancona, sarcophagus of St. Dasius at, 310 

Andalusia, 173 

Anderson, J. D., 176 2.3 

Anderson, Miss, of Barskimming, 169 7.? 

Andree-Eysn, Mrs., quoted, 245 sg. 

Animals, transference of evil to, 31 sgq. ; 
as scapegoats, 31 sgg., 190 sgg., 208 
sgq., 216 sg.; guardian spirits of, 98 ; 
prayed to, 236; dances taught by, 
237; imitated in dances, 376, 377, 
381, 382 

Aninga, aquatic plant in Brazil, 264 

Annam, 33; demon of cholera sent away 
on a raft from, 190; explanation of 
human mortality in, 303 

Anthesteria, Athenian festival of the 
dead, 152 sg. 

Anthesterion, an Athenian month, 352 

Antibes, Holy Innocents’ Day at, 336 sg. 

Antinmas, 167 

Antiquity, human scapegoats in classical, 
229 sqgq. 

Antoninus, Marcus, plague in his reign, 
64 

Ants, jealousy transferred to, 33; sting- 
ing people with, 263 

Anu, Babylonian god, visit of Ishtar to, 
399 2.1 

Apachitas, heaps of stones, 9 

Aphrodite and Adonis, 386 

Aphrodite, the Oriental, 369 z.} 

Apis, sacred Egyptian bull, 217 

Apollo, temple of, at the Lover’s Leap, 
254 

and Artemis, cake with twelve 
knobs offered to, 351 7.3 

April, Siamese festival of the dead in, 
150 

Arab cure for melancholy, 4 

Arabia, 33 

Arabs, their custom as to widows, 35; 
their custom in regard to murder, 63 ; 
beat camels to deliver them from jinn, 
260; of Morocco, their custom at the 
Great Feast, 265 

Aracan,sit2i 7,7 
crops in, 236 

Araucanians, the, of South America, 12 

Arawaks of British Guiana, their explana- 
tion of human mortality, 302 sg. 

Arcadian custom of beating Pan’s image, 
256 

Arch to shut out plague, 5; creeping 
through, as a cure, 55 

Arches made over paths at expulsion of 
demons, I13, 120 sq. 


dances for the 


INDEX 


Arctic regions, ceremonies at the re- 
appearance of the sun in the, 124 sq., 
125 2.1 

Ardennes, the King of the Bean in the, 


314; the Eve of Epiphany in the, 
317 
Argentina, 9 


Argus, the murder of, 24 

Aricia, 305; the priest of, 273; King of 
the Wood at, 409 

Arician grove, the, 274, 305 

priesthood, 305 

Aries, the constellation, 
361 2.1, 403 

Armenia, the worship of Anaitis in, 369 
ta 

Armenians, their belief in demons, 107 sg. 

Arrows, invisible, of demons, tor, 126 

Artaxerxes II., his promotion of the 
worship of Anaitis, 370 

Artemisia laciniata, garlands of, 284 

Aru Archipelago, 121 2. 

Arval Brothers, the college of the, at 
Rome, 230, 232, 238 

Aryan custom of counting by nights 
instead of days, 326 2.2 

languages, names for moon and 

month in, 325 

peoples, their correction of the 
lunar year, 342 

Aryans of the Vedic age, 324; 
calendar, 325, 342 

Ascalon, Derceto at, 370 .1 

Ascension Day, cures on Eve of, 54; 
annual expulsion of the devil on, 
214 sg. ; ceremony at Rouen on, 215 
sg. ; bells rung to make flax grow on, 
247 Sq. 

Ash-tree in popular cure, 57 

Ashantee, annual period of license in, 
226 2.4 

Ashtaroth, 366 

Ashurbanapal and Sardanapalus, 387 sg. 

Asia, Saturnalia in Western, 354 5gq. 

Asia Minor, use of human scapegoats by 
the Greeks of, 255 

Asongtata, an annual ceremony, 208 

Aspen in popular cure, 57 

Ass in cure for scorpion’s bite, 49 sg. ; 
introduced into church at Festival of 
Fools, 335 sg.; triumphal ride of a 
buffoon on an, 402 sg. 

Assam, the Kacharis of, g3; the Lushais 
of, 94; the Khasis of, 173; the Nagas 
of, 177; the Garos of, 208 sg. 

Assembly of the gods at the New Year in 
Babylon, 356 

Assimilation of human victims to trees, 
257, 259 7.° 

Assyria, Ashurbanapal, king of, 387 sg. 

Assyrian monarchs, conquerors of Baby- 
lonia, 356 


the sun in, 


their 


INDEX 


Assyrians, the ancient, their belief in 
demons, 102 

Astarte or Ishtar, a great Babylonian 
goddess, 365. See a/so Ishtar 

and Semiramis, 369 sgqg. 

Aston, W. G., quoted, 213 2.1 

Aswang, an evil spirit, exorcism of, 260 

Athenians, their use of human scapegoats, 
253 sg.; their mode of reckoning a 
day, 326 .”; their religious dramas, 
384 

Athens, Cronus and the Cronia at, 351 sg. 

Atkhans, the, of Aleutian Islands, 3 

Atlas, Berbers of the Great, 178 

Atlatatonan, Mexican goddess of lepers, 
292; woman annually sacrificed in the 
character of, 292 

Atonement, the Jewish Day of, 210 

Attis and Cybele, 386 

Aubrey, John, on sin-eating, 43 sg. 

Aucas, the, of South America, 12 

Australia, Central, 2 

, demons in, 74; annual expulsion 
of ghosts in, 123 sg. 

Austria, cure of warts in, 48 

Autumn, ceremony of the Esquimaux in 
late, 125 

Autun, the Festival of Fools at, 335 

Avestad in Sweden, 20 

Axim, on the Gold Coast, 131 

Aymara Indians, their remedy for plague, 
193 

Azazel, 210 2.4 

Aztecs, their custom of sacrificing human 
representatives of gods, 275; their 
five supplementary days, 339 

Azur, the month of March, 403 


Baal, human sacrifices to, 353, 354 

Babalawo, priest, 212 

Babar Archipelago, 8 ; sickness expelled 
in a boat from the, 187 

Baboons sent by evil spirits, 110 sg. 

Baby, effigy of, used to fertilize women, 
245, 249 

Babylon, festival of the Sacaea at, 354 
59. 

Babylonia, belief in demons in ancient, 
102 sg. ; conquered by Assyria, 356 ; 
the feast of Purim in, 393 

Babylonian calendar, 398 7.2 

Bacchanalia, Purim a Jewish, 363 

Badagas, the, of the Neilgherry Hills, 
36 

Badi, performer at a ceremony, 197 

Baffin Land, the Esquimaux of, 125 

Baganda, the, of Central Africa, 4, 7, 17 
5g., 27, 32; human scapegoats among 
the, 42 

Bahima, the, of the Uganda Protect- 
orate, 6, 32 

Baiga, aboriginal priest, 27 


427 


Bali, belief in demons in, 86; periodical 
expulsion of demons in, 140 

Ball, games of, played as a magical cere- 
mony, 179 sg.; in Normandy, 183 sg. 

Balolo, a sea-slug, 141 

Bamboo-rat sacrificed for riddance of 
evils, 208 sq. 

Bananas, mode of fertilizing, 264; the 
cause of human mortality, 303 

Bangkok, 150 

Banishment of evil spirits, 86 

Banks’ Islands, 9 

Banks’ Islanders, their story of the origin 
of death, 304 

Banmanas of Senegambia, their custom 
at the death of an infant, 261 sg. 

Banquets in honour of the spirits of 
disease, 119 

Bantu tribes, 77 

Banyoro, the, 42, 194 

Barabbas and Christ, 417 sgq. 

Baraka, blessed influence, 265 

Barat, a ceremony performed in Kumaon, 
196 

Barito, river in Borneo, 87 

Baron, S., quoted, 148 

Barwan, river, 123 

Bassa tribe, of the Cameroons, 120 

Bassus, Roman officer, 309 

Basutos, the, 30 2.” 

Batchelor, Rev. J., 261 

Baton of Sinope, 350 

Battas or Bataks of Sumatra, 34; their 
belief in demons, 87 sg. ; their use of 
human scapegoats, 213 

Battle, annual, among boys in Tumleo, 
143 

Bavaria, mode of reckoning the Twelve 
Days in, 327 

, Rhenish, 56 

Bavarian cure for fever, 49 

Bawenda, the, 30 7.2 

Bean, the King of the, 313 sgg.; the 
Queen of the, 313, 315 

clan, the, 27 

Beans thrown about the house at the 
expulsion of demons, 143 sg. ; thrown 
about the house at the expulsion of 
ghosts, 155 

‘« Beardless One, the Ride of the,” 402 
Sq. 

eae as a mode of purification, 262 

human scapegoats, 196, 252, 255, 

256 sg., 272 Sq. 

people as a mode of conveying 

good qualities, 262 sgg.; with skins 

of sacrificial victims, 265; with green 

boughs, 270 sgq. 

persons, animals, or things to 
deliver them from demons and ghosts, 
259 5979- 

Beating the air to drive away demons or 


428 


ghosts, 109; EXT, L15, £22, 131, T52; 
156, 234 

Beauce and Perche, in France, 57, 62 

Beauvais, the Festival of Fools at, 335 sg. 

‘Bechuana king, cure of, 31 sg. 

Bedriacum, the battle of, 416 

Befana at Rome and elsewhere, 167 

Behar, 37 2.4 

Bekes, in Hungary, mode of fertilizing 
women in, 264 

Bel, a Babylonian deity, 389 

Belethus, J., 270 2. 

Belgium, the King of the Bean in, 313 

Bella Coola Indians of N.W. America, 
their masked dances, 376 z.2 

Bells on animal used as scapegoat, 37; 
rung to expel demons, 117; rung asa 
protection against witches, 157, 158, 
I59, 161, 165, 166; used in the ex- 
pulsion of evils, 196, 200; used at 
the expulsion of demons, 214, 246 sg., 
251; worn by dancers, 242, 243, 246 
Sqq., 250 sg.; rung to make grass 
and flax grow, 247 sg. ; golden, worn 
by human representatives of gods in 
Mexico, 278, 280, 284 

Benin, time of the ‘‘grand devils” in, 
I3I sg. 

Bergell in the Grisons, 247 

Berkhampstead, cure for ague in, 57 sg. 

Berosus, Babylonian historian, 355, 358, 
359 

Besisi of the Malay Peninsula, their 
carnival at rice-harvest, 226 7.1 

Bethlehem, the star of, 330 

Bevan, Professor A. A., 367 2.2 

Beverley minster, the Boy Bishop at, 337 

Bhars of India, 190 

Bhootan, cairns in, 26 

Bhotiyas of Juhar, their use of a scape- 
goat, 209 

Biajas of Borneo, their expulsion of evils, 
200 

Biggar, ‘‘ Burning out the Old Year’’ at, 
165 

Bikol, in Luzon, 260 

Bilaspur, 44 

Bilda in Algeria, 60 

Birch, sprigs of, a protection against 
witches, 162; used to beat people with 
at Easter and Christmas, 269, 270 

-trees in popular cure for gout, 56 sg. 

Bird-chief of the Sea Dyaks, 383, 384 

Birds as scapegoats, 35 5g., 51 sg. 

Bishop, the Boy, on Holy Innocents’ 
Day, 336 sqq. 

of Innocents, 333 

Bishop, Mrs., quoted, 99 sg. 

Bismarck Archipelago, the Melanesians 
of the, their belief in demons, 83 

Bithynia and Pontus, rapid spread of 
Christianity in, 420 sg. 


INDEX 


Biyars of N. W. India, 230 2.7 
Black animals as scapegoats, 190, 192, 
193 


god and white god among the 
Slavs, 92 

Black and white in relation to human 
scapegoats, 220, 253, 257, 272 

Mountains in S. France, 166 

Blankenheim in the Eifel, the King of 
the Bean at, 313 

Blood, fatigue let out with, 12; of chil- 
dren used to knead a paste, 129; of 
pigs used in purificatory rites, 262; 
drawn from ears as penance, 292 

Bloodless altars, 307 

Blows to drive away ghosts, 260 sgg. 

Boars, evil spirits transferred to, 31 

Boas, Franz, quoted, 375 sq. 

Bocage of Normandy, games of ball in 
the, 183 sg.; mode of forecasting the 
weather in, 323; Eve of Twelfth 
Night in the, 316 sg. 

Bock, C., quoted, 97 

Bogle, George, envoy to Tibet, 203 

Bohemia, ‘‘ Easter Smacks” in, 268, 
269; the Three Kings of Twelfth 
Day in, 330 

, the Germans of Western, their cus- 
tom at Christmas, 270; Twelfth Day 
among, 331 

Bohemian cures for fever, 49, 51, 55 59.5 
58, 59, 63; remedy for jaundice, 52 

Bohmerwald Mountains, 159 

Bolang Mongondo in Celebes, 85 sg., 
121 2.° 

Bolbe in Macedonia, lake of, 142 2.1 

Bolivia, 9; Indians of, 26, 193 

Boloki, the, of the Upper Congo, their 
fear of demons, 76 sg. 

Bonfires, leaping over, 156; on the Eve 
of Twelfth Day, 316 sg. 

Book of the Dead, the Egyptian, 103 
Borneo, the Dyaks of, 14, 383; belief in © 
demons in, 87 ; the Kayans of, £54 ., 
236, 382 sg.; sickness expelled in a 
ship from, 187; the Biajas and Dusuns 

of, 200 

Bourlet, A., quoted, 97 sgq. 

Boy Bishop on Holy Innocents’ Day, 
336 599. 

Brahmanism, vestiges of, under Moham- 
medanism, go z.} 

Brahmans, sacrificial custom of the, 25; — 
as human scapegoats, 42 5g., 44 5g.; 
their theory of sacrifice, 410 sg. 

Branches, fatigue transferred to, 8; sick- — 
ness transferred to, 186 

Brandenburg, Mark of, cure for headache 
and giddiness in, 52, 53;. cure for 
toothache in, 60 


Bras Basah, a village on the Perak river, 


199 


INDEX 


Brass instrument sounded to frighten 
away demons, 147 

Brazil, Indians of North-Western, 236 ; 
custom of, 264 ; their masked dances, 
381 

Breadalbane, use of a scapegoat in, 209 

‘« Brethren of the Ploughed Fields,” 232 

Bride, the last, privilege of, 183 

Brittany, custom of sticking pins into a 
saint’s image in, 70; riddles in, 121 
5sg., m.; forecasting the weather in, 
323 5g. 

Brooms used to sweep misfortune out of 
house, 5 

Broomsticks, witches ride on, 162 

Brown, Dr. George, quoted, 142 7.1 

Bruguiére, Mgr., quoted, 97, 150 sg. 

Brunnen, Twelfth Night at, 165 

Buchanan, Francis, quoted, 175 sg. 

Buckthorn chewed to keep off ghosts, 
153; as a charm against witchcraft, 
153 2.1, 163; used to beat cattle, 266 

Buddha, transmigrations of, 41; in re- 
lation to spirits, 97; offerings to, 150 

Buddhism in Burma, 95 sg.; the pope 
of, 223 

Buddhist Lent, the, 349 sy. 

monk, ceremony at the funeral of a, 

175 

priests expel demons, 116 

Buddhists of Ceylon, 90 ~.!; nominal, 


97 

Budge, E. A. Wallis, quoted, 103 sg. 

Buffalo calf, sins of dead transferred to a, 
36 sq. 

dance to ensure a supply of buffaloes, 
171 

Buffaloes as scapegoats, 190, I9I 

Buffooneries at the Festival of Fools, 
335 59- 

Bukaua, the, of Gefman New Guinea, 
their belief in demons, 83 sg. 

Bulgarian cure for fever, 55 

Bulgarians, their way of keeping off 
ghosts, 153 z.! 

Bulls as scapegoats in ancient Egypt, 
216 sg. 

Bunyoro, in Central Africa, 195 

Burial of infants, 45 

Burkitt, Professor F. C., 420 7.1 

Burlesques of ecclesiastical ritual, 336 sg. 

Burma, belief in demons in, 95 sg.; ex- 
pulsion of demons in, 116 sg.; the 
tug-of-war in, 175 sg. 

Burmese Lent, 349 sg. 

‘‘Burning the Old Year,’’ 230 72.7; at 
Biggar, 165 

of Sandan and Hercules, 388 sgq. 

witches alive, 19, 319; on May 

Day in the Tyrol, 158 sy.; on Wal- 

purgis Night in Bohemia; 161, in 

Silesia and Saxony, 163 


429 


Buru, demons of sickness expelled in a 
proa from, 186 

Burying the evil spirit, r10 

Bushes, ailments transferred to, 54, 56 

Bushmen, the, 16, 30 

Butterflies, annual expulsion of, 159 7.1 

Butterfly dance, 381 


Caffres of South Africa, 11, 30, 31 

Cairms to which every passer-by adds a 
stone, 9 sgg.; near shrines of saints, 
21; offerings at, 26 sgg. See also 
Heaps 

Cairo, cure for toothache and headache 
at, 63 

Cake on Twelfth Night used to deter- 
mine the King, 313 sgg. ; put on horn 
of ox, 318 sg.; offered to Cronus, 
351 

Cakes, special, at New Year, 149 sg. ; 
with twelve knobs offered to gods, 


255 2.9 
Calabar, Old, biennial expulsion of 
demons at, 203 sg. 
River, 28 
Calabria, annual expulsion of witches in, 
157 


Calendar of the Mayas of Yucatan, 171 ; 
of the primitive Aryans, 325; of the 
Celts of Gaul, 342 sgg. ; the Coligny, 
342 sgqg.; the Alexandrian, 395 2.1; 
the Babylonian, 398 z.? 

Calicut, ceremonies at sowing in, 235 

California, the Pomos of, 170 sg. 

Cambodia, annual expulsion of demons 
in, 149; palace of the Kings of Cam- 
bodia purged of devils, 172 

Cambridge, Lord of Misrule at, 330 

Camel, plague transferred to, 33 

Camels infested by jinn, 260 

Cameroons, the, of West Africa, 120 

Candlemas, dances at, 238 

Day, 332, 333 

Candles, twelve, on Twelfth Night, 321 
sg. ; burnt at the Feast of Purim, 394 

Cannibal banquets, 279 7.1, 283, 298 

Canton, the province of, 144 

Caprification, the artificial fertilization of 
fig-trees, 257 

Caprificus, the wild fig-tree, 258 

Car Nicobar, annual expulsion of devils 
in, 201 sg. 

Carabas and Barabbas, 418 sg. 

Carmona in Andalusia, 173 

Carnival, bell-ringing processions at the, 
247; Senseless Thursday in, 248; in 
relation to the Saturnalia, 312, 345 
597 


and Purim, 394 

‘‘Carrying out Death; 227 sg., 230, 
252 

Casablanca in Morocco, 21 


430 


Caspar, Melchior, and Balthasar, the 
Three Kings of Twelfth Day, 329 
59q- 

Castilian peasants, their dances in May, 
280 

Casting the skin supposed to be a mode 
of renewing youth, 302 sgq. 

Cattle exposed to attacks of witches, 
162; beaten to do them good, 266 sg. 

Caucasus, the Albanians of the, 218 

Caunians of Asia Minor, their expulsion 
of foreign gods, 116 

Cecrops, first king of Attica, 351 

Cedar-bark ornaments worn in dances, 

76 

Geiches, Bolang Mongondo in, 85, 121 ; 
Minahassa in, III sg. 

, Central, 34, 122 ”., 265 

Celts, their mode of forecasting the 
weather of the year, 323 sg. ; of Gaul, 
their calendar, 342 sqq. 

Ceram, sicknesses expelled in a ship from, 
185 

Ceylon, fear of demons in, 94 sg. 

Chaeronea, the ‘‘ expulsion of hunger” 
at, 252 

Chain used to expel demons, 260 

Chains clanked as a protection against 
witches, 163 ; clanked in masquerade, 
244 

Chaldeans, magic of, 64 

Chalking up crosses as a_ protection 
against witches, 162 sg. 

Chamar caste, 196 

Chamba in India, 45 

Chambers, E. K., quoted, 336 z.} 

Chameleon, ceremony at killing a, 28 

Chariots, epidemics sent away in toy, 
193 Sq. 

Cheremiss of Russia, their expulsion of 
Satan, 156 

Cherokee Indians, annual expulsion of 
evils among the, 128 

Cheshire, cure for thrush in, 50; cure for 
warts in, 57 

Chickens as scapegoats, 190 

Chicomecohuatl, Mexican goddess of 
maize, 286 7.1, 291, 292; girl annually 
sacrificed in the character of, 292 sgq. 

Childermas (Holy Innocents’ Day), 336 

Children personating spirits, 139 

China, the Miotse of, 4; belief in 
demons in, 98; men possessed by 
spirits in, 117; the Mossos of, 139 ; 
the Shans of Southern, 141; annual 
expulsion of demons in, 145 sg@¢. 

, aboriginal tribes of, their use of a 
human scapegoat, 196; their annual 
destruction of evils, 202 

Chinese festival of new fire, 359 

Chins of Burma, their way of keeping off 
cholera, 123 


INDEX 


Chirouba, festival in Manapur, 4o 
Chirus of Assam, 177 2.3 

Chitral, devil-driving in, 137 
Chittagong, 63 z.4 

Hill Tracts, the Chukmas of the, 


174 

Choerilus, historian, 388 7.1 

Cholera sent away in animal scapegoats, 
190, I9I sg. 

, demon of, 172; expelled, 116, 

I1I7; sent away ona raft, 190 

, goddess of, 194 

Cholula, a city of Mexico, 281 

Chota Nagpur in India, 19; annual ex- 
pulsion of disease in, 139 

Christ, the crucifixion of, 412 sgq. 

Christian festivals, the great, timed by 
the Church to coincide with old pagan 
festivals, 328 

Christianity, Latin, its tolerance of rustic 
paganism, 346 

Christmas, custom of young men and 
women beating each other at, 270; an 
old midwinter festival of the sun-god, 
328 

Day, Mexican festival on, 287 ; Old 

(Twelfth Night), 321 

Eve, witches active on, 160 

Chukmas, the tug-of-war among the, 174 

Church bells a protection against witch- 
craft, 157, 158 

Churn-dashers ridden by witches, 160 

Chwolsohn, D., on the worship of 
Haman, 366 z.! 

Ciallos, intercalary month of Gallic 
calendar, 343 

Cilicia, Tarsus in, 388, 389, 391 

Cingalese, the tug-of-war among the, 181; 
devil-dancers, 38 

Cinteotl or Centeotl, Mexican goddess of 
maize, 286 2.1, 290 

Circumcision Day, 334 

Clangour of metal used to dispel demons, 
233 

Clanking chains as a protection against 
witches, 163 

Clark, J. V. H., 209 

Clarke, E. D., quoted, 20 sg. 

Clashing of metal instruments a protec- 
tion against witchcraft, 158; used to 
dispel demons, 233 

Clavigero, historian of Mexico, 286 .1 

Clippings of nails in popular cures, 57, 
58 

Clowns in processions, 244 5g. 

Cochinchina, mode of disposing of ghosts 
in, 62 

Cock, disease transferred to a white, 187; 
white, as scapegoat, 210 7.4 

Cocks as scapegoats, I9gI 5g. 

Coligny calendar of Gaul, 342 sgg. 

Columella on caprification, 258 


INDEX 431 


Comana, sacred harlots at, 370 w.!; 
worship of Ma at, 421 z.} 

Comitium, dances of the Salii in the, 
232 

Communion by means of stones, 21 sg. 

Concubines of a king taken by his suc- 
cessor, 368 

Condé in Normandy, 183 

Confession of sins, 31, 36, 127 

Conflicts, annual, at the New Year, old 
intention of, 184 

Congrégation de Notre Dame at Paris, 
S37 

Consumption, cure for, 51 

Cook, A. B., 246 2.? 

Cook, Captain James, 80 

Cootchie, a demon, 110 

Cora Indians of Mexico, their dance at 
sowing, 238; their dramatic dances, 
381 

Coran, the, 62 

Corea, 11, 27; traps for demons in, 61 
sq. ; belief in demons in, 99 sq. ; spirit 
of disease expelled in, 119; annual 
expulsion of demons in, 147; the tug- 
of-war in, 177 sg. 

Coreans, their annual ceremonies for the 
riddance of evils, 202 sg. 

Corn festivals of the Cora Indians, 381 

-ears, wreath of, as badge of priestly 
office, 232 

——  -sieve beaten at ceremony, 145 

Cornel-tree in popular remedy, 55 

Cornouaille in Brittany, 323 

‘« Corpse-praying priest,’ 45 

Corpses devoured by members of Secret 
Societies, 377 

Cos, custom of Greek peasants in, 266 

Cosmogonies, primitive, perhaps influ- 
enced by human sacrifices, 409 sgq. 

Cosquin, E., on the book of Esther, 
367 2.3 

Coughs transferred to animals, 51, 52 

Couppé, Mgr., quoted, 82 

Crabs change their skin, 303 

Crackers ignited to expel demons, 117, 
146 sq. 

Creation of the world, legends of, influ- 
enced by human sacrifices, 409 sgq. 
Creator beheaded, 410; sacrifices him- 

self daily to create the world afresh, 
411 
Creeping through an arch as a cure, 55 
Cretan festival of Hermes, 350 
Crimes, sticks or stones piled on the 
scene of, 13 599. 
Criminals sacrificed, 354, 396 sg., 408 
Croatia, Good Friday custom in, 268 
Croesus on the pyre, 391 
Cronia, a Greek festival resembling the 
Saturnalia, 351; at Olympia, 352 sg. 
Cronion, a Greek month, 351 7.” 


Cronus and the Cronia, 351 sg. ; and 
the Golden Age, 353; and human 
sacrifice, 353 57., 397 

Cross-roads, 6, 7, 10, 24; offerings at, 
I40; ceremonies at, 144, I59, 161, 
196; witches at, 162 

Crosses painted with tar as charms 
against ghosts and vampyres, 153 7.!; 
chalked on doors as protection against 
witchcraft, 160, 162 sg. ; white, made 
by the King of the Bean, 314 

Crow as scapegoat, 193 

Crucifixion of Christ, 412 sqq. 

Cumont, Franz, 309, 393 z.! 

Cuzco, its scenery, 128 sg. 

Cybele and Attis, 386 

Cyrus and Croesus, 391 


Dahomey, Porto Novo in, 205 

Dalton, E. T., quoted, 92 sy. 

Dance at cairns, 29; the buffalo dance 
to ensure a supply of buffaloes, 171 ; 
to cause the grass to grow, 238 

Dancers personate spirits, 375 

Dances of the witches, 162; of the Salii, 
232; to promote the growth of the 
crops, 232 sgg., 347; at sowing, 234 
sqqg.; taught by animals, 237; for 
rain, 236 sg., 238; solemn Mexican, 
280, 284, 286, 287, 288, 289; of 
Castilian peasants in May, 280; of 
salt-makers in Mexico, 284; to make 
hemp grow tall, 315; as dramatic 
performances of myths, 375 sgg. ; 
bestowed on men by spirits, 375; in 
imitation of animals, 376, 377, 381, 382 

Dances, masked, to promote fertility, 
236; of savages, 374 sgg. ; to ensure 
good crops, 382 

Daneing to obtain the favour of the 


gods, 236 
Dandaki, King, 41 
‘‘Dark"’ moon and ‘‘light” moon, 


140, 141 2,1 

Darwin, Sir Francis, 153 7.1 

Dasius, martyrdom of St., 308 sgq. 

Dassera festival in Nepaul, 226 2. 

Date palm, artificial fertilization of the, 
272 Sq. 

Davies, T. Witton, 360 z.? 

Dead, disembodied souls of the, dreaded, 
77; worship of the, 97; ghosts of 
the, periodically expelled, 123 sq. ; 
souls of the, received by their rela- 
tions once a year, 150 sq. 

, Spirits of the, in the Philippine 
Islands, 82; in Timor, 85 

Death, the funeral of, 205; the cere- 
mony of carrying out, 227 sg., 230, 
252; savage tales of the origin of, 
302 59g. 

Debang monastery at Lhasa, 218 


432 


December, annual expulsion of demons 
in, 145; custom of the heathen of 
Harran in, 263 sg.; the Saturnalia 
held in, 306, 307, 345 

Decle, L., 11 2. 

De Goeje, M. J., 24 2.1 

Deified men, sacrifices of, 409 

Delaware Indians, their remedies for 
sins, 263 

Demonophobia in India, 91 

Demon-worship, 94, 96. See also Pro- 
pitiation 

Demons bunged up, 61 sg.; omni- 
presence of, 72 sgg. ; propitiation of, 
93, 94, 96, 100; religious purifica- 
tion intended to ward off, 104; cause 
sickness, failure of crops, etc., 109 
sqqg. ; of cholera, 116, 117, 123; men 
disguised as, 170 sg., 172, 173; de- 
coyed by a pig, 200, 201; conjured 
into images, I7I, 172, 173, 203, 204, 
205; put to flight by clangour of 
metal, 233; banned by masks, 246 ; 
exorcised by bells, 246 sg., 251. 
See also Devil and Devils 

De Mortival, Roger, 338 

Derceto, the fish goddess of Ascalon, 
370 2.1 

De Ricci, 8., 343 2. 

Deslawen, village of Bohemia, 161 

Devil driven away by paper kites, 4 

Devil-driving in Chitral, 137 

Devil’s Neck, the, 16, 30 

Devils personated by men, 235. 
Demons 

Devonshire, cure for cough in, 51 

Dharmi or Dharmesh, the Supreme God 
of the Oraons, 92 sg. 

Dice used in divination, 220; played at 
festivals, 350 

Dieri tribe of Central Australia, 
expulsion of a demon, 110 

Dinkas, their use of cows as scapegoats, 
193 

Dio Chrysostom on the Sacaea, 368 ; 
his account of the treatment of the 
mock king of the Sacaea, 414 

Dionysiac festival of the opening of the 
wine jars, 351 sg. 

Dionysus and the drama, 384 

Disease transferred to other people, 6 sg.; 
transferred to tree, 7; caused by ghosts, 
85; annual expulsion of, 139; sent 
away in little ships, 185 sgq. 

Dittmar, C. von, quoted, roo sg. 

Divination on Twelfth Night, 316 

Divine animals as scapegoats, 216 sg., 
226 sq. j 

men as scapegoats, 217 sgg., 226 sq. 

Dog, sickness transferred to, 33; as 
scapegoat, 51, 208 sg.; sacrifice of 
white, 127 


See 


their 


INDEX 


Dog-demon of epilepsy, 69 z. 

Doreh in Dutch New Guinea, the tug-of- 
war at, 178 

Doubs, Montagne de, 316 

Douglas, Alexander, victim of witch- 
craft, 39 

Doutté, E., 22 2.2 

Doves of Astarte, the sacred, 370 7.1 

Dracaena terminalis, its leaves used to 
beat the sick, 265 

Dramas, sacred, as magical rites, 373 
59. 

Dravidian tribes of N. India, their cure 
for epilepsy, 259 sg. 

Dreams, festival of, among the Iroquois, 
127 

Dreikinigstag, Twelfth Day, 329 

‘Driving out the Witches,” 162 

Drowo, gods, 74 

Drums beaten to expel demons, r1rt, 113, 
I16, 120, 126, 146, 204 

Dubrowitschi, a Russian village, 173 

Duck as scapegoat, 50 

Dudilaa, a spirit who lives in the sun, 
186 


Dumannos, a month of the Gallic 
calendar, 343 
Duran, Diego, Spanish historian of ~ 


Mexico, 295 2.1, 297, 300 2.1 

Durostorum in Moesia, celebration of the. 
Saturnalia at, 309 

Dussaud, René, 22 2.2 

Dusuns of Borneo, their annual expulsion 
of evils, 200 sg. 

Dyak priestesses, 5 ; transference of evil, 
5; mode of neutralizing bad omens, 


39 

Dyaks, their ‘‘lying heaps,’ 
Head Feast, 383 

Dying god as scapegoat, 227 


14; their 


Eabani, Babylonian hero, 398 sg. 

Ears, blood drawn from, as penance, 
292 ; 

Earth, the Mistress of the, 85 

-god, 28; the Egyptian, 341 


- Earthman, the, 61 


East, the Wise Men of the, 330 sg. 

Indian Islands, 2 

Indies, the tug-of-war in the, 177 

Easter an old vernal festival of the 
vegetation-god, 328 

eggs, 269 

Eve in Albania, expulsion of Kore 

on, 157 

Monday, ‘‘ Easter Smacks’’ on, 268 

us Smacks" in Germany and Austria, 
268 sg. 

Sunday, ceremony on the Eve of, 

207 Sq. 

Tuesday, ‘‘ Easter Smacks” on, 


268 


NEY et Nee) I 


ate 


INDEX 


Eastertide, expulsion of evils at, in 
Calabria, 157 

Eck, R. van, quoted, 86 

Edward VI., his Lord of Misrule, 332, 
334 : 

Effigies, disease transferred to, 7; demons 
conjured into, 204, 205; substituted 
for human victims, 408 

Effigy of baby used to fertilize women, 
245, 249 

Eggs, red Easter, 269 

Egypt, mode of laying ghosts in, 63; 
modern, belief in the jinn in, 104; 
Isis and Osiris in, 386 

Egyptians, the ancient, their belief in 
spirits, 103 sg. ; their use of bulls as 
scapegoats, 216 sg. ; the five supple- 
mentary days of their year, 340 sg. 

Hifel, the King of the Bean in the, 313 

Eight days, feast and license of, before 
expulsion of demons, 131 

Ekoi, the, of West Africa, 28 

Elamite deities in opposition to Baby- 
lonian deities, 366 ; inscriptions, 367 

Elamites, the hereditary foes of the 
Babylonians, 366 

Elaphebolion, an Athenian month, 351 

Elaphius, an Elean month, 352 

Elder brother, the sin of marrying before 
an, 3 

Elgon, Mount, 246 

Elis, law of, 352 7.? 

Ellis, W., quoted, 80 

Embodied evils, expulsion of, 170 sgq. 

Emetics as remedies for sins, 263 

Endle, S., quoted, 93 

England, cure of warts in, 48; the King 
of the Bean in, 313; the Boy Bishop 
in, 337 59. 

Enigmas, ceremonial use of, 121 7.3. 
See Riddles 

Entlebuch in Switzerland, expulsion of 
Posterli at, 214 

Epidaurus, Aesculapius at, 47 

Epidemics attributed to demons, 111 
5qg.; kept off by means of a plough, 
172 sg.; sent away in toy chariots, 
193 5g. 

Epilepsy, cure for, 2, 331; Highland 
treatment of, 68 2.2; Ronian cure for, 

_ 68; Hindoo cure for, 69 z. ; cured by 
beating, 260. See also Falling Sickness 

Epiphany, annual expulsion of the powers 
of evil at, 165 sgg. ; the King of the 
Bean on, 313 sgg. See also Twelfth 
Night 

Eponyms, annual, as scapegoats, 39 sqq. 

Equinox, the vernal, festival of Cronus at, 
352; Persian marriages at the, 406 7.3 

Equos, a Gallic month, 343 7. 

Erech, Babylonian city, Ishtar at, 398, 
399 

Pr VI 


433 


Erz-gebirge, the Saxon, 271 

Esagila, temple at Babylon, 356 

Esquimaux of Labrador, their fear of 
demons, 79 sg.; of Point Barrow, 
their expulsion of Luna, 124 sg. ; of 
Baffin Land, their expulsion of Sedna, 
125 sg.; the Central, the tug-of-war 
among the, 174; of Bering Strait, 
their masquerades, 379 sg. 

Esther, fast of, 397 sg.; the story of, 
acted as a comedy at Purim, 364 

, the book of, its date and purpose, 

360; its Persian colouring, 362, 401 ; 

duplication of the personages in, 400 

sg. ; the personages unmasked, 405 

SQq. 

and Mordecai equivalent to Ishtar 

and Marduk, 405; the duplicates of 

Vashti and Haman, 406 

and Vashti, temporary queens, 401 

Esthonian mode of transferring bad luck 
to trees, 54; expulsion of the devil, 
173 

Eton College, Boy Bishop at, 338 

Euhemerism, 385 

Euripides, 19 

Europe, transference of evil in, 47 59g. ; 
annual expulsion of demons and witches 
in, I55 sgg. ; annual expulsion of evils 
in, 207 sgg. ; masquerades in modern, 
251 sg. 

European folk-custom of ‘‘ carrying out 
Death,” 227 sq. 

Eve and Adam, 259 z.° 

Evening Star, the goddess of the, 369 
2.3 

Evessen, in Brunswick, 60 

Evil, the transference of, 1 syg. ; trans- 
ferred to other people, 5 sq. ; transferred 
to sticks and stones, 8 sgq. ; transferred 
to animals, 31 sgg.; transferred to 
men, 38 sgg.; transference of, in 
Europe, 47 599. 

spirits, banishment of, 86, See 
Demons 

Evil-Merodach, Babylonian king, 367 7. 

Evils transferred to trees, 54 sgg. ; nailed 
into trees, walls, etc., 59 sgg. ; Occa- 
sional expulsion of, 109 sgg., 185 sgq. ; 
periodic expulsion of, 123 sgg., 198 
sqq.; expulsion of embodied, 170 sgq. ; 
expulsion of, in a material vehicle, 185 
sqgg. See also Expulsion 

Ewe, white-footed, as scapegoat, 192 sy. 

Ewe-speaking negroes of the Slave 
Coast, 74 

Excommunication of human scapegoat, 
254 

Execution by stoning, 24 7.” 

Exeter, the Boy Bishop at, 337 

Exorcising spirits at sowing the seed, 


235 


2F 


434 


Exorcism of devils in Morocco, 63 ; 
annual, of the evil spirit in Japan, 143 
sg. ; Nicobarese ceremony of, 262 

Exorcists, 2 5g., 33 

Expiation for sin, 39 

Expulsion of evils, 109 sgg. ; the direct 
or immediate and the indirect or 
mediate, 109, 224; occasional, 109 
sqgq., 185 sgg.; periodic, 123 sgg., 198 
sqgqg.; of embodied evils, 170 sgg.; of 
evils in a material vehicle, 185 sgq. ; 
annual, of demons and witches in 
Europe, 155 sgy.; of Trows in Shet- 
land, 168 sg. ; of hunger at Chaeronea, 
252; of winter, ceremony of the, 404 sg. 


Faditras among the Malagasy, 33 sq. 
Faiths of the world, the great, their little 
influence on common men, 8g 
Falling sickness, cure for, 52, 330. 
also Epilepsy 

Fans, the, of West Africa, 30 7.2 

‘Fast of Esther ’’ before Purim, 397 sg. 

Fatigue transferred to stones or sticks, 8 
sgqg.; let out with blood, 12 

Fawckner, Captain James, quoted, 131 
SQ. 

Fear as a source of religion, 93 

Feast, the Great, in Morocco, 180, 182, 
265 

of Lanterns in Japan, I51 sg. 

February and March, the season of the 
spring sowing in Italy, 346 

Ferghana in Turkestan, 184 

Ferrers, George, a Lord of Misrule, 332 

Fertility of the ground, magical ceremony 
to promote the, 177 

Fertilization, artificial, of fig-trees, 257 
S97., 272 sg.; of the date palm, 272 

Fertilizing virtue attributed to certain 


See 


sticks, 264 
‘« Festival of dreams’’ among the Iro- 
quois, 127 
of the Flaying of Men, Mexican, 
296 s9q. 


of Fools in France, 334 sgg. + in 

Germany, Bohemia, and England, 

336 n.1 

of the Innocents, 336 sgq. 

Festivals, the great Christian, timed by 
the Church to coincide with old pagan 
festivals, 328 

Féte des Fous in France, 334 sqq. 

des Rois, Twelfth Day, 329 

Fever, remedy for, 38 ; Roman cure for, 
47; popular cures for, 47, 49, 51, 53, 
55, 56, 58, 59, 63; driven away by 
firing guns, etc., 121 

Fielding, H., quoted, 349 sg. 

Fiends burnt in fire, 320 

Fig, the wild, human scapegoats beaten 
with branches of, 255 


INDEX 


Fig-tree, sacred, 61 

-trees artificially fertilized, 257 sgq., 
272 sg. ; personated by human victims, 
257 

Fights, annual, at the New Year, old 
intention of, 184 

Figs, black and white, worn by human 
scapegoats, 253, 257, 272 

Fiji, 15 ; annual ceremony at appearance 
of sea-slug in, 141 sg. 

Fir used to beat people with at Christmas, 
270, 271 

-trees in popular cure, 56 

Fire, Mexican god of, 300 ; human sacri- 
fices to, 300 sgg.; to burn witches, 


319 


new, at New Year, 209; Chinese 
festival of the, 359 

sacred, of King of Uganda, 195 ; 
kindled by friction, 391 7.4 

-spirit, annual expulsion of the, 


141 
Fires extinguished during ceremony, 172; 
ceremonial, on Eve of Twelfth Day, 
316 sgg.; to burn fiends, 320. 
also Bonfires 
Five days’ duration of mock king's reign, 
407 2.1 
days’ reign of mock king at the 
Sacaea, 355, 357; of Semiramis, 


369 


Flax, giddiness transferred to, 53; bells — 


rung to make flax grow, 247 sq. 

Flaying of Men, Mexican festival of the, 
296 sqq. 

Flemish cure for ague, 56 

Flight from the demons of disease, 122 
Sq. 

Flint, holed, a protection against witches, 
162 

Flood, the great, 399 2.1} 

Flowers, the goddess of, 278 

Flying Spirits, the, at Lhasa, 197 sg. 

Food set out for ghosts, 154 

Fools in processions of maskers, 243 

, festival of, in France, 334 sgg.; in 
Germany, Bohemia, 
336 2.1 

Football, suggested origin of, 184 

Fords, offerings and prayers at, 27 sg. 

Formosa, 33 

Forty days, man treated as a god during, 


281; man personating god during, 
297 © : 

nights of mourning for Persephone, 
348 


Foucart, G., quoted, 341 z.} 

Fountains Abbey, 338 

Fowler, W. Warde, 67 7.2, 229 2.1 
Fowls as scapegoats, 31, 33, 36, 52 sg. 
France, cure of warts in, 48; cure for 


toothache in, 59; the King of the 


See 


and England, 


INDEX 435 


Bean in, 313 sgg.; Festival of Fools 
in, 334 579. 

Franche-Comté, the King of the Bean 
in, 313; bonfires on the Eve of Twelfth 
Night in, 316; the Three Kings of 
Twelfth Day in, 330; Lent in, 348 z.} 

Frankenwald Mountains, 160 

Frankfort, the feast of Purim at, 394 

Fratres Arvales, 232 

‘French and English”’ or the ‘‘ Tug-of- 
war”’ as a religious or magical rite, 
174 597- 

French cure for fever, 55 

Fresh and green, beating people, 270 
Sq. 

Frogs, malady transferred to, 50, 53 

Fruit-trees, fire applied to, on Eve of 
Twelfth Night, 317 

Fruitful tree, use of stick cut from a, 264 

Fumigation with juniper and rue as a 
precaution against witches, 158 

Funeral, relations whipped at a, 260 sg. 

of Death, 205 

ceremony in Uganda, 45 27; of 
a Buddhist monk, 175 

Furrow drawn round village as protection 
against epidemic, 172 


Gallas, their mode of expelling fever, 
121; annual period of license among 
the, 226 2.1; their story of the origin 
of death, 304 

Gallows-hill, witches at, 162 

Gambling allowed during three days of 
the year, 150 

Games of ball played to produce rain or 
dry weather, 179 sq. 

Garcilasso de la Vega, 130 7.1 

Garos of Assam, their annual use of a 
scapegoat, 208 sg. 

Gatto, in Benin, 131 

Gaul, the Celts of, their calendar, 342 
59. 

Gazelle Peninsula in New Britain, 82, 
393 

Ge-lug-pa, a Lamaist sect, 94 

Geraestius, a Greek month, 350 

Gerard, E., quoted, 106 sg. 

Germany, cure for toothache in, 59; the 
King of the Bean in, 313 

Ghansyam Deo, a deity of the Gonds, 
217 

Ghats, the Eastern, use of scapegoats in 
the, 191 

Ghosts of suicides feared, 17 sg. ; im- 
pregnation of women by, 18 ; shut up 
in wood, 60 sg.; modes of laying, 
63; diseases caused by, 85; of the 
dead periodically expelled, 123 sg.; 
Roman festival of, in May, 154 sg. ; 
driven off by blows, 260 sqgq. 

Giddiness, cure for, 53 


Gilgamesh, the epic of, 371, 398 sg. ; 
his name formerly read as Izdubar, 
372 2.1; a Babylonian hero, beloved 
by the goddess Ishtar, 371 sg., 398 sq. 

Gilgamus, a Babylonian king, 372 .} 

Gilgenburg in Masuren, 269 

Gilyaks of the Amoor, their belief in 
demons, Iot sg. 

Glamorganshire, cure for warts in, 53 

Glen Mor, in Islay, 62 

Gloucester, the Boy Bishop at, 337 

Gloucestershire, Eve of Twelfth Day in, 
318, 321 

Goat's Marsh at Rome, 258 

Goats, evil transferred to, 31, 32; as 
scapegoats, 190, I9I, 192 

Gobi, the desert of, 13 

God, killing the, 1; the black and the 
white, 92; dying, as scapegoat, 227 ; 
the killing of the, in Mexico, 275 sqq. ; 
resurrection of the, 400 

Gods and goddesses represented by living 
men and women, 385 sg. 

, Mexican, burn themselves to 

create the sun, 410; Mother of the, 

289; woman annually sacrificed in 

the character of the Mother of the, 

289 sq. 

shut up in wood, 61; of the 
Maoris, 81; of the Pelew Islanders, 
81 sg.; personated by priests, 287; 
represented in masquerades, 377 

Goitre, popular cure for, 54 

Gold Coast of West Africa, expulsion of 
demons on the, 120, 131 5gq. 

Golden Age, the, 353, 386; the reign of 
Saturn, 306, 344 

Golden bells worn by human representa- 
tives of gods in Mexico, 278, 280, 284 

Gomes, E. H., on the head-feast of the 
Sea Dyaks, 384 2. 

Gonds of India, human 
among the, 217 sg. 

Gongs beaten to expel demons, 113, 
117, 147 

Good Friday, 214; expulsion of witches 
in Silesia on, 157; cattle beaten on, 
266 ; custom of beating each other 
with rods on, 268 

Goudie, Mr. Gilbert, 169 7. 

Gour-deziou, ‘‘Supplementary Days,” 
in Brittany, 324 

Gout, popular cures for, 56 sg. 

Graetz, H., 395 2.1 

Gran Chaco, Indians of the, 122, 262 

Grass to grow, dances to cause the, 238 ; 
bells rung to cause the, 247 

Grasshoppers, sacrifice of, 35 

‘« Grass-ringers,’” 247 

Graubiinden (the Grisons), 239 

Graves, heaps of sticks or stones on, 15 


Sgq. 


scapegoats 


436 


Great Bassam in Guinea, exorcism of 
evil spirit at, 120 

Feast, the, in Morocco, 180, 182, 
265 

«s Purification,” 
mony, 213 7.1 

Greece, ancient, custom of stone-throw- 
ing in, 24 sg.; human scapegoats in, 
252 sgg. ; Saturnalia in, 350 sqq. 

Greek use of swallows as scapegoats, 
35; of laurel in purification, 262 

Greek women, their mourning for Perse- 
phone, 349 

Greeks, the ancient, their cure for love, 3 

of Asia Minor, their use of human 
scapegoats, 255 

Green boughs, custom of beating young 
people with, at Christmas, 270 

Grisons, masquerades in the, 239 

Groot, J. J. M. de, quoted, 99 

Grove, the Arician, 305 

Grub in the Grisons, masquerade at, 239 

Grubb, W. Barbrooke, quoted, 78 sg. 

Griinberg in Silesia, 163 

Guardian spirits of animals, 98 

Guatemala, 10; Indians of, 26 

Guaycurus, Indian nation, their ceremony 
at appearance of the Pleiades, 262 

Gudea, king of Southern Babylonia, 356 

Guessing dreams, 127 

Guiana, British, the Arawaks of, 302 

, French, the Roocooyen Indians of, 
181, 263; their fear of demons, 78 sg. 

Guinea, annual expulsion of the devil in, 
131 

, French, 235 

negroes, 31 

Guns fired to expel demons, 116 sg., 
TIQ, 120, T2I, 125, 132, 133,137, 
147, 148, 149, 150, 203, 204, 221 2,1; 
against witches, 160, 161, 164 

Gypsies, annual ceremony performed by 
the, 207 sg. 


Japanese cere- 


Hagen, B., quoted, 87 sg. 

Hair of patient inserted in oak, 57 sg. 

Hak-Ka, the, a native race in the 
province of Canton, 144 

Halberstadt in Thiiringen, annual cere- 
mony at, 214 

Hall in the Tyrol, 248 : 

Halmahera, the Alfoors of, 112; cere- 
monies at a funeral in, 260 sg. 

Haman, effigies of, burnt at Purim, 392 sgg. 

and Mordecai, 364 sgg.; as tem- 

porary kings, 400 sg. 

and Vashti the duplicates of Mor- 
decai and Vashti, 406 

Haman, a god worshipped by the heathen 
of Harran, 366 z.} 

Haman-Sfr, a name for Purim, 393 

Hammedatha, father of Haman, 373 2.3 


INDEX . 


Hammer, sick people struck with a, 
259 2.4 

Hands of deity, ceremony of grasping 
the, 356 

Flantoes, spirits, 87 

Hare as scapegoat, 50 sg. 

Harlots, sacred, 370, 
Comana, 421 2.1 

Harpooning a spirit, 126 

Harran, the heathen of, their custom in 
December, 263 sg.; their marriage 
festival of all the gods, 273 x1; 
worship a god Haman, 366 z.1 

Harrison, Miss J. E., 153 2.1 

Harthoorn, S. E., quoted, 86 sg. 

Hartland, E. S., 22 7.%, 69 2.1 

Harvest, annual expulsion of demons at 
or after, 137 sg., 225 

Hasselt, J. L. van, quoted, 83 

Hastings, Warren, 203 

Haupt, P., 406 2.? 

Hawk, omens from, 384 z.1 

Hawthorn a charm against ghosts, 153 
n.} 

Headache, cure for, 2, 52, 58, 63, 64 

Head-feast of the Sea Dyaks, 383, 384 
ae 

Headman sacred, 177 2.3 

Heaps of stones, sticks, or leaves, to 
which every passer-by adds, 9 sgq. ; 
on the scene of crimes, 13 sgg.; on 


graves, 15 sgg. ; ‘‘lying heaps,”’ 14 

Hearn, Lafcadio, 144 

Hearts of human victims offered to the 
sun, 279, 298 

Hebrews, their custom as to leprosy, 35 

Hebron, 21 

Hecatombaeon, an Athenian month, 351 

Hecquard, H., 120 

Heitsi-eibib, Hottentot god or hero, 16 

Hemp, augury as to the height of the, 
315; dances to make hemp grow tall, 
315 

Hercules, cake with twelve knobs offered 
to, 351 z.°; identified with Sandan, 
388 ; his death on a pyre, 391 

and Omphale, 389 

Hereford, the Boy Bishop at, 337 

Herefordshire, the sin-eater in, 43; Eve 
of Twelfth Day in, 318 sgq. 

Hermes, wayside images of, 24; Cretan 
festival of, 350 

and Argus, 24 

Herodotus on the worship of Ishtar 
(Astarte), 372 

Hide beaten with rods, 231 

Hierapolis, festival of the Pyre at, 392 

Highlands of Scotland, 20; the Twelve 
Days in the, 324 

Hildesheim, bell-ringing at, on Ascension 
Day, 247 sg. 

Himalayan districts of N.W. India, 29 


371, 372; at 


INDEX 


Hindoo Koosh, expulsion of demons in 
the, 225 

tribes, their annual expulsion of 
demons after harvest, 137 

Hindoos, transference of evil among the, 
38 ; their fear of demons, 91 sg. 

Hirt, H., 325 2.3 

Hobby-horse to carry away spirit of 
smallpox, 119 

Hochofen, village of Bohemia, 161 

Hockey played as a ceremony, 174 

Holed flint a protection against witches, 
162 

Holy Innocents’ Day, 336, 337, 338; 
young people beat each other on, 270, 
271 

Homoeopathic or imitative magic, 177 

Homogeneity of civilization in prehistoric 
times in Southern Europe and Western 
Asia, 409 

Honorius and Theodosius, decree of, 392 

Hood Bay in New Guinea, 84 

Horns blown to expel demons, 111, 117, 
204, 214; to ban witches, 160, 161, 
165, 166; at Penzance on eve of May 
Day, 163 sg. ; by maskers, 243, 244 

of straw worn to keep off demons, 
118; of goat a protection against 
witches, 162 

Horse sacrificed to Mars, 230; beloved 
by Ishtar, 371, 407 2.2; beloved by 
Semiramis, 407 7. 

—— -shoes a protection against witches, 
162 

Horus, the birth of, 341 

Hos of N.E. India, their annual expul- 
sion of demons at harvest, 136 sg. 

of Togoland, their annual expulsion 
of evils, 134 sgy., 206 sq. 

Hosskirch in Swabia, 323 

Hottentots, the, 16, 29 

Hoyerswerda in Silesia, 163 

fluddler or Huttler in the Tyrol, 248 

fludel-ranning in the Tyrol, 248 

Huichol Indians of Mexico, 10, 347 x. 

Huitzilopochtli, great Mexican god, 280, 
300; young man sacrificed in the 
character of, 280 sg. ; temple of, 287, 
290, 297; hall of, 294 

Huixtocihuatl, Mexican goddess of Salt, 
283 ; woman annually sacrificed in the 
character of, 283 sg. 

Human god and goddess, their enforced 
union, 386 sg. 

representatives of gods sacrificed in 

Mexico, 275 sqq. 

sacrifice, successive mitigations of, 

396 sg., 408 

sacrifices, their influence on cosmo- 

gonical theories, 409 sqq. 

scapegoats, 38 sgg., 194 sgg., 210 

sgg.; in ancient Rome, 229 sgg.; in 


437 


classical antiquity, 229 sgg.; in 
ancient Greece, 252 sgg. ; reason for 
beating the, 256 sg. ; victims, men 
clad in the skins of, 265 sg. 

Hunger, expulsion of, at Chaeronea, 252 

Hurons, their way of expelling sickness, 
121 

Husbandman, the Roman, his prayers to 
Mars, 229 

Huss, John, 336 z.! 

Hluttler or Huddler in the Tyrol, 248 

Huzuls, the, of the Carpathians, 32 sy., 
35 

Hyginus on the death of Semiramis, 
407 72.2 

Hysteria cured by beating, 260 


Identification of girl with Maize Goddess, 
295 

Idols, nails knocked into, 69 sg. 

Igbodu, a sacred grove, 212 

Igliwa, a Berber tribe, 178 

Ilamatecutli, Mexican goddess, 287; 
woman sacrificed in the character of, 
287 sq. 

Ill Luck embodied in an ascetic, 41 ; the 
casting away of, 144 

Im Thurn, Sir Everard F., quoted, 78 

Images, demons conjured into, 171, 172, 
173, 203 

Immestar in Syria, 394 

Immortality, how men lost the boon of, 
302 Sqq. 

Impregnation of women by ghosts, 18 * 

Inanimate objects, transference of evil to, 
I sgq. 

Znao, sacred whittled sticks, 261 _ 

Inauguration of a king in ancient India, 
26 

mca Peru, their annual expulsion of 
evils, 128 syq. 

Incense used against witches, 158, 159 

India, fear of demons in, 89 sgg. ; epi- 
demics sent away in toy chariots in, 
193 5g. ; Dravidian tribes of Northern, 
259; inauguration ofa king in ancient, 
263; the Twelve Days in ancient, 324 
sq. ; origin of the drama in, 384 sg. 

, the Central Provinces of, 7 ; expul- 

sion of disease in the, 190 

, the North-Western Provinces of, 
61; the tug-of-war in, 181 

Indian Archipelago, expulsion of diseases 
in the, 199 

tribes of N.W. America, 
masked dances, 375 599. 

Indians, mutual scourgings of South 
American, 262 

Indo-China, worship of spirits in, 97 sg. 

Indra, creation of the great god, 410 

Infant, children whipt at death of an, 
261 5g. 


their 


438 


Infants, burial of, 45 

Infertility, evil spirits of, 250 

Influenza expelled by scapegoat, 191, 
193 

Initiation by spirits, 375 

Innocents, Bishop of, in France, 334 ; 
Festival of the, 336 sgq. 

Innocents’ Day, 336, 337, 338; young 
people beat each other on, 270, 271 

Inspired men in China, 117 

Intercalary month, 342 sqq. 

period of five days, 407 2.1 

periods, customs and superstitions 
attaching to, 328 sg. ; deemed unlucky, 
339 529- 

Intercalation, rudimentary, to equate 
lunar and solar years, 325 sgq. 

Interregnum on intercalary days, 328 
Sq. 

Inversion of social ranks at the Saturnalia 
and kindred festivals, 308, 350, 407 

Ireland, Twelfth Night in, 321 sg. 

Iroquois, their ‘‘festival of dreams,”’ 
127; their use of scapegoats, 209 sg., 
233 

Iser Mountains in Silesia, 163 

Iserlohn in Westphalia, 266 

Ishtar, a great Babylonian goddess, 365 ; 
associated with Sirius, 359 2.1; at 
Erech, 398; her visit to Anu, 399 z.!; 
goddess of fertility in animals, 406 
n.1 See also Astarte 

and Gilgamesh, 371 sg., 398 sg. 

and Semiramis, 369 sgq. 

and Tammuz, 399, 406 

Isis, the birth of, 341 

and Osiris, 386 

Italian cure for fever, 55; 
sowing in spring, 346 

Italy, cure of warts in, 48 

Izdubar. See Gilgamesh 


season of 


Jackson, Professor Henry, 35 z.° 
Jacobsen, J. Adrian, on the Secret 
Societies of N.W. America, 377 s¢q. 
Jalno, temporary ruler at Lhasa, 218, 

220, 221, 222 

James, M. R., 395 zofes 2 and 3 

Jamieson, J., on Trows, 168 2.1, 169 
n. 

Japan, cure for toothache in, 71; ex- 
pulsion of demons in, 118 sg., 143 5g. ; 
Feast of Lanterns in, 151 sg.; annual 
expulsion of evil in, 212 sg. 

Jastrow, M., on the epic of Gilgamesh, 
399 2.1 

Jataka, the, 41 

Jaundice, cure for, 52 

Java, belief in demons in, 86 sg.; the 
Tenggerese of, 184 

Jay, blue, as scapegoat, 51 

Jealousy, cure for, 33 


INDEX 


Jensen, P., 362 7.1; his theory of Haman 


and Vashti as Elamite deities, 366 sg. ; 


on Anaitis, 369 z.1; on the fast of 
Esther, 398 sg. 

Jepur in India, use of scapegoat at, 191 

Jerusalem, the weeping for Tammuz at, 
400 

Jewish calendar, New Year’s Day of the, 


359 
converts, form of abjuration used 


by, 393 

Day of Atonement, 210 

festival of Purim, 360 sqq. 

use of scapegoats, 210 

Jews accused of ritual murders, 394 sgq. ; 
the great deliverance of the, at Purim, 
398 

Jinn, belief in the, 104 ; infesting camels, 
260 

Jochelson, W., quoted, ror 

Johns, Rev. C. H. W.; 357. 7gon 
notes * and 8, 

Joustra, M., quoted, 88 

Juhar, the Bhotiyas of, 209 

July, the Monae Caprotinae in, 258 

June, Mexican human sacrifice in, 283 

Jungle Mother, the, 27 

Juniper burned to keep out ghosts, 154 
m.; used to beat people with, 271 

berries, fumigation with, as a pre- 
caution against witches, 158 

Juno Caprotina, 258 

Jupiter, temple of Capitoline, 66 


Kabyle cure for jealousy, 33 

Kacharis, the, of Assam, their fear of 
demons, 93 

Kachins of Burma, their belief in demons, 
96 

Kai, the, of German New Guinea, 264 

Kalau, demons, 101 

Kaliths, gods of the Pelew Islanders, 
8I sg. ; 

Kamtchatka, the tug-of-war in, 178 

Kamtchatkans, their fear of demons, 
89 

Kanagra in India, 45 

Kanhar river, 60 

Karens of Burma, their belief in demons, 
96 

Karkantzari, fiends or 
Macedonia, 320 

Karpathos, a Greek island, 55 

Kasan Government in Russia, the Wot- 
yaks of the, 156 

Kaua Indians of N.W. Brazil, 236; 
their masked dances, 381 

Kaumpuli, god of plague, 4 

Kaustka Sutra, Indian book of magic, 
192 


monsters in 


Kayans, the, of Borneo, 19, 154 ”.j 


their masked dances, 236, 382 sg. 


INDEX 


Keb, the Egyptian Earth-god, 341 

Kei Islands, expulsion of demons in the, 
112 sq. 

river, II 

Kengtung in Burma, 116 

peatedy, Prof. A. R. S., quoted, 210 
n. 

Kharwars of N. India, their use of 
scapegoats, 192 

Khasis of Assam, their annual expulsion 
of demon of plague, 173 

Khonds, their annual expulsion of demons 
at seed-time, 138, 234; their treat- 
ment of human victims, 259 

Killing the god, 1; in Mexico, 275 sgq. 

King, temporary, in Siam, 151; in 
ancient India, inauguration of a, 263 ; 
assembly for determining the fate 
of the, 356; mock or temporary, 
403 Sg. 

and Queen of May, 406 

— of the Bean, 313 sgg. ; at Merton 
College, Oxford, 332 

of the Saturnalia, 308, 311, 312 

of the Years at Lhasa, 220, 221 

King’s College, Cambridge, Boy Bishop 
at, 338 

Kings, the Three, on Twelfth Day, 329 
sgg. ; Magistrates at Olympia called, 
352; marry the wives and concubines 
of their predecessors, 368 

Kingsley, Mary H., quoted, 74 

Kioga Lake, 246 

Kiriwina, in S.E. New Guinea, 134 

Kirkland, Rev. Mr., 210 

Kitching, A. L., quoted, 246 sg. 

Kites, artificial, used to drive away the 
devil, 4; paper, flown as scapegoats, 
203 

Kleintitschen, P. A., quoted, 82 sg. 

Kleptomania, cure for, 34 

Kling or Klieng, a mythical hero of the 
Dyaks, 383, 384 7. 

Knives under the threshold, a protection 
against witches, 162 

Knots tied in branches of trees as 
remedies, 56 sq. 

Knotted thread in magic, 48 

Kobeua Indians of N.W. Brazil, their 
masked dances, 236, 381 

Kore, expulsion of, on Easter Eve in 
Albania, 157 

Korkus, the, of India, 7 

Korwas of Mirzapur, their use of scape- 
goats, 192 

Koryaks, the, of N.E. Asia, their belief 
in demons, 100 sg.; expulsion of 
demons among the, 126 sg. 

Kubary, J., quoted, 81 sg. 

Kumaon, in N.W. India, 37; sliding 
down a rope in, 196 sg. 

Kumis, the, of S.E. India, 117 


439 


Kurmis of India, 190 

Kururumany, the Arawak creator, 302 

Kuskokwin River, 380 

Kwakiutl Indians of N.W. America, 
their masked dances, 376 7.”, 378 


Labrador, fear of demons in, 79 sg. 

Labruguiere, in S. France, 166 

Lagarde, on the ‘‘ Ride of the Beardless 
One,” 402, 405 

Lakor, island of, 199 

Lama of Tibet, the Grand, 197, 220, 
221, 222 

, the Teshu, 203 

Lamaist sects, 94 

Lanchang, a Malay craft, 187 

Lande-Patry in Normandy, 183 

Lane, E. W., quoted, 104 

Lanterns, feast of, in Japan, 151 sg. 

Laos, 29 

Laosians of Siam, their belief in demons, 


Last day of the year, annual expulsion 
of demons on the, 145 sgq. 

Latin Christianity, its tolerance of rustic 
paganism, 346 

Laurel in purification, 262 

Laurels, ceremony of renewing 
346 1 

Lawes, W. G., quoted, 84 sq. 

Lead, melted, in cure, 4 

Leafman, the, 61 

Leaping over bonfires, 156 

Leaps to promote the growth of the 
crops, 232, 238 sqq. 

Leaves, disease transferred to, 2; fatigue 
transferred to, 8 sgg.; used to expel 


the, 


demons, 201, 206; sickness trans- 
ferred to, 259; used in exorcism, 
262 


Lehmann-Haupt, C. F., 412 7,1, 415 7.1 

Lehner, Stefan, quoted, 83 sg. 

Leith Links, witches burnt on, 165 

Leme, the river, 182 

Lengua Indians, 78 

Lent, ceremony at Halberstadt in, 214 ; 
perhaps derived from an old pagan 
period of abstinence observed for the 
growth of the seed, 347 sq. 

and the Saturnalia, 345 sgq. 

Lenten fast, its origin, 348 

Leobschiitz district of Silesia, 268 

Leprosy, Hebrew custom as to, 35; 
Mexican goddess of, 292 

Lerwick, ceremony of Up-helly-a’ at, 
169 

Leti, island of, 199 

Leucadians, their use of human scape- 
goats, 254 

Lhasa, ceremony of the Tibetan New 
Year at, 197 sg., 218 sgq. 

‘*Liar’s mound, the,’’ in Borneo, 14 


440 


License, month of general, 148 ; periods 
of, preceding or following the annual 
expulsion of demons, 225 sg., 306, 
328 sg., 343, 344; granted to slaves 
at the Saturnalia, 307 sg., 350 Sg., 
351 59- 

Licentious rites for the fertilization of the 
ground, 177 

Lichfield, the Boy Bishop at, 337 

Licorice root used to beat people with at 
Easter, 269 

Liebrecht, F., 392 7.1 

Lienz in the Tyrol, masquerade at, 242, 
245 

Lime-tree in popular cure, 59 sg. 

Limewood used at expulsion of demons, 
156 

Lincoln, the Boy Bishop at, 337 

Lion beloved by Ishtar, 371 

with the Sheepskins,” 265 

Livuans, the, of New Britain, 82 

Livy on the annual custom of knocking 

_a nail, 66; on the Saturnalia, 345 z.} 

Lizard or snake in annual ceremony for 
the riddance of evils, 208 

Lizards and serpents supposed to renew 
their youth by casting their skins, 302 
59q. 

Llama, black, as scapegoat, 193 

Loango, practice of knocking nails into 
idols in, 69 sg. 

Lokoala, initiation by spirits, 376 

Lord of the Diamond, 29 

of Misrule, 251; in England, 331 
5qq- 

Lorraine, King and Queen of the Bean 
in, 315 

Loth, J., 325 2.3 

Lots cast at Purim, 361 sg. 

Louis XIV. as King of the Bean, 313 

Lous, a Babylonian month, 355, 358 

Love, cure for, 3 

Lover's Leap, 254 

Lovers of Semiramis and Ishtar, their 
sad fate, 371 sg. 

Lucian, as to the rites of Hierapolis, 
392 

Ludlow in Shropshire, the tug-of-war at, 
182 

Lugg, river, 183 

Lules or Tonocotes of the Gran Chaco, 
their behaviour in an epidemic, 122 
Sg. 

Lumholtz, C., quoted, 10, 347 2.3 

Lunar year equated to solar year by 
intercalation, 325, 342 sq. 

Lusatia, the ‘‘ Witch-burning”’ in, 163 

Lushais of Assam, their belief in demons, 
94 

Luzon, exorcism in, 260 

Lycaeus, Mount, in Arcadia, 
sacrifice on, 353 


human 


INDEX 


Lydia, the burning of kings in, 391 
Lydus, Joannes, 229 .1 


Ma, goddess worshipped at Comana, 
421 2.4 

MacCulloch, J. A., 326 z. 

Macdonald, Rev. James, 111 2.1 

Macdonell, Lady Agnes, 164 2.1 

Macedonian superstitions as to the 
Twelve Days, 320 

Machindranath temple at Lhasa, 219 

Mackenzie, Sheriff David J., 169 2.” 

Macrobius on institution of the Satur- 
nalia, 345 7.1 

Madagascar, 19 

Madis, the, of Central Africa, 217 


Magdalen College, Oxford, the Boy 
Bishop at, 337 
Magic in ancient India, 91; and witch- 


craft, permanence of the belief in, 89 ; 
homoeopathic or imitative, 177, 232, 
257 

Magnesia on the Maeander, 397 2.” 

Mahadeva, propitiation of, 197 

Maize, the goddess of the Young, 278 ; 
Mexican goddesses of, 285 sg., 286 
n.1, 290, 291, 292, 294, 295 

Majhwars, Dravidian race of Mirzapur, 
36, 60 

Makrizi, Arabic writer, 393 

Malabar, use of cows as scapegoats in, 
216 

Malagasy, faditras among the, 33 sg. 

Malay Peninsula, the Besisi of the, 226 
n+ 

Malays, their use of birds as scapegoats, 
35; Stratification of religious be 
among the, go z.} 

Mallans of India, 190 

Mamurius Veturius in ancient Rome, 
229 sgq., 252, 257 

Man-god in China, 117 sg. 

Mandan Indians, their annual expulsion 
of the devil, 171 


Manipur, Rajah of, 39 sg.; annual 
eponyms in, 39 5g. 
Mannhardt, W., on processions of 


maskers, 250; on beating human 
scapegoats, 255, 272 

Mantras, the, of the Malay Peninsula, 
their fear of demons, 88 sg. 

Maori gods, 81 

Maraves, the, of South Africa, 19 

Marcellus of Bordeaux, 48, 50 

March, annual expulsion of demons in, 
149; annual expulsion of witches in, 
157; annual expulsion of evils in, 
199 ; ceremony of Mamurius Veturius ~ 
in, 229, 231; old Roman year began 
in, 231, 345; dances of the Salii in, 
232; bell-ringing procession on the 
first of, 247; custom of beating 


INDEX 


people and cattle in, 266; marriage 
festival of all the gods in, 373 z.!; 
festival of the Matronalia in, 346 

Marduk or Merodach, Babylonian god, 
356, 357, 399; as a deliverer from 
demons, 103 ; his ceremonial marriage 
at New Year, 356; the votaries of, 
372 2.2 

Marjoram a protection against witch- 
craft, 160 

Mar-na, a Philistine deity, 418 7.1 

Marriage of the god Marduk, 356 

, mock or real, of human victims, 

257 Sq. 

festival of all the gods, 273 z.} 

Mars a god of vegetation, 229 sg. ; the 
Old, at Rome, 229, 231, 252 

Silvanus, 230 

Marsaba, a demon, 109 

Marseilles, human scapegoats at, 253 

Marsh-marigolds a protection against 
witches, 163 

Martin, Rev. John, quoted, 132 sg. 

Martyrdom of St. Dasius, 308 sgq. 

Mascal or Festival of the Cross in Abys- 
sinia, 133 5g. 

Mashti, supposed name of Elamite god- 
dess, 366 sg. 

Mask, two-faced, worn by image of 
goddess, 287. See also Masks 

Masked dances and ceremonies of 
savages, 374 5sgg. ; to promote fertility, 
236 | 

Maskers in the Tyrol and Salzburg, 242 
sqg.; as bestowers of fertility, 249; 
supposed to be inspired by the spirits 
whom they represent, 380, 382, 383 

Masks worn at expulsion of demons, 
III, 127, 145, 213; intended to ban 
demons, 246; worn at ceremonies to 
promote the growth of the crops, 236, 
240, 242 sgqg., 247, 248 sg. ; worn by 
the Perchien, 242, 243, 245, 247; 
worn by priests who personate gods, 
287; worn in religious dances and 
performances, 375, 376 7.7, 378, 379, 
380, 382; burned at end of mas- 
querade, 382; treated as animate, 
382 

Masquerades in modern Europe, inten- 
tion of certain, 251 sg. 

Master of the Revels, 333 sg. 

Masuren, ‘‘ Easter Smacks”’ in, 269 

Mateer, S., quoted, 94 

Mater Dolorosa, the ancient and the 
modern, 349 

Material vehicles of immaterial things 
(fear, misfortune, disease, etc.), I sgg., 
22 2., 23 sqq. 

Materialization of prayer, 22 7.? 

Matronalia, festival of the, in March, 
346 


441 


Matse negroes of Togoland, 3 

Mawu, Supreme Being of Ewe negroes, 
74 5g: 

Maxwell, W. E., quoted, go x. 

May, Mexican human sacrifices in, 276, 
280; dances of Castilian peasants in, 
280; the King and Queen of, 406 

Day, 359; Eve of, witches abroad 

on, 158 sgg. ; in the Tyrol, ‘‘ Burn- 

ing out of the Witches” on, 158 sg. ; 

witches rob cows of milk on, 267 

morning, custom of herdsmen on, 
266 

Mayas of Yucatan, their annual expul- 
sion of the demon, 171; their calendar, 
171; their five supplementary days, 
349 

Mecca, stone-throwing at, 24 

Mecklenburg, custom on Good Friday 
in, 266; mode of reckoning the Twelve 
Days in, 327 

Medicine-man, need of, 76 

Melanesia, belief in demons in, 82 

Melenik in Macedonia, 320 

Men, evil transferred to, 38 sgg. ; pos- 
sessed by spirits in China, 117; divine, 
as scapegoats, 217 sgg.; sacrifices of 
deified, 409 

and women forbidden by Mosaic 
law to interchange dress, 363 

Mengap, a Dyak liturgy, 383 

Merodach or Marduk, Babylonian deity, 
356 

Merton College, Oxford, King of the 
Bean at, 332 

Metageitnion, a Greek month, 354 

Mexican temples, their form, 279 

Mexico, Indians of, 10; the Cora Indians 
of, 238, 381 ; the Tarahumare Indians 
of, 236 sg.; use of skins of human 
victims in ancient, 265 sg. ; killing the 
god in, 275 sgg. ; story of the creation 
of the sun in, 410 

Meyer, Eduard, 349 7.4 

Midsummer Day, 359 

Eve, witches active on, 158, 160 

Milan, festival of the Three Kings of 
Twelfth Day at, 331 

Milk, heifers beaten to make them yield, 
266 sq. 

Milky juice of wild fig-tree in religious 
rite, 258 

Mimicry the principle of religious or 
magical dramas, 374 

Minahassa in Celebes, 
demons in, III sg. 

Mingolt, spirits of the dead, 77 

Miotse, the, of China, 4 

Mirzapur, 6, 27, 36; the Korwas and 
Pataris of, 192 

Misfortune swept 
brooms, 5 


expulsion of 


out of house with 


442 


Misrule, the Lord of, 251; in England, 
331 599. 

Missiles hurled at dangerous ghosts or 
spirits, 17 sgq. 

Mistress of the Earth, 85 

Mitigations of human sacrifice, 396 sg., 
408 

Mnevis, sacred Egyptian bull, 217 

Moa, island of, 199 

Mock king, 403 sg. 

marriage of human victims, 257 sq. 

Mockery of Christ, 412 sqq. 

Modai, invisible spirits, 93 

Moesia, Durostorum in Lower, 309 

Mogador, 63 

Mohammed and the devil, 24 

Mohammedan custom of raising cairns, 21 

saints, 21, 22 

““Moles and Field-mice,"’ fire ceremony 
on Eve of Twelfth Night, 317 

Molina, Spanish historian, 130 7.1 

Molonga, a demon, 172 

Mommsen, August, 153 7.1 

Mongol transference of evil, 7 sg. 

Monkey sacrificed for riddance of evils, 
208 sq. 

Montagne du Doubs, 316 

Month during which men disguised as 
devils go about, 132; of general license 
before expulsion of demons, 148; inter- 
calary, 342 sgq. 

and moon, names for, in Aryan 
languages, 325 

Monumbo, the, of German New Guinea, 
their masked dances, 382 

Moon, bodily ailments transferred to the, 
53 sg.; the waning, 60; the ‘‘dark”’ 
and the ‘‘light,’’ 140, 141 7.1; temple 
of the, 218; hearts of human victims 
offered to the, 282; the goddess of 
the, 341, 381 

and month, names for, in Aryan 
languages, 325 

Moors of Morocco, 31 

Moravia, precautions against witchcraft 
in, 162; ‘‘ Easter Smacks”’ in, 268, 
269 

Mordecai, his triumphal ride in Susa, 
403 


and Esther equivalent to Marduk 

and Ishtar, 405; the duplicates of 

Haman and Vashti, 406 

and Haman, 364 sgg. ; as temporary 
kings, 400 sq. 

Morning Star, personated by a man, 238 ; 
the god of the, 381 

Morocco, 21, 31; exorcism in, 63; the 
tug-of-war in, 178 sg., 182 ; custom of 
beating people in, 265, 266 

Morris-dancers, 250 sg. 

Mortality, savage explanations of human, 
302 Sgg. 


INDEX 


Mortlock Islanders, their belief in spirits, 
82 

Mosaic law forbids interchange of dress 
between men and women, 363 

Moses, the tomb of, 21 

Moslem custom of raising cairns, 21 

Mossos of China, their annual expulsion 
of demons, 139 

Mosul, cure for headache at, 64 

Mother of the Gods, Mexican goddess, 
289; woman annually sacrificed in the 
character of the, 289 sg. 

-kin in royal families, 368 7.1 

Moulton, Professor J. H., 325 2.°, 373 
n+ 

Mounds of Semiramis, 370, 371, 373 

Mountain of Parting, 279 

Movers, F. C., on the Sacaea, 368, 387, 
388, 391 

Mowat in British New Guinea, 265 

Mrus, the, of Aracan, 12 7. 

Mule as scapegoat, 50 

Miiller, K. O., on Sandan, 389 sg. 

Mundaris, the, of N.E. India, 
annual saturnalia at harvest, 137 

Munich, annual expulsion of the devil at, 
214 sg. 

Munzerabad in S. India, 172 

Muota Valley in Switzerland, 166 

Murder, heaps of sticks or stones on 
scenes of, I5 

Mylitta, Babylonian goddess, 372 2.?, 
390 

Mysore in S. India, 172 

Mysteries as magical ceremonies, 374 

Mythical beings represented by men and 
women, 385 5g. 

Myths in relation to magic, 374; per- 
formed dramatically in dances, 375 
5Qq- 


their 


Nabu, Babylonian god, 358 z. 

Nagas of Assam, the tug-of-war among 
the, 177 

Nahum, the prophet, on Nineveh, 390 

Nahunti, an Elamite goddess, 369 2.1 

Nailing evils into trees, walls, etc., 59 
59. 

Nails, clippings of, in popular cures, 57, 
58; knocked into trees, walls, etc., as 
remedy, 59 sgg.; knocked into idols 
or fetishes, 69 sg.; knocked in ground 
as cure for epilepsy, 330 

Nakiza, the river, 27 

Nat superstition in Burma, go 2.1 

Nats, spirits in Burma, 175 sg.; pro- 
pitiation of, 96 

Navona, Piazza, at Rome, ceremony of 
Befana on the, 166 sg. 

Nebuchadnezzar, his record of the festival 
of Marduk, 357 

Negritos, religion of the, 82 


INDEX 


Neilgherry Hills, 36, 37 

Nelson, E. W., on the masquerades of 
the Esquimaux, 379 sqq. 

Nemontemz, the five supplementary days 
of the Aztec calendar, 339 

Nepaul, Dassera festival in, 226 7.1 

Nephthys, the birth of, 341 

Nettles, whipping with, 263 

Neugramatin in Bohemia, 270 

Neumann, J. B., quoted, 87 

New Britain, the Melanesians of, their 
belief in demons, 82 sg. ; expulsion of 
devils in, 109 sg. ; Gazelle Peninsula 
A303 

Caledonia, burying the evil spirit in, 

110; mode of promoting growth of 

taros in, 264 

College, Oxford, Boy Bishop at, 


338° 

Guinea, annual expulsion of demons 
in, 134 

Guinea, British, 265; belief in 


ghosts in, 84 sg. 

Guinea, Dutch, 178 ; the Papuans 
of, their belief in demons, 83 

Guinea, German, the Yabim of, 
188; the Bukaua of, their belief in 
demons, 83 sg. ; the Kaiof, 264; the 
Monumbo of, 382 

Hebrideans, their story of the 
origin of death, 304 

yams, ceremonies before eating the, 
134 599. 

Year, expulsion of evils at the, 127, 
133, 149 5g.,155; not reckoned from 


first month, 149 7.2; sham fight at 


the, 184; ceremony at the Tibetan, 

197 sq. ; festival among the Iroquois, 

209 sg. ; the Tibetan, 218 ; festival at 

Babylon, 356 sgq. 

Year’s Day in Corea, annual 

riddance of evil on, 202; in Tibet, 

ceremony on, 203; among _ the 

Swahili, 226 7.1; young women beat 

young men on, 271; of the Jewish 

calendar, 359 

Zealand, human scapegoats in, 39 

Nganga, medicine-man, 76 

Ngoc hoang, his message to men, 
393 

Nias, expulsion of demons in, 113 sgg. ; 
explanation of human mortality in, 
393 

Nicaragua, 9 

Nicholas Bishop, 338 

Nicobar Islanders, their belief in demons, 
88; theirannual expulsion of demons, 
201 sq. 

Islands, demon of disease sent 
away in a boat from the, 189 sg. 

Nicobarese ceremony of exorcism, 262 

Nights, custom of reckoning by, 326 7.? 


443 


Nineveh, tomb of Sardanapalus at, 388 
n.1; the burning of Sandan at, 390 

Ninus, Assyrian hero, 391 

Nirriti, goddess of evil, 25 

Nisan, Jewish month, 356, 361, 415 

No, annual expulsion of demons in China, 
145 Sg. 

Noises made to expel demons, 109 sgq., 
47 

Noldeke, Professor Th., on Purim and 
Esther, 366, 367 .1, 368 z.; on 
Omanos and Anadates, 373 .? 

Nonae Caprotinae, Roman celebration of 
the, 258 

Normandy, the Bocage of, 183 sg., 316, 
323 

Northamptonshire cure for cough, 51 

Nortia, Etruscan goddess, 67 

Norwegian sailors, their use of rowan, 
267 

Norwich, the Boy Bishop at, 337 

November, annual ceremony in, at 
catching sea-slug, 143; expulsion of 
demons in, 204 

Nut, the Egyptian sky-goddess, 341 

Nyassa, Lake, ro 


Oak and wild olive, pyre of Hercules 
made of, 391 

-trees in popular cures, 57, 60 

Obassi Nsi, earth-god, 28 

October, annual expulsion of demons in, 
226 2.1; Roman sacrifice of horse in, 
230 

Oels, in Silesia, 157 

Oesel, Esthonian island, 14 

Offerings at cairns, 26 sgg. ; to demons, 
96 

Oho-harahi, a Japanese ceremony, 213 

Old Christmas Day (Twelfth Night), 
321 

Oldenberg, H., quoted, 90 sg. 

Oldenburg, popular cures in, 49, 51, 52, 
53, 58 

Oldfield, H. A., quoted, 226 z.} 

Olive, wild, and oak, pyre of Hercules 
made of, 391 

-tree in popular remedy, 60 

Olympia, festival of Cronus at, 352 sg. 

Olynthiac, river, 142 7.} 

Olynthus, tomb of, 143 2. 

Omanos at Zela, 373 7.1 

Omens, mode of neutralizing bad, 39 

Omnipresence of demons, 72 sgq. 

Omphale and Hercules, 389 

One-eyed buffoon in New Year ceremony, 
402 

Onions used to foretell weather of the 
year, 323 

Onitsha, on the Niger, annual expulsion 
of evils at, 133 ; use of human scape- 
goats at, 210 sy. 


444 


Opening of the Wine-jars, Dionysiac 
festival of the, 352 

Oraons, the, of Bengal, their belief in 
demons, 93 sg.; their use of a human 
scapegoat, 196 

Orchards, fire applied to, on Eve of 
Twelfth Day, 317, 319, 320 

Orestes, purification of, 262 

Origin of death, savage tales of the, 
302 Sgq. 

Orinoco, Indians of the, 303 

Orkney Islands, 29; transference of 
sickness in the, 49 

Orlagau in Thiiringen, 271 

Oscans, the enemies of Rome, 231 

Osiris, the birth of, 341 

and Isis, 386 

Ottery St. Mary’s, the Boy Bishop at, 337 

Oude, burial of infants in, 45 

‘“‘Our Mother among the 
Mexican goddess, 278 

Owl represented dramatically as a mys- 
tery, 377 

Ox, disease transferred to, 31 sg. 

Oxen pledged on Eve of Twelfth Day, 
319 

Oxford, Lords of Misrule at, 332 


Water,” 


Pairing dogs, stick that has beaten, 264 

Palm Sunday, Russian custom on, 268 

Pan’s image beaten by the Arcadians, 
256 

Pancakes to scald fiends on New Year's 
Eve, 320 

Pandarus, tattoo marks of, 47 sg. 

Papa Westray, one of the Orkney 
Islands, 29 

Papuans, their belief in demons, 83 

Parkinson, R., quoted, 83 

Parti, name of an Elamite deity, 367 

Passover, accusations of murders at, 
395 sg. ; the crucifixion of Christ at, 
414 Sqq. 

Patagonians, their remedy for smallpox, 
122 

Pataris of Mirzapur, their use of scape- 
goats, 192 

Pathian, a beneficent spirit, 94 

Paton, L. B., 360 z.} 

Paton, W. R., on human scapegoats in 
ancient Greece, 257 Sd-, 259, 272): 
on Adam and Eve, 259 z.*; on the 
crucifixion, 413 7.2 

Pauntley, parish of, Eve of Twelfth Day 
in, 318 

Pawnees, their human sacrifice, 296 

Payne, E. J., 286 1 

Peach-tree in popular remedy, 54 

Peatman, sorcerer, 78 

Peg used to transfer disease to tree, 7 

Pegging ailments into trees, 58 sgq. 

Pelew Islanders, their gods, 81 sy. 


INDEX 


Peloria, a Thessalian festival resembling 
the Saturnalia, 350 

Pelorian Zeus, 350 

Pemali, taboo, 39 

Pembrokeshire, cure for warts in, 53 

Penance by drawing blood from ears, 292 

Pennant, Thomas, quoted, 321, 324 

Penzance, horn-blowing at, on the Eve of 
May Day, 163 sg. 

Perak, periodic expulsion of evils in, 198 
sqgq. ; the rajah of, 198 sg. 

Perche and Beauce, in France, 57, 62 

Perchta, Frau, 240 sq. 

Perchta’s Day, 240, 242, 244 

Perchten, maskers in Salzburg and the 
Tyrol, 240, 242 sqq. 

Percival, R., quoted, 94 sg. 

Perham, Rev. J., on the Head-feast of 
the Sea Dyaks, 383 sg. 

Periodic expulsion of evils in a material 
vehicle, 198 sgq. 

Periods of license preceding or following 
the annual expulsion of demons, 225 5g. 

Tlepivnua, 255 2.1 

Persephone, mourning for, 348 sg. 

Persia, cure for toothache in, 59; the 
feast of Purim in, 393 

Persian framework of the book of Esther, 
362, 401 


predecessors, 368 7.1 

marriages at the vernal equinox, 
406 2.3 

Persians annually expel demons, 145 ; 
the Sacaea celebrated by the, 402 

Peru, Indians of, 3; Incas of, 128; 
Aymara Indians of, 193; autumn 
festival in, 262 

Peruvian Indians, 9, 27 

Phees (phi), evil spirits, 97 

Philadelphia in Lydia, coin of, 389 

Philippine Islands, spirits of the dead in 
the, 82 

Philippines, the Tagbanuas of the, 189 

Philo of Alexandria, on the mockery of 
King Agrippa, 418 

Phocylides, the poet, on Nineveh, 390 

Phrygia, Cybele and Attis in, 386 

Piazza Navona at Rome, Befana on the, 
166 sg. 

Pig used to decoy demons, 200, 201 

Pig's blood used in purificatory rites, 262 

Pilate and Christ, 416 sg. 

Piles of sticks or stones. See Heaps 

Pillar, fever transferred to a, 53 

Pine-resin burnt as a protection against 
witches, 164 

Pins stuck into saint’s image, 70 sg. 

Pinzgau district of Salzburg, 244 

Pitch smeared on doors to keep out 
ghosts, 153 

Pitchforks ridden by witches, 160, t62 


kings married the wives of their. 


——— at 


ee 


—— 


aaa ce 


ee bt in 


aa 


ne 
ies 


INDEX 


Pithoria, village in India, ror 

Pitteri Pennu, the god of increase, 138 

Plague transferred to plantain-tree, 4 
sg. ; god of, 4; transferred to camel, 
33; preventive of, 64; demon of, ex- 
pelled, 173; sent away in scapegoat, 
193 

Plato on parricide, etc., 24 sg.; on 
poets, 35 2.2; on sorcery, 47 

Playfair, Major A., quoted, 208 sg. 

Pleiades, ceremony at the appearance of 
the, 262; observed by savages, 326 

Pliny on cure of warts, 48 2.2; on cure 
for epilepsy, 68 

Pliny’s letter to Trajan, 420 

Plough drawn round village to keep off 
epidemic, 172 sg. 

——- Monday, the rites of, 250 sq. 

Ploughing, ceremonies at, 235 

Plutarch on ‘‘the expulsion of hunger,”’ 
252 

Po Then, a great spirit, 97 

Point Barrow, the Esquimaux of, 124 

Pollution caused by murder, 25 

Polynesia, demons in, 80 sq. 

Pomerania, 17 

Pomos of California, their expulsion of 
devils, 170 sg. 

Pongau district of Salzburg, 244 

Pontarlier, Eve of Twelfth Day in, 316 

Pontiff of Zela in Pontus, 370, 372 

Pontus, rapid spread of Christianity in, 
420 Sg. 

Porphyry on demons, 104 

Port Charlotte in Islay, 62 

Moresby in New Guinea, 84 

Porto Novo, annual expulsion of demons 
at, 205 

Poseidon, cake with twelve knobs offered 
to, 351 

Posterli, expulsion of, 214 

Potala Hill at Lhasa, 197 

Poverty, annual expulsion of, 144 sg. 

Powers, Stephen, quoted, 170 sg. 

Prajapati, the sacrifice of the creator, 
411 

Prayer, the materialization of, 22 n.2+ at 
sowing, 138 

Prayers at cairns or heaps of sticks or 
leaves, 26, 28, 29 sg. 

Presteign in Radnorshire, the tug-of-war 
at, 182 sq. : 

Priest, the corpse-praying, 45 

Priests personating gods, 287 

Proa, demons of sickness expelled in a, 
185 sgg. ; diseases sent away in a, 199 
Sq. 

Processions for the expulsion of demons, 
117, 233; bell-ringing, at the Carnival, 
247; to drive away demons of infer- 
tility, 245 ; of maskers, W. Mannhardt 
on, 250 


445 


Procopius, quoted, 125 7.1 

Propertius, 19 

Propitiation of ancestral spirits, 86; of 
demons, 93, 94, 96, 100 

Prussia, ‘‘ Easter Smacks” in, 268 

, West, 17 

Prussian rulers, formerly burnt, 391 

Public expulsion of evils, 109 sgq. 

scapegoats, 170 sgq. 

Puhru, ‘‘assembly,”’ 361 

Puithiam, sorcerer, 94 

Puna Indians, 9 

Punjaub, human scapegoats in the, 196 

Puppy, blind, as scapegoat, 50 

Pur in the sense of ‘‘ lot,’’ 361 

Purification by bathing or washing, 3 sg.3 
by means of stone-throwing, 23 sgg. ; 
religious, intended to keep off demons, 
104 sg. ; the Great, a Japanese cere- 
mony, 213 2.1; by beating, 262; 
Feast of the, (Candlemas), 332 

festival among the Cherokee 
Indians, 128 

Purim, the Jewish festival of, 360 sgq. ; 
custom of burning effigies of Haman 
at, 392 sgg.; compared to the Car- 
nival, 394; its relation to Persia, 4o1 
5g. 

Purushu, great primordial giant, 410 

Pyre, traditionary death of Asiatic kings 
and heroes on a, 387, 388, 389 sqq. ; 
festival of the, at Hierapolis, 392 

Pythagoras, his saying as to swallows, 


2s ee 


Quauhtitlan, city in Mexico, 301 

Queen of the Bean, 313, 315 

Queensland, tribes of Central, their ex- 
pulsion of a demon, 172 

Quetzalcoatl, a Mexican god, 281, 300; 
man sacrificed in the character of, 
281 sq. 

‘«Quickening”’ heifers with a branch of 
rowan, 266 sq. 

Quixos, Indians of the, 263 


Ra, the Egyptian Sun-god, 341 

Races to ensure good crops, 249 

Radnorshire, 182 

Rafts, evils expelled in, 199, 200 sg. 

Rain, charms to produce, 175 5g., 
178 sg.; or drought, games of ball 
played to produce, 179 sg. ; dances to 
obtain, 236 sg., 238; festival to pro- 
cure, 277; divinities of the, 381 

gods of Mexico, 283 

Rainy season, expulsion of demons at 
the beginning of the, 225 

Rajah of Manipur, 39 sg. ; of Travan- 
core, 42 sg. ; of Tanjore, 44 

Ramsay, Sir W. M., 421 2.3 

Ranchi, in Chota Nagpur, 139 


446 


Rattles to keep out ghosts, 154 7. 

Raven legends among the Esquimaux, 
380 

Red thread in popular cure, 55 

and yellow paint on human victim 
to represent colours of maize, 285 

Reed, W. A., quoted, 82 

Reinach, Salomon, 420 7.1 

Renan, Ernest, 70 

Renewal, annual, of king’s power at 
Babylon, 356, 358 


Resurrection, the divine, in Mexican 
ritual, 288, 296, 302; of the dead 
god, 400 


Revelry at Purim, 363 sg. 

Revels, Master of the, 333 5g. 

Rhea, wife of Cronus, 351 

Rhodians, their annual sacrifice of a man 
to Cronus, 353 5g-, 397 

Rhys, Sir John, 343 z. ; quoted, 70 sq. 

Ribhus, Vedic genii of the seasons, 325 

Rice-harvest, carnival at the, 226 7.1! 

Richalm, Abbot, his fear of devils, 105 
5d. 

Riddles asked at certain seasons or on 
certain occasions, 120 sg., 7. 

‘« Ride of the Beardless One,” a Persian 
New Year ceremony, 402 sg. 

Ridgeway, W., 353 2.4; on the origin 
of Greek tragedy, 384 7.” 

Ridley, Rev. W., quoted, 123 sg. 

Riedel, J. G. F., quoted, 85 

Rig Veda, story of creation in the, 410 

Ring suspended in Purim bonfire, 393 

Rings, headache transferred to, 2 

Ritual murder, accusations of, brought 
against the Jews, 394 sq. 

River of Good Fortune, 28 

Rivers used to sweep away evils, 3 5g., 5; 
offerings and prayers to, .27 sq. 

Rivros, a month of the Gallic calendar, 
343 

Rockhill, W. W., 220 z.1 

Rogations, 277 

Roman cure for fever, 47 ; for epilepsy, 
68 


festival in honour of ghosts, 154 sg. 

husbandman, his prayers to Mars, 

229 

seasons of sowing, 232 

soldiers, celebration of the Saturn- 
alia by, 308 sg. 

Romans, their mode of reckoning a day, 
326 2. 

Rome, the knocking of nails in ancient, 
64 sqg.; Piazza Navona at, 166 sq. ; 
ancient, human scapegoats in, 229 
sgg. ; the Saturnalia at, 307 sg. 

Romulus, disappearance of, 258 

Roocooyen Indians of French Guiana, 
263; their tug-of-war, 181 

Roof, dances on the, 315 


INDEX 


Rook, expulsion of devil in island of, 
109 

Rope, ceremony of sliding down a, 196 
S9q. 

Ropes used to keep off demons, 120, 
149; used to exclude ghosts, 152 sg., 
154 2. 

Roscher, W. H., on the Salii, 231 7.3 

Roscommon, Twelfth Night in, 321 sg. 

Rosemary, used to beat people with, 
270, 271 

Rouen, ceremony on Ascension Day at, 
215 sq. 

Roumanians of Transylvania, 16; their 
belief in demons, 106 sg. 

Rowan-tree, cattle beaten with branches 
of, on May Day, 266 sg.; used to 
keep witches from cows, 267 

Rue, fumigation with, as a precaution 
against witches, 158 

Rupture, popular cures for, 52, 60 

Russia, the Wotyaks of, 155 sg. 

Russian custom on Palm Sunday, 268 

villagers, their precautions against 
epidemics, 172 sg. 

Rutuburi, a dance of the Tarahumare 
Indians, 237 


Sacaea, a Babylonian festival, 354 
sgg. ; in relation to Purim, 359 sgg. ; 
and Zakmuk, 399; celebrated by the 
Persians, 402 

Sacred dramas, as magical rites, 373 
59q) 

harlots, 370, 371, 372 

slaves, 370 

Sacrifice, human, successive mitigations 
of, 396 sg., 408; the Brahmanical 
theory of, 410 sg. 

Sacrifices, human, their influence on 
cosmogonical theories, 409 sgg.; of 
deified men, 409 

Sacrificial victims, beating people with 
the skins of, 265 ; 

Sagar in India, use of scapegoat at, 
190 sq. 

Sahagun, B. de, 276, 280, 300 2.}, 
zor 2.1 

‘‘Saining,” a protection against spirits, 
168 

St. Barbara’s Day, custom of putting 
rods in pickle on, 270 

St. Dasius, martyrdom of, 308 sgq. 

St. Edmund’s Day in November, 332 

St. Eustorgius, church of, at Milan, 
332 

St. George, Eve of, witches active on 
the, 158 

St. George’s Day among the South Slavs, 
54 

St. Guirec, 70 

St. Hiztibouzit, 413 7. 


INDEX 


St. John the Baptist, 53 
St. John (the Evangelist), festival of, 


334 

St. John’s Day in Abyssinia, 133 

St. John’s wort a protection against 
witchcraft, 160 

St. Joseph, feast of, 297 

St. Nicholas Day, 337, 338 

St. Paul's, London, the Boy Bishop at, 
Bo”, 

St. Peter’s, Canterbury, the Boy Bishop 
at, 337 

St. Peter’s Day (22nd February), cere- 
mony on, 159 z.1 

St. Pierre d’Entremont in Normandy, 
183 

St. Romain, the shrine of, at Rouen, 
216 

St. Stephen’s Day, 333, 334; custom of 
beating young women on, 270 

St. Sylvester's Day (New Year’s Eve), 
precautions against witches on, 164 sg. 

Eve at Trieste, 165 

St. Tecla, 52 

St. Thomas’s Eve, witches active on, 160 

Saints, cairns near shrines of, 21; Mo- 
hammedan, 21, 22 

Salii, the dancing priests of Mars, 231 


59: 

Salisbury, the Boy Bishop at, 337, 338 

Salt, the goddess of, 278, 283 

-makers worship the goddess of Salt, 
283; their dance, 284 

Saluting the rising sun, a Syrian custom, 
416 

Salzburg, the Perchten in, 240, 242 sqq. 

Samon, a month of the Gallic calendar, 
343 

Sampson, Agnes, a witch, 38 

Samsi-Adad, king of Assyria, 370 7.} 

Samyas monastery near Lhasa, 220 

San Pellegrino, church of, at Ancona, 
310 

Sandan, 368 ; legendary or mythical hero 
of Western Asia, 388 sqq. 

Sandes, the Persian Hercules, 389. See 
Sandan 

Santiago Tepehuacan, Indians of, 4, 347 
n.4 

Sarawak, the Sea Dyaks of, 154 

Sardan or Sandan, the burning of, 389 
Sq. 

Sardanapalus, 368 ; the epitaph of, 388 

and Ashurbanapal, 387 sg. 

Sardes in Lydia, 389, 391 

Sarn, valley of the, in Salzburg, 245 

Sarum use, service-books of the, 338 

Satan annually expelled by the Wotyaks, 
I55 sg. ; by the Cheremiss, 156 

Saturn, the Roman god of sowing, 232, 
306, 307 7.1; his festival the Saturnalia, 
306 sgg.; and the Golden Age, 306, 


447 


344, 386; man put to death in the 
character of, 309; dedication of the 
temple of, 345 2.1; the old Italian 
god of sowing, 346 

Saturnalia among the Hos and Mundaris 
of N.E. India, 136 sg. ; and kindred 
festivals, 306 sgg.; the Roman, 306 
sgg.; as celebrated by Roman soldiers, 
308 sg.; the King of the, 308, 311, 
312; its relation to the Carnival, 312, 
345 sgg.; and Lent, 345 sgg.; in 
ancient Greece, 350 sgg.; in Western 
Asia, 354 sgg.; wide prevalence of 
festivals like the, 407 sq. 

Savages, their regulation of the calendar, 
326 

Saxon cure for rupture, 52 

Scapegoat, plantain-tree as a, 5; decked 
with women’s ornaments, 192 ; Jewish 
use of, 210; a material vehicle for the 
expulsion of evils, 224 

Scapegoats, immaterial objects as, 1 sgq. ; 
animals as, 31 sgg., 190 sgg., 208 sqgq. ; 
birds as, 35 sg. ; human beings as, 38 
Sqq., 210 5gqg.; public, 170 sgg. ; divine 
animals as, 216 sg., 226 sg.; divine 
men as, 217 sgg., 226 sg. ; in general, 
224 sqq. 

, human, 194 sgg. ; in classical an- 
tiquity, 229 sgg.; in ancient Greece, 
252 sgg.; beaten, 252, 255; stoned, 
253, 254; cast into the sea, 254 sg. ; 
reason for beating the, 256 sg. 

«‘Scaring away the devil’ at Penzance 
on the Eve of May Day, 163 sg. 

Scarlet thread in charm against witch- 
craft, 267 

Schechter, Dr. S., 364 2.1 

Scheil, Father, on Elamite inscriptions, 
367 2.3 

Schmeckostern in Germany and Austria, 
268 sq. 

Schonthal, the abbot of, ros 

Schénwert, village of Bohemia, 161 

Schrader, O., 326 z. 

Schuyler, E., 45 

Schwaz, on the Inn, the ‘‘ grass-ringers ” 
at, 247 

Scorpion’s bite, cure for, 49 sg. 

Scotch witch, 38 sg. 

Scotland, the Highlands of, 20; cure of 
warts in, 48; witches burnt in, 165; 
Abbot of Unreason in, 331. See also 
Highlands 

Scourgings, mutual, of South American 
Indians, 262 

Scythian kings married the wives of their 
predecessors, 368 z.} 

Scythians, revellers disguised as, 355 

Sea, scapegoats cast into the, 254 sg. 

Dyaks of Sarawak, their Festival of 

Departed Spirits, 154 


448 


Sea-god, sacrifice to, 255 

-slugs, ceremonies at the annual 
appearance of, 141 sgq. 

Secret Societies in North-Western 
America, 377 59. 

Sedna, Mistress of the Nether World, 
among the Esquimaux, 125 sg. 

Seed-time, annual expulsion of demons 
at, 138 

Selangor, demons of disease expelled in 
a ship from, 187 sg. 

Selemnus, the river, 3 

Seler, E., 277 

Seleucia, 64 

Semiramis, mythical and historical, 369 
sgg.; the mounds of, 370, 371, 373, 
388 72.1; the sad fate of her lovers, 
371; burnt herself on a pyre, 407 7.? 

Sena-speaking people, 7 

Senegambia, 16 ; the Banmanas of, 261 

Senseless Thursday in Carnival, 248 

September, expulsion of evils by the 
Incas of Peru in, 128 

Serpents and lizards supposed to renew 
their youth by casting their skins, 302 
5Qq- 

Servians, their precaution against vam- 
pyres, 153 2.1 

Set, the birth of, 341 

Sham fight at New Year, 184; asreligious 
rite, 289 

Shaman, function of the, 79 sg. 

Shamans, necessity of, 99, 100; expel 
demons, 126; among the Esquimaux, 
379, 380 

Shammuramat and Semiramis, 370 z.} 

Shampoo, the fatal, 42 

Shans of Kengtung, their expulsion of 
-demons, 116 sg. ; of Southern China, 
their annual expulsion of the fire-spirit, 
I4I 

Shawms blown to ban witches, 160 

Sheepskins, people beaten with, 265 

Shepherd beloved by Ishtar, 371 

Shetland Islands, Yule in the, 167 sgq. 

Shinto priest, 116 

Ship, sicknesses expelled in a, 185 sgq. ; 
demons expelled in a, 201 sg. 

Shogun’s palace in Japan, 144 

‘«Shooting the Witches,”’ 164 

Shropshire, 182; the sin-eater in, 44; 
fires on Twelfth Night in, 321 

Shrove Tuesday, the tug-of-war on, 182 
sg.; dances to promote the growth 
of the crops on, 239, 347 

Siam, the Laosians of, 97 ; annual expul- 
sion of demons in, 149 sgg. ; human 
scapegoats in, 212 

Siamese year of twelve lunar months, 
149 2.2 

Sicily, Ascension Day in, 54 

Sickness transferred to animals in Europe, 


INDEX 


49 sqgg.; ascribed to demons, 
S9Q. 

Sicknesses expelled in a ship, 185 sgq. 

Sihanaka, the, of Madagascar, 2 


Sikhim, cairns in, 26; demonolatry in, 


109 


Silence, compulsory, to deceive demons, 
132 sg., 140. Compare 142 

Silesia, expulsion of witches on Good 
Friday in, 157; precautions against 
witches in, 162 sg., 164; . ‘‘ Easter 
Smacks” in, 268, 269; mode of 
reckoning the Twelve Days in, 327 

Silili, a Babylonian goddess, 371 

Sin-eater, the, 43 sg. 

Sin-eating in Wales, 43 sg. 

Singalang Burong, a Dyak war-god, 383 

Sins, confession of, 36, 127; transferred 
to a buffalo calf, 36 sg. ; transferred 
vicariously to human beings, 39 sgq. ; 
of people transferred to animals, 210 ; 
Delaware Indian remedies for, 263 

Sirius associated with Ishtar, 359 2.1 

Situa, annual festival of the Incas, 128 

Siyins, of N.E. India, their belief in 
demons, 93 

Skin disease, supposed remedy for, 266 ; 
Mexican remedy for, 298 

Skins, creatures that slough their, sup- 
posed to renew their youth, 302 sgq. 

of human victims, worn by men in 

Mexico, 265 sg., 288, 290, 294 sq., 

296 sgg., 301 sg. 

of sacrificial victims used to beat 
people, 265 

Sky-goddess, the Egyptian, 341 

Sladen, Colonel, 141 

Slave Coast, 74 

women, religious ceremony per- 
formed by, 258 

Slaves, license granted to, at the Saturn- 
alia, 307 sg., 350 5g., 351 sg.; feasted 
by their masters, 308, 350 sg. ; feasted 
by their mistresses, 346 

Slavonia, Good Friday custom in, 268 

Slavonic custom of ‘‘carrying out Death,” 
230 

peoples, ‘‘ Easter Smacks ’’ 

the, 268 

year, the beginning of the, 228 

Slavs, black god and white god among 
the, 92 

Sleeman, General Sir William, r9t 

Sloth, the animal, imitated by masker, 
381 

Sloughing the skin supposed to be a 
mode of renewing youth, 302 sgq. 

Smallpox, cure for, 6; attributed to a 
devil, 117, 119, 120, 123; expelled 
in a proa, 186 

, demon of, 172; sent away in a 

canoe, 188 sg. 


among 


INDEX 


Smell, foul, used to drive demons away, 
112 

Smith, W. Robertson, on Semiramis, 
369 sg. 

Smut in wheat, ceremony to prevent, 318 

Snails as scapegoats, 52, 53 

Snake or lizard in annual ceremony for 
the riddance of evils, 208 

Snipe as seapegoat, 51 

Social ranks, inversion of, at festivals, 
350, 407 

Socrates, church historian, 394 

Sods, freshly cut, a protection against 
witches, 163 

Soldiers, Roman, celebration of the 
Saturnalia by, 308 sg. 

Solomon Islanders, their expulsion of 
demons, 116 


—— Islands, 9 
Solstice, the winter, ceremony after the, 
127 


Soma, worship of, go 

Songs, liturgical, revealed by gods, 381 

and dances, how they originate, 
378 5g. 

Sonnenberg, popular cure for gout in, 56 

Soracte, Mount, 311 

Sorcerers as protectors against demons, 
94; exorcise demons, 113 

Soule, a ball contended for in Normandy, 
183 

Souls of the dead received once a year 
by their relations, 150 sgq. 

South American Indians, 12, 20 

Sow as scapegoat, 33 

Sowing, prayer at, 138; expulsion of 
demons at, 225; the god of, 232; 
dances at, 234 sgg.; Saturn the god 
of, 346; in Italy, season of the spring, 
346 

Sown fields, fire applied to, on Eve of 
Twelfth Night, 316, 318, 321 

Spain, the Boy Bishop in, 338 

Spear, sacred, 218 

Spears used to expel demons, 115, 116 

Spirits, retreat of the army of, 72 sg. ; 
guardian, 98; good and evil, per- 
sonated by children, 139; Festival of 
Departed, 154 

Spitting as a mode of transferring evil, 
3, IO, I1; as a mode of transferring 
disease, 187; at ceremony for ex- 
pulsion of evils, 208 

Spittle as a protection against demons, 
118 

Spring, rites to ensure the revival of life 
in, 400 

Squills used to beat human scapegoats, 
etc., 255 5g. 

Star, the Morning, personated by a 
man, 238; of Bethlehem, 330 

Steele, Sir Richard, quoted, 333 


PT. VI 


449 


Sternberg, L., quoted, ror sg. 

Sticks, fertilizing virtue attributed to 
certain, 264 sg. 

and stones, evils transferred to, 8 
sqg. ; piled on the scene of crimes, 13 
sgg. See also Throwing 

Stinging young people with ants and 
wasps, custom of, 263 

tone-throwing at Mecca, rite of, 24; in 
ancient Greece, 24 sg. 

Stones heaped up near shrines of saints, 
21; communion by means of, 21 sg. ; 
thrown at demons, 131, 146, 152 

and sticks, evil transferred to, 8 
sqg. ; piled on the scene of crimes, 13 
sqqg. See also Throwing 

Stoning, execution by, 24 .? 

human scapegoats, 253, 254 

Stopfer, maskers in Switzerland, 239 

Stow, John, on Lords of Misrule, 
quoted, 331 5g. 

Strabo, on the Sacaea, 355, 369; on 
the worship at Zela, 370 2.4; on the 
sanctuary at Zela, 421 7.1 

Strack, ELM, 395 72:2 

Stratification of religious beliefs among 
the Malays, go z.} 

Straw wrapt round fruit-trees as a pro- 
tection against evil spirits, 164 

Strehlitz, in Silesia, 157 

Strudeli and Stratteli, 165 

Substitutes in human sacrifice, 396 sq., 
408 

Sucla-Tirtha in India, expulsion of sins 
in, 202 

Suffering, principle of vicarious, I sg. 

Suffolk cure for ague, 68 

Suicides, ghosts of, feared, 17 sg. 

Sukandar river, 60 

Sumatra, the Battas or Bataks of, 87, 
213 

Sun, appeal to the, 3; charm to pre- 
vent the sun from setting, 30 7.7; 
reappearance of, in the Arctic regions, 
ceremonies at, 124 sg., 125 2.1; 
temple of the, at Cuzco, 129; spirit 
who lives in the, 186; hearts of 
human victims offered to the, 279, 
298; Mexican story of the creation of 
the, 410; Syrian custom of saluting 
the rising, 416 

-god, Christmas, an old pagan 
festival of the, 328; the Egyptian, 341 

Sunderland, cure for cough in, 52 

Siintevigel or Sunnenvigel, 159 n.} 

Superhuman power supposed to be 
acquired by actors in sacred dramas, 
382, 383 

Supplementary days of the year, 171 

Supreme Being in West Africa, 74 sg. 

God of the Oraons, 92 sg. 

Susa, capital of the Elamites, 366 


2G 


450 


Swabia, the ‘‘ Twelve Lot Days ” in, 322 

Swahili, the, of East Africa, their New 
Year's Day, 226 7.! 

Swallow dance, 381 

Swallows as scapegoats, 35 

Sweden, 14, 20, 27 

Sweeping misfortune out of house with 
brooms, 5 

out the town, annual ceremony of, 
135 

Swords used to ward off or 

. demons, 113, 118, I19, 120, 
203; carried by mummers, 245 

Syria, 17, 21; Aphrodite and Adonis 
in, 386 

Syro-Macedonian calendar, 358 7.1 


expel 
123, 


Tagbanuas of the Philippines, their 
custom of sending spirits of disease 
away in little ships, 189 

Tahiti, transference of sins in, 45 5g. 

Tahitians, the, 80 

Taigonos Peninsula, 126 

Taleins, the, of Burma, their worship of 
demons, 96 

Talmud, the, on Purim, 363 

Tamanachiers, Indian tribe of the 
Orinoco, 303 

Tamanawas, dramatic performances of 
myths, 376, 377 

Tamarisk branches used to beat people 
ceremonially, 263 

Tambaran, demons, 82, 83 

Tammuz, the lover of Ishtar, 371, 373; 
annual death and resurrection of, 398 , 
at Jerusalem, the weeping for, 400. 
See also Adonis 

and Ishtar, 399, 406 

Tanganyika, Lake, ro 

Tangkhuls of Assam, 177 

Tanjore, Rajah of, 44 

Taoism, 99 

Tar to keep out ghosts and witches, 
153 2.1 

-barrels burnt, 169 

Tarahumares, the, of Mexico, to; their 
dances for the crops, 236 sqq. 

Taros, mode of fertilizing, 264 

Tarsus in Cilicia, Sandan at, 388, 389, 
391, 392 

Taupes et Mulots, fire ceremony on Eve 
of Twelfth Night, 317 

Tavernier, J. B., quoted, 148 7.1 

Taylor, Rev. J. C., quoted, 133, 211 

Taylor, Rev. R., quoted, 81 

Tellemarken in Norway, 14 

Telugu remedy for a fever, 38 

Temple, Sir Richard C., quoted, 88 

Temple, the Inner and the Middle, 
Lords of Misrule in the, 333 

church, Lord of Misrule in the, 
333 


INDEX 


Temporary king, 403 sg. ; in Siam, 151 

Tench as scapegoat, 52 

Tenggerese of Java, their sham fight at 
New Year, 184 

Tepehuanes, the, of Mexico, 10 

Teshu Lama, the, 203 

Lumbo in Tibet, 203 

Teso people of Central Africa, their use 
of bells to exorcise fiends, 246 sg. 

Tezcatlipoca, great Mexican god, 276; 
young man annually sacrificed in the 
character of, 276 sq. 

Thales on spirits, 104 

Thargelia, human scapegoats at the 
festival of the, 254, 255, 256, 257, 
259; 272, 273 

Thay, the, of Indo-China, their worship 
of spirits, 97 sg. 

Theal, G. McCall, on fear of demons, 
77 Sq. 

Theckydaw, expulsion of demons, 147 sg. 

Then, spirits, 97 

Theodosius and Honorius, decree of, 392 

Theory of sacrifice, the Brahmanical, 
410 Sq. 

Thompson Indians of British Columbia, 
their charms against ghosts, 154 7. 

Thorns, wreaths of, 140 

Thrace, Abdera in, 254 

Thrashing people to do them good, 
262 sqg. See also Beating and Whip- 
ping 

Thread, red, in popular cure, 55 

Three Kings on Twelfth Day, 329 sqq. 

Threshold protected against witches by 
knives, 162; by sods, 163 

Throwing of sticks or stones interpreted 
as an offering or token of respect, 
20 sqg., 25 Sgg.; aS a mode of rid- 
dance of evil, 23 sg@. 

Thule, ceremony in Thule at the annual 
reappearance of the sun, 125 z.! 

Thunder, the first peal heard in spring, 
144; demon of, exorcised by bells, 
246 sq. 

Thiiringen, expulsion of witches in, 160; 
custom of beating people on Holy 
Innocents’ Day in, 271 

Tiamat, mythical Babylonian monster, 
410 

Tibet, demonolatry in, 
scapegoats in, 218 sgq. 

Tiger-spirits, 199 

Tikopia, island of, 189 

Timbo in French Guinea, 235 

Time, personification of periods of, 230 

Timor, the island of, 8; belief in the 
spirits of the dead in, 85 

Timor fecit deos, 93 

Timor-laut Islands, the tug-of-war in 
the, 176; demons of sicknesses ex- 
pelled in a proa from, 185 sg. 


94; human 


INDEX 


Tinchebray in Normandy, 183 

Tjingilli tribe of Central Australia, 2 

Tlacaxipeualiztli, Mexican festival, 296 

Tlaloc, temple of, in Mexico, 284, 292 

Tlemcen in Algeria, 31 

Toad as scapegoat, 193, 206 sq. 

Toboongkoo, the, of Central Celebes, 
riddles among the, 112 z. 

Toci, Mexican goddess, 289 

Todas, the, of the Neilgherry Hills, 37 

Togoland, 3; the Hos of, 134, 206; 
the negroes of, their remedy for influ- 
enza, 193 

Tokio, annual expulsion of demons at, 
213 

Tomb of Moses, 21 

Tonan, Mexican goddess, 287; woman 
sacrificed in the character of, 287 sg. 

Tonocotes. See Lules 

Tonquin, demon of sickness expelled in, 
rig; annual expulsion of demons in, 
147 5g. 

Toothache, cure for, 6, 57, 58, 59 5g., 
62763; 7x 

Toradjas, the, of Central Celebes, 34; 
their cure by beating, 265 

Torches used in the expulsion of demons, 
IIO, II7, 120, 130, 131, 132, 133 sq., 
139, 140, 146, 157, 171; used in the 
expulsion of witches, etc., 156, 157, 
158, 159, 160, 163, 165, 166; carried 
in procession by maskers, 243; ap- 
plied to fruit-trees on Eve of Twelfth 
Night, 316 sg. 

Torquemada, J. de, Spanish historian of 
Mexico, 279 2.1, 286 2.1, 300 x. 

Totec, Mexican god, 297, 298 ; person- 
ated by a man wearing the skin of a 
human victim, 300 

Totonacs, their worship of the corn- 
spirit, 286 7.1 

Tototectin, men clad in skins of human 
victims, 298 

Toxcatl, fifth month of old Mexican 
year, 149 2.2; Mexican festival, 276 

Trajan, Pliny’s letter to, 420 

Transference of evil, 1 sgg.; to other 
people, 5 sgg. ; to sticks and stones, 
8 sgg.; to animals, 31 sgg. ; to men, 
38 sgg. ; in Europe, 47 sg. 

Transformation of animals into men, 380 

Transylvania, the Roumanians of, 16, 
106 sg. 

Travancore, Rajah of, 42 sg. ; demon- 
worship in, 94 

Tree, disease transferred to, 6; use of 
stick cut from a fruitful, 264 

Trees, evils transferred to, 52, 54 sgq. 

Trieste, St. Sylvester's Eve at, 165 

Trinity, the Batta, 88 z.} 

College, Cambridge, Lord of Mis- 

rule at, 332 


451 


« 
Trinouxtion, 343 2. 
Tripoli, mode of laying ghosts in, 63 
Troezenians, their festival resembling the 
Saturnalia, 350 
Trows in Shetland, 168 sg. 
Trumpets blown to expel demons, 116, 


117, 156; blown at the feast of 
Purim, 394 

Tsuina, expulsion of demons in Japan, 
212 sg. 


Tstl, a Berber tribe, 179 

Tuaran district of British North Borneo, 
200 

Tug-of-war as a religious or magical rite, 
173 59g. ; aS a charm to produce rain, 
175 5g., 178 sg. 

Tul-ya's e’en in Shetland, 168 

Tullus Hostilius, 345 7. 

Tumleo, annual fight in, 142 sg. 

Tuna, a spirit, expulsion of, 124 sg. 

Tung ak, a powerful spirit, 79, 80 

Turkestan, 45; Ferghana in, 184 

Turkish tribes of Central Asia, riddles 
among the, 122 2. 

Turner, L. M., quoted, 79 sg. 

Tuscan Romagna, the, 167 

Twelfth Day, serious significance of, 
315; the Three Kings on, 329 sgq. 
See also Twelfth Night 

Day, Eve of, 318; expulsion of 

witches, etc., on, 166 sg. 

Night, expulsion of the powers of 

evil on, 165 sgg.; dances on, 238; 

Perchta’s Day, 244; (Epiphany), the 


King of the Bean on, 313 sgg. See 
also Twelfth Day 
Night, Eve of, 316; old Mrs. 


Perchta on, 240, 241 ; ceremonial fires 
on, 316 sgqg. 

Twelve Days, weather of the twelve 
months supposed to be determined by 
the weather of the, 322 sgg. ; in Mace- 
donia, superstitions as to the, 320; in 
ancient India, 324 sg. ; accounted a 
miniature of the year, 324; in the 
Highlands of Scotland, 324; differ- 
ence of opinion as to the date of the, 
324, 327; probably an old inter- 
calary period at midwinter, 338 sg., 

42 

see Days from Christmas to Twelfth 
Night (Epiphany), precautions against 
witches during the, 158 sgg., 164 
S9q- 

Days or Twelve Nights not of 

Christian origin, 326 sqg. 

fires op Eve of Twelfth Day, 318 
SJ. 321 5g. 

Two-faced mask worn by image of god- 
dess, 287 

Typhon, the birth of, 341 

Tyre and Sidon, 17 


452 


Tyrol, annual ‘‘ Burning out of the 
Witches"’ in the, 159 sg. ; the Perchten 
in the, 240, 242 sg. ; Senseless Thurs- 
day in the, 248 


Uganda Protectorate, 6, 42; funeral 
ceremony in, 45 2.*; human scape- 
goats in, 194 sg. See also Baganda 

Unalashka, one of the Aleutian Islands, 
16 

Unkareshwar, the goddess of cholera at, 
194 

Unreason, Abbot of, in Scotland, 331 

Up-helly-a’ in Shetland, 168 sg. 

Urquhart, Sir Thomas, quoted, 332 

Usener, H., 167 7.1, 229 2.” 

Utch Kurgan, in Turkestan, 45 


Vampyres, charms against, 153 7.1 

Vashti and Esther, temporary queens, 
401 

and Haman the duplicates of Esther 
and Mordecai, 406 

Vedic times, 3; cure for consumption 
in, 51; the creed of the, 90; riddles 
in, 122 #. ; the Aryans of the, 324 

Vegetation, Mars a deity of, 229 sg.; 
out-worn deity of, 231; processions 
representing spirits of, 250 

-god, Easter an old vernal festival 
of the, 328 

Vehicle, expulsion of evils in a material, 
185 sgq., 198 sgq., 224 

Vehicles, material, of immaterial things 
(fear, misfortune, disease, etc.), I sgq., 
22 2.%, 23 sgq. 

Venus and Adonis, 406. See also Adonis, 
Aphrodite 

Verrall, A. W., 391 7.4 . 

Vicarious suffering, principle of, r sg. 

Vienne, the Boy Bishop at, 337 z.! 

Vieux-Pont, in Orne, 183 2. 

Vitzilopochtli, great Mexican god, 280; 
young man annually sacrificed in the 
character of, 280 sg. 

Vohumano or Vohu Manah, a Persian 
archangel, 373 2.1 

Voigtland, cure for toothache in, 59; 
belief in witchcraft in, 160; ‘‘ Easter 
Smacks" in, 268; young people beat 
each other at Christmas in, 271 

Vosges, cure for toothache in the, 59 

Mountains, dances on Twelfth Day 
in the, 315; the Three Kings of Twelfth 
Day in the, 330 

Vulsinii in Etruria, 67 


Wagogo, the, of German East Africa, 6 

Walpurgis Night, witches abroad on, 
158 sgg.; annual expulsion of witches 
on, 159 sgg.; dances on, 238 

Warramunga tribe of Central Australia, 2 


INDEX 


Warts, transference of, 48 sg.; popular 
cures for, 54, 57 

Washamba, the, of German East Africa, 29 

Wasps, stinging people with, 263 

Wassailing on Eve of Twelfth Day, 319 

Wax figures in magic, 47 

Weapons turned against spiritual foes, 
233 

Weariness transferred to stones or sticks, 
8 sqq. 

Weather of the twelve months deter- 
mined by the weather of the Twelve 
Days, 322 sgq. 

Weber, A., on origin of the Twelve Days, 
325 7.° 

Weeks, Rev. John H., quoted, 76 sg. 

Weights and measures, false, corrected 
in time of epidemic, 115 

Weinhold, K., 327 2.4 

Welsh cure for cough, 51 

custom of sin-eating, 43 sg. 

Wendland, P., on the crucifixion of 
Christ, 412 sg., 418 2.1 

Wends of Saxony, their precautions 
against witches, 163 

Westermarck, Dr. Edward, 180 

Westphalia, 266 

Westphalian form of the expulsion of 
evil, 159 .} 

Whale represented dramatically as a 
mystery, 377 

Whipping people to rid them of ghosts, 
260 sqq. 

Whips used in the expulsion of demons 
and witches, 156, 159, 160, 161, 165, 
214; used by maskers, 243, 244 

White as a colour to repel demons, 115 

and black in relation to human 

scapegoats, 220; figs worn by human 

scapegoats, 253, 257, 272 

cock, disease transferred to, 187 ; 

as scapegoat, 210 2.4 

crosses made by the King of the 

Bean, 314 J 

dog, sacrifice of, 127; as scape- 

goat, 209 sg. 

god and black god among the 

Slavs, 92 

Nile, the Dinkas of the, 193 

Whitsuntide, 359 

Whydah, the King of, 234 

Widow, bald-headed, in cure, 38 

Widows, cleansing of, 35 sg. 

Wild Huntsman, 164, 241 

Willcock, Dr. J., 169 7.? 

William of Wykeham, 338 

Williams, Monier, quoted, 91 sg. 

Willow used to beat people with at Easter 
and Christmas, 269, 270 

-trees in popular remedies, 56, 58, 59 

Willow-wood used against witches, 160 

Winchester College, Boy Bishop at, 338 


INDEX 453 


Wind, charm to produce a rainy or dry, 
176, 178 sq. 
Winnowing-basket beaten at ceremony, 


145 
Winter, ceremony at the end of, 124 ; 


dances performed only in, 376; cere- . 


mony of the expulsion of, 404 sg. ; 

effigies of, destroyed, 408 sg. 

solstice, ceremony after the, 126 

Witch, fire to burn old, on Twelfth 
Day, 319 

Witchcraft in Scotland, 38 sg. ; on the 
Congo, dread of, 77 2.2; permanence 
of the belief in, 89 ; in Moravia, pre- 
cautions against, 162 

Witches burnt alive, 19; the burning 
out of the, in the Tyrol, 158 sg., in 
Bohemia, 161, in Silesia and Saxony, 
163; special precautions against, at 
certain seasons of the year, 157 sqq. ; 
annually expelled in Calabria, Silesia, 
and other parts of Europe, 157 sgq. ; 
active during the Twelve Days from 
Christmas to Twelfth Night, 158 sgq.; 
shooting the, 164; driving out the, 
164; burnt in Scotland, 165 ; beaten 
with buckthorn, 266; rob cows of 
milk on May Day, 267 

Wives of a king taken by his successor, 
368 2.1 

Woman's ornaments, scapegoat decked 
with, 192 

Women impregnated by ghosts, 18; 
fertilized by effigy of a baby, 245, 
249 ; mode of fertilizing, 264; put to 
death in the character of goddesses in 
Mexico, 283 sgq. 

Wood, King of the, at Aricia, 409 

World conceived as animated, go sy. ; 
daily created afresh by the self-sacri- 
fice of the deity, 411 

Worship of the dead, 97; paid to 
human representatives of gods in 
Mexico, 278, 282, 289, 293 

Wotyaks of Russia, annual expulsion of 
Satan among the, 155 sg. 

Wuttke, A., 327 2.4 


Xerxes identified with Ahasuerus, 360 

Xilonen, Mexican goddess of the Young 
Maize, 285; woman annually sacri- 
ficed in the character of, 285 sg. 

Xipe, Mexican god, 297, 298, 299; 
statuette of, 291 7.1; his festival, 296 
sqqg. ; his image, 297 

Xixipeme, men clad in skins of human 
victims, 298, 299 


Yabim of German New Guinea, their 
custom of sending disease away in a 
small canoe, 188 sq. 

Yams, ceremonies before eating the 
new, 134 

Year, burning out the Old, 165, 230 
z.7 ; the old Roman, began in March, 
229; supposed representatives of the 
old, 230. See also New Year 

——, lunar, of old Roman calendar, 232; 
equated to solar year by intercalation, 
325, 342 Sg. 

, solar, intercalation of the, 407 7.1 

-man, the, in Japan, 144 

Years named after eponymous magis- 
trates, 39 sg. 

, the King of the, 220, 221 

Yellow the royal colour among the 
Malays, 187 

Yopico, temple in Mexico, 299 

York, the Boy Bishop at, 337, 338 

Yoruba negroes of West Africa, their 
use of human scapegoats, 211 sg. 

Younghusband, Sir Francis, 13 

Youth supposed to be renewed by 
sloughing of skin, 302 sgq. 

Yucatan, the Mayas of, 171, 340 

Yukon River, the Lower, 380 

Yules, the, in Shetland, 168 

Yumari, a dance of the Tarahumare 
Indians, 237 sq. 


Zakmuk or Zagmuk, the Babylonian 
festival of the New Year, 356 sgq. 

and the Sacaea, 399 

Zambesi, the river, 7, 11 

Zela in Pontus, Anaitis and the Sacaea 
at, 370, 372, 373, 421 2.1; Omanos 
and Anadates at, 373 2.1 

Zeus, cake with twelve knobs offered to, 
351; an upstart at Olympia, 352; 
identified with the Babylonian Bel, 
389 

, Laphystian, associated with human 

sacrifices, 354 

, Lycaean, human sacrifices to, 353, 
354 

——, Olympian, histemple at Athens, 351 

, Pelorian, 350 

Zimmern, H., 358 z., 359 2.1, 361 2.4, 
406 2. 

Zoganes, a mock king at Babylon, 355, 
357, 365, 368, 369, 387, 388, 406 

Zoroaster, 389 

Ziindel, G., on demonolatry in West 
Africa, 74 sqgq. 

Zuni sacrifice of turtle, 217 


Printed by R. & R. Crark, LimitTep, Edinburgh. 


Works by J. G. FRAZER, D.C.L., LL.D., Litt.D. 


THE GOLDEN BOUGH 


A STUDY IN MAGIC AND RELIGION 
Third Edition, revised and enlarged. 8vo. 


Part I. THE Macic ART AND THE EvoLUTION OF KINGS. Two 
volumes. Second Impression. 2os. net. 


II. TABoo AND THE PERILS OF THE SOUL. One volume. Second 
Impression. ros. net. 


Il]. THE Dyinc Gop. Onevolume. Second Impression. ros. net. 
IV. Aponts, ATTIS, Osiris. One volume. Second Edition. ros. net. 

V. SPIRITS OF THE CORN AND OF THE WILD. Two volumes. 20s. net. 
VI. THE ScaPEcoaT. One volume. tos. net. 


VII. BALDER THE BEAUTIFUL. ‘Two volumes. [Lx the Press. 


TIMES.—‘‘ The verdict of posterity will probably be that Zhe Golden Bough has 
influenced the attitude of the human mind towards supernatural beliefs and symbolical 
rituals more profoundly than any other books published in the nineteenth century 
except those of Darwin and Herbert Spencer.” 


TOTEMISM AND EXOGAMY. A Treatise on 
Certain Early Forms of Superstition and Society. With 
Maps. Four vols. 8vo. 50s. net. 


Mr. A. E. CRAWLEY in VA 7UREZ.—“‘ That portion of the book which is con- 
cerned with totemism (if we may express our own belief at the risk of offending Prof. 
Frazer's characteristic modesty) is actually ‘The Complete History of Totemism, its 
Practice and its Theory, its Origin and its End.’ . . . Nearly two thousand pages are 
occupied with an ethnographical survey of totemism, an invaluable compilation. The 
maps, including that of the distribution of totemic peoples, are a new and useful 
feature.” 


LECTURES ON THE EARLY HISTORY OF 
THE KINGSHIP. 8vo. 8s. 6d. net. 


ATHENA UM.—“‘It is the effect of a good book not only to teach, but also to 
stimulate and to suggest, and we think this the best and highest quality, and one that 
will recommend these lectures to all intelligent readers, as well as to the learned.” 


PSYCHE’S TASK. A Discourse concerning the Influence 
of Superstition on the Growth of Institutions. | Second Edition, 
revised and enlarged. To which is added “ The Scope of Social 
Anthropology.” 8vo. 5s. net. 


TIMES (on the First Edition).—‘‘Dr. Frazer has answered the question of 
how the moral law has been safeguarded, especially in its infancy, with a wealth of 
learning and a clearness of utterance that leave nothing to be desired.” 


MACMILLAN AND CO., Lrp., LONDON. 


Works by J. G. FRAZER, D.C.L., LL.D., Litt.D. 


THE BELIEF IN IMMORTALITY AND THE 
WORSHIP OF THE DEAD. Vol. I. The Belief 
among the Aborigines of Australia, the Torres Straits 
Islands, New Guinea, and Melanesia. The Gifford Lectures, 
St. Andrews, I9 1I-I912. 8vo. Ios. net. 

Mr. EDWARD CLoppD in the DA/Z VY CHRONICLE.—“ ‘If a man die, shall he 
live again ?’ isa question asked chiliads before Job put it, and the generations of man- 
kind repeat it. In this profoundly interesting volume, Professor Frazer, out of the 


treasury of his knowledge, and with consummate art of attractive presentment, gives 
the answers devised by the Lower Races.” 


PAUSANIAS’S DESCRIPTION OF GREECE: 


Translated with a Commentary, Illustrations, and Maps. 
Second Edition. Six vols. 8vo. 126s, net. 

ATHEN“7£UM.—“ All these writings in many languages Mr. Frazer has read 

and digested with extraordinary care, so that his book will be for years ¢he book of 


reference on such matters, not only in England, but in France and Germany. It isa 
perfect thesaurus of Greek topography, archeology, and art.” 


PAUSANIAS AND OTHER GREEK SKETCHES. 
Globe 8vo. 4s. net. 


GUA RDIA N.—“ Here we have material which every one who has visited Greece, 
or purposes to visit it, most certainly should read and enjoy. . . . We cannot imagine 
a more excellent book for the educated visitor to Greece.” 


LETTERS OF WILLIAM COWPER. Chosen and 
Edited with a Memoir and a few Notes by J. G. FRAZER, 


D.C.L., LL.D., Litt.D. Two vols. Globe Syo, 3Ssamem 
[Zversley Series. 


Mr. CLEMENT SHORTER in the DA7L Y CHRONICLE.—“‘To the task Dr. 
Frazer has given a scholarly care that will make the edition one that is a joy to 
possess. His introductory Memoir, of some eighty pages in length, is a valuable 
addition to the many appraisements of Cowper that these later years have seen. It is 
no mere perfunctory ‘introduction,’ but a piece of sound biographical work... . 
Dr. Frazer has given us two volumes that are an unqualified joy.” 


MACMILLAN AND CO., Lrp., LONDON. 


BRINWING wewt- AGI Lv iviv¥ 


PLEASE DO NOT REMOVE 
CARDS OR SLIPS FROM THIS POCKET 


UNIVERSITY OF TORONTO LIBRARY 
ee ee 


BL Frazer, (Sir) James George 
310 The golden bough. 3d ed. 
F7 

191la 


eats 


any musa ect 
aeeseieaaernt 


Aopeperenepere 
i a5) 


> 


its 
ot 


eepsne yee 


(stent Saoaey 


Cyeth 


3] 
aia 


artat 
ety 


Seiibeed 


ihe 
Srrrsseibattes 


(i 


t2% 


tices 
rears 
Webs 


Lyeb. 


‘es 
ee, 
eteb | 
tit 


Soe eerste 
Sie “ 


reteset 


Bierbastaie tt 
: Sea al 
. oH Bash, fs 


eater 


. 
rat bbe os 

ne eats 
Ht ie siete 


hil 


iF ai OE A 
t 9 y tg 
Fess cape 
eh 

MG 
sitet Ht 

Yeegtd ead 


eee 
chs tersies. z 
62 = 
= Senate! 
Soyer" 
at 


cheats 
ech saasteaeain gt 
© Ne hoaaeTt 


SS 
ie 


es 


Robie a eee = 
a 


it 
i 


: i | 
. 


rene) 


SSS 
Rs 


Se 
See 


~ys 
x 


. 


3 i 


Bais 


seus 
eke 


iqrptiriets 


lay 
Be 
. SH 
; ae 4 is] 
trite bes 3) tart. r hs Hts! (hain She ? 
ty i ‘ pg ryiel Ms sy p «he siepieset 18 
i at Uy See Minteats Eto esbboate ale i$ BH! } iii Petrie 
ST a ce ee it a ae sett 
arf rf 


tak ina ea Fa rakspeuensyciee Pobre! { 
fiat aivesee tubes Seat Ti dat 
; racic ieee eesti tat 

; eet ih 


he 


fritteet 
PRE NRT ES Fi bi te pitsahe 1 - * 
* 1+ tne . i j 
(at Shas aa ec Sbea ptr ttpcit stat oateicey tye vsggt 


yee ree 
Z 


5 


~exerghtit 


es 


shitdst: 


Se ga 


Bet oe xx toa a 
z a ~r* 


é 
Sere Eo 
a 


es 
t 


a. 


SGD aE ei roe a 
hak ae : i 5 te Pa . hg 
5. ee bet 
bs aoe 


o Sieg - 
ia Pe -wilhead i 


Be Oe a. Es ys. 
ae # ee oe se ; phe Ot ae 
. ee ~ = Pe <e 7 Pt a 
pare lat ala a! pe Poe nig S.) ees, 
> : Ed tg : e * oN Print wee tn, <7 se : ae : So aie See ae 

ae Ts * ae coe Sees oe: is = >*% 
pt a 38 i . 2 

# ot Fer ROPER i Se ores 
— ‘yn SR ®t — 


~o 7%, . es +2 
Boe.) Sencar 
5 De ot ae ra ie aS Foe : 
a, Sosy ¥< we ae 

hs pt? og an 


<3 a ae ae Seca ets SOO SK S is s 

ge ee ae A Ae oS Oko Peg ea ora 9 erase Soa Oe: 
eee eee yer. eee 

(ie GEG ee 


“ h 


See “es 


= a 
os 
eS he 


, ow <tie ee ee 
ae ad ag 
Me a we see ae ee 
Fy 


AAS 
— > chen are we oy Fg TR Fig i 
4 ' “5 
oe as ber z aR SaaS 
Ae a mecica. 


we 


Fs 
rs lg x eo ce: 
in 


SAS; Fy 


Pty 
“ey 
f } 


» Si 


om. < a! 


4 


Co ey 
of my 


a’ ‘ thats 
a «>. Sf << Wa 2% ag , 
; 7 y << e, A, my rs “ 
Sgantetee Sing 
pe ea Rare: 
Py re tate tee on 


we 
CS 


ln ia ie 
i ee 
1 eee 
Tal ie 
un ann 
| S88
