The Golden Bough (3rd ed.), Vol. 3: Taboo and the Perils of the Soul (James George Frazer, 1911)
==========================================================
Vol. 3 of the Golden Bough 3rd edition. Public domain. Source: Internet Archive.

Ontario Council of University Libraries


http:/Awww.archive.org/details/goldenboughstud03fraz


THE GOLDEN BOUGH


A STUDY IN MAGIC AND RELIGION


THIRD EDITION


Vol. 3
bs (} F 7


PART Il


TABOO
AND THE PERILS OF THE SOUL


MACMILLAN AND CO., LimirED
LONDON - BOMBAY - CALCUTTA
MELBOURNE
THE MACMILLAN COMPANY
NEW YORK - BOSTON + CHICAGO
ATLANTA « SAN FRANCISCO


THE MACMILLAN CO. OF CANADA, LtTb.
TORONTO


sg ois


/


“a
GY my AD C):O


AND rae PERILS OF THE SOUL


BY


Pita k ee thy, D.C.L., (Li Dy Live. D.


FELLOW OF TRINITY COLLEGE, CAMBRIDGE
PROFESSOR OF SOCIAL ANTHROPOLOGY IN THE UNIVERSITY OF LIVERPOOL


"ale Wi:
at


MACMILLAN AND CO., LIMITED
ST. MARTIN’S STREET, LONDON


IgIil
ae


Third Edition May xoxx
Reprinted November 1911


PREFACE


THE term Taboo is one of the very few words which the
English language has borrowed from the speech of savages.
In the Polynesian tongue, from which we have adopted it, the
word designates a remarkable system which has deeply in-
fluenced the religious, social, and political life of the Oceanic
islanders, both Polynesians and Melanesians, particularly
by inculcating a superstitious veneration for the persons of
nobles and the rights of private property. When about the
year 1886 my ever-lamented friend William Robertson
Smith asked me to write an article on Taboo for the Ninth
Edition of the Eucyclopaedia Britannica, 1 shared what I
believe to have been at the time the current view of
anthropologists, that the institution in question was con-
fined to the brown and black races of the Pacific. But
an attentive study of the accounts given of Taboo by
observers who wrote while it still flourished in Polynesia
soon led me to modify that view. The analogies which the
system presents to the superstitions, not only of savages
elsewhere, but of the civilised races of antiquity, were too
numerous and too striking to be overlooked ; and I came to
the conclusion that Taboo is only one of a number of similar
systems of superstition which among many, perhaps among
all races of men have contributed in large measure, under
many different names and with many variations of detail, to
build up the complex fabric of society in all the various sides


or elements of it which we describe as religious, social,
Vv


vi PREFACE


political, moral and economic. This conclusion I briefly
indicated in my article. My general views on the subject
were accepted by my friend Robertson Smith and applied
by him in his celebrated Lectures to the elucidation of some
aspects of Semitic religion. Since then the importance of
Taboo and of systems like it in the evolution of religion and
morality, of government and property, has been generally
recognised and has indeed become a commonplace of
anthropology.

The present volume is merely an expansion of the
corresponding chapter in the first edition of Zhe Golden
Bough. It treats of the principles of taboo in their special
application to sacred personages, such as kings and priests,
who are the proper theme of the book. It does not profess
to handle the subject as a whole, to pursue it into all its
ramifications, to trace the manifold influences which systems
of this sort have exerted in moulding the multitudinous
forms of human society. A treatise which should adequately
discuss these topics would far exceed the limits which I have
prescribed for myself in Zhe Golden Bough. For example, I
have barely touched in passing on the part which these
superstitions have played in shaping the moral ideas and
directing the moral practice of mankind, a profound subject
fraught perhaps with momentous issues for the time when
men shall seriously set themselves to revise their ethical
code in the light of its origin. For that the ethical like
the legal code of a people stands in need of constant
revision will hardly be disputed by any attentive and dispas-
sionate observer. The old view that the principles of right
and wrong are immutable and eternal is no longer tenable.
The moral world is as little exempt as the physical world
from the law of ceaseless change, of perpetual flux. Con-
template the diversities, the inconsistencies, the contradictions
of the ethical ideas and the ethical practice, not merely of
different peoples in different countries, but of the same


PREFACE vii


people in the same country in different ages, then say
whether the foundations of morality are eternally fixed and
unchanging. If they seem so to us, as they have probably
seemed to men in all ages who did not extend their views
beyond the narrow limits of their time and country, it is in
all likelihood merely because the rate of change is commonly
so slow that it is imperceptible at any moment and can only
be detected by a comparison of accurate observations
extending over long periods of time. Such a comparison,
could we make it, would probably convince us that if we
speak of the moral law as immutable and eternal, it can
only be in the relative or figurative sense in which we apply
the same words to the outlines of the great mountains, by
comparison with the short-lived generations of men. The
mountains, too, are passing away, though we do not see
it; nothing is stable and abiding under or above the sun.
We can as little arrest the process of moral evolution as we
can stay the sweep of the tides or the courses of the stars,
Therefore, whether we like it or not, the moral code by
which we regulate our conduct is being constantly revised
and altered: old rules are being silently expunged and new
rules silently inscribed in the palimpsest by the busy, the
unresting hand of an invisible scribe. For unlike the public
and formal revision of a legal code, the revision of the moral
code is always private, tacit, and informal. The legislators
who make and the judges who administer it are not clad in
ermine and scarlet, their edicts are not proclaimed with the
blare of trumpets and the pomp of heraldry. We ourselves
are the lawgivers and the judges: it is the whole people who
make and alter the ethical standard and judge every case by
reference to it. We sit in the highest court of appeal,
judging offenders daily, and we cannot if we would rid
ourselves of the responsibility. All that we can do is to
take as clear and comprehensive a view as possible of the
evidence, lest from too narrow and partial a view we


viii PREFACE


should do injustice, perhaps gross and irreparable injustice,
to the prisoners at the bar. Few things, perhaps, can better
guard us from narrowness and illiberality in our moral judg-
ments than a survey of the amazing diversities of ethical
theory and practice which have been recorded among the
various races of mankind in different ages ; and accordingly
the Comparative Method applied to the study of ethical
phenomena may be expected to do for morality what the
same method applied to religious phenomena is now doing
for religion, by enlarging our mental horizon, extending the
boundaries of knowledge, throwing light on the origin of
current beliefs and practices, and thereby directly assisting
us to replace what is effete by what is vigorous, and what is
false by what is true. The facts which I have put together
in this volume as well as in some of my other writings may
perhaps serve as materials for a future science of Compara-
tive Ethics. They are rough stones which await the master-
builder, rude sketches which more cunning hands than mine
may hereafter work up into a finished picture.


J. G. FRAZER.


CAMBRIDGE,
ust February 19tt.


ee a


Ee


CONTENTS


PREFACE . ; ‘ . ‘ 4 Pp. v-viii


CHAPTER I.— THE BURDEN OF ROYALTY . Pp. 1-25


§ 1. Royal and Priestly Taboos, pp. 1-17.—Life of divine kings and priests
regulated by minute rules, 1 sg. ; rules of life observed by the Mikado,
2-4, and by kings and priests in Africa and America, 5-7 ; intention of
these rules, 7 sg. ; taboos observed by African kings and others, 8-11,
by Irish kings, 11 sg., by Egyptian kings, 12 sg., by chiefs in Burma,
13, by the Flamen Dialis at Rome, 13 sg., by the Bodia of Sierra
Leone, 14 sg., and by sacred milkmen among the Todas, 15-17.


§ 2. Divorce of the Spiritual from the Temporal Power, pp. 17-25.—Reluctance
to accept sovereignty, 17-19; sovereign powers divided between a
temporal and a spiritual head in Japan, Tonquin, Fiji, Tonga, Athens,
and elsewhere, 19-21; fetish kings and civil kings in West Africa,
21-23; civil rajahs and taboo rajahs in the East Indies, 23-25.


CHAPTER II. — THE PERILS OF THE
SOUL : ; 3 . Pp. 26-100


§ 1. The Soul as a Mannikin, pp. 26-30.—Primitive conception of the soul as
a mannikin, 26 sg., in Australia, America, and among the Malays, 27
sg., in ancient Egypt, 28 sg., in Nias, Fiji, and India, 29 sg.


§ 2. Absence and Recall of the Soul, pp. 30-77.—Attempts to prevent the soul /
from escaping from the body, 30 sgg. ; tying the soul in the body, 32 sg. ;
the soul as a bird ready to fly away, 33-36; the soul absent from the
body in sleep and prevented from returning, 36-39; danger of suddenly
awaking a sleeper or altering his appearance, 39-42 ; absence of the soul
in sickness and attempts to recall it, 42 sgg.; recalling truant souls in
Australia, Burma, China, and Sarawak, 43 sg., in Luzon and Mongolia,
44, in Africa and America, 44 sg., in Sumatra, Borneo, and Celebes,

1x


x CONTENTS


45-48 ; wandering souls in popular tales, 49 sg. ; wandering souls detained
by ghosts, 51-53; attempts to rescue souls from the spirits of the dead,
53-583 abduction of souls by demons and gods, 58-65 ; lost souls brought
back in a visible form, 65-67; soul recovered from the earth, 67 sg. ;
recovery of the soul in ancient Egypt, 68 sg. ; souls stolen or detained by
sorcerers, 69-71 ; souls taken by head-hunters, 71 sg. ; abduction of souls
by Malay wizards, 73-75; souls extracted from the stomachs of doctors,
76 sg. :

§ 3. The Soul as a Shadow and a Reflection, pp. 77-100.—A man’s soul con-
ceived as his shadow, so that he can be injured through it, 77-81 ; animals
also injured through their shadows, 81 sg. ; danger of being overshadowed
by certain persons, 82 sg. ; the savage’s dread of his mother-in-law, 83-
86 ; health and strength supposed to vary with the length of the shadow,
86-88 ; fear of the resemblance of a child to its parents, 88 sg. ; shadows
of people built into foundations to strengthen them, 89 sg. ; foundation _
sacrifices, 90 sg.; deification of a measuring-tape, 91 sg.; the soul
supposed to be in the reflection, 92-94 ; reason for covering up mirrors in
sickness or after a death, 94-96 ; the soul supposed to be in the portrait,
especially in photographs, 96-100.


CHAPTER III.—TABOOED ACTS : . Pp. 101-130


§ 1. Zaboos on Intercourse with Strangers, pp. 101-116.—Rules of life observed
by sacred kings are based on primitive conceptions of the soul, 101 sg. ;
effect of these rules to isolate the king, 102; savage dread of the magic
arts of strangers, 102; various modes of disenchanting strangers, 102-
105; disenchantment effected by stinging ants, pungent spices, and cuts
with knives, 105-107 ; ceremonies observed at the reception of strangers
perhaps intended to counteract their enchantments, 107-109 ; ceremonies
at entering a strange land to disenchant it, 109-111, purificatory cere-
monies observed on the return from a journey, III-1143 special
precautions to guard the king against the magic arts of strangers,
114-116.


§ 2. Taboos on Eating and Drinking, pp. 116-119.—Spiritual dangers of eating
and drinking, 116 sg. ; seclusion of kings at their meals, 117-119.


§ 3. Taboos on shewing the Face, pp. 120-122.—Faces veiled to avert evil
influences, 120; kings not to be seen by their subjects, 120-122; faces
veiled against the evil eye, etc., 122.


§ 4. Taboos on quitting the House, pp. 122-126.—Kings forbidden to leave their
palaces, 122-125; kings not allowed to be seen abroad by their subjects,
125 5g.

$5. Zaboos on leaving Food over, pp. 126-130.—Magical harm done to a man
through the refuse of his food, 126; customs of the Narrinyeri in South
Australia, 126 sg.; customs in Melanesia and New Guinea, 127-129;
customs in Africa, Celebes, India, and ancient Rome, 129 sg. 3 effect of
the superstition in fostering cleanliness and strengthening the ties of
hospitality, 130.


CONTENTS xi


CHAPTER IV.—TABOOED PERSONS . . Pp. 131-223


§ 1. Chiefs and Kings tabooed, pp. 131-137.—Disastrous results supposed to
follow from usin? the dishes of a sacred personage, 131; sacred persons
regarded as a source of danger to others, 131 sgg.; taboo of chiefs and /
kings in Tonga, 133 sg. ; touching for the King’s Evil, 134; fatal effects
of contact with Maori chiefs, 134-136; other examples of death by
imagination, 136 sg.


§ 2. Mourners tabooed, pp. 138-145.—Taboos observed by sacred persons re-
semble those observed by unclean persons, such as manslayers and
menstruous women, 138; taboos laid on persons who have handled the
dead in New Zealand, 138 sz.; persons who have been in contact with
a corpse forbidden to touch food with their hands, 140 sg. ; similar rule
observed by novices at initiation, 141 sg. ; taboos laid on mourners among
North American Indians, 142-144; seclusion of widows and widowers in
the Philippines and New Guinea, 144 sg.


§ 3. Women tabooed at Menstruation and Childbirth, pp. 145-157.—Taboos im-
posed on women at menstruation, 145-147 ; taboos imposed on women in
childbed, 147-150; dangers apprehended from women in childbed, 150-
155; similar taboos imposed on young men at initiation, 156 sg.


§ 4. Warriors tabooed, pp. 157-165.—Taboos laid on warriors when they go
forth to fight, 157-160 ; ceremonies observed by North American Indians
before they went on the war-path, 160-162; rules observed by Indians
on a war expedition, 162 sg. ; the rule of continence observed by savage
warriors may be based on a fear of infecting themselves sympathetically
with feminine weakness, 163-165.


§ 5. Manslayers tabooed, pp. 165-190,—Taboos laid on warriors who have slain
foes, 165 ; seclusion of manslayers in the East Indies and New Guinea,
165-169; the manslayer unclean, 169; the ghosts of the slain driven
away, 169-171; precautions taken by executioners against the ghosts of
their victims, 171 sg. ; seclusion and purification of manslayers in African
tribes, 172-177; precautions taken by Australian manslayers against the
ghosts of their victims, 177 sg. ; seclusion of manslayers in Polynesia,
178 sg. ; seclusion and purification of manslayers among the Tupi Indians
of Brazil, 179-181; seclusion and purification of manslayers among the
North American Indians, 181-186; the purification of murderers prob-
ably intended to avert the ghosts of their victims, 186-188 ; ancient Greek
dread of the ghosts of the slain, 188 ; taboos imposed on men who have
partaken of human flesh, 188-190.


§ 6. Hunters and Fishers tabooed, pp. 190-223.—Taboos observed by hunters
and fishers probably dictated by a fear of the spirits of the animals or fish,
190 sg. ; taboos observed as a preparation for whaling, fishing, and hunt-
ing, 191-193 ; taboos observed at the hatching and pairing of silkworms,
193 sg.; taboos observed by fishermen in Uganda, 194-196; taboos


xii CONTENTS


observed by hunters in Nias, 196; continence observed by fishers and
hunters apparently based on a fear of offending the fish and animals, 196
sg. ; chastity observed by American Indians before hunting, 197 sg. ;
taboos observed by Hidatsa Indians at catching eagles, 198-200 ; miscel-
laneous examples of chastity observed from superstitious motives, 200-204 ;
the taboos observedby hunters and fishers are often continued and in-
creased in stringency after the animals and fish have been killed, 204 sg. ;
taboos observed by the Esquimaux after killing sea beasts, 205-209 ;
native explanation of these taboos, 209-213; passage of animism into
religion among the Esquimaux, 213 sg. ; the confession of sins originally
practised as a kind of physical purgation, 214-218 ; possible survivals of
savage taboos among civilised peoples, 218 sg. ; purificatory ceremonies
observed by hunters after slaying dangerous animals, such as panthers,
lions, bears, and serpents, 219-223; such purificatory ceremonies based
on a fear of the souls of the animals, 223.


CHAPTER V.—TABOOED THINGS . ~ Pp. 224-319


§ 1. Zhe Meaning of Taboo, pp. 224 sg.—Taboos of holiness agree with
taboos of pollution, because the savage does not distinguish between
holiness and pollution, 224; the principles of taboo to be further illus-
trated by tabooed things and tabooed words, 225.


§ 2. lron tabooed, pp. 225-236. —The bodies of kings not to be touched,
especially with iron, 225 sg.; the use of iron forbidden to kings and
priests, 226 sg. ; use of iron forbidden at circumcision, childbirth, and
other rites and seasons, 227-230; use of iron forbidden in building,
230; the taboo on iron perhaps based on its novelty, 230; everything
new excites the fear of the savage, 230-232; iron used as a charm
against demons and ghosts, 232-236.


§ 3. Sharp Weapons tabooed, pp. 237-239.—Use of sharp weapons forbidden
lest they wound spirits, 237 sg. ; knives not used after deaths or funerals,
238; use of sharp weapons forbidden at pregnancy and childbirth,
238 sq.


§ 4. Blood tabooed, pp. 239-251.—Raw meat tabooed because the life or spirit
is in the blood, 239-241; royal blood not to be spilt on the ground,
241-243; reluctance to shed any human blood on the ground, 243-247 ;
unwillingness to shed the blood of animals, 247 ; sacredness of whatever
is touched by a Maori chief’s blood, 247 sg.; the juice of the grape
regarded as the blood of the vine, 248; wine treated as blood and
intoxication as inspiration, 248-250; men’s dread of the blood of
women, 250 s¢.


§ 5. Zhe Head tabooed, pp. 252-257.—The head sacred on account of the
residence of a spirit, 252 sg. ; objection to have any one overhead, 253
sg.; sanctity of the head, especially of a chief’s head, in Polynesia and
elsewhere, 254-257.


CONTENTS xiii


§ 6. Hair tabooed, pp. 258-264.—Hair of kings, priests, and other tabooed
persons kept unshorn, 258-260 ; hair kept unshorn on various occasions,
such as a wife’s pregnancy, a journey, and war, 261; hair unshorn
during a vow, 261 sg.; nails of children not pared, 262 sg. ; children’s
hair left unshorn as a refuge for their souls, 263 sg.


§ 7. Ceremonies at Hair-cutting, pp. 264-267.—Ceremonies at hair-cutting in
Fiji, New Zealand, and Cambodia, 264 sg. ; ceremonies at cutting the
hair of Siamese children, 265-267.


§ 8. Disposal of Cut Hair and Nails, pp. 267-287.—Belief that people may be
bewitched through the clippings of their hair and the parings of their
nails, 267-270; headaches caused by clipped hair, 270 sg. ; rain, hail,
thunder, and lightning caused by cut hair, 271 sg. ; cut hair and nails
used as hostages for the good behaviour of their original owners, 272-
2743 cut hair and nails deposited in sacred places, such as temples and
cemeteries, 274 5g. ; cut hair and nails buried under trees or deposited
among the branches, 275 sg.; cut hair and nails stowed away in any
safe place, 276-279; cut hair and nails kept against the resurrection,
279-281; cut hair and nails burnt to prevent them from falling into the
hands of sorcerers, 281-283; hair-cutting as a purificatory ceremony to
rid persons of the virus of taboo or the pollution of death, 283-287.


§ 9. Spittle tabooed, pp. 287-290.—Belief that people may be bewitched through
their spittle, 287 sg. ; hence precautions taken by persons, especially by
chiefs and kings, to prevent their spittle from falling into the hands of
sorcerers, 288-290 ; use of spittle in making a covenant, 290.


§ 10, Foods tabooed, pp. 291-293.—Certain foods tabooed to sacred persons,
such as kings and priests, 291-293; these taboos probably based on the
same motive which underlies the whole system of taboo, 293.


§ 11. Knots and Rings tabooed, pp. 293-317.—Knots and rings not worn by
certain sacred persons, 293 sg.; knots untied, locks unlocked, doors,
etc., opened, at childbirth to facilitate delivery, 294-298 ; the crossing of
the legs supposed to impede childbirth and other things, 298 sg. ; knots
supposed to prevent the consummation of marriage, 299-301; use of
knots at marriage in Rotti, 301 ; knots used as charms to inflict or cure
disease, 301-305 ; knots used as charms to win lovers or capture runaway
slaves, 305 sg.; knots used as charms by hunters and travellers, 306;
knots used as protective amulets in Russia and elsewhere, 306-309 ; the
magical virtue of a knot is that of an impediment for good or evil, 309
sg. ; rule that the hair should be loose and the feet bare at certain rites,
310 sgg. ; the custom of going on certain solemn occasions with one shoe
on and one shoe off intended to free the man from magical constraint and
to lay it on his enemy, 311-313 ; rings as magical fetters which prevent
the egress or ingress of spirits, 313 sg. ; rings as amulets against demons,
witches, and ghosts, 314 sg. ; why the Flamen Dialis might not wear knots
and rings, 315 sg. ; the Gordian knot perhaps a talisman, 316 sg.


pe bee ae Ree, 3 ite eee, et Be enh i De eth i ie Oe bee es


xiv CONTENTS


CHAPTER VI.—TABOOED WORDS . . Pp. 318-418


§ 1. Personal Names tabooed, pp. 318-334.—The personal name regarded by
the savage as a vital part of himself through which he can be magically
injured, 318-320; personal names kept secret from fear of sorcery among
the Australian aborigines, 320-322, in Egypt, Africa, Asia, and the East
Indies, 322-324, and among the American Indians, 324-326; some
savages, though they will not mention their own names, will invite others
to do so for them, 326-330; the prohibition to mention personal names is
sometimes only temporary, 330 sg. ; in order to avoid the use of people’s
own names parents are sometimes named after their children, uncles and
aunts after their nephews and nieces, etc., 331-334.


g 2. Names of Relations tabooed, pp. 335-349.—Prohibition to mention
names of relations, especially of relations by marriage, 335 sgg. 3 women’s
speech among the Caffres, 335 sg. ; names of husbands, wives, first-born
sons, etc., tabooed among various peoples, 336-338 ; names of relations,
especially of relations by marriage, tabooed in the East Indies, 338-341,
in New Guinea, 341-343, in Melanesia, 343-345, and in Australia, 345-
347 ; these taboos not to be explained by the intermarriage of persons
speaking different languages, 347-349.


g 3. Vames of the Dead tabooed, pp. 349-374.—Names of the dead not men-
tioned by the Australian aborigines, the American Indians, and other
peoples, 349-353; the taboo based on a fear of the ghosts, 353-355;
from a like fear namesakes of the dead change their names, 355 sg. ;
sometimes all the near relations of the deceased change their names, 356-
358; when the name of the deceased is that of a common object, the
word is often dropped in ordinary speech and another substituted for it,
358-360; modification of savage languages produced by this custom,
360-363 ; historical tradition impeded by the custom, 363 sg. ; revival
of the names of the dead after a time, 364 sg. ; the dead supposed to be
reincarnated in their namesakes, 365-372; names of the dead allowed to
be mentioned after their bodies are decayed, 372; final mourning cere-
mony among the Arunta, 372-374.


§ 4. Names of Kings and other Sacred Persons tabooed, pp. 374-386.—Birth-
names of kings tabooed, 374-376; names of Zulu chiefs and kings
tabooed, 376 sg. ; names of living kings and chiefs tabooed in Madagas-
car, 378 sg.; names of dead kings and chiefs tabooed in Madagascar,
379-381; names of chiefs tabooed in Polynesia, 381 sy.; names of
Eleusinian priests tabooed, 382 sg.; names of members of the Yewe
order in Togo tabooed, 383 sg. ; the utterance of the names of gods and
spirits supposed to disturb the course of nature, 384-386; winter and
summer names of the Kwakiutl Indians, 386.


§ 5. Names of Gods tabooed, pp. 387-391.—Names of gods kept secret, 387 ; Ra
and Isis, 387-389; divine names used to conjure with by wizards in
Egypt, North Africa, and China, 389 sg.; divine names used by the


ho


Ee ee


CONTENTS


Romans to conjure with, 391 ; taboos on the names of kings and com-
moners alike in origin, 391.


§ 6. Common Words tabooed, pp. 392-418.—Common words tabooed by Highland
fowlers, fishermen, and others, 392-396; common words, especially the
names of dangerous animals, tabooed in various parts of Europe, 396-398 ;
names of various animals tabooed in Siberia, Kamtchatka, and America,
398 sg. ; names of animals and things tabooed by Arabs, Africans, and
Malagasy, 400 sg. ; names of animals tabooed in India, 401-403 ; names
of animals and things tabooed in Indo-China, 403 sg. ; the camphor lan-
guage in the East Indies, 405-407 ; special language used by Malay miners,
fowlers, and fishers, 407-409; names of things and animals tabooed in
Sumatra, Nias, and Java, 409-411 ; names of things and animals tabooed
in Celebes, 411-413, common words tabooed by East Indian mariners
at sea, 413-415; common words tabooed in Sunda, Borneo, and the
Philippines, 415 sg. ; the avoidance of common words based on a fear of
spirits or of animals and fish, 416-418.


CHAPTER VII.—OuUR DEBT TO THE SAVAGE
Pp. 419-422


General conclusion. Human gods obliged to observe many taboos for their own
good and that of their people, 419; these taboos identical with those
observed by common people from motives of prudence, 419 sg. ; a study
of these rules afford an insight into the philosophy of the savage, 420 s¢.;
our debt to our savage forefathers, 421 sg.


NOTE.—Not to step over Persons and Things. Pp. 423-425


INDEX . ; : ; : ; . Pp. 427-446


oo CHAPTER |
ie THE BURDEN OF ROYALTY


§ 1. Royal and Priestly Taboos


AT a certain stage of early society the king or priest is Life of
often thought to be endowed with supernatural powers or — ye
to be an incarnation of a deity, and consistently with priests
this belief the course of nature is supposed to be more or i anaes
less under his control,and he is held responsible for bad rules.
weather, failure of the crops, and similar calamities.’ To
some extent it appears to be assumed that the king’s power
over nature, like that over his subjects and slaves, is
exerted through definite acts of will; and therefore if
drought, famine, pestilence, or storms arise, the people
attribute the misfortune to the negligence or guilt of their
king, and punish him accordingly with stripes and bonds,
or, if he remains obdurate, with deposition and death.”
Sometimes, however, the course of nature, while regarded as
dependent on the king, is supposed to be partly independent
of his will. His person is. considered, if we may express it
so, as the dynamical centre of the universe, from which lines
of force radiate to all quarters of the heaven; so that any
motion of his—the turning of his head, the lifting of his
hand— instantaneously affects and may seriously disturb
some part of nature. He is the point of support on which
hangs the balance of the world, and the slightest irregularity
on his part may overthrow the delicate equipoise. The
greatest care must, therefore, be taken both by and of him ;

1 See The Magic Art and the Evolu- 2 The Magic Art and the Evolution
tion of Kings, vol. i. pp. 332 sgg-, of Kings, vol. i. pp. 352 sgq.
373 599.

PT. II .) B


Japan.


2 THE BURDEN OF ROYALTY CHAP.


and his whole life, down to its minutest details, must be so
regulated that no act of his, voluntary or involuntary, may
disarrange or upset the established order of nature. Of this
class of monarchs the Mikado or Dairi, the spiritual emperor
of Japan, is or rather used to be a typical example. He is
an incarnation of the sun goddess, the deity who rules the
universe, gods and men included; once a year all the gods
wait upon him and spend a month at his court. During
that month, the name of which means “ without gods,” no one
frequents the temples, for they are believed to be deserted.’
The Mikado receives from his people and assumes in his
official proclamations and decrees the title of “manifest or
incarnate deity” (A&ztsu Kamz) and he claims a _ general


authority over the gods of Japan.”


1 Manners and Customs of the Japan-
ese in the Nineteenth Century: from
recent Dutch Visitors to Japan, and the
German of Dr. Ph, Fr. von Siebold
(London, 1841), pp. 141 sgg.

2 W. G. Aston, Shinto (the Way of
the Gods) (London, 1905), p. 41;
Michel Revon, Ze Shintoisme, i. (Paris,
1907), pp. 189 sgg. The Japanese
word for god or deity is kamz. It is
thus explained by the native scholar
Moto6ri, one of the chief authorities on
Japanese religion: ‘*The term Kami
is applied in the first place to the vari-
ous deities of Heaven and Earth who
are mentioned in the ancient records as
well as their spirits (#z-¢ama) which
reside in the shrines where they are
worshipped. | Moreover, not only
human beings, but birds, beasts, plants
and trees, seas and mountains, and all
other things whatsoever which deserve
to be dreaded and revered for the ex-
traordinary and pre-eminent powers
which they possess, are called Kami.
They need not be eminent for surpass-
ing nobleness, goodness, or serviceable-
ness alone. Malignant and uncanny
beings are also called Xami if only
they are the objects of general dread.
Among Xami who are human beings
I need hardly mention first of all the
successive Mikados—with reverence be
it spoken. . . . Then there have been
numerous examples of divine human
beings both in ancient and modern


For example, in an


times, who, although not accepted by
the nation generally, are treated as
gods, each of his several dignity, in
a single province, village, or family.”
Hirata, another native authority on
Japanese religion, defines 4amz as a
term which comprises all things strange,
wondrous, and possessing ¢sao or virtue.
And a recent dictionary gives the fol-
lowing definitions: ** Kamz. 1. Some-
thing which has no form but is only
spirit, has unlimited supernatural power,
dispenses calamity and good fortune,
punishes crime and rewards virtue.
2. Sovereigns of all times, wise and
virtuous men, valorous and heroic per-
sons whose spirits are prayed to after
their death. 3. Divine things which
transcend human intellect. 4. The
Christian God, Creator, Supreme Lord.”
See W. G, Aston, Shinto (the Way of
the Gods), pp. 8-10, from which the
foregoing quotations are made. Mr.
Aston himself considers that ‘ the dei-
fication of living Mikados was. titular
rather than real,” and he adds: ‘I
am not aware that any specific so-
called miraculous powers were authori-
tatively claimed for them” (of. cé¢, p.
41). No doubt it is very difficult for
the Western mind to put itself at the
point of view of the Oriental and to
seize the precise point (if it can be said
to exist) where the divine fades into
the human or the human brightens into
the divine. In translating, as we must


I ROYAL AND PRIESTLY TABOOS 3


official decree of the year 646 the emperor is described as
“the incarnate god who governs the universe.” ’

The following description of the Mikado’s mode of life Rules
was written about two hundred years ago :-—* pede

“Even to this day the princes descended of this family, observed
more particularly those who sit on the throne, are looked Hs Bose #5
upon as persons most holy in themselves, and as Popes by
birth. And,in order to preserve these advantageous notions
in the minds of their subjects, they are obliged to take an
uncommon care of their sacred persons, and to do such
things, which, examined according to the customs of other
nations, would be thought ridiculous and impertinent. It
will not be improper to give a few instances of it. He
thinks that it would be very prejudicial to his dignity and
holiness to touch the ground with his feet ; for this reason,
when he intends to go anywhere, he must be carried thither
on men’s shoulders. Much less will they suffer that he
should expose his sacred person to the open air, and the
sun is not thought worthy to shine on his head. There is
such a holiness ascribed to all the parts of his body that he
dares to cut off neither his hair, nor his beard, nor his nails.
However, lest he should grow too dirty, they may clean him
in the night when he is asleep; because, they say, that
which is taken from his body at that time, hath been stolen
from him, and that such a theft doth not prejudice his
holiness or dignity. In ancient times, he was obliged to sit
on the throne for some hours every morning, with the
imperial crown on his head, but to sit altogether like a


do, the vague thought of a crude theo-
logy into the comparatively exact lan-
guage of civilised Europe we must
allow for a considerable want of corre-
spondence between the two: we must
leave between them, as it were, a
margin of cloudland to which in the
last resort the deity may retreat from
the too searching light of philosophy
and science.

1M. Revon, of. cé#. i. 190 n.?

2 Kaempfer, ‘‘ History of Japan,”
in Pinkerton’s Voyages and Travels,
vii. 716 sg. However, Mr. W. G.
Aston tells us that Kaempfer’s state-
ments regarding the sacred character of


the Mikado’s person cannot be depended
on (Shinto, the Way of the Gods, p. 41,
notet). M. Revon quotes Kaempfer’s
account with the observation that, ‘‘/s
naivetés recdlent plus d’une idée juste”
(Ze Shintoisme, vol. i. p. 191, note®).
To me it seems that Kaempfer’s de-
scription is very strongly confirmed by
its close correspondence in detail with
the similar customs and superstitions
which have prevailed in regard to
sacred personages in many other parts
of the world and with which it is most
unlikely that Kaempfer was acquainted.
This correspondence will be brought
out in the following pages.


Rules
of life
formerly
observed
by the
Mikade,


4 THE BURDEN OF ROYALTY CHAP.


statue, without stirring either hands or feet, head or eyes,
nor indeed any part of his body, because, by this means, it
was thought that he could preserve peace and tranquillity
in his empire; for if, unfortunately, he turned himself on
one side or the other, or if he looked a good while towards
any part of his dominions, it was apprehended that war,
famine, fire, or some other great misfortune was near at hand
to desolate the country. But it having been afterwards dis-
covered, that the imperial crown was the palladium, which by
its immobility’ could preserve peace in the empire, it was
thought expedient to deliver his imperial person, consecrated
only to idleness and pleasures, from this burthensome duty,
and therefore the crown is at present placed on the throne
for some hours every morning. His victuals must be dressed
every time in new pots, and served at table in new dishes:
both are very clean and neat, but made only of common
clay ; that without any considerable expense they may be
laid aside, or broke, after they have served once. They
are generally broke, for fear they should come into the hands
of laymen, for they believe religiously, that if any layman
should presume to eat his food out of these sacred dishes, it
would swell and inflame his mouth and throat. The like ill
effect is dreaded from the Dairi’s sacred habits; for they
believe that if a layman should wear them, without the
Emperor’s express leave or command, they would occasion
swellings and pains in all parts of his body.” To the same
effect an earlier account of the Mikadosays: “It was considered
as a shameful degradation for him even to touch the ground
with his foot. The sun and moon were not even permitted
to shine upon his head. None of the superfluities of the
body were ever taken from him, neither his hair, his beard,
nor his nails were cut. Whatever he eat was dressed in
new vessels,” *


1 In Pinkerton’s reprint this word
appears as ‘‘ mobility.” I have made
the correction from a comparison with
the original (Kaempfer, History of
Japan, translated from the original
Dutch manuscript by J. G. Scheuchzer,
London, 1728, vol. i. p. 150).

* Caron, “Account of Japan,” in
Pinkerton’s Voyages and Travels, vii.


613. Compare B. Varenius, Descriptio
regent Japoniae et Siam (Cambridge,
1673), p. 11: ** Nunquam attingebant
(guemadmodum et hodie td observat)
pedes ipsius terram: radiis Solis caput
nungquam itllustrabatur: in apertum
atrem non procedebat,” etc. The first
edition of this book was published by
Elzevir at Amsterdam in 1649. The


.


1 ROYAL AND PRIESTLY TABOOS 5


Similar priestly or rather divine kings are found, at a Rules
lower level of barbarism, on the west coast of Africa. At of Me
Shark Point near Cape Padron, in Lower Guinea, lives the by kings
priestly king Kukulu, alone in a wood. He may not touch a a
woman nor leave his house; indeed he may not even quit and —
his chair, in which he is obliged to sleep sitting, for if he lay ““*"*
down no wind would arise and navigation would be stopped.

He regulates storms, and in general maintains a wholesome
and equable state of the atmosphere." On Mount Agu in
Togo, a German possession in West Africa, there lives a fetish
or spirit called Bagba, who is of great importance for the
whole of the surrounding country. The power of giving or
withholding rain is ascribed to him, and he is lord of the
winds, including the Harmattan, the dry, hot wind which
blows from the interior. His priest dwells in a house on
the highest peak of the mountain, where he keeps the winds
bottled up in huge jars. Applications for rain, too, are
made to him, and he does a good business in amulets, which
consist of the teeth and claws of leopards. Yet though his
power is great and he is indeed the real chief of the land,
the rule of the fetish forbids him ever to leave the mountain,
and he must spend the whole of his life on its summit. Only
once a year may he come down to make purchases in the
market ; but even then he may not set foot in the hut of any
mortal man, and must return to his place of exile the same
day. The business of government in the villages is con-
ducted by subordinate chiefs, who are appointed by him?
In the West African kingdom of Congo there was a supreme
pontiff called Chitomé or Chitombé, whom the negroes
regarded as a god on earth and all-powerful in heaven.
Hence before they would taste the new crops they offered
him the first-fruits, fearing that manifold misfortunes would
befall them if they broke this rule. When he left his residence
to visit other places within his jurisdiction, all married people
had to observe strict continence the whole time he was out;


Geographia Generalis of the same
writer had the honour of appearing in
an edition revised and corrected by
Isaac Newton (Cambridge, at the
University Press, 1672).

1 A. Bastian, Die deutsche Expedi-


tion an der Loango-Kiiste (Jena, 1874-
75), i. 287 sg., compare pp. 353
Sq.

2H. Klose, Zogo unter deutscher
ee (Berlin, 1899), pp. 189,
268.


6 THE BURDEN OF ROYALTY CHAP.


Rules of for it was supposed that any act of incontinence would prove
ere; fatal to him. And if he were to die a natural death, they
kings and thought that the world would perish, and the earth, which he
Pia , alone sustained by his power and merit, would immediately
America. be annihilated.’ Similarly in Humbe, a kingdom of Angola,
the incontinence of young people under the age of puberty
used to be a capital crime, because it was believed to
entail the death of the king within the year. Of late the
death penalty has been commuted for a fine of ten oxen
inflicted on each of the culprits. This commutation has
attracted thousands of dissolute youth to Humbe from the
neighbouring tribes, among whom the old penalty is still
rigorously exacted.2. Amongst the semi-barbarous nations
of the New World, at the date of the Spanish conquest,
there were found hierarchies or theocracies like those of
Japan ;* in particular, the high pontiff of the Zapotecs
in Southern Mexico appears to have presented a close
parallel to the Mikado. A powerful rival to the king him-
self, this spiritual lord governed Yopaa, one of the chief
cities of the kingdom, with absolute dominion. It is
impossible, we are told, to overrate the reverence in which
he was held. He was looked on as a god whom the earth
was not worthy to hold nor the sun to shine upon. He
profaned his sanctity if he even touched the ground with his
foot. The officers who bore his palanquin on their shoulders
were members of the highest families ; he hardly deigned to
look on anything around him; and all who met him fell
with their faces to the earth, fearing that death would over-
take them if they saw even his shadow. A rule of continence
was regularly imposed on the Zapotcc priests, especially
upon the high pontiff; but “on certain days in each year,
which were generally celebrated with feasts and dances, it
was customary for the high priest to become drunk.. While
in this state, seeming to belong neither to heaven nor to
earth, one of the most beautiful of the virgins consecrated to
the service of the gods was brought to him.” If the child


1 J. B. Lahat, Relation historiquede du Cuntne,” AMésstons Catholiques,
VE thiopie occidentale (Paris, 1732), i. xx. (1888) p, 262.
254 #99.

# Ch, Wunenberger, ‘La Mission et 8 See The Magic Art and the Evolu-
le royaume de Humbé, sur les bords “ion of Xings, vol. i. pp. 415 sy.


I ROYAL AND PRIESTLY TABOOS 7


she bore him was a son, he was brought up as a prince of
the blood, and the eldest son succeeded his father on the
pontifical throne. The supernatural powers attributed to
this pontiff are not specified, but probably they resembled
those of the Mikado and Chitomé.

Wherever, as in Japan and West Africa, it is supposed The rules
that the order of nature, and even the existence of the world, pahnet
is bound up with the life of the king or priest, it is clear on kings in
that he must be regarded by his subjects as a source both of pene Bea
infinite blessing and of infinite danger. On the one hand, intended


the people have to thank him for the rain and sunshine jhe,


r lives
which foster the fruits of the earth, for the wind which ‘or the
brings ships to their coasts, and even for the solid ground es
beneath their feet. But what he gives he can refuse ; People.
and so close is the dependence of nature on his person, so
delicate the balance of the system of forces whereof he is the
centre, that the least irregularity on his part may set up a
tremor which shall shake the earth to its foundations. And

if nature may be disturbed by the slightest involuntary act of

the king, it is easy to conceive the convulsion which his death
might provoke. The natural death of the Chitomé, as we
have seen, was thought to entail the destruction of all things.
Clearly, therefore, out of a regard for their own safety, which
might be imperilled by any rash act of the king, and still more

by his death, the people will exact of their king or priest

a strict conformity to those rules, the observance of which is
deemed necessary for his own preservation, and consequently

for the preservation of his people and the world. The idea

that early kingdoms are despotisms in which the people
exist only for the sovereign, is wholly inapplicable to the
monarchies we are considering. On the contrary, the
sovereign in them exists only for his subjects; his life is
only valuable so long as he discharges the duties of his
position by ordering the course of nature for his people’s
benefit. So soon as he fails to do so, the care, the devotion,

the religious homage which they had hitherto lavished on

him cease and are changed into hatred and contempt ; he is


1 Brasseur de Bourbourg, Histoire des Bancroft, Native Races of the Pacific
nations ctvilisées du Mexique et de States, ii. 142 sg.
? Amérique-centrale, iii. 29 sg.; H. H.


Taboos
observed
by African
kings.


8 THE BURDEN OF RO VALTY CHAP,


dismissed ignominiously, and may be thankful if he escapes
with his life. Worshipped as a god one day, he is killed
as a criminal the next. But in this changed behaviour
of the people there is nothing capricious or inconsistent.
On the contrary, their conduct is entirely of a piece. If
their king is their god, he is or should be also their
preserver; and if he will not preserve them, he must
make room for another who will. So long, however, as
he answers their expectations, there is no limit to the
care which they take of him, and which they compel him to
take of himself. A king of this sort lives hedged in by a
ceremonious etiquette, a network of prohibitions and observ-
ances, of which the intention is not to contribute to his ©
dignity, much less to his comfort, but to restrain him from
conduct which, by disturbing the harmony of nature, might
involve himself, his people, and the universe in one common
catastrophe. Far from adding to his comfort, these observ-
ances, by trammelling his every act, annihilate his freedom
and often render the very life, which it is their object to
preserve, a burden and sorrow to him.

Of the supernaturally endowed kings of Loange it is
said that the more powerful a king is, the more taboos is he
bound to observe ; they regulate all his actions, his walking
and his standing, his eating and drinking, his sleeping and
waking.’ To these restraints the heir to the throne is
subject from infancy ; but as he advances in life the number
of abstinences and ceremonies which he must observe
increases, “until at the moment that he ascends the throne
he is lost in the ocean of rites and taboos.”? In the crater
of an extinct volcano, enclosed on all sides by grassy slopes,
lie the scattered huts and yam-fields of Riabba, the capital
of the native king of Fernando Po. This mysterious being
lives in the lowest depths of the crater, surrounded by a
harem of forty women, and covered, it is said, with old silver
coins. Naked savage as he is, he yet exercises far more
influence in the island than the Spanish governor at Santa
Isabel. In him the conservative spirit of the Boobies or
aboriginal inhabitants of the island is, as it were, incor-


1 A. Bastian, Die deutsche Expedi- 2 O, Dapper, Description de 1’ Afrique
tion an der Loango-Kiiste, i. 355. (Amsterdam, 1686), p. 336.


ROYAL AND PRIESTLY TABOOS © 9


porate. He has never seen a white man and, according to
the firm conviction of all the Boobies, the sight of a pale
face would cause his instant death. He cannot bear to look
upon the sea ; indeed it is said that he may never see it
even in the distance, and that therefore he wears away his
life with shackles on his legs in the dim twilight of his hut.
Certain it is that he has never set foot on the beach. With
the exception of his musket and knife, he uses nothing that
comes from the whites; European cloth never touches his
person, and he scorns tobacco, rum, and even salt.

Among the Ewe-speaking peoples of the Slave Coast, in Taboos
West Africa, “the king is at the same time high priest. In pag shores
this quality he was, particularly in former times, unapproach- kings.
able by his subjects. Only by night was he allowed to quit
his dwelling in order to bathe and so forth. None but his
representative, the so-called ‘ visible king, with three chosen
elders might converse with him, and even they had to sit on
an ox-hide with their backs turned to him. He might not Prohibition
see any European nor any horse, nor might he look upon the pods rey
sea, for which reason he was not allowed to quit his capital
even for a few moments. These rules have been disregarded
in recent times.”* The king of Dahomey himself is subject
to the prohibition of beholding the sea,° and so are the kings
of Loango* and Great Ardra in Guinea. The sea is the
fetish of the Eyeos, to the north-west of Dahomey, and they
and their king are threatened with death by their priests if
ever they dare to look on it.° It is believed that the king
of Cayor in Senegal would infallibly die within the year if he
were to cross a river or an arm ofthe sea.” In Mashonaland
down to recent times the chiefs would not cross certain
rivers, particularly the Rurikwi and the Nyadiri; and the


10. Baumann, Zine afrikanische
Tropen-Insel, Fernando Pio und die
Bube (Wien und Olmiitz, 1888), pp.
103 sg.

2 G. Ziindel, ‘‘ Land und Volk der


’ Eweer auf der Sclavenkiiste in West-


afrika,” Zedtschrift der Gesellschaft fiir
Erdkunde zu Berlin, xii. (1877) p.
402.

3 Béraud, “Note sur le Dahomé,”
Bulletin de la Société de Géographie
(Paris), Vme Série, xii. (1866) p. 377.


4 A. Bastian, Die deutsche Expedi-
tion an der Loango-Kiiste, i. 263.

6 Bosman’s ‘‘ Guinea,” in Pinker-
ton’s Voyages and Travels, xvi. 500.

6 A. Dalzell, History of Dahomey
(London, 1793), p. 15; Th. Winter-
bottom, 42 Account of the Native
Africans in the Neighbourhood of Sierra
Leone (London, 1803), pp. 229 sg.

™J. B. L. Durand, Voyage au
Sénégal (Paris, 1802), p. 55.


Horror of
the sea.


Taboos
observed
by chiefs
among the
Sakalavas
and the
hill tribes
of Assam.


fo) THE BURDEN OF ROYALTY CHAP.


custom was still strictly observed by at least one chief
within the last few years. “On no account will the chief
cross the river. If it is absolutely necessary for him to do
so, he is blindfolded and carried across with shouting and
singing. Should he walk across, he will go blind or die and
certainly lose the chieftainship.”’ So among the Mahafalys
and Sakalavas in the south of Madagascar some kings are
forbidden to sail on the sea or to cross certain rivers.” The
horror of the sea is not peculiar to kings. The Basutos are said
to share it instinctively,though they have never seen salt water,
and live hundreds of miles from the Indian Ocean.2 The
Egyptian priests loathed the sea, and called it the foam of
Typhon ; they were forbidden to set salt on their table, and
they would not speak to pilots because they got their
living by the sea; hence too they would not eat fish, and
the hieroglyphic symbol for hatred was a fish* When
the Indians of the Peruvian Andes were sent by the Spaniards
to work in the hot valleys of the coast, the vast ocean which
they saw before them as they descended the Cordillera was
dreaded by them as a cause of disease; hence they
prayed to it that they might not fall ill. This they all
did without exception, even the little children.? Similarly
the inland people of Lampong in Sumatra are said to
pay a kind of adoration to the sea, and to make it an
offering of cakes and sweetmeats when they behold it
for the first time, deprecating its power of doing them
mischief.

Among the Sakalavas of southern Madagascar the chief
is regarded as a sacred being, but “he is held in leash by a
crowd of restrictions, which regulate his behaviour like that
of the emperor of China. He can undertake nothing what-
ever unless the sorcerers have declared the omens favourable:
he may not eat warm food: on certain days he may not quit


1 Ww. S. Taberer (Chief Native
Commissioner for Mashonaland),
**Mashonaland Natives,” Journal of
the African Society, No. 1§ (April
1905), p. 320,

* A. van Gennep, Zadou et totd-
misme a Madagascar (Paris, 1904), p.


§ Father Porte, ‘‘ Les Reminiscences


dun missionnaire du _ Basutoland,”
Missions Catholiques, xxviii, (1896)
P+ 235+

* Plutarch, Zszs e¢ Osiris, 32.

5 Pp, J. de Arriaga, Lxtirpacion de
la idolatria del Piru (Lima, 1621), pp.
II, 132,

® W. Marsden, History of Sumatra
(London, 1811), p. 301.


I ROYAL AND PRIESTLY TABOOS II


his hut; and so on.”* Among some of the hill tribes of
Assam both the headman and his wife have to observe many
taboos in respect of food; thus they may not eat buffalo,
pork, dog, fowl, or tomatoes. The headman must be chaste,
the husband of one wife, and he must separate himself from
her on the eve of a general or public observance of taboo.
In one group of tribes the headman is forbidden to eat in a
strange village, and under no provocation whatever may he
utter a word of abuse. Apparently the people imagine that
the violation of any of these taboos by a headman would
bring down misfortune on the whole village.

The ancient kings of Ireland, as well as the kings of the Taboos
four provinces of Leinster, Munster, Connaught, and Ulster, peng rhe
were subject to certain quaint prohibitions or taboos, on the kings.
due observance of which the prosperity of the people and
the country, as well as their own, was supposed to depend.
Thus, for example, the sun might not rise on the king of
Ireland in his bed at Tara, the old capital of Erin; he was
forbidden to alight on Wednesday at Magh Breagh, to
traverse Magh Cuillinn after sunset, to incite his horse at
Fan-Chomair, to go in a ship upon the water the Monday
after Bealltaine (May day), and to leave the track of his
army upon Ath Maighne the Tuesday after All-Hallows.
The king of Leinster might not go round Tuath Laighean
left-hand-wise on Wednesday, nor sleep between the Dothair
(Dodder) and the Duibhlinn * with his head inclining to one
side, nor encamp for nine days on the plains of Cualann, nor
travel the road of Duibhlinn on Monday, nor ride a dirty
black-heeled horse across Magh Maistean. The king of
Munster was prohibited from enjoying the feast of Loch
Lein from one Monday to another; from banqueting by
night in the beginning of harvest before Geim at Leitreacha ;
from encamping for nine days upon the Siuir; and from
holding a border meeting at Gabhran. The king of


1 A. van Gennep, Zabou et toté- amongst the Tribes of Assam,” Journal
misme & Madagascar, p. 113, quoting of the Anthropological Institute, xxxvi.
De Thuy, Etude historique, géographi- (1906) p. 98. The word for taboo
gue et ethnographique sur la province among these tribes is genna.
de Tuléar, Notes, Rec., Expl., 1899,

p. 104. 3 The Duibhlinn is the part of the

2 T. C. Hodson, ‘The genxna Liffey on which Dublin now stands.


Taboos

observed
by Irish
kings.


Taboos
observed


by
Egyptian
kings.


12 THE BURDEN OF ROYALTY CHAP,


Connaught might not conclude a treaty respecting his ancient
palace of Cruachan’* after making peace on All-Hallows
Day, nor go in a speckled garment on a grey speckled steed
to the heath of Dal Chais, nor repair to an assembly of
women at Seaghais,nor sit in autumn on the sepulchral
mounds of the wife of Maine, nor contend in running with
the rider of a grey one-eyed horse at Ath Gallta between
two posts. The king of Ulster was forbidden to attend the
horse fair at Rath Line among the youths of Dal Araidhe,
to listen to the fluttering of the flocks of birds of Linn
Saileach after sunset, to celebrate the feast of the bull of
Daire-mic-Daire, to go into Magh Cobha in the month of
March, and to drink of the water of Bo Neimhidh between
two darknesses. If the kings of Ireland strictly observed
these and many other customs, which were enjoined by
immemorial usage, it was believed that they would never
meet with mischance or misfortune, and would live for ninety
years without experiencing the decay of old age; that no
epidemic or mortality would occur during their reigns ; and
that the seasons would be favourable and the earth yield its
fruit in abundance; whereas, if they set the ancient usages
at naught, the country would be visited with plague, famine,
and bad weather.”

The kings of Egypt were worshipped as gods,® and
the routine of their daily life was regulated in every detail
by precise and unvarying rules. “The life of the kings
of Egypt,” says Diodorus, “was not like that of other
monarchs who are irresponsible and may do just what
they choose ; on the contrary, everything was fixed for them
by law, not only their official dutics, but even the details of
their daily life. . . . The hours both of day and night were


1 The site, marked by the remains
of some earthen forts, is now known as
Rathcroghan, near Belanagare in the
county of Roscommon.

2 The Book of Rights, edited with
translation and notes by John O’Dono-
van (Dublin, 1847), pp. 3-8. This
work, comprising a list both of the
prohibitions (wxyharta or geasa) and
the prerogatives (duadha) of the Irish
kings, is preserved in a number of
manuscripts, of which the two oldest


date from 1390 and about 1418 re-
spectively. The list is repeated twice,
first in prose and then in verse. I
have to thank my friend Professor Sir J.
Rhys for kindly calling my attention to
this interesting record of along-vanished
past in Ireland, As to these taboos,
see P, W. Joyce, Social History of
Ancient Ireland, i. 310 sqq.


8 See The Magic Art and the Evolu-
tion of Kings, vol. i, pp. 418 sgg.


I ROYAL AND PRIESTLY TABOOS 13


arranged at which the king had to do, not what he pleased,
but what was prescribed for him. . . . For not only were
the times appointed at which he should transact public
business or sit in judgment; but the very hours for his
walking and bathing and sleeping with his wife, and, in
short, performing every act of life were all settled. Custom
enjoined a simple diet ; the only flesh he might eat was veal
and goose, and he might only drink a prescribed quantity of
wine.”! However, there is reason to think that these rules
were observed, not by the ancient Pharaohs, but by the
priestly kings who reigned at Thebes and in Ethiopia
at the close of the twentieth dynasty.* Among the
Karen-nis of Upper Burma a chief attains his position,
not by hereditary right, but on account of his habit of
abstaining from rice and liquor. The mother, too, of a
candidate for the chieftainship must have eschewed these
things and lived solely on yams and potatoes so long as
she was with child. During that time she may not eat any
meat nor drink water from a common well. And if her son
is to be qualified for the office of chief he must continue to
observe these habits.*

Of the taboos imposed on priests we may see a striking Taboos
example in the rules of life prescribed for the Flamen Dialis mae
at Rome, who has been interpreted as a living image of Flamen
Jupiter, or a human embodiment of the sky-spirit.t beens
They were such as the following:—The Flamen Dialis
might not ride or even touch a horse, nor see an army
under arms,> nor wear a ring which was not broken, nor
have a knot on any part of his garments; no fire except
a sacred fire might be taken out of his house; he might
not touch wheaten flour or leavened bread; he might
not touch or even name a goat, a dog,® raw meat,


1 Diodorus Siculus, i. 70.

2 G. Maspero, Histoire ancienne des
peuples de [Orient classique, ii. 759,
note; A. Moret, Du caractire reli-
gieux de la royauté Pharaonique
(Paris, 1902), pp. 314-318.

_ 8 (Sir) J. G. Scott, Gazetteer of Upper

Burma and the Shan States, part ii.
vol. i. (Rangoon, 1901) p. 308.

* See Zhe Magic Art and the Evolu-
tion of Kings, vol. ii. pp. 191 sg.


5 Among the Gallas the king, who
also acts as priest by performing sacri-
fices, is the only man who is not
allowed to fight with weapons; he
may not even ward off a blow. See Ph.
Paulitschke, Zthnographie Nordost-
Afrikas : die geistige Cultur der Dana-
kil, Galla und Somél, p.. 136.

6 Among the Kafirs of the Hindoo
Koosh men who are preparing to be
headmen are considered ceremonially


Taboos
observed
by the
Flamen
Dialis.


Taboos
observed
by the
Bodia of
Sierra
Leone.


14 THE BURDEN OF ROYALTY CHAP.


beans,’ and ivy ; he might not walk under a vine ; the feet of
his bed had to be daubed with mud; his hair could be cut
only by a free man and with a bronze knife, and his hair
and nails when cut had to be buried under a lucky tree; he
might not touch a dead body nor enter a place where one
was burned ;* he might not see work being done on holy
days ; he might not be uncovered in the open air; if a man
in bonds were taken into his house, the captive had to be
unbound and the cords had to be drawn up through a hole
in the roof and so let down into the street. His wife, the
Flaminica, had to observe nearly the same rules, and others
of her own besides. She might not ascend more than three
steps of the kind of staircase called Greek; at a certain
festival she might not comb her hair; the leather of her
shoes might not be made from a beast that had died a
natural death, but only from one that had been slain or
sacrificed ; if she heard thunder she was tabooed till she had
offered an expiatory sacrifice.®

Among the Grebo people of Sierra Leone there is a
pontiff who bears the title of Bodia and has been compared,
on somewhat slender grounds, to the high priest of the Jews.
He is appointed in accordance with the behest of an oracle.
At an elaborate ceremony of installation he is anointed, a


pure, and wear a semi-sacred uniform
which must not be defiled by coming
into contact with dogs. ‘‘ The Kaneash
{persons in this state of ceremonial
purity] were nervously afraid of my
dogs, which had to be fastened up
whenever one of these august person-
ages was seen to approach. The
dressing has to be performed with the
greatest care, in a place which cannot
be defiled with dogs. Utah and
another had convenient dressing-rooms
on the top of their houses which
happened to be high and isolated, but
another of the four Kaneash had been
compelled to erect a curious-looking
square pen made of poles in front of
his house, his own roof being a common
thoroughfare” (Sir George Scott
Robertson, Zhe Kafirs of the Hindu
Kush (London, 1898), p. 466).

' Similarly the Egyptian priests
abstained from beans and would not


even look at them. See Herodotus,
ii. 37, with A. Wiedemann’s note;
Plutarch, Jsés e¢ Ostris, 5.

2 Similarly among the Kafirs of the
Hindoo Koosh the high priest ‘* may
not traverse certain paths which go
near the receptacles for the dead, nor
may he visit the cemeteries. He may
not go into the actual room where a
death has occurred until after an effigy
has been erected for the deceased.
Slaves may cross his threshold, but
must not approach the hearth” (Sir
George Scott Robertson, of. cit. p.
416).

% Aulus Gellius, x. 15; Plutarch,
Quaest, Rom, 109-112; Pliny, Mat.
Hist. xxviii. 146; Servius on Virgil,
Aen, i. 179, 448, iv. 518; Macro-
bius, Saturn, i, 16. 8 sg. ; Festus, p.
161 A, ed. C, O, Miller, For more
details see J. Marquardt, Réimische
Staatsverwaltung, iii.* 326 sgg.


I ROYAL AND PRIESTLY TABOOS 15


ring is put on his ankle as a badge of office, and the door-
posts of his house are sprinkled with the blood of a sacrificed
goat. He has charge of the public talismans and idols, which
he feeds with rice and oil every new moon; and he sacrifices
on behalf of the town to the dead and to demons. Nomin-
ally his power is very great, but in practice it is very limited;
for he dare not defy public opinion, and he is held respons-
ible, even with his life, for any adversity that befalls the
country. It is expected of him that he should cause the
earth to bring forth abundantly, the people to be healthy,
war to be driven far away, and witchcraft to be kept in
abeyance. His life is trammelled by the observance of
certain restrictions or taboos. Thus he may not sleep in
any house but his own official residence, which is called the
“anointed house” with reference to the ceremony of anoint-
ing him at inauguration. He may not drink water on the
highway. He may not eat while a corpse is in the town,
and he may not mourn for the dead. If he dies while in
office, he must be buried at dead of night; few may hear of
his burial, and none may mourn for him when his death is
made public. Should he have fallen a victim to the poison
ordeal by drinking a decoction of sassywood, as it is called,
he must be buried under a running stream of water.’

Among the Todas of Southern India the holy milkman Taboos
(palol), who acts as priest of the sacred dairy, is subject to a eae
variety of irksome and burdensome restrictions during the milkmen
whole time of his incumbency, which may last many years. —<

Thus he must live at the sacred dairy and may never visit of South
his home or any ordinary village. He must be celibate ; if ”

he is married he must leave his wife. On no account may

any ordinary person touch the holy milkman or the holy
dairy ; such a touch would so defile his holiness that he


1 Sir Harry Johnston, Zzderia (Lon-
don, 1906), ii. 1076 sg., quoting from
Bishop Payne, who wrote ‘‘ some fifty
years ago.” The Bodia described by
Bishop Payne is clearly identical with
the Bodio of the Grain Coast who is
described by the Rev. J. L. Wilson
(Western Africa, pp. 129 sgg.). See
below, p. 23; and Zhe Magic Art and
the Evolution of Kings, vol. i. p. 353-


As to the iron ring which the pontiff
wears on his ankle as the badge of his
office we are told that it “is regarded
with as much veneration as the most
ancient crown in Europe, and the in-
cumbent suffers as deep disgrace by its
removal as any monarch in Europe
would by being deprived of his crown”
(J. L. Wilson, of. cz¢. pp. 129 sg.).


Taboos
observed
by sacred
milkmen
among the
Todas of
South
India.


16 THE BURDEN OF ROYALTY _ CHAP.


would forfeit his office. It is only on two days a week,
namely Mondays and Thursdays, that a mere layman may
even approach the milkman; on other days if he has any
business with him, he must stand at a distance (some say a
quarter of a mile) and shout his message across the inter-
vening space. Further, the holy milkman never cuts his
hair or pares his nails so long as he holds office; he never
crosses a river by a bridge, but wades through a ford and
only certain fords ; if a death occurs in his clan, he may not
attend any of the funeral ceremonies, unless he first resigns
his office and descends from the exalted rank of milkman to
that of a mere common mortal. Indeed it appears that in
old days he had to resign the seals, or rather the pails, of
office whenever any member of his clan departed this life.
However, these heavy restraints are laid in their entirety
only on milkmen of the very highest class! Among the
Todas there are milkmen and milkmen; and some of them
get off more lightly in consideration of their humbler
station in life. Still, apart from the dignity they enjoy, the
lot even of these other milkmen is not altogether a happy
one. Thus, for example, at a place called Kanodrs there is
a dairy-temple of a conical form. The milkman who has
charge of it must be celibate during the tenure of his office:
he must sleep in the calves’ house, a very flimsy structure
with an open door and a fire-place that gives little heat: he
may wear only one very scanty garment: he must take his
meals sitting on the outer wall which surrounds the dairy:
in eating he may not put his hand to his lips, but must throw
the food into his mouth; and in drinking he may not put to
his lips the leaf which serves as a cup, he must tilt his head
back and pour the liquid into his mouth in a jet from above.
With the exception of a single layman, who is allowed to
bear the milkman company, but who is also bound to celi-
bacy and has a bed rigged up for him in the calves’ house,
no other person is allowed to go near this very sacred dairy
under any pretext whatever. No wonder that some years
ago the dairy was unoccupied and the office of milkman


1 W. H.R. Rivers, 74e Zodas (Lon- lesser milkmen see W, H. R. Rivers,
don, 1906), pp. 98-103. op. cit, pp. 62, 66, 67 59., 72, 73,
% For restrictions imposed on these 79-81,


sea se


et Tr aa ee Me Sr


I ROYAL AND PRIESTLY TABOOS 17


stood vacant. “At the present time,” says Dr. Rivers, “a
dairyman is appointed about once a year and holds office
for thirty or forty days only. So far as I could ascertain,
the failure to occupy the dairy constantly is due to the very
considerable hardships and restrictions which have to be
endured by the holder of the office of dairyman, and the
time is probably not far distant when this dairy, one of the
most sacred among the Todas, will cease altogether to be
used,” *


§ 2. Divorce of the Spiritual from the Tr emporal Power


The burdensome observances attached to the royal or The effect
priestly office produced their natural effect. Either men rel
refused to accept the office, which hence tended to fall into some rules
abeyance ; or accepting it, they sank under its weight into }°"° ...
spiritless creatures, cloistered recluses, from whose nerveless temporal
fingers the reins of government slipped into the firmer grasp pier
of men who were often content to wield the reality of authority.
sovereignty without its name. In some countries this rift
in the supreme power deepened into a total and permanent
separation of the spiritual, and temporal powers, the old
royal house retaining their purely religious functions, while
the civil government passed into the hands of a younger
and more vigorous race.

To take examples. In a previous part of this work Reluctance
we saw that in Cambodia it is often necessary to force pesca
the kingships of Fire and Water upon the reluctant suc- with its .
cessors,” and that in Savage Island the monarchy actually bem
came to an end because at last no one could be induced tions.
to accept the dangerous distinction.® In some parts
of West Africa, when the king dies, a family council is
secretly held to determine his successor. He on whom
the choice falls is suddenly seized, bound, and thrown
into the fetish-house, where he is kept in durance till he
consents to accept the crown. Sometimes the heir finds
means of evading the honour which it is sought to thrust


upon him; a ferocious chief has been known to go about


1 W. H. R. Rivers, Zhe Todas, pp. 2 The Magic Art, vol. ii. p. 4.
79-81. 3 Jd. vol. i. pp. 354 sg.


PT. Il Cc


Reluctance
to accept
sovereignty
with its
burden-
some re-
strictions.


18 THE BURDEN OF ROYALTY CHAP,


constantly armed, resolute to resist by force any attempt to
set him on the throne’ The savage Timmes of Sierra
Leone, who elect their king, reserve to themselves the right
of beating him on the eve of his coronation ; and they avail
themselves of this constitutional privilege with such hearty
goodwill that sometimes the unhappy monarch does not
long survive his elevation to the throne. Hence when the
leading chiefs have a spite at a man and wish to rid them-
selves of him, they elect him king. Formerly, before a
man was proclaimed king of Sierra Leone, it used to be the
custom to load him with chains and thrash him. Then the
fetters were knocked off, the kingly robe was placed on him,
and he received in his hands the symbol of royal dignity,
which was nothing but the axe of the executioner? It is
not therefore surprising. to read that in Sierra Leone, where
such customs have prevailed, “except among the Mandingoes
and Suzees, few kings are natives of the countries they
govern. So different are their ideas from ours, that very
few are solicitous of the honour, and competition is very
seldom heard of.”* Another writer on Sierra Leone tells
us that “the honour of reigning, so much coveted in Europe,
is very frequently rejected in Africa, on account of the
expense attached to it, which sometimes greatly exceeds
the revenues of the crown.”® A reluctance to accept the
sovereignty in the Ethiopian kingdom of Gingiro was
simulated, if not really felt, as we learn from the old Jesuit
missionaries. “They wrap up the dead king’s body in
costly garments, and killing a cow, put it into the hide;
then all those who hope to succeed him, being his sons or
others of the royal blood, flying from the honour they covet,
abscond and hide themselves in the woods. This done, the
electors, who are all great sorcerers, agree among themselves
who shall be king, and go out to seek him, when entering
the woods by means of their enchantments, they say, a large


1 A, Bastian, Die deutsche Expedition
an der Loango-Kiiste, i. 354 sq., ii.
9, 11.

* Zweifel et Moustier, ‘* Voyage aux
sources du Niger,” Bulletin de la Société
de Géographie (Paris), VIme Série,
xx, (1880) p, 111,

® O, Dapper, Description del Afrique


(Amsterdam, 1686), p. 250.


4 J. Matthews, Voyage to Sierra-
Leone (London, 1791), p. 75.


5 T, Winterbottom, Account of the
Native Africans in the Neighbour-
hood of Sierra Leone (London, 1803),
p. 124.


1 DIVORCE OF SPIRITUAL FROM TEMPORAL POWER 19


bird called “ber, as big as an eagle, comes down with mighty
cries over the place where he is hid, and they find him
encompass’d by lyons, tygers, snakes, and other creatures
gather'd about him by witchcraft. The elect, as fierce as
those beasts, rushes out upon those who seek him, wounding
and sometimes killing some of them, to prevent being seiz’d.
They take all in good part, defending themselves the best
they can, till they have seizd him. Thus they carry him
away by force, he still struggling and seeming to refuse
taking upon him the burthen of government, all which is
mere cheat and hypocrisy.” ?

The Mikados of Japan seem early to have resorted to Sovereign
the expedient of transferring the honours and burdens of fo"0"
supreme power to their infant children; and the rise of the between a
Tycoons, long the temporal sovereigns of the country, is —,
traced to the abdication of a certain Mikado in favour of rt
his three-year-old son. The sovereignty having been
wrested by a usurper from the infant prince, the cause of
the Mikado was championed by Yoritomo, a man of spirit
and conduct, who overthrew the usurper and restored
to the Mikado the shadow, while he retained for himself
the substance, of power. He bequeathed to his descendants
the dignity he had won, and thus became the founder of the
line of Tycoons. Down to the latter half of the sixteenth
century the Tycoons were active and efficient rulers ; but the
same fate overtook them which had befallen the Mikados.
Immeshed in the same inextricable web of custom and law,
they degenerated into mere puppets, hardly stirring from
their palaces and occupied in a perpetual round of empty
ceremonies, while the real business of government was
managed by the council of state? In Tonquin the mon-
archy ran a similar course. Living like his predecessors in
effeminacy and sloth, the king was driven from the throne
by an ambitious adventurer named Mack, who from a
fisherman had risen to be Grand Mandarin. But the king’s
brother Tring put down the usurper and restored the king,
retaining, however, for himself and his descendants the


1 The Travels of the Jesuits in (London, 1710), pp. 197 sg.
Ethiopia, collected and_ historically 2 Manners and Customs of the
digested by F. Balthazar Tellez Japanese, pp. 199 sgg., 355 599.


Sovereign
powers
divided
between a
temporal
anda
spiritual
head,


20 THE BURDEN OF ROYALTY CHAP.


dignity of general of all the forces. Thenceforward the
kings or dovas, though invested with the title and pomp of
sovereignty, ceased to govern. While they lived secluded
in their palaces, all real political power was wielded by the
hereditary generals or chovas.' The present king of Sikhim,
“like most of his predecessors in the kingship, is a mere
puppet in the hands of his crafty priests, who have made
a sort of priest-king of him. They encourage him by
every means in their power to leave the government to
them, whilst he devotes all his time to the degrading rites
of devil-worship, and the ceaseless muttering of meaningless
jargon, of which the Tibetan form of Buddhism chiefly
consists. They declare that he is a saint by birth, that he
is the direct descendant of the greatest king of Tibet, the
canonised Srongtsan Gampo, who was a contemporary of
Mahomed in the seventh century A.D. and who first intro-
duced Buddhism to Tibet.’ “This saintly lineage, which
secures for the king’s person popular homage amounting to
worship, is probably, however, a mere invention of the
priests to glorify their puppet-prince for their own sordid
ends. Such devices are common in the East.”? The
custom regularly observed by the Tahitian kings of abdi-
cating on the birth of a son, who was immediately pro-
claimed sovereign and received his father’s homage, may
perhaps have originated, like the similar custom occasionally
practised by the Mikados, in a wish to shift to other
shoulders the irksome burden of royalty ; for in Tahiti as
elsewhere the sovereign was subjected to a system of
vexatious restrictions.® In Mangaia, another Polynesian
island, religious and civi] authority were lodged in separate
hands, spiritual functions being discharged by a line of
hereditary kings, while the temporal government was en-
trusted from time to time to a victorious war-chief, whose
investiture, however, had to be completed by the king. To
the latter were assigned the best lands, and he received
daily offerings of the choicest food.‘ The Mikado and


! Richard, ‘* History of Tonquin,” 3° W. Ellis, Polynesian Researches,
in Pinkerton’s Voyages and Travels, ix. Second Edition (London, 1832-1836),
744 547. iii. 99 gg.

4 L. A. Waddell, Among the Hima- 4 W, W. Gill, AZvths and Songs of


/ayas (Westminster, 1899), pp. 146. sg. the South Pacific, pp. 293 s¢¢.


1 DIVORCE OF SPIRITUAL FROM TEMPORAL POWER 21


Tycoon of Japan had their counterparts in the Roko Tui Sovereign
and Vunivalu of Fijii The Roko Tui was the Reverend FP" s.;
or Sacred King. The Vunivalu was the Root of War or between a
War King. In one kingdom a certain Thakambau, who bargin
was the War King, kept all power in his own hands, but in ne Bs
a neighbouring kingdom the real ruler was the Sacred “*
King.’ Similarly in Tonga, besides the civil king or How,
whose right to the throne was partly hereditary and partly
derived from his warlike reputation and the number of his
fighting men, there was a great divine chief called 7ooztonga

or “Chief of Tonga,’ who ranked above the king and the

other chiefs in virtue of his supposed descent from one of the

chief gods. Once a year the first-fruits of the ground were
offered to him at a solemn ceremony, and it was believed

that if these offerings were not made the vengeance of the

gods would fall in a signal manner on the people. Peculiar
forms of speech, such as were applied to no one else, were

used in speaking of him, and everything that he chanced to

touch became sacred or tabooed. When he and the king

met, the monarch had to sit down on the ground in token

of respect until his holiness had passed by. Yet though he
enjoyed the highest veneration by reason of his divine
origin, this sacred personage possessed no _ political
authority, and if he ventured to meddle with affairs of

state it was at the risk of receiving a rebuff from the
king, to whom the real power belonged, and who finally
succeeded in ridding himself of his spiritual rival.2 The

king of the Getae regularly shared his power with a
priest, whom his subjects called a god. This divine man

led a solitary life in a cave on a holy mountain, seeing

few people but the king and his attendants. His counsels
added much to the king’s influence with his subjects, who
believed that he was thereby enabled to impart to them the
commands and admonitions of the gods. At Athens the
kings degenerated into little more than sacred functionaries,

and it is said that the institution of the new office of


1 The late Rev. Lorimer Fison, ina Edition (London, 1818), ii. 75-79,
letter to the author, dated August 26, 132-136.
1808.

* W. Mariner, 4x Account of the 3 Strabo, vii. 3. 5, pp. 297 sg.
Natives of the Tonga Islands, Second Compare 7d. vii. 3. 11, p. 304.


Fetish
kings and
civil kings
in West
Africa.


THE BURDEN OF ROYALTY CHAP.


22


Polemarch or War Lord was rendered necessary by their
growing effeminacy.. American examples of the partition
of authority between a king and a pope have already been
cited from the early history of Mexico and Colombia.’

In some parts of western Africa two kings reign side by
side, ‘a fetish or religious king and a civil king, but the
fetish king is really supreme. He controls the weather and
so forth, and can put a stop to everything. When he lays
his red staff on the ground, no one may pass that way. This
division of power between a sacred and a secular ruler is
to be met with wherever the true negro culture has been
left unmolested, but where the negro form of society has
been disturbed, as in Dahomey and Ashantee, there is a
tendency to consolidate the two powers in a single
king® Thus, for example, there used to be a fetish king
at New Calabar who ranked above the ordinary king in
all native matters, whether religious or civil, and always
walked in front of him on public occasions, attended by a
slave who held an umbrella over his head. His opinion
carried great weight. The office and the causes which led
to its extinction are thus described by a missionary who
spent many years in Calabar: “ The worship of the people
is now given especially to their various zdems, one of which,
called Ndem Efik, is a sort of tutelary deity of the country.
An individual was appointed to take charge of this object
of worship, who bore the name of King Calabar; and
likely, in bypast times, possessed the power indicated by the
title, being both king and priest. He had as a tribute the
skins of all leopards killed, and should a slave take refuge
in his shrine he belonged to Ndem Efik. The office, how-
ever, imposed certain restrictions on its occupant. He, for
instance, could not partake of food in the presence of


1 Aristotle, Constitution of Athens,
iii, 2. My friend Professor Henry
Jackson kindly called my attention
to this passage,

2 See The Magic Art and the Evolu-
tion of Kings, vol. i. p. 416, and above,
p. 6.

3 Miss Mary H. Kingsley in Journal
of the Anthropological Institute, xxix.
(1899) pp. 61 sgg. I had some con-


versation on this subject with Miss
Kingsley (Ist June 1897) and have
embodied the results in the text. Miss
Kingsley did not know the rule of
succession among the fetish kings.

4 T. J. Hutchinson, Jmpressions of
Western Africa (London, 1858), pp.
1o1 sg.; Le Comte C. N. de Cardi,
**Ju-ju Laws and Customs in the Niger
Delta,” Journal of the Anthropological
/nstitute, xxix. (1899) p. 51.


: DIVORCE OF SPIRITUAL FROM TEMPORAL POWER 23


any one, and he was prohibited from engaging in traffic. Fetish
On account of these and other disabilities, when the last ea pones
holder of the office died, a poor old man of the Cobham in West
family, no successor was found for him, and the priesthood “"™
has become extinct.”' One of the practical inconveniences
of such an office is that the house of the fetish king enjoys
the right of sanctuary, and so tends to become little better
than a rookery of bad characters. Thus on the Grain
Coast of West Africa the fetish king or Bodio, as he is
called, “exercises the functions of a high- priest, and is
regarded as protector of the whole nation. He lives in a
house provided for him by the people, and takes care of the
national fetiches. He enjoys some immunities in virtue of
his office, but is subject to certain restrictions which more
. than counterbalance his privileges. His house is a sanctum
to which culprits may betake themselves without the
danger of being removed by any one except by the Bodio
himself.” One of these Bodios resigned office because of the
sort of people who quartered themselves on him, the cost
of feeding them, and the squabbles they had among them-
selves. He led a cat-and-dog life with them for three years.
Then there came a man with homicidal mania varied by
epileptic fits; and soon afterwards the spiritual shepherd
retired into private life, but not before he had lost an ear
and sustained other bodily injury in a personal conflict with
this very black sheep.®
At Porto Novo there used to be, in addition to the The King

ordinary monarch, a King of the Night, who reigned during wane
the hours of darkness from sunset to sunrise. He might not
shew himself in the street after the sun was up. His duty
was to patrol the streets with his satellites and to arrest all
whom he found abroad after a certain hour. Each band of
his catchpoles was led by a man who went about concealed
from head to foot under a conical casing of straw and blew
blasts on a shell which caused every one that heard it to
shudder. The King of the Night never met the ordinary

1 H. Goldie, Calabar and its Mis- taboos observed by the Bodio or Bodia
ston, New Edition (London, 1901), see above, p. 15.
Pp: 43- 3 Miss Mary H. Kingsley, in

2 J. L. Wilson, Western Africa Journal of the Anthropological Insti-
(London, 1856), p. 129. As to the ‘ute, xxix. (1899) p. 62.


Civil rajahs
and taboo
rajahs in
the East
Indies.


24 THE BURDEN OF ROYALTY CHAP.


king except on the first and last days of their respective
reign; for each of them invested the other with office and
paid him the last honours at death." With this King of
the Night at Porto Novo we may compare a certain king of
Hawaii who was so very sacred that no man might see
him, even accidentally, by day under pain of death; he
only shewed himself by night.”

In some parts of the East Indian island of Timor we
meet with a partition of power like that whichis repre-
sented by the civil king and the fetish king of western
Africa. Some of the Timorese tribes recognise two rajahs,
the ordinary or civil rajah, who governs the people, and
the fetish or taboo rajah (vadja pomali), who is charged
with the control of everything that concerns the earth
and its products. This latter ruler has the right of
declaring anything taboo; his permission must be obtained
before new land may be brought under cultivation, and he
must perform certain necessary ceremonies when the work
is being carried out. If drought or blight threatens the
crops, his help is invoked to save them. Though he ranks
below the civil rajah, he exercises a momentous influence on
the course of events, for his secular colleague is bound to
consult him in all important matters. In some of the
neighbouring islands, such as Rotti and eastern Flores, a
spiritual ruler of the same sort is recognised under various
native names, which all mean “lord of the ground.”
Similarly in the Mekeo district of British New Guinea
there is a double chieftainship. The people are divided
into two groups according to families, and each of the
groups has its chief. One of the two is the war chief, the
other is the taboo (afw) chief. The office of the latter is
hereditary ; his duty is to impose a taboo on any of the


1 Marchoux, ‘* Ethnographie, Porto-
Novo,” Kevue Scientifique, Quatriéme
Série, iii. (1895) pp. 595 sg. This

e€ was pointed out to me by
Mr. N, W. Thomas,

#0, von Kotzebue, Antdeckungs-
Reise in die Stid-See und nach der
Berings-Strasse (Weimar, 1821), iii.
149.

§ J. J. de Hollander, Handleiding


bij de Beofening der Land- en Volken-
hkunde van Nederlandsch Oost-Indié,
ii. 606 sg. In other parts of Timor
the spiritual ruler is called Anaha paha
or **conjuror of the land.” Compare
H. Zondervan, ‘* Timor en de Timor-
eezen,” Tijdschrift van het Neder-
landsch Aardrijkskundig Genootschap,
Tweede Serie, v, (1888) Afdeeling, mehr
uitgebreide artikelen, pp. 400-402.


1 DIVORCE OF SPIRITUAL FROM TEMPORAL POWER 25


crops, such as the coco-nuts and areca nuts, whenever he Civil rajahs
thinks it desirable to prohibit their use. In his office we 0 '\0°
may perhaps detect the beginning of a priestly dynasty, but the East
as yet his functions appear to be more magical than “>
religious, being concerned with the control of the harvests
rather than with the propitiation of higher powers. The
members of another family are bound to see to it that the
taboo imposed by the chief is strictly observed. For this
purpose some fourteen or fifteen men of the family form
a sort of constabulary. Every evening they go round the
village armed with clubs and disguised with masks or leaves.
All the time they are in office they are forbidden to live
with their wives and even to look at a woman. Hence
women may not quit their houses while the men are going
their rounds. Further, the constables on duty are pro-
hibited from chewing betel nut and drinking coco-nut water,
lest the areca and coco-nuts should not grow. When there
is a good show of nuts, the taboo chief proclaims that on
a certain day the restriction will come to an end.’ In
Ponape, one of the Caroline Islands, the kingship is elective |
within the limits of the blood royal, which runs in the
female line, so that the sovereignty passes backwards and
forwards between families which we, reckoning descent in
the male line, should regard as distinct. The chosen
monarch must be in possession of certain secrets. He must
know the places where the sacred stones are kept, on which
he has to seat himself. He must understand the holy
words and prayers of the liturgy, and after his election he
must recite them at the place of the sacred stones. But he
enjoys only the honours of his office; the real powers of
government are in the hands of his prime-minister or vizier.’

1A. C. Haddon, Head-hunters, Ponape,” Ethnologisches Notizblatt, ii.
Black, White, and Brown (London, Heft 2 (Berlin, 1901), pp. 5 s¢., 7.
1901), pp. 270-272. The title of the prime-minister is


2 Dr. Hahl, ‘‘Mittheilungen iiber  Nanekin.
Sitten und rechtliche Verhiltnisse auf


CHAPTER il
THE PERILS OF THE SOUL


§ 1. The Soul as a Mannikin


hen THE foregoing examples have taught us that the office of
primitive a sacred king or priest is often hedged in by a series of
conception burdensome restrictions or taboos, of which a principal
of death ? aioe
purpose appears to be to preserve the life of the divine man
for the good of his people. But if the object of the taboos
is to save his life, the question arises, How is their observ-
ance supposed to effect this end? To understand this we
must know the nature of the danger which threatens the
king’s life, and which it is the intention of these curious
restrictions to guard against. We must, therefore, ask:
What does early man understand by death? To what
causes does he attribute it? And how does he think
it may be guarded against?
a As the savage commonly explains the processes of
the human inanimate nature by supposing that they are produced by
seeker living beings working in or behind the phenomena, so he
the pro. explains the phenomena of life itself. If an animal lives and
enc of Moves, it can only be, he thinks, because there is a little
which fron animal inside which moves it: if a man lives and moves, it
conabettie can only be because he has a little man or animal inside who
death. moves him. The animal insidé the animal, the man inside
the man, is the soul. And as the activity of an animal or
man is explained by the presence of the soul, so the repose
of sleep or death is explained by its absence ; sleep or trance
being the temporary, death being the permanent absence of
the soul. Hence if death be the permanent absence of the


26


CHAP, II THE SOUL AS A MANNIKIN 27


soul, the way to guard against it is either to prevent the soul
from leaving the body, or, if it does depart, to ensure that it
shall return. The precautions adopted by savages to secure
one or other of these ends take the form of certain pro-
hibitions or taboos, which are nothing but rules intended
to ensure either the continued presence or the return of the
soul. In short, they are life-preservers or life-guards. These
general statements will now be illustrated by examples.

Addressing some Australian blacks, a European mission- The soul
ary said, “I am not one, as you think, but two.” Upon this *@ "ié"
they laughed. “You may laugh as much as you like,” Australia,
continued the missionary, “I tell you that I am two in one; rye |
this great body that you see is one; within that there is the
another little one which is not visible. The great body dies, ——
and is buried, but the little body flies away when the great
one dies.” To this some of the blacks replied, “ Yes, yes.

We also are two, we also have a little body within the breast.”
On being asked where the little body went after death, some
said it went behind the bush, others said it went into the sea,
and some said: they did not know.’ The Hurons thought
that the soul had a head and body, arms and legs; in short,
that it was a complete little model of the man himself? The
Esquimaux believe that “the soul exhibits the same shape
as the body it belongs to, but is of a more subtle and ethereal
nature.”* According to the Nootkas of British Columbia
the soul has the shape of a tiny man; its seat is the crown
of the head. So long as it stands erect, its owner is hale and
hearty ; but when from any cause it loses its upright position,
he loses his senses.* Among the Indian tribes of the Lower
Fraser River, man is held to have four souls, of which the
‘principal one has the form of a mannikin, while the other


1 R. Salvado, Mémoires historiques
sur 7 Australie (Paris, 1854), p. 1623
Journal of the Anthropological Institute,
vii. (1878) p. 282. In this edifying
catechism there is little to choose be-
tween the savagery of the white man
and the savagery of the black.

2 Relations des Jésuites, 1634, p. 173
ed., 1636, p. 104; za., 1639, p. 43
(Canadian reprint, Quebec, 1858).

3 H. Rink, Zales and Traditions of
the Eskimo, p. 36. The Esquimaux


or Bering Strait believe that every
man has several souls, and that two of
these souls are shaped exactly like the
body. See E. W. Nelson, ‘‘ The
Eskimo about Bering Strait,” Zigh-
teenth Annual Report of the Bureau of
American Ethnology, part i. (Washing-
ton, 1899) p. 422.

* Fr. Boas, in Sixth Report on the
North-Western Tribes of Canada, p.
44 (separate reprint from the Report
of the British Association for 1890).


The soul
as a man-
nikin in
ancient


Egypt.


28 THE PERILS OF THE SOUL ‘CHAP.


three are shadows of it.. The Malays conceive the human
soul (semangat) as a little man, mostly invisible and of the
bigness of a thumb, who corresponds exactly in shape, pro-
portion, and even in complexion to the man in whose body
he resides. This mannikin is of a thin unsubstantial nature,
though not so impalpable but that it may cause displace-
ment on entering a physical object, and it can flit quickly
from place to place; it is temporarily absent from the
body in sleep, trance, and disease,and permanently absent
after death.”

The ancient Egyptians believed that every man has a soul
(ka) which is his exact counterpart or double, with the same
features, the same gait, even the same dress as the man him-
self. Many of the monuments dating from the eighteenth
century onwards represent various kings appearing before
divinities, while behind the king stands his soul or double,
portrayed as a little man with the king’s features. Some of
the reliefs in the temple at Luxor illustrate the birth of King
Amenophis III. While the queen-mother is being tended
by two goddesses acting as midwives, two other goddesses
are bringing away two figures of new-born children, only one
of which is supposed to be a child of flesh and blood: the
inscriptions engraved above their heads shew that, while the
first is Amenophis, the second is his soul or double. And
as with kings and queens, so it was with common men and
women. Whenever a child was born, there was born with
him a double which followed him through the various stages
of life ; young while he was young, it grew to maturity and
declined along with him. And not only human beings, but
gods and animals, stones and trees, natural and artificial
objects, everybody and everything had its own soul or double.
The doubles of oxen and sheep were the duplicates of the
original oxen or sheep; the doubles of linen or beds, of
chairs or knives, had the same form as the real linen, beds,
chairs, and knives. So thin and subtle was the stuff, so fine
and delicate the texture of these doubles, that they made no
impression on ordinary eyes. Only certain classes of priests


1 Fr. Boas, in Ninth Report on the for 1894).
North-Western Tribes of Canada, p. 2 WwW. W. Skeat, Malay Magic
461 (Report of the British Association (London, 1900), p. 47.


+f THE SOUL AS A MANNIKIN 29


or seers were enabled by natural gifts or special training to
perceive the doubles of the gods, and to win from them a
knowledge of the past and the future. The doubles of men

and things were hidden from sight in the ordinary course of

life ; still, they sometimes flew out of the body endowed with

colour and voice, left it in a kind of trance, and departed to
manifest themselves at a distance.’

So exact is the resemblance of the mannikin to the man, The soul

in other words, of the soul to the body, that, as there are *)% "8"
fat bodies and thin bodies, so there are fat souls and thin Nias, Fiji,
souls ;? as there are heavy bodies and light bodies, long bodies *"* '"“*
and short bodies, so there are heavy souls and light souls, long

souls and short souls. The people of Nias (an island to the

west of Sumatra) think that every man, before he is born,

is asked how long or how heavy a soul he would like, and a

soul of the desired weight or length is measured out to him.

The heaviest soul ever given out weighs about ten grammes.

The length of a man’s life is proportioned to the length of

his soul; children who die young had short souls.* The

Fijian conception of the soul as a tiny human being comes

clearly out in the customs observed at the death of a chief
among the Nakelo tribe. When a chief dies, certain men,

who are the hereditary undertakers, call him, as he lies, oiled

and ornamented, on fine mats, saying, “ Rise, sir, the chief,

and let us be going. The day has come over the land.”

Then they conduct him to the river side, where the ghostly
ferryman comes to ferry Nakelo ghosts across the stream.


1 G, Maspero, Etudes de mythologie
et d’archéologie égyptiennes (Paris,
1893), i. 388 sg.; A. Wiedemann,
The ancient Egyptian Doctrine of the
Immortality of the Soul(London, 1895),
pp. 10 sgg. In Greek works of art,
especially vase - paintings, the human
soul is sometimes represented as a tiny
being in human form, generally winged,
sometimes clothed and armed, some-
times naked. See O, Jahn, Archdolo-
gische Bettrige (Berlin, 1847), pp. 128
sqg.; E. Pottier, Atude sue les lécythes
blancs attigues (Paris, 1883), pp. 75-
79; American Journal of Archaeology,
ii, (1886) pll. xii., xiii. ; O. Kern, in
Aus der Anomia, Archiologische Bet-
trage Carl Robert sur Erinnerung an


Berlin dargebracht (Berlin, 1890), pp.
89-95. Greek artists of a later period
sometimes portrayed the human soul in
the form of a butterfly (O. Jahn, of. c#t.
pp- 138sgg.). There wasa particularsort
of butterfly to which the Greeks gave
the name of soul (yvx}). See Aristotle,
Hist. anim. v. 19, p. 550 b 26, p.
551 b 13 sg.; Plutarch, Quaest.
conviv. ii, 3. 2.


2 W. W. Gill, Mths and Songs of
the South Pacific (London, 1876), p.
171.


3H. Sundermann, ‘Die Insel
Nias und die Mission daselbst,” 4//-
gemeine Missions - Zeitschrift, Bd. xi.
October 1884, p. 453.


Attempts
to prevent
the soul
from
escaping
from the
body.


30 THE PERILS OF THE SOUL CHAP.


As they thus attend the chief on his last journey, they hold
their great fans close to the ground to shelter him, because,
as one of them explained to a missionary, “ His soul is only
a little child.”’ People in the Punjaub who tattoo them-
selves believe that at.death the soul, “the little entire man
or woman” inside the mortal frame, will go to heaven
blazoned with the same tattoo patterns which adorned
the body in life? Sometimes, however, as we shall see,
the human soul is conceived not in human but in animal
form.


§ 2. Absence and Recall of the Soul


The soul is commonly supposed to escape by the
natural openings of the body, especially the mouth and
nostrils. . Hence in Celebes they sometimes fasten fish-
hooks toa sick man’s nose, navel, and feet, so that if his
soul should try to escape it may be hooked and held
fast.2 A Turik on the Baram River, in Borneo, refused to
part with some hook-like stones, because they, as it were,
hooked his soul to his body, and so prevented the spiritual
portion of him from becoming detached from the material.
When a Sea Dyak sorcerer or medicine-man is initiated,
his fingers are supposed to be furnished with fish-hooks,
with which he will thereafter clutch the human soul in
the act of flying away, and restore it to the body of the
sufferer.° But hooks, it is plain, may be used to catch the
souls of enemies as well as of friends. Acting on this
principle head-hunters in Borneo hang wooden hooks beside
the skulls of their slain enemies in the belief that this helps
them on their forays to hook in fresh heads.2 When an
epidemic is raging, the Goajiro Indians of Colombia attribute
it to an evil spirit, it may be the prowling ghost of an enemy.


1 The late Rev. Lorimer Fison, in a


letter to the author, dated November
3, 1895.
2H, A. Rose, ‘Note on Female


Tattooing in the Panjib,” J/ndian
Antiquary, xxxi. (1902) p. 298.

5B. F. Matthes, Over de Bissoes of
heidensche priesters en priesteressen der
Boeginesen (Amsterdam, 1872), p. 24
(reprinted from the Verhandelingen der


Koninklijke Akademie van Wetenschap-
pen, Afdeeling Letterkunde, Deel
vii.).

4 A, C, Haddon, Head-hunters, p.


39.

5 H. Ling Roth, ‘* Low’s Natives of
Borneo,” Journal of the Anthropological
Jnstitute, xxi, (1892) p. 115.

6 A, C. Haddon, Head-hunters, pp.
371, 396.


i ABSENCE AND RECALL OF THE SOUL 31


So they hang strings furnished with hooks from the roofs of

their huts and from all the trees in the neighbourhood, in

order that the demon or ghost may be caught on a hook

and thus rendered powerless to harm them.’ Similarly the
Calchaquis Indians to the west of Paraguay used to plant
arrows in the ground about a sick man to keep death from
getting at him.2 One of the implements of a Haida medicine- Attempts
man is a hollow bone, in which he bottles up departing {? Pr‘r™"
souls, and so restores them to their owners. When any one from
yawns in their presence the Hindoos always snap their. ie
thumbs, believing that this will hinder the soul from issuing body.
through the open mouth.* The Marquesans used to hold

the mouth and nose of a dying man, in order to keep him in

life by preventing his soul from escaping ;° the same custom

is reported of the New Caledonians ;° and with the like
intention the Bagobos of the Philippine Islands put rings of

brass wire on the wrists or ankles of their sick.’ On the

other hand, the Itonamas in South America seal up the

eyes, nose, and mouth of a dying person, in case his ghost
should get out and carry off others;* and for a similar
reason the people of Nias, who fear the spirits of the
recently deceased and identify them with the breath, seek to
confine the vagrant soul in its earthly tabernacle by bunging

up the nose or tying up the jaws of the corpse.’ Before
leaving a corpse the Wakelbura in Australia used to place

hot coals in its ears in order to keep the ghost in the body,

until they had got such a good start that he could not


1H. Candelier, Rzo-Hacha et les
Indiens Goajires (Paris,e 1893), pp.
258 sg.

2 R. Southey, History of Brazzil, iii.
396.

3G. M. Dawson, ‘On the Haida
Indians of the Queen Charlotte Is-
lands,” Geological Survey of Canada,
Report of Progress for 1878-1879
(Montreal, 1880), pp. 123 B, 139 B.

4 Panjab Notes and Queries, ii. p.
114, § 665.

5 M. Radiguet, Zes Derniers Sau-
vages (Paris, 1882), p. 245; Matthias
G***, Lettres sur Lles les Marquises
(Paris, 1843), p. 115; Clavel, Les
Marqutsiens, p. 42 note.

6 Gagniére, in Annales de la Propa-


gation de la Foti, xxxii. (1860) p.
439.

7 F. Blumentritt, ‘‘ Das Stromgebiet
des Rio Grande de Mindano,” Peter-
manns Mitteilungen, xxxvii. (1891) p.
III.

8 A, d’Orbigny, L’ Homme américain,
ii. 241; T. J. Hutchinson, ‘‘ The
Chaco Indians,” Zvamsactions of the
Ethnological Society of London, N.S.,
iil. (1865) pp. 322 sg.; A. Bastian,
Culturlander des alten Amerika, i.
476. A similar custom is observed by
the Cayuvava Indians (A. d’Orbigny,
op. cet, li. 257).

® E. Modigliani, Un Viaggio a Nias
(Milan, 1890), p. 283.


Tying
the soul in
the body.


32 THE PERILS OF THE SOUL craw


overtake them.! Esquimaux mourners plug their nostrils
with deerskin, hair, or hay for several days,’ probably to
prevent their souls from following that of their departed
friend ; the custom is especially incumbent on the persons
who dress the corpse. In southern Celebes, to hinder
the escape of a woman’s soul at childbirth, the nurse
ties a band as tightly as possible round the body
of the expectant mother* The Minangkabauers of
Sumatra observe a similar custom; a skein of thread ora
string is sometimes fastened round the wrist or loins of a
woman in childbed, so that when her soul seeks to depart
in her hour of travail it may find the egress barred.
Among the Kayans of Borneo illness is attributed to
the absence of the soul; so when a man has been ill and
is well again, he attempts to prevent his soul from departing
afresh. For this purpose he ties the truant into his body
by fastening round his wrist a piece of string on which a
lukut, or antique bead, is threaded; for a magical virtue
appears to be ascribed to such beads. But lest the string
and the bead should be broken and lost, he will sometimes
tattoo the pattern of the bead on his wrist, and this is found
to answer the purpose of tethering his soul quite as well.°
Again, the Koryak of North-Eastern Asia fancy that if


1 A, W. Howitt, Native Tribes of


his nostrils to prevent the exhalations
South-East Australia (London, 1904),


from entering his own lungs” (Fr.


p- 473-
2 Fr. Boas, ** The Central Eskimo,”


Sixth Annual Report of the Bureau of
Ethnology (Washington, 1888), pp. 613
sg. Among the Esquimaux of Smith
Sound male mourners plug up the
right nostril and female mourners the
left (E. Bessels in American Naturalist,
xviii. (1884) p. 877; cp. J. Murdoch,
**Ethnological Results of the Point
Barrow Expedition,” Ninth Annual
Report of the Bureau of Ethnology
(Washington, 1892), p. 425). This
seems to point to a belief that the soul
enters by one nostril and goes out by
the other, and that the functions
assigned to the right and left nostrils
in this respect are reversed in men and
women. Among the Esquimaux of
Baffin Land ‘the person who prepares
a body for burial puts rabbit’s fur into


Boas, ‘*The Eskimo of Baffin Land
and Hudson Bay,” Bulletin of the
American Museum of Natural History,
xv. part i. (1901) p. 144). But this
would hardly explain the custom of
stopping one nostril only.

8G. F. Lyon, Private Journal
(London, 1824), p. 370.

4B. F. Matthes, Bzydragen iot
de Ethnologie van Zuid-Celebes (The
Hague, 1875), p. 54.

oT, van der Toorn, ‘ Het
animisme bij den Minangkabauer der
Padangsche Bovenlanden,” Aijdragen
tot de Taal- Land- en Volkenkunde
van Nederlandsch-Indié, xxxix. (1890)
Pp. 56.

® C,,Hose and R. Shelford, ‘* Ma-
terials fora Study of Tatu in Borneo,”
Journal of the Anthropological Institute,
xxxvi. (1906) p. 65,


0 ABSENCE AND RECALL OF THE SOUL 33


there are two sick people in a house and one of them is at Tying the
the last extremity, the soul of the other is apt to be lured ir tng the
away by the soul of the dying man; hence in order to
hinder its departure they tie the patient’s neck by a string
to the bands of the sleeping-tent and recite a charm over
the string so that it may be sure to detain the soul... And
lest the soul of a babe should escape and be lost as
soon as it is born, the Alfoors of Celebes, when a birth is
about to take place, are careful to close every opening in the
house, even the keyhole ; and they stop up every chink and
cranny in the walls. Also they tie up the mouths of all
animals inside and outside the house, for fear one of them
might swallow the child’s soul. For a similar reason all
persons present in the house, even the mother herself, are
obliged to keep their mouths shut the whole time the birth
is taking place. When the question was put, Why they did
not hold their noses also, lest the child’s soul should get into
one of them? the answer was that breath being exhaled
as well as inhaled through the nostrils, the soul would
be expelled before it could have time to settle down?
Popular expressions in the language of civilised peoples,
such as to have one’s heart in one’s mouth, or the soul on
the lips or in the nose, shew how natural is the idea that the
life or soul may escape by the mouth or nostrils.®

Often the soul is conceived as a bird ready to take The soul
flight. This conception has probably left traces in most **# >t¢


1 W. Jochelson, “The Koryak,


in naso esse, stabam tanquam mortuus,”


Religion and Myths” (Leyden and
New York, 1905), p. 103 (Memoir
of the American Museum of Natural
History, The Jesup North Pacific Ex-
pedition, vol. vi. part i.).

2W. F. A. Zimmermann, Déze
Inseln des Indischen und Stillen
Meeres (Berlin, 1864-65), ii. 386
Sq.
3 Compare Todrovy kar’ duov Seipor,
dxpis ) Yuxh | adrod éml xechéwy podvov
) xaxyn AeepOn, Herodas, Amamdd,
iii. 3 sg.3 pévov od éml rots xeldeor
Tas Wuxds exovras, Dio Chrysostom,
Orat. xxxii. vol. i. p.° 417, ed.
Dindorf; modern Greek pé rh Yuxi)’s
7a ddvria, G. F. Abbott, Alacedonian
Folklore, p. 193 note; ‘* mzhz anima


PTs) IT


Petronius, Sat. 62; ‘*2n primis labris
animam habere,” Seneca, Natur.
guaest, iii. praef. 16; “* Voila un
pauvre malade gui a le feu dans le
corps, et Padme sur le bout des levres,”
J. de Brebeuf, in Relations des
Jésuites, 1636, p. 113 (Canadian
reprint); ‘* This posture keeps the
weary soul hanging upon the lip ; ready
to leave the carcass, and yet not
suffered to take its wing,” R. Bentley,
‘‘Sermon on  Popery,” quoted in
Monk’s Life of Bentley,” i. 382. In
Czech they say of a dying person that
his soul is on his tongue (Br. Jelfnek,
in Mitthetlungen der anthropolog.
Gesellschaft in Wien, xxi. (1891) p.
22).
D


The soul
conceived
as a bird
ready to

fly away.


34 THE PERILS OF THE SOUL CHAP.


languages,’ and it lingers as a metaphor in poetry. But
what is metaphor to a modern European poet was sober
earnest to his savage ancestor, and is still so to many
people. The Bororos of Brazil fancy that the human
soul has the shape of a bird, and passes in that shape
out of the body in dreams.? According to the Bilqula
or Bella Coola Indians of British Columbia the soul
dwells in the nape of the neck and resembles a_ bird
enclosed in an egg. If the shell breaks and. the soul flies
away, the man must die. If he swoons or becomes crazed,
it is because his soul has flown away without breaking its
shell. The shaman can hear the buzzing of its wings, like
the buzz of a mosquito, as the soul flits past; and he may
catch and replace it in the nape of its owners neck.2 A
Melanesian wizard in Lepers’ Island has been known to
send out his soul in the form of an eagle to pursue a ship
and learn the fortunes of some natives who were being
carried off in it.* The soul of Aristeas of Proconnesus was
seen to issue from his mouth in the shape of a raven.?
There is a popular opinion in Bohemia that the parting soul
comes forth from the mouth like a white bird. The Malays
carry out the conception of the bird-soul in a number of odd
ways. If the soul is a bird on the wing, it may be attracted
by rice, and so either prevented from taking wing or lured
back again from its perilous flight. Thus in Java when a
child is placed on the ground for the first time (a moment
which uncultured people seem to regard as_ especially
dangerous), it is put in a hen-coop and the mother makes a
clucking sound, as if she were calling hens.’ Amongst the
Battas of Sumatra, when a man returns from a dangerous
enterprise, grains of rice are placed on his head, and these


1 Compare the
dvarrepbw, etc.

“ K. von den Steinen, Unter den
Naturvilkern Zentral-Brasiliens (Ber-
lin, 1894), pp. 511, 512.

3 Fr, Boas, in Seventh Report on the
North- Western Tribes of Canada, pp. 14
sq. (separate reprint of the Report of
the British Association for 1891),


4K, H. Codrington, Zhe Melan-
estas, pp. 207 Sq.


Greek  ordopuat,


5 Pliny, Mat, Hist. vii. 174. Com-
pare Herodotus, iv. 14 sg.; Maximus
Tyrius, Déssert. xvi. 2.

6 Br. Jelfnek, ‘‘ Materialien zur
Vorgeschichte und Volkskunde Boh-
mens,” A@itthetlungen der anthro-
pologischen Gesellschaft in Wien, xxi.
(1891) p. 22.

7G, A. Wilken, ‘ Het animisme
bij de volken van den Indischen
Archipel,” De Jndische Gids, June
1884, p. 944.


ul ABSENCE AND RECALL OF THE SOUL 35


grains are called padiruma tondi, that is, “means to make the The soul
soul (ond?) stay at home.” In Java also rice is placed on the papel
head of persons who have escaped a great danger or have ready to
returned home unexpectedly after it had been supposed that *Y *¥*¥-
they were lost.'_ Similarly in the district of Sintang in
West Borneo, if any one has had a great fright, or escaped a
serious peril, or comes back after a long and dangerous
journey, or has taken a solemn oath, the first thing that his
relations or friends do is to strew yellow rice on his head,
mumbling, “Cluck! cluck! soul!” (hoer, koer semangat).
And when a person, whether man, woman, or child, has
fallen out of a house or off a tree, and has been brought
home, his wife or other kinswoman goes as speedily as
possible to the spot where the accident happened, and _ there
strews rice, which has been coloured yellow, while she
utters the words, “Cluck! cluck! soul! So-and-so is in
his house again. Cluck! cluck! soul!” Then she gathers
up the rice in a basket, carries it to the sufferer, and drops
the grains from her hand on his head, saying again, “ Cluck !
cluck! soul!”* Here the intention clearly is to decoy back
the loitering bird-soul and replace it in the head of its owner.
In southern Celebes they think that a bridegroom’s soul is
apt to fly away at marriage, so coloured rice is scattered over
him to induce it to stay. And, in general, at festivals in
South Celebes rice is strewed on the head of the person in
whose honour the festival is held, with the object of detaining
his soul, which at such times is in especial danger of being
lured away by envious’ demons.* For example, after a
successful war the welcome to the victorious prince takes the
form of strewing him with roasted and coloured rice “to


1G, A. Wilken, Ac.


2 FE. L. M. Kiihr, ‘Schetsen uit
Borneo’s Westerafdeeling,” 2zydragen
tot de Taal- Land- en Volkenkunde
van Nederlandsch-Indié, x\vii. (1897)
P. 57:

3 B. F. Matthes, Bzydragen tot de
Ethnologie van Zuid-Celebes, p. 333
td., Over de Bissoes of hetdensche
priesters en priesteressen der Boeginezen,
pp-9 s¢.; z@., Makassaarsch-Hollandsch
Woordenboek, s,vv. Kéerréde and soe-


mafigé, pp. 41, 569. Of these two
words, the former means the sound made
in calling fowls, and the latter means
the soul. The expression for the cere-
monies described in the text is
dpakéerrbe soemafigé. So common is
the recall of the bird-soul among the
Malays that the words oer (kur)
semangat (**cluck! cluck! soul !”)
often amount to little more than an
expression of astonishment, like our
‘Good gracious me!” See W. W.
Skeat, Malay Magic, p. 47, note 2.


The soul


to
absent in
sleep.


is supposed
be


36 THE PERILS OF THE SOUL CHAP,


prevent his life-spirit, as if it were a bird, from flying out of
his body in consequence of the envy of evil spirits.”
In Central Celebes, when a party of head-hunters returns
from a successful expedition, a woman scatters rice on their
heads for a similar purpose.” Among the Minangkabauers of
Sumatra the old rude notions of the soul seem to be dying
out. Nowadays most of the people hold that the soul, being
immaterial, has no shape or form. But some of the sorcerers
assert that the soul goes and comes in the shape of a tiny
man. Others are of opinion that it does so in the form of a
fly; hence they make food ready to induce the absent
soul to come back, and the first fly that settles on the food
is regarded as the returning truant. But in native poetry
and popular expressions there are traces of the belief that
the soul quits the body in the form of a bird.®

The soul of a sleeper is supposed to wander away from
his body and actually to visit the places, to see the persons,
and to perform the acts of which he dreams. For example,
when an Indian of Brazil or Guiana wakes up from a sound
sleep, he is firmly convinced that his soul has really been away
hunting, fishing, felling trees, or whatever else he has dreamed
of doing, while all the time his body has been lying motion-
less in his hammock. A whole Bororo village. has been
thrown into a panic and nearly deserted because somebody
had dreamed that he saw enemies stealthily approaching it.
A Macusi Indian in weak health, who dreamed that his
employer had made him haul the canoe up a series of
difficult cataracts, bitterly reproached his master next


1 B. F. Matthes, ‘*‘ Over de ddd’s of
gewoonten der Makassaren en Boegin-
eezen,” Verslagen en Mededeelingen der
honinklijke Akademie van Wetenschap-
pen (Amsterdam), Afdeeling Letter-
kunde, Reeks iii. Deel ii, (1885)
pp. 174 sg.; J. K. Niemann, ‘‘ De
Boegineezen en Makassaren,” Bijdra-
gen tot de Taal- Land- en Volkenkunde
van Nederlandsch-Indté, xxxviii. (1889)
p. 281.


2 A. C, Kruyt, ‘* Het koppensnellen
der Toradja’s,” Verslagen en Mede-
delingen der honinklijke Akademie van
Wetenschappen (Amsterdam), Afdeel-


ing Letterkunde, Reeks iv, Deel iii,
(1899) p. 162.

8 J. L. van der Toorn, “ Het
animisme bij den Minangkabauer der
Padangsche Bovenlanden,” Aijdragen
tot de Taal- Land- en Volkenkunde van
Nederlandsch - Indit, xxxix. (1890)
pp. 56-58. On traces of the bird-soul
in Mohammedan popular belief, see
I. Goldziher, ‘*Der Seelenvogel im
islamischen Volksglauben,” Globus,
Ixxxiii. (1903) pp. 301-304; and on
the soul in bird-form generally, see
J. von Negelein, ‘*Seele als Vogel,”
Globus, \xxix, (1901) pp. 357-361,
381-384.


I ABSENCE AND RECALL OF THE SOUL 37


morning for his want of consideration in thus making a poor
invalid go out and toil during the night.!. The Indians of
the Gran Chaco are often heard to relate the most incredible
stories as things which they have themselves seen and heard ;
hence strangers who do not know them intimately say in
their haste that these Indians are liars. In point of fact
the Indians are firmly convinced of the truth of what they
relate; for these wonderful adventures are simply their
dreams, which they do not distinguish from waking realities.?

Now the absence of the soul in sleep has its dangers, for The soul
if from any cause the soul should be permanently detained nape
away from the body, the person thus deprived of the vital tea
principle must die. There is a German belief that the =
soul escapes from a sleeper’s mouth in the form of a white returning
mouse or a little bird, and that to prevent the return of ‘° ae
the bird or animal would be fatal to the sleeper. Hence
in Transylvania they say that you should not let a child
sleep with its mouth open, or its soul will slip out in
the shape of a mouse, and the child will never wake.®
Many causes may detain the sleeper’s soul. Thus, his soul
may meet the soul of another sleeper and the two souls
may fight ; if a Guinea negro wakens with sore bones in the
morning, he thinks that his soul has been thrashed by
another soul in sleep.’ Or it may meet the soul of a person
just deceased and be carried off by it; hence in the Aru
Islands the inmates of a house will not sleep the night after
a death has taken place in it, because the soul of the
deceased is supposed to be still in the house and they fear
to meet it ina dream.’ Similarly among the Upper Thomp-
son Indians of British Columbia, the friends and neighbours


1 K. von den Steinen, Unter den
Naturvilkern Zentral-Brastliens, p.
340; E. F. im Thurn, Among the In-
dians of Guiana, pp. 344 s¢q.

2 V. Fri¢é, ‘‘ Eine Pilcomayo-Reise
in den Chaco Central,” Glodus, 1xxxix.
(1906) p. 233.

’ Shway Yoe, Zhe Burman, his
Life and Notions (London, 1882), ii.
100.

4 R. Andree, Braunschweiger Volks-
kunde (Brunswick, 1896), p. 266.

5 H. von Wlislocki, Volksglaube und


Volksbrauch der Siebenbiirger Sachsen
(Berlin, 1893), p. 167.

6 J. L. Wilson, Western Africa
(London, 1856), p. 220; A. B. Ellis,
The Ewe-speaking Peoples of the Slave
Coast, p. 20,

TJ. G. F. Riedel, De sluck- en
hkroesharige rassen tusschen Selebes en
Papua, p. 267. For detention of a
sleeper’s soul by spirits and consequent
illness, see also Mason, quoted in
A. Bastian’s Dze Volker des dstlichen
Asien, ii. 387 note.


The soul
absent

in sleep
may be
prevented
from
returning
to the
body.


38 THE PERILS OF THE SOUL CHAP.


who gathered in a house after a death and remained there
till the burial was over were not allowed to sleep, lest their
souls should be drawn away by the ghost of the deceased or
by his guardian spirit." The Lengua Indians of the Gran
Chaco hold that the vagrant spirits of the dead may come
to life again if only they can take possession of a sleeper’s
body during the absence of his soul in dreams. Hence,
when the shades of night have fallen, the ghosts of the
departed gather round the villages, watching for a chance to
pounce on the bodies of dreamers and to enter into them
through the gateway of the breast.2 Again, the soul of the
sleeper may be prevented by an accident or by physical
force from returning to his body. When a Dyak dreams
of falling into the water, he supposes that this accident
has really befallen his spirit, and he sends for a wizard,
who fishes for the spirit with a hand-net in a basin of
water till he catches it and restores it to its owner® The
Santals tell how a man fell asleep, and growing very
thirsty, his soul, in the form of a lizard, left his body and
entered a pitcher of water to drink. Just then the owner of
the pitcher happened to cover it; so the soul could not
return to the body and the man died. While his friends
were preparing to burn the body some one uncovered the
pitcher to get water. The lizard thus escaped and returned
to the body, which immediately revived ; so the man rose
up and asked his friends why they were weeping. They
told him they thought he was dead and were about to burn
his body. He said he had been down a well to get water,
but had found it hard to get out and had just returned. So
they saw it all. A similar story is reported from Transylvania


1 J. Teit, ‘‘ The Thompson Indians
of British Columbia,” A/emoir of the
American Museum of Natural History,
The Jesup North Pacific Expedition,
vol, i, part iv, (April 1900) p. 327.
The Koryak of North-Eastern Asia
also keep awake so long as there is a
corpse in the house. See W. Jochelson,
‘The Koryak, Religion and Myths,”
Memoir of the American Museum for
Natural History, The Jesup North
Pacific Expedition, vol. vi. part i.
(Leyden dnd New York, 1905) p. 110.


2 G. Kurze, ‘* Sitten und Gebriiuche
der Lengua-Indianer,” A/tte‘/ungen
der Geographischen Gesellschaft su
Jena, xxiii, (1905) p. 18.

8 H. Ling Roth, ‘*Low’s Natives
of Borneo,” Journal of the Anthropo-
logical Institute, xxi. (1892) p. 112.


4 Indian Antiquary, vii. (1878)
p- 273; A. Bastian, Vodlkerstdmme
am Brahmaputra, p. 127. A similar


story is told by the Hindoos and
Malays, though the lizard form of the
soul is not mentioned, See Panjab


}


. ms.
Il ABSENCE AND RECALL OF THE SOUL 39
as follows. In the account of a witch’s trial at Miihlbach in
the eighteenth century it is said that a woman had engaged
two men to work in her vineyard. After noon they all lay
down to rest as usual. An hour later the men got up and
tried to waken the woman, but could not. She lay motion-
less with her mouth wide open. They came back at sunset
and still she lay like a corpse. Just at that moment a big
fly came buzzing past, which one of the men caught and
shut up in his leathern pouch. Then they tried again to
waken the woman, but could not. Afterwards they let out
the fly ; it flew straight into the woman’s mouth and she
awoke. On seeing this the men had no further doubt that
she was a witch.’
It is a common rule with primitive people not to waken Danger of


a sleeper, because his soul is away and might not have time pape!


to get back ; so if the man wakened without his soul, he suddenly


would fall sick.


If it is absolutely necessary to rouse a


before his
soul has


sleeper, it must be done very gradually, to allow the soul oe to
time to return? A Fijian in Matuku, suddenly wakened *"™
from a nap by somebody treading on his foot, has been


Notes and Queries, iii. p. 166, § 679;
N. Annandale, ‘ Primitive Beliefs and
Customs of the Patani Fishermen,”
Fasciculi Malayenses, Anthropology,
part i. (April 1903) pp. 94 sg.

1 E. Gerard, Zhe Land beyond the
Forest, ii. 27 sg. A similar story is told
in Holland (J. W. Wolf, Nederland-
sche Sagen, No, 250, pp. 343 sg.). The
story of King Gunthram belongs to the
same class; the king’s soul comes out
of his mouth as a small reptile (Paulus
Diaconus, H7st. Langobardorum, iii. 34).
In an East Indian story of the same
type the sleeper’s soul issues from his
nose in the form of a cricket (G. A.
Wilken, in De /ndische Gids, June 1884,
p- 940). In a Swabian story a girl’s
soul creeps out of her mouth in the form
of a white mouse (A, Birlinger, Vo/és-
thiimliches aus Schwaben, i. 303). In
a Saxon story the soul comes out of the
sleeper’s mouth in the shape of a red
mouse. See E. Mogk, in RK. Wuttke’s
Sdchsische Volkskunde®( Dresden, 1901),
p. 318.


2 Shway Yoe, Zhe Burman, ii.103;


M. and B. Ferrars, Burma (London,
1900), p. 77; R. G. Woodthorpe, in
Journal of the Anthropological Institute,
xxvi. (1897) p. 23; A. Bastian, Dye
Volker des dstlichen Asien, ii. 389; F.
Blumentritt, ‘‘ Der Ahnencultus una
die religidsen Anschauungen der
Malaien des Philippinen-Archipels,”
Mitthetlungen der Wiener Geogr. Gesell-
schaft, 1882, p. 209; J. G. F. Riedel,
De slutk- en kroesharige rassen tusschen
Selebes en Papua, p. 440; itd., ** Die
Landschaft Dawan oder West-Timor,”
Deutsche geographische Blitter, x. 280;
A. C. Kruijt, “Een en ander aan-
gaande het geestelijk en maatschapelijk
leven van den Poso-Alfoer,” MJededee-
lingen van wege het Nederlandsche Zen-
delinggenootschap, xxxix. (1895) p. 43
K. von den Steinen, Unter den Natur-
volkern Zentral-Brasiliens, pp. 340,
510; L. F. Gowing, Five Thousand
Miles in a Sledge (London, 1889),
p- 226; A. C, Hollis, Zhe Masai
(Oxford, 1905), p. 308. The rule is
mentioned and a mystic reason assigned
for it in the Satapatha Braéhmana (part
v. p. 371, J. Eggeling’s translation).


Danger of
awaking
a sleeper
suddenly
before his
soul has
time to
return.


40 THE PERILS OF THE SOUL CHAP.


heard bawling after his soul and imploring it to return.
He had just been dreaming that he was far away in Tonga,
and great was his alarm on suddenly wakening to find his
body in Matuku. Death stared him in the face unless his
soul could be induced to speed at once across the sea and
reanimate its deserted tenement. The man would probably
have died of fright if a missionary had not been at hand to
allay his terror. Some Brazilian Indians explain the head-
ache from which a man sometimes suffers after a broken
sleep by saying that his soul is tired with the exertions it
made to return quickly to the body.2. A Highland story,
told to Hugh Miller on the picturesque shores of Loch Shin,
well illustrates the haste made by the soul to regain its body
when the sleeper has been prematurely roused by an indis-
creet friend. Two young men had been spending the early
part of a warm summer day in the open air,and sat down
on a mossy bank to rest. Hard by was an ancient ruin
separated from the bank on which they sat only by a
slender runnel, across which there lay, immediately over a
miniature cascade, a few withered stalks of grass. ‘“ Over-
come by the heat of the day, one of the young men fell
asleep ; his companion watched drowsily beside him ; when
all at once the watcher was aroused to attention by seeing a
little indistinct form, scarce larger than a humble-bee, issue
from the mouth of the sleeping man, and, leaping upon the
moss, move downwards to the runnel, which it crossed along
the withered grass stalks, and then disappeared among the
interstices of the ruin. Alarmed by what he saw, the
watcher hastily shook his companion by the shoulder, and
awoke him ; though, with all his haste, the little cloud-like
creature, still more rapid in its movements, issued from the
interstice into which it had gone, and, flying across the
runnel, instead of creeping along the grass stalks and over
the sward, as before, it re-entered the mouth of the sleeper,
just as he was in the act of awakening. ‘What is the
matter with you?’ said the watcher, greatly alarmed, ‘ what
ails you?’ ‘Nothing ails me,’ replied the other; ‘but you


1 Rev. Lorimer Fison, in a letter 2 K. von den Steinen, Unter den
to the author dated August 26,  Naturvilkern Zentral-Brasiliens, p.
1898, 340.


ul ABSENCE AND RECALL OF THE SOUL 41


have robbed me of a most delightful dream. 1 dreamed I
was walking through a fine rich country, and came at length
to the shores of a noble river; and, just where the clear
water went thundering down a precipice, there was a bridge
all of silver, which I crossed; and then, entering a noble
palace on the opposite side, I saw great heaps of gold and
jewels ; and I was just going to load myself with treasure,
when you rudely awoke me, and I lost all.’”?

Still more dangerous is it in the opinion of primitive Danger of
man to move a sleeper or alter his appearance, for if this oer or
were done the soul on its return might not be able to find altering his
or recognise its body, and so the person would die. The {PP&*
Minangkabauers of Sumatra deem it highly improper to
blacken or dirty the face of a sleeper, lest the absent soul
should shrink from re-entering a body thus disfigured.”
Patani Malays fancy that if a person’s face be painted while
he sleeps, the soul which has gone out of him will not recog-
nise him, and he will sleep on till his face is washed.2 In
Bombay it is thought equivalent to murder to change the
aspect of a sleeper, as by painting his face in fantastic
colours or giving moustaches to a sleeping woman. For
when the soul returns it will not know its own body.and
the person will die The Coreans are of opinion that
in sleep “the soul goes out of the body, and that if
a piece of paper is put over the face of the sleeper he
will surely die, for his soul cannot find its way back
into him again.”® The Servians believe that the soul of
a sleeping witch often leaves her body in the form of a
butterfly. If during its absence her body be turned round,
so that her feet are placed where her head was before, the
butterfly soul will not find its way back into her body
through the mouth, and the witch will die.® The Esthonians


1 Hugh Miller, My Schools and Jlayenses, Anthropology, part i. (April


Schoolmasters (Edinburgh, 1854), ch.
vi. pp. 106 sg.

2 J. L. van der Toorn, ‘‘ Het ani-
misme bij den Minangkabauer der
Padangsche Bovenlanden,” Szydragen
tot de Taal- Land- en Volkenkunde
van Nederlandsch-Indié, xxxix. (1890)
p. 50.

3 N. Annandale, in FasctculZ Ma-


1903) p. 94.

4 Panjab Notes and Queries, iii.
p- 116, § 530.

5 W.W. Rockhill, ‘* Notes on some
of the Laws, Customs, and Supersti-
tions of Korea,” American Anthrofo-
Jogist, iv. (1891) p. 183.

6 W. R. S. Ralston, Songs of the
Russian People, pp. 117 sy.; F.S.


Danger of
moving the
body of a
sleeper.


The soul
may quit
the body
in waking
hours,
thereby
causing
sickness,
insanity
or death.


42 THE PERILS OF THE SOUL CHAP.


of the island of Oesel think that the gusts which sweep up
all kinds of trifles from the ground and whirl them along
are the souls of eld women, who have gone out in this shape
to seek what they can find. Meantime the beldame’s body
lies as still as a stone, and if you turn it round her soul will
never be able to enter it again, until you have replaced the
body in its original position. You can hear the soul
whining and whimpering till it has found the right aperture.’
Similarly in Livonia they think that when the soul of a
were-wolf is out on his hateful business, his body lies like
dead ; and if meanwhile the body were accidentally moved,
the soul would never more find its way into it, but would
remain in the body of a wolf till death.2 In the picturesque
but little known Black Mountain of southern France, which
forms a sort of link between the Pyrenees and the Cevennes,
they tell how a woman, who had long been suspected of
being a witch, one day fell asleep at noon among the
reapers in the field. Resolved to put her to the test, the
reapers carried her, while she slept, to another part of the
field, leaving a large pitcher on the spot from which they
had moved her. When her soul returned, it entered the
pitcher and cunningly rolled it over and over till the vessel
lay beside her body, of which the soul thereupon took
possession.®

But in order that a man’s soul should quit his body, it
is not necessary that he should be asleep. It may quit him
in his waking hours, and then sickness, insanity, or death
will be the result. Thus a man of the Wurunjeri tribe in
Victoria lay at his last gasp because his spirit (surup) had
departed from him. A medicine-man went in pursuit and
caught the ‘spirit by the middle just as it was about to
plunge into the sunset glow, which is the light cast by the
souls of the dead as they pass in and out of the under-


Krauss, Volksglaube und religidser
Brauch der Stidslaven (Minster i, W.,
1890), p. 112, ‘The latter writer tells
us that the witch’s spirit is also supposed
to assume the form of a fly, a hen,
a turkey, a crow, and especially a
toad,

! Holzmayer, ‘ Osiliana,” Verhand-
lungen der gelehrten Estnischen Gesell-


schaft su Dorpat, vii. (1872) No. 2,
P» 53.

* Pp. Einhorn, ‘ Wiederlegunge der
Abgotterey,” etc., reprinted in Serzp-
tores rerum Livonicarun, ii. 645 (Riga
and Leipsic, 1848).

3 A, de Nore, Coutumes, mythes et
traditions des provinces de France
(Paris and Lyons, 1846), p. 88,


Il ABSENCE AND RECALL OF THE SOUL 43


world, where the sun goes to rest. Having captured the Recalling
vagrant spirit, the doctor brought it back under his opossum E™0t
rug, laid himself down on the dying man, and put the Australia,
soul back into him, so that after a time he revived. etal
The Karens of Burma are perpetually anxious about their Sarawak.
souls, lest these should go roving from their bodies, leaving

the owners to die. When a man has reason to fear that

his soul is about to take this fatal step, a ceremony is
performed to retain or recall it, in which the whole family

must take part. A meal is prepared consisting of a cock

and hen, a special kind of rice, and a bunch of bananas.

Then the head of the family takes the bow! which is used to

‘skim rice, and knocking with it thrice on the top of the house-
ladder says: “ Prrrroo! Come back, soul, do not tarry
outside! If it rains, you will be wet. If the sun shines,

you will be hot. The gnats will sting you, the leeches will

bite you, the tigers will devour you, the thunder will crush

you. Prrrroo! Come back, soul! Here it will be well

with you. You shall want for nothing. Come and eat
under shelter from the wind and the storm.” After that the
family partakes of the meal, and the ceremony ends with
everybody tying their right wrist with a string which has

been charmed by a sorcerer. Similarly the Lolos, an
aboriginal tribe of western China, believe that the soul
leaves the body in chronic illness. In that case they read

a sort of elaborate litany, calling on the soul by name and
beseeching it to return from the hills, the vales, the rivers,

the forests, the fields, or from wherever it may be straying.

At the same time cups of water, wine, and rice are set at the

door for the refreshment of the weary wandering spirit. When

the ceremony is over, they tie a red cord round the arm of.

the sick man to tether the soul, and this cord is worn by him

until it decays and drops off3 So among the Kenyahs of
Sarawak a medicine-man has been known to recall the stray

soul of a child, and to fasten it firmly in its body by

tying a string round the child’s right wrist, and smearing

1 A, W. Howitt, Native Tribes of 8 A. Henry, “The Lolos and other
South-East Australia, p. 387. ‘tribes of Western China,” /ournal of
2 Bringaud, “Les Karens de la ‘the Anthropological Institute, xxxiii.


Birmanie,” AZésstons Catholiques, xx. (1903) p. 102.
(1888) pp. 297 sg.


Recalling
truant
souls in
Luzon and
Mongolia.


Recalling
truant
souls in
Africa and
America.


44 THE PERILS OF THE SOUL CHAP.


its little arm with the blood of a fowl.' The Ilocanes of Luzon
think that a man may lose his soul in the woods or gardens,
and that he who has thus lost his soul loses also his senses.
Hence before they quit the woods or the fields they call to
their soul, “ Let us go! let us go!” lest it should loiter behind
or go astray. And when a man becomes crazed or mad, they
take him to the place where he is supposed to have lost his
soul and invite the truant spirit to return to his body.2,_ The
Mongols sometimes explain sickness by supposing that the
patient’s soul is absent, and either does not care to return
to its body or cannot find the way back. To secure the
return of the soul it is therefore necessary on the one hand
to make its body as attractive as possible, and on the other
hand to shew the soul the way home. To make the body
attractive all the sick man’s best clothes and most valued
possessions are placed beside him; he is washed, incensed,
and made as comfortable as may be; and all his friends
march thrice round the hut calling out the sick man’s name
and coaxing his soul to return. To help the wanderer to find
its way back a coloured cord is stretched from the patient’s
head to the door of the hut. The priest in his robes reads
a list of the horrors of hell and the dangers incurred by
souls which wilfully absent themselves from their bodies.
Then turning to the assembled friends and the patient he
asks, “Is it come?” All answer “Yes,” and bowing to the
returning soul throw seed over the sick man. The cord
which guided the soul back is then rolled up and placed
round the patient’s neck, who must wear it for seven days
without taking it off. No one may frighten or hurt him,
lest his soul, not yet familiar with its body, should again
take flight.’

Some of the Congo tribes believe that when a man is
ill, his soul has left his body and is wandering at large,
The aid of the sorcerer is then called in to capture the


1 C, Hose and W. M‘Dougall, “The (Luzon),” Aitthetlungen der kh. kh.
Relations between Men and Animalsin Geograph. Gesellschaft in Ween, xxxi
Sarawak,” Journal of the Anthropo- (1888) pp. 569 s¢.
logical Institute, xxxi. (1901) pp. ‘

183 sg. 3 A, Bastian, Die Seele und thre

* De los Reyes y Florentino, ‘Die Lrscheinungswesen in der Ethnogra-
religidse Anschauungen der Ilocanen pAie, p, 36.


II ABSENCE AND RECALL OF THE SOUL 45


vagrant spirit and restore it to the invalid. Generally the
physician declares that he has successfully chased the soul
into the branch of a tree. The whole town thereupon turns
out and accompanies the doctor to the tree, where the
strongest men are deputed to break off the branch in which
the soul of the sick man is supposed to be lodged. This
they do and carry the branch back to the town, insinuating
by their gestures that the burden is heavy and hard to bear.
When the branch has been brought to the sick man’s hut, he
is placed in an upright position by its side, and the sorcerer
performs the enchantments by which the soul is believed
to be restored to its owner.’ The soul or shade of a Déné or
Tinneh Indian in the old days generally remained invisible,
but appeared wandering about in one form or another when-
ever disease or death was imminent. . All the efforts of the
sufferer’s friends were therefore concentrated on catching
the roving shade. The method adopted was simple.
They stuffed the patient’s moccasins with down and hung
them up. If next morning the down was warm, they made
sure that the lost soul was in the boots, with which accord-
ingly they carefully and silently shod their suffering friend.
Nothing more could reasonably be demanded for a perfect
cure.” An Ottawa medicine-man has been known to catch
a stray soul in a little box, which he brought back and
inserted in the patient’s mouth.®
Pining, sickness, great fright,and death are ascribed by the Recalling

Battas or Bataks of Sumatra to the absence of the soul (¢endz) SP"
from the body. At first they try to beckon the wanderer Sumatra.
back, and to lure him, like a fowl, by strewing rice. Then
the following form of words is commonly repeated: “ Come
back, O soul, whether thou art lingering in the wood, or on
the hills, or in the dale. See, I call thee with a soemba
bras, with an egg of the fowl Rajah moelija, with the eleven
healing leaves. Detain it not, let it come straight here,


1H. Ward, Five Years with the
Congo Cannibals (London, 1890), pp.
53 59-

2 A. G. Morice, ‘*The Western
Dénés, their Manners and Customs,”
Proceedings of the Canadian Institute,
Toronto, Third Series, vii. (1888-1889)


pp. 158 sg.; t@., Au pays de Pours
notr, chez les sauvages de la Colombie
Britannique (Paris and Lyons, 1897),
P- 75+

3 Clicteur, in Annales de P Associa
tion de la Propagation de la Foi, iv
(1830) p. 479.


Recalling
truant
souls in
Sumatra.


46 THE PERILS OF THE SOUL CHAP.


detain it not, neither in the wood, nor on the hill, nor in
the dale. That may not be. O come straight home!”?
Sometimes the means adopted by the Battas to procure
the return of a sick person’s soul are more elaborate. A
procession sets out from the village to the tuck of drum to
find and bring home the strayed soul. First goes a person
bearing a basket which contains cakes of rice-meal, rice
dyed yellow, and a boiled fowl’s egg. The sorcerer follows
carrying a chicken, and behind him walks a man with a
black, red, and white flag. A crowd of sympathisers brings
up the rear. On reaching the spot where the lost soul is
supposed to tarry, they set up a small bamboo altar, and
the sorcerer offers on it the chicken to the spirit of the place,
the drums beating all the time. Then, waving his shawl to
attract the soul of the sick man, he says: “Come hither,
thou soul of So-and-So, whether thou sittest among the
stones or in the mud. In the house is thy place. We
have besought the spirit to let thee go.” After that the
procession reforms and marches back to the village to the
roll of drums and the clash of cymbals. On reaching the
door of the house the sorcerer calls out to the inmates,
“ Has it come?” and a voice from within answers, “ It is
here, good sorcerer.” At evening the drums beat again.”
A number of plants, including rice, a species of fig, and
garlic, are supposed by the Battas to possess soul-compelling
virtue and are accordingly made use of by them in rites
for the recovery of lost souls. When a child is sick, the
mother commonly waves a cloth to beckon home its wander-
ing spirit, and when a cock crows or a hen cackles in the
yard, she knows that the prodigal has returned. If the
little sufferer persists in being ill in spite of these favourable
omens, the mother will hang a bag of rice at the head of
her bed when she goes to sleep, and next morning on
getting up she measures the rice. If the rice has increased
in volume during the night, as it may do in a moisture-


1M. Joustra, ‘‘ Het leven, de zeden der Bataks in het maatschappelijk
en gewoonten der Bataks,” A/ededee- leven,” Mededeelingen van wege het
lingen van wege het Nederlandsche Nederlandsche  Zendelinggenootschap,
Zendelinggenootschap, x\vi. (1902) p. li. (1907) pp. 98 sg. The writer
408. gives /ondi as the form of the Batak
2 J. H. Meerwaldt, ‘*Gebruiken word for ‘ soul.”


II ABSENCE AND RECALL OF THE SOUL 47


laden atmosphere, she is confident that the lost soul has Recalling
indeed come home to stay.' The Kayans of Borneo Sm
fasten packets of rice, flesh, and fish to the window in Borneo.
the roof through which the wandering soul of a sick
man is expected to return home. The doctor sits cross-
legged on a mat under the open window with a display
of pretty things spread out temptingly before him as baits
to entice the spirit back to its deserted tabernacle. From
the window hangs a string of precious corals or pearls to serve
the returning prodigal as a ladder and so facilitate his descent
into the house. The lower end of the string is attached to
a bundle composed of wooden hooks, a fowl’s feather, little
packets of rice, and so forth. Chanting his spells, the doctor
strokes the soul down the string into the bundle, which he
then deposits in a basket and hides in a corner till the dusk
of the evening. When darkness has fallen, he blows the
captured soul back into the patient’s head and strokes the
sufferer’s arm downwards with the point of an old spear in
order to settle the soul firmly in his body.” Once when a
popular traveller was leaving a Kayan village, the mothers,
fearing that their children’s souls might follow him on his
journey, brought him the boards on which they carry
their infants and begged him to pray that the souls of
the little ones would return to the familiar boards and
not go away with him into the far country. To each
board was fastened a looped string for the purpose of
tethering the vagrant spirits, and through the loop
each baby was made to pass a chubby finger to make sure
that its tiny soul would not wander away.’ When a Dyak
is dangerously ill, the medicine-men may say that his soul
has escaped far away, perhaps to the river; then they will
wave a garment or cloth about to imitate the casting of a
net, signifying thereby that they are catching the soul like a .
fish in a net. Or they may give out that the soul has
escaped into the jungle; and then they will rush out of the
house to circumvent and secure it there. Or again they
1 Dr. R. Romer, ‘‘Bijdrage tot de Borneo (Leyden, 1900), i. 148, 152
Geneeskunst der Karo-Batak’s,” Zid-  sg., 164 sg.3 id., Quer durch Borneo
schrift voor Indische Taal- Land- en (hopes 1904-1907), i i, 112 sg., 125.


Volkenkunde, \. (1908) pp. 212 sg. 3 A. W. Nieuwenhuis, Quer durch
2 A. W. Nieuwenhuis, Zz Centraal Borneo, ii. 481.


Recalling
truant
souls in
Borneo


48 THE PERILS OF THE SOUL CHAP.


may allege that it has been carried away over seas to some
unknown land; and then they will play at paddling a boat
to follow it across the great water. But more commonly
their mode of treatment is as follows. A spear is set up in
the middle of the verandah with a few leaves tied to it and
the medicine-boxes of the medicine-men laid at its foot.
Round this the doctors run at full speed, chanting the while,
till one of them falls down and lies motionless. The
bystanders cover him with a blanket, and wait while his
spirit hies away after the errant soul and brings it back.
Presently he comes to himself, stares vacantly about like a
man awaking from sleep, and then rises, holding the soul in
his clenched right hand. He then returns it to the patient
through the crown of his head, while he mutters a spell.
Among the Dyaks of the Kayan and Lower Melawie
districts you will often see, in houses where there are children,
a basket of a peculiar shape with shells and dried. fruits
attached to it. These shells contain the remains of the
children’s navel-strings, and the basket to which they are
fastened is commonly hung beside the place where the
children sleep. When a child is frightened, for exampie by
being bathed or by the bursting of a thunderstorm, its soul
flees from its body and nestles beside its old familiar friend
the navel-string in the basket, from which the mother easily
induces it to return by shaking the basket and pressing it to
the child’s body.?, The Toboongkoos of Central Celebes
believe that sickness in general is caused by the departure of
the soul. To recover the wanderer a priest will set out food
in the courtyard of the sufferer’s house and then invoke the
soul, promising it many fine things if it will only come back.
When he thinks it has complied with his request, he catches
it in a cloth which he keeps ready for the purpose. This
cloth he afterwards claps on the sick man’s head, thereby
restoring to him his lost soul.*


1 J. Perham, ‘ Manangism in 2 FE. L. M. Kiihr, ‘Schetsen uit


Borneo,” Journal of the Straits Branch
of the Royal Asiatic Society, No. 19
(Singapore, 1887), p. 91, compare pp.
89, 90; H. Ling Roth, 7he Natives
of Sarawak and British North Borneo,
i, 274, compare pp. 272 sg.


Borneo’s Westerafdeeling,” Biydragen
tot de Taal- Land- en Volkenkunde van
Nederlandsch- Indi, x\vii, (1897) pp.
60 59.

3 A. C. Kruijt, ‘Eenige ethno-
grafische aanteekeningen omtrent de


ul ABSENCE AND RECALL OF THE SOUL 49


In an Indian story a king conveys his soul into the Wandering
dead body of a Brahman, and a hunchback conveys his soul os
into the deserted body of the king. The hunchback is now tales.
king and the king isa Brahman. However, the hunchback
is induced to shew his skill by transferring his soul to the
dead body of a parrot, and the king seizes the opportunity
to regain possession of his own body.’ A tale of the samé
type, with variations of detail, reappears among the Malays.
A king has incautiously transferred his soul to an ape, upon
which the vizier adroitly inserts his own soul into the king’s
body and so takes possession of the queen and the kingdom,
while thé true king languishes at court in the outward
semblance of an ape. But one day the false king, who
played for high stakes, was watching a combat of rams,
and it happened that the animal on which he had laid his
money fell down dead. All efforts to restore animation
proved unavailing till the false king, with the instinct of a
true sportsman, transferred his own soul to the body of the
deceased ram, and thus renewed the fray. The real king in
the body of the ape saw his chance, and with great presence
of mind darted back into his own body, which the vizier
had rashly vacated. So he came to his own again, and the
usurper in the ram’s body met with the fate he richly
deserved.” In another Indian story a Brahman reanimates
the dead body of a king by conveying his own soul into it.
Meantime the Brahman’s body has been burnt, and his soul
is obliged to remain in the body of the king.’ In a Chinese
story we read of a monk in a Buddhist monastery who used
from time to time to send his soul away out of himself.
Whenever he was thus absent from the body, he took the
precaution of locking the door of his cell. On one of these
occasions an envoy from the north arrived and put up at


Toboengkoe en de Tomori,” JMede-
deelingen van wege het Nederlandsche
Zendelinggenootschap, xliv. (1900) p.
225.

1 Pantschatantra, iibersetzt von Th.
Benfey (Leipsic, 1859), ii. 124 sg.

2 J. Brandes, ‘‘Iets over het Pape-
gaai-boek, zooals het bij de Maleiers
voorkomt,” 7Zzdschrift voor Indische


Taal- Land- en Volkenkunde, xii.
(1899) pp. 480-483. A story of this
Prit


sort is quoted from the Persian Tales
in the Spectator (No. 578, Aug. 9,
1714).

3 Katha Sarit Sdgara, translated by
C. H. Tawney (Calcutta, 1880), i. 21
sg. For other Indian tales of the same
general type, with variations in detail,
see Lettres édifiantes et curieuses,
Nouvelle Edition, xii. 183 sg.; North
Indian Notes and Queries, iv. p. 28,
§ 54.

E


50 THE PERILS OF THE SOUL CHAP.


Wandering the monastery, but there was no cell for him to pass the


souls in


popular
tales,


night in. Then he looked into the cell of the brother whose
soul was not at home, and seeing his body lying there
motionless, he battered the door in and said, “I will lodge
here. The man is dead. Take the body and burn it.”
His servants obeyed his orders, the monks being powerless
to interfere. That very night the soul came back, only to
find its body reduced to ashes. Every night it could be
heard crying, “Where shall I settle?” Those who knew
him then opened their windows, saying, “Here I am.” So
the soul came in and united itself with their body, and the
result was that they became much cleverer than before.’
Similarly the Greeks told how the soul of Hermotimus of
Clazomenae used to quit his body and roam far and wide,
bringing back intelligence of what he had seen on his rambles
to his friends at home; until one day, when his spirit was
abroad, his enemies contrived to seize his deserted body and
committed it to the flames.” It is said that during the last
seven years of his life Sultan Bayazid ate nothing that had
life and blood in it. One day, being seized with a great
longing for sheep’s trotters, he struggled long in this
glorious contest with his soul, until at last, a savoury dish —
of trotters being set before him, he said unto his soul, “My
soul, the trotters are before thee; if thou wishest to enjoy
them, leave the body and feed on them.” Hardly had he
uttered these words when a living creature was seen to issue
from his mouth and drink of the juice in the dish, after
which it endeavoured to return whence it came. But the
austere sultan, determined to mortify his carnal appetite,
prevented it with his hand from entering his mouth, and
when it fell to the ground commanded that it should be
beaten. The pages kicked it to death, and after this
murder of his soul the sultan remained in gloomy seclusion,
taking no part or interest in the affairs of government.®


1 J. J. M. de Groot, Zhe Religious
System of China, iv. 104.

2 Pliny, Mat, Hist. vii. 1743 Plut-
arch, De genio Socratis, 22; Lucian,
Muscae encomium, 7. Plutarch calls
the man Hermodorus, Epimenides,
the Cretan seer, had also the power of
sending his soul out of his body and


keeping it out as long as he pleased,
See Hesychius Milesius, in /ragmenta
historicorum Graecorum, ed, C. Miiller,
v. 162; Suidas, s.v. "Earmevidns, On
such reported cases in antiquity see
further E, Rohde, Pyyche,® ii. 91 sgg.
3 Narrative of Travels in Europe,
Asia, and Africa in the Seventeenth


i ABSENCE AND RECALL OF THE SOUL 51


The departure of the soul is not always voluntary. It The |
may be extracted from the body against its will by ghosts, pear ps
demons, or sorcerers. Hence, when a funeral is passing the be detained
. house, the Karens of Burma tie their children with a special ” 8°°*
kind of string to a particular part of the house, lest the
souls of the children should leave their bodies and go into

the corpse which is passing. The children are kept tied in

this way until the corpse is out of sight.’ And after the
corpse has been laid in the grave, but before the earth has

been shovelled in, the mourners and friends range themselves
round the grave, each with a bamboo split lengthwise in one

hand and a little stick in the other; each man thrusts his
bamboo into the grave, and drawing the stick along the
groove of the bamboo points out to his soul that in this way

it may easily climb up out of the tomb. While the earth is
being shovelled in, the bamboos are kept out of the way, lest

the souls should be in them, and so should be inadvertently
buried with the earth as it is being thrown into the grave ;

and when the people leave the spot they carry away the
bamboos, begging their souls to come with them.’ Further,

on returning from the grave each Karen provides himself

with three little hooks made of branches of trees, and calling

his spirit to follow him, at short intervals, as he returns, he
makes a motion as if hooking it, and then thrusts the hook

into the ground. This is done to prevent the soul of the
living from staying behind with the soul of the dead.* On

the return of a Burmese or Shan family from a burial, old

men tie up the wrists of each member of the family with
string, to prevent his or her “butterfly” or soul from
escaping ; and this string remains till it is worn out and

falls off* When a mother dies leaving a young baby, the


Century by Evliya Efendi, translated
from the Turkish by the Ritter Joseph
von Hammer (Oriental Translation
Fund), vol. i. pt. ii. p. 3. I have not
seen this work. An extract from it,
containing the above narrative, was
kindly sent me by Colonel F. Tyrrel,
and the exact title and reference were
supplied to me by Mr. R. A. Nichol-
son, who was so good as to consult the
book for me in the British Museum.

1 E. B. Cross, ‘*On the Karens,”


Journal of the American Oriental
Society, iv. (1854) p. 311.

2 A. R. McMahon, Zhe Karens of
the Golden Chersonese (London, 1876),
p. 318.

3 F, Mason, ‘* Physical Character of
the Karens,” Journal of the Asiatic
Society of Bengal, 1866, pt. ii. pp.
28 sg.

4 R. G. Woodthorpe, in Journal of
the Anthropological Institute, xxvi.
(1897) p. 23.


52 THE PERILS OF THE SOUL » CHAP.


The | Burmese think that the “butterfly” or soul of the baby
wandering follows that of the mother, and that if it is not recovered


sapere the child must die. So a wise woman is called in to get
by ghosts. back the baby’s soul. She places a mirror near the corpse,
and on the mirror a piece of feathery cotton down.
Holding a cloth in her open hands at the foot of the mirror,
she with wild words entreats the mother not to take with
her the “ butterfly ” or soul of her child, but to send it back.
As the gossamer down slips from the face of the mirror she
catches it in the cloth and tenderly places it on the baby’s
breast. The same ceremony is sometimes observed when
one of two children that have played together dies, and is
thought to be luring away the soul of its playmate to the
spirit-land. It is sometimes performed also for a bereaved
husband or wife. The Bahnars of eastern Cochin-China
think that when a man is sick of a fever his soul has gone
away with the ghosts to the tombs. At sunset a sorcerer
attempts to lure the soul back by offering it sugar-cane,
bananas, and other fruits, while he sings an incantation
inviting the wanderer to return from among the dead to the
land of the living. He pretends to catch the truant soul
in a piece of cotton, which he then lays on the patient’s
head.?, When the Karo-Bataks of Sumatra have buried
somebody and are filling in the grave, a sorceress runs
about beating the air with a stick. This she does in order
to drive away the souls of the survivors, for if one of these
souls happened to slip into the grave and to be covered up
with earth, its owner would die.® Among some of the
Dyak tribes of south-eastern Borneo, as soon as the coffin
is carried to the place of burial, the house in which the
death occurred is sprinkled with water, and the father of
the family calls out the names of all his children and the
other members of his household. For they think that the
ghost loves to decoy away the souls of his kinsfolk, but that


1c, J. S. F. Forbes, British  stons Catholiques, xix.


(1887) pp.


Burma (London, 1878), pp. 99 s¢- 3
Shway Yoe, Zhe Burman (London,
1882), ii. 102; A. Bastian, Die Volker
des dstlichen Asien, ii. 389.

2 Guerlach, ‘‘Moeurs et supersti-
tions des sauvages Ba-hnars,” AZis-


525 sg.

3 J, H. Neumann, ‘ De degve in de
godsdienstige begrippen der Karo. —
Bataks in de Doesoen,” Mededeelingen
van wege het Nederlandsche Zende-
linggenootschap, x\vi. (1902) p. 27.


il ABSENCE AND RECALL OF THE SOUL 53


his designs upon them can be defeated by calling out their
names, which has the effect of bringing back the souls to

their owners. The same ceremony is repeated on the
return from the burial.' It is a rule with the Kwakiutl
Indians of British Columbia that a corpse must not be
coffined in the house, or the souls of the other inmates
would enter the coffin, and they, too, would die. The body

is taken out either through the roof or through a hole made

in one of the walls, and is then coffined outside the house.”

In the East Indian island of Keisar it is deemed imprudent

to go near a grave at night, lest the ghosts should catch

and keep the soul of the passer-by. The Kei Islanders
believe that the spirits of their forefathers, angry at not
receiving food, make people sick by detaining their souls.

So they lay offerings of food on the grave and beg their
ancestors to allow the soul of the sick to return, or to

drive it home speedily if it should be lingering by the

way.’

In Bolang Mongondo, a district in the west of Celebes, Attempts
all sickness is ascribed to the ancestral spirits who have |p '\<l°
carried off the patient’s soul. The object therefore is to soul from
bring back the soul of the sufferer and restore it to him. ° SPS,
An eye-witness has thus described the attempted cure of a whoarede-
sick boy. The priestesses, who acted as physicians, made “”"®™
a doll of cloth and fastened it to the point of a spear, which

an old woman held upright. Round this doll the priestesses
danced, uttering charms, and chirruping as when one calls

a dog. Then the old woman lowered the point of the spear

a little, so that the priestesses could reach the doll. By this

time the soul of the sick boy was supposed to be in the doll,
having been brought into it by the incantations. So the
priestesses approached it cautiously on tiptoe and caught the

soul in the many-coloured cloths which they had been waving

in the air. Then they laid the soul on the boy’s head, that

is, they wrapped his head in the cloth in which the soul was


1 F, Grabowsky, in Jnternationales of the British Association for 1896).
Archiv fiir Ethnographie, ii. (1889) 3 J. G. F. Riedel, De slutk- en
p. 182. hroesharige rassen tusschen Selebes en

2 Fr. Boas, in Eleventh Report on Papua, p. 414.
the North-Western Tribes of Canada, 4 J. G. F. Riedel, of. cét. pp.
p- 6 (separate reprint from the Report 221 sg.


Attempts
to rescue
the lost
soul from
the spirits


of the dead


who are
detaining
it.


THE PERILS OF THE SOUL CHAP,


54


supposed to be, and stood still for some moments with great
gravity, holding their hands on the patient’s head. Suddenly
there was a jerk, the priestesses whispered and shook their
heads, and the cloth was taken off—the soul had escaped.
The priestesses gave chase to it, running round and round
the house, clucking and gesticulating as if they were driving
hens into a poultry-yard. At last they recaptured the soul
at the foot of the stair and restored it to its owner as before.’
Much in the same way an Australian medicine-man will
sometimes bring the lost soul of a sick man into a puppet
and restore it to the patient by pressing the puppet to his
breast.2 In Uea, one of the Loyalty Islands, the souls of
the dead seem to have been credited with the power of
stealing the souls of the living. For when a man was sick
the soul-doctor would go with a large troop of men and
women to the graveyard. Here the men played on flutes
and the women whistled softly to lure the soul home. After
this had gone on for some time they formed in procession and
moved homewards, the flutes playing and the women whistling
all the way, while they led back the wandering soul and drove
it gently along with open palms. On entering the patient’s
dwelling they commanded the soul in a loud voice to enter
his body.* In Madagascar when a man was sick or lunatic in
consequence of the loss of his soul, his friends despatched a
wizard in haste to fetch him a soul from the graveyard.
The emissary repaired by night to the spot, and having made
a hole in the wooden house which served as a tomb, begged
the spirit of the patient’s father to bestow a soul on his son
or daughter, who had none. So saying he applied a bonnet
to the hole, then folded it up and rushed back to the house
of the sufferer, saying he had a soul for him. With that he
clapped the bonnet on the head of the invalid, who at once
said he felt much better and had recovered the soul which he
had lost.‘


1 N. Ph, Wilken en J. A. Schwarz,
‘*Het heidendom en de Islam in
Bolaang Mongondou,” A/ededeelingen
van wege het Nederlandsche Zendeling-
genoolschap, xi, (1867) pp. 263 sg.

4 James Dawson, Australian Abor-
igines (Melbourne, Sydney, and Ade.


laide, 1881), pp. 57 sg.

8 W. W. Gill, AZyths and Songs of
the South Pacific (London, 1876), pp.
171 sq.

4 De Flacourt, //istotre de la grande
Tsle Madagascar (Paris, 1658), pp.
101 s4.


lI - ABSENCE AND RECALL OF THE SOUL 55


When a Dyak or Malay of some of the western tribes Rescuing
or districts of Borneo is taken ill, with vomiting and profuse {"° 5°"
sweating as the only symptoms, he thinks that one of his dead in
deceased kinsfolk or ancestors is at the bottom of it. To peeoand
discover which of them is the culprit, a wise man or woman
pulls a lock of hair on the crown of the sufferer’s head, calling
out the names of all his dead relations. The name at which
the lock gives forth a sound is the name of the guilty party.

If the patient’s hair is too short to be tugged with effect,
he knocks his forehead seven times against the forehead
of a kinsman who has long hair. The hair of the latter
is then tugged instead of that of the patient and answers
to the test quite as well. When the blame has thus
been satisfactorily laid at the door of the ghost who is
responsible for the sickness, the physician, who, as in other
countries, is often an old woman, remonstrates with him on
his ill behaviour. “Go back,” says she, “to your grave;
what do you come here for? The soul of the sick man
does not choose to be called by you, and will remain yet a
long time in its body.” Then she puts some ashes from the
hearth in a winnowing fan and moulds out of them a small
figure or image in human likeness. Seven times she moves
the basket with the little ashen figure up and down before
the patient, taking care not to obliterate the figure, while at
the same time she says, “ Sickness, settle in the head, belly,
hands, etc.; then quickly pass into the corresponding part
of the image,” whereupon the patient spits on the ashen
image and pushes it from him with his left hand. Next the
beldame lights a candle and goes to the grave of the person
whose ghost is doing all the mischief. On the grave she
throws the figure of ashes, calling out, “Ghost, plague the
sick man no longer, and stay in your grave, that he may see
you no more.” On her return she asks the anxious relations
in the house, “Has his soul come back?” and they must
answer quickly, “ Yes, the soul of the sick man has come
back.” Then she stands beside the patient, blows out the
candle which had lighted the returning soul on its way, and
strews yellow-coloured rice on the head of the convalescent,
saying, “Cluck, soul! cluck, soul! cluck, soul!” Last of
all she fastens on his right wrist a bracelet or ring which he


Rescuing
lost souls
from
ghosts in
Melanesia.


Buryat
mode of
recovering
a lost soul
from the
nether
world.


56 THE PERILS OF THE SOUL CHAP.


must wear for three days! In this case we see that the
saving of the soul is combined with a vicarious sacrifice to
the ghost, who receives a puppet on which to work his will
instead of on the poor soul. In San Cristoval, one of the
Melanesian islands, the vicarious sacrifice takes the form of
a pig ora fish. A malignant ghost of the name of Tapia
is supposed to have seized on the sick man’s soul and tied it
up to a banyan-tree. Accordingly a man who has influence
with Tapia takes a pig or fish to the holy place where the
ghost resides and offers it to him, saying, “ This is for you to
eat in place of that man; eat this, don’t kill him.” This
satisfies the ghost; the soul is loosed from the tree and
carried back to the sufferer, who naturally recovers. A
regular part of the stock-in-trade of a Dyak medicine-man is
a crystal into which he gazes to detect the hiding-place of a
lost soul or to identify the demon who is causing the
sickness.2 In one of the New Hebrides a ghost will some-
times impound the souls of trespassers within a magic fence
in his garden, and will only consent to pull up the fence and
let the souls out on receiving an unqualified apology and a
satisfactory assurance that no personal disrespect was
intended. In Motlav, another Melanesian island, it is
enough to call out the sick man’s name in the sacred place
where he rashly intruded, and then, when the cry of the
kingfisher or some other bird is heard, to shout “Come
back” to the soul of the sick man and run back with it to
the house.

It is a comparatively easy matter to save a soul which
is merely tied up to a tree or detained as a vagrant ina
pound ; but it is a far harder task to fetch it up from the
nether world, if it once gets down there. When a Buryat
shaman is called in to attend a patient, the first thing he
does is to ascertain where exactly the soul of the invalid
is ; for it may have strayed, or been stolen, or be languish-


1E. L. M. Kihr, **Schetsen uit 8 Bishop Hose, ‘* The Contents of a
Borneo’s Westerafdeeling,” Bijdragen Dyak Medicine Chest,” Journal of the
tot de Taal- Land- en Volkenkundevan Straits Branch of the Royal Asiatic
Nederlandsch-Indit, x\vii. (1897) pp. Society, No. 39, June 1903, p. 69.

61 sg. 4 R. H. Codrington, of. cét. p. 208,

* KR. H. Codrington, Zhe Melan- ® R. H, Codrington, of. cit. pp.
esians, pp. 138 59. 146 sg.


a ABSENCE AND RECALL OF THE SOUL 57


ing in the prison of the gloomy Erlik, lord of the world
below. If it is anywhere in the neighbourhood, the
shaman soon catches and replaces it in the patient’s body.
If it is far away, he searches the wide world till he finds
it, ransacking the deep woods, the lonely steppes, and the
bottom of the sea, not to be thrown off the scent even
though the cunning soul runs to the sheep-walks in the hope
that its footprints will be lost among the tracks of the
sheep. But when the whole world has been searched in
vain for the errant soul, the shaman knows that there is
nothing for it but to go down to hell and seek the lost one
among the spirits in prison. At the stern call of duty he
does not flinch, though he knows that the journey is
toilsome, and that the travelling expenses, which are naturally
defrayed by the patient, are very heavy. Sometimes the
lord of the infernal regions will only agree to release the
soul on condition of receiving another in its stead, and that
one the soul of the sick man’s dearest friend. If the patient
consents to the substitution, the shaman turns himself into
a hawk, pounces upon the soul of the friend as it soars from
his slumbering body in the form of a lark, and hands over
the fluttering, struggling thing to the grim warden of the
dead, who thereupon sets the soul of the sick man at liberty.
So the sick man recovers and his friend dies.’

When a shaman declares that the soul of a sick American
Thompson Indian has been carried off by the dead, the Mian
good physician, who is the shaman himself, puts on a recovering
conical mask and sets off in pursuit. He now acts as poy
if on a: journey, jumping rivers and such like obstacles, land of
searching, talking, and sometimes engaging in a tussle for otis
the possession of the soul. His first step is to repair to the
old trail by which the souls of heathen Thompsons went to the
spirit-land ; for nowadays the souls of Christian Thompsons
travel by a new road. If he fails to find the tracks of the
lost soul there, he searches all the graveyards, one after
the other, and almost always discovers it in one of them.
Sometimes he succeeds in heading off the departing soul by
taking a short cut to the other world. A shaman can only


1 V. M. Mikhailovskii, “‘Shamanism  _/ournal of the Anthropological Institute,
in Siberia and European Russia,” xxiv. (1895) pp.’ 69 sg.


American
Indian
modes of
recovering
lost souls
from the
land of
the dead.


Abduction
of souls by
demons in
Annam,
Cochin-
China,
and China.


58 THE PERILS OF THE SOUL CHAP.


stay a short time there. So as soon as he lays hands on
the soul he is after, he bolts with it. The other souls
give chase, but he stamps with his foot, on which he wears
a rattle made of deer’s hoofs. At the rattle of the hoofs
the ghosts retreat and he hurries on. A bolder shaman
will sometimes ask the ghosts for the soul, and if they refuse
to give it, he will wrest it from them. They attack him, but
he clubs them and brings away the soul by force. When
he comes back to the world, he takes off his mask and shews
his club all bloody. Then the people know he had a
desperate struggle. If he foresees that the harrowing of
hell is likely to prove a tough job, he increases the number
of wooden pins in his mask. The rescued soul is placed by
him on the patient’s head and so returned to his body.'
Among the Twana Indians of Washington State the descent
of the medicine-men into the nether world to rescue lost
souls is represented in pantomime before the eyes of the
spectators, who include women and children as well as men.
The surface of the ground is often broken to facilitate the
descent of the rescue party. When the adventurous band
is supposed to have reached the bottom, they journey along,
cross at least one stream, and travel till they come to the
abode of the spirits. These they surprise, and after a
desperate struggle, sustained with great ardour and a
prodigious noise, they succeed in rescuing the poor souls,
and so, wrapping them up in cloth, they make the best of
their way back to the upper world and restore the recovered
souls to their owners, who have been seen to cry heartily for
joy at receiving them back.’

Often the abduction of a man’s soul is set down to
demons. The Annamites believe that when a man meets a
demon and speaks to him, the demon inhales the man’s
breath and soul.2 The souls of the Bahnars of eastern
Cochin-China are apt to be carried off by evil spirits, and


! J. Teit, ‘The Thompson Indians
of British Columbia,” M/emoir of the
American Miuseum of Natural History,
The Jesup North Pacific Expedition,
vol, i, part iv, (April 1900) pp.
303 S97.

* Kev. Myron Eels, ‘‘ The Twana,
Chemakum, and Klallam Indians of


Washington Territory,” Annual Report
of the Smithsonian Institution for
1887, pt. i. pp. 677 59.

8 A, Landes, ‘Contes et légendes
annamites,” No. 76 in Cochinchine
Frangaise; excursions et reconnats-
sances, No, 23 (Saigon, 1885), p.
80.


nN ABSENCE AND RECALL OF THE SOUL 59


the modes of recovering them are various. If a man suffers
from a colic, the sorcerer may say that in planting sugar-
cane, maize or what-not, he has pierced the stomach of a
certain god who lives like a mole in the ground, and that
the injured deity has punished him by abstracting his soul
and burying it under a plant. Hence the cure for the colic
is to pull up the plant and water the hole with millet wine
and the blood of a fowl, a goat, or a pig. Again, if a child
falls ill in the forest or the fields, it is because some devil
has made off with its soul. To retrieve this spiritual loss
the sorcerer constructs an apparatus which comprises an egg-
shell in an egg-holder, a little waxen image of the sick
child, and a small bamboo full of millet wine. This
apparatus he sets up at a cross-road, praying the devil to
drink the wine and surrender the stolen soul by depositing
it in the egg-shell. Then he returns to the house, and
putting a little cotton to the child’s head restores the soul
to its owner. Sometimes the sorcerer lays a trap for the
thievish demon, the bait consisting of the liver of a pig or a
fowl and the blood-smeared handle of a little mattock. At
nightfall he sets the trap at a cross-road and lies in wait
hard by. While the devil is licking the blood and munching
the liver, the artful sorcerer pounces out on him, and after a
severe struggle wrests the soul from his clutches, return-
ing to the village victorious, but breathless and bleeding
from his terrific encounter with the enemy of souls.’
Fits and convulsions are generally set down by the
Chinese to the agency of certain mischievous spirits who
love to draw men’s souls out of their bodies. At Amoy
the spirits who serve babies and children in this way
rejoice in the high-sounding titles of “celestial agencies
bestriding galloping horses” and “ literary graduates residing
halfway up in the sky.” When an infant is writhing in
convulsions, the frightened mother hastens to the roof of the
house, and, waving about a bamboo pole to which one of
the child’s garments is attached, cries out several times, “ My
child So-and-so, come back, return home!” Meantime,
another inmate of the house bangs away at a gong in the


1 Guerlach, ‘‘Chez les sauvages (1884) p. 436, xix. (1887) p. 453,
Ba-hnars,” A/sstons Catholigues, xvi. xxvi. (1894) pp. 142 Sg.


Abduction
of souls by
demons in
the East
Indies.


60 THE PERILS OF THE SOUL CHAP.


hope of attracting the attention of the strayed soul, which is
supposed to recognise the familiar garment and to slip into
it. The garment containing the soul is then placed on or
beside the child, and if the child does not die recovery is
sure to follow sooner or later.’ Similarly we saw that some
Indians catch a man’s lost soul in his boots and restore it to
his body by putting his feet into them.

If Galelareese mariners are sailing past certain rocks or
come to a river where they never were before, they must
wash their faces, for otherwise the spirits of the rocks or the
river would snatch away their souls When a Dyak is
about to leave a forest through which he has been walking -
alone, he never forgets to ask the demons to give him back
his soul, for it may be that some forest-devil has carried it
off. For the abduction of a soul may take place without its
owner being aware of his loss, and it may happen either
while he is awake or asleep. The Papuans of Geelvink
Bay in New Guinea are apt to think that the mists which
sometimes hang about the tops of tall trees in their tropical
forests envelop a spirit or god called Narbrooi, who draws
away the breath or soul of those whom he loves, thus
causing them to languish and die. Accordingly, when a
man lies sick, a friend or relation will go to one of these
mist-capped trees and endeavour to recover the lost soul.
At the foot of the tree he makes a peculiar sound to attract
the attention of the spirit, and lights a cigar. In its curling
smoke his fancy discerns the fair and youthful form of
Narbrooi himself, who, decked with flowers, appears and
informs the anxious enquirer whether the soul of his sick
friend is with him or not. If it is, the man asks, “ Has he
done any wrong?” “Qh no!” the spirit answers, “I love
him, and therefore I have taken him to myself.” So the
man lays down an offering at the foot of the tree, and goes
home with the soul of the sufferer in a straw bag. Arrived
at the house, he empties the bag with its precious contents


1 J, J. M. de Groot, 7he Religious lareezen,” Bijdragen tot de Taal- Land:


System of China, i. 243 sq. en Volkenkunde van Nederlandsch-Indié,
xlv. (1895) p. 509.
Se Re ee “4M, 1. H. Perelaer, Ethno-


3M. J. van Baarda, ‘Fabelen, graphische Beschrijving der Dajaks
Verhalen en Overleveringen der Gale- (Zalt-Bommel, 1870), pp. 26 sg.


in ABSENCE AND RECALL OF THE SOUL 61


over the sick man’s head, rubs his arms and hands with
ginger-root, which he had first chewed small, and then ties a
bandage round one of the patient’s wrists. If the bandage
bursts, it is a sign that Narbrooi has repented of his bargain,
and is drawing away the sufferer once more to himself.’

In the Moluccas when a man is unwell it is thought that Abduction


some devil has carried away his soul to the tree, mountain, ponte Y
or hill where he (the devil) resides. A sorcerer having in the


Moluccas.


pointed out the devil’s abode, the friends of the patient carry
thither cooked rice, fruit, fish, raw eggs, a hen, a chicken, a
silken robe, gold, armlets, and so forth. Having set out the
food in order they pray, saying: “ We come to offer to you,
O devil, this offering of food, clothes, gold, and so on; take
it and release the soul of the patient for whom we pray. Let
it return to his body, and he who now is sick shall be made
whole.” Then they eat a little and let the hen loose as a
ransom for the soul of the patient; also they put down the
raw eggs; but the silken robe, the gold, and the armlets
they take home with them. As soon as they are come to
the house they place a flat bowl containing the offerings
which have been brought back at the sick man’s head, and
say to him: “ Now is your soul released, and you shall fare
well and live to grey hairs on the earth.” A more modern
account from the same region describes how the friend of the
patient, after depositing his offerings on the spot where the
missing soul is supposed to be, calls out thrice the name of
the sick person, adding, “Come with me, come with me.”
Then he returns, making a motion with a cloth as if he had
caught the soul in it. He must not look to right or left or
speak a word to any one he meets, but must go straight to
the patient’s house. At the door he stands, and calling out
the sick person’s name, asks whether he is returned. Being


1 «‘Kenige bijzonderheden betreffende
de Papoeas van de Geelvinksbaai van


Nieuw-Guinea,” Bijdragen tot de Taal- |


Land- en Volkenkunde van Neérlandsch-
Indié, ii. (1854) pp. 375 sg. It is
especially the souls of children that
the spirit loves to take to himself.
See J. L. van Hasselt, ‘‘ Die Papua-
stimme an der Geelvinkbai,” J/ttez-
lungen der Geographischen Gesellschaft


au Jena, ix. (1891) p. 103; compare
26, iv. (1886) pp. 118 sg. The mists
seen to hang about tree-tops are due
to the power of trees to condense
vapour, as to which see Gilbert White,
Natural History of Selborne, part ii.
letter 29.


2 Fr. Valentyn, Oud- en nieuw Oost-
Lndién, iii. 13 sg.


Abduction
of souls by
demons in
Celebes
and
Siberia,


62 THE PERILS OF THE SOUL CHAP.


answered from within that he is returned, he enters and lays
the cloth in which he has caught the soul on the patient’s
throat, saying, “ Now you are returned to the house.” Some-
times a substitute is provided; a doll, dressed up in gay
clothing and tinsel, is offered to the demon in exchange for
the patient’s soul, with these words, “Give us back the ugly
one which you have taken away and receive this pretty one
instead.” *

Among the Alfoors or Toradjas of Poso, in Central
Celebes,a wooden puppet is offered to the demon as a substitute
for the soul which he has abstracted, and the patient must touch
the puppet in order to identify himself with it. The effigy is
then hung on a bamboo pole, which is planted at the place
of sacrifice outside of the house. Here too are deposited
offerings of rice, an egg, a little wood (which is afterwards
kindled), a sherd of a broken cooking-pot, and so forth. A
long rattan extends from the place of sacrifice to the sufferer,
who grasps one end of it firmly, for along it his lost soul will
return when the devil has kindly released it. All being
ready, the priestess informs the demon that he has come to
the wrong place, and that there are no doubt much better
quarters where he could reside. Then the father of the patient,
standing beside the offerings, takes up his parable as follows:
“QO demon, we forgot to sacrifice to you. You have visited
us with this sickness; will you now go away from us to
some other place? We have made ready provisions for you
on the journey. See, here is a cooking-pot, here are rice, fire,
and a fowl. O demon, go away from us.” With that the
priestess strews rice towards the bamboo-pole to lure back
the wandering soul; and the fowl promised to the devil is
thrown in the same direction, but is instantly jerked back
again by a string which, in a spirit of intelligent economy,
has been previously attached to its leg. The demon is now
supposed to accept the puppet, which hangs from the pole,
and to release the soul, which, sliding down the pole and
along the rattan, returns to its proper owner. And lest the


1 Van Schmidt, ‘‘ Aanteekeningen  eilanden Saparoea, Haroekoe, Noessa
nopens de zeden, gewoonten en gebrui- _—_ Laut, en van een gedeelte van de zuid-
ken, benevens de vooroordeelen en bij-  kust van Ceram,” in 7¥dschrift voor
gelovigheden der bevolking van de Meérlands Jndié, 1843, dl. ii. 511 sgg.


il ABSENCE AND RECALL OF THE SOUL 63


evil spirit should repent of the barter which has just been
effected, all communication with him is broken off by cutting
down the pole. Similarly the Mongols make up a horse of
birch-bark and a doll, and invite the demon to take the doll
instead of the patient and to ride away on the horse” A
Yakut shaman, rigged out in his professional costume, with
his drum in his hand, will boldly descend into the lower
world and haggle with the demon who has carried off a sick
man’s soul. Not uncommonly the demon proves amenable
to reason, and in consideration of the narrow circumstances
of the patient’s family will accept a more moderate ransom
. than he at first demanded. For instance, he may be
brought to put up with the skin of an Arctic hare or Arctic
fox instead of a foal or a steer. The bargain being struck,
the shaman hurries back to the sufferer’s bedside, from
which to the merely carnal eye he has never stirred, and
informs the anxious relatives of the success of his mission.
They in turn gladly hasten to provide the ransom.’


Demons are especially feared by persons who have just Souls


entered a new house.


: rescued
Hence at a house-warming among the ¢.,,


Alfoors of Minahassa in Celebes the priest performs aceremony peor at


for the purpose of restoring their souls to the inmates.


a
He war


use-
ming in


hangs up a bag at the place of sacrifice and then goes Minahassa.


through a list of the gods. There are so many of them that
this takes him the whole night through without stopping.
In the morning he offers the gods an egg and some rice.
By this time the souls of the household are supposed to be


1A. C. Kruijt, ‘‘Een en ander
aangaande het geestelijk en maat-
schappelijk leven van den Poso-Al-
foer,” Mededeelingen van wege het
Nederlandsche  Zendelinggenootschap,
xxxix. (1895) pp. 5-8.

2 A. Bastian, Die Seele und thre
Erscheinungswesen in der Ethno-
graphie (Berlin, 1868), pp. 36 sg. ;
J. G. Gmelin, Reise durch Sibirien, ii.


359 sg. This mode of curing sickness,


by inducing the demon to swap the soul
of the patient for an effigy, is practised
also by the Dyaks and by some tribes
on the northern coast of New Guinea.
See H. Ling Roth, ‘‘ Low’s Natives of
Borneo,” Journal of the Anthropological


Institute, xxi. (1892) p. 117; E.L.M.
Kiihr, ‘* Schetsen uit Borneo’s Wester-
afdeeling,” Bijdragen tot de Taal- Land-
en Volkenkunde van Nederlandsch-
Indié, x\vii. (1897) pp. 62 sg. ; F.S.A.
de Clercq, ‘‘ De West- en Noordkust
van Nederlandsch Nieuw - Guinea,”
Tijdschrift van het kon. Nederlandsch
Aardrijkskundig Genootschap, Tweede
Serie, x. (1893) pp. 633 sg.


3 V. Priklonski, ‘‘ Todtengebrauche
der Jakuten,” Globus, lix. (1891) pp.
81 sg. Compare zd., ‘“‘Uber das
Schamenthum bei den Jakuten,” in
A. Bastian’s Allerled aus Volks- und
Menschenkunde, i. 218 sq.


Souls
carried off
by the sun
and other
gods,


64 THE PERILS OF THE SOUL CHAP.


gathered in the bag. So the priest takes the bag, and
holding it on the head of the master of the house, says,
“Here you have your soul; go (soul) to-morrow away
again.” He then does the same, saying the same words,
to the housewife and all the other members of the family.’
Amongst the same Alfoors one way of recovering a sick
man’s soul is to let down a bowl by a belt out of a window
and fish for the soul till it is caught in the bowl and hauled
up.” And among the same people, when a priest is bringing
back a sick man’s soul which he has caught in a cloth, he is
preceded by a girl holding the large leaf of a certain palm
over his head as an umbrella to keep him and the soul from
getting wet, in case it should rain; and he is followed by a
man brandishing a sword to deter other souls from any
attempt at rescuing the captured spirit.®

In Nias, when a man dreams that a pig is fastened
under a neighbour’s house, it is a sign that some one in that
house will die. They think that the sun-god is drawing
away the shadows or souls of that household from this world
of shadows to his own bright world of radiant light, and a
ceremony must needs be performed to win back these pass-


_ ing souls to earth. Accordingly, while it is still night, the


priest begins to drum and pray, and he continues his orisons
till about nine o’clock next morning. Then he takes his
stand at an opening in the roof through which he can
behold the sun, and spreading out a cloth waits till the
beams of the morning sun fall full upon it. In the sunbeams
he thinks the wandering souls have come back again ; so he
wraps the cloth up tightly, and quitting the opening in the
roof, hastens with his precious charge to the expectant house-
hold. Before each member of it he stops, and dipping his
fingers into the cloth takes out his or her soul and restores
it to the owner by touching the person on the forehead.‘


1 Pp, N. Wilken, “ Bijdragen tot de
kennis van de zeden en gewoonten der
Alfoeren in de Minahassa,” AZededee-
lingen van wege het Nederlandsche Zen-
delinggenootschap, vii. (1863) pp. 146
sq. Why the priest, after restoring the
soul, tells it to go away again, is not
clear,

* J. G. F. Riedel, ‘*De Minahasa


in 1825,” TZiydschrift voor Indische
Taal- Land- en Volkenkunde, xviii.
523.

8°N. Graafland, De Minahassa
(Rotterdam, 1869), i. 327 59.

4 Fr. Kramer, ‘Der Gétzendienst
der Niasser,” 7idschrift voor Indische
Taal- Land- en Volkenkunde, xxxiii.
(1890) pp. 490 sg.


II ABSENCE AND RECALL OF THE SOUL 65


The Thompson Indians of British Columbia think that the
setting sun draws the souls of men away towards it; hence
they will never sleep with their heads to the sunset.1. The
Samoans tell how two young wizards, passing a house
where a chief lay very sick, saw a company of gods from
the mountain sitting in the doorway. They were handing
from one to another the soul of the dying chief. It was
wrapt in a leaf, and had been passed from the gods inside
the house to those sitting in the doorway. One of the gods
handed the soul to one of the wizards, taking him for a god
in the dark, for it was night. Then all the gods rose up
and went away; but the wizard kept the chief’s soul. In
the morning some women went with a present of fine mats
to fetch a famous physician. The wizards were sitting on
the shore as the women passed, and they said to the women,
“Give us the mats and we will heal him.” So they went to
the chiefs house. He was very ill, his jaw hung down, and
his end seemed near. But the wizards undid the leaf and
let the soul into him again, and forthwith he brightened up
and lived.?

The Battas or Bataks of Sumatra believe that the soul of Lost souls
a living man may transmigrate into the body of an animal. pyar
Hence, for example, the doctor is sometimes desired to fowl.
extract the patient’s soul from the body of a fowl, in which
it has been hidden away by.an evil spirit. |

Sometimes the lost soul is brought back in a visible Lost souls
shape. In Melanesia a woman, knowing that a neighbour hk
was at the point of death, heard a rustling in her house, as visible
of a moth fluttering, just at the moment when a noise of
weeping and lamentation told her that the soul was flown,
She caught the fluttering thing between her hands and ran
with it, crying out that she had caught the soul. But
though she opened her hands above the mouth of the corpse,
it did not revive In Lepers’ Island, one of the New


Bila - stroomgebied eiland


1 J. Teit, ‘‘ The Thompson Indians
of British Columbia,” Jemotr of the
American Museum of Natural History,
The Jesup North Pacific Expedition,
vol. i. part iv. (April 1900) p. 357.

2 G, Turner, Samoa, pp. 142 sg.

3 J. B. Neumann, ‘‘ Het Pane- en


PT. I


op het
Sumatra,” Zijdschrift van het Neder-
landsch Aardrijkskundig Genootschap,
Tweede Serie, dl. iii., Afdeeling, meer
uitgebreide artikelen, No. 2 (1886),
Pp. 302..

*R. H. Codrington, ‘ Religious


F


66 THE PERILS OF THE SOUL CHAP.


Lost souls Hebrides, for ten days after a birth the father is careful not


brought
back in a
visible
form.


to exert himself or the baby would suffer for it. If during
this time he goes away to any distance, he will bring back
with him on his return a little stone representing the infant’s
soul. Arrived at home he cries, “Come hither,” and puts
down the stone in the house. Then he waits till the child
sneezes, at which he cries, “ Here it is” ; for now he knows
that the little soul has not been lost after all... The Salish
or Flathead Indians of Oregon believe that a man’s soul may
be separated for a time from his body without causing death
and without the man being aware of his loss. It is necessary,
however, that the lost soul should be soon found and restored
to its owner or he will die. The name of the man who has
lost his soul is revealed in a dream to the medicine-man,
who hastens to inform the sufferer of his loss. Generally a
number of men have sustained a like loss at the same time;
all their names are revealed to the medicine-man, and all
employ him to recover their souls. The whole night long
these soulless men go about the village from lodge to lodge,
dancing and singing. Towards daybreak they go into a
separate lodge, which is closed up so as to be totally dark.
A small hole is then made in the roof, through which the
medicine-man, with a bunch of feathers, brushes in the souls,
in the shape of bits of bone and the like, which he receives
on a piece of matting. A fire is next kindled, by the light
of which the medicine-man sorts out the souls. First he
puts aside the souls of dead people, of which there are usually
several; for if he were to give the soul of a dead person to
a living man, the man would die instantly. Next he picks
out the souls of all the persons present, and making them
all to sit down before him, he takes the soul of each, in the
shape of a splinter of bone, wood, or shell, and placing it on
the owner’s head, pats it with many prayers and contortions
till it descends into the heart and so resumes its proper
place. In Amboyna the sorcerer, to recover a soul detained


Beliefs and Practices in Melanesia,”
Journal of the Anthropological Institute,
x, (1881) p. 281; #@., Zhe Melan-
esians, p. 267.

1 R. H. Codrington, 7he Melan-
esians, P. 229.


2 Horatio Hale, United States Ex-
ploring Expedition, Ethnography and
Philology (Philadelphia, 1846), pp.
208 sq. Compare Ch, Wilkes,
Narrative of the United States Ex-
ploring Expedition (London, 1845),


iI ABSENCE AND RECALL OF THE SOUL 67


by demons, plucks a branch from a tree, and waving it to and
fro as if to catch something, calls out the sick man’s name.
Returning he strikes the patient over the head and body
with the branch, into which the lost soul is supposed to
have passed, and from which it returns to the patient. In
the Babar Islands offerings for evil spirits are laid at the
root of a great tree (wokioraz), from which a leaf is plucked
and pressed on the patient’s forehead and breast; the lost
soul, which is in the leaf, is thus restored to its owner.2 In
some other islands of the same seas, when a man returns ill
and speechless from the forest, it is inferred that the evil
spirits which dwell in the great trees have caught and kept
his soul. Offerings of food are therefore left under a tree
and the soul is brought home in a piece of wax.2 Amongst
the Dyaks of Sarawak the priest conjures the lost soul into
a cup, where it is seen by the uninitiated as a lock of hair,
but by the initiated as a miniature human being. This the
priest pokes back into the patient’s body through an invisible
hole in his skull In Nias the sick man’s soul is restored
to him in the shape of a firefly, visible only to the , sorcerer,
who catches it in a cloth and places it on the forehead of
the patient. Amongst the Indians of Santiago Tepehuacan, Soul lost
if a child has fallen from the arms of its bearer and an 2%?


and


illness has resulted from the fall, the parents will take the recovered
child’s shirt, stretch it out on the spot where the little one <a


fell, and say, “Come, come, come back to the infant.”


‘iv. 448 .sg. Similar methods of roesharige rassen tusschen Selebes en


recovering lost souls are practised
by the Haidas, Nootkas, Shuswap,
and other Indian tribes of British
Columbia. See Fr. Boas, in Fifth
Report on the North-Western Tribes of
Canada, pp. 58 sg. (separate reprint
from the Report of the British Assocta-
tion for 1889); id. in Sixth Report,
etc., Pp. 30, 44, 59 57., 94 (separate
reprint of the Report of the Brit. Assoc.
for 1890); zd. in Ninth Report, etc.,
p. 462 (in Report of the Brit. Assoc.
for 1894). Kwakiutl medicine-men
exhibit captured souls in the shape of
little balls of eagle down. See Fr.
Boas, in Report of the U.S, National
resco lied 1895, pp. 561, 575.
1jJ. G. F. Riedel, De sluth- en


Papua, pp. 77 59.

2 J. G. F. Riedel, of. ct. pp. 356 sg.

3 J. G. F. Riedel, of. ctt. p. 376.

4 Spenser St. John, Life in the
Forests of the Far LEast,? i. 189; H.
Ling Roth, Zhe Natives of Sarawak
and British North Borneo, i. 261.
Sometimes the souls resemble cotton


seeds (Spenser St. John, 4c.), Com-
pare zd. i. 183.
5 Nieuwenhuisen en Rosenberg,


‘*Verslag omtrent het Eiland Nias,”
Verhandel. van het Batav. Genootsch.
van Kunsten en Wetenschappen, xxx.
(Batavia, 1863) p.116; H. von Rosen-
berg, Der Malayische Archipel, p. 174 3
E. Modigliani, Viageto a Nias (Milan,
1890), p. 192.


Soul lost
by a fall
and re-
covered
from the
earth.


Recovery _
of the soul
in ancient


Egypt.


68 THE PERILS OF THE SOUL CHAP,


Then they bring back a little of the earth wrapped up in
the shirt, and put the shirt on the child. They say that in
this manner the spirit is replaced in the child’s body and
that he will recover.' With this we may compare an Irish
custom reported by-Camden. When any one happens to
fall, he springs up again, and turning round thrice to the
right, digs the earth with a sword or knife, and takes up a
turf, because they say the earth restores his shade to him.
But if he falls sick within two or three days thereafter, a
woman skilled in these matters is sent to the spot, and
there says: “I call thee, So-and-so, from the East and
West, from the South and North, from the groves, woods,
rivers, marshes, fairies white, red, and black,” and so forth.
After uttering certain short prayers, she returns home to the
sick person, and whispering in his ear another prayer, along
with a Pater Noster, puts some burning coals into a cup of
clean water, and so decides whether the distemper has been
inflicted by the fairies.2 Here, though Camden is not very
explicit, and he probably did not quite understand the
custom he describes, it seems plain that the shade or soul of
a man who has fallen is conceived as adhering to the
ground where he fell. Accordingly he seeks to regain
possession of it by digging up the earth; but if he fails to
recover it, he sends a wise woman to the spot to win
back his soul from the fairies who are detaining it.

The ancient Egyptians held that a dead man is notin a
state to enter on the life hereafter until his soul has been
found and restored to his mummified body. The vital spark
had been commonly devoured by the malignant god Sit,
who concealed his true form in the likeness of a horned
beast, such as an ox or a gazelle. So the priests went in
quest of the missing spirit, slaughtered the animal which
had devoured it, and cutting open the carcase found the soul
still undigested in its stomach. Afterwards the son of the
deceased embraced the mummy or the image of his father
in order to restore his soul to him. Formerly it was

1 “Tettre du curé de Santiago (1834) p. 178.
Tepehuacan a son évéque sur les 2 W. Camden, Britannia (London,
meeurs et coutumes des Indiens soumis 1607), p. 792. The passage has not


a ses soins,” Bulletin de la Société de always been understood by Camden’s
Géographie (Paris), Ime Série, ii, translators,


i ABSENCE AND RECALL OF THE SOUL 69


customary to place the skin of the slain beast on the dead
man for the purpose of recruiting his strength with that of
the animal.

Again, souls may be extracted from their bodies or Souls
detained on their wanderings not only by ghosts and demons —_—- by
but also by men, especially by sorcerers. In Fiji, if a criminal sorcerers in
refused to confess, the chief sent for a scarf with which “to chance
catch away the soul of the rogue.” At the sight or even at
the mention of the scarf the culprit generally made a clean
breast. For if he did not, the scarf would be waved over
his head till his soul was caught in it, when it would be
carefully folded up and nailed to the end of a chief’s canoe ;
and for want of his soul the‘criminal would pine and die.*
The sorcerers of Danger Island used to set snares for souls.
The snares were made of stout cinet, about fifteen to thirty
feet long, with loops on either side of different sizes, to suit
the different sizes of souls; for fat souls there were large
loops, for thin souls there were small ones. When a man
was sick against whom the sorcerers had a grudge, they set
up these soul-snares near his house and watched for the
flight of his soul. If in the shape of a bird or an insect it
was caught in the snare the man would infallibly die.* When
a Polynesian mother desired that the child in her womb
should grow up to be a great warrior or a great thief, she
repaired to the temple of the war-god Oro or of the thief-
god Hiro. There the priest obligingly caught the spirit of
the god in a snare made of coco-nut fibre, and then infused
it into the woman. When the child was born, the mother
took it to the temple and dedicated it to the god with
whose divine spirit the infant was already possessed.* The
Algonquin Indians also used nets to catch souls, but only as


1 A. Moret, Ze Rituel du culte divin
journalier en Egypte (Paris, 1902),
PP. 32-35, 83 sg. .

2 Th. Williams, Fi7z and the Fijians*
(London, 1860), i. 250.


3 W. W. Gill, AZyths and Songs of
the South Pacific, p. 171 ; td., Life in
the Southern Isles, pp. 181 sgg. Cinet,
sinnet, or sennit is cordage made from
the dried fibre of the coco-nut husk.
Large quantities of it are used in Fiji.


See Th, Williams, 7777 and the Fijians,”
i. 69.

4 J. Williams, Varrative of Mission-
ary Enterprises in the South Sea Islands
(London, 1838), pp. 93, 466 sg. A
traveller in Zombo-land found traps
commonly set at the entrances of
villages and huts for the purpose of
catching the devil. See Rev. Th.
Lewis, ‘*‘The Ancient Kingdom of
Kongo,” Zhe Geographical Journal,
xix. (1902) p. 554.


Detention
of souls by
sorcerers in
Africa.


70 THE PERILS OF THE SOUL CHAP.


a measure of defence. They feared lest passing souls, which
had just quitted the bodies of dying people, should enter
their huts and carry off the souls of the inmates to deadland.
So they spread nets about their houses to catch and entangle
these ghostly intruders in the meshes.’

Among the Sereres of Senegambia, when a man wishes
to revenge himself on his enemy he goes to the /7taure
(chief and priest in one), and prevails on him by presents to
conjure the soul of his enemy into a large jar of red
earthenware, which is then deposited under a consecrated
tree. The man whose soul is shut up in the jar soon dies.”
Among the Baoules of the Ivory Coast it happened once
that a chief’s soul was extracted by the magic of an enemy,
who succeeded in shutting it up in a box. To recover it,
two men held a garment of the sick man, while a witch
performed certain enchantments. After a time she de-
clared that the soul was now in the garment, which was
accordingly rolled up and hastily wrapped about the invalid
for the purpose of restoring his spirit to him. Some of the
Congo negroes think that enchanters can get possession
of human souls, and enclosing them in tusks of ivory,
sell them to the white man, who makes them work for
him in his country under the sea. It is believed that
very many of the coast labourers are men thus obtained ;
so when these people go to trade they often look anxiously
about for their dead relations. The man whose soul is
thus sold into slavery will die “in due course, if not at the
time.”* In some parts of West Africa, indeed, wizards are
continually setting traps to catch souls that wander from their
bodies in sleep ; and when they have caught one, they tie it
up over the fire, and as it shrivels in the heat the owner
sickens. This is done, not out of any grudge towards the
sufferer, but purely as a matter of business. The wizard
does not care whose soul he has captured, and will readily
restore it to its owner if only he is paid for doing so, Some
sorcerers keep regular asylums for strayed souls, and any-


1 Relations des Jésuites, 1639, p. 44 8 Delafosse, in LZ’ Anthropologie, xi.
(Canadian reprint, Quebec, 1858). (1895) p. 558.
2L. J. B. Bérenger-Féraud, Les
Peuplades de la Sénégambie (Paris, 4 W. H., Bentley, Zife on the Congo
1879), p. 277. (London, 1887), p. 71.


II ABSENCE AND RECALL OF THE SOUL 71


body who has lost or mislaid his own soul can always have
another one from the asylum on payment of the usual fee.
No blame whatever attaches to men who keep these private
asylums or set traps for passing souls; it is their profession,
and in the exercise of it they are actuated by no harsh or
unkindly feelings. But there are also wretches who from pure
spite or for the sake of lucre set and bait traps with the
deliberate purpose of catching the soul of a particular man ;
and in the bottom of the pot, hidden by the bait, are knives
and sharp hooks which tear and rend the poor soul, either
killing it outright or mauling it so as to impair the health of
its owner when it succeeds in escaping and returning to him.
Miss Kingsley knew a Kruman who became very anxious
about his soul, because for several nights he had smelt in
his dreams the savoury smell of smoked crawfish seasoned
with red pepper. Clearly some ill-wisher had set a trap
baited with this dainty for his dream-soul, intending to do
him grievous bodily, or rather spiritual, harm ; and for the
next few nights great pains were taken to keep his soul
from straying abroad inhis sleep. In the sweltering heat of
the tropical night he lay sweating and snorting under a
blanket, his nose and mouth tied up with a handkerchief to
prevent the escape of his precious soul.’

When Dyaks of the Upper Melawie are about to go out Taking the
head-hunting they take the precaution of securing the souls —
of their enemies before they attempt to kill their bodies, first and
. calculating apparently that mere bodily death will soon ‘et heads
,) follow the spiritual death, or capture, of the soul. With this
. intention they clear a small space in the underwood of the
‘ forest, and set up in the clearing one of those miniature
7 houses in which it is customary to deposit the ashes of the
dead. Food is placed in the little house, which, though
raised on four posts, is connected with the ground by a tiny
inverted ladder of the sort up which spirits are believed to
swarm. When these preparations have been completed, the
leader of the expedition comes and sits down a little way
from the miniature house, and addressing the spirits of
kinsmen who had the misfortune to be beheaded by their
enemies, he says, “ O ghosts of So-and-so, come speedily back

1 Mary H. Kingsley, 7ravels ix West Africa (London, 1897), pp. 461 sg.


_—


SRLS Te en eS


Taking
the souls
of enemies
first and
their heads
afterwards.


72 THE PERILS OF THE SOUL CHAP.


to our village. We have rice in abundance. Our trees all
bear ripe fruit. Our baskets are full to the brim. O ghosts,
come swiftly back and forget not to bring your new friends
and acquaintances with you.” But by the new friends
and acquaintances_of the ghosts he means the souls of the
enemies against whom he is about to lead the expedition.
Meantime the other warriors have hidden themselves close
by behind trees and bushes, and are listening with all their
ears. When the cry of an animal is heard in the forest, or
a humming sound seems to issue from the little house, it is
a sign that the ghosts of their friends have come, bringing
with them the souls of their enemies, which are accordingly
at their mercy. At that the lurking warriors leap forth from
their ambush, and with brandished blades hew and slash at
the souls of their foemen swarming unseen in the air.” Taken
completely by surprise, the panic-stricken souls flee in all
directions, and are fain to hide under every leaf and stone on
the ground. But even here their retreat is cut off. For
now the leader of the expedition is hard at work, grubbing
up with his hands every stone and leaf to right and left, and
thrusting them with feverish haste into the basket, which he
at once ties up securely. He now flatters himself that he
has the souls of the enemy safe in his possession ; and when
in the course of the expedition the heads of the foe are
severed from their bodies, he will pack them into the same
basket in which their souls are already languishing in
captivity.’

In Hawaii there were sorcerers who caught souls of living
people, shut them up in calabashes, and gave them to people


1 EF. L. M. Kithr, in Zternationales
Archiv fiir Ethnographie, ii, (1889)
p- 163; ¢a@., **Schetsen uit Borneo’s
Westerafdeeling ,” Bijdragen tot de Taal-
Land- en Volkenkundevan Nederlandsch-
Indié, x\vii. (1897) pp. 59 sg, Among
the Haida Indians of Queen Charlotte
Islands ‘‘every war-party must be
accompanied by a shaman, whose duty
it was to find a propitious time for
making an attack, etc,, but especially
to war with and kill the souls of the
enemy. Then the death of their
natural bodies was certain,” See J.


R. Swanton, ‘ Contributions to the
Ethnology of the Haida” (Leyden and
New York, 1905), p. 40 (AZemoir of
the American Museum of Natural
History, The Jesup North Pacific
Expedition, vol. v. part i.). Some
of the Dyaks of south-eastern Borneo
perform a ceremony for the purpose of
extracting the souls from the bodies of
prisoners whom they are about to
torture to death, See F, Grabowsky,
“Der Tod, das Begriibnis, etc., bei
den Dajaken,” Juternationales Archiv
fiir Ethnographie, ii. (1889) p. 199.


II ABSENCE AND RECALL OF THE SOUL 73


to eat. By squeezing a captured soul in their hands they Injuries
discovered the place where people had been secretly buried.’ peabiaapsc.
Amongst the Canadian Indians, when a wizard wished to kill to captured
a man, he sent out his familiar spirits, who brought him the morn:
victim’s soul in the shape of a stone or the like. The wizard
struck the soul with a sword or an axe till it bled profusely,

and as it bled the man to whom it belonged fell ill and
died? In Amboyna ifa doctor is convinced that a patient’s

soul has been carried away by a demon beyond recovery, he

seeks to supply its place with a soul abstracted from another

man. For this purpose he goes by night to a house and

asks, “ Who’s there?” If an inmate is incautious enough

to answer, the doctor takes up from before the door a

clod of earth, into which the soul of the person who
replied is thought to have passed. This clod the doctor

lays under the sick man’s pillow, and performs certain
ceremonies by which the stolen soul is conveyed into the
patient’s body. Then as he goes home the doctor fires

two shots to frighten the soul from returning to its proper
owner. A Karen wizard will catch the wandering soul of

a sleeper and transfer it to the body of a dead man. The
latter, therefore, comes to life as the former dies. But the
friends of the sleeper in turn engage a wizard to steal the

soul of another sleeper, who dies as the first sleeper comes to

life. In this way an indefinite succession of deaths and
resurrections is supposed to take place.‘

Nowhere perhaps is the art of abducting human souls Abduction
more carefully cultivated or carried to higher perfection than pea
in the Malay Peninsula. Here the methods by which the Malay
wizard works his will are various, and so too are his motives. ar
Sometimes he desires to destroy an enemy, sometimes to win
the love of a cold or bashful beauty. Some of the charms
operate entirely without contact; in others, the receptacle
into which the soul is to be lured has formed part of, or at
least touched, the person of the victim. Thus, to take an


1 A. Bastian, 4//erled aus Volks-und  kroesharige rassen tusschen Selebes en
Menschenkunde (Berlin, 1888), i. Papua (the Hague, 1886), pp. 78
TI9. Sqe

2 Relations des Jésuites, 1637, p. 4 E. B. Cross, ‘‘On the Karens,”
50 (Canadian reprint, Quebec, 1858). Journal of the American Oriental

3 J. G. F. Riedel, De siuik- en Society, iv. (1854) p. 307-


Abduction
of human
souls by
Malay
wizards,


74 THE PERILS OF THE SOUL CHAP.


instance of the latter sort of charm, the following are the
directions given for securing the soul of one whom you wish
to render distraught. Take soil from the middle of his
footprint ; wrap it up in pieces of red, black, and yellow
cloth, taking care to keep the yellow outside ; and hang it
from the centre of your mosquito curtain with parti-coloured
thread. It will then become your victim’s soul. To
complete the transubstantiation, however, it is needful to
switch the packet with a birch composed of seven leaf-ribs
from a “green” coco-nut. Do this seven times at sunset, at
midnight, and at sunrise, saying, “ It is not earth that I switch,
but the heart of So-and-so.” Then bury it in the middle
of a path where your victim is sure to step over it, and he
will unquestionably become distraught. Another way is to
scrape the wood of the floor where your intended victim has
been sitting, mix the scrapings with earth from his or her
footprint, and knead the whole with wax from a deserted
bees’ comb into a likeness of him or her. Then fumigate the
figure with incense and beckon to the soul every night for
three nights successively by waving a cloth, while you recite
the appropriate spell? In the following cases the charm
takes effect without any contact whatever, whether direct or
indirect, with the victim. When the moon, just risen, looks
red above the eastern horizon, go out, and standing in the
moonlight, with the big toe of your right foot on the big toe
of your left, make a speaking-trumpet of your right hand and
recite through it the following words:


“OM. TI loose my shaft, I loose it and the moon clouds over,
I loose it, and the sun is extinguished.
I loose it, and the stars burn dim.
But it is not the sun, moon, and stars that I shoot at,
lt is the stalk of the heart of that child of the congregation,
So-and-so.


Cluck! cluck! soul of So-and-so, come and walk with me,
Come and sit with me,

Come and sleep and share my pillow.

Cluck / cluck! soul,”


Repeat this thrice and after every repetition blow through


1 W. W. Skeat, Malay Magic (London, 1900), pp. 568 sg.
2 W, W. Skeat, of, c#t. pp. 569 s¢.


————— ee


bat ABSENCE AND RECALL OF THE SOUL 75


your hollow fist... Or you may catch the soul in your turban,
thus. Go out on the night of the full moon and the two
succeeding nights ; sit down on an ant-hill facing the moon,
burn incense, and recite the following incantation :


“7 bring you a betel leaf to chew,
Dab the lime on to it, Prince Ferocious,
For Somebody, Prince Distraction’s daughter, to chew.
Somebody at sunrise be distraught for love of me,
Somebody at sunset be distraught for love of me.
As you remember your parents, remember me ;
As you remember your house and house-ladder, remember me.
When thunder rumbles, remember me ;
When wind whistles, remember me;
When the heavens rain, remember me ;
When cocks crow, remember me ;
When the dial-bird tells its tales, remember me;
When you look up at the sun, remember me ;
When you look up at the moon, remember me,
For in that self-same moon I am there.
Cluck ! cluck! soul of Somebody come hither to me.
I do not mean to let you have my soul,
Let your soul come hither to mine.”


Now wave the end of your turban towards the moon
seven times each night. Go home and put it under your
pillow, and if you want to wear it in the daytime, burn
incense and say, “ It is not a turban that I carry in my girdle,
but the soul of Somebody.” *

Perhaps the magical ceremonies just described may help Athenian
to explain a curious rite, of immemorial antiquity, which 1% 3

panied

was performed on a very solemn occasion at Athens. On by the
the eve of the sailing of the fleet for Syracuse, when all pore
hearts beat high with hope, and visions of empire dazzled
all eyes, consternation suddenly fell on the people one May
morning when they rose and found that most of the images
of Hermes in the city had been mysteriously mutilated in
the night. The impious perpetrators of the sacrilege were
unknown, but whoever they were, the priests and priestesses
solemnly cursed them according to the ancient ritual, stand-
ing with their faces to the west and shaking red cloths up
and down.® Perhaps in these cloths they were catching the


1 W. W. Skeat, of. cet. pp. 574 sg. 8 Lysias, Or. vi. 51, p. 51 ed. C.
2 W. W. Skeat, of. c##. pp. 576 sg. Scheibe. The passage was pointed


Extracting
a patient's
soul from


thestomach patient’s soul by mistake.


of his
doctor. .


76 THE PERILS OF THE SOUL CHAP.


souls of those at whom their curses were levelled, just as we
have seen that Fijian chiefs used to catch the souls of
criminals in scarves and nail them to canoes.!

The Indians of the Nass River, in British Columbia, are
impressed with a belief that a physician may swallow his
A doctor who is believed to have
done so is made by the other members of the faculty tostand —
over the patient, while one of them thrusts his fingers down —
the doctor’s throat, another kneads him in the stomach with
his knuckles, and a third slaps him on the back. If the
soul is not in him after all, and if the same process has been
repeated upon all the medical men without success, it is con-
cluded that the soul must be in the head-doctor’s box. A
party of doctors, therefore, waits upon him at his house and
requests him to produce his box. When he has done so and
arranged its contents on a new mat, they take the votary of
Aesculapius and hold him up by the heels with his head in a
hole in the floor. In this position they wash his head, and
“any water remaining from the ablution is taken and poured
upon the sick man’s head.” Among the Kwakiutl Indians
of British Columbia it is forbidden to pass behind the back
of a shaman while he is eating, lest the shaman should in-
advertently swallow the soul of the passer-by. When that
happens, both the shaman and the person whose soul he
has swallowed fall down in a swoon. Blood flows from the
shaman’s mouth, because the soul is too large for him and
is tearing his inside. Then the clan of the person whose
soul is doing this mischief must assemble and sing the
song of the shaman. In time the suffering sorcerer


out to me by my friend Mr. W. Wyse.
As to the mutilation of the Hermae,
see Thucydides, vi. 27-29, 60 sg. ;
Andocides, Or. i. 37 sgg.3 Plutarch,
Alcibiades, 18.


1 Above, p. 69,


2 J. B. McCullagh, in Zhe Church
Missionary Gleaner, xiv. No. 164
(August 1887), p. 91. The same
account is copied from the ‘* North
Star” (Sitka, Alaska, December 1888)
in Journal of American Folk-lore, ii.
(1889) pp. 745g. Mr. McCullagh’s ac-
count (which is closely followed in the


text) of the latter part of the custom is
not quite clear. It would seem that fail-
ing to find the soul in the head-doctor’s
box it occurs to them that he may have
swallowed it, as the other doctors were
at first supposed to have done. With
a view of testing this hypothesis they
hold him up by the heels to empty out
the soul; and as the water with which
his head is washed may possibly contain
the missing soul, it is poured on the
patient’s head to restore the soul to
him. We have already seen that the
recovered soul is often conveyed into
the sick person’s head.


AI ABSENCE AND RECALL OF THE SOUL 77


vomits out the soul, which he exhibits in the shape of a
small bloody ball in the open palms of his hands. He
restores it to its owner, who is lying prostrate on a mat, by
throwing it at him and then blowing on his head. The
man whose soul was swallowed has very naturally to pay


for the damage he did to the shaman as well as for his


own cure,!


_§ 3. The Soul as a Shadow and a Reflection


But the spiritual dangers I have enumerated are not the


only ones which beset the savage.


1 Fr. Boas in Eleventh Report on
the North-Western Tribes of Canada,
p- 571 (Report of the British Associa-
tion for 1896). For other examples of
the recapture or recovery of lost, stolen,
and strayed souls, in addition to those
which have been cited in the preceding
pages, see J. N. Vosmaer, Korte
Beschrijving van het Zuid -oostelijhk
Schieretland van Celebes, pp. 119-123
(this work, of which I possess a copy,
forms part of a Dutch journal which I
have not identified ; it is dated Batavia,
1835); J. G. F. Riedel, ‘*De Topan-
tunuasu of oorspronkelijke volksstam-
men van Central Selebes,” Bijdragen
tot de Taal- Land- en Volkenkunde van
Nederlandsch-Indi#, xxxv, (1886) p.
93; J. B. Neumann, “ Het Pane- en
Bilastroom-gebeid,” 77jdschrift van het
Nederlandsch Aardrijkskundig Genoot-
schap, Tweede Serie, dl. iii., Afdeel-
ing, meer uitgebreide artikelen, No. 2
(1886), pp. 300 sg.; J. L. van der
Toorn, ‘*‘Het animisme bei den
Minangkabauer,” Sijdragen tot de
Taal- Land-- en Volkenkunde van
Nederlandsch-Indié, xxxix. (1890) ‘pp.
51 sg.3 H. Ris, ** De onderafdeeling
Klein Mandailing Oeloe en Pahantan,”
Bijdragen tot de Taal- Land- en Volken-
kunde van Nederlandsch-Indié, x\vi.
(1896) p.529; C. Snouck Hurgronje, De
Atjéhers (Bataviaand Leyden, 1893-4), i.
4265g.; W. W. Skeat, Malay Magic, pp.
49-51, 452-455, 570 sqg.3 Journal of
the Anthropological ‘Institute, xxiv.
(1895) pp. 128, 287; Chimkievitch,
**Chez les Bouriates de l’Amoor,”
Tour du monde, N.S. iii. (1897) pp.
622 sg.; Father Ambrosoli, ‘‘ Notice


Often he regards his


sur Vile de Rook,” Annales de la
Propagation de la Fot, xxvii, (1855)
p- 364; A. Bastian, Dée Volker des
Ostlichen Asten, ii. 388, iii. 236; zd.,
Volkerstimme am Brahmaputra, p.
23; ¢@., *‘ Hiigelstimme Assam’s,”
Verhandlungen der Berlin. Gesell. fiir
Anthropol., Ethnol, und Urgeschichte,
1881, p. 156; Shway Yoe, Zhe
Burman, i. 283 5g., ii, IOI sg.3
G. M, Sproat, Scenes and Studies of
Savage Life, p. 214; J. Doolittle,
Social Life of the Chinese, pp. 110 sg,
(ed, Paxton Hood); T. Williams, 77z
and the Fijians,?i, 242; E, B, Cross,


‘On the Karens,” Journal of the


American Oriental Society, iv. (1854)
pp. 309 sg.; A, W. Howitt, ‘On
some Australian Beliefs,” Journal of the
Anthropological Institute, xiii. (1884)
pp. 187 sg.; ¢@., ‘*On Australian
Medicine Men,” Journ, Anthrop. Inst.
xvi, (1887) p. 41; E. P. Houghton,
**On the Land Dayaks of Upper Sara-
wak,” Memoirs of the Anthropological
Society of London, iii, (1870) pp. 196
sg. ; L. Dahle, ‘‘ Sikidy and Vintana,”
Antananarivo Annual and Madagascar
Annual, xi. (1887) pp. 320 sg.; C.
Leemius, De Lapponibus Finmarchiae
corum@que lingua, vita et religione pris-
tina commentatio (Copenhagen, 1767),
pp- 416 sg.; A. E. Jenks, Zhe Bontoc
Lgorot (Manilla, 1905), pp. 199 sg. ;
C. G. Seligmann, Zhe Melanesians of
British New Guinea(Cambridge, 1910),
pp- 185 sg. My friend W. Robertson
Smith suggested to me that the practice
of hunting souls, which is denounced
in Ezekiel xiii. 17 sgg., may have been
akin to those described in the text.


A man's
soul con-
ceived as
hisshadow,
so that to
injure the
shadow is
to injure
the man.


THE PERILS OF THE SOUL CHAP.


78


shadow or reflection as his soul, or at all events as a vital
part of himself, and as such it is necessarily a source of
danger to him. For if it is trampled upon, struck, or
stabbed, he will feel the injury as-if it were done to his
person ; and if it is detached from him entirely (as he
believes that it may be) he will die. In the island of Wetar
there are magicians who can make a man ill by stabbing
his shadow with a pike or hacking it with a sword.’ After
Sankara had destroyed the Buddhists in India, it is said
that he journeyed to Nepaul, where he had some difference
of opinion with the Grand Lama. To prove his super-
natural powers, he soared into the air. But as he mounted
up, the Grand Lama, perceiving his shadow swaying and
wavering on the ground, struck his knife into it and down
fell Sankara and broke his neck.? In the Babar Islands the
demons get power over a man’s soul by holding fast his
shadow, or by striking and wounding it Among the
Tolindoos of central Celebes to tread on a man’s shadow is
an offence, because it is supposed to make the owner sick ;*
and for the same reason the ‘Toboongkoos of that region
forbid their children to play with their shadows.2 The
Ottawa Indians thought they could kill a man by making
certain figures on his shadow.£ The Baganda of central
Africa regarded a man’s shadow as his ghost; hence they
used to kill or injure their enemies by stabbing or treading
on their shadows.’ Among the Bavili of West Africa it
used to be considered a crime to trample on or even to cross
the shadow of another, especially if the shadow were that of
a married woman. Some Caffres are very unwilling to let
anybody stand on their shadow, believing that they can be


1 J. G. F. Riedel, De sluik- en  grafische aanteekeningen omtrent de


hroesharige rassen tusschen Selebes en
Papua, p. 440.

* A, Bastian, Die Volker des dstlichen
Asien, Vv. 455.

3 J. G. F. Riedel, of, cit. p. 340.

4 N. Adriani en A. C, Kruijt, ‘* Van
Posso naar Parigi, Sigi en Lindoe,”
Mededeclingen van wege het Neder-
landsche Zendelinggenootschap, xiii.
(1898) p. 511; compare A. C, Kruijt,
ib, xliv, (1900) p. 247.

6 A, C. Kruijt, ‘Eenige ethno-


Toboengkoe en de Tomori,” of, cit.
xliv. (1900) p. 226.

6 Annales de Ll’ Association de la
Propagation de la Fot, iv. (1830) p.
481.

7 Rev. J. Roscoe, in a letter to
me dated Mengo, Uganda, May 26,
1904.

§ R. E. Dennett, ‘‘ Bavili Notes,”
Folk-lore, xvi. (1905) p. 3723 ta, At
the Back of the Black Man's Mind
(London, 1906), p. 79.


u THE SOUL AS A.SHADOW AND A REFLECTION 79


influenced for evil through it. They think that “a sick
man’s shadow dwindles in intensity when he is about to
die; for it has such an intimate relation to the man
that it suffers with him.”* The Ja-Luo tribes of Kavirondo,
to the east of Lake Victoria Nyanza, tell of the ancestor
of all men, Apodtho by name, who descended to earth
from above, bringing with him cattle, fowls, and seeds.
When he was old, the Ja-Luo plotted to kill him, but for a
long time they did not dare to attack him. At last, hearing
that he was sick, they thought their chance had come, and
sent a girl to see how he was. She took a small horn, used
for cupping blood, in her hand, and while she talked with
him she placed the cupping-horn on his shadow. To her
surprise it drew blood. So she returned and told her
friends that, if they wished to kill Apodtho, they must not
touch his body, but spear his shadow. They did so, and he
died and turned into a rock, which has ever since possessed
the property of sharpening spears unusually well. In a
Chinese book we read of a sage who examined human
shadows by lamplight in order to discover the fate of their
owners. “A man’s shadow,” he said, “ought to be deep,
for, if so, he will attain honourable positions, and a great
age. Shadows are averse to being reflected in water, or in
wells, or in washing-basins. It was on such grounds that
the ancients avoided shadows, and that in old days Khii-seu,
twan-hu, and other shadow-treading vermin caused injury by
hitting the shadows of men. In recent times there have
been men versed in the art of cauterizing the shadows of their
patients.” Another sapient Chinese writer observes : “ I have
heard that, if the shadow of a bird is hit with a piece of wood
that was struck by thunder, the bird falls to the ground im-
mediately. I never tried it, but on account of the matter
stated above I consider the thing certain.”* The natives of
Nias tremble at the sight of a rainbow, because they think it
is a net spread by a powerful spirit to catch their shadows.®


1 Dudley Kidd, 7he Essential Kafir, cal Institute, xxxiii. (1903) pp. 327
p- 84. 5g.
2 Dudley Kidd, Savage Childhood, 4 J. J. M. de Groot, Zhe Religious
. 68. System of China, iv. 84 sq.
3. C. W. Hobley, “British East 5 E. Modigliani, Viaggio a Nias, p.
Africa,” Journal of the Anthropologi- 620, compare p. 624.


A person's
soul con-
ceived as
theshadow
so that to
injure the
shadow is
to injure
him or her.


Danger to
a person
of letting
his shadow
fall on
certain
things.


80 THE PERILS OF THE SOUL CHAP.


In the Banks Islands, Melanesia, there are certain
stones of a remarkably long shape which go by the name of
tamate gangan or “eating ghosts,” because certain powerful
and dangerous ghosts are believed to lodge in them. If a
man’s shadow falls on one of these stones, the ghost will
draw his soul out from him, so that he will die. Such stones,
therefore, are set in a house to guard it; and a messenger
sent to a house by the absent owner will call out the name
of the sender, lest the watchful ghost in the stone should
fancy that he came with evil intent and should do him a
mischief.' In Florida, one of the Solomon Islands, there
are places sacred to ghosts, some in the village, some in the
gardens, and some in the bush. No man would pass one
of these places when the sun was so low as to cast his
shadow into it, for then the ghost would draw it from him?
The Indian tribes of the Lower Fraser River believe that
man has four souls, of which the shadow is one, though not
the principal, and that sickness is caused by the absence of one
of the souls, Hence no one will let his shadow fall on a sick
shaman, lest the Jatter should purloin it to replace his own
lost soul.® Ata funeral in China, when the lid is about to
be placed on the coffin, most of the bystanders, with the
exception of the nearest kin, retire a few steps or even retreat
to another room, for a person’s health is believed to be en-
dangered by allowing his shadow to be enclosed in a coffin.
And when the coffin is about to be lowered into the grave
most of the spectators recoil to a little distance lest their
shadows should fall into the grave and harm should thus be
done to’ their persons, The geomancer and his assistants stand
on the side of the grave which is turned away from the sun ;
and the grave-diggers and coffin-bearers attach their shadows
firmly to their persons by tying a strip of cloth tightly round
their waists. In the Nicobar Islands burial usually takes
place at sundown, before midnight, or at early dawn. In no
case can an interment be carried out at noon or within an
hour of it, lest the shadows of the bearers who lower the


1 R. H. Codrington, Zhe AMelan- North-Western Tribes of Canada, pp.


estans, p. 184. 461 sg. (Report of the British Associa-
2 R. H. Codrington, of, cit, p. ton for 1894).
176, 4 J.J. M. de Groot, Zhe Religious


3 Fr, Boas, in Ninth Report on the System of China, i. 94, 210 sg.


oe ere


u THE SOUL AS A SHADOW AND A REFLECTION 31


body into the earth, or of the mourners taking their last

look at the shrouded figure, should fall into the grave; for

that would cause them to be sick or die. And when the

dead has been laid in his last home, but before the earth is
shovelled in upon him, the leaves of a certain jungle tree are
waved over the grave, and a lighted torch is brandished
inside it, to disperse any souls of the sorrowing bystanders

that may be lingering with their departed friend in his
narrow bed. Then the signal is given, and the earth or

sand is rapidly shovelled in by a party of young men who

have been standing in readiness to perform the duty.’
When the Malays are building a house, and the central post

is being set up, the greatest precautions are taken to prevent

the shadow of any of the workers from falling either on the

post or on the hole dug to receive it; for otherwise they
think that sickness and trouble will be sure to follow.
When members of some Victorian tribes were performing
magical ceremonies for the purpose of bringing disease and
misfortune on their enemies, they took care not to let their
shadows fall on the object by which the evil influence was
supposed to be wafted to the foe. In Darfur people think

that they can do an enemy to death by burying a certain

root in the earth on the spot where the shadow of his head
happens to fall. The man whose shadow is thus tampered

with loses consciousness at once and will die if the proper
antidote be not administered. In like manner they can
paralyse any limb, as a hand or leg, by planting a particular

root in the earth in the shadow of the limb they desire to
maim.* Nor is it human beings alone who are thus liable Animals +
to be injured by means of their shadows. Animals are to wag be
some extent in the same predicament. A small snail, which through
frequents the neighbourhood of the limestone hills in Perak, , a
is believed to suck the blood of cattle through their shadows ;
hence the beasts grow lean and sometimes die from loss of


1E. H. Man, ‘Notes on the 3 J. Dawson, Australian Aborigines,
Nicobarese,” /ndian Antigquary, xxviii. p. 54.
(1899) pp. 257-259. Compare Sir
R. C. Temple, in Census of India, 4 Mohammed Ebn-Omar_ EI-


1901, iii. 209. Tounsy, Voyage au Darfour, traduit
2 W. W. Skeat, Malay Magic, p. de VArabe par le Dr. Perron (Paris,
143. 1845), Pp. 347-


Pr G


Animals
and trees
may be
injured
through
their
shadows.


Danger of
being over-
shadowed
by certain
birds or


people.


82 THE PERILS OF THE SOUL


CHAP,


blood.' The ancients supposed that in Arabia, if a hyzna
trod on a man’s shadow, it deprived him of the power of
speech and motion; and that if a dog, standing on a roof in
the moonlight, cast a shadow on the ground and a hyena
trod on it, the dog would fall down as if dragged with a
rope.” Clearly in these cases the shadow, if not equivalent
to the soul, is at least regarded as a living part of the man
or the animal, so that injury done to the shadow is felt by
the person or animal as if it were done to his body. Even
the shadows of trees are supposed by the Caffres to be
sensitive. Hence when a Caffre doctor seeks to pluck the
leaves of a tree for medicinal purposes, he “ takes care to run
up quickly, and to avoid touching the shadow lest it should
inform the tree of the danger, and so give the tree time to
withdraw the medicinal properties from its extremities into
the safety of the inaccessible trunk. The shadow of the tree
is said to feel the touch of the man’s feet.” ®

Conversely, if the shadow is a vital part of a man or an
animal, it may under certain circumstances be as hazardous
to be touched by it as it would be to come into contact with
the person or animal. Thus in the North-West Provinces of
India people believe that if the shadow of the goat-sucker
bird falls on an ox or a cow, but especially on a cow buffalo, .
the beast will soon die. The remedy is for some one to kill
the bird, rub his hands or a stick in the blood, and then
wave the stick over the animal. There are certain men who
are noted for their powers in this respect all over the district.‘
The Kaitish of central Australia hold that if the shadow of
a brown hawk falls on the breast of a woman who is suckling
a child, the breast will swell up and burst. Hence if a
woman sees one of these birds in these circumstances, she


runs away in fear.


1 W. W. Skeat, Malay A/agic, p.
306. (

* [Aristotle] AZirvab. Auscult. 145
(157) 3 Geoponica, xv. 1. In the latter
passage, for kardye: éavrjv we must read
xardye abrév, an emendation necessi-
tated by the context, and confirmed by
the passage of Damiri quoted and
translated by Bochart, Azerosotcon, i.
col, 833, ‘*cum ad lunam calcat umbram
canis, gui supra tectum est, canis ad


In the Central Provinces of India a


eam [scil. hyaenam] dectadit, et ea edlum
devorat.’’ Compare W._ Robertson
Smith, Zhe Religion of the Semites,*
p. 129.

8 Dudley Kidd, Savage Childhood,
p. 71.

4 W. Crooke, in /udian Antiquary,
xix. (1890) p. 254.

6 Spencer and Gillen, Northern
Tribes of Central Australia, p. 612.


u THE SOUL AS A SHADOW AND A REFLECTION 83


pregnant woman avoids the shadow of a man, believing that
if it fell on her, the child would take after him in features,
though not in character." In Shoa any obstinate disorder,
for which no remedy is known, such as insanity, epilepsy,
delirium, hysteria, and St. Vitus’s dance, is traced either to
possession by a demon or to the shadow of an enemy which
has fallen on the sufferer.” The Bushman is most careful
not to let his shadow fall on the dead game, as he thinks
this would bring bad luck.? Amongst the Caffres to over-
shadow the king by standing in his presence was an offence
worthy of instant death. And it is a Caffre superstition
that if the shadow of a man who is protected by a certain
charm falls on the shadow of a man who is not so protected,
the unprotected person will fall down, overcome by the
power of the charm which is transmitted through the
shadow.” In the Punjaub some people believe that if the
shadow of a pregnant woman fell on a snake, it would
blind the creature instantly.®

Hence the savage makes it a rule to shun the shadow of The
certain persons whom for various reasons he regards as *)200Ws.
sources of dangerous influence. Amongst the dangerous persons
classes he commonly ranks mourners and women in general, posi 2
but especially his mother-in-law. The Shuswap Indians of peculiarly
British Columbia think that the shadow of a mourner falling bes isis
upon a person would make him sick.’ Amongst the Kurnai
tribe of Victoria novices at initiation were cautioned not to
let a woman’s shadow fall across them, as this would make
them thin, lazy, and stupid.* An Australian native is said The _
to have once nearly died of fright because the shadow of his greet of
mother-in-law fell on his legs as he lay asleep under a tree.” "ag —


1M. R. Pedlow, in /ndian Anti-
quary, xxix. (1900) p. 60.

2 W. Cornwallis Harris, 7he High-
lands of Aethiopia (London, 1844),
i. 158.

3 Dudley Kidd, 7he Essential Kafr,


Pp. 313.

4 D. Kidd, of. cit. p. 356.

5 Dudley Kidd, Savage Childhood,
Pp. 70.

8 Panjab Notes and Queries, i. p.
15, § 122.

7 Fr. Boas, in Sixth Report on the


North-Western Tribes of Canada, pp.
92, 94 (separate reprint from the
Report of the British Association for
7890); compare zd. in Seventh Re-
port, etc., p. 13 (separate reprint from
the Rep. Brit. Assoc. for 1891).

8 A. W. Howitt, ‘*The Jeraeil, or
Initiation Ceremonies of the Kurnai
Tribe,” Journal of the Anthropological
Institute, xiv. (1885) p. 316.

9 Miss Mary E. B. Howitt, Fodk-
lore and Legends of some Victorian
Trzbes (in manuscript).


84 THE PERILS OF THE SOUL CHAP.


The The awe and dread with which the untutored savage
eres contemplates his mother-in-law are amongst the most
his mother- familiar facts of anthropology. In the Yuin tribes of New
inlaw. South Wales the rule which forbade a man to hold any
communication with his wife’s mother was very strict. He
might not look at her or even in her direction. It was a
ground of divorce if his shadow happened to fall on his
mother-in-law: in that case he had to leave his wife, and
she returned to her parents.’ In the Hunter River tribes of
New South Wales it was formerly death for a man to speak
to his mother-in-law ; however, in later times the wretch who
: . had committed this heinous crime was suffered to live, but
he was severely reprimanded and banished for a time from
the camp.” In the Kulin tribe it was thought that if a
woman looked at or spoke to her son-in-law or even his
brother, her hair would turn white. The same result, it was
supposed, would follow if she ate of game which had been
presented to her husband by her son-in-law ; but she could
obviate this ill consequence by blackening her face, and
especially her mouth, with charcoal, for then her hair would
not turn white.2 Similarly in the Kurnai tribe of Victoria a
woman is not permitted to see her daughter’s husband in
camp or elsewhere. When he is present, she keeps her
head covered with an opossum rug. The camp of the
mother-in-law faces in a different direction to that of her
son-in-law. A screen of high bushes is erected between
both huts, so that no one can see over from either. When
the mother-in-law goes for firewood, she crouches down as
she goes out or in, with her head covered.* In Uganda a
man may not see his mother-in-law nor speak to her face to
face. Should they meet by accident, she must turn aside
and cover her head with her clothes ; or if her garments are
too scanty for that, she may squat on her haunches and hide
her face in her hands. If he wishes to hold any com-
munication with her, it must be done through a third person,
or through a wall or closed door. Were he to break these


1 A. W. Howitt, Native Tribes of 256 sg.

South-East Australia, p. 266, 4 A. W. Howitt, of, et. pp. 280
2 A. W. Howitt, of. cit. p. 267. sg. Compare J. Dawson, Australiaw
3 A. W. Howitt, of. cit. pp. Aborigines, pp. 32 sq.


1 THE SOUL AS A SHADOW AND A REFLECTION 85


rules, he would certainly be seized with a shaking of the The
hands and general debility." Among some tribes of eastern atte
Africa which formerly acknowledged the suzerainty of the his mother.
sultan of Zanzibar, before a young couple had children they ™*”
might meet neither their father-in-law nor their mother-in-

law. To avoid them they must take a long roundabout.

But if they could not do that, they must throw themselves

on the ground and hide their faces till the father-in-law or
mother-in-law had passed by.” Among the Basutos a man
may never meet his wife’s mother, nor speak to her, nor see

her. If his wife is ill and her mother comes to nurse her,

he must flee the house so long as she is in it; sentinels are
posted to warn him of her departure.’ In New Britain the
native imagination fails to conceive the extent and nature of

the calamities which would result from a man’s accidentally
speaking to his wife’s mother ; suicide of one or both would
probably be the only course open to them. The most
solemn form of oath a New Briton can take is, “ Sir, if I

am not telling the truth, 1 hope I may shake hands with

my mother-in-law.” * At Vanua Lava in the Banks Islands,

a man would not so much as follow his mother-in-law along

the beach until the rising tide had washed out her footprints

in the sand.° To avoid meeting his mother-in-law face to
face a very desperate Apache Indian, one of the bravest of

the brave, has been seen to clamber along the brink of a
precipice at the risk of his life, hanging on to rocks from
which had he fallen he would have been dashed to pieces or

at least have broken several of his limbs.° Still more curious


1 Partly from notes sent me by my
friend the Rev. J. Roscoe, partly from
Sir H. Johnston’s account (7he Uganda
Protectorate, ii. 688). In his printed
notes (Journal of the Anthropological
Institute, xxxii. (1902) p. 39) Mr.
Roscoe says that the mother-in-law
‘«may be in another room out of sight
and speak to him through the wall or


open door.”
2 Father Picarda, ‘‘Autour du
Mandera, Notes sur |’Ouzigoua,


VOukwéré et lOudoé (Zanguebar),”
Missions Catholiques, xviii. (1886) p.
286.

8 Father Porte, ‘‘ Les Réminiscences


d’un missionnaire du Basutoland,”
Missions Catholiques, xxviii. (1896)
p. 318.

4 H. H. Romily and Rev. George
Brown, in Proceedings of the Royal
Geographical Society, N.S. ix. (1887)
pp- 9, 17.

5 R. H. Codrington, Zhe Melan-
eStans, Pp. 43.

6 J. G. Bourke, On the Border with
Crook, p. 132. More evidence of the
mutual avoidance of mother-in-law and
son-in-law among savages is collected
in my Zotemism and Exogamy; see
the Index, s.v. ‘‘ Mother - in-law.”
The custom is probably based on a fear


A man’s
health and
strength
supposed
to vary
with the
length of
his
shadow.


86 THE PERILS OF THE SOUL CHAP,


and difficult to explain is the rule which forbids certain
African kings, after the coronation ceremonies have been
completed, ever to see their own mothers again. This
restriction was imposed on the kings of Benin and Uganda.
Yet the queen-mothers lived in regal state with a court and
lands of their own. In Uganda it was thought that if the
king were to see his mother again, some evil and probably
death would surely befall him."

Where the shadow is regarded as so intimately bound
up with the life of the man that its loss entails debility or
death, it is natural to expect that its diminution should be
regarded with solicitude and apprehension, as betokening a
corresponding decrease in the vital energy of its owner.
An elegant Greek rhetorician has compared the man who
lives only for fame to one who should set all his heart on
his shadow, puffed up and boastful when it lengthened, sad
and dejected when it shortened, wasting and pining away
when it dwindled to nothing. The spirits of such an one, he
goes on, would necessarily be volatile, since they must rise
or fall with every passing hour of the day. In the morning,
when the level sun, just risen above the eastern horizon,
stretched out his shadow to enormous length, rivalling the
shadows cast by the cypresses and the towers on the city
wall, how blithe and exultant would he be, fancying that in
stature he had become a match for the fabled giants of old ;
with what a lofty port he would then strut and shew himself
in the streets and the market-place and wherever men con-
gregated, that he might be seen and admired of all. But
as the day wore on, his countenance would change and he
would slink back crestfallen to his house. At noon, when
his once towering shadow had shrunk to his feet, he would
shut himself up and refuse to stir abroad, ashamed to look


of incest between them. To the Journal of the Anthropological Institute,


almost universal rule of savage life
that a man must avoid his mother-
in-law there is a most remarkable ex-
ception among the Wahehe of German
East Africa, In that tribe a bride-
groom must sleep with his mother-
in-law before he may cohabit with her
daughter, See Rev, H. Cole, ‘* Notes
on the Wagogo of German East Africa,”


xxxii, (1902) p. 312.

1 O. Dapper, Description del’ Afrique,
p. 312; H. Ling Roth, Great Benin,
p. 119; Aéssions Catholiques, xv.
(1883) p, 110; J. Roscoe, ‘* Further
Notes on the Manners and Customs
of the Baganda,” Journal of the An-
thropological Institute, xxxii, (1902)
p. 67.


1 THE SOUL AS A SHADOW AND A REFLECTION 87


his fellow-townsmen in the face; but in the afternoon his A man's

drooping spirits would revive, and as the day declined his bealth and
gth

joy and pride would swell again with the length of the even- supposed

ing shadows.' The rhetorician who thus sought to expose ‘6 )"Y

the vanity of fame as an object of human ambition by liken- length of

ing it to an ever-changing shadow, little dreamed that in pe

real life there were men who set almost as much store by

their shadows as the fool whom he had conjured up in his

imagination to point a moral. So hard is it for the strain-

ing wings of fancy to outstrip the folly of mankind. In

Amboyna and Uliase, two islands near the equator, where

necessarily there is little or no shadow cast at noon, the

people make it a rule not to go out of the house at mid-day,

because they fancy that by doing so a man may lose the

shadow of his soul.” The Mangaians tell of a mighty

warrior, Tukaitawa, whose strength waxed and waned with

the length of his shadow. In the morning, when his shadow

fell longest, his strength was greatest; but as the shadow

shortened towards noon his strength ebbed with it, till exactly

at noon it reached its lowest point; then, as the shadow

stretched out in the afternoon, his strength returned. A

certain hero discovered the secret of Tukaitawa’s strength

and slew him at noon.’ The savage Besisis of the Malay

Peninsula fear to bury their dead at noon, because they

fancy that the shortness of their shadows at that hour would

sympathetically shorten their own lives.‘ The Baganda of

central Africa used to judge of a man’s health by the length of

his shadow. They said, “So-and-so is going to die, his shadow

is very small”; or, “He is in good health, his shadow is

large.”° Similarly the Caffres of South Africa think that a

man’s shadow grows very small or vanishes at death. When

her husband is away at the wars,a woman hangs up his sleep-

ing-mat ; if the shadow grows less, she says her husband is

killed ; if it remains unchanged, she says he is unscathed.


1 Dio Chrysostom, Or. Ixvii. vol.
ii. p. 230, ed. L. Dindorf.

2 J. G. F. Riedel, De sluzk- en
kroesharige rassen tusschen Selebes en
Papua, p. 61.

3° W. W. Gill, AGths and Songs of
the South Pacific, pp. 284 sqq.

4 W. W. Skeat and C. O. Blagden,


Pagan Races of the Malay Peninsula
(London, 1906), ii. 110.

5 The Rev. J. Roscoe, in a letter to
me dated Mengo, Uganda, May 26,
1904.

6 T. Arbousset et F. Daumas, Voyage
@exploration (Paris, 1842), p. 2913
Dudley Kidd, 7ke Essential Kafir, pp.


Fear of
the loss
of the

shadow.


Fear

of the re-
semblance
of a child
to its
parents.


88 THE PERILS OF THE SOUL


CHAP,


It is possible that. even in lands outside the tropics the
observation of the diminished shadow at noon may have
contributed, even if it did not give rise, to the superstitious
dread with which that hour has been viewed by many peoples,
as by the Greeks, ancient and modern, the Bretons, the
Russians, the Roumanians of Transylvania, and the Indians
of Santiago Tepehuacan.’ In this observation, too, we may
perhaps detect the reason why noon was chosen by the
Greeks as the hour for sacrificing to the shadowléss dead.”
The loss of the shadow, real or apparent, has often been
regarded as a cause or precursor of death. Whoever entered
the sanctuary of Zeus on Mount Lycaeus in Arcadia was
believed to lose his shadow and to die within the year.2 In
Lower Austria on the evening of St. Sylvester’s day—the
last day of the year—the company seated round the table
mark whose shadow is not cast on the wall, and believe that
the seemingly shadowless person will die next year. Similar
presages are drawn in Germany both on St. Sylvester’s day
and on Christmas Eve.“ The Galelareese fancy that if a
child resembles his father, they will not both live long ; for
the child has taken away his father’s likeness or shadow, and
consequently the father must soon die.2 Similarly among


83, 303 ; za., Savage Childhood, p. 69.
In the last passage Mr. Kidd tells
us that ‘the mat was wof held up in
the sun, but was placed in the hut at
the marked-off portion where the zZongo
or ancestral spirit was supposed to live ;
and the fate of the man was divined,
not by the /ezgth of the shadow, but
by its strength,”

1 Theocritus, i. 15 sgg.; Philostratus,
Heroic. i. 3; Porphyry, De antro nym-
pharum, 26; Lucan, iii. 423 sgg.;
Drexler, s.v. ‘* Meridianus daemon,”
in Roscher’s Lexikon der griech. und
rim. Mythologie, ii. 2832 sgg.; Ber-
nard Schmidt, Das Volksleben der
Neugriechen, pp. 94 s9g., 119 sq. 3
Georgeakis et Pineau, /o/k-lore de Les-
bos, p. 3423; A. de Nore, Coutumes,
mythes, et traditions des provinces de
France, pp. 214 sg.3 J. Grimm,
Deutsche Mythologie, ii. 972; C. L.
Rochholz, Deutscher Glaube und
Brauch, i, 62 sgg.; E. Gerard, Zhe
Land beyond the Forest, i. 3313


*‘Lettre du curé de Santiago Tepe-
huacan,” Bulletin de la Société de
Géographie (Paris), IIme Série, ii.
(1834) p. 180; N. von Stenin, ‘* Die
Permier,” Globus, \xxi. (1897) p.
374; D. Louwerier, ‘‘ Bijgeloovige
gebruiken, die door die Javanen worden
in acht genomen,” A/ededeelingen van
wege het Nederlandsche Zendeling genoot-
schap, xlix, (1905) p. 257.

2 Schol. on Aristophanes, Avags, 293.

3 Pausanias, viii. 38. 6; Polybius,
xvi. 12. 73; Plutarch, Qzaestiones
Graecae, 39.

4 Th. Vernaleken, A%ythen una
Bréuche des Volkes in Osterreich,
p- 341; Reinsberg-Diiringsfeld, Das
festliche Jahr, p. 401; A, Whuttke,
Der deutsche Volksaberglaube,* p. 207,
§ 314.

5 M. J. van Baarda, ‘ Fabelen,
Verhalen en Overleveringen der Gale-
lareezen,” Biydragen tot de Taal- Land-
en Volkenkunde van Nederlanasch-
Indié, x\v. (1895) p. 459.


7 ,


i THE SOUL AS A SHADOW AND A REFLECTION 89


some tribes of the Lower Congo, “if the child is like its

mother, father, or uncle, they think it has the spirit of the

person it resembles, and that that person will soon die.

Hence a parent will resent it if you say that the baby is like

him or her.” ?

Nowhere, perhaps, does the equivalence of the shadow The

to the life or soul come out more clearly than in some Seer p>

customs practised to this day in south-eastern Europe. In built into

modern Greece, when the foundation of a new building is —

being laid, it is the custom to kill a cock, a ram, or a lamb, strengthen
s : theedifices

and to let its blood flow on the foundation-stone, under

which the animal is afterwards buried. The object of the

sacrifice is to give strength and stability to the building.

But sometimes, instead of killing an animal, the builder

entices a man to the foundation-stone, secretly measures his

body, or a part of it, or his shadow, and buries the measure

under the foundation-stone ; or he lays the foundation-stone

upon the man’s shadow. It is believed that the man will

die within the year.” In the island of Lesbos it is deemed

enough if the builder merely casts a stone at the shadow of

a passer-by ; the man whose shadow is thus struck will die,

but the building will be solid. A Bulgarian mason measures

the shadow of a man with a string, places the string in a

box, and then builds the box into the wall of the edifice.

Within forty days thereafter the man whose shadow was

measured will be dead and his soul will be in the box beside

the string; but often it will come forth and appear in its

former shape to persons who were born on a Saturday. If

a Bulgarian builder cannot obtain a human shadow for this

purpose, he will content himself with measuring the shadow

of the first animal that comes that way. The Roumanians

of Transylvania think that he whose shadow is thus immured

will die within forty days; so persons passing by a building

which is in course of erection may hear a warning cry,

“Beware lest they take thy shadow!” Not long ago there


1 J. H. Weeks, ‘* Notes on some 3 Georgeakis et Pineau, Folk-lore de


‘Customs of the Lower Congo People,”
Folk-lore, xix. (1908) p. 422.

2 B. Schmidt, Das Volksleben der
Neugriechen (Leipsic, 1871), pp. 196
59.


Lesbos, pp. 346 sg.
* A. Strausz, Die Bulgaren (Leipsic,


1898), p. 199; W. R. S. Ralston,
Songs of the Russian Feople, p.
127.


Living
people
built into
founda-
tions to
serve as
guardian
’ spirits.


go THE PERILS OF THE SOUL CHAP.


were still shadow-traders whose business it was to provide
architects with the shadows necessary for securing their
walls.’ In these cases the measure of the shadow is looked
on as equivalent to the shadow itself, and to bury it is to
bury the life or soul of the man, who, deprived of it, must
die. Thus the custom is a substitute for the old practice of
immuring a living person in the walls, or crushing him under


‘the foundation-stone of a new building, in order to give


strength and durability to the structure, or more definitely in
order that the angry ghost may haunt the place and guard
it against the intrusion of enemies. Thus when a new gate
was made or an old gate was repaired in the walls of Bang-
kok, it used to be customary to crush three men to death
under an enormous beam ina pit at the gateway. Before
they were led to their doom, they were regaled at a splendid
banquet: the whole court came to salute them; and the
king himself charged them straitly to guard well the gate
that was to be committed to their care, and to warn him
if enemies or rebels came to assault the city. The next
moment the ropes were cut and the beam descended on
them. The Siamese believed that these unfortunates were
transformed into the genii which they called phz.? It is said |
that when the massive teak posts of the gateways of Mandalay
were set up, a man was bound and placed under each post
and crushed to death. The Burmese believe that men who
die a violent death turn into za¢s or demons and haunt the
spot where they were killed, doing a mischief to such as
attempt to molest the place. Thus their spirits become
guardians of the gates.® This theory would explain why
such sacrifices appear to be offered most commonly at
thoroughfares, such as gates and bridges, where ghostly
warders may be deemed especially serviceable in keeping
watch on the multitudes that go to and fro. In Bima, a


' W. Schmidt, Das Jahr und seine
Tage in Meinung und Brauch der
Rominen Siebenbiirgens (Hermann-
stadt, 1866), p. 27; E. Gerard, Zhe
Land beyond the Forest, ii. 17 sq.
Compare F, S, Krauss, Volksglaudbe
und religiiser Brauch der Siidslaven,
p. 161,


2 Mgr. Bruguitre, in Annales de


l’Association de la Propagation de la
Foi, v. (1831) pp. 164 sg. 3 Pallegoix,
Description du royaume That ou Siam,
ii, 50-52.

8 A. Fytche, Burma, Past and
Present (London, 1878), i. 251 note.

* On such practices in general, see
E. B. Tylor, Primitive Culture,* i,
104 sgg.; F. Liebrecht, Zur Volks.


u THE SOUL AS A SHADOW AND A REFLECTION 91


district of the East Indian island of Sambawa, the custom is
marked by some peculiar features, which deserve to be
mentioned. When a new flag-pole is set up at the sultan’s
palace a woman is crushed to death under it ; but she must
be pregnant. If the destined victim should be brought to
bed before her execution, she goes free. The notion may
be that the ghost of such a woman would be more than
usually fierce and vigilant. Again, when the wooden doors
are set up at the palace, it is customary to bury a child
under each of the door-posts. For these purposes officers
are sent to scour the country for a pregnant woman or little
children, as the case may be, and if they come back empty-
handed they must give up their own wives or children to
serve as victims. When the gates are set up, the children
are killed, their bodies stript of flesh, and their bones laid in
the holes in which the door-posts are erected. Then the
flesh is boiled with horse’s flesh and served up to the officers.
Any officer who refuses to eat of it is at once cut down.!
The intention of this last practice is perhaps to secure the
fidelity of the officers by compelling them to enter into a
covenant of the most solemn and binding nature with the
ghosts of the murdered children who are to guard the gates.

The practice of burying the measure of a man’s shadow,
as a substitute for the man himself, under the foundation-
stone of a building may perhaps throw light on the singular
deity whom the people of Kisser, an East Indian island,


kunde, pp. 284-296; F. S. Krauss,
‘*Der Bauopfer bei den Siidslaven,”
Mitthetlungen der Anthropologischen
Gesellschaft in Wien, xvii. (1887) pp.
16-24; P. Sartori, ‘‘Uber das
Bauopfer,” Zeztschrift fiir Ethnologie,
xxx. (1898) pp. I-54; E. Wester-
marck, Origin and Development of the
Moral Ideas (London, 1906-1908), i.
451sgg. Forsome special evidence, see
H. Oldenberg, Die Religion des Veda,
pp. 363 sgg. (as to ancient India) ;
Sonnerat, Voyage aux Indes Orientales
et 2 la Chine, ii. 47 (as to Pegu) ;
Guerlach, ‘*Chez les sauvages Ba-
hnars,” issions Catholiques, xvi.
(1884) p. 82 (as to the Sedans of
Cochin-China) ; W. H. Furness, Home-
life of Borneo Head-hunters, p. 3 (as to


the Kayans and Kenyahs of Burma) ;
A. C. Kruijt, ‘Van Paloppo naar
Posso,” Mededeelingen van wege het
Nederlandsche Zendelinggenootschap,
xlii. (1898) p. 56 note (as to central
Celebes); L. Hearn, Glimpses of Un-
familiar Japan (London, 1894), i. 148
sg.; H. Ternaux-Compans, Zssaz sur
Pancten Cundinamarca, p. 70 (as to
the Indians of Colombia). These cus-
toms are commonly called foundation-
sacrifices. But the name is inappro-
priate, as Prof. H. Oldenberg has
rightly observed, since they are not
sacrifices but charms.

1D. F. van Braam Morris, in
Tijdschrift voor Indische Taal- Land-
en Volkenkunde, xxxiv. (1891) p.
224.


Deification
ofa
measuring:
tape.


The soul
sometimes
supposed
to be in
the reflec-
tion,


THE PERILS OF THE SOUL


CHAP,


92


choose to guard their houses and villages. The god in
question is nothing more or less than the measuring-tape
which was used to measure the foundations of the house or
of the village temple. After it has served this useful
purpose, the tape is wound about a stick shaped like a
paddle, and is then deposited in the thatch of the roof of the
house, where food is offered to it on all special occasions. The
deified measuring-tape of the whole village is that which was
used to measure the foundations of the first house or of the
village temple. The handle of the paddle-like stick on
which it is wound is carved into the figure of a person
squatting in the usual posture; and the whole is kept ina
rough wooden box along with one or two figures to act as
its guards.’ It is possible, though perhaps hardly probable,
that these tapes may be thought to contain the souls of men
whose shadows they measured at the foundation ceremony.
As some peoples believe a man’s soul to be in his
shadow, so other (or the same) peoples believe it to be in
his reflection in water or a mirror. Thus “the Andamanese
do not regard their shadows but their reflections (in any
mirror) as their souls.”* According to one account, some
of the Fijians thought that man has two souls, a light one
and a dark one; the dark one goes to Hades, the light one
is his reflection in water or a mirror.2 When the Motumotu
of New Guinea first saw their likenesses in a looking-glass
they thought that their reflections were their souls‘ In
New Caledonia the old men are of opinion that a person’s
reflection in water or a mirror is his soul ; but the younger men,


1 J. H. de Vries, “‘ Reis door eenige
eilandgroepen der Residentie Am-
boina,” 7ijdschrift van het koninklijk
Nederlandsch Aardrijkskundig Genoot-
schap, Tweedie Serie, xvii. (1900) pp.
612 sg.


2 £. H. Mann, Aboriginal Inhabit.
ants of the Andaman Islands, p. 94.


8 T, Williams, /iji and the Fijians,*
i. 241. However, the late Mr.
Lorimer Fison wrote to me _ that
this reported belief in a bright
soul and a dark soul “is one of
Williams’ absurdities, I inquired into
it on the island where he was, and


found that there was no such belief.
He took the word for ‘ shadow,’ which
is a reduplication of ya/o, the word for
soul, as meaning the dark soul. But
yaloyalo does not mean the soul at all.
It is not part of a man as his soul is,
This is made certain by the fact that
it does not take the possessive suffix
yalo-na=his soul; but nona yaloyalo=
his shadow. This.settles the question
beyond dispute. If ya/oyalo were any
kind of soul, the possessive form would
be yaloyalona” (letter dated August
26, 1898).

* James Chalmers, Pioneering in
New Guinea (London, 1887), p, 170.


1 THE SOUL AS A SHADOW AND A REFLECTION’ 93


taught by the Catholic priests, maintain that it is a reflection

and nothing more, just like the reflection of palm-trees in the
water! The reflection-soul, being external to the man, is Dangers
exposed to much the same dangers as the shadow-soul. (? uch
Among the Galelareese, half-grown lads and girls may not tion-soul is
look at themselves in a mirror; for they say that the mirror Nahin
takes away their bloom and leaves them ugly.”, And as the
shadow may be stabbed, so may the reflection. Hence an
Aztec mode of keeping sorcerers from the house was to leave

a vessel of water with a knife in it behind the door. When

a sorcerer entered he was so much alarmed at seeing his
reflection in the water transfixed by a knife that he turned

and fled.® In Corréze, a district of the Auvergne, a cow’s

milk had dried up through the maleficent spells of a neigh-
bouring witch, so a sorcerer was called in to help. He made

the woman whose cow was bewitched sit in front of a pail of
water with a knife in her hand till she thought she saw the
image of the witch in the water, whereupon he made her

stab the image with the knife. They say that if the knife
strikes the image fair in the eye, the person whose likeness it

is will suffer a corresponding injury in his or her eye. This
procedure, we are informed, has been successful in restoring

milk to the udders of a cow when even holy water had been

tried in vain. The Zulus will not look into a dark pool
because they think there is a beast in it which will take

away their reflections, so that they die.® The Basutos say

that crocodiles have the power of thus killing a man by
dragging his reflection under water. When one of them

dies suddenly and from no apparent cause, his relatives will

allege that a crocodile must have taken his shadow some

time when he crossed a_ stream.°® In Saddle Island,


1 Father Lambert, Meurs et super-
stitions des Néo-Calédoniens (Nouméa,
1900), pp. 45 Sg.

2M. J. van Baarda, ‘ Fabelen,
Verhalen en Overleveringen der Gale-
lareezen,” Bzjdragen tot de Taal- Land-
en Volkenkunde van Nederlandsch-
Indié, xlv. (1895) p. 462.

3 B. deSahagun, Histoire générale des
choses de la Nouvelle-Espagne (Paris,
1880), p. 314. The Chinese hang
brass mirrors over the idols in their


houses, because it is thought that evil
spirits entering the house and seeing
themselves in the mirrors will be scared
away (China Review, ii. 164).

* G. Vuillier, “Chez les magiciens
et les sorciers de la Corréze,” Zour du
monde, N.S. v. (1899) pp. 522, 524.

5 H. Callaway, Nursery Tales, Tradi-
tions, and FHiistories of the Zulus
(Natal and London, 1868), p. 342.

6 T. Arbousset et F. Daumas, Voyage
@exploration au nord-est de la colonie


94 THE PERILS OF THE SOUL CHAP.


Melanesia, there is a pool “into which if any one looks he
dies ; the malignant spirit takes hold upon his life by means
of hig’reflection on the water.” !


Dread of e can now understand why it was a maxim both in
oe @t ancient India and ancient Greece not to look at one’s


reflection reflection in water, and why the Greeks regarded it as an
m water’ omen of death if a man dreamed of seeing himself so
reflected.” They feared that the water-spirits would drag
the person’s reflection or soul under water, leaving him soul-
less to perish. This was probably the origin of the classical
, story of the beautiful Narcissus, who languished and died
/ through seeing his reflection in the water. The explana-
‘fh tion that he died for love of his own fair image was
y probably devised later, after the old meaning of the story
was forgotten. } The same ancient belief lingers, in a faded
form, in the Enélish superstition that whoever sees a water

fairy must pine and die.


“ Alas, the moon should ever beam
To show what man should never see !—
I saw a maiden on a stream,
And fair was she!


I staid to watch, a little space,
Her parted lips tf she would sing ;
The waters closed above her face
With many a ring.


Z know my life will fade away,
I know that I must vainly pine,
For I am made of mortal clay,
But she’s divine!”


Reason for Further, we can now explain the widespread custom of
ap mirrors covering up mirrors or turning them to the wall after a death


- ape has taken place in the house. It is feared that the soul,
em to


the wall projected out of the person in the shape of his reflection in


nati the mirror, may be carried off by the ghost of the departed,
du Cap de Bonne-Espérance, p. 12; 7.  td., The Melanesians, p. 186.
Lindsay Fairclough, ‘* Notes on the 2 Fragmenta philosophorum Graeco-
Basuto,” Journal of the African rum, ed, F. G. A. Mullach, i. 510;
Socidy, No. 14 (January 1905), p. 201. Artemidorus, Ondvrocr. ii. 7; Laws of
1R. H. Codrington, ‘‘ Religious  A/anu, iv. 38 (p. 135, G. Bihler’s
Beliefs and Practices in Melanesia,” translation, Sacred Books of the Last,
Journ, Anthrop, Inst. x, (1881) p. 3133 vol. xxv.).


a THE SOUL AS A SHADOW AND A REFLECTION 95


which is commonly supposed to linger about the house till
the burial. The custom is thus exactly parallel to the Aru
custom of not sleeping in a house after a death for fear that
the soul, projected out of the body in a dream, may meet
the ghost and be carried off by it.’ In Oldenburg it is thought
that if a person sees his image in a mirror after a death he
will die himself. So all the mirrors in the house are covered
up with white cloth? In some parts of Germany and
Belgium after a death not only the mirrors but everything
that shines or glitters (windows, clocks, etc.) is covered up?
doubtless because they might reflect a person’s image. The
same custom of covering up mirrors or turning them to the
wall after a death prevails in England, Scotland, Madagascar,*
and among the Karaits, a Jewish sect in the Crimea.® The
Suni Mohammedans of Bombay cover with a cloth the mirror
in the room of a dying man and do not remove it until the
corpse is carried out for burial. They also cover the looking-
glasses in their bedrooms before retiring to rest at night.
The reason why sick people should not see themselves in a
mirror, and why the mirror in a sick-room is therefore
covered up,’ is also plain; in time of sickness, when the soul
might take flight so easily, it is particularly dangerous to
project it out of the body by means of the reflection
in a mirror. The rule is therefore precisely parallel to the
rule observed by some peoples of not allowing sick people
to sleep ; for in sleep the soul is projected out of the body,


1 See above, p. 37.

2 A. Wuttke, Der deutsche Volksaber-
glaube,? pp. 429 sq., § 726.

3 A, Wuttke, 2.c.; E. Monseur, Ze
Folklore Wallon, p. 40.

4 Folk-lore Journal, iii. (1885) p.
281; T. F. Thiselton Dyer, Zngiish
Folk-lore, p. 109; J. Napier, Folk-lore,
or Superstitious Beliefs in the West of
Scotland, p. 60; W. Ellis, History of
Madagascar, i. 238. Compare A.
Grandidier, ‘‘ Des rites funéraires chez
les Malgaches,” Revue a Ethnographie,
v. (1886) p. 215.

5 S. Weissenberg, ‘‘ Die Karaer der
Krim,” Globus, Ixxxiv. (1903) p. 143 ;
zd. *‘Krankheit und Tod bei den
siidrussischen Juden,” Globus, xci.
(1907) p. 360.


6° Panjab Notes and Queries, ii. p.
169, § 906.

7 J. V. Grohmann, Aderglauden und
Gebriuche aus Bihmen und Mahren,
p- 151, § 1097; Folk-lore Journal, vi.
(1888) pp. 145 sg.: Panjab Notes and
Queries, ii. p. 61, § 378.

8 J. G. Frazer, “On certain Burial
Customs as illustrative of the Primitive
Theory of the Soul,” Journal of the An-
thropological Institute, xv. (1886) pp. 82
sgg.- Among the heathen Arabs, when a
man had beenstung byascorpion, he was
kept from sleeping for seven days, during
which he had to wear a woman’s brace-
lets and earrings (Rasmussen, Addifa-
menta ad histortam Arabum ante Isla-
mismum, p. 65, compare p. 69). The
old Mexican custom of masking and


96 THE PERILS OF THE SOUL CHAP,


and there is always a risk that it may not return. “In the
opinion of the Raskolniks a mirror is an accursed thing,
invented by the devil,” + perhaps on account of the mirror’s
supposed power of drawing out the soul in the reflection and

so facilitating its capture.
As with shadows and reflections, so with portraits ; they
Sean are often believed to contain the soul of the person por-
to be inthe trayed. People who hold this belief are naturally loth to
portrait. have their likenesses taken; for if the portrait is the soul,
or at least a vital part of the person portrayed, whoever
possesses the portrait will be able to exercise a fatal influence
This belief over the original of it. Thus the Esquimaux of Bering Strait
Susie the believe that persons dealing in witchcraft have the power of

quimaux

and stealing a person’s zzua or shade, so that without it he will
American bine away and die. Once at a village on the lower Yukon
River an explorer had set up his camera to get a picture
of the people as they were moving about among their houses.
While he was focusing the instrument, the headman of the
village came up and insisted on peeping under the cloth.
Being allowed to do so, he gazed intently for a minute at
the moving figures on the ground glass, then suddenly with-
drew his head and bawled at the top of his voice to the people,
“He has allof your shades in this box.” Apanic ensued among
the group, and in an instant they disappeared helter-skelter
into their houses.” The Dacotas hold that every man has
several wanagi or “apparitions,” of which after death one
remains at the grave, while another goes to the place of the
departed. For many years no Yankton Dacota would consent
to have his picture taken lest one of his “apparitions ” should
remain after death in the picture instead of going to the
spirit-land.2 An Indian whose portrait the Prince of Wied


The soul


veiling the images of the gods so long _ largely due to exaggerated Puritanism,
as the king was sick (Brasseur de Bour- 2 E. W. Nelson, ‘The Eskimo
bourg, Histoire des nations civilisées about Bering Strait,” ighteenth


du Mexique et de [ Amérique-Centrale,
iii. 571 sg.) may perhaps have been
intended to prevent the images from
drawing away the king’s soul.

1 W. R. S. Ralston, Songs of the
Russian People, p. 117. The objection,
however, may be merely Puritanical.
W. Robertson Smith informed me that
the peculiarities of the Raskolniks are


Annual Report of the Bureau of
American Ethnology, Part I. (Wash-
ington, 1899) p. 422.

8 J. Owen Dorsey, ‘*A Study of
Siouan Cults,” Zveventh Annual Re-
port of the Bureau of Ethnology
(Washington, 1894), p. 484;  ¢a.
‘Teton Folk-lore,” American Anthro-
pologist, ii. (1889) p. 143.


1 THE SOUL AS A SHADOW AND A REFLECTION 97


wished to get, refused to let himself be drawn, because he
believed it would cause his death.| The Mandan Indians
also thought that they would soon die if their portraits were
in the hands of another; they wished at least to have the
artist’s picture as a kind of hostage? The Tepehuanes of
Mexico stood in mortal terror of the camera, and five days’
persuasion was necessary to induce them to pose for it.
When at last they consented, they looked like criminals
about to be executed. They believed that by photographing
people the artist could carry off their souls and devour them
at his leisure moments. They said that when the pictures
reached his country they would die or some other evil would
befall them.* The Canelos Indians of Ecuador think that
their soul is carried away in their picture. Two of them,
who had been photographed, were so alarmed that they came
back next day on purpose to ask if it were really true that
their souls had been taken away.* Similar notions are enter-
tained by the Aymara Indians of Peru and Bolivia.® The
Araucanians of Chili are unwilling to have their portraits
drawn, for they fancy that he who has their portraits in his
possession could, by means of magic, injure or destroy
_ themselves.®
The Yaos, a tribe of British Central Africa in the neigh- The same

bourhood of Lake Nyassa, believe that every human being prvigg
has a /isoka, a soul, shade, or spirit, which they appear to
associate with the shadow or picture of the person. Some
of them have been known to refuse to enter a room where
pictures were hung on the walls, “because of the masoka,
souls, in them.” The camera was at first an object of dread
to them, and when it was turned on a group of natives
they scattered in all directions with shrieks of terror. They
said that the European was about to take away their shadows
and that they would die; the transference of the shadow or
portrait (for the Yao word for the two is the same, to wit


1 Maximilian Prinz zu Wied, Retse of the Anthropological Institute, ix.


in das innere Nord-America, i. 417. (1880) p. 392.
2 Jbid. ii. 166. 5 DPD. Forbes, in Journal of the
3C. Lumholtz, Unknown Mexico Ethnological Society of London, ii.
(London, 1903), i. 459 sg. (1870) p. 236.
4 A, Simson, ‘‘ Notes on_ the 6 E. R. Smith, Zhe Araucantans


Jivaros and Canelos Indians,” Journal (London, 1855), p. 222.
Pr. Tl H


The same
belief in
Asia.


THE PERILS OF THE SOUL CHAP,


98


chiwzlilz) to the photographic plate would involve the disease
or death of the shadeless body. A Yao chief, after much
difficulty, allowed himself to be photographed on condition
that the picture should be shewn to none of his subjects, but
sent out of the country as soon as possible. He feared lest
some ill-wisher might use it to bewitch him. Some time
afterwards he fell ill, and his attendants attributed the illness
to some accident which had befallen the photographic plate
in England." The Ngoni of the same region entertain a
similar belief, and formerly exhibited a similar dread of
sitting to a photographer, lest by so doing they should yield
up their shades or spirits to him and they should die.2 When
Joseph Thomson attempted to photograph some of the
Wa-teita in eastern Africa, they imagined that he was a
magician trying to obtain possession of their souls, and that
if he got their likenesses they themselves would be entirely
at his mercy. When Dr. Catat and some companions were
exploring the Bara country on the west coast of Madagascar,
the people suddenly became hostile. The day before the
travellers, not without difficulty, had photographed the royal
family, and now found themselves accused of taking the
souls of the natives for the purpose of selling them when
they returned to France. Denial was vain; in compliance
with the custom of the country they were obliged to catch
the souls, which were then put into a basket and ordered by
Dr. Catat to return to their respective owners.*

Some villagers in Sikhim betrayed a lively horror and
hid away whenever the lens of a camera, or “the evil eye of
the box” as they called it, was turned on them. They
thought it took away their souls with their pictures, and so
put it in the power of the owner of the pictures to cast spells
on them, and they alleged that a photograph of the scenery
blighted the landscape.® Until the reign of the late King
of Siam no Siamese coins were ever stamped with the image


1 Rev. A. MHetherwick, ‘' Some 8 J. Thomson, Zhrough Masai


Animistic Beliefs among the Yaos of
British Central Africa,” Journal of the
Anthropological Institute, xxxii, (1902)
pp. 89 59.

2 W. A. Elmslie, Among the Wild
Neoni (Edinburgh and London, 1899),


pp. 70 59.


Land (London, 1885), p. 86.

4 FE. Clodd, in Folk-lore, vi. (1895)
pp. 73 sg., referring to Zhe 7imes of
March 24, 1891.

5 L. A, Waddell, Among the Hima-
/ayas (Westminster, 1899), pp. 85


Sq.


u THE SOUL AS A SHADOW AND A REFLECTION 99


of the king, “for at that time there was a strong prejudice
_against the making of portraits in any medium. Europeans
who travel into the jungle have, even at the present time,
only to point a camera at a crowd to procure its instant
dispersion. When a copy of the face of a person is made
and taken away from him, a portion of his life goes with the
picture. Unless the sovereign had been blessed with the
years of a Methusaleh he could scarcely have permitted his
life to be distributed in small pieces together with the coins
of the realm.”! Similarly, in Corea, “the effigy of the king
is not struck on the coins; only a few Chinese characters
are put on them. They would deem it an insult to the king
to put his sacred face on objects which pass into the most
vulgar hands and often roll on the ground in the dust or the
mud. When the French ships arrived for the first time in
Corea, the mandarin who was sent on board to communicate
with them was dreadfully shocked to see the levity with
which these western barbarians treated the face of their
sovereign, reproduced on the coins, and the recklessness with
which they put it in the hands of the first comer, without
troubling themselves in the least whether or not he would
shew it due respect.”* In Minahassa, a district of Celebes, The same
many chiefs are reluctant to be photographed, believing that belief in
if that were done they would soon die. For they imagine Indies.
that, were the photograpli lost by its owner and found by
somebody else, whatever injury the finder chose to do to the
portrait would equally affect the person whom it represented.*
Mortal terror was depicted on the faces of the Battas upon
whom von Brenner turned the lens of his camera; they
thought he wished to carry off their shadows or spirits ina
little box. When Dr. Nieuwenhuis attempted to photograph
the Kayans or Bahaus of central Borneo, they were much
alarmed, fearing that their souls would follow their photo-


1 E, Young, Zhe Kingdom of the
Yellow Robe (Westminster, 1898), p.
140.

2 Ch. Dallet, Histoire de PE glise
de Corée (Paris, 1874), i. p. xxv. This
account of Corea was written at a time
when the country was still almost
secluded from European influence.
The events of recent years have natur-


ally wrought great changes in the
habits and ideas of the people.

3 «Tets over het bijgeloof in de
Minahasa,” Zijdschrift voor Neder-
landsch Indié, III. Série, iv. (1870)
pp. 8 sg.

4 J. Freiherr von Brenner, Besuch
bet den Kannibalen Sumatras (Wiirz-


burg, 1894), p. 195.


The same
belief in
Europe.


100 THE PERILS OF THE SOUL CHAP. II


graphs into the far country and that their deserted bodies
would fall sick. Further, they imagined that possessing .
their likenesses the explorer would be able by magic art
to work on the originals at a distance.’

Beliefs of the same sort still linger in various parts of
Europe. Not very many years ago some old women in the
Greek island of Carpathus were very angry at having their
likenesses drawn, thinking that in consequence they would
pine and die.?_ It is a German superstition that if you have
your portrait painted, you will die Some people in Russia
object to having their silhouettes taken, fearing that if this
is done they will die before the year is out In Albania
Miss Durham sketched an old man who boasted of being a
hundred and ten years old. -When every one recognised
the likeness, a look of great anxiety came over the patriarch’s
face, and most earnestly he besought the artist never to
destroy the sketch, for he was certain that the moment the
sketch was torn he would drop down dead.*® An artist in
England once vainly attempted to sketch a gypsy girl. “I
won’t have her drawed out,” said the girl’s aunt. “I told her
I’d make her scrawl the earth before me, if ever she let herself
be drawed out again.” “Why, what harm can there be?” “I
know there’s a fiz (a charm) in it. There was my youngest,
that the gorja drawed out on Newmarket Heath, she never
held her head up after, but wasted" away, and died, and she’s
buried in March churchyard.”® There are persons in the
West of Scotland “who refuse to have their likenesses taken
lest it prove unlucky; and give as instances the cases of
several of their friends who never had a day’s health after
being photographed.” ?


1 A, W. Nieuwenhuis, Quer durch
Borneo, i. 314.

2 «* A Far-off Greek Island,”’ Black-
wood’s Magazine, February 1886, p.
235.

8 J. A. E. Ko6hler, Volksbrauch,
Aberglauben, Sagen und andre alte
Uberlieferungen im Voigtlande (Leipsic,
1867), p. 423.

4 W. R. S. Ralston, Songs of the
Russian People, p, 117.


5 Miss M. E. Durham, High Albania
(London, 1909), p. 107.

6 F, H. Groome, /n Gipsy Tents
(Edinburgh, 1880), pp. 337 sg.

7 James Napier, olk-lore, or
Superstitious Beliefs in the West of
Scotland, p. 142. For more examples
of the same sort, see R. Andree,
Ethnographische Parallelen und Ver-
gleiche, Neue Folge (Leipsic, 1889),
pp. 18 sgq.


CHAPTER III
TABOOED ACTS


§ 1. Zaboos on Intercourse with Strangers


So much for the primitive conceptions of the soul and the primitive
dangers to which it is exposed. These conceptions are not ConeeP.
limited to one people or country ; with variations of detail soul helped
they are found all over the world, and survive, as we have peewee snll
seen, in modern Europe. Beliefs so deep-seated and _ so ships by
widespread must necessarily have contributed to shape the ‘tng |
mould in which the early kingship was cast. For if every observed
person was at such pains to save his own soul from the perils 77. "2"
which threatened it on so many sides, how much more soul's.
carefully must 4e have been guarded upon whose life hung ——
the welfare and even the existence of the whole people, and

whom therefore it was the common interest of all to preserve ?
Therefore we should expect to find the king’s life protected

by a system of precautions or safeguards still more numerous

and minute than those which in primitive society every man

adopts for the safety of his own soul. Now in point of fact

the life of the early kings is regulated, as we have seen and

shall see more fully presently, by a very exact code of rules.

May we not then conjecture that these rules are in fact the

very safeguards which we should expect to find adopted for

the protection of the king’s life? An examination of the

rules themselves confirms this conjecture. For from this it
appears that some of the rules observed by the kings are
identical with those observed by private persons out of

regard for the safety of their souls ; and even of those which

seem peculiar to the king, many, if not all, are most readily


Io!


The
general
effect of
these rules
is to isolate
the king,
especially
from
strangers.
The
savage
fears the
magic arts
ofstrangers
and hence
guards
himself
against
them.


Various
modes of
disenchant-
ing
strangers.


102 TABOOED ACTS CHAP.


explained on the hypothesis that they are nothing but safe-
guards or lifeguards of the king. I will now enumerate
some of these royal rules or taboos, offering on each of them
such comments and explanations as may serve to set the
original intention ofthe rule in its proper light.

As the object of the royal taboos is to isolate the king
from all sources of danger, their general effect is to compel
him to live in a state of seclusion, more or less complete, ~
according to the number and stringency of the rules he
observes. Now of all sources of danger none are more
dreaded by the savage than magic and witchcraft, and he
suspects all strangers of practising these black arts. To
guard against the baneful influence exerted voluntarily or
involuntarily by strangers is therefore an elementary dictate
of savage prudence. Hence before strangers are allowed
to enter a district, or at least before they are permitted
to mingle freely with the inhabitants, certain ceremonies
are often performed by the natives of the country for
the purpose of disarming the strangers of their magical
powers, of counteracting the baneful influence which is
believed to emanate from them, or of disinfecting, so to
speak, the tainted atmosphere by which they are supposed
to be surrounded. Thus, when the ambassadors sent by
Justin II., Emperor of the East, to conclude a peace with
the Turks had reached their destination, they were received
by shamans, who subjected them to a ceremonial purification
for the purpose of exorcising all harmful influence. Having
deposited the goods brought by the ambassadors in an open
place, these wizards carried burning branches of incense
round them, while they rang a bell and beat on a tambourine,
snorting and falling into a state of frenzy in their efforts to
dispel the powers of evil. Afterwards they purified the
ambassadors themselves by leading them through the flames.'
In the island of Nanumea (South Pacific) strangers from
ships or from other islands were not allowed to communicate
with the people until they all, or a few as representatives of
the rest, had been taken to each of the four temples in the


1 Menander Protector, in “vagmenta Fall of the Roman Empire, ch, xlii.
historicorum Graecorum, ed, C. Miller, vol. vii. pp. 294 sg. (Edinburgh,
iv, 227. Compare Gibbon, Decline and 1811).


mt TABOOS ON INTERCOURSE WITH STRANGERS | 103


island, and prayers offered that the god would avert any Various
disease or treachery which these strangers might have rye se
brought with them. Meat offerings were also laid upon the enchanting
altars, accompanied by songs and dances in honour of the “““"8"*
god. While these ceremonies were going on, all the people
except the priests and their attendants kept out of sight.'

On returning from an attempted ascent of the great African
mountain Kilimanjaro, which is believed by the neighbouring
tribes to be tenanted by dangerous demons, Mr. New and

his party, as soon as they reached the border of the inhabited
country, were disenchanted by the inhabitants, being
sprinkled with “a professionally prepared liquor, supposed

to possess the potency of neutralising evil influences, and
removing the spell of wicked spirits.”* In the interior of
Yoruba (West Africa) the sentinels at the gates of towns
often oblige European travellers to wait till nightfall before
they admit them, fearing that if the strangers were admitted

by day the devil would enter behind them. The whole
Mahafaly country in Madagascar used to be tabooed to
strangers of the white race, the natives imagining that the
intrusion of a white man would immediately cause the death

of their king. The traveller Bastard had the greatest
difficulty in overcoming the reluctance of the natives to allow

him to enter their land and especially to visit their holy city.‘
Amongst the Ot Danoms of Borneo it is the custom
that strangers entering the territory should pay to the
natives a certain sum, which is spent in the sacrifice

. of buffaloes or pigs to the spirits of the land and water,

in order to reconcile them to the presence of the strangers,

and to induce them not to withdraw their favour from

the people of the country, but to bless the rice-harvest,

and so forth.2 The men of a certain district in Borneo,
fearing to look upon a European traveller lest he should
make them ill, warned their wives and children not


1G, Turner, Samoa, pp. 291 sg.

2 Charles New, Life, Wanderings,
and Labours in Eastern Africa (Lon-
don, 1873), p. 432. Compare zézd.
pp. 400, 402. For the demons on
Mt. Kilimanjaro, see also]. L. Krapf,
Travels, Researches, and Missionary
Labours in Eastern Africa (London,


1860), p. 192.

3 Pierre Bouche, La Céte des Es-
claves et le Dahomey (Paris, 1885), p.
133.

4 A. van Gennep, 7abou et totémisme
@ Madagascar (Paris, 1904), p. 42.

5 C. A. L. M. Schwaner, Borneo
(Amsterdam, 1853-54), ii. 77.


Various
modes

of dis-
enchanting
strangers.


TABOOED ACTS CHAP.


104


to go near him. Those who could not restrain their.
curiosity killed fowls to appease the evil spirits and smeared
themselves with the blood." “More dreaded,” says a
traveller in central Borneo, “than the evil spirits of the
neighbourhood are the evil spirits from a distance which
accompany travellers. When a company from the middle
Mahakam river visited me among the Blu-u Kayans in the
year 1897,no woman shewed herself outside her house with-
out a burning bundle of plehiding bark, the stinking smoke of
which drives away evil spirits.”* In Laos, before a stranger
can be accorded hospitality, the master of the house must offer
sacrifice to the ancestral spirits ; otherwise the spirits would
be offended and would send disease on the inmates.* When
Madame Pfeiffer arrived at the village of Hali-Bonar, among
the Battas of Sumatra, a buffalo was killed and the liver
offered to her. Then a ceremony was performed. to pro-
pitiate the evil spirits. Two young men danced, and one of
them in dancing sprinkled water from a buffalo’s horn on
the visitor and the spectators. In the Mentawei Islands,
when a stranger enters a house where there are children, the
father or other member of the family takes the ornament
which the children wear in their hair and hands it to the
stranger, who holds it in his hands for a while and then
gives it back to him. This is thought to protect the children
from the evil effect which the sight of a stranger might have
upon them. When a Dutch steamship was approaching
their villages, the people of Biak, an island off the north
coast of New Guinea, shook and knocked their idols about
in order to ward off ill-luck.6 At Shepherd’s Isle Captain
Moresby had to be disenchanted before he was allowed to
land his boat’s crew. When he leaped ashore, a devil-man
seized his right hand and waved a bunch of palm leaves
over the captain’s head. Then “he placed the leaves in my
left hand, putting a small green twig into his mouth, still


1 Jbid., ii, 167.

2 A, W. Nieuwenhuis, Quer durch
Borneo, ii, 102.

3 FE. Aymonier, Noles sur le Laos
(Saigon, 1885), p. 196,

4 Bulletin de la Société de Géographie
(Paris), IVme Série, vi. (1853) pp.
134 4g.


5 H. von Rosenberg, Der malayische
Archipel (Leipsic, 1878), p. 198.


® PD. W. Horst, ‘* Rapport van eene
reis naar de Noordktst van Nieuw
Guinea,” Tijdschrift voor Indische
Taal- Land- en Volkenkunde,  xxxii.
(1889) p, 229.


m1. TABOOS ON INTERCOURSE WITH STRANGERS | 105


holding me fast, and then, as if with great effort, drew the
twig from his mouth—this was extracting the evil spirit—
after which he blew violently, as if to speed it away. I now
held a twig between my teeth, and he went through the
same process.” Then the two raced round a couple of sticks
fixed in the ground and bent to an angle at the top, which
had leaves tied to it. After some more ceremonies the
devil-man concluded by leaping to the level of Captain
Moresby’s shoulders (his hands resting on the captain’s
shoulders) several times, “as if to show that he had
conquered the devil, and was now trampling him into
the earth.”? North American Indians “have an idea that
strangers, particularly white strangers, are ofttimes accom-
panied by evil spirits. Of these they have great dread, as
creating and delighting in mischief. One of the duties of
the medicine chief is to exorcise these spirits. 1 have some-
times ridden into or through a camp where I was unknown
or unexpected, to be confronted by a tall, half-naked savage,
standing in the middle of the circle of lodges, and yelling in
a sing-song, nasal tone, a string of unintelligible words.” *
When Crevaux was travelling in South America he Disen-

entered a village of the Apalai Indians. A few moments {ame


effected by
after his arrival some of the Indians brought him a number means of


of large black ants, of a species whose bite is painful, pier
fastened on palm leaves. ‘Then all the people of the village, —
without distinction of age or sex, presented themselves to?
him, and he had to sting them all with the ants on their
faces, thighs, and other parts of their bodies. Sometimes
when he applied the ants too tenderly they called out
“More! more!” and were not satisfied till their skin was
thickly studded with tiny swellings like what might have
been produced by whipping them with nettles? The object
of this ceremony is made plain by the custom observed in
Amboyna and Uliase of sprinkling sick people with pungent
spices, such as ginger and cloves, chewed fine, in order by
the prickling sensation to drive away the demon of disease


1 Capt. John Moresby, D¢scovertes (Hartford, Conn., 1886), p. 119.
and Surveys tn New Guinea (London, 3 J.  Crevaux, Voyages dans
1876), pp. 102 sg. PAmérique du Sud (Paris, 1883), p
2 R. I. Dodge, Our Wild Indians 300.


Disen-
chantment
effected by
cuts with
knives.


106


TABOOED ACTS CHAP.


which may be clinging to their persons.' In Java a popular
cure for gout or rheumatism is to rub Spanish pepper into
the nails of the fingers and toes of the sufferer; the pun-
gency of the pepper is supposed to be too much for the gout
or rheumatism, who accordingly departs in haste.2 So on
the Slave Coast of Africa the mother of a sick child some-
times believes that an evil spirit has taken possession of the
child’s body, and in order to drive him out, she makes small
cuts in the body of the little sufferer and inserts green
peppers or spices in the wounds, believing that she will
thereby hurt the evil spirit and force him to be gone. The
poor child naturally screams with pain, but the mother
hardens her heart in the belief that the demon is suffering
equally.” In Hawaii a patient is sometimes pricked with
bamboo needles for the sake of hurting and expelling a re-
fractory demon who is lurking in the sufferer’s body and
making him ill* Dyak sorceresses in south-eastern Borneo
will sometimes slash the body of a sick man with sharp
knives in order, it is said, to allow the demon of disease
to escape through the cuts;° but perhaps the notion
rather is to make the present quarters of the spirit too
hot for him. With a similar intention some of the natives
of Borneo and Celebes sprinkle rice upon the head or body
of a person supposed to be infested by dangerous spirits ; a
fowl is then brought, which, by picking up the rice from the
person’s head or body, removes along with it the spirit or
ghost which is clinging like a burr to his skin. This is done,
for example, to persons who have attended a funeral, and
who may therefore be supposed to be infested by the ghost


1j. G. F. Riedel, De slutk- en
hroesharige rassen tusschen Selebes en
Papua, p. 78.

4 J. Kreemer, ‘‘ Hoe de Javaan zijne
zieken verzorgt,” Mededeelingen van
wege het Nederlandsche Zendelinggenoot-
schap, xxxvi. (1892) p. 13. Mr, E.
W. Lewis, of Woodthorpe, Atkins
Road, Clapham Park, London, S,W.,
writes to me (July 2, 1902) that his
grandmother, a native of Cheshire,
used to make bees sting her as a cure for
local rheumatism ; she said the remedy
was infallible and had been handed


down to her from her mother.

3 Father Baudin, ‘* Le Fétichisme,”
Missions Catholiques, xvi, (1884) p.
249; A. B. Ellis, Zhe Yoruba-speak-
ing Peoples of the Slave Coast (London,
1894), pp. 113 sg.

4 A. Bastian, Allerle? aus Volks-
und Menschenkunde (Berlin, 1888), i.
116,

5 J, B. de Callone, ‘‘Iets over de
geneeswijze en ziekten der Daijakers
ter Zuid Oostkust van Borneo,”
Tijdschrift voor Neérlands Indie,
1840, dl. i, p. 418,


ur TABOOS ON INTERCOURSE WITH STRANGERS 107


of the deceased.' Similarly Basutos, who have carried a
corpse to the grave, have their hands scratched with a knife
from the tip of the thumb to the tip of the forefinger, and
magic stuff is rubbed into the wound,’ for the purpose, no
doubt, of removing the ghost which may be adhering to their
skin. Among the Barotse of south-eastern Africa a few
days after a funeral the sorcerer makes an incision in the
forehead of each surviving member of the family and fills it
with medicine, “in order to ward off contagion and the effect
of the sorcery which caused the death.”* When elephant-
hunters in East Africa have killed an elephant they get
upon its carcase, make little cuts in their toes, and rub gun-
powder into the cuts. This is done with the double
intention of counteracting any evil influence that may
emanate from the dead elephant, and of acquiring thereby
the fleetness of foot possessed by the animal in its life.*
The people of Nias carefully scrub and scour the weapons
and clothes which they buy, in order to efface all connexion
between the things and the persons from whom they bought
5


the
c is probable that the same dread of strangers, rather
thart any desire to do them honour, is the motive of certain


ceremonies which are sometimes observed at their reception)


but of which the intention is not directly stated. In th
Ongtong Java Islands, which are inhabited by Polynesians,
and lie a little to the north of the Solomon Islands, the
priests or sorcerers seem to wield great influence. Their main


Cere-


monies
°


t the
reception
of strangers
may some-
times be
intended to
counteract


. . . e" their
business is to summon or exorcise spirits for the purpose enchant-


of averting or dispelling sickness, and of procuring favour-
able winds, a good catch of fish, and so on. When strangers
land on the islands, they are first of all received by the
sorcerers, sprinkled with water, anointed with oil, and girt


1M. T. H. Perelaer, Z¢hno- 3 L. Decle, Three Years in Savage


graphische Beschrijving der Dajaks,
PP. 44, 54, 252; B. F. Matthes,
Bijdragen tot de Ethnologie van Zuid-
Celebes (The Hague, 1875), p. 49.

2H. Griitzner, “Uber die Ge-
brauche der Basutho,” in Verhand-
lungen der Berliner Gesellschaft fiir
Anthropologie, Ethnologie, und Ur-
geschichte, 1877, pp. 84 57.


Africa (London, 1898), p. 81.

4 P. Reichard, Deutsch - Ostafrika
(Leipsic, 1892), p. 431.

5 Nieuwenhuisen en Rosenberg,
‘* Verslag omtrent het eiland Nias,” in
Verhandelingen van het Bataviaasch
Genootschap van Kunsten en Weten-
schappen, xxx. (Batavia, 1863) p.
26.


ments.


TABOOED ACTS CHAP.


108


Ceremonies With dried pandanus leaves. At the same time sand and
Aoshi water are freely thrown about in all directions, and the new-
receptionof comer and his boat are wiped with green leaves. After this


strangers :
may some. Ceremony the strangers are introduced by the sorcerers to


timesbe the chief." In Afghanistan and in some parts of Persia
siete. the traveller, before h illage, is f ived
as veller, before he enters a village, is frequently receive
oe with a sacrifice of animal life or food, or of fire and incense.
ments, lhe Afghan Boundary Mission, in passing by villages


in Afghanistan, was often met with fire and: incense.
Sometimes a tray of lighted embers is thrown under the
hoofs of the traveller’s horse, with the words, “ You are
welcome.” * On entering a village in central Africa Emin
Pasha was received with the sacrifice of two goats; their
blood was sprinkled on the path and the chief stepped over
the blood to greet Emin* Before strangers entered the
country or city of Benin, custom compelled them to have
their feet washed ; sometimes the ceremony was performed
in a sacred place. Amongst the Esquimaux of Cumber-
land Inlet, when a stranger arrives at an encampment, the
sorcerer goes out to meet him. The stranger folds his
arms and inclines his head to one side, so as to expose
his cheek, upon which the magician deals a terrible blow,
sometimes felling him to the ground. Next the sorcerer in
his turn presents his cheek to the smiter and receives a buffet
from the stranger. Then they kiss each other, the ceremony
is over, and the stranger is hospitably received by all.°
Sometimes the dread of strangers and their magic is too
great to allow of their reception on any terms. Thus when
Speke arrived at a certain village, the natives shut their
doors against him, “ because they had never before seen a


white man nor the tin boxes


! KR, Parkinson, ‘‘ Zur Ethnographie
der Ontong Java- und Tasman-In-
seln,” Jnternationales Archiv fiir
Ethnographie, x, (1897) p. 112.

2 T, S. Weir, ** Note on Sacrifices
in India as a Means of averting Epi-
demics,” Journal of the Anthropological
Society of Bombay, i. 35.

3 E, O'Donovan, 7he Merv Oasis
(London, 1882), ii. 58.

4 Emin Pasha in Central Africa,
being a Collection of his Letters and


that the men were carrying:


Journals (London, 1888), p. 107.


5H. Ling Roth, Great Benin
(Halifax, England, 1903), p. 123.


8 Narrative of the Second Arctic
Expedition made by Charles /. Hall,
edited by Prof, J. G., Nourse, U.S.N,
(Washington, 1879), p. 269, note,
Compare Fr, Boas, ‘*The Central
Eskimo,” Sixth Annual Report of the
Bureau of Ethnology (Washington,
1888), p. 609.


m TABOOS ON INTERCOURSE WITH STRANGERS | 109


‘Who knows,’ they said, ‘but that these very boxes are the
plundering Watuta transformed and come to kill us? You
cannot be admitted.’ No persuasion could avail with them,
and the party had to proceed to the next village.”’

The fear thus entertained of alien visitors is often mutual. Cere-
Entering a strange land the savage feels that he is treading — a
enchanted ground, and he takes steps to guard against the at entering
demons that haunt it and the magical arts of its inhabitants. {578°
Thus on going to a strange land the Maoris performed disenchant
certain ceremonies to make it moa (common), lest it might 4
have been previously zapu (sacred).? When Baron Miklucho-
Maclay was approaching a village on the Maclay Coast of
New Guinea, one of the natives who accompanied him broke
a branch from a tree and going aside whispered to it for a
while ; then stepping up to each member of the party, one
after another, he spat something upon his back and gave
him some blows with the branch. Lastly, he went into the
forest and buried the branch under withered leaves in the
thickest part of the jungle. This ceremony was believed to
protect the party against all treachery and danger in the
village they were approaching.® The idea probably was
that the malignant influences were drawn off from the
persons into the branch and buried with it in the depths of
the forest. Before Stuhlmann and his companions entered
the territory of the Wanyamwesi in central Africa, one of
his men killed a white cock and buried it in a pot just at
the boundary. In Australia, when a strange tribe has been
invited into a district and is approaching the encampment
of the tribe which owns the land, “the strangers carry
lighted bark or burning sticks in their hands, for the purpose,
they say, of clearing and purifying the air.”® On the coast
of Victoria there is a tract of country between the La Trobe
River and the Yarra River, which some of the aborigines
called the Bad Country. It was supposed to act injuriously


1 J. A. Grant, 4 Walk across Africa, Guinea,” Natuurkundig Tijdschrift
pp. 104 sg. voor Nederlandsch Indie, xxxvi. 317
2 E. Shortland, Zraditions and sq.
Superstitions of the New Zealanders * 4 Fr. Stuhlmann, Ait Emin Pascha
(London, 1856), p. 103. ins Herz von Afrika (Berlin, 1894), p.
3 N. von Miklucho-Maclay, ‘“‘Eth- 94.
nologische Bemerkungen iiber die 5 R. Brough Smyth, Adorigines of
Papuas der Maclay-Kuste in Neu- (Uictoria, i. 134.


110 TABOOED ACTS CHAP,


Ceremonies On strangers. Hence when a man of another clan entered


at entering
a strange
land to
disenchant
it or to
propitiate
the local
spirits.


it he needed some one of the natives to look after him ;


-and if his guardian went away from the camp, he deputed


another to take his place. During his first visit, before he
became as it were acclimatised, the visitor did nothing for
himself as to food, drinking-water, or lodging. He was
painted with a band of white pipe-clay across the face below
the eyes, and had to learn the Nulit language before going
further. He slept on a thick layer of leaves so that he
should not touch the ground; and he was fed with flesh-
meat from the point of a burnt stick, which he removed with
his teeth, not with his lips. His drinking-water was drawn
from a small hole in the ground by his entertainers, and they
made it muddy by stirring it with a stick. He might only
take three mouthfuls at a time, each of which he had to let
slowly trickle down his throat. If he did otherwise, his
throat would close up... The Kayans and Kenyahs of
Borneo think it well to conciliate the spirit of the land
when they enter a strange country. “The old men, indeed,
trusting to the protection afforded by omens, are in little
need of further aid, but when young boys are brought into a
new river of importance, the hospitality of the local demons
is invoked. The Kayans make an offering of fowls’ eggs,
which must not be bought on the spot, but are carried from
the house, sometimes for distances so long that the devotion
of the travellers is more apparent than their presents to the
spirits of the land. Each boy takes an egg and puts it ina
bamboo split at the end into four, while one of the older
men calls upon the hills, rocks, trees, and streams to hear
him and to witness the offering. Careful to disguise the
true nature of the gift, he speaks of it as ové,a yam, using
a form of words fixed by usage. ‘Omen bird,’ he shouts
into the air,‘ we have brought you these boys. It is on
their account only that we have prepared this feast. Harm
them not; make things go pleasantly; and they give you
the usual offering of a yam. I give this to the country.’
The little ceremony is performed behind the hut where the
night is spent, and the boys wait about for the charm to
take effect. The custom of the Kenyahs shows the same
1 A. W. Howitt, Mative Tribes of South-East Australia, p, 403.


ur TABOOS ON INTERCOURSE WITH STRANGERS 11


feeling for the unknown and unseen spirits that are supposed
to abound. A fowl’s feathers, one for each boy, are held by
an old man, while the youngsters touch his arm. The
invocation is quite a powerful example of native rhetoric:
‘Smooth away trouble, ye mystic mountains, hills, valleys,
soil, rocks, trees. Shield the lives of the children who have
come hither’”* When the Toradjas of central Celebes are
on a head-hunting expedition and have entered the enemy’s
country, they may not eat any fruits which the foe has
planted nor any animal which he has reared until they have
first committed an act of hostility, as by burning a house or
killing a man. They think that if they broke this rule they
would receive something of the soul or spiritual essence of
the enemy into themselves, which would destroy the mystic
virtue of their talismans.’ It is said that just before Greek
armies advanced to the shock of battle, a man bearing a
lighted torch stepped out from either side and threw his
torch into the space between the hosts. Then they retired
unmolested, for they were thought to be sacred to Ares and
inviolable.2 Now some peoples fancy that when they
advance to battle the spirits of their fathers hover in the
van.* Hence fire thrown out in front of the line of battle
may be meant to disperse these shadowy combatants,
leaving the issue of the fight to be determined by more
substantial weapons than ghosts can wield. Similarly the
fire which is sometimes borne at the head of an army” is
perhaps in some cases intended to dissipate the evil
influences, whether magical or spiritual, with which the air
of the enemy’s country may be conceived to teem.

Again, it is thought that a man who has been on a Purifica-
journey may have contracted some magic evil from the 0%


strangers with whom he has been brought into contact, observed
Hence, on returning home, before he is readmitted to the —_
from a


1 Ch. Hose, Notes on the Natives of 3 Scholiast on Euripides, Phoentssae, journey.


British Borneo (in manuscript).

2 A. C. Kruijt, ‘‘ Het koppensnellen
der Toradja’s van Midden-Celebes,
en zijne beteekenis,” Verslagen en
Mededeelingen der Kontkl. Akademie
van Wetenschappen, Afdeeling Letter-
kunde, iv. Reeks, iii. (1899) p.
204.


1377, ed. E. Schwartz.

4 Conon, Warrationes, 18 ; Pausanias,
iii, 19. 12; Francis Fleming, Southern
Africa (London, 1856), p. 259;
Dudley Kidd, Zhe Zssential Kafir, p.
307.

5 See The Magic Art and the Evo-
lution of Kings, vol. ii. pp. 263 sg.


Purifica-


tory cere-


monies
observed
on the
return
from a
journey.


112 TABOOED ACTS CHAP.


society of his tribe and friends, he has to undergo certain
purificatory ceremonies. Thus the Bechuanas “cleanse or
purify themselves after journeys by shaving their heads, etc.,
lest they should have contracted from strangers some evil
by witchcraft or sorcery.” In some parts of western Africa
when a man returns home after a long absence, before he is
allowed to visit his wife, he must wash his person with a
particular fluid, and receive from the sorcerer a certain mark
on his forehead, in order to counteract any magic spell
which a stranger woman may have cast on him in his
absence, and which might be communicated through him to
the women of his village.® Every year about one-third of
the men of the Wanyamwesi tribe make journeys to the east
coast of Africa either as porters or as traffickers. Before he
sets out, the husband smears his cheeks with a sort of meal-
porridge, and during his absence his wife may eat no flesh
and must keep for him the sediment of the porridge in the
pot. On their return from the coast the men sprinkle meal
every day on all the paths leading to the camp, for the
purpose, it is supposed, of keeping evil spirits off; and
when they reach their homes the men again smear porridge
on their faces, while the women who have stayed at home
strew ashes on their heads.’ In Uganda, when a man
returns from a journey, his wife takes some of the bark
cloths from the bed of one of his children and lays them on
her husband’s bed; and as he enters the house, he jumps
over one of his wives who has children by him, or over one
of his children. If he neglects to do this, one of his children
or one of his wives will die.* When Damaras return home
after a long absence, they are given a small portion of the
fat of particular animals, which is supposed to possess
certain virtues.° A story is told of a Navajo Indian
who, after long wanderings, returned to his own people.
When he came within sight of his house, his people
1 John Campbell, Zravels in South ins Hers von Afrika (Berlin, 1894), p.
Africa, being a Narrative of a Second 89.
Journey in the Interior of that Country 4 J. Roscoe, ‘* Further Notes on the
(London, 1822), ii. 205. Manners and Customs of the Baganda,”


2 Ladislaus Magyar, Reisen in Stid- Journal of the Anthropological Institute,


Afrika (Buda-Pesth and Leipsic, 1859), —_ xxxii. (1902) p. 62.
p. 203. 6 C, J. Andersson, Lake Ngami?


% Fr, Stuhlmann, 47 Emin Pascha (London, 1856), p. 223.


m= =TABOOS ON INTERCOURSE WITH STRANGERS 113


made him stop and told him not to approach nearer till Purifica-
they had summoned a shaman. When the shaman was come (YS


“ceremonies were performed over the returned wanderer, observed
and he was washed from head to foot, and dried with corn- tak e9
meal; for thus do the Navajo treat all who return to their from a
homes from captivity with another tribe, in order that all?"
alien substances and influences may be removed from them.
When he had been thus purified he entered the house, and

his people embraced him and wept over him.”’ Two
Hindoo ambassadors, who had been sent to England by a
native prince and had returned to India, were considered to
have so polluted themselves by contact with strangers that
nothing but being born again could restore them to purity.
“For the purpose of regeneration it is directed to make an
image of pure gold of the female power of nature, in the
shape either of a woman or of a cow. In this statue the
person to be regenerated is enclosed, and dragged through

the usual channel. As a statue of pure gold and of proper
dimensions would be too expensive, it is sufficient to make

an image of the sacred Yonz, through which the person to be
regenerated is to pass.” Such an image of pure gold was
made at the prince’s command, and his ambassadors were
born again by being dragged through it.” In some of the
Moluccas, when a brother or young blood-relation returns
from a long journey, a young girl awaits him at the door with

a caladi \eaf in her hand and water in the leaf. She throws

the water over his face and bids him welcome.’ Among the
Kayans of Borneo, men who have been absent on a long
journey are secluded for four days in a small hut made
specially for the purpose before they are allowed to
enter their own house.* The natives of Savage Island
(South Pacific) invariably killed, not only all strangers in
distress who were drifted to their shores, but also any

of their own people who had gone away in a ship and
returned home. This was done out of dread of disease.


Long after they began to


1 Washington Matthews, ‘‘ The
Mountain Chant: a Navajo Ceremony,”
Fifth Annual Report of the Bureau of
Ethnology (Washington, 1887), p. 410.

2 Asiatick Researches, vi. 535 sq. ed.


PT. Il


venture out to ships they


4to (p. 537 sg. ed. 8vo).
8 Francois Valentyn, Oud en nieuv
Oost-Indién, iii, 16.
# A. W. Nieuwenhuis, Zz Centraal
Borneo, i, 165.
I


114 TABOOED ACTS CHAP,


would not immediately use the things they obtained from
them, but hung them up in quarantine for weeks in the
bush."
Special When precautions like these are taken on_ behalf
precautoPs of the people in general against the malignant influence


taken to
soa the supposed to be exercised by strangers, it is no wonder
ni the that special measures are adopted to protect the king


magicof from the same insidious danger. In the middle ages the
strangers. a .
envoys who visited a Tartar Khan were obliged to pass
between two fires before they were admitted to his presence,
and the gifts they brought were also carried between the
fires. The reason assigned for the custom was that the fire
purged away any magic influence which the strangers might
mean to exercise over the Khan.” When subject chiefs come
with their retinues to visit Kalamba (the most powerful
chief of the Bashilange in the Congo Basin) for the first
time or after being rebellious, they have to bathe, men and
women together, in two brooks on two successive days,
passing the nights under the open sky in the market-place.
After the second bath they proceed, entirely naked, to the
house of Kalamba, who makes a long white mark on the
breast and forehead of each of them. Then they return to
the market-place and dress, after which they undergo the
pepper ordeal. Pepper is dropped into the eyes of each of
them, and while this is being done the sufferer has to make
a confession of all his sins, to answer all questions that may
be put to him, and to take certain vows. This ends the
ceremony, and the strangers are now free to take up their
quarters in the town for as long as they choose to remain.
Before strangers were admitted to the presence of Loben-
gula, king of the Matebeles, they had to be treated with
a sticky green medicine, which was profusely sprinkled
over them by means of a cow’s tail.‘ At Kilema, in.
1G, Turner, Samoa, pp. 305 sg. 8 Paul Pogge, ‘‘ Bericht iiber die
2 De Plano Carpini, //istorta Mon- Station Mukenge,” MMittheilungen der
golorum quos nos Tartaros appellamus,  Afrikanischen Gesellschaft in Deutsch-
ed, D’Avezac (Paris, 1838), cap. iii, §iii, /and, iv, (1883-1885) pp. 182 sg.
p. 627, cap. ult. § i. x. p. 744, and
Appendix, p. 775; ‘Travels of William 4 Coillard, ‘* Voyage au pays des
de Rubriquis into Tartary and China,” Banyaiset au Zambése,” Budletin de la


in Pinkerton’s Voyages and Travels, vii. Société de Géographie (Paris), VIme
$2 59. Série, xx. (1880) p. 393.


m1 TABOOS ON INTERCOURSE WITH STRANGERS 115


eastern Africa, when a stranger arrives, a medicine is
made out of a certain plant or a tree fetched from a
distance, mixed with the blood of a sheep or goat. With
this mixture the stranger is besmeared or besprinkled
before he is admitted to the presence of the king.’ The
king of Monomotapa, in South-East Africa, might not wear
any foreign stuffs for fear of their being poisoned.2 The
king of Cacongo, in West Africa, might not possess or even
touch European goods, except metals, arms, and articles
made of wood and ivory. Persons wearing foreign stuffs
were very careful to keep at a distance from his person, lest
they should touch him. The king of Loango might not
look upon the house of a white man. We have already
seen how the native king of Fernando Po dwells secluded
from all contact with the whites in the depths of an extinct
volcano, shunning the very sight of a pale face, which, in the
belief of his subjects, would be instantly fatal to him. Ina
wild mountainous district of Java, to the south of Bantam,
there exists a small aboriginal race who have been described
as a living antiquity. These are the Baduwis, who about
the year 1443 fled from Bantam to escape conversion to
Islam, and in their mountain fastnesses, holding aloof from
their neighbours, still cleave to the quaint and primitive ways
of their heathen forefathers. Their villages are perched in
spots which deep ravines, lofty precipices, raging torrents,
and impenetrable forests combine to render almost inaccess-
ible. Their hereditary ruler bears the title of Girang-Pu-un
and unites in his hands the temporal and spiritual power.
He must never quit the capital, and none even of his subjects
who live outside the town are ever allowed to see him.
Were an alien to set foot in his dwelling, the place would
be desecrated and abandoned. In former times the repre-
sentatives of the Dutch Government and the Regent of Java


1 J. L. Krapf, Travels, Researches, Kakongo,” etc., in Pinkerton’s Voyages


and Missionary Labours during an
Eighteen Years’ Residence in Eastern
Africa (London, 1860), pp. 252
59.

* O. Dapper, Description de l’A-
frigue (Amsterdam, 1686), p. 391.

3 Proyart, ‘History of Loango,


and Travels, xvi. 583; Dapper, of.
cit. p. 340; J. Ogilby, Africa (London,
1670), p. 521. Compare A. Bastian,
Die deutsche Expedition an der Loango-
Kiiste, i. 288:

4 A. Bastian, of. cit. i. 268 sg.

5 See above, pp. 8 sg.


116 TABOOED ACTS CHAP.


once paid a visit to the capital of the Baduwis. ‘That very
night all the people fled the place and never returned.’


§ 2. Taboos on Eating and Drinking


Spiritual In the opinion of savages the acts of eating and drinking
See cat are attended with special danger ; for at these times the soul
drinking may escape from the mouth, or be extracted by the magic
os arts of an enemy present. Among the Ewe-speaking peoples
taken of the Slave Coast “the common belief seems to be that the
‘indwelling spirit leaves the body and returns to it through


the mouth; hence, should it have gone out, it behoves a
man to be careful about opening his mouth, lest a homeless
spirit should take advantage of the opportunity and enter
his body. This, it appears, is considered most likely to take
place while the man is eating.”? Precautions are therefore
taken to guard against these dangers. Thus of the Battas
of Sumatra it is said that “since the soul can leave the body,
they always take care to prevent their soul from straying on
occasions when they have most need of it. But it is only
possible to prevent the soul from straying when one is in
the house. At feasts one may find the whole house shut
up, in order that the soul (¢omd7) may stay and enjoy the
good things set before it.”* The Zafimanelo in Madagascar
lock their doors when they eat, and hardly any one ever
sees them eating.* In Shoa, one of the southern provinces
of Abyssinia, the doors of the house are scrupulously barred
at meals to exclude the evil eye, and a fire is invariably
lighted, else devils would enter and there would be no
blessing on the meat.’ Every time that an Abyssinian of
rank drinks, a servant holds a cloth before his master to


1 L, von Ende, **Die Baduwis auf
Java,” Mittheilungen der anthropo-
logischen Gesellschaft in Wien, xix.
(1889) pp. 7-10. As to the Baduwis
(Badoejs) see also G, A. Wilken,
Handleiding voor de vergelijkende Vol-
kenkunde van Nederlandsch - Indié
(Leyden, 1893), pp. 640-643.

7A, B, Ellis, Zhe Lwe-speaking
Peoples of the Slave Coast, p. 107.

5 J. B. Neumann, ‘‘Het Pane- en
Bila-Stroomgebied op het eiland


Sumatra,” Ziydschrift van het Neder-

landsch Aardrijkskundig Genootschap,

Tweede Serie, dl. iii. (1886) Afdeel-

ing, meer uitgebreide artikelen, No. 2,
00,

‘ J. Richardson, ‘* Tanala Customs,
Superstitions and Beliefs,” Zhe An-
tananarivo Annual and Madagascar
Magasine, Reprint of the First Four
Numbers (Antananarivo, 1885), p. 219.

5 W. Cornwallis Harris, Zhe High-
lands of Aethiopia, iii, 171 sq.


iI TABOOS ON EATING AND DRINKING 117


guard him from the evil eye.’ The Warua will not allow
any one to see them eating and drinking, being doubly
particular that no person of the opposite sex shall see them
doing so. “I had to pay a man to let me see him drink ;
I could not make a man let a woman see him drink.”
When offered a drink of pombe they often ask that a cloth
may be held up to hide them whilst drinking. Further,
every man and woman must cook for themselves; each
person must have his own fire.” The Tuaregs of the
Sahara never eat or drink in presence of any one else.’
The Thompson Indians of British Columbia thought that a
shaman could bewitch them most easily when they were
eating, drinking, or smoking ; hence they avoided doing any
of these things in presence of an unknown shaman.’ In
Fiji persons who suspected others of plotting against them
avoided eating in their presence, or were careful to leave no
fragment of food behind.’

If these are the ordinary precautions taken by common Seclusion
people, the precautions taken by kings are extraordinary. pg. he:
The king of Loango may not be seen eating or drinking by
man or beast under pain of death. A favourite dog having
broken into the room where the king was dining, the king
ordered it to be killed on the spot. Once the king’s
own son, a boy of twelve years old, inadvertently saw the
king drink. Immediately the king ordered him to be finely
apparelled and feasted, after which he commanded him to
be cut in quarters, and carried about the city with a pro-
clamation that he had seen the king drink. “When the
king has a mind to drink, he has a cup of wine brought ; he
that brings it has a bell in his hand, and as soon as he has
delivered the cup to the king, he turns his face from him and
rings the bell, on which all present fall down with their faces
to the ground, and continue so till the king has drank... .


1 Th. Lefebvre, Voyage en Abys- de la Société de Géographie (Paris),


sinie, i, p. xxii.

2 Lieut. V. L. Cameron, Across
Africa (London, 1877), ii. 713 ¢d., in
Journal of the Anthropological Institute,
vi. (1877) p. 173.

3 Ebn-el-Dyn el-Eghouathy, ‘ Re-
lation d’un voyage dans V’intérieur
de l’Afrique septentrionale,” Bzdletin


IIme Série, i. (1834) p. 290.

4 J. Teit, ‘* The Thompson Indians
of British Columbia,” Memoir of the
American Museum of Natural History,
The Jesup North Pacific Expedition,
vol. i. part iv. (April 1900) p. 360.

5 Th. Williams, 7272 and the Fijians?
i. 249.


Seclusion
of kings at
their meals,


118 TABOOED ACTS CHAP.


His eating is much in the same style, for which he has a
house on purpose, where his victuals are set upon a bensa
or table: which he goes to, and shuts the door: when he
has done, he knocks and comes out. So that none ever see
the king eat or drink. For it is believed that if any one
should, the king shall immediately die.” The remnants of
his food are buried, doubtless to prevent them from falling
into the hands of sorcerers, who by means of these fragments
might cast a fatal spell over the monarch.’ The rules
observed by the neighbouring king of Cacongo were similar ;
it was thought that the king would die if any of his subjects
were to see him drink.? It is a capital offence to see the
king of Dahomey at his meals. When he drinks in public,
as he does on extraordinary occasions, he hides himself
behind a curtain, or handkerchiefs are held up round his
head, and all the people throw themsélves with their faces to
the earth.2 Any one who saw the Muata Jamwo (a great
potentate in the Congo Basin) eating or drinking would
certainly be put to death When the king (Muata) of
Cazembe raises his glass to his mouth to drink, all who are
present prostrate themselves and avert their faces in such a
manner as not to see him drinking.» At Asaba, on the
Lower Niger, where the kings or chiefs number fully four
hundred, no one is allowed to prepare the royal dishes.
The chiefs act as their own cooks and eat in the strictest
privacy.” The king and royal family of Walo, on the
Senegal, never take their meals in public; it is expressly
forbidden to see them eating.’ Among the Monbutto of
central Africa the king invariably takes his meals in


1 «¢ Adventures of Andrew Battel,”
in Pinkerton’s Voyages and Travels,
xvi. 330; O. Dapper, Description de
? Afrique, p. 330; A. Bastian, Dee
deutsche Expedition an der Loango-
Kuiste, i. 262 sg.; RR. F. Burton,
Abcokuta and the Cameroons Mountains,


Reade, Savage Africa, p. 543.

4 Paul Pogge, /m Retche des Muata
Jamwo (Berlin, 1880), p. 231.

5 F. T. Valdez, Stx Years of a
Traveller's Life in Western Africa
(London, 1861), ii. 256,


i. 147.

* Proyart’s ‘History of Loango,
Kakongo,” etc., in Pinkerton’s Voyages
and Travels, xvi. 584.

3 J. L. Wilson, Western Africa, p.
202; John Duncan, 7vavels in Western
Africa, i, 222. Compare W. W.


6 A, F. Mockler-Ferryman, Up the
Niger (London, 1892), p. 38.

7 Baron Roger, ‘Notice sur le
gouvernement, les moeurs et les super-
stitions des Négres du pays de Walo,”
Bulletin de la Société de Géographie
(Paris), viii, (1827) p. 351.


III TABOOS ON EATING AND DRINKING 119


private ; no one may see the contents of his dish, and all Seclusion
that he leaves is carefully thrown into a pit set apart for bose eo!
that purpose. Everything that the king has handled is
held sacred and may not be touched... When the king of
Unyoro in central Africa went to drink milk in the dairy,
every man must leave the royal enclosure and all the
women had to cover their heads till the king returned. No
one might see him drink. One wife accompanied him to
the dairy and handed him the milk-pot, but she turned
away her face while he drained it.2 The king of Susa,
a region to the south of Abyssinia, presides daily at the
feast in the long banqueting-hall, but is hidden from the
gaze of his subjects by a curtain.? Among the Ewe-speaking
peoples of the Slave Coast the person of the king is sacred,
and if he drinks in public every one must turn away the
head so as not to see him, while some of the women of the
court hold up a cloth before him as a screen. He never
eats in public, and the people pretend to believe that he
neither eats nor sleeps. It is criminal to say the contrary.‘
When the king of Tonga ate, all the people turned their
backs to him. In the palace of the Persian kings there
were two dining-rooms opposite each other ; in one of them
the king dined, in the other his guests. He could see them
through a curtain on the door, but they could not see him.
Generally the king took his meals alone; but sometimes his


wife or some of his sons dined


1G. Schweinfurth, Zhe Heart of
Africa, ii. 45 (third edition, London,
1878); G. Casati, Zen Years in
£quatoria (London and New York,
1891), i. 177. As to the various
customs observed by Monbutto chiefs
in drinking see G. Burrows, 7he Land
of the Pigmies (London, 1898), pp.
88, 9I.

2 J. G. Frazer, Zotemism and Exo-
gamy, ii, 526, from information
furnished by the Rev. John Roscoe.

3 W. Cornwallis Harris, Zhe High-
lands of Aethiopia, iii. 78.

4A. B. Ellis, Zhe Lwe-speaking


with him.®


Peoples of the Slave Coast, pp. 162 sg.

5 Capt. James Cook, Voyages, v.
374 (ed. 1809).

6 Heraclides Cumanus, in Athenaeus,
iv. 26, p. 145 B-D. On the other hand,
in Kafa no one, not even the king, may
eat except in the presence of a legal
witness. A slave is appointed to wit-
ness the king’s meals, and his office
is esteemed honourable. See F. G.
Massaja, in Bulletin de la Société de
Géographie (Paris), WVme Série, i.
(1861) pp. 330 sg.; Ph. Paulitschke,
Ethnographie Nordost-Afrikas: die
geistige Cultur der Dané&kil, Galla und
Somdl (Berlin, 1896), pp. 248 sg.


Faces
veiled to
avert evil
influences.


120


TABOOED ACTS CHAP.


§ 3. Taboos on shewing the Face


In some of the preceding cases the intention of eating
and drinking in strict seclusion may perhaps be to hinder
evil influences from entering the body rather than to pre-
vent the escape of the soul. -This certainly is the motive
of some drinking customs observed by natives of the
Congo region. Thus we are told of these people that
“there is hardly a native who would dare to swallow a
liquid without first conjuring the spirits. One of them
rings a bell all the time he is drinking ; another crouches
down and places his left hand on the earth; another veils
his head ; another puts a stalk of grass or a leaf in his
hair, or marks his forehead with a line of clay. This fetish
custom assumes very varied forms. To explain them, the
black is satisfied to say that they are an energetic mode of
conjuring spirits.” In this part of the world a chief will
commonly ring a bell at each draught of beer which he
swallows, and at the same moment a lad stationed in front
of him brandishes a spear “ to keep at bay the spirits which
might try to sneak into the old chief's body by the same
road as the massanga (beer).”* |The same motive of
warding off evil spirits probably explains the custom
observed by some African sultans of veiling their faces.
The Sultan of Darfur wraps up his face with a piece of white
muslin, which goes round his head several times, covering
his mouth and nose first, and then his forehead, so that only
his eyes are visible. The same custom of veiling the face
as a mark of sovereignty is said to be observed in other
parts of central Africa? The Sultan of Wadai always
speaks from behind a curtain; no one sees his face except
his intimates and a few favoured persons.’ Similarly the
Sultan of Bornu never shewed himself to his people and


1 Notes analytiques sur les collec-
tions ethnographiques du Musée du
Congo, 1. Les Arts, Religion (Brussels,
1902-1906), p. 164,

* Mohammed Ibn-Omar el Tounsy,
Voyage au Darfour (Paris, 1845), p.
203; TZyravels of an Arab Merchant


{Mohammed Ibn-Omar el Tounsy] 7
Soudan, abridged from the French
(of Perron) by Bayle St. John (London,
1854), Pp. 91 sg.

8 Mohammed Ibn-Omar el Tounsy,
Voyage au Ouaddy (Paris, 1851), p.
375.


ul TABOOS ON SHEWING THE FACE 121


only spoke to them from behind a curtain." The king of Kings nox
Chonga, a town on the right bank of the Niger above Egga, oe
may not be seen by his subjects nor by strangers. At an subjects.
interview he sits in his palace concealed by a mat which
hangs like a curtain, and from behind it he converses with
his visitor.2 The Muysca Indians of Colombia had such a
respect for their chiefs that they dared not lift their eyes on
them, but always turned their backs when they had to
address them. If a thief, after repeated punishments, proved
incorrigible, they took him to the chief, and one of the nobles,
turning the culprit round, said to him, “Since you think
yourself so great a lord that you have the right to break the
laws, you have the right to look at the chief.” From that
moment the criminal was regarded as infamous. Nobody
would have anything to do with him or even speak to him,
and he died an outcast.2 Montezuma was revered by his
subjects as a god, and he set so much store on their
reverence that if on going out of the city he saw a man
lift up his eyes on him, he had the rash gazer put to death.
He generally lived in the retirement of his palace, seldom
shewing himself. On the days when he went to visit his
gardens, he was carried in a litter through a street which
was enclosed by walls; none but his bearers had the right
to pass along that street. It was a law of the Medes that
their king should be seen by nobody.® The king of Jebu,
on the Slave Coast of West Africa, is surrounded by a great
deal of mystery. Until lately his face might not be seen
even by his own subjects, and if circumstances compelled
him to communicate with them he did so through a screen
which concealed him from view. Now, though his face may
be seen, it is customary to hide his body; and at audiences
a cloth is held before him so as to conceal him from the
neck downwards, and it is raised so as to cover him altogether
whenever he coughs, sneezes, spits, or takes snuff. His face


1 Ibn Batoutah, Voyages, ed. C.
Defrémery et B. R. Sanguinetti (Paris,
1853-1858), iv. 441.

2 Le Commandant Mattei, Aas-
Niger, Bénoué, Dahomey (Paris, 1895),
Pp: 99 sg.

8-H. Ternaux-Compans, Zssaz sur


Pancien Cundinamarca, p. 60.

* Manuscrit Ramirez, histoire de
Porigine des Indiens gui habitent la
Nouvelle Espagne selon leurs traditions,
publié par D. Charnay (Paris, 1903),
pp. 107 sg.

5 Herodotus, i. 99.


Faces, and
especially
mouths,
veiled to
avert evil
influences.


122 TABOOED ACTS CHAP.


is partially hidden by a conical cap with hanging strings of
beads. Amongst the Tuaregs of the Sahara all the men
(but not the women) keep the lower part of their face,
especially the mouth, veiled constantly; the veil is never
put off, not even in eating or sleeping.” Among the Arabs
men remarkable for their good looks have been known to
veil their faces, especially at festivals and markets, in order
to protect themselves against the evil eye.® The same
reason may explain the custom of muffling their faces which
has been observed by Arab women from the earliest times *
and by the women of Boeotian Thebes in antiquity.® In
Samoa a man whose family god was the turtle might not
eat a turtle, and if he helped a neighbour to cut up and
cook one he had to wear a bandage tied over his mouth lest
an embryo turtle should slip down his throat, grow up, and
be his death.© In West Timor a speaker holds his right
hand before his mouth in speaking lest a demon should
enter his body, and lest the person with whom he converses
should harm the speaker’s soul by magic.’ In New South
Wales for some time after his initiation into the tribal
mysteries, a young blackfellow (whose soul at this time is in
a critical state) must always cover his mouth with a rug when
a woman is present.6 We have already seen how common is
the notion that the life or soul may escape by the mouth or
nostrils.®


§ 4. Taboos on quitting the House


By an extension of the like precaution kings are some-
times forbidden ever to leave their palaces; or, if they are


1 A. B. Ellis, Zhe Yoruba-speaking
Peoples of the Slave Coast, p. 170.

* Ebn-el-Dyn el-Eghouathy, ‘ Re-
lation d’un voyage,” Bulletin de la
Société de Géographie (Paris), IIme
Série, i. (1834) p. 2900; H. Duvey-
rier, Lxploration du Sahara: les Toua-
reg du Nord, pp. 391 sg.3; Reclus,
Nouvelle Géographie Universelle, xi.
838 sg.; James Richardson, 7ravels
in the Great Desert of Sahara, ii. 208.

5 J. Wellhausen, Reste arabischen
Heidentums* (Berlin, 1897), p. 196.

§ Tertullian, De virginibus velandis,
17 (Migne’s Patrologia Latina, ii.


col. 912).

5 Pseudo - Dicaearchus, Descriptio
Graeciae, 18, in Geographt Graeci
Minores, ed. C. Miiller, i. 103; za,
in Fragmenta Historicorum Graecorum,
ed. C. Miiller, ii, 259.

6 G. Turner, Samoa, pp. 67 sg.

7 J. G. F. Riedel, ** Die Landschaft
Dawan oder West-Timor,” Deutsche
geographische Blitter, x. 230.

8 A, W. Howitt, ‘*On some Aus-
tralian Ceremonies of Initiation,”
Journal of the Anthropological Insti-
tute, xiii, (1884) p. 456.

9 Above, pp. 30 sgg.


Il TABOOS ON QUITTING THE HOUSE 123


allowed to do so, their subjects are forbidden to see them Kings for-
abroad. We have seen that the priestly king at Shark Paden te
Point, West Africa, may never quit his house or even his palaces or


chair, in which he is obliged to sleep sitting; and that the pease ge
king of Fernando Po, whom no white man may see, is their sub-
reported to be confined to his house with shackles on hie
legs.| The fetish king of Benin, who was worshipped as a
deity by his subjects, might not quit his palace.’ After his
coronation the king of Loango is confined to his palace,
which he may not leave® The king of Onitsha, on the
Niger, “does not step out of his house into the town unless

a human sacrifice is made to propitiate the gods: on this
account he never goes out beyond the precincts of his
premises.”* Indeed we are told that he may not quit his
palace under pain of death or of giving up one or more
slaves to be executed in his presence. As the wealth of the
country is measured in slaves, the king takes good care not

to infringe the law. One day the monarch, charmed by
some presents which he had received from a French officer,
politely attended his visitor to the gate, and in a moment of
forgetfulness was about to break bounds, when his chamber-
lain, seizing his majesty by his legs, and his wives, friends,
and servants rushing up, prevented him from taking so fatal

a step. Yet once a year at the Feast of Yams the king is
allowed, and even required by custom, to dance before his
people outside the high mud wall of the palace. In dancing

he carries a great weight, generally a sack of earth, on his
back to prove that he is still able to support the burden and
cares of state. Were he unable to discharge this duty, he
would be immediately deposed and perhaps stoned.? The


1 See above, pp. 5, 8 sg.

2 This rule was mentioned to me in
conversation by Miss Mary H. Kingsley.
However, he is said to have shewn
himself outside his palace on solemn
occasions once or twice a year. See
O. Dapper, Description de ? Afrique,
pp. 311 sg.; H. Ling Roth, Great
Benin, p. 74. As to the worship of the
king of Benin, see Zhe Magic Art and
the Evolution of Kings, vol. i. p. 396.

3 A, Bastian, Die deutsche Expedt-
tion an der Loango- Kiiste, i. 263.


However, a case is recorded in which he
marched out to war (zdzd. i. 268 sg.).

4S. Crowther and J. C. Taylor,
The Gospel on the Banks of the Niger
(London, 1859), p. 433-

5 Le Commandant Mattei, Bas-
Niger, Bénoué, Dahomey (Paris, 1895),
pp. 67-72. The annual dance of the
king of Onitsha outside of his palace
is mentioned also by S. Crowther and
J. C. Taylor (of. cét. p. 379), and
A. F. Mockler-Ferryman (Up the
Niger, p. 22).


Kings for-
bidden to
leave their
palaces or
to be seen
abroad

by their
subjects.


124 TABOOED ACTS CHAP.


Tomas or Habes, a hardy race of mountaineers who inhabit
Mount Bandiagara in Nigeria, revere a great fetish doctor
called the Ogom, who is not suffered to quit his house on
any pretext.. Among the natives of the Cross River in
Southern Nigeria the sacred chiefs of certain villages are
confined to their compounds, that is, to the enclosures in
which their houses are built. Such chiefs may be confined
for years within these narrow bounds. “Among these
primitive people, the head chief is often looked upon as half
divine, the human representative of their ancestral god. He
regulates their religious rites, and is by some tribes believed
to have the power of making rain fall when they require
it, and of bringing them good harvests. So, being of
such value to the community, he is not permitted,
except on very rare occasions, to go outside his compound,
lest evil should befall him, and the whole town have
to suffer.”” The kings of Ethiopia were worshipped as
gods, but were mostly kept shut up in their palaces.? On
the mountainous coast of Pontus there dwelt in antiquity a
rude and warlike people named the Mosyni or Mosynoeci,
through whose rugged country the Ten Thousand marched
on their famous retreat from Asia to Europe. These
barbarians kept their king in close custody at the top of
a high tower, from which after his election he was never
more allowed to descend. Here he dispensed justice to his
people; but if he offended them, they punished him by
stopping his rations for a whole day, or even starving him
to death. The kings of Sabaea or Sheba, the spice country
of Arabia, were not allowed to go out of their palaces ; if they
did so, the mob stoned them to death. But at the top of


1 «¢ Mission Voulet-Chanoine,” Bu/-
letin de la Société de Géographie (Paris),
VilIme Série, xx. (1899) p. 223.

2 C. Partridge, Cross River Natives
(London, 1905), p. 7; compare 7d, pp.
8, 200, 202, 203 sg. See also Major
A. G, Leonard, 7he Lower Niger and
tts Tribes (London, 1906), pp. 371 sg.

3 Strabo, xvii. 2, 2 o¢Bovra 8 ws
Geods robs Bagidas, Karaxdelorous bvras
Kal olxovpods 7d mdéov,

4 Xenophon, Anadasis, v. 4. 26;
Scymnus Chius, Ordis deseriptio, 900


gq. (Geographt Graecit Minores, ed. C.
Miller, i. 234); Diodorus Siculus,
xiv. 30. 6 sg. ; Nicolaus Damascenus,
quoted by Stobeaus, /Vortlegdum, xliv.
41 (vol. ii, p. 185, ed. Meineke) ;
Apollonius Rhodius, Argon. ii. 1026,
$gg-, With the note of the scholiast ;
Pomponius Mela, i, 106, p. 29, ed.
Parthey, Die Chrysostom refers to the
custom without mentioning the name
of the people (Ov. xiv. vol. i, p. 257,
ed. L. Dindorf).

§ Strabo, xvi. 4.19, p.778; Diodorus


I TABOOS ON QUITTING THE HOUSE 125


the palace there was a window with a chain attached to it. Kings for-

If any man deemed he had suffered wrong, he pulled the pida*

chain, and the king perceived him and called him in and palaces or
y 1 a . to be seen

gave judgment.’ So down to recent times the kings of soa4

Corea, whose persons were sacred and received “honours by their

almost divine,” were shut up in their palace from the age of sae ae

twelve or fifteen ; and if a suitor wished to obtain justice of

the king he sometimes lit a great bonfire on a mountain

facing the palace; the king saw the fire and informed

himself of the case.” The Emperor of China seldom quits

his palace, and when he does so, no one may look at him;

even the guards who line the road must turn their backs.®

The king of Tonquin was permitted to appear abroad twice

or thrice a year for the performance of certain religious

ceremonies; but the people were not allowed to look at

him. The day before he came forth notice was given to all

the inhabitants of the city and country to keep from the

way the king was to go; the women were obliged to remain

in their houses and durst not shew themselves under pain of

death, a penalty which was carried out on the spot if any

one disobeyed the order, even through ignorance. Thus the

king was invisible to all but his troops and the officers of

his suite. In Mandalay a stout lattice-paling, six feet high

and carefully kept in repair, lined every street in the walled


Siculus, iii. 47. Inscriptions found in Cored (Paris, 1874), i. pp. xxiv-xxvi.


Sheba (the country about two hundred
miles north of Aden) seem to shew
that the land was at first ruled by a
succession of priestly kings, who were
afterwards followed by kings in the
ordinary sense. The names of many
of these priestly kings (makarribs, liter-
ally ‘‘blessers”) are preserved in in-
scriptions. See Prof. S. R. Driver, in
Authority and Archaeology Sacred and
Profane, edited by D. G. Hogarth
(London, 1899), p. 82. Probably these
‘* blessers ” are the kings referred to by
the Greek writers. We may suppose
that the blessings they dispensed con-
sisted in a proper regulation of the
weather, abundance of the fruits of the
earth, and so on.

1 Heraclides Cumanus, in Athenaeus,
xii. 13, Pp. 517 B.C.

2 Ch. Dallet, Histoire de PEglise de


The king sometimes, though rarely,
left his palace. When he did so, notice
was given beforehand to his people.
All doors must be shut and each house-
holder must kneel before his threshold
with a broom and a dust-pan in his
hand. All windows, especially the
upper ones, must be sealed with slips
of paper, lest some one should look
down upon the king. See W. E.
Griffis, Corea, the Hermit Nation, p.
222. These customs are now obsolete
(G. N. Curzon, Problems of the Far
Last, Westminster, 1896, pp. 154 sg.
note).

3 This I learned from the late Mr.
W. Simpson, formerly artist of the
Illustrated London News.

4 Richard, ‘‘ History of Tonquin,”
in Pinkerton’s Voyages ana Travels,
ix. 746.


Australia.


126 TABOOED ACTS _. CHAP.


city and all those streets in the suburbs through which the
king was likely at any time to pass. Behind this paling,
which stood two feet or so from the houses, all the people
had to stay when the king or any of the queens went out.
Any one who was caught outside it by the beadles after the
procession had started was severely handled, and might
think himself lucky if he got off with a beating. Nobody
was supposed to peep through the holes in the lattice-work,
which were besides partly stopped up with flowering shrubs.’


§ 5. Zaboos on leaving Food over


Again, magic mischief may be wrought upon a man
through the remains of the food he has partaken-of, or the
dishes out of which he has eaten. On the principles of
sympathetic magic a real connexion continues to subsist
between the food which a man has in his stomach and the
refuse of it which he has left untouched, and hence by
injuring the refuse you can simultaneously injure the eater.
Among the Narrinyeri of South Australia every adult is
constantly on the look-out for bones of beasts, birds, or fish,


i of which the flesh has been eaten by somebody, in order to


construct a deadly charm out of them. Every one is there-
fore careful to burn the bones of the animals which he has
eaten lest they should fall into the hands of a sorcerer. Too
often, however, the sorcerer succeeds in getting hold of such
a bone, and when he does so he believes that he has the
power of life and death over the man, woman, or child who
ate the flesh of the animal. To put the charm in operation
he makes a paste of red ochre and fish oil, inserts in it the
eye of a cod and a small piece of the flesh of a corpse, and
having rolled the compound into a ball sticks it on the top
of the bone. After being left for some time in the bosom of
a dead body, in order that it may derive a deadly potency
by contact with corruption, the magical implement is set up
in the ground near the fire, and as the ball melts, so the
person against whom the charm is directed wastes with
disease ; if the ball is melted quite away, the victim will die.


1 Shway Yoe, 7he Burman (London, 1882), i, 30 sg.; compare Judian Anti-
quary, xx. (1891) p. 49.


II TABOOS ON LEAVING FOOD OVER 127


When the bewitched man learns of the spell that is being
cast upon him, he endeavours to buy the bone’ from the
sorcerer, and if he obtains it he breaks the charm by throwing
the bone into a river or lake.’ Further, the Narrinyeri think
that if a man eats of the totem animal of his tribe, and an
enemy obtains a portion of the flesh, the latter can make it
grow in the inside of the eater, and so cause his death.
Therefore when a man partakes of his totem he is careful
either to eat it all or else to conceal or destroy the refuse.”
In the Encounter Bay tribe of South Australia, when a man
cannot get the bone of an animal which his enemy has eaten,
he cooks a bird, beast, or fish, and keeping back one of the
creature’s bones, offers the rest under the guise of friendship
to his enemy. If the man is simple enough to partake of
the proffered food, he is at the mercy of his perfidious foe, who
can kill him by placing the abstracted bone near the fire.’

Ideas and practices of the same sort prevail, or used to Ideas and
prevail, in Melanesia; all that was needed to injure a Sotoms
man was to bring the leavings of his food into contact leavings
with a malignant ghost or spirit. Hence in the island of {)/00¢™
Florida when a scrap of an enemy’s dinner was secreted and New
and thrown into a haunted place, the man was supposed
to fall ill; and in the New Hebrides if a snake of a certain
sort carried away a fragment of food to a spot sacred to
a spirit, the man who had eaten the food would sicken as
the fragment decayed. In Aurora the refuse is made up by
the wizard with certain leaves; as these rot and stink, the
man dies. Hence it is, or was, a constant care with the
Melanesians to prevent the remains of their meals from
falling into the hands of persons who bore them a grudge;
for this reason they regularly gave the refuse of food to


the pigs.


1G, Taplin, ‘The Narrinyeri,” in
Native Tribes of South Australia
(Adelaide, 1879), pp. 24-26; zd@., in E.
M. Curr, Zhe Australian Race, ii. p.
247.

2G. Taplin, ‘*The Narrinyeri,”
in Native Tribes of South Australia,
p- 63; za@., *‘Notes on the Mixed
Races of Australia,” Journal of the
Anthropological Institute, iv. (1875) p.


In Tana, one of the New Hebrides, people bury


53; z@.,in E. M. Curr, Zhe Australian
Race, ii. 245.

3 H. E. A. Meyer, ‘‘ Manners and
Customs of the Aborigines of the
Encounter Bay Tribe,” in ative
Tribes of South Australia, p. 196.

4 R. H. Codrington, Zhe Melan-
esians, pp. 203 sg., compare pp. 178,


188, 214.


Ideas and
customs
as to the
leavings
of food in
Melanesia
and New
Guinea.


128 TABOOED ACTS CHAP.


or throw into the sea the leavings of their food, lest these
should fall into the hands of the disease-makers. For if
a disease-maker finds the remnants of a meal, say the skin
of a banana, he picks it up and burns it slowly in the fire.
As it burns, the person who ate the banana falls ill and sends
to the disease-maker, offering him presents if he will stop
burning the banana skin.’ In German New Guinea the
natives take the utmost care to destroy or conceal the husks
and other remains of their food, lest these should be found
by their enemies and used by them for the injury or de-
struction of the eaters. Hence they burn their leavings,
throw them into the sea, or otherwise put them out of
harm’s way. To such an extent does this fear influence
them that many people dare not stir beyond the territory of
their own village, lest they should leave behind them on the
land of their neighbours something by means of which a
hostile sorcerer might do them a mischief.? Similar fears
have led to similar customs in New Britain and the other
islands of what is now called the Bismarck Archipelago, off
the north coast of New Guinea. There also the natives bury,
burn, or throw into the sea the remains of their meals to
prevent them from falling into the hands of magicians ;
there also the more superstitious of them will not eat in
another village because they dread the use which a sorcerer
might make of their leavings when their back is turned,
This theory has led to an odd practical result ; all the cats
in the islands of the Archipelago go about with stumpy tails.
The reason of the peculiarity is this. The natives sometimes
roast and eat their cats; and unscrupulous persons might
be tempted to steal a neighbour’s cat in order to furnish
a meal. Accordingly, in the interests of the higher morality
people remove this stumbling-block from the path of their
weaker brothers by docking their cats of a piece of their
tails and keeping the severed portions in a secret place. If


1G, Turner, Samoa, pp. 302 sg. Section, ein Beitrag zur Ethnographie
See The Magic Art and the Evolution der Neu-Guinea Kiiste,” /nternationales
of Kings, i. 341 sg. Archiv fiir Ethnographie, xiii, (1900)
p. 44; M. J. Erdweg, ‘* Die Bewohner
2 K. Vetter, Komm heriiber und hilf der Insel Tumleo, Berlinhafen, Deutsch-
uns! iii, (Barmen, 1898) p. 9; M. Neu-~ Guinea,” Aittheilungen der
Krieger, Neu- Guinea, pp. 185 sg.; Anthropologischen Geselischaftin Wien,
R, Parkinson, ‘Die  Berlinhafen  xxxii. (1902) p. 287.


111 TABOOS ON LEAVING FOOD OVER 129


now a cat is stolen and eaten, the lawful owner of:the animal
has it in his power to avenge the crime: he neeci only bury
the piece of tail with certain spells in the ground, and the
thief will fall ill. Hence a man will herdly dare to
steal and eat a cat with a stumpy tail, knowing the
righteous retribution that would sooner @r later over-
take him for so doing.’

From a like fear, no doubt, of sorcery, no one may Ideas and
touch the food which the king of Loango leaves upon Sutoms
his plate ; it is buried in a hole in the grounyi. And no one leavings
may drink out of the king’s vessel.? Similaryy, no man may yo 5
drink out of the same cup or glass with the king of Fida Celebes,
(Whydah) in Guinea ; “he hath always one }ept particularly "4% #4
for himself ; and that which hath but once jouched another’s Rome.
lips he never uses more, though it be made ct metal that may
be cleansed by fire.”® Amongst the Alfoors of Celebes
there is a priest called the Le/een, whose dyty appears to be
to make the rice grow. His functions begin about a month
before the rice is sown, and end after the crop is housed.
During this time he has to observe certain taboos ; amongst
others he may not eat or drink with any one else, and he
may drink out of no vessel but his own.t An ancient
Indian way of injuring an enemy was to offer him a meal
of rice and afterwards throw the remains of the rice into a
fishpond ; if the fish swam up in large numbers to devour
the grains, the man’s fate was sealed.2 In antiquity the
Romans used immediately to break the shells of eggs and of
snails which they had eaten in order to prevent enemies
from making magic with them. The common practice,


1 Mgr. Couppé, ‘‘En Nouvelle-


4 P. N. Wilken, “ Bijdragen tot de
Poméranie,” Aisstons  Catholigues,


kennis van de zeden en gewoonten


xxiii. (1891) p. 364; J. Graf Pfeil,
Studien und Beobachtungen aus der
Stidsee (Brunswick, 1899), pp. 141 5¢.;
P. A. Kleintitschen, Dze visten-
bewohner der Gazellehalbinsel (Hiltrup
bei Miinster, N.D.), pp. 343 sg.

2 O. Dapper, Descriptionde? Afrique,
p- 330. We have seen that the food
left by the king of the Monbutto, is
carefully buried (above, p. 119).

3 Bosman’s ‘‘ Guinea,” in Pinker-
ton’s Voyages and Travels, xvi. 487.

PT. II


der Alfoeren in de Minahassa,” A/ede-
deelingen van wege het Nederlandsche
Zendelinggenootschap, vii. (1863) p.
126.

5 W. Caland, Altindisches Zauber-
ritual, pp. 163 sg.

6 Pliny, Wat. Hist. xxviii. 19. For
other examples of witchcraft wrought
by means of the refuse of food, see
E. S. Hartland, Zhe Legend of Perseus,
ii. 83 sgg.

K


130 TABOOED ACTS CHAP. III


still observed among us, of breaking egg-shells after the
eggs have been eaten may very well have originated in the
same superstition.
The fear The superstitious fear of the magic that may be wrought
shod on a man rir puigh the leavings of his food has had the
evil which beneficial effect, of inducing many savages to destroy refuse
may be an Which, if left \to rot, might through its corruption have
through = proved a real, not a merely imaginary, source of disease
his food ae oe : eis
hashad and death. Nor is it only the sanitary condition of a
= aaa tribe which has benefited by this superstition ; curiously
fostering enough the same baseless dread, the same false notion of
ecto causation, has indirectly strengthened the moral bonds of
andin hospitality, hon@ur, and good faith among men who enter-
ey aa tain it. For it is obvious that no one who intends to
tiesof | harm a man by working magic on the refuse of his food
hospitality. 1] himself partake of that food, because if he did so
he would, on the principles of sympathetic magic, suffer
equally with his enemy from any injury done to the
refuse. This is the idea which in primitive society lends
sanctity to the bond produced by eating together; by
participation in the same food two men give, as it were,
hostages for their good behaviour; each guarantees the
other that he will devise no mischief against him, since,
being physically united with him by the common food in
their stomachs, any harm he might do to his fellow would
recoil on his own head with precisely the same force with
which it fell on the head of his victim. In strict logic,
however, the sympathetic bond lasts only so long as the
food is in the stomach of each of the parties. Hence the
covenant formed by eating together is less solemn and
durable than the covenant formed by transfusing the blood
of the covenanting parties into each other’s veins, for this
transfusion seems to knit them together for life.’

1 On the covenant entered into by _ of the blood-covenant, see H. C, Trum-
eating together see the classical ex- bull, Zhe Blood Covenant (London,
position of W. Robertson Smith, 74e 1887). The examples might easily be
Religion of the Semites* (London, multiplied,

1894), pp. 269 sgg. For examples


CHAPTER IV
TABOOED PERSONS


§ 1. Chiefs and Kings tabooed


WE have seen that the Mikado’s food was cooked every Disastrous
day in new pots and served up in new dishes; both pots peso Pat
and dishes were of common clay, in order that they might follow from
be broken or laid aside after they had been once used, S08 ‘he
They were generally broken, for it was believed that if any the Mikado
one else ate his food out of these sacred dishes, his mouth rien.
and throat would become swollen and inflamed. The same chief.
ill effect was thought to be experienced by any one who
should wear the Mikado’s clothes without his leave; he
would have swellings and pains all over his body.’ In Fiji
there is a special name (4ana /ama) for the disease supposed
to be caused by eating out of a chief’s dishes or wearing his
clothes. “The throat and body swell, and the impious
person dies. I had a fine mat given to me by a man who
durst not use it because Thakambau’s eldest son had sat
upon it. There was always a family or clan of commoners
who were exempt from this danger. I was talking about
this once to Thakambau. ‘Oh yes, said he. ‘ Here, So-and-
so! come and scratch my back. The man scratched; he
was one of those who could do it with impunity.” The -
name of the men thus highly privileged was Na nduka ni,
or the dirt of the chief.
In the evil effects thus supposed to follow upon the use

1 Kaempfer’s ‘‘ History of Japan,” me dated August 26, r898. In Fijian,

in Pinkerton’s Voyages and Travels, kana is to eat; the meaning of Jama is


vii. 7173 unknown.
2 Rev. Lorimer Fison, in a letter to


131


Sacred per-
sons area
source of
danger to
others :
their
divinity
burns like a
fire what it
touches.


African
examples.


132 TABOOED PERSONS CHAP.


of the vessels or clothes of the Mikado and a Fijian chief
we see that other side of the god-man’s character to which
attention has been already called. The divine person is a
source of danger as well as of blessing; he must not only
be guarded, he must also be guarded against. His sacred
organism, so delicate that a touch may disorder it, is also,
as it were, electrically charged with a powerful magical or
spiritual force which may discharge itself with fatal effect
on whatever comes in contact with it. Accordingly the
isolation of the man-god is quite as necessary for the safety
of others as for his own. His magical virtue is in the
strictest sense of the word contagious: his divinity is a
fire, which, under proper restraints, confers endless bless-
ings, but, if rashly touched or allowed to break bounds,
burns and destroys what it touches. Hence the disastrous
effects supposed to attend a breach of taboo; the offender
has thrust his hand into the divine fire, which shrivels
up and consumes him on the spot. The Nubas, for ex-
ample, who inhabit the wooded and fertile range of Jebel
Nuba in eastern Africa, believe that they would die if they
entered the house of their priestly king; however they
can evade the penalty of their intrusion by baring the left
shoulder and getting the king to lay his hand on it. And
were any man to sit on a stone which the king has
consecrated to his own use, the transgressor would die
within the year." The Cazembes, in the interior of Angola,
regard their king (the J/wata or Mambo) as so holy that no
one can touch him without being killed by the magical
power which pervades his sacred person. But since contact
with him is sometimes unavoidable, they have devised a
means whereby the sinner can escape with his life. Kneeling
down before the king he touches the back of the royal hand


1 «Coutumes étranges des indigénes
du Djebel-Nouba,” AZissions Catho-
liques, xiv. (1882) p. 460; Father S.
Carceri, ‘* Djebel-Nouba,” zd¢d. xv.
(1883) p. 450. The title of the


on whom all depend. But he has no
princely privileges or immunities; no
royal insignia, no badge mark him off
from his subjects. He lives like them
by the produce of his fields and his


priestly king is cogiour or codjour.
‘*The codjour is the pontifical king of
each group of villages; it is he who
regulates and administers the affairs of
the Nubas., He is an absolute monarch,


industry ; he works like them, earns
his daily bread, and has no guard of
honour, no tribunal, no code of laws,
no civil list” (Father S, Carceri, /oc,
cit.)


~


IV CHIEFS AND KINGS TABOOED 133


with the back of his own, then snaps his fingers ; afterwards
he lays the palm of his hand on the palm of the king’s
hand, then snaps his fingers again. This ceremony is
repeated four or five times, and averts the imminent danger
of death... In Tonga it was believed that if any one fed
himself with his own hands after touching the sacred person
of a superior chief or anything that belonged to him, he
would swell up and die; the sanctity of the chief, like a
virulent poison, infected the hands of his inferior, and, being
communicated through them to the food, proved fatal to the
eater. A commoner who had incurred this danger could
disinfect himself by performing a certain ceremony, which
consisted in touching the sole of a chief’s foot with the palm
and back of each of his hands, and afterwards rinsing his
hands in water. If there was no water near, he rubbed his
hands with the juicy stem of a plantain or banana. After
that he was free to feed himself with his own hands without
danger of being attacked by the malady which would other-
wise follow from eating with tabooed or sanctified hands.
But until the ceremony of expiation or disinfection had been
performed, if he wished to eat, he had either to get some
one to feed him, or else to go down on his knees and pick
up the food from the ground with his mouth like a beast.
He might not even use a toothpick himself, but might guide
the hand of another person holding the toothpick. The
Tongans were subject to induration of the liver and certain
forms of scrofula, which they often attributed to a failure to
perform the requisite expiation after having inadvertently
touched a chief or his belongings. Hence they often went
through the ceremony as a precaution, without knowing that
they had done anything to call for it. The king of Tonga
could not refuse to play his part in the rite by presenting
his foot to such as desired to touch it, even when they
applied to him at an inconvenient time. A fat unwieldy
king, who perceived his subjects approaching with this
intention, while he chanced to be taking his walks abroad,


1 «Der Muata Cazembe und die Zrdkunde (Berlin), vi. (1856) pp.
Volkerstimme der Maravis, Chevas, 398 sg.; F. T. Valdez, Six Years of a


Muembas, Lundas und andere von JTvyaveller’s Life in Western Africa


Siid-Afrika,” Zectschreft fiir allgemeine (London, 1861), ii. 251 sg.


The taboo
of chiefs

and kings
in Tonga.


The King’s and that he might not swell up and die.’
Evil cured


by the
king's
touch.


Fatal


effects of


contact


134


TABOOED PERSONS


CHAP.


has been sometimes seen to waddle as fast as his legs could
carry him out of their way, in order to escape the impor-
tunate and not wholly disinterested expression of their


homage.


If any one fancied he might have already un-


wittingly eaten with tabooed hands, he sat down before the
chief, and, taking the chief’s foot, pressed it against his own
stomach, that the food in his belly might not injure him,


Since scrofula was


regarded by the Tongans as a result of eating with tabooed
hands, we may conjecture that persons who suffered from it
among them often resorted to the touch or pressure of the
king’s foot as a cure for their malady. The analogy of the
custom with the old English practice of bringing scrofulous
patients to the king to be healed by his touch is sufficiently
obvious, and suggests, as I have already pointed out elsewhere,
that among our own remote ancestors scrofula may have
obtained its name of the King’s Evil, from a belief, like
that of the Tongans, that it was caused as well as cured
by contact with the divine majesty of kings.”

In New Zealand the dread of the sanctity of chiefs was


at least as great as in Tonga.


Their ghostly power, derived


with sacred from an ancestral spirit or atua, diffused itself by contagion
over everything they touched, and could strike dead all who


chiefs in
New
Zealand.


rashly or unwittingly meddled with it®


For instance, it


once happened that a New Zealand chief of high rank and
great sanctity had left the remains of his dinner by the


wayside.


A slave, a stout, hungry fellow, coming up after


the chief had gone, saw the unfinished dinner, and ate it


up without asking questions.


1 W. Mariner, 7he Natives of the
Tonga Islands,® i. 141 sg. note, 434
note, ii, 82 sg., 221-224; Captain J.
Cook, Voyages (London, 1809), v. 427
sg. Similarly in Fiji any person who
had touched the head of a living chief
or the body of a dead one was for-
bidden to handle his food, and must
be fed by another (J. E. Erskine,
The Western Pacific, p. 254).

2 On the custom of touching for
the King’s Evil, see Zhe Magic Art
and the Evolution of Kings, vol. i,
pp- 368 59q-

5 «The idea in which this law [the


Hardly had he finished when


law of taboo or /apu, as it was called
in New Zealand] originated appears
to have been, that a portion of the
spiritual essence of an atua or of a
sacred person was communicated
directly to objects which they touched,
and also that the spiritual essence
so communicated to any object was
afterwards more or less retransmitted
to anything else brought into contact
with it” (I. Shortland, 7vaditions and
Superstitions of the New Zealanders,
Second Edition, London, 1856, p.
102), Compare 7d., Maori Religion
and Mythology, p,. 25.


IV CHIEFS AND KINGS TABOOED 135


he was informed by a horror-stricken spectator that the
food of which he had eaten was the chief’s. “I knew the
unfortunate delinquent well. He was remarkable for
courage, and had signalised himself in the wars of the
tribe,” but “no sooner did he hear the fatal news than he
was seized by the most extraordinary convulsions and
cramp in the stomach, which never ceased till he died, about
sundown the same day. He was a strong man, in the
prime of life, and if any pakeha [European] freethinker
should have said he was not killed by the ¢apu of the chief,
which had been communicated to the food by contact, he
would have been listened to with feelings of contempt for |
his ignorance and inability to understand plain and direct
evidence.” This is not a solitary case. A Maori woman
having eaten of some fruit, and being afterwards told that
the fruit had been taken from a tabooed place, exclaimed
that the spirit of the chief, whose sanctity had been thus
profaned, would kill her. This was in the afternoon, and
next day by twelve o’clock she was dead.? An _ observer
who knows the Maoris well, says, “ Tapu [taboo] is an awful
weapon. I have seen a strong young man die the same
day he was tapued; the victims die under it as though
their strength ran out as water.’* A Maori chief’s tinder-
box was once the means of killing several persons ; for,
having been lost by him, and found by some men who used
it to light their pipes, they died of fright on learning to
whom it had belonged. So, too, the garments of a high
New Zealand chief will kill any one else who wears them.
A chief was observed by a missionary to throw down a
precipice a blanket which he found too heavy to carry.
Being asked by the missionary why he did not leave it on
a tree for the use of a future traveller, the chief replied that
“it was the fear of its being taken by another which caused
him to throw it where he did, for if it were worn, his tapu”
(that is, his spiritual power communicated by contact to


the blanket and through the


1 Old New Zealand, by a Pakeha
Maori (London, 1884), pp. 96 sg.

2 W. Brown, New Zealand and its
Aborigines (London, 1845), p. 76.
For more examples of the same kind


blanket to the man) “ would


see 2bid. pp. 177 5g.

E, Tregear, ‘*The Maoris of
New Zealand,” Journal of the An-
thropological Institute, xix. (1890) p.
100,


136 TABOOED PERSONS CHAP.


kill the person.” For a similar reason a Maori chief would


not blow a fire with his mouth ; for his sacred breath would
communicate its sanctity to the fire, which would pass it on
to the pot on the fire, which would pass it on to the meat in
the pot, which would pass it on to the man who ate the
meat, which was in the pot, which stood on the fire, which
was breathed on by the chief; so that the eater, infected by


_ the chief’s breath conveyed through these intermediaries,


Examples
of the fatal
effects of
imagina-
tion in
other parts
of the
world.


would surely die.”

Thus inthe Polynesian race, to which the Maoris belong,
superstition erected round the persons of sacred chiefs a
real, though at the same time purely imaginary barrier, to
transgress which actually entailed the death of the trans-
gressor whenever he became aware of what he had done. This
fatal power of the imagination working through superstitious
terrors is by no means confined to one race; it appears to
be common among savages. For example, among the
aborigines of Australia a native will die after the infliction of
even the most superficial wound if only he believes that the
weapon which inflicted the wound had been sung over and
thus endowed with magical virtue. He simply lies down,
refuses food, and pines away.’ Similarly among some of the
Indian. tribes of Brazil, if the medicine-man predicted the
death of any one who had offended him, “the wretch took to
his hammock instantly in such full expectation of dying,
that he would neither eat nor drink, and the prediction was
a sentence which faith effectually executed.”* Speaking of
certain African races Major Leonard observes: “I have
seen more than one hardened old Haussa soldier dying
steadily and by inches, because he believed himself to be
bewitched ; so that no nourishment or medicines that were
given to him had the slightest effect either to check the mis-
chief or to improve his condition in any way, and nothing
was able to divert him from a fate which he considered in-
evitable. In the same way, and under very similar conditions,
I have seen Kru-men and others die, in spite of every effort
that was made to save them, simply because they had made


1K. Taylor, 7¢ Jha a Maui, or, 8 Spencer and Gillen, Native 7ribes
New Zealand and its Inhabitants," p, of Central Australia, pp. 537 sq.
164. 4 KR. Southey, History of Brasil,


* R. Taylor, of. c#t. p. 165. i® (London, 1822), p. 238.


Iv CHIEFS AND KINGS TABOOED 137


up their minds, not (as we thought at the time) to die, but
that being in the clutch of malignant demons they were
bound to die.”* The Capuchin missionary Merolla da
Sorrento, who travelled in the West African kingdom of
Congo in the latter part of the seventeenth century, has
described a remarkable case of death wrought purely by
superstitious fear. He says: “It is a custom that either
the parents or the wizards give certain rules to be inviolably
observed by the young people, and which they call chegz/la:
these are to abstain from eating either some sorts of poultry,
the flesh of some kinds of wild beasts, such and such fruits,
roots either raw or boiled after this or another manner, with
several other ridiculous injunctions of the like nature, too
many to be enumerated here. You would wonder with what
religious observance these commands are obeyed. These
young people would sooner chuse to fast several days to-
gether, than to taste the least bit of what has been forbidden
them ; and if it sometimes happen that the chegz//a has been
neglected to have been given them by their parents, they
think they shall presently die unless they go immediately to
receive it from the wizards. A certain young negro, being
upon a journey, lodged in a friend’s house by the way: his
friend, before he went out the next morning, had got a wild
hen ready for his breakfast, they being much better than the
tame ones. The negro hereupon demanded, ‘If it were a
wild hen?’ His host answered, ‘No’: then he fell on
heartily, and afterwards proceeded on his journey. About
four years after these two met together again, and the afore-
said negro being not yet married, his old friend asked him,
‘If he would eat a wild hen?’ To which he answered,
‘That he had received the chegz//a, and therefore could not.’
Hereat the host began immediately to laugh, enquiring of
him, ‘What made him refuse it now, when he had eaten one
at his table about four years ago?’ At the hearing of this
the negro immediately fell a trembling, and suffered himself
to be so far possessed with the effects of imagination, that
he died in less than twenty-four hours after.” ”


1 Major A. G. Leonard, Zhe Lower 2 Merolla’s ‘* Voyage to Congo,” in
Niger and its Tribes (London, 1906), —Pinkerton’s Voyages and Travels, xvi.
pp: 257 sg. : 237 5g. Astothese chegz//a or taboos on


The taboos .


observed
by sacred
kings re-
semble
those im-
posed on
persons
who are
commonly
regarded as
unclean,
such as
menstruous
women,
homicides,
and so
forth.


Taboos
laid on
persons
who have
been in
contact
with the
dead in
New
Zealand.


138 TABOOED PERSONS CHAP,


§ 2. Mourners tabooed


Thus regarding his sacred chiefs and kings as charged
with a mysterious spiritual force which so to say explodes at
contact, the savage naturally ranks them among the dan-
gerous classes of society, and imposes upon them the same
sort of restraints that he lays on manslayers, menstruous
women, and other persons whom he looks upon with a
certain fear and horror. For example, sacred kings and
priests in Polynesia were not allowed to touch food with
their hands, and had-therefore to be fed by others; and as
we have just seen, their vessels, garments, and other property
might-not be used by others on pain of disease and death.
Now precisely the same observances are exacted by some
savages from girls at their first menstruation, women after
childbirth, homicides, mourners, and all persons who have
come into contact with the dead. Thus, for example,
to begin with the last class of persons, among the
Maoris any one who had handled a corpse, helped to
convey it to the grave, or touched a dead man’s bones, was
cut off from all intercourse and almost all communication
with mankind. He could not enter any house, or come into
contact with any person or thing, without utterly bedevilling
them. He might not even touch food with his hands, which
had become so frightfully tabooed or unclean as to be quite
useless. Food would be set for him on the ground, and he


food, which are commonly observed by
the natives of this part of Africa, see
further my Zotemism and Exogamy, ii.
614 599.


1 W, Ellis, Polynesian Researches
(Second Edition, London, 1832-1836),
iv, 388. Ellis appears to imply that
the rule was universal in Polynesia,
but perhaps he refers only to Hawaii,
of which in this part of his work he is
specially treating. We are told that
in Hawaii the priest who carried the
principal idol about the country was
tabooed during the performance of this
sacred office ; he might not touch any-
thing with his hands, and the morsels of
food which he ate had to be put into his


mouth by the chiefs of the villages
through which he passed or even by the
king himself, who accompanied the
priest on his rounds (L. de Freycinet,
Voyage autour du monde, Historique,
ii, Premiére Partie, Paris, 1829, p. 596).
In Tonga the rule applied to chiefs only
when their hands had become tabooed
by touching asuperiorchief(W. Mariner,
Tonga Islands, i, 82 sg.). In New
Zealand chiefs were fed by slaves (A. S.
Thomson, 7he Story of New Zealand,
i, 102); or they may, like tabooed
people in general, have taken up their
food from little stages with their mouths
or by means of fern-stalks (R. Taylor,
Te tha a Maui, or New Zealand and
its Inhabitants,* p. 162),


IV MOURNERS TABOOED 139


would then sit or kneel down, and, with his hands carefully
held behind his back, would gnaw at it as best he could. In
some cases he would be fed by another person, who with
outstretched arm contrived to do it without touching the
tabooed man ; but the feeder was himself subjected to many
severe restrictions, little less onerous than those which were
imposed upon the other. In almost every populous village
there lived a degraded wretch, the lowest of the low, who
earned a sorry pittance by thus waiting upon the defiled.
Clad in rags, daubed from head to foot with red ochre and
stinking shark oil, always solitary and silent, generally old,
haggard, and wizened, often half crazed, he might be seen
sitting motionless all day apart from the common path or
thoroughfare of the village, gazing with lack-lustre eyes on
the busy doings in which he might never take a part. Twice
a day a dole of food would be thrown on the ground before
him to munch as well as he could without the use of his
hands; and at night, huddling his greasy tatters about him,
he would crawl into some miserable lair of leaves and refuse,
where, dirty, cold, and hungry, he passed, in broken ghost-
haunted slumbers, a wretched night as a prelude to another
wretched day. Such was the only human being deemed fit
to associate at arm’s length with one who had paid the last
offices of respect and friendship to the dead. And when, the
dismal term of his seclusion being over, the mourner was
about to mix with his fellows once more, all the dishes he
had used in his seclusion were-diligently smashed, and all the
garments he had worn were carefully thrown away, lest they
should spread the contagion of his defilement among others,’
just as the vessels and clothes of sacred kings and chiefs are
destroyed or cast away for a similar reason. So complete
in these respects is the analogy which the savage traces
between the spiritual influences that emanate from divinities
and from the dead, between the odour of sanctity and the
stench of corruption.


1 Old New Zealand, by a Pakeha  vels in New Zealand, ii. 104 sg.; J.
Maori (London, 1884), pp. 104-114. Dumont D’Urville, Voyage autour du
For more evidence see W. Yate, Vew monde et a la recherche de La Pérouse,
Zealand, p. 85; G. F. Angas, Savage ii. 530; Father Servant, ‘‘ Notice sur la
Life and Scenes in Australia and New Nouvelle Zélande,” Annales de la Pro
Zealand, ii. 90; E. Dieffenbach, 7ra- pagation dela Foi, xv. (1843) p. 22.


140 TABOOED PERSONS CHAP.


ise 47 The rule which forbids persons who have been in contact
bids per- With the dead to touch food with their hands would seem to
sons who have been universal in Polynesia. Thus in Samoa “ those
have been
in contact Who attended the deceased were most careful not to handle
rae 1 {00d, and for days were fed by others as if they were helpless
touch food infants. Baldness and the loss of teeth were supposed to be
‘ong the punishment inflicted by the household god if they violated
seemsto the rule.”’ Again, in Tonga, “no person can touch a dead
have been , chief without being taboo’d for ten lunar months, except
Polynesia. chiefs, who are only taboo’d for three, four, or five months,
according to the superiority of the dead chief ; except again
it be the body of Tooitonga [the great divine chief], and then
even the greatest chief would be taboo’d ten months, as was
the case with Finow’s wife above mentioned. During the
time a man is taboo’d he must not feed himself with his own
hands, but must be fed by somebody else: he must not even
use a toothpick himself, but must guide another person’s hand
holding the toothpick. If he is hungry and there is no one
to feed him, he must go down upon his hands and knees,
and pick up his victuals with his mouth: and if he infringes
upon any of these rules, it is firmly expected that he will
swell up and die: and this belief is so strong that Mr.
Mariner thinks no native ever made an experiment to prove
the contrary. They often saw him feed himself with his
hands after having touched dead chiefs, and not observing
his health to decline, they attributed it to his being a
foreigner, and being governed by different gods.”* Again, in
Wallis Island “contact with a corpse subjects the hands to
the law of taboo till they are washed, which is not done
for several weeks. Until that purification has taken place,
the tabooed persons may not themselves put food to their


mouths ; other people render them that service.”* A rule


1 G, Turner, Samoa, p. 145. Com- Zonga Jslands* (London, 1818), i,
pare G. Brown, D.D., Melanesians 141 5g., note.
and Polynesians (London, 1910), p. 8 Father Bataillon, in Annales de la
402: **The men who took hold of Propagation de la Fot, xiii, (1841) p.
the body were fata (sacred) for the 19. For more evidence of the practice
time, were forbidden to touch their of this custom in Polynesia, see Captain
own food, and were fed by others, J, Cook, Voyages (London, 1809), vii.
No food was eaten in the same house 147; James Wilson, Afisstonary Voy-
with the dead body.” age to the Southern Pacific Ocean

* W. Mariner, Zhe Natives of the (London, 1799), p. 363.


IV MOURNERS TABOOED 141


of the same sort is or was observed in various parts of
Melanesia. Thus in Fiji the taboo for handling a dead chief
lasted from one to ten months according to his rank; for a
commoner it lasted not more than four days. It was
commonly resorted to by the lazy and idle; for during the
time of their seclusion they were not only provided with food,
but were actually fed by attendants or ate their food from
the ground.’ Similarly in the Motu tribe of New Guinea a
man is tabooed, generally for three days, after handling a
corpse, and while the taboo lasts he may not touch food
with his hands. At the end of the time he bathes and the
taboo is over.” So in New Caledonia the two men who are
charged with the duty of burying and guarding a corpse
have to remain in seclusion and observe a number of rules of
abstinence. They live apart from their wives. They may not
shave or cut their hair. Their food is laid for them on leaves
and they take it up with their mouth or a stick ; but oftener
an attendant feeds them, just as he might feed a man whose
limbs were palsied.2 So among the Nandi of British East
Africa persons who have handled a corpse bathe in a river,
anoint their bodies with fat, partially shave their heads, and
live in the hut of the deceased for four days. All these
days they may not be seen by boys or women: they may
not drink milk ; and they may not touch food with their
hands, but must eat it with the help of a potsherd or chip
of a gourd.* Similarly in the Ba-Pedi and Ba-Thonga
tribes of South Africa men who have dug a grave may not
touch food with their fingers till the rites of their purification
are accomplished; meantime they eat with the help of
special spoons. If they broke this rule, it is thought that they
would be consumptive.’ So in the Ngarigo tribe of New South
Wales a novice who has just passed through the ceremony


1 Ch. Wilkes, Marrative of the
United States Exploring Expedition,
New Edition (New York, 1851), iii.
99 597.

2 W. G. Lawes, ‘ Ethnological
Notes on the Motu, Koitapu, and
Koiari Tribes of New Guinea,” Jozsval
of the Anthropological Institute, viii.
(1879) p. 370.


3 Father Lambert, in Jfisstons


Catholiques, xii. (1880) p. 365; zd.,
Meurs et superstitions des Néo-Calé-
doniens (Nouméa, 1900), pp. 238


5G.

4 A. C. Hollis, 7ze Nandi (Oxford,
1909), p. 70.

5 H. A. Junod, ‘* Les Conceptions
physiologiques des Bantou sud-africains
et leurs tabous,” Revue a’ Ethnographie
et de Sociologie, i. (1910) p. 153.


A rule of
the same
sort is ob-
served in
Melanesia
and Africa.


Taboos
laid on
mourners
among the
Indian
tribes of
North
America.


142 TABOOED PERSONS CHAP.


of initiation has to go away to the mountains and stay there
for a while, sometimes for more than six months, under the
charge of one or more old men; and all the time of his
absence among the mountains he may not touch cooked
food with his hands; the food is put into his mouth by the
man who looks after him.’

Among the Shuswap of British Columbia widows and
widowers in mourning are secluded and forbidden to touch
their own head or body ; the cups and cooking-vessels which
they use may be used by no one else. They must build
a sweat-house beside a creek, sweat there all night and
bathe regularly, after which they must rub their bodies
with branches of spruce. The branches may not be used
more than once, and when they have served their purpose
they are stuck into the ground all round the hut. No hunter
would come near such mourners, for their presence is unlucky.
If their shadow were to fall on any one, he would be taken
ill at once. They employ thorn bushes for bed and pillow,
in order to keep away the ghost of the deceased ; and thorn
bushes are also laid all around their beds.” This last pre-
caution shews clearly what the spiritual danger is which
leads to the exclusion of such persons from ordinary society ;
it is simply a fear of the ghost who is supposed to be hover-
ing near them, Among the Thompson Indians of British
Columbia the persons who handled a corpse and dug the
grave were secluded for four days. They fasted until the
body was buried, after which they were given food apart
from the other people. They would not touch the food with
their hands, but must put it into their mouths with sharp-
pointed sticks, They ate off a small mat, and drank out of
birch-bark cups, which, together with the mat, were thrown
away at the end of the four days, The first four mouthfuls
of food, as well as of water, had to be spit into the fire.
During their seclusion they bathed in a stream and might
not sleep with their wives. Widows and widowers were
obliged to observe rules of a similar kind. Immediately
after the death they went out and passed through a patch of


1 A, W. Howitt, Mative Tribes of North-Western Tribes of Canada, pp. 91
South-East Australia, p. 563. sg. (separate Reprint from the Aefort of
2 Fr, Boas, in Sixth Nefort on the the British Association for 1890),


IV MOURNERS TABOOED 143


rose-bushes four times, probably in order to rid themselves Taboos
of the ghost, who might be supposed to stick on a thorn. pact
For a year they had to sleep on a bed of fir-boughs, on among the
which sticks of rose-bushes were laid; many wore twigs of as
rose-bush and juniper in a piece of buckskin on their persons. North
The first four days they might not touch their food, but ate “™°"*
with sharp-pointed sticks and spat out the first four mouthfuls

of each meal, and the first four of water, into the fire A
widower might not fish at another man’s fishing-place or

with another man’s net; if he did, it would make the place

and the net useless for the season. If he transplanted a

trout into another lake, before releasing it he blew on the

head of the fish, and after chewing deer-fat, he spat some of

the grease on its head in order to remove the baneful effect

of his touch. Then he let the trout go, bidding it farewell,

and asking it to propagate its kind in plenty. Any grass

or branches that a widow or widower sat or lay down on
withered up. If a widow should break sticks or boughs, her
hands or arms would also break. She might not pick berries

for a year, else the whole crop of berries would fall off the
bushes or wither up. She might not cook food or fetch
water for her children, nor let them lie down on her bed, nor
should she lie or sit where they slept. Sometimes a widow
would wear a breech-cloth made of dry bunch-grass for
several days to prevent her husband’s ghost from having
intercourse with her.’ Among the Tinneh or Déné Indians

| of North-West America all who have handled a corpse are
subject to many restrictions and taboos, They are debarred

for a certain period from eating any fresh meat: they may

never use a knife to cut their food but must tear it with

their teeth: they may not drink out of a vessel in common

use, but must employ a gourd which they carry about for

the purpose; and they wear peeled willow wands about

their arms and necks or carry them in their hands as
disinfectants to annul the evil consequences which are
supposed to follow from handling the dead” Among the


1 J. Teit, ‘The Thompson Indians of part iv. (April 1900) pp. 331, 332 59.
British Columbia,” Memozr of the Ameri- 2 C. Hill-Tout, Zhe Far West, the
can Museum of Natural History, The Home of the Salish and Déné (London,
Jesup North Pacific Expedition, vol. i. 1907), pp. 193 sg.


ce | ie, ne en elles


Seclusion
of widows
and
widowers
in the
Philippines
and New
Guinea.


144 TABOOED PERSONS CHAP.


Indian tribes of Queen Charlotte Sound a_ widow or
widower goes into special mourning for a month; among
the Koskimos the period of mourning is four months.
During this time he or she lives apart in a very small hut
behind the house, eating and drinking alone, and using for
that purpose dishes which are not employed by other
members of the tribe.’

Among the Agutainos, who inhabit Palawan, one of the
Philippine Islands, a widow may not leave her hut for seven
or eight days after the death; and even then she may only
go out at an hour when she is not likely to meet anybody,
for whoever looks upon her dies a sudden death. To prevent
this fatal catastrophe, the widow knocks with a wooden peg
on the trees as she goes along, thus warning people of her
dangerous proximity; and the very trees on which she
knocks soon die.” So poisonous is the atmosphere of death
that surrounds those to whom the ghost of the departed
may be thought to cleave. In the Mekeo district of British
New Guinea a widower loses all his civil rights and becomes
a social outcast, an object of fear and horror, shunned by all.
He may not cultivate a garden, nor shew himself in public,
nor traverse the village, nor walk on the roads and paths.
Like a wild beast he must skulk in the long grass and the
bushes ; and if he sees or hears any one coming, especially
a woman, he must hide behind a tree or a thicket. If he
wishes to fish or hunt, he must do it alone and at night. If
he would consult any one, even the missionary, he does so
by stealth and at night ; he seems to have lost his voice and
speaks only in whispers. Were he to join a party of fishers
or hunters, his presence would bring misfortune on them ;
the ghost of his dead wife would frighten away the fish or
the game. He goes about everywhere and at all times
armed with a tomahawk to defend himself, not only against
wild boars in the jungle, but against the dreaded spirit of
his departed spouse, who would do him an ill turn if she


1G, M. Dawson, ‘Notes and Ob- (Montreal, 1888) Trans. Section ii.
servations on the Kwakiool People of _ pp. 78 sg. ‘a
the Northern part of Vancouver Island * F, Blumentritt, ‘* Uber die Einge-
and adjacent Coasts,” Proceedings and  borenen der Insel Palawan und der
Transactions of the Royal Society of Inselgruppe der Talamianen,” Glodus,
Canada for the Year 1887, vol. ¥. — lix, (1891) p. 182.


Iv MOURNERS TABOOED


145


could ; for all the souls of the dead are malignant and their
only delight is to harm the living.’


§ 3. Women tabooed at Menstruation and Childbirth


In general, we may say that the prohibition to use the Taboos
vessels, garments, and so on of certain persons, and the effects eee
supposed to follow an infraction of the rule, are exactly the menstrua-
same whether the persons to whom the things belong are “™
sacred or what we might call unclean and polluted. As the
garments which have been touched by a sacred chief kill
those who handle them, so do the things which have been
touched by a menstruous woman. An Australian black-
fellow, who discovered that his wife had lain on his blanket
at her menstrual period, killed her and died of terror himself
within a fortnight.2, Hence Australian women at these times
are forbidden under pain of death to touch anything that
men use, or even to walk on a path that any man frequents.
They are also secluded at childbirth, and all vessels used by
them during their seclusion are burned.* In Uganda the
pots which a woman touches while the impurity of childbirth
or of menstruation is on her should be destroyed ; spears
and shields defiled by her touch are not destroyed but only
purified No Esquimaux of Alaska will willingly drink out
of the same cup or eat out of the same dish that has been
used by a woman at her confinement until it has been purified
by certain incantations. Amongst some of the Indians of
North America, women at menstruation are forbidden to
touch men’s utensils, which would be so defiled by their
touch that their subsequent use would be attended by certain
mischief or misfortune.® For instance, in some of the Tinneh


1 Father Guis, “Les Canaques,


Messrs. Roscoe and Miller, mission-


Mort - Deuil,” Jfissions Catholiques,
xxxiv. (1902) pp. 208 sg.

2 Capt. W. E. Armit, ‘‘ Customs of
the Australian Aborigines,” Journal of
the Anthropological Institute, ix. (1880)


P- 459.

3 W. Ridley, ‘‘ Report on Aus-
tralian Languages and Traditions,”
Journal of the Anthropological Institute,
ii. (1873) p. 268.

* From information given me by


PT. 11


aries to Uganda (June 24, 1897), and
afterwards corrected by the Xatzkiro
(Prime Minister) of Uganda in conversa-
tion with Mr. Roscoe (June 20, 1902).

5 Report of the International Polar
Expedition to Point Barrow, Alaska
(Washington, 1885), p. 46.

6 Alexander Mackenzie, Voyages
Jrom Montreal through the Continent
of North América (London, 1801),
Pp. Cxxiii.

L


Taboos
imposed on
women at
menstrua-
tion.


146 TABOOED PERSONS ’ CHAP.


or Déné tribes girls verging on maturity take care that the
dishes out of which they eat are used by no one else. When
their first periodical sickness comes on, they are fed by their
mothers or nearest kinswomen, and will on no account touch
their food with their own hands, At the same time they
abstain from touching their heads with their hands, and keep
a small stick to scratch their heads with when they itch,
They remain outside the house in a hut built for the purpose,
and wear a skull-cap made of skin to fit very tight, which
they never lay aside till the first monthly infirmity is over.
A fringe of shells, bones, and so on hangs down from their
forehead so as to cover their eyes, lest any malicious sorcerer
should harm them during this critical period “ Among all
the Déné and most other American tribes, hardly any other
being was the object of so much dread as a menstruating
woman. As soon as signs of that condition made them-
selves apparent in a young girl she was carefully segregated
from all but female company, and had to live by herself in a
small hut away from the gaze of the villagers or of the male
members of the roving band. While in that awful state, she
had to abstain from touching anything belonging to man, or
the spoils of any venison or other animal, lest she would
thereby pollute the same, and condemn the hunters to
failure, owing to the anger of the game thus slighted. Dried
fish formed her diet, and cold water, absorbed through a
drinking tube, was her only beverage. Moreover, as the
very sight of her was dangerous to society, a special skin
bonnet, with fringes falling over her face down to her
breast, hid her from the public gaze, even some time


1 Gavin Hamilton, ‘‘ Customs of the
New Caledonian Women,” Journal of
the Anthropological /nstitute, vii. (1878)
p- 206. Among the Nootkas of British
Columbia a girl at puberty is hidden
from the sight of men for several days
behind a partition of mats; during her
seclusion she may not scratch her head
or her body with her hands, but she
may do so with a comb or a piece of
bone, which is provided for the purpose.
See Fr. Boas, in Sixth Report on the
North-Western Tribes of Canada, p. 41
(separate reprint from the Xefort of
the British Assoctation for 1890).


Again, among the Shuswap of British
Columbia a girl at puberty lives alone
in a little hut on the mountains and is
forbidden to touch her head or scratch
her body; but she may scratch her
head with a three-toothed comb and her
body with the painted bone of a deer,
See Fr, Boas, of. ct, pp. 89 sg. In the
East Indian island of Ceram a girl may
not scratch herself with her fingers the
night before her teeth are filed, but she
may do it with a piece of bamboo. See
J. G. F. Riedel, De sluck- en kroesharige
vassen tusschen Selebes en Papua,
Ps 137+


IV MENSTRUATION AND CHILDBIRTH 147


»1


after she had recovered her normal state. Among the
Bribri Indians of Costa Rica a menstruous woman is
regarded as unclean (dukuru). The only plates she may
use for her food are banana leaves, which, when she has
done with them, she throws away in some _ sequestered
spot ; for were a cow to find them and eat them, the animal
would waste away and perish. And she drinks out of a
special vessel for a like reason; because if any one drank
out of the same cup after her, he would-surely die.” In
the islands of Mabuiag and Saibai, in Torres Straits, girls
at their first menstruation are strictly secluded from the
sight of men. In Mabuiag the seclusion lasts three months,
in Saibai about a fortnight. During the time of her separa-
‘ tion the girl is forbidden to feed herself or to handle food,
which is put into her mouth by women or girls told off to
wait on her.®
Among many peoples similar restrictions are imposed Taboos
on women in childbed and apparently for similar reasons ;'™P0S*4
at such periods women are supposed to be in a dangerous inchildbed
condition which would infect any person or thing they
might touch ; hence they are put into quarantine until, with
the recovery of their health and strength, the imaginary
danger has passed away. Thus, in Tahiti a woman after
childbirth was secluded for a fortnight or three weeks in
a temporary hut erected on sacred ground; during the
time of her seclusion she was debarred from touching pro-
visions, and had to be fed by another. Further, if any
one else touched the child at this period, he was subjected
to the same restrictions as the mother until the ceremony of
her purification had been performed.* Similarly in Manahiki,
an island of the Southern Pacific, for ten days after her
delivery a woman was not allowed to handle food, and had
to be fed by some other person.” In the Sinaugolo tribe of
British New Guinea, for about a month after her confinement


1 A. G. Morice, ‘‘The Canadian
Dénés,” Annual Archaeological Report
(Zoronto), 1905, p. 218.

2H. Pittier de Fabrega, ‘“ Die
Sprache der Bribri-Indianer in Costa
Rica,” Sztsungsberichte der philoso-
phischen-historischen Classe der Katser-
lichen Akademie der Wissenschaften


_ (Vienna), cxxxviii. (1898) p. 20.


3 C. G. Seligmann, in Reforts of
the Cambridge Anthropological Expedt-
tion to Torres Straits, v. (Cambridge,
1904) pp. 201, 203.

* James Wilson, A/¢sstonary Voyage
to the Southern Pacific Ocean, p. 354.

5 G. Turner, Samoa, p. 276.


148 TABOOED PERSONS CHAP.


Taboos a WOMan may not prepare or handle food; she may not
imposed even cook for herself, and when she is eating the food


inchildbed. Made ready for her by her friends she must use a
sharpened stick to transfer it to her mouth.’ Similarly
in the Roro and Mekeo districts of British New Guinea a
woman after childbirth becomes for a time taboo (ofz),
and any person or thing she

ecomes taboo also. Accordingly during this time she
abstains from cooking ; for were she to cook food, not only
the victuals themselves but the pot and the fire would be
tabooed, so that nobody could eat the victuals, or use the
pot, or warm himself at the fire. Further at meals she may
not dip her hand into the dish and help herself, as the
natives commonly do; she must use for the purpose a long
fork, with which she takes up the bananas, sweet potatoes,
yams, and so forth, in order not to contaminate the rest of
the food in the vessel by the touch of her fingers. If she
wishes to drink, a gourd is set before her, and wrapping up
her hands in a cloth or coco-nut fibre she pours the water
into a small calabash for her use; or she may pour the water
directly into her mouth without letting the gourd touch her
lips. If anything has to be handed to her, it is not given
from hand to hand but reached to her at the end of a long
stick.? Similarly in the island of Kadiak, off Alaska, a
woman about to be delivered retires to a miserable low
hovel built of reeds, where she must remain for twenty days
after the birth of her child, whatever the season may be, and
she is considered so unclean that no one will touch her, and
food is reached to her on sticks.’ In the Ba-Pedi and Ba-
Thonga tribes of South Africa a woman in childbed may
not touch her food with her hands all the time of her
seclusion; she must eat with the help of a wooden spoon.


1 C, G, Seligmann, ‘‘ The Medicine, three days only. See J. Roscoe,


may chance to touch.


Surgery, and Midwifery of the Sinau-
golo,” Journal of the Anthropological
Lnstitute, xxxii. (1902) p. 302. In
Uganda a bride is secluded for a month,
during which she only receives near
relatives; she wears her veil all this
time. She may not handle food, but
is fed by one of her attendants. A
peasant’s wife is secluded for two or


‘‘Further Notes on the Manners and
Customs of the Baganda,” Journal of
the Anthropological Institute, xxxii.
(1902) p. 37.

* Father Guis, ‘‘ Les Canaques, ce
qwils font, ce quiils disent,” Adisstons
Catholigues, xxx. (1898) p, 119.

3 V, Lisiansky, 4 Voyage Round the
World (London, 1814), p. 201.


Iv MENSTRUATION AND CHILDBIRTH 149


They think that if she touched her victuals she might infect Taboos

them with her bloody flux, and that having partaken of such pot tec
tainted food she would fall into a consumption.’ The Bribri in childbea,
Indians regard the pollution of childbed as much more danger- ;
ous even than that of menstruation. When a woman feels her
time approaching, she informs her husband, who makes haste
to build a hut for her in a lonely spot. There she must live
alone, holding no converse with anybody save her mother
or another woman. After her delivery the medicine-man
purifies her by breathing on her and laying an animal, it
matters not what, upon her. But even this ceremony only
mitigates her uncleanness into a state considered to be
equivalent to that of a menstruous woman; and for a full
lunar month she must live apart from her housemates,
observing the same rules with regard to eating and drinking
as at her monthly periods. The case is still worse, the
pollution is still more deadly, if she has had a miscarriage or
has been delivered of a stillborn child. In that case she
may not go near a living soul: the mere contact with things
she has used is exceedingly dangerous: her food is handed
to her at the end of a long stick. This lasts generally for
three weeks, after which she may go home subject only
to the restrictions incident to an ordinary confinement.
Among the Adivi or forest Gollas of Southern India, when
a woman feels the first pains of labour, she is turned clean
out of the village and must take up her quarters in a little
hut made of leaves or mats about two hundred yards
away. In this hut she must bring forth her offspring
unaided, unless a midwife can be fetched in time to be with
her before the child is born ; if the midwife arrives after the
birth has taken place she may not go near the woman. For
ninety days the mother lives in the hut by herself. If any
one touches her, he or she becomes, like the mother herself,
an outcast and is expelled from the village for three months.
The woman’s husband generally makes a little hut about
fifty yards from hers and stays in it sometimes to watch
over her, but he may not go near her on pain of being an

1H. A. Junod, ‘‘Les Conceptions et de Sociologie, i. (1910) p. 153.


physiologiques des Bantou sud-africains 2H. Pittier de Fabrega, of. cét.
et leurs tabous,” Revue d’Ethnographie pp, 20 sg.


Dangers
appre-
hended
from
women in
childbed.


150 TABOOED PERSONS CHAP,


outcast for three months. Food is placed on the ground
near the woman’s hut and she takes it. On the fourth day
after the birth a woman of the village goes to her and pours
water on her, but may not come into contact with her.
On the fifth day the villagers clear away the stones and
thorny bushes from a patch of ground about ten yards on
the village side of the hut, and to this clearing the woman
removes her hut unaided; no one may help her to do so.
On the ninth, fifteenth, and thirtieth days she again shifts
her hut nearer and nearer to the village; and again once in
each of the two following months she brings her hut still
nearer. On the ninetieth day of her seclusion the woman
is called out from her hut, washed, clad in clean clothes, and
after being taken to the village temple is conducted to her own
house by a man of the caste, who performs purificatory
ceremonies.’ :

These customs shew that in the opinion of some primitive


* peoples a woman at and after childbirth is pervaded by a


certain dangerous influence which can infect anything and
anybody she touches; so that in the interest of the com-.
munity it becomes necessary to seclude her from society
for a while until the virulence of the infection has passed
away, when, after submitting to certain rites of purification,
she is again free to mingle with her fellows. This dread of
lying-in women appears to be widespread, for the practice
of shutting them up at such times in lonely huts away from
the rest of the people is very common. Sometimes the
nature of the danger which is apprehended from them is
explicitly stated. Thus in the island of Tumleo, off German
New Guinea, after the birth of her first child a woman is
shut up with her infant for five to eight days, during which
no man, not even her husband, may see her; for the men
think that were they to see her, their bodies would swell up
and they would die.” Apparently their notion is that the
sight of a woman who has just been big with child will, on


1 F, Fawcett, ‘Note on a Custom 287 59.
of the Mysore ‘Gollavalu’ or Shepherd *M. J. Erdweg, ‘* Die Bewohner
Caste People,” Journal of the Anthro- der Insel Tumleo, Berlinhafen, Deutsch
pological Society of Bombay, i. 536 sg.; Neu-Guinea,” A/ittheilungen der An-
E. Thurston, Castes and Tribes of thropologischen Gesellschaft in Wien,
Southern India (Madras, 1909), ii,  xxxii, (1902) p, 280,


IV MENSTRUATION AND CHILDBIRTH I5!


the principles of homoeopathic magic, make their bodies big Dangers
also to bursting. The Sulka of New Britain imagine that, (PP
when a woman has been delivered of a child, the men from


become cowardly, weapons lose their force, and the slips {oribea.
which are to be planted out are deprived of their power of
germinating. Hence they perform a ceremony which is
intended to counteract this mysterious influence on men and
plants. As soon as it is known that a woman has been
brought to bed, all the male population of the village
assembles in the men’s clubhouse. Branches of a strong-
smelling tree are fetched, the twigs are broken off, the leaves
stripped off and put on the fire. All the men present then
seize branches with young buds. One of them holds ginger
in his hand, which, after reciting a spell over it, he distributes
to the others. They chew it and spit it out on the twigs,
and these twigs are afterwards laid on the shields and other
weapons in the house, and also on the slips which are to be
planted ; moreover they are fastened on the roofs and over ~
the doorways of the houses. In this way they seek to annul
the noxious infection of childbirth. Among the Yabim of
German New Guinea, when a birth has taken place in the
village, all the inhabitants remain at home next morning
“in order that the fruits of the field may not be spoiled.” ?
Apparently they fear that if they went out to their fields
and gardens immediately after a woman had been brought
to bed, they would carry with them a dangerous contagion
which might blight the crops. When a Herero woman has
given birth to a child, her female companions hastily con-
struct a special hut for her to which she is transferred. Both
the hut and the woman are sacred and “for this reason, the
men are not allowed to see the lying-in woman until the
navel string has separated from the child, otherwise they
would become weaklings, and when later they yumdbana, that
is, go to war with spear and bow, they would be shot.” ®
Thus the Herero like the Sulka appear to imagine that the


1 P. Rascher, ‘* Die Sulka,” Archiv Kaztser Wilhelms-Land und den Bis-
fiir Anthropologie, xxix. (1904) p.  marck-Archipel, 1897, p. 87.


212; R. Parkinson, Drezssig /ahre 3 Rev. E. Dannert, ‘*Customs of
in der Siidsee (Stuttgart, 1907), p. the Ovaherero at the Birth of a Child,”
180. (South African) Folk-lore Journal, ii.


2K. Vetter, in Nachrichten tiber (1880) p. 63.


Dangers
appre-
hended
from
women in
childbed
by Indians
and Esqui-
maux.


Dangers
appre-
hended
from
women in
childbed
by Bantu
tribes of
South
Africa.


152 TABOOED PERSONS CHAP.


weakness of a lying-in woman can, on the principles of
homoeopathic magic, infect any men who may chance to
see her.

Among the Saragacos Indians of eastern Ecuador, as
soon as a woman feels the travail-pangs beginning, she
retires into the forest to a distance of three or four leagues
from her home, where she takes up her abode in a hut of
leaves which has been already prepared for her. “This
banishment,” we are told, “is the fruit of the superstition
of these Indians, who are persuaded that the spirit of evil
would attach himself to their house if the women were
brought to bed in it.”* The Esquimaux of Baffin Land
think that the body of a lying-in woman exhales a vapour
which would adhere to the souls of seals if she ate the flesh
of any seals except such as have been caught by her
husband, by a boy, or by an aged man. “Cases of prema-
ture birth require particularly careful treatment. The event
must be announced publicly, else dire results will follow. If
a woman should conceal from the other people that she has
had a premature birth, they might come near her, or even
eat in her hut of the seals procured by her husband. The
vapor arising from her would thus affect them, and they
would be avoided by the seals. The transgression would
also become attached to the soul of the seal, which would
take it down to Sedna,” the mythical mother of the sea-
mammals, who lives in the lower world and controls the
destinies of mankind.”

Some Bantu tribes of South Africa entertain even more
exaggerated notions of the virulent infection spread by a
woman who has had a miscarriage and has concealed it.
An experienced observer of these people tells us that the
blood of childbirth “appears to the eyes of the South
Africans to be tainted with a pollution still more dangerous
than that of the menstrual fluid. The husband is excluded
from the hut for eight days of the lying-in period, chiefly
from fear that he might be contaminated by this secretion.


1 Levrault, ‘* Rapport sur les pro- Baffin Land and Hudson Bay,” Bulletin
vinces de Canélos et du Napo,” Bulletin of the American Museum of Natural
dé la Socidté de Géographie (Paris),  Atstory, xv. part i. (New York, 1901)
Deuxiéme Série, xi. (1839) p. 74. pp. 125 sg. As to Sedna, see za. pp.

2 Franz Boas, ‘The Eskimo of 119 sgq.


Iv MENSTRUATION AND CHILDBIRTH 153


He dare not take his child in his arms for the three first
months after the birth. But the secretion of childbed is Dangers
particularly terrible when it is the product of a miscarriage, }PPa0,
especially a concealed miscarriage. In this case it is not froma
merely the man who is threatened or killed, it is the whole prs aye
country, it is the sky itself which suffers. By a curious carriage.
association of ideas a physiological fact causes cosmic
troublés!”! Thus, for example, the Ba-Pedi believe that a
woman who has procured abortion can kill a man merely by
lying with him; her victim is poisoned, shrivels up, and

dies within a week. As for the disastrous effect which a
miscarriage may have on the whole country I will quote the
words of a medicine-man and rain-maker of the Ba-Pedi
tribe: “When a woman has had a miscarriage, when she

has allowed her blood to flow, and has hiddén the child, it

is enough to cause the burning winds to blow and to parch

the country with heat. The rain no longer falls, for the
country is no longer in order. When the rain approaches

the place where the blood is, it will not dare to approach.

It will fear and remain at a distance. That woman has
committed a great fault. She has spoiled the country of

the chief, for she has hidden blood which had not yet been

well congealed to fashion a man. That blood is taboo
(yila). It should never drip on the road! The chief will
assemble his men and say to them, ‘ Are you in order in your
villages?’ Some one will answer, ‘Such and such a woman

was pregnant and we have not yet seen the child which she

has given birth to.” Then they go and arrest the woman.
They say to her, ‘Shew us where you have hidden it” They

go and dig at the spot, they sprinkle the hole with a
decoction of mbendoula and nyangale (two sorts of roots)
prepared in a special pot. They take a little of the earth

of this grave, they throw it into the river, then they bring
back water from the river and sprinkle it where she shed her
blood. She herself must wash every day with the medicine.
Then the country will be moistened again (by rain).
Further, we (medicine-men) summon the women of the
country ; we tell them to prepare a ball of the earth which


1H. A. Junod, ‘‘Les Conceptions — et leurs tabous,” Revue d’Ethnographie
physiologiques des Bantou sud-africains et de Soctologie, i. (1910) p. 139.


Belief of
the Ba-
Thonga
that severe
droughts
result from
the con-
cealment
of mis-
carriages
by women.


154 TABOOED PERSONS CHAP.


contains the blood. They bring it to us one morning. If
we wish to prepare medicine with which to sprinkle the
whole country, we crumble this earth to powder; at the end
of five days we send little boys and little girls, girls that yet
know nothing of women’s affairs and have not yet had
relations with men. We put the medicine in the horns of
oxen, and these children go to all the fords, to all the
entrances of the country. AQ little girl turns up the soil
with her mattock, the others dip a branch in the horn and
sprinkle the inside of the hole saying, ‘Rain! rain!’ So
we remove the misfortune which the women have brought
on the roads ; the rain will be able to come. The country
is purified !”?

Similarly the Ba-Thonga, another Bantu tribe of South
Africa in the valley of the Limpopo river, attribute severe
droughts to the concealment of miscarriages by women,
and they perform the following rites to remove the pollu-
tion and procure rain. A small clearing is made in a
thick and thorny wood, and here a pot is buried in the
ground so that its mouth is flush with the surface. From
the pot four channels run in the form of a cross to the four
cardinal points of the horizon. Then a black ox or a
black ram, without a speck of white on it, is killed and the
pot is stuffed with the half-digested grass found in the ©
animal’s stomach. Next, little girls, still in the age of
innocence, are sent to draw water, which they pour into the
pot till it overflows into the four channels. After that the
women assemble, strip off their clothes, and covering their
nakedness only with a scanty petticoat of grass they dance,
leap, and sing, “ Rain, fall!” Then they go and dig up the
remains of the prematurely born infants and of twins buried
in dry ground on a hill. These they collect in one place.
No man may approach the spot. The women would beat
any male who might be so indiscreet as to intrude on their
privacy, and they would put riddles to him which he would
have to answer in the most filthy language borrowed from
the circumcision ceremonies ; for obscene words, which are
usually forbidden, are customary and legitimate on these
occasions. The women pour water on the graves of the

1H, A. Junod, of. eft. pp. 139 59.


IV MENSTRUATION AND CHILDBIRTH 155


infants and of twins in order to “ extinguish” (¢7#ula) them,
as the natives phrase it; which seems to imply that the
graves are thought to be the source of the scorching heat
which is blasting the country. At the fall of evening they
bury all the remains they have discovered, poking them
away in the mud near a stream. Then the rain will be free
to fall.1 In these ceremonies the pouring of water into
channels which run in the direction of the four quarters of the
heaven is clearly a charm based on the principles of homoeo-
pathic magic to procure rain. The supposed influence of
twins over the waters of heaven and the use of foul language
at rain-making ceremonies have been illustrated in another
part of this work.’

Among the natives of the Nguén So’n valley in Annam, Dangers
during the first month after a woman has been delivered of {PPO
a child, all the persons of the house are supposed to be from _
affected with an evil destiny or ill luck called phong long. Wied
If a member of such a household enters another house, the by some
inmates never fail to say to him, “You bring me the phong rrmacky
long!” Should a member of a family in which somebody
is seriously ill have to enter a house infected by the phong
Jong, on returning home he always fumigates himself with
tea leaves or some other plant in order to rid himself of the
infection which he has contracted; for they fear that the
blood of the woman who has been brought to bed may harm
the patient. All the time a house is tainted with the phong
long, a branch of cactus (Euphorbia antiqguorum) or pandanus
is hung at the door. The same thing is done to a house
infected by small-pox: it is a danger signal to warn
people off. The phong long only disappears when the woman
has gone to market for the first time after her delivery. A
trace of a similar belief in the dangerous infection of child-
birth may be seen in the rule of ancient Greek religion,
which forbade persons who had handled a corpse or been in
contact with a lying-in woman to enter a temple or approach
an altar for a certain time, sometimes for two days.*

1 H, A. Junod, of. cit. pp. 140 sg. So’n,” Bulletin de PEcole Francaise

2 See The Magic Art and the Evolu- od Extréme-Orient, ii. (Hanoi, 1902)
tion of Kings, vol. i. pp. 262 sgg., 278. pp. 353 5¢-

3 Le R. P. Cadiére, ‘ Coutumes * Dittenberger, Sy/oge inscriplionum
populaires de la vallée du Nguén- Graecarum,? No. 566; Ch. Michel,


Taboos
imposed
on lads at
initiation.


156 TABOOED PERSONS


CHAP,


Restrictions and taboos like those laid on menstruous
and lying-in women are imposed by some savages on lads
at the initiatory rites which celebrate the attainment of
puberty ; hence we may infer that at such times young
men are supposed to be in a state like that of women at
menstruation and in childbed. Thus, among the Creek
Indians a lad at initiation had to abstain for twelve moons
from picking his ears or scratching his head with his
fingers; he had to use a small stick for these purposes.
For four moons he must have a fire of his own to cook
his food at; and a little girl, a virgin, might cook for him.
During the fifth moon any person might cook for him, but
he must serve himself first, and use one spoon and pan.
On the fifth day of the twelfth moon he gathered corn
cobs, burned them to ashes, and with the ashes rubbed his
body all over. At the end of the twelfth moon he sweated
under blankets, and then bathed in water, which ended the
ceremony. While the ceremonies lasted, he might touch no
one but lads who were undergoing a like course of initiation.’
Caffre boys at circumcision live secluded in a special hut; they
are smeared from head to foot with white clay ; they wear tall
head-dresses with horn-like projections and short skirts like
those of ballet-dancers. When their wounds are healed, all the
vessels which they had used during their seclusion and the
boyish mantles which they had hitherto worn are burned,


Recueil d’inscriplions grecques, No.
730 dyvevérwoav be Kal eloirwoay els
rov Tijs Oe 0 vadv] . . . woadrws dé Kal
amd xhdovs Kal rexovons yuvatkds dev-
repaios: Euripides, /phigeniain Tauris,
380 sgg.:


Ta Tijs Ocod 5 péupouat coplopara,
hris, Bpordv pev hv res dynrae pbvov
4h Kal Noxelas 7) vexpod Ovyp xepoiw,
Bwpdv dmrelpye, mvoapdy ws hryounevy.


Compare also a mutilated Greek in-
scription found in Egypt (Revue arché-
ologique, IIIme Série, ii. 182 sg9.).
In the passage of Euripides which I
have just quoted an acute verbal
scholar, the late Dr, Badham, proposed
to omit the line # Kal Noxelas } vexpod
Ovyi xepotv with the comment ; ‘* WiA7/
Jacit adargumentum puerperae mentio;


patet versum a sciolo additum.” To
do Dr. Badham justice, the inscription
which furnishes so close a parallel to
the line of Euripides had not yet
been discovered among the ruins of
Pergamum, when he proposed to mutil-
ate the text of the poet.

1 B. Hawkins, ** The Creek Con-
federacy,”” Collections of the Georgia
Historical Society, iii, pt. i. (Savannah,
1848) pp. 78 sg. Hawkins’s account is
reproduced by A, S, Gatschett, in his
Migration Legend of the Creek Indians,
i. 185 sg. (Philadelphia, 1884). In
the Turrbal tribe of southern Queens-
land boys at initiation were not allowed
to scratch themselves with their fingers,
but they might do it with a stick. See
A. W. Howitt, Native Tribes of South-
East Australia, p. 596.


Iv MENSTRUATION AND CHILDBIRTH 157


together with the hut, and the boys rush away from the
burning hut without looking back, “lest a fearful curse
should cling to them.” After that they are bathed,
anointed, and clad in new garments."


§ 4. Warriors tabooed


Once more, warriors are conceived by the savage to Taboos
move, so to say, in an atmosphere of spiritual danger which eit
constrains them to practise a variety of superstitious observ- when they
ances quite different in their nature from those rational i:
precautions which, as a matter of course, they adopt against
foes of flesh and blood. The general effect of these observ-
ances is to place the warrior, both before and after victory,
in the same state of seclusion or spiritual quarantine in
which, for his own safety, primitive man puts his human
gods and other dangerous characters. Thus when the
Maoris went out on the war-path they were sacred or taboo
in the highest degree, and they and their friends at home
had to observe strictly many curious customs over and above
the numerous taboos of ordinary life. They became, in the
irreverent language of Europeans who knew them in the
old fighting days, “tabooed an inch thick”; and as for the
leader of the expedition, he was quite unapproachable.?
Similarly, when the Israelites marched forth to war they
were bound by certain rules of ceremonial purity identical
with rules observed by Maoris and Australian black-
fellows on the war-path. The vessels they used were
sacred, and they had to practise continence and a custom of
personal cleanliness of which the original motive, if we may
judge from the avowed motive of savages who conform to
the same custom, was a fear lest the enemy should obtain


1L. Alberti, De Xaffers (Amster-
dam, 1810), pp. 76 sg.; H. Lichten-
stein, Retsen im sitidlichen Afrika
(Berlin, 1811-12), i. 427; S. Kay,
Travels and Researches in Caffraria
(London, 1833), pp. 273 sg.; Dudley
Kidd, Zhe Zssential Kafir, p. 208;
J. Stewart, D.D., Zovedale, South
Africa (Edinburgh, 1894), pp. 105 s¢.,
with illustrations,

2 Old New Zealand, by a Pakeha


Maori (London, 1884), pp. 96, 114 sg.
One of the customs mentioned by the
writer was that all the people left in
the camp had to fast strictly while the
warriors were out in the field. This rule
is obviously based on the sympathetic
connexion supposed to exist between
friends at a distance, especially at
critical times. See Zhe Magic Art
and the Evolution of Kings, vol. i.


pp. 126 sgg.


Taboos
laid on
warriors
when they
go forth
to fight.


TABOOED PERSONS CHAP.


158


the refuse of their persons, and thus be enabled to work
their destruction by magic." Among some Indian tribes of
North America a young warrior in his first campaign had to
conform to certain customs, of which two were identical with
the observances imposed by the same Indians on girls at
their first menstruation: the vessels he ate and drank out of
might be touched by no other person, and he was forbidden
to scratch his head or any other part of his body with his
fingers ; if he could not help scratching himself, he had to
do it with a stick.2 The latter rule, like the one which
forbids a tabooed person to feed himself with his own fingers,
seems to rest on the supposed sanctity or pollution, which-


ever we choose to call it, of the tabooed hands.®


1 Deuteronomy xxiii, 9-14; I
Samuel xxi. 5. The rule laid down
in Deuteronomy xxiii. 10, 11, suffices
to prove that the custom of continence
observed in time of war by the
Israelites, as by a multitude of savage
and barbarous peoples, was based on a
superstitious, not a rational motive. To
convince us of this it is enough to remark
that theruleis often observed by warriors
for some time after their victorious
return, and also by the persons left at
home during the absence of the fight-
ing men. In these cases the observ-
ance of the rule evidently does not
admit of a rational explanation, which
could hardly, indeed, be entertained by
any one conversant with savage modes
of thought. For examples, see Zhe
Magic Art and the Evolution of
Kings, vol. i. pp. 125, 128, 131, 133,
and below, pp. 161, 163, 165, 166,
167, 168, 169, 175 sg., 178, 179, 181.

The other rule of personal cleanli-
ness referred to in the text is exactly
observed, for the reason I have
indicated, by the aborigines in various
parts of Australia, See (Sir) George
Grey, Journals, ii. 344; R. Brough
Smyth, Aborigines of Victoria, i. 165 ;
J. Dawson, Australian Aborigines, p.
12; P. Beveridge, in Journal and Pro-
ceedings of the Royal Society of New
South Wales, xvii. (1883) pp. 69 sg.
Compare W, Stanbridge, ‘‘On the
Aborigines of Victoria,” Zvansactions
of the Ethnological Society of London,
N.S. i. (1861) p. 299; Fison and


Moreover


Howitt, Kamdlarot and Kurnait, p. 251;
E. M. Curr, Zhe Australian Race, iii.
178 sg., 547; W. E. Roth, North
Queensland Ethnography, Bulletin No.
5 (Brisbane, 1903), p. 22, § 80. The
same dread has resulted in a similar
custom of cleanliness in Melanesia and
Africa. See R. Parkinson, Jm Bizs-
marck-Archipel, pp. 143 sqg.; R. H.
Codrington, Zhe Melanesians, p. 203
note; F. von Luschan, “ Einiges iiber
Sitten und Gebriiuche der Eingebo-
renen Neu- Guineas,” Verhandlungen
der Berliner Gesellschaft fiir Anthropo-


logie, LEthnologie, und Urgeschichte
(1900), p. 416; J. Macdonald,
‘* Manners, Customs, Superstitions,


and Religions of South African Tribes,”
Journal of the Anthropological Insti:
tute, xx, (1891) p. 131. Mr. Lorimer
Fison sent me some notes on the
Fijian practice, which agrees with the
one described by Dr. Codrington, The
same rule is observed, probably from
the same motives, by the Miranha
Indians of Brazil. See Spix und
Martius, Xetse in Brasilien, iii, 1251
note. On this subject compare F.
Schwally, Seméitische Kriegsaltertiimer,
i, (Leipsic, 1901) pp. 67 sg.

® Narrative of the Captivity and


Adventures of John Tanner (London,
1830), p. 122.


5 We have seen (pp. 146, 156) that
the same rule is observed by girls at
puberty among some Indian tribes of
British Columbia and by Creek lads at


Iv WARRIORS TABOOED 159


among these Indian tribes the men on the war-path had
always to sleep at night with their faces turned towards
their own country ; however uneasy the posture they might
not change it. They might not sit upon the bare ground,
nor wet their feet, nor walk on a beaten path if they could
help it; when they had no choice but to walk on a path,
they sought to counteract the ill effect of doing so by
doctoring their legs with certain medicines or charms which
they carried with them for the purpose. No member of the
party was permitted to step over the legs, hands, or body of
any other member who chanced to be sitting or lying on the


initiation, It is also observed by
Kwakiutl Indians who have eaten
human flesh (see below, p.189). Among
the Blackfoot Indians the man who was
appointed every four years to take
charge of the sacred pipe and other
emblems of their religion might not
scratch his body with his finger-nails,
but carried a sharp stick in his hair
which he used for this purpose. During
the term of his priesthood he had to
fast and practise strict continence.
None but he dare handle the sacred
pipe and emblems (W. W. Warren,
‘* History of the Ojibways,” Collections
of the Minnesota Historical Society, v.
(1885) pp. 68 sg.). In Vedic India
the man who was about to offer the
solemn sacrifice of soma prepared him-
self for his duties by a ceremony of
consecration, during which he carried
the horn of a black deer or antelope
wherewith to scratch himself if necessary
(Satapatha-Bréhmana, bk. iii. 31, vol.
ii. pp. 33 sg. trans. by J. Eggeling ; H.
Oldenberg, Die Religion des Veda, p.
399). Some of the Peruvian Indians
used to prepare themselves for an im-
portant office by fasting, continence,
and refusing to, wash themselves, to
comb their hair, and to put their hands
to their heads ; if they wished to scratch
themselves, they must do it with a
stick. See P.J.de Arriaga, Extirpacion
de la idolatria del Piru (Lima, 1621),
p. 20. Among the Isistines Indians
of Paraguay mourners refrained from
scratching their heads with their
fingers, believing that to break the rule
would make them bald, no hair grow-


ing on the part of the head which their
fingers had touched. See Guevara,

‘** Historia del Paraguay,” in P. de
Angelis’s Coleccion de obras y docu-

mentos relativos a la historia antigua
y moderna de las provincias del Rio de

la Plata, ii, (Buenos-Aires, 1836) p.

30. Amongst the Macusis of British

Guiana, when a woman has given birth

to a child, the father hangs up his ham-

mock beside that of his wife and stays
there till the navel-string drops off the

child. During this time the parents

have to observe certain rules, of which

one is that they may not scratch their
heads or bodies with their nails, but

must use for this purpose a piece of
palm-leaf. If they broke this rule,

they think the child would die or be an

invalid all its life. See R. Schomburgk, |
Reisen in Britisch-Guiana, ii. 314.

Some aborigines of Queensland believe

that if they scratched themselves with
their fingers during a rain-making cere-

mony, no rain would fall. See Zhe
Magic Art and the Evolution of Kings,

vol. i. p. 254. In all these cases,

plainly, the hands are conceived to be

so strongly infected with the venom of
taboo that it is dangerous even for the
owner of the hands to touch himself
with them. The cowboy who herded

the cows of the king of Unyoro had

to live strictly chaste, no one might

touch him, and he might not scratch or
wound himself so as to draw blood.

But it is not said that he was forbidden

to touch himself with his own hands.

See my Zotemism and Exogamy, ii.

527.


Taboos
laid on
warriors
when they
go forth
to fight.


Cere-
monies ob-
served by
American
Indians
before they
went out
on the war-


path,


shen TABOOED PERSONS cai


ground; and it was equally forbidden to step over his
blanket, gun, tomahawk, or anything that belonged to him.
If this rule was inadvertently broken, it became the duty of
the member whose person or property had been stepped over
to knock the other member down, and it was similarly the
duty of that other to be knocked down peaceably and with-
out resistance. The vessels out of which the warriors ate
their food were commonly small bowls of wood or birch bark,
with marks to distinguish the two sides; in marching from
home the Indians invariably drank out of one side of the
bowl, and in returning they drank out of the other. When
on their way home they came within a day’s march of the
village, they hung up all their bowls on trees, or threw them
away on the prairie,’ doubtless to prevent their sanctity or
defilement from being communicated with disastrous effects
to their friends, just as we have seen that the vessels and
clothes of the sacred Mikado, of women at childbirth and
menstruation, of boys at circumcision, and of persons defiled
by contact with the dead are destroyed or laid aside fora
similar reason. The first four times that an Apache Indian
goes out on the war-path, he is bound to refrain from scratch-
ing his head with his fingers and from letting water touch
his lips. Hence he scratches his head with a stick, and
drinks through a hollow reed or cane. Stick and reed are
attached to the warrior’s belt and to each other by a leathern
thong.” The rule not to scratch their heads with their
fingers, but to use a stick for the purpose instead, was
regularly observed by Ojebways on the war-path.’

For three or four weeks before they went on a warlike
expedition, the Nootka Indians made it an invariable rule to
go into the water five or six times a day, when they washed
and scrubbed themselves from head to foot with bushes inter-
mixed with briars, so that their bodies and faces were often
entirely covered with blood. During this severe exercise
they continually exclaimed, “Good or great God, let me live,


1 Narrative of the Captivity and 2 J. G. Bourke, On the Border with
Adventures of John Tanner (London, Crook (New York, 1891), p. 1333 #.,
1830), p. 123. As to the custom of in Fo/k-/ore, ii, (1891) p. 4533 #d., in
not stepping over a person or his Minth Annual Report of the Bureau of
weapons, see the note at the end of LZ¢thnology (Washington, 1892), p. 490.
the volume, § J. G. Kohl, Adésché-Gami, ii, 168.


Iv . WARRIORS TABOOED 161


not be sick, find the enemy, not fear him, find him asleep,
and kill a great many of them.” All this time they had no
intercourse with their women, and for a week before setting
out abstained from feasting and every kind of merriment.
For the last three days they were almost constantly in the
water, scrubbing and lacerating themselves in a terrible
manner. They believed that this hardened their skin, so
that the weapons of the enemy could not pierce them.’
Before they went out on the war-path the Arikaras and the
Big Belly Indians (“Gros Ventres”) “observe a rigorous
fast, or rather abstain from every kind of food for four days.
In this interval their imagination is exalted to delirium ;
whether it be through bodily weakness or the natural effect
of the warlike plans they cherish, they pretend to have strange
visions. The elders and sages of the tribe, being called upon
to interpret these dreams, draw from them omens more or
less favourable to the success of the enterprise; and their
explanations are received as oracles by which the expedition
will ‘be faithfully regulated. So long as the preparatory fast
continues, the warriors make incisions in their bodies, insert
pieces of wood in the flesh, and having fastened leather
thongs to them cause themselves to be hung from a beam.
which is fixed horizontally above an abyss a hundred and
fifty feet deep. Often indeed they cut off one or two fingers
which they offer in sacrifice to the Great Spirit in order that
they may come back laden with scalps.”” It is hard to
conceive any course of training which could more effectually
incapacitate men for the business of war than that which
these foolish Indians actually adopted.” With regard to
the Creek Indians and kindred tribes we are told they
“will not cohabit with women while they are out at war ;
they religiously abstain from every kind of intercourse even
with their own wives, for the space of three days and nights
before they go to war, and so after they return home,
because they are to sanctify themselves.”* And as a


1 Narrative of the Adventures and ong passed away, and the Indians
Sufferings of John R. Jewitt (Middle- who practised them may well have
town, 1820), pp. 148 sg. suffered the extinction which they did

2 J. de Smet, in Aznales de la Pro- their best to incur.
pagation de la Fot, xiv. (1842) pp. 67 3 J. Adair, History of the American
sg. These customs have doubtless J#dians (London, 1775), p. 163.


PT, Il M


Rules
observed
by Indians
on a war-
expedition.


162 TABOOED PERSONS CHAP.


preparation for attacking the enemy they “go to the afore-
said winter house, and there drink a warm decoction of their
supposed holy consecrated herbs and roots for three days and
nights, sometimes without any other refreshment. This is to
induce the deity to guard and prosper them, amidst their
impending dangers. In the most promising appearance of
things, they are not to take the least nourishment of food,
nor so much as to sit down, during that time of sanctifying
themselves, till after sunset. While on their expedition, they
are not allowed to lean themselves against a tree, though
they may be exceedingly fatigued, after a sharp day’s march ;
nor must they lie by, a whole day to refresh themselves, or
kill and barbicue deer and bear for their war journey. The
more virtuous they are, they reckon the greater will be their
success against the enemy, by the bountiful smiles of the
deity. To gain that favourite point, some of the aged
warriors narrowly watch the young men who are newly
initiated, lest they should prove irreligious, and prophane the
holy fast, and bring misfortunes on the out-standing camp.
A gentleman of my acquaintance, in his youthful days ob-
served one of their religious fasts, but under the greatest
suspicion of his virtue in this respect, though he had often
headed them against the common enemy: during their three
days’ purification, he was not allowed to go out of the
sanctified ground, without a trusty guard, lest hunger should
have tempted him to violate their old martial law, and by
that means have raised the burning wrath of the holy fire
against the whole camp.” “Every war captain chuses a
noted warrior, to attend on him and the company. He is
called Eitss#, or ‘the waiter” Everything they eat or drink
during their journey, he gives them out of his hand,
by a rigid abstemious rule-—though each carries on his
back all his travelling conveniencies, wrapt in a _ deer
skin, yet they are so bigoted in their religious customs
in war that none, though prompted by sharp hunger or
burning thirst, dares relieve himself. They are contented
with such trifling allowance as the religious waiter distributes
to them, even with a scanty hand, Such a regimen would
be too mortifying to any of the white people, let their opinion
of its violation be ever so dangerous. When I roved the


IV WARRIORS TABOOED 163


woods in a war party with the Indians, though I carried no
scrip, nor bottle, nor staff, I kept a large hollow cane well
corked at each end, and used to sheer off now and then to
drink, while they suffered greatly by thirst. The constancy
of the savages in mortifying their bodies, to gain the divine
favour, is astonishing, from the very time they beat to arms,
till they return from their campaign. All the while they are
out, they are prohibited by ancient custom, the leaning
against a tree, either sitting or standing; nor are they allowed
to sit in the day-time, under the shade of trees, if it can be
avoided ; nor on the ground, during the whole journey, but
on such rocks, stones, or fallen wood, as their ark of war
rests upon. By the attention they invariably pay to those
severe rules of living, they weaken themselves much more
than by the unavoidable fatigues of war; but it is fruitless
to endeavour to dissuade them from those things which they
have by tradition, as the appointed means to move the
deity, to grant them success against the enemy, and a safe
return home.”* “An Indian, intending to go to war, will
commence by blacking his face, permitting his hair to grow
long, and neglecting his personal appearance, and also will
frequently fast, sometimes for two or three days together,
and refrain from all intercourse with the other sex. If his
dreams are favorable, he thinks that the Great Spirit will
give him success.” Among the Ba-Pedi and Ba-Thonga
tribes of south Africa not only have the warriors to abstain
from women, but the people left behind in the villages are
also bound to continence; they think that any incontinence
on their part would cause thorns to grow on the ground
traversed by the warriors, and that success would not attend
the expedition.’

When we observe what pains these misguided savages The rule of
took to unfit themselves for the business of war by abstain- Spernence
ing from food, denying themselves rest, and lacerating by savage


1 J. Adair, History of the American
Indians, pp. 380-382.

2 Maj. M. Marston, in Rev. Jedidiah
Morse’s Report to the Secretary of War
of the United States on Indian Affairs
(New-haven, 1822), Appendix, p. 130.
The account in the text refers especially


to the Sauk, Fox, and Kickapoo
Indians, at the junction of the Rock
and Mississippi rivers.

3 H. A. Junod, ‘‘ Les Conceptions
physiologiques des Bantou sud-africains
et leurs tabous,” Revue a’ Ethnographie
et de Soctologte, i. (1910) p. 149.


warriors is
perhaps
based on a
fear of
infecting
themselves
sympa-
thetically
with


164 TABOOED PERSONS. CHAP.


their bodies, we shall probably not be disposed to attribute
their practice of continence in war to a rational fear of dis-
sipating their bodily energies by indulgence in the lusts of
the flesh. On the contrary, we can scarcely doubt that the
motive which impelled them to observe chastity on a campaign
was just as frivolous as the motive which led them simul-
taneously to fritter away their strength by severe fasts,
gratuitous fatigue, and voluntary wounds at the very


* moment when prudence called most loudly for a precisely


opposite regimen. Why exactly so many savages have
made it a rule to refrain from women in time of war,’ we
cannot say for certain, but we may conjecture that their
motive was a superstitious fear lest, on the principles of
sympathetic magic, close contact with women should infect
them with feminine weakness and cowardice. Similarly some
savages imagine that contact with a woman in childbed
enervates warriors and enfeebles their weapons.” Indeed the
Kayans of central Borneo go so far as to hold that to touch
a loom or women’s clothes would so weaken a man that he


1 For more evidence of the practice of
continence by warriors, see R. Taylor,
Te Tha A Maui, or New Zealand and its
Inhabitants,? p. 189; E. Dieffenbach,
Travels in New Zeaiand, ii. 85 sg. ;
Ch. Wilkes, Narrative of the United
States Exploring Expedition, iii. 78 ;
J. Chalmers, ‘‘ Toaripi,” Journal of
the Anthropological Institute, xxvii.
(1898) p. 3323 ¢a., Pioneering in New
Guinea, p. 65; Van Schmidt, ** Aan-
teekeningen nopens de zeden, etc., der
bevolking van de eilanden Saparoea,
Haroekoe, Noessa Laut, etc.,” Zzd-
schrift voor Neériands Indie, 1843, deel
ii, p. 507; J. G. F. Riedel, De sluzk-
en kroesharige rassen tusschen Selebes
en Papua, p. 223; td., ‘*Galela und
Tobeloresen,” Zettschrift fiir Ethno-
logie, xvii. (1885) p. 68; W. W. Skeat,
Malay Magic, p. 524; E. Reclus,
Nouvelle Géographie universelle, viii.
126 (compare J, Biddulph, Z7rides of
the Hindoo Koosh, p. 18); N. Isaacs,
Travels and Adventures in Eastern
Africa,i. 120; H. Callaway, Religious
System of the Amasulu, iv. 437 8q.3
Dudley Kidd, 7he Essential Kajir, p.


306; A. Bastian, Die deutsche Expedi-
tion an der Loango-Kiiste, i, 2033
H. Cole, ‘* Notes on the Wagogo of
German East Africa,” /ournal of the
Anthropological Institute, xxxii, (1902)
p- 317; R. H. Nassau, Fetichism in
West Africa, p. 177; H. R. School-
craft, Jndian Tribes, iv. 63; J. Morse,
Report to the Secretary of War of the
U.S. on Indian Affairs (New-haven,
1822), pp. 130, 131; H. H. Bancroft,
Native Races of the Pacific States, i.
189. On the other hand in Uganda,
before an army set out, the general and
all the chiefs had either to lie with
their wives or to jump over them.
This was supposed to ensure victory
and plenty of booty. See J. Roscoe,
in Journal of the Anthropological In-
stitute, xxxii, (1902) p. 59. And in
Kiwai Island, off British New Guinea,
men had intercourse with their wives
before they went to war, and they drew
omens from it. See J. Chalmers, ‘* Notes
on the Natives of Kiwai,” Journal of
the Anthropological Institute, xxxiii.
(1903) p. 123.
* See above, pp. 151 sg.


IV WARRIORS TABOOED 165


would have no success in hunting, fishing, and war! Hence
it is not merely sexual intercourse with women that the
savage warrior sometimes shuns; he is careful to avoid the
sex altogether. Thus among the hill tribes of Assam, not
only are men forbidden to cohabit with their wives during
or after a raid, but they may not eat food cooked by
a woman; nay they should not address a word even to
their own wives. Oncea woman, who unwittingly broke the
rule by speaking to her husband while he was under the
war taboo, sickened and died when she learned the awful
crime she had committed.”


§ 5. Manslayers tabooed


If the reader still doubts whether the rules of conduct Taboos
which we have just been considering are based on super- pods
stitious fears or dictated by a rational prudence, his doubts after slay-
will probably be dissipated when he learns that rules of the padiyass:
same sort are often imposed even more stringently on
warriors after the victory has been won and when all fear
of the living corporeal foe is at an end. In such cases one
motive for the inconvenient restrictions laid on the victors in
their hour of triumph is probably a dread of the angry ghosts
of the slain; and that the fear of the vengeful ghosts does
influence the behaviour of the slayers is often expressly
affirmed. The general effect of the taboos laid on sacred The effect
chiefs, mourners, women at childbirth, men on the war-path, poAwent is
and so on, is to seclude or isolate the tabooed persons from to seclude
ordinary society, this effect being attained by a variety of rules, py on
which oblige the men or women to live in separate huts or from
in the open air, to shun the commerce of the sexes, to avoid pees:
the use of vessels employed by others, and so forth. Now
the same effect is produced by similar means in the case of
victorious warriors, particularly such as have actually shed
the blood of their enemies. In the island of Timor, when a Seclusion
warlike expedition has returned in triumph bringing the edhe

yers in
heads of the vanquished foe, the leader of the expedition is cl East
naies.
1 A. W. Nieuwenhuis, Quer durch amongst the Tribes of Assam,” Journal
Borneo, i. 350. of the Anthropological Institute, xxxvi.
* T. C. Hodson, “The genna (1906) p. 100.


Seclusion
of man-
slayers in
the East
Indies.


166 TABOOED PERSONS CHAP.


forbidden by religion and custom to return at once to his
own house. A special hut is prepared for him, in which he
has to reside for two months, undergoing bodily and spiritual
purification. During this time he may not go to his wife
nor feed himself; the food must be put into his mouth by
another person. That these observances are dictated by
fear of the ghosts of the slain seems certain; for from
another account of the ceremonies performed on the return
of a successful head-hunter in the same island we learn that
sacrifices are offered on this occasion to appease the soul of
the man whose head has been taken ; the people think that
some misfortune would befall the victor were such offerings
omitted. Moreover, a part of the ceremony consists of a
dance accompanied by a song, in which the death of the
slain man is lamented and his forgiveness is entreated. “Be
not angry,” they say, “because your head is here with us;
had we been less lucky, our heads might now have been —
exposed in your village. We have offered the sacrifice to
appease you. Your spirit may now rest and leave us at
peace. Why were you our enemy? Would it not have
been better that we should remain friends? Then
your blood would not have been spilt and your head would
not have been cut off.”? The people of Paloo, in
central Celebes, take the heads of their enemies in war
and afterwards propitiate the souls of the slain in the
temple.* In some Dyak tribes men on returning from an
expedition in which they have taken human heads are
obliged to keep by themselves and abstain from a variety


1S. Miiller, Retzen en Ondersoe-
kingen in den Indischen Archipel
(Amsterdam, 1857), ii. 252.

2 J. S. G. Gramberg, ‘* Eene maand
in de binnenlanden van Timor,” Ver-
handelingen van het Bataviaasch
Genootschap van Kunsten en Weten-
schappen, xxxvi, (1872) pp. 208, 216 sq.
Compare H. Zondervan, ‘Timor en
de Timoreezen,” Tijdschrift van het
Nederlandsch Aardrijhkskundig Genoot-
schap, Tweede Serie, v. (1888) Af-
deeling, meer uitgebreide artikelen, pp.
399, 413. Similarly Gallas returning
from war sacrifice to the jinn or
guardian spirits of their slain foes


before they will re-enter their own
houses (Ph. Paulitschke, Zthnographte
Nordost-Afrikas, die geistige Cultur der
Daniékil, Galla und Soméi, pp. 50, 136).
Sometimes perhaps the sacrifice con-
sists of the slayers’ own blood. See
below, pp. 174, 176, 180, Orestes is
said to have appeased the Furies of his
murdered mother by biting off one of
his fingers (Pausanias, viii. 34. 3).


3 N, Adriani en A. C, Kruijt,
‘Van Posso naar Parigi, Sigi en
Lindoe,” AMededeelingen van wege het
Nederlandsche  Zendelinggenootschap,
xlii, (1898) p. 451.


Iv MANSLAYVERS TABOOED 167


of things for several days; they may not touch iron nor eat
salt or fish with bones, and they may have no intercourse
with women.’

In Logea, an island off the south-eastern extremity of Seclusion
New Guinea, men who have killed or assisted in killing prior
enemies shut themselves up for about a week in their New
houses. They must avoid all intercourse with their wives °™"™
and friends, and they may not touch food with their hands.
They may eat vegetable food only, which is brought to
them cooked in special pots. The intention of these
restrictions is to guard the men against the smell of the
blood of the slain; for it is believed that if they smelt the
blood, they would fall ill and die? In the Toaripi or
Motumotu tribe of south-eastern New Guinea a man who
has killed another may not go near his wife, and may
not touch food with his fingers. He is fed by others,
and only with certain kinds of food. These observances
last till the new moon. Among the tribes at the mouth of
the Wanigela River, in New Guinea, “a man who has taken
life is considered to be impure until he has undergone
certain ceremonies: as soon as possible after the deed
he cleanses himself and his weapon. This satisfactorily
accomplished, he repairs to his village and seats himself on
the logs of sacrificial staging. No one approaches him or
takes any notice whatever of him. A house is prepared for
him which is put in charge of two or three small boys as
servants. He may eat only toasted bananas, and only the
centre portion of them—the ends being thrown away. On
the third day of his seclusion a small feast is prepared by
his friends, who also fashion some new perineal bands for
him. This is called zvz oro. The next day the man dons
all his best ornaments and badges for taking life, and sallies
forth fully armed and parades the village. The next day a
hunt is organised, and a kangaroo selected from the game
captured. It is cut open and the spleen and liver rubbed


1S. W. Tromp, ‘* Uit de Salasila of Logea and Neighbourhood,” British
van Koetei,” Bzjdragen tot de Taal- New Guinea, Annual Report for 1894-
Land- en Volkenkunde van Neder- 1895 (London, 1896), p. 52.
landsch-Indié, xxxvii. (1888) p. 74. 3 Rev. J. Chalmers, ‘ Toaripi,”

2 Dr. L. Loria, ‘*Notes on the Journal of the Anthropological Institute,
Ancient War Customs of the Natives xxvii. (1898) p. 333.


Seclusion
of man-
slayers in
New
Guinea.


168 TABOOED PERSONS CHAP.


over the back of the man. He then walks solemnly down
to the nearest water, and standing straddle-legs in it washes
himself. All the young untried warriors swim between his
legs. This is supposed to impart courage and strength to
them. The following day, at early dawn, he dashes out of
his house, fully armed, and calls aloud the name of his
victim. Having satisfied himself that he has thoroughly
scared the ghost of the dead man, he returns to his house.
The beating of flooring-boards and the lighting of fires is
also a certain method of scaring the ghost. A day later
his purification is finished. He can then enter his wife’s
house.”* Among the Roro-speaking tribes of British New
Guinea homicides were secluded in the warriors’ clubhouse.
They had to pass the night in the building, but during the
day they might paint and decorate themselves and dance in
front of it. For some time they might not eat much food
nor touch it with their hands, but were obliged to pick it up
on a bone fork, the heft of which was wrapped in a banana
leaf. After a while they bathed in the sea and thence
forward for a period of about a month, though they had
still to sleep in the warriors’ clubhouse, they were free to eat
as much food as they pleased and to pick it up with their
bare hands. Finally, those warriors who had never killed
a man before assumed a beautiful ornament made of fretted
turtle shell, which none but homicides were allowed to flaunt in
their head-dresses. Then came a dance, and that same night
the men who wore the honourable badge of homicide for
the first time were chased about the village; embers were
thrown at them and firebrands waved in order, apparently,
to drive away the souls of the dead enemies, who seem to
be conceived as immanent in some way in the headgear of
their slayers.” Again, among the Koita of British New
Guinea, when a man had killed another, whether the victim
were male or female, he did not wash the blood off the
spear or club, but carefully allowed it to dry on the weapon.
On his way home he bathed in fresh or salt water, and


1K. E. Guise, “On the Tribes pp. 213 sg.
inhabiting the Mouth of the Wanigela “Cc. G, Seligmann, Zhe Alelan-
River, New Guinea,” Journal of the  esians of British New Guinea (Cam-
Anthropological Institute, xxviii, (1899) bridge, 1910), p. 298.


Iv MANSLAYVERS TABOOED 169


on reaching his village went straight to his own house,
where he remained in seclusion for about a week. He was
taboo (azva): he might not approach women, and he lifted his
food to his mouth with a bone fork. His women-folk were
not obliged to leave the house, but they might not come
near him. At the end of a week he built a rough shelter
in the forest, where he lived for a few days. During this
time he made a new waist-band, which he wore on his
return to the village. A man who has slain another is
supposed to grow thin and emaciated, because he had been
splashed with the blood of his victim, and as the corpse
rotted he wasted away.’ Among the Southern Massim of
British New Guinea a warrior who has taken a prisoner or
slain a man remains secluded in his house for six days,
During the first three days he may eat only roasted food
and must cook it for himself. Then he bathes and blackens
his face for the remaining three days.”

Among the Monumbos of German New Guinea any one The man-
who has slain a foe in war becomes thereby “unclean” porta
(d0lobolo), and they apply the same term “unclean” to
menstruous and lying-in women and also to everything that
has come into contact with a corpse, which shews that all
these classes of persons and things are closely associated
in their minds. The “unclean” man who has killed an
enemy in battle must remain a long time in the men’s club-
house, while the villagers gather round him and celebrate his
victory with dance and song. He may touch nobody, not
even his own wife and children; if he were to touch them
it is believed that they would be covered with sores. He
becomes clean again by washing and using other modes of
purification? In Windessi, Dutch New Guinea, when a party Driving
of head-hunters has been successful, and they are nearing prec
home, they announce their approach and success by blow- the slain.
ing on triton shells. Their canoes are also decked with
branches. The faces of the men who have taken a head
are blackened with charcoal. If several have taken part in

1C. G. Seligmann, of. cit. pp. 3 P. Franz Vormann, ‘‘Zur Psy-
129 sg. chologie, Religion, Soziologie und
Geschichte der Monumbo- Papua,


2 C. G. Seligmann, of. cit. pp. Deutsch-Neuguinea,” <Anthropos, v.
563 sg. (1910) pp. 410 sg.


Driving

away the
ghosts of
the slain.


- should attempt to return to his old home.


170 TABOOED PERSONS CHAP


killing the same victim, his head is divided among them.
They always time their arrival so as to reach home in the
early morning. They come rowing to the village with a
great noise, and the women stand ready to dance in the
verandahs of the houses. The canoes row past the room
svam or house where the young men live ; and as they pass,
the murderers throw as many pointed sticks or bamboos at
the wall or the roof as there were enemies killed. The day
is spent very quietly. Now and then they drum or blow
on the conch; at other times they beat the walls of the
houses with loud shouts to drive away the ghosts of the
slain. Similarly in the Doreh district of Dutch New
Guinea, if a murder has taken place in the village, the
inhabitants assemble for several evenings in succession and
utter frightful yells to drive away the ghost of the victim in
case he should be minded to hang about the village.* So
the Yabim of German New Guinea believe that the spirit of
a murdered man pursues his murderer and seeks to do him
a mischief. Hence they drive away the spirit with shouts
and the beating of drums.2 When the Fijians had buried a
man alive, as they often did, they used at nightfall to make
a great uproar by means of bamboos, trumpet-shells, and so
forth, for the purpose of frightening away his ghost, lest he
And to render
his house unattractive to him they dismantled it and clothed
it with everything that to their ideas seemed most repulsive.*
On the evening of the day on which they had tortured a
prisoner to death, the American Indians were wont to run
through the village with hideous yells, beating with sticks
on the furniture, the walls, and the roofs of the huts to
prevent the angry ghost of their victim from settling there
and taking vengeance for the torments that his body had
endured at their hands. “Once,” says a traveller, “on


1 J, L. D. van der Roest, ‘* Uit het
leven der Bevolking van Windessi,”
Tijdschrift voor Indische Taal. Land:
en Volkenkunde, x\. (1898) pp. 157
54.
2 H. von Rosenberg, Der malayische
Archipel, p. 461.

3K, Vetter, in Machrichten tiber
Kaiser Wilhelms-Land und den Bis-


march-Archipel, 1897, p. 94.

4 J. E. Erskine, Zhe Western Pacific
(London, 1853), p. 477:

5 Charlevoix, Histoire de la Nouvelle
France, vi. pp. 77, 122 sg.3 J. F.
Lafitau, AZeurs des sauvages amert-
guains, ii, 279. In many places it is
customary to drive away the ghosts
even of persons who have died a


IV . MANSLAYVERS TABOOED — 171


approaching in the night a village of Ottawas, I found all the
inhabitants in confusion: they were all busily engaged in
raising noises of the loudest and most inharmonious kind.
Upon inquiry, I found that a battle had been lately fought
between the Ottawas and the Kickapoos, and that the object
of all this noise was to prevent the ghosts of the departed
combatants from entering the village.” *

The executioner at Porto Novo, on the coast of Guinea,
used to decorate his walls with the jawbones of the persons
on whom he had operated in the course of business. But
for this simple precaution their ghosts would unquestionably
have come at night to knock with sobs and groans, in
an insufferable manner, at the door of the room where
he slept the sleep of the just? The temper of a man
who has just been executed is naturally somewhat short,
and in a burst of vexation his ghost is apt to fall foul
of the first person he comes across, without discriminating
between the objects of his wrath with that nicety of judg-
ment which in calmer moments he may be expected to
display. Hence in China it is, or used to be, customary
for the spectators of an execution to shew a clean pair
of heels to the ghosts as soon as the last head was off.
The same fear of the spirits of his victims leads the
executioner sometimes to live in seclusion for some time
after he has discharged his office. Thus an old writer,
speaking of Issini on the Gold Coast of West Africa, tells
us that the “executioners, being reckoned impure for three
days, they build them a separate hut at a distance from
the village. Meantime these fellows run like madmen
through the place, seizing all they can lay hands on;
poultry, sheep, bread, and oil; everything they can touch
is theirs; being deemed so polluted that the owners
willingly give it up. They continue three days confined
to their hut, their friends bringing them victuals. This
time expired, they take their hut in pieces, which they


natural death. An account of these ministres religieux des Négres de la


customs is reserved for another work. Guinée,” Jfissions Catholiques, xvi.
1 W. H. Keating, Narrative of an (1884) p. 332.

Expedition to the Source of St. Peter's 3 Juan de la Concepcion, Historia

River (London, 1§25), i. 109. general de Philipinas, xi. (Manilla,


2 Father Baudin, ‘‘Féticheurs, ou 1791) p. 387.


Precautions
taken by
executioners
against the
ghosts of
their
victims.


172 TABOOED PERSONS CHAP.


bundle up, not leaving so much as the ashes of their fire.
The first executioner, having a pot on his head, leads them
to the place where the criminal suffered. There they all
call him thrice by his name. The first executioner breaks
his pot, and leaving their old rags and bundles they all
scamper home.”* Here the thrice-repeated invocation of


. the victim by name gives the clue to the rest of the


observances; all of them are probably intended to ward
off the angry ghost of the slain man or to give him the
slip.

Among the Basutos “ablution is specially performed on
return from battle. It is absolutely necessary that the
warriors should rid themselves, as soon as possible, of the
blood they have shed, or the shades of their victims would
pursue them incessantly, and disturb their slumbers. They


‘go in a procession, and in full armour, to the nearest


stream. At the moment they enter the water a diviner,
placed higher up, throws some purifying substances into
the current. This is, however, not strictly necessary. The
javelins and battle-axes also undergo the process of wash-
ing.”*? According to another account of the Basuto custom,
“warriors who have killed an enemy are: purified. The
chief has to wash them, sacrificing an ox in presence of the
whole army. They are also anointed with the gall of the
animal, which prevents the ghost of the enemy from pur-
suing them any further.”® Among the Bechuanas a man
who has killed another, whether in war or in single combat,
is not allowed to enter the village until he has been purified.


1G. Loyer, ‘‘ Voyage to Issini on
the Gold Coast,” in T. Astley’s Mew
General Collection of Voyages and
Travels, ii, (London, 1745) p. 444.
Among the tribes of the Lower Niger
it is customary for the executioner to
remain in the house for three days
after the execution; during this time
he sleeps on the bare floor, eats off
broken platters, and drinks out of
calabashes or mugs, which are also
damaged, See Major A, G, Leonard,
The Lower Niger and its Tribes
(London, 1906), p. 180,

2 E. Casalis, Zhe Basutos, p. 258.
So Caffres returning from battle are


unclean and must wash before they
enter their houses (L. Alberti, De .
Kaffers, p. 104). It would seem that
after the slaughter of a foe the Greeks
or Romans had also to bathe in running
water before they might touch holy
things (Virgil, den. ii. 719 sgg.).

8 Father Porte, ‘‘Les Réminiscences
dun missionnaire du Basutoland,”
Missions Catholiques, xxviii. (1896)
p. 371. For a fuller description of a
ceremony of this sort see T, Arbousset
et F, Daumas, Voyage a’exploration
au nord-est de la colonie du Cap de
Bonne-Espérance (Paris, 1842), pp.
561-563.


IV MANSLAYERS TABOOED 173


The ceremony takes place in the evening. An ox is
slaughtered, and a hole having been made through the
middle of the carcase with a spear, the manslayer has to force
himself through the animal, while two men hold its stomach
open.’ Sometimes instead of being obliged to squeeze through
the carcase of an ox the manslayer is merely smeared with
the contents of its stomach. The ceremony has been
described as follows: “In the purification of warriors, too,
the ox takes a conspicuous part. The warrior who has
slain a man in the battle is unclean, and must on no account
enter his own courtyard, for it would be a serious thing if
even his shadow were to fall upon his children. He
studiously keeps himself apart from the civil life. of the
town until he is purified. The purification ceremony is
significant. Having bathed himself in running water, or, if
that is not convenient, in water that has been appropriately
medicated, he is smeared by the doctor with the contents
of the stomach of an ox, into which certain powdered
roots have been already mixed, and then the doctor strikes
him on the back, sides, and belly with the large bowel of
an ox. ... A doctor takes a piece of roasted beef and
cuts it into small lumps of about the size of a walnut,
laying them carefully on a large wooden trencher. He
has already prepared charcoal, by roasting the root of
certain trees in an old cracked pot, and this he grinds
down and sprinkles on the lumps of meat on the trencher.
Then the army surrounds the trencher, and every one
who has slain a foe in the battle steps forth, kneels
down before the trencher, and takes out a piece of
meat with his mouth, taking care not to touch it or the
trencher with his hands. As he takes the meat, the doctor
gives him a smart cut with a switch. And when he has
eaten that lump of meat his purification is complete. This
ceremony is called Go alafsha dintéé, or ‘the purification of
the strikers.’” The writer to whom we owe this description
adds: “This taking of meat from the trencher without
using the hands is evidently a matter of ritual.”? The


1 «¢ Extrait du journal des missions (1834) Pp. 199 sg.
évangeliques,” Bulletin de la Société de 2 Rev. W. C. Willoughby, ‘ Notes.
Géographie (Paris), IIme Série, ii. on the Totemism of the Becwana,’’


Purifica-
tion of
manslayers
among the
Bageshu.


Expulsion
of the
ghosts of


174 TABOOED PERSONS CHAP.


observation is correct. Here as in so many cases persons
ceremonially unclean are forbidden to touch food with
defiled hands until their uncleanness has been purged away.
The same taboo is laid on the manslayer by the Bageshu
of British East Africas Among them a man who has
killed another may not return to his own house on the
same day, though he may enter the village and spend
the night in a friend’s house. He kills a sheep and smears
his chest, his right arm, and his head with the contents of
the animal’s stomach. His children are brought to him
and he smears them in like manner. Then he smears each
side of the doorway with the tripe and entrails, and finally
throws the rest of the stomach on the roof of his house.
For a whole day he may not touch food with his hands,
but picks it up with two sticks and so conveys it to his
mouth. His wife is not under any such restrictions. She
may even go to mourn for the man whom her husband has
killed, if she wishes to do so.’ In some Bechuana tribes the
victorious warrior is obliged to eat a piece of the skinof the man
he killed ; the skin is taken from about the navel of his victim,
and without it he may not enter the cattle pen. Moreover,
the medicine-man makes a gash with a spear in the warrior’s
thigh for every man he has killed.” Among the Angoni, a
Zulu tribe settled to the north of the Zambesi, warriors who


the slainby have slain foes on an expedition smear their bodies and


the Angoni.


faces with ashes, hang garments of their victims on their
persons, and tie bark ropes round their necks, so that the
ends hang down over their shoulders or breasts. This
costume they wear for three days after their return, and
rising at break of day they run through the village uttering
frightful yells to drive away the ghosts of the slain, which,
if they were not thus banished from the houses, might bring
sickness and misfortune on the inmates. In some Caffre
tribes of South Africa men who have been wounded or
killed an enemy in fight may not see the king nor drink


Journal of the Anthropological Insti- 2 Dudley Kidd, 7he Essential Kafr,
tute, Xxxv. (1905) pp. 305 Sg. p- 310.

1 Rev. J. Roscoe, ** Notes on the 8 C, Wiese, ‘‘ Beitrage zur Geschichte
Bageshu,” Journal of the Royal An- der Zulu im Norden des Zambesi,”
thropological Institute, xxxix. (1909)  Zettschrift Siir Ethnalogie, xxxii. (1900)
Pp. 190, PP: 197 5g &


Iv MANSLAYERS TABOOED 175


milk till they have been purified. An ox is killed, and its
gall, intestines, and other parts are boiled with roots. Of
this decoction the men have to take three gulps, and the
rest is sprinkled on their bodies. The wounded man has
then to take a stick, spit on it thrice, point it thrice at the
enemy, and then throw it in his direction. After that he
takes an emetic and is declared clean.

In some of these accounts nothing is said of an Seclusion
enforced seclusion, at least after the ceremonial cleansing, pass MAN
but some South -African tribes certainly require the -slayer of man-
of a very gallant foe in war to keep apart from his wife 5. \tica.
and family for ten days after he has washed his body in
running water, He also receives from the tribal doctor a
medicine which he chews with his food.2 When a Nandi
of British East Africa has killed a member of another tribe,
he paints one side of his body, spear, and sword red, and the
other side white. For four days after the slaughter he is
considered unclean and may not go home. He has to build
a small shelter by a river and live there; he may not
associate with his wife or sweetheart, and he may eat
nothing but porridge, beef, and goat’s flesh. At the end of
the fourth day he must purify himself by taking a strong
purge made from the bark of the segetet tree and by
drinking goat’s milk mixed with blood.* Among the
Akikuya of British East Africa all who have shed human
blood must be purified. The elders assemble and one of
them cuts a strip of hair from above both ears of each man-
slayer. After that the warriors rub themselves with the
dung taken from the stomach of a sheep which has been
slaughtered for the occasion. Finally their bodies are
cleansed with water. All the hair remaining on their heads
is subsequently shaved off by their wives. For a month
after the shedding of blood they may have no contact with


1 Dudley Kidd, The Essential Kafir,
Pp: 309 sg.


2 Rev. J. Macdonald, ‘‘ Manners,
Customs, Superstitions, and Religions
of South African Tribes,” Journal of the
Anthropological Institute, xx, (1891)
p. 138; zd., Light in Africa, p.
220,


3 A. C. Hollis, The Nandi (Oxford,
1909), p. 74. As to the painting of
the body red on one side and white on
the other see also C. W. Hobley,
Eastern Uganda, pp. 38, 42; Sir H.
Johnston, Zhe Uganda Protectorate,
ii, 868. As to the custom of painting
the bodies of homicides, see below,
p- 178 note! and p, 186 note},


176 TABOOED PERSONS CHAP.


Purificas women. On the contrary, when a Ketosh warrior of British
Sees East Africa, who has killed a foe in battle, returns home
in Africa. “it is considered essential that he should have connection


with his wife as soon as convenient; this is believed to
prevent the spirit of his dead enemy from haunting and


bewitching him.” *


An Angoni who has killed a man in battle


is obliged to perform certain purificatory ceremonies before


he may return to ordinary life.


Amongst other things, he


must be sure to make an incision in the corpse of his slain
foe, in. order to let the gases escape and so prevent the body


from swelling.


If he fails to do so, his own body will swell
in proportion as the corpse becomes inflated.*


Among the


Ovambos of southern Africa, when the warriors return to
their villages, those who have killed an enemy pass the first
night in the open fields, and may not enter their houses
until they have been cleansed of the guilt of blood by an
older man, who smears them for this purpose with a kind of


porridge.*


Herero warriors on their return from battle may


not approach the sacred hearth until they have been purified


from the guilt of bloodshed.


They crouch in a circle round


the hearth, but at some distance from it, while the chief
besprinkles their brows and temples with water in which


branches


of a holy bush have been placed.®


Again,


ancient Herero custom requires that he who has killed a
man or a lion should have blood drawn from his breast and
upper arm so as to trickle on the ground: a special name
(outonz) is given to the cuts thus made; they must be made


with a flint, not with an iron tool.®


Among the Bantu


tribes of Kavirondo, in eastern Africa, when a man has


1H. R. Tate, ‘Further Notes on
the Kikuyu Tribe of British EastAfrica,”
Journal of the Anthropological Institute,
xxxiv. (1904) p. 264.

2C. W. Hobley, “British East
Africa,” Journal of the Anthropological
Institute, xxxiii, (1903) p. 353-

% Miss Alice Werner, Natives of
British Central Africa (London, 1906),
pp. 67 59.

4 H. Schinz,
Afrika, p. 321.

5 Pp, H. Brincker, ‘‘ Heidnisch-
religidse Sitten der Bantu, speciell


Deutsch - Stidwest-


der Ovaherero und Ovambo,” Glodus,
Ixvii. (1895) p. 289; ¢a@., ‘* Charak-
ter, Sitten und Gebriiuche speciell
der Bantu Deutsch-Siidwestafrikas,”
Mittheilungen des Seminars fiir orien-
talische Sprachen su Berlin, iii. (1900)
Dritte Abtheilung, p. 76.

® /d., ‘*Beobachtungen tiber die
Deisidiimonie der _—_Eingeborenen
Deutsch - Siidwest - Afrikas,” G/odus,
Iviii. (1890) p. 3243 ¢d., in Globus,
Ixvii. (1895) p. 2893 ¢#@., in A/itthei-
lungen des Seminars fiir orientalische
Sprachen su Berlin, iii, (1900) Dritte
Abtheilung, p. 83.


Iv MANSLAYERS TABOOED 177


killed an enemy in warfare he shaves his head on his return Purifica-
home, and his friends rub a medicine, which generally ase wa
consists of goat’s dung, over his body to prevent the spirit in Africa.
of the slain man from troubling him.’ Exactly the same
custom is practised for the same reason by the Wageia
of German East Africa.2 With the Ja-Luo of Kavirondo
the custom is somewhat different. Three days after his
return from the fight the warrior shaves his head. But
before he may enter his village he has to hang a live
fowl, head uppermost, round his neck; then the bird is
decapitated and its head left hanging round his neck. Soon
after his return a feast is made for the slain man, in order
that his ghost may not haunt his slayer.® After the
slaughter of the Midianites the Israelitish warriors were
obliged to remain outside the camp for seven days: who-
ever had killed a man or touched the slain had to purify
himself and his captive. The spoil taken from the enemy
had also to be purified, according to its nature, either by fire
or water. Similarly among the Basutos cattle taken from
the enemy are fumigated with bundles of lighted branches
before they are allowed to mingle with the herds of the
tribe.®

The Arunta of central Australia believe that when a Man-
party of men has been out against the enemy and taken i
life, the spirit of the slain man follows the party on its guard
return and is constantly on the watch to do a mischief nour
to those of the band who actually shed the blood. It ghosts of
takes the form of a little bird called the chichurkna, and oe
may be heard crying like a child in the distance as it
flies. If any of the slayers should fail to hear its cry,
he would become paralysed in his right arm and shoulder.
At night-time especially, when the bird is flying over
the camp, the slayers have to lie awake and keep the
right arm and shoulder carefully hidden, lest the bird should
look down upon and harm them. When once they have


1 Sir H. Johnston, Zhe Uganda 1910), p. 198.
Protectorate (London, 1902), ii. 743 3 Sir H. Johnston, of. czt. ii. 794;
sg.; C. W. Hobley, Zastern Uganda CC. W. Hobley, of. czt. p. 31.
(London, 1902), p. 20. * Numbers xxxi. 19-24.

2M. Weiss, Die Volkerstimme im 5 E. Casalis, The Basutos, pp. 258
Norden Deutsch - Ostafrikas (Berlin, sg.


PT, II N


Manslayers
in Australia
guard
themselves
against the
ghosts of
the slain.


Seclusion
of man-
slayers in
Polynesia.


178 TABOOED PERSONS CHAP,


heard its cry their minds are at ease, because the spirit of
the dead then recognises that he has been detected, and can
therefore do no mischief. On their return to their friends,
as soon as they come in sight of the main camp, they begin
to perform an excited war-dance, approaching in the form of
a square and moving their shields as if to ward off something
which was being thrown at them, This action is intended
to repel the angry spirit of the dead man, who is striving to
attack them. Next the men who did the deed of blood
separate themselves from the others, and forming a line,
with spears at rest and shields held out in front, stand silent
and motionless like statues. A number of old women now
approach with a sort of exulting skip and strike the shields
of the manslayers with fighting-clubs till they ring again.
They are followed by men who smite the shields with
boomerangs. This striking of the shields is supposed to be
a very effective way of frightening away the spirit of the
dead man. The natives listen anxiously to the sounds
emitted by the shields when they are struck; for if any
man’s shield gives forth a hollow sound under the blow, that
man will not live long, but if it rings sharp and clear, he is
safe. For some days after their return the slayers will not
speak of what they have done, and continue to paint them-
selves all over with powdered charcoal, and to decorate their
foreheads and noses with green twigs. Finally, they paint
their bodies and faces with bright colours, and become free
to talk about the affair; but still of nights they must lie
awake listening for the plaintive cry of the bird in which
they fancy they hear the voice of their victim.’

In the Washington group of the Marquesas Islands, the
man who has slain an enemy in battle becomes tabooed for
ten days, during which he may hold no intercourse with his
wife, and may not meddle with fire. Hence another has to
make fire and to cook for him. Nevertheless he is treated
with marked distinction and receives presents of pigs.” In


1 Spencer and Gillen, ative Tribes them invisible to the ghost. A widow,


of Central Australia, pp. 493-4953
id., Northern Tribes of Central Aus-
tralia, pp. 563-568. The writers
suggest that the practice of painting
the slayers black is meant to render


on the contrary, must paint her body ~
white, in order that her husband’s spirit
may see that she is mourning for him.
2G. H. von Langsdorff, Reise um
die Welt (Frankfort, 1812), i. 114 sg.


Iv MANSLAVERS TABOOED 179


Fiji any one who had clubbed a human being to death in
war was consecrated or tabooed. He was smeared red -by
the king with turmeric from the roots of his hair to his
heels, A hut was built, and in it he had to pass the next
three nights, during which he might not lie down, but must
sleep as he sat. Till the three nights had elapsed he might
not change his garment, nor remove the turmeric, nor enter
a house in which there was a woman. In the Pelew
Islands, when the men return from a warlike expedition in
which they have taken a life, the young warriors who have
been out fighting for the first time, and all who handled the
slain, are shut up in the large council-house and become
tabooed. They may not quit the edifice, nor bathe, nor
touch a-woman, nor eat fish; their food is limited to coco-
nuts and syrup. They rub themselves with charmed leaves
and chew charmed betel. After three days they go together
to bathe as near as possible to the spot where the man was
killed.?

When the Tupi Indians of Brazil had made A Sectasion
prisoner in war, they used to bring him home amid great * ease
rejoicings, decked with the gorgeous plumage of tropical of man-
birds. In the village he was well treated: he received Mae
house and furniture and was married to a wife. When he the Tupi
was thus comfortably installed, the relations and friends of eee
his captor, who had the first pick, came and examined him
and decided which of his limbs and joints they proposed
to eat; and according to their choice they-were bound
to provide him with victuals. Thus he might live for
months or years, treated like a king, supplied with all the
delicacies of the country, and rearing a family of children
who, when they were big, might or might not be eaten
with their father. While he was thus being fattened like
a capon for the slaughter, he wore a necklace of fruit or
of fish-bones strung on a cotton thread. This was the
measure of his life. For every fruit or every bone on the
string he had a month to live; and as each moon waned
and vanished they took a fruit or a bone from the necklace.


1 T. Williams, 727 and the Fijians,?  tungen der Pelauer (Berlin, 1885), pp.
i. 55 5g. 126 sg., 130.
2 J. Kubary, Die soctalen Einrich-


Seclusion
and purifi-
cation of
manslayers
among

the Tupi
Indians

of Brazil.


180 TABOOED PERSONS CHAP.


When only one remained, they sent out invitations to
friends and neighbours far and near, who flocked in, some-
times to the number of ten or twelve thousand, to witness
the spectacle and partake of the feast ; for often a number
of prisoners were to die the same day, father, mother, and
children all together. As a rule they shewed a remarkable
stolidity and indifference to death. The club with which
they were to be despatched was elaborately prepared by the
women, who adorned it with tassels of feathers, smeared it
with the pounded shells of a macaw’s eggs, and traced lines
on the egg-shell powder. Then they hung it to a pole,
above the ground, in an empty hut, and sang around it all
night. The executioner, who was painted grey with ashes
and his whole body covered with the beautiful feathers of
parrots and other birds of gay plumage, performed his office
by striking the victim on the head from behind and dashing
out his brains. No sooner had he despatched the prisoner
than he retired to his house, where he had to stay all that
day without eating or drinking, while the rest of the people
feasted on the body of the victim or victims. And for
three days he was obliged to fast and remain in seclusion.
All this time he lay in his hammock and might not set foot
on the ground; if he had to go anywhere, he was carried
by bearers. They thought that, were he to break this rule,
some disaster would befall him or he would die. Meantime
he was given a small bow and passed his time in shooting
arrows into wax. This he did in order to keep his hand
and aim steady. In some of the tribes they rubbed the
pulse of the executioner with one of the eyes of his victim,
and hung the mouth of the murdered man like a bracelet
on his arm. Afterwards he made incisions in his breast,
arms, and legs, and other parts of his body with a saw
made of the teeth of an animal. An ointment and a black
powder were then rubbed into the wounds, which left
ineffaceable scars so artistically arranged that they pre-
sented the appearance of a tightly-fitting garment. It was
believed that he would die if he did not thus draw blood
from his own body after slaughtering the captive.’ We


1 F, A. Thevet, Les Singularites de nommée Amerique (Antwerp, 1558),
la France Antarctique, autrement pp. 74°76; td., Cosmographie univer-


Iv MANSLAYERS TABOOED 181


may conjecture that the original intention of these customs
was to guard the executioner against the angry and
dangerous ghosts of his victims.

Among the Natchez of North America young braves Seclusion
who had taken their first scalps were obliged to observe eriediiea
certain rules of abstinence for six months. They of man-
might not sleep with their wives nor eat flesh; their pod
only food was fish and hasty-pudding. If they broke pec nie
these rules, they believed that the soul of the man Indians.
they had killed would work their death by magic, that
they would gain no more successes over the enemy, and
that the least wound inflicted on them would prove
mortal.’ When a Choctaw had killed an enemy and taken
his scalp, he went into mourning for a month, during
which he might not comb his hair, and if his head itched
he might not scratch it except with a little stick which he
wore fastened to his wrist for the purpose.” This ceremonial
mourning for the enemies they had slain was not uncommon
among the North American Indians. Thus the Dacotas, when
they had killed a foe, unbraided their hair, blackened them-
selves all over, and wore a small knot of swan’s down on the
top of the head. “They dress as mourners yet rejoice.”* A
Thompson River Indian of British Columbia, who had slain
an enemy, used to blacken his own face, lest his victim’s
ghost should blind him. When the Osages have mourned
over their own dead, “they will mourn for the foe just as if
he was a friend.”® From observing the great respect paid by


selle (Paris, 1575), pp. 944 [978] sg. ;
Pero de Magalhanes de Gandavo,
Histoire de la province de Sancta-Cruz
(Paris, 1837), pp. 134-141 (H. Ter-
naux-Compans, Voyages, relations, et
mémoires originaux pour servir a
Phistoire de la découverte de lAmé-
vigue ; the original of Gandavo’s work
was published in Portuguese at Lisbon
in 1576); J. Lery, Métstorta naviga-
tionis in Brasiliam, quae et America
dicitur (1586), pp. 183-194; Zhe
Captivity of Hans Stade of Hesse, in
A.D. 1547-1555, among the Wild
Tribes of Eastern Brazil, translated
by A. Tootal (London, 1874), pp.
155-159; J. F. Lafitau, MWours des
Sauvages ameriquains, ii. 292 sgg.; R.


Southey, Héstory of Brazil, i.? 227-232.

1 «Relation des Natchez,” Voyages
au nord, ix. 24 (Amsterdam, 1737) 3
Lettres édifiantes et curieuses, vii. 26;
Charlevoix, Histoire de la Wouualle
France, vi. 186 sq.

2 Bossu, Nouveaux Vepaees aux
Indes occidentales (Paris, 1768), ii. 94.

3-H. R. Schooleraft, Zudian Tribes,
iv. 63.

4 J. Teit, ‘‘ The Thompson Indians
of British Columbia,” A/emotr of the
American Museum of Natural History,
The Jesup North Pacific Expedition,
vol. i. part iv. (April 1900) p. 357.

5 J. O. Dorsey, ‘* An Account of the
War Customs of the Osages,” American
Naturalist, xviii. (1884) p. 126.


Seclusion
and purifi-
cation of
manslayers
among

the Pima
Indians.


182 TABOOED PERSONS — CHAP.


the Indians to the scalps they had taken, and listening to the
mournful songs which they howled to the shades of their
victims, Catlin was convinced that “they have a superstitious
dread of the spirits of their slain enemies, and many concilia-
tory offices to perform, to ensure their own peace.”* When
a Pima Indian has killed an Apache, he must undergo puri-
fication. Sixteen days he fasts, and only after the fourth day
is he allowed to drink a little pinole. During the whole time
he may not touch meat nor salt, nor look on a blazing fire,
nor speak to a human being. He lives alone in the woods,
waited on by an old woman, who brings him his scanty dole
of food. He bathes often in a river, and keeps his head
covered almost the whole time with a plaster of mud. On
the seventeenth day a large space is cleared near the village
and a fire lit in the middle of it. The men of the tribe
form a circle round the fire, and outside of it sit all the
warriors who have just been purified, each in a small
excavation. Some of the old men then take the weapons
of the purified and dance with them in the circle, after which
both the slayer and his weapon are considered clean; but
not until four days later is the man allowed to return to
his family.” No doubt the peace enforced by the


1G. Catlin, North American Australia, ii. 354; G. F. Angas, Savage


Indians, i. 246.

2 H. H. Bancroft, Native Races of
the Pacific States, i. 553; Capt.
Grossman, cited in Minth Annual
Report of the Bureau of Ethnology
(Washington, 1892), pp. 475 5g. The
custom of plastering the head with mud
was observed by Egyptian women in
mourning (Herodotus, ii. 85; Dio-
dorus Siculus, i. 91). Among some of
the aboriginal tribes of Victoria and
New South Wales widows wore a thick
skullcap of clay or burned gypsum,
forming a cast of the head, for some
months after the death; when the
period of mourning was over, the cap
was removed, baked in the fire, and
laid on the husband’s grave. One of
these widows’ caps is exhibited in the
British Museum. See T. L. Mitchell,
Three Expeditions into the Interior of
Eastern Australia (London, 1838), i.
251 sg.; E. J. Eyre, Journals of
Expeditions of Discovery into Central


Life and Scenes in Australia and New
Zealand (London, 1847), i. 86; G,
Krefft, ‘*On the Manners and Customs
of the Aborigines of the Lower Murray
and Darling,” Zvansactions of the Philo-
sophical Society of New South Wales,
1862-1865 (Sydney, 1866), pp. 373
$q.3 J. Dawson, Australian Aborigines,
p- 66; R. Brough Smyth, Zhe Aéd-
origines of Victoria, i. p. xxx.3 W.
Stanbridge, ‘‘On the Aborigines of
Victoria,” Zransactions of the Ethno-
logical Society of London, N.S., i. (1861)
p- 298; A. Oldfield, ‘‘ The Aborigines
of Australia,” zd2d, iii. (1865) p. 248 ;
F. Bonney, ‘*On some Customs of the
Aborigines of the River Darling, New
South Wales,” Journal of the Anthropo-
logical Institute, xiii, (1884) p. 1353
E. M. Curr, Zhe Australian Race, i.
88, ii. 238 sg., iii, 21; A. W. Howitt,
Native Tribes of South-East Australia,
pp. 248, 452; R.° Etheridge, jun.,
** The ‘ Widow’s Cap’ of the Australian


Iv MANSLAYERS TABOOED 183


government of the United States has, along with tribal Seclusion
warfare, abolished also these quaint customs. A fuller 20¢ Put
account of them has been given by a recent writer, and it manslayers
deserves to be quoted at length. “There was no law among the Pina
the Pimas,” he says, “observed with greater strictness than Indians,
that which required purification and expiation for the deed

that was at the same time the most lauded—the killing of

an enemy. For sixteen days the warrior fasted in seclusion

and observed meanwhile a number of tabus. .. . Attended

by an old man, the warrior who had to expiate the crime of

blood guilt retired to the groves along the river bottom at

some distance from the villages or wandered about the
adjoining hills. During the period of sixteen days he was

not allowed to touch his head with his fingers or his hair
would turn white. If he touched his face it would become
wrinkled. He kept a stick to scratch his head with, and at

the end of every four days this stick was buried at the root

and on the west side of a cat’s claw tree and a new stick

was made of greasewood, arrow bush, or any other convenient

shrub. He then bathed in the river, no matter how cold

the temperature. The feast of victory which his friends

were observing in the meantime at the village lasted eight

days. At the end of that time, or when his period of retire-

ment was half-completed, the warrior might go to his home

to get a fetish made from the hair of the Apache whom he

had killed. The hair was wrapped in eagle down and tied

with a cotton string and kept in a long medicine basket.

He drank no water for the first two days and fasted for the

first four. After that time he was supplied with pinole by

his attendant, who also instructed him as to his future con-

duct, telling him that he must henceforth stand back until


Aborigines,” Proceedings of the Linnaean
Society of New South Wales for the Year
1899, xxiv. (Sydney, 1900) pp. 333-
345 (with illustrations). In the
Andaman Islands mourners coat their
heads with a thick mass of white clay
(Jagor, in Verhandlungen der Berliner
Gesellschaft fiir Anthropologie, 1876,
p- (57); M. V. Portman, ‘‘ Disposal
of the Dead among the Andamanese,”
Indian Antiquary, xxv. (1896) p. 57;
compare E, H. Man, Aboriginal Jn-


habitants of the Andaman Islands, pp.
73, 75). Among the Bahima of the
Uganda Protectorate, when herdsmen
water their cattle in the evening, they
plaster their faces and bodies with
white clay, at the same time stiffening
their hair with mud into separate
lumps. This mud is left on the head
for days till it crumbles into dust (Sir
H. Johnston, 7he Uganda Protectorate,
ii. 626, compare 620).


Seclusion
and purifi-
cation of
manslayers
among the
Pimas and
Apaches.


Taboos
observed
by Indians
who had
slain Es-
quimaux,.


184 TABOOED PERSONS CHAP.


all others were served when partaking of food and drink.
If he was a married man his wife was not allowed to eat
salt during his retirement, else she would suffer from the
owl disease which causes stiff limbs. The explanation
offered for the observance of this law of lustration is that
if it is not obeyed the warrior’s limbs will become stiffened
or paralyzed.”* The Apaches, the enemies of the Pimas,
purify themselves for the slaughter of their foes by means of
baths in the sweat-house, singing, and other rites. These
ceremonies they perform for all the dead simultaneously
after their return home; but the Pimas, more punctilious on
this point, resort to their elaborate ceremonies of purification
the moment a single one of their own band or of the enemy
has been laid low.” How heavily these religious scruples
must have told against the Pimas in their wars with their
ferocious enemies is obvious enough. “This long period of
retirement immediately after a battle,’ says an American
writer, “ greatly diminished the value of the Pimas as scouts
and allies for the United States troops operating against
the Apaches. The bravery of the Pimas was praised by all
army Officers having any experience with them, but Captain
Bourke and others have complained of their unreliability, due
solely to their rigid observance of this religious law.”* In
nothing, perhaps, is the penalty which superstition sooner or
later entails on its devotees more prompt and crushing than
in the operations of war.

Far away from the torrid home of the Pima and Apaches,
an old traveller witnessed ceremonies of the same sort prac-
tised near the Arctic Circle by some Indians who had surprised
and brutally massacred an unoffending and helpless party
of Esquimaux. His description is so interesting that I will
quote it in full) “Among the various superstitious customs
of those people, it is worth remarking, and ought to have been
mentioned in its proper place, that immediately after my com-
panions had killed the Esquimaux at the Copper River, they
considered themselves in a state of uncleanness, which induced


1 F, Russell, ‘* The Pima Indians,” Crook, p. 203.


Twenty-Sixth Annual Report of the 8 F. Russell, ‘* The Pima Indians,”
Bureau of American Ethnology (Wash- Twenty-Sixth Annual Report of the
ington, 1908), pp. 204 sg. Bureau of American Ethnology (Wash-


* J, G, Bourke, On the Border with ington, 1908), p. 204.


|


Iv MANSLAYVERS TABOOED 185


them to practise some very curious and unusual ceremonies.
In the first place, all who were absolutely concerned in the
murder were prohibited from cooking any kind of victuals,
either for themselves or others. As luckily there were two in
company who had not shed blood, they were employed always
as cooks till we joined the women. This circumstance was
exceedingly favourable on my side; for had there been no
persons of the above description in company, that task, I
was told, would have fallen on me; which would have been
no less fatiguing and troublesome, than humiliating and
vexatious. When the victuals were cooked, all the
murderers took a kind of red earth, or oker, and painted all
the space between the nose and chin, as well as the greater
part of their cheeks, almost to the ears, before they would
taste a bit, and would not drink out of any other dish, or
smoke out of any other pipe, but their own; and none ef
the others seemed willing to drink or smoke out of theirs.
We had no sooner joined the women, at our return from the
expedition, than there seemed to be an universal spirit of
emulation among them, vying who should first make a suit of
ornaments for their husbands, which consisted of bracelets
for the wrists,and a band for the forehead, composed of
porcupine quills and moose-hair, curiously wrought on
leather. The custom of painting the mouth and part of
the cheeks before each meal, and drinking and smoking out
of their own utensils, was strictly and invariably observed,
till the winter began to set in; and during the whole of that
time they would never kiss any of their wives or children.
They refrained also from eating many parts of the deer and
other animals, particularly the head, entrails, and blood ; and
during their uncleanness, their victuals were never sodden in
water, but dried in the sun, eaten quite raw, or broiled, when
a fire fit for the purpose could be procured. When the
time arrived that was to put an end to these ceremonies,
the men, without a female being present, made a fire at
some distance from the tents, into which they threw all
their ornaments, pipe-stems, and dishes, which were soon
consumed to ashes ; after which a feast was prepared, con-
sisting of such articles as they had long been prohibited
from eating; and when all was over, each man was at


The puri-
fication of
murderers,
like that of
warriors
who have
slain
enemies,
was prob-
ably in-
tended to
avert or


186


TABOOED PERSONS


CHAP,


liberty to eat, drink, and smoke as he pleased ; and also to
kiss his wives and children at discretion, which they seemed
to do with more raptures than I had ever known them do


it either before or since.” !


Thus we see that warriors who have taken the life of
a foe in battle are temporarily cut off from free intercourse
with their fellows, and especially with their wives, and
must undergo certain rites of purification before they are
readmitted to society. Nowif the purpose of their seclusion
and of the expiatory rites which they have to perform is,
as we have been led to believe, no other than to shake


off, frighten, or appease the


1 S. Hearne, Journey from Prince of
Wales's Fort in Hudson’s Bay to the
Northern Ocean (London, 1795), pp.
204-206. The custom of painting the
face or the body of the manslayer,
which may perhaps be intended to
disguise him from the vengeful spirit
of the slain, is practised by other
peoples, as by the Nandi (see above,
p- 175). Among the Ba-Yaka of the
Congo Free State a man who has been
slain in battle is supposed to send his
soul to avenge his death on his slayer ;
but the slayer can protect himself
against the ghost by wearing the red
tail-feathers of a parrot in his hair and
painting his forehead red (E, Torday
and T. A. Joyce, ‘‘ Notes on the
Ethnography of the Ba-Yaka,” Journal
of the Anthropological Institute, xxxvi.
(1906) pp. 50 sg.). Among the Borana
Gallas, when a war-party has returned
to the village, the victors who have slain
a foe are washed by the women with a
mixture of fat and butter, and their
faces are painted with red and white
(Ph. Paulitschke, Zthnographie Nord-
ost-Afrikas: die materielle Cultur der
Dandhil, Galla und Soméal (Berlin,
1893), p. 258). When Masai warriors
kill enemies in fight they paint the
right half of their own bodies red and
the left half white (A. C. Hollis, Zhe
Masai, p. 353). Among the Wagogo of
German East Africa, a man who has
killed an enemy in battle paints a red
circle round his right eye and a black
circle round his left eye (Rev. H. Cole,
‘*Notes on the Wagogo of German


angry spirit of the slain man,


East Africa,” Journal of the Anthropo-
logical Institute, xxxii. (1902) p. 314).
Among the Angoni of central Africa,
after a successful raid, the leader calls
together all who have killed an enemy
and paints their faces and heads white ;
also he paints a white band round the
body under the arms and across the
chest (British Central Africa Gazette,
No. 86, vol. v. No. 6 (April 30,
1898), p. 2). A Koossa Caffre who
has slain a man is accounted unclean.
He must roast some flesh on a fire
kindled with wood of a special sort
which imparts a bitter flavour to the
meat. This flesh he eats, and after-
wards blackens his face with the ashes
of the fire. After a time he may wash
himself, rinse his mouth with fresh
milk, and paint himself brown again,
From that moment he is clean (H.


Lichtenstein, Reise im  siidlichen
Africa, i, 418). Among the Yabim of
German New Guinea, when the


relations of a murdered man have
accepted a bloodwit instead of avenging
his death, they must allow the family
of the murderer to mark them with
chalk on the brow. If this is not
done, the ghost of their murdered
kinsman may come and trouble them
for not doing their duty by him; for
example, he may drive away their
swine or loosen their teeth (K, Vetter,
in Nachrichten tiber Kaiser Wilhelms-
Land und den Bismarck ~- Archipel,
1897, p. 99). In this last case the
marking the face with chalk seems to be
clearly a disguise to outwit the ghost.


Iv MANSLAYERS TABOOED 187


we may safely conjecture that the similar purification of appease
homicides and murderers, who have imbrued their hands in rk con
the blood of a fellow-tribesman, had at first the same signifi- slain.
cance, and that the idea of a moral or spiritual regeneration
symbolised by the washing, the fasting, and so on, was merely
a later interpretation put upon the old custom by men who
had outgrown the primitive modes of thought in which the
custom originated. The conjecture will be confirmed if we
can shew that savages have actually imposed certain restric-
tions on the murderer of a fellow-tribesman from a definite
fear that he is haunted by the ghost of his victim. This
we can do with regard to the Omahas, a tribe of the
Siouan stock in North America. Among these Indians the
kinsmen of a murdered man had the right to put the
murderer to death, but sometimes they waived their right in
consideration of presents which they consented to accept.
When the life of the murderer was spared, he had to observe
certain stringent rules for a period which varied from two to
four years. He must walk barefoot, and he might eat no warm
food, nor raise his voice, nor look around. He was com-
pelled to pull his robe about him and to have it tied at the
neck even in hot weather; he might not let it hang loose or
fly open. He might not move his hands about, but had to
keep them close to his body. He might not comb his hair,
and it might not be blown about by the wind. When the
tribe went out hunting, he was obliged to pitch his tent
about a quarter of a mile from the rest of the people “lest
the ghost of his victim should raise a high wind, which might
cause damage.” Only one of his kindred was allowed to
remain with him at his tent. No one wished to eat with him,
for they said, “If we eat with him whom Wakanda hates,
Wakanda will hate us.” Sometimes he wandered at night
crying and lamenting his offence. At the end of his long
isolation the kinsmen of the murdered man heard his crying
and said, “It isenough. Begone, and walk among the crowd.
Put on moccasins and wear a good robe.”? Here the reason
alleged for keeping the murderer at a considerable distance
from the hunters gives the clue to all the other restrictions


1 J. Owen Dorsey, ‘Omaha Soci- Bureau of Ethnology (Washington,
ology,” Third Annual Report of the 1884), p. 369.


Ancient
Greek
dread of
the ghosts
of the
slain.


Taboos
imposed on
men who
have par-
taken of
human
flesh.


TABOOED PERSONS


188 CHAP.


laid on him: he was haunted and therefore dangerous. The
ancient Greeks believed that the soul of a man who had just
been killed was wroth with his slayer and troubled him;
wherefore it was needful even for the involuntary homicide
to depart from his country for a year until the anger of the
dead man had cooled down; nor might the slayer return
until sacrifice had been offered and ceremonies of purification
performed. If his victim chanced to be a foreigner, the
homicide had to shun the native country of the dead man as
well as his own.’ The legend of the matricide Orestes, how
he roamed from place to place pursued by the Furies of his
murdered mother, and none would sit at meat with him, or take
him in, till he had been purified,? reflects faithfully the real
Greek dread of such as were still haunted by an angry ghost.
When the turbulent people of Cynaetha, after perpetrating
an atrocious massacre, sent an embassy to Sparta, every
Arcadian town through which the envoys passed on their
journey ordered them out of its walls at once; and the
Mantineans, after the embassy had departed, even instituted
a solemn purification of the city and its territory by carrying
sacrificial victims round them both.®

Among the Kwakiutl Indians of British Columbia, men
who have partaken of human flesh as a ceremonial rite
are subject for a long time afterwards to many restrictions
or taboos of the sort we have been dealing with. They
may not touch their wives for a whole year; and during the
same time they are forbidden to work or gamble. For four
months they must live alone in their bedrooms, and when
they are obliged to quit the house for a necessary purpose,
they may not go out at the ordinary door, but must use
only the secret door in the rear of the house. On such
occasions each of them is attended by all the rest, carrying
small sticks. They must all sit down together on a long
log, then get up, then sit down again, repeating this three


1 Plato, Zaws, ix. pp. 865 D-866 4;
Demosthenes, Contra Aristocr. pp. 643
sg.; Hesychius, s.v. dreviauriouds,

* Euripides, Jphig. in Zaur. 940
sgq.; Pausanias, ii, 31. 8. We may
compare the wanderings of the other
matricide Alemaeon, who could find no


rest till he came to a new land on
which the sun had not yet shone when
he murdered his mother (Thucydides,
ii, 102; Apollodorus, iii, 7, 5; Pau-
sanias, viii. 24, 8).


§ Polybius, iv, 21,


Iv MANSLAYERS TABOOED 189


times before they are allowed to remain seated. Before Taboos
they rise they must turn round four times. Then they go impose’
back to the house. Before entering they must raise their who have
feet four times; with the fourth step they really pass the maces
door, taking care to enter with the right foot foremost. In flesh.
the doorway they turn four times and walk slowly into

the house. They are not permitted to look back. During

the four months of their seclusion each man in eating
must use a spoon, dish, and kettle of his own, which are
thrown away at the end of the period. Before he draws
water from a bucket or a brook, he must dip his cup
into it thrice; and he may not take more than four
mouthfuls at one time. He must carry a wing-bone of

an eagle and drink through it, for his lips may not touch

the brim of his cup. Also he keeps a copper nail to
scratch his head with, for were his own nails to touch his
own skin they would drop off. For sixteen days after

he has partaken of human flesh he may not eat any
warm food, and for the whole of the four months he is
forbidden to cool hot food by blowing on it with his
breath. At the end of winter, when the season of ceremonies

is over, he feigns to have forgotten the ordinary ways of
men, and has to learn everything anew. The reason for
these remarkable restrictions imposed on men who have
eaten human flesh is not stated; but we may surmise that

fear of the ghost of the man whose body was eaten has at
least a good deal to do with them. We are confirmed in

our conjecture by observing that though these cannibals
sometimes content themselves with taking bites out of living
people, the rules in question are especially obligatory on
them after they have devoured a corpse. Moreover, the
careful treatment of the bones of the victim points to the
same conclusion; for during the four months of seclusion
observed by the cannibals, the bones of the person on whom

they feasted are kept alternately for four days at a time under
rocks in the sea and in their bedrooms on the north side of

the house, where the sun cannot shine onthem. Finally the
bones are taken out of the house, tied up, weighted with a
stone, and thrown into deep water, “because it is believed

that if they were buried they would come back and take


190 TABOOED PERSONS CHAP.


their master’s soul.” This seems to mean that if the bones
of the victim were buried, his ghost would come back and
fetch away the souls of the men who had eaten his body.
The Gebars, a cannibal tribe in the north of New Guinea,
are much afraid of the spirit of a slain man or woman,
Among them persons who have partaken of human flesh
for the first time reside for a month afterwards in a small
hut and may not enter the dwelling-house.’


§ 6. Hunters and Fishers tabooed


Hunters In savage society the hunter and the fisherman have
and fishers | f e
have to Often to observe rules of abstinence and to submit to
observe ceremonies of purification of the same sort as those which
a soe bligatory on the rri d th ] : d
undergo are obligatory warrior an e manslayer; an
pees ot though we cannot in all cases perceive the exact purpose
purifica-


tion, which Which these rules and ceremonies are supposed to serve,
are prob- we may with some probability assume that, just as the


bly dic- a : aes : :

tated by dread of the spirits of his enemies is the main motive for

fe ctiiss the seclusion and purification of the warrior who hopes

of the to take or has already taken their lives, so the huntsman or
imals . . . . . . .

fc which HSherman who complies with similar customs is principally

they have actuated by a fear of the spirits of the beasts, birds, or fish

killed or


Si 40 which he has killed or intends to kill.
kill.


For the savage
commonly conceives animals to be endowed with souls and
intelligences like his own, and hence he naturally treats them
with similar respect. Just as he attempts to appease the
ghosts of the men he has slain, so he essays to propitiate the
spirits of the animals he has killed, These ceremonies of pro-
pitiation will be described later on in this work;* here we have
to deal, first, with the taboos observed by the hunter and the


1 Fr, Boas, ** The Social Organiza-
tion and the Secret Societies of the
Kwakiutl Indians,” Refort of the U.S.
National Museum for 1895, pp. 440,
537 59+

2 Th. H. Ruys, ‘* Bezoek an den
Kannibalenstam van Noord Nieuw-
Guinea,” Tijdschrift van het honinklijk
Nederlandsch Aardrijhkskundig Genoot-
schap, Tweede Serie, xxiii. (1906) p.
328. Among these savages the genitals
of a murdered man are eaten by


an old woman, and the genitals of
a murdered woman are eaten by an
old man. What the object of this
curious practice may be is not apparent.
Perhaps the intention is to unsex and
disarm the dangerous ghost. On the
dread of ghosts, especially the ghosts
of those who have died a violent death,
see further Psyche’s Task, pp. 52 sgg.
5 Meantime I may refer the reader
to Zhe Golden Bough, Second Edition,


vol, ii, pp. 389 sgg.


SS


IV HUNTERS AND FISHERS TABOOED IgI


fisherman before or during the hunting and fishing seasons,
and, second, with the ceremonies of purification which have
to be practised by these men on returning with their booty
from a successful chase.

While the savage respects, more or less, the souls of all
animals, he treats with particular deference the spirits of
such as are either especially useful to him or formidable on
account of their size, strength, or ferocity. Accordingly the
hunting and killing of these valuable or dangerous beasts
are subject to more elaborate rules and ceremonies than the
slaughter of comparatively useless and insignificant creatures.
Thus the Indians of Nootka Sound prepared themselves for
catching whales by observing a fast for a week, during which
they ate very little, bathed in the water several times a day,


sang, and rubbed their bodies, limbs, and faces with shells before


and bushes till they looked as if they had been severely torn
with briars. They were likewise required to abstain from
any commerce with their women for the like period, this last
condition being considered indispensable to their success,
A chief who failed to catch a whale has been known to
attribute his failure to a breach of chastity on the part of
his men.’ It should be remarked that the conduct thus
prescribed as a preparation for whaling is precisely that
which in the same tribe of Indians was required of men
about to go on the war-path.? Rules of the same sort are,
or were formerly, observed by Malagasy whalers. For eight
days before they went to sea the crew of a whaler used to
fast, abstaining from women and liquor, and confessing their
most secret faults to each other; and if any man was found
to have sinned deeply he was forbidden to share in the
expedition.? In the island of Kadiak, off the south coast of
Alaska, whalers were reckoned unclean during the fishing


_ season, and nobody would eat out of the same dish with


them or even come near them. Yet we are told that great
respect was paid to them, and that they were regarded as


1 Narrative of the Adventures and I’lle Maurice (Paris, 1838), iii. 271.
Sufferings of John R. Jewitt (Middle- Compare A. van Gennep, Zadou ef
town, 1820), pp. 133, 136. Totémisme @ Madagascar (Paris, 1904),
p. 253, who refers to Le Gentil, Voyage
dans les Mers de P?Inde (Paris, 1781),
8 Baron d’Unienville, Statistigue de ii. 562.


2 See above, pp. 160 sg.


Taboos
and cere-
monies
observed


catching
whales.


192 TABOOED PERSONS CHAP.


the purveyors of their country... Though it is not expressly
said it seems to be implied, and on the strength of analogy
we may assume, that these Kadiak whalers had to remain
Taboos chaste so long as the whaling season lasted. In the island
ipeloaag of Mabuiag continence was imposed on the people both
tion for before they went to hunt the dugong and while the turtles
catching hn :
dugong Were pairing. The turtle-season lasts during parts of
and turtle October and November; and if at that time unmarried
persons had sexual intercourse with each other, it was
believed that when the canoe approached the floating turtle,
the male would separate from the female and both would
dive down in different directions? So at Mowat in New
Guinea men have no relation with women when the turtle
are coupling, though there is considerable laxity of morals
at other times? Among the Motu of Port Moresby, in
New Guinea, chastity is enjoined before fishing and wallaby-
hunting ; they believe that men who have been unchaste
will be unable to catch the fish and the wallabies, which will
turn round and jeer at their pursuers. Among the tribes
about the mouth of the Wanigela River in New Guinea the
preparations for fishing turtle and dugong are most elaborate.
They begin two months before the fishing. A headman is
appointed who becomes holy. On his strict observance of
the laws of the dugong net depends the success of the
season. While the men of the village are making the nets,
this sanctified leader lives entirely secluded from his family,
and may only eat a roasted banana or two after the sun has
gone down. Every evening at sundown he goes ashore and,
stripping himself of all his ornaments, which he is never
allowed to doff at other times, bathes near where the dugongs
feed ; as he does so he throws scraped coco-nut and scented
herbs and gums into the water to charm the dugong.°


1 U. Lisiansky, Voyage Round the pp. 467.
World (London, 1814), pp. 174, 209. 4 Reports of the Cambridge Anthropo-
2 A.C. Haddon, ‘*The Ethnography  Jogical Expedition to Torres Straits, v.
of the Western Tribe of Torres Straits,” 271 note.
Journal of the Anthropological Institute, 5 R, E, Guise, On the Tribes in-
xix. (1890) p. 397; Xeports of the  habiting the Mouth of the Wanigela
Cambridge Anthropological Expedition River,” Journal of the Anthropological
to Torres Straits, v. 271. Institute, xxviii, (1899) p. 218. The
8 A. C. Haddon, in Journal of the account refers specially to Bulaa, which
Anthropological Institute, xix. (1890) the author describes (pp. 205, 217) as


Vv HUNTERS AND FISHERS TABOOED 193


Among the Roro-speaking tribes of British New Guinea the Taboos
magician who performs ceremonies for the success of a wallaby one
hunt must abstain from intercourse with his wife for a month paration
before the hunt takes place ; and he may not eat food cooked anit
by his wife or by any other woman.’ In the island of Uap,

one of the Caroline group, every fisherman plying his craft

lies under a most strict taboo during the whole of the fishing
season, which lasts for six or eight weeks. Whenever he is

on shore he must spend all his time in the men’s clubhouse
(faz/u), and under no pretext whatever may he visit his own

house or so much as look upon the faces of his wife and
womenkind, Were he but to steal a glance at them, they

think that flying fish must inevitably bore out his eyes at
night. If his wife, mother, or daughter brings any gift for

him or wishes to talk with him, she must stand down towards

the shore with her back turned to the men’s clubhouse.

Then the fisherman may go out and speak to her, or with

his back turned to her he may receive what she has brought

him; after which he must return at once to his rigorous
confinement. Indeed the fishermen may not even join in

dance and song with the other men of the clubhouse in the
evening ; they must keep to themselves and be silent.2_ In the

Pelew Islands, also, which belong to the Caroline group, fisher-

men are likewise debarred from intercourse with women, since

it is believed that any such intercourse would infallibly have

a prejudicial effect on the fishing. The same taboo is said

to be observed in all the other islands of the South Sea. In


‘**a marine village ” and ‘‘the greatest
fishing village in New Guinea.” Prob-
ably it is built out over the water.


men’s clubhouses has one young woman,
or sometimes two young women, who
have been captured from another dis-


eee


This would explain the allusion to the
sanctified headman going ashore daily
at sundown.

1 Captain F. R. Barton and Dr.
Strong, in C. G. Seligmann’s Zhe
Melanesians of British New Guinea
(Cambridge, 1910), pp. 292, 293 sg.

2 W. Furness, Zhe Jsland of
Stone Money, Uap of the Carolines
(Philadelphia and London, 1910), pp.
38 sg., 44. sg. Though the fisherman
may have nothing to do with his wife
and family, he is not wholly debarred
from female society ; for each of the


PT.


trict, and who cohabit promiscuously
with all the men of the clubhouse. The
name for one of these concubines is
mispil, See W. H. Furness, of. cit. pp.
46 sgg. There is a similar practice of
polyandry in the men’s clubhouses of the
Pelew Islands. See J. Kubary, Die
soctalen LEinrichtungen der Pelauer
(Berlin, 1885), pp. 50 sgg. Compare
Adonis, Attis, Ostris, Second Edition,
PP. 435 59.
3 J. S. Kubary, Zthnographische
Beitriige zur Kenntnis des Karolinen
Archipels (Leyden, 1895), p. 127.


oO


Taboos
and cere-
monies
observed
at the
hatching


TABOOED PERSONS


194 CHAP.


Mirzapur, when the seed of the silkworm is brought into the
house, the Kol or Bhuiyar puts it in a place which has been


‘carefully plastered with holy cow-dung to bring good luck.


From that time the owner must be careful to avoid


and pairing ceremonial impurity. He must give up cohabitation with


of silk-
worms.


Taboos
observed
by fisher-
men in
Uganda.


his wife ; he may not sleep on a bed, nor shave himself, nor
cut his nails, nor anoint himself with oil, nor eat food cooked
with butter, nor tell lies, nor do anything else that he deems
wrong. He vows to Singarmati Devi that if the worms are
duly born he will make her an offering. When the cocoons
open and the worms appear, he assembles the women of the
house and they sing the same song as at the birth of a baby,
and red lead is smeared on the parting of the hair of all the
married women of the neighbourhood. When the worms
pair, rejoicings are made as at a marriage.’ Thus the silk-
worms are treated as far as possible like human beings.
Hence the custom which prohibits the commerce of the
sexes while the worms are hatching may be only an
extension, by analogy, of the rule which is observed by
many races, that the husband may not cohabit with his
wife during pregnancy and lactation.

On Lake Victoria Nyanza the Baganda fishermen use a
long stout line which is supported on the surface of the water
by wooden floats, while short lines with baited hooks attached
to them depend from it at frequent intervals. The place
where the fisherman makes his line, whether in his hut or
his garden, is tabooed, People may not step over his cords
or tools, and he himself has to observe a number of restric-
tions. He may not go near his wife or any other woman.
He eats alone, works alone, sleeps. alone. He may not
wash, except in the lake. He may not eat salt or meat or
butter, He may not smear any fat on his body. When
the line is ready he goes to the god, asks his blessing on it,
and offers him a pot of beer. In return he receives from


1 W. Crooke, Popular Religion and
Folklore of Northern India (West-
minster, 1896), ii. 257. In Chota
Nagpur and the Central Provinces of
India the rearers of silk-worms ‘‘ care-
fully watch over and protect the worms,
and while the rearing is going on, live
with great cleanliness and self-denial,


abstaining from alcohol and all inter-
course with women, and adhering very
strictly to certain ceremonial ob-
servances, The business is a very
precarious one, much depending on
favourable weather” (/ndian AZuseum
Notes, issued by the Trustees, vol. i.
No. 3 (Calcutta, 1890), p. 160),


IV HUNTERS AND FISHERS TABOOED 195


the deity a stick or bit of wood to fasten to the line, and jana
also some medicine of herbs to smoke and blow over the py fisher.
water in order that the fish may come to the line and be pent
caught, Then he carries the line to the lake. If in going aN
thither he should stumble over a stone or a tree-root, he
takes it with him, and he does the same with any grass-seeds
that may stick to his clothes. These stones, roots, and seeds
he puts on the line, believing that just as he stumbled over
them and they stuck to him, so the fish will also stumble
over them and stick to the line. The taboo lasts till he has
caught his first fish. If his wife has kept the taboo, he eats
the fish with her; but if she has broken it, she may not
partake of the fish. After that if he wishes to go in to his
wife, he must take his line out of the water and place it in a
tree or some other place of safety; he is then free to be
with her. But so long as the line is in the water, he must
keep apart from women, or the fish would at once leave the
shore. Any breach of this taboo renders the line useless to
him. He must sell it and make a new one and offer an
expiatory offering to the god.’ Again, in Uganda the
_fisherman offers fish to his canoe, believing that if he
neglected to make this offering more than twice, his net
would catch nothing. The fish thus offered to the canoe is
eaten by the fishermen. But if at the time of emptying the
traps there is any man in the canoe who has committed
adultery, eaten flesh or salt, or rubbed his body with butter
or fat, that man is not allowed to partake of the fish offered
to the canoe. And if the sinner has not confessed his fault
to the- priest and been purified, the catch will be small.
When the adulterer has confessed his sin, the priest calls the
husband of the guilty woman and tells him of her crime.
Her paramour has to wear a sign to shew that he is doing
penance, and he makes a feast for the injured husband,
which the latter is obliged to accept in token of reconcilia-
tion. After that the husband may not punish either of the
erring couple; the sin is atoned for and they are able to
catch fish again.27 Among the Bangala of the Upper Congo,


1 The Rev. J. Roscoe in letters to on the Manners and Customs of the
me dated Mengo, Uganda, April 23 Baganda,” /ournal of the <Anthro-
and June 6, 1903. pological Institute, xxxii. (1902) p.

2 Rev. J. Roscoe, ‘‘ Further Notes 56,


196 TABOOED PERSONS CHAP.


Continence while fishermen are making their traps, they must observe
cated strict continence, and the restriction lasts until the traps
fishermen have caught fish and the fish have been eaten. Similarly
“oo Bangala hunters may have no sexual intercourse from the
time they made their traps till they have caught game and
eaten it; it is believed that any hunter who broke this rule
: of chastity would have bad luck in the chase.’
Taboos In the island of Nias the hunters sometimes dig pits,
anions cover them lightly over with twigs, grass, and leaves, and
in Nias. then drive the game into them. While they are engaged in
digging the pits, they have to observe a number of taboos.
They may not spit, or the game would turn back in disgust
from the pits. They may not laugh, or the sides of the pit
would fall in. ° They may eat no salt, prepare no fodder for
swine, and in the pit they may not scratch themselves, for if
they did, the earth would be loosened and would collapse.
And the night after digging the pit they may have no inter-
course with a woman, or all their labour would be in vain.”
The prac- This practice of observing strict chastity as a condition
wine Ni of success in hunting and fishing is very common among
F oeeoebtl rude races; and the instances of it which have been cited
seems tobe render it probable that the rule is always based on a
ocreagaha superstition rather than on a consideration of the temporary
that in. | Weakness which a breach of the custom may entail on the
— hunter or fisherman. In general it appears to be supposed
fishand the that the evil effect of incontinence is not so much that it
animals. weakens him, as that, for some reason or other, it offends
the animals, who in consequence will not suffer themselves
to be caught. In the Motumotu tribe of New Guinea a
man will not see his wife the night before he starts on a
great fishing or hunting expedition; if he did, he would
have no luck. In the Motu tribe he is regarded as holy
that night, and in the morning no one may speak to him or
call out his name.* In German East Africa elephant hunters


must refrain from women for several days before they set out


1 Rev. J. H. Weeks, ‘‘ Anthropo-  eiland Nias,” Zijdschrift voor Indische
logical Notes on the Bangala of the TZaal- Land- en Volkenkunde, xxvi.
Upper Congo,” Journal of the Anthro- (1880) pp. 276 sg.
pological Institute, xxxix, (1909) pp.

458, 459. 3 J, Chalmers, Pioneering in New

4 J. W. Thomas, ‘*De jacht op het Guinea (London, 1887), p. 186,


Iv HUNTERS AND FISHERS TABOOED 197


for the chase.’ We have seen that in the same region a
wife’s infidelity during the hunter’s absence is believed to
give the elephant power over him so as to kill or wound
him.” As this belief is clearly a superstition, based on
sympathetic magic, so doubtless is the practice of chastity
before the hunt. The pygmies of the great African forest
are also reported to observe strict continence the night
before an important hunt. It is said that at this time they
propitiate their ancestors by rubbing their skulls, which they
keep in boxes, with palm oil and with water in which the
ashes of the bark and leaves of a certain tree (moduma) have
been mixed.’

The Huichol Indians of Mexico think that only the pure Chastity
of heart should hunt the deer. The deer would never enter ng buat
a snare put up by a man in love; it would only look at it, can Indians
snort “ Pooh, pooh,” and go back the way it came. Good ree
luck in love means bad luck in deer-hunting. But even
those who have been abstinent must invoke the aid of the
fire to burn the last taint or blemish out of them. So the
night before they set out for the chase they gather round the
fire and pray aloud, all trying to get as near as they can to
the flaming god, and turning every side of their bodies to
his blessed influence. They hold out their open hands to it,
warm the palms, spit on them, and then rub them quickly
over their joints, legs, and shoulders, as the shamans do in
curing a sick man, in order that their limbs and sinews may
be as strong as their hearts are pure for the task of the
morrow.’ A Carrier Indian of British Columbia used to
separate from his wife for a full month before he set traps
for bears, and during this time he might not drink from
the same vessel as his wife, but had to use a special cup
made of birch bark. The neglect of these precautions
would cause the game to escape after it had _ been
snared. But when he was about to snare martens, the
period of continence was cut down to ten days.° The Sia,


1 P. Reichard, Deutsch- Ostafrika 269


(Leipsic, 1892), p. 427. 4 C. Lumholtz, Unknown Mexico,
2 See The Magic Art and the Evolu- ii. 40 sq.
tion of Kings, vol.i. p. 123. 5 Father A. G. Morice, ‘‘ Notes,


3 Mgr. Le Roy, ‘‘ Les Pygmées,” Archaeological, Industrial, and Socio-
Missions Catholigues, xxix. (1897) p. logical on the Western Denés,” 7ramns-


Chastity
observed by
American
Indians
before
hunting.


Taboos
observed
by Hidatsa
Indians at
catching
eagles,


198 TABOOED PERSONS CHAP.
a tribe of Pueblo Indians, observe chastity for four days
before a hunt as well as the whole time that it lasts, even if
the game be only rabbits. Among the Tsetsaut Indians of
British Columbia hunters who desire to secure good luck
fast and wash their bodies with ginger-root for three or four
days,.and do not touch a woman for two or three months.’
A Shuswap Indian, who intends to go out hunting must
also keep away from his wife, or he would have no luck.
Among the Thompson Indians the grisly-bear hunter must
abstain from sexual intercourse for some time before he went
forth to hunt. These Indians believe that bears always hear
what is said of them. Hence a man who intends to go
bear-hunting must be very careful what he says about the
beasts or about his preparations for killing them, or they
will get wind of it and keep out of his way.* In the same
tribe of Indians some trappers and hunters, who were
very particular, would not eat with other people when they
were engaged, or about to be engaged, in hunting or
trapping; neither would they eat food cooked by any
woman, unless she were old. They drank cold water in
which mountain juniper or wild rhubarb had been soaked,
using a cup of their own, which no one else might touch.
Hunters seldom combed their hair when they were on an
expedition, but waited to do so till their return? The
reason for this last rule is certainly not that at such seasons
they have no time to attend to their persons; the custom is
probably based on that superstitious objection to touch the
heads of tabooed persons of which some examples have already
been given, and of which more will be adduced shortly.

In the late autumn or early winter a few families of the
Hidatsa Indians seek some quiet spot in the forest and
pitch their camp there to catch eagles. After setting up their


actions of the Canadian Jnstitute, iv.
(1698- -93) pp. 107, 108.

1M. C. Stevenson, ‘*The Sia,”
Eleventh Annual Report of the Bureau
of Ethnology (Washington, 1894), p
118,

2 Fr. Boas, in Zenth Report on the
North-Western Tribes of Canada, p.
47 (separate reprint from the Report of
the British Association for 1895).


8 Jd.,in Sixth Report on the North-
Western Tribes of Canada, p. 90
(separate reprint from the Report of the
British Association for 1890).

4 J. Teit, ‘The Thompson Indians
of British Columbia,” Aemoir of the
American Museum of Natural Ristory,
The Jesup North Pacific Expedition,
vol, i. part iv. (April 1900) p. 347.

5 J, Teit, of. cét. p. 348.


Iv HUNTERS AND FISHERS TABOOED 199


tents they build a small medicine-lodge, where the ceremonies
supposed to be indispensable for trapping the eagles are per-
formed. Nowoman mayenterit. The traps are set on high
places among the neighbouring hills. When some of the men
wish to take part in the trapping, they fast and then go by day
to the medicine-lodge. There they continue without food
until about midnight, when they partake of a little nourish-
ment and fall asleep. They get up just before dawn, or
when the morning-star has risen, and go to their traps.
There they sit all day without food or drink, watching for
their prey, and struggling, it may be, from time to time with
a captive eagle, for they always take the birds alive. They
return to the camp at sunset. As they approach, every one
rushes into his tent; for the hunter may neither see nor be
seen by any of his fellow-hunters until he enters the
medicine-lodge. They spend the night in the lodge, and
about midnight eat and drink for the first time since the
previous midnight; then they lie down to sleep, only to
rise again before dawn and repair anew to the traps. If any
one of them has caught nothing during the day, he may not
sleep at night, but must spend his time in loud lamentation
and prayer. This routine has to be observed by each
hunter for four days and four nights, after which he returns
to his own tent, hungry, thirsty, and tired, and follows his
ordinary pursuits till he feels able to go again to the eagle-
traps. During the four days of the trapping he sees none
of his family, and speaks to none of his friends except those
who are engaged in the trapping at the same time. They
believe that if any hunter fails to perform all these rites, the
captive eagle will get one of his claws loose and tear his
captor’s hands. There are men in the tribe who have had
their hands crippled for life in that way.’ It is obvious that
the severe fasting coupled with the short sleep, or even the
total sleeplessness, of these eagle-hunters can only impair
their physical vigour and so far tend to incapacitate them
for capturing the eagles. The motive of their behaviour in


1 Washington Matthews, Z/hwo- observe elaborate superstitious cere-
graphy and Philology of the Hidatsa monies in hunting eagles. See 7otem-
Jndians (Washington, 1877), pp. <tsm and Exogamy, iii. 182, 187
58-60. Other Indian tribes also sg.


Miscel-
laneous
examples
of chastity
practised
from super-
stitious
motives.


200 TABOOED PERSONS CHAP.


these respects is purely superstitious, not rational, and so, we
may safely conclude, is the custom which simultaneously
cuts them off from all intercourse with their wives and
families.

An examination of all the many cases in which the savage
bridles his passions and remains chaste from motives of super-
stition, would be instructive, but I cannot attempt it now. I will
only add a few miscellaneous examples of the custom before
passing to the ceremonies of purification which are observed by
the hunter and fisherman after the chase and the fishing are
over. The workers in the salt-pans near Siphoum, in Laos,
must abstain from all sexual relations at the place where they
are at work ; and they may not cover their heads nor shelter
themselves under an umbrella from the burning rays of the
sun.’ Among the Kachins of Burma the ferment used in
making beer is prepared by two women, chosen by lot, who
during the three days that the process lasts may eat nothing
acid and may have no conjugal relations with their husbands ;
otherwise it is supposed that the beer would be sour. Among
the Masai honey-wine is brewed by a man and a woman who
live in a hut set apart for them till the wine is ready for
drinking. But they are strictly forbidden to have sexual
intercourse with each other during this time; it is deemed
essential that they should be chaste for two days before they
begin to brew and for the whole of the six days that the
brewing lasts. The Masai believe that were the couple
to commit a breach of chastity, not only would the wine be
undrinkable but the bees which made the honey would fly
away. Similarly they require that a man who is making
poison should sleep alone and observe other taboos which
render him almost an outcast.? The Wandorobbo, a tribe
of the same region as the Masai, believe that the mere
presence of a woman in the neighbourhood of a man who is
brewing poison would deprive the poison of its venom, and


1 FE, Aymonier, Motes sur le Laos
(Saigon, 1885), p. 141.

2 Pp, Ch. Gilhodes, ‘*La Culture
matérielle des Katchins (Birmanie),”
Anthropos, v. (1910) p. 622. Com-
pare J. Anderson, “rom Mandalay to
Momien (London, 1876), p. 198, who
observes that among the Kakhyens


(Kachins) the brewing of beer ‘is
regarded as a serious, almost sacred,
task, the women, while engaged in
it, having to live in almost vestal
seclusion,”

8 J. G, Frazer, Zotemism and Exo-
gamy, ii, 410 5g., on Mr. A, C,
Hollis’s authority.


a


IV HUNTERS AND FISHERS TABOOED 201


that the same thing would happen if the wife of the poison- Miscel-
maker were to commit adultery while her husband was anaes
brewing the poison.’ In this last case it is obvious that a of chastity
rationalistic explanation of the taboo is impossible. How  eieraranel
could the loss of virtue in the poison be a physical conse- stitious
quence of the loss of virtue in the poison-maker’s wife 7°"
Clearly the effect which the wife’s adultery is supposed

to have on the poison is a case of sympathetic magic ; her
misconduct sympathetically affects her husband and _ his
work at a distance. We may, accordingly, infer with some
confidence that the rule of continence imposed on the poison-
maker himself is also a simple case of sympathetic magic,

and not, as a civilised reader might be disposed to
conjecture, a wise precaution designed to prevent him
from accidentally poisoning his wife. Again, to take
other instances, in the East Indian island of Buru people
smear their bodies with coco-nut oil as a_ protection
against demons. But in order that the charm may be
effective, the oil must have been made by young unmarried
girls.” In the Seranglao and Gorong archipelagoes

the same oil is regarded as an antidote to poison;

but it only possesses this virtue if the nuts have been
gathered on a Friday by a youth who has never known

a woman, and if the oil has been extracted by a pure
maiden, while a priest recited the appropriate spells.* So in

the Marquesas Islands, when a woman was making coco-

nut oil, she was tabooed for four or five or more days,
during which she might have no intercourse with her husband.

If she broke this rule, it was believed that she would obtain

no oil. Inthe same islands when a man had placed a dish of
bananas and coco-nuts in an oven of hot stones to bake over
night, he might not go in to his wife, or the food would not

be found baked in the morning.® In ancient Mexico


we ees ee SSC el lS Ye


the men who distilled the wine known as pulgue from the


1M. Weiss, Die Volker-Stdimme im
Norden Deutsch - Ostafrikas (Berlin,
1910), p. 396.

2G. A. Wilken, ‘‘ Bijdrage tot de
Kennis der Alfoeren van het eiland
Boeroe,” p. 30 ( Verhandelingen van het
Bataviaasch Genootschap van Kunsten
en Wetenschappen, xxxvi.).


3 J. G. F. Riedel, De s/uik- en kroes-
harige rassen tusschen Selebes en Papua,
Pp. 179.

4 G. H. von Langsdorff, Reise um
die Welt (Frankfort, 1812), i. 118
Sq.

5 G. H. von. Langsdorff, of. cit. i.
Tri


Miscel-
laneous
examples
of con-
tinence
observed


CHAP.


202 TABOOED PERSONS


sap of the great aloe, might not touch a woman for four days ;
if they were unchaste, they thought the wine would be sour
and putrid.

Among the Ba-Pedi and Ba-thonga tribes of South
Africa, when the site of a new village has been chosen and
the houses are building, all the married people are forbidden
to have conjugal relations with each other. If it were


from super- discovered that any couple had broken this rule, the work


stitious
motives.


of building would immediately be stopped, and another site
chosen for the village. For they think that a breach of
chastity would spoil the village which was growing up,
that the chief would grow lean and perhaps die, and
that the guilty woman would never bear another child.
Among the Chams of Cochin-China, when a dam is made or
repaired on a river for the sake of irrigation, the chief who
offers the traditional sacrifices and implores the protection of
the deities on the work, has to stay all the time in a wretched
hovel of straw, taking no part in the labour, and observing the
strictest continence ; for the people believe that a breach of
his chastity would entail a breach of the dam.’ Here, it is
plain, there can be no idea of maintaining the mere bodily
vigour of the chief for the accomplishment of a task in
which he does not even bear a hand. In New Caledonia
the wizard who performs certain superstitious ceremonies at
the building and launching of a large canoe is bound to the
most rigorous chastity the whole time that the vessel is on
the stocks, Among the natives of the Gazelle Peninsula in
New Britain men who are engaged in making fish-traps avoid
women and observe strict continence. They believe that
if a woman were even to touch a fish-trap, it would catch
nothing.” Here, therefore, the rule of continence probably
springs from a fear of infecting sympathetically the traps


1 B. de Sahagun, Histoire générale
des choses de la Nouvelle Espagne,
traduite par D, Jourdanet et R. Simeon,


» 45.
2H. A. Junod, ‘* Les Conceptions
physiologiques des Bantou  sud-afri-
cains et leurs tabous,” Revue a’Lthno-
graphic et de Sociologie, i, (1910) p.
148.
* Dameon Grangeon, ‘‘ Les Chams


et leurs superstitions,” AZ‘sstons Catho-
ligues, xxviii, (1896) p. 70.

4 Father Lambert, ‘*Mceurs et
superstitions de la tribu  Bélep,”
Missions Catholiques, xii, (1880) p.
215; td., Maurs et superstitions des
Néo-Calédoniens (Nouwméa, 1900), pp.
I19I Sg.

5 R, Parkinson, Dretssig Jahre in
der Siddsee (Stuttgart, 1907), p. 99.


Iv HUNTERS AND FISHERS TABOOED 203


with feminine weakness or perhaps with menstrual pollution.

Every year at the end of September or the beginning of Continence

October, when the north-east monsoon is near an end, a fleet sp

of large sailing canoes leaves Port Moresby and the neigh- Mota of

bouring Motu villages of New Guinea on a trading voyage to ess

the deltas of the rivers which flow into the Papuan Gulf. The before and
during a

canoes are laden with a cargo of earthenware pots, and trading

after about three months they return, sailing before the north- voyse:

west monsoon and bringing back a cargo of sago which they

have obtained by barter for their crockery. It is about the

beginning of the south-east monsoon, that is, in April or May,

that the skippers, who are leading men in the villages, make

up their minds to go on these trading voyages. When their

resolution is taken they communicate it to their wives, and

from about that time husband and wife cease to cohabit.

The same custom of conjugal separation is observed by what

we may call the mate or second in command of each vessel.

But it is not till the month of August that the work of

preparing the canoes. for sea by overhauling and caulking

them is taken seriously in hand. From that time both

skipper and mate become particularly sacred or taboo

(helaga), and consequently they keep apart from their wives

more than ever. Husband and wife, indeed, sleep in the

same house but on opposite sides of it. In speaking of his

wife he calls her “maiden,” and she calls him “ youth.”

They have no direct conversation or dealings with each

other. If he wishes to communicate with her, he does so

through a third person, usually a relative of one of them.

Both refrain from washing themselves, and he from combing

his hair. “The wife’s position indeed becomes very much

like that of a widow.” When the canoe has been launched,

skipper, mate, and crew are all forbidden to touch their food

with their fingers; they must always handle it and convey

it to their mouths with a bone fork.’ A briefer account of

the custom and superstition had previously been given by a

native pastor settled in the neighbourhood of Port Moresby.


1 Captain F. R. Barton, in C. G. have translated respectively ‘‘ skipper ”
Seligmann’s Zhe Melanesians of British and “‘mate” are baditauna and dori-
New Guinea (Cambridge, 1910), pp. fauna, The exact meaning of the
100-102. The native words which I words is doubtful,


Continence
observed
by the
Akamba
and
Akikuyu
ona
journey
and other
occasions.


The taboos
observed
by hunters
and fishers
are often
continued
and even
increased
in strin-
gency after


204 TABOOED PERSONS CHAP,


He says: “Here is a custom of trading-voyage parties :—
If it is arranged to go westward, to procure arrowroot, the
leader of the party sleeps apart from his wife for the time
being, and on until the return from the expedition, which is
sometimes a term of five months. They say if this is not
done the canoe of the chief will be sunk on the return
voyage, all the arrowroot lost in the sea, and he himself
covered with shame. He, however, who observes the rule of
self-denial, returns laden with arrowroot, has not a drop
of salt water to injure his cargo, and so is praised by his
companions and crew.” The Akamba and Akikuyu of
eastern Africa refrain from the commerce of the sexes on a
journey, even if their wives are with them in the caravan;
and they observe the same rule of chastity so long as the
cattle are at pasture, that is, from the time the herds are
driven out to graze in the morning till they come back in the
evening.” Why the rule should be in force just while the
cattle are at pasture is not said, but we may conjecture that
any act of incontinence at that time is somehow supposed,
on the principles of sympathetic magic, to affect the animals
injuriously. The conjecture is confirmed by the observation
that among the Akikuyu for eight days after the quarterly
festivals, which they hold for the sake of securing God’s
blessing on their flocks and herds, no commerce is permitted
between the sexes. They think that any breach of con-
tinence in these eight days would be followed by a mortality
among the flocks.®

If the taboos or abstinences observed by hunters and
fishermen before and during the chase are dictated, as we
have seen reason to believe, by superstitious motives, and
chiefly by a dread of offending or frightening the spirits of
the creatures whom it is proposed to kill, we may expect
that the restraints imposed after the slaughter has been
perpetrated will be at least as stringent, the slayer and his


8 H.R. Tate, ‘* Further Notes on ~
the Kikuyu Tribe of British East Africa,”


1 Quoted by Dr. George Turner,
Samoa (London, 1884), pp. 349


5g.

4 J. M. Hildebrandt, “ Ethnograph-
ische Notizen tiber Wakamba und ihre
Nachbarn,” Zeitschrift fiir Ethnologie,
x. (1878) p. 401.


Journal of the Anthropological Institute,

xxxiv, (1904) pp. 260 sg. At the
festivals sheep and goats are sacrificed
to God (gaz), and the people feast on
the roast flesh,


Iv HUNTERS AND FISHERS TABOOED 205


friends having now the added fear of the angry ghosts of his the game
victims before their eyes. Whereas on the hypothesis that j4* 5°?
the abstinences in question, including those from food, drink, the fish
and sleep, are merely salutary precautions for maintaining {28° ive
the men in health and strength to do their work, it is for this
obvious that the observance of these abstinences or taboos ecg
after the work is done, that is, when the game is killed and * beara)
the fish caught, must be wholly superfluous, absurd, and
inexplicable. But as I shall now shew, these taboos often
continue to be enforced or even increased in stringency after

the death of the animals, in other words, after the hunter or

fisher has accomplished his object by making his bag or
landing his fish. The rationalistic theory of them therefore
_breaks down entirely ; the hypothesis of superstition is clearly

the only one open to us.

Among the Inuit or Esquimaux of Bering Strait “ the Taboos
dead bodies of various animals must be treated very carefully nea ag
by the hunter who obtains them, so that their shades may Bering
not be offended and bring bad luck or even death upon him mere
or his people.” Hence the Unalit hunter who has had a after catch-
hand in the killing of a white whale, or even has helped to pond:
take one from the net, is not allowed to do any work for the
next four days, that being the time during which the shade
or ghost of the whale is supposed to stay with its body. At
the same time no one in the village may use any sharp or
pointed instrument for fear of wounding the whale’s shade,
which is believed to be hovering invisible in the neighbour-
hood ; and no loud noise may be made lest it should frighten
or offend the ghost. Whoever cuts a whale’s body with an
iron axe will die. Indeed the use of all iron instruments is
forbidden in the village during these four days. These Inuit
have a special name (wu-na hlukh-tuk) “for a spot of
ground where certain things are tabooed, or where there is
to be feared any evil influence caused by the presence of
offended shades of men or animals, or through the influence
of other supernatural means. This ground is sometimes con-
sidered unclean, and to go upon it would bring misfortune to
the offender, producing sickness, death, or lack of success in
hunting or fishing. The same term is also applied to ground
where certain animals have been killed or have died.” In


Taboos
observed
by the
Esquimaux
after
catching
whales or
salmon.


Taboos
observed
by the
Bering
Strait
Esquimaux


206 TABOOED PERSONS CHAP,


the latter case the ground is thought to be dangerous only to
him who there performs some forbidden act. For example,
the shore where a dead white whale has been beached is so
regarded, At such a place and time to chop wood with an
iron axe is supposed to be fatal to the imprudent person who
chops. Death, too, is supposed to result from cutting wood
with an iron axe where salmon are being dressed. An old
man at St. Michael told Mr. Nelson of a melancholy case of
this kind which had fallen within the scope of his own obser-
vation. A man began to chop a log near a woman who
was splitting salmon: both of them died soon afterwards.
The reason of this disaster, as the old man explained, was
that the shade or ghost (zzua) of the salmon and the spirit
or mystery (yu-a) of the ground were incensed at the pro-
ceeding. Such offences are indeed fatal to every person who
may be present at the desecrated spot. Dogs are regarded
as very unclean and offensive to the shades of game animals,
and great care is taken that no dog shall get at the bones of
a white whale. Should a dog touch one of them, the
hunter might lose his luck; his nets would break or be
shunned by the whales, and his spears would not strike.
But in addition to the state of uncleanness or taboo which
arises from the presence of the shades of men or animals,
these Esquimaux believe in uncleanness of another sort
which, though not so serious, nevertheless produces sickness
or bad luck in hunting. It consists, we are told, of a kind
of invisible, impalpable vapour, which may attach itself to a
person from some contamination, A hunter infected by
such a vapour is much more than usually visible to game, so
that his luck in the chase is gone until he succeeds in
cleansing himself once more. That is why hunters must
avoid menstruous women ; if they do not, they will be unable
to catch game.’

These same Esquimaux of Bering Strait celebrate a great
annual festival in December, when the bladders of all the
seals, whales, walrus, and white bears that have been killed
in the year are taken into the assembly-house of the village.


1 E, W, Nelson, ‘The Eskimo American Ethnology, part i, (Washing:
about Bering Strait,” Zighteenth ton, 1899) pp. 438, 440.
Annual Report of the Bureau of


Iv HUNTERS AND FISHERS TABOOED 207


They remain there for several days, and so long as they do and the
so the hunters avoid all intercourse with women, saying that reba
if they failed in that respect the shades of the dead animals of regard
would be offended.’ Similarly among the Aleuts of Alaska oe:
the hunter who had struck a whale with a charmed spear they have
would not throw again, but returned at once to his home and
separated himself from his people in a hut specially con-
structed for the purpose, where he stayed for three days
without food or drink, and without touching or looking upon

a woman. During this time of seclusion he _ snorted
occasionally in imitation of the wounded and dying whale,

in order to prevent the whale which he had struck from
leaving the coast. On the fourth day he emerged from his
seclusion and bathed in the sea, shrieking in a hoarse voice

and beating the water with his hands. Then, taking with

him a companion, he repaired to that part of the shore
where he expected to find the whale stranded. If the beast

was dead he at once cut out the place where the death-
wound had been inflicted. If the whale was not dead, he

again returned to his home and continued washing himself

until the whale died.” Here the hunter’s imitation of the
wounded whale is probably intended by means of homoeopathic

magic to make the beast die in earnest. Among the
Kaniagmuts of Alaska the men who attacked the whale were
considered by their countrymen as unclean during the fishing
season, though otherwise they were held in high honour,

The central Esquimaux of Baffin Land and Hudson Bay Taboos
think that whales, ground seals, and common seals originated aa
in the severed fingers of the goddess Sedna. Hence an central
Esquimau of these regions must make atonement for each priory
of these animals that he kills, and must observe strictly sea-beasts.
certain taboos after their slaughter. Some of the rules of
conduct thus enjoined are identical with those which are in
force after the death of a human being. Thus after the
killing of one of these sea-mammals, as after the decease of
a person, it is forbidden to scrape the frost from the window,


1E. W. Nelson, of, ct. p. 440,
compare pp. 380 sg. The bladder


tion, Industries, and Resources of
Alaska (preface dated August 7,


festival of these Esquimaux will be
described in a later part of this work.
2 I. Petroff, Report on the Popula-


1882), pp. 154 sg.
3 W. H. Dall, Alaska and its Re-
sources (London, 1870), p. 404.


208 TABOOED PERSONS CHAP.


Taboos to shake the bed or to disturb the shrubs under the bed, to
be ag remove the drippings of oil from under the lamp, to scrape
central hair from skins, to cut snow for the purpose of melting it,
Esquimaux F F
after killing to work on iron, wood, stone, or ivory. Furthermore, women
sea-beasts. are forbidden to comb their hair, to wash their faces, and to
dry their boots and stockings. All these regulations must
be kept with the greatest care after a ground seal has been
killed, because the transgression of taboos that refer to this —
animal makes the hands of Sedna very sore. When a seal
is brought into the hut, the women must stop working until
it is cut up. After the capture of a ground seal, walrus, or
whale, they must rest for three days. Not all kinds of work,
however, are forbidden ; they may mend articles made of
sealskin, but they may not make anything new. Working
on the new skins of caribou, the American reindeer, is strictly
prohibited ; for a series of rules forbids all contact between
The sea- that animal and the sea-mammals. Thus reindeer-skins
— obtained in summer may not be prepared before the ice
y not be
brought has formed and the first seal is caught with the harpoon.
nee, Later, as soon as the first walrus has been killed, the work
reindeer. must stop again until the next autumn. Hence everybody is
eager to have his reindeer-skins ready as quickly as possible,
for until that is done the walrus season will not begin. When
the first walrus has been killed a messenger goes from village
to village and announces the news, whereupon all work on
reindeer-skins immediately ceases. On the other hand, when
the season for hunting the reindeer begins, all the winter
clothing and the winter tents that had been in use during
the walrus hunting season become tabooed and are buried
under stones ; they may not be used again till the next walrus
hunting season comes round. No walrus-hide or thongs made
of such hide may be taken inland, where the reindeer live.
Venison may not be put in the same boat with walrus-meat,
nor yet with salmon. If venison or the antlers of the reindeer
were in a boat which goes walrus-hunting, the boat would be
liable to be broken by the walrus. The Esquimaux are nct
allowed to eat venison and walrus on the same day, unless
they first strip naked or put on clothing of reindeer-skin that
has never been worn in hunting walrus. The transgression
of these taboos gives umbrage to the souls of walrus; and a


IV HUNTERS AND FISHERS TABOOED 209


myth is told to account for the mutual aversion of the walrus
and the reindeer. And in general the Esquimaux say that
Sedna dislikes the reindeer, wherefore they may not bring
the beast into contact with her favourites, the sea-mammals.
Hence the meat of the whale and the seal, as well as of the
walrus, may not be eaten on the same day with venison. It
is not permitted that both sorts of meat lie on the floor of
the hut or behind the lamps at the same time. If a man
who has eaten venison in the morning happens to enter a
hut in which seal meat is being cooked, he is allowed to eat
venison on the bed, but it must be wrapped up before it is
carried into the hut, and he must take care to keep clear of
the floor. Before they change from one food to the other
the Esquimaux must wash themselves.

But even among the sea-beasts themselves there are rules yen
of mutual avoidance which these central Esquimaux must pete =m
observe. Thus a person who has been eating or hunting the sheen
walrus must strip naked or change his clothes before he eats pris
seal; otherwise the transgression will become fastened to mutual
the soul of the walrus in a manner which will be explained pitesrege::
presently. Again, the soul of a salmon is very powerful,.central
and its body may not be eaten on the same day with walrus pence
or venison. Salmon may not be cooked in a pot that has ones
been used to boil any other kind of meat; and it must
always be cooked at some distance from the hut. The
salmon-fisher is not allowed to wear boots that have been
used in hunting walrus ; and no work may be done on boot-
legs till the first salmon has been caught and put on a boot-
leg. Once more the soul of the grim polar bear is offended
if the taboos which concern him are not observed. His soul
tarries for three days near the spot where it left his body,
and during these days the Esquimaux are particularly care-
ful to conform rigidly to the laws of taboo, because they
believe that punishment overtakes the transgressor who sins
against the soul of a bear far more speedily than him who
sins against the souls of the sea-beasts.!

The native explanation of the taboos thus enjoined on


1 Fr. Boas, ‘The Central Eskimo,” Baffin Land and Hudson Bay,” Bulle
Sixth Annual Report of the Bureau of tin of the American Museum of Natural
Ethnology (Washington, 1888), pp. History, xv. part i, (1901) pp. 12I-
584 sg., 595; zd. ‘The Eskimo of 124. See also zd. ‘*Die Sagen der

PT. i P


210 TABOOED PERSONS | CHAP.


Native ex- hunters among the central Esquimaux has been given us by the


Pavan’ eminent American ethnologist Dr. Franz Boas. As it sets


Esquimau what may be called the spiritual basis of taboo in the clearest


as light, it deserves to be studied with attention.
Becht The goddess Sedna, he tells us, the mother of the sea-
° e€


taboos ob- Mammals, may be considered to be the chief deity of the
sag central Esquimaux. She is supposed to bear supreme
beasts is to Sway Over the destinies of mankind, and almost all the
Sra ce a observances of these tribes have for their object to retain her
slainani- good will or appease her anger. Her home is in the lower


soot eal world, where she dwells in a house built of stone and‘ whale-
>


certain ribs. “ The souls of seals, ground seals, and whales are believed


ea to proceed from her house. After one of these animals has


ee : been killed, its soul stays with the body for three days, Then
wou urt


not only it goes back to Sedna’s abode, to be sent forth again by her.
them, but Jf, during the three days that the soul stays with the body,


also the ‘ P 6 ‘ 7
great god- any taboo or proscribed custom is violated, the violation


“ge agg (pitsséte) becomes attached to the animal's soul, and causes
In woose


house the it pain. The soul strives in vain to free itself of these
Ss attachments, but is compelled to take them down to Sedna.
souls of the The attachments, in some manner not explained, make her
eh hands sore, and she punishes the people who are the cause
of her pains by sending to them sickness, bad weather, and
starvation. If, on the other hand, all taboos have been
observed, the sea-animals will allow themselves to be caught ;
they will even come to meet the hunter. The object of the
innumerable taboos that are in force after the killing of these
sea-animals, therefore, is to keep their souls free from attach-
ments that would hurt their souls as well as Sedna.
The souls “ The souls of the sea-animals are endowed with greater
of the se “powers than those of ordinary human beings. They can
agreat see the effect of contact with a corpse, which causes objects
aoe. touched by it to appear dark in colour; and they can sce
colour of the effect of flowing human blood, from which a vapour rises


death an . : :
én the that surrounds the bleeding person and is communicated to


Baffin-land Eskimo,” Verhandlungen ii. pp. 35 sg.3 C. F. Hall, Life with
der Berliner Gesellschaft fiir Anthro- the LEsquimaux (London, 1864), ii.
pologie, Ethnologie, und Urgeschichte 321 sg.; td., Narrative of the Second
(1885), pp. 162 sg. ; #d.,in Proceedings Arctic Expedition made by Charles F,
and Transactions of the Royal Soctety Hail, edited by Professor J, E. Nourse
of Canada, v. (Montreal, 1888) section (Washington, 1879), pp. 191 sg.


Iv HUNTERS AND FISHERS TABOOED 211


every one and every thing that comes in contact with such vapour that
a person. This vapour and the dark colour of death are #'<s fom
exceedingly unpleasant to the souls of the sea-animals, that blood, and
will not come near a hunter thus affected. The hunter must pa Aa
therefore avoid contact with people who have touched a body, who are
or with those who are bleeding, more particularly with men- — by
struating women or with those who have recently given things.
birth. The hands of menstruating women appear red to the
sea-animals. If any one who has touched a body or who
is bleeding should allow others to come in contact with him,
“he would cause them to become distasteful to the seals, and
therefore to Sedna as well. For this reason custom demands
that every person must at once announce if he has touched
a body, and that women must make known when they are
menstruating or when they have had a miscarriage. If they
do not do so, they will bring ill-luck to all the hunters.

“ These ideas have given rise to the belief that it is neces-
sary to announce the transgression of any taboo. The trans- The trans-
gressor of a custom is distasteful to Sedna and to the animals, —
and those who abide with him will become equally distasteful must
through contact with him. For this reason it has come top. «..<,
be an act required by custom and morals to confess any and gression, in
every transgression of a taboo, in order to protect the com- pri sy
munity from the evil influence of contact with the evil-doer. people may
The descriptions of Eskimo life given by many observers —
contain records of starvation, which, according to the belief
of the natives, was brought about by some one transgressing
a law, and not announcing what he had done.

“T presume the importance of the confession of a trans-
gression, with a view to warning others to keep at a distance Hence the
from the transgressor, has gradually led to the idea that a Seiad
transgression, or, we might say, a sin can be atoned for by have come
confession. This is one of the most remarkable traits (0 ">
among the religious beliefs of the central Eskimo. There can be
are innumerable tales of starvation brought about by the peepee tr
transgression of a taboo. In vain the hunters try to fession.
supply their families with food; gales and drifting snow
make their endeavours fruitless. Finally the help of the
angakok* is invoked, and he discovers that the cause of the


1 That is, the wizard or sorcerer.


212 TABOOED PERSONS CHAP.


misfortune of the people is due to the transgression of a
taboo. Then the guilty one is searched for. If he confesses,
all is well; the weather moderates, and the seals allow
themselves to be caught; but if he obstinately maintains
his innocence, his death alone will soothe the wrath of
the offended deity. ...
The trans- “The transgressions of taboos do not affect the souls of
Seca game alone. It has already been stated that the sea-
affects the mammals see their effect upon man also, who appears to
soul ofthe them of a dark colour, or surrounded by a vapour which is
gressor, invisible to ordinary man. This means, of course, that the’
becoming , transgression also affects the soul of the evil-doer. It be-
a. comes attached to it, and makes him sick. The angakok*
him sick. iS able to see these attachments with the help of his
i guardian spirit, and is able to free the soul from them. If
isnotre- this is not done, the person must die. In many cases the
reese transgressions become fastened also to persons who come in
theman contact with the evil-doer. This is especially true of
will die. children, to whose souls the sins of their parents, and
particularly of their mothers, become readily attached.
Therefore, when a child is sick, the angakok,' first of all,
asks its mother if she has transgressed any taboos. The
attachment seems to have a different appearance, according
to the taboo that has been violated. A black attachment is
due to removing oil-drippings from under the lamp, a piece
of caribou-skin represents the scrapings removed from a
caribou-skin at a time when such work was forbidden. As
soon as the mother acknowledges the transgression of a taboo,
the attachment leaves the child’s soul, and the child recovers,
The Esqui- “A number of customs may be explained by the
leep the endeavours of the natives to keep the sea-mammals free
ee from contaminating influences. All the clothing of a dead
contamina. Person, the tent in which he died, and the skins obtained by
~ dose him, must be discarded ; for if a hunter should wear clothing
especially Made of skins that had been in contact with the deceased,
from con- these would appear dark, and the seal would avoid him.
tact with 4 ;
corpses Neither would a seal allow itself to be taken into a hut
crest darkened by a dead body; and all those who entered such a


who have hut would appear dark to it, and would be avoided.


1 That is, the wizard or sorcerer,


IV HUNTERS AND FISHERS TABOOED 213


“While it is customary for a successful hunter to invite recently
all the men of the village to eat of the seal that he has tame oe
caught, they must not take any of the seal-meat out of the bed.
hut, because it might come in contact with persons who are
under taboo, and thus the hunter might incur the displeasure
of the seal and of Sedna. This is particularly strictly
forbidden in the case of the first seal of the season.

“ A woman who has a new-born child, and who has not
quite recovered, must eat only of seals caught by her husband,
by a boy, or by an aged man; else the vapour arising from
her body would become attached to the souls of other seals,
which would take the transgression down to Sedna, thus
making her hands sore. .

“Cases of premature birth require particularly careful
treatment. The event must be announced publicly, else dire
results will follow. If a woman should conceal from the
other people that she has had a premature birth, they might
come near her, or even eat in her hut of the seals procured
by her husband. The vapour arising from her would thus
affect them, and they would be avoided by the seals. The
transgression would also become attached to the soul of
the seal, which would take it down to Sedna.” ?

In these elaborate taboos so well described by Dr. Boas In the
we seem to see a system of animism in the act of passing 97°" of
into religion. The rules themselves bear the clearest traces of the
of having originated in a doctrine of souls, and of being semi
determined by the supposed likes and dislikes, sympathies we see


and antipathies of the various classes of spirits toward each cuamant
other. But above and behind the souls of men and animals #™*° .


A 3 religion ;
has grown up the overshadowing conception of a powerful morality is


goddess who rules them all, so that the taboos come more °°™88 to
rest ona


and more to be viewed as a means of propitiating her rather super-
than as merely adapted to suit the tastes of the souls them- rae


selves. Thus the standard of conduct is shifted from a namely the


natural to a supernatural basis: the supposed wish of the phi oe


deity or, as we commonly put it, the will of God, tends to super- Sedna.


1 Fr. Boas, ‘The Eskimo of Baffin 121, 124-126. In quoting these
Land and Hudson Bay,” Auzlletin of passages I have changed the spelling
the American Museum of Natural of a few words in accordance with
History, xv. pt. i, (1901) pp. 119- English orthography.


214 TABOOED PERSONS CHAP.


sede the wishes, real or imaginative, of purely natural beings
as the measure of right and wrong. The old savage taboos,
resting on a theory of the direct relations of living creatures
to each other, remain in substance unchanged, but they are
outwardly transformed into ethical precepts with a religious
Inthis Or supernatural sanction. In this gradual passage of a rude
evolution of ,hilosophy into an elementary religion the place occupied by


religion the
practice of confession as a moral purgative is particularly interesting.


confession °

has playea 1 can hardly agree with Dr. Boas that among these
apart.  Esquimaux the confession of sins was in its origin no more
It seems : °

tohave than a means of warning others against the dangerous
inl 4 contagion of the sinner; in other words, that its saving
regarde ° . . .

ig efficacy consisted merely in preventing the innocent


ae from suffering with the guilty, and that it had no healing
emetic, by Virtue, no purifying influence, for the evil-doer himself.


which si» It seems more probable that originally the violation of
asasort taboo, in other words, the sin, was conceived as something
ot aie almost physical, a sort of morbid substance lurking in the
wasex- sinner’s body, from which it could be expelled by confession
anlage as by a sort of spiritual purge or emetic. This is confirmed
the sinner. by the form of auricular confession which is practised by
the Akikuyu of British East Africa. Amongst them, we
are told, “sin is essentially remissable ; it suffices to confess
it. Usually this is done to the sorcerer, who expels the sin


by a ceremony of which the principal rite is a pretended


emetic: kotahikio, derived from tahtka, ‘to vomit?”! Thus:


among these savages the confession and absolution of sins is,
so to say, a purely physical process of relieving a sufferer of
a burden which sits heavy on his stomach rather than on his
conscience. This view of the matter is again confirmed by
the observation that these same Akikuyu resort’ to another
physical mode of expelling sin from a sinner, and that is by
the employment of a scapegoat, which by them, as by the
Jews and many other people, has been employed as a vehicle
for carting away moral rubbish and dumping it somewhere
else. For example, ifa Kikuyu man has committed incest,
which would naturally entail his death, he produces a substi-
tute in the shape of a he-goat, to which by an ignoble cere-


1 Le P. P. Cayzac, “La Religion des Kikuyu,” Anthropos, v. (1905) p-
311.


an


IV HUNTERS AND FISHERS TABOOED 215


mony he transfers his guilt. Then the throat of the animal
is cut, and the human culprit is thereby purged of his sin.’

Hence we may suspect that the primary motive of the Hence the

P ‘ : : confession

confession of sins among savages was self-regarding ; in other > <i; i,
words, the intention was rather to benefit the sinner himself employed
than to safeguard others by warning them of the danger they feticine -
would incur by coming into contact with him. This view is - Ress
borne out by the observation that confession is sometimes of the ick.
used as a means of healing the sick transgressor himself, who
is supposed to recover as soon as he has made a clean breast
of his transgression. Thus “when the Carriers are severely
sick, they often think that they shall not recover, unless they
divulge to a priest or magician every crime which they may
have committed, which has hitherto been kept secret. In
such a case they will make a full confession, and then they
expect that their lives will be spared fora time longer. But
should they keep back a single crime, they as firmly believe
that they shall suffer almost instant death.”? Again, the
Aurohuaca Indians, who, under the tropical sun of South
America, inhabit a chilly region bordering on the perpetual
snows of the Sierra Nevada in Colombia, believe that all
sickness is a punishment for sin. So when one of their
medicine-men is summoned to a sick bed, he does not enquire
after the patient’s symptoms but makes strange passes over
him and asks in a sepulchral voice whether he will con-
fess his sins. Ifthe sick man persists in drawing a veil of
silence over his frailties, the doctor will not attempt to treat
him, but will turn on his heel and leave the house. On the
other hand if a satisfactory confession has been made, the
leech directs the patient’s friends to procure certain odd-
looking bits of stone or shell to which the sins of the sufferer
may be transferred, for when that is done he will be made
whole. For this purpose the sin-laden stones or shells are
carried high up into the mountains and laid in some spot


1 Le P. P. Cayzac, Joc. cit. The Morse’s Report to the Secretary of War


nature of the ‘‘ignoble ceremony ” of
transferring sin to a he-goat is not
mentioned by the missionary. It can
hardly have been the simple Jewish one
of laying hands on the animal’s head.

2 D. W. Harmon, in Rev. Jedidiah


of the United States on Indian Affairs
(New-haven, 1822), p. 345. The
Carriers are an Indian tribe of North-
West America who call themselves
Ta-cul-lies, ‘‘a people who go upon
water” (zbzd. p. 343).


Similarly
the
confession
of sins is
sometimes
resorted
to by
women

in hard
labour as
a means of
accelerat-
ing their
delivery.


216 TABOOED PERSONS CHAP.


where the first beams of the sun, rising in clear or clouded
majesty above the long white slopes or the towering crags of
the Sierra Nevada, will strike down on them, driving sin and
sickness far away by their radiant influence.’ Here, again,
we see that sin is regarded as something almost material
which by confession can be removed from the body of the
patient and laid on stones or shells. Further, the confession
of sins has been resorted to by some people as a means of
accelerating the birth of a child when the mother was in
hard labour. Thus, “among the Indians of Guatemala, in
the time of their idolatry when a woman was in labour, the
midwife ordered her to confess her sins; and if she was not
delivered, the husband was to confess his ; and if that did not
do they took off his clouts and put them about his wife’s
loins ; if still she could not be delivered, the midwife drew
blood from herself and sprinkled it towards the four quarters
of heaven with some invocations and ceremonies.”” In these
attempts of the Indians to accelerate the birth of the child it
seems clear that the confession of sins on the part first of the
wife and afterwards of the husband is nothing but a magical
ceremony like the putting of the husband’s clothes on the
suffering woman ® or the sprinkling of the midwife’s blood
towards the four quarters of the heaven. Amongst the »
Antambahoaka, a savage tribe of Madagascar, when a woman
is in hard labour, a sorcerer is called in to her aid. After


1 Francis C. Nicholas, ‘‘ The Ab-
origines of Santa Maria, Colombia,”
American Anthropologist, N.S. iii.
(1901) pp. 639-641.

2 A. de Herrera, Zhe General His-
tory of the Vast Continent and Islands
of America, translated by Capt. J.
Stevens (London, 1725-26), iv. 148.
The confession of sins appears to
have held an important place in the
native religion of the American Indians,
particularly the Mexicans and Peru-
vians. There is no sufficient reason
to suppose that they learned the
practice from Catholic priests. For
more evidence of the custom among
the aborigines of America see L, H.
Morgan, League of the Iroquois (Roch-
ester, U.S. America, 1851), pp. 170
59+, 187 sg.; B. de Sahagun, Histoire


générale des choses de la Nouvelle
Espagne, bk. i, ch. 12, bk. vi. ch. 7,
pp. 22-27, 339-344 (Jourdanet and
Simeon’s French translation); A. de
Herrera, of, c#t. iv. 173, 190; Diego
de Landa, Relation des choses de
Yucatan (Paris, 1864), pp. 154 sgg. $
Brasseur de Bourbourg, //éstoire des
nations civilisées du Mexique et de
l’Amérique Centrale, ii, 114 Sq,
567, iii, 567-569; P. J. de Arriaga,
Extirpacion de la idolatria del Piru
(Lima, 1621), pp. 18, 28 sg.

8 As to this means of hastening the
delivery see Zotemism and Exogamy,
iv. 248 sgg. The intention of the ex-
change of clothes at childbirth between
husband and wife seems to be to relieve
the woman by transferring the travail
pangs to the man,


Vv HUNTERS AND FISHERS TABOOED 217


making some magical signs and uttering some incantations,
he generally declares that the patient cannot be delivered
until she has publicly confessed a secret fault which she has
committed. In such a case a woman has been known to
confess to incest with her brother; and immediately after
her confession the child was born.’ In these cases the con- In these
fession of sins is clearly not a mode of warning people to j...,. 5.
keep clear of the sinner; it is a magical ceremony primarily 2 magical
intended to benefit the sinner himself or herself and no a Ne
other. The same thing may perhaps be said of a confession ‘to relieve
which was prescribed in a certain case by ancient Hindoo cana
ritual. At a great festival of Varuna, which fell at the
beginning of the rainy season, the priest asked the wife of
the sacrificer to name her paramour or paramours, and she
had to mention their names or at least to take up as many
grass-stalks as she had lovers. “Now when a woman who
belongs to one man carries on intercourse with another, she
undoubtedly commits a sin against Varuna. He therefore
thus asks her, lest she should sacrifice with a secret pang in
her mind; for when confessed the sin becomes less, since it
becomes truth ; this is why he thus asks her. And whatever
connection she confesses not, that indeed will turn out
injurious to her relatives.”* In this passage of the Satapatha
Brahmana confession of sin is said to diminish the
sin, just as if the mere utterance of the words ejected or
expelled some morbid matter from the person of the sinner,
thereby relieving her of its burden and benefiting also her
relatives, who would suffer through any sin which she might
not have confessed.

Thus at an early stage of culture the confession of sins Thus the
wears the aspect of a bodily rather than of a moral and Comession


of sins is


spiritual purgation; it is a magical rather than a religious at first
rite, and as such it resembles the ceremonies of washing, bodily es
scouring, fumigation, and so forth, which in like manner moral

: wi ece : + __ purgation,
are applied by many primitive peoples to the purification resembling


of what we should regard as moral guilt, but what they the cere-


1G. Ferrand, Les Musulmans & Veda (Berlin, 1894), pp. 319 sg.
Madagascar, Deuxiéme Partie (Paris, 3 Satapatha Brahmana, translated


1893), pp. 20 sg. by J. Eggeling, pt. i. p. 397 (Sacred
2 H. Oldenberg, Die Religior des Books of the East, vol. xii.).


monies of
washing,


fumigation,


and so on,
which are
observed
by many
primitive
peoples
for the
removal
of sin.


It is
possible
that some
savage


taboos may


still lurk,
under
various
disguises,
in the
morality of
civilised
peoples.


218 TABOOED PERSONS CHAP.


consider rather as a corporeal pollution or infection, which
can be removed by the physical agencies of fire, water,
fasts, purgatives, abrasion, scarification, and so forth. But
when the guilt of sin ceases to be regarded as something
material, a sort of clinging vapour of death, and is conceived
as the transgression of the will of a wise and good God, it
is obvious that the observance of these outward ‘rites of
purification becomes superfluous and absurd, a vain show
which cannot appease the anger of the offended deity. The
only means of turning away his wrath and averting the fatal
consequences of sin is now believed to be the humble con-
fession and true repentance of the sinner. At this stage of
ethical evolution the practice of confession loses its old
magical character as a bodily purge and assumes the new


aspect of a purely religious rite, the propitiation of a great


supernatural and moral being, who by a simple fiat can
cancel the transgression and restore the transgressor to
a state of pristine innocence. This comfortable doctrine
teaches us that in order to blot out the effects of our
misdeeds we have only to acknowledge and confess them
with a lowly and penitent heart, whereupon a merciful
God will graciously pardon our sin and absolve us and ours
from its consequences. It might indeed be well for the
world if we could thus easily undo the past, if we could
recall the words that have been spoken amiss, if we could
arrest the long train that follows, like a flight of avenging
Furies, on every evil action. But this we cannot do.
Our words and acts, good and bad, have their natural,
their inevitable consequences. God may pardon sin, but
Nature cannot. :

It seems not improbable that in our own rules of conduct,
in what we call the common decencies of life as well as in
the weightier matters of morality, there may survive not a
few old savage taboos which, masquerading as an expression


|


of the divine will or draped in the flowing robes of a false —


philosophy, have maintained their credit long after the crude
ideas out of which they sprang have been discarded by the
progress of thought and knowledge; while on the other hand
many ethical precepts and social laws, which now rest firmly
on a solid basis of utility, may at first have drawn some


Iv HUNTERS AND FISHERS TABOOED


219


portion of their sanctity from the same ancient system of
superstition. For example, we can hardly doubt that in
primitive society the crime of murder derived much of its
horror from a fear of the angry ghost of the murdered man.
Thus superstition may serve as a convenient crutch to
morality till she is strong enough to throw away the crutch
and walk alone. To judge by the legislation of the
Pentateuch the ancient Semites appear to have passed
through a course of moral evolution not unlike that which
we can still detect in process among the Esquimaux of
Baffin Land. Some of the old laws of Israel are clearly
‘savage taboos of a familiar type thinly disguised as com-
mands of the deity. This disguise is indeed a good deal
more perfect in Palestine than in Baffin Land, but in
substance it is the same. Among the Esquimaux it is
the will of Sedna; among the Israelites it is the will of
Jehovah."

But it is time to return to our immediate subject, to wit,
the rules of conduct observed by hunters after the slaughter
of the game.

When the Kayans or Bahaus of central Borneo have shot Ceremonies
one of the dreaded Bornean panthers, they are very anxious rege
about the safety of their souls, for they think that the soul Kayans
of a panther is almost more powerful than their own. Hence apg
they step eight times over the carcase of the dead beast
reciting the spell, “ Panther, thy soul under my soul.” On
returning home they smear themselves, their dogs, and their
weapons with the blood of fowls in order to calm their souls
and hinder them from fleeing away ; for being themselves
fond of the flesh of fowls they ascribe the same taste to
their souls. For eight days afterwards they must bathe by
day and by night before going out again to the chase.”


1 The similarity of some of the
Mosaic laws to savage customs has
struck most Europeans who have ac-
quired an intimate knowledge of the
savage and his ways. They have often
explained the coincidences as due to a
primitive revelation or to the dispersion
of the Jews into all parts of the earth.
Some examples of these coincidences
were cited in my article ‘‘ Taboo,”
Encyclopaedia Britannica,® xxiii. 17.


The subject has since been handled,
with consummate ability and learning,
by my lamented friend W. Robertson
Smith in his Religion of the Semites
(New Edition, London, 1894). In
Psyche’s Task 1 have illustrated by
examples the influence of superstition
on the growth of morality.


2 A. W. Nieuwenhuis, Quer durch
Borneo, i. 106 sg.


220 TABOOED PERSONS CHAP.


After killing an animal some Indian hunters used to
Cere- purify themselves in water as a religious rite.’ When a
sere Damara hunter returns from a successful chase he takes
observed water in his mouth and ejects it three times over his feet,
faba and also into the fire on his own hearth.2 * Amongst the
after killing Caffres of South Africa “the slaughter of a lion, however
dangerous honourable it is esteemed, is nevertheless associated with an
idea of moral uncleanness, and is followed by a very strange
ceremony. When the hunters approach the village on their
return, the man who gave the lion the first wound is hidden
from every eye by the shields which his comrades hold up
before him. »One of the hunters steps forward and, leaping
and bounding in a strange manner, praises the courage of
the lion-killer. Then he rejoins the band, and the same
performance is repeated by another. All the rest meanwhile
keep up a ceaseless shouting, rattling with their clubs on
their shields. This goes on till they have reached the village.
Then a mean hut is run up not far from the village ; and in
this hut the lion-killer, because he is unclean, must remain
four days, cut off from all association with the tribe. There
he dyes his body all over with white paint; and lads who
have not yet been circumcised, and are therefore, in respect
to uncleanness, in the same state as himself, bring him a calf
to eat, and wait upon him. When the four days are over,
the unclean man washes himself, paints himself with red
paint in the usual manner, and is escorted back to the village
by the head chief, attended with a guard of honour. Lastly,
a second calf is killed; and, the uncleanness being now at
an end, every one is free to eat of the calf with him.”?®
Among the Hottentots, when a man has killed a lion, leopard,
elephant, or rhinoceros he is esteemed a great hero, but he
is deluged with urine by the medicine-man and has to remain
at home quite idle for three days, during which his wife may
not come near him; she is also enjoined to restrict herself


1 J. Adair, History of the American Lichtenstein, Reisen im  siidlichen


Indians, p. 118. Africa (Berlin, 1811-12), i, 419.
* C. J. Andersson, Lake Ngami, p. These accounts were written about a
224, century ago, The custom may since


* L. Alberti, De Xaffers aan de have become obsolete. A similar re-
Zuidkust van Afrika (Amsterdam, mark applies to other customs described
1810), pp. 158 sg. Compare H. _ in this and the following paragraph,


ee ae


ee


ee


“=


Iv HUNTERS AND FISHERS TABOOED 221


to a poor diet and to eat no more than is barely necessary
to keep her in health.’ Similarly the Lapps deem it the
height of glory to kill a bear, which they consider the king
of beasts. Nevertheless, all the men who take part in the
slaughter are regarded as unclean, and must live by them-
selves for three days in a-hut or tent made specially for
them, where they cut up and cook the bear’s carcase. The
reindeer which brought in the carcase on a sledge may not
be driven by a woman for a whole year; indeed, according
to one account, it may not be used by anybody for that
period. Before the men go into the tent where they are to
be secluded, they strip themselves of the garments they had
worn in killing the bear, and their wives spit the red juice of
alder bark in their faces. They enter the tent not by the
ordinary door but by an opening at the back. When the
bear’s flesh has been cooked, a portion of it is sent by the
hands of two men to the women, who may not approach the
men’s tent while the cooking is going on. The men who
convey the flesh to the women pretend to be strangers
bringing presents from a foreign land ; the women keep up
the pretence and promise to tie red threads round the legs
of the strangers. The bear’s flesh may not be passed in to
the women through the door of their tent, but must be thrust
in at a special opening made by lifting up the hem of the
tent-cover. When the three days’ seclusion is over and the
men are at liberty to return to their wives, they run, one
after the other, round the fire, holding the chain by which
pots are suspended over it. This is regarded as a form of
purification ; they may now leave the tent by the ordinary
door and rejoin the women. But the leader of the party
must still abstain from cohabitation with his wife for two
days more.”

Again, the Caffres are said to dread greatly the boa-
constrictor or an enormous serpent resembling it ; “and being


1 P. Kolbe, Present State of the Cape
of Good Hope, 1.* (London, 1738) pp.
251-255. The reason alleged for the
custom is to allow the slayer to recruit
his strength. But the reason is clearly
inadequate as an explanation of this and
similar practices.

J. Scheffer, Lapponza (Frankfort,


1673), pp. 234-243; C. Leemius, De
Lapponibus Finmarchiae eorumque
lingua, vita et religione pristina com-
mentatio (Copenhagen, 1767), pp.
502 sg.; E. J. Jessen, De Finnorum
Lapponumgue Nouvegicorum religione
pagana tractatus singularis, pp. 64 sq.
(bound up with Leemius’s work).


Cere-
monies ob-
served by
Lapp
hunters
after killing
a bear.


Expiatory
ceremonies
performed
for the
slaughter
of serpents.


222 TABOOED PERSONS CHAP,


influenced by certain superstitious notions they even fear to
kill it. The man who happened to put it to death, whether
in self-defence or otherwise, was formerly required to lie in
a running stream of water during the day for several
weeks together ; and no beast whatever was allowed to be
slaughtered at the hamlet to which he belonged, until this
duty had been fully performed. The body of the snake was
then taken and carefully buried in a trench, dug close to the
cattle-fold, where its remains, like those of a chief, were
henceforward kept perfectly undisturbed. The period of
penance, as in the case of mourning for the dead, is now
happily reduced to a few days.” Amongst the Ewe-speaking
peoples of the Slave Coast, who worship the python, a native
who killed one of these serpents used to be burned alive.
But for some time past, though a semblance of carrying out
the old penalty is preserved, the culprit is allowed to escape
with his life, but he has to pay a heavy fine. A small hut
of dry faggots and grass is set up, generally near the lagoon
at Whydah, if the crime has been perpetrated there; the
guilty man is thrust inside, the door of plaited grass is shut
on him, and the hut is set on fire. Sometimes a dog, a kid,
and two fowls are enclosed along with him, and he is


drenched with palm-oil and yeast, probably to render him |


the more combustible. As he is unbound, he easily breaks
out of the frail hut before the flames consume him ; but he
has to run the gauntlet of the angry serpent-worshippers,
who belabour the murderer of their god with sticks and
pelt him with clods until he reaches water and plunges
into it, which is supposed to wash away his sin. Thirteen
days later a commemoration service is held in honour
of the deceased python.2 In Madras it is considered a
great sin to kill a cobra, When this has happened, the
people generally burn the body of the serpent just as they
burn the bodies of human beings. The murderer deems
himself polluted for three days. On the second day milk
is poured on the remains of the cobra, On the third

1S, Kay, 7ravels and Researches in Dahomans (London, 1851), i, 107; P.
Caffraria (London, 1833), pp. 341 sg. Bouche, La Céte des Esclaves (Paris,

2 J. Duncan, 7ravels in Western 1885), p. 3973 A. B, Ellis, Zhe Hwe-


Ajrica (London, 1847), i. 195 sg.3 speaking Peoples of the Slave Coast, pp.
F. E. Forbes Dahomey and the 58 89.


iv HUNTERS AND FISHERS TABOOED 223


day the guilty wretch is free from pollution.’ Under native
rule, we may suspect, he would not get off so lightly.

In these last cases the animal whose slaughter has to be All such
atoned for is sacred, that is, it is one whose life is commonly (P“°r
spared from motives of superstition. Yet the treatment of et
the sacrilegious slayer seems to resemble so closely the treat- which —
ment of hunters and fishermen who have killed animals for pave
food in the ordinary course of business, that the ideas on the souls of
which both sets of customs are based may be assumed to *™™#!s.
be substantially the same. Those ideas, if I am right,
are the respect which the savage feels for the souls
of beasts, especially valuable or formidable beasts, and
the dread which he entertains of their vengeful ghosts.

Some confirmation of this view may be drawn from the
ceremonies observed by fishermen of Annam when the carcase
of a whale is washed ashore. These fisherfolk, we are told,
worship the whale on account of the benefits they derive from
it. There is hardly a village on the sea-shore which has not
its small pagoda, containing the bones, more or less authentic,
of a whale. When a dead whale is washed ashore, the people
accord it a solemn burial. The man who first caught sight
of it acts as chief mourner, performing the rites which as
chief mourner and heir he would perform for a human kins-
man. He puts on all the garb of woe, the straw hat, the
white robe with long sleeves turned inside out, and the other
paraphernalia of full mourning. As next of kin to the
deceased he presides over the funeral rites. Perfumes are
burned, sticks of incense kindled, leaves of gold and silver
scattered, crackers let off. When the flesh has been cut off
and the oil extracted, the remains of the carcase are buried
in the sand. Afterwards a shed is set up and offerings are
made in it. Usually some time after the burial the spirit of
the dead whale takes possession of some person in the village
and declares by his mouth whether he is a male or a female.”


1 Indian Antiquary, xxi. (1892) p.
224. Many of the above examples of
expiation exacted for the slaughter of
animals have already been cited by me
in a note on Pausanias, ii, 7. 7, where
I suggested that the legendary purifica-
tion of Apollo for the slaughter of the
python at Delphi (Plutarch, Quaest,


Graec., 12; td., De defectu oraculorum,
15; Aelian, Var. Hzst. iii. 1) may be
a reminiscence of a custom of this sort.

2 Le R. P. Cadiére, ‘‘ Croyances et
dictons populaires de Ja Vallée du
Nguén-son, Province de Quang-binh
(Annam),” Bulletin del’ Ecole Francaise
@’ Extréme Orient, i, (1901) pp. 183 sg.


Taboos of
holiness
agree with
taboos of
pollution,
because in
the savage
mind the
ideas of
holiness
and pollu-
tion are
not yet
differ-
entiated,


CHAP DER '¥
TABOOED THINGS


§ 1. The Meaning of Taboo


THUS in primitive society the rules of ceremonial purity
observed by divine kings, chiefs, and priests agree in many
respects with the rules observed by homicides, mourners,
women in childbed, girls at puberty, hunters and fishermen,
and soon. To us these various classes of persons appear to
differ totally in character and condition; some of them we
should call holy, others we might pronounce unclean and
polluted. But the savage makes no such moral distinction
between them ; the conceptions of holiness and pollution are
not yet differentiated in his mind. To him the common
feature of all these persons is that they are dangerous and
in danger, and the danger in which they stand and to which
they expose others is what we should call spiritual or ghostly,
and therefore imaginary. The danger, however, is not less
real because it is imaginary; imagination acts upon man as.
really as does gravitation, and may kill him as certainly as a
dose of prussic acid, To seclude these persons from the rest
of the world so that the dreaded spiritual danger shall neither
reach them, nor spread from them, is the object of the taboos
which they have to observe. These taboos act, so to say,
as electrical insulators to preserve the spiritual force with
which these persons are charged from suffering or inflicting
harm by contact with the outer world.’


1 On the nature of taboo see my Jigionof the Semites*(London, 1894), pp.
article ‘‘ Taboo” in the Encyclopaedia 148 sqq., 446 sgg. Some languages.
Britannica, gthedition, vol. xxiii.(1888) have retained a word for that general
pp. 15 sgg.3 W. Robertson Smith, Xe- idea which includes under it the notions:


224


CHAP. V THE MEANING OF TABOO 225


To the illustrations of these general principles which
have been already given I shall now add some more, draw-
ing my examples, first, from the class of tabooed things, and,
second, from the class of tabooed words ; for in the opinion
of the savage both things and words may, like persons, be
charged or electrified, either temporarily or permanently,
with the mysterious virtue of taboo, and may therefore
require to be banished for a longer or shorter time from the
familiar usage of common life. And the examples will be
chosen with special reference to those sacred chiefs, kings
and priests, who, more than anybody else, live fenced about
by taboo as by a wall. Tabooed things will be illustrated
in the present chapter, and tabooed words in the next.


§ 2. Iron tabooed


In the first place we may observe that the awful


sanctity of kings naturally


which we now distinguish as sanctity
and pollution, The word in Latin is
sacer, in Greek, dy.os. In Polynesian
it is tabu (Tongan), ¢afmz (Samoan,
Tahitian, Marquesan, Maori, etc.), or
kapu (Hawaiian), See E. Tregear,
Maori-Polynesian Comparative Dic-
tionary (Wellington, N.Z., 1891), s.v.
tapu. In Dacotan the word is wakan,
which in Riggs’s Dakota-English Dic-
tionary (Contributions to North Ameri-
can Ethnology, vol. vii., Washington,
1890, pp. 507 sg.) isdefinedas ‘‘speritual,
sacred, consecrated ; wonderful, incom-
prehensible ; said also of women at the
menstrual period,” Another writer
in the same dictionary defines wakan
more fully as follows: ‘‘ AZystertous ;
incomprehensible ; in a peculiar state,
which, from not being understood, it ts
dangerous to meddle with; hence the
application of this word to women at
the menstrual period, and from hence,
too, arises the feeling among the
wilder Indians, that if the Bible, the
church, the missionary, etc., are
‘wakan,’ they are to be avoided, or
shunned, not as being dad or dangerous,
but as wakan. The word seems to be
the only one suitable for holy, sacred,
etc., but the common acceptation of it,


PT. I


leads to a_ prohibition to


given above, makes it quite misleading
to the heathen.” On the notion desig-
nated by wakan, see also G. H. Pond,
‘* Dakota Superstitions,” Collections of
the Minnesota Historical Society for
the year 1867 (Saint Paul, 1867), p.
33; J. Owen Dorsey, in Zleventh
Annual Report of the Bureau of Eth-
nology (Washington, 1894), pp. 366 sg.
It is characteristic of the equivocal
notion denoted by these terms that,
whereas the condition of women in
childbed is commonly regarded by the
savage as what we should call unclean,
among the Herero the same con-
dition is described as holy; for some
time after the birth of her child, the
woman is secluded in a hut made
specially for her, and every morning
the milk of all the cows is brought to
her that she may consecrate it by
touching it with her mouth. See H.
Schinz, Deutsch - Siidwest- Afrika, p.
167. Again, whereas a girl at puberty is
commonly secluded as dangerous, among
the Warundi of eastern Africa she is led
by her grandmother all over the house
and obliged to touch everything (O. Bau-
mann, Durch Massatland sur Nilguelle
(Berlin, 1894), p. 221), as if her touch
imparted a blessing instead of a curse.


Q


Kings may touch their sacred persons.


not be
touched.


The use of
iron for-
bidden to
kings and
priests-


226 TABOOED THINGS CHAP,


Thus it was unlawful to lay
hands on the person of a Spartan king; no one might
touch the body of the king or queen of Tahiti;? it is
forbidden to touch the person of the king of Siam under
pain of death;* and no one may touch the king of
Cambodia, for any purpose whatever, without his express
command. In July 1874 the king was thrown from his
carriage and lay insensible on the ground, but not one
of his suite dared to touch him ; a European coming to the
spot carried the injured monarch to his palace. Formerly
no one might touch the king of Corea; and if he deigned
to touch a subject, the spot touched became sacred, and the
person thus honoured had to wear a visible mark (generally
a cord of red silk) for the rest of his life. Above all, no iron
might touch the king’s body. In 1800 King Tieng-tsong-
tai-oang died of a tumour in the back, no one dreaming of
employing the lancet, which would probably have saved his
life. It is said that one king suffered terribly from an
abscess in the lip, till his physician called in a jester, whose
pranks made the king laugh heartily, and so the abscess
burst.2 Roman and Sabine priests might not be shaved with
iron but only with bronze razors or shears ;° and whenever
an iron graving-tool was brought into the sacred grove of
the Arval Brothers at Rome for the purpose of cutting an
inscription in stone, an expiatory sacrifice of a lamb and a
pig must be offered, which was repeated when the graving-tool


was removed from the grove.’


As a general rule iron might


not be brought into Greek sanctuaries. In Crete sacrifices


1 Plutarch, Agis, 19.

2 W. Ellis, Polynesian Researches,*
iii. 102.

3 E. Aymonier, Ze Cambodge, ii.
(Paris, 1901) p. 25.

4 J. Moura, Le Royaume du Cam-
bodge (Paris, 1883), i. 226. |

6 Ch. Dallet, Histoire de PEglise de
Corée (Paris, 1874), i. pp. xxiv. 59.3
W. E. Griffis, Corea, the Hermit Nation
(London, 1882), p. 219. These
customs are now obsolete (G, N.


Curzon, Problems of the Far Last
(Westminster, 1896), pp. 154 sg.
note),


® Macrobius, Sav. v. 19. 13; Servius


on Virgil, Aen. i. 448; Joannes
Lydus, De mensibus, i. 31. We have
already seen (p, 16) that the hair ot
the Flamen Dialis might only be cut
with a bronze knife. The Greeks
attributed a certain cleansing virtue to
bronze; hence they employed it in
expiatory rites, at eclipses, etc. See
the Scholiast on Theocritus, ii. 36.

1 Acta Fratrum Arvalium, ed. G.
Henzen (Berlin, 1874), pp. 128-135; J.
Marquardt, Rimische Staatsverwaltung,
iii.? (Das Sacralwesen) pp. 459 sq.

8 Plutarch, Praecepia gerendae ret-
publicae, xxvi. 7. Plutarch here men-
tions that gold was also excluded from


ee ee ee Me ee ee a a "


a ee


Vv IRON TABOOED 227


were offered to Menedemus without the use of iron, because

the legend ran that Menedemus had been killed by an iron
weapon in the Trojan war.' The Archon of Plataea might

not touch iron; but once a year, at the annual commemora-

tion of the men who fell at the battle of Plataea, he was
allowed to carry a sword wherewith to sacrifice a bull? To

this day a Hottentot priest never uses an iron knife, but
always a sharp splint of quartz, in sacrificing an animal or
circumcising a lad. Among the Ovambo of south-west Use of iron
Africa custom requires that lads should be circumcised with epost
a sharp flint ; if none is to hand, the operation may be per- cision,
formed with iron, but the iron must afterwards be buried.* pear urcine
The Antandroy and Tanala of Madagascar cut the navel- forth.
strings of their children with sharp wood or with a thread,

but never with an iron knife.® In Uap, one of the Caroline
Islands, wood of the hibiscus tree, which was used to make

the fire-drill, must be cut with shell knives or shell


some temples. At first sight this is
surprising, for in general neither the
gods nor their ministers have displayed
any marked aversion to gold. But a
little enquiry suffices to clear up the
mystery and set the scruple in its proper
light. From a Greek inscription dis-
covered some years ago we learn that no
person might enter the sanctuary of the
Mistress at Lycosura wearing golden
trinkets, unless for the purpose of dedi-
cating them to the goddess ; and if any
one did enter the holy place with such
ornaments on his body but no such
pious intention in his mind, the trinkets
were forfeited to the use of religion.
See ’Ednuepls dpyacokoy:xy (Athens,
1898), col. 249; Dittenberger, Sy//oge
inscriptionum Graecarum,® No. 939.
The similar rule, that in the procession
at the mysteries of Andania no woman
might wear golden ornaments (Ditten-
berger, of. czt. No. 653), was probably
subject to a similar exception and en-
forced by a similar penalty. Once
more, if the maidens who served Athena
on the Acropolis at Athens put on gold
ornaments, the ornaments became
sacred, in other words, the property
of the goddess (Harpocration, s.v.
dopnopeiv, vol. i. p. 59, ed, Dindorf).
Thus it appears that the pious scruple


about gold was ‘concerned rather with
its exit from, than with its entrance
into, the sacred edifice. At the sacri-
fice to the Sun in ancient Egypt
worshippers were forbidden to wear
golden trinkets and to give hay to
an ass (Plutarch, /sis et Osiris, 30)—a
singular combination of religious pre-
cepts. In India gold and silver are
common totems, and members of such
clans are forbidden to wear gold and
silver trinkets respectively. See
Totemism and Exogamy, iv. 24.

1 Callimachus, referred to by the
Old Scholiast on Ovid, JZézs. See
Callimachea, ed. O. Schneider, ii. p.
282, Frag. 1007 E.; Chr. A. Lobeck,
Aglaophamus, p. 686.

2 Plutarch, Aristides, 21. This
passage was pointed out to me by my
friend Mr. W. Wyse.

8 Theophilus Hahn, 7sumnz-||Goam,
the Supreme Being of the Khoi-Khot
(London, 1881), p. 22.

* Dr. P. H. Brincker, ‘‘ Charakter,
Sitten und Gebriauche speciell der
Bantu Deutsch-Siidwestafrikas,” J/t-
theilungen des Seminars fiir orienta-
lische Sprachen su Berlin, iii. (1900)
Dritte Abtheilung, p. 80.

5 A. van Gennep, 7adou et totémisme
@ Madagascar (Paris, 1904), p. 38.


Use of iron
forbidden
at certain
times and
places
among the
- Esquimaux,


228 TABOOED THINGS CHAP.


axes, never with iron or steel. Amongst the Moquis
of Arizona stone knives, hatchets, and so on have passed
out of common use, but are retained in religious cere-
monies.” After the Pawnees had ceased to use stone
arrow-heads for ordinary purposes, they still employed
them to slay the sacrifices, whether human captives or
buffalo and deer.’ We have seen that among the Esqui-
maux of Bering Strait the use of iron implements is for-
bidden for four days after the slaughter of a white whale, and
that the use of an iron axe at a place where salmon are being
dressed is believed by these people to be a fatal imprudence.*
They hold a festival in the assembly-house of the village,
while the bladders of the slain beasts are hanging there,
and during its celebration no wood may be cut with an iron
axe. If it is necessary to split firewood, this may be done
with wedges of bone.? At Kushunuk, near Cape Vancouver,
it happened that Mr. Nelson and his party entered an
assembly-house of these Esquimaux while the festival of
the bladders was in progress. “When our camping outfit
was brought in from the sledges, two men took drums, and
as the clothing and goods of the traders who were with me
were brought in, the drums were beaten softly and a song
was sung in a low, humming tone, but when our guns and
some steel traps were brought in, with other articles of iron,
the drums were beaten loudly and the songs raised in pro-
portion. This was done that the shades of the animals
present in the bladders might not be frightened.”® The
Esquimaux on the western coast of Hudson Bay may not
work on iron during the season for hunting musk-oxen,
which falls in March. And no such work may be done by
them until the seals have their pups." Negroes of the Gold
Coast remove all iron or steel from their person when they


1 W. H. Furness, Zhe Jsland of 5 E. W. Nelson, ‘*The Eskimo
Stone Money, Uap of the Carolines about Bering Strait,” Zighteenth An-
(Philadelphia and London, 1910), p. ual Report of the Bureau of American
151. Ethnology, Part I. (Washington, 1899)

2 J. G. Bourke, Zhe Snake Dance of pp. 392.

Z. Arizona (New A

pr Pegs i %, 9. (ew: Fork, 6 E. W. Nelson, of. cét. p. 383.
3G. B.. Grinnell, Pawnee Hero 7 Fr. Boas, ‘‘ The Eskimo of Baffin
Stories and Folk-tales (New York, Land and Hudson Bay,” Audlletin of
1889), p. 253. the American Museum of Natural
4 See above, pp. 205 sg. History, xv. Part I, (1901) p. 149.


v IRON TABOOED 229


consult their fetish. The men who made the need-fire in
Scotland had to divest themselves of all metal.? There was use of iron
hardly any belief, we are told, that had a stronger hold on ponding)
the mind of a Scottish Highlander than that on no account occasions
whatever should iron be put in the ground on Good Friday. the High-
Hence no grave was dug and no field ploughed on that day. landers of
It has been suggested that the belief was based on that aaa
rooted aversion to iron which fairies are known to feel.

These touchy beings live underground, and might resent
having the roof pulled from over their heads on the hallowed

day Again, in the Highlands of Scotland the shoulder-

blades of sheep are employed in divination, being consulted

as to future marriages, births, deaths, and funerals; but the
forecasts thus made will not be accurate unless the flesh has

been removed from the bones without the use of any iron.*


In making the clavze (a kind of Yule-tide fire-wheel) at


1 C, F. Gordon Cumming, /n the
Hebrides (ed. 1883), p. 195.


2 James Logan, Zhe Scottish Gael
(ed. Alex. Stewart), ii. 68 sg.


8 J. G. Campbell, Witchcraft and
Second Sight in the Highlands and
Islands of Scotland (Glasgow, 1902),
pp. 262, 298, 299.

4 R. C. Maclagan, M.D., ‘* Notes
on Folklore Objects from Argyleshire,”
Folk-lore, vi. (1895) p. 1573 J. G.
Campbell, Superstitions of the High-
lands and Islands of Scotland (Glasgow,
1900), pp. 263-266. The shoulder-
blades of sheep have been used in
divination by many peoples, for ex-
ample by the Corsicans, South Slavs,
Tartars, Kirghiz, Calmucks, Chukchees,
and Lolos, as well as by the Scotch.
See J. Brand, Popular Antiquities,
iii. 339 sg. (Bohn’s ed.); Sir John
Lubbock (Lord Avebury), Origin of
Civilisation,* pp. 237 sg.; Ch. Rogers,
Soctal Life in Scotland, iii. 224;
Camden, Britannia, translated by
E. Gibson (London, 1695), col. 1046 ;
M. MacPhail, ‘‘ Traditions, Customs,
and Superstitions of the Lewis,” Fo/k-
lore, vi. (1895) p. 167; J. G. Dalyell,
Darker Superstitions of Scotland, pp.
515 sgg.; F. Gregorovius, Corszca,
(London, 1855), p. 187; F. S. Krauss,


Volksglaube und religivser Brauch der
Siidslaven, pp. 166-170; M. E. Dur-
ham, High Albania (London, 1909),
pp. 104 sgg.; E. Doutté, Magie et
religion dans l'Afrique du Nord
(Algiers, 1908), p. 371; W. Radloff,
Proben der Volksliteratur der tir-
kischen Stimme Stid-Sibiriens, iii. 115,
note I, compare p. 132; J. Grimm,
Deutsche Mythologie,’ ii. 932; W. W.
Rockhill, Zhe Land of the Lamas
(London, 1891), pp. 176, 341-344;
P. S. Pallas, Reise durch verschiedene
Provinzen des russischen Reichs, i.
393; J. G. Georgi, Beschreibung aller
Nationen des russischen Reichs, p.
223; T. de Pauly, Description ethno-
graphique des peuples de la Russie,
peuples de la Sibérie orientale (St.
Petersburg, 1862), p. 7; Krahmer,
“Der Anadyr-Bezirk nach A. W.
Olssufjew,” Petermann’s Mitthetlungen,
xlv. (1899) pp. 230 sg.; W. Bogoras,
“‘The Chuckchee Religion,” Memoir
of the American Museum of Natural
History, The Jesup North Pacific
LExpedition,vol. vii. part ii. (Leyden and
New York) pp. 487 sgg. ; Crabouillet,
‘*Les Lolos,” Missions Catholiques, v.
(1873) p. 723; W. G. Aston, Shinto,
p- 339; R. Andree, ‘* Scapulimantia,”
in Boas Anniversary Volume (New
York, 1906), pp. 143-165.


230 TABOOED THINGS CHAP.


Burghead, no hammer may be used; the hammering must
be done with a stone." Amongst the Jews no iron tool was
used in building the Temple at Jerusalem or in making an
altar.* The old wooden bridge (Pons Sublicius) at Rome,
which was considered sacred, was made and had to be kept
in repair without the use of iron or bronze.® It was
expressly provided by law that the temple of Jupiter Liber
at Furfo might be repaired with iron tools.* | The council
chamber at Cyzicus was constructed of wood without any
iron nails, the beams being so arranged that they could be
taken out and replaced.” The late Rajah Vijyanagram, a
member of the Viceroy’s Council, and described as one of
the most enlightened and estimable of Hindoo princes, would
not allow iron to be used in the construction of buildings
within his territory, believing that its use would inevitably
be followed by small-pox and other epidemics.®
Everything This superstitious objection to iron perhaps dates from
vehi that early time in the history of society when iron was still
and fear a novelty, and as such was viewed by many with suspicion
sti and dislike.’ For everything new is apt to excite the awe
and dread of the savage. “It is a curious superstition,”
says a pioneer in Borneo, “this of the Dusuns, to attribute
anything—whether good or bad, lucky or unlucky—that
happens to them to something novel which has arrived in
their country. For instance, my living in Kindram has
caused the intensely hot weather we have experienced of
late.”* Some years ago a harmless naturalist was collecting
plants among the high forest-clad mountains on the borders
of China and Tibet. From the summit of a pass he gazed
with delight down a long valley which, stretching away as
far as eye could reach to the south, resembled a sea of
bloom, for everywhere the forest was ablaze with the


Iron not
used in
building
sacred
edifices.


1 C. F. Gordon Cumming, Zn the
Hebrides, p. 226; E. J. Guthrie, Old
Scottish Customs (London and Glasgow,
1885), p. 223.

2 1 Kings vi. 7; Exodus xx. 25.

3 Dionysius Halicarnasensis, Av-
tiquit. Roman. iii. 45, Vv. 243 Plutarch,
Numa, 9; Pliny, Nat. Hist, xxxvi, 100,

4 Acta Fratrum Arvalium, ed. G,
Henzen, p. 132; Corpus Inscripltionum
Latinarum, i, No, 603. :


6 Pliny, Wat. Hist, xxxvi. 100,

® Indian Antiquary, x. (1881) p. 364.

7 Prof. W. Ridgeway ingeniously
suggests that the magical virtue of iron
may be based on an observation of its
magnetic power, which would lead
savages to imagine that it was possessed
ofa spirit. See Report of the British
Association for 1903, p. 816,

8 Frank Hatton, North Borneo
(1886), p. 233.


<< eee eee


v IRON TABOOED 231


gorgeous hues of the rhodcdendron and azalea in flower.
In this earthly paradise the votary of science hastened to
install himself beside a lake. But hardly had he done so
when, alas! the weather changed. Though the season was
early June, the cold became intense, snow fell heavily, and
the bloom of the rhododendrons was cut off. The inhabitants
of a neighbouring village at once set down the unusual
severity of the weather to the presence of a stranger in the
forest; and a round-robin, signed by them unanimously,
was forwarded to the nearest mandarin, setting forth that
the snow which had blocked the road, and the hail which was
blasting their crops, were alike caused by the intruder, and
that all sorts of disturbances would follow if he were allowed
to remain. In these circumstances the naturalist, who had
intended to spend most of the summer among the mountains,
was forced to decamp. “Collecting in this country,” he
adds pathetically, “is not an easy matter.” The unusually
heavy rains which happened to follow the English survey
of the Nicobar Islands in the winter of 1886-1887 were
imputed by the alarmed natives to the wrath of the spirits
at the theodolites, dumpy-levellers, and other strange instru-
ments which had been set up in so many of their favourite
haunts; and some of them proposed to soothe the anger of
the spirits by sacrificing a pig.” When the German Hans
Stade was a captive in a cannibal tribe of Brazilian Indians, ~
it happened that, shortly before a prisoner was to be eaten, a
great wind arose and blew away part of the roofs of the
huts. The savages were angry with Stade, and said he had
made the wind to come by looking into his thunder-skins, by
which they meant a book he had been reading, in order to
save the prisoner, who was a friend of his, from their
stomachs. So the pious German prayed to God, and God
mercifully heard his prayer; for next morning the weather
was beautifully fine, and his friend was butchered, carved,
and eaten in the most perfect comfort.’ According to the


1 A. E. Pratt, ‘“Two Journeys to


Ta-tsien-lu on the eastern Borders of
Tibet,” Proceedings of the R. Geo-
graphical Soctety, xiii. (1891) p. 341.
2 W. Svoboda, ‘*‘ Die Bewohner des
Nikobaren-Archipels,” /n¢ernationales


Archiv fiir Ethnographie, vi. (1893)


p- 13.

8 The Captivity of Hans Stade of
Hesse, tn A.D. 1547-1555, translated
by A. Tootal (London, 1874), pp.
85 sq.


The dislike
of spirits to
iron allows
men to use
the metal
asa
weapon
against
them.


Iron used
as acharm
against
fairies in
the High-
lands of
Scotland.


232 TABOOED THINGS CHAP.


Orotchis of eastern Siberia, misfortunes have multiplied on
them with the coming of Europeans; “they even go so far
as to lay the appearance of mew phenomena like thunder at
the door of the Russians.”’ In the seventeenth century a
succession of bad seasons excited a revolt among the Esthonian
peasantry, who traced the origin of the evil to a water-mill,
which put a stream to some inconvenience by checking its
flow” The first introduction of iron ploughshares into
Poland having been followed by a succession of bad harvests,
the farmers attributed the badness of the crops to the iron
ploughshares, and discarded them for the old wooden ones.
To this day the primitive Baduwis of Java, who live chiefly
by husbandry, will use no iron tools in tilling their fields.‘
The general dislike of innovation, which always makes
itself strongly felt in the sphere of religion, is sufficient by
itself to account for the superstitious aversion to iron enter-
tained by kings and priests and attributed by them to the
gods ; possibly this aversion may have been intensified in
places by some such accidental cause as the series of bad
seasons which cast discredit on iron ploughshares in Poland.
But the disfavour in which iron is held by the gods and
their ministers has another side. Their antipathy to the
metal furnishes men with a weapon which may be turned
against the spirits when occasion serves. As their dislike
of iron is supposed to be so great that they will not approach
persons and things protected by the obnoxious metal, iron
may obviously be employed as a charm for banning ghosts
and other dangerous spirits. And often it isso used. Thus
in the Highlands of Scotland the great safeguard against the
elfin race is iron, or, better yet, steel. The metal in any
form, whether as a sword, a knife, a gun-barrel, or what not,
is all-powerful for this purpose. Whenever you enter a fairy
1E. H. Fraser, “The Fish-skin évoniae, etc. (Elzevir, 1627) p. 276;


Tartars,” Journal of the China Branch
of the R, Asiatic Society for the Year
1891-92, N.S. xxvi. p. 15.

4 Fr, Kreutzwald und H. Neus,
Mythische und magische Lieder der
Ehsten (St. Petersburg, 1854), p.
113.

% Alexand, Guagninus, ‘* De ducatu
Samogitiae,” in Respublica sive status
vegni Poloniae, Lituaniae, Prussiae,


Johan. Lasicius, ‘*De diis Samogi-
tarum caeterorumque Sarmatum,” in
Respublica, etc. (ut supra), p. 294
(p. 84, ed. W. Mannhardt, in AZagasin
herausgegeben von der Lettisch-Litera-
rischen Gesellschaft, vol. xiv.).

41. von Ende, ‘*Die Baduwis
von Java,” AZitthetlungen der anthro-
pologischen Gesellschaft in Wien, xix.
(1889) p. 10,


oS eee


Vv IRON TABOOED 233


dwelling you should always remember to stick a piece of
steel, such as a knife, a needle, or a fish-hook, in the door ;
for then the elves will not be able to shut the door till you
come out again. So too when you have shot a deer and
are bringing it home at night, be sure to thrust a knife into
the carcase, for that keeps the fairies from laying their weight

on it. A knife or a nail in your pocket is quite enough to
prevent the fairies from lifting you up at night. Nails in
the front of a bed ward off elves from women “in the straw”
and from their babes; but to make quite sure it is better to
put the smoothing-iron under the bed, and the reaping-hook

in the window. Ifa bull has fallen over a rock and been
killed, a nail stuck into it will preserve the flesh from the
fairies. | Music discoursed on that melodious instrument, a
Jew’s harp, keeps the elfin women away from the hunter,
because the tongue of the instrument is of steel.’ Again, Iron used
when Scotch fishermen were at sea, and one of them***


E - protective
happened to take the name of God in vain, the first man charm by


who heard him called out “Cauld airn,” at which every pera
man of the crew grasped the nearest bit of iron and held and others.
it between his hands for a while. So too when he hears
the unlucky word “ pig” mentioned, a Scotch fisherman
will feel for the nails in his boots and mutter “Cauld
airn.”*® The same magic words are even whispered in
the churches of Scotch fishing-villages when the clergy-
man reads the passage about the Gadarene swine.* In
Morocco iron is considered a great protection against demons;
hence it is usual to place a knife or dagger under a sick
man’s pillow.° The Singhalese believe that they are con-
stantly surrounded by evil spirits, who lie in wait to do them
harm. A peasant would not dare to carry good food, such
as cakes or roast meat, from one place to another without
putting an iron nail on it to prevent a demon from taking
possession of the viands and so making the eater ill. No


1 J. G. Campbell, Superstitions of
the Highlands and Islands of Scotland
(Glasgow, 1900), pp. 46 sg.

2 E. J. Guthrie, Old Scottish Customs,
p- 149; Ch. Rogers, Social Life tn Scot-
dand (Edinburgh, 1884-1886), iii. 218.

3 J. Macdonald, Religion and Myth,
p. gl.


4 W. Gregor, Folk-lore of the North-
East of Scotland (London, 1881), p.
201. The fishermen think that if the
word ‘‘ pig,” ‘‘sow,” or ‘‘swine” be
uttered while the lines are being baited,
the line will certainly be lost.

5 A. Leared, Morocco and the Moors
(London, 1876), p. 273.


Iron used
asa
protective
charm
against
devils and
ghosts in
India.


234 TABOOED THINGS CHAP,


sick person, whether man or woman, would venture out of
the house without a bunch of keys or a knife in his hand,
for without such a talisman he would fear that some devil
might take advantage of his weak state to slip into his body.
And if a man has a large sore on his body he tries to keep
a morsel of iron on it as a protection against demons.’ The
inhabitants of Salsette, an island near Bombay, dread a spirit
called gird, which plays many pranks with a solitary
traveller, leading him astray, lowering him into an empty
well, and so on. But a gévé dare not touch a person who
has on him anything made of iron or steel, particularly a
knife or a nail, of which the spirit stands in great fear. Nor
will he meddle with a woman, especially a married woman,
because he is afraid of her bangles.2 Among the Majhwér,
an aboriginal tribe in the hill country of South Mirzapur, an
iron implement such as a sickle or a betel-cutter is con-
stantly kept near an infant’s head during its first year for
the purpose of warding off the attacks of ghosts.? Among
the Maravars, an aboriginal race of southern India, a knife
or other iron object lies beside a woman after childbirth to
keep off the devil“. When a Mala woman is in labour, a
sickle and some wim leaves are always kept on the cot. In
Malabar people who have to pass by burning-grounds or
other haunted places commonly carry with them iron in some
form, such as a knife or an iron rod used as a walking-
stick. When pregnant women go on a journey, they carry
with them a few twigs or leaves of the mzm tree, or iron
in some shape, to scare evil spirits lurking in groves or
burial-grounds which they may pass.’ In Bilaspore people
attribute cholera to a goddess who visits the afflicted family.
But they think that she may be kept off by iron; hence
during an epidemic of cholera people go about with axes
or sickles in their hands. “Their horses are not shod,
otherwise they might possibly nail horse-shoes to the door,

1 Wickremasinghe, in Am Urquell, 4 F. Jagor, ‘* Bericht iiber verschie-
v, (1894) p. 7. dene Volksstiimme in Vorderindien,”

2 G.F. D’Penha, ‘*Superstitionsand  Zedtschrift fir Ethnologie, xxvi. (1894)
Customs in Salsette,” /ndian Anti.  p. 70.
quary, xxvili, (1899) p. 114.

3 W. Crooke, 7ribes and Castes of 5 E. Thurston, Zthnographic Notes


the North-Western Provincesand Oudh, in Southern India (Madras, 1906),
iii, 431. Pp 341. ‘


ee ee ee ee eee


v IRON TABOOED 235


but their belief is more primitive ; for with them iron does
not dring good luck, but it scares away the evil spirits, so
when a man has had an epileptic fit he will wear an iron
bracelet to keep away the evil spirit which was supposed
to have possessed him.”* The Annamites imagine that a Iron used
new-born child is exposed to the attacks of evil spirits. oro
To protect the infant from these malignant beings the charm in
parents sometimes sell the child to the village smith, who 4?"2™
makes a small ring or circlet of iron and puts it on the and India.
child’s foot, commonly adding a little chain of iron. When
the infant has been sold to the smith and firmly
attached to him by the chain, the demons no longer have
any power over him. After the child has grown big and
the danger is over, the parents ask the smith to break
the iron ring and thank him for his services. No metal but
iron will serve the purpose.” On the Slave Coast of Africa
when a mother sees her child gradually wasting away, she con-
cludes that a demon has entered into the child and takes her
measures accordingly. To lure the demon out of the body
of her offspring, she offers a sacrifice of food; and while the
devil is bolting it, she attaches iron rings and small bells to
her child’s ankles and hangs iron chains round his neck.
The jingling of the iron and the tinkling of the bells are
supposed to prevent the demon, when he has concluded his
repast, from entering again into the body of the little sufferer.
Hence many children may be seen in this part of Africa
weighed down with iron ornaments.’ The use of iron as a
means to exercise demons was forbidden by the Coptic
church.* In India “the mourner who performs the ceremony
of putting fire into the dead person’s mouth carries with him
a piece of iron: it may be a key or a knife, or a simple piece
of iron, and during the whole time of his separation (for he
is unclean for a certain time, and no one will either touch
him or eat or drink with him, neither can he change his

1 E. M. Gordon, /udian Folk Tales Catholigues, xvi. (1884) p. 249; A. B.


(London, 1908), p. 31. Ellis, The Yoruba-speaking Peoples of
2L. R. P. Cadiére, ‘‘Coutumes she Slave Coast, p. 113.
populaires de la vallée du Ngudn- 4 Il Fetha Nagast o legislazione det


So’n,” Bulletin de l’Ecole Francaise re, codice ecclesiastico e civile di

@’ Extréime- Orient, ii. (1902) pp.  Ad¢ssinta, tradotto e annotato da

354 sg. Ignazio Guidi (Rome, 1899), p.
3 Baudin, ‘‘Le Fétichisme,” Missions 140.


Iron used
asa
protective
charm in
India and
Scotland.


236 TABOOED THINGS CHAP,


clothes *) he carries the piece of iron about with him to keep
off the evil spirit. In Calcutta the Bengali clerks in the
Government Offices used to wear a small key on one of
their fingers when they had been chief mourners.”* When
a woman dies in childbed in the island of Salsette, they put
a nail or other piece of iron in the folds of her dress ; this is
done especially if the child survives her. The intention
plainly is to prevent her spirit from coming back; for they
believe that a dead mother haunts the house and seeks to
carry away her child.® In the north-east of Scotland
immediately after a death had taken place, a piece of iron,
such as a nail or a knitting-wire, used to be stuck into all the
meal, butter, cheese, flesh, and whisky in the house, “to
prevent death from entering them.” The neglect of this
salutary precaution is said to have been closely followed by
the corruption of the food and drink ; the whisky has been
known to become as white as milk.“ When iron is used as
a protective charm after a death, as in these Hindoo and
Scotch customs, the spirit against which it is directed is the


ghost of the deceased.


1 The reader may observe how closely
the taboos laid upon mourners resemble
those laid upon kings. From what has
gone before, the reason of the re-
semblance is obvious.

2 Panjab Notes and Queries, iii.
p- 61, § 282.

3G, F. D’Penha, ‘Superstitions
and Customs in Salsette,” Jnxdian
Antiquary, xxviii. (1899) p. 115.

4 W. Gregor, Folk-lore of the North-
East of Scotland, p, 206.

5 This is expressly said in Panjab
Notes and Queries, iii, p. 202, § 846.
On iron as a protective charm see also
F. Liebrecht, Gervasius von Tilbury,
pp. 99 sgg.; ta., Zur Volkskunde, p.
3113; L. Strackerjan, Aderglaube und
Sagen aus dem Hersogthum Oldenburg,
i. pp. 354 sg. § 233; A. Wuttke, Der
deutsche Volksaberglaube,? § 414 5q.3
E. B. Tylor, Primitive Culture,* i.
140; W. Mannhardt, Baumkultus, p.
132 note. Many peoples, especially in
Africa, regard the smith’s craft with
awe or fear as something uncanny and
savouring of magic. Hence smiths
are sometimes held in high honour,


sometimes looked down upon with
great contempt. These feelings prob-
ably spring in large measure from the
superstitions which cluster round iron.
See R. Andree, Zthnographische
Parallelen und Vergleiche, pp. 153-
159; G. McCall Theal, Records of
South-Eastern Africa, vii. 447; O.
Lenz, Skzzzen aus West-Afrika (Berlin,
1878), p. 184; A. Bastian, Die deutsche
Expedition an der Loango-Kiiste, ii,
217; M. Merkel, Die AZasaz (Berlin,
1904), pp. 110 sg.; A. C. Hollis, Zhe
Masai (Oxford, 1905), pp. 330 sg.5
ta., The Nandi (Oxford, 1909), pp. 36
sg.3 J. Spieth, Die we - Stimme
(Berlin, 1906), p. 776; E. Doutté,
Magie et religion dans [Afrique du
Nord, pp. 40 sgg.; Ph. Paulitschke,
Ethnographie Nordost - Afrikas, die
geistige Cultur der Danakil, Galla
und Somél (Berlin, 1896), p. 303 #.,
Ethnographie Nordost - Afrikas, die
materielle Cultur der Dan@kil, Galla
und Somal (Berlin, 1893), p. 202; Th.
Levebvre, Voyage en Abyssinie, i, p.
Ixi. ; A. Cecchi, Da Zetla alle frontiere
del Caffa, i. (Rome, 1886) p. 45; M.


Se


v SHARP WEAPONS TABOOED 237


§ 3. Sharp Weapons tabooed


There is a priestly king to the north of Zengwih in The use of
Burma, revered by the Sotih as the highest spiritual and se
temporal authority, into whose house no weapon or cutting weapons is
instrument may be brought.! This rule may perhaps be joniaae,.
explained by a custom observed by various peoples after a lest they
death ; they refrain from the use of sharp instruments so pete
long as the ghost of the deceased is supposed to be near, Pitits.
lest they should wound it. Thus among the Esquimaux of
Bering Strait “during the day on which a person dies in the
village no one is permitted to work, and the relatives must
perform no labour during the three following days. It is
especially forbidden during this period to cut with any
edged instrument, such as a knife or an axe; and the use of
pointed instruments, like needles or bodkins, is also for-
bidden. This is said to be done to avoid cutting or injuring
the shade, which may be present at any time during this
period, and, if accidentally injured by any of these things, it
would become very angry and bring sickness or death to the
people. The relatives must also be very careful at this time
not to make any loud or harsh noises that may startle or
anger the shade.”* We have seen that in like manner after
killing a white whale these Esquimaux abstain from the use
of cutting or pointed instruments for four days, lest they
should unwittingly cut or stab the whale’s ghost.2 The
satne taboo is sometimes observed by them when there is a
sick person in the village, probably from a fear of injuring
Parkyns, Lefe in Abyssinia? (London,
1868), pp. 300 sg. ; J. T. Bent, Sacred
City of the Ethiopians (London, 1893),
p. 212; G. Rohlf, ‘*Reise durch
Nord- Afrika,” etermann’s Mitthet-


lungen, Ergdnsungsheft, No. 25
(Gotha, 1868), pp. 30, 54; G.


good work. See A. W. Nieuwenhuis,
Quer durch Borneo, ii. 198.

1 A, Bastian, Die Volker des dstlichen
Asien, i. (Leipsic, 1866) p. 136.

2 E. W. Nelson, ‘*The Eskimo
about Bering Strait,”  Zighteenth
Annual Report of the Bureau of


BO Oe a


Nachtigal, ‘*Die Tibbu,” Zeztschrift
fiir Erdkunde su Berlin, v. (1870)
pp: 312 sg. 3; ¢@., Sahara und Sudan,
i, 443 sg., ii. 145, 178, 371, iii, 189,
234 sg. The Kayans of Borneo think
that a smith is inspired by a special
spirit, the smith’s spirit, and that
without this inspiration he could do no


American Ethnology, part i. (Washing-
ton, 1899) p. 312. Compare 7bzd.
pp- 315, 364; W. H. Dall, Alaska
and its Resources, p. 146; ia@., in
American Naturalist, xii. 73; td., in
The Yukon Territory (London, 1898),
p. 146.
3 See above, p. 205.


The use
of sharp-
edged
weapons
forbidden
lest they
should
wound
spirits.


TABOOED THINGS CHAP.


238


his shade which may be hovering outside of his body.’
After a death the Roumanians of Transylvania are careful
not to leave a knife lying with the sharp edge uppermost as
long as the corpse remains in the house, “or else the soul
will be forced to ride on the blade.”* For seven days after
a death, the corpse being still in the house, the Chinese abstain
from the use of knives and needles, and even of chopsticks,
eating their food with their fingers.® On the third, sixth,
ninth, and fortieth days after the funeral the old Prussians
and Lithuanians used to prepare a meal, to which, standing
at the door, they invited the soul of the deceased. At these
meals they sat silent round the table and used no knives,
and the women who served up the food were also without
knives. If any morsels fell from the table they were left
lying there for the lonely souls that had no living relations
or friends to feed them. When the meal was over the priest
took a broom and swept the souls out of the house, saying,
“Dear souls, ye have eaten and drunk. Go forth, go
forth.”* In cutting the nails and combing the hair of a
dead prince in South Celebes only the back of the knife and
of the comb may be used.® The Germans say that a knife
should not be left edge upwards, because God and the spirits
dwell there, or because it will cut the face of God and the
angels. Among the Monumbos of New Guinea a pregnant
woman may not use sharp instruments; for example, she


eS
—


may not sew.


1 A, Woldt, Captain Jacobsen’s Reise
an der Nordwesthiiste Americas 1881-
1883 (Leipsic, 1884), p. 243.

2 W. Schmidt, Das Jahr und
seine Tage in Meinung und Brauch
der Rominen Siebenbiirgens (Hermann-
stadt, 1866), p. 40; E. Gerard, Zhe
Land beyond the Forest, i. 312.

% J. H. Gray, China (London, 1878),
i, 288, ;

4 Jo, Meletius (Maeletius, Menecius),
“De religione et sacrificiis veterum
Borussorum,” in De Russorum Musco-
vitarum et Tartarorum  religione,
sacrificits, nuptiarum, funerum ritu
(Spires, 1582), p. 263; #d., reprinted
in Scriptores rerum Livonicarum,
vol, ii. (Riga and Leipsic, 1848) pp.


If she used such instruments, they think that
she would thereby stab the child in her womb.’


Among


391 sg., and in JAitteilungen der
Litterarischen Gesellschaft Masovia,
viii. (Létzen, 1902) pp. 194 sg.
Compare Chr. Hartknoch, 4/¢ und
neues Preussen (Frankfort and Leipsic,
1684), pp. 187 sg.

6B. F. Matthes, Bzjdragen tot
de Ethnologie van Zuid- Celebes, p.
136.

® Tettau und Temme, Die Volkssagen
Ostpreussens, Litthauens und West-
preussens, p. 285; J. Grimm, Deutsche
Mythologie, iii, 454, compare pp.
441, 469; J. V. Grohmann, Ader-
glauben und Gebriuche aus Bohmen
und Mihren, p. 198, § 1387.

7 Franz Vormann, “Zur Psycho-
logie, Soziologie und Geschichte der


v SHARP WEAPONS TABOOED 239


the Kayans of Borneo, when the birth-pangs begin, all sharp-
men leave the room, and all cutting weapons and iron Ses
are also removed, “perhaps in order not to frighten the removed
child,” says the writer who reports the custom.’ The peperatl
reason may rather be a fear of injuring the flitting soul of where
mother or babe. In Uganda, when the hour of a woman’s pagardes in
delivery is at hand, her husband carries all spears and woman.
weapons out of the house,? doubtless in order that they

may not hurt the tender soul of the new-born child.

Early in the period of the Ming dynasty a professor of
geomancy made the alarming discovery that the spiritual
atmosphere of Kii-yung, a city near Nanking, was in a truly
deplorable condition through the intrusion of an evil spirit.

The Chinese emperor, with paternal solicitude, directed that

the north gate, by which the devil had effected his entrance,

should be built up solid, and that for the future the popula-

tion of the city should devote their energies to the pursuits

of hair-dressing, corn-cutting, and the shaving of bamboo-

roots, because, as he sagaciously perceived, all these professions

call for the use of sharp-edged instruments, which could not

fail to keep the demon at bay.® We can now understand

why no cutting instrument may be taken into the house

of the Burmese pontiff. Like so many priestly kings, he is
probably regarded as divine, and it is therefore right that

his sacred spirit should not be exposed to the risk of being

cut or wounded whenever it quits his body to hover invisible

in the air or to fly on some distant mission.


§ 4. Blood tabooed


We have seen that the Flamen Dialis was forbidden to Raw meat
touch or even name raw flesh. At certain times a Brahman bssastae
teacher is enjoined not to look on raw flesh, blood, or persons life or


whose hands have been cut off® In Uganda the father of P's"


the blood.
Monumbo-Papua, Deutsch-Neuginea,” 3 J. J. M. de Groot, The Religious
Anshrepps, v. (1910) p. 410. System of China, iii. 1045 (Leyden,
A. W. Nieuwenhuis, Zz Centraal 1897).
Mie (Leyden, 1900), i. 613; 2a., 4 Plutarch, Quaest. Rom. 110; Aulus
Quer durch Borneo, i. 69. Gellius, x. 15. 12. See above, p. 13.


2 Fr. Stuhlmann, AZ Emin Pascha 5 Grikya-Sutras, translated by H.
ins Herz von Afrika (Berlin, 1894), p. Oldenberg, part i. pp. 81, 141 (Sacred
184. Books of the East, vol. xxix.).


the life or
spirit is in
the blood.


240 TABOOED THINGS CHAP.


twins is in a state of taboo for some time after the birth;
among other rules he is forbidden to kill anything or to see
blood. In the Pelew Islands when a raid has been made
on a village and a head carried off, the relations of the slain
man are tabooed and have to submit to certain observances
in order to escape the wrath of his ghost. They are shut
up in the house, touch no raw flesh, and chew betel over
which an incantation has been uttered by the exorcist.
After this the ghost of the slaughtered man goes away to
the enemy’s country in pursuit of his murderer? © The taboo
is probably based on the common belief that the soul or
spirit of the animal is in the blood. As tabooed persons are
believed to be in a perilous state—for example, the relations
of the slain man are liable to the attacks of his indignant
ghost—it is especially necessary to isolate them from contact
with spirits ; hence the prohibition to touch raw meat. But
as usual the taboo is only the special enforcement of a
general precept; in other words, its observance is particu-
larly enjoined in circumstances which seem urgently to call
for its application, but apart from such circumstances: the
prohibition is also observed, though less strictly, as a common
rule of life. Thus some of the Esthonians will not taste
blood because they believe that it contains the animal's soul,
which would enter the body of the person who tasted the
blood.2 Some Indian tribes of North America, “through a
strong principle of religion, abstain in the strictest manner
from eating the blood of any animal, as it contains the life
and spirit of the beast.” These Indians “commonly pull
their new-killed venison (before they dress it) several times
through the smoke and flame of the fire, both by the way of
a sacrifice and to consume the blood, life, or animal spirits
of the beast, which with them would be a most horrid
abomination to eat.”* Among the western Dénés or
Tinneh Indians of British Columbia until lately no woman


1 J. Roscoe, ‘‘ Further Notes on the
Manners and Customs of the Baganda,”
Journal of the Anthropological Institute,
xxxii, (1902) p. 53.

2 J. Kubary, Die socialen Einrich-
tungen der Pelauer (Berlin, 1885), pp.
126 sq.

3 F, J, Wiedemann, Aus dem inneren


und dussern Leben der Ehsten (St.
Petersburg, 1876), pp. 448, 478.

4 James Adair, History of the Ameri:
can Indians (London, 1775), pp. 134,
117. The Indians described by Adair
are the Creek, Cherokee, and other
tribes in the south-east of the United
States.


Vv BLOOD TABOOED 241


would partake of blood, “and both men and women
abhorred the flesh of a beaver which had been caught and
died in a trap, and of a bear strangled to death in a snare,
because the blood remained in the carcase.”* Many of the
Slave, Hare, and Dogrib Indians scruple to taste the blood
of game; hunters of the former tribes collect the blood in
the animal’s paunch and bury it in the snow.” The Malepa,
a Bantu tribe in the north of the Transvaal, will taste no
blood. Hence they cut the throats of the cattle they
slaughter and let the blood drain out of the carcase before
they will eat it. And they do the same with game.’
Jewish hunters poured out the blood of the game they had
killed and covered it up with dust. They would not taste
the blood, believing that the soul or life of the animal was
in the blood, or actually was the blood.* The same belief
was held by the Romans,’ and is shared by the Arabs,’ by
Chinese medical writers,” and by some of the Papuan tribes
of New Guinea.®

It is a common rule that royal blood may not be shed Royal
-upon the ground. Hence when a king or one of his family posers: {
is to be put to death a mode of execution is devised by which on the
the royal blood shall not be spilt upon the earth. About the Su?!


h

year 1688 the generalissimo of the army rebelled against kings and
the king of Siam and put him to death “after the manner 5 peg
of royal criminals, or as princes of the blood are'treated when death by
convicted of capital crimes, which is by putting them into a eee eT 6
large iron caldron, and pounding them to pieces with wooden eee
pestles, because none of their royal blood must be spilt on

the ground, it being, by their religion, thought great impiety

to contaminate the divine blood by mixing it with earth.” °


1 A, G. Morice, ‘*The Western
Dénés, their Manners and Customs,”
Proceedings of the Canadian Institute,
Third Series, vii. (1888-89) p. 164.

2 E. Petitot, Monographie des Déne-
Dindjté (Paris, 1876), p. 76.

8 Schl6mann, ‘Die Malepa in
Transvaal,” Verhandlungen der Berliner
Gesellschaft fiir Anthropologie, Ethno-
logie und Urgeschichte, 1894, p. (67).

* Leviticus xvii. 10-14. The Hebrew
word (v3) translated ‘‘life” in the
English version of verse 11 means also


PT. II


‘** soul” (marginal note in the Revised
Version). Compare Deuteronomy xii.
23-25.

5 Servius on Virgil, Aen. v. 79;
compare zd. on Aen, iii. 67.

6 J. Wellhausen, este arabischen
Heidentumes (Berlin, 1887), p. 217.

TJ. J. M. de Groot, Religious
System of China, iv. 80-82.

8 A. Goudswaard, De Papoewa’s van
de Geelvinksbaai (Schiedam, 1863), p.


9 Hamilton’s ‘* Account of the East
R


Royal
blood may
not be spilt
on the
ground ;
hence
kings and
princes

are put

to death

in ways
which do
not involve
bloodshed.


242 TABOOED THINGS CHAP.


Other Siamese modes of executing a royal person are
starvation, suffocation, stretching him on a scarlet cloth and
thrusting a billet of fragrant sandal-wood into his stomach,}
or lastly, sewing him up in a leather sack with a large stone
and throwing him into the river; sometimes the sufferer’s
neck is broken with sandal-wood clubs before he is thrown
into the water.2 When Kublai Khan defeated and took his
uncle Nayan, who had rebelled against him, he caused Nayan
to be put to death by being wrapt in a carpet and tossed to
and fro till he died, “because he would not have the blood
of his Line Imperial spilt upon the ground or exposed in the
eye of Heaven and before the Sun.”*® “ Friar Ricold mentions
the Tartar maxim: ‘One Khan will put another to death to
get possession of the throne, but he takes great care that the
blood be not spilt. For they say that it is highly improper
that the blood of the Great Khan should be spilt upon the
ground ; so they cause the victim to be smothered somehow
or other.” The like feeling prevails at the court of Burma,
where a peculiar mode of execution without bloodshed is
reserved for princes of the blood.”* Another writer on
Burma observes that “according to Mongolian tradition, it
is considered improper to spill the blood of any member of
the royal race. Princes of the Blood are executed by a
blow, or blows, of a bludgeon, inflicted on the back of the
neck. The corpse is placed in a red velvet sack, which is
fixed between two large perforated jars, and then sunk in
the river Irawadi. Princesses are executed in a similar
manner, with the exception that they are put to death by a
blow in front, instead of the back of the neck.”® In 1878
the relations of Theebaw, king of Burma, were despatched
by being beaten across the throat with a bamboo.’ In
Tonquin the ordinary mode of execution is beheading, but
persons of the blood royal are strangled.” In Ashantee the
Indies,” in Pinkerton’s Voyages and Yule (Second Edition, 1875), i. 335.


Travels, viii. 469. Compare W. 4 Col. H. Yule on Marco Polo, Z¢.
Robertson Smith, Religion of the 5 A, Fytche, Burma, Past and


Semites,* i, 369, note 1. Present (London, 1878), i. 217 note.
1 De la Loubere, Du royaume de Compare Jndian Antiguary, xxix,
Siam (Amsterdam, 1691), i. 317. (1900) p. 199.
* Pallegoix, Description du royaume 8 Indian Antiquary, xx. (1891)


Thai ou Siam, i, 271, 365 sg. p. 49.
8 Marco Polo, translated by Col. H. 7 Baron’s ‘* Description of the King-


v BLOOD TABOOED 243


blood of none of the royal family may be shed; if one of
them is guilty of a great crime he is drowned in the river
Dah.’ As the blood royal of Dahomey may not be spilled,
offenders of the royal family are drowned or strangled.
Commonly they are bound hand and foot, carried out to sea
in a canoe, and thrown overboard.” When a king of Benin
came to the throne he used to put his brothers to death ;
but as no one might lay hands on a prince of the blood, the
king commanded his brothers to hang themselves, after
which he buried their bodies with great pomp.2 In Mada-
gascar the blood of nobles might not be shed ; hence when
four Christians of that class were to be executed they were
burned alive* In Uganda “no one may shed royal blood
on any account, not even when ordered by the king to slay
one of the royal house; royalty may only be starved or
burned to death.”® Formerly when a young king of
Uganda came of age all his brothers were burnt except two
or three, who were preserved to keep up the succession.®
Or a space of ground having been fenced in with a high
paling and a deep ditch, the doomed men were led into the
enclosure and left there till they died, while guards kept
watch outside to prevent their escape.’ Among the Bawenda
of southern Africa dangerous princes are strangled, for their
blood may not be shed.®


The reluctance to spill royal blood seems to be only a Reluctance


particular case of a general unwillingness to shed blood or at
least to allow it to fall on the ground.
that in his day persons caught in the streets of Cambaluc


dom of Tonqueen,” in Pinkerton’s
Voyages and Travels, ix, 691.
1T. E. Bowdich, Afission from
Cape Coast Castle to Ashantee (London,
1873), p. 207.
2 A.B. Ellis, Zwe-speaking Peoples of
the Slave Coast, p. 224, compare p. 89.
3 O. Dapper, Description de? Afrique
(Amsterdam, 1686), p. 313.
4 J. Sibree, Madagascar and its
People, p. 430.
5 J. Roscoe, ** Further Notes on the
Manners and Customs of the Baganda,”
Journal of the Anthropological Institute,
Xxxii. (1902) p. 50.
® C. T, Wilson and R. W. Felkin,


Uganda and the Egyptian Soudan
(London, 1882), i. 200.

7 J. Roscoe, of. ct. p. 67. There
is an Arab legend of a king who was
slain by opening the veins of his arms
and letting the blood drain into a bowl ;
not a drop might fall on the ground,
otherwise there would be blood revenge
for it. Robertson Smith conjectured
that the legend was based on an old
form of sacrifice regularly applied to
captive chiefs (Religion of the Semites,?
p- 369note, compare p. 418 note).

8 Rev. E. Gottschling, ‘‘ The Ba-
wenda,” Journal of the Anthropological
Lnstitute, xxxv. (1905) p. 366.


to shed
any human


Marco Polo tells us blood on
the ground,


244 TABOOED THINGS CHAP,


Reluctance (Peking) at unseasonable hours were arrested, and if found
fo shed any Guilty of a misdemeanour were beaten with a stick. “ Under
blood on this punishment people sometimes die, but they adopt it in
the ground. Oder to eschew bloodshed, for their Bacszs say that it is an
evil thing to shed man’s blood.”* When Captain Christian
was shot by the Manx Government at the Restoration in 1660,
the spot on which he stood was covered with white blankets,
that his blood might not fall on the ground.2 In West
Sussex people believe that the ground on which human blood
has been shed is accursed and will remain barren for ever.®
Among some primitive peoples, when the blood of a tribes-
man has to be spilt it is not suffered to fall upon the ground,
but is received upon the bodies of his fellow-tribesmen.
Thus in some Australian tribes boys who are being circum-
cised are laid on a platform, formed by the living bodies of
the tribesmen ;* and when a boy’s tooth is knocked out as
an initiatory ceremony, he is seated on the shoulders of a
man, on whose breast the blood flows and may not be wiped
away. When Australian blacks bleed each other as a cure
for headache and other ailments, they are very careful not to
spill any of the blood on the ground, but sprinkle it on each
other.2 We have already seen that in the Australian
ceremony for making rain the blood which is supposed to
imitate the rain is received upon the bodies of the tribes-
men.” “Also the Gauls used to drink their enemies’ blood
and paint themselves therewith. So also they write that the
old Irish were wont; and so have I seen some of the Irish
do, but not their enemies’ but friends’ blood, as, namely,
at the execution of a notable traitor at Limerick, called
Murrogh O’Brien, I saw an old woman, which was his foster-
mother, take up his head whilst he was quartered and suck


1 Marco Polo, i. 399, Yule’s trans-
lation, Second Edition.

2 Sir Walter Scott, note 2 to Peveril
of the Peak, ch. v.

% Charlotte Latham, ‘*Some West
Sussex Superstitions,” /o/k-/ore Record,
i, (1878) p. 17.

4 Native Tribes of South Australia,
p. 230; E. J. Eyre, Journals of £x-
peditions of Discovery into Central
Australia, ii, 3353; R. Brough Smyth,


Aborigines of Victoria, i. 75 note.

5 D. Collins, Account of the English
Colony of New South Wales (London,
1798), p. 580.

8 Native Tribes of South Australia,
pp. 224 sg.; G. F. Angas, Savage Life
and Scenes in Australia and New
Zealand (London, 1847), i. I10 sg.


1 The Magic Art and the Evolution
of Kings, vol. i. p. 256.


Cate | =


v BLOOD TABOOED 245


up all the blood that ran thereout, saying that the earth was Reluctance
not worthy to drink it, and therewith also steeped her face {? 0¥


and breast and tore her hair, crying out and shrieking most blood to
terribly.”! After a battle in Horne Island, South Pacific, it plac
was found that the brother of the vanquished king was
among the wounded. “It was sad to see his wife collect in
her hands the blood which had flowed from his wounds, and
throw it on to her head, while she uttered piercing cries.
All the relatives of the wounded collected in the same
manner the blood which had flowed from them, down even
to the last drop, and they even applied their lips to the
leaves of the shrubs and licked it all up to the last drop.” ?
In the Marquesas Islands the persons who helped a woman
at childbirth received on their heads the blood which flowed
at the cutting of the navel-string ; for the blood might not
touch anything but a sacred object, and in Polynesia the
head is sacred in a high degree.® In South Celebes at
childbirth a female slave stands under the house (the houses
being raised on posts above the ground) and receives in a
basin on her head the blood which trickles through the
bamboo floor.* Among the Latuka of central Africa the
earth on which a drop of blood has fallen at childbirth is
carefully scraped up with an iron shovel, put into a pot along
with the water used in washing the mother, and buried
tolerably deep outside the house on the left-hand side.® In
West Africa, if a drop of your blood has fallen on the ground,
you must carefully cover it up, rub and stamp it into the
soil; if it has fallen on the side of a canoe or a tree, the
place is cut out and the chip destroyed.6 The Caffres, we
are told, have a great horror of blood, and must purify
themselves from the pollution if they have shed it and been
bespattered by it. Hence warriors on the return from
battle purge themselves with emetics, and that so violently
that some of them give up the ghost. A Caffre would


1 Edmund Spenser, View of the State
of Ireland, p. 101 (reprinted in H.
Morley’s Jreland under Elizabeth and
James the First, London, 1890).

2 «Futuna, or Horne Island and its
People,” Journal of the Polynesian
Soctety, vol. i. No. 1 (April 1892), p.
43.


3 Max Radiguet, Les Derniers Sau-
vages (Paris, 1882), p. 175.

4B. F. Matthes, Biydragen tot de
Ethnologie van Zuid-Celebes, p. 53.

5 Fr. Stuhlmann, Wit Emin Pascha
ins Hers von Afrika, p. 795.

6 Miss Mary H. Kingsley, Zravels
in West Africa, pp. 440, 447-


Reluctance
to allow
human
blood to
fall on the
ground.


246 TABOOED THINGS CHAP.


never allow even a drop of blood from his nose or a wound
to lie uncovered, but huddles it over with earth, that his
feet may not be defiled by it! One motive of these African
customs may be a wish to prevent the blood from falling
into the hands of magicians, who might make an evil use
of it. That is admittedly the reason why people in West
Africa stamp out any blood of theirs which has fallen on
the ground or cut out any wood that has been soaked
with it? From a like dread of sorcery natives of New
Guinea are careful to burn any sticks, leaves, or rags which
are stained with their blood ; and if the blood has dripped
on the ground they turn up the soil and if possible light a
fire on the spot.2 The same fear explains the curious
duties discharged by a class of men called vamanga or
“blue blood” among the Betsileo of Madagascar. It is
their business to eat all the nail-parings and to lick up all
the spilt blood of the nobles. When the nobles pare their
nails, the parings are collected to the last scrap and
swallowed by these rvamanga. If the parings are too large,
they are minced small and.so gulped down. Again, should
a nobleman wound himself, say in cutting his nails or
treading on something, the vamanga lick it up as fast as
possible. Nobles of high rank hardly go anywhere without
these humble attendants; but if it should happen that
there are none of them present, the cut nails and the
spilt blood are carefully collected to be afterwards swallowed
by the vamanga. There is scarcely a nobleman of any
pretensions who does not strictly observe this custom,* the
intention of which probably is to prevent these parts of his
person from falling into the hands of sorcerers, who on
the principles of contagious magic could work him harm
thereby. The tribes of the White Nile are said never to
shed human blood in their villages because they think the


1 A. Kropf, ‘Die religidsen An- (1904) p. 370. See also The Magic


schauungen der Kaffern,” Verhan-
dlungen der Berliner Gesellschaft fiir
Anthropologie, Ethnologie und Urge-
schichte, 1888, p. (46).

2 R. H. Nassau, Fetichism in West
Africa (London, 1904), p. 83.

3 Le R. P. Guis, “Les Mepu ou
Sorciers,” A/issions Catholiques, xxxvi.


Art and the Evolution of Kings, vol.


i, p. 205.
4A. van Gennep, TZabou et
totémisme & Madagascar, p. 338,


quoting J. Sibree, ‘* Remarkable Cere-
monial at the Decease and Burial of
a Betsileo Prince,” Antananarivo
Annual, No, xxii. (1898) pp. 195 59.


§
a
:
;
;
‘
|


v BLOOD TALOOED 247


sight of it would render women barren or bring misfortune
on their children. Hence executions and murders commonly
take place on the roads or in the forest.’

The unwillingness to shed blood is extended by some Unwilling-

peoples to the blood of animals. Thus, when the Caffres 585‘).
offer an ox to the spirits, the blood of the beast must be blood of
carefully caught in a calabash, and none of it may fall on “"™**
the ground,? When the Wanika in eastern Africa kill their
cattle for food, “they either stone or beat the animal to
death, so as not to shed the blood.”* Amongst the Damaras
cattle killed for food are suffocated, but when sacrificed they
are speared to death.* But like most pastoral tribes in
Africa, both the Wanika and Damaras very seldom kill
their cattle, which are indeed commonly invested with a
kind of sanctity Some of the Ewe-speaking negroes of
Togoland, in West Africa, celebrate a festival in honour of
the Earth at which it is unlawful to shed blood on the
ground. Hence the fowls which are sacrificed on these
occasions have their necks wrung, not their throats cut.’
In killing an animal for food the Easter Islanders do not
shed its blood, but stun it or suffocate it in smoke.? When
the natives of San Cristoval, one of the Solomon Islands,
sacrifice a pig to a ghost in a sacred place, they take great
care that the blood shall not fall on the ground; so they
place the animal in a large bowl and cut it up there.’ It is
said that in ancient India the sacrificial victims were not
slaughtered but strangled.’

The general explanation of the reluctance to shed blood Anything
on the ground is probably to be found in the belief that the 3"


a Maori
soul is in the blood, and that therefore any ground on which it chief’s


1 Brun-Rollet, Ze Wil Blane e¢ le p. 135. On the original sanctity of


Soudan (Paris, 1855), pp. 239 sg.

2 Dudley Kidd, The Essential Kafir,
p. 169.

3 Lieut. Emery, in Journal of the R.
Geographical Society, iii. 282.

4 Ch. Andersson, Lake Ngami
(London, 1856), p. 224.

5 Ch. New, Lzfe, Wanderings, and
Labours in Eastern Africa, p. 1243
Francis Galton, ‘‘ Domestication of
Animals,” 7ransactions of the Ethnologi-
cal Society of London, N.S., iii. (1865)


domestic animals see, above all, W.
Robertson Smith, Zhe Religion of
the Semites,? pp. 280 sgg., 295 sgq.

6 J. Spieth, Die Ewe-Stimme, p.
796.

7 L. Linton Palmer, ‘‘A Visit to
Easter Island,” Journal of the R.
Geographical Soctety, xl. (1870) p.
171.

8 R. H. Codrington, Zhe Melan-
estans, p. 129.

9 Strabo, xv. I. 54, p. 710.


blood falls
becomes
sacred to
him.


The pro-
hibition to
pass under
a trellised
vine is
probably
based on
the idea
that the
juice of the
grape is the
blood or
spirit of the
vine. This
notion is
confirmed
by the in-
toxicating
or inspiring
effect of
wine,


248 TABOOED THINGS CHAP, .


may fall necessarily becomes taboo or sacred. In New Zealand
anything upon which even a drop of a high chief’s blood
chances to fall becomes taboo or sacred to him. For —
instance, a party of natives having come to visit a chief in a
fine new canoe, the chief got into it, but in doing so a splinter
entered his foot, and the blood trickled on the canoe, which
at once became sacred to him. The owner jumped out,
dragged the canoe ashore opposite the chief’s house, and left
it there. Again, a chief in entering a missionary’s house
knocked his head against a beam, and the blood flowed.
The natives said that in former times the house would have
belonged to the chief! As usually happens with taboos of
universal application, the prohibition to spill the blood of a
tribesman on the ground applies with peculiar stringency to
chiefs and kings, and is observed in their case long after it
has ceased to be observed in the case of others.

We have seen that the Flamen Dialis was not allowed to
walk under a trellised vine.” The reason for this prohibition
was perhaps as follows. It has been shewn that plants are
considered as animate beings which bleed when cut, the red
juice which exudes from some of them being regarded as the
blood of the plant. The juice of the grape is therefore
naturally conceived as the blood of the vine‘ And since,
as we have just seen, the soul is often believed to be in the
blood, the juice of the grape is regarded as the soul, or as
containing the soul, of the vine. This belief is strengthened
by the intoxicating effects of wine. or, according to
primitive notions, all abnormal mental states, such as intoxi-
cation or madness, are caused by the entrance of a spirit into
the person ; such mental states, in other words, are accounted
forms of possession or inspiration. Wine, therefore, is con-
sidered on two distinct grounds as a spirit, or containing a
spirit ; first because, as a red juice, it is identified with the
blood of the plant, and second because it intoxicates or
inspires, Therefore if the Flamen Dialis had walked under
a trellised vine, the spirit of the vine, embodied in the


1R. Taylor, 7e Jka a Maui, or  p. 14.
New Zealand and its Inhabitants,* pp. 8 The Magic Art and the Evolution
194 54. of Kings, vol. ii, pp. 18, 20.

2“ Plutarch, Quaest. Rom, 112; 4 Compare W. Robertson Smith,


Aulus Gellius, x. 15. 13. See above, Religion of the Semites,* p. 230.


v BLOOD TABOOED 249


clusters of grapes, would have been immediately over his
head and might have touched it, which for a person like him
in a state of permanent taboo’ would have been highly
dangerous. This interpretation of the prohibition will be
made probable if we can shew, first, that wine has been
actually viewed by some peoples as blood, and intoxication
as inspiration produced by drinking the blood ; and, second,
that it is often considered dangerous, especially for tabooed
persons, to have either blood or a living person over their
heads. ®

With regard to the first point, we are informed by
Plutarch that of old the Egyptian kings neither drank wine
nor offered it in libations to the gods, because they held it
to be the blood of beings who had once fought against the
gods, the vine having sprung from their rotting bodies ;
and the frenzy of intoxication was explained by the sup-
position that the drunken man was filled with the blood of
the enemies of the gods.” The Aztecs regarded pulgue or
the wine of the country as bad, on account of the wild deeds
which men did under its influence. But these wild deeds
were believed to be the acts, not of the drunken man, but of
the wine-god by whom he was possessed and inspired ; and
so seriously was this theory of inspiration held that if any
one spoke ill of or insulted a tipsy man, he was liable to be
punished for disrespect to the wine-god incarnate in his
votary. Hence, says Sahagun, it was believed, not without
ground, that the Indians intoxicated themselves on purpose
to commit with impunity crimes for which they would
certainly have been punished if they had committed them


1 “< Dialis cotidie feriatus est,” Aulus 564). When wine was offered to the


Gellius, x. 15. 16.


2 Plutarch, Jszs e¢ Osiris, 6. A
myth apparently akin to this has been
preserved in some native ptian
writings. See Ad. Erman, Agyften
und dgyptisches Leben im Altertum, p.
364. Wine might not be taken into
the temple at Heliopolis (Plutarch,
Isis et Osiris, 6). It was apparently
forbidden to enter the temple at Delos
after drinking wine (Dittenberger,
Sylloge Inscriptionum Graecarum,? No.


Good Goddess at Rome it was not
called wine but milk (Macrobius,
Saturn, i. 12. 53 Plutarch, Quaest.
Rom. 20). It was a rule of Roman
religion that wine might not be poured
out in libations to the gods which had
been made either from grapes trodden
with bleeding feet or from the clusters
of a vine beside which a human body
had hung in a noose (Pliny, Vat. Hist.
xiv. 119). This rule shews that wine
was supposed to be defiled by blood
or death.


Wine
treated as
blood, and
intoxica-
tion as
inspiration.


Fear of
passing
under
women’s
blood.


250 TABOOED THINGS


sober.’ Thus it appears that on the primitive view intoxica-
tion or the inspiration produced by wine is exactly parallel
to the inspiration produced by drinking the blood of animals.”
The soul or life is in the blood, and wine is the blood of the
vine. Hence whoever drinks the blood of an animal is
inspired with the soul of the animal or of the god, who, as
we have seen,® is often supposed to enter into the animal
before it is slain; and whoever drinks wine drinks the blood,
and so receives into himself the soul or spirit, of the god of
the vine. s

With regard to the second point, the fear of passing
under blood or under a living person, we are told that some
of the Australian blacks have a dread of passing under a
leaning tree or even under the rails of a fence. The reason
they give is that a woman may have been upon the tree or
fence, and some blood from her may have fallen on it and
might fall from it on them.* In Ugi, one of the Solomon
Islands, a man will never, if he can help it, pass under a tree
which has fallen across the path, for the reason that a woman
may have stepped over it before him. Amongst the Karens
of Burma “going under a house, especially if there are
females within, is avoided; as is also the passing under
trees of which the branches extend downwards in a particular
direction, and the butt-end of fallen trees, etc.”® The
Siamese think it unlucky to pass under a rope on which
women’s clothes are hung, and to avert evil consequences
the person who has done so must build a chapel to the
earth-spirit.”


CHAP,


1 Bernardino de Sahagun, Histotre
générale des choses de la Nouvelle-
Espagne, traduite par Jourdanet et
Siméon (Paris, 1880), pp. 46 sg. The
native Mexican wine (Zu/gue) is made
from the sap of the great American
aloe. See the note of the French
translators of Sahagun, of. c#t. pp.
858 sgg.3 E. J. Payne, History of the
New World called America, i. 374 sqq.
The Chiquites Indians of Paraguay
believed that the spirit of chica, or
beer made from maize, could punish
with sickness the person who was so
irreverent or careless as to upset a
vessel of the liquor, See Charlevoix,


Histoire du Paraguay (Paris, 1756),
ii. 234.

2 See The Magic Art and the Evolu-
tion of Kings, vol. i. pp. 381 sgq.

3 Op, cit. vol. i. pp. 384 5g.

4 E. M. Curr, Zhe Australian Race .
(Melbourne and London, 1887), iii.
179.

5H. B, Guppy, Zhe Solomon
Islands and their Natives (London,
1887), p. 41.

6 EF. B. Cross, ‘*On the Karens,”
Journal of the American Oriental
Soctety, iv. (1854) p. 312.

7 A, Bastian, Die Volker des dstlichen
Asien, iii, 230,


v BLOOD TABOOED 251


Probably in all such cases the rule is based on a fear of Disastrous
being brought into contact with blood, especially the blood sone
of women. From a like fear a Maori will never lean his blood on
back against the wall of a native house.’ For the blood of ™™
women is supposed to have disastrous effects upon males.
The Arunta of central Australia believe that a draught of
woman’s blood would kill the strongest man.? In the
Encounter Bay tribe of South Australia boys are warned
that if they see the blood of women they will early become
grey-headed and their strength will fail prematurely.2 Men of
the Booandik tribe in South Australia think that if they see the
blood of their women they will not be able to fight against
their enemies and will be killed ; if the sun dazzles their eyes
at a fight, the first woman they afterwards meet is sure to
get a blow from their club.* In the island of Wetar it is
thought that ifa man or a lad comes upon a woman’s blood
he will be unfortunate in war and other undertakings, and
that any precautions he may take to avoid the misfortune
will be vain.2 The people of Ceram also believe that
men who see women’s blood will be wounded in battle.®
It is an Esthonian belief that men who see women’s blood
will suffer from an eruption on the skin.” A Fan negro
told Miss Kingsley that a young man in his village, who
was so weak that he could hardly crawl about, had fallen
into this state through seeing the blood of a woman who
had been killed by a falling tree. “The underlying idea
regarding blood is of course the old one that the blood is
the life. The life in Africa means a spirit, hence the
liberated blood is the liberated spirit, and liberated spirits
are always whipping into people who do not want them. In
the case of the young Fan, the opinion held was that the
weak spirit of the woman had got into him.” ®


1 For the reason, see E. Shortland, 4 Mrs. James Smith, 7he Booandik
Traditions and Superstitions of the Tribe, p. 5.
New Zealanders, pp. 112 sg., 292; 5 J. G. F. Riedel, De siuik- en


E. Tregear, ‘*The Maoris of New
Zealand,” Journal of the Anthropo-
logical Institute, xix. (1890) p. 118.

2 F, J. Gillen, in Report of the Horn
Scientific Expedition to Central Aus-
tralia, pt. iv. p, 182.

3 Native Tribes of South Australia,
p- 186.


kroesharige rassen tusschen Selebes en
Papua, p. 450.

6 J. G. F. Riedel, of. cit. p. 139,
compare p. 209.

7 F. J. Wiedemann, Aus dem innern
und dussern Leben der Ehsten, p. 475.

8 Miss Mary H. Kingsley, 7rave/s
in West Africa, p. 447. . Conversely


The head
sacred
because a
spirit
resides

in it.


252 TABOOED THINGS CHAP.


§ 5. The Head tabooed


Again, the reason for not passing under dangerous
objects, like a vine or women’s blood, is a fear that they
may come in contact with the head; for among many
peoples the head is peculiarly sacred. The special sanctity
attributed to it is sometimes explained by a belief that it is
the seat of a spirit which is very sensitive to injury or
disrespect. Thus the Yorubas of the Slave Coast hold that
every man has three spiritual inmates, of whom the first,
called Olori, dwells in the head and is the man’s protector,
guardian, and guide. Offerings are made to this spirit, chiefly
of fowls, and some of the blood mixed with palm-oil is rubbed
on the forehead.. The Karens of Burma suppose that a
being called the ¢so resides in the upper part of the head,
and while it retains its seat no harm can befall the person
from the efforts of the seven Kelahs, or personified passions.
“ But if the zso becomes heedless or weak certain evil to the
person is the result. Hence the head is carefully attended
to, and all possible pains are taken to provide such dress
and attire as will be pleasing to the ¢so.”” The Siamese
think that a spirit called khuan or kwun dwells in the human
head, of which it is the guardian spirit. The spirit must be
carefully protected from injury of every kind ; hence the act
of shaving or cutting the hair is accompanied with many
ceremonies. The wum is very sensitive on points of honour,
and would feel mortally insulted if the head in which he
resides were touched by the hand of a stranger. When Dr.
Bastian, in conversation with a brother of the king of Siam,


raised his hand to touch the
trate some medical remarks


prince’s skull in order to illus-
he was making, a sullen and


threatening murmur bursting from the lips of the crouching


among the central Australian tribes
women are never allowed to witness
the drawing of blood from men, which
is often done for purposes of decoration ;
and when a quarrel has taken place and
men’s blood has been spilt in the pres-
ence of women, it is usual for the man
whose blood has been shed to perform a
ceremony connected with his own or his


father or mother’s totem. See Spencer
and Gillen, Native Tribes of Central
Australia, p. 463.

1 A. B. Ellis, Zhe Yoruba-speaking
Peoples of the Slave Coast, pp. 125
Sq.

2 E. B. Cross, ‘On the Karens,”
Journal of the American Oriental
Soctety, iv. (1854) pp. 311 sg.


v THE HEAD TABOOED 253


courtiers warned him of the breach of etiquette he had com-
mitted, for in Siam there is no greater insult to a man of rank
than to touch his head. If a Siamese touch the head of
another with his foot, both of them must build chapels to the
earth-spirit to avert the omen. Nor does the guardian spirit
of the head like to have the hair washed too often ; it might
injure or incommode him. It was a grand solemnity when
the king of Burma’s head was washed with water drawn
from the middle of the river. Whenever the native professor,
from whom Dr. Bastian took lessons in Burmese at Mandalay,
had his head washed, which took place as a rule once a
month, he was generally absent for three days together, that
time being consumed in preparing for, and recovering from,
the operation of head- washing. Dr. Bastian’s custom of
washing his head daily gave rise to much remark.’ The
head of the king of Persia was cleaned only once a year, on
his birthday.2, Roman women washed their heads annually
on the thirteenth of August, Diana’s day. The Indians of
Peru fancied they could rid themselves of their sins by
scrubbing their heads with a small stone and then washing
them in a stream.‘

Again, the Burmese think it an indignity to have any Objection
one, especially a woman, over their heads, and for this ——
reason Burmese houses have never more than one story. head.
The houses are raised on posts above the ground, and
whenever anything fell through the floor Dr. Bastian had
always difficulty in persuading a servant to fetch it from
under the house. In Rangoon a priest, summoned to the
bedside of a sick man, climbed up a ladder and got in at
the window rather than ascend the staircase, to reach which
he must have passed under a gallery. A pious Burman of
Rangoon, finding some images of Buddha in a ship’s cabin,
offered a high price for them, that they might not be degraded


1 A. Bastian, Die Volker des dstlichen
Asien, ii. 256, iii. 71, 230, 235 sg.
The spirit is called £wa2 by E. Young
(The Kingdom of the Yellow Robe, pp.
75 sgg.). See below, pp. 266 sg.

2 Herodotus, ix. 110. This passage
was pointed out to me by the late
Mr. E. S. Shuckburgh of Emmanuel
College, Cambridge.


3 Plutarch, Quwaestiones Romanae,
100, Plutarch’s words (uddora pu-
mrecOar Tas Kepadds kal xabalpew ém-
Tndevovet) leave room to hope that the
ladies did not strictly confine their
ablutions to one day in the year.

4 Pp. J. de Arriaga, Zxtirpacion de
la Idolatria del Piru (Lima, 1621),
pp. 28, 29.


254 TABOOED THINGS CHAP.


Objection
to have
any one
overhead.


by sailors walking over them on the deck.’ Formerly in
Siam no person might cross a bridge while his superior in
rank was passing underneath, nor might he walk in a room
above one in which his superior was sitting or lying.” The
Cambodians esteem it a grave offence to touch a man’s
head ; some of them will not enter a place where anything
whatever is suspended over their heads; and the meanest
Cambodian would never consent to live under an inhabited
room. Hence the houses are built of one story only ; and
even the Government respects the prejudice by never placing
a prisoner in the stocks under the floor of a house, though
the houses are raised high above the ground. The same
superstition exists amongst the Malays; for an early
traveller reports that in Java people “ wear nothing on their
heads, and say that nothing must be on their heads...
and if any person were to put his hand upon their head they
would kill him; and they do not build houses with storeys,
in order that they may not walk over each other’s heads.” *
In Uganda no person belonging to the king’s totem clan
was allowed to get on the top of the palace to roof it, for
that would have been regarded as equivalent to getting on
the top of the king. Hence the palace had to be roofed by
men of a different clan from the king.’

aa The same superstition as to the head is found in full
eootally force throughout Polynesia. Thus of Gattanewa,a Marquesan
eng 's chief, it is said that “to touch the top of his head, or any-
Polynesia. thing which had been on his head, was sacrilege. To pass
over his head was an indignity never to be forgotten.
Gattanewa, nay, all his family, scorned to pass a gateway
which is ever closed, or a house with a door; all must be


Sanctity of


1 A, Bastian, of. cz. ii. 150; Sanger-
mano, Description of the Burmese Em-
pire (Rangoon, 1885), p. 131; C. F. S.
Forbes, British Burma, p. 334; Shway
VYoe, Zhe Burman (London, 1882),
i, 91.

2 E. Young, Zhe Kingdom of the
Yellow Robe (Westminster, 1898), p.
131.

5 J. Moura, Ze Royaume du Cam-
bodge, i. 178, 388.

* Duarte Barbosa, Description of the
Coasts of East Africa and Malabar in


the beginning of the Sixteenth Century
(Hakluyt Society, 1866), p. 197.

6 This I learned in conversation
with Messrs. Roscoe and Miller, mis-
sionaries to Uganda. ‘The system of
totemism exists in full force in Uganda.
No man will eat his totem animal
or marry a woman of his own totem
clan. Among the totems of the clans
are the lion, leopard, elephant, antelope,
mushroom, bufialo, sheep, grasshopper,
crocodile, otter, beaver, and lizard. See
Totemism and Exogamy, ii. 472 599:


: lt


v THE HEAD TABOOED 255


as open and free as their unrestrained manners. He would
pass under nothing that had been raised by the hand of
man, if there was a possibility of getting round or over it.
Often have I seen him walk the whole length of our barrier,
in preference to passing between our water-casks; and at
the risk of his life scramble over the loose stones of a wall,
rather than go through the gateway.” Marquesan women
have been known to refuse to go on the decks of ships for
fear of passing over the heads of chiefs who might be below.”
The son of a Marquesan high priest has been seen to roll
on the ground in an agony of rage and despair, begging for
death, because some one had desecrated his head and
deprived him of his divinity by sprinkling a few drops of
water on his hair.® But it was not the Marquesan chiefs
only whose heads were sacred. The head of every Mar-
quesan was taboo, and might neither be touched nor stepped
over by another; even a father might not step over the
head of his sleeping child ;* women were forbidden to carry
or touch anything that had been in contact with, or had
merely hung over, the head of their husband or father.” No
one was allowed to be over the head of the king of Tonga.®
In Hawaii (the Sandwich Islands) if a man climbed upon a
chiefs house or upon the wall of his yard, he was put to
death ; if his shadow fell on a chief, he was put to death;
if he walked in the shadow of a chief's house with his head
painted white or decked with a garland or wetted with
water, he was put to death.” In Tahiti any one who
stood over the king or queen, or passed his hand over
their heads, might be put to death.® Until certain rites
were performed over it, a Tahitian infant was especially
taboo; whatever touched the child’s head, while it was
in this state, became sacred and was deposited in a conse-


1 David Porter, Journal of a Cruise
made to the Pacific Ocean in the U.S.
frigate ** Essex” (New York, 1822),
ii. 65.

2 Vincendon-Dumoulin et C. Desgraz
fies Marquises (Paris, 1843), p. 262.

3 Le P. Matthias G* * *, Lettres sur
les Hes Marquises (Paris, 1843), p. 50.

4 G. H. von Langsdorff, Reise um
adie Welt (London, 1812), i. 115 sg.


5 Max Radiguet, Les Derniers Sau-
vages (Paris, 1882), p. 156.

® Capt. James Cook, Voyages, v. 427
(London, 1809).

7 Jules Remy, Ka Mooolelo Hawaii,
Histoire de l’Archipel Havaiien (Paris
and Leipsic, 1862), p. 159.

8 W. Ellis, Polynesian Researches?
(London, 1832-36), iii. 102,


Sanctity of
the head,
especially
of a chief's
head, in
Polynesia.


TABOOED THINGS CHAP.


256


crated place railed in for the purpose at the child’s house.
If a branch of a tree touched the child’s head, the tree
was cut down; and if in its fall it injured another tree
so as to penetrate the bark, that tree also was cut down as
unclean and unfit for use. After the rites were performed
these special taboos ceased ; but the head of a Tahitian was
always sacred, he never carried anything on it, and to touch
it was an offence In New Zealand “the heads of the
chiefs were always tabooed (¢apu), hence they could not
pass, or sit, under food hung up; or carry food, as others,
on their backs; neither would they eat a meal in a house,
nor touch a calabash of water in drinking. No one could
touch their head, nor, indeed, commonly speak of it, or
allude to it; to do so offensively was one of their heaviest
curses, and grossest insults, only to be wiped out with
blood.”* So sacred was the head of a Maori chief that
“if he only touched it with his fingers, he was obliged
immediately to apply them to his nose, and snuff up the
sanctity which they had acquired by the touch, and thus
restore it to the part from whence it was taken.”*® On account
of the sacredness of his head a Maori chief “could not blow
the fire with his mouth, for the breath being sacred, com-
muhicated his sanctity to it, and a brand might be taken by
a slave, or a man of another tribe, or the fire might be used.
for other purposes, such as cooking, and so cause his death.” *
It is a crime for a sacred person in New Zealand to leave
his comb, or anything else which has touched his head, in
a place where food has been cooked, or to suffer another
person to drink out of any vessel which has touched his.
lips. Hence when a chief wishes to drink he never puts his
lips to the vessel, but holds his hands close to his mouth so.
as to form a hollow, into which water is poured by another
person, and thence is allowed to flow into his mouth. Ifa
light is needed for his pipe, the burning ember taken from


1 James Wilson, A Missionary
Voyage to the Southern Pacific Ocean
(London, 1799), pp. 354 59

2 W., Colenso,. ‘‘ The Maori Races
of New Zealand,” p. 43, in 7ransac-
tions and Proceedings of the New
Zealand Institute, 1868, vol, i. (separ-
ately paged),


8 R. Taylor, Zo Jka a@ Maui, or
New Zealand and its Inhabitants,* p.
165. We have seen that under certain
special circumstances common persons.
also are temporarily forbidden to touch
their heads with their hands, Seeabove,
pp. 146, 156, 158, 160, 183.

4 R. Taylor, Ae.


cae cee ae ee a oe


v THE HEAD TABOOED 257


the fire must be thrown away as soon as it is used; for the
pipe becomes sacred because it has touched his mouth ; the
coal becomes sacred because it has touched the pipe ; and
if a particle of the sacred cinder were replaced on the
common fire, the fire would also become sacred and could
no longer be used for cooking! Some Maori chiefs, like
other Polynesians, object to go down into a ship’s cabin
from fear of people passing over their heads.* Dire mis-
fortune was thought by the Maoris to await those who
entered a house where any article of animal food was
suspended over their heads. “A dead pigeon, or a piece
of pork hung from the roof, was a better protection from
molestation than a sentinel.”* If I am right, the reason for
the special objection to having animal food over the head
is the fear of bringing the sacred head into contact with the
spirit of the animal; just as the reason why the Flamen
Dialis might not walk under a vine was the fear of bringing
his sacred head into contact with the spirit of the vine.
Similarly King Darius would not pass through a gate over
which there was a tomb, because in doing so he would have
had a corpse above his head.* Among the Awuna tribes of
the Gold Coast, West Africa, the worshippers of Hebesio,
the god of thunder, believe that their heads are sacred, beihg"
associated in some mysterious way with the presence of the
protective spirit of their god, which has passed into them
through this channel at baptism. Hence they carefully
guard their heads against injury, especially against any
wound that might draw blood, for they think that such a
wound would entail the loss of reason on the sufferer, and
that it would bring down the wrath of the thundering god
and of his mouth-piece the fetish priest on the impious
smiter.°


1 E. Shortland, Zhe Southern Dis-
tricts of New Zealand (London, 1851),
Pp. 293; 2@., Traditions and Super-
stitions of the New Zealanders, pp.
107 sg.

2 J. Dumont D'Urville, Voyage autour
du monde et dla recherche de La Pérouse,
exécuté sous son commandement sur la
corvette ‘* Austrolabe”: histoire du
voyage, li. 534.

3 R. A. Cruise, Journal of a Ten

PR


Months Residence in New Zealand
(London, 1823), p. 187; J. Dumont
D’Urville, op. c#t. ii. 533; E. Short-
land, The Southern Districts of New
Zealand, p. 30.


4 Herodotus, i. 187.


5 H. France, “Customs of the
Awuna Tribes,” Journal of the African
Society, No. 17 (October, 1905), p.
39-

S


Sanctity of
the head
in Poly-
nesia and
elsewhere.


When the
head is
sacred, the
cutting of
the hair
becomes a
difficult
and
dangerous


operation.


The hair of are proportionately stringent.


kings,
priests,
and other
tabooed
persons is
sometimes
kept
unshorn.


258 TABOOED THINGS CHAP.


§ 6. Hair tabooed


When the head was considered so sacred that it might not
even be touched without grave offence, it is obvious that the
cutting of the hair must have been a delicate and difficult
operation. The difficulties and dangers which, on the
primitive view, beset the operation are of two kinds. There
is first the danger of disturbing the spirit of the head, which
may be injured in the process and may revenge itself upon
the person who molests him. Secondly, there is the difficulty
of disposing of the shorn locks. For the savage believes
that the sympathetic connexion which exists between him-
self and every part of his body continues to exist even after
the physical connexion has been broken, and that therefore
he will suffer from any harm that may befall the severed
parts of his body, such as the clippings of his hair or the
parings of his nails. Accordingly he takes care that these
severed portions of himself shall not be left in places where
they might either be exposed to accidental injury or fall
into the hands of malicious persons who might work magic
on them to his detriment or death. Such dangers are


common to all, but sacred persons have more to fear from


them than ordinary people, so the precautions taken by them
The simplest way of evading
the peril is not to cut the hair at all; and this is the
expedient adopted where the risk is thought to be more
than usually great. The Frankish kings were never allowed
to crop their hair; from their childhood upwards they had
to keep it unshorn.’ To poll the long locks that floated


1 Agathias, 7st. i. 33 J. Grimm,


Volkslieder, pp. 70 Sg., 224 Sq.3
Deutsche Rechtsalterthiimer, pp. 239


Grimm’s Household Tales, ii. 498,


sgqg. Compare F, Kauffmann, Sa/der
(Strasburg, 1902), pp. 209 sg. The
story of the Phrygian king Midas, who
concealed the ears of an ass under his
long hair (Aristophanes, Plutus, 287 ;
Ovid, Metam, xi. 146-193) may perhaps
be a distorted reminiscence of a similar
custom in Phrygia, Parallels to the
story are recorded in modern Greece,
Ireland, Brittany, Servia, India, and
among the Mongols. See B. Schmidt,
Griechische Mirchen, Sagen und


trans. by M. Hunt; Patrick Kennedy,
Legendary Fictions of the Irish Celts,
pp. 248 sgg. (ed. 1866); A. de Nore,
Coutumes, mythes, et traditions des
provinces de la France, pp. 219 59.3
W. S. Karadschitsch, Volksmdrchen
der Serben, No. 39, pp. 225 sgg.3
North Indian Notes and Queries, iii.
p. 104, § 218; B. Jiilg, A/ongolische
Mirchen-Sammlung, No. 22, pp. 182
sqq.3 Sagas from the Far East, No.
21, pp. 206 sgq.


v HAIR TABOOED 259


on their shoulders would have been to renounce their right
to the throne. When the wicked brothers Clotaire and
Childebert coveted the kingdom of their dead brother
Clodomir, they inveigled into their power their little nephews,
the two sons of Clodomir; and having done so, they sent
a messenger bearing scissors and a naked sword to the
children’s grandmother, Queen Clotilde, at Paris. The envoy
shewed the scissors and the sword to Clotilde, and bade
her choose whether the children should be shorn and live
er remain unshorn and die. The proud queen replied that if
her grandchildren were not to come to the throne she would
rather see them dead than shorn. And murdered they were
by their ruthless uncle Clotaire with his own hand The
king of Ponape, one of the Caroline Islands, must wear his
hair long, and so must his grandees.2_ The hair of the Aztec
priests hung down to their hams, so that the weight of it
became very troublesome ; for they might never poll it so
long as they lived, or at least until they had been relieved
of their office on the score of old age. They wore it braided
in great tresses, six fingers broad, and tied with cotton? A
Haida medicine-man may neither clip nor comb his tresses,
so they are always long and tangled. Among the Hos,
a negro tribe of Togoland in West Africa, “there are priests
on whose head no razor may come during the whole of
their lives. The god who dwells in the man forbids the
cutting of his hair on pain of death. If the hair is at last
too long, the owner must pray to his god to allow him at
least to clip the tips of it. The hair is in fact conceived as
the seat and lodging-place of his god, so that were it shorn
the god would lose his abode in the priest.”> A rain-maker at
Boroma, on the lower Zambesi, used to give out that he was


1 Gregory of Tours, Histoire
eccléstastegue des Francs, iii. 18, com-
pare vi. 24 (Guizot’s translation).

2 Dr. Hahl, “ Mitteilungen iiber
Sitten und rechtliche Verhiltnisse auf
Ponape,” Zthnologisches Notizbiatt, ii.
Heft 2 (Berlin, 1901), p. 6.

3 Manuscrit Ramirez, Histoire de
Porigine des Indiens qui habitent la
Nouvelle Espagne (Paris, 1903), p. 1713
J. de Acosta, Natural and Moral
History of the Indies, ii. 365 (Hakluyt


Society) ; A. de Herrera, General His-:
tory of the vast Continent and Islands
of America, iii, 216 (Stevens's transla-
tion). The author of the Manuscrit
Ramirez speaks as if the rule applied
only to the priests of the god Tezcat-
lipoca.

4 G. M. Dawson, ‘*On the Haida
Indians of Queen Charlotte Islands,”


- in Geological Survey of Canada, Report


of Progress for 1878-79, p. 123 B.
5 J. Spieth, Die Zwe-Stdmme, p. 229.


Hair of
priests,
chiefs,
sorcerers,
and others
kept un-
shorn.


260 TABOOED THINGS CHAP.


possessed by two spirits, one of a lion, the other of a leopard,
and in the assemblies of the people he mimicked the roaring
of these beasts. In order that their spirits might not leave
him, he never cut his hair nor drank alcohol." The Masai
clan of the El Kiboron, who are believed to possess the art
of making rain, may not pluck out their beards, because the
loss of their beards would, it is supposed, entail the loss of
their rain-making powers. The head chief and the sorcerers
of the Masai observe the same rule for a like reason: they
think that were they to pull out their beards, their super-
natural gifts would desert them.* In central Borneo
the chiefs of a particular Kayan family never allow
their hair to be shorn. Ancient Indian law required that
when a new king had performed the ceremony of con-
secration he might not shave his hair for a year, though
he was allowed to crop it. According to one account none
of his subjects, except a Brahman, might have his hair cut
during this period, and even horses were left unclipped.*
Amongst the Alfoors of Celebes the Le/een or priest who
looks after the rice-fields may not shear his hair during the
time that he exercises his special functions, that is from
a month before the rice is sown until it is housed. In
Usukuma, a district to the south of Lake Victoria Nyanza,
the people are forbidden to shave their heads till the corn
has been sown. Men of the Tsetsaut tribe in British
Columbia do not cut their hair, believing that if they cut it
they would quickly grow old.’ In Ceram men do not crop
their hair: if married men did so, they would lose their wives ;
if young men did so, they would grow weak and enervated.
In Timorlaut married men may not poll their hair for the
same reason as in Ceram, but widowers and men on a


1 Missions Catholiques, xxv. (1893)
p. 266,

2M. Merker, Die Masai (Berlin,
1904), pp. 21, 22, 143.

3 A, W. Nieuwenhuis, Quer durch
Borneo, i. 68.

4 Satapatha Brahmana, translated
by J. Eggeling, part iii. pp. 126, 128,
with the translator’s note on p. 126
(Sacred Books of the East, vol. xii.).

5 Pp, N. Wilken, ‘ Bijdragen tot
de kennis van de zeden en gewoonten


der Alfoeren in de Minahassa,” AZede-
deelingen van wege het Nederlandsche
Zendelinggenootschap, vii. (1863) p. 126.

® R. P. Ashe, 7wo Kings of Uganda
(London, 1889), p. 109.

7 Fr. Boas, in Zenth Report on the
North-Western Tribes of Canada, p. 45
(separate reprint from the Report of
the British Association for 1895).

8 J. G. F, Riedel, De sluth- en
hkroesharige vassen tusschen Selebes en
Papua, p. 137.


v HAIR TABOOED 261


journey may do so after offering a fowl or a pig in sacrifice.’ Hair kept
Malays of the Peninsula are forbidden to clip their hair pagers
during their wife’s pregnancy and for forty days after the occasions,


child has been born; and a similar abstention is said to SiS

have been formerly incumbent on all persons prosecuting pregnancy,
: j 2 -__ a journey,

a journey or engaged in war.” Elsewhere men travelling ang war.

abroad have been in the habit of leaving their hair unshorn

until their return. The reason for this custom is probably

the danger to which, as we have seen, a traveller is believed

to be exposed from the magic arts of the strangers amongst

whom he sojourns ; if they got possession of his shorn hair,

they might work his destruction through it. The Egyptians

on a journey kept their hair uncut till they returned home.®

“ At Taif when a man returned from a journey his first duty

was to visit the Rabba and poll his hair.”* Achilles kept

unshorn his yellow hair, because his father had vowed to

offer it to the River Sperchius if ever his son came home

from the wars beyond the sea Formerly when Dyak

warriors returned with the heads of their enemies, each man

cut off a lock from the front of his head and threw it into

the river as a mode of ending the taboo to which they had

been subjected during the expedition.6 Bechuanas after a

battle had their hair shorn by their mothers “in order that

new hair might grow, and that all which was old and polluted

might disappear and be no more.”?

Again, men who have taken a vow of vengeance some- Hair
times keep their hair unshorn till they have fulfilled their pene
vow. Thus of the Marquesans we are told that “ occasionally vow.
they have their head entirely shaved, except one lock on the
crown, which is worn loose or put up in a knot. But the
latter mode of wearing the hair is only adopted by them


1jJ. G. F. Riedel, of. 2. pp.
292 sg.

2 W. W. Skeat, Malay Magic, p. 44.

3 Diodorus Siculus, i. 18.

4 W. Robertson Smith, Azship and
Marriage in Early Arabia (Cam-
bridge, 1885), pp. 152 sg.

® Homer, Jiad, xxiii. 141 sgg.
This Homeric passage has been imi-
tated by Valerius Flaccus (Argonaut.
i. 378). The Greeks often dedicated
a lock of their hair to rivers. See


Aeschylus, Choephori, 5 sg.; Philo-
stratus, /Yferotca, xiii. 4; Pausanias, i.
37- 3, Vili. 20. 3, viii. 41. 3. The
lock might be at the side or the back of
the head or over the brow ; it received
a special name (Pollux, ii. 30).

6S. W. Tromp, ‘‘Een Dajaksch
Feest,” Bijdragen tot de Taal- Land- en
Volkenkunde van Nederlandsch-Indié,
xxxix. (1890) p. 38.

? T. Arbousset et F. Daumas, Relation
a’un voyage a’exploration, p. 565.


Hair
unshorn
during
a vow.


The nails
of infants
should not
be pared.


262 TABOOED THINGS CHAP,


when they have a solemn vow, as to revenge the death of
some near relation, etc. In such case the lock is never cut
off until they have fulfilled their promise.”? A _ similar
custom was sometimes observed by the ancient Germans ;
among the Chatti the young warriors never clipped their
hair or their beard- till they had slain an enemy. Six
thousand Saxons once swore that they would not poll their
hair nor shave their beards until they had taken vengeance
on their foes? On one occasion a Hawaiian taboo is
said to have lasted thirty years, “during which the men
were not allowed to trim their beards, etc.’* While his
vow lasted, a Nazarite might not have his hair cut: “ All
the days of the vow of his separation there shall no razor
come upon his head.”> Possibly in this case there was
a special objection to touching the tabooed man’s head with
iron. The Roman priests, as we have seen, were shorn with
bronze knives. The same feeling perhaps gave rise to the
European rule that a child’s nails should not be pared during
the first year, but that if it is absolutely necessary to shorten
them they should be bitten off by the mother or nurse.®
For in all parts of the world a young child is believed to be
especially exposed to supernatural dangers, and particular
precautions are taken to guard it against them; in other
words, the child is under a number of taboos, of which the


rule just mentioned is one.


“Among Hindus the usual


custom seems to be that the nails of a first-born child are


cut at the age of six months.


1D. Porter, Journal of a Cruise
made to the Pacific Ocean, ii. 120.

2 Tacitus, Germania, 31. Vows of
the same sort were occasionally made
by the Romans (Suetonius, Jz/ius, 67 ;
Tacitus, “77st. iv. 61).

8 Paulus Diaconus, //7st. Langodbard.
iii, 7; Gregory of Tours, Histoire
ecclésiastique des Francs, v. 15, vol. i.
p. 268 (Guizot’s translation, Nouvelle
Edition, Paris, 1874).

4 W. Ellis, Polynesian Researches,*
iv. 387,

6 Numbers vi. 5.

6 J. A. E. Kohler, Vo/hsbrauch, etc.,
im Voigtlande, p. 424; W. Henderson,


With other children a year


Folk-lore of the Northern Counties,
pp. 16 sg.; F. Panzer, Bettrag sur
deutschen Mythologie, i. p. 258, § 233
I, V. Zingerle, Sztten, Brauche und
Meinungen des Tiroler Volkes,? §§ 46,
72; J. W. Wolf, Bettrdge sur deutschen
Mythologie, i. p. 208 § 45, p. 209 § 53;
O. Knoop, Volkssagen, Eradhlungen,
etc., aus dem dstlichen Hinterpommern,
p- 157 § 23; E. Veckenstedt, Wendische
Sagen, Mirchen und abergliubische
Gebrduche, p. 4453 J. Haltrich, Zur
Volkskunde der Siebenbiirger Sachsen,
p. 313; E. Krause, ‘‘ Abergliiubische
Kuren und sonstiger Aberglaube in
Berlin,” Zeitschrift fir Ethnologie, xv.
(1883) p. 84.


es eee


v HAIR TABOOED


or two is allowed to elapse.”! The Slave, Hare, and Dogrib
Indians of North-West America do not pare the nails of female
children till they are four years of age.” In Uganda a child’s

hair may not be cut until the child has received a name.
Should any of it be rubbed or plucked off accidentally, it is
refastened to the child’s head with string or by being knotted

to the other hair.3 Amongst the Ewe negroes of the Slave
Coast, a mother sometimes vows a sacrifice to the fetish if

her infant should live. She then leaves the child unshorn

till its fourth or sixth year, when she fulfils her vow and has

the child’s hair cut by a priest* To this day a Syrian
mother will sometimes, like Hannah, devote her little one to

God. When the child reaches a certain age, its hair is cut

and weighed, and money is paid in proportion to the weight.

If the boy thus dedicated is a Moslem, he becomes in time

a dervish ; if he is a Christian, he becomes a monk. Among Child's
the Toradjas of central Celebes, when a child’s hair is cut pose’ ial
to rid it of vermin, some locks are allowed to remain on the a refuge for
crown of the head as a refuge for one of the child’s souls, “S *°
Otherwise the soul would have no place in which to settle,

and the child would sicken.6 The Karo-Bataks of Sumatra

are much afraid of frightening away the soul (¢énd2) of a
child ; hence when they cut its hair, they always leave a
patch unshorn, to which the soul can retreat before the


263


shears.
or at least up till manhood.’


1 Panjab Notes and Queries, ii. p.
205, § 1092.

2 G, Gibbs, ‘‘ Notes on the Tinneh
or Chepewyan Indians of British and
Russian America,” in Annual Report
of the Smithsonian Institution, 1866,
p. 3053; W. Dall, Alaska and its
Resources, p. 202. The reason alleged
by the Indians is that if the girls’ nails
were cut sooner the girls would be lazy
and unable to embroider in porcupine
quill-work, But this is probably a
late invention like the reasons assigned
in Europe for the similar custom, of
which the commonest is that the child
would become a thief if its nails were
cut,

8 J. Roscoe, “‘ Further Notes on the
Manners and Customs of the Baganda,”’


Usually this lock remains unshorn all through life,


In some parts of Germany it


Journal of the Anthropological Institute,
xxxii, (1902) p. 30.

# Lieut. Herold, ‘‘Religidse An-
schauungen und Gebriuche der deut-
schen Ewe-Neger,” Mittheilungen aus
den Deutschen Schutzgebieten, v. 148 sq.

5S. J. Curtiss, Primitive Semitic
Religion To-day (Chicago, etc., 1902),
Pp. 153.

6 A. C. Kruyt, ‘* Het koppensnellen
der Toradja’s,” Verslagen en Mede-
deelingen der konink. Akademie van
Wetenschapen, Afdeeling Letterkunde,
iv. Reeks, iii, 198n? (Amsterdam,
1899).

TR. Romer, “ Bijdrage tot de Gen-
eeskunst der Karo-Batak’s,” 77jdschrift
voor Indische Taal- Land- en Volken-
kunde, |. (1908) p. 216.


264 TABOOED THINGS CHAP.


is thought that if a child’s hair is combed in its first year
the child will be unlucky ;+ or that if a boy’s hair is cut
before his seventh year he will have no courage.”


§ 7. Ceremonies at Hair-cutting


Solemn But when it becomes necessary to crop the hair, measures
ceremonies :

“Beereed at BFC. taken to lessen the dangers which are supposed to attend
hair- the operation. The chief of Namosi in Fiji always ate a
cutting.


man by way of precaution when he had had his hair cut.
“There was a certain clan that had to provide the victim,
and they used to sit in solemn council among themselves to
choose him. It was a sacrificial feast to avert evil from the
chief.”* This remarkable custom has been described more
fully by another observer. The old heathen temple at Namosi
is called Rukunitambua, “and round about it are hundreds
of stones, each of which tells a fearful tale. A subject tribe,
whose town was some little distance from Namosi, had
committed an unpardonable offence, and were condemned
to a frightful doom. The earth-mound on which their
temple had stood was planted with the mountain zdalo
(arum), and when the crop was ripe, the poor wretches had
to carry it down to Namosi, and give at least one of their
number to be killed and eaten by the chief. He used to
take advantage of these occasions to have his hair cut,
for the human sacrifice was supposed to avert all danger
of witchcraft if any ill-wisher got hold of the cuttings of his
hair, human hair being the most dangerous channel for the
deadliest spells of the sorcerers. The stones round Rukuni-
tambua represented these and other victims who had been
killed and eaten at Namosi. Each stone was the record of
a murder succeeded by a cannibal feast.” Amongst the
Maoris many spells were uttered at hair-cutting ; one, for


delivered December


1 O, Knoop, Volkssagen, Ersdhlun-
gen, etc., aus dem dstlichen Hinter-
pommern (Posen, 1885), p. 157, § 23.

2 J. W. Wolf, Bettrige sur deut-
schen Mythologie, i, p, 209, § 57.

3 Rev, Lorimer Fison, in a letter
to the author, dated August 26,
1898.


* From the report of a lecture


in Melbourne,
9, 1898, by the Rev. H. Worrall,
of Fiji, missionary. The newspaper
cutting from which the above extract
is quoted was sent to me by the Rev.
Lorimer Fison in a letter, dated Mel-
bourne, January 9, 1899. Mr. Fison
omitted to give the name and date of
the newspaper,


OE ee


ee


7a I,


a


Vv CEREMONIES AT HAIR-CUTTING 265


example, was spoken to consecrate the obsidian knife with
which the hair was cut; another was pronounced to avert
the thunder and lightning which hair-cutting was believed to
cause! “He who has had his hair cut is in immediate charge
of the Atua (spirit); he is removed from the contact and
society of his family and his tribe; he dare not touch his
food himself; it is put into his mouth by another person ;
nor can he for some days resume his accustomed occupations
or associate with his fellow-men.”* The person who cuts
the hair is also tabooed; his hands having been in contact
with a sacred head, he may not touch food with them or
engage in any other employment; he is fed by another
person with food cooked over a sacred fire. He cannot be
released from the taboo before the following day, when he
rubs his hands with potato or fern root which has been
cooked on a sacred fire ; and this food having been taken to
the head of the family in the female line and eaten by her,
his hands are freed from the taboo. In some parts of New
Zealand the most sacred day of the year was that appointed
for hair-cutting ; the people assembled in large numbers on
that day from all the neighbourhood.’ Sometimes a Maori
chief’s hair was shorn by his wife, who was then tabooed for
a week as a consequence of having touched his sacred locks.‘
It is an affair of state when the king of Cambodia’s hair is
cropped. The priests place on the barber’s fingers certain old
rings set with large stones, which are supposed to contain
spirits favourable to the kings, and during the operation the
Brahmans keep up a noisy music to drive away the evil
spirits.© The hair and nails of the Mikado could only be cut
while he was asleep,° perhaps because his soul being then
absent from his body, there was less chance of injuring it
with the shears,

From their earliest days little Siamese children have the


1 R. Taylor, Ze Lka a Maui, or 3 E. Shortland, 7Zvaditions and
New Zealand and its Inhabitants? Superstitions of the New Zealanders,
(London, 1870), pp. 206 sgg. pp. 108 sgg.; R. Taylor, Zc.

* Richard A. Cruise, Journal of a 4G, F. Angas, Savage Life and
Zen Months Residence in New Zealand Scenes in Australia and New Zealand
(London, 1823), pp. 283 sg. Compare (London, 1847), ii. 90 sg.

J. Dumont D’Urville, Voyage autour du 5 J. Moura, Le Royaume du Cam-
monde et a la recherche de La Pérouse:  bodge, i. 226 sg.
histoire du voyage (Paris, 1832), ii. 533. § See above, p. 3.


Solemn


ceremonies


observed
at hair-
cutting.


Cere-
monies at
cutting the
hair of
Siamese
children.


266 TABOOED THINGS CHAP,


crown of the head clean shorn with the exception of a single
small tuft of hair, which is daily combed, twisted, oiled, and
tied in a little knot until the day when it is finally removed
with great pomp and ceremony. The ceremony of shaving
the top-knot takes place before the child has reached puberty,
and great anxiety is felt at this time lest the Awan, or
guardian-spirit who commonly resides in the body and
especially the head of every Siamese,’ should be so disturbed
by the tonsure as to depart and leave the child a hopeless
wreck for life. Great pains are therefore taken to recall this
mysterious being in case he should have fled, and to fix him
securely in the child. This is the object of an elaborate
ceremony performed on the afternoon of the day when the
top-knot has been cut. A miniature pagoda is erected, and
on it are placed several kinds of food known to be favourites
of the spirit. When the £wuz has arrived and is feasting
on these dainties, he is caught and held fast under a cloth
thrown over the food. The child is now placed near the
pagoda, and all the family and friends form a circle, with the
child, the captured spirit, and the Brahman priests in the


middle. Hereupon the priests address the spirit, earnestly —


entreating him to enter into the child. They amuse him
with tales, and coax and wheedle him with flattery, jest, and
song; the gongs ring out their loudest; the people cheer
and only a £wun of the sourest and most obdurate disposition
could resist the combined appeal. The last sentences of
the formal invocation run as follows: “Benignant wun !
Thou fickle being who art wont to wander and dally about !
From the moment that the child was conceived in the
womb, thou hast enjoyed every pleasure, until ten (lunar)
months having elapsed and the time of delivery arrived,
thou hast suffered and run the risk of perishing by being
born alive into the world. Gracious kwun! thou wast at
that time so tender, delicate, and wavering as to cause great
anxiety concerning thy fate; thou was exactly like a child,
youthful, innocent, and inexperienced. The least trifle
frightened thee and made thee shudder. In thy infantile
playfulness thou wast wont to frolic and wander to no
purpose. As thou didst commence to learn to sit, and,
1 See above, p. 252.


v CEREMONIES AT HAIR-CUTTING + 267


unassisted, to crawl totteringly on all fours, thou wast ever Ceremonies
falling flat on thy face or on thy back. As thou didst grow oo
up in years and couldst move thy steps firmly, thou didst of Siamese
begin to run and sport thoughtlessly and rashly all round Lamia:
the rooms, the terrace, and bridging planks of travelling boat

or floating house, and at times thou didst fall into the
stream, creek, or pond, among the floating water-weeds, to

the utter dismay of those to whom thy existence was most

dear. O gentle kwumn, come into thy corporeal abode; do

not delay this auspicious rite. Thou art now full-grown and

dost form everybody’s delight and admiration. Let all the

tiny particles of kwuu that have fallen on land or water
assemble and take permanent abode in this darling little

child. Let them all hurry to the site of this auspicious
ceremony and admire the magnificent preparations made for

them in this hall.’ The brocaded cloth from the pagoda,

under which lurks the captive spirit, is now rolled up tightly

and handed to the child, who is told to clasp it firmly to

his breast and not let the Awum escape. Further, the child

drinks the milk of the coco-nuts which had been offered to

the spirit, and by thus absorbing the food of the kwun
ensures the presence of that precious spirit in his body. A

magic cord is tied round his wrist to keep off the wicked

spirits who would lure the wun away from home; and for

three nights he sleeps with the embroidered cloth from the
pagoda fast clasped in his arms.!


§ 8. Disposal of Cut Hair and Nails


But even when the hair and nails have been safely cut, Belief that
there remains the difficulty of disposing of them, for their PP,
owner believes himself liable to suffer from any harm that bewitched


may befall them. The notion that a man may be oe


bewitched by means of the clippings of his hair, the parings nee ot
of his nails, or any other severed portion of his person is ee canta


1 E. Young, Zhe Kingdom of the
Yellow Robe (Westminster, 1898),
pp. 64 sg., 67-84. I have abridged
the account of the ceremonies by
omitting some details. For anaccount
of the ceremonies observed at cutting


the hair of a young Siamese prince,
at the age of thirteen or fourteen,
see Mgr. Bruguiére, in Annales de
P Association de la Propagation de la
Fot, v. (1831) pp. 197 sg.


of their
nails, and
other
severed
parts

of their
persons.


268 » TABOOED THINGS CHAP.


almost world-wide,’ and attested by evidence too ample,
too familiar, and too tedious in its uniformity to be here
analysed at length. The general idea on which the
superstition rests is that of the sympathetic connexion
supposed to persist between a person and everything that
has once been part of his body or in any way closely related
to him. A very few examples must suffice. They belong
to that branch of sympathetic magic which may be called
contagious.” Thus, when the Chilote Indians, inhabiting the
wild, deeply indented coasts and dark rain~beaten forests
of southern Chili, get possession of the hair of an enemy,
they drop it from a high tree or tie it to a piece of
seaweed and fling it into the surf; for they think that the
shock of the fall, or the blows of the waves as the tress is
tossed to and fro on the heaving billows, will be transmitted
through the hair to the person from whose head it was cut?
Dread of sorcery, we are told, formed one of the most salient
characteristics of the Marquesan islanders in the old days.
The sorcerer took some of the hair, spittle, or other bodily
refuse of the man he wished to injure, wrapped it up in a leaf,
and placed the packet in a bag woven of threads or fibres,
which were knotted in an intricate way. The whole was then
buried with certain rites, and thereupon the victim wasted away
of a languishing sickness which lasted twenty days. His life,
however, might be saved by discovering and digging up the
buried hair, spittle, or what not; for as soon as this was
done the power of the charm ceased. A Marquesan chief
told Lieutenant Gamble that he was extremely ill, the
Happah tribe having stolen a lock of his hair and buried it
in a plantain leaf for the purpose of taking his life.
Lieutenant Gamble argued with him, but in vain; die he
must unless the hair and the plantain leaf were brought back
tohim ; and to obtain them he had offered the Happahs the


greater part of his property.


! The aboriginal tribes of Central
Australia form an exception to this
rule; for among them no attempt is
made to injure a person by performing
magical ceremonies over his shorn hair,
See Spencer and Gillen, Northern
Tribes of Central Australia, p. 478.

4 See Zhe Magic Art and the Evolu-


He complained of excessive


tion of Kings, vol. i. pp. 52-54, 174
$9q-
3 C. Martin, ‘*Uber die Einge-
borenen von Chiloe,” Zeitschrift fir
LEthnologie, ix. (1877) p. 177.

# Vincendon-Dumoulin et C, Des-
graz, Sles Marquises (Paris, 1843), pp.
247 sg.


v DISPOSAL OF CUT HAIR AND NAILS 269


pain in the head, breast, and sides! A Maori sorcerer Belief that
intent on bewitching somebody sought to get a tress Leh gt
of his victim’s hair, the parings of his nails, some of his bewitched
spittle, or a shred of his garment. Having obtained the Srotacet
object, whatever it was, he chanted certain spells and curses their hair.
over it in a falsetto voice and buried it in the ground. As

the thing decayed, the person to whom it had belonged was
supposed to waste away.2 Again, an Australian girl, sick of

a fever, laid the blame of her illness on a young man who

had come behind her and cut off a lock of her hair ; she was

sure he had buried it and that it was rotting. “Her hair,”

she said, “was rotting somewhere, and her Marm-bu-la
(kidney fat) was wasting away, and when her hair had
completely rotted, she would die.”* When an Australian
blackfellow wishes to get rid of his wife, he cuts off a lock of

her hair in her sleep, ties it to his spear-thrower, and goes with

it to a neighbouring tribe, where he gives it toa friend. His

friend sticks the spear-thrower up every night before the

camp fire, and when it falls down it is a sign that the wife

is dead.t The way in which the charm operates was
explained to Dr. Howitt by a Wirajuri man. “You see,”

he said, “when a blackfellow doctor gets hold of something
belonging to a man and roasts it with things, and sings over

it, the fire catches hold of the smell of the man, and that

settles the poor fellow.”® A slightly different form of the

charm as practised in Australia is to fasten the enemy’s hair

with wax to the pinion bone of a hawk, and set the bone in

a small circle of fire. According as the sorcerer desires the

death or only the sickness of his victim he leaves the bone

in the midst of the fire or removes it and lays it in the sun.

When he thinks he has done his enemy enough harm, he

places the bone in water, which ends the enchantment.®


1D. Porter, Journal of a Cruise * J. Dawson, Australian Aborigines,
made to the Pacific Ocean® (New York, pp. 36.
1882), ii. 188. 5 A. W. Howitt, ‘On Australian
2 R. Taylor, Ze Zka a Maut, or Medicine-men,” Journal of the Anthro-
New Zealand and its Inhabitants,? pp. pological Institute, xvi. (1887) p. 27.
203 sg.3; A. S. Thomson, Zhe Story Compare z@., Native Tribes of South-
of New Zealand (London, 1859), i. Last Australia, pp. 360 sg.
116 sg. 6 E. Palmer, ‘*‘ Notes on some Aus-
3. R. Brough Smyth, Aborigines of tralian Tribes,” Journal of the Anthro-
Victoria, i. 468 sg. pological Institute, xiii. (1884) p. 293.


Belief that
people
may be
bewitched
through the


clippings of


their hair.


Clipped
hair may
cause head-
ache.


270 TABOOED THINGS CHAP.


Lucian describes how a Syrian witch professed to bring back
a faithless lover to his forsaken fair one by means of a lock
of his hair, his shoes, his garments, or something of that
sort. She hung the hair, or whatever it was, on a peg and
fumigated it with brimstone, sprinkling salt on the fire and
mentioning the names of the lover and his lass. Then she
drew a magic wheel from her bosom and set it spinning,
while she gabbled a spell full of barbarous and fearsome
words. This soon brought the false lover back to the feet of
his charmer.’ Apuleius tells how an amorous Thessalian witch
essayed to win the affections of a handsome Boeotian youth by
similar means. As darkness fell she mounted the roof, and
there, surrounded by a hellish array of dead men’s bones, she
knotted the severed tresses of auburn hair and threw them on
the glowing embers of a perfumed fire. But her cunning hand-
maid had outwitted her; the hair was only goat’s hair; and
all her enchantments ended in dismal and ludicrous failure.”

The Huzuls of the Carpathians imagine that if mice get
a person’s shorn hair and make a nest of it, the person will
suffer from headache or even become idiotic. Similarly in
Germany it is a common notion that if birds find a person’s
cut hair, and build their nests with it, the person will suffer
from headache ;* sometimes it is thought that he will have


an eruption on the head.®


1 Lucian, Dial. meretr. iv. 4 sq.

2 Apuleius, Metamorph. iii. 16 sgg.
For more evidence of the same sort, see
Th. Williams, Fiji and the Fijians,? i.
248 ; James Bonwick, Daily Life of the
Tasmanians, p. 178 ; James Chalmers,
Pioneering in New Guinea, p. 187;
J. S. Polack, AZanners and Customs of
the New Zealanders, i. 282 ; A. Bastian,
Die Volker des Gstlichen Asien, iii.
270; G. H. von Langsdorff, Rese um
die Welt, i. 134 sg. 3 W. Ellis, Poly-
nesian Researches,*i, 364; A, B. Ellis,
Lwe-speaking peoples of the Slave Coast,
p- 99; R. H. Codrington, Zhe
Melanesians, p. 203; K. von den
Steinen, Unter den Naturvilkern Zen-
tral-Brastliens, p. 343; Miss Mary H.
Kingsley, Zravels in West Africa, p.
447; 1. V. Zingerle, Sitten, Brduche
und Meinungen des Tiroler Volkes,*
§ 178; KR. Andree, Zthnographische


The same superstition prevails,


Parallelen und Vergleiche, Neue Folge,
pp. 12 sgg.; E. S. Hartland, Legend
of Perseus, ii, 64-74, 132-139.

3 R. F. Kaindl, ‘‘Neue Beitriige
zur Ethnologie und Volkeskunde der
Huzulen,” Glodus, lxix. (1896) p. 94.

4 E. Meier, Deutsche Sagen, Sitten
und Gebriuche aus Schwaben, p. 509;
A. Birlinger, Volksthiimliches aus
Schwaben, i. 493; F. Panzer, Beitrag
sur deutschen Mythologie, i. 258 ; J. A.
E. K6hler, Volksbrauch, etc., tm
Voigtlande, p. 425; A. Witzschel,
Sagen, Sitten und Gebriuche aus
Thiiringen, p. 282; I. V. Zingerle,
op, cit, § 180; J. W. Wolf, Bettrage
sur deutschen Mythologie, i. p. 224,
§ 273. A similar belief prevails among
the gypsies of Eastern Europe (H. von
Wlislocki, Volksglaube und religidser
Brauch der Zigeuner, p, 81).

5 I, V. Zingerle, of. cit, § 181.


ee ee ee


v DISPOSAL OF CUT HAIR AND NAILS 271


or used to prevail, in West Sussex. “I knew how it would
be,” exclaimed a maidservant one day, “when I saw that
bird fly off with a bit of my hair in its beak that blew out
of the window this morning when I was dressing; I knew !
should have a clapping headache, and so I have.”! In like
manner the Scottish Highlanders believe that if cut or loose
hair is allowed to blow away with the wind and it passes
over an empty nest, or a bird takes it to its nest, the head
from which it came will ache.2. The Todas of southern India
hide their clipped hair in bushes or hollows in the rocks, in
order that it may not be found by crows, and they bury the
parings of their nails lest they should be eaten by buffaloes,
with whom, it is believed, they would disagree.®

Again it is thought that cut or combed-out hair may Cut hair
disturb the weather by producing rain and hail, thunder and Mi? Sr"
lightning. We have seen that in New Zealand a spell was thunder
uttered at hair-cutting to avert thunder and lightning. In the ma
Tyrol, witches are supposed to use cut or combed-out hair to
make hailstones or thunderstorms with.* Thlinkeet Indians
have been known to attribute stormy weather to the rash
act of a girl who had combed her hair outside of the house.®
The Romans seem to have held similar views, for it was a
maxim with them that no one on shipboard should cut his
hair or nails except in a storm,° that is, when the mischief
was already done. In the Highlands of Scotland it is said
that no sister should comb her hair at night if she have a
brother at sea.’ In West Africa, when the Mani of Chitombe
or Jumba died, the people used to run in crowds to the
corpse and tear out his hair, teeth, and nails, which they
kept as a rain-charm, believing that otherwise no rain would
fall. The Makoko of the Anzikos begged the missionaries
to give him half their beards as a rain-charm$ When
Du Chaillu had his hair cut among the Ashira of West


1 Charlotte Latham, ‘*‘ Some West 5 A. Krause, Die Tiinkit-Indianer
Sussex Superstitions,” Fo/k-lore Record, (Jena, 1885), p. 300.
i. (1878) p. 40. 6 Petronius, Sa¢. 104,

2 J. G. Campbell, Superstitions of 7 J. G. Campbell, of. cit. pp. 236
the Highlands and Islands of Scotland sq.


(Glasgow, 1900), p. 237. 8 A. Bastian, Die deutsche Expedition
3 'W. H. R. Rivers, Zhe Todas an der Loango-Kiiste, i. 231 59.3 td,
(London, 1906), pp. 268 sg. Ein Besuch in San Salvador, pp. 117


4 I. V. Zingerle, of. cz. §§ 176,179. 59.


Magical
uses of
cut hair.


Cut hair
and nails


hostages
for good
behaviour


272 TABOOED THINGS CHAP.


Africa, the people scuffled and fought for the clippings of
his hair, even the aged king himself taking part in the
scrimmage. Every one who succeeded in getting some
of the hairs wrapped them up carefully and went off in
triumph. When the traveller, who was regarded as a spirit
by these simple-minded folk, asked the king what use the
clippings could be to him, his sable majesty replied, “ Oh,
spirit! these hairs are very precious; we shall make mondas
(fetiches) of them, and they will bring other white men to
us, and bring us great good luck and riches. - Since you
have come to us, oh spirit! we have wished to have some
of your hair, but did not dare to ask for it, not knowing
that it could be cut.”* The Wabondei of eastern Africa
preserve the hair and nails of their dead chiefs and
use them both for the making of rain and the healing
of the sick.2, The hair, beard, and nails of their deceased
chiefs are the most sacred possession, the most precious
treasure of the Baronga of south-eastern Africa. Pre-
served in pellets of cow-dung wrapt round with leathern
thongs, they are kept in a special hut under the charge
of a high priest, who offers sacrifices and prayers at
certain seasons, and has to observe strict continence for a
month before he handles these holy relics in the offices of
religion. A terrible drought was once the result of this
palladium falling into the hands of the enemy.® In some
Victorian tribes the sorcerer used to burn human hair in
time of drought ; it was never burned at other times for fear
of causing a deluge of rain. Also when the river was low,
the sorcerer would place human hair in the stream to
increase the supply of water.‘

If cut hair and nails remain in sympathetic connexion
with the person from whose body they have been severed,
it is clear that they can be used as hostages for his good
behaviour by any one who may chance to possess them ;
for on the principles of contagious magic he has only to


1p, B. du Chaillu, ZLxplorations
and Adventures in Equatorial Africa
(London, 1861), pp. 426 sg.

20. Baumann, Usambara
seine Nachbargebiete (Berlin,
p. 141,


und
1891),


3 A, Junod, Les Ba-Ronga (Neu-
chiatel, 1898), pp. 398-400.

4 W. Stanbridge, ‘*On the Abori-
gines of Victoria,” Zyansactions of the
Ethnological Society of London, N.S.,
i, (1861) p, 300.


Vv DISPOSAL OF CUT HAIR AND NAILS 273


injure the hair or nails in order to hurt simultaneously of the
their original owner. Hence when the Nandi have taken PO" o.
a prisoner they shave his head and keep the shorn hair as bodies they
have been
a surety that he will not attempt to escape; but when the ,,)...,
captive is ransomed, they return his shorn hair with him
to his own people.’ For:a similar reason, perhaps, when the
Tiaha, an Arab tribe of Moab, have taken a prisoner whom
they do not wish to put to death, they shave one corner of
his head above his temples and let him go. So, too, an
Arab of Moab who pardons a murderer will sometimes
cut off the man’s hair and shave his chin before releasing
him. Again, when two Moabite Arabs had got hold of a
traitor who had revealed their plan of campaign to the
enemy, they contented themselves with shaving completely
one side of his head and his moustache on the other,
after which they set him at liberty.2. We can now, perhaps,
understand why Hanun King of Ammon shaved off one-
half of the beards of King David’s messengers and cut
off half their garments before he sent them back to their
master.® His intention, we may conjecture, was not simply
to put a gross affront on the envoys. He distrusted the
ambitious designs of King David and wished to have some
guarantee of the maintenance of peace and friendly relations
between the two countries. That guarantee he may have
imagined that he possessed in half of the beards and
garments of the ambassadors ; and if that was so, we may
suppose that when the indignant David set the army of
Israel in motion against Ammon, and the fords of Jordan
were alive with the passage of his troops, the wizards of
Ammon were busy in the strong keep of Rabbah muttering
their weird spells and performing their quaint enchantments
over the shorn hair and severed skirts in order to dispel the
thundercloud of war that was gathering black about their
country. Vain hopes! The city fell, and from the gates
the sad inhabitants trooped forth in thousands to be laid
in long lines on the ground and sawed asunder or ripped
up with harrows or to walk into the red glow of the


1 A. C. Hollis, Zhe Nandi (Ox- Arabes au pays de Moab (Paris, 1908),
ford, pepe PP: 39, 74 sg. Pp. 94 Sg.
* Le P. A. Jaussen, Cozgumes des 3 2 Samuel, x. 4.
PT. Il T


274 TABOOED THINGS CHAP,


burning brick kilns.’ Again, the parings of nails may serve
the same purpose as the clippings of hair; they too may
be treated as bail for the good behaviour of the persons
from whose fingers they have been cut. It is apparently


- on this principle that when the Ba-yaka of the Congo


Cut hair
and nails
are de-
posited in
sacred
places,
such as
temples
and ceme-
teries, to
preserve
them from


injury.


valley cement a peace, the’ chiefs of the two tribes meet
and eat a cake which contains some of their nail-parings
as a pledge of the maintenance of the treaty. They believe
that he who breaks an engagement contracted in this solemn
manner will die. Each of the high contracting’ parties has
in fact given hostages to fortune in the shape of the nail-
parings which are lodged in the other man’s stomach.

To preserve the cut hair and nails from injury and from
the dangerous uses to which they may be put by sorcerers,
it is necessary to deposit them in some safe place. Hence
the natives of the Maldives carefully keep the cuttings of
their hair and nails and bury them, with a little water, in
the cemeteries; “for they would not for the world tread
upon them nor cast them in the fire, for they say that they
are part of their body, and demand burial as it does; and,
indeed, they fold them neatly in cotton; and most of them
like to be shaved at the gates of temples and mosques.” ?®
In New Zealand the severed hair was deposited on some
sacred spot of ground “to protect it from being touched
accidentally or designedly by any one.”* The shorn locks
of a chief were gathered with much care and placed in an
adjoining cemetery.” The Tahitians buried the cuttings of
their hair at the temples.° In the streets of Soku, West
Africa, a modern traveller observed cairns of large stones
piled against walls with tufts of human hair inserted in the
crevices. On asking the meaning of this, he was told that
when any native of the place polled his hair he carefully


1 2 Samuel, x., xii. 26-31.

2 R. Torday and T. A. Joyce,
** Notes on the Ethnography of the
Ba-Yaka,” /Journal of the Anthropo-
logical Institute, xxxvi. (1906) p. 49. *

8 Francois Pyrard, Voyages to the
East Indies, the Maldives, the Moluccas,
and Brasil, translated by Albert Gray
(Hakluyt Society, 1887), i, 110 sg.


4 E. Shortland, 7Zyraditions and


Superstitions of the New Zealanders,
p. 110,

5 J. S. Polack, Manners and Cus-
toms of the New Zealanders, i, 38 sq.
Compare G, F, Angas, Savage Life
and Scenes in Australia and New
Zealand (London, 1847), ii. 108 sg.

® James Wilson, A AZissionary Voy-
age to the Southern Pacific Ocean
(London, 1799), p. 355.


v DISPOSAL OF CUT HAIR AND NAILS 275


gathered up the clippings and deposited them in one of these
cairns, all of which were sacred to the fetish and therefore
inviolable. These cairns of sacred stones, he further learned,

were simply a precaution against witchcraft, for if a man

were not thus careful in disposing of his hair, some of it
might fall into the hands of his enemies, who would, by
means of it, be able to cast spells over him and so compass

his destruction.1 When the top-knot of a Siamese child has

been cut with great ceremony, the short hairs are put into

a little vessel made of plantain leaves and set adrift on the
nearest river or canal. As they float away, all that was
wrong or harmful in the child’s disposition is believed to
depart with them. The long hairs are kept till the child
makes a pilgrimage to the holy Footprint of Buddha on the
sacred hill at Prabat. They are then presented to the
priests, who are supposed to make them into brushes with
which they sweep the Footprint ; but in fact so much hair

is thus offered every year that the priests cannot use it all,

so they quietly burn the superfluity as soon as the pilgrims’

backs are turned.” The cut hair and nails of the Flamen Cut hair
Dialis were buried under a lucky tree. The shorn tresses ete
of the Vestal virgins were hung on an ancient lotus-tree.* under
In Morocco women often hang their cut hair on a tree that (2.
grows on or near the grave of a wonder-working saint; for deposited
they think thus to rid themselves of headache or to guard scare Lge;
against it. In Germany the clippings of hair used often to

be buried under an elder-bush.® In Oldenburg cut hair and

nails are wrapt in a cloth which is deposited in a hole in an


1 R. A. Freeman, Zravels and Life
in Ashanti and Jaman (Westminster,
1898), pp. 171 sg.

2 E. Young, Zhe Kingdom of the
Yellow Robe, p. 79.

3 Aulus Gellius, x. 15. 15. The
ancients were not agreed as to the dis-
tinction. between lucky and unlucky
trees. According to Cato and Pliny,
trees that bore fruit were lucky, and
trees which did not were unlucky
(Festus, ed. C. O. Miiller, p. 29, s.v.
Felices; Pliny, Nat. Hist. xvi. 108) ;
but according to Tarquitius Priscus
those trees were unlucky which were
sacred to the infernal gods and. bore


black berries or black fruit (Macrobius,
Saturn, ii. 16, but iii. 20 in L. Jan’s
edition, Quedlinburg and _ Leipsic,
1852).

4 Pliny, Wat. Hist. xvi. 235 ; Festu ,
p- 57 ed. C. O, Miiller, s.v. Capillatam
vel capillarem arborem.


5 M. Quedenfelt, “‘ Aberglaube und
halbreligidse Bruderschaft bei den
Marokkanern,” Verhandlungen der
Berliner Gesellschaft fiir Anthropologie,
Ethnologie und Urgeschichte, 1886, p.
(680).

6 A. Wuttke, Der deutsche Volks-
aberglaube,? pp. 294 sg., § 464.


Cut hair
and nails
buried
under
certain
trees or
deposited
among the
branches,


Cut hair
and nails
may be
stowed
away for
safety in
any secret
place.


276 TABOOED THINGS CHAP,


elder-tree three days before the new moon ; the hole is then
plugged up." In the West of Northumberland it is thought
that if the first parings of a child’s nails are buried under an
ash-tree, the child will turn out a fine singer?’ In Amboyna,
before a child may taste sago-pap for the first time, the
father cuts off a lock of the infant’s hair, which he buries
under a sago-palm.? In the Aru Islands, when a child is
able to run alone, a female relation shears a lock of its
hair and deposits it on a banana-tree* In the island of
Rotti it is thought that the first hair which a child gets is
not his own, and that, if it is not cut off, it will make him
weak and ill. Hence, when the child is about a month old,
his hair is polled with much ceremony. As each of the
friends who are invited to the ceremony enters the house he
goes up to the child, snips off a little of its hair and drops it
into a coco-nut shell full of water. Afterwards the father
or another relation takes the hair and packs it into a little
bag made of leaves, which he fastens to the top of a palm-
tree. Then he gives the leaves of the palm a good shaking,
climbs down, and goes home without speaking to any one.
Indians of the Yukon territory, Alaska, do not throw away
their cut hair and nails, but tie them up in little bundles
and place them in the crotches of trees or wherever they are
not likely to be disturbed by beasts. For “they have a
superstition that disease will follow the disturbance of such
remains by animals.” °

Often the clipped hair and nails are stowed away in any
secret place, not necessarily in a temple or cemetery or at
a tree, as in the cases already mentioned. Thus in Swabia
you are recommended to deposit your clipped hair in some
spot where neither sun nor moon can shine on it, for example
in the earth or under a stone.’ In Danzig it is buried in a


1 W, Mannhardt, Germanische My- ten op het eiland Rottie,” 7idschrift


then (Berlin, 1858), p. 630.

2 W. Henderson, Folk-lore of the

Northern Counties (London, 1879),
p. 17.
3 J. G. F. Riedel, De sluik- en
hroesharige rassen tusschen Selebes en
Paptta, ~. 74.

4 Jj. G, F. Riedel, of, cit, p. 265.

6 G, Heijmering, ‘‘Zeden en gewoon-


voor Neériands Indié, 1843, dl. ii. pp.
634-637.

6 W, Dall, Alaska and its Resources
(London, 1870), p. 54; F. Whymper,
‘©The Natives of the Youkon River,”
Transactions of the Ethnological Society
of London, N.S., vii. (1869) p.
174.

1 E. Meier, Deutsche Sagen, Sitten


v DISPOSAL OF CUT HAIR AND NAILS 277


bag under the threshold.’ In Ugi, one of the Solomon
Islands, men bury their hair lest it should fall into the hands
of an enemy who would make magic with it and so bring
sickness or calamity on them.” The same fear seems to be
general in Melanesia, and has led to a regular practice of
hiding cut hair and nails.* In Fiji, the shorn hair is concealed
in the thatch of the house.‘ Most Burmese and Shans: tie
the combings of their hair and the parings of their nails to a
stone and sink them in deep water or bury them in the
ground.” The Zend-Avesta directs that the clippings of hair
and the parings of nails shall be placed in separate holes,
and that three, six, or nine furrows shall be drawn round
each hole with a metal knife.© In the Grzhya-Sitras it is
provided that the hair cut from a child’s head at the end of
the first, third, fifth, or seventh year shall be buried in the
earth at a place covered with grass or in the neighbourhood
of water.” At the end of the period of his studentship a
Brahman has his hair shaved and his nails cut ; and a person
who is kindly disposed to him gathers the shorn hair and
the clipped nails, puts them in a lump of bull’s dung, and
buries them in a cow-stable or near an aduméara tree or in
a clump of darbha grass, with the words, “Thus I hide the
sins of So-and-so.”* The Madi or Moru tribe of central”
Africa bury the parings of their nails in the ground. In
Uganda grown people throw away the clippings of their
hair, but carefully bury the parings of their nails.° The A-lur


und Gebriuche aus Schwaben, p.
509; A. Birlinger, Volksthiimliches aus
Schwaben, i. 493.

1 W. Mannhardt, Germanische My-
then, p. 630.

2 H. B. Guppy, Zhe Solomon Islands
and their Natives (London, 1887), p.
54

8 R. H. Codrington, Zhe Mela-
nestans, Pp. 203.

4 Th, Williams, 772 and the Fijians,®
i. 249.

5 J. G. Scott and J. P. Hardiman,
Gazetteer of Upper Burma and the Shan
States, part i. vol. ii. p.

6 The Zend- Avesta,  Vendtdéd,
Fargaard, xvii. (vol. i. pp. 186 sgg.,
translated by J. Darmesteter, Sacred
Books of the East, vol. iv.).


’ Grikya-Sétras, translated by H.
Oldenberg, part i. p. 57; compare
td., Pp. 303, 399, part ii. p. 62 (Sacred
Books of the East, vols. xxix., xxx.).
Compare H,. Oldenberg, Die Religion
des Veda, p. 487.

8 Grikya-Sitras, translated by H.
Pe part ii. pp. 165 s9.,
218.

® R. W. Felkin, ‘‘ Notes on the
Madi or Moru Tribeof Central Africa,”
Proceedings of the Royal Society of
Edinburgh, xii. (1882-84) p. 332.

10 Fr, Stuhlmann, Ait Emin Pascha
ins Herz von Afrika, p. 185 note.
The same thing was told me in con-
versation by the Rev. J. Roscoe,
missionary to Uganda; but I under-
stood him to mean that the hair was


Cut hair
and nails
deposited
in safe
places.


278 TABOOED THINGS CHAP.


are careful to collect and bury both their hair and nails in
safe places... The same practice prevails among many tribes
of South Africa, from a fear lest wizards should get hold of
the severed particles and work evil with them.? The Caffres
carry still further this dread of allowing any portion of them-
selves to fall into-the hands of an enemy ; for not only do
they bury their cut hair and nails in a secret spot, but when
one of them cleans the head of another he preserves the
vermin which he catches, “carefully delivering them to the
person to whom they originally appertained, supposing, ac-
cording to their theory, that as they derived their support
from the blood of the man from whom they were taken,
should they be killed by another, the blood of his neighbour
would be in his possession, thus placing in his hands the
power of some superhuman influence.”* Amongst the
Wanyoro of central Africa all cuttings of the hair and nails
are carefully stored under the bed and afterwards strewed
about among the tall grass. Similarly the Wahoko of
central Africa take pains to collect their cut hair and nails
and scatter them in the forest.2 The Asa, a branch of the
Masai, hide the clippings of their hair and the parings of
their nails or throw them away far from the kraal, lest a
sorcerer should get hold of them and make their original
owners ill by his magic.® In North Guinea the parings of the
finger-nails and the shorn locks of the head are scrupulously
concealed, lest they be converted into a charm for the
destruction of the person to whom they belong.’ For
the same reason the clipped hair and nail-parings of
chiefs in Southern Nigeria are secretly buried.® Among
the Thompson Indians of British Columbia loose hair was
buried, hidden, or thrown into the water, because, if an


not carelessly disposed of, but thrown
away in some place where it would not
easily be found.

1 Fr, Stuhlmann, of. cit, pp. 516
5q.
2 J. Macdonald, Light in Africa, p.
209 ; id., ** Manners, Customs, Super-
stitions and Religions of South African
Tribes,” Journal of the Anthropological
/nstitute, xx. (1891) p. 131.

8 A. Steedman, Wanderings and
Adventures in the Interior of Southern


Africa (London, 1835), i. 266.

4 Emin Pasha in Central Africa,
being a Collection of his Letters and
Journals (London, 1888), p. 74.

5 Fr. Stuhlmann, A/7t Emin Pascha
ins Herz von Afrika, p. 625.

6M. Merkel, Die Aasaz (Berlin,
1904), Pp. 243.

7 J. L. Wilson, Western Africa, p.
215.
5 Ch, Partridge, Cross River Natives
(London, 1905), pp. 8, 203 sg.


v DISPOSAL OF CUT HAIR AND NAILS 279


enemy got hold of it, he might bewitch the owner.’ In
Bolang Mongondo, a district of western Celebes, the first
hair cut from a child’s head is kept in a young coco-nut,
F which is commonly hung on the front of the house, under
the roof To spit upon the hair before throwing it away is
thought in some parts of Europe to be a sufficient safeguard
against its use by witches.’ Spitting as a protective charm
is well known.

Sometimes the severed hair and nails are preserved, not Cut hair
to prevent them from falling into the hands of a magician, raha
but that the owner may have them at the resurrection of the against the
body, to which some races look forward. aT


Thus the Incas 4.)
of Peru “took extreme care to preserve the nail-parings and
the hairs that were shorn off or torn out with a comb;
placing them in holes or niches in the walls; and if they fell
out, any other Indian that saw them picked them up and
put them in their places again. I very often asked different
Indians, at various times, why they did this, in order to see
what they would say, and they all replied in the same words -
saying, ‘ Know that all persons who are born must return to
life’ (they have no word to express resuscitation), ‘and the
souls must rise out of their tombs with all that belonged to
their bodies. We, therefore, in order that we may not have
to search for our hair and nails at a time when there will be
much hurry and confusion, place them in one place, that


1 James Teit, ‘‘The Thompson River
Indians of British Columbia,” AZemoir
of the American Museum of Natural
History, The Jesup North Pacific
Expedition, vol. i, part iv. (April
1900) p. 360.

2 N. P. Wilken en J. A. Schwarz,
‘¢ Allerlei over het land en volk van
Bolaang Mongondou,” MMededeelingen
van wege het Nederlandsche Zendeling-
genootschap, xi, (1867) p. 322.

3 J. V. Zingerle, Sztten, Brduche
und Meinungen des Tiroler Volkes?
(Innsbruck, 1871), §§ 176, 580;
Mélusine, 1878, col. 79; E, Monseur,
Le Fotklore Wallon, p. 91.

4 Pliny, Mat. Hist. xxviii. 35;
Theophrastus, Characters, ‘The Super-
stitious Man”; Theocritus, zd. vi. 39,
vii. 1273; Persius, Sat. ii. 31 sgg. At


the siege of Danzig in 1734, when the
old wives saw a bomb coming, they
used to spit thrice and cry, ‘‘ Fi, fi, fi,
there comes the dragon !” in the per-
suasion that this secured them against
being hit (Tettau und Temme, Déze
Volkssagen Ostpreussens, Litthauens
und Westpreussens (Berlin, 1837), p.
284). For more examples, see J. E. B.
Mayor on Juvenal, Sa¢. vii. 112; J. E.
Crombie, ‘The Saliva Superstition,”
International Folk-lore Congress, 1891,
Papers and Transactions, pp. 249 sq. 3
C. de Mensignac, Recherches ethno-
graphiques sur la salive et le crachat
(Bordeaux, 1892), pp. 50 sgg.; F. W.
Nicolson, ‘*‘ The Saliva Superstition in
Classical Literature,” Harvard Studies
in Classical Philology, viii. (1897) pp.


35 599.


Cut hair
and nails
kept
against the
resurrec-
tion.


280 TABOOED THINGS CHAP.


they may be brought together more conveniently, and,
whenever it is possible, we are also careful to spit in one
place””* In Chili this custom of stuffing the shorn hair
into holes in the wall is still observed, it being thought the
height of imprudence to throw the hair away.? Similarly
the Turks never throw away the parings of their nails, but
carefully stow them in cracks of the walls or of the boards,
in the belief that they will be needed at the resurrection?
The Armenians do not throw away their cut hair and nails
and extracted teeth, but hide them in places that are
esteemed holy, such as a crack in the church wall, a pillar
of the house, or a hollow tree. They think that all these
severed portions of themselves will be wanted at the resur-—
rection, and that he who has not stowed them away in a
safe place will have to hunt about for them on the great
day. With the same intention the Macedonians bury the ~
parings of their nails in a hole,> and devout Moslems in
Morocco hide them in a secret place.® Similarly the
Arabs of Moab bestow the parings of their nails in the crannies
of walls, where they are sanguine enough to expect to find
them when they appear before their Maker.’ Some of the
Esthonians keep the parings of their finger and toe nails
in their bosom, in order to have them at hand when they
are asked for them at the day of judgment. In a like
spirit peasants of the Vosges will sometimes bury their
extracted teeth secretly, marking the spot well so that they
may be able to walk straight to it on the resurrection day.’
In the village of Drumconrath, near Abbeyleix, in Ireland,
there used to be some old women who, having ascertained
from Scripture that the hairs of their heads were all


1 Garcilasso de la Vega, First Part
of the Royal Commentaries of the Yncas,
bk. ii. ch. 7 (vol. i, p. 127, Markham’s
translation).

2 Mélusine, 1878, coll. 583 sg.

8 The People of Turkey, by a Con-
sul’s daughter and wife, ii. 250.

4M. Abeghian, Der armenische
Volksglaube, p. 68.

6 G. F. Abbott, Macedonian Folk-
fore (Cambridge, 1903), p. 214.

© M. Quedenfelt, ‘* Aberglaube und
halbreligidse Bruderschaft bei den
Marokkanern,” Verhandlungen der


Berliner Gesellschaft fiir Anthropologie,
Ethnologie und Urgeschichte, 1886,
p. (680).

7 Le P. A. Jaussen, Coutumes des
Arabes au pays de Moab (Paris, 1908),
p- 94 note},

8 Boecler-Kreutzwald, Der Zhsten
abergliubische Gebriuche, Weisen und
Gewohnheiten, p. 139; F. J. Wiede-
mann, Aus dem innern und dussern
Leben der Ehsten, p. 491.


9L, F. Sauvé, Ze Folk-lore des
Hautes- Vosges (Paris, 1889), p. 41.


2


Vv DISPOSAL OF CUT HAIR AND NAILS 281


numbered by the Almighty, expected to have to account
for them at the day of judgment. In order to be able to
do so they stuffed the severed hair away in the thatch of
their cottages. In Abyssinia men who have had their
hands or feet cut off are careful to dry the severed limbs
over a fire and preserve them in butter for the purpose of
being buried with them in the grave. Thus they expect to
get up with all their limbs complete at the general rising.’
The pains taken by the Chinese to preserve corpses entire
and free from decay seems to rest on a firm belief in the
resurrection of the dead; hence it is natural to find their
ancient books laying down a rule that the hair, nails, and
teeth which have fallen out during life should be buried with
the dead in the coffin, or at least in the grave.® The Fors
of central Africa object to cut any one else’s nails, for
should the part cut off be lost and not delivered into its
owner’s hands, it will have to be made up to him somehow
or other after death. The parings are buried in the ground.‘

Some people burn their loose hair to save it from falling
into the hands of sorcerers. This is done by the Patagonians
and some of the Victorian tribes.° In the Upper Vosges
they say that you should never leave the clippings of your
hair and _ nails lying about, but burn them to hinder the
sorcerers from using them against you. For the same
reason Italian women either burn their loose hairs or throw
them into a place where no one is likely to look for them.’
The almost universal dread of witchcraft induces the West
African negroes, the Makololo of South Africa, and the
Tahitians to burn or bury their shorn hair. For the


1 Miss A. H. Singleton, in a letter ‘* On the Races of Patagonia,” Journal


to me, dated Rathmagle House, of the Anthropological Institute, i.
Abbeyleix, Ireland, 24th February (1872) p.197; J. Dawson, Australian
1904. Aborigines, p. 36. The Patagonians


2 Dr. Antoine Petit, in Th. Lefe-
bvre, Voyage en Abyssinie, i. 373.

3 J. J. M. de Groot, Zhe Religious
System of China, i. 342 sg. (Leyden,
1892).

+R. W. Felkin, ‘‘ Notes on the
For Tribe of Central Africa,” Proceed-
ings of the Royal Society of Edinburgh,
xiii. (1884-86) p. 230.

5 A. D’Orbigny, Voyage dans 2 Amé-
rigue méridionale, ii. 93; Lieut. Musters,


sometimes throw their hair into a river
instead of burning it.

6L. F. Sauvé, Le Folk-lore des
Hautes - Vosges, p. 170.

7 Z. Zanetti, La Medicina delle
nostre donne (Citta di Castello, 1892),
PP: 234 59.

8 A. B. Ellis, Zhe Ewe-speaking
Peoples of the Slave Coast, p. 99; Miss
Mary H. Kingsley, 7ravels in West
Africa, p. 447; R. H. Nassau, Fetich-


Cut hair
and nails
burnt to
prevent
them from
falling
into. the
hands of
sorcerers,


Cut hair
and nails
burnt.


282 TABOOED THINGS CHAP.


same reason the natives of Uap, one of the Caroline
Islands, either burn or throw into the sea the clippings
of their hair and the parings of their nails One of the
pygmies who roam through the gloomy depths of the vast
central African forests has been seen to collect carefully the
clippings of his hair-in a packet of banana leaves and keep
them till next morning, when, the camp breaking up for the
day’s march, he threw them into the hot ashes of the aban-
doned fire.* Australian aborigines of the Proserpine River,
in Queensland, burn a woman’s cut hair to prevent it from
getting into a man’s bag; for if it did, the woman would
fall ill? When an English officer had cut off a lock of hair
of a Fuegian woman, the men of her party were angry, and
one of them, taking the lock away, threw half of it into the
fire and swallowed the rest. “Immediately afterwards,
placing his hands to the fire, as if to warm them, and
looking upwards, he uttered a few words, apparently of
invocation: then, looking at us, pointed upwards, and ex-
claimed, with a tone and gesture of explanation, ‘ Pecheray,
Pecheray. After which they cut off some hair from several
of the officers who were present, and repeated a similar
ceremony.”* The Thompson Indians used to burn the
parings of their nails, because if an enemy got possession
of the parings he might bewitch the person to whom they
belonged.2 In the Tyrol many people burn their hair
lest the witches should use it to raise thunderstorms ; others
burn or bury it to prevent the birds from lining their nests
with it, which would cause the heads from which the hair
came to ache. Cut and combed-out hair is burned in


ism in West Africa (London, 1904),
p- 83; A. F. Mockler-Ferryman,
British Nigeria (London, 1902),
p. 286; David Livingstone, Narrative
of Expedition to the Zambesi, pp. 46
sq. 3 W. Ellis, Polynesian Researches,?
i. 365. In some parts of New Guinea
cut hair is destroyed for the same
reason (H. H. Romilly, 7rom my
Verandah in New Guinea, London,
1889, p. 83).

1 W. H. Furness, Zhe Jsland of
Stone Money, Uap of the Carolines
(Philadelphia and London, 1910),
Pp 137:


2 Fr. Stuhlmann, JZzt Emin Pascha
ins Hers von Afrika, p. 451.

3 'W. E. Roth, North Queensland
Ethnography, Bulletin No. § (Bris-
bane, 1903), p. 21.

4 Captain R. Fitzroy, Marrative of
the Surveying Voyages of His Majesty’s
Ships Adventureand Beagle, i, (London,
1839), pp. 313 59.

6 J. Teit, ‘The Thompson Indians
of British Columbia,” A/emoir of the
American Museum of Natural History,
The Jesup North Pacific Expedition,
vol. i, part iv. (April 1900) p. 360.

9 I, V. Zingerle, Sitten, Brdauche


v DISPOSAL OF CUT HAIR AND NAILS 283


Pomerania and sometimes in Belgium In Norway the Cut hair
parings of nails are either burned or buried, lest the elves ("4%
or the Finns should find them and make them into bullets
wherewith to shoot the cattle.” In Corea all the clippings

and combings of the hair of a whole family are carefully
preserved throughout the year and then burned in potsherds
outside the house on the evening of New Year’s Day. At

such seasons the streets of Seoul, the capital, present a weird
spectacle. They are for the most part silent and deserted,
sometimes muffled deep in snow; but through the dusk of
twilight red lights glimmer at every door, where little groups

are busy tending tiny fires whose flickering flames cast a
ruddy fitful glow on the moving figures. The burning of

the hair in these fires is thought to exclude demons from

the house for a year; but coupled with this belief may well

be, or once have been, a wish to put these relics out of the

reach of witches and wizards.

This destruction of the hair and nails plainly involves Incon-
an inconsistency of thought. The object of the destruction pana in
is avowedly to prevent these severed portions of the body cut hair
from being used by sorcerers. But the possibility of their *"4™"*
being so used depends upon the supposed sympathetic con-
nexion between them and the man from whom they were
severed. And if this sympathetic connexion still exists,
clearly these severed portions cannot be — without
injury to the man.

Before leaving this subject, on which I have ‘itdhco Hair is
dwelt too long, it may be well to call attention to the motive mets
assigned for cutting a young child’s hair in Rotti In that itisinfected
island the first hair is regarded as a danger to the child, and tne
its removal is intended to avert the danger. The reason of taboo.
this may be that as a young child is almost universally pada
supposed to be in a tabooed or dangerous state, it is neces- ‘utting is


a form of
sary, in removing the taboo,


to remove also the separable p purification,
und Meitnungen des Ttroler Volkes?


Mythen, ii. Achillets (Berlin, 1877), p.
523.

3 P. Lowell, Chosén, the Land of
the Morning Calm, a Sketch of Korea
(London, Preface dated 1885), pp. 199-
201; Mrs. Bishop, Xorea and her
Neighbours (London, 1898), ii. 55 sg.

* Above, p. 276.


(Innsbruck, 1871), p. 28, §§ 177, 179,
180,

1 U. Jahn, Hexenwesen und. Zau-
beret in Pommern (Breslau, 1886), p
15; Mélusine, 1878, col. 79; E. Mon-
seur, Le Folklore Wallon, p. 91.

2 E. H. Meyer, Jndogermanische


Hair some-
times cut
because it
is infected
with the
virus of
taboo.

In these
cases hair-
cutting is
a form of


purification.


284 TABOOED THINGS CHAP.


parts of the child’s body because they are infected, so to
say, by the virus of taboo and as such are dangerous, The
cutting of the child’s hair would thus be exactly parallel
to the destruction of the vessels which have been used by a
tabooed person.1 This view is borne out by a practice,
observed by some- Australians, of burning off part of a
woman’s hair after childbirth as well as burning every vessel
which has been used by her during her seclusion.2 Here
the burning of the woman’s hair seems plainly intended to
serve the same purpose as the burning of the vessels used by
her ; and as the vessels are burned because they are believed
to be tainted with a dangerous infection, so, we must suppose,
is also the hair. Similarly among the Latuka of central
Africa, a woman is secluded for fourteen days after the
birth of her child, and at the end of her seclusion her hair is
shaved off and burnt2 Again, we have seen that girls at
puberty are strongly infected with taboo; hence it is not
surprising to find that the Ticunas of Brazil tear out all the
hair of girls at that period# Once more, the father of twins
in Uganda is tabooed for some time after the birth of the
children, and during that time he may not dress his hair nor
cut his finger nails. This state of taboo lasts until the next
war breaks out. When the army is under orders to march,
the father of twins has the whole of his body shaved and his
nails cut. The shorn hair and the cut nails are then tied
up in a ball, which the man takes with him to the war,
together with the bark cloth he wore at the ceremonial
dances after the birth of the twins. When he has killed a
foe, he crams the ball into the dead man’s mouth, ties the


. bark cloth round the neck of the corpse, and leaves them there


on the battlefield.5 The ceremony appears to be intended
to rid the man of the taint of taboo which may be supposed
to adhere to his hair, nails, and the garment he wore,
Hence we can understand the importance attached by many


1 Above, pp. 4, 131, 139, 145, 156. 4 F, de Castelnau, Zxpédition dans
* W. Ridley, ‘* Report on Australian “es parties centrales de ? Amérique du
Languages and Traditions,” Journal Sud, v. (Paris, 1851) p. 46.
of the Anthropological Institute, ii. ® J. Roscoe, ‘* Further Notes on the
(1873) p, 268. Manners and Customs of the Baganda,”
® Fr. Stuhlmann, A/it Emin Pascha Journal of the Anthropological Insti-
ins Hers von Afrika, p. 795. tute, xxxil, (1902) p. 34.


Ke


a a


v DISPOSAL OF CUT HAIR AND NAILS 285


peoples to the first cutting of a child’s hair and the elaborate Hair some-
ceremonies by which the operation is accompanied.’ Again, ps
we can understand why a man should poll his head is infected
after a journey. For we have seen that a traveller is pr
often believed to contract a dangerous infection from rage sb
strangers, and that, therefore, on his return home he is gases hair-
obliged to submit to various purificatory ceremonies before ates
he is allowed to mingle freely with his own people? On purification
my hypothesis the polling of the hair is simply one of

these purificatory or disinfectant ceremonies. Certainly

this explanation applies to the custom as practised by the
Bechuanas, for we are expressly told that “they cleanse or

purify themselves after journeys by shaving their heads, etc.,

lest they should have contracted from strangers some evil

by witchcraft or sorcery.”* The cutting of the hair after a

vow may have the same meaning. It is a way of ridding

the man of what has been infected by the dangerous state,
whether we call it taboo, sanctity, or uncleanness (for all

these are only different expressions for the same primitive
conception), under which he laboured during the continuance

of the vow. Still more clearly does the meaning of the Hair of
practice come out in the case of mourners, who cut their Rewmes
hair and nails and use new vessels when the period of their them of the
mourning is at an end. This was done in ancient India, PeuMte”
obviously for the purpose of purifying such persons from the
dangerous influence of death and the ghost to which for a

time they had been exposed.6 Among the Bodos and
Dhimals of Assam, when a death has occurred, the family of

the deceased is reckoned unclean for three days. At the end

of that time they bathe, shave, and are sprinkled with holy


water, after which they hold the funeral feast.6 Here the act


1 See G. A. Wilken, Uber das
Haaropfer und einige andere Trauerge-
braduche bet den Volkern Indonesiens,
pp. 94 sgg. (reprinted from the Revue
Coloniale Internationale, Amsterdam,
1886-87); H. Ploss, Das Kind in
Brauch und Sitte der Volker,? i, 289
sgg.; K. Potkanski, ‘‘ Die Ceremonie
der Haarschur bei den Slaven und
Germanen,” <Azzeiger der Akademie
der Wissenschaften in Krakau, May
1896, pp. 232-251.


2 Above, p. 261.

3 Above, pp. III sgg.

4 J. Campbell, Zravels in South
Africa, Second Journey (London, 1822),
ii. 205.

5 H. Oldenberg, Die Religion des
Veda, pp. 426 sg.

6 L. F, Alfred Maury, ‘‘ Les Popu-
lations primitives du nord de l’Hindou-
stan,” Bulletin de la Société de Géo-
graphie (Paris) IVme Série, vii.
(1854) p. 197.


286 TABOOED THINGS CHAP.


Hairof of shaving must clearly be regarded as a purificatory rite, like
cut teria the bathing and sprinkling with holy water. At Hierapolis


cut to rid
them of the no man might enter the great temple of Astarte on the same


ape day on which he had seen a corpse; next day he might
enter, provided he had first purified himself. But the kinsmen
of the deceased were not allowed to set foot in the sanctuary
for thirty days after the death, and before doing so they had
to shave their heads. At Agweh, on the Slave Coast of
West Africa, widows and widowers at the end of their
period of mourning wash themselves, shave their heads, pare
their nails, and put on new cloths; and the old cloths,
the shorn hair, and the nail-parings are all burnt.2. The :
Kayans of Borneo are not allowed to cut their hair or shave
their temples during the period of mourning; but as soon
as the mourning is ended by the ceremony of bringing home
a newly severed human head, the barber’s knife is kept busy
enough. As each man leaves the barber’s hands, he gathers
up the shorn locks and spitting on them murmurs a prayer
to the evil spirits not to harm him. He then blows the
hair out of the verandah of the house*® Among the
Wajagga of East Africa mourners shear their hair under a
fruit-bearing banana-tree and lay their shorn locks at the .
foot of the tree. When the fruit of the tree is ripe, they
brew beer with it and invite all the mourners to partake of
it, saying, “ Come and drink the beer of those hair-bananas.” 4
The tribes of British Central Africa destroy the house in
which a man has died, and on the day when this is done the
mourners have their heads shaved and bury the shorn hair on
the site of the house ; the Atonga burn it in a new fire made
by the rubbing of two sticks. When an Akikuyu woman has,
in accordance with custom, exposed her misshapen or pre-
maturely born infant in the wood for the hyaenas to devour,
she is shaved on her return by an old woman and given a
magic potion to drink ; after which she is regarded as-clean.°


1 Lucian, De dea Syria, 53. Ixxxix. (1906) p. 198.

2A, B. Ellis, Zhe Hwe-speaking & Miss A, Werner, Zhe Natives of
Peoples of the Slave Coast, p. 160. British Central Africa (London, 1906),

3 W. H. Furness, Fo/k-lore in Bor- pp. 165, 166, 167.
neo (Wallingford, Pennsylvania, 1899 ; ® J. M. Hildebrandt, ‘ Ethno-
privately printed), p. 28. graphische Notizen tiber Wakamba und


4 B, Gutmann, ‘ Trauer und Be- ihre Nachbarn,” Zed¢schrift fiir Bthno-
gvlibnissitten der Wadschagga,” Globus, dogie, x. (1878) p. 395. Children who


v DISPOSAL OF CUT HAIR AND NAILS 287


Similarly at some Hindoo places of pilgrimage on the
banks of rivers men who have committed great crimes or
are troubled by uneasy consciences have every hair shaved
off by professional barbers before they plunge into the sacred
stream, from which “they emerge new creatures, with all the
accumulated guilt of a long life effaced.”* The matricide
Orestes is said to have polled his hair after appeasing the
angry Furies of his murdered mother.’


§ 9. Spitile tabooed


The same fear of witchcraft which has led so many People
people to hide or destroy their loose hair and nails has cen Na
induced other or the same people to treat their spittle in a by means
like fashion. For on the principles of sympathetic magic pose
the spittle is part of the man, and whatever is done to it will
have a corresponding effect on him. A Chilote Indian, who
has gathered up the,spittle of an enemy, will put it in a
potato, and hang the potato in the smoke, uttering certain
spells as he does so in the belief that his foe will waste away
as the potato dries in the smoke. Or he will put the spittle
in a frog and throw the animal into an inaccessible, un-
navigable river, which will make the victim quake and shake
with ague.2 When a Cherokee sorcerer desires to destroy a
man, he gathers up his victim’s spittle on a stick and puts
it in a joint of wild parsnip, together with seven earthworms
beaten to a paste and several splinters from a tree which has
been struck by lightning. He then goes into the forest,
digs a hole at the foot of a tree which has been struck by
lightning, and deposits in the hole the joint of wild parsnip


are born in an unusual position, the of .the purifier preparing to cut


second born of twins, and children
whose upper teeth appear before the
lower, are similarly exposed by the
Akikuyu. The mother is regarded as
unclean, not so much because she has
exposed, as because she has given
birth to such a child.

1 Monier Williams, Religious
Thought and Life in India, p. 375.

2 Strabo, xii. 2. 3, p. 5353; Pausanias,
viii. 34. 3. In two paintings on Greek
vases we see Apollo in his character


off the hair of Orestes. See Monu-
mentt ineditt, 1847, pl. 48; Annali
dell? Instituto adi  Corrispondenza
Archeologica, 1847, pl. x. ; Archaco-
logische Zeitung, 1860, pll. cxxxvii.
exxxvili.; L. Stephani, in Compte
rendu de la Commission archéolo-
gique (St. Petersburg), 1863, pp.
271 Sq. co

3 C. Martin, ‘‘Uber die Einge-
borenen von Chiloe,” Zeztschrift fiir
Ethnologie, ix. (1877) pp. 177 sg.


288 TABOOED THINGS CHAP.


Further, he lays seven yellow stones


People with its contents.
may be a in the hole, then fills in the earth, and makes a fire over the
by means spot to destroy all traces of his work. If the ceremony has
bois been properly carried out, the man whose spittle has thus
been treated begins to feel ill at once; his soul shrivels up
and dwindles ; and within seven days he is a dead man.’
In the East Indian island of Siaoo or Siauw, one of the
Sangi group, there are witches who by means of hellish
charms compounded from the roots of plants can change
their shape and bring sickness and misfortune on other folk.
These hags also crawl under the houses, which are raised
above the ground on posts, and there gathering up the spittle
of the inmates cause them -to fall ill? If a Wotjobaluk
sorcerer cannot get the hair of his foe, a shred of his
rug, or something else that belongs to the man, he will
watch till he sees him spit, when he will carefully pick up
the spittle with a stick and use it for the destruction of
the careless spitter.2 The natives of Urewera, a district in
the north island of New Zealand, enjoyed a high reputation
for their skill in magic. It was said that they made use of
people’s spittle to bewitch them. Hence visitors were careful
to conceal their spittle, lest they should furnish these wizards
Hence witha handle for working them harm.* Similarly among some
os arias tribes of South Africa no man will spit when an enemy is
their spittle near, lest his foe should find the spittle and give it to a wizard,
hon who would then mix it with magical ingredients so as to injure
falling the person from whom it fell. Even in a man’s own house
into the ° ° * : §o sole
hands of his saliva is carefully swept away and obliterated for a similar


sorcerers. reason.” For a like reason, no doubt, the natives of the


Marianne Islands use great precautions in spitting and
take care never to expectorate near somebody else’s house.°


1 J. Mooney, ‘* Sacred Formulas of
the Cherokees,” Seventh Annual Re-
port of the Bureau of Ethnology
(Washington, 1891), pp. 392 s@.

2 B.C. A. J. van Dinter, “ Eenige
geographische en ethnographische


pological Institute, xvi. (1887) p. 27 5
td., Native Tribes of South-east Aus-
tralia, p. 365.

4 FE. Dieffenbach, Zravels in New
Zealand (London, 1843), ii. 59.

5 Rev, J. Macdonald, Light in Africa,


aanteekeningen betreffende het eiland
Siaoe,” 7ijdschrift voor Indische Taal-
Land- en Volkenkunde, xii, (1899) p.
381.

% A, W. Howitt, ‘*On Australian
Medicine-men,” Journal of the Anthro-


p. 209; #d., in Journal of the Anthro-
pological Institute, xx. (1891) p. 131.

6 C. le Gobin, Histoire des Isles
Marianes (Paris, 1700), p. 52. The
writer confesses his ignorance of the
reason of the custom. -


v SPITTLE TABOOED 289


Negroes of Senegal, the Bissagos Archipelago, and some
of the West Indian Islands, such as Guadeloupe and
Martinique, are also careful to efface their spittle by press-
ing it into the ground with their feet, lest a sorcerer should
use it to their hurt.’ Natives of Astrolabe Bay, in German
New Guinea, wipe out their spittle for the same reason ;* anda
like dread of sorcery prevents some natives of German New
Guinea from spitting on the ground in presence of others.’
The Telugus say that if a man, rinsing his teeth with char-
coal in the mornings, spits on the road and somebody else
treads on his spittle, the spitter will be laid up with a sharp
attack of fever for two or three days. Hence all who wish
to avoid the ailment should at’once efface their spittle by
sprinkling water on it.‘

If common folk are thus cautious, it is natural that Precau-
kings and chiefs should be doubly so. In the Sandwich pager
Islands chiefs were attended by a confidential servant and kings
bearing a portable spittoon, and the deposit was care- sek apt
fully buried every morning to put it out of the reach of from being
sorcerers. On the Slave Coast of Africa, for the same cheesy
reason, whenever a king or chief expectorates, the saliva is magicians.
scrupulously gathered up and hidden or buried.° The same
precautions are taken for the same reason with the spittle
of the chief of Tabali in Southern Nigeria.’ At Bule-
bane, in Senegambia, a French traveller observed a captive
engaged, with an air of great importance, in covering over
with sand all the spittle that fell from the lips of a native
dignitary ; the man used a small stick for the purpose.®
Page-boys, who carry tails of elephants, hasten to sweep up
or cover with sand the spittle of the king of Ashantee ;°


an attendant used to perform


1C. de Mensignac, Recherches
ethnographigues sur la salive et le
crachat (Bordeaux, 1892), pp. 48
59.
2 Vahness, reported by F. von
Luschan, in Verhandlungen der Berliner
Gesellschaft fiir Anthropologie, Ethno-
logie und Urgeschichte, 1900, p.
(416).

3K. Vetter, Komm heriiber und
hilf uns! iii, (Barmen, 1898) pp.
9 sq.

PT. I


a similar service for the king


* Indian Antiquary, xxviii. (1899)
pp. 83 59.

5 W. Ellis, Polynesian Researches,?
i. 365.

6 A. B. Ellis, Zhe Ewe - speaking
Peoples of the Slave Coast, p. 99.

7 C. Partridge, Cross River Natives
(London, 1905), p. 8.

8 A. Raffenel, Voyage dans 1’ Afrigue
occidentale (Paris, 1846), p. 338.

®C. de Mensignac, of. ctt. “p.
48.


U


290 TABOOED THINGS CHAP.
Spittle of of Congo;' and a custom of the same sort prevails or used
ron to prevail at the court of the Muata Jamwo in the interior
guarded of Angola.? In Yap, one of the Caroline Islands, there are
eta two great wizards, the head of all the magicians, whose
exalted dignity compels them to lead a very strict life.
They may eat fruit only from plants or trees which are
grown specially for them. When one of them goes abroad
the other must stay at home, for if they were to meet each
other on the road, some direful calamity would surely follow.
Though they may not smoke tobacco, they-are allowed to
chew a quid of betel; but that which they expectorate is
carefully gathered up, carried away, and burned in a special
manner, lest any evil-disposed person should get possession
of the spittle and do their reverences a mischief by uttering
a curse over it.2 Among the Guaycurus and Payaguas of
Brazil, when a chief spat, the persons about him received his
saliva on their hands,‘ probably in order to prevent it from
being misused by magicians.
Use of The magical use to which spittle may be put marks it
Pirie a out, like blood or nail-parings, as a suitable material basis
covenant. for a covenant, since by exchanging their saliva the


covenanting parties give each other a guarantee of good
faith. If either of them afterwards forswears himself, the
other can punish his perfidy by a magical treatment of the
perjurer’s spittle which he has in his custody. Thus when
the Wajagga of East Africa desire to make a covenant,
the two parties will sometimes sit down with a bowl of
milk or beer between them, and after uttering an incantation
over the beverage they each take a mouthful of the milk or
beer and spit it into the other’s mouth. In urgent cases,
when there is no time to stand on ceremony, the two will
simply spit into each other’s mouth, which seals the covenant
just as well.


' Mission Evangelica al reyno de
Congo por la serafica religion de los
Capuchinos (Madrid, 1649), p. 70
verso,

2 R. Andree, Zthnographische Par-
allelen und Vergleiche, Neue Folge
(Leipsic, 1889), p. 13.


3 F, W. Christian, Zhe Caroline


Tslands
S


(London, 1899), pp. 289
4 R. Southey, Héstory of Brasil, i?
(London, 1822) pp. 127, 138.

§ J, Raum, ‘Blut und Speichel-
biinde bei den Wadschagga,” Archiv
Siir Religionswissenschaft, x. (1907)


pp. 290 sg.


v FOODS TABOOED 291


§ 10. Foods tabooed


As might have been expected, the superstitions of the Certain
savage cluster thick about the subject of food; and he et
abstains from eating many animals and plants, wholesome sacred
enough in themselves, which for one reason or another oe
he fancies would prove dangerous or fatal to the eater, kings and
Examples of such abstinence are too familiar and far too ee
numerous to quote. Butif the ordinary man is thus deterred
by superstitious fear from partaking of various foods, the
restraints of this kind which are laid upon sacred or tabooed
persons, such as kings and priests, are still more numerous
and stringent. We have already seen that the Flamen
Dialis was forbidden to eat or even name several plants
and animals, and that the flesh diet of Egyptian kings was
restricted to veal and goose.’ In antiquity many priests
and many kings of barbarous peoples abstained wholly
from a flesh diet.2 The Gangas or fetish priests of the
Loango Coast are forbidden to eat or even see a variety
of animals and fish, in consequence of which their
flesh diet is extremely limited; often they live only on
herbs and roots, though they may drink fresh blood. The
heir to the throne of Loango is forbidden from infancy to
eat pork ; from early childhood he is interdicted the use of
the cola fruit in company; at puberty he is taught by a
priest not to partake of fowls except such as he has himself
killed and cooked ; and so the number of taboos goes on
increasing with his years In Fernando Po the king after
installation is forbidden to eat cocco (arum acaule), deer, and
porcupine, which are the ordinary foods of the people.

The head chief of the Masai may eat nothing but milk,
honey, and the roasted livers of goats; for if he partook of
any other food he would lose his power of soothsaying and
of compounding charms.° The diet of the king of Unyoro


1 Above, pp. 13 sg. Kings, vol. i. pp. 381 sgq.

2 Porphyry, De abstinentia, iii. 18. 4 O.Dapper, Description del Afrique,

3 A. Bastian, Die deutsche Expedi-  p. 336.
tion an der Loango-Kiiste,ii. 170. The 6 T. J. Hutchinson, Jmpressions of
blood may perhaps be drunk by them Western Africa (London, 1858), p. 198.
as a medium of inspiration. See . © M. Merker, Die Masai (Berlin,


The Magic Art and the Evolution of 1904), p. 21.


Certain
foods
tabooed

to kings
and chiefs.


292 TABOOED THINGS CHAP,


in Central Africa was strictly regulated by immemorial
custom. He might never eat vegetables, but must live on
milk and beef. Mutton he might not touch. The beef he
ate must be that of young animals not more than one year
old, and it must be spitted and roasted before a wood fire.
But he might not.drink milk and eat beef at the same meal.
He drank milk thrice a day in the dairy, and the milk
was always drawn from a sacred herd which was kept for
his exclusive use. Nine cows, neither more nor less, were
daily brought from pasture to the royal enclosure to be
milked for the king. The herding and the milking of the
sacred animals were performed according to certain rules
prescribed by ancient custom.! Amongst the Murrams of
Manipur (a district of eastern India, on the border of Burma)
“there are many prohibitions in regard to the food, both animal
and vegetable, which the chief should eat, and the Murrams
say the chief’s post must be a very uncomfortable one.” ?
Among the hill tribes of Manipur the scale of diet allowed
by custom to the ghennabura or religious head of a village
is always extremely limited. The savoury dog, the tomato,
the murghi, are forbidden to him. If a man in one of
these tribes is wealthy enough to feast his whole village and
to erect a memorial stone, he is entitled to become subject
to the same self-denying ordinances as the ghennabura. He
wears the same special clothes, and for the space of a year
at least he may not use a drinking horn, but must drink
from a bamboo cup.2 Among the Karennis or Red Karens
of Burma a chief attains his position not by hereditary right
but in virtue of the observance of taboo. He must abstain
from rice and liquor. His mother too must have eschewed
these things and lived only on yams and potatoes while she
was with child. During that time she might neither eat
meat nor drink water from a common well ; and in order to
be duly qualified for a chiefship her son must continue these
habits.“ Among the Pshaws and Chewsurs of the Caucasus,


1 J. G. Frazer, Zotemism and  pological Institute, xvi. (1887) p. 360.
Exogamy, ii. 526 sqq., from informa- 8 T. C, Hodson, ‘‘ The Native Tribes
tion furnished by the Rev. J. Roscoe. of Manipur,” Journal of the Anthro-

2G. Watt (quoting Col. W. J.  pological Institute, xxxi. (1901) p. 306.
M‘Culloch), ‘The Aboriginal Tribes 4 Indian Antiquary, xxi, (1892)
of Manipur,” in Journal of the Anthro- pp. 317 5q.3 (Sir) J. G. Scott and J. P.


v FOODS TABOOED 293


whose nominal Christianity has degenerated into superstition Certain
and polytheism, there is an annual office which entails a [0%
number of taboos on the holder or dasturi, as he is called. to sacred
He must live the whole year in the temple, without going to °°”
his house or visiting his wife; indeed he may not speak to
any one, except the priests, for fear of defiling himself. Once
a week he must bathe in the river, whatever the weather
may be, using for the purpose a ladder on which no one else
may set foot. His only nourishment is bread and water.
In the temple he superintends the brewing of the beer for
the festivals. In the village of Tomil, in Yap, one of the
Caroline Islands, the year consists of twenty-four months,
and there are five men who for a hundred days of the year
may eat only fish and taro, may not chew betel, and must
observe strict continence. The reason assigned by them for
submitting to these restraints is that if they did not act thus
the immature girls would attain to puberty too soon.

To explain the ultimate reason why any particular food
is prohibited to a whole tribe or to certain of its members
would commonly require a far more intimate knowledge of
the history and beliefs of the tribe than we possess. The
general motive of such prohibitions is doubtless the same
which underlies the whole taboo system, namely, the
conservation of the tribe and the individual.


§ 11. Knots and Rings tabooed


We have seen that among the many taboos which the Knots and
Flamen Dialis at Rome had to observe, there was one that ee sc
forbade him to have a knot on any part of his garments, certain
and another that obliged him to wear no ring unless it were pes
broken.’ In like manner Moslem pilgrims to Mecca are in


a state of sanctity or taboo and may wear on their persons


Hardiman, Gazetteer of Upper Burma
and the Shan States, part ii. vol. i.
p. 308.

1 “Die Pschawen und Chewsuren
im Kaukasus,” Zeztschrift fiir allge-
meine Erdkunde, ii. (1857) p. 76.

2 A. Senfft, “ Ethnographische Bei-
triage iiber die Karolineninsel Yap,”


Petermanns Mitteilungen, xix. (1903)
p- 54. In Gall, another village of
the same island, the people grow
bananas for sale, but will not eat them
themselves, fearing that if they did so
the women of the village would be
barren (zdzd.).

3 Aulus Gellius, x. 15. 6and9. See
above, p. 13.


Knots
loosed and
locks un-
locked at
childbirth
to facilitate
delivery.


294 TABOOED THINGS CHAP,


neither knots nor rings.’ These rules are probably of kindred
significance, and may conveniently be considered together.
To begin with knots, many people in different parts of the
world entertain a strong objection to having any knot about
their person at certain critical seasons, particularly childbirth,
marriage, and death, Thus among the Saxons of Transyl-
vania, when a woman is in travail all knots on her garments
are untied, because it is believed that this will facilitate her
delivery, and with the same intention all the locks in the
house, whether on doors or boxes, are unlocked.2. The
Lapps think that a lying-in woman should have no knot on
her garments, because a knot would have the effect of
making the delivery difficult and painful.2 In ancient India
it was a rule to untie all knots in a house at the moment of
childbirth.4 Roman religion required that women who took
part in the rites of Juno Lucina, the goddess of childbirth,
should have no knot tied on their persons. In the East
Indies this superstition is extended to the whole time of
pregnancy ; the people believe that if a pregnant woman
were to tie knots, or braid, or make anything fast, the child
would thereby be constricted or the woman would herself be
“tied up” when her time came. Nay, some of them enforce
the observance of the rule on the father as well as the mother
of the unborn child. Among the Sea Dyaks neither of the
parents may bind up anything with string or make anything
fast during the wife’s pregnancy.’ Among the Land Dyaks
the husband of the expectant mother is bound to refrain from
tying things together with rattans until after her delivery.®


1 E. Doutté, Magie et religion dans
PAprage du Nord, pp. 87 sq.

J. Hillner, Volksthiimlicher Brauch
und Glaube bei Geburt und Taufe im
Siebenbiirger Sachsenlande, p. 15. This
tractate (of which I possess a copy)
appears to be a programme of the High
School (Gymnasium) at Schiissburg in
Transylvania for the school year 1876-
1877.

3 C, Leemius, De Lapponibus Fin-
marchiae corumque lingua, vita, et
religione pristina commentatio (Copen-
hagen, 1767), p. 494.

4 W. Caland, A/tindisches Zauber-
ritual (Amsterdam, 1900), p, 108,


5 Servius on Virgil, den. iii. 518.

8 J. Kreemer, ‘‘ Hoe de Javaan zijne
zieken verzorgt,” Mededeelingen van
wege het Nederlandsche Zendelingge-
nootschap, xxxvi, (1892) p. I143
C. M. Pleyte, ‘ Plechtigheden en
gebruiken uit den cyclus van het
familienleven der volken van den In-
dischen Archipel,” Bijdragen tot de
Taal- Land- en Volkenkunde van
Nederlandsch-/ndié, xli, (1892) p. 586.

TH. Ling Roth, Zhe Natives of
Sarawak and British North Borneo,
i, 98.

8 Spenser St. John, Life in the
Forests of the Far East, i. 170.


v KNOTS AND RINGS TABOOED 295


In the Toumbuluh tribe of North Celebes a ceremony
is performed in the fourth or fifth month of a woman’s
pregnancy, and after it her husband is forbidden, among
many other things, to tie any fast knots and to sit with
his legs crossed over each other.’ In the Kaitish tribe
of central Australia the father of a newborn child goes out
into the scrub for three days, away from his camp, leaving
his girdle and arm-bands behind him, so that he has nothing
tied tightly round any part of his body. This freedom from
constriction is supposed to benefit his wife.’

In all these cases the idea seems to be that the tying of On the
a knot would, as they say in the East Indies, “tie up” the PrpeciPles
woman, in other words, impede and perhaps prevent her pathic
delivery, or delay her convalescence after the birth. On the po...
principles of homoeopathic or imitative magic the physical impedi-
obstacle or impediment of a knot on a cord would panne Hee
create a corresponding obstacle or impediment in the oe ae:
body of the woman. That this is really the explana- prevent
tion of the rule appears from a custom observed by the Pér eta
Hos of Togoland in West Africa at a difficult birth. the child to
When a woman is in hard labour and cannot bring forth, ¢ >"
they call in a magician to her aid. He looks at her and
says, “ The child is bound in the womb, that is why she
cannot be delivered.” On the entreaties of her female
relations he then promises to loose the bond so that she
may bring forth. For that purpose he orders them to
fetch a tough creeper from the forest, and with it he binds
the hands and feet of the sufferer on her back. Then
he takes a knife and calls out the woman’s name, and
when she answers he cuts through the creeper with a
knife, saying, “I cut through to-day thy bonds and thy
child’s bonds.” After that he chops up the creeper small,
puts the bits in a vessel of water, and bathes the woman
with the water.® Here the cutting of the creeper with
which the woman’s hands and feet are bound is a simple


piece of homoeopathic or imitative magic: by releasing her
1 J. G. F, Riedel, ‘* Alte Gebriiuche (1895) pp. 95 sg.


bei Heirathen, Geburt und Sterbefallen 2 Spencer and Gillen, Northern
bei dem Toumbuluh-Stamm in der 7Z7rides of Central Australia, pp. 606 sg.
Minahasa (Nord Selebes),” /n¢erva- 3 J. Spieth, Die Ewe-Stimme, p.


tionales Archiv fiir Ethnographie, viii, 692.


All locks,
doors,
drawers,
windows,
etc, opened
in order to
facilitate
childbirth.


296 TABOOED THINGS CHAP.


limbs from their bonds the magician imagines that he
simultaneously releases the child in her womb from the
trammels which impede its birth. For a similar reason, no
doubt, among the same people a priest ties up the limbs
of a pregnant woman with grass and then unties the knots,
saying, “I will now open you.” After that the woman has
to partake of some maize-porridge in which a ring made
of a magic cord had been previously placed by the priest.’
The intention of this ceremony is probably, on the principles
of homoeopathic magic, to ensure for the woman an easy
delivery by releasing her from the bonds of grass. The
same train of thought underlies a practice observed by
some peoples of opening all locks, doors, and so on,
while a birth is taking place in the house. We have
seen that at such a time the Germans of Transylvania
open all the locks, and the same thing is done also in
Voigtland and Mecklenburg. In north-western Argyll-
shire superstitious people used to open every lock in
the house at childbirth® The old Roman custom of
presenting women with a key as a symbol of an easy
delivery * perhaps points to the observance of a similar
custom. In the island of Salsette near Bombay, when a
woman is in hard labour, all locks of doors or drawers are
opened with a key to facilitate her delivery.® Among the
Mandelings of Sumatra the lids of all chests, boxes, pans and
so forth are opened ; and if this does not produce the desired
effect, the anxious husband has to strike the projecting ends
of some of the house-beams in order to loosen them; for
they think that “everything must be open and loose to
facilitate the delivery.”® At a difficult birth the Battas
of Sumatra make a search through the possessions of
husband and wife and untie everything that is tied up ina


1 J. Spieth, Die Hwe-Stimme, pp.
433 59.

2 J. A. E, Kohler, Volksbrauch,
Aberglauben, Sagen und andre alte
Uberlicferungen im Voigtlande, pp.
435 59.3; A. Wuttke, Der deutsche
Volksaberglaube,* p. 355, § 574.

5 J. G, Campbell, Superstitions of
the Highlands and Islands of Scotland,
p. 37, note I,

* Festus, p. 56, ed, C, O, Miiller,


6G, F, D’Penha, ‘Superstitions
and Customs in Salsette,” Jndian
sake bopak xxviii, (1899) p. 115.
®H. Ris, ‘De  onderafdeeling
Klein Mandailing Oeloe en Pahantan
en hare Bevolking,” Bijdragen tot de
Taal- Land- en Volkenkunde van
Nederlandsch-Indié, x\vi, (1896) p.
503. Compare A, L. van Hasselt,
Volksbeschrijving van Midden Sumatra,
p. 266,


Vv KNOTS AND RINGS TABOOED 297


bundle.’ In some parts of Java, when a woman is in travail,
everything in the house that was shut is opened, in order
that the birth may not be impeded; not only are doors
opened and the lids of chests, boxes, rice-pots, and water-
buts lifted up, but even swords are unsheathed and spears
drawn out of their cases.” Customs of the same sort
are practised with the same intention in other parts of
the East Indies. In Chittagong, when a woman cannot
bring her child to the birth, the midwife gives orders to
throw all doors and windows wide open, to uncork all bottles,
to remove the bungs from all casks, to unloose the cows in
the stall, the horses in the stable, the watchdog in his
kennel, to set free sheep, fowls, ducks, and so forth. This
universal liberty accorded to the animals and even to
inanimate things is, according to the people, an infallible
means of ensuring the woman’s delivery and allowing the
babe to be born. At the moment of childbirth the Chams
of Cochin-China hasten to open the stall of the buffaloes and
to unyoke the plough, doubtless with the intention of aiding
the woman in travail, though the writer who reports the
custom is unable to explain it.» Among the Singhalese, a
few hours before a birth is expected to take place, all the
cupboards in the house are unlocked with the express
purpose of facilitating the delivery.2 In the island of
Saghalien, when a woman is in labour, her husband undoes


everything that can be undone.


1 J. H. Meerwaldt, ‘‘ Gebruiken
der Bataks in het maatschappelijk
leven,” Mededeelingen van wege het
Nederlandsche  Zendelinggenootschap,
xlix. (1905) p. 117.

2 H. Kfern], ‘‘ Bijgeloof onder de
inlanders in den Oosthoek van Java,”
Tijdschrift voor Indische Taal- Land-
en Volkenkunde, xxvi, (1880) 310; J.
Kreemer, “ Hoe de Javaan zijne zieken
verzorgt,” Mededeelingen van wege het
Nederlandsche Zendelinggenootschap,
xxxvi, (1892) pp. 120, 124; D.
Louwerier, ‘ Bijgeloovige gebruiken,
die door de Javanen worden in acht
genomen bij de verzorging en opvoed-
ing hunner kinderen,” A/ededeelingen
van wege het Nederlandsche Zendeling-
genootschap, xlix. (1905) p. 253.


He loosens the plaits of his


3 A. W. P. V. Pistorius, Studien
over de inlandsche hutshouding in de
Padangsche Bovenlanden (Zalt-Bommel,
1871), pp. 55 sg.; A. L. van Hasselt,
Volksbeschrijving van Midden-Sumatra
(Leyden, 1882), p. 266; J. G. F.
Riedel, De slutk- en kroesharige rassen
tusschen Selebes en Papua (the Hague,
1886), pp. 135, 207, 325.

4 Th, Bérengier, ‘‘ Croyances super-
stitieuses dans le pays de Chittagong,”
Missions Catholigues, xiii. (1881) p.
515.

6 Damien Grangeon, “Les Chams
et leurs superstitions,” AZsstons Catho-
ligues, xxviii, (1896) p. 93.

6 A. A, Perera, ‘‘ Glimpses of Sing-
halese Social Life,” /zadtan Antiguary,
xxxi, (1902) p. 378.


On the
principles
of homoeo-
pathic
magic the
crossing of
the legs

is also
thought to
impede
childbirth
and other
things.


298 TABOOED THINGS CHAP.


hair and the laces of his shoes. Then he unties whatever is
tied in the house or its vicinity. In the courtyard he takes
the axe out of the log in which it is stuck ; he unfastens
the boat, if it is moored to a tree, he withdraws the
cartridges from his gun, and the arrows from his crossbow.’
In Bilaspore a woman’s hair is never allowed to remain
knotted while she is in the act of giving birth to a child”?
Among some modern Jews of Roumania it is customary for
the unmarried girls of a household to unbraid their hair and
let it hang loose on their shoulders while a woman is in hard
labour in the house.

Again, we have seen that a Toumbuluh man abstains
not only from tying knots, but also from sitting with
crossed legs during his wife’s pregnancy. The train of
thought is the same in both cases. Whether you cross
threads in tying a knot, or only cross your legs in sitting
at your ease, you are equally, on the principles of homoeo-
pathic magic, crossing or thwarting the free course of
things, and your action cannot but check and impede
whatever may be going forward in your neighbourhood.
Of this important truth the Romans were fully aware. To
sit beside a pregnant woman or a patient under medical
treatment with clasped hands, says the grave Pliny, is
to cast a malignant spell over the person, and it is worse
still if you nurse your leg or legs with your clasped hands,
or lay one leg over the other. Such postures were regarded
by the old Romans as a let and hindrance to business of
every sort, and at a council of war or a meeting of magis-
trates, at prayers and sacrifices, no man was_ suffered to
cross his legs or clasp his hands.* The stock instance of
the dreadful consequences that might flow from doing one
or the other was that of Alcmena, who travailed with
Hercules for seven days and seven nights, because the
goddess Lucina sat in front of the house with clasped hands


1 B. Pilsudski, ‘*Schwangerschaft, A/agic (London, 1908), p. 169.


Hist. xxviii.


59.


Entbindung und Fehlgeburt bei den
Bewohnern der Insel Sachalin,” An-
thropos, V. (1910) p. 759.

2 E. M. Gordon, /ndian Folk Tales
(London, 1908), p. 39.


5 RK. Campbell Thompson, Semitic


4 Pliny, az,
Compare Hippocrates, De mordo sacro,
pnbe wbda ert modt Exew, wnde xetpa emt
xeipl: radra yap rdvra Kkwdtpara elvan
(vol. i, p. 589, ed, Kiihn, Leipsie,
1825, quoted by E, Rohde, Psyche,
ii, 76 note),


v KNOTS AND RINGS TABOOED 299


and crossed legs, and the child could not be born until the
goddess had been beguiled into changing her attitude.’ It
is a Bulgarian superstition that if a pregnant woman is in
the habit of sitting with crossed legs, she will suffer much
in childbed.? In some. parts of Bavaria, when conversation
comes to a standstill and silence ensues, they say, “ Surely
somebody has crossed his legs.” ®

The magical effect of knots in trammelling and obstruct- Knots are
ing human activity was believed to be manifested at parc
marriage not less than at birth. During the Middle Ages, the con-
and down to the eighteenth century, it seems to have been tion of
commonly held in Europe that the consummation of marriage.
marriage could be prevented by any one who, while the
wedding ceremony was taking place, either locked a lock or
tied a knot in a cord, and then threw the lock or the cord
away. The lock or the knotted cord had to be flung into
water ; and until it had been found and unlocked, or untied,
no real union of the married pair was possible.‘ Hence it
was a grave offence, not only to cast such a spell, but also
to steal or make away with the material instrument of it,
whether lock or knotted cord. In the year 1718 the par-
liament of Bordeaux sentenced some one to be burned alive
for having spread desolation through a whole family by means
of knotted cords ; and in 1705 two persons were condemned
to death in Scotland for stealing certain charmed knots which
a woman had made, in order thereby to mar the wedded
happiness of Spalding of Ashintilly.2 The belief in the effi-
cacy of these charms appears to have lingered in the Highlands
of Perthshire down to the end of the eighteenth century, for
at that time it was still customary in the beautiful parish of
Logierait, between the river Tummel and the river Tay, to
unloose carefully every knot in the clothes of the bride and


1 Ovid, Metam, ix. 285 sgg. An-
toninus Liberalis, quoting Nicander,
says it was the Fates and Ilithyia who
impeded the birth of Hercules, but
though he says they clasped their
hands, he does not say that they
crossed their legs (7vansform. 29).
Compare Pausanias, ix. II. 3.

2 A. Strausz, Die Bulgaren (Leipsic,
1898), p. 293.

3 F. Panzer, Bectrag zur deutschen


Mythologie, ii. 303.

4 J. Grimm, Deutsche Mythologie,*
ii. 897, 983; J. Brand, Popular Antt-
guities, iii. 299; J. G. Dalyell, Darker
Superstitions of Scotland, pp. 302,
306 sg.; B. Souché, Croyances, pré-
sages et traditions diverses, p. 16;
J. G. Bourke, in Ninth Annual Report
of the Bureau of Ethnology (Washing-
ton, 1892), p. 567.

§ J. G. Dalyell, Ace.


Knots
loosed

in the
costume
of bride
and bride-
groom in
order to
ensure the
consum-
mation

of the
matriage.


Knots
tied by
enchanters
to render
the bride-
groom
impotent.


300 TABOOED THINGS CHAP.


bridegroom before the celebration of the marriage ceremony.
When the ceremony was over, and the bridal party had left
the church, the bridegroom immediately retired one way
with some young men to tie the knots that had been loosed
a little before; and the bride in. like manner withdrew
somewhere else to adjust the disorder of her dress.’ In


some parts of the Highlands it was deemed enough that


the bridegroom’s left shoe should be without buckle or
latchet, “to prevent witches from depriving him, on the


nuptial night, of the power of loosening the virgin zone.”? —


We meet with the same superstition and the same custom
at the present day in Syria. The persons who help a
Syrian bridegroom to don his wedding garments take care
that no knot is tied on them and no button buttoned, for
they believe that a button buttoned or a knot tied would
put it within the power of his enemies to deprive him of his
nuptial rights by magical means.* In Lesbos the malignant
person who would thus injure a bridegroom on his wedding
day ties a thread to a bush, while he utters imprecations ;
but the bridegroom can defeat the spell by wearing at
his girdle a piece of an old net or of an old mantilla
belonging to the bride in which knots have been tied.*
The fear of such charms is diffused all over North Africa
at the present day. To render a bridegroom impotent the
enchanter has only to tie a knot in a handkerchief which he
had previously placed quietly on some part of the bride-
groom’s body when he was mounted on horseback ready to
fetch his bride: so long as the knot in the handkerchief


1 Rev. Dr. Th. Bisset, in Sir John
Sinclair’s Statistical Account of Scotland,
v. (Edinburgh, 1793) p. 83. In his ac-
count of the second tour which he made
in Scotland in the summer of 1772, Pen-
nant says that ‘the precaution of loosen-
ing every knot about the new-joined
pair is strictly observed” (Pinkerton’s
Voyages and Travels, iii. 382), He
is here speaking particularly of the
Perthshire Highlands,

2 Pennant, “Tour in Scotland,”
Pinkerton’s Voyages and Travels, iii.
91. However, at a marriage in the
island of Skye, the same traveller ob-
served that ‘*the bridegroom put all


the powers of magic to defiance, for
he was married with both shoes tied
with their latchet ” (Pennant, *‘ Second
Tour in Scotland,” Pinkerton’s Voyages
and Travels, iii, 325). According to
another writer the shoe-tie of the bride-
groom’s right foot was unloosed at the
church-door (Ch, Rogers, Socta/ Life in
Scotland, iii. 232).

8 Eijib Abela, ‘ Beitrige zur
Kenntniss abergliubischer Gebriiuche
in Syrien,” Zeztschrift des deutschen
Palaestina- Vereins, vii, (1884) pp.
QI sg.

4 Georgeakis et Pineau, /o/k-/ore de
Lesbos, pp. 344 Sq.


|


—e Oe CU


v KNOTS AND RINGS TABOOED 301


remains tied, so long will the bridegroom remain powerless
to consummate the marriage. Another way of effecting the
same object is to stand behind the bridegroom when he is on
horseback, with an open clasp-knife or pair of scissors in
your hand and to call out his name; if he imprudently
answers, you at once shut the clasp-knife or the pair of
‘scissors with a snap, and that makes him impotent. To
guard against this malignant spell the bridegroom’s mother
will sometimes buy a penknife on the eve of the marriage,
shut it up, and then open it just at the moment when her
son is about to enter the bridal chamber.’

A curious use is made of knots at marriage in the little East Use of

Indian island of Rotti. When a man has paid the price of his "St
bride, a cord is fastened round her waist, if she is a maid, but in the
not otherwise. Nine knots are tied in the cord, and in order poaey =
to make them harder to unloose, they are smeared with wax.
Bride and bridegroom are then secluded in a chamber, where
he has to untie the knots with the thumb and forefinger of
his left hand only. It may be from one to twelve months
before he succeeds in undoing them all. Until he has done
so he may not look on the woman as his wife. In no case
may the cord be broken, or the bridegroom would render
himself liable to any fine that the bride’s father might choose
to impose. When all the knots are loosed, the woman is
his wife, and he shews the cord to her father, and generally
presents his wife with a golden or silver necklace instead
of the cord.” The meaning of this custom is not clear, but
we may conjecture that the nine knots refer to the nine
months of pregnancy, and that miscarriage would be the
supposed result of leaving a single knot untied.

The maleficent power of knots may also be manifested Knots may
in the infliction of sickness, disease, and all kinds of ate ™
misfortune. Thus among the Hos of Togoland a sorcerer disease.
will sometimes curse his enemy and tie a knot in a stalk of
grass, saying, “I have tied up So-and-So in this knot.


1 E. Doutté, Magie et religion dans
?’ Afrique du Nord, pp. 288-292.

2 ««Eenige mededeelingen _ betref-
fende Rote door een inlandischen
Schoolmeester,” Zidschrift voor Ind-
tsche Taal- Land-en Volkenkunde, xxvii.


(1882) p. 554; N. Graafland, ‘‘Eenige
aanteekeningen op _ ethnographisch
gebied ten aanzien van het eiland
Rote,” Mededeelingen van wege het
Nederlandsche  Zendelinggenootschap,


xxxlii. (1889) pp. 373 sg.


302 TABOOED THINGS CHAP,


May all evil light upon him! When he goes into the field,
may a snake sting him! When he goes to the chase, may
a ravening beast attack him! And when he steps into a
river, may the water sweep him away! When it rains, may
the lightning strike him! May evil nights be his!”
It is believed that in the knot the sorcerer has bound
Knots up the life of his enemy.’ Babylonian witches and wizards
used by ,of old used to strangle their victim, seal his mouth,


witches and zi
wizards wrack his limbs, and tear his entrails by merely tying


isa knots in a cord, while at each knot they muttered a spell.
But happily the evil could be undone by simply undoing the
knots.” We hear of a man in one of the Orkney Islands
who was utterly ruined by nine knots cast on a blue thread ;
and it would seem that sick people in Scotland sometimes
prayed to the devil to restore them to health by loosing the
secret knot that was doing all the mischief.* In the Koran
there is an allusion to the mischief of “those who puff into
the knots,” and an Arab commentator on the passage
explains that the words refer to women who practise magic
by tying knots in cords, and then blowing and spitting upon
them. He goes on to relate how, once upon a time, a wicked
Jew bewitched the prophet Mohammed himself by tying nine
knots on a string, which he then hid in a well. So the
prophet fell ill, and nobody knows what might have happened
if the archangel Gabriel had not opportunely revealed to the
holy man the place where the knotted cord was concealed.
The trusty Ali soon fetched the baleful thing from the well ;
and the prophet recited over it certain charms, which were
specially revealed to him for the purpose. At every verse of
the charms a knot untied itself, and the prophet experienced
a certain relief.* It will hardly be disputed that by tying
knots on the string the pestilent Hebrew contrived, if I may
say so, to constrict or astringe or, in short, to tie up some
vital organ or organs in the prophet’s stomach. At least
we are informed that something of this sort is done by


1 J. Spieth, Die Lwe-Stimme, p. 4 Al Baidawi’s Commentary on the
533. Koran, chap. 113, verse 4. I have to

* M. Jastrow, The Religion of Baby- thank my friend Prof. A. A. Bevan
lonia and Assyria, pp. 268, 270. for indicating this passage to me,

8 J. G. Dalyell, Darker Superstitions and furnishing me with a translation
of Scotland, p. 307. of it.


’ =
EO ee ea


' KNOTS AND RINGS TABOOED 303


Australian blackfellows at the present day, and if so, why
should it not have been done by Arabs in the time of
Mohammed? The Australian mode of operation is as
follows. When a blackfellow wishes to settle old scores
with another blackfellow, he ties a rope of fibre or bark
so tightly round the neck of his slumbering friend as
partially to choke him. Having done this he takes out the
man’s caul-fat from under his short rib, ties up his inside
carefully with string, replaces the skin, and having effaced
all external marks of the wound, makes off with the stolen
fat. The victim on awakening feels no inconvenience, but
sooner or later, sometimes months afterwards, while he is
hunting or exerting himself violently in some other way, he
will feel the string snap in his inside. “ Hallo,” says he,
“ somebody has tied me up inside with string!” and he goes
home to the camp and dies on the spot.’ Who can doubt
but that in this lucid diagnosis we have the true key to the
prophet’s malady, and that he too might have succumbed to
the wiles of his insidious foe if it had not been for the timely
intervention of the archangel Gabriel ?

If knots are supposed to kill, they are also supposed to Knots may
cure. This follows from the belief that to undo the knots pages.<,
which are causing sickness will bring the sufferer relief. But disease.
apart from this negative virtue of maleficent knots, there
are certain beneficent knots to which a positive power of
healing is ascribed. Pliny tells us that some folk cured
diseases of the groin by taking a thread from a web, tying
seven or nine knots on it, and then fastening it to the
patient’s groin; but to make the cure effectual it was
necessary to name some widow as each knot was tied.
The ancient Assyrians seem to have made much use of
knotted cords as a remedy for ailments and disease. The
cord with its knots, which were sometimes twice seven in
number, was tied round the head, neck, or limbs of the
patient, and then after a time cut off and thrown away,
carrying with it, as was apparently supposed, the aches and


1 E. Palmer, ‘‘ Notes on some Aus- _ illnesses to the twisting and knotting
tralian Tribes,” Journal of the Anthro- of their insides by demons (W. Ellis,
pological Institute, xiii, (1884) p. 293. Polynesian Researches,? i. 363).

The Tahitians ascribed certain painful 2 Pliny, Mat. Hist. xxviii. 48.


Knots used pains of the sufferer.


to cure
disease.


. 304 TABOOED THINGS


CHAP.


Sometimes the magic cord which was
used for this beneficent purpose consisted of a double strand
of black and white wool; sometimes it was woven of the
hair of a virgin kid... A modern Arab cure for fever re-
ported from the ruins of Nineveh is to tie a cotton thread
with seven knots-on it round the wrist of the patient, who
must wear it for seven or eight days or till such time as the
fever passes, after which he may throw it away. O’Donovan
describes a similar remedy for fever employed among the
Turcomans. The enchanter takes some camel hair and spins
it into a stout thread, droning a spell the while. Next he
ties seven knots on the thread, blowing on each knot before
he pulls it tight. This knotted thread is then worn as a
bracelet on his wrist by the patient. Every day one of the
knots is untied and blown upon, and when the seventh knot
is undone the whole thread is rolled up into a, ball and
thrown into a river, bearing away (as they imagine) the
fever with it? The Hos of Togoland in like manner tie
strings round a sick man’s neck, arms, or legs, according
to the nature of the malady; some of the strings are
intended to guard him against the influence of “the
evil mouth”; others are a protection against the ghosts
of the dead. In Argyllshire, threads with three knots
on them are still used to cure the internal ailments
of man and beast. The witch rubs the sick person or
cow with the knotted thread, burns two of the knots in
the fire, saying, “I put the disease and the sickness on the
top of the fire,” and ties the rest of the thread with the single
knot round the neck of the person or the tail of the cow,
but always so that it may not be seen. A Scotch cure for a
sprained leg or arm is to cast nine knots in a black thread and
then tie the thread round the suffering limb, while you say:


1C. Fossey, La Magie assyrienne
(Paris, 1902), pp. 83 sg.; R. Campbell
Thompson, Semitic Magic (London,
1908), pp. 164 sgg.

2 R. Campbell Thompson, Semitic
Magic, pp. 168 sq.

3 E. O'Donovan, Zhe Alerv Oasis
(London, 1882), ii. 319.

4 J. Spieth, Die Lwe-Stdimme, p.
531.


5 R. C. Maclagan, M.D., ‘‘ Notes
on Folklore Objects collected in Argyle-
shire,” Folk-lore, vi. (1895) pp. 154-


' 156. In the north-west of Ireland


divination by means of a knotted thread
is practised in order to discover whether
a sick beast will recover or die, See
E. B. Tylor, in Zrternational Folk-lore
Congress, 1891, Papers and Trans-
actions, pp. 391 sq.


KNOTS AND RINGS TABOOED 305


“ The Lord rade,
And the foal slade ;
fle lighted
And he righted,
Set joint to joint,
Bone to bone,
And sinew to sinew.
Fleal, in the Holy Ghost’s name /”»


In Gujarat, if a man takes seven cotton threads, goes to
a place where an owl is hooting, strips naked, ties a knot
at each hoot, and fastens the knotted thread round the
right arm of a man sick of the fever, the malady will
leave him.

Again, knots may be used by an enchantress to win a Knots may
lover and attach him firmly to herself. Thus the love-sick ban
maid in Virgil seeks to draw Daphnis to her from the city or capture
by spells and by tying three knots on each of three strings {.y00"
of different colours.2 So an Arab maiden, who had lost her
heart to a certain man, tried to gain his love and bind him
to herself by tying knots in his whip; but her jealous rival
undid the knots.* On the same principle magic knots may
be employed to stop a runaway. In Swazieland you may
often see grass tied in knots at the side of the footpaths,

Every one of these knots tells of a domestic tragedy. A
wife has run away from her husband, and he and his friends
have gone in pursuit, binding up the paths, as they call it, in
this fashion to prevent the fugitive from doubling back over
them.’ When a Swaheli wishes to capture a runaway slave
he will sometimes take a string of coco-nut fibre to a wise
man and get him to recite a passage of the Koran seven


1 R. Chambers, Popular Rhymes of
Scotland, New Edition, p. 349. Grimm
has shewn that the words of this charin
are a very ancient spell for curing a
lame horse, a spell based on an incident
in the myth of the old Norse god
Balder, whose foal put its foot out of
joint and was healed by the great
master of spells, the god Woden. See
J. Grimm, Dewutsche Mythologie,* i. 185,
ii. 1030 sg. Christ has been substituted
for Balder in the more modern forms
of the charm’ both in Scotland and
Germany.


PT, I


2 W. Crooke, Popular Religion and
Folk-lore of Northern India (West-
minster, 1896), i. 279.

3 Virgil, Zc/. viii. 78-80. Highland
sorcerers also used three threads of
different colours with three knots tied
on each thread. See J. G. Dalyell,
Darker Superstitions of Scotiand, p.
306.

4 J. Wellhausen, Reste arabischen
Heidentums? (Berlin, 1897), p. 163.


5 Dudley Kidd, 7he Essential Kajfir,
p. 263.
x


306


TABOOED THINGS


CHAP,


times over it, while at each reading the wizard ties a knot in
the string. Then the slave-owner, armed with the knotted
string, takes his stand in the door of the house and calls on
his slave seven times by name, after which he hangs the


string over the door.


The obstructive power of knots and locks as means of


barring out evil manifests itself in many ways.
travellers. principle that prevention is better than cure, Zulu hunters.


Thus on the


immediately tie a knot in the tail of any animal they have
killed, because they believe that this will hinder the meat
from giving them pains in their stomachs.? An ancient Hindoo
book recommends that travellers on a dangerous road should
tie knots in the skirts of their garments, for this will cause


their journey to prosper.®


Similarly among some Caffre


tribes, when a man is going on a doubtful journey, he knots
a few blades of grass together that the journey may turn out


well.*


In Laos hunters fancy that they can throw a spell


over a forest so as to prevent any one else from hunting
there successfully. Having killed game of any kind, they
utter certain magical words, while they knot together some
stalks of grass, adding, “As I knot this grass, so let no


hunter be lucky here.”


The virtue of this spell will last, as


usually happens in such cases, so long as the stalks remain


knotted together.’


The Yabims of German New Guinea lay


a knot in a fishing-boat that is not ready for sea, in order
that a certain being called Balum may not embark in it; for
he has the power of taking away the fish and weighing down


the boat.®


In Russia amulets often derive their protective virtue in


great measure from knots.


Here, for example, is a spell
amulets in which will warrant its employer against all risk of being


shot: “I attach five knots to each hostile, infidel shooter,
over arquebuses, bows, and all manner of warlike weapons.


1C. Velten, Sttéen und Gebrduche
der Suaheli (Gottingen, 1903), p.
317.

2 David Leslie, Among the Zulus
and Amatongas (Edinburgh, 1875),


Pp. 147.

8 Grihya-Shiras, translated by H.
Oldenberg, part i. p. 432, part ii.
p. 127 (Sacred Books of the East,


vols, xxix., XXx.).

4 J. Shooter, Zhe Kafirs of Natal
and the Zulu Country (London, 1857),
Pp. 217 59.

6 FE. Aymonier, Noles sur le Laos
(Saigon, 1885), pp. 23 sg,

® Vetter, in AVittetlungen der geo-
graphischen Gesellschaft su Jena, xii.
(1893) p. 95.


v KNOTS AND RINGS TABOOED 307


Do ye, O knots, bar the shooter from every road and way,
lock fast every arquebuse, entangle every bow, involve all
warlike weapons, so that the shooters may not reach me
with their arquebuses, nor may their arrows attain to me,
nor their warlike weapons do me hurt. In my knots lies
hid the mighty strength of snakes—from the twelve-headed
snake.” A net, from its affluence of knots, has always been
considered in Russia very efficacious against sorcerers ; hence
in some places, when a bride is being dressed in her wedding
attire, a fishing-net is flung over her to keep her out of
harm’s way. For a similar purpose the bridegroom and
his companions are often girt with pieces of net, or at least
with tight-drawn girdles, for before a wizard can begin
to injure them he must undo all the knots in the net,
or take off the girdles. But often a Russian amulet is
merely a knotted thread. A skein of red wool wound about
the arms and legs is thought to ward off agues and fevers ;
and nine skeins, fastened round a child’s neck, are deemed
a preservative against scarlatina. In the Tver Government
a bag of a special kind is tied to the neck of the cow which
walks before the rest of a herd, in order to keep off wolves ;
its force binds the maw of the ravening beast. On the
same principle, a padlock is carried thrice round a herd of
horses before they go afield in the spring, and the bearer
locks and unlocks it as he goes, saying, “I lock from my
herd the mouths of the grey wolves with this steel lock.”
After the third round the padlock is finally locked, and then,
when the horses have gone off, it is hidden away somewhere
till late in the autumn, when the time comes for the drove to
return to winter quarters. In this case the “firm word” of
the spell is supposed to lock up the mouths of the wolves.
The Bulgarians have a similar mode of guarding their cattle
against wild beasts. A woman takes a needle and thread
after dark, and sews together the skirt of her dress. A child
asks her what she is doing, and she tells him that she is
sewing up the ears, eyes, and jaws of the wolves so that they
may not hear, see, or bite the sheep, goats, calves, and pigs.’
Similarly in antiquity a witch fancied that she could shut
the mouths of her enemies by sewing up the mouth of a fish
1 W. R. S. Ralston, Songs of tie Russian People, pp. 388-390.


Knots and
locks as
protective
amulets.


TABOOED THINGS CHAP.


308


with a bronze needle,’ and farmers attempted to ward off
hail from their crops by tying keys to ropes all round the
fields” The Armenians essay to lock the jaws of wolves
by uttering a spell, tying seven knots in a shoe-lace, and
placing the string between the teeth of a wool-comber, which
are probably taken to represent the fangs of a wolf.*® And
an Armenian bride and bridegroom will carry a locked lock
on their persons at and after marriage to guard them
against those evil influences to which at this crisis of life
they are especially exposed. The following mode of
keeping an epidemic from a village is known to have been
practised among the Balkan Slavs. Two old women
proceed to a spot outside the village, the one with a copper
kettle full of water, the other with a house-lock and key.
The old dame with the kettle asks the other, ‘“ Whither
away?” The one with the lock answers, “I came to lock
the village against mishap,” and suiting the action to the
words she locks the lock and throws it, together with the
key, into the kettle of water. Then she strides thrice round
the village, each time repeating the performance with the
lock and kettle. To this day a Transylvanian sower thinks
he can keep birds from the corn by carrying a lock in the
seed-bag.® Such magical uses of locks and keys are clearly
parallel to the magical use of knots, with which we are here
concerned. In Ceylon the Singhalese observe “a curious
custom of the threshing-floor called ‘Goigote’—the tying of
the cultivator’s knot. When a sheaf of corn has been
threshed out, before it is removed the grain is heaped up
and the threshers, generally six in number, sit round it, and
taking a few stalks, with the ears of corn attached, jointly
tie a knot and bury it in the heap. It is left there until all
the sheaves have been threshed, and the corn winnowed
and measured. The object of this ceremony is to prevent
the devils from diminishing the quantity of corn in the


1 Ovid, Fasti, ii. 577 sgg.; com-
pare W. Warde Fowler, Xoman Fes-
tivals of the Period of the Republic,
PP. 309 5g.

2 Geoponica, i. 14,

3M. Abeghian,
Volhsglaube, p. 115.

4M. Abeghian, of. c#t. p. 91.


Der armenische


5 V, Titelbach, ‘‘ Das heilige Feuer
bei den Balkanslaven,” /éernationales
Archiv fiir Ethnographie, xiii, (1900)

ne

: ® A. Heinrich, Agrarische Sitten
und Gebriuche unter den Sachsen
Siebenbirgens (Hermannstadt, 1880),


p. 9


v KNOTS AND RINGS TABOOED 309


heap.” Knots and locks may serve to avert not only devils Knots and
P y


but death itself. When they brought a woman to the stake pccmtr
at St. Andrews in 1572 to burn her alive for a witch, they amulets.
found on her a white cloth like a collar, with strings and
many knots on the strings. They took it from her, sorely
against her will, for she seemed to think that she could not
die in the fire, if only the cloth with the knotted strings
was on her. When it was taken away, she said, “Now I
have no hope of myself.”* In many parts of England it is
thought that a person cannot die so long as any locks are
locked or bolts shot in the house. It is therefore a very
common practice to undo all locks and bolts when the
sufferer is plainly near his end, in order that his agony
may not be unduly prolonged. For example, in the
year 1863, at Taunton, a child lay sick of scarlatina
and death seemed inevitable. “A jury of matrons was,
as it were, empanelled, and to prevent the child ‘dying
hard’ all the doors in the house, all the drawers, all the
boxes, all the cupboards were thrown wide open, the keys
taken out, and the body of the child placed under a beam,
whereby a sure, certain, and easy passage into eternity could
be secured.” Strange to say, the child declined to avail
itself of the facilities for dying so obligingly placed at its
disposal by the sagacity and experience of the British matrons
of Taunton; it preferred to live rather than give up the °
ghost just then. A Masai man whose sons have gone out to
war will take a hair and tie a knot in it for each of his absent
sons, praying God to keep their bodies and souls as firmly
fastened together as these knots.°

The precise mode in which the virtue of the knot is


1 C. J. R. Le Mesurier, ‘‘ Customs
and Superstitions connected with the
Cultivation of Rice in the Southern


On the other hand the Karaits, a
Jewish sect in the Crimea, lock all
cupboards when a person is in the last


Province of Ceylon,” Journal of the
Royal <Astatic Soctety, N.S., xvii.
(1885) p. 371.

2 J. G. Dalyell, Darker Superstitions
of Scotland, p. 307.

3 J. Brand, Popular Antiquities, ii.
231 (Bohn’s edition); R. Hunt,
Popular Romances of the West of
England, p. 379; T. F. Thiselton
Dyer, English Folk-lore, pp. 229 sq.


agony, lest their contents should be
polluted by the contagion of death.
See S. Weissenberg, ‘‘ Die Kariaer
der Krim,” Globus, lxxxiv. (1903) p.
143.

* Extract from Zhe Times of 4th
September 1863, quoted in Fo/k-lore,
xix. (1908) p. 336.

5 M. Merker, Die Masaz (Berlin,
1904), p. 98.


The
magical
virtue of
a knot is
always
that of an
impedi-
ment or
hindrance
whether
for good
or evil.


310 TABOOED THINGS


CHAP.


supposed to take effect in some of these instances does not
clearly appear. But in general we may say that in all
the cases we have been considering the leading charac-
teristic of the magic knot or lock is that, in strict accordance
with its physical nature, it always acts as an impediment,
hindrance, or obstacle, and,that its influence is maleficent or
beneficent according as the thing which it impedes or hinders
is good or evil. The obstructive tendency attributed to the
knot in spiritual matters appears in a Swiss superstition
that if, in sewing a corpse into its shroud, you make a
knot on the thread, it will hinder the soul of the deceased
on its passage to eternity.’ In coffining a corpse the
Highlanders of Scotland used to untie or cut every string in
the shroud ; else the spirit could not rest.2 The Germans
of Transylvania place a little pillow with the dead in the
coffin; but in sewing it they take great care not to make
any knot on the thread, for they say that to do so would
hinder the dead man from resting in the grave and his
widow from marrying again.2 -Among the Pidhireanes, a
Ruthenian people on the hem of the Carpathians, when
a widow wishes to marry again soon, she unties the knots
on her dead husband’s grave-clothes before the coffin is shut
down on him. This removes all impediments to her future
marriage.* A Nandi who is starting on a journey will tie
a knot in grass by the wayside, as he believes that by so
doing he will prevent the people whom he is going to
visit from taking their meal till he arrives, or at all
events he will ensure that they leave enough food over
for him.®

The rule which prescribes that at certain magical and
religious ceremonies the hair should hang loose and the feet


1H. Runge, ** Volksglaube in der
Schweiz,”  Zettschrift fiir deutsche
Mythologie und Sittenkunde, iv. (1859)
p. 178, § 25. The belief is reported
from Zurich,

2 J. G. Campbell, Witchcraft and
Second Sight in the Highlands and
Islands of Scotland, p. 174; td., Super-
stitions of the Highlands and Islands of
Scotland, p. 241.

8 E, Gerard, The Land beyond the
Forest, i, 208,


$R. F. Kaindl, ‘* Volksiiberliefe-
rungen der Pidhireane,” Globus, Ixxiii.
(1898) p. 251.

5 A.C. Hollis, Zhe Mandi (Oxford,
1909), pp. 89 sg. The tying and un-
tying of magic knots was forbidden by
the Coptic church, but we are not told
the purposes for which the knots were
used, See J/ Fetha Nagast o legis-
lasione det re, codice ecclesiastico eé
civile di Abissinia, tradotto e annotato
da Ignazio Guidi (Rome, 1899), p. 140,


ee eS a ae


Tr


v KNOTS AND RINGS TABOOED 311


should be bare’ is probably based on the same fear of The rule
trammelling and impeding the action in hand, whatever it ‘*t *
may be, by the presence of any knot or constriction, magical
whether on the head or on the feet of the performer. This talon
connexion of ideas comes out clearly in a passage of Ovid, who rites the
bids a pregnant woman loosen her hair before she prays to the ney Hy a
goddess of childbirth, in order that the goddess may gently a a e
loose her teeming womb.’ It is less easy to say why on probably
certain solemn occasions it appears to have been customary ee
with some people to go with one shoe off and one shoe on. jmpedi-
The forlorn hope of two hundred men who, on a dark and ngs:
stormy night, stole out of Plataea, broke through the lines to be

of the besieging Spartans, and escaped from the doomed peng to
city, were shod on the left foot only. The historian who or con-
records the fact assumes that the intention was to prevent “C°™
their feet from slipping in the mud.’ But if so, why were pees
not both feet unshod or shod? What is good for the one pent
foot is surely good for the other. The peculiar attire of the psa
Plataeans on this occasion had probably nothing to do with — yes
the particular state of the ground and the weather at the time and one
when they made their desperate sally, but was an old custom, *®°° °

a form of consecration or devotion, observed by men in any

great hazard or grave emergency. Certainly the costume
appears to have been regularly worn by some fighting

races in antiquity, at least when they went forth to battle.

Thus we are told that all the Aetolians were shod only on

one foot, “because they were so warlike,”* and Virgil
represents some of the rustic militia of ancient Latium as
marching to war, their right feet shod in boots of raw hide,

while their left feet were bare.® An oracle warned Pelias,

king of Iolcus, to beware of the man with one sandal, and

when Jason arrived with a sandal on his right foot but with


his left foot bare, the king recognised the hand of fate. The


1 For examples see Horace, Sat. i.  Recuetl Winscriptions grecques, No.
8, 23 sg.; Virgil, den. iii. 370, iv. 694. Compare Servius on Virgil, den.


509; Ovid, Metam. vii. 182 sg.; iv. 518, “‘ Le sacrés nihil solet esse
Tibullus, i. 3. 29-32; Petronius, Sat.44;  vreligatum.”

Aulus Gellius, iv, 3. 33; Columella, 2 Ovid, Fast, iii..257 sg.

De re rustica, x. 357-362 ; Athenaeus, 3 Thucydides, iii. 22.


v. 28, p. 198 E; Dittenberger, Sy//oge 4 Schol. on Pindar, Pyth. iv,
inscriptionum Graecarum,* Nos. 653 133.
(lines 23 sg.) and 939; Ch. Michel, 5 Virgil, Aen. vii. 689 sg.


Custom of
going on
certain
solemn
occasions
with one
shoe on
and one
shoe off.


312 TABOOED THINGS CHAP,


common story that Jason had lost one of his sandals in
fording a river was probably invented when the real motive
of the costume was forgotten.’ Again, according to one
legend Perseus seems to have worn only one shoe when he
went on his perilous enterprise to cut off the Gorgon’s head?
In certain forms of purification Greek ritual appears to have
required that the person to be cleansed should wear a
rough shoe on one foot, while the other was unshod. The
rule is not mentioned by ancient writers, but may be
inferred from a scene painted on a Greek vase, where a
man, naked except for a fillet round his head, is seen
crouching on the skin of a sacrificial victim, his bare right
foot resting on the skin, while his left foot, shod in a
rough boot, is planted on the ground in front of him.
Round about women with torches and vessels are engaged
in performing ceremonies of purification over him. When
Dido in Virgil, deserted by Aeneas, has resolved to die, she
feigns to perform certain magical rites which will either win
back her false lover or bring relief to her wounded heart.
In appealing to the gods and the stars, she stands by the
altar with her dress loosened and with one foot bare.’
Among the heathen Arabs the cursing of an enemy was a
public act. The maledictions were often couched in the
form of a satirical poem, which the poet himself recited with
certain solemn formalities. Thus when the young Lebid
appeared at the Court of Norman to denounce the Absites,
he anointed the hair of his head on one side only, let his
garment hang down loosely, and wore but one shoe. This,
we are told, was the costume regularly adopted by certain
poets on such occasions.’


1 Pindar, Pyth. iv. 129 sgq.:
Apollonius Rhodius, Argonaut, i. §


De Witte and F. Lenormant, pp. 352
sg. The skin on which the man is


sgqg.; Apollodorus, i. 9. 16.

2 Artemidorus, Onirocrit. iv. 63.
At Chemmis in Upper Egypt there was
atemple of Perseus, and the people
said that from time to time Perseus
appeared to them and they found his
great sandal, two cubits long, which
was a sign of prosperity for the whole
land of Egypt. See Herodotus, ii.

1


4 Gasette archéologique, 1884,
plates 44, 45, 46 with the remarks of


crouching is probably the so-called

‘fleece of Zeus” (Aus xdd.ov), as to
which see Hesychius and Suidas, s,z. ;
Polemo, ed, Preller, pp. 140-1423; C.
A. Lobeck, Aglaophamus, pp. 183
sgg. Compare my note on Pausanias,
ii, 31. 8.

4 Virgil, Aen. iv. 517 sgg.

, © 1. Goldziher, ‘Der Diwin des
Garwal b, Aus Al-Eutej’ a,” Zed¢schrift
der Deutschen Morgenlindischen Gesell-
schaft, xvi. (1892) p. 5.


v KNOTS AND RINGS TABOOED 313


Thus various peoples seem to be of opinion that it stands The _
a man in good stead to go with one foot shod and one foot hada
bare on certain momentous occasions. But why? The with one
explanation must apparently be sought in the magical virtue —
attributed to knots; for down to recent times, we may take shoe off
it, shoes have been universally tied to the feet by latchets. poskerie
Now the magical action of a knot, as we have seen, is seems to
supposed to be to bind and restrain not merely the body the man
but the soul,! and this action is beneficial or harmful rchsgaee,
according as the thing which is bound and restrained is evil magical
or good. It is a necessary corollary of this doctrine that to twa
be without knots is to be free and untrammelled, which, by it on his
the way, may be the reason why the augur’s staff at Rome ™™"”
had to be made from a piece of wood in which there was no
knot ;? it would never do for a divining rod to be spell-
bound. Hence we may suppose that the intention of going
with one shoe on and one shoe off is both to restrain and to
set at liberty, to bind and to unbind. But to bind or unbind
whom or what? Perhaps the notion is to rid the man
himself of magical restraint, but to lay it on his foe, or at
all events on his foe’s magic; in short, to bind his enemy
by a spell while he himself goes free. This is substantially
the explanation which the acute and learned Servius gives
of Dido’s costume. He says that she went with one shoe on
and one shoe off in order that Aeneas might be entangled
and herself released.2 An analogous explanation would
obviously apply to all the other cases we have considered,
for in all of them the man who wears this peculiar
costume is confronted with hostile powers, whether human
or supernatural, which it must be his object to lay under
a ban. :

A similar power to bind and hamper spiritual as well as Rings
bodily activities is ascribed by some people to rings. Thus aeschrte
in the Greek island of Carpathus, people never button the as magical


clothes they put upon a dead body and they are careful to rare aa
1 See Servius, on Virgil, Ae. iii. mon potest, ex cognatione sentire.”

370: ln ratione sacrorum par est et 2 Livy, i. 18. 7.

animae et corporis causa: nam plerum- 3 “UNUM EXUTA PEDEM

gue guae non possunt circa animam quia td agitur, ut et tsta solvatur et

frert fiunt circa corpus, ut solvere vel implicetur Aeneas,” Servius, on Virgil,

ligare, guo possit anima, quod per se Aen, iv. 518.


vent the
egress or
ingress of
spirits.


Rings
worn as
amulets
against
demons,
witches,
and ghosts.


TABOOED THINGS CHAP.


314


remove all rings from it; “for the spirit, they say, can even
be detained in the little finger, and cannot rest.”* Here it
is plain that even if the soul is not definitely supposed to
issue at death from the finger-tips, yet the ring is conceived
to exercise a certain constrictive influence which detains and
imprisons the immortal spirit in spite of its efforts to escape
from the tabernacle of clay ; in short the ring, like the knot,
acts as a spiritual fetter. This may have been the reason of
an ancient Greek maxim, attributed to Pythagoras, which
forbade people to wear rings.” Nobody might enter the
ancient Arcadian sanctuary of the Mistress at Lycosura with
a ring on his or her finger. Persons who consulted the
oracle of Faunus had to be chaste, to eat no flesh, and
to wear no rings.‘

On the other hand, the same constriction which
hinders the egress of the soul may prevent the entrance of
evil spirits; hence we find rings used as amulets against
demons, witches, and ghosts. In the Tyrol it is said that
a woman in childbed should never take off her wedding-
ring, or spirits and witches will have power over her.
Among the Lapps, the person. who is about to place a
corpse in the coffin receives from the husband, wife, or
children of the deceased a brass ring, which he must wear
fastened to his right arm until the corpse is safely deposited
in the grave. The ring is believed to serve the person as
an amulet against any harm which the ghost might do to
him.6 The Huzuls of the Carpathians sometimes milk a
cow through a wedding-ring to prevent witches from stealing


have shewn elsewhere that the maxims
or symbols of Pythagoras, as they were


1 «*On a Far-off Island,” Black-
woods Magazine, February 1886,


p. 238.

2 Clement of Alexandria, Strom. v.
5. 28, p. 662, ed. Potter ; Jamblichus,
Adhortatio ad philosophiam, 23;
Plutarch, De educatione puerorum, 17.
According to others, all that Pytha-
goras forbade was the wearing of a
ring on which the likeness of a god
was engraved (Diogenes Laertius, viii.
1. 173; Porphyry, Vit. Pythag. 42;
Suidas, s,v, Ivdaydpas); according to
Julian a ring was only forbidden if it
bore the names of the gods (Julian, Or.
vii, p. 236 D, p. 306 ed. Dindorf), 1


called, are in great measure merely
popular superstitions (/o/k-lore, i,
(1890) pp. 147 599.)

3 This we learn from an inscription
found on the site. See "E@nuepls
dpxaoroyixh, Athens, 1898, col. 249;
Dittenberger, Sy//oge  inscriptionum
Graecarum,® No. 939.

4 Ovid, Fasti, iv. 657 sg.

5 I. V. Zingerle, Sitter, Brduche
und Meinungen des Tiroler Volkes,*


P. 3
® J. Scheffer, Lapponia (Frankfort,
1673), Pp.» 313+


v KNOTS AND RINGS TABOOED 315


its milk... In India iron rings are often worn as an amulet Rings
against disease or to counteract the malignant influence of "O'" #°
the planet Saturn. A coral ring is used in Gujarat to ward
off the baleful influence of the sun, and in Bengal mourners
touch it as a form of purification.” A Masai mother who
has lost one or more children at an early age will put a
copper ring on the second toe of her next infant’s right foot
to guard it against sickness. Masai men also wear on the
middle finger of the right hand a ring made out of the hide
of a sacrificial victim ; it is supposed to protect the wearer
from witchcraft and disease of every kind.* We have seen
that magic cords are fastened round the wrists of Siamese
children to keep off evil spirits ;° that some people tie strings
round the wrists of women in childbed, of convalescents after
sickness, and of mourners after a funeral in order to prevent
the escape of their souls at these critical seasons ;° and that
with the same intention the Bagobos put brass rings on
the wrists or ankles of the sick.’ This use of wrist-bands,
_ bracelets, and anklets as amulets to keep the soul in the
body is exactly parallel to the use of finger-rings which we
are here considering. The placing of these spiritual fetters
on the wrists is especially appropriate, because some people
fancy that a soul resides wherever a pulse is felt beating.’
How far the custom of wearing finger-rings, bracelets, and
anklets may have been influenced by, or even have sprung
from, a belief in their efficacy as amulets to keep the soul in
the body, or demons out of it, is a question which seems worth
considering. Here we are only concerned with the belief
_ in so far as it seems to throw light on the rule that the
Flamen Dialis might not wear a ring unless it were broken.
Taken in conjunction with the rule which forbade him to
1R. F. Kaindl, Die Huszulen


(Vienna, 1894), p. 893; zd., ‘‘ Vieh-
zucht und Viehzauber in den Ostkar-


6 Above, pp. 32, 51.
7 Above, p. 31.
8 De la Borde, ‘‘ Relation de lori-


paten,” Globus, Ixix. (1896) p. 386.

2 W. Crooke, Popular Religion and
Folk-lore of Northern India (West-
minster, 1896), ii. 13, 16.

3M. Merker, De Afasaz (Berlin,
1904), Pp. 143.

4M. Merker, of. ct. pp. 200 sg.,
202 ; compare, 7@. p. 250.

5 Above, p. 267.


gine, etc., des Caraibes sauvages,” p.
15, in Recuedl de divers voyages faits en
Afrique et en ? Amérique (Paris, 1684).
® A considerable body of evidence
as to rings and the virtues attributed
to them has been collected by Mr. W.
Jones in his work /inger-ring Lore
(London, 1877). See also W. G,
Black, Fo/k-medicine, pp. 172-177.


Reason
why the
Flamen
Dialis
might not
wear knots
and rings.


The
Gordian
knot was
perhaps a
royal talis-
man,


316 TABOOED THINGS CHAP.


have a knot on his garments, it points to a fear that the
powerful spirit embodied in him might be trammelled and
hampered in its goings-out and comings-in by such corporeal
and spiritual fetters as rings and knots. The same fear
probably dictated the rule that if a man in bonds were taken
into the house of the Flamen Dialis, the captive was to be
unbound and the cords to be drawn up through a hole in the
roof and so let down into the street.' Further, we may
conjecture that the custom of releasing prisoners at a festival
may have originated in the same train of thought ; it might
be imagined that their fetters would impede the flow of the
divine grace. The custom was observed at the Greek
festival of the Thesmophoria,” and at the Athenian festival
of Dionysus in the city. At the great festival of the Dassera,
celebrated in October by the Goorkhas of Nepaul, all the law
courts are closed, and all prisoners in gaol are removed from
the precincts of the city ; but those who are imprisoned outside
the city do not have to change their place of confinement at
the time of the Dassera.* This Nepaulese custom appears
strongly to support the explanation here suggested of such
gaol-deliveries. For observe that the prisoners are notreleased,
but merely removed from the city. The intention is therefore
not to allow them to share the general happiness, but merely
to rid the city of their inopportune presence at the festival.
Before quitting the subject of knots I may be allowed
to hazard a conjecture as to the meaning of the famous
Gordian knot, which Alexander the Great, failing in his
efforts to untie it, cut through with his sword. In Gordium,
the ancient capital of the kings of Phrygia, there was pre-
served a waggon of which the yoke was fastened to the pole
by a strip of cornel-bark or a vine-shoot twisted and tied in
an intricate knot. Tradition ran that the waggon had been
dedicated by Midas, the first king of the dynasty, and that
whoever untied the knot would be ruler of Asia.® Perhaps


1 Aulus Gellius, x.
above, p. 14.


15. 8. See Dionysos en Attique (Paris, 1904), p.
168,


oH, 3A,


* Marcellinus on Hermogenes, in
Rhetores Graeci, ed, Walz, iv. 462;
Sopater, ¢bid. viii. 67.

% Demosthenes, Contra Androt, 68,
p- 6143; P. Foucort, Le Culte de


Oldfield, Sketches from
Nipal (London, 1880), ii. 342 sg.

® Arrian, Anadasis, ii, 33 Quintus
Curtius, iii, 13 Justin, xi, 73 Schol.
on Euripides, /7ppolytus, 671.


Vv KNOTS AND RINGS TABOOED 317


the knot was a talisman with which the fate of the dynasty
was believed to be bound up in such a way that whenever
the knot was loosed the reign of the dynasty would come
to an end. We have seen that the magic virtue ascribed
to knots is naturally enough supposed to last only so long
as they remain untied. If the Gordian knot was the talis-
man of the Phrygian kings, the local fame it enjoyed, as
guaranteeing to them the rule of Phrygia, might easily be
exaggerated by distant rumour into a report that the sceptre
of Asia itself would fall to him who should undo the wondrous
knot!


1 Public talismans, on which the See C. A. Lobeck, Aglaophamus, pp.
safety of the state was supposed to 278 sgg,, and my note on Pausanias,
depend, were common in antiquity. viii. 47. 5.


CHAPTER’ VI
TABOOED WORDS


§ 1. Personal Names tabooed


The savage UNABLE to discriminate clearly between words and things,
oe 4 the savage commonly fancies that the link between a name
things, andand the person or thing denominated by it is not a mere
eae nis arbitrary and ideal association, but a real and substantial
name asa bond which unites the two in such a way that magic may
pd att be wrought on a man just as easily through his name as
va _— through his hair, his nails, or any other material part of
SE his person.!. In fact, primitive man regards his name as
magically vital portion of himself and takes care of it accordingly.
injured : : °
through it, Thus, for example, the North American Indian “ regards his
name, not as a mere label, but as a distinct part of his per-
sonality, just as much as are his eyes or his teeth, and believes
that injury will result as surely from the malicious handling of
his name as from a wound inflicted on any part of his physical
organism. This belief was found among the various tribes
from the Atlantic to the Pacific, and has occasioned a
number of curious regulations in regard to the concealment
and change of names, It may be on this account that both
Powhatan and Pocahontas are known in history under
assumed appellations, their true names having been con-
cealed from the whites until the pseudonyms were too
firmly established to be supplanted. Should his prayers
1 On the primitive conception of the (Stuttgart, 1878), pp. 165 sgg.3 E.
relation of names to persons and things, Clodd, Zom-dzt-¢ot (London, 1898), pp.
see Kk. B. Tylor, Zarly History of Man- 53 s¢q., 79 sqgg. In what follows I
hind,® pp. 123 sqqg.; KR. Andree, Z¢ino- have used with advantage the works of

graphische Parallelen und Vergleiche all these writers,


318


CHAP. VI PERSONAL NAMES TABOOED


319


have no apparent effect when treating a patient for some Savage
serious illness, the shaman sometimes concludes that the prpricee
name is affected, and accordingly goes to water, with with the
appropriate ceremonies, and christens the patient with a P**°™
new name, by which he is henceforth to be known. He
then begins afresh, repeating the formulas with the new
name selected for the patient, in the confident hope that his
efforts will be crowned with success.”? Some Esquimaux

take new names when they are old, hoping thereby to get a

new lease of life? The Tolampoos of central Celebes
believe that if you write a man’s name down you can carry

off his soul along with it. On that account the headman of

a village appeared uneasy when Mr. A. C. Kruijt wrote
down his name. He entreated the missionary to erase it,

and was only reassured on being told that it was not his

real name but merely his second name that had been put on
paper. Again, when the same missionary took down the
names of villages from the lips of a woman, she asked him
anxiously if he would not thereby take away the soul of the
villages and so cause the inhabitants to fall sick.® If we

may judge from the evidence of language, this crude
conception of the relation of names to persons was widely
prevalent, if not universal, among the forefathers of the
Aryan race. For an analysis of the words for “name” in

the various languages of that great family of speech points

to the conclusion that “the Celts, and certain other widely
separated Aryans, unless we should rather say the whole
Aryan family, believed at one time not only that the name

was a part of the man, but that it was that part of him
which is termed the soul, the breath of life, or whatever you

may choose to define it as being.”* However this may
have been among the primitive Aryans, it is quite certain

that many savages at the present day regard their names as

vital parts of themselves, and therefore take great pains to


1 J. Mooney, *‘ Sacred Formulas of
the Cherokees,” Seventh Annual Report
of the Bureau of Ethnology (Washing-
ton, x89), Pp. 343-

2 E. W. Nelson, ‘‘The Eskimo


about Bering Strait,” Zighteenth


Annual Report of the Bureau of -


American Ethnology, part i. (Washing-


ton, 1899) p. 289.

3 A. C. Kruijt, ‘‘ Van Paloppo naar
Posso,” Mededeelingen van wege het
Nederlandsche  Zendelinggenootschap,
xlii. (1898) pp. 61 sg.

* Professor (Sir) J. Rhys, ‘* Welsh
Fairies,” Zhe Nineteenth Century, xxx.
(July-December 1891) pp. 566 sg.


The Aus-
tralian
savages
keep their
names
secret lest
sorcerers
should
injure
them by
means of
their
names.


320 TABOOED WORDS CHAP.


conceal their real names, lest these should give to evil-
disposed persons a handle by which to injure their owners.
Thus, to begin with the savages who rank at the bottom
of the social scale, we are told that the secrecy with which
among the Australian aborigines personal names are often
kept from general knowledge “arises in great measure from
the belief that an enemy, who knows your name, has in it
something which he can use magically to your detriment.” ?
“ An Australian black,” says another writer, “is always very
unwilling to tell his real name, and there is no doubt that
this reluctance is due to the fear that through his name he
may be injured by sorcerers.” On Herbert River in Queens-
land the wizards, in order to practise their arts against some
one, “ need only to know the name of the person in question,
and for this reason they rarely use their proper names in
addressing or speaking of each other, but simply their class
names.”* In the tribes of south-eastern Australia “when
the new name is given at initiation, the child’s name
becomes secret, not to be revealed to strangers, or to be
mentioned by friends. The reason appears to be that a
name is part of a person, and therefore can be made use of
to that person’s detriment by any who wish to ‘catch’ him
by evil magic.”* Thus among the Yuin of New South
Wales the totem name is said to have been something magical
rather than a mere name in our sense, and it was kept secret
lest an enemy should injure its bearer by sorcery. The name
was revealed to a youth by his father at initiation, but very
few other people knew it.” Another writer, who knew the
Australians well, observes that in many tribes the belief
prevails “that the life of an enemy may be taken by the
use of his name in incantations. The consequence of this
idea is, that in the tribes in which it obtains, the name
of the male is given up for ever at the time when he under-
goes the first of a series of ceremonies which end in confer-
ring the rights of manhood. In such tribes a man has no
name, and when a man desires to attract the attention of
1 A, W. Howitt, Native Tribes of 8 C. Lumholtz, Among Cannibals
South- East Australia, p. 377; com- (London, 1889), p. 280.
pare 14. p. 440, 4 A, W. Howitt, of. cét. p. 736.


* R. Brough Smyth, Aborigines of
Victoria, i. 469, note. 6 A, W. Howitt, of, ct, p. 133.


vi PERSONAL NAMES TABOOED 321


any male of his tribe who is out of his boyhood, instead of Personal
calling him by name, he addresses him as brother, nephew, D2" 8
or cousin, as the case may be, or by the name of the class among the
to which he belongs. I used to notice, when I lived amongst prise
the Bangerang, that the names which the males bore in
infancy were soon almost forgotten by the tribe.”* It may

be questioned, however, whether the writer whom I have just
quoted was not deceived in thinking that among these tribes

men gave up their individual names on passing through the
ceremony of initiation into manhood. It is more in harmony

with savage beliefs and practices to suppose either that the

old names were retained but dropped out of use in daily life,

or that new names were given at initiation and sedulously
concealed from fear of sorcery. A missionary who resided
among the aborigines at Lake Tyers, in Victoria, informs us

that “the blacks have great objections to speak of a person

by name. In speaking to each other they address the
person spoken to as brother, cousin, friend, or whatever
relation the person spoken to bears. Sometimes a black

bears a name which we would term merely a nickname, as

the left-handed, or the bad-handed, or the littlhe man. They

would speak of a person by this name while living, but they
would never mention the proper name. I found great diffi-

culty in collecting the native names of the blacks here. I

found afterwards that they had given me wrong names ; and,

on asking the reason why, was informed they had two or

three names, but they never mentioned their right name for

fear any one got it, when they would die.”* Amongst the

tribes of central Australia every man, woman, and child has,
besides a personal name which is in common use, a secret or
sacred name which is bestowed by the older men upon him

or her soon after birth, and which is known to none but the

fully initiated members of the group. This secret name is

never mentioned except upon the most solemn occasions ; to

utter it in the hearing of women or of men of another group

would be a most serious breach of tribal custom, as serious as


1 E. M. Curr, Zhe Australian Race, writer appears to mean that the natives
i. 46. feared they would die if any one, or at
2 J. Bulmer, in Brough Smyth’s any rate, an enemy, learned their real
Aborigines of Victoria, ii. 94. The names.


PT. II Y


‘The same
fear of
sorcery has
led people
to conceal
their names
in Egypt,
Africa,
Asia, and
the East
Indies.


322 TABOOED WORDS CHAP.


the most flagrant case of sacrilege among ourselves. When
mentioned at all, the name is spoken only in a whisper, and
not until the most elaborate precautions have been taken
that it shall be heard by no one but members of the group.
“The native thinks that a stranger knowing his. secret
name would have special power to work him ill by means
of magic.” 1

The same fear seems to have led to a custom of the same
sort amongst the ancient Egyptians, whose comparatively
high civilisation was strangely dashed and chequered with
relics of the lowest savagery. Every Egyptian received
two names, which were known respectively as the true
name and the good name, or the great name and the little
name ; and while the good or little name was made public,
the true or great name appears to have been carefully
concealed.” Similarly in Abyssinia at the present day it is
customary to conceal the real name which a person receives
at baptism and to call him only by a sort of nickname which
his mother gives him on leaving the church. The reason
for this concealment is that a sorcerer cannot act upon a
person whose real name he does not know. But if he has
ascertained his victim’s real name, the magician takes a par-
ticular kind of straw, and muttering something over it bends
it into a circle and places it under a stone. The person
aimed at is taken ill at the very moment of the bending of
the straw; and if the straw snaps, he dies. A Brahman
child receives two names, one for common use, the other a
secret name which none but his father and mother should
know. The latter is only used at ceremonies such as
marriage. The custom is intended to protect the person
against magic, since a charm only becomes effectual in
combination with the real name. Amongst the Kru


1 Spencer and Gillen, Native Tribes
of Central Australia, p. 139 ; compare
thid. p. 6373 ta., Northern Tribes of
Central Australia, pp. 584 sq.

2 E. Lefébure, ‘* La Vertu et la vie
du nom en Egypte,” A/éusine, viii.
(1897) coll. 226 sg.

4% Mansfield Parkyns, Life in Abys-
sinta (London, 1868), pp. 301 sg.

4 Grihya Sitras, translated by H.
Oldenberg, part i. pp. 50, 183, 395,


part ii, pp. 55, 215, 281; A. Hille-
brandt, Vedische Opfer und Zauber, pp.
46, 170 sg. 3, W. Caland, Altindésches
Zauberritual, p. 162, note®; D.C. J.
Ibbetson, Outlines of Punjdb Ethno-
graphy (Calcutta, 1883), p. 118; W.
Crooke, Popular Religion and Folk-
lore of Northern India (Westminster,
1896), i. 24, ii, 53 ta, Natives of
Northern India (London, 1907), p.
199


vI PERSONAL NAMES TABOOED 323


negroes of West Africa a man’s real name is always con-
cealed from all but his nearest relations; to other people
he is known only under an assumed name.’ The Ewe-
speaking people of the Slave Coast “ believe that there is a
real and material connexion between a man and his name,
and that by means of the name injury may be done to the
man. An illustration of this has been given in the case of
the tree-stump that is beaten with a stone to compass the
death of an enemy ; for the name of that enemy is not pro-
nounced solely with the object of informing the animating
principle of the stump who it is whose death is desired, but
through a belief that, by pronouncing the name, the person-
ality of the man who bears it is in some way brought to
the stump.”? The Wolofs of Senegambia are very much
annoyed if any one calls them in a loud voice, even by day ;
for they say that their name will be remembered by an evil
spirit and made use of by him to do them a mischief at
night.2 Similarly, the natives of Nias believe that harm may
be done to a person by the demons who hear his name pro-
nounced. Hence the names of infants, who are especially
exposed to the assaults of evil spirits, are never spoken ;
and often in haunted spots, such as the gloomy depths of
the forest, the banks of a river, or beside a bubbling spring,
men will abstain from calling each other by their names for
a like reason.* Among the hill tribes of Assam each indi-
vidual has a private name which may not be revealed.
Should any one imprudently allow his private name to be
known, the whole village is tabooed for two days and a
feast is provided at the expense of the culprit.” A Manegre,
of the upper valley of the Amoor, will never mention his
own name nor that of one of his fellows. Only the names
of children are an exception to this rule.° A Bagobo
man of Mindanao, one of the Philippine Islands, never


1A. B. Ellis, Zhe Tshi-speaking


(Milan, 1890), p. 465.
Peoples of the Gold Coast, p. 109. fi a


Hodson, ‘‘The enna


2A. B. Ellis, Zhe Ewe-speaking
Peoples of the Slave Coast, p. 98. -

3 L. J. B. Bérenger-Féraud, Les
Peuples de la Sénégambie (Paris, 1879),
p. 28.

4 E. Modigliani, Un Viaggio a Nias


amongst the Tribes of Assam,” Journal
of the Anthropological Institute, xxxvi.
(1906) p. 97.

6 C. de Sabir, “‘ Quelques notes sur
les Manégres,” Bulletin de la Société
de Géographie (Paris), Vme Série, i.
(1861) p. 51.


The

South and
Central
American
Indians
also keep
their names
secret

from fear
of sorcery.


TABOOED WORDS CHAP.


324


utters his own name from fear of being turned into a
raven, because the raven croaks out its own name.
The natives of the East Indian island of Buru, and the
Manggarais of West Flores are forbidden by custom to
mention their own names. When Fafnir had received
his death-wound from Sigurd, he asked his slayer what his
name was; but the cunning Sigurd concealed his real name
and mentioned a false one, because he well knew how
potent are the words of a dying man when he curses his
enemy by name? | |
The Indians of Chiloe, a large island off the southern
coast of Chili, keep their names secret and do not like to
have them uttered aloud; for they say that there are fairies
or imps on the mainland or neighbouring islands who, if
they knew folk’s names, would do them an injury; but so
long as they do not know the names, these mischievous
sprites are powerless. The Araucanians, who inhabit the
mainland of Chili to the north of Chiloe, will hardly ever
tell a stranger their names because they fear that he would
thereby acquire some supernatural power over themselves.
Asked his name by a stranger, who is ignorant of their
superstitions, an Araucanian will answer, “I have none.”®
Names taken from plants, birds, or other natural objects are
bestowed on the Indians of Guiana at their birth by their
parents or the medicine-man, “but these names seem of
little use, in that owners have a very strong objection to
telling or using them, apparently on the ground that the
name is part of the man, and that he who knows the name
has part of the owner of that name in his power. To avoid
any danger of spreading knowledge of their names, one
Indian, therefore, generally addresses another only according
to the relationship of the caller and the called, as brother,


1 A. Schadenburg, ‘‘ Die Bewohner
von Siid-Mindanao und der Insel
Samal,” Zeitschrift fiir LEthnologie,
xvii. (1885) p. 30.

2 J. H. W. van der Miesen, ‘‘ Een
en ander over Boeroe,” Mededeelingen
van wege het Nederlandsche Zendeling-
genootschap, x\vi. (1902) p. 455; J.
W. Meerburg, ‘* Proeve einer beschrijv-
ing van land en volk van Midden-
Manggarai (West-Flores), Afdeeling


Bima,” 7ijdschrift voor Indische Taal-
Land- en Volkenkunde, xxxiv. (1891)
p. 465.

8 F, Kauffmann, Ba/der (Strasburg,
1902), p. 198.

* This I learned from my wife, who
spent some years in Chili and visited
the island of Chiloe.

5 FE. R. Smith, Zhe Avraucanians
(London, 1855), p. 222.


VI PERSONAL NAMES TABOOED 325


sister, father, mother, and so on; or, when there is no
relationship, as boy, girl, companion, and so on. These
terms, therefore, practically form the names actually used

by Indians amongst themselves.” Amongst the Indians of

the Goajira peninsula in Colombia it is a punishable offence

to mention a man’s name; in aggravated cases heavy com-
pensation is demanded.? The Indians of Darien never tell

their names, and when one of them is asked, “ What is your
name?” he answers, “I have none.”* For example, the
Guami of Panama, “like the greater part of the American
Indians, has several names, but that under which he is
known to his relations and friends is never mentioned to a
stranger ; according to their ideas a stranger who should learn

a man’s name would obtain a secret power over him. As to

the girls, they generally have no name of their own up to the

age of puberty.”* Among the Tepehuanes of Mexico a name

is a sacred thing, and they never tell their real native names.®

In North America superstitions of the same sort are Similar

current. “Names bestowed with ceremony in childhood,” ecg
says Schoolcraft, “are deemed sacred, and are seldom personal
pronounced, out of respect, it would seem, to the spirits *™°


among the
under whose favour they are supposed to have been selected, Indians of


Children are usually called in the family by some name ptakes
which can be familiarly used.”° The Navajoes of New
Mexico are most unwilling to reveal their own Indian
names or those of their friends ; they generally go by some
Mexican names which they have received from the whites.’
“No Apache will give his name to a stranger, fearing some
hidden power may thus be placed in the stranger’s hand to
his detriment.”® The Tonkawe Indians of Texas will give


merica,


1 E.F. im Thurn, Among the Indians
of Guiana (London, 1883), p. 220.

2 F. A. Simons, ‘‘ An Exploration
of the Goajira Peninsula, U.S. of
Colombia,” Proceedings of the Royal
Geographical Society, N.S., vii. (1885)

. 790.

3 Dr. Cullen, ‘‘ The Darien Indians,”
Transactions of the Ethnological Society
of London, N.S., iv. (1866) p. 265.

4 A, Pinart, ‘* Les Indiens de |’Etat
de Panama,” Revue d’Ethnographie, vi.


(1887) p. 44.


5 C. Lumholtz, Unknown Mexico, i.
462.

6 H. R. Schoolcraft, The American
Indians, their History, Condition, and
Prospects (Buffalo, 1851), p. 213.
Compare 7zd., Onedta, or Character-
istics of the Red Race of America (New
York and London, 1845), p. 456.

7 H. R. Schoolcraft, /ndian Tribes,
iv. 217.

8 J. G. Bourke, ‘‘ Notes upon the
Religion of the Apache Indians,” Fo/&-
lore, ii, (1891) p. 423.


Personal


names kept


secret


TABOOED WORDS CHAP.


326


their children Comanche and English names in addition to—


their native names, which they are unwilling to communicate


among the to others; for they believe that when somebody calls: a


North
American
Indians.


Sometimes
savages,
though
they will
not utter
their own
names,


person by his or her native name after death the spirit of
the deceased may hear it, and may be prompted to take
revenge on such as disturbed his rest ; whereas if the spirit
be called by a name drawn from another language, it will
pay no heed.’ Speaking of the Californian Indians, and
especially of the Nishinam tribe, a well-informed writer


observes: “One can very seldom learn an Indian’s and
never a squaw’s Indian name, though they will tell
their American titles readily enough... . No squaw will


reveal her own name, but she will tell all her neigh-
bors’ that she can think of. For the reason above given
many people believe that half the squaws have no names at
all. So far is this from the truth that every one possesses
at least one and sometimes two or three.”* Blackfoot
Indians believe that they would be unfortunate in all their
undertakings if they were to speak their names.’ When
the Canadian Indians were asked their names, they used
to hang their heads in silence or answer that they did not
know. When an Ojebway is asked his name, he will look
at some bystander and ask him to answer. “ This reluctance
arises from an impression they receive when young, that if
they repeat their own names it will prevent their growth,
and they will be small in stature. On account of this
unwillingness to tell their names, many strangers have
fancied that they either have no names or have forgotten
them.” ®

In this last case no scruple seems to be felt about
communicating a man’s name to strangers, and no ill effects
appear to be dreaded as a consequence of divulging it; harm
is only done when a name is spoken by its owner. Why is
this? and why in particular should a man be thought to


es


1 A, S. Gatschet, Zhe Xarankawa
Indians, the Coast People of Texas (Ar-
chacological and Ethnological Papers of
the Peabody Museum, Harvard Unt:
versity, vol. i, No. 2), p. 69.

2S. Powers, Zribes of California

Washington, 1877), p. 315.
3G, B, Grinnell, Blackfoot Lodye


Tales, p. 194.

4 Relations des Jésuites, 1633, p. 3
(Canadian reprint, Quebec, 1858).

5 Peter Jones, History of the Ojebway
Indians, p. 162. Compare A. P.
Reid, ‘* Religious Beliefs of the Ojibois
or Sauteux Indians,” Journal of the An-
thropological Institute, iii, (1874) p. 107.


VI PERSONAL NAMES TABOOED 327


stunt his growth by uttering his own name? We may con- do not
jecture that to savages who act and think thus a person’s or .
name only seems to be a part of himself when it is uttered people's
with his own breath; uttered by the breath of others it has °* **
no vital connexion with him, and no harm can come to him
through it. Whereas, so these primitive philosophers may

have argued, when a man lets his own name pass his lips,

he is parting with a living piece of himself, and if he persists

in so reckless a course he must certainly end by dissipating

his energy and shattering his constitution. Many a broken-

down debauchee, many a feeble frame wasted with disease,

may have been pointed out by these simple moralists to

their awe-struck disciples as a fearful example of the fate

that must sooner or later overtake the profligate who in-
dulges immoderately in the seductive habit of mentioning

his own name.

However we may explain it, the fact is certain that Men who
many a savage evinces the strongest. reluctance to pronounce pisos
his own name, while at the same time he makes no objection their own
at all to other people pronouncing it, and will even invite ee
them to do so for him in order to satisfy the curiosity of pen ie
an inquisitive stranger. Thus in some parts of Madagascar do so for
it is fady or taboo for a person to tell his own name, but a “°™
slave or attendant will answer for him.’ “Chatting with an
old Sakalava while the men were packing up, we happened
to ask him his name; whereupon he politely requested us
to ask one of his servants standing by. On expressing our
astonishment that he should have forgotten this, he told us
that it was faédy (tabooed) for one of his tribe to pronounce
his own name. We found this was perfectly true in that
district, but it is not the case with the Sakalava a few days
farther down the river.”* The same curious inconsistency,
as it may seem to us, is recorded of some tribes of American
Indians. Thus we are told that “the name of an American
Indian is a sacred thing, not to be divulged by the owner
himself without due consideration. One may ask a warrior


1 J. Sibree, Zhe Great African Coast,” Antananarivo Annual and
Island (London, 1880), p. 289. Madagascar Magazine, No. i. p. 25

2H. W. Grainge, ‘‘Journal of a (reprint of the first four numbers,
Visit to Mojanga on the North-West Antananarivo and London, 1885).


Men who
will not
mention
their own
names will
yet invite
other
people to
do so for
them.


328 TABOOED WORDS CHAP.


of any tribe to give his name, and the question will be met
with either a point-blank refusal or the more diplomatic
evasion that he cannot understand what is wanted of him.
The moment a friend approaches, the warrior first interrog-
ated will whisper what is wanted, and the friend can tell
the name, receiving a reciprocation of the courtesy from
the other.”’ This general statement applies, for example,
to the Indian tribes of British Columbia, as to whom it is
said that “one of their strangest prejudices, which appears
to pervade all tribes alike, is a dislike to telling their names
—thus you never get a man’s right name from himself;
but they will tell each other’s names without hesitation.” ?
Though it is considered very rude for a stranger to ask an
Apache his name, and the Apache will never mention it him-
self, he will allow his friend at his side to mention it for him.
The Abipones of South America thought it a sin in a man to
utter his own name, but they would tell each other’s names
freely ; when Father Dobrizhoffer asked a stranger Indian his
name, the man would nudge his neighbour with his elbow
as a sign that his companion should answer the question.*
Some of the Malemut Esquimaux of Bering Strait dislike
very much to pronounce their own names; if a man be
asked his name he will appear confused and will generally
turn to a bystander, and request him to mention it for him.
In the whole of the East Indian Archipelago the etiquette
is the same. As a general rule no one will utter his own
name. To enquire, “What is your name?” is a very in-
delicate question in native society. When in the course of
administrative or judicial business a native is asked his name,
instead of replying he will look at his comrade to indicate
that he is to answer for him, or he will say straight out,
“Ask him.” The superstition is current all over the East
Indies without exception,’ and it is found also among the


1 J. G. Bourke, ‘* Medicine-men of
the Apaches,” Ninth Annual Report of
the Bureau of Ethnology (Washington,
1892), p. 461.

2R. C. Mayne, Four Years in
British Columbia and Vancouver
‘sland (London, 1862), pp. 278 sq.

8 J. G. Bourke, On the Border with
Crook, pp. 131 59.


4M. Dobrizhofler, Historia de Abi-
pontbus (Vienna, 1784), ii. 498.

5 E. W. Nelson, ‘*The Eskimo
about Bering Strait,” Aighteenth An-
nual Report of the Bureau of American
Ethnology, part i. (Washington, 1899)
p. 289.

® G, A. Wilken, Handleiding voor de
vergelijkende Volkenkunde van Neder.


VI PERSONAL NAMES TABOOED 329


Motu and Motumotu tribes of British New Guinea,’ the
Papuans of Finsch Haven in German New Guinea,” the
Nufoors of Dutch New Guinea,’ and the Melanesians of the
Bismarck Archipelago. Among many tribes of South
Africa men and women never mention their names if they
can get any one else to do it for them, but they do not
absolutely refuse when it cannot be avoided.2 No Warua
will tell his name, but he does not object to being addressed
by it.° Among the Masai, “when a man is called or spoken
to, he is addressed by his father’s name, and his own name
is only used when speaking to his mother. It is considered
unlucky for a man to be addressed by name. The methods
employed in finding out what an individual is called seem
apt to lead to confusion. If a man is asked his name, he
replies by giving that of his father, and to arrive at his own


landsch-Indié, p. 221. Compare J. het Nederlandsche Zendelinggenootschap,


H. F. Kohlbrugge, ‘‘ Naamgeving in
Insulinde,” Sijdragen tot de Taal-
Land- en Volkenkunde van Neder-
landsch-Indié, lii. (1901) pp. 172 sg.
The custom is reported for the British
settlements in the Straits of Malacca
by T. J. Newbold (Political and Sta-
tistical Account of the British Settle-
ments tn the Straits of Malacca,London,
1839, ii. 176); for Sumatra in general
by W. Marsden (History of Sumatra,
pp. 286 sg.), and A. L. van Hasselt
(Volksbeschrijving van Midden-Suma-
tra, p. 271); for the Battas by Baron
van Hoévell (‘‘Iets over ’t oorlogvoeren
der Batta’s,” Zijdschrift voor Neder-
landsch Indi#, N.S., vii. (1878) p.
436, note) ; for the Dyaks by C. Hupe
(‘* Korte Verhandeling over de Gods-
dienst, Zeden, enz. der Dajakkers,”
Tijdschrift voor Neériands Indié, 1846,
dl. iii. p. 250), and W. H. Furness
(Home-life of Borneo Head-hunters,
Philadelphia, 1902, p. 16); for the
island of Sumba by S. Roos (* Bij-
drage tot de Kennis van Taal, Land en
Volk op het Eiland Soemba,” p. 70,
Verhandelingen van het Bataviaasch
Genootschap van Kunsten en Weten-
schappen, xxxvi.); and for Bolang Mon-
gondo, in the west of Celebes, by N. P.
Wilken and J. A. Schwarz (‘* Allerlei
over het land en volk van Bolaang
Mongondou,” Mededeelingen van wege


xi. (1867) p. 356).

1 J. Chalmers, Pioneering in New
Guinea, p. 187. If a Motumotu man
is hard pressed for his name and there
is nobody near to help him, he will at
last in a very stupid way mention it
himself. F

2 ©. Schellong, ‘Uber Familien-
leben und Gebrauche der Papuas der
Umgebung von Finschhafen,” Zez¢-
schrift fiir Ethnologie, xxi. (1889) p.
12. Compare M. Krieger, Meu Guinea
(Berlin, 1899), p. 172.

3 Th. J. F. van Hasselt, ‘‘ Gebruik
van vermomde Taal door de Nufooren,”
Tijdschrift voor Indische Taal- Land-
en Volkenkunde, xlv. (1902) p. 279.
The Nufoors are a Papuan tribe on
Doreh Bay, in Dutch New Guinea.
See zd., in TZijdschrit voor Indische
Taal- Land- en Volkenkunde, xvi.
(1903) p. 287.

4 J. Graf Pfeil, Studien und Beobacht-
ungen aus der Stidsee (Brunswick,
1899), p. 78; P. A. Kleintitschen,
Die Kiistenbewohner der Gazellehalb-
tinsel (Hiltrup bei Miinster, preface
dated Christmas, 1906), pp. 237 sg.

5 J. Macdonald, ‘‘ Manners, Customs,
Superstitions, and Religions of South
African Tribes,” Journal of the Anthro-
pological Institute, xx. (1891) p. -131.

$V. L. Cameron, Across Africa
(London, 1877), ii. 61.


Sometimes
the pro-
hibition to
mention
personal
names

is not
permanent
but temp-
orary and
contingent.


330 TABOOED WORDS


CHAP,


name it is necessary to ask a third person, or to ask him
what is the name of his mother. There is no objection to
another person mentioning his name even in his presence.” *
We are told that the Wanyamwesi almost always address
each other as “ Mate” or “ Friend,’ and a man sometimes
quite forgets his own name and has to be reminded of it by
another.2. The writer who makes this statement was prob-
ably unaware of the reluctance of many savages to utter
their own names, and hence he mistook that reluctance for
forgetfulness. In Uganda no one will mention his totem.
If it is necessary that it should be known, he will ask a
bystander to mention it for him.® The Ba-Lua in the
Congo region are unwilling to pronounce the name of
their tribe ; if they are pressed on the subject, they will
call on some foreigner to give the required information.‘
Sometimes the embargo laid on personal names is not
permanent; it is conditional on circumstances, and when
these change it ceases to operate. Thus when the Nandi
men are away on a foray, nobody at home may pronounce
the names of the absent warriors ; they must be referred to
as birds. Should a child so far forget itself as to mention
one of the distant ones by name, the mother would rebuke
it, saying, “ Don’t talk of the birds who are in the heavens.” °
Among the Bangala of the Upper Congo, while a man is
fishing and when he returns with his catch, his proper name
is in abeyance and nobody may mention it. Whatever the
fisherman’s real name may be, he is called mzwe/e without
distinction. The reason is that the river is full of spirits,
who, if they heard the fisherman’s real name, might so work
against him that he would catch little or nothing. Even
when he has caught his fish and landed with them, the buyer
must still not address him by his proper name, but must
only call him mwe/le; for even then, if the spirits were to


1 S$. L. Hinde and H. Hinde, 7he
Last of the Masai (London, 1901),
pp. 48 sg. Compare Sir H. Johnston,
The Uganda Protectorate (London,
1902), ii. 826 sg.; M. Merker, Die
Masai (Berlin, 1904), p. 56.

2 P, Reichard, ‘* Die Wanjamuesi,”
Zeitschrift der Gesellschaft fir Erd-
tunde su Berlin, xxiv, (1889) p. 258.


8 J. Roscoe, ‘* Further Notes on the
Manners and Customs of the Baganda,”
Journal of the Anthropological Insti-
lute, Xxxil, (1902) p. 29.

4 FE. Torday and T. A. Joyce,
**Note on the Southern Ba-Mbala,”
Man, vii. (1907) p. 81.

6 A, C. Hollis, Zhe Nandi, p.
43:


VI PERSONAL NAMES TABOOED 331


hear his proper name, they would either bear it in mind and
serve him out another day, or they might so mar the fish he
had caught that he would get very little for them. Hence
the fisherman can extract heavy damages from anybody who
mentions his name, or can compel the thoughtless speaker to
relieve him of the fish at a good price so as to restore his
luck. When the Sulka of New Britain are near the territory
of their enemies the Gaktei, they take care not to mention
them by their proper name, believing that were they to do so,
their foes would attack and slay them. Hence in these
circumstances they speak of the Gaktei as o /apszek, that is,
“the rotten tree-trunks,” and they imagine that by calling them
that they make the limbs of their dreaded enemies ponderous
and clumsy like logs.” This example illustrates the ex-
tremely materialistic view which these savages take of the
nature of words; they suppose that the mere utterance of
an expression signifying clumsiness will homoeopathically
affect with clumsiness the limbs of their distant foemen.
Another illustration of this curious misconception is furnished
by a Caffre superstition that the character of a young thief
can be reformed by shouting his name over a boiling kettle
of medicated water, then clapping a lid on the kettle and
leaving the name to steep in the water for several days.
It is not in the least necessary that the thief should be
aware of the use that is being made of his name behind his
back; the moral reformation will be effected without his
knowledge.’

When it is deemed necessary that a man’s real name In order to
should be kept secret, it is often customary, as we have seen, 2¥0!4 the
to call him by a surname or nickname. As distinguished people's
from the real or primary names, these secondary names are 0").
apparently held to be no part of the man himself, so that parents are
they may be freely used and divulged to everybody without "<u"


named


endangering his safety thereby. Sometimes in order to = their
avoid the use of his own name a man will be called after Gnetes and


his child. Thus we are informed that “the Gippsland aunts after


1 Rev. J. H. Weeks, ‘ Anthropo- 2 R. Parkinson, Dredssig Jahre in
logical Notes on thé Bangala of the er Siidsee, p. 198.
Upper Congo River,” Journal of the
Anthropological Institute, xxxix. (1909) 8 Dudley Kidd, Savage Childhood,
pp. 128, 459. P- 73


their
nephews
and nieces,
and so
forth.


332 TABOOED WORDS CHAP,


blacks objected strongly to let any one outside the tribe
know their names, lest their enemies, learning them, should
make them vehicles of incantation, and so charm their lives
away. As children were not thought to have enemies, they
used to speak of a man as ‘the father, uncle, or cousin of
So-and-so, naming a child; but on all occasions abstained from
mentioning the name of a grown-up person.”’ Similarly
among the Nufoors of Dutch New Guinea, grown-up persons
who are related by marriage may not mention each other’s
names, but it is lawful to mention the names of children ;
hence in order to designate a person whose name they may
not pronounce they will speak of him or her as the father or
mother of So-and-so.2 The Alfoors of Poso, in Celebes,
will not pronounce their own names. Among them, accord-
ingly, if you wish to ascertain a person’s name, you ought
not to ask the man himself, but should enquire of others.
But if this is impossible, for example, when there is no one
else near, you should ask him his child’s name, and then
address him as the “Father of So-and-so.” Nay, these Alfoors
are shy of uttering the names even of children; so when a
boy or girl has a nephew or niece, he or she is addressed
as “ Uncle of So-and-so,” or “ Aunt of So-and-so.”* In pure
Malay society, we are told, a man is never asked his name,
and the custom of naming parents after their children is
adopted only as a means of avoiding the use of the parents’
own names. The writer who makes this statement adds
in confirmation of it that childless persons are named after
their younger brothers“ Among the land Dyaks of
northern Borneo children as they grow up are called,
according to their sex, the father or mother of a child of
their father’s or mother’s younger brother .or sister,’ that is,


1 EF, M. Curr, Zhe Australian Race,
iii, 545. Similarly among the Daco-
tas ‘‘there is no secrecy in children’s
names, but when they grow up there
is a secrecy in men’s names” (H. R.
Schoolcraft, /udian Tribes, iii. 240).

2 Th. J. F. van Hasselt, ‘* Gebruik
van vermomde Taal door de Nufooren,”
Tijdschrift voor Indische Taal- Land-
en Volkenkunde, x\v. (1902) p. 278.

9 A.C. Kruijt, ‘* Een en ander aan-
gaande het geestelijk en maatschappelijk


leven van den Poso-Alfoer,” AZededee-
lingen van wege het Nederlandsche Zen-
delinggenootschap, x\. (1896) pp. 273599.

4G. Mansveld (Kontroleur van
Nias), ‘* Iets over de namen en Galars
onder de Maleijers in de Padangsche
Bovenlanden, bepaaldelijk in noorde-
lijkk Agam,” Zijdschrift voor Indische
Taal- Land- en Volkenkunde, xxiii.
(1876) pp. 443, 449.

6 Spenser St. John, Life in the For:
ests of the Far East,* i, 208


VI PERSONAL NAMES TABOOED 333


they are called the father or mother of what we should
call their first cousin. The Caffres used to think it dis-
courteous to call a bride by her own name, so they would
call her “the Mother of So-and-so,” even when she was only
betrothed, far less a wife and a mother... Among the Kukis
and Zemis or Kacha Nagas of Assam parents drop their
own names after the birth of a child and are named Father
and Mother of So-and-so. Childless couples go by the
names of “the childless father,” “the childless mother,” “the
father of no child,” “the mother of no child”? A Zulu
woman may not utter her husband’s name; if she speaks to

or of him she says, “ Father of So-and-so,” mentioning the
name of one of his children.2 A Hindoo woman will not
name her husband. If she has to refer to him she will
designate him as the father of her child or by some other
periphrasis.« The widespread custom of naming a father The
after his child has sometimes been supposed to spring from Somme"


custom of


a desire on the father’s part to assert his paternity, appar- naming


Pia . : : parents
ently as a means of obtaining those rights over his children 34... their


which had previously, under a system of mother-kin, been children


possessed by the mother.’ But this explanation does not svice from


account for the parallel custom of naming the mother after ria 3
her child, which seems commonly to co-exist with the patti


practice of naming the father after the child. Still less, ifthe’ pan’ :
possible, does it apply to the customs of calling childless persons

couples the father and mother of children which do not dressed
: ° ‘ or directly
exist, of naming people after their younger brothers, and of referred to.


1 Dudley Kidd, 7he Essential Kajir,
p. 202.

2 L. A. Waddell, ‘*The Tribes of
the Brahmapootra Valley,” Journal of
the Asiatic Society of Bengal, \xix. part
iii. (1901) pp. 52, 69, compare 46.

3-H. Callaway, Religious System of
the Amazulu, part iii. p. 316, note.

4 W. Crooke, Popular Religion and
Folk-lore of Northern India (West-
minster, 1896), ii. 5 sg. Compare 7d.,
Tribes and Castes of the North-Western
Provinces and Oudh, ii. 251.

5 G. A. Wilken, Handleiding voor
de vergelijkende Volkenkunde van Neder-
landsch-Indié, pp. 216-219; E. B.
Tylor, ‘On a Method of Investigating
the Developement of Institutions,”


Journal of the Anthropological Institute,

xviii. (1889) pp. 248-250 (who refers
to a series of papers by G. A. Wilken,
‘*Over de primitieve vormen van het
huwelijk,” published in /xdische Gids,
1880, etc., which I have not seen).
Wilken’s theory is rejected by Mr.
A. C. Kruijt (4¢.), who explains the
custom by the fear of attracting the
attention of evil spirits to the person
named. Other explanations are sug-
gested by Mr. J. H. F. Kohlbrugge
(‘*Naamgeving in Insulinde,” £27-
adragen tot de Taal- Land- en Volken-
kunde van Nederlandsch-Indié, ii,
(1901) pp. 160-170), and by Mr. E.
Crawley (Zhe Mystic Rose, London,
1902, pp. 428-433).


334 TABOOED WORDS


CHAP,


designating children as the uncles and aunts of So-and-so,


or as the fathers and mothers of their first cousins.


But


all these practices are explained in a simple and natural
way if we suppose that they originate in a _ reluctance
to utter the real names of persons addressed or directly


referred to.


That reluctance is probably based partly on a


fear of attracting the notice of evil spirits, partly on a dread
of revealing the name to sorcerers, who would thereby obtain
a handle for injuring the owner of the name.’


1 For evidence of the custom of
naming parents after their children in
Australia, see E. J. Eyre, Journals of
Expeditions of Discovery into Central
Australia (London, 1845), ii. 325 sg.:
in Sumatra, see W. Marsden, Azstory
of Sumatra, p. 286; Baron van Hoé-
vell, ‘‘Iets over *t oorlogvoeren der
Batta’s,” Zadschrift voor Nederlandsch-
Indié, N.S. vii. (1878) p. 436, note ;
A. L. van Hasselt, Volksbeschrijving van
Midden-Sumatra, p. 274: in Nias, see
J. T. Nieuwenhuisen en H. C. B. von
Rosenberg, Verslag omtrent het etland
Nias, p. 28 (Verhandelingen van het
Bataviaasch Genootschap van Kunsten
en Wetenschappen, xxx. Batavia, 1863):
in Java, see P, J. Veth, Java, i. (Haar-
lem, 1875) p. 642; J. H. F. Kohl-
brugge, ‘* Die Tenggeresen, ein alter
Javanischen Volksstamm,” Azjdragen
tot de Taal- Land- en Volkenkunde van
Nederlandsch-Indié, liii. (1901) p. 121:
in Borneo, see C. Hupe, ‘‘ Korte Ver-
handeling over de Godsdienst, Zeden,
enz. der Dajakkers,” Zijdschrift voor
Neérlands Indié, 1846, dl. iii. p. 249 ;
H. Low, Sarawak, p. 249; Spenser
St. John, Life in the Forests of the Far
East,? i. 208; M. T. H.  Perelaer,
Ethnographische Beschrijving der Da-
jaks, p. 42; C. Hose, ‘The Natives
of Borneo,” Journal of the Anthropo-
logical Institute, xxiii. (1894) p. 170;
W. H. Furness, /olk-lore in Borneo
(Wallingford, Pennsylvania, 1899,
privately printed), p. 26; ¢d., Home-
life of Borneo Head-hunters, pp. 17 $q.,
55; A. W. Nieuwenhuis, Quer durch
Borneo, i. 75: among the Mantras of
Malacca, see W. W. Skeat and C, O,
Blagden, Pagan Races of the Malay
Peninsula, ii, 16 5g.% among the


Negritos of Zambales in the Philip-
pines, see W. A. Reed, Wegritos of
Zambales (Manilla, 1904), p. 55:
in the islands between Celebes and
New Guinea, see J. G. F. Riedel, De
slutk- en kroesharige rassen tusschen
Selebes en Papua, pp. 5, 137, 152 5¢.,
238, 260, 353, 392, 418, 450; J. H.
W. van der Miesen, ‘‘ Een en ander
over Boeroe,” Mededeelingen van wege
het Nederlandsche Zendelinggenootschap,
xlvi. (1902) p. 444: in Celebes and
other parts of the Indian Archipelago,
see J. H. F. Kohlbrugge, ‘* Naam-
geving in Insulinde,” Azjdragen tot de
Taal- Land- en Volkenkunde van
Nederlandsch-Indié, \ii. (1901) pp.
160-170; G. A. Wilken, TZand-
leiding voor de vergelijkende Volken-
kunde van Nederlandsch-Indié, pp.
216 sgg.: in New Guinea, see P. W.
Schmidt, ‘‘ Ethnographisches von Ber-


‘linhafen, Deutsch- Neu- Guinea,” AZ?t-


thetlungen der  Anthropologischen
Geselischaft in Wien, xxx. (1899) p.
28; among the Kasias of North-eastern
India, see Col. H. Yule, in Journal of
the Anthropological Institute, ix. (1880)
p. 298; L. A. Waddell, ‘‘ The Tribes
of the Brahmaputra Valley,” Journal
of the Asiatic Society of Bengal, \xix.
part iii, (Calcutta, 1901) p. 46: among
some of the indigenous races of southern
China, see P. Vial, ‘* Les Gni ou Gni-
pa, tribu Lolote du Yun-Nan,” AZzsstans
Catholiques, xxv. (1893) p. 270; La
Mission lyonnaise @exploration com-
merciale en Chine (Lyons, 1898), p.
369: in Corea, see Mrs. Bishop, Korea
and her Neighbours (London, 1898), i.
136: among the Yukagirs of north-
eastern Asia, see W. Jochelson, ‘* Die
Jukagiren im jfussersten Nordosten


v1 NAMES OF RELATIONS TABOOED 335


§ 2. Names of Relations tabooed


It might naturally be expected that the reserve so The names
commonly maintained with regard to personal names would es ag
be dropped or at least relaxed among relations and friends. the speaker
But the reverse of this is often the case. It is precisely the el pe
persons most intimately connected by blood and especially ally by
by marriage to whom the rule applies with the greatest inay often
stringency. Such people are often forbidden, not only to not be
pronounce each other's names, but even to utter ordinary ragga ns
words which resemble or have a single syllable in common
with these names. The persons who are thus mutually
debarred from mentioning each other’s names are especially
husbands and wives, a man and his wife’s parents, and a
woman and her husband’s father. For example, among the Women’s
Caffres of South Africa a woman may not publicly pronounce pane ae
the birth-name of her husband or of any of his brothers, nor Caftres.
may she use the interdicted word in its ordinary sense. If
her husband, for instance, be called u-Mpaka, from zmpaka,


a small feline animal, she must speak of that beast by some


other name.’


Asiens,” xvii. Jahresbericht der Geogra-
phischen Gesellschaft von Bern (Bern,
1900), pp. 26 sg.; P. von Stenin,
‘¢Jochelson’s Forschungen unter den
Jukagiren,” Glodus, Ixxvi. (1899) p.
169: among the Masai, see M.
Merker, Dze Masaz (Berlin, 1904),
pp. 59, 235: among the Bechuanas,
Basutos, and other Caffre tribes of
South. Africa, see D. Livingston, J/7s-
stonary Travels and Researches in
South Africa (London, 1857), p. 126;
J. Shooter, Zhe Kajfirs of Natal (Lon-
don, 1857), pp. 220 sg.; D. Leslie,
Among the Zulus and Amatongas*
(Edinburgh, 1875), pp. 171 sg.; G.
M‘Call Theal, Kafir Folk-lore* (Lon-
don, 1886), p. 225; Father Porte,
**Les reminiscences d’un missionaire
du Basutoland,” AZsstons Catholiques,
xxviii. (1896) p. 300: among the
Hos of Togoland in West Africa, see
J. Spieth, Die Lwe-Stamme, p. 217:
among the Patagonians, see G. C.
Musters, 4/ Home with the Patagonians


Further, a Caffre wife is forbidden to pro-


(London, 1871), p. 177: among the
Lengua Indians of the Gran Chaco, see
G. Kurze, ‘* Sitten und Gebrauche der
Lengua-Indianer,” /cttheilungen der
Geographischen Gesellschaft 2u Jena,
xxiii. (1905) p. 28: among the Mayas
of Guatemala, see H. H. Bancroft, Va-
tive Races of the Pacific States, ii. 680:
among the Haida Indians of Queen
Charlotte Islands, see J. R. Swanton,
‘* Contributions to the Ethnology of
the Haida,” Memoir of the American
Museum of Natural History, The Jesup
North Pacific Expedition, vol. v. part i.
(Leyden and New York, 1905) p. 118:
and among the Tinneh and occasion-
ally the Thlinkeet Indians of north-
west America, see E. Petitot, J/ono-
graphie des Déene-Dindjié (Paris, 1876),
p- 61; H. J. Holmberg, ‘‘ Ethno-
graphische Skizzen iiber die Vélker des
russischen Amerika,” Acta Societatzs
Scientiarum Fennicae, iv. (1856) p. 319.

1 J. Shooter, Zhe Kajirs of Natal
(London, 1857), p. 221.


Women’s
speech
among the
Caffres.


TABOOED WORDS CHAP,


336


nounce even mentally the names of her father-in-law and of
all her husband’s male relations in the ascending line ; and
whenever the emphatic syllable of any of their names occurs
in another word, she must avoid it by substituting either an
entirely new word, or, at least, another syllable in its place.
Hence this custom has given rise to an almost distinct
language among the women, which the Caffres call Ukuteta
Kwabafazi or “women’s speech.”* The interpretation of
this “women’s speech” is naturally very difficult, “for no
definite rules can be given for the formation of these substi-
tuted words, nor is it possible to form a dictionary of them,
their number being so great——since there may be many
women, even in the same tribe, who would be no more at
liberty to use the substitutes employed by some others, than
they are to use the original words themselves.”? A Caffre
man, on his side, may not mention the name of his mother-
in-law, nor may she pronounce his; but he is free to utter
words in which the emphatic syllable of her name occurs.®
In Northern Nyassaland no woman will speak the name of
her husband or even use a word that may be synonymous
with it. If she were to call him by his proper name, she
believes it would be unlucky and would affect her powers of
conception. In like manner women abstain, for superstitious
reasons, from using the common names of articles of food,
which they designate by terms peculiar to themselves.‘


Among the Kondes, at the


1 Maclean, Compendium of Kajir
Laws and Customs (Cape Town, 1866),
pp. 92 sg. ; D. Leslie, Among the Zulus
and Amatongas,* pp. 141 sg., 1723
M. Kranz, Natur- und Kulturleben der
Zulus (Wiesbaden, 1880), pp. 114 sg.;
G. M‘Call Theal, Xafir Folk-lore*®
(London, 1886), p. 214; z@., Records
of South-Eastern Africa, vii. 4353
Dudley Kidd, 7he Zssential Kajir, pp.
236-243; Father Porte, ‘‘ Les re-
miniscences d’un missionaire du Basuto-
land,” Missions Catholiques, xxviii.
(1896) p. 233.

* Rev. Francis Fleming, Aaffraria
and its Inhabitants (London, 1853),
p. 97; t#d., Southern Africa (London,
1856), pp. 238 sg. This writer states
that the women are forbidden to pro-


north - western end of Lake


nounce ‘‘any word which may happen
to contain a sound similar to any one in
the names of their nearest male rela-
tives.”

3 Maclean, of. cit. p. 93; D.
Leslie, Among the Zulus and Ama-
tongas,* pp. 46, 102, 172, The exten-
sive system of taboos on_ personal
names among the Caffres is known as
Ukuhlonipa, or simply hloni~a. The
fullest account of it with which I am
acquainted is given by Leslie, of. cét.
pp. 141 sg., 172-180, See further
Miss A, Werner, ‘*The Custom of
Hionipa in its Influence on Language,”
Journal of the African Society, No. 15
(Apal, 1905), pp. 346-356.»

Sir H. H, Johnston, British Central
Africa (London, 1897), p. 452.


VI NAMES OF RELATIONS TABOOED 337


Nyassa, a woman may not mention the name of her father- Names of
in-law ; indeed she may not even speak to him nor see him.* pacmncgs,
Among the Barea and Bogos of Eastern Africa a woman first-born
never mentions her husband’s name; a Bogo wife would (33. \"
rather be unfaithful to him than commit the monstrous sin
of allowing his name to pass her lips.7 Among the Haussas
“the first-born son is never called by his parents by his
name ; indeed they will not even speak with him if other
people are present. The same rule holds good of the first
husband and the first wife.”* In antiquity Ionian women
would not call their husbands by their names.* While the
rites of Ceres were being performed in Rome, no one might
name a father or a daughter.” Among the South Slavs at
the present day husbands and wives will not mention each
other’s names, and a young wife may not call any of her
housemates by their true names ; she must invent or at least
adopt other names for them. A Kirghiz woman dares not
pronounce the names of the older relations of her husband,
nor even use words which resemble them in sound. For
example, if one of these relations is called Shepherd, she
may not speak of sheep, but must call them “the bleating
ones”; if his name is Lamb, she must refer to lambs as
“the young of the bleating ones.””_ After marriage an Aino
wife may not mention her husband’s name; to do so would
be deemed equivalent to killing him.8 Among the Sgaus,
a Karen tribe of Burma, children never mention their
parents’ names.’ A Toda man may not utter the names of
his mother’s brother, his grandfather and grandmother, his
wife’s mother, and of the man from whom he has received


1 A, Merensky, ‘‘Das Konde-volk
im deutschen Gebiet am Nyassa-See,”
Verhandlungen der Berliner Gesellschaft
fiir Anthropologie, Ethnologie, und
Urgeschichte, 1893, p. (296).

2 W. Munzinger, Ostafrikanische
Studien (Schaffhausen, 1864), p. 526;
td., Sitten und Recht der Bogos (Win-
terthur, 1859), p. 95.

3G. A. Krause,
Sitten der Haussa,’
(1896) p. 375.

* Herodotus, i. 146.

§ Servius, on Virgil, den. iv. 58.


PT. I


“* Merkwiirdige
Globus, xix.


6 K. Rhamm, ‘*Der Verkehr der
Geschlecter unter den Slaven in
seinen gegensatzlichen Erscheinungen,”
Globus, \xxxii. (1902) p. 192.

7 W. Radloff, Proben der Volks-
litteratur der tiirkischen Stimme Siid-
Sibiriens, iii. (St. Petersburg, 1870)
p. 13, note 3.

8 J. Batchelor, The Ainu and their
Folk-lore (London, 1901), pp. 226,


249 sg., 252.
® Bringaud, ‘‘Les Karins de la
Birmanie,” A/isstons Catholiques, xx.


(1888) p. 308.
; Z


338 TABOOED WORDS CHAP.


Names of
relations
by mar-


riage
tabooed.


his wife, who is usually the wife’s father. All these names
are tabooed to him in the lifetime of the persons who bear
them, and after death the prohibitions are not only main-
tained but extended.’ In southern India wives believe that
to tell their husband’s name or to pronounce it even in a
dream would bring him to an untimely end. Further, they -
may not mention the names of their parents, their parents-in-
law, and their brothers-in-law and sisters-in-law.2 Among
the Ojebways husbands and wives never mention each other’s
names ;* among the Omahas a man and his father-in-law
and mother-in-law will on no account utter each other’s
names in company.* A Dacota “is not allowed to address
or to look towards his wife’s mother, especially, and the
woman is shut off from familiar intercourse with her
husband’s father and others, and etiquette prohibits them
from speaking the names of their relatives by marriage.”
“ None of their customs,” adds the same writer, “is more
tenacious of life than this; and no family law is more
binding.”® In the Nishinam tribe of California “a husband
never calls his wife by name on any account, and it is said
that divorces have been produced by no other provocation
than that.” °
The Battas or Bataks of Sumatra display a great aversion
to mentioning their own names and a still greater aversion
to mentioning the names of their parents, grandparents, or
ne elder blood-relations. Politeness forbids the putting of
speaker by direct questions on this subject, so that the investigation of
marriage, i ‘ .
may not be personal identity becomes difficult and laborious. When a
raping set Batta expects to be questioned as to his relations, he will
Indies. usually provide himself with a friend to answer for him.”
A Batak man may never mention the names of his wife, his
daughter-in-law and of his son-in-law; a woman is most
particularly forbidden to mention the name of the man who


Names of
relations,

especially
of persons


1 W. H. R. Rivers, Zhe Zodas, p.
626.

* E. Thurston, Zthnographic Notes
in Southern India, p. 533.

% Peter Jones, History of the Ojeb-
way [ndians, p. 162.

4. James, Zxpedition from Pitts-
burgh to the Rocky Mountains (London,
1823), i. 232.


5S. R. Riggs, Dakota Grammar,
Texts, and Ethnography (Washington,
1893), Pp. 204.

8S. Powers, Zribes of California,

i 38s;

7 Willer, ‘* Verzameling der Battasche
Wetten en Instellingen in Mandheling
en Pertibie,” 7%ydschrift voor Neder-
landsch-Indié, 1846, dl. ii. 337 sg.


VI NAMES OF RELATIONS TABOOED 339


has married her daughter." Among the Karo-Bataks the for-
bidden names are those of parents, uncles, aunts, parents-
in-law, brothers and sisters, and especially grandparents.”
Among the Dyaks a child never pronounces the names of
his parents, and is angry if any one else does so in his presence.
A husband never calls his wife by her name, and she never
calls him by his. If they have children, they name each other
after them, “Father of So-and-so” and “Mother of So-and-so” ’;
if they have no children they use the pronouns “he” and “she,”
or an expression such as “he or she whom I love”; and in
general,members of a Dyak family do not mention each other’s
names.® Moreover, when the personal names happen also, as
they often do, to be names of common objects, the Dyak is
debarred from designating these objects by their ordinary
names. For instance, if a man or one of his family is called
Bintang, which means “star,” he must not call a star a star
(dcntang); he must call it a parzama. If he or a member of
his domestic circle bears the name of Bulan, which means
“moon,” he may not speak of the moon as the moon
(dulan) ; he must call it penala. Hence it comes about that
in the Dyak language there are two sets of distinct names
for many objects.“ Among the sea Dyaks of Sarawak a
man may not pronounce the name of his father-in-law or
mother-in-law without incurring the wrath of the spirits.
And since he reckons as his father-in-law and mother-in-law
not only the father and mother of his own wife, but also the
fathers and mothers of his brothers’ wives and sisters’
husbands, and likewise the fathers and mothers of all his
cousins, the number of tabooed names may be very consider-
able and the opportunities of error correspondingly numerous.
To make confusion worse confounded, the names of persons
are often the names of common things, such as moon, bridge,


1 J. H. Meerwaldt, “‘ Gebruiken der
Bataks in het maatschappelijk leven,”
Mededeelingen van wege het Neder-


landsche Zendelinggenootschap, x\ix.
(1905) PP. 123, 125.
2 J. E. Neumann, ‘‘ Xemali, Pan-


tang en "Reboe bij de Karo-Bataks,”
Tijdschrift voor Indische Taal- Land-
en Volkenkunde, xlviii. (1906) p.
510.


3 C. Hupe, ‘‘ Korte Verhandeling
over de Godsdienst, Zeden, enz. der
Dajakkers,” 7ijdschrift voor Neériands
Indié, 1846, dl. iii. pp. 249 sg.

* «De Dajaks op Borneo,” Mededee-
lingen van wege het Nederlandsche Zen-
delinggenootschap, xiii. (1869) p. 78;
G. A. Wilken, Handleiding voor de
vergelijkende Volkenkunde van Neder-
landsch-lidié, p. 599.


340 TABOOED WORDS CHAP,
Names of barley, cobra, leopard ; so that when any of a man’s many
relations, = .
especially fathers-in-law and mothers-in-law are called by such names,


of persons these common words may not pass his lips. Among the

related to : AN ae . :

the speaker Dyaks of Landak and Tajan it is forbidden to mention the

by mar- names of parents and grandparents, sometimes also of great-

riage, may :

not be | grandparents, whether they are alive or dead.? Among

mentioned the Alfoors or Toradjas of Poso, in central Celebes, you may

Indies. | not pronounce the names of your father, mother, grand-
parents, and other near relations. But the strictest taboo is
on the names of parents-in-law. A son-in-law and a
daughter-in-law may not only never mention the names of
their parents-in-law, but if the names happen to be ordinary
words of the language, they may never allow the words in
their common significance to pass their lips. For example,
if my father is called Njara (“horse”), I may not speak of
him by that name; but in speaking of the animal I am free
to use the word horse (zara). But if my father-in-law is
called Njara, the case is different, for then not only may I
not refer to him by his name, but I may not even call a
horse a horse; in speaking of the animal I must use some
other word. The missionary who reports the custom is
acquainted with a man whose mother-in-law rejoices in the
name of Ringgi (“rixdollar”). When this man has occasion
to refer to real rixdollars, he alludes to them delicately as
“large guilders” (voepia bose). Another man may not use
the ordinary word for water (cewe); in speaking of water he
employs a word (owaz) taken from a different dialect.
Indeed, among these Alfoors it is the common practice in
such cases to replace the forbidden word by a kindred word
of the same significance borrowed from another dialect. In
this way many fresh terms or new forms of an old word pass
into general circulation.’ Among the Alfoors of Minahassa,


1 R, Shelford, “Two Medicine- gaande het geestelijk en maatschappelijk
baskets from Sarawak,” Journal of the levenvan den Poso-Alfoer,” Mededeelin-
Anthropological Institute, xxxiii.(1903) gen van wege het Nederlandsche Zende-
pp. 78 sg. linggenootschap, x\, (1896) pp. 273 sy.

* M. C, Schadee, * Bijdrage tot de The word for taboo among these people
kennis van den godsdienst der Dajaks is Aapali, See further A, C. Kruijt,


van Landak en Tajan,” Bijdragen totde ‘*Eenige ethnographische aanteeken-
Taal- Land- en Volhenkundevan Neder- ingen omtrent de Toboengkoe en
landsche-Indié, \vi, (1904) p. 536. Tomori,” of. c#t, xliv. (1900) pp. 219,


8 A. C, Kruijt, “Een enander aan- 237,


VI NAMES OF RELATIONS TABOOED 341


in northern Celebes, the custom is carried still further so as
to forbid the use even of words which merely resemble the
personal names in sound. It is especially the name of a
father-in-law which is thus laid under an interdict. If he,
for example, is called Kalala, his son-in-law may not speak
of a horse by its common name awalo; he must call it a
“ riding-beast ” (sasakajan).' So among the Alfoors of the
island of Buru it is taboo to mention the names of parents
and parents-in-law, or even to speak of common objects by
words which resemble these names in sound. Thus, if your
mother-in-law is called Dalu, which means “ betel,” you may
not ask for betel by its ordinary name, you must ask for
“red mouth” (mue mtha); if you want betel-leaf, you may
not say betel-leaf (da/u ’mun), you must say karon fenna.
In the same island it is also taboo to mention the name of
an elder brother in his presence.? Transgressions of these
rules are punished with fines.’ In Bolang Mongondo, a
district in the west of Celebes, the unmentionable names are
those of parents, parents-in-law, uncles and aunts.“ Among
the Alfoors of Halmahera a son-in-law may never use his
father-in-law’s name in speaking to him; he must simply
address him as “ Father-in-law.”® In Sunda it is thought
that a particular crop would be spoilt if a man were to
mention the names of his father and mother.*

Among the Nufoors, as we have seen,’ persons who are
related to each other by marriage are forbidden to mention


1G. A. Wilken, Handleiding voor de
vergelijkende Volkenkunde van Neder-
landsch-Indié, pp. 599 sq.

2G. A. Wilken, ‘‘ Bijdrage tot de
Kennis der Alfoeren van het Eiland
Boeroe,” p. 26 (Verhandelingen van
het Bataviaasch Genootschap van Kun-
sten en Wetenschappen, xxxvi.).
words for taboo among these Alfoors
are foto and koin; poto applies to
actions, oim to things and _ places.
The literal meaning of Zofo is ‘* warm,”
‘hot ” (Wilken, of. cz#. p. 25).

3 J. H. W. van der Miesen, ‘‘ Een
en ander over Boeroe,” Mededeelingen
van wege het Nederlandsche Zendeling-
genootschap, xvi. (1902) p. 455.

4 N. P. Wilken and J. A. Schwarz,
‘* Allerlei over het Land en Volk van


The.


Bolaang Mongondou,” AMededeelingen
van wege het Nederlandsche Zendeling-
genootschap, xi. (1867) p. 356.

5 C. F. H. Campen, ‘“‘De gods-
dienstbegrippen der Halmaherasche
Alfoeren,” Zijdschrift voor Indische
Taal- Land- en Volkenkunde, xxvii.
(1882) p. 450.


6 K. F. Holle, ‘‘Snippers van den
Regent van Galoeh,” 777dschrift voor
Indische Taal- Land- en Volkenkunde,
xxvii. (1882) pp. tor sg. The precise
consequence supposed to follow is that
the oeéz(?) plantations would have no
bulbs (gee knollen). The names of
several animals are also tabooed in
Sunda. See below, p. 415.

T Above, p. 332.


Names of
persons
related by
marriage
to the
speaker are
tabooed in
New
Guinea.


TABOOED WORDS


342 CHAP.


each other’s names. Among the connexions whose names
are thus tabooed are wife, mother-in-law, father-in-law, your
wife’s uncles and aunts and also her grand-uncles and grand-
aunts, and the whole of your wife’s or your husband’s family
in the same generation as yourself, except that men may
mention the names of their brothers-in-law, though women
may not. The taboo comes into operation as soon as the
betrothal has taken place and before the marriage has been
celebrated. Families thus connected by the betrothal of two
of their members are not only forbidden to pronounce each
other’s names ; they may not even look at each other, and
the rule gives rise to the most comical scenes when they
happen to meet unexpectedly. And not merely the names
themselves, but any words that sound like them are scrupu-
lously avoided and other words used in their place. If it
should chance that a person has inadvertently uttered a
forbidden name, he must at once throw himself on the floor
and say, “I have mentioned a wrong name. I throw it
through the chinks of the floor in order that I may
eat well.”* In German New Guinea near relations by
marriage, particularly father-in-law and daughter-in-law,
mother-in-law and son-in-law, as well as_brothers-in-law
and sisters-in-law, must see as little of each other as possible;
they may not converse together and they may not mention
each other’s names, not even when these names have passed
to younger members of the family. Thus if a child is called
after its deceased paternal grandfather, the mother may not
call her child by its name but must employ another name
for the purpose.” Among the Yabim, for example, on the
south-east coast of German New Guinea, parents-in-law may
neither be touched nor named. Even when their names are
borne by other people or are the ordinary names of common
objects, they may not pass the lips of their sons-in-law and


daughters-in-law.®


1 Th. J. F. van Hasselt, ‘‘ Gebruik
van vermomde Taal door de Nufooren,”’
Tijdschrift voor Indische Taal- Land-
on Volhkenkunde, x\v. (1902) pp. 278 sg.
The writer explains that ‘‘ to eat well”
is a phrase used in the sense of ‘to be
decent, well-behaved,” ‘‘ to know what
is customary.”


Among the western tribes of British New


2M. Krieger, Meu - Guinea, pp.
I7I Sg.

8K, Vetter, in Machrichten tber
Kaiser Wilhelms-Land und den
Bismarch-Archipel, 1897, p. 92. For
more evidence of the observance of this
custom in German New Guinea see
O. Schellong, ‘* Uber Familienleben


VI NAMES OF RELATIONS TABOOED 343


Guinea the principal taboo or sadz, as it is there called,
concerns the names of relatives by marriage. A man may
not mention the name of his wife’s father, mother, elder
sister, or elder brother, nor the name of any male or female
relative of her father or mother, so long as the relative in
question is a member of the same tribe as the speaker. The
names of his wife’s younger brothers and sisters are not
tabooed to him. The same law applies to a woman with
reference to the names of her husband’s relatives. Asa
general rule, this taboo does not extend outside the tribal
boundaries. Hence when a man or woman marries out of
his or her tribe, the taboo is usually not applied. And when
members of one tribe, who may not pronounce each other's
names at home, are away from their own territory, they are
no longer strictly bound to observe the prohibition. A
breach of the taboo has to be atoned for by the offender
paying a fine to the person whose name he has taken in
vain. Until that has been done, neither of the parties
concerned, if they are males, may enter the men’s club-
house. In the old times the offended party might recover
his social standing by cutting off somebody else’s head.’

In the western islands of Torres Straits a man never Names of
mentioned the personal names of his father-in-law, mother- related by
in-law, brother-in-law, and sister-in-law ; and a woman was raya
subject to the same restrictions. A heother-s -in-law might be speaks
spoken of as the husband or brother of some one whose tabooed in
name it was lawful to mention ; and similarly a sister-in-law aaa es
might be called the wife of So-and-so. Ifa man by chance
used the personal name of his brother-in-law, he was
ashamed and hung his head. His shame was only relieved
when he had made a present as compensation to the man
whose name he had taken in vain. The same compensation
was made to a sister-in-law, a father-in-law, and a mother-
in-law for the accidental mention of their names. This


und Gebriauche der Papuas der Umge-
bung von Finschhafen,” Zez¢schrift fiir
Ethnologie, xxi. (1889) p. 12; M. J.
Erdweg, ‘‘Die Bewohner der Insel
Tumleo, Berlinhafen, Deutsch - Neu-
Guinea,” Mitthetlungen der Anthropo-
logischen Gesellschaft in Wien, xxxii.


(1902) pp. 379 s¢.

1 B, A. Hely, ‘* Notes on Totemism,
etc., among the Western Tribes,”
British New Guinea, Annual Report
Jor 1894-95, pp. 54 sg. Compare
M. Krieger, Neu - Guinea, pp. 313
Sq.


TABOOED WORDS CHAP.


344


Naines of disability to use the personal names of relatives by marriage


Fase Bay was associated with the custom, so common throughout the
marriage world, that a man or woman is not allowed to speak to these
to the


speaker are Telatives. If a man wished to communicate with his father-
tabooed in in-law or mother-in-law, he spoke to his wife and she spoke
Melanesia. +4 her parent. When direct communication became absolutely
necessary, it was said that a man might talk to his father-in- .
law or mother-in-law a very little in a low voice. The
behaviour towards a brother-in-law was the same.’ Similar
taboos on the names of persons connected by marriage are
in force in New Britain and New Ireland.2 Among the
natives who inhabit the coast of the Gazelle Peninsula in
New Britain to mention the name of a brother-in-law is the
grossest possible affront you can offer to him ; it is a crime
punishable with death.® In the Santa Cruz and Reef
Islands a man is forbidden to pronounce the name of his
mother-in-law, and he may never see her face so long as he
lives. She on her side lies under similar restrictions in
regard to him. Further, a man is prohibited from men-
tioning the name of his son-in-law, though he is allowed to
look at him. And if a husband has paid money for his wife
to several men, none of these men may ever utter his name
or look him in the face. If one of them did by chance
look at him, the offended husband would destroy some
of the offender’s property. In New Caledonia a brother
may not mention his sisters name, and she may not
mention his. The same rule is observed by male and
female cousins in regard to each other’s names.® In the
Banks’ Islands, Melanesia, the taboos laid on the names
of persons connected by marriage are very strict. A man
will not mention the name of his father-in-law, much less


1 Reports of the Cambridge Anthropo-
logical Expedition to Torres Straits, v.
142 Sq.

2 Dr. Hahl, ‘‘ Uber die Rechtsan-
schauungen der Eingeborenen eines
Teiles der Blanchebucht und des
Innern der Gazelle Halbinsel,’? Nach-
vichten tiber Kaiser Wilthelms- Land
und den Bismarck - Archipel, 1897,
p. 80; O. Schellong, in Zettschrift fiir
Ethnologie, xxi. (1889) p. 12.

5 Pp, A, Kleintitschen, Die Avisten-


bewohner der Gazellehalbinsel, pp. 190,
238.

4 Rey. W. O’Ferrall, ‘‘ Native Stories
from Santa Cruz and Reef Islands,”


Journal of the Anthropological Institute,


xxxiv. (1904) pp. 223 sg.

5 Father Lambert, ‘* Moeurs et super-
stitions de la tribu Belep,” AZisstons
Catholiques, xii. (1880) pp. 30, 68;
td., Maurs et superstitions des Néo-
Calédoniens (Nouméa, 1900), pp.
94 59.


VI NAMES OF RELATIONS TABOOED 345


the name of his mother-in-law, nor may he name his
wife’s brother; but he may name his wife’s sister—she is
nothing to him. A woman may not name her father-in-law,
nor on any account her son-in-law. Two people whose
children have intermarried are also debarred from mention-
ing each other’s names. And not only are all these persons
forbidden to utter each other’s names; they may not even
pronounce ordinary words which chance to be either identical
with these names or to have any syllables i in common with
them. “A man on one occasion spoke to me of his house as
a shed, and when that was not understood, went and touched
it with his hand to shew what he meant; a difficulty being
still made, he looked round to be sure that no one was near
and whispered, not the name of his son’s wife, but the
respectful substitute for her name, amen Mulegona, she who
was with his son, and whose name was Tuwarina, Hind-
house.” Again, we hear of a native of these islands who
might not use the common words for “ pig” and “to die,”
because these words occurred in the polysyllabic name of his
son-in-law; and we are told of another unfortunate who
might not: pronounce the everyday words for “hand” and
“hot” on account of his wife’s brother’s name, and who was
even debarred from mentioning the number “one,” because
the word for “one” formed part of the name of his wife’s
cousin.’

It might be expected that similar taboos on the names Names of
of relations and on words resembling them would commonly Tetons.
occur among the aborigines of Australia, and that some light Australia.
might be thrown on their origin and meaning by the primi-
tive modes of thought and forms of society prevalent among
these savages. Yet this expectation can scarcely be said
to be fulfilled ; for the evidence of the observance of such
customs in Australia is scanty and hardly of a nature to
explain their origin. We are told that there are instances
“in which the names of natives are never allowed to be
spoken, as those of a father or mother-in-law, of a son-in-law,
and some cases arising from a connection with each other’s
wives.”* Among some Victorian tribes, a man never at


1R. H. Codrington, Zhe Melan- 2 E. J. Eyre, Journals of Expedi-
estans, pp. 43 5g. tions, ii. 339.


Names of
relations
tabooed in
Australia.


346 TABOOED WORDS CHAP.


any time mentioned the name of his mother-in-law, and
from the time of his betrothal to his death neither she nor
her sisters might ever look at or speak to him. He might
not go within fifty yards of their habitation, and when he
met them on a path they immediately left it, clapped
their hands, and covering up their heads with their rugs,
walked in a stooping posture and spoke in whispers until he
had gone by. They might not talk with him, and when he
and they spoke to other people in each other’s presence, they
used a special form of speech which went by the name of
“turn tongue.” This was not done with any intention of
concealing their meaning, for “turn tongue” was understood
by everybody.’ A writer, who enjoyed unusually favourable
opportunities of learning the language and customs of the
Victorian aborigines, informs us that “A stupid custom
existed among them, which they called val-oyne. Whenever
a female child was promised in marriage to any man, from
that very hour neither he nor the child’s mother were per-
mitted to look upon or hear each other speak nor hear their
names mentioned by others; for, if they did, they would
immediately grow prematurely old and die.”* Among the
Gudangs of Cape York, in Queensland, and the Kowraregas
of the Prince of Wales Islands, a man carefully avoids
speaking to or even mentioning the name of his mother-in-
law, and his wife acts similarly with regard to her father-in-
law. “Thus the mother of a person called Nuki—which
means water—is obliged to call water by another name.”
In the Booandik tribe of South Australia persons connected
by marriage, except husbands and wives, spoke to each
other in a low whining voice, and employed words different
from those in common use. Another writer, speaking of


1 J. Dawson, Australian Aborigines,
p. 29. Specimens of this peculiar
form of speech are given by Mr. Daw-
son. For example, ‘‘It will be very
warm by and by” was expressed in
the ordinary language Baawan kulluun ;
in ‘*turn tongue” it was Gnullewa
enatnan tirambuul,


2 Joseph Parker, in Brough Smyth’s
Aborigines of Victoria, ii. 156.


3 J. Macgillivray, Narrative of the


Voyage of H.M.S. Rattlesnake(London,
1852), ii, 10 sg. It is obvious that
the example given by the writer does
not illustrate his general statement.
Apparently he means to say that Nuki
is the son-in-law, not the son, of the
woman in question, and that the pro-
hibition to mention the names of
persons standing in that relationship
is mutual,

4 Mrs. James Smith, 7he Booandik
Tribe, p. 5.


VI NAMES OF RELATIONS TABOOED 347


the same tribe, says: ‘“ Mothers-in-law and sons-irt-law
studiously avoid each other. A father-in-law converses with
his son-in-law in a low tone of voice, and in a phraseology
differing somewhat from the ordinary one.” *

It will perhaps occur to the reader that customs of this These
latter sort may possibly have originated in the intermarriage cae ie
of tribes speaking different languages; and there are some accounted
Australian facts which seem at first sight to favour this ;7,>¥
supposition. Thus with regard to the natives of South marriage
Australia we are told that “the principal mark of distinction wale
between the tribes is difference of language or dialect Peeper
where the tribes intermix greatly no inconvenience is isha
experienced on this account, as every person understands, in
addition to his own dialect, that of the neighbouring tribe ;
the consequence is that two persons commonly converse in
two languages, just as an Englishman and German would
hold a conversation, each person speaking his own language,
but understanding that of the other as well as hisown. This
peculiarity will often occur in one family through inter-
marriages, neither party ever thinking of changing his or her
dialect for that of the other. Children do not always adopt
the language of the mother, but that of the: tribe among
whom they live.”* Among some tribes of western Victoria
a man was actually forbidden to marry a wife who spoke
the same dialect as himself; and during the preliminary
visit, which each paid to the tribe of the other, neither was
permitted to speak the language of the tribe which he or
she was visiting. The children spoke the language of their
father and might never mix it with any other. To her
children the mother spoke in their father’s language, but to
her husband she spoke in her own, and he answered her in
his ; “so that all conversation is carried on between husband
and wife in the same way as between an Englishman and
a Frenchwoman, each speaking his or her own language.

This very remarkable law explains the preservation of so
many distinct dialects within so limited a space, even where
there: are no physical obstacles to ready and frequent


1D. Stewart, in E. M. Curr’s T77ribes of South Australia (Adelaide,
Australian Race, iii. 461. 1879), p. 249.
2 C. W. Schiirmann, in WMative


Differences
of language
between
husbands
and wives.


348 TABOOED WORDS CHAP.


communication between the tribes.”' So amongst the
Sakais, an aboriginal race of the Malay Peninsula, a man goes
to a considerable distance for a wife, generally to a tribe
who speak quite a different dialect.2 The Indian tribes of
French Guiana have each their own dialect and would hardly
be able to understand each other, were it not that almost
every person marries a wife or a husband of a different tribe,
and thus the newcomers serve as interpreters between the
tribe in which they live and that in which they were born
and brought up.’ It is well known that the Carib women
spoke a language which differed in some respects from that
of the men, and the explanation generally given of the
difference is that the women preserved the language of a
race of whom the men had been exterminated and the
women married by the Caribs. This explanation is not, as
some seem to suppose, a mere hypothesis of the learned,
devised to clear up a curious discrepancy ; it was a tradition
current among the Caribs themselves in the seventeenth
century,* and as such it deserves serious attention. But
there are other facts which seem to point to a different
explanation.” Among the Carayahis, a tribe of Brazilian


Indians on the Rio Grande or Araguaya River, the dialect


of the women differs from that of the men. For the most
part the differences are limited to the form and sound of the


1 J. Dawson, Australian Aborigines,
pp. 27, 30 sg., 40. So among the
Gowmditch-mara tribe of western
Victoria the child spoke his father’s
language, and not his mother’s, when
she happened to be of another tribe
(Fison and Howitt, XAamzlarot and
Kurnai, p. 276). Compare A, W.
Howitt, Native Tribes of South-East
Australia, pp. 250 sq.

2 A, Hale, ‘On theSakais,” Journal
of the Anthropological Institute, xv.
(1886) p. 291.

3H. A. Coudreau, Za France
équinoxiale (Paris, 1887), ii, 178.

4 De Rochefort, Histoire naturelle
et morale des Iles Antilles de [Ame-
rique* (Rotterdam, 1665), pp. 349 sg. 3
De la Borde, ‘* Relation de l’origine,
etc., des Caraibs sauvages des Isles
Antilles de l'Amerique,” pp. 4, 39
(Recueil de divers voyages fails en


Afrique et en Amerique, qui n’ont point
est encore publiexz, Paris, 1684);
Lafitau, Meurs des sauvages ameri-
guains, i, 55. On the language of
the Carib women see also Jean Bap-
tiste du Tertre, Histoire generale des
Isles de S. Christophe, de la Guade-
loupe, de la Martinique et autres dans
PAmerique (Paris, 1654), p. 462;
Labat, Mouveau Voyage aux isles de
PAmerique (Paris, 1713), vi. 127 59. 3
J. N. Rat, ‘‘The Carib Language,”
Journal of the Anthropological Institute,
xxvii. (1898) pp. 311 sg.

5 See C. Sapper, ‘ Mittelamericani-
sche Caraiben,” /nternationales Archiv
Siir Ethnographie, x. (1897) pp. 56 579.3
and my article, ‘* A Suggestion as to the
Origin of Gender in Language,” /ort-
nightly Review, January 1900, pp.
79-90; also Zotemism and Exogamy,
iv. 237 Sq.


na a eee


v1 NAMES OF RELATIONS TABOOED 349


words ; only a few words seem to be quite distinct in the

two dialects. The speech of the women appears to preserve

older and fuller forms than that of the men: for instance,

“ girl” is yadokoma in the female speech but yadéma in the

male; “nail” is destka in the mouth of a woman but desza

in the mouth of a man. However such remarkable differ- Inter-
ences are to be explained, a little reflection will probably ™"° “
convince us that a mere intermixture of races speaking speaking
different tongues could scarcely account for the phenomena ie
of language under consideration, For the reluctance to would
mention the names or even syllables of the names of persons paies <a
connected with the speaker by marriage can hardly be bapa
separated from the reluctance evinced by so many people names of
to utter their own names or the names of the dead or of Felations.
chiefs and kings; and if the reticence as to these latter

names springs mainly from superstition, we may infer that

the reticence as to the former has no better foundation.

That the savage’s unwillingness to mention his own name is

based, at least in part, on a superstitious fear of the ill use

that might be made of it by his foes, whether human or
spiritual, has already been shewn. It remains to examine

the similar usage in regard to the names of the dead and of

royal personages.


§ 3. Names of the Dead tabooed


The custom of abstaining from all mention of the names The names
of the dead was observed in antiquity by the Albanians of pile yg ‘a
the Caucasus,’ and at the present day it is in full force general not
among many savage tribes. Thus we are told that one of aoe
the customs most rigidly observed and enforced amongst the Australian
Australian aborigines is never to mention the name of PA >
deceased person, whether male or female; to name aloud
one who has departed this life would be a gross violation of
their most sacred prejudices, and they carefully abstain from


it.2 The chief motive for this abstinence appears to be a


1 P, Ehrenreich, ‘* Materialien zur ‘ons of Discovery in North-West and
Sprachenkunde Brasiliens,” Zedtschrift | Western Australia (London, 1841), ii.
fiir Ethnologie, xxvi. (1894) pp. 23-35. 232,257. The writer is here speaking

2 Strabo, xi. 4. 8, p. 503. especially of western Australia, but his

3 G, Grey, Journals of Two Expedi- statement applies, with certain restric-


The
names of
the dead
are not
generally
mentioned
by the
Australian
aborigines.


350 TABOOED WORDS CHAP.
fear of evoking the ghost, although the natural unwillingness
to revive past sorrows undoubtedly operates also to draw the
veil of oblivion over the names of the dead.'. Once Mr.
Oldfield so terrified a native by shouting out the name of a
deceased person, that the man fairly took to his heels and
did not venture to shew himself again for several days. At
their next meeting he bitterly reproached the rash white man
for his indiscretion; “ nor could 1,” adds Mr. Oldfield, “ induce
him by any means to utter the awful sound of a dead man’s
name, for by so doing he would have placed himself in the
power of the malign spirits.”* On another occasion, a
Watchandie woman having mentioned the name of a certain
man, was informed that he had long been dead. At that she
became greatly excited and spat thrice to counteract the
evil effect of having taken a dead man’s name into her lips.
This custom of spitting thrice, as Mr. Oldfield afterwards
learned, was the regular charm whereby the natives freed
themselves from the power of the dangerous spirits whom
they had provoked by such a rash act.2 Among the
aborigines of Victoria the dead were very rarely spoken of,
and then never by their names; they were referred to in a
subdued voice as “ the lost one” or “the poor fellow that is
no more.” To speak of them by name would, it was sup-
posed, excite the malignity of Couit-gil, the spirit of the
departed, which hovers on earth for a time before it departs


for ever towards the setting °


tions which will be mentioned presently,
to all parts of the continent. For evi-
dence see D. Collins, Account of the
English Colony in New South Wales
(London, 1804), p. 390; Hueber,
ae travers l’Australie,” Bulletin de
la Société de Géographie (Paris), Vme
Série, ix. (1865) p. 429; S. Gason,
in Native Tribes of South Australia, p.
275; R. Brough Smyth, Adorigines of
Victoria, i. 120, ii. 297; A. L. P.
Cameron, in Journal of the Anthropo-
logical Institute, xiv. (1885) p. 3633
KE. M. Curr, Zhe Australian Race, i.
88, 338, ii. 195, iii, 22, 29, 139, 166,
596; J. D. Lang, Queensland (London,
1861), pp. 367, 387, 388; C. Lumholtz,
Among Cannibals (London, 1889), p.
279; Report on the Work of the Horn


sun.” Once when a Kurnai
Scientific Expedition to Central Aus-
tralia (London and Melbourne, 1896),
pp. 137, 168. More evidence is
adduced below.

1 On this latter motive see especially
the remarks of A. W. Howitt, in
Kamilaroti and Kurnat, p. 249. Com-
pare also C, W. Schtirmann, in Va/cve
Tribes of South Australia, p. 247;
F, Bonney, in Journal of the Anthro-
pological Institute, xiii. (1884) p.
127,

2 A. Oldfield, ‘The Aborigines of
Australia,” Zransactions of the Ethno-
logical Society of London, N.S., iii.
(1865) p. 238.

8 A, Oldfield, of. czt. p. 240.

4 W. Stanbridge, ‘*On the Abori-
gines of Victoria,” Zransactions of the


vi NAMES OF THE DEAD TABOOED 351


man was spoken to about a dead friend, soon after the
decease, he looked round uneasily and said, “Do not do
that, he might hear you and kill me!”* If a Kaiabara
black dies, his tribes-people never mention his name, but
call him Wurponum, “the dead,” and in order to explain
who it is that has died, they speak of his father, mother,
brothers, and so forth.2 Of the tribes on the Lower Murray
River we are told that when a person dies “they carefully
avoid mentioning his name; but if compelled to do so, they
pronounce it in a very low whisper, so faint that they
imagine the spirit cannot hear their voice.”* Amongst the
tribes of Central Australia no one may utter the name of
the deceased during the period of mourning, unless it is
absolutely necessary to do so, and then it is only done in a
whisper for fear of disturbing and annoying the man’s spirit
which is walking about in ghostly form. If the ghost hears
his name mentioned he concludes that his kinsfolk are not
mourning for him properly ; if their grief were genuine they
could not bear to bandy his name about. Touched to the
quick by their hard-hearted indifference, the indignant ghost
will come and trouble them in dreams.* In these tribes no
woman may ever again mention the name of a dead person,
but the restriction on the male sex is not so absolute, for
the name may be mentioned by men of the two subclasses
to which the wife’s father and wife’s brother of the deceased
belong. Among some tribes of north-western Australia a
dead man’s name is never mentioned after his burial and he
is only spoken of as “that one”; otherwise they think that
he would return and frighten them at night in camp.°
The same reluctance to utter the names of the dead The names

appears to prevail among all the Indian tribes of America beat yon


are not
from Hudson’s Bay Territory to Patagonia. Among the uttered


Ethnological Society of London, N.S.,
i. (1861) p. 299.

1 A. W. Howitt, ‘*On some Austra-
lian Beliefs,” Journal of the Anthropo-
logical Institute, xiii. (1884) p. 191;
td., Native Tribes of South-East Aus-
tralia, p. 440.

2 Id., Native Tribes of South-East
Australia, p. 469.

8G. F. Angas, Savage Life and


Scenes in Australia and New Zealand
(London, 1847), i. 94.

# Spencer and Gillen, Native Tribes
of Central Australia, p. 498.

5 Spencer and Gillen, Northern
Tribes of Central Australia, p. 526.

6 E. Clement, ‘ Ethnographical
Notes on the Western Australian
Aborigines,” Internationales Archiv
Sir Ethnographie, xvi. (1904) p. 9.


by the
American
Indians.


TABOOED WORDS CHAP,


352


Iroquois, for example, the name of the deceased was never
mentioned after the period of mourning had expired." The
same rule was rigidly observed by the Indians of California
and Oregon ; its transgression might be punished with a heavy
fine or even with death.” Thus among the Karok of Cali-
fornia we are told that “the highest crime one can commit
is the fet-chz-é-ri, the mere mention of the dead relative’s
name. It is a deadly insult to the survivors, and can be
atoned for only by the same amount of blood-money paid
for wilful murder. In default of that they will have the
villain’s blood.”* Amongst the Wintun, also of California,
if some one in a group of merry talkers inadvertently men-
tions the name of a deceased person, “ straightway there falls
upon all an awful silence. No words can describe the
shuddering and heart-sickening terror which seizes upon them
at the utterance of that fearful word.”* Among the Goajiros
of Colombia to mention the dead before his kinsmen is a
dreadful offence, which is often punished with death ; for if
it happen on the rancho of the deceased, in presence of his
nephew or uncle, they will assuredly kill the offender on the
spot if they can. But if he escapes, the penalty resolves
itself into a heavy fine, usually of two or more oxen.? So
among the Abipones of Paraguay to mention the departed
by name was a serious crime, which often led to blows and
bloodshed.. When it was needful to refer to such an one,
it was done by means of a general phrase such as “ he who
is no more,” eked out with particulars which served to
identify the person meant.°


1 L. H. Morgan, League of the lro-
guots (Rochester, U.S., 1851), p. 175.

2 A, S. Gatschett, Zhe Xlamath
Indians of South-Western Oregon
(Washington, 1890) (Contributions to
North American Ethnology, vol. ii. pt.
1), p. xli; Chase, quoted by H. H.
Bancroft, Native Races of the Lacific
States, i. 357, note 76.

3 §. Powers, Zribes of California,
p- 333 compare p. 68.

4 S, Powers, of, cit. p. 240.

6 F, A. Simons, ‘*An Exploration
of the Goajira Peninsula, U.S. of
Colombia,” Proceedings of the Royal
Geographical Society, vii, (1885) p. 791.


6 M. Dobrizhoffer, Wistoria de Abi-
ponibus, ii. 301, 498. For more
evidence of the observance of this
taboo among the American Indians
see A, Woldt, Captain Jacobsen’s Reise
an der Nordwestkiiste Americas (Leip-
sic, 1884), p. 57 (as to the Indians of
the north-west coast) ; W. Colquhoun
Grant, ‘* Description of Vancouver’s
Island,” Journal of the Royal Geo-
graphical Soctety, xxvii. (1857) p. 303
(as to Vancouver Island); Capt.
Wilson, ‘* Report on the Indian Tribes,”
Transactions of the Ethnological Society
of London, N.S., iv. (1866) p. 286 (as
to Vancouver Island and neighbour-


vI NAMES OF THE DEAD TABOOED 353


A similar reluctance to mention the names of the dead Manyother
is reported of peoples so widely separated from each other poner
as the Samoyeds of Siberia and the Todas of southern mention
India ; the Mongols of Tartary and the Tuaregs of the Sahara ; pr Ora:
the Ainos of Japan and the Akamba and Nandi of central dead.
Africa ; the Tinguianes of the Philippines and the inhabitants
of the Nicobar Islands, of Borneo, of Madagascar, and of Tas-
mania.’ In all cases, even where it is not expressly stated, the This
fundamental reason for this avoidance is probably the fear ‘3c?
of the ghost. That this is the real motive with the Tuaregs be based
of the Sahara we are positively informed. They dread the ¢F frgia
return of the dead man’s spirit, and do all they can to avoid ghosts,
it by shifting their camp after a death, ceasing for ever to ilenion Ie
pronounce the name of the departed, and eschewing every- ee be
thing that might be regarded as an evocation or recall of by the
his soul. Hence they do not, like the Arabs, designate mention
individuals by adding to their personal names the names of names.
their fathers ; they never speak of So-and-so, son of So-and-


so; they give to every man a name which will live and die


with him?


hood) ; C. Hill Tout, in Journal of the
Anthropological Institute, xxxv. (1905)
p. 138; z@., The Far West, the Land
of the Salish and Déné, p, 201; A.
Ross, Adventures on the Oregon or
Columbia River, p. 322; H. R.
Schoolcraft, Judian Tribes, iv. 226
(as to the Bonaks of California) ;

Ch. N. Bell, ‘*The Mosquito Terri-
tory,” Journal of the Royal Geographi-
cal Soctety, xxxii, (1862) p. 255; A.
Pinart, ‘‘Les Indiens de lEtat de
Panama,” Revue @Ethnographie, vi.
(1887) p. 56; G. C. Musters, in Jour-
nal of the Royal Geographical Society,
xli, (1871) p. 68 (as to Patagonia).
More evidence is adduced below.

1 See P. S. Pallas, Retse durch ver-
schiedene Provinzen des russtschen
Reichs, iii. 76 (Samoyeds); J. W.
Breeks, Account of the Primitive Tribes
and Monuments of the Nilagiris (Lon-
don, 1873), p. 19; W. E. Marshall,
Travels amongst the Todas, p. 177; W.
H. R. Rivers, The Zodas, pp. 462, 496,
626; Plan deCarpin (de Plano Carpini),
Relation des Mongols ou Tartares, ed.
D’Avezac, cap. iii, § iii. ; H. Duveyrier,

PT..-T!


So among some of the Victorian tribes in


Exploration du Sahara, les Touareg du
nord (Paris, 1864), p. 415; Lieut.
S. C. Holland, ‘‘ The Ainos,” Journal
of the Anthropological Institute, iii.
(1874) p. 238; J. Batchelor, 7ke Ainu
and their Folk-lore (London, 1901),
pp- 252, 564; J. M. Hildebrandt,
**Ethnographische Notizen iiber Wa-
kamba und ihre Nachbarn,” Zez¢schrift
Siir Ethnologie, x. (1878) p. 405;
A. C. Hollis, Zhe Nandi, p. 71;
F. Blumentritt, Versuch einer Ethno-
graphite der Philippinen (Gotha, 1882),
p- 38 (fetermann’s Mitthetlungen,
LErginzungsheft, No. 67); N. Fontana,
‘On the Nicobar Isles,” Aszatick Re-
searches, iii. (London, 1799) p. 1543
W. H. Furness, Folk-lore in Borneo
(Wallingford, Pennsylvania, 1899), p.
26; A. van Gennep, Zabou et toté-
misme & Madagascar, pp. 70 sg.;
J. E. Calder, ‘Native Tribes of
Tasmania,” Journal of the Anthropo-
logical Institute, iii. (1874) p. 233 J.
Bonwick, Dazly Life of the Tasmanians,
Pp. 97, 145, 183.

2H. Duveyrier, Exploration du
Sahara, les Touareg du nord, p. 431.

2.A


354 TABOOED WORDS CHAP.
The Australia personal names were rarely perpetuated, because
capeine 04 the natives believed that any one who adopted the name of
thenames a deceased person would not live long;! probably his
a ghostly namesake was supposed to come and fetch him
ePa i away to the spirit-land. The Yabims of German New
sfther, Guinea, who believe that the spirits of the dead pass their


sven time in the forest eating unpalatable fruits, are unwilling to
waose : .

attention Mention the names of the deceased lest their ghosts should
might be suspend their habitual occupation to come and trouble the
attracted nga 2 : :

bythe living.” In Logea, one of the Samarai Archipelago, off the
nae south-eastern end of New Guinea, no custom is observed so
names. Strictly as the one which forbids the naming of the dead in


presence of their relations. To say to a person “ Your
fathers are dead,” is considered a direct challenge to
fight; it is an insult which must be avenged either by
the death of the man who pronounced these awful words,
or by the death of one of his relatives or friends. The.
uttering of the names of the dead is, along with homi-
cide, one of the chief causes of war in the island. When
it is necessary to refer to a dead man they designate him
by such a phrase as “the father of So-and-so,” or “the
brother of So-and-so.”* Thus the fear of mentioning the
names of the dead gives rise to circumlocutions of precisely
the same sort as those which originate in a reluctance to
name living people. Among the Klallam Indians of
Washington State no person may bear the name of his
deceased father, grandfather, or any other direct ancestor in
the paternal line.* The Masai of eastern Africa are said to
resort to a simple device which enables them to speak of the
dead freely without risk of the inopportune appearance of
the ghost. As soon as a man or woman dies, they change
his or her name, and henceforth always speak of him or her
by the new name, while the old name falls into oblivion, and


1 J. Dawson, Australian Aborigines,
. 42.
‘ 2K. Vetter, Komm heriiber und
hilf uns! iii. (Barmen, 1898) p. 24;
td., in Nachrichten tiber Kaiser
Withelms-Land und den Bismarck-
Archipel, 1897, p. 92.

3 Dr. L. Loria, ‘* Notes on the
ancient War Customs of the Natives of


Logea,” British New Guinea, Annual
Report for 1894-95, PP. 45, 46 sg.
Compare M,. Krieger, Meu-Guinea,
. 322.

4 Myron Eels, ‘*The Twana,
Chemakum, and Klallam Indians of
Washington Territory,” Annual Report
of the Smithsonian Institute for 1887,
part i. p. 656,


VI NAMES OF THE DEAD TABOOED


355


to utter it in the presence of a kinsman of the deceased is
an insult which calls for vengeance. They assume that the
dead man will not know his new name, and so will not
answer to it when he hears it pronounced.’ Ghosts are
notoriously dull-witted; nothing is easier than to dupe
them. However, according to another and more probable
account, the name of a Masai is not changed after his
death ; it is merely suppressed, and he or she is referred to
by a descriptive phrase, such as “my brother,” “my uncle,”
“my sister.” To call a dead man by his name is deemed
most unlucky, and is never done except with the intention
of doing harm to his surviving family, who make great
lamentations on such an occasion.”

The same fear of the ghost, which moves people to The like
suppress his old name, naturally leads all persons who bear ‘* 'eads
a similar name to exchange it for another, lest its utterance feat the
should attract the attention of the ghost, who cannot SS" nim
reasonably be expected to discriminate between all the to change
different applications of the same name. Thus we are told —
that in the Adelaide and Encounter Bay tribes of South
Australia the repugnance to mentioning the names of
those who have died lately is carried so far, that persons
who bear the same name as the deceased abandon it, and
either adopt temporary names or are known by any others
that happen to belong to them.* The same practice was
observed by the aborigines of New South Wales,* and is
said to be observed by the tribes of the Lower Murray
River,’ and of King George’s Sound in western Australia.

A similar custom prevails among some of the Queensland
tribes ; but the prohibition to use the names of the dead is
not permanent, though it may last for many years. On the


1 Baron C. C. von der Decken,
Reisen in Ost-Afrika (Leipsic, 1869-
1871), ii, 253; R. Andree, Zthno-
graphische Parallelen und Vergleiche,
pp. 182 sg.

2S. L. Hinde and H. Hinde, Zhe
last of the Masaz (London, 1901), p.
50; Sir H. Johnston, Zhe Uganda
Protectorate, ii. 826.

3 W. Wyatt, in ative Tribes of
South Australia, p. 165.

4 D. Collins, Account of the English


Colony in New South Wales (London,
1804), p. 392.

5 P. Beveridge, ‘Notes on the
Dialects, Habits, and Mythology of the
Lower Murray Aborigines,” 77ansac-
tions of the Royal Society of Victoria,
vi. 20 sg.

6 “Description of the Natives of
King George’s Sound (Swan River) and
adjoining Country,” Journal of the R.
Geographical Society, i. (1832) pp. 46
Sq.


356 TABOOED WORDS CHAP.
People Bloomfield River, when a namesake dies, the survivor is
ie the called Tanyu, a word whose meaning is unknown; or else
nameas he or she receives a name which refers to the corpse, with
ark the syllable Wau prefixed to it. For example, he may be
a fear called Wau-batcha, with reference to the place where the
pe man was buried; or Wau-wotchinyu (“burnt”), with refer-


ence to the cremation of the body. And if there should be
several people in camp all bearing one of these allusive
designations, they are distinguished from each: other by the
mention of the names of their mothers or other relatives,
even though these last have long been dead and gone.
Whenever Mr. W. E. Roth, to whom we owe this informa-
tion, could obtain an explanation of the custom, the reason
invariably assigned was a fear that the ghost, hearing himself
called by name, might return and cause mischief." In some
Australian tribes the change of name thus brought about is
permanent; the old name is laid aside for ever, and the
man is known by his new name for the rest of his life, or at
least until he is obliged to change it again for a like reason.”
Among the North American Indians all persons, whether
men or women, who bore the name of one who had just died
were obliged to abandon it and to adopt other names, which
was formally done at the first ceremony of mourning for
the dead.® In some tribes to the east of the Rocky
Mountains this change of name lasted only during the
season of mourning,‘ but in other tribes on the Pacific
Coast of North America it seems to have been permanent.?
. Amongst the Masai also, when two men of the same tribe
bear the same name, and one of them dies, the survivor
changes his name.°
Sometimes by an extension of the same reasoning all
the near relations of the deceased change their names, what-


1 W. E. Roth, Morth Queensland
Ethnography, Bulletin No. § (Bris-
bane, 1903), § 72, p. 20.

2G. F. Angas, Savage Life and
Scenes in Australia and New Zealand
(London, 1847), ii. 228.

3 J. F. Lafitau, Maurs des sauvages
ameriquains, ii. 434; KR. Southey,
History of Brasil, iii, 894 (referring
to Roger Williams),


4 Charlevoix, Wistotve de la Nouvelle
France, vi. 109.

5 S. Powers, Zribes of California,
p- 349; Myron Eels, ‘The Twana,
Chemakum, and Klallam Indians of
Washington Territory,” Avnual Report
of the Smithsonian Institute for 1887,
p. 656.

® S, L. Hinde and H. Hinde, 7he
Last of the Masai, p. 50.


vI NAMES OF THE DEAD TABOOED 357


ever they may happen to be, doubtless from a fear that the Sometimes
sound of the familiar names might lure back the vagrant 4) ‘he nes"
spirit to its old home. Thus in some Victorian tribes the of the
ordinary names of all the next of kin were disused during pce
the period of mourning, and certain general terms, prescribed their
by custom, were substituted for them. To call a mourner ie
by his own name was considered an insult to the departed,

and often led to fighting and bloodshed.’ Among Indian
tribes of north-western America near relations of the deceased
often change their names “under an impression that spirits

will be attracted back to earth if they hear familiar names
often repeated.”? Among the Kiowa Indians the name of

the dead is never spoken in the presence of the relatives, and

on the death of any member of a family all the others take

new names. This custom was noted by Raleigh’s colonists

on Roanoke Island more than three centuries ago. Among

the Lengua Indians of the Gran Chaco in South America not

only is a dead man’s name never mentioned, but all the
survivors change their names also. They say that Death has

been among them and has carried off a list of the living, and

that he will soon come back for more victims ; hence in order

to defeat his fell purpose they change their names, believing

that on his return Death, though he has got them all on his

list, will not be able to identify them under their new names,

and will depart to pursue the search elsewhere.“ So among

the Guaycurus of the Gran Chaco, when a death had taken
place, the chief used to change the names of every person in

the tribe, man and woman, young and old, and it is said to
have been wonderful to observe how from that moment
everybody remembered his new name just as if he had borne

it all his life. Nicobarese mourners take new names in
order to escape the unwelcome attentions of the ghost ; and


1 J. Dawson, Australian Aborigines,
p- 42.

2 H. H. Bancroft, Native Races of
the Pacific States, i. 248. Compare
K. F. v. Baer und Gr. v. Helmersen,
BLettrige sur Kenntniss des russischen
Retches und der angransenden Lander
Asiens, i. (St. Petersburg, 1839), p.
108 (as to the Kenayens of Cook’s
Inlet and the neighbourhood).

3 J. Mooney, ‘‘ Calendar History ot


the Kiowa Indians,” Seventeenth Annual
Report of the Bureau of American Eth-
nology, part i. (Washington, 1898) p.
231.

4 F. de Azara, Voyages dans
PAmérique Méridionale (Paris, 1808),
ii, 153 5g.

5 P. Lozano, WDescripcion choro-
graphica, etc., del Gran Chaco (Cordova,
1733), Pp» 79.


When the
nameof the
deceased

is that of a
common
object, the
word is
often
dropped in
ordinary
speech and
another
substituted
for it.


358 TABOOED WORDS CHAP


for the same purpose they disguise themselves by shaving
their heads so that the ghost is unable to recognise them."
The Chukchees of Bering Strait believe that the souls of the
dead turn into malignant spirits who seek to harm the living.
Hence when a mother dies the name of her youngest and
dearest child is changed, in order that her ghost may not
know the child”

Further, when the name of the deceased happens to be
that of some common object, such as an animal, or plant, or
fire, or water, it is sometimes considered necessary to drop
that word in ordinary speech and replace it by another. A
custom of this sort, it is plain, may easily be a potent agent
of change in language ; for where it prevails to any consider-
able extent many words must constantly become obsolete
and new ones spring up. And this tendency has been
remarked by observers who have recorded the custom in
Australia, America, and elsewhere. For example, with
regard to the Australian aborigines it has been noted that
“the dialects change with almost every tribe. Some tribes
name their children after natural objects; and when the
person so named dies, the word is never again mentioned ;
another word has therefore to be invented for the object
after which the child was called.” The writer gives as an
instance the case of a man whose name Karla signified
“fire”; when Karla died, a new word for fire had to be
introduced. “Hence,” adds the writer, “the language is
always changing.”*® In the Moorunde tribe the name for
“teal” used to be Zorfool; but when a boy called Torpool
died, a new name (¢i/guaitch) was given to the bird, and the
old name dropped out altogether from the language of the
tribe.* Sometimes, however, such substitutes for common
words were only in vogue for a limited time after the death,
and were then discarded in favour of the old words. Thus
among the Kowraregas of the Prince of Wales’ Islands and


1. H. Man, ‘Notes on the 2 J. Enderli, ‘Zwei Jahre bei den


Nicobarese,” /ndian Antiquary, xxviii.
(1899) p. 261. Elsewhere I have
suggested that mourning costume in
general may have been adopted with
this intention. See Journal of the
Anthropological Institute, xv. (1886)


Pp. 73, 98 sgg.


Tchuktschen und Korjaken,” Peter-
manns Mitteilungen, xlix. (1903) p.
257.
8 R. Brough Smyth, Adorigines of
Victoria, ii. 266.

4 E. J. Eyre, Journals of Expeditions
of Discovery, ii. 354 5g.


VI NAMES OF THE DEAD TABOOED 359


the Gudangs of Cape York in Queensland, the names of the
dead are never mentioned without great reluctance, so that,
for example, when a man named Us, or quartz, died, the
name of the stone was changed to mattam ure, “the thing
which is a namesake,” but the original word would gradually
return to common use.’ Again, a missionary, who lived
among the Victorian aborigines, remarks that “it is
customary among these blacks to disuse a word when a
person has died whose name was the same, or even of the
same sound. I find great difficulty in getting blacks to
repeat such words. I believe this custom is common to all
the Victorian tribes, though in course of time the word is
resumed again. I have seen among the Murray blacks the
dead freely spoken of when they have been dead some
time.”” Again, in the Encounter Bay tribe of South
Australia, if a man of the name of Ngnke, which means
“water,” were to die, the whole tribe would be obliged to
use some other word to express water for a considerable
time after his decease. The writer who records this custom
surmises that it may explain the presence of a number of
synonyms in the language of the tribe.2 This conjecture is
confirmed by what we know of some Victorian tribes whose
speech comprised a regular set of synonyms to be used
instead of the common terms by all members of a tribe in
times of mourning. For instance, if a man called Waa
(“crow ”) departed this life, during the period of mourning
for him nobody might call a crow a waa; everybody had to
speak of the bird as a marrapart. When a person who
rejoiced in the title of Ringtail Opossum (weearn) had
gone the way of all flesh, his sorrowing relations and the
tribe at large were bound for a time to refer to ringtail
opossums by the more sonorous name of manuungkuurt.
If the community were plunged in grief for the loss of a
respected female who bore the honourable name of Turkey
Bustard, the proper name for turkey bustards, which was
barrim barrim, went out, and ¢l/7t t2littsh came in. And so


1 J. Macgillivray, Narrative of the Aborigines of Victoria, ii. 94.
Voyage of H. M.S. Rattlesnake (London, 3H. E. A. Meyer, in Native Tribes
1852), ii. 10 59. of South Australia, p. 199, compare
2 J. Bulmer, in Brough Smyth’s _ p. xxix.


360 TABOOED WORDS CHAP.


mutatis mutandis with the names of Black Cockatoo, Grey
Duck, Gigantic Crane, Kangaroo, Eagle, Dingo, and the


rest.’
This A similar custom used to be constantly transforming the
has trans. Language of the Abipones of Paraguay, amongst whom,


formed however, a word once abolished seems never to have been


as as :

cackling revived. New words, says the missionary Dobrizhoffer,

rie the sprang up every year like mushrooms in a night, because
erican


Indians, all words that resembled the names of the dead were
abolished by proclamation and others coined in their place.
The mint of words was in the hands of the old women of
the tribe, and whatever term they stamped with their
approval and put in circulation was immediately accepted
without a murmur by high and low alike, and spread like
wildfire through every camp and settlement of the tribe.
You would be astonished, says the same missionary, to see
how meekly the whole nation acquiesces in the decision of a
withered old hag, and how completely the old familiar words
fall instantly out of use and are never repeated either
through force of habit or forgetfulness. In the seven years
that Dobrizhoffer spent among these Indians the native word
for jaguar was changed thrice, and the words for crocodile,
thorn, and the slaughter of cattle underwent similar though
less varied vicissitudes. As a result of this habit, the
vocabularies of the missionaries teemed with erasures, old
words having constantly to be struck out as obsolete and
new ones inserted in their place.” Similarly, a peculiar
feature of the Comanche language is that a portion of the
vocabulary is continually changing. If, for example, a
person called Eagle or Bison dies, a new name is invented
for the bird or beast, because it is forbidden to mention the
name of any one who is dead.’ So amongst the Kiowa
Indians all words that suggest the name of a deceased
person are dropped for a term of years and other words


! J. Dawson, Australian Aborigines, 2M. Dobrizhoffer, Astoria de
p- 43. Mr. Howitt mentions the case Adipontdus (Vienna, 1784), ii. 199,
of a native who arbitrarily substituted jor.
the name odler (* spirituous liquor ”)
for yan (** water”) because Yan was 3H. Ten Kate, ‘* Notes ethno-
the name of a man who had recently _—graphiques sur les Comanches,” Revue
died (Kamilaroi and Kurnai, p. 249). a’ Ethnographie, iv. (1885) p. 131.


VI NAMES OF THE DEAD TABOOED 361


are substituted for them. The old word may after the
lapse of years be restored, but it often happens that the
new one keeps its place and the original word is entirely
forgotten. Old men sometimes remember as many as three
different names which have been successively used for the
same thing. The new word is commonly a novel combina-
tion of existing roots, or a novel use of a current word,
rather than a deliberately invented term.’

The Basagala, a cattle-breeding people to the west of A similar
Uganda, cease to use a word if it was the name of an oa
influential person who has died. For example, after the languages
death of a chief named Mwenda, which means “nine,” the abana
name for the numeral was changed.” “On the death Guinea,
of a child, or a warrior, or a woman amongst the Masai, panei
the body is thrown away, and the person’s name is buried, !slands.
ze. it is never again mentioned by the family. Should
there be anything which is called by that name, it is
given another name which is not like that of the deceased.

For instance, if an unimportant person called Ol-onana (he
who is soft, or weak, or gentle) were to die, gentleness would
not be called exanaz in that kraal, but it would be called by
another name, such as efolpol (it is smooth). . . . If an elder
dies leaving children, his name is not buried for his descend-
ants are named after him.”* From this statemnet, which is
translated from a native account in the Masai language, we
may perhaps infer that among the Masai it is as a rule only
the childless dead whose names are avoided. In the island of
Buru it is unlawful to mention the names of the dead or
any words that resemble them in sound.* In many tribes
of British New Guinea the names of persons are also the
names of common things. The people believe that if the
name of a deceased person is pronounced, his spirit will
return, and as they have no wish to see it back among
them the mention of his name is tabooed and a new word


1 J. Mooney, ‘Calendar History
of the Kiowa Indians,” Seventeenth
Annual Report of the Bureau of Ameri-
can Ethnology, part i. (Washington,
1898) p. 231.

2 Rev. J. Roscoe in a letter to me
dated Mengo, Uganda, 17th February
1904.


3 A.C. Hollis, Zhe Masai (Oxford,
1905), pp- 304 sg. As to the Masai
customs in this respect see also above,
PP. 354 Ly. +» 356.

4 J. H. W. van der Miesen, ‘‘ Een
en ander over Boeroe,” Mededeelingen
van wege het Nederlandsche Zendeling-


genootschap, xlvi. (1902) p. 455.


362 TABOOED WORDS CHAP,


is created to take its place, whenever the name happens to
be a common term of the language.’ Thus at Waga-
waga, near the south-eastern extremity of New Guinea,
the names of the dead become taboo immediately after
death, and if they are, as generally happens, the names
of common objects, new words must be adopted for
these things and the old words are dropped from the
language, so long at least as the memory of the dead sur-
vives. For example, when a man died whose name Binama
meant “hornbili,” a new name ambadina, literally “the
plasterer,” was adopted for the bird. Consequently many
words are permanently lost or revived with modified or new
meanings. The frequent changes of vocabulary caused by
this custom are very inconvenient, and nowadays the practice
of using foreign words as substitutes is coming more and
more into vogue. English profanity now contributes its
share to the language of these savages.” In the Caroline
Islands the ordinary name for pig is puzk, but in the Paliker
district of Ponape the pig is called not puzk but man-teztet,
or “the animal that grubs in the soil,’ for the word puzk
was there tabooed after the death of a man named Puik.
“This is a living instance showing how under our very eyes
old words are dropping out of use in these isolated dialects
Asimilar and new ones are taking their place.”* In the Nicobar
sacepreg Islands a similar practice has similarly affected the speech
speechof of the natives. “A most singular custom,” says Mr. de
the Nico Roepstorff, “ prevails among them which one would suppose
must most effectually hinder the ‘making of history,’ or, at
any rate, the transmission of historical narrative. By a
strict rule, which has all the sanction of Nicobar superstition,
no man’s name may be mentioned after his death! To such
a length is this carried that when, as very frequently happens,
the man rejoiced in the name of ‘ Fowl,’ ‘ Hat,’ ‘ Fire, ‘ Road,’
etc., in its Nicobarese equivalent, the use of these words is
carefully eschewed for the future, not only as being the
personal designation of the deceased, but even as the names


' Sir William Macgregor, British of British New Guinea (Cambridge,
New Guinea (London, 1897), p. 1930) pp. 629-631.
79% F, W. Christian, Zhe Caroline
2 C. G, Seligmann, 7he Melanesians Islands (London, 1899), p. 366.


VI NAMES OF THE DEAD TABOOED


363


of the common things they represent ; the words die out of
the language, and either new vocables are coined to express
the thing intended, or a substitute for the disused word is
found in other Nicobarese dialects or in some foreign tongue.
This extraordinary custom not only adds an element of
instability to the language, but destroys the continuity of
political life, and renders the record of past events precarious
and vague, if not impossible.” *

That a superstition which suppresses the names of the The sup-
dead must cut at the very root of historical tradition has geomis.
been remarked by other workers in this field. “ The of the dead
Klamath people,” observes Mr. A. S. Gatschet, “ possess no so
historic traditions going further back in time than a historical
century, for the simple reason that there was a strict ere
law prohibiting the mention of the person or acts of a
deceased individual by useng his name. This law was
rigidly observed among the Californians no less than among
the Oregonians, and on its transgression the death penalty
could be inflicted. This is certainly enough to suppress all
historical knowledge within a people. How can history be
written without names?”* Among some of the tribes of
New South Wales the simple ditties, never more than two
lines long, to which the natives dance, are never transmitted
from one generation to another, because, when the rude poet
dies, “all the songs of which he was author are, as it were,
buried with him, inasmuch as they, in common with his very
name, are studiously ignored from thenceforward, conse-
quently they are quite forgotten in a very short space of
time indeed. This custom of endeavouring persistently to
forget everything which had been in any way connected
with the dead entirely precludes the possibility of anything


of an historical nature having


1 F. A. de Roepstorff, ‘ Tiom-
berombi, a Nicobar Tale,” Journal of
the Asiatic Society of Bengal, liii. (1884)
pt. i. pp. 24 sg. In some tribes
apparently the names of the dead are
only tabooed in the presence of their
relations. See C. Hill-Tout, in “ Re-
port of the Committee on the Ethno-
logical Survey of Canada,” Report of
the British Association for the Ad-
vancement of Science, Bradford, 1900,


existence amongst them ; in


p. 484; G. Brown, A/elanesians and
Polynesians (London, 1910), p. 399.
But in the great majority of the
accounts which I have consulted no
such limitation of the taboo is men-
tioned.

2 A. S. Gatschet, Zhe Xamath
Indians of South-Western Oregon
(Washington, 1890), p. xli. (Co#-
tributions to North American Ethnology,
vol. ii, pt. 1).


Sometimes
the names


of the dead


364 TABOOED WORDS CHAP.


fact the most vital occurrence, if only dating a single genera-
tion back, is quite forgotten, that is to say, if the recounting
thereof should necessitate the mention of a _ defunct
aboriginal’s name.”* Thus among these simple savages
even a sacred bard-could not avail to rescue an Australian
Agamemnon from the long night of oblivion.

In many tribes, however, the power of this superstition to
blot out the memory of the past is to some extent weakened


are revived and impaired by a natural tendency of the human mind.


after a
certain
time.


Time, which wears out the deepest impressions, inevitably
dulls, if it does not wholly efface, the print left on the savage
mind by the mystery and horror of death. Sooner or later,
as the memory of his loved ones fades slowly away, he
becomes more willing to speak of them, and thus their rude
names may sometimes be rescued by the philosophic enquirer
before they have vanished, like autumn leaves or winter
snows, into the vast undistinguished limbo of the past.
This was Sir George Grey’s experience when he attempted
to trace the intricate system of kinship prevalent among the
natives of western Australia. He says: “It is impossible
for any person, not well acquainted with the language of the
natives, and who does not possess great personal influence
over them, to pursue an inquiry of this nature ; for one of
the customs most rigidly observed and enforced amongst
them is, never to mention the name of a deceased person,
male or female. In an inquiry, therefore, which principally
turns upon the names of their ancestors, this prejudice must
be every moment violated, and a very great difficulty
encountered in the outset. The only circumstance which at
all enabled me to overcome this was, that the longer a
person has been dead the less repugnance do they evince in
uttering his name. I, therefore, in the first instance,
endeavoured to ascertain only the oldest names on record ;
and on subsequent occasions, when I found a native alone,


and in a loquacious humour, I


1 P, Beveridge, ‘* Of the Aborigines
inhabiting the great Lacustrine and
Riverine Depression of the Lower
Murray,” etc., Journal and Proceedings
of the Royal Society of New South
Wales for 1883, vol. xvii. p. 65. The


succeeded in filling up some


custom of changing common words on
the death of persons who bore them as
their names seems also to have been
observed by the Tasmanians. See J.
Bonwick, Daily Life of the Tasmanians,


Ps 145.


vs NAMES OF THE DEAD TABOOED


of the blanks. Occasionally, round their fires at night, I
managed to involve them in disputes regarding their
ancestors, and, on these occasions, gleaned much of the
information of which I was in want.”! In some of the
Victorian tribes the prohibition to mention the names of the

dead remained in force only during the period of mourn-

ing;? in the Port Lincoln tribe of South Australia it

lasted many years.’ Among the Chinook Indians of North
America “custom forbids the mention of a dead man’s

name, at least till many years have elapsed after the
bereavement.”* In the Twana, Chemakum, and Klallam

tribes of Washington State the names of deceased
members may be mentioned two or three years after their
death. Among the Puyallup Indians the observance of the

taboo is relaxed after several years, when the mourners have
forgotten their grief; and if the deceased was a famous
warrior, one of his descendants, for instance a great-
grandson, may be named after him. In this tribe the

taboo is not much observed at any time except by the
relations of the dead. Similarly the Jesuit missionary The
Lafitau tells us that the name of the departed and the re
similar names of the survivors were, so to say, buried with used to
the corpse until, the poignancy of their grief being abated, prey Jens
it pleased the relations to “lift up the tree and raise the lifeagainby
dead.” By raising the dead they meant bestowing the rams
name of the departed upon some one else, who thus became theirnames
to all intents and purposes a reincarnation of the deceased, pets
since on the principles of savage philosophy the name is Pride 3
vital part, if not the soul, of the man. When Father regarded
Lafitau arrived at St. Louis to begin work among the weaken
Iroquois, his colleagues decided that in order to make a the dead.
favourable impression on his flock the new shepherd should


assume the native name of his deceased predecessor, Father


365


1 G, Grey, Journals of two Expedi-
tions of Discovery in North-West and
Western Australia, ii. 231 sq.

2 J. Dawson, Australian Aborigines,
Pp. 42.

3C. W. Schiirmann, in Wative
Tribes of South Australia, p. 247.

4 H. H. Bancroft, ative Races of
the Pacific States, iii. 156.


5 Myron Eels, ‘‘ The Twana, Chema-
kum, and Klallam Indians of Washing-
ton Territory,” Annual Report of the
Prarie Institution for 1887, p.

56.

6S. R. M‘Caw, ‘‘ Mortuary Cus-
toms of the Puyallups,” Zhe American
Antiquarian and Oriental Journal,
viii. (1886) p. 235.


Mode of
reviving
the dead
in the
persons

of their
namesakes
among the
North
American
Indians.


366 TABOOED WORDS CHAP.


Briiyas, “the celebrated missionary,” who had lived many
years among the Indians and enjoyed their high esteem.
But Father Briiyas had been called from his earthly labours
to his heavenly rest only four short months before, and it
was too soon, in the phraseology of the Iroquois, to “raise
up the tree.” However, raised up it was in spite of them ;
and though some bolder spirits protested that their new
pastor had wronged them by taking the name of his
predecessor, “nevertheless,” says Father Lafitau, “they did
not fail to regard me as himself in another form (um autre
luz-méme), since I had entered into all his rights.” *

The same mode of bringing a dead man to life again by
bestowing his name upon a living person was practised by
the Hurons and other Indian tribes of Canada. An early
French traveller in Canada has described the ceremony
of resurrection as- it was observed by a tribe whom he
calls the Attiuoindarons, He says: “The Attiuoindarons
practise resurrections of the dead, principally of persons who
have deserved well of their country by their remarkable
services, so that the memory of illustrious and valiant men
revives in a certain way in others. Accordingly they call
assemblies for this purpose and hold councils, at which they
choose one of them who has the same virtues and qualities,
if possible, as he had whom they wish to resuscitate ; or at
least he must be of irreproachable life, judged by the standard
of a savage people. Wishing, then, to proceed to the
resurrection they all stand up, except him who is to be
resuscitated, to whom they give the name of the deceased,
and all letting their hands down very low they pretend to
lift him up from the earth, intending by that to signify that
they draw the great personage deceased from the grave and
restore him to life in the person of this other, who stands up
and, after great acclamations of the people, receives the
presents which the bystanders offer him. They further
hold several feasts in his honour and regard him thence-
forth as the deceased whom he represents; and by this

1 J. F. Lafitau, Meurs des sauvages vi. 109). ‘* A good long while” is the
ameriquains (Paris, 1724), ii. 434. phrase used by Captain J. G. Bourke
Charlevoix merely says thatthe taboo on in speaking of the same custom among


the names of the dead lasted ‘‘acertain the Apaches (On the Border with Crook,
time” (Histoire de la Nouvelle France, p. 132).


vI NAMES OF THE DEAD TABOOED 367


means the memory of virtuous men and of good and
valiant captains never dies among them.”* Among the
Hurons the ceremony took place between the death and the
great Festival of the Dead, which was usually celebrated
at intervals of twelve years. When it was resolved to resus-
citate a departed warrior, the members of his family met
and decided which of them was to be regarded as an incar-
nation of the deceased. If the dead man had been a
famous chief and leader in war, his living representative and
namesake succeeded to his functions. Presents were made
to him, and he entertained the whole tribe at a magnificent
banquet. His old robes were taken from him, and he was
clad in richer raiment. Thereupon a herald proclaimed
aloud the mystery of the incarnation. ‘“ Let all the people,”
he said, “remain silent. Open your ears and shut your
mouths. That which I am about to say is of importance.
Our business is to resuscitate a dead man and to bring a great
captain to life again.” With that he named the dead man
and all his posterity, and reminded his hearers of the place
and manner of his death. Then turning to him who was to
succeed the departed, he lifted up his voice: “ Behold him,”
he cried, “clad in this beautiful robe. It is not he whom you
saw these past days, who was called Nehap. He has given
his name to another, and he himself is now called Etouait”
(the name of the defunct). “Look on him as the true
captain of this nation. It is he whom you are bound to
obey ; it is he whom you are bound to listen to; it is he
whom you are bound to honour.” The new incarnation
meanwhile maintained a dignified silence, and afterwards led
the young braves out to war in order to prove that he had
inherited the courage and virtues as well as the name of
the dead chief? The Carrier Indians of British Columbia
firmly believe “that a departed soul can, if it pleases, come
back to the earth, in a human shape or body, in order to see
his friends, who are still alive. Therefore, as they are about
to set fire to the pile of wood on which a corpse is laid, a

1 Gabriel Sagard, Le Grand Voyage 2 Relations des Jésuites, 1636, p.
du pays des Hurons, Nouvelle Edition 131; @@., 1642, pp. 53, 85; 7a.,
(Paris, 1865), p. 202. The original 1644, pp. 66 sg. (Canadian reprint,


edition of Sagard’s book was published Quebec, 1858).
at Paris in 1632.


The dead
revived

in their
namesakes
among the
Lapps,
Khonds,
Yorubas,
Baganda,
and
Makalaka.


368 TABOOED WORDS CHAP.


relation of the deceased person stands at his feet, and asks
him if he will ever come back among them. Then the
priest or magician, with a grave countenance, stands at the
head of the corpse, and looks through both his hands on its
naked breast, and then raises them toward heaven, and
blows through them, as they say, the soul of the deceased,
that it may go and find, and enter into a relative. Or, if
any relative is present, the priest will hold both his hands
on the head of this person, and blow through them, that the
spirit of the deceased may enter into him or her; and
then, as they affirm, the first child which this person has
will possess the soul of the deceased person.”* The writer
does not say that the infant took the name of the deceased
who was born again in it; but probably it did. For some-
times the priest would transfer the soul from a dead to a
living person, who in that case took the name of the departed
in addition to his own?

Among the Lapps, when a woman was with child and
near the time of her delivery, a deceased ancestor or relation
(known as a /abmek) used to appear to her in a dream and
inform her what dead person was to be born again in her
infant, and whose name the child was therefore to bear. If
the woman had no such dream, it fell to the father or the
relatives to determine the name by divination or by consult-
ing a wizard.® Among the Khonds a birth is celebrated on
the seventh day after the event by a feast given to the priest
and to the whole village. To determine the child’s name the
priest drops grains of rice intoa cup of water, naming with
each grain a deceased ancestor. From the movements of
the seed in the water, and from observations made on the
person of the infant, he pronounces which of his progenitors
has reappeared in him, and the child generally, at least


1 Daniel W. Harmon, quoted by
Rev. Jedidiah Morse, Report to the
Secretary of War of the United States
on Indian Affairs (New-Haven, 1822),
Appendix, p. 345. The custom seems
now to be extinct. It is not mentioned
by Father A. G. Morice in his accounts
of the tribe (in Proceedings of the
Canadian Institute, Third Series, vol.
vii, 1888-89; Transactions of the
Canadian Institute, vol. iv, 1892-93 3


Annual Archaeological Report, Toronto,
1905).

* Ch. Wilkes, Narrative of the
United States Exploring Expedition
(New York, 1851), iv. 453.

3 E. J. Jessen, De Finnorum Lappon-
umque Norwegicorum religione pagana,
pp. 33 sg. (bound up with C. Leemius,
De Lapponibus Finmarchiae eorumque
lingua, vita, et religione pristina com-
mentatio, Copenhagen, 1767).


vI NAMES OF THE DEAD TABOOED 369


among the northern tribes, receives the name of that
ancestor. Among the Ewe-speaking peoples of Togo, in

West Africa, when a woman is in hard labour, a fetish

priest or priestess is called in to disclose the name of the
deceased relative who has just been born again into the

world in the person of the infant. The name of that
relative is bestowed on the child.2 Among the Yorubas,

soon after a child has been born, a priest of Ifa, the god

of divination, appears on the scene to ascertain what ances-

tral soul has been reborn in the infant. As soon as this has

been decided, the parents are told that the child must con-

form in all respects to the manner of life of the ancestor who

now animates him or her, and if, as often happens, they
profess ignorance, the priest supplies the necessary informa-

tion. The child usually receives the name of the ancestor

who has been born again in him.? In Uganda a child is Reincarna-
named with much ceremony by its grandfather, who bestows ‘0? of 4
on it the name of one of its ancestors, but never the name of effected by
its father. The spirit of the deceased namesake then enters “8,
the child and assists him through life.* Here the reincarna- child.
tion of the ancestor appears to be effected by giving his

name, and with it his soul, to his descendant. The same

idea seems to explain a curious ceremony observed by the
Makalaka of South Africa at the naming of a child. The

spirit of the ancestor (mots¢mo), whose name the child is to

bear, is represented by an elderly kinsman or kinswoman,


1 MajorS. C. Macpherson, Memorials
of Service in India (London, 1865),
Pp. 72 Sg.

2 C. Spiess, ‘‘Einiges tiber die
Bedeutung der Personennamen der
Evheer in Togo-Gebiete,” J/itthetlun-
gen des Seminars fiir orientalische
Sprachen su Berlin, vi. (1903) Dritte
Abtheilung, pp. 56 sg.

3 A. B. Ellis, The Yoruba-speaking
Peoples of the Slave Coast, p. 1523; td.,
The Ewe-speaking Peoples of the Slave
Coast, pp. 153 sg. In the former
passage the writer says nothing about
the child’s name. In the latter he
merely says that an ancestor is supposed
to have sent the child, who accordingly
commonly takes the name of that
ancestor. But the analogy of other


PT.


peoples makes it highly probable that,
as Col. Ellis himself states in his later
work (Zhe Yoruba-speaking Peoples),
the ancestor is believed to be incarnate
in the child. That the Yoruba child
takes the name of the ancestor who
has come to life again in him is
definitely stated by A. Dieterich in
Archiv fiir Religionswissenschaft, viii.
(1904) p. 20, referring to Zeztschrift
Jiir Missionskunde und Religions-
wissenschaft, xv. (1900) p. 17, a work
to which I have not access. Dieterich’s
account of the subject of rebirth (of. cz.
pp- 18-21) deserves to be consulted.

4 J. Roscoe, ** Further Notes on the
Manners and Customs of the Baganda,”
Journal of the Anthropological Institute,
XXXxii. (1902) p. 32.

2B


370 TABOOED WORDS CHAP.


according as the little one is a boy or a girl. A pretence
is made of catching the representative of the spirit, and
dragging him or her to the hut of the child’s parents. Out-
side the hut the pretended spirit takes his seat and the skin
of an animal is thrown over him. He then washes his
hands in a vessel of water, eats some millet-porridge, and
washes it down with beer. Meantime the women and girls
dance gleefully round him, screaming or singing, and throw
copper rings, beads, and so forth as presents into the vessel
of water. The men do the same, but without dancing ; after
that they enter the hut to partake of a feast. The repre-
sentative of the ancestral spirit now vanishes, and the child
thenceforth bears his or her name.’ This ceremony may be
intended to represent the reincarnation of the ancestral spirit
in the child.
Revival of In the Nicobar Islands the names of dead relatives are
= oteaag al tabooed for a generation ; but when both their parents are
among the dead, men and women are bound to assume the names of
Nicobares® their deceased grandfathers or grandmothers respectively.”
Gilyaks. Perhaps with the names they may be thought to inherit
the spirits of their ancestors. Among the Tartars in the
Middle Ages the names of the dead might not be uttered till
the third generation.2 Among the Gilyaks of Saghalien no
two persons in the same tribe may bear the same name at
the same time ; for they think that if a child were to receive
the name of a living man, either the child or the man would
die within the year. When a man dies, his name may not
be uttered until after the celebration of the festival at which
they sacrifice a bear for the purpose of procuring plenty of
game and fish. At that festival they call out the name of
the deceased while they beat the skin of the bear. Thence-
forth the name may be pronounced by every one, and it will
be bestowed on a child who shall afterwards be born.* These
customs suggest that the Gilyaks, like other peoples, suppose


1 C. Mauch, Rezsen im Inneren von Relation des Mongols ou Tartares, ed.
Siid-Afrika (Gotha, 1874), p. 43  D’Avezac, cap. iii. § iii, The writer's
(Petermann’s Mittheilungen, Ergin- statement (‘‘ mec nomen proprium ejus


sungsheft, No. 37). usgue ad tertiam generationem audet
2 Sir R. C. Temple, in Census of  aliguis nominare”’) is not very clear,
India, 1901, vol, iii, 207, 212. 4 P, Labbé, Un Bagne russe, [tle


% Plan de Carpin (de Plano Carpini), de Sakhaline (Paris, 1903), p. 166.


i et i


VI NAMES OF THE DEAD TABOOED 37!


the namesake of a deceased person to be his or her reincar-
nation ; for their objection to let two living persons bear the
same name seems to imply a belief that the soul goes with
the name, and therefore cannot be shared by two people at
the same time.

Among the Esquimaux of Bering Strait the first child Namesakes
born in a village after some one has died receives the dead 1 ‘he dea
person’s name, and must represent him in subsequent the dead
festivals which are given in his honour. The day before the pet auney
great feast of the dead the nearest male relative of the wry ars:
deceased goes to the grave and plants before it a stake Strait, s
bearing the crest or badge of the departed. This is the
notice served to the ghost to attend the festival. Accord-
ingly he returns from the spirit-land to the grave. Afterwards
a song is sung at the grave inviting the ghost to repair to the
assembly-house, where the people are gathered to celebrate
the festival. The shade accepts the invitation and takes
his place, with the other ghosts, in the fire-pit under the
floor of the assembly-house. All the time of the festival,
which lasts for several days, lamps filled with seal-oil are
kept burning day and night in the assembly-house in order
to light up the path to the spirit-land and enable the ghosts
to find their way back to their old haunts on earth. When
the spirits of the dead are gathered in the pit, and the
proper moment has come, they all rise up through the floor
and enter the bodies of their living namesakes. Offerings of
food, drink, and clothes are now made to these namesakes, who
eat and drink and wear the clothes on behalf of the ghosts.
Finally, the shades, refreshed and strengthened by the
banquet, are sent away back to their graves thinly clad in
the spiritual essence of the clothes, while the gross materia]
substance of the garments is retained by their namesakes.'
Here the reincarnation of the dead in the living is not
permanent, but merely occasional and temporary. Still a
special connexion may well be thought to subsist at all times
between the deceased and the living person who bears his or
her name.


1 E. W. Nelson, ‘“*The Eskimo <American Ethnology, part i. (Wash-
about Bering Strait,” Zighteenth ington, 1899), pp. 363 sg., 365, 368,
Annual Report of the Bureau of 371, 377, 379; 424 Sg.


372 TABOOED WORDS CHAP,
Cere- The foregoing facts seem to render it probable that
ersig even where a belief in the reincarnation of ancestors either is


naming of not expressly attested or has long ceased to form part of


hildr “a ;

eiceably “the popular creed, many of the solemnities which attend
ssagite the naming of children may have sprung originally from
with the the widespread notion that the souls of the dead come to
idea of life again in their namesakes.’

eres | In some cases the period during which the name of the
ee ares deceased may not be pronounced seems to: bear a close
hilt relation to the time during which his mortal remains may
_ aaaee be supposed still to hold together. Thus, of some Indian

er their


bodieshave tribes on the north-west coast of America it is said that
decayed. they may not speak the name of a dead person “until the
bones are finally disposed of.”* Among the Narrinyeri of
South Australia the name might not be uttered until the
corpse had decayed.* In the Encounter Bay tribe of the
same country the dead body is dried over a fire, packed up
in mats, and carried about for several months among the
scenes which had been familiar to the deceased in his life.
Next it is placed on a platform of sticks and left there till it
has completely decayed, whereupon the next of kin takes the
skull and uses it as a drinking-cup. After that the name of
the departed may be uttered without offence. Were it pro-
nounced sooner his kinsmen would be deeply offended, and
a war might be the result. The rule that the name of the
dead may not be spoken until his body has mouldered
away seems to point to a belief that the spirit continues to
exist only so long as the body does so, and that, when the
material frame is dissolved, the spiritual part of the man
perishes with it, or goes away, or at least becomes so feeble
and incapable of mischief that his name may be bandied
about with impunity.6 This view is to some extent con-


1 On the doctrine of the reincarnation 2 H. H, Bancroft, Native Races of


of ancestors in their descendants see
E. B. Tylor, Primitive Culture,? ii. 3-5,
who observes with great probability
that ‘*among the lower races generally
the renewal of old family names by
giving them to new-born children may
always be suspected of involving some
such thought.” See further Zotemism
and Exogamy, iii. 297-299.


the Pacific States, i. 248.

8G. Taplin, in Mative Tribes of
South Australia, p. 19.

4H. E. A. Meyer, in Native Tribes
of South Australia, p. 199.

5 Some of the Indians of Guiana
bring food and drink to their dead so
long as the flesh remains on the bones;
when it has mouldered away, they con-


-— ee


VI NAMES OF THE DEAD TABOOED 373


firmed by the practice of the Arunta tribe in central Arunta

Australia. We have seen that among them no one may eames

mention the name of the deceased during the period of cap into
the grave

mourning for fear of disturbing and annoying the ghost, who a: the ena

is believed to be walking about at large. Some of the relations of ~ “

of the dead man, it is true, such as his parents, elder brothers selene xt

and sisters, paternal aunts, mother-in-law, and all his sons-

in-law, whether actual or possible, are debarred all their lives

from taking his name into their lips; but other people,

including his wife, children, grandchildren, grandparents,

younger brothers and sisters, and father-in-law, are free to

name him so soon as he has ceased to walk the earth and

hence to be dangerous.. Some twelve or eighteen months

after his death the people seem to think that the dead man

has enjoyed his liberty long enough, and that it is time to

confine his restless spirit within narrower bounds. Accord-

ingly a grand battue or ghost-hunt brings the days of

mourning to an end. The favourite haunt of the deceased

is believed to be the burnt and deserted camp where ‘he died.

Here therefore on a certain day a band of men and women,

the men armed with shields and spear-throwers, assemble

and begin dancing round the charred and blackened remains

of the camp, shouting and beating the air with their weapons

and hands in order to drive away the lingering spirit from

the spot he loves too well. When the dancing is over, the

whole party proceed to the grave at a run, chasing the ghost

before them. It is in vain that the unhappy ghost makes a

last bid for freedom, and, breaking away from the beaters,


clude that the man himself has departed.
See A. Biet, Voyage de la France équi-
noxtaleenl Islede Cayenne (Paris, 1664),
p- 392. The Alfoors or Toradjas of
central Celebes believe that the souls of
the dead cannot enter the spirit-land
until all the flesh has been removed
from their bones; till that has been
done, the gods (/amoa) in the other
world could not bear the stench of the
corpse. Accordingly at a great festival
the bodies of all who have died within
a certain time are dug up and the
decaying flesh scraped from the bones.
See A. C. Kruijt, ‘‘Een en ander
aangaande het geestelijk en maat-


schappelijk leven van den  Poso-
Alfoer,” Mededeelingen van wege het
Nederlandsche  Zendelinggenootschap,
xxxix. (1895) pp. 26, 32 sgg.3 id.,
‘* Het wezen van het Heidendom te
Posso,” zbzd. xlvii. (1903) p. 32. The
Matacos Indians of the Gran Chaco
believe that the soul of a dead man
does not pass down into the nether
world until his body is decomposed or
burnt. See J. Pelleschi, Zos Jndios
Matacos (Buenos Ayres, 1897), p. 102.
These ideas perhaps explain the wide-
spread custom of disinterring the dead
after a certain time and disposing of
their bones otherwise.


The birth-
names of
kings kept
secret or
not pro-
nounced.


374 TABOOED WORDS CHAP,


doubles back towards the camp; the leader of the party is
prepared for this manceuvre, and by making a long circuit
adroitly cuts off the retreat of the fugitive. Finally, having
run him to earth, they trample him down into the grave,
dancing and stamping on the heaped-up soil, while with
downward thrusts through the air they beat and force him
under ground. There, lying in his narrow house, flattened
and prostrate under a load of earth, the poor ghost sees his
widow wearing the gay feathers of the ring-neck parrot in
her hair, and he knows that the time of her mourning for
him is over. The loud shouts of the men and women shew
him that they are not to be frightened and bullied by him
any more, and that he had better lie quiet. But he may
still watch over his friends, and guard them from harm, and
visit them in dreams."


§ 4. Names of Kings and other Sacred Persons tabooed


When we see that in primitive society the names of
mere commoners, whether alive or dead, are matters of such
anxious care, we need not be surprised that great precau-
tions should be taken to guard from harm the names of
sacred kings and priests. Thus the name of the king of
Dahomey is always kept secret, lest the knowledge of it
should enable some evil-minded person to do him a mis-
chief. The appellations by which the different kings of
Dahomey have been known to Europeans are not their true
names, but mere titles, or what the natives call “strong
names” (zyz-sese). Asa rule, these “strong names” are the
first words of sentences descriptive of certain qualities. Thus
Agaja, the name by which the fourth king of the dynasty
was known, was part of a sentence meaning, “ A spreading
tree must be lopped before it can be cast into the fire” ; and
Tegbwesun, the name of the fifth king, formed the first word
of a sentence which signified, “ No one can take the cloth off
the neck of a wild bull.” The natives seem to think that no
harm comes of such titles being known, since they are not,
like the birth-names, vitally connected with their owners.”


1 Spencer and Gillen, Native Tribes 2A. B. Ellis, Zhe Zwe - speaking
of Central Australia, pp. 498-508. Peoples of the Slave Coast, pp. 98 sg.


|
:


vI NAMES OF SACRED PERSONS TABOOED 375


In the Galla kingdom of Ghera the birth-name of the
sovereign may not be pronounced by a subject under pain
of death, and common words which resemble it in sound are
changed for others. Thus when a queen named Carre reigned
over the kingdom, the word dara, which means smoke, was
exchanged for uno; further, arre, “ass,” was replaced by
culula; and gudare, “potato,” was dropped and /occzo substi-
tuted for it.' Among the Bahima of central Africa, when the
king dies, his name is abolished from the language, and if his
name was that of an animal, a new appellation must be
found for the creature at once. For example, the king is
often called a lion; hence at the death of a king named
Lion a new name for lions in general has to be coined.
Thus in the language of the Bahima the word for “lion”
some years ago was mpologoma. But when a prominent
chief of that name died, the word for lion was changed to
kichunchu. Again, in the Bahima language the word for
“nine” used to be mwenda, a word which occurs with the
same meaning but dialectical variations in the languages of
other tribes of central and eastern Africa. But when a chief
who bore the name Mwenda died, the old name for “ nine”
had to be changed, and accordingly the word zsaga has been
substituted for it. In Siam it used to be difficult to ascertain
the king’s real name, since it was carefully kept secret from fear
of sorcery ; any one who mentioned it was clapped into gaol.
The king might only be referred to under certain high-sound-
ing titles, such as “ the august,” “ the perfect,” “the supreme,”
“the great emperor,” “descendant of the angels,” and so on.*
In Burma it was accounted an impiety of the deepest dye to
mention the name of the reigning sovereign ; Burmese sub-
jects, even when they were far from their country, could not be
prevailed upon to do so ;° after his accession to the throne
the king was known by his royal titles only.2 The proper
name of the Emperor of China may neither be pronounced


1 A. Cecchi, Da Zezla alle frontiere Siam (Amsterdam, 1691), i. 306;


del Caffa, ii. (Rome, 1885) p. 551.

2 Rev. J. Roscoe, ‘‘The Bahima,”
Journal of the Royal Anthropological
Institute, xxxvii. (1907) p. 96.

3 J. F. Cunningham, Uganda and its
Peoples (London, 1905), pp. 14, 16.

4 De la Loubere, Du royaume de


Pallegoix, Royaume Thai ou Siam, i.
260,

5 J. S. Polack, Manners and Cus-
toms of the New Zealanders (London,
1840), ii. 127, note 43.

6 A. Fytche, Burma Past and
Present (London, 1878), i. 238.


376 TABOOED WORDS


nor written by any of his subjects.


CHAP.


Coreans were formerly


forbidden, under severe penalties, to utter the king’s name,


which, indeed, was seldom known.?


When a prince ascends


the throne of Cambodia he ceases to be designated by his
real name ; and if that name happens to be a common word
in the language, the word is often changed. Thus, for
example, since the reign of King Ang Duong the word


duong.


g, which meant a small coin, has been replaced by dom.®


In the island of Sunda it is taboo to utter any word which


coincides with the name of a prince or chief.*


The name of


the rajah of Bolang Mongondo, a district in the west of
Celebes, is never mentioned except in case of urgent
necessity, and even then his pardon must be asked re-


peatedly before the liberty is taken.


In the island of Sumba


people do not mention the real name of a prince, but refer to
him by the name of the first slave whom in his youth he


became master of.


This slave is regarded by the chief as


his second self, and he enjoys practical impunity for any


misdeeds he may commit.®


Among the Zulus no man will mention the name of the
chief of his tribe or the names of the progenitors of the chief,


chiefs may so far as he can remember them; nor will he utter common


words which coincide with or merely resemble in sound


tabooed names.


“ As, for instance, the Zungu tribe say mata


for manzi (water), and zxkosta for tshaniti (grass), and embz-
gatdu for umkondo (assegai), and znxyatugo for enhlela (path),
because their present chief is Umfan-o inhlela, his father was
Manzini, his grandfather Imkondo, and one before him


Tshani.”


1 J. Edkins, Religion in China®
(London, 1878), p. 35.

2 Ch. Dallet, Histoire de lEglise
de Corée, i. p. xxiv.; Mrs. Bishop,
Korea and her Neighbours (London,
1898), i. 48. The custom is now
obsolete (G. N. Curzon, Problems of
the Far East, Westminster, 1896, p.
155 note).

8 E. Aymonier, Notice sur le Cam-
bodge (Paris, 1875), p. 22; td., Le
Cambodge, i. (Paris, 1900) p. 58.

4 K. F. Holle, **Snippers van den
Regent van Galoeh,” 7ijdschrift voor
Indische Taal. Land- en Volkenkunde,


In the tribe of the Dwandwes there was a chief


xxvii, (1882) p. Ior.

5 N. P. Wilken en J. A. Schwarz,
** Allerlei over het land en volk van
Bolaang Mongondou,” A/ededeelingen
van wege het Nederlandsche Zendeling-
genootschap, xi, (1867) p. 356.

® S. Roos, “ Bijdrage tot de Kennis
van Taal, Land, en Volk op het eiland
Soemba,” p. 70, Verhandelingen van
het Bataviaasch Genootschap van Kun-
sten en Wetenschappen,xxxvi. Compare
J. H. F. Kohlbrugge, ‘ Naamgeving
in Insulinde,” Biydragen tot de Taal-
Land. en Volkenkunde van Neder-
landsche-Indié, li, (1900) p. 173.


eS eS


VI NAMES OF SACRED PERSONS TABOOED 377


called Langa, which means the sun; hence the name of the
sun was changed from /anga to gala, and so remains to this
day, though Langa died more than a hundred years ago.
Once more, in the Xnumayo tribe the word meaning “to
herd cattle” was changed from alusa or ayusa to kagesa,
because u-Mayusi was the name of the chief. Besides these
taboos, which were observed by each tribe separately, all the
Zulu tribes united in tabooing the name of the king who
reigned over the whole nation. Hence, for example, when
Panda was king of Zululand, the word for “a root of a tree,”
which is zpando, was changed to nxabo, Again, the word
for “lies” or “ slander ” was altered from amacebo to amakwata,
because amacebo contains a syllable of the name of the
famous King Cetchwayo. These substitutions are not, how-
ever, carried so far by the men as by the women, who omit
every sound even remotely resembling one that occurs in a
tabooed name. At the king’s kraal, indeed, it is sometimes
difficult to understand the speech of the royal wives, as they
treat in this fashion the names not only of the king and his
forefathers, but even of his and their brothers back for genera-
tions. When to these tribal and national taboos we add
those family taboos on the names of connexions by marriage
which have been already described,’ we can easily under-
stand how it comes about that in Zululand every tribe has
words peculiar to itself, and that the women have a con-
siderable vocabulary of their own. Members, too, of one
family may be debarred from using words employed by
those of another. The women of one kraal, for instance,
may call a hyaena by its ordinary name; those of the next
may use the common substitute ; while in a third the substi-
tute may also be unlawful and another term may have to be
invented to supply its place. Hence the Zulu language at
the present day almost presents the appearance of being a
double one; indeed, for multitudes of things it possesses
three or four synonyms, which through the blending of tribes
are known all over Zululand.


1 Above, pp. 335 59. Amatongas* (Edinburgh, 1875), pp.
2 J. Shooter, Zhe Kajfirs of Natal 172-179; J. Macdonald, ‘‘ Manners,
and the Zulu Country, pp. 221 sg.; Customs, Superstitions, and Religions of
David Leslie, dmong the Zulus and South African Tribes,” Journal of the


The names
of living
kings and
chiefs may
not be pro-
nounced
in Mada-
gascar.


378 TABOOED WORDS CHAP.


In Madagascar a similar custom everywhere prevails and
has resulted, as among the Zulus, in producing certain
dialectic differences in the speech of the various tribes.
There are no family names in Madagascar, and almost every
personal name is drawn from the language of daily life and
signifies some common object or action or quality, such as
a bird, a beast, a tree, a plant, a colour, and so on. Now,
whenever one of these common words forms the name or
part of the name of the chief of the tribe, it becomes sacred
and may no longer be used in its ordinary signification as
the name of a tree, an insect, or what not. Hence a new
name for the object must be invented to replace the one
which has been discarded. Often the new name consists of
a descriptive epithet or a periphrasis. Thus when the prin-
cess Rabodo became queen in 1863 she took the name of
Rasoherina. Now soherina was the word for the silkworm
moth, but having been assumed as the name of the sovereign
it could no longer be applied to the insect, which ever since
has been called zany-dandy, “ offspring of silk.” So, again,
if a chief had or took the name of an animal, say of the dog
(amboa),and was known as Ramboa, the animal would hence-
forth be called by another name, probably a descriptive one,
such as “the barker” (/amovo) or “the driver away” (/fan-
droaka), etc. In the western part of Imerina there was a
chief called Andria-mamba; but samba was one of the
names of the crocodile, so the chiefs subjects might not call
the reptile by that name and were always scrupulous to use
another. It is easy to conceive what confusion and un-
certainty may thus be introduced into a language when it is
spoken by many little local tribes each ruled by a petty chief
with his own sacred name. Yet there are tribes and people
who submit to this tyranny of words as their fathers did
before them from time immemorial. The inconvenient re-
sults of the custom are especially marked on the western
coast of the island, where, on account of the large number of
independent chieftains, the names of things, places, and
rivers have suffered so many changes that confusion often
arises, for when once common words have been banned by


Anthropological Institute, xx, (1891) mainly on Leslie’s description, which is
p- 131. Theaccountinthetextisbased by far the fullest.


v1 NAMES OF SACRED PERSONS TABOOED 379


the chiefs the natives will not acknowledge to have ever
known them in their old sense.’

But it is not merely the names of living kings and chiefs The names
which are tabooed in Madagascar; the names of dead rehome
sovereigns are equally under a ban, at least in some parts of chiefs are
the island. Thus among the Sakalavas, when a king has
died, the nobles and people meet in council round the dead in Mada-
body and solemnly choose a new name by which the
deceased monarch shall be henceforth known. The new
name always begins with andrian, “lord,” and ends with
arrivou, “thousand,” to signify that the late king ruled over
a numerous nation. The body of the name is composed of
an epithet or phrase descriptive of the deceased or of his
reign. After the new name has been adopted, the old name
by which the king was known during his life becomes sacred
and may not be pronounced under pain of death. Further,
words in the common language which bear any resemblance
to the forbidden name also become sacred and have to be
replaced by others. For example, after the death of King
Makka the word /aka, which meant a canoe, was abandoned
and the word fiounrdma substituted for it. When Taoussi
died, the word éaouss?, signifying “ beautiful,’ was replaced
by senga. For similar reasons the word éntétsz, “ old,” was
changed for matoué, which properly means “ ripe” ; the word
vousst, “castrated,” was dropped and manapaka, “cut,”
adopted in its place; and the word for island (mossz) was
changed into vario#, which signifies strictly “a place where
there is rice.” Again, when a Sakalava king named
Marentoetsa died, two words fell into disuse, namely, the
word mary or mare meaning “true,” and the word /oetsa
meaning “condition.” Persons who uttered these forbidden
words were looked on not only as grossly rude, but even
as felons; they had committed a capital crime. How-
ever, these changes of vocabulary are confined to the


1D. Tyerman and G. Bennet, Magazine, No. xi. (Christmas, 1887)


Journal of Voyages and Travels pp. 308 sg.; id., in Journal of the
(London, 1831), ii, 525 sg.3 J. Anthropological Institute, xxi. (1887)
Sibree, Zhe Great African Island pp. 226 sgg. On the custom of


(London, 1880), pp. 150 sg.3 7@.,
** Curiosities of Words connected with
Royalty and Chieftainship,” Amtana-
narivo Annual and Madagascar


tabooing royal or chiefly names in
Madagascar, see A. van Gennep, 7adou
et totémisme &@ Madagascar (Paris,
1904), pp. 104 59g.


The
names of
dead kings
not pro-
nounced
in Mada-
gascar.


380 TABOOED WORDS CHAP.


district over which the deceased king reigned; in the
neighbouring districts the old words continue to be em-
ployed in the old sense." Again, among the Bara, another
tribe of Madagascar, “the memory of their deceased kings
is held in the very highest respect; the name of such
kings is considered sacred—too sacred indeed for utterance,
and no one is allowed to pronounce it. To such a length
is this absurdity carried that the name of any person or
thing whatsoever, if it bear a resemblance to the name of
the deceased king, is no longer used, but some other
designation is given. For instance, there was a king named
Andriamasoandro. After his decease the word masoandro
was no longer employed as the name of the sun, but
mahenika was substituted for it.”* An eminent authority on
Madagascar has observed: “A curious fact, which has had
a very marked influence on the Malagasy language, is the
custom of no longer pronouncing the name of a dead person
nor even the words which resemble it in their conclusions.
The name is replaced by another. King Ramitra, since his
decease, has been called Mahatenatenarivou, ‘the prince who
has conquered a thousand foes, and a Malagasy who should
utter his old name would be regarded as the murderer of the
prince, and would therefore be liable to the confiscation of
his property, or even to the penalty of death. It is easy
accordingly.to understand how the Malagasy language, one
in its origin, has been corrupted, and how it comes about that
at the present day there are discrepancies between the
various dialects. In Menabe, since the death of King
Vinany, the word vz/any, meaning a pot, has been replaced
by jiketrehane, ‘cooking vessel, whereas the old word con-
tinues in use in the rest of Madagascar. These changes, it


1V. Noel, “fle de Madagascar, et totémisme & Madagascar, pp. 110


recherches sur les Sakkalava,” Bulletin
de la Société de Géographie (Paris), IIme
Série, xx. (1843) pp. 303-306. Com-
pare A, Grandidier, ‘* Les Rites funé-
raires chez les Malgaches,” Revue
d’Ethnographie, v. (1886) p. 224;
A. Walen, ‘The Sakalava,” Ansana-
narivo Annual and Madagascar Maga-
sine, vol. ii., Reprint of the Second
Four Numbers (Antananarivo, 1896),
p- 242; A. van Gennep, Zadou


sg. Amongst the Sakalavas it is
forbidden to mention the name of
any dead person. See A. Voeltzkow,
**YVom Morondava zum Mangoky,
Reiseskizzen aus West-Madagascar,”
Zeitschrift der Gesellschaft fiir Erd-
hkunde su Berlin, xxxi, (1896) p. 118.

2 R, Baron, ‘*The Bara,” Anfana-
narivo Annual and Madagascar Maga-
sine, vol, ii., Reprint of the Second Four
Numbers (Antananarivo, 1896), p. 83.


VI NAMES OF SACRED PERSONS TABOOED


381


is true, hardly take place except for kings and great
chiefs.” *

The sanctity attributed to the persons of chiefs in Poly- The names
nesia naturally extended also to their names, which on the abe
primitive view are hardly separable from the personality of be pro- _
their owners. Hence in Polynesia we find the same system- oreo ts
atic prohibition to utter the names of chiefs or of common
words resembling them which we have already met with in
Zululand and Madagascar. Thus in New Zealand the name
of a chief is held so sacred that, when it happens to be a
common word, it may not be used in the language, and
another has to be found to replace it. For example, a chief
to the southward of East Cape bore the name of Maripi,
which signified a knife, hence a new word (mekra) for knife
was introduced, and the old one became obsolete. Else-
where the word for water (zvaz) had to be changed, because
it chanced to be the name of the chief, and would have been
desecrated by being applied to the vulgar fluid as well as to
his sacred person. This taboo naturally produced a plentiful
crop of synonyms in the Maori language, and travellers
newly arrived in the country were sometimes puzzled at find-
ing the same things called by quite different names in neigh-
bouring tribes.2 When a king comes to the throne in
Tahiti, any words in the language that resemble his name in
sound must be changed for others. In former times, if any
man were so rash as to disregard this custom and to use the
forbidden words, not only he but all his relations were
immediately put to death.2 On the accession of King Otoo,
which happened before Vancouver’s visit to Tahiti, the
proper names of all the chiefs were changed, as well as forty
or fifty of the commonest words in the language, and every
native was obliged to adopt the new terms, for any neglect


1 A. Grandidier, ‘*‘ Madagascar,” ‘The Maoris of New Zealand,” Jour-


Bulletin de la Société de Géographie
(Paris), Vme Série, xvii. (1869) pp.
401 sg. The writer is here speaking
specially of the Sakalavas, though his
remarks, appear to be of general
application.

2 J. S. Polack, Manners and Cus-
toms of the New Zealanders, i. 37 5q.,
ii. 126 sg. Compare E. Tregear,


nal of the Anthropological Institute,
xix. (1890) p. 123.


3 Captain J. Cook, Voyages (London,
1809), vi. 155 (Third Voyage). Com-
pare Captain James Wilson, J/isszonary
Voyage to the Southern Pacific Ocean
(London, 1799), p. 366; W. Ellis,
Polynesian Researches,? iii. 101.


The names
of the
Eleusinian
priests
might not
be uttered.


382 TABOOED WORDS CHAP,


to do so was punished with the greatest severity.. When
a certain king named Tu came to the throne of Tahiti the
word ¢z, which means “to stand,” was changed to ta; fetu,
“a star,” became fetva; tuz, “to strike,’ was turned into ad,
and so on. Sometimes, as in these instances, the new names
were formed by merely changing or dropping some letter or
letters of the original words ; in other cases the substituted
terms were entirely different words, whether chosen for their
similarity of meaning though not of sound, or adopted from
another dialect, or arbitrarily invented. But the changes
thus introduced were only temporary ; on the death of the
king the new words fell into disuse, and the original ones
were revived.2 Similarly in Samoa, when the name of a
sacred chief was that of an animal or bird, the name of the
animal or bird was at once changed for another, and the old
one might never again be uttered in that chief’s district.
For example, a sacred Samoan chief was named Pe’a, which
means “ flying-fox.” Hence in his district a flying-fox was
no longer called a flying-fox but a “bird of heaven”
(manu lang).

In ancient Greece the names of the priests and other
high officials who had to do with the performances of the
Eleusinian mysteries might not be uttered in their lifetime.
To pronounce them was a legal offence. The pedant in
Lucian tells how he fell in with these august personages
hailing along to the police court a ribald fellow who had
dared to name them, though well he knew that ever since
their consecration it was unlawful to do so, because they had
become anonymous, having lost their old names and acquired
new and sacred titles“ From two inscriptions found at


1 Vancouver, Voyage of Discovery to
the North Pacific Ocean and round the
World (London, 1798), i. 135.

2 United States Exploring Expedi-
tion, Ethnography and Philology, by
Horatio Hale (Philadelphia, 1846), pp.
288 sq.

8 G. Brown, D.D., Melanesians and
Polynesians (London, 1910), p. 280,

* Lucian, Lexiphanes, 10. The in-
scriptional and other evidence of this
Greek superstition was first brought to
the notice of anthropologists by Mr.


W. R. Paton in an interesting article,
‘The Holy Names of the Eleusinian
Priests,” Jnternational Folk-lore Con-
gress, 1891, Papers and Transactions,
pp. 202-214. Compare E. Maass,
Orpheus (Munich, 1895), p. 70; Aug.
Mommsen, /este der Stadt Athen im Al-
tertum (Leipsic, 1898), pp. 253-255; P.
Foucart, Les Grands Mystdres da’ Eleusis
(Paris,1900), pp. 28-31. The two last
writers shew that, contrary to what
we might have expected, the custom
appears not to have been very ancient.


VI NAMES OF SACRED PERSONS TABOOED 383


Eleusis it appears that the names of the priests were
committed to the depths of the sea;* probably they were
engraved on tablets of bronze or lead, which were then
thrown into deep water in the Gulf of Salamis. The inten-
tion doubtless was to keep the names a profound secret ;
and how could that be done more surely than by sinking
them in the sea? what human vision could spy them
glimmering far down in the dim depths of the green
water? A clearer illustration of the confusion between the
incorporeal and the corporeal, between the name and its
material embodiment, could hardly be found than in this
practice of civilised Greece.

In Togo, a district of West Africa, a secret religious The old
society flourishes under the name of the Yewe order. Both eth a
men and women are admitted to it.


The teaching and the Yewe
practice of the order are lewd and licentious. Murderers 2¢* ™


Togo may
and debtors join it for the sake of escaping from justice, for not be
the members are not amenable to the laws. On being bey eer
initiated every one receives a new name, and thenceforth his

or her old name may never be mentioned by anybody under
penalty of a heavy fine. Should the old name be uttered in

a quarrel by an uninitiated person, the aggrieved party, who
seems to be oftener a woman than a man, pretends to fall

into a frenzy, and in this state rushes into the house of the
offender, smashes his pots, destroys the grass roof, and tears
down the fence. Then she runs away into the forest, where

the simple people believe that she is changed into a leopard.

In truth she slinks by night into the conventual buildings of


1 G. Kaibel, Zpigrammata Graeca ex
lapidibus conlecta, No. 863 ; ’"E@npepis
dpxaodoytxt, 1883, col. 79 sg. From
the latter of these inscriptions we learn
that the name might be made public
after the priest’s death. Further, a
reference of Eunapius (Vz¢ae sophis-
tarum, p. 475 of the Didot edition)
shews that the name was revealed to
the initiated. In the essay cited in the
preceding note Mr, W. R. Paton as-
sumes that it was the new and sacred
name which was kept secret and com-
mitted to the sea. The case is not
clear, but both the evidence and the
probability seem to me in favour of the


view that it was rather the old everyday
name of the priest or priestess which
was put away at his or her consecration.
If, as is not improbable, these sacred
personages had to act the parts of gods
and goddesses at the mysteries, it might
well be deemed indecorous and even
blasphemous to recall the vulgar names
by which they had been known in the
familiar intercourse of daily life. If
our clergy, to suppose an analogous
case, had to personate the most exalted
beings of sacred history, it would surely
be grossly irreverent to address them
by their ordinary names during the
performance of their solemn functions.


The utter-
ance of the
names of
gods and
spirits is
supposed
to disturb
the course
of nature.


384 TABOOED WORDS CHAP.


the order, and is there secretly kept in comfort till the
business is settled. At last she is publicly brought back by
the society with great pomp, her body smeared with red
earth and adorned with an artificial tail in order to make
the ignorant think that she has really been turned into a
leopard.’

When the name is held to be a vital part of the person,
it is natural to suppose that the mightier the person the
more potent must be his name. Hence the names of super-
natural beings, such as gods and spirits, are commonly
believed to be endowed with marvellous virtues, and the
mere utterance of them may work wonders and disturb the
course of nature. The Warramunga of central Australia
believe in a formidable but mythical snake called the
Wollunqua, which lives in a pool. When they speak of it
amongst themselves they designate it by another name,
because they say that, were they to call the snake too often
by its real name, they would lose control over the creature,
and it would come out of the water and eat them all up.
For this reason, too, the sacred books of the Mongols,
which narrate the miraculous deeds of the divinities, are
allowed to be read only in spring or summer ; because at
other seasons the reading of them would bring on tempests
or snow2 When Mr. Campbell was travelling with some
Bechuanas, he asked them one morning after breakfast to
tell him some of their stories, but they informed him that
were they to do so before sunset, the clouds would fall from
the heavens upon their heads.* The Sulka of New Britain
believe in a certain hostile spirit named Kot, to whose wrath
they attribute earthquakes, thunder, and lightning. Among


1 H. Seidel, ‘‘ Der Yew'e Dienst im
Togolande,” Zeitschrift fiir afrika-
nische und oceanische Sprachen, iii.
(1897) pp. 161-173; H. Klose, 7ago0
unter deutscher Flagge (Berlin, 1899),
pp. 197-205. Compare Lieut. Herold,
‘* Bericht betreffend religiése Anschau-
ungen und Gebriiuche der deutschen
Ewe-Neger,” A/itthetlungen aus den
deutschen Schutagebieten, v. (1892) p.
146; J. Spieth, ‘‘ Der Jehve Dienst
der Evhe-Neger,” A/itthetlungen der
Geographischen Gesellschaft su Jena,


xii. (1893) pp. 83-88; C. Spiess,
‘* Religionsbegriffe der Evheer in West-
afrika,” /ttthetlungen des Seminars
Suir orientalische Sprachen su Berlin,
vi. (1903) Dritte Abtheilung, p. 126,

2 Spencer and Gillen, Northern
Tribes of Central Australia, p, 227.

8G, Timkowski, Zravels of the
Russian Mission through Mongolia to
China (London, 1827), ii. 348.

4 J. Campbell, Zravels in South
Africa, Second Journey (London, 1822),
ii. 204 sg.


’
.
|


v1 NAMES OF SACRED PERSONS TABOOED 385


the things which provoke his vengeance is the telling of
tales and legends by day; stories should be told only at
evening or night.’ Most of the rites of the Navajo
Indians may be celebrated only in winter, when the thunder
is silent and the rattlesnakes are hibernating. Were they
to tell of their chief gods or narrate the myths of the
days of old at any other time, the Indians believe that they
would soon be killed by lightning or snake-bites. When Dr.
Washington Matthews was in New Mexico, he often em-
ployed as his guide and informant a liberal-minded member
of the tribe who had lived with Americans and Mexicans
and seemed to be free from the superstitions of his fellows.
“On one occasion,” says Dr. Matthews, “ during the month
of August, in the height of the rainy season, 1 had him in my
study conversing with him. In an unguarded moment, on
his part, I led him into a discussion about the gods of his
people, and neither of us had noticed a heavy storm coming
over the crest of the Zufii mountains, close by. We were just
talking of Estsanatlehi, the goddess of the west, when the
house was shaken by a terrific peal of thunder. He rose at
once, pale and evidently agitated, and, whispering hoarsely,
‘Wait till Christmas; they are angry, he hurried away. I
have seen many such evidences of the deep influence of this
superstition on them.”* Among the Iroquois the rehearsal
of tales of wonder formed the chief entertainment at the
fireside in winter. But all the summer long, from the
time when the trees began to bud in spring till the
red leaves of autumn began to fall, these marvellous
stories were hushed and historical traditions took their
place.® Other Indian tribes also will only tell their
mythic tales in winter, when the snow lies like a pall on
the ground, and lakes and rivers are covered with sheets of
ice ; for then the spirits underground cannot hear the stories
in which their names are made free with by merry groups


1 P.Rascher, ‘‘DieSulka, ein Beitrag of Ethnology (Washington, 1887), pp.
zur Ethnographie Neu-Pommern,” 386 sg.
Archiv fiir Anthropologie, xxix. (1904) 3 L. H. Morgan, League of the Iro-
p- 216. Compare R. Parkinson, wots (Rochester, U.S., 1851), pp.
Dretssig Jahre in der Siidsee, p. 198. 167 sg. The writer derives the pro-

2 Washington Matthews, ‘The hibition to tell tales of wonder in
Mountain Chant, a NavajoCeremony,” summer ‘‘ from a vague and indefinable
Fifth Annual Report of the Bureau dread.”


PT. Il 2c


TABOOED WORDS


gathered round the fire’ The Yabims of German New
Guinea tell their magical tales especially at the time when
the yams have been gathered and are stored in the houses.
Such tales are told at evening by the light of the fire to a.
circle of eager listeners, the narrative being broken from
time to time with a song in which the hearers join. The
telling of these stories is believed to promote the growth of
the crops. Hence each tale ends with a wish that there may
be many yams, that the taro may be big, the sugar-cane
thick, and the bananas long.”


386 CHAP.


F
7
4
4
..
f
4
.
]
;
4


Winter and Among the Kwakiutl Indians of British Columbia the
names of superstition about names has affected in a very curious way
the a the social structure of the tribe. The nobles have two
oe different sets of names, one for use in winter and the other


in summer. Their winter names are those which were given
them at initiation by their guardian spirits, and as these
spirits appear to their devotees only in winter, the names
which they bestowed on the Indians may not be pronounced
in summer. Conversely the summer names may not be
used in winter. The change from summer to winter names
takes place from the moment when the spirits are supposed
to be present, and it involves a complete transformation of
the social system; for whereas during summer the people
are grouped in clans, in winter they are grouped in societies,
each society consisting of all persons who have been initiated |
by the same spirit and have received from him the same
magical powers. Thus among these Indians the funda- |
mental constitution of society changes with the seasons: in
summer it is organised on a basis of kin, in winter on a basis

of spiritual affinity: for one half the year it is civil, for the
other half religious.®


eo


1H. R. Schoolcraft, Jndian Tribes,
iii. 314, 492.

2K. Vetter, in A@ittheilungen der
Geographischen Gesellschaft su Jena,
xii, (1893) p. 953 2d., Komm hertiber
und hilf uns! ii, (Barmen, 1898) p.
26; B. Hagen, Unter den Papuas
(Wiesbaden, 1898), p. 270. On myths
or magical tales told as spells to pro-
duce the effects which they describe,


compare F, Kauffmann, Balder (Stras-
burg, 1902), pp. 299 sgg.; C. Fossey,
La Magie assyrienne (Paris, 1902),
PP: 95-97-

3 Fr, Boas, ‘* The Social Organization
and the Secret Societies of the Kwakiutl
Indians,” Report of the U.S. National
Museum for 1895, pp. 396, 418 sg.,
503, 504. Compare Zolemism and


Lxogamy, iii, 333 59+) 517 5g.


VI NAMES OF GODS TABOOED 387


§ 5. Names of Gods tabooed


Primitive man creates his gods in his own image. Names of
Xenophanes remarked long ago that the complexion of negro a
gods was black and their noses flat; that Thracian gods
were ruddy and blue-eyed; and that if horses, oxen, and
lions only believed in gods and had hands wherewith to
portray them, they would doubtless fashion their deities in
the form of horses, and oxen, and lions." Hence just as the
furtive savage conceals his real name because he fears that
sorcerers might make an evil use of it, so he fancies that his
gods must likewise keep their true names secret, lest other
gods or even men should learn the mystic sounds and thus
be able to conjure with them. Nowhere was this crude
conception of the secrecy and magical virtue of the divine
name more firmly held or more fully developed than in
ancient Egypt, where the superstitions of a dateless past were
embalmed in the hearts of the people hardly less effectually
than the bodies of cats and crocodiles and the rest of the
divine menagerie in their rock-cut tombs. The conception How Isis
is well illustrated by a story which tells how the subtle Isis ¢Sovere4
wormed his secret name from Ra, the great Egyptian god of of Ra, the
the sun. Isis, so runs the tale, was a woman mighty in “8°
words, and she was weary of the world of men, and yearned
after the world of the gods. And she meditated in her
heart, saying, “Cannot I by virtue of the great name of Ra
make myself a goddess and reign like him in heaven and
earth?” For Rahad many names, but the great name which
gave him all power over gods and men was known to none but
himself. Now the god was by this time grown old; he
slobbered at the mouth and his spittle fell upon the ground.

So Isis gathered up the spittle and the earth with it, and
kneaded thereof a serpent and laid it in the path where the
great god passed every day to his double kingdom after his
heart’s desire. And when he came forth according to his
wont, attended by all his company of gods, the sacred serpent

1 Xenophanes, quoted by Eusebius, sg., ed. Potter; H. Diels, Die Frag-
Praeparatio Evangelii, xiii. 13, pp. 269 mente der Vorsokratiker® (Berlin, 1906-


sg., ed. Heinichen, and by Clement  1gI0), i. 49.
of Alexandria, Strom. vii. 4, pp. 840


How Isis
discovered
the name
of Ra, the
sun-god,


388 TABOOED WORDS CHAP.


stung him, and the god opened his mouth and cried, and
his cry went up to heaven. And the company of gods cried,
“ What aileth thee ?” and the gods shouted, “ Lo and behold !”
But he could not answer; his jaws rattled, his limbs shook,
the poison ran through his flesh as the Nile floweth over the
land. When the great god had stilled his heart, he cried to
his followers, “Come to me, O my children, offspring of my
body. I am a prince, the son of a prince, the divine seed of
a’ god. My father devised my name; my father and my
mother gave me my name, and it remained hidden in my
body since my birth, that no magician might have magic
power over me. I went out to behold that which I have
made, I walked in the two lands which I have created, and
lo! something stung me. What it was, I know not. Was
it fire? was it water? My heart is on fire, my flesh
trembleth, all my limbs do quake. Bring me the children
of the gods with healing words and understanding lips, whose
power reacheth to heaven.” Then came to him the children
of the gods, and they were very sorrowful. And Isis came
with her craft, whose mouth is full of the breath of life,
whose spells chase pain away, whose word maketh the dead
to live. She said, “ What is it, divine Father? what is it?”
The holy god opened his mouth, he spake and said, “I went
upon my way, I walked after my heart’s desire in the two
regions which I have made to behold that which I have
created, and lo! a serpent that I saw not stung me. Is it
fire? is it water? I am colder than water, I am hotter than
fire, all my limbs sweat, I tremble, mine eye is not steadfast,


I behold not the sky, the moisture bedeweth my face as in.


summer-time.” Then spake Isis, “ Tell me thy name, divine
Father, for the man shall live who is called by his name.”
Then answered Ra, “I created the heavens and the earth, I
ordered the mountains, I made the great and wide sea, I
stretched out the two horizons like a curtain. I am he who
openeth his eyes and it is light, and who shutteth them and
it is dark, At his command the Nile riseth, but the gods
know not his name. I am Khepera in the morning, I am
Ra at noon, I am Tum at eve.” But the poison was not
taken away from him ; it pierced deeper, and the great god
could no longer walk. Then said Isis to him, “ That was


Pe Pee TS a ee er


ee ee ee ee


vI NAMES OF GODS TABOOED 389


not thy name that thou spakest unto me. Oh tell it me, that
the poison may depart; for he shall live whose name is
named.” Now the poison burned like fire, it was hotter
than the flame of fire. The god said, “I consent that Isis
shall search into me, and that my name shall pass from my
breast into hers.” Then the god hid himself from the gods,
and his place in the ship of eternity wasempty. Thus was the
name of the great god taken from him, and Isis, the witch,
spake, “ Flow away poison, depart from Ra. It is I, even I,
who overcome the poison and cast it to the earth; for the
name of the great god hath been taken away from him. Let
Ra live and let the poison die.” Thus spake great Isis, the
queen of the gods, she who knows Ra and his true name.’

Thus we see that the real name of the god, with which Egyptian
his power was inextricably bound up, was supposed to be jars
lodged, in an almost physical sense, somewhere in his breast, Spats)
from which it could be extracted bya sort of surgical opera- ments by
tion and transferred with all its supernatural powers to the the names
breast of another. In Egypt attempts like that of Isis to Ncheg rh pe
appropriate the power of a high god by possessing herself ee
of his:‘name were not mere legends told of the mythical times
beings of a remote past; every Egyptian magician aspired
to wield like powers by similar means. For it was believed
that he who possessed the true name possessed the very
being of god or man, and could force even a deity to obey
him as a slave obeys his master. Thus the art of the
magician consisted in obtaining from the gods a revelation
of their sacred names, and he left no stone unturned to
accomplish his end. When once a god in a moment of
weakness or forgetfulness had imparted to the wizard the
wondrous lore, the deity had no choice but to submit
humbly to the man or pay the penalty of his contumacy,


136 sgg.; 7@., The Gods of the Egyptians
(London, 1904), i. 360 sg. The
abridged form of the story given in the


1 A. Erman, Agypten und dagyp-
tisches Leben im Altertum, pp. 359-
302-Sans Wiedemann, Die Religion


der alten Agypter, Pp- 29-323 G.
Maspero, Aizstotre anctenne des peuples
de POrtent classique: les origines, pp.
162-164; R. V. Lanzone, Dzzzonario
di mitologia egista (Turin, 1881-1884),
pp. 818-822; E, A. Wallis Budge, Zhe
Book of the Dead (London, 1895), pp.
Ixxxix.-xci. 3 2@., Egyptian Magic, pp.


text is based on a comparison of these
various versions, of which Erman’s is
slightly, and Maspero’s much curtailed.
Mr. Budge’s version is reproduced by Mr,
E. Clodd (Zom Z7t Tot, pp. 180 sgq.).

2 G. Maspero, Etudes de mythologie
et @archéologie égyptienne (Paris, 1893),
ii. 297 sg.


Magical
constraint
exercised
over
demons
by means
of their
names in
North
Africa and
China.


390 TABOOED WORDS CHAP.


In one papyrus we find the god Typhon thus adjured: “I
invoke thee by thy true names, in virtue of which thou canst
not refuse to hear me” ; and in another the magician threatens
Osiris that if the god does not do his bidding he will name
him aloud in the port of Busiris... So in the Lucan the
Thessalian witch whom Sextus Pompeius consulted before
the battle of Pharsalia threatens to call up the Furies by
their real names if they will not do her bidding.2 In modern
Egypt the magician still works his old enchantments by the
same ancient means; only the name of the god by which he
conjures is different. The man who knows “the most great
name” of God can, we are told, by the mere utterance of it
kill the living, raise the dead, transport himself instantly
wherever he pleases, and perform any other miracle.*
Similarly among the Arabs of North Africa at the present
day “the power of the name is such that when one knows
the proper names the jinn can scarcely help answering the
call and obeying; they are the servants of the magical
names; in this case the incantation has a constraining
quality which is for the most part very strongly marked.
When Ibn el Hadjdj et-Tlemsani relates how the jinn
yielded up their secrets to him, he says, ‘I once met the
seven kings of the jinn in a cave and I asked them to teach
me the way in which they attack men and women, causing
them to fall sick, smiting them, paralysing them, and the
like. They all answered me: “If it were anybody but you
we would teach that to nobody, but you have discovered the
bonds, the spells, and the names which compel us; were it
not for the names by which you have constrained us, we
would not have answered to your call.”’”* So, too, “the
Chinese of ancient times were dominated by the notion that
beings are intimately associated with their names, so that a
man’s knowledge of the name of a spectre might enable him
to exert power over the latter and to bend it to his will.” °

1 E. Lefébure, ‘‘La Vertu et la vie 3 E. W, Lane, Manners and Customs
du nom en Egypte,” Aéusine, viii. of the Ancient Egyptians (Paisley and
(1897) coll, 227 sg. Compare A, London, 1895), ch. xii. p. 273.
Erman, Agypten und dgyptisches 4 E. Doutté, AMagie et religion dans
Leben im Altertum, pp. 4725q.; E, A. UAfrique du nord, p. 130.
Wallis Budge, Zgyptian Magic, pp. 5 J. J. M. de Groot, Zhe Religious


157 594. System of China, vi, (Leyden, 1910)
* Lucan, Pharsalia, vi. 730 sqq. p. 1126.


VI NAMES OF GODS TABOOED 391


The belief in the magic virtue of divine names was
shared by the Romans. When they sat down before a city,
the priests addressed the guardian deity of the place in a
‘set form of prayer or incantation, inviting him to abandon
the beleaguered city and come over to the Romans, who
would treat him as well as or better than he had ever
been treated in his old home. Hence the name of the
guardian deity of Rome was kept a profound secret, lest the
enemies of the republic might lure him away, even as the
Romans themselves had induced many gods to desert, like
rats, the falling fortunes of cities that had sheltered them in
happier days." Nay, the real name, not merely of its
guardian deity, but of the city itself, was wragt in mystery
and might never be uttered, not even in the sacred rites. A
certain Valerius Soranus, who dared to divulge the priceless
secret, was put to death or came toa bad end.’ In like manner,
it seems, the ancient Assyrians were forbidden to mention
the mystic names of their cities ;* and down to modern
times the Cheremiss of the Caucasus keep the names of their
communal villages secret from motives of superstition.*

If the reader has had the patience to follow this long
and perhaps tedious examination of the superstitions attaching
to personal names, he will probably agree that the mystery
in which the names of royal personages are so often shrouded
is no isolated phenomenon, no arbitrary expression of courtly
servility and adulation, but merely the particular application
of a general law of primitive thought, which includes within
its scope common folk and gods as well as kings and priests.


1 Pliny, Wat. Hist. xxviii, 18;
Macrobius, Saturn. iii. 9 ; Servius on


be the first to answer to their names in
a levy or a census. See Cicero, De


Virgil, Aen, ii. 351; Plutarch, Quaest.
Rom. 61. According to Servius (/.¢.)
it was forbidden by the pontifical law
to mention any Roman god by his


proper name, lest it should be pro-


faned. Compare Festus, p. 106, ed.
C. O. Miiller: ‘* Zndigetes dit quorum
nomina vuleart non licet.” On the
other hand the Romans were careful,
for the sake of good omen, to choose
men with lucky names, like Valerius,
Salvius, Statorius, to open any enterprise
of moment, such as to lead the sacrificial
victims in a religious procession or to


divinatione, i. 45. 102 sg.3 Festus,
s.v. ‘*Lacus Lucrinus,” p. 121, ed.
C. O. Miiller; Pliny, Wat. Hist.
xxvili, 22 ; Tacitus, A7stor. iv. 53.

2 Pliny, Mat. Hist. iii. 65 ; Solinus,
i. 4 sg. ; Macrobius, Sat, iii. 9, 3, and
53 Servius, on Virgil, Ae. i. 2773
Joannes Lydus, De mensibus, iv. 50.

3 F. Fossey, La Magie assyrienne
(Paris, 1902), pp. 58, 95.

4 T. de Pauly, Description ethno-
graphique des peuples de la Russie (St.
Petersburg, 1862), euples ouralo-
altaigques, p. 24.


Divine
names used
by the
Romans to
conjure
with.


The taboos
on names
of kings
and com-
moners are
alike in
origin.


Common
words as
well as
personal
names

are often
tabooed
from super-
stitious
motives.


Common
words
tabooed by
Highland
fowlers
and
fishermen,


392 TABOOED WORDS CHAP.


§ 6. Common Words tabooed


But personal names are not the only words which
superstitious fears have banished from everyday use. In
many cases similar motives forbid certain persons at certain
times to call common things by common names, thus obliging
them either to refrain from mentioning these things altogether
or to designate them by special terms or phrases reserved
for such occasions. A consideration of these cases follows
naturally on an examination of the taboos imposed upon
personal names; for personal names are themselves very
often ordinary terms of the language, so that an embargo
laid on them necessarily extends to many expressions current
in the commerce of daily life. And though a survey of
some of the interdicts on common words is not strictly
necessary for our immediate purpose, it may serve usefully
to complete our view of the transforming influence which
superstition has exercised on language. I shall make no
attempt to subject the examples to a searching analysis or
a rigid classification, but will set them down as they come
in a rough geographical order. And since my native land
furnishes as apt instances of the superstition as any other,
we may start on our round from Scotland.

In the Atlantic Ocean, about six leagues to the west of
Gallon Head in the Lewis, lies a small group of rocky islets
known as the Flannan Islands. Sheep and wild fowl are
now their only inhabitants, but remains of what are described
as Druidical temples and the title of the Sacred Isles given
them by Buchanan suggest that in days gone by piety or
superstition may have found a safe retreat from the turmoil
of the world in these remote solitudes, where the dashing of
the waves and the strident scream of the sea-birds are almost
the only sounds that break the silence. Once a year, in
summer-time, the inhabitants of the adjacent lands of the
Lewis, who have a right to these islands, cross over to them
to fleece their sheep and kill the wild fowl for the sake both
of their flesh and their feathers. They regard the islands as
invested with a certain sanctity, and have been heard to say
that none ever yet landed in them but found himself more


vI COMMON WORDS TABOOED 393


disposed to devotion there than anywhere else. Accordingly
the fowlers who go thither are bound, during the whole of
the time that they ply their business, to observe very punc-
tiliously certain quaint customs, the transgression of which
would be sure, in their opinion, to entail some serious incon-
venience. When they have landed and fastened their boat
to the side of a rock, they clamber up into the island by a
wooden ladder, and no sooner are they got to the top, than
they all uncover their heads and make a turn sun-ways round
about, thanking God for their safety. On the biggest of the
islands are the ruins of a chapel dedicated to St. Flannan.
When the men come within about twenty paces of the altar,
they all strip themselves of their upper garments at once and
betake themselves to their devotions, praying thrice before
they begin fowling. On the first day the first prayer is
offered as they advance towards the chapel on their. knees ;
the second is said as they go round the chapel; and the
third is said in or hard by the ruins. They also pray thrice
every evening, and account it unlawful to kill a fowl after
evening prayers, as. also to kill a fowl at any time with a
stone. Another ancient custom forbids the crew to carry
home in the boat any suet of the sheep they slaughter in
the islands, however many they may kill. But what here
chiefly concerns us is that so long as they stay on the islands
they are strictly forbidden to use certain common words, and
are obliged to substitute others for them. Thus it is absol-
utely unlawful to call the island of St. Kilda, which lies
thirty leagues to the southward, by its proper Gaelic name
of Hirt; they must call it only “the high country.” They
may not so much as once name the islands in which they
are fowling by the ordinary name of Flannan; they must
speak only of “the country.” “There are several other
things that must not be called by their common names: e.g.
visk, which in the language of the natives signifies water,
they call burn; a rock, which in their language is creg, must
here be called cruey, ze. hard; shore in their language .
expressed by claddach, must here be called vah, ze. a cave;
sour in their language is expressed gort, but must here be
called gare, ze. sharp; slippery, which is expressed dog,
must be called soft; and several other things to this


394 TABOOED WORDS CHAP.


purpose.”* When Highlanders were in a boat at sea, whether


sailing or fishing, they were forbidden to call things by the
names by which they were known on land. Thus the boat-hook
should not be called a croman, but a chliob ; a knife not sgzan,
but “ the sharp one” (a ghzar) ; a seal not von, but “the bald
beast” (ésd mhaol); a fox not szonnach, but “the red dog”
(madadh ruadh); the stone for anchoring the boat not cach,
but “hardness” (cruatdh). This practice now prevails much
more on the east coast than on the west, where it may be
said to be generally extinct. It is reported to be carefully
observed by the fishermen about the Cromarty Firth.
Among the words tabooed by fishermen in the north of
Scotland when they are at sea are minister, salmon, hare,
rabbit, rat, pig, and porpoise. At the present day if some
of the boats that come to the herring-fishing at Wick should
meet a,salmon-boat from Reay in Caithness, the herring-men
will not speak to, nor even look at, the salmon-fishers.®
Common When Shetland fishermen are at sea, they employ a
at by Nomenclature peculiar to the occasion, and hardly anything
Scotch may be mentioned by its usual name. The substituted
fishermen . ° os
and others. terms are mostly of Norwegian origin, for the Norway
men were reported to be good fishers. In setting their
lines the Shetland fishermen are bound to refer to certain
objects only by some special words or phrases. Thus a
knife is then called a skunze or tullie; a church becomes
buanhoos or banehoos; a minister is upstanda or haydeen or
prestingolva ; the devil is da auld chield, da sorrow, da ill-healt
(health), or da black tief; a cat is kirser, fitting, vengla, or
foodin On the north-east coast of Scotland there are some
villages, of which the inhabitants never pronounce certain
words and family names when they are at sea; each village
has its peculiar aversion to one or more of these words,


among which are “ minister,’ “kirk,” “ swine,’ “ salmon,”
1M. Martin, ‘‘ Description of the (Glasgow, 1900), p. 239.

Western Islands of Scotland,” in 3 Miss Morag Cameron, ‘* Highland

Pinkerton’s Voyages and Travels, iii. Fisher-folk and their Superstitions,”

579 sg. As to the Flannan Islands /o/k-lore, xiv. (1903) p. 304.

see also Sir J. Sinclair’s Statistical 4 A. Edmonston, Zetland Islands

Account of Scotland, xix. (Edinburgh, (Edinburgh, 1809), ii. 74.

1797), p. 283. 5 Ch. Rogers, Social Life in Scot.
2 J. G. Campbell, Superstitions of land (Edinburgh, 1884 - 1886), iii.


the Highlands and Islands of Scotland 218,


;
|


VI COMMON WORDS TABOOED 395


“trout,” and “dog.” When a church has to be referred to,
as often happens, since some of the churches serve as land-
marks to the fishermen at sea, it is spoken of as the “ bell-
hoose” instead of the “kirk.” A minister is called “the
man wi’ the black quyte.” It is particularly unlucky to
utter the word “sow” or “swine” or “ pig” while the line is
being baited ; if any one is foolish enough to do so, the line
is sure to be lost. In some villages on the coast of Fife a
fisherman who hears the ill-omened word spoken will cry out
“Cold iron.” In the village of Buckie there are some family
names, especially Ross, and in a less degree Coull, which no
fisherman will pronounce. If one of these names be men-
tioned in the hearing of a fisherman, he spits or, as he calls
it, “ chiffs.” Any one who bears the dreaded name is called
a “chiffer-oot,” and is referred to only by a circumlocution
such as “The man it diz so in so,” or “the laad it lives at
such and such a place.” During the herring-season men
who are unlucky enough to inherit the tabooed names have
little chance of being hired in the fishing-boats ; and some-
times, if they have been hired before their names were
known, they have been refused their wages at the end of the
season, because the boat in which they sailed had not been
successful, and the bad luck was set down to their presence
in it.’ Although in Scotland superstitions of this kind
appear to be specially incident to the callings of fishermen
and fowlers, other occupations are not exempt from them.
Thus in the Outer Hebrides the fire of a kiln is not called
fire (¢ezme) but azmgeal. Such a fire, it is said, is a dangerous
thing, and ought not to be referred to except by a euphemism.
“Evil be to him who called it fire or who named fire in the
kiln. It was considered the next thing to setting it on fire.” ?
Again, in some districts of Scotland a brewer would have
resented the use of the word “water” in reference to the
work in which he was engaged. “Water be your part of it,”
was the common retort. It was supposed that the use of
the word would spoil the brewing.? The Highlanders say


1 W. Gregor, Folk-lore of the North- ‘*The Powers of Evil in the Outer
East of Scotland, pp. 199-201. Hebrides,” Fo/k-lore, x. (1899) p. 265

2 « Traditions, Customs, and Super- 3 J. Mackenzie, Zen Years north of
stitions of the Lewis,” Folk-lore, vi. the Orange River (Edinburgh, 1871),
(1895) p.170; Miss A.Goodrich-Freer, p. 151, note I.


Common
words,
especially
the names
of danger-
ous ani-
mals,
tabooed in
various
parts of
Europe.


396 TABOOED WORDS


CHAP.


that when you meet a hobgoblin, and the fiend asks what is
the name of your dirk, you should not call it a dirk (dzodag),
but “my father’s sister” (pzuthar m’athar) or “my grand-
mother’s sister” (pzuthar mo sheanamhair) or by some similar
title. If you do not observe this precaution, the goblin will
lay such an enchantment on the blade that you will be unable
to stab him with it; the dirk will merely make a tinkling
noise against the soft impalpable body of the fiend.’

Manx fishermen think it unlucky to mention a horse or
a mouse on board a fishing-boat.? The fishermen of Dieppe
on board their boats will not speak of several things, for
instance priests and cats. German huntsmen, from motives
of superstition, call everything by names different from those
in common use. In some parts of Bavaria the farmer will
not mention a fox by its proper name, lest his poultry-yard
should suffer from the ravages of the animal. So instead
of Fuchs he calls the beast Loznl, Henolotnl, Henading, or
Henabou, In Prussia and Lithuania they say that in the
month of December you should not call a wolf a wolf but
“the vermin” (das Gewiirm), otherwise you will be torn in
pieces by the werewolves.® In various parts of Germany it
is a rule that certain animals may not be mentioned by their
proper names in the mystic season between Christmas and
Twelfth Night. Thus in Thiiringen they say that if you
would be spared by the wolves you must not mention their
name at this time.’ In Mecklenburg people think that
were they to name a wolf on one of these days the animal
would appear. A shepherd would rather mention the devil
than the wolf at this season; and we read of a farmer who
had a bailiff named Wolf, but did not dare to call the
man by his name between Christmas and Twelfth Night,
referring to him instead as Herr Undeert (Mr. Monster).


1 J. G. Campbell, Witchcraft and
Second Sight in the Highlands and
Islands of Scotland (Glasgow, 1902),
pp. 184 sg.

2 J. Rhys, ‘*Manx Folk-lore and
Superstitions,” Folk-lore, iii. (1892)
p. 84.

8 A. Bosquet, La Normandie roma-
nesque et merveilleuse (Paris and Rouen,
1845), p. 308.


4 J. G. Gmelin, Reise durch Sibirien,
ii. (Géttingen, 1752), p. 277.

5 Bavaria, Landes- und Volkskunde
des Kinigreichs Bayern, ii. (Munich,
1863), p. 304.

6 Tettau und Temme, Die Volks-
sagen Ostpreussens, Litthauens und
Westpreussens (Berlin, 1837), p. 281.

7 W. Witzschel, Sagen, Sitten, und
Gebriuche aus Thiiringen, p. 175, § 30.


;


PS Te en,


ee Sle


vI COMMON WORDS TABOOED 397


In Quatzow, a village of Mecklenburg, there are many
animals whose common names are disused at this season
and replaced by others: thus a fox is called “ long - tail,”
and a mouse “leg-runner” (Boen/oper). Any person who
disregards the custom has to pay a fine.’ In the Mark of
Brandenburg they say that between Christmas and Twelfth
Night you should not speak of mice as mice but as
dinger ; otherwise the field-mice would multiply excessively.
According to the Swedish popular belief, there are certain
animals which should never be spoken of by their proper
names, but must always be signified by euphemisms and
kind allusions to their character. Thus, if you speak slight-
ingly of the cat or beat her, you must be sure not to mention
her name ; for she belongs to the hellish crew, and is a friend
of the mountain troll, whom she often visits. Great caution is
also needed in talking of the cuckoo, the owl, and the magpie,
for they are birds of witchery. The fox must be called
“blue-foot,” or “he that goes in the forest”; and rats are
“the long-bodied,” mice “ the small grey,” and the seal
“brother Lars.” Swedish herd-girls, again, believe that if
the wolf and the bear be called by other than their proper
and legitimate names, they will not attack the herd. Hence
they give these brutes names which they fancy will not hurt
their feelings. The number of endearing appellations
lavished by them on the wolf is legion; they call him
“golden tooth,” “the silent one,” “grey legs,’ and so on;
while the bear is referred to by the respectful titles of “the
old man,” “grandfather,” “twelve men’s strength,” “golden
feet,” and more of the same sort. Even inanimate things
are not always to be called by their usual names. For
instance, fire is sometimes to be called “heat” (etfa) not
eld or ell; water for brewing must be called /ag or Jou, not
vain, else the beer would not turn out so well. The Huzuls
of the Carpathians, a pastoral people, who dread the ravages
of wild beasts on their flocks and herds, are unwilling to
mention the bear by his proper name, so they call him


1 K. Bartsch, Sagen, Marchen, und Marchen, p. 378, § 14.
Gebriiuche aus Meklenburg, ii. p. 246, 3 B. Thorpe, Northern Mythology,
§§ 1273, 1274. ii. 83 sg.; L. Lloyd, Peasant Life in
2 A. Kuhn, Mérkische Sagen und Sweden (London, 1870), p. 251.


398 TABOOED WORDS CHAP.


respectfully “the little uncle” or “the big one.” In like
manner and for similar reasons they name the wolf “the
little one” and the serpent “the long one.”*? They may not
say that wool is scalded, or in the heat of summer the sheep
would rub themselves till their sides were raw; so they
merely say that the wool is warmed.? The Lapps fear to
call the bear by his true name, lest he should ravage their
herds ; so they speak of him as “the old man with the coat
of skin,” and in cooking his flesh to furnish a meal they may
not refer to the work they are engaged in as “cooking,” but
must designate it by a special term.2 The Finns speak of
the bear as “the apple of the wood,” “ beautiful honey-paw,”
“the pride of the thicket,” “the old man,” and so on“ And
in general a Finnish hunter thinks that he will have poor
sport if he calls animals by their real names; the beasts
resent it. The fox and the hare are only spoken of as
“game,” and the lynx is termed “the forest cat,” lest it
should devour the sheep.’ Esthonian peasants are very loth
to mention wild beasts by their proper names, for they
believe that the creatures will not do so.much harm if only
they are called by other names than theirown. Hence they d
speak of the bear as “broad foot” and the wolf as “grey
coat.” ®

The names The natives of Siberia are unwilling to call a bear a

of various bear; they speak of him as “the little old man,” “the master


animals


tabooed in of the forest,” “the sage,” “the respected one.” Some who
per are more familiar style him “my cousin.”” The Kamtchat-
tchatka, kans reverence the whale, the bear, and the wolf from fear,
Paces. and never mention their names when they meet them, be- .


lieving that they understand human speech.’ Further, they


1R. F. Kaindl, Die Husulen 1853), p. 201.
(Vienna, 1894), p. 103; #d., ‘* Vieh- 5 Varonen, reported by Hon. J.
zucht und Viehzauber in den Ost- Abercromby in Folk-lore, ii. (1891)
karpaten,” Glodus, Ixix. (1896) p. 387. Pp. 245 sq.

* a, “Neue Beitriige zur Ethno- ® Boecler - Kreutzwald, Der Ehsten


. ”
peeing reli tern Huzulen, abergliubische Gebriuche, Weisen und
8 Cc. Leemius, De Lapponibus Fin- Gewonwhesten, p. 120.


marchiae eorumque lingua, vita, et " P. Labbé, Un Bagne russe, Ptle de
veligione pristina commentatio (Copen- Sakhaline (Paris, 1903), p. 231.
hagen, 1767), pp. 502 sg. 8G. W. Steller, Beschreibung von


4M. A, Castren, Vorlesungen ber die dem Lande Kamischatha (Frankfort and
Jjinnische Mythologie (St. Petersburg, Leipsic, 1774), p. 276.


VI COMMON WORDS TABOOED 399


think that mice also understand the Kamtchatkan language ;
so in autumn, when they rob the field-mice of the bulbs which
these little creatures have laid up in their burrows as a store
against winter, they call everything by names different from
the ordinary ones, lest the mice should know what they were
saying. Moreover, they leave odds and ends, such as old
rags, broken needles, cedar-nuts, and so forth, in the burrows,
to make the mice think that the transaction has been not a
robbery but a fair exchange. If they did not do that, they
fancy that the mice would go and drown or hang themselves
out of pure vexation ; and then what would the Kamtchat-
kans do without the mice to gather the bulbs for them?
They also speak kindly to the animals, and beg them not to
take it ill, explaining that what they do is done out of pure
friendship." The Cherokee Indians regard the rattlesnake
as a superior being and take great pains not to offend him,
They never say that a man has been bitten by a snake but
that he has been “scratched by a briar.” In like manner,
when an eagle has been shot for a ceremonial dance, it is
announced that “a snowbird has been killed.” The purpose
is to deceive the spirits of rattlesnakes or eagles which might
be listening? The Esquimaux of Bering Strait think that
some animals can hear and understand what is said of them
at a distance. Hence, when a hunter is going out to kill
bears he will speak of them with the greatest respect and
give out that he is going to hunt some other beast. Thus
the bears will be deceived and taken unawares.» Among
the Esquimaux of Baffin Land, women in mourning may
not mention the names of any animals. Among the
Thompson Indians of British Columbia, children may not
name the coyote or prairie wolf in winter, lest he should
turn on his back and so bring cold weather.’


1G. W. Steller, of ct. p. 91; about Bering Strait,” Ziehseenth
compare 72d, pp. 129, 130. Annual Report of the Bureau of


2 J. Mooney, *‘ Sacred Formulas of
the Cherokees,” Seventh Annual Report
of the Bureau of Ethnology (Washing-
ton, 1892), p. 352. Compare zd.,
‘¢ Myths of the Cherokee,” (Veneteenth
Annual Report of the Bureau of
American Ethnology, Part i. (Washing-
ton, 1900) p. 295.

3 E.


W. Nelson, ‘*The Eskimo


American Ethnology, Part i. (Washing-
ton, 1899) p. 438.

4 F, Boas, ‘*The Eskimo of Baffin
Land and Hudson Bay,” Bulletin of
the American Museum of Natural
History, xv. (1901) p. 148.

5 J. Teit, ‘‘ The Thompson Indians
of British Columbia,” J/emoir of the
American Museum of Natural History,


400 TABOOED WORDS CHAP.


Names of The Arabs call a man who has been bitten by a snake
a ais “the sound one”; leprosy or the scab they designate “ the
tabooed by blessed disease ” ; the left side they name “the lucky side” ;
react they will not speak of a lion by his right name, but refer to
and him as for example “the fox.”* In Africa the lion is
Malagasy. ailuded to with the same ceremonious respect as the wolf
and the bear in northern Europe and Asia. The Arabs of
Algeria, who hunt the lion, speak of him as Mr, John Johnson
(Johan -ben-el-Johan), because he has the noblest qualities of
man and understands all languages. Hence, too, the first
huntsman to catch sight of the beast points at him with his
finger and says, “He is not there”; for if he were to say
“ He is there,” the lion would eat him up.” Except under
dire necessity the Waziguas of eastern Africa never mention
the name of the lion from fear of attracting him. They call
him “the owner of the land” or “the great beast.”* The
negroes of Angola always use the word zgana (“sir”) in
speaking of the same noble animal, because they think that
he is “fetish” and would not fail to punish them for dis-
respect if they omitted to do so. Bushmen and Bechuanas
both deem it unlucky to speak of the lion by his proper
name; the Bechuanas call him “the boy with the beard.”°
During an epidemic of smallpox in Mombasa, British East
Africa, it was noticed that the people were unwilling to
mention the native name (mduz) of the disease. They
referred to it either as “grains of corn” (¢e¢e) or simply as
“the bad disease.” ® So the Chinese of Amoy are averse to
speak of fever by its proper name; they prefer to call it
“beggar’s disease,” hoping thereby to make the demons of
fever imagine that they despise it and that therefore it would


be useless to attack them.’


The Jesup North Pacific Expedition,
vol, i, part iv. (April 1900) p.


374-

1 J, Wellhausen, este arabischen
Heidentums* (Berlin, 1897), p. 199.

2 A, Certeux et E. H. Carnoy,
L’ Aletrie traditionnelle (Paris and
Algiers, 1884), pp. 172, 175.

3% Father Picarda, ‘* Autour de Man-


déra,” Missions Catholiques, xviii.
(1886) p. 227.
4 J. J. Monteiro, Angola and the


Some of the natives of Nigeria


River Congo (London, 1875), ii. 116.

5 J. Mackenzie, Zen Years north of
the Orange River (Edinburgh, 1871),
p. 151; C. R. Conder, in Journal of
the Anthropological Institute, xvi.
(1887) p. 84.

® H. B. Johnstone, ‘* Notes on the
Customs of the Tribes occupying Mom-
basa Sub-district, British East Africa,”
Journal of the Anthropological Institute,
xxxii, (1902) p. 268,

7 J.J. M. de Groot, Zhe Religious


VI COMMON WORDS TABOOED 401


dread the owl as a bird of ill omen and are loth to mention
its name, preferring to speak of it by means of a cir-
cumlocution such as “the bird that makes one afraid.”}
The Herero think that if they see a snake and call it by
its name, the reptile will sting them, but that if they call it a
strap (omuvia) it will lie still? When Nandi warriors are
out on an expedition, they may not call a knife a knife
(chepkeswet); they must call it “an arrow for bleeding cattle”
(lofiget); and none of the party may utter the usual word
employed in greeting males. In Madagascar there seems
to be an aversion to pronouncing the word for lightning
(varatra); the word for mud (/dtaka) is sometimes substi-
tuted for it* Again, it is strictly forbidden to mention the
word for crocodile (#amba) near some rivers of Madagascar ;
and if clothes should be wetted in certain other rivers of
the island, you may not say that they are wet (/éna);
you must say that they are on fire (may) or that
they are drinking water (mzsdtro rano). A certain spirit,
who used to inhabit a lake in Madagascar, entertained a
rooted aversion to salt, so that whenever the thing was
carried past the lake in which he resided it had to be called
by another name, or it would all have been dissolved and
lost. The persons whom he inspired had to veil their
references to the obnoxious article under the disguise of
“sweet peppers.”® In a West African story we read of a
man who was told that he would die if ever the word for
salt was pronounced in his hearing. The fatal word was
pronounced, and die he did sure enough, but he soon came
to life again with the help of a magical wooden pestle of
which he was the lucky possessor.’
In India the animals whose names are most commonly Names of

tabooed are the snake and the tiger, but the same tribute of 22!


C : é especially
respect is paid to other beasts also. Sayids and Mussul- the snake


System of China, v. (Leyden, 1907) Antananarivo Annual and Madagascar


p- 691. ‘ Magazine, vol. ii., Reprint of the
1 A. F. Mockler-Ferryman, British Second Four Numbers (Antananarivo,
Nigeria (London, 1902), p. 285. 1896), p. 258.
2 J. Inle, Die Herero (Giitersloh, 5 H. F. Standing, of. cit. p. 263.
1906), p. 133. 6 J. Sibree, Zhe Great African
3 A.C. Hollis, Zhe Nandi (Oxford, sland, pp. 307 sg. :
1909), p. 43. 7 R. H. Nassau, Fetichism in West


4 H. F. Standing, ‘‘Malagasy fady,” Africa (London, 1904), pp. 381 sgg.
Fao tk 2D


and the
tiger,
ta


in India.


402 TABOOED WORDS CHAP,


mans of high rank in northern India say that you should
never call a snake by its proper name, but always describe
it either as a tiger (sher) or a string (vassz) In Telingana
the euphemistic name for a snake, which should always be
employed, is worm or insect (purugu) ; if you call a cobra by
its proper name, the creature will haunt you for seven years
and bite you at the first opportunity.” Ignorant Bengalee
women will not mention a snake or a thief by their proper
names at night, for fear that one or other might appear.
When they have to allude to a serpent, they call it “the
creeping thing”; when they speak of a thief, they say “the
unwelcome visitor.”* Other euphemisms for the snake in
northern India are “maternal uncle” and “rope.” They
say that if a snake bites you, you should not mention its
name, but merely observe “A rope has touched me.” *
Natives of Travancore are careful not to speak disrespect-
fully of serpents. A cobra is called “the good lord” (walla
tambivan) or “the good snake” (walla pambu). While the
Malayalies of the Shervaray Hills are hunting the tiger, they
speak of the beast only as“the dog.”® The Canarese of
southern India call the tiger either “the dog” or “the
jackal”; they think that if they called him by his proper
name, he would be sure to carry off one of them.® The
jungle people of northern India, who meet the tiger in his
native haunts, will not pronounce his name, but speak of him
as “the jackal” (g/dar), or “the beast” (janwar), or use
some other euphemistic term. In some places they treat
the wolf and the bear in the same fashion.’ The Pankas of
South Mirzapur will not name the tiger, bear, camel, or
donkey by their proper names; the camel they call “long
neck.”
mention certain animals in the morning. Thus, the Khar-
wars, a Dravidian tribe, will not name a pig, squirrel, hare,
jackal, bear, monkey, or donkey in the morning hours; if


Other tribes of the same district only scruple to .


1 Panjab Notes and Queries, i. p. 15,


§ 122.
2 North Indian Notes and Queries,


i. p. 104, § 690.
3 Td. Vv. P. 133, § 372
4° W. Crooke, Popular Religion


and Folk-lore of Northern India


(Westminster, 1896), ii. 142 sg.

5 S. Mateer, Native Life in Travan-
core, pp. 320 sg.

6 North Indian Notes and Queries,
Vv. Pp» 133) § 372.

TW. Crooke, of. c#t. ii, 212.


a


oo


v1 COMMON WORDS TABOOED 403


they have to allude to these animals at that time, they call
them by special names. For instance, they call the hare
“the four-footed one” or “he that hides in the rocks”;
while they speak of the bear as jigarzya, which being inter-
preted means “he with the liver of compassion.” If the
Bhuiyars are absolutely obliged to refer to a monkey or a
bear in the morning, they speak of the monkey as “ the tree-
climber” and the bear as “the eater of white ants.” They
would not mention a crocodile. Among the Pataris the
matutinal title of the bear is “the hairy creature.”’ The
Kols, a Dravidian race of northern India, will not speak of
death or beasts of prey by their proper names in the morn-
ing. Their name for the tiger at that time of day is “he
with the claws,” and for the elephant “he with the teeth.” ?
The forests of the Sundarbans, the district at the mouth of
the Ganges, are full of man-eating tigers and the annual
loss of life among the woodcutters is heavy. Here accord-
ingly the ferocious animal is not called a tiger but a jackal
(ctal)3

In Annam the fear inspired by tigers, elephants, and Names of
other wild animals induces the people to address these perpen
creatures with the greatest respect as “lord” or “grand- tabooed in
father,” lest the beasts should take umbrage and attack them.* —
The tiger reigns supreme in the forests of Tonquin and
Cochin-China, and the peasants honour him as a maleficent
deity. In talking of him they always call him ong, which
means monsieur or grandfather. They are convinced that
if they dared to speak of him disrespectfully, he would
avenge the insult. In Siam there are many people who
would never venture to utter the words tiger or crocodile in
a spot where these terrible creatures might be in hiding, lest


1 W. Crooke in Worth Indian Notes
and Queries, i. p. 70, § 5793 2za.,
Tribes and Castes of the North-Western
Provinces and Oudh, iii. 2493 7d.,
Popular Religion and Folk-lore of
Northern India (Westminster, 1896),


ji. 54.


2 W. Crooke, Zribes and Castes of »


the North-Western Provinces and
Oudh, iii. 314.
3 D. Sunder, ‘‘ Exorcism of Wild


Animals in the Sundarbans,” /ournal


of the Asiatic Society of Bengal, \xxii.
part iii. (Calcutta, 1904) pp. 45 sgg., 51.

4 H. Mouhot, Travels in the Central
Parts of Indo-China (London, 1864),
i. 263 sg.

5 Mgr Masson, in Annales de la
Propagation de la Fot, xxiv. (1852) p.
323. Compare Le R. P. Cadiére,
‘*Croyances et dictons populaires de
la vallée du Nguén-son,” Bulletin de
PE cole Francaise d’Extréme-Orient, i.
(1901) p. 134.


Names of
animals
and things
tabooed in
Indo-
China.


TABOOED WORDS CHAP,


404


the sound of their names should attract the attention of the
beasts towards the speakers.’ When the Malays of Patani
Bay in Siam are in the jungle and think there is a tiger near,
they will either speak of him in complimentary terms as the
“orandfather of the woods” or only mention him in a
whisper.” In Laos, while a man is out hunting elephants he
is obliged to give conventional names to all common objects,.
which creates a sort of special language for elephant-hunters.®
So when the Chams and Orang-Glai of Indo-China are
searching for the precious eagle-wood in the forest, they
must employ an artificial jargon to designate most objects of
everyday life ; thus, for example, fire is called “the red,” a
she-goat becomes “a spider,” and so on. Some of the terms
which compose the jargon are borrowed from the dialects of
neighbouring tribes. When the Mentras or aborigines of
Malacca are searching for what they call gaharu (lignum
aloes) they are obliged to use a special language, avoiding
the words in ordinary use. At such times they call gaharu
by the name of ¢adak, and they speak of a snake as “ the
long animal” and of the elephant as “the great animal.”
They have also to observe a number of other taboos, particu-
larly in the matter of diet. Ifa man has found a promising
gaharu tree, and on going home dreams that the guardian
spirit of the tree (Lantu gaharu) demands a human victim as.
the price of his property, the dreamer will try next day to
catch somebody asleep and to smear his forehead with lime.
This is a sign to the guardian spirit of the tree, who
accordingly carries away the soul of the sleeper to the
land of the dead by means of a fever or other ailment,
whereas the original dreamer gets a good supply of aloes.
wood.”


1E. Young, Zhe Kingdom of the
Yellow Robe (Westminster, 1898), p.
61.

2 N. Annandale, ‘‘ Primitive Beliefs
and Customs of the Patani Fishermen,”
Fasciculi Malayenses, Anthropology,
part i. (April 1903) p. 104.

5 E, Aymonier, Notes sur le Laos,
p. 1133 #@., Voyage dans le Laos, i.
(Paris, 1895) p. 311. In the latter
passage the writer observes that the
custom of giving conventional names


to common objects is very generally
observed in Indo-China during the
prosecution of long and _ perilous.
journeys undertaken periodically.

4 Jd., ‘‘Les Tchames et leurs.
religions,” Revue de LHistoire des
Religions, xxiv. (1891) p. 278. Com-


. pare A, Cabaton, Mouvelles Recherches


sur les Chams (Paris, 1901), p. 53.

5 D. F. A. Hervey, in Zndian Notes
and Queries (December 1886), p. 45,
§ 154.


vi COMMON WORDS TABOOED 405


At certain seasons of the year parties of Jakuns and Special
Binuas go out to seek for camphor in the luxuriant forests ne
of their native country, which is the narrow southern EastIndian
extremity of the Malay Peninsula, the Land’s End of Asia. f""°"**
They are absent for three or four months together, and camphor.
during the whole of this time the use of the ordinary Malay
language is forbidden to them, and they have to speak a
special language called by them the dassa kapor (camphor
language) or pantang’ kapur. Indeed not only have the
searchers to employ this peculiar language, but even the
men and women who stay at home in the villages are
obliged to speak it while the others are away looking for
the camphor. They believe that a spirit presides over the
camphor trees, and that without propitiating him they could
not obtain the precious gum; the shrill cry of a species of
cicada, heard at night, is supposed to be the voice of the
spirit. If they failed to employ the camphor language, they
think that they would have great difficulty in finding the
camphor trees, and that even when they did find them the
camphor would not yield itself up to the collector. The
camphor language consists in great part of words which are
either Malayan or of Malay origin; but it also contains
many words which are not Malayan but are presumed to be
remains of the original Jakun dialects now almost extinct in
these districts. The words derived from Malayan are formed
in many cases by merely substituting a descriptive phrase
for the common term. Thus instead of rice they say “grass
fruit” ; instead of gun they say “far sounding” ; the epithet
“ short-legged ” is substituted for hog ; hair is referred to as
“leaves,” and soon.? So when the Battas or Bataks of Sumatra
have gone out to search for camphor, they must abandon the
speech of daily life as soon as they reach the camphor


1 Pantang is equivalent to taboo.
In this sense it is used also by the
Dyaks. See S. W. Tromp, ‘ Een
Dajaksch Feest,” 2Bzjdragen tot de
Taal- Land- en Volkenkundevan Neder-
landsch-Indté, xxxix. (1890) pp. 31 sg.

2 J. R. Logan, “‘The Orang Binua
of Johore,” Journal of the Eastern
Archipelago and Eastern Asia, i.
{1847) pp. 249, 263-265; A. Bastian,


Die Volker des dstlichen Asien, v.
37; H. Lake and H. J. Kelsall, ‘*‘ The
Camphor Tree and Camphor Language
ofJohore,” Journalof the Straits Branch
of the Royal Asiatic Society, No. 26
(January 1894), pp. 39 sg.; W. W.
Skeat, Malay Magic, pp. 212-214;
W. W. Skeat and C. O. Blagden,
Pagan Races of the Malay Peninsula
(London, 1906), ii. 414-431.


406 TABOOED WORDS CHAP.


Special forest. For example, if they wish to speak of the forest they
pes may not use the ordinary word for it (Zoetan), but must call


East Indian it Aerrengettetdoeng. When they have fixed on a spot in
— which to try their luck, they sét up a booth and clear a
camphor. space in front of it to serve as a place of sacrifice. Here,
after summoning the camphor spirit (derroe ni kapoer) by
playing on a flute, they offer sacrifice to him repeatedly.
Then they lie down to dream of the place where camphor is
to be found. If this succeeds, the leader goes and chooses
the tree. When it has been cut down to the accompaniment
of certain spells or incantations, one of the men runs and
wraps the top of the fallen tree in a garment to prevent the


camphor from escaping from the trunk before they have


secured it.


Then the tree is cleft and split up in the search


for the camphor crystals, which are to be found in the fibres


of the wood.!


Similarly, when the Kayans of Borneo are


searching for camphor, they talk a language invented solely


for their use at this time.


The camphor itself is never men-


tioned by its proper name, but is always referred to as “the
thing that smells” ; and all the tools employed in collecting


the drug receive fanciful names.


Unless they conform to


this rule they suppose that the camphor crystals, which are
found only in the crevices of the wood, will elude them.’
The Malanau tribes of Borneo observe the same custom very
strictly, believing that the crystals would immediately dissolve


if they spoke anything but the camphor language.


For


example, the common Malanau word for “return” is sudz,


but in presence of a camphor tree they say deteku.


Again,


“to hide” is paliém in the Malanau language, but when they


are looking for camphor they say rian.


In like manner,


all common names for implements and food are exchanged


for others.


In some tribes the camphor-seekers may


never mention the names of chiefs and influential men ;


1 C. M, Pleyte, ‘* Herinneringen uit
Oost-Indié,” 7ijdschrift van het konink-
lijk Nederlandsch Aardrijkshundig
Genootschap, II Serie, xvii. (1900) pp.
27 54.

2 W. H. Furness, Folk-lore in Borneo
(Wallingford, Pennsylvania, 1899 ;
privately printed), p. 27; 7¢@., Home-
life of Borneo Head-hunters (Phila-


delphia, 1902), p. 17. A special
language is also used in the search for
camphor by some of the natives of
Sumatra. See Th. A. L. Heyting,
** Beschrijving der onder -afdeeling
Groot-Mandeling en Batang-Natal,”
Tijdschrift van het Nederlandsch
Aardrijkskundig Genootschap, Tweede
Serie, xiv. (1897) p. 276,


VI COMMON WORDS TABOOED 407


it they broke this rule, they would find no camphor in
the trees.’

In the western states of the Malay Peninsula the chief Special
industry is tin-mining, and odd ideas prevail among the sf
natives as to the nature and properties of the ore. They Malay
regard it as alive and growing, sometimes in the shape of a”
buffalo, which makes its way from place to place under-
ground. Ore of inferior quality is excused on the score of
its tender years; it will no doubt improve as it grows older.

Not only is the tin believed to be under the protection and
command of certain spirits who must be propitiated, but it

is even supposed to have its own special likes and dislikes

for certain persons and things. Hence the Malays deem it
advisable to treat tin ore with respect, to consult its con-
venience, nay, to conduct the business of mining in such a

way that the ore may, as it were, be extracted without its

own knowledge. When such are their ideas about the
mineral it is no wonder that the miners scruple to employ
certain words in the mines, and replace them by others
which are less likely to give offence to the ore or its guardian
spirits. Thus, for example, the elephant must not be called

an elephant but “the tall one who turns himself about” ;

and in like manner special words, different from those in
common use, are employed by the miners to designate the

cat, the buffalo, the snake, the centipede, tin sand, metallic

tin, and lemons. Lemons are particularly distasteful to the
spirits ; they may not be brought into the mines.? Again, Special
the Malay wizard, who is engaged in snaring pigeons with pa
the help of a decoy-bird and a calling-tube, must on no Malay
account call things by their common names. The tiny °™*™*
conical hut, in which he sits waiting for the wild pigeons to
come fluttering about him, goes by the high-sounding name

of the Magic Prince, perhaps with a delicate allusion to

its noble inmate. The calling-tube is known as Prince


1 W. H. Furness, Home -life of
Borneo Head-hunters, pp. 168 sg.

2 W. W. Skeat, Malay Magic, pp.
250, 253-260. In like manner the
people of Sikhim intensely dread all
mining operations, believing that the
ores and veins of metals are the stored
treasures of the earth-spirits, who are


enraged by the removal of these
treasures and visit the robbers with
sickness, failure of crops, and other
calamities. Hence the Sikhimese leave
the copper mines to be worked by
Nepaulese. See L. A. Waddell,
Among the Himalayas (Westminster,
1899), p. IOI.


Special
language
used by
Malay
fishermen.


408 TABOOED WORDS CHAP.


Distraction, doubtless on account of the extraordinary
fascination it exercises on the birds. The decoy-pigeon
receives the name of the Squatting Princess, and the rod with
a noose at the end of it, which serves to catch the unwary
birds, is disguised under the title of Prince Invitation.
Everything, in fact, is on a princely scale, so far at least as
words can make it so. The very nooses destined to be
slipped over the necks or legs of the little struggling prisoners
are dignified by the title of King Solomon’s necklaces and
armlets; and the trap into which the birds are invited to
walk is variously described as King Solomon’s Audience
Chamber, or a Palace Tower, or an Ivory Hall carpeted
with silver and railed with amalgam. What pigeon could
resist these manifold attractions, especially when it is
addressed by the respectful title of Princess Kapor or
Princess Sarap or Princess Puding?* Again, the fisher-
folk on the east coast of the Malay Peninsula, like their
brethren in Scotland, are reluctant to mention the names of
birds or beasts while they are at sea. All animals then go
by the name of cheweh,a meaningless word which is believed
not to be understood by the creatures to whom it refers.
Particular kinds of animals are distinguished by appropriate
epithets ; the pig is “the grunting cheweh,” the buffalo is “the
cheweh that says uak,” the snipe is “the cheweh that cries kek-
kek,’ and so on.” In this respect the fishermen of Patani Bay
class together sea spirits, Buddhist monks, beasts, and
reptiles ; these are all cheweh and their common names may
not be mentioned at sea. But, curiously enough, they lay no
such embargo on the names of fish and birds, except the
vulture and domestic fowls and ducks. At sea the vulture
is named “bald head,” the tiger “striped,’ the snake
“weaver’s sword,” the horse “ fast,’ and a species of monkey
“long tail.” The human foot is called “tortoise,” and
a Buddhist monk “yellow” on account of the colour of
his robe. These Malay fishermen are at least as un-
willing to speak of a Buddhist monk at sea as Scotch fisher-
men are to mention a minister in similar circumstances. If
one of them mentions a monk, his mates will fall on him
and beat him; whereas for other slips of the tongue they
1 W. W. Skeat, of. cit. pp. 139 5g. 2 W. W. Skeat, of. cit, pp. 192 sg.


ee ee peer


Se ee ee


VI . COMMON WORDS TABOOED 409


think it enough to throw a little bilge-water over the back of
the transgressor and to say, “ May the ill-luck be dismissed !”
The use of this special language is even more obligatory by
night than by day. On shore the fishermen make very
merry over those lubberly landsmen who cannot talk correctly
at sea In like manner Achinese fishermen, in northern
Sumatra, employ a special vocabulary when they are at sea.
Thus they may not call a mountain a mountain, or mountain-
high billows would swamp the boat ; they refer to it as “ high
ground.” They may not speak of an elephant by its proper
name of gadjah, but must call it pd meurah. If a man wishes
to say that something is clear, he must not use the ordinary
word for clear (/heuéh) because it bears the meaning also of
“free,” “loose”; and the utterance of such a word might
enable the fish to get free from the net and escape. Instead
of ¢heuéh he must therefore employ the less dangerous
synonym /eungka. In like manner, we are told, among the
fishermen of the north coast of Java whole lists of words
might be compiled which are tabooed at sea and must be
replaced by others.’

In Sumatra the spirits of the gold mines are treated with Names of
as much deference as the spirits of the tin-mines in the pee
Malay Peninsula. Tin, ivory, and the like may not be tabooed in
brought by the miners to the scene of their operations, for at }i*"*",
the scent of such things the spirits of the mine would cause Java.
the gold to vanish. For the same reason it is forbidden to
refer to certain things by their proper names, and in speak-
ing of them the miners must use other words. In some
cases, for example in removing the grains of the gold,a deep
silence must be observed; no commands may be given or
questions asked,’ probably because the removal of the
precious metal is regarded as a theft which the spirits would


punish if they caught the thieves in the act.


1 N. Annandale, ‘‘ Primitive Beliefs
and Customs of the Patani Fishermen,”
Fasciculi Malayenses, Anthropology,
part i. (April 1903) pp. 84-86.

2 C, Snouck Hurgronje, De Atjehers
(Batavia and Leyden, 1893-1894), i.
303s

8 J. L. van der Toorn, ‘‘ Het ani-


Certainly the


misme bij den Minangkabauer der
Padangsche Bovenlanden,” Aijdragen
tot de Taal- Land-en Volkenkunde van
Nederlandsch-Indié, xxxix. (1890) p.
100. -As to the superstitions of gold-
washers among the Gayos of Sumatra,
see C. Snouck Hurgronje, Het Gajoland
en zijne Bewoners (Batavia, 1903), pp.
361 sg. .


Names of
things and
animals
tabooed in
Sumatra,
Nias, and
Java.


TABOOED WORDS CHAP.


410


Dyaks believe that gold has a soul which seeks to avenge
itself on men who dig the precious metal. But the angry
spirit is powerless to harm miners who observe certain
precautions, such as never to bathe in a river with their faces
turned up stream, never to sit with their legs dangling, and
never to tie up their hair. Again, a Sumatran who fancies
that there is a tiger or a crocodile in his neighbourhood, will
speak of the animal by the honourable title of “ grandfather ”
for the purpose of propitiating the creature. In the
forest a Karo-Batak refers to a tiger as “Grandfather
to whom the wood belongs,” “he with the striped coat,”
or “the roving trap.” Among the Gayos of Sumatra
it is forbidden to mention the name of small-pox in the
house of a man who is suffering from the disease; and
the words for ugly, red, stinking, unlucky, and so forth
are forbidden under the same circumstances. The disease
is referred to under the title of “prince of the averters of
misfortune.”* So long as the hunting season lasts, the
natives of Nias may not name the eye, the hammer, stones,
and in some places the sun by their true names; no smith
may ply his trade in the village,and no person may go from
one village to another to have smith’s work done for him.
All this, with the exception of the rule about not naming
the eye and the sun, is done to prevent the dogs from grow-
ing stiff, and so losing the power of running down the game.
During the rice-harvest in Nias the reapers seldom speak to
each other, and when they do so, it is only in whispers.
Outside the field they must speak of everything by names
different from those in common use, which gives rise to a
special dialect or jargon known as “field speech.” It
has been observed that some of the words in this jargon


1M. T. H. Perelaer, Zthnogra-
phische Beschrijuing der Dajaks (Zalt-
Bommel, 1870), p. 215.

2 J. T. Nieuwenhuisen en H. C. B.
von Rosenberg, ‘* Verslag omtrent het
eiland Nias,” Verhandelingen van het
Bataviaasch Genootschap van Kunsten
en Wetenschappen, xxx. (1863) p. 115.
Compare W. Marsden, Zistory of
Sumatra, p. 292; T. J. Newbold,
Account of the British Settlements in
the Straits of Malacca, ii. 192 59.


3 J. E. Neumann, “‘ Kemali, Pantang
en Xeboe bij de Karo-Bataks,” 7id-
schrift voor Indische Taal- Land- en
Volkenkunde, xiviii. (1906) pp. 511
SY.
4 C, Snouck Hurgronje, Het Gajo-
land en sijne Bewoners (Batavia, 1903),
Pp. ZIT Sg.

5 J. W. Thomas, ‘* De jacht op het
eiland Nias,” Zijdschrift voor Indische
Taal. Land. en Volkenkunde, xxvi.


(1880) p. 275.


VI COMMON WORDS TABOOED 411


resemble words in the language of the Battas of Sumatra.
While these rice-reapers of Nias are at work they may not
address each other by their names; they must use only such
general terms as “man,” “woman,” “ girl,” “old man,” and
“old woman.” The word for “fire” may not pass their lips ;
instead of it they must use the word for “cold.” Other
words tabooed to them during the harvest are the words for
“smoke” and “stone.” If a reaper wishes to ask another
for his whetstone to sharpen his knife, he must speak of it
as a “fowl’s egg.”* In Java when people suspect that a
tiger or crocodile is near, they avoid the use of the proper
name of the beast and refer to him as “the old lord” or
“srandfather.” Similarly, men who are watching a plantation
to protect it from wild boars speak of these animals as
“handsome men” (wong bagus). When after harvest the
unhusked rice is to be brought into the barn, the barn is
not called a barn but “the dark store-house.” Serious
epidemics may not be mentioned by their true names; thus
smallpox is called the “pretty girl” (dara bagus). The
Javanese are particularly careful to eschew certain common
words at evening or night. Thus the snake is then called a
“tree-root” ; the venomous centipede is referred to as the
“red ant”; oil is spoken of as “water”; and so forth. And
when leaves and herbs are being gathered for use in medicine
they are regularly designated by other than their ordinary
names.®

The Alfoors or Toradjas of Poso, in Celebes, are for- Names of
bidden by custom to speak the ordinary language when they ss
are at work in the harvest-field. At such times they.employ tabooed in
a secret language which is said to agree with the ordinary
one only,in this, that in it some things are designated by |


1L, N. H. A. Chatelin, ‘* Gods-
dienst en bijgeloof der Niassers,” 77/d-
schrift voor Indische Taal- Land- en
Volkenkunde, xxvi. (1880) p. 165; H.
Sundermann, ‘*Die Insel Nias und
die Mission daselbst,”” Al/gemeine Mis-
stons-Zeitschrift, xi. (1884) p. 349; E.
Modigliani, Uz Viaggio a Néas (Milan,
1890), p. 593.

2 A. L. van Hasselt, ‘* Nota, betreff-
ende de rijstcultuur in de Residentie
Tapanoeli,” Tiydschrift voor Indische


Taal- Land- en Volkenkunde, xxxvi.
(1893) pp. 525 sg. The Singhalese
also call things by strange names when
they are in the rice-fields. See A. A.
Perera, ‘* Glimpses of Singhalese Social
Life,” Jndian Antiquary, xxxii. (1903)
P- 437+

3G. A. J. Hazeu, ‘Kleine Bij-
dragen tot de Ethnografie en de Folk-
lore van Java,” Tijdschrift voor Indische
Taal. Land- en Volkenkunde, x\vii.
(1903) pp. 291 sg.


Names of
things and
animals
tabooed in
Celebes.


412 TABOOED WORDS “CHAP,


words usually applied in a different sense, or by descriptive
phrases or circumlocutions. Thus instead of “run” they say
“limp”; instead of “hand” they say “that with which one
reaches”; instead of “ foot” they say “that with which one
limps”; and instead of “ear” they say “that with which
one hears.” Again, in the field-speech “to drink” becomes
“to thrust forward the mouth”; “to pass by” is expressed
by “to nod with the head”; a gun is “a fire-producer” ;
and wood is “that which is carried on the shoulder.” The
writer who reports the custom was formerly of opinion that
this secret language was designed to avoid attracting the
attention of evil spirits to the ripe rice; but further enquiry
has satisfied him that the real reason for adopting it is a
wish not to frighten the soul of the rice by revealing to it
the alarming truth that it is about to be cut, carried home,
boiled, and eaten. It is just the words referring to these
actions, he tells us, which are especially tabooed and replaced
by others. Beginning with a rule of avoiding a certain
number of common words, the custom has grown among
people of the Malay stock till it has produced a complete
language for use in the fields. In Minahassa also this secret
field-speech consists in part of phrases or circumlocutions, of
which many are said to be very poetical.’ But it is not only
on the harvest field that the Toradja resorts to the use of a
secret language from superstitious motives. In the great
primaeval forest he feels ill at ease, for well he knows the
choleric temper of the spirits who inhabit the giant trees of
the wood, and that were he to excite their wrath they would
assuredly pay him out in one way or other, it might be by
carrying off his soul and so making him ill, it might be by
crushing him flat under a falling tree. These touchy beings
particularly dislike to hear certain words pronounced, and
accordingly on his way through the forest the Toradja takes
care to avoid the offensive terms and to substitute others for
them. Thus he will not call a dog a dog, but refers to it as
“the hairy one”; a buffalo is spoken of as “thick hide”; a

1A. C. Kruijt, “Een en ander (1895) pp. 146-148; iéd., ‘‘ Eenige
aangaande het geestelijk en maatschap- _ethnografische aanteekeningen omtrent
pelijk leven van den Poso-Alfoer,” de Toboengkoe en de Tomori,” #d/d,


Mededeelingen van wege het Neder-  xliv. (1900) pp. 228 sg.
landsche Zendelinggenootschap, xxxix.


vI COMMON WORDS TABOOED 413


cooking pot becomes “that which is set down” ; the hair of
the head is alluded to as “betel”; goats and pigs are “the
folk under the house”; a horse is “long nose”; and deer
are “denizens of the fell.” If he is rash or careless enough
to utter a forbidden word in the forest, a short-tempered
tree-spirit will fetch him such a bang on the head that the
blood will spout from his nose and mouth.1 Again, when
the weather is fine and the Toradja wishes it to continue so,
he is careful not to utter the word “rain,” for if he did so
the rain would fancy he was called for and would obligingly
present himself. Indeed, in the district of Pakambia,
which is frequently visited by heavy storms, the word “ rain”
may not be mentioned throughout the year lest it should
provoke a tempest; the unmentionable thing is there
delicately alluded to as “ tree-blossoms.” *

When a Bugineese or Macassar man is at sea and sail- Common
ing past a place which he believes to be haunted by evil po eel
spirits, he keeps as quiet as he can; but if he is obliged to by East
speak he designates common things and actions, such as peertlh
water, wind, fire, cooking, eating, the rice-pot, and so forth, t se.
by peculiar terms which are neither Bugineese nor Macassar,
and therefore cannot be understood by the evil spirits, whose
knowledge of languages is limited to these two tongues,
However, according to another and later account given by
the same authority, it appears that many of the substituted
terms are merely figurative expressions or descriptive phrases
borrowed from the ordinary language. Thus the word for
water is replaced by a rare word meaning “rain”; a rice-
pot is called a “black man”; boiled rice is “one who is
eaten”; a fish is a “tree-leaf” ; a fowl is “one who lives in
a poultry hatch”; and an ape is a “tree-dweller.”* Natives
of the island of Saleyer, which lies off the south coast of


1 N. Adriani und A. C. Kruijt, ‘*Van
Posso naar Mori,” Aededeelingen van
wege het Nederlandsche Zendelinggenoot-
schap, xliv. (1900) pp. 145 sg.


schap, II. Serie, xvii. (1900) p. 464,
note.

3B. F. Matthes, Biydragen tot de
Ethnologie van Zuid-Celebes (The


2 A. C. Kruijt, “Regen lokken en
regen verdrijven bij de Toradja’s van
Midden Celebes,” Zijdschrift voor
Indische Taal- Land- en Volkenkunde,
xliv. (1901) p. 8; ¢d@., “Het rijk
Mori,” Tijdschrift van het Koniklijk
Nederlandsch Aardrijkskundig Genoot-


Hague, 1875), p. 107; 2d@., ‘‘ Over de
ddés of gewoonten der Makassaren en
Boegineezen,” Verslagen en Mededeel-
ingen der Koninklijke Akademie van
Wetenschappen, Afdeeling Letterkunde,
III. Recks, ii. (Amsterdam, 1885) pp.
164 sg.


Common
words
tabooed
by East
Indian
mariners
at sea.


414 TABOOED WORDS CHAP.


Celebes, will not mention the name of their island when they
are making a certain sea-passage; and in sailing they will
never speak of a fair wind by its proper name. The reason
in both cases is a fear of disturbing the evil spirits... When
natives of the Sapoodi Archipelago, to the north-east of
Java, are at sea they will never say that they are near the


island of Sapoodi, for if they did so they would be carried’


away from it by a head wind or by some other mishap.
When Galelareese sailors are crossing over to’a land that is
some way Off, say one or two days’ sail, they do not remark
on any vessels that may heave in sight or any birds that
may fly past; for they believe that were they to do so they
would be driven out of their course and not reach the land
they are making for. Moreover, they may not mention their
own ship, or any part of it. If they have to speak of
the bow, for example, they say “the beak of the bird”;
starboard is named “sword,” and larboard “shield.”* The
inhabitants of Ternate and of the Sangi Islands deem it very
dangerous to point at distant objects or to name them while
they are at sea. Once while sailing with a crew of Ternate
men a European asked one of them the name of certain
small islands which they had passed. The man had been
talkative before, but the question reduced him to silence.
“ Sir,” he said, “that is a great taboo; if I told you we
should at once have wind and tide against us, and perhaps
suffer a great calamity. As soon as we come to anchor I
will tell you the name of the islands.” The Sangi Islanders
have, besides the ordinary language, an ancient one which is
only partly understood by some of the people. This old
language is often used by them at sea, as well as in popular
songs and certain heathen rites. The reason for resorting to
it on shipboard is to hinder the evil spirits from overhearing


1 H. E. D. Engelhard, ‘‘ Mededeel-
ingen over het eiland Saleijer,” Bz-
dragen tot de Taal- Land- en Volken-
hkunde van Nebtrlandsch-Indié, Vierde
Volgreeks, viii. (1884) p. 369.

2 E. F, Jochim, ‘ Beschrijving van
den Sapoedi Archipel,” Zijdschri/t
voor Indische Taal- Land- en Volken-
hunde, xxxvi, (1893) p, 361.

3M. J. van Baarda, ‘* Fabelen, Ver-


halen en Overleveringen der Galelaree-
zen,” Bijdragen tot de Taal- Land- en
Volkenkunde van Nederlandsch-Indie,
xlv, (1895) p. 508.


4S, D. van de Velde van Cappellan,
**Verslag eener Bezoekreis naar de
Sangi-eilanden,” A/ededeelingen van
wege het Nederlandsche Zendelingge-
nootschap, i. (1857) pp» 33) 35+


q
‘


eh


ae ee ee eer


.


vI COMMON WORDS TABOOED 415


and so frustrating the plans of the voyagers.’ The Nufoors
of Dutch New Guinea believe that if they were to mention
the name of an island to which the bow of their vessel was
pointing, they would be met by storm, rain, or mist which
would drive them from their course.”

In some parts of Sunda it is taboo or forbidden to call Common
a goat a goat; it must be called a “deer under the house.” pot
A tiger may not be spoken of as a tiger; he must be referred in Sunda,
to as “the supple one,” “the one there,” “the honourable,” pry
“the whiskered one,” and so on. Neither a wild boar nor a Philip-
mouse may be mentioned by its proper name; a boar must ?"™
be called “the beautiful one” (masculine) and the mouse
“the beautiful one” (feminine). When the people are asked
what would be the consequence of breaking a taboo, they
generally say that the person or thing would suffer for it,
either by meeting with a mishap or by falling ill. But some
say they do not so much fear a misfortune as experience
an indefinite feeling, half fear, half reverence, towards an
institution of their forefathers. Others can assign no reason
for observing the taboos, and cut enquiry short by saying
that “It is so because it is so.”* When the Kenyahs of
Borneo are about to poison the fish of a section of the river
with the vba root, they always speak of the matter as little
as possible and use the most indirect and fanciful modes of
expression. Thus they will say, “There are many leaves
fallen here,” meaning that there are many fish in the river.
And they will not breathe the name of the ¢uda root ; if they
must refer to it, they call it pakat abong, where abong is the
name of a strong-smelling root something like ¢uba, and
pakat means “to agree upon”; so that pakat abong signifies
“what we have agreed to call abong.” This concealment of
the truth deceives all the bats, birds, and insects, which might
otherwise overhear the talk of the men and inform the fish of
the deep-laid plot against them.*| These Kenyahs also fear


1A. C. Kruijt, ‘*Een en ander
aangaande het geestelijk en maat-
schappelijk leven van den Poso-Alfoer,”
Mededeelingen van wege het Neder-
landsche Zendelinggenootschap, xxxix.
(1895) p. 148.

2 Th. J. F. van Hasselt, ‘* Gebruik
van vermomde Taal door de Nufooren,”


Tijdschrift voor Indische Taal- Land-
en Volkenkunde, xlv. (1902) pp. 279 sg.

3K, F. Holle, “Snippers van den
Regent van Galoeh,” Zidschrift voor
Indische Taal- Land- en Volkenkunde,
xxvii. (1882) pp. 101 sg.

4 Ch. Hose and W. McDougall,
** The Relations between Men and


The avoid-
ance of
common
words


of spirits
and a wish
to deceive
them or
elude their
notice.


416 TABOOED WORDS CHAP..


the crocodile and do not like to mention it by name, especially
if one be in sight; they refer to the beast as “the old
grandfather.” When small-pox invades a village of the
Sakarang Dyaks in Borneo, the people desert the place and
take refuge in the jungle. In the daytime they do not dare
to stir or to speak above a whisper, lest the spirits should see
or hear them. They do not call the small-pox by its proper
name, but speak of it as “jungle leaves” or “ fruit” or “ the
chief,” and ask the sufferer, “Has he left you?” and the
question is put in a whisper lest the spirit should hear.”
Natives of the Philippines were formerly prohibited from
speaking of the chase in the house of a fisherman and from
speaking of fishing in the house of a hunter; journeying by
land they might not talk of marine matters, and sailing on
the sea they might not talk of terrestrial matters.’

When we survey the instances of this superstition which
have now been enumerated, we can hardly fail to be struck
by the number of cases in which a fear of spirits, or of other
beings regarded as spiritual and intelligent, is assigned as the
reason for abstaining in certain circumstances from the use


of certain words.*


The speaker imagines himself to be over-


heard and understood by spirits, or animals, or other beings.


Animals in Sarawak,” Journal of the
Anthropological Institute, xxxi. (1902)
p. 205; W.-H. Furness, Home-life of
Borneo Head-hunters (Philadelphia,
1902), pp. 17, 186 sg.

1 Ch. Hose and W. McDougall, of.
cit. p. 186.

2 Ch. Brooke, Zen Vears in Sarawak
(London, 1866), i. 208; Spenser St.
John, Life in the Forests of the Far
East,* i. 71 sq.

8 Juan de la Concepcion, Historia
general de Philipinas, i. (Manilla,
1788), p. 20. Compare J. Mallat, Les
Philippines (Paris, 1846), i. 64.

4 On this subject Mr. R. J, Wilkin-
son’s account of the Malay’s attitude to
nature (Malay Beliefs, London and
Leyden, 1906, pp. 67 sg.) deserves to
be quoted: ‘*The practice of magic
arts enters into every department of
Malay life. If (as the people of the
Peninsula believe) all nature is teem-
ing with spiritual life, some spiritual
weapon is necessary to protect man


against possible ghostly foes. Now the
chief and most characteristic weapon
of the Malay in his fight against the
invisible world is courtesy. The peasant
will speak no evil of a tiger in the
jungle or of an evil spirit within the
limits of that spirit’s authority. . . .
The tiger is the symbol of kingly op-
pression ; still, he is royal and must
not be insulted; he is the ‘shaggy-
haired father’ or ‘grandfather’ of the
traveller in the woods. Even the
birds, the fish and the fruits that serve
as human food are entitled to a certain
consideration : the deer is addressed as.
a ‘prince,’ the coco-nut tree as a
‘princess,’ the chevrotin as ‘emperor
of the jungle’ (shah alam di-rimba).
In all this respect paid to unseen
powers—for it is the soul of the animal
or plant that is feared—there is no
contemptible adulation or cringeing ;
the Malay believes that courtesy hon-
ours the speaker more than the persom
addressed,”


a a, a


|
|


VI COMMON WORDS TABOOED 417


whom his fancy endows with human intelligence ; and hence
he avoids certain words and substitutes others in their stead,
either from a desire to soothe and propitiate these beings by
speaking well of them, or from a dread that they may under-
stand his speech and know what he is about, when he happens
to be engaged in that which, if they knew of it, would excite
their anger or their fear. Hence the substituted terms fall into
two classes according as they are complimentary or enigmatic ;
and these. expressions are employed, according to circum-
stances, for different and even opposite reasons, the compli-
mentary because they will be understood and appreciated,
and the enigmatic because they will not. We can now see
why persons engaged in occupations like fishing, fowling,
hunting, mining, reaping, and sailing the sea, should abstain
from the use of the common language and veil their mean-
ing in strange words and dark phrases. For they have this
in common that all of them are encroaching on the domain
of the elemental beings, the creatures who, whether visible
or invisible, whether clothed in fur or scales or feathers,
whether manifesting themselves in tree or stone or running
stream or breaking wave, or hovering unseen in the air, may
be thought to have the first right to those regions of earth
and sea and sky into which man intrudes only to plunder
and destroy. Thus deeply imbued with a sense of the all-
pervading life and intelligence of nature, man at a certain
stage of his intellectual development cannot but be visited
with fear or compunction, whether he is killing wild fowl
among the stormy Hebrides, or snaring doves in the sultry
thickets of the Malay Peninsula ; whether he is hunting the
bear in Lapland snows, or the tiger in Indian jungles, or
hauling in the dripping net, laden with silvery herring, on
the coast of Scotland; whether he is searching for the
camphor crystals in the shade of the tropical forest, or
extracting the red gold from the darksome mine, or laying
low with a sweep of his sickle the yellow ears on the harvest
field. In all these his depredations on nature, man’s first
endeavour apparently is by quietness and silence to escape
the notice of the beings whom he dreads ; but if that cannot
be, he puts the best face he can on the matter by dissembling


his foul designs under a fair exterior, by flattering the
PT. Il 2E


418 TABOOED WORDS CHAP. VI


Common creatures whom he proposes to betray, and by so guarding
ante 4 by his lips, that, though his dark ambiguous words are under-
hunters ~ stood well enough by his fellows, they are wholly unintelligible
and fwets to his victims. He pretends to be what he is not, and to be
deceive the doing something quite different from the real business in
— and hand. He is not, for example, a fowler catching pigeons in
irds. ’ 9 &
the forest ; he is a Magic Prince or King Solomon himself?
inviting fair princesses into his palace tower or ivory hall.
Such childish pretences suffice to cheat the guileless creatures
whom the savage intends to rob or kill, perhaps they even
impose to some extent upon himself; for we can hardly dis-
sever them wholly from those forms of sympathetic magic in
which primitive man seeks to effect his purpose by imitating
the thing he desires to produce, or even by assimilating him-
self to it. It is hard indeed for us to realise the mental
state of a Malay wizard masquerading before wild pigeons in
the character of King Solomon; yet perhaps the make-
believe of children and of the stage, where we see the players
daily forgetting their real selves in their passionate im-
personation of the shadowy realm of fancy, may afford us
some glimpse into the workings of that instinct of imitation
or mimicry which is deeply implanted in the constitution of
the human mind.


1 The character of King Solomon
appears to be a favourite one with the
Malay sorcerer when he desires to in-
gratiate himself with or lord it over the
powers of nature. Thus, for example,
in addressing silver ore the sage ob-
serves :—


** Tf you do not come hither at this very
moment


You shall be a rebel unto God,

And a rebel unto God's Prophet Solo-
mon,

For I am God's Prophet Solomon.”’—


See W. W. Skeat, Malay Magic, p. 273.
No doubt the fame of his wisdom has
earned for the Hebrew monarch this
distinction among the dusky wizards
of the East.


CHAPTER VII
OUR DEBT TO THE SAVAGE


IT would be easy to extend the list of royal and priestly General
taboos, but the instances collected in the preceding pages natn
may suffice as specimens. To conclude this part of our gods, on
subject it only remains to state summarily the general ——
conclusions to which our enquiries have thus far con- the com-


ducted us. We have seen that in savage or barbarous puma to
society there are often found men to whom the superstition depend,
of their fellows ascribes a controlling influence over the a ee
general course of nature. Such men are accordingly adored psig _—
and treated as gods. Whether these human divinities their own
also hold temporal sway over the lives and fortunes of — a
their adorers, or whether their functions are purely spiritual] their
and supernatural, in other words, whether they are kings as People:
well as gods or only the latter, is a distinction which hardly
concerns us here. Their supposed divinity is the essential

fact with which we have to deal. In virtue of it they are a

pledge and guarantee to their worshippers of the continuance

and orderly succession of those physical phenomena upon

which mankind depends for subsistence. Naturally, there-

fore, the life and health of such a god-man are matters of
anxious concern to the people whose welfare and even
existence are bound up with his; naturally he is constrained

by them to conform to such rules as the wit of early man

has devised for averting the ills to which flesh is heir, includ-

ing the last ill, death. These rules, as an examination of

them has shewn, are nothing but the maxims with which, on

the primitive view, every man of common prudence must


comply if he would live long in the land. But while in the
419


A study of
these rules
affords us
an insight
into the
philosophy
of the
savage,


420 OUR DEBT TO THE SAVAGE CHAP.


case of ordinary men the observance of the rules is left to
the choice of the individual, in the case of the god-man it
is enforced under penalty of dismissal from his high station,
or even of death. For his worshippers have far too great
a stake in his life to allow him to play fast and loose with
it. Therefore all the quaint superstitions, the old - world
maxims, the venerable saws which the ingenuity of savage
philosophers elaborated long ago, and which old women at
chimney corners still impart as treasures of great price to
their descendants gathered round the cottage fire on winter
evenings—all these antique fancies clustered, all these cob-
webs of the brain were spun about the path of the old king,
the human god, who, immeshed in them like a fly in the
toils of a spider, could hardly stir a limb for the threads of
custom, “light as air but strong as links of iron,” that
crossing and recrossing each other in an endless maze bound
him fast within a network of observances from which death
or deposition alone could release him.

Thus to students of the past the life of the old kings
and priests teems with instruction. In it was summed up
all that passed for wisdom when the world was young. It
was the perfect pattern after which every man strove to
shape his life; a faultless model constructed with rigorous
accuracy upon the lines laid down by a barbarous philosophy.
Crude and false as that philosophy may seem to us, it would
be unjust to deny it the merit of logical consistency. Start-
ing from a conception of the vital principle as a tiny being
or soul existing in, but distinct and separable from, the
living being, it deduces for the practical guidance of life a
system of rules which in general hangs well together and
forms a fairly complete and harmonious whole.’ The flaw—


1 « The mind of the savage is not a
blank ; and when one becomes familiar
with his beliefs and superstitions, and
the complicated nature of his laws and
customs, preconceived notions of his
simplicity of thought go to the winds,
I have yet to find that most apocryphal
of beings described as the ‘ unsophisti-
cated African.’ We laugh at and
ridicule his fetishes and superstitions,
but we fail to follow the succession of
ideas and effort of mind which have


created these things. After most care-
ful observations extending over nineteen
years, Ihave come to the conclusion that
there is nothing in the customs and
fetishes of the African which does not
represent a definite course of reasoning”
(Rev, Thomas Lewis, ‘* The Ancient
Kingdom of Kongo,” Zhe Geographical
Journal, xix, (1902) p. 554). ‘* The
study of primitive peoples is extremely
curious and full of surprises, It is
twenty years since I undertook it


vil OUR DEBT TO THE SAVAGE 421


and it is a fatal one—of the system lies not in its reasoning,

but in its premises ; in its conception of the nature of life,

not in any irrelevancy of the conclusions which it draws
from that conception. But to stigmatise these premises as
ridiculous because we can easily detect their falseness, would

be ungrateful as well as unphilosophical. We stand upon Our debt
the foundation reared by the generations that have gone pot
before, and we can but dimly realise the painful and pro- forefathers.
longed efforts which it has cost humanity to struggle up to

the point, no very exalted one after all, which we have
reached. Our gratitude is due to the nameless and forgotten
toilers, whose patient thought and active exertions have
largely made us what we are. The amount of new know-
ledge which one age, certainly which one man, can add to

the common store is small, and it argues stupidity or dis-
honesty, besides ingratitude, to ignore the heap while vaunt-

ing the few grains which it may have been our privilege to

add to it. There is indeed little danger at present of
undervaluing the contributions which modern times and
even classical antiquity have made to the general advance-
ment of our race. But when we pass these limits, the case

is different. Contempt and ridicule or abhorrence and
denunciation are too often the only recognition vouchsafed

to the savage and his ways. Yet of the benefactors whom


among the Thonga and Pedi tribes of
South Africa, and the further I advance,
the more I am astonished at the great
number, the complexity, and the pro-
fundity of the rites of these so-called
savages. Only a superficial observer
could accuse their individual or tribal
life of superficiality. If we take the
trouble to seek the reason of these
strange customs, we perceive that at
their base there are secret, obscure
reasons, principles hard to grasp, even
though the most fervent adepts of the
rite can give no account of it. To
discover these principles, and so to give
a true explanation of the rites, is the
supreme task of the ethnographer,—a
task in the highest degree delicate, for
it is impossible to perform it if we do
not lay aside our personal ideas to
saturate ourselves with those of primi-
tive peoples” (Rev. H. A. Junod,


**Les Conceptions physiologiques des
Bantou sud-africains et leurs tabous,”
Revue d’Ethnographie et de Soctologie,
i. (1910) p. 126). These weighty
words, the fruit of ripe experience,
deserve to be pondered by those
who fancy that the elaborate system of
savage custom can have grown up
instinctively without a correspondingly
elaborate process of reasoning in the
minds of its founders. We may not,
indeed, always be able to discover the
reason for which a particular custom or
rite was instituted, for we are only
beginning to understand the mind of
uncivilised man ; but all that we know
of him tends to shew that his practice,
however absurd it may seem to us,
originated in a definite train of thought
and for a definite and very practical


purpose.


Our debt
to our
savage
forefathers.


422 OUR DEBT TO THE SAVAGE CHAP, VII


we are bound thankfully to commemorate, many, perhaps
most, were savages. For when all is said and done our
resemblances to the savage are still far more numerous than
our differences from him; and what we have in common
with him, and deliberately retain as true and useful, we owe
to our savage forefathers who slowly acquired by experience
and transmitted to us by inheritance those seemingly funda-
mental ideas which we are apt to regard as original and
intuitive. We are like heirs to a fortune which has been
handed down for so many ages that the memory of those
who built it up is lost, and its possessors for the time being
regard it as having been an original and unalterable pos-
session of their race since the beginning of the world. But
reflection and enquiry should satisfy us that to our pre-
decessors we are indebted for much of what we thought
most our own, and that their errors were not wilful extra-
vagances or the ravings of insanity, but simply hypotheses,
justifiable as such at the time when they were propounded,
but which a fuller experience has proved to be inadequate.
It is only by the successive testing of hypotheses and
rejection of the false that truth is at last elicited. After all,
what we call truth is only the hypothesis which is found to
work best. Therefore in reviewing the opinions and prac-
tices of ruder ages and races we shall do well to look with
leniency upon their errors as inevitable slips made in the
search for truth, and to give them the benefit of that in-
dulgence which we ourselves may one day stand in need of:
cum excusatione ttaque veteres audiend? sunt.


NOTE


NOT TO STEP OVER PERSONS AND THINGS!


THE superstition that harm is done to a person or thing by stepping
over him or it is very widely spread. Thus the Galelareese think
that if a man steps over your fishing-rod or your arrow, the fish will
not bite when you fish with that rod, and the game will not be hit
by that arrow when you shoot it. They say it is as if the imple-
ments merely skimmed past the fish or the game.” Similarly, if a
Highland sportsman saw a person stepping over his gun or fishing-
rod, he presumed but little on that day’s diversion.? When a Dacota
had bad luck in hunting, he would say that a woman had been
stepping over some part of the animal which he revered.*- Amongst
many South African tribes it is considered highly improper to step
over a sleeper ; ifa wife steps over her husband he cannot hit his
enemy in war ; if she steps over his assegais, they are from that time
useless, and are given to boys to play with.® The Baganda think
that if a woman steps over a man’s weapons, they will not aim straight
and will not kill, unless they have been first purified.© The Nandi
of British East Africa hold that to step over a snare or trap is to
court death and must be avoided at all risks; further, they are
of opinion that if a man were to step over a pot, he would fall to
pieces whenever the pot were broken.’ The people of the Lower
Congo deem that to step over a person’s body or legs will cause ill-
luck to that person and they are careful not to do so, especially


1 See above, pp. 159 sg. ii. 175.

2 M. J. van Baarda, ‘‘ Fabelen, Ver- 5 J. Macdonald, Light in Africa
halen en Overleveringen der Galelar- (London, 1890), p. 209.
eezen,” Bijdragen tot de Taal- Land-en ® Rev. J. Roscoe, in Journal of the
Volkenkunde van Nederlandsch-Indié, Anthropological Institute, xxxii. (1902)
xlv. (1895) p. 513: Pp. 59.

3 John Ramsay, Scotland and Scots- T A.C. Hollis, 7he Nandz, pp. 24 5¢.,
men in the Eighteenth Century (Edin- 36. In these cases the harm is thought
burgh, 1888), ii. 456. to fall on the person who steps over, not

4 H. R. Schoolcraft, Zxdian Tribes, on the thing which is stepped over.


423


424. NOT TO STEP OVER PERSONS AND THINGS


in passing men who are holding a palaver. At such times a passer-by
will shuffle his feet along the ground without lifting them in order


that he may not be charged with bringing bad luck on any one. On_
the other hand among the Wajagga of East Africa grandchildren:


leap over the corpse of their grandfather, when it is laid out,
expressing a wish that they may live to be as old as he? In Laos
hunters are careful never to. step over their weapons? The Tep-
ehuanes of Mexico believe that if anybody steps over them, they
will not be able to kill another deer in their lives.*
Australian aborigines are seriously alarmed if a woman steps over
them as they lie asleep on the ground.® In the tribes about
Maryborough in Queensland, if a woman steps over anything that
belongs to a man he will throw it away. In New Caledonia it is
thought to endanger a canoe if a woman steps over the cable.’
Everything that a Samoyed woman steps over becomes unclean and
must be fumigated. Malagasy porters believe that if a woman
strides over their poles, the skin will certainly peel off the shoulders
of the bearers when next they take up the burden.® The Cherokees
fancy that to step over a vine causes it to wither and bear no fruit.!°
The Ba-Pendi and Ba-thonga of South Africa think that if a woman
steps over a man’s legs, they will swell and he will not be able to
run. According to the South Slavonians, the most serious maladies
may be communicated to a person by stepping over him, but they
can afterwards be cured by stepping over him in the reverse
direction.!2 The belief that to step over a child hinders it from
growing is found in France, Belgium, Germany, Austria, and Syria ;
in Syria, Germany, and Bohemia the mischief can be remedied by
stepping over the child in the opposite direction."


NOTE-


Some of the .


1 Rev. J. H. Weeks, ‘‘ Customs of
the Lower Congo People,” /o/k-/ore,
xx. (1909) p. 474.

2 B. Gutmann, ‘‘Trauer und Begriib-
nissitten der Wadschagga,” Glodus,
Ixxxix. (1906) p. 199.

3 E. Aymonier, Voyage dans le Laos,
i. (Pacis, 1895) p. 144.

4 C, Lumholtz, Unknown Mexico
(London, 1903), i. 435

5 E. M. Curr, Zhe Australian Race,
i, 50.
* A, W. Howitt, Mative Tribes of
South-East Australia, p, 402.

7 Father Lambert, A/wurs et super-
stitions des Néo-Calédoniens, pp. 192 sq.

8 P, von Stenin, ‘‘Das Gewohn-
heitsrecht der Samojeden,” G/odus, Ix.
(1891) p. 173.

" J. Richardson, in Antananarivo
Annual and Madagascar Magasine,
Reprint of the First Four Numbers


(Antananarivo, 1885), p. 529; z., Re-
print of the Second Four Numbers (An-
tananarivo, 1896), p. 296; J.’ Sibree,
The Great African Island, p. 288; com-
pare De Flacourt, Wstotre de la grande
isle Madagascar (Paris, 1658), p. 99.

10 J. Mooney, ‘* Myths of the Chero-
kee,” Mineteenth Annual Report of the
Bureau of American Ethnolgoy, pt. i.
(Washington, 1900) p. 424.

1 H. A. Junod, ‘* Les Conceptions
physiologiques des Bantou sud - afri-
cains,” Revue a’Ethnographtie et de
Soctologie, i, (1910) p. 138, note %,

2 F, S. Krauss, Volksglaube und
religidser Brauch der Siidslaven, p. 52.

13 See L. F. Sauvé, Folk-lore des
Hautes- Vosges, p. 226, compare pp.
219 sg.; E. Monseur, Ze Folk-lore
Wallon, p. 39; A. Wuttke, Der
deutsche Volksaberglaube,? § 603; J.
W. Wolf, Bettrdge sur deutschen Mytho-


NOTE


lopte, 12 p. 208, § 42; J. A. E..
Kohler, Volksbrauch, etc., im Voigt-
lande, p. 423; A. Kuhn und W.
Schwartz, orddeutsche Sagen, Miér-
chen und Gebriuche, p. 462, § 461;
E. Krause, ‘‘ Abergliubische Kuren
und sonstiger Aberglaube in Berlin,”
Zeitschrift fiir Ethnologie, xv. (1883)
p. 85; RK. H. Kaindl, Die Huzulen,


NOT TO STEP OVER PERSONS AND THINGS


425


p- 53 J. V. Grohmann, Aderglauben
und Gebriuche aus Bihmen und Mah-
ren, p. 109, §§ 798, 799; Eijiib Abéla,
‘* Beitrage zur Kenntniss aberglau-
bischer Gebrauche in Syrien,” Zezt-
schrift des deutschen Paldstina-Ver-
eins, vii. (1884) p. 81; compare B,
Chemali, ‘* Naissance et premier Age au
Liban,” Anthrofos, v. (1910) p. 741.


aw


INDEX


Abdication of kings in favour of their
infant children, 19, 20

Abduction of souls by demons, 58 sgq.

Abipones, the, 328, 350; changes in
their language, 360

Abnormal mental states accounted in-
spiration, 248

Abortion, superstition as to woman who
has procured, 153

Absence and recall of the soul, 30 sgq.

Achilles, 261

Acts, tabooed, ror sq.

Adivi or forest Gollas, the, 149

Aetolians, the, 311

Africa, fetish kings in West, 22 sgg. ;
names of animals and things tabooed
in, 400 sg.

Agutainos, the, 144

Air, prohibition to be uncovered in the
open, 3, 14

Akamba, the, 204

Akikuyu, the, 175, 204, 286; auricular
confession among the, 214

Albanians of the Caucasus, 349

Alberti, L., 220

Alcmena and Hercules, 298 sg.

Alfoors of Celebes, 33; of Minahassa,
63 Sq.

Amboyna, 87, 105

Amenophis III., his birth represented
on the monuments, 28

American Indians, their fear of naming
the dead, 351 sg¢.

Ammon, Hanun, King of, 273

Amoy, 59

Amulets, knots used as, 306 sgq. ; rings
as, 314 59g.

Ancestors, names of, bestowed on their
reincarnations, 368 sg.; reborn in
their descendants, 368 sg.

Ancestral spirits cause sickness, 53;
sacrifices to, 104

Andaman Islanders, 183 7.

Andania, mysteries of, 227 x.

Angakok, Esquimaux wizard or sorcerer,
air, /9I2


427


Angoni, the, 174

Animals injured through their shadows,
81 sg. ; propitiation of spirits of slain,
190, 204 sg.; atonement for slain,
207; dangerous, not called by their
proper names, 396 sgg.; thought to
understand human speech, 398 sg., 400

Animism passing into religion, 213

Anklets as amulets, 315

Annamites, the, 235

Anointment of priests at installation, 14

Antambahoaka, the, 216

Ants, bites of, used in purificatory
ceremony, 105

Apaches, the, 182, 184, 325, 328

Apollo, purification of, 223 .!

Apuleius, 270

Arab mode of cursing an enemy, 312

Arabs of Moab, 273, 280

Araucanians, the, 97, 324

Ares, men sacred to, 111

Arikaras, the, 161

Aristeas of Proconnesus, 34

Army under arms, prohibition to see, 13

Arrows to keep off death, 31

Aru Islands, 37, 276

Arunta, their belief as to the ghosts of
the slain, 177 sg. ; ceremonies at the
end of mourning among the, 373 s¢.

Arval Brothers, 226

Aryans, the primitive, their theory of
personal names, 319

Ashes strewn on the head, 112

Ash-tree, parings of nails buried under
an, 276

Assam, taboos observed by headmen
in, 11; hill tribes of, 323

Astarte at Hierapolis, 286

Aston, W. G., 2 2.?

Astrolabe Bay, 289

Athens, kings at, 21 sg. ; ritual of cursing
at, 75

Atonement for slain animals, 207

Attiuoindarons, the, 366

Atua, ancestral spirit, 134, 265

Augur’s staff at Rome, 313


428


Auricular confession, 214

Aurohuaca Indians, 215

Australian aborigines; their conception
of the soul, 27; personal names kept
secret among the, 320 sgg. ; their fear
of naming the dead, 349 sgg.

Aversion of spirits and fairies to iron,
229, 232 sg.

Avoidance of common words to deceive
spirits or other beings, 416 sgg¢.

Aymara Indians, the, 97

Aztecs, the, 249; their priests, 259


Babylonian witches and wizards, 302

Bad Country, the, 109

Badham, Dr., 156 2.

Baduwis, the, of Java, 115 sg., 232

Bag, souls collected in a, 63 sg.

Baganda, the, 78, 87

fishermen, taboos observed by,
194 sg. See also Uganda

Bagba, a fetish, 5

Bageshu, the, 174

Bagobos, the, 31, 315, 323

Bahima, the, 183 z.; names of their
dead kings not mentioned, 375

Bahnars of Cochin-China, 52, 58

Baking continence observed at, 201

Balder, Norse god, 305 2.1

Ba-Lua, the, 330

Banana-trees, fruit-bearing, hair deposited
under, 286

Bandages to prevent the escape of the
soul, 32, 71

Bangala, the, 195 sg., 330

Bangkok, 90

Baoules, the, 70

Ba-Pedi, the,-141, 153, 163, 202

Baron, R., 380

Baronga, the, 272

Basagala, the, 361

Basket, souls gathered into a, 72

Bastian, A., 252, 253

Basutos, burial custom of the, 107 ; puri-
fication of warriors among the, 172

Bathing (washing) as a ceremonial puri-
fication, 141, 142, 150, 153, 168, 169,
172, 173, 175, 179, 183, 192, 198,
219, 220, 222, 285, 286

Ba-Thonga, the, 141, 154, 163, 202

Battas or Bataks of Sumatra, 34, 45, 46,
65, 116, 296

Bavili, the, 78

Bawenda, the, 243

Bayazid, the Sultan, and his soul, so

Beans, prohibition to touch or name,
13 5g.

Bear, the polar, taboos concerning, 209 ;
customs observed by Lapps after
killing a, aax

Bears not to be called by their proper
NAMES, 397 $+» 399, 402


INDEX


Bechuanas, purification of manslayers
among the, 172 sg., 174
Bed, feet of, smeared with mud, 14)
prohibition to sleep in a, 194 i
Beef and milk not to be eaten at the —
same meal, 292
Beer, continence observed at brewing,
200 ty:
Bells as talismans, 235
Benin, kings of, 123, 243
Bentley, R., 33 2.8
Besisis, the, 87


Beveridge, P., 363 sg.


Bird, soul conceived as a, 33 5¢qs 4
Birds, ghosts of slain as, 177 sg. ; cause


headache through clipped hair, 270 sg.,


282

Birth from a golden image, pretence
of, 113; premature, 213.
carriage

Bismarck Archipelago, 128 a

Bites of ants used as purificatory cere
mony, 105

Blackening faces of warriors, 163; of
manslayers, 169, 178, 181

Blackfoot Indians, 159 z.


Black Mountain of southern France,


42

ox or black ram in magic, 154 i

Bladders, annual festival of, among the ©
Esquimaux, 206 sg., 228

‘«Blessers ” or sacred kings, 125 2.

Blood put on doorposts, 15; of slain,


supposed effect of it on the slayer,


169; smeared on person as a purifica-
tion, 104, 115, 219; drawn from
bodies of manslayers, 176,
tabooed, 239 sgg. ; not eaten, 240 5¢.;
soul in the, 240, 241, 247, 250; of


game poured out, 241; royal, not to —


be shed on the ground, 241 sgg. ; un-
willingness to shed, 243, 246 sg. ;
received on bodies of kinsfolk, 244 —


sg.; drops of, effaced, 245 sg.; horror


of, 245; of chief sacred, 248; of ~
women, dread of, 250 sg. _ a
—— of childbirth, supposed dangerous
infection of, 152 sgg.; received on
heads of friends or slaves, 245
—— -lickers, 246 g
Blowing upon knots, as a charm, 302,
304 a
Boa-constrictor, purification of man who
has killed a, 221 sg. a
Boars, wild, not to be called by their
proper names, 411, 415 f ;
Boas, Dr. Franz, 210 sgq., 214
Bodia or Bodio, a West African pontiff
or fetish king, 14 5g., 23 j
Bodies, souls transferred to other, 49
Bodos, the, of Assam, 285
Boiled flesh tabooed, 185


See Mis- —


180;


INDEX


Bolang Mongondo, a district n Celebes,
53> 279, 341

Bonds, no man in bonds allowed in
priest’s house, 14

Bones of human bodies which have been
eatea, special treatment of, 189 sg. ;
of the dead, their treatment after the
decay of the flesh, 372 2.5; of dead
disinterred and scraped, 373 2.

Boobies, the, 8 sg.

Born again, pretence of being, 113

Bornu, Sultan of, 120

Bororos, the, 34, 36

Bourke, Captain J. G., 184

Box, strayed soul caught in, 45, 70, 76

Bracelets as amulets, 315

Brahman student, his cut hair and nails,


277 E
Brahmans, their common and _ secret
names, 322


Branches used in exorcism, 109

Breath of chief sacred, 136, 256

Breathing on a person as a mode of
purification, 149

Brewing, continence observed at, 200,
201 Sg.

Bribri Indians, their ideas as to the un-
cleanness of women, 147, 149

Bride and bridegrooms, all knots on their
garments unloosed, 299 sg.

Bronze employed in expiatory rites,
226 2.8; priests to be shaved with,
226

—— knife to cut priest’s hair, 14

Brother and sister not allowed to men-
tion each other's names, 344

Brothers-in-law, their names not to be
pronounced, 338, 342, 343, 344, 345

Buddha, Footprint of, 275

Building shadows into foundations, 89 sg.

Bukuru, unclean, 147

Bulgarian building custom, 89

Burghead, 230

Burial under a running stream, 15

—— customs to prevent the escape of
the soul, 51, 52

Burials, customs as to shadows at, 80 sg.

Burma, kings of, 375

Burmese conception of the soul as a
butterfly, 51 sg.

Burning cut hair and nails to prevent
them being used in sorcery, 281 sgg.
Buryat shaman, his mode of recovering

lost souls, 56 sg.

Butterfly, the soul as a, 29 ~.}, 41, 51 5g.


Cacongo, King of, 115, 118
Caffre customs at circumcision, 156 sg.
Caffres, ‘‘ women’s speech’ among the,


335 Sg.
Calabar, fetish king at, 22 sg.
Calabashes, souls shut up in, 72


429


Calchaquis Indians, 3

Californian Indians, 352

Cambodia, kings of, 376

Camden, W., 68

Campbell, J., 384

Camphor, special language employed by
searchers for, 405 sq.

Canelos Indians, 97

Cannibalism at hair-cutting, 264

Cannibals, taboos imposed on, among
the Kwakiutl, 188 sgq.

Canoe, fish offered to, 195

Canoes, continence observed at building,


202

Captives killed and eaten, 179 sg.

Carayahis, the, 348

Caribou, taboos concerning, 208

Caribs, difference of language between
men and women among the, 348

Caroline Islands, 25, 193, 299, 293

Caron's Account of Japan, 4.”

Carrier Indians, 215, 367

Catat, Dr., 98

Catlin, G., 182

Cats with stumpy tails, reason of, 128
SY

Cattle, continence observed for sake of,
204; protected against wolves by
charms, 307

Caul-fat extracted by Australian enemies,
393

‘* Cauld airn,” 233

Cazembes, the, 132

Celebes, 32, 33, 35; hooking souls in,


30

Celibacy of holy milkmen, 15, 16

Ceremonial purity observed in war, 157

Ceremonies at the reception of strangers,
102 sgg. ; at entering a strange land,
109 sgg. ; purificatory, on return from
a journey, 111 sgg.; observed after
slaughter of panthers, lions, bears,
serpents, etc., 219 sgy.; at hair-
cutting, 264 sg.

Cetchwayo, King, 377

Chams, the, 202, 297

Change of language caused by taboo on
the names of the dead, 358 sgg., 375;
caused by taboo on names of oe
and kings, 375, 376 sg@.

—— of names to deceive ghosts, 3 F
599.

Charms to facilitate childbirth, 295 sg.

Chastity. See Continence

Chegilla, taboo, 137

Cheremiss, the, 391

Cherokee sorcery with spittle, 287 sg.

Chiefs, foods tabooed to, 291, 292;
names of, tabooed, 376 s¢g., 378 s¢.,
381, 382

—— and kings tabooed, 131 sg.

—— sacred, not allowed to leave their


430


enclosures, 124; regarded as danger-
ous, 138

Child and father, supposed danger of
resemblance between, 88 sg.

Child’s nails bitten off, 262

Childbed, taboos imposed_on women in,


147 59g. : :
Childbirth, precautions taken with
mother at, 32, 33; women tabooed


at, 147 sgg. ; confession of sins as a
means of expediting, 216 sg. ; women
after, their hair shaved and burnt, 284;
homoeopathic magic to facilitate, 295
sqgg.; knots untied at, 294, 296 sg.,
297 Sq.
Children, young, tabooed, 262, 283;
parents named after their, 331 sgg.
Chiloe, Indians of, 287, 324
China, custom at funerals in, 80; Em-
peror of, 125, 375 sg.
Chitomé or Chitombé, a pontiff of Congo,
§ 59-1 7
Chittagong, 297
Choctaws, the, 181
Chuckchees, the, 358
Circumcision customs among the Caffres,
156 sg.; performed with flints, not
iron, 227; in Australia, 244
Circumlocutions adopted to avoid naming
the dead, 350, 351, 354, 355; em-
ployed by reapers, 412
Cities, guardian deities of, evoked by
enemies, 391
Clasping of hands forbidden, 298
Clavie, the, at Burghead, 229 sg.
Cleanliness fostered by ‘superstition,
130 ; perscnet, observed in war, 157,
I 58 a
Clippings of hair, magic wrought through,
268 sgq., 275, 277, 278 sg.
Clotaire, 259
Clothes of sacred persons tabooed, 131
Cloths used to catch souls, 46, 47, 48,
52, 53, 64, 67, 75 Sg.
Clotilde, Queen, 259
Cobra, ceremonies after killing a, 222 sg.
Coco-nut oil made by chaste women, 201
Codjour, a priestly king, 132 2.1
Coins, portraits of kings not stamped on,
~ 98 sq.
Comanches, the, 360
Combing the hair forbidden, 187, 203,
208, 264; thought to cause storms,
271
Combs of sacred persons, 256
Common objects, names of, changed
when they are the names of the dead,
358 s99., 375, or the names of chiefs
and kings, 375, 376 s¢¢.
—— words tabooed, 392 sg¢.
Concealment of miscarriage in childbed,


supposed effects of, 152 sq¢.


INDEX


Concealment of personal names from
fear of magic, 320 sgg¢.
Conciliating the spirits of the land, r10 sg.
Conduct, standard of, shifted from
natural to supernatural basis, 213 sg.
Confession of sins, 114, I9I, 195, 211
Sg., 214 sgg.; originally a magical
ceremony, 217
Connaught, kings of, 11 sg.
Consummation of marriage prevented by
knots and locks, 299 sgq.
Contagious magic, 246, 268, 272
Continence enjoined on people during
the rounds of sacred pontiff, 5; of
Zapotec priests, 6; of priests, 159 7.
—— observed on eve of period of taboo,
11; by those who have handled the
dead, 142; during war, 157, 158 z.},


161, 163, 164, 165; after victory, 166 i


Sgq., 175, 178, 179, 181; by canni-
bals, 188 ; by fishers and hunters, 191,
192, 193, 194, 195, 196, 197, 198,
207; by workers in salt- pans, 200;
at brewing beer, wine, and poison,
200 Sg., 201 Sg. ; at baking, 201; at
making coco-nut oil, 201; at building
canoes, 202; at house-building, 202 ;
at making or repairing dams, 202 ; on
trading voyages, 203; after festivals,
204; on journeys, 204; while cattle
are at pasture, 204; by lion-killers
and _ bear-killers, 220, 221; before
handling holy relics, 272; by tabooed
men, 293

Cooking, taboos as to, 147 sg., 156,
165, 169, 178, 185, 193, 194, 198,
209, 221, 256

Coptic church, 235, 310 #.°

Cords, knotted, in magic, 302, 303 sg.

Corea, clipped hair burned in, 283

kings of, 125; not to be touched
with iron, 226

Corpses, knots not allowed about, 310

Cousins, male and female, not allowed
to mention each other’s names, 344

Covenant, spittle uSed in making a, 290

Covering up mirrors at a death, 94 sg.

Cow bewitched, 93

Cowboy of the king of Unyoro, 159 .

Creek Indians, the, 156; their war cus:
toms, 161

Crevaux, J., 105

Criminals shaved as a mode of purifica-
tion, 287

Crocodiles not called by their proper
names, 403, 410, 411, 415 sg.

Crossing of legs forbidden, 295, 298 sq.

Crown, imperial, as palladium, 4

Crystals used in divination, 56

Curr, E. M., 320 sg.

Cursing at Athens, ritual of, 75

—— an enemy, Arab mode of, 312


INDEX


Curtains to conceal kings, 120 sg.

Cut hair and nails, disposal of, 267 sg.

Cuts made in the body as a mode of ex-
pelling demons or ghosts, 106 sg. ; in
bodies of mansiayers, 174, 176, 180;
in bodies of slain, 176. See also In-
cisions

Cutting the hair a purificatory ceremony,
283 sgq.

Cynaetha, people of, 188
Cyzicus, council chamber at, 230


Dacotas, the, 181

Dahomey, the King of, 9; royal family
of, 243; kings of, their ‘‘strong
names,” 374

Dairi, the, or Mikado of Japan, 2, 4

Dairies, sacred, of the Todas, 15 sgg.

Dairymen, sacred, of the Todas, 15 sq.

Damaras, the, 247

Dams, continence at making or repair-
ing, 202

Dance of king, 123 ; of successful head-
hunters, 166

Dances of victory, 169, 170, 178, 182

Danger of being overshadowed by certain
birds or people, 82 sg. ; supposed, of
portraits and photographs, 96 sgg. ;
supposed to attend contact with divine
or sacred persons, such as chiefs and
kings, 132, 138

Darfur, 81; Sultan of, 120

Dassera, festival of the, 316

Daughter-in-law, her name not to be
pronounced, 338

David and the King of Moab, 273

Dawson, J., 347 5g.

Dead, sacrifices to the, 15, 88; taboos
on persons who have handled the, 138
sqgg. ; souls of the dead all malignant,
145; names of the dead tabooed, 349
sgg.; to name the dead a serious
crime, 352; names of the dead not
borne by the living, 354; reincarna-
tion or resurrection of the dead in
their namesakes, 365 sgg.; festivals
of the, 367, 371

body, prohibition to touch, 14

Death, natural, of sacred king or priest,
supposed fatal consequences of, 6, 7;
kept off by arrows, 31; mourners
forbidden to sleep in house after a
death, 37; custom of covering up
mirrors at a, 94 sg.; from imagina-
tion, 135 sgg.

Debt of civilisation to savagery, 421 sg.

Defiled hands, 174. See Hands

De Groot, J. J. M., 390

Demons, abduction of souls by, 58 sgg. ;
of disease expelled by pungent spices,
pricks, and cuts, 105 sg. ; and ghosts
averse to iron, 232 sg.


431


Devils, abduction of souls by, 58 sgg.
Dido, her magical rites, 312
Diet of kings and priests regulated, 291


599-

Dieterich, A., 369 7.°

Difference of Janguage between husbands
and wives, 347 sg. ; between men and
women, 348 sg.

Diminution of shadow regarded with
apprehension, 86 sg.

Dio Chrysostom, on fame as a shadow,
86 sg.

Diodorus Siculus, 12 sg.

Dionysus in the city, festival of, 316

Disease, demons of, expelled by pungent
spices, pricks, and cuts, 105 s¢.

Disenchanting strangers, various modes
of, 102 sgg.

Dishes, effect of eating out of sacred, 4;
of sacred persons tabooed, 131. See
Vessels

Disposal of cut hair and nails, 267
59d:

Divination by shoulder-blades of sheep,
229

Divinities, human, bound by many rules,
419 sg.

Divorce of spiritual from temporal power,
17 S99.

Dobrizhoffer, Father M., 328, 360

Dog, prohibition to touch or name, 13

Dogs, bones of game kept from, 206;
unclean, 206 ; tigers called, 402

Dolls or puppets employed for the restora-
tion of souls to their bodies, 53 sg¢.,
62 sg.

Geceenety blood put on, 15

Doors opened to facilitate childbirth,
296, 297; to facilitate death, 309

Doubles, spiritual, of men and animals,
28 sg.

Doutté, E., 390

Dreams, absence of soul in, 36 sg¢. ;
belief of savages in the reality of, 36
sg. ; omens drawn from, 161

Drinking and eating, taboos on, 116
sgg. ; modes of drinking for tabooed
persons, 117 sgg., 120, 143, 146, 147,
148, 160, 182, 183, 185, 189, 197,
198, 256

Drought supposed to be caused by a
concealed miscarriage, 153 sg.

Dugong fishing, taboos in connexion
with, 192

Dyaks, the Sea, 30; their modes of
recalling the soul, 47 sg., 52 5g., 55
sg., 60, 67; taboos observed by head-
hunters among the, 166 sg.


Eagle, soul in form of, 34
-hunters, taboos observed by, 198


5g.


432


Eagle-wood, special language employed
by searchers for, 404

Eating out of sacred vessels, supposed
effect of, 4

and drinking, taboos on, 116 sgg. ;

fear of being seen in the act of, 117


599.

Eggs offered to demons, 110; reason
for breaking shells of, 129 sg.

Egypt, rules of life observed by ancient
kings of, 12 sg.

Egyptian magicians, their power of com-
pelling the deities, 389 sg.

Egyptians, the ancient, their conception
of the soul, 28; their practice as to
souls of the dead, 68 sg. ; personal
names among, 322

Elder brother, his name not to be pro-
nounced, 341

Elder-tree, cut hair and nails inserted in
an, 275 sg.

Elephant-hunters, special language em-
ployed by, 404

Eleusinian priests, their names sacred,
382 sq.

Elfin race averse to iron, 232 sg.

Emetic as mode of purification, 175,
245; pretended, in auricular confes-
sion, 214

Emin Pasha, 108

Epidemics attributed to evil spirits, 30

Epimenides, the Cretan seer, 50 .?

Esquimaux, their conception of the soul,
27; their dread of being photo-
graphed, 96; or Inuit, taboos ob-
served by hunters among the, 205 sq. ;
namesakes of the dead among the, 371

Esthonians, the, 41 sg., 240

Ethical evolution, 218 sg.

—— precepts developed out of savage
taboos, 214

Ethiopia, kings of, 124

Euphemisms employed for certain
animals, 397 sgg. ; for smallpox, 400,
410, 411, 416

Europe, south-eastern, superstitions as
to shadows in, 89 sg.

Evil eye, the, 116 sg.

Ewe-speaking peoples of the Slave Coast,
9; rebirth of ancestors among the, 369

Execution, peculiar modes of, for mem-
bers of royal families, 241 sgq.

Executioners, customs observed by, 171
5q., 180 sq.

Exorcising harmful influence of strangers,
102 $qq.

Eye, the evil, 116 sg.

Eyeos, the, 9


Faces veiled to avert evil influences, 120
sqq.; of warriors blackened, 163; of
manslayers blackened, 169


INDEX


Fady, taboo, 327

Fafnir and Sigurd, 324

Fairies averse to iron, 229, 232 sq.

Fasting, custom of, 157 7.2, 159 2., 161,
162, 163, 182, 183, 119, 198, 199 5

Father and child, supposed danger of _
resemblance between, 88 sg. j

and mother, their names not to be
mentioned, 337, 341

—— in-law, his name not to be pro-
nounced by his daughter-in-law, 335
$99-» 343, 345, 346; by his son-in-law,
338, 339, 349 341, 342, 343, 344

Fathers named after their children, 331
59q-

Faunus, consultation of, 314

Feast of Yams, 123

— worn by manslayers, 180, 186
n.

Feet, not towet the, 159. See also Foot


Fernando Po, taboos observed by the a


kings of, 8 sg., 115, 123, 291
Festival of the Dead among the Hurons,
367
Fetish or taboo rajah, 24
kings in West Africa, 22 sgg.
Fever, euphemism for, 400
‘Field speech,” a special jargon em-
ployed by reapers, 410 sg., 411 sg.
Fiji, catching away souls in, 69; War
King and Sacred King in, 21; custom
as to remains of food in, 117 a
Fijian chief, supposed effect of using his _
dishes or clothes, 131 4
conception of the soul, 29 sg., 92
custom of frightening away ghosts,
170


dreams, 39 5g.
Fingers cut off as a sacrifice, 161
Finnish hunters, 398 g
Fire, rule as to removing fire from priest's
house, 13; prohibition to blow the


fire with the breath, 136, 256; in S


purificatory rites, 108, 109, 111, 114,

197; tabooed, 178, 182, 256 sq. ;

new, made by friction, 286

and Water, kingships of, 17

Firefly, soul in form of, 67

First-fruits, offering of, 5

Fish - traps,
making, 202

Fishermen, words tabooed by, 394 59g.,
396, 408 sg., 415

Fishers and hunters tabooed, 190 sg. :


Fison, Rev. Lorimer, 30 #1, 40 #3, _


92 2.3, 131 2.”
Fits and convulsions set down to demons,


59

Flamen Dialis, taboos observed by the,
13 57-, 239, 248, 257, 275, 291, 293,
315 5g.


notion of absence of the soul in


continence observed at


INDEX


Flaminica, rules observed by the, 14

Flannan Islands, 392

Flesh, boiled, not to be eaten by tabooed
persons, 185; diet restricted or for-
bidden, 291 sgg.

Flints, not iron, cuts to be made with,
176 ; use of, prescribed in ritual, 176;
sharp, circumcision performed with,


227

Fly, soul in form of, 39

Food, remnants of, buried as a precau-
tion against sorcery, 118, I19, 127
sg., 129; magic wrought by means of
refuse of, 126 sgg. ; taboos on leaving
food over, 127 sgq. ; not to be touched
with hands, 138 sgg., 146 sgg., 166,
167, 168, 169, 174, 203, 265; objec-
tion to have food over head, 256,
257

Foods tabooed, 291 sgg.

Foot, custom of going with only one foot
shod, 311 sgg. See also Feet

Footprint in magic, 74; of Buddha, 275

Forgetfulness, pretence of, 189

Forks used in eating by tabooed persons,
148, 168, 169, 203

Fors, the, of Central Africa, 281

Foundation sacrifices, 89 sgg.

Fowl used in exorcism, 106

Fowlers, words tabooed by, 393, 407 sg.

Foxes not to be mentioned by their
proper names, 396, 397

Frankish kings, their unshorn hair, 258


Sq.

Fresh meat tabooed, 143

Fumigation as a mode of ceremonial
purification, 155, 177


Funerals in China, custom as to shadows


at, 80. See a/so Burial, Burials


Furfo, 230


Gabriel, the archangel, 302, 303

Gangas, fetish priests, 291

Garments, effect of wearing sacred, 4

Gates, sacrifice of human beings at
foundations of, go sg. ;

Gatschet, A. S., 363

Gauntlet, running the, 222

Genitals of murdered people eaten,
190 2.

Getae, priestly kings of the, 21

Ghost of husband kept from his widow,
143; fear of evoking the ghost by
mentioning his name, 349 sgg.; chased
into the grave at the end of mourning,
373 59.

Ghosts, sacrifices to, 56, 247; draw
away the souls of their kinsfolk, 51
sqq. ; draw out men’s shadows, 80;
as guardians of gates, 90 sy. ; kept
off by thorns, 142 ; and demons averse
to iron, 232 sgg.; fear of wounding,


PT. If


433


237 Sg. ; Swept out of house, 238;
names changed in order to deceive
ghosts or to avoid attracting their
attention, 354 sgq.

Ghosts of animals, dread of, 223

—— of the slain haunt their slayers, 165
sqq.; fear of the, 165 sgg. ; sacrifices
to, 166; scaring away the, 168, 170,
171, 172, 174 sg. ; as birds, 177 sg.

Gilyaks, the, 370

Ginger in purificatory rites, 105, 151

Gingiro, kingdom of, 18

Girls at puberty obliged to touch every-
thing in house, 225 ”.; their hair torn
out, 284

Goajiro Indians, 30, 350

Goat, prohibition to touch or name, 13 ;
transference of guilt to, 214 sg.

——- -sucker, shadow of the, 82

God, ‘‘ the most great name” of, 390

—— -man a source of danger, 132;
bound by many rules, 419 sg.

Gods, their names tabooed, 387 sg. ;
Xenophanes on the, 387; human,
bound by many rules, 419 sg. See
also Myths

Soke excluded from some temples, 226
2.

——- and silver as totems, 227 2.

—— mines, spirits of the, treated with
deference, 409 sg.

Goldie, H., 22

Gollas, the, 149

Good Friday, 229

Goorkhas, the, 316

Gordian knot, 316 sg.

Gran Chaco, Indians of the, 37, 38, 357

Grandfathers, grandsons named after
their deceased, 370

Grandidier, A., 380 sg.

Grandmothers, granddaughters named
after their deceased, 370

Grass knotted as a charm, 305, 310

Grave, soul fetched from, 54

-clothes, no knots in, 310

—— -diggers, taboos observed by, 141,
142

Graves, food offered on, 53; water
poured on, as a rain-charm, 154 sg.

Great Spirit, sacrifice of fingers to the,
161

Grebo people of Sierra Leone, 14

Greek conception of the soul, 29 #.!

customs as to manslayers, 188

Grey, Sir George, 364 sg.

Grihya-Sitras, 277

Grimm, J., 305 7.1

Ground, prohibition to touch the, 3,
4, 6; not to sit on the, 159, 162,
163; not to set foot on, 180; royal
blood not to be shed on the, 241 sgg.

Guardian deities of cities, 391


2F


434


Guaycurus, the, 357
Guiana, Indians of, 324
Gypsy superstition about portraits, 100


Haida medicine-men, 31

Hair, mode of cutting the Mikado's, 3;
cut with bronze knife,.14; of man-
slayers shaved, 175, 176; of slain
enemy, fetish made from, 183; not to
be combed, 187, 203, 208, 264;
tabooed, 258 sgg. ; of kings, priests,
and wizards unshorn, 258 sgg. ; re-
garded as the seat of a god or spirit,
258, 259, 263; kept unshorn at cer-
tain times, 260 sgg. ; offered to rivers,
261 ; of children unshorn, 263 ; magic
wrought through clippings of, 268
Sqg-, 275, 277, 278 sg.; cut or
combed out may cause rain and
thunderstorms, 271, 272, 282; clip-
pings of, used as hostages, 272 sg. ;
infected by virus of taboo, 283 sg. ;
cut as a purificatory ceremony, 283
sqq. ; of women after childbirth shaved
and burnt, 284; loosened at child-
birth, 297 sg. ; loosened in magical
and religious ceremonies, 310 sg.

and nails of sacred persons not cut,

3» 4, 16

and nails, cut, disposal of, 267
sqqg.; deposited on or under trees,
14, 275 sy., 286; deposited in sacred
places, 274 sgg. ; stowed away in any
secret place, 276 sgg.; kept for use at
the resurrection, 279 sgg.; burnt to
prevent them from falling into the
hands of sorcerers, 281 5979.

—— -cutting, ceremonies at, 264 sgq.

Hands tabooed, 138, 140 sgq., 146 5gq.,
158, 159 2., 265; food not to be
touched with, 138 sgy., 146 sgg., 166,
167, 168, 169, 174, 265; defiled,
174; not to be clasped, 298

Hanun, King of Moab, 273

Hawaii, 72, 106; customs as to chiefs
and shadows in, 255

Head, stray souls restored to, 47, 48,
52, 53 sg-, 64, 67; prohibition to
touch the, 142, 183, 189, 252 5g.,
254, 255 sg.; plastered with mud,
182; the human, regarded as sacred,
252 sgg.; tabooed, 252 sgg.; sup-

to be the residence of spirits,

252; objection to have any one over-
head, 253 sgg. ; washing the, 253

—— -hunters, customs of, 30, 36, 71
Sq. 111, 166 57., 169 5g.

Headache caused by clipped hair, 270
5q., 282

Heads of manslayers shaved, 177

Hearne, S., quoted, 184 sgq.

Hebesio, god of thunder, 257


INDEX


Hercules and Alemena, 298 sg. ‘a
Herero, the, 151, 177, 225 7. a mS
Hermotimus of Clazomenae, 50 ‘aan
Hidatsa Indians, taboos observed fl p

eagle-hunters among the, 198 sq.
Hierapolis, temple of Astarte at, 286
Hiro, thief-god, 69 Be
Historical tradition hampered by the ~

taboo on the names of the dead, 363 =m

599-


by savages, 224
Hollis, A. C., 200 2.3 /
Holy water, sprinkling with, 285 sg.
Homicides. See Manslayers i:
Homoeopathic magic, 151, 152, 207,
295, 298
Honey-wine, continence observed at
brewing, 200
Hooks to catch souls, 30 sg., 51 9
Horse, prohibition to see a, 9; prohibi- —
tion to ride, 13 .
Hos of Togoland, the, 295, 301 a
Hostages, clipped hair used as, 272 sg.
Hottentots, the, 220 ia
House, ceremony at entering a new,
63 sg.; taboos on quitting the, 122


59.
building, custom as to shadows at, _
81, 89 sg.; continence observed at,
202 a
Howitt, A. W., 269
Huichol Indians, 197 4
Human gods bound by many rules, 419 _
Sg. a
—— sacrifices at foundation of build-—
ings, 90 sg. “a
Humbe, a kingdom of Angola, 6 4
Hunters use knots as charms, 306; —
words tabooed by, 396, 398, 399, 400, —
402, 404, 410
and fishers tabooed, 190 sgg.
Hurons, the, 366; their conception of
the soul, 27; their Festival of the
Dead, 367 ,
Husband's ghost kept from aaa) ‘
143


wife, 335, 336, 337, 338, 339
Husbands and wives, difference of lan


guage between, 347 sq.
Huzuls, the, 270, 314


Ilocanes of Luzon, 44

Imagination, death from, 135 sgg.

Imitative or homoeopathic magic, 295

Impurity of manslayers, 167

Incas of Peru, 279

Incisions made in bodies of warriors as .
a preparation for war, 161; in bodies 4
of slain, 176; in bodies of mansiayere
174, 176, 180. See also Cuts 3


INDEX


Incontinence of young people supposed
to be fatal to the king, 6

India, names of animals tabooed in,
40Ol Sgq.

Indians of North America, their customs
on the war-path, 158 sgg.; their fear
of naming the dead, 351 s¢¢.

Infants tabooed, 255

Infection, supposed, of lying-in women,
150 sgg.

Infidelity of wife supposed to be fatal to
hunter, 197

Initiation, custom of covering the mouth
after, 122; taboos observed by novices
at, 141 sg., 156 sg.; new names given
at, 320

Injury to a man’s shadow conceived as
an injury to the man, 78 sgg.

Inspiration, primitive theory of, 248

Intercourse with wives enjoined before
war, 1647.1; enjoined on manslayers,
176. See also Continence

Intoxication accounted inspiration, 248,
249, 250

Inuit, See Esquimaux

Ireland, taboos observed by the ancient
kings of, 11 sg.

Irish custom as to a fall, 68; as to
friends’ blood, 244 sg.

Iron not to be touched, 167; tabooed,
176, 225 sgg.; used as a charm
against spirits, 232 sg.

—— instruments, use of, tabooed, 205,
206

rings as talismans, 235

Troquois, the, 352, 385

Isis and Ra, 387 sgg.

Israelites, rules of ceremonial purity
observed by the Israelites in war, 157
SG. 177

Issini, the, 171

Itonamas, the, 31

Ivy, prohibition to touch or name, 13 sy.


Ja-Luo, the, 79

Jackals, tigers called, 402, 403

Jackson, Professor Henry, 21 2.3

Japan, the Mikado of, 2 sgg. ; Kaempfer's

history of, 3 2.2; Caron’s account of,

4”.

Jars, souls conjured into, 70

Jason and Pelias, 311 sg.

Java, 34, 35

Jebu, the king of, 121

Jewish hunters, their customs as to blood
of game, 241

Jinn, the servants of their magical
names, 390 .

Journey, purificatory ceremonies on
return from a, III sgg.; continence
observed on a, 204; hair kept unshorn
on a, 261


435


Jumping over wife or children as a
ceremony, 112, 164 7.}

Juno Lucina, 294

Junod, H. A., 152 sgg., 420 7.1

Jupiter Liber, temple of, at Furfo, 230


Ka, the ancient Egyptian, 28

Kachins of Burma, 200

Kaempfer’s History of Japan, 3 sq.

Kafirs of the Hindoo Koosh, 13 2.8,
14 2.2

Kaitish, the, 82, 295

Kalamba, the, a chief in the Congo
region, 114

Kami, the Japanese word for god, 2 n.?

Kamtchatkans, their attempts to deceive
mice, 399

Karaits, the, 95

Karen-nis of Burma, the, 13

Karens, the Red, of Burma, 292; their
recall of the soul, 43; their customs
at funerals, 51

Karo-Bataks, 52. See also Battas

Katikiro, the, of Uganda, 145 2.4

Kavirondo, 176

Kayans of Borneo, 32, 47, 110, 164, 239

Kei Islanders, 53

Kenyahs of Borneo, 43, 415

Key as symbol of delivery in childbed,
296

Keys as charms against devils and
ghosts, 234, 235, 236; as amulets,
308. See also Locks

Khonds, rebirth of ancestors among the,
368 sg.

Kickapoos, the, 171

Kidd, Dudley, 88 x.

King not to be overshadowed, 83

—— of the Night, 23

King's Evil, the, 134

Kings, supernatural powers attributed
to, 1; beaten before their coronation,
18; forbidden to see their mothers,
86; portraits of, not stamped on
coins, 98 sg.; guarded against the
magic of strangers, 114 sg. ; forbidden
to use foreign goods, 115; not to be
seen eating and drinking, 117 sgg. ;
concealed by curtains, 120 sg. ; for-
bidden to leave their palaces, 122 sgq. ;
compelled to dance, 123; punished
or put to death, 124; not to be
touched, 132, 225 sg. ; their hair un-
shorn, 258 sg. ; foods tabooed to, 291
5qg.; names of, tabooed, 374 sgg. ;
taboos observed by, identical with
those observed by commoners, 419 sg.

Kings and chiefs tabooed, 131 sgg.;
their spittle guarded against sorcerers,
289 sg.

fetish or religious, in West Africa,

22 sqg.


436


Kingsley, Miss Mary H., 22 2.°, 71,
123 2.2, 251

Kiowa Indians, 357, 360

Klallam Indians, the, 354

Knife as charm against spirits, 232, 233,
234, 235

Knives not to be left edge upwards, 238 ;
not used at funeral banquets, 238

Knot, the Gordian, 316 sq.

Knots, prohibition to wear, 13; untied
at childbirth, 294, 296 sg., 297 Sg. ;
thought to prevent the consummation
of marriage, 299 sgg.; thought to
cause sickness, disease, and all kinds
of misfortune, 301 sgg. ; used to cure
disease, 303 sgg. ; used to win a lover
or capture a runaway slave, 305 sg. ;
used as protective amulets, 306 sgg. ;
used as charms by hunters and travel-
lers, 306; as a charm to protect corn
from devils, 308 sg. ; on corpses un-
tied, 310

and locks, magical virtue of, 310,
313

—— and rings tabooed, 293 sgq.

Koita, the, 168

Koryak, the, 32

Kruijt, A. C., 319

Kublai Khan, 242

Kukulu, a priestly king, 5

Kwakiutl, the, 53; customs observed by
cannibals among the, 188 sgg. ; change
of names in summer and winter among
the, 386

Kwun, the spirit of the head, 252 ; sup-
posed to reside in the hair, 266 sg.


Lafitau, J. F., 365 sg.

Lampong in Sumatra, 10

Lamps to light the ghosts to their old
homes, 371

Language of husbands and wives, differ-
ence between, 347 sg.; of men and
women, difference between, 348 sg.

change of, caused by taboo on the

names of the dead, 358 sgg., 375;

caused by taboo on the names of chiefs

and kings, 375, 376 s99.

special, employed by hunters, 396,
398, 399, 400, 402, 404, 410 ; em-
ployed by searchers for eagle-wood
and /ignum aloes, 404; employed by
searchers for camphor, 405 sgg. ; em-
ployed by miners, 407, 409 ; employed
by reapers at harvest, 410 sg., 411
5g. ; employed by sailors at sea, 413
$9:

Laos, 306

Lapps, the, 294; their customs after
killing a bear, 2ar; rebirth of ances-
tors among the, 368

Latuka, the, 245


INDEX


Leaning against a tree prohieaas to
warriors, 162, 163 ;
Leavened bread, prohibition to to a
Leaving food over, taboos on, 126
Leavings of food, magic wrough
means of, 118, 119, 126 sgg.
Legs not to be crossed, 295, i 5g.
Leinster, kings of, rr
Leleen, the, 129
Lengua Indians of the Gran


357

Leonard, A. G., Major, 136 sg, _

Lesbos, building custom in, 89

Lewis, Rev. Thomas, 420 7.1

Life in the blood, 241, 250.

Limbs, amputated, kept by the
against the resurrection, 281 _

Lion-killer, purification of, 176, 22

Lions not called by their proper
400

Lithuanians, the old, their funeral
quets, 238

Liver, induration of the, attrib
touching sacred chief, 133

Lizard, soul in form of, 38

Loango, taboos observed by
8, 9; taboos observed by |
throne of, 291

—— king of, forbidden to see
man’s house, 115; not to
eating or drinking, 117 sg. ;
to his palace, 123; refuse of |
buried, 129

Locks calscked at childbirth, 294.
thought to prevent the consun
of marriage, 299; as amulets
309; unlocked to facilitate deat

and knots, magical virtue i
See also Keys

Lolos, the, 43

Look back, not to, 157

Loom, men not allowed to con a

Loss of the shadow regarded as omi
88

Lovers won by knots, 305

Lucan, 390

Lucian, 270, 382

Lucina, 294, 398 sg.

Lucky names, 391 #.!

Lycaeus, sanctuary of Zeus on Mount,

Lycosura, sanctuary of the Mistress a
227 n., 314 $

Lying-in women, dread of, 150 sg
sacred, 151 :


Mack, an adventurer, 19

Macusi Indians, 36, 159 #.

Madagascar, names of chiefs and ki
tabooed in, 378 sgg.

Magic wrought by means of refuse
food, 126 sgg.; sympathetic, 126, r


+ FA Re Ie aT Sree SP ed ee) Sy


pathic, 151, 152, 207, 295, 298; con-
us, 246, 268, 272; wrought


er name, 318, 320 s¢q.

: tian, their power of
1 coanpellings the deities, 389 sg.
“Mahafalys of Madagascar, the, 10


Malagas y language, dialectical variations
of, 378 5g., 380

Malanau tribes of Borneo, 406
if conception of the soul as a bird,


5qq.
forms of speech employed by,


./ fpurificasion, of, 165 sgy. ;
| 165 seg. ; tabooed, 165 sg¢.;
ghosts of slain, 165 sgg. ;


blackened, 169; their
» 175, 178, 179, 180,
hair shaved, 175, 177


c “their sanctity or taboo,
7. ; their heads sacred, 256
§ oe nt in the, 381


242, 243
nds, 288
J., quoted, 140
sea, special language em-
of 413 599.
esans, the, 31; their regard for
faaruetity of the head, 254 sy. ; their
customs as to the hair, 261 sg. ; their
dread of sorcery, 268
Marquesas Islands, 178
Marriage, the consummation of, pre-
vented by knots and locks, 299 sgg.
Masai, the, 200, 309, 329, 354 5g., 356,
361
Matthews, Dr. Washington, 385
Meal sprinkled to keep off evil spirits, 112
Measuring shadows, 89 sg.
—— -tape deified, 91 sg.
Mecca, pilgrims to, not allowed to wear
knots and rings, 293 sg.


INDEX


h clippings of hair, 268 sgg.,_
78 sg.; wrought on a man |


miners, fowlers, and fishermen,


Medes, law of the, 121

Mekeo district of New Guinea, 24

Men injured through their shadows,
78 sq.


_—— and women, difference of language


between, 348 sg.

Menedemus, 227

Menstruation, women tabooed at, 145

q.

ererdous women, dread of, 145 sgq.,
206 ; avoidance of, by hunters, 211

Mentras, the, 404

Merolla da Sorrento, 137

Mice thought to understand human
speech, 399; not to be called by their
proper names, 399, 415

Midas and his ass’s ears, 258 2.!;
of Gordium, 316 :

Mikado, rules of life of the, 2 sgg. ; sup-
posed effect of using his dishes or
clothes, 131; the cutting of his hair
and nails, 265

Mikados, their relations to the Tycoons,


; king


19

Miklucho-Maclay, Baron N. von, 10g

Milk, custom as to drinking, 119; pro-
hibition to drink, 141; not to be
drunk by wounded men, 174 sg. ;
wine called, 249 2.7; and beef not to
be eaten at the same meal, 292

Milkmen of the Todas, taboos observed
by the holy, 15 s¢g.

Miller, Hugh, 40

Minahassa, a district of Celebes, 99;
the Alfoors of, 63

Minangkabauers of Sumatra, 32, 36, 41

Miners, special language employed by,
4°97, 409

Mirrors, superstitions as to, 93 ; covered
after a death, 94 sg.

Miscarriage in childbed, dread of, 149,
152 sgg. ; supposed danger of conceal-

‘ing a, 211, 213

Moab, Arabs of, 280;
shaving prisoners, 273

Moabites, King David’s treatment of
the, 273 sg.

Mohammed bewitched by a Jew, 302 sg.

Mongols, their recall of the soul, 44;
sacred books of the, 384

Montezuma, 121

Monumbos, the, 169, 238

Mooney, J., 318 sgg.

Moguis, the, 228

Moral guilt regarded as a corporeal
pollution, 217 5g.

Morality developed out of taboo, 213 sg.;
shifted from a natural toa supernatural
basis, 213; survival of savage taboos
in civilised, 218 sg.

Morice, A. G., 146 sg.

Mosyni or Mosynoeci, the, 124


their custom of


438


Mother-in-law, the savage’s dread of his,
83 sgg.; her name not to be mentioned
by her son-in-law, 338, 339, 340, 341,
342, 343, 344, 345, 346

Mothers, African kings forbidden to see
their, 86 ; named after their children,
332, 333

Mourners, customs observed by, 31 5¢.,
159 2.; tabooed, 138 sgg.; bodies
of, smeared with mud or clay, 182 7.?;
hair and nails of, cut at end of
mourning, 285 sg.

Mourning of slayers for the slain, 181

Mouse, soul in form of, 37, 39 2.

Mouth closed to prevent escape of soul,
31, 33; soul in the, 33; covered to
prevent entrance of demons, etc., 122

Muata Jamwo, the, 118, 290

Mud smeared on feet of bed,
plastered on head, 182

Munster, kings of, 11

Murderers, taboos imposed on, 187 sg.

Murrams, the, of Manipur, 292

Muysca Indians, r2t

Myths of gods and spirits to be told only
in spring and summer, 384; to be
told only in winter, 385 sg. ; not to
be told by day, 384 sg.


14;


Nails, prohibition to cut finger-nails,
194; of children not pared, 262 sg.
and hair, cut, disposal of, 267 sgq.;
deposited in sacred places, 274 sgg. ;
stowed away in any secret place, 276
sqq. ; kept for use at the resurrection,
279 sgg. ; burnt to prevent them from
falling into the hands of sorcerers,

281 sqq.
Nails, iron, used as charms against fairies,
demons, and ghosts, 233, 234, 236
—— parings of, used in rain-charms,
271, 272; swallowed by treaty-
makers, 246, 274

Name, the personal, regarded as a vital
part of the man, 318 sgg. ; identified
with the soul, 319; the same, not to
be borne by two living persons, 370

Names of relations tabooed, 335 sgg. ;
changed to deceive ghosts, 354 sgg. ;
of common objects changed when they
are the names of the dead, 358 sgg.,
375, or the names of chiefs and kings,
375, 376 sq. ; of ancestors bestowed
on their reincarnations, 368 sg.; of
kings and chiefs tabooed, 374 sgq. ; of
supernatural beings tabooed, 384 s¢¢.;
of gods tabooed, 387 sg. ; of spirits
and gods, magical virtue of, 389 s¢¢.;
of Roman gods not to be mentioned,
391 n.*; lucky, 391 #.!; of dangerous
animals not to be mentioned, 396


57q.


INDEX


Names, new, given to the sick and old,
319; new, at initiation, 320

of the dead tabooed, 349 sgg.; not
borne by the living, 354; revived
after a time, 365 sgg.

—— personal, tabooed, 318 sgg. ; kept
secret from fear of magic, 320 sgg. ;
different in summer and winter, 386

Namesakes of the dead change their
names to avoid attracting the attention
of the ghost, 355 sgg.; of deceased
persons regarded as their reincarna-
tions, 365 59g.

Naming the dead a serious crime, 352,
354; of children, solemnities at the,
connected with belief in the reincarna-
tion of ancestors in their namesakes,
372

Namosi, in Fiji, 264

Nandi, the, 175, 273, 310, 330

Nanumea, island of, 102

Narbrooi, a spirit or god, 60

Narcissus and his reflection, 94

Narrinyeri, the, 126 sg.

Natchez, customs of manslayers among
the, 181

Nats, demons, 90

Natural death of sacred king or priest,
supposed fatal consequences of, 6, 7

Navajo Indians, 112 sg., 325, 385

Navel-string used to recall the soul, 48

Nazarite, vow of the, 262

Nelson, E. W., 228, 237

Nets to catch souls, 69 sy.; as amulets,
300, 307

New Britain, 85

—— Caledonia, 92, 141

everything, excites awe of savages,
230 Sqq.

—— fire made by friction, 286

—— Hebrides, the, 56, 127

names given to the sick and old,

319; at initiation, 320

Zealand, sanctity of chiefs in, 134


59q.

Nias, island ot, conception of the soul
in, 29; custom of the people of, 107 ;
special language of hunters in, 410;
special language employed by reapers
in, 410 sg.

Nicknames used in order to avoid the
use of the real names, 321, 331

Nicobar Islands, customs as to shadows
at burials in the, 80 sg.

Nicobarese, the, 357; changes in their
language, 362 sg.

Nieuwenhuis, Dr. A. W., 99

Night, King of the, 23

Nine knots in magic, 302, 303, 304

Noon, sacrifices to the dead at, il
superstitious dread of, 88

Nootka Indians, their idea of the un


:
:
|


INDEX 439


27; customs of girls at puberty among
the, 146 2.1; their preparation for
war, 160 sg.

North American Indians, their dread of
menstruous women, 145; their theory
of names, 318 sg.

Norway, superstition as to parings of
nails in, 283

Nose stopped to prevent the escape of
the soul, 31, 71

Nostrils, soul supposed to escape by the,
90) 32, 33; 122 '

Novelties excite the awe of savages, 230
59.

Novices at initiation, taboos observed
by, 141 5g., 156 sg.

Nubas, the, 132

Nufoors of New Guinea, 332, 341, 415


Obscene language in ritual, 154, 155

O'Donovan, E., 304

Oesel, island of, 42

Ojebways, the, 160

Oldfield, A., 350

Omahas, customs as to murderers among
the, 187

Omens, reliance on, r10

One shoe on and one shoe off, 311 sgqg.

Ongtong Java Islands, 107

Onitsha, the king of, 123

Opening everything in house to facilitate
childbirth, 296 sg.

Orestes, the matricide, 188, 287

Oro, war god, 69

Orotchis, the, 232

Ot Danoms, the, 103

Ottawa Indians, the, 78

Ovambo, the, 227

Overshadowed, danger of being, 82 sg.

Ovid, on loosening the hair, 311

Ox, purification by passing through the
body of an, 173


Padlocks as amulets, 307
Painting bodies of manslayers, 175, 178,
179, 180, 186 7.}


Palaces, kings not allowed to leave their, .


122 sqq.

Pantang, taboo, 405

Panther, ceremonies at the slaughter of
a, 219

Parents named after their children, 331
5qq.

-in-law, their names not to be pro-
nounced, 338, 339, 34°, 341, 342

Partition of spiritual and temporal power
between religious and civil kings, 17
59g.

Patagonians, the, 281

Paton, W. R., 382 2.4, 383 2.1

Pawnees, the, 228

Peace, ceremony at making, 274


Pelias and Jason, 311

Pentateuch, the, 219

Pepper in purificatory rites, 106, 114

Perils of the soul, 26 sgg.

Perseus and the Gorgon, 312

Persian kings, their custom at meals, 119

Persons, tabooed, 131 sgq.

Philosophy, primitive, 420 sg.

Phong long, ill luck caused by women in
childbed, 155

Photographed or painted, supposed
danger of being, 96 sgq.

Pictures, supposed danger of, 96 sg.

Pig, the word unlucky, 233

Pigeons, special language employed by
Malays in snaring, 407 sg.

Pilgrims to Mecca not allowed to wear
knots and rings, 293 sg.

Pimas, the purification of manslayers
among the, 182 sgq.

Plataea, Archon of, forbidden to touch
iron, 227; escape of besieged from,


gir

Pliny on crossed legs and clasped hands,
298 ; on knotted threads, 303

Plutarch, 249

Poison, continence observed at brewing,
200

ordeal, 15

Polar bear, taboos concerning the, 209

Polemarch, the, at Athens, 22

Pollution or sanctity, their equivalence in
primitive religion, 145, 158, 224

and holiness not differentiated by
savages, 224

Polynesia, names of chiefs tabooed in,
381

Polynesian chiefs sacred, 136

Pons Sublicius, 230

Port Moresby, 203

Porto Novo, 23

Portraits, souls in, 96 sgg.; supposed
dangers of, 96 sqq.

Powers, S., 326

Pregnancy, husband’s hair kept unshorn
during wife’s, 261; conduct of hus-
band during wife’s, 294, 295 ; super-
stitions as to knots during wife's, 294


5g.

Pregnant women, their superstitions
about shadows, 82 sg.

Premature birth, 213. See Miscarriage

Pricking patient with needles to expel
demons of disease, 106

Priests to be shaved with bronze, 226;
their hair unshorn, 259, 260; foods
tabooed to, 291

Prisoners shaved, 273; released at festi-
vals, 316

Propitiation of the souls of the slain,
166; of spirits of slain animals, 190,
204 sg. ; of ancestors, 197


. 440


Prussians, the old, their funeral feasts,
238

Pulque, 201, 249

Puppets or dolls employed for the re-
storation of souls to their bodies, 53 sgq.

Purge as mode of ceremonial purifica-
tion, 175

Purification of city, 188 ; of Pimas after
slaying Apaches, 182 sgg. ; of hunters
and fishers, 190 sg.; of moral guilt
by physical agencies, 217 sg.; by
cutting the hair, 283 sg.

of manslayers, 165 sgg. ; intended
to rid them of the ghosts of the slain,
186 sq.

Purificatory ceremonies at reception of
strangers, 102 sgg. ; on return froma
journey, 111 sgq.

Purity, ceremonial, observed in war, 157

Pygmies, the African, 282

Pythagoras, maxims of, 314 7.

Python, punishment for killing a, 222


Quartz used at circumcision instead of
iron, 227
Queensland, aborigines of, 159 7.


Ra and Isis, 387 sq.

Rabbah, siege of, 273

Rain caused by cut or combed out hair,
271, 272; word for, not to be men-
tioned, 413

-charm by pouring water, 154 sg.

-makers, their hair unshorn, 259


Sq.

Rainbow, the, a net for souls, 79
Ramanga, 246

Raven, soul as a, 34

Raw flesh not to be looked on, 239
meat, prohibition to touch or name,


13

Reapers, special language employed by,
410 Sg., 411 Sg.

Reasoning, definite, at the base of savage
custom, 420 2.1

Rebirth of ancestors in their descendants,
368 sg.

Recall of the soul, 30 sqq.

Red, bodies of manslayers painted, 175,
179 ; faces of manslayers painted, 185,
186 2,3

Reflection, the soul identified with the,
92 59g.

Reflections in water or mirrors, supposed
dangers of, 93 57.

Refuse of food, magic wrought by means
of, 126 sgq.

Regeneration, pretence of, 113

Reincarnation of the dead in their name-
sakes, 365 sgg. ; of ancestors in their
descendants, 368 sgg.

Reindeer, taboos concerning, 208


INDEX


Relations, names of, tabooed, 335 sqq.

Relationship, terms of, used as terms of
address, 324 sg.

Release of prisoners at festivals, 316

Religion, passage of animism into, 213

Reluctance to accept sovereignty on
account of taboos attached to it, 17


599.
Remnants of food buried as a precaution
against: sorcery, 118, 119, 127 Ssg.,
- 129
Resemblance of child to father, supposed
danger of, 88 sg. 4
Resurrection, cut hair and nails kept for
use at the, 279 sg.
—— of the dead effected by giving their
names to living persons, 365 sgq.
Rhys, Professor Sir John, 12 7.2; on
personal names, 319
Rice used to attract the soul conceived
as a bird, 34 sgg., 45 sgg. ; soul of,
not to be frightened, 412
—— -harvest, special language employed
by reapers at, 410 Sg., 411 sg.
Ring, broken, 13; on ankle as badge of
office, 15
Rings used to prevent the escape of the
soul, 31; as spiritual fetters, 313 s¢q.;
as amulets, 314 sgg.; not to be worn,
314
—— and knots tabooed, 293 sgg.
Rivers, Dr. W. H. R., 17
Rivers, prohibition to cross, 9 sg.
Robertson, Sir George Scott, 14 notes
Roepstorff, F. A. de, 362 sg.
Roman gods, their names not to be
mentioned, 391 7.1
—— superstition about crossed legs, 298
Romans, their evocation of gods of
besieged cities, 391
Rome, name of guardian deity of Rome
kept secret, 391
Roscoe, Rev. J., 85 2.1, 145 2.4, 195 2.1,
254 2.°, 277 2.10
Roth, W. E., 356
Rotti, custom as to cutting child’s hair
in the island of, 276, 283 ; custom as
to knots at marriage in the island of,
301
Roumanian building superstition, 89


Royal blood not to be shed on the e:


ground, 241 sgg.

Royalty, the burden of, x sgq.

Rules of life observed by sacred kings
and priests, 1 sgq.

Runaways, knots as charm to stop,


305 Sg.
Russell, F,, 183 sg.
Sabaea or Sheba, kings of, 124


Sacred chiefs and kings regarded as
dangerous, 131 sgg., 138; their analogy


INDEX 441.


to mourners, homicides, and women
at menstruation and childbirth, 138

Sacred and unclean, correspondence of
rules regarding the, 145

Sacrifices to ghosts, 56, 166; to the
dead, 88; at foundation of buildings,
89 sgg. ; to ancestral spirits, 104

Sagard, Gabriel, 366 sg.

Sahagun, B. de, 249

Sailors at sea, special language employed
by, 413 sgg. :

Sakais, the, 348

Sakalavas of Madagascar, the, 10, 327;
customs as to names of dead kings
among the, 379 sg.

Salish Indians, 66

Salmon, taboos concerning, 2c9

Salt not to be eaten, 167, 182, 184, 194,
195, 196; name of, tabooed, gor

—— -pans, continence observed -by
workers in, 200

Samoyeds, 353

Sanctity of the head, 252 sgq.

—— or pollution, their equivalence in
primitive religion, 145, 158, 224

Sankara and the Grand Lama, 78

Saragacos Indians, 152

Satapatha Brahmana, 217

Saturday, persons born on a, 89

Saturn, the planet, 315

Savage, our debt to the, 419 sgg.

custom the product of definite

reasoning, 420 .!

philosophy, 420 sg.

Saxons of Transylvania, 294

Scapegoat, 214 sq.

Scarification of warriors, 160 sg.; of
bodies of whalers, 191

Scaring away the ghosts of the slain,
168, 170, 171, 172, 174 5g.

Schoolcraft, H. R., 325

Scotch fowlers and fishermen, words
tabooed by, 393 s¢q.

Scotland, common words tabooed in,
392 S99.

Scratching the person or head, rules as
to, 146, 156, 158, 159 ~., 160, 181,
183, 189, 196

Scrofula thought to be caused and cured
by touching a sacred chief or king,
133 Sg.

Sea, horror of the, 10; offerings made
to the, 10; prohibition to look on the,
10; special language employed by
sailors at, 413 sqq.

—— -mammals, atonement for killing,
207; myth of their origin, 207

Seals, supposed influence of lying-in
women on, 152; taboos observed after
the killing of, 207 sg., 209, 213

Seclusion of those who have handled the
dead, 138 sgg. ; of women at menstrua-


tion and childbirth, 145 sgg., 147 5¢q. ;
of tabooed persons, 165; of man-
slayers, 166 sgg.; of cannibals, 188
5gq.; of men who have killed large
game, 220 sg.

Secret names among the Central Aus-
tralian aborigines, 321 sg.

Sedna, an Esquimau goddess, 152, 207,
208, 209, 210, 211, 213

Semangat, Malay word for the soul, 28,


35

Semites, moral evolution of the, 219

Seoul, capital of Corea, 283

Serpents, purificatory ceremonies ob-
served after killing, 221 sg.

Servius, on Dido's costume, 313

Seven knots in magic, 303, 304, 308

Sewing as a charm, 307

Shades of dead animals, fear of offend-
ing, 205, 206, 207

Shadow, the soul identified with the, 77 |
sgg. ; injury done to a man through
his, 78 sgg.; diminution of shadow
regarded with apprehension, 86 sq. ;
loss of the, regarded as ominous, 88 ;
not to fall on a chief, 255

Shadows drawn out by ghosts, 80;
animals injured through their, 81 sg. ;
of trees sensitive, 82; of certain birds
and people viewed as dangerous, 82
sg.; built into the foundations of
edifices, 89 sg.; of mourners dan-
gerous, 142; of certain persons dan-
gerous, 173

Shamans among the Thompson Indians,
57 SY:

—— Buryat, their mode of recovering
lost souls, 56 sg.

—— Yakut, 63

Shark Point, priestly king at, 5

Sharp instruments, use of, tabooed, 205

weapons tabooed, 237 sgg.

Shaving prisoners, reason of, 273

Sheep used in purificatory ceremony,
174, 175; shoulder-blades of, used in
divination, 229

Shetland fishermen, their tabooed words,
394

Shoe untied at marriage, 300; custom
of going with one shoe on and one
shoe off, 311 sgg.

Shoulder-blades, divination by, 229

Shuswap Indians, the, 83, 142

Siam, kings of, 226, 241; names of
kings of, concealed from fear of sor-
cery, 375

Siamese children, ceremony at cutting
their hair, 265 sgq.

view of the sanctity of the head,
252 sg.

Sick man, attempts to prevent the escape
of the soul of, 30 sg.


442 INDEX


Sick people not allowed to sleep, 95;
sprinkled with pungent spices, 105 sg.

-room, mirrors covered up in, 95

Sickness explained by the absence of the
soul, 42 sgg.; caused by ancestral
spirits, 53

Sierra Leone, priests and Kings of, 14
5g., 18

Nevada of Colombia, 215, 216

Sigurd and Fafnir, 324

Sikhim, kings of, 20

Silkworms, taboos observed by breeders
of, 194

Simpson, W., 125 2.3

Sin regarded as something material, 214,
216, 217 Sg.

Singhalese, 297; their fear of demons,
233 5g.

Sins, confession of, 114, I9I, 195, 211
Sq., 214 sgg.; originally a magical
ceremony, 217

Sisters-in-law, their names not to be pro-
nounced, 338, 342, 343

Sit, Egyptian god, 68

Sitting on the ground prohibited to
warriors, 159, 162, 163

Skull-cap worn by girls at their first
menstruation, 146; worn by Australian
widows, 182 2.”

Skulls of ancestors rubbed as a propitia-
tion, 197; of dead used as drinking-
cups, 372

Slain, ghosts of the, fear of the, 165 sgg.

Slave Coast, the, 9

Slaves, runaway, charm for recovering,
305 Sg.

Sleep, absence of soul in, 36 sgg. ; sick
people not allowed to, 95; forbidden
in house after a death, 37 sg.; for-
bidden to unsuccessful eagle-hunter,


199

Sleeper not to be wakened suddenly, 39
sqq. ; not to be moved nor his appear-
ance altered, 41 sg.

Smallpox not mentioned by its proper
name, 400, 410, 411, 416

Smearing blood on the person as a
purification, 104, 115; on persons,
dogs, and weapons as a mode of
pacifying their souls, 219

bodies of manslayers with porridge,

176

porridge or fat on the person as a

purification, 112

sheep's entrails on body as mode
of purification, 174

Smith, W. Robertson, 77 7.1, 96 n.},
243 ”.7, 247 0.°

erry s craft regarded as uncanny, 236


aides not called by their proper names,
399, 400, 40% 57., 4iX


Snapping the thumbs to prevent the
departure of the soul, 31

Snares set for souls, 69

Son-in-law, his name not to be pro-
nounced, 338 5g., 344, 345

Sorcerers, souls extracted or detained by,
69 sgg.; make use of cut hair and
other bodily refuse, 268 sg., 274 5sg.;
278, 281 sg. See also Magic

Soul conceived as a mannikin, 26 sgg. ;
the perils of the, 26 sgg.; ancient
Egyptian conception of the, 28 sg. ;
representations of the soul in Greek
art, 29 z.'; as a butterfly, 29 #.}, 41,
51 sg. ; absence and recall of the, 30
sqg.; attempts to prevent the soul
from escaping from the body, 30 sgq.;
sickness attributed to the absence of
the, 32, 42 sgg.; tied by thread or
string to the body, 32 sg., 43, 51;
conceived as a bird, 33 sgz. ; absent


in sleep, 36 sgg.; in form of mouse, —


37, 39 #.2; in form of lizard, 38; in
form of fly, 39 ; caught in a cloth, 46,
47, 48, 52, 53, 64, 67, 75 sg. ; identi-
fied with the shadow, 77 sgq. ; identi-
fied with the reflection in water or a
mirror, 92 sgg. ; supposed to escape
at eating and drinking, 116; in the
blood, 240, 241, 247, 250; identified
with the personal name, 319 ; of rice
not to be frightened, 412
Souls, every man thought to have four, 27,
o; light and heavy, thin and fat, 29 ;
transferred to other bodies, 49; im-


pounded in magic fence, 56 ; abducted


by demons, 58 sgg. ; transmigrate into
animals, 65 ; brought back in a visible
form, 65 sgg.; caught in snares or
nets, 69 sgg.; extracted or detained
by sorcerers, 69 sgg.; in tusks of
ivory, 70; conjured into jars, 70; in
boxes, 70, 76; shut up in calabashes,
72; transferred from the living to the


dead, 73; gathered into a basket, 72; —


wounded and bleeding, 73; supposed e


to be in portraits, 96 sgg.
—— of beasts respected, 223
—— of the dead all malignant, 145;


cannot go to the spirit-land till the :
flesh has decayed from their bones, —


372 ”.°

of the slain, propitiation of, 166

Sovereignty, reluctance to accept the,
on account of its burdens, 17 s¢q.

Spells cast by strangers, 112; at hair-
cutting, 264 sg.

Spenser, Edmund, 244 sg.

Spices used in exorcism of demons, 105


Sq.
Spirit of dead apparently supposed te
decay with the body, 372


INDEX 443


Spirits averse to iron, 232 sgq.

—— of land, conciliation of the, 110
5q.

Spiritual power, its divorce from tem-
poral power, 17 sgq.

Spitting forbidden, 196; as a protective
charm, 279, 286; upon knots as a
charm, 302

Spittle effsced or concealed, 288 $99. i
tabooed, 287 sgg.; used in magic,
268, 269, 287 sgg.; used in making
a covenant, 290

Spoil taken from enemy plirified: 177

Spoons used in eating by tabooed per-
sons, 141, 148, 189

Sprained leg, cure for, 304 sg.

Spring and summer, myths of divinities
and spirits to be told only in, 384

Sprinkling with holy water, 285 sg.

St. Sylvester’s Day, 88

Stabbing reflections in water to injure
the persons reflected, 93

Stade, Hans, captive among Brazilian
Indians, 231

Standard of conduct shifted from natural
to supernatural basis, 213

Stepping over persons or things for-

_ bidden, 159 sg., 194, 423 sgg. ; Over
dead panther, 219. See a/so Jumping

Stone knives and arrow-heads used in
religious ritual, 228

Stones on which a man’s shadow should
not fall, 80

Storms caused by cutting or combing
the hair, 271, 282

Strange land, ceremonies at entering a,
109 sgg.

Strangers, taboos on intercourse with,
IOI sgg.; suspected of practising
magical arts, 102; ceremonies at the
reception of, ro2 sgg. ; dread of, ro2
sqq. ; spells cast by, 112; killed, 113

String or thread used to tie soul to body,
32 SQ.» 43, 51

Strings, knotted, as amulets, 309. See
also Cords, Threads

‘«Strong names” of kings of Dahomey,


374

Sulka, the, 151, 331

Sultan Bayazid and his soul, 50

Sultans veiled, 120

Sumba, custom as to the names of
princes in the island of, 376

Summer, myths of gods and spirits not
to be told in, 385 sg.

and winter, personal names dif-
ferent in, 386

Sun not allowed to shine on sacred per-
sons, 3, 4, 6

-god draws away souls, 64 sg.

Sunda, tabooed words in, 341, 415

Supernatural basis of morality, 213 sg.


Supernatural beings, their names tabooed,
384 599.

Superstition a crutch to morality, 219

Swaheli charm, 305 sg.

Sweating as a purification, 142, 184

Swelling and inflammation thought to
be caused by eating out of sacred
vessels or by wearing sacred gar-
ments, 4

Sympathetic connexion between a person
and the severed parts of his body,
267 sg., 283

magic, 164, 201, 204, 258, 268,
287

Synonyms adopted in order to avoid
naming the dead, 359 sgg.; in the
Zulu language, 377; in the Maori
language, 381


Taboo of chiefs and kings in Tonga,
133 sg.; of chiefs in New Zealand,
134 sgg-; Esquimau theory of, 210
sqq. ; the meaning of, 224

—— rajah and chief, 24 sg.

Tabooed acts, 101 sgg.

—— hands, 138, 140 sgg., 146 5gg.,
158, 159 2.

—— persons, 131 sgg. ; secluded, 165

—— things, 224 sgg.

—— words, 318 sgg.

Taboos, royal and priestly, 1 sgg.; on
intercourse with strangers, 101 sgq. ;
on eating and drinking, 116 sgg. ; on
shewing the face, 120 sgg. ; on quitting
the house, 122 sgg. ; on leaving food
over, 126 syg.; on persons who have
handled the dead, 138 sgg.; on
warriors, 157 sgg.; on manslayers,
165 sgg. ; imposed on murderers, 187
sg. ; imposed on hunters and fishers,
190 sgq. ; transformed into ethical pre-
cepts, 214; survivals of, in morality,
218 sg. ; as spiritual insulators, 224 ;
on sharp weapons, 237 5¢g.; on blood,
239 sgg.; relating to the head, 252
sqq.; on hair, 258 sgg.; on spittle,
287 sgg.; on foods, 291 sgg.; on
knots and rings, 293 sgg. ; on words,
318 sgg., 392 sgg.; on _ personal
names, 318 sgg. ; on names of rela-
tions, 335 sgg. ; on the names of the
dead, 349 sgg.; on names of kings
and chiefs, 374 sgg.; on names of
supernatural beings, 384 sgg.; on
names of gods, 387 sg.

observed by the Mikado, 3 sg. ; by
headmen in Assam, 11; by ancient
kings of Ireland, 11 sg. ; by the Flamen
Dialis, 13 sg. ; by the Bodia or Bodio,
15; by sacred milkmen among the
Todas, 16 sg.

Tahiti, 255


444 INDEX


Tahiti, kings of, 226; abdicate on birth
of a son, 20; their names not to be
pronounced, 381 sg.

Tails of cats docked asa magical precau-
tion, 128 sg.

Tales, wandering souls in popular, 49 sg.

Tara, the old capital of Ireland, 11

Tartar Khan, ceremony at visiting a,
II4

Teeth, loss of, supposed effect of break-
ing a taboo, 140; loosened by angry
ghosts, 186 7.1; asa rain-charm, 271;
extracted, kept against the resurrec-
tion, 280. See also Tooth

Temple at Jerusalem, the, 230

Temporary reincarnation of the dead in
their living namesakes, 371

Tendi, Batta word for soul, 45. See
also Tondi

Tepehuanes, the, 97

Terms of relationship used as terms of
address, 324 sg.

Thakambau, 131

Thebes in Egypt, priestly kings of, 13

Theocracies in America, 6

Thesmophoria, release of prisoners at,
316 5

Thessalian witch, 390

Things tabooed, 224 sgg.

Thompson Indians of British Columbia,
37 5g-; customs of mourners among
the, 142 sg.

Thomson, Joseph, 98

Thorn bushes to keep off ghosts, 142

Thread or string used to tie soul to body,
32 59+, 43, 51 d

Threads, knotted, in magic, 303, 304 sg.,
397

Three knots in magic, 304, 305

Thumbs snapped to prevent the de-
parture of the soul, 31

Thunderstorms caused by cut hair, 271,
282

Thurn, E. F. im, 324 sg.

Tigers not called by their proper names,
401, 402, 403 Sg., 410, 415; called
dogs, 402; called jackals, 402, 403

Timines of Sierra Leone, 18

Timor, fetish or taboo rajah in, 24;
customs as to war in, 165 sq.

Tin ore, Malay superstitions as to, 407

Tinneh or Déné Indians, 145 59.

Toboongkoos of Celebes, 48, 78

Todas, holy milkmen of the, 15 sgq.

Togoland, 247

Tolampoos, the, 319

Tolindoos, the, 78

Tondi, Batta word for soul, 35. See
also Tendi

Tonga, divine chiefs in, 21; the taboo
of chiefs and kings in, 133 sg.; taboos
connected with the dead in, 140


Tonquin, division of monarchy in, 19 sg. ;
kings of, 125

Toottonga, divine chief of Tonga, 21

Tooth knocked out as initiatory rite,
244. See also Teeth

Toradjas, tabooed names among the,
340; their field-speech, 411 sgg.

Touching sacred king or chief, supposed
effects of, 132 sq.

Trading voyages, continence observed
on, 203

Tradition, historical, hampered by the
taboo on the names of the dead, 363
5gq.

Transference of souls from the living to
the dead, 73; of souls to other bodies,
49; Of sins, 214 sgqg.

Transgressions, need of confessing, 211
sg. See also Sins

Transmigration of souls into animals,
65

Transylvania, the- Germans of, 296,
310

Traps set for souls, 70 sg.

Travail, women in, knots on their gar
ments untied, 294. See also Childbirth

Travellers, knots used as charms by,
306

Tree-spirits, fear of, 412 sg.

Trees, the shadows of trees sensitive, 82 ;
cut hair deposited on or under, 14,
275 5sg., 286

Tuaregs, the, 117, 122; their fear of
ghosts, 353

Tumleo, island of, 150

Tupi Indians, their customs as to eating
captives, 179 sg.

Turtle catching, taboos in connexion
with, 192 :

Tusks of ivory, souls in, 70

Twelfth Night, 396

Twins, water poured on graves of, 154 5g.

father of, taboos observed by the,
239 sg. ; his hair shaved and nails cut,
284

Tycoons, the, 19

Tying the soul to the body, 32 sg., 43

Tylor, E. B., on reincarnatién of
ancestors, 372 #.}


Uganda, 84, 86, 112, 145, 164 7.1, 239,
243, 254, 263, 277, 330, 369. See
also Baganda

Ulster, kings of, 12

Unclean and sacred, correspondence of
the rules regarding the, 145

Uncleanness regarded as a vapour, 152,
206; of manslayers, of menstruous
and lying-in women, and of persons
who have handled the dead, 169 ; of
whalers, 191, 207; of lion-killer, 220;
of bear-killers, 221


EE


INDEX F 445


Uncovered in the open air, prohibition
to be, 3, 14

Unyoro, king of, his custom of drinking
milk, 119; cowboy of the king of,
159 2. ; diet of the king of, 291 sg.


Vapour thought to be exhaled by lying-
in women and hunters, 152, 206;
supposed, of blood and corpses, 210
5g. ; supposed to be produced by the
violation of a taboo, 212

Varuna, festival of, 217

Veiling faces to avert evil intluences,
120 sqq.

Venison, taboos concerning, 208 sg.

Vermin from hair returned to their
owner, 278

Vessels used by tabooed persons de-
stroyed, 4, 131, 139, 145, 156,
284

—— special, employed by tabooed per-
sons, 138, 139, 142, 143, 144, 145,
146, 147, 148, 160, 167, 185, 189,
197, 198

Victims, sacrificial, carried round city,
188

Vine, prohibition to walk under a, 14,
248

Virgil, the enchantress in, 305 ; on rustic
militia of Latium, 311

Vow, hair kept unshorn during a, 261
5g., 285


Wabondei, the, 272

Wadai, Sultan of, 120

Wakan, mysterious, sacred, taboo, 225 2.

Wakelbura, the, 31

Wallis Island, 140

Walrus, taboos concerning, 208 sg.

Wanigela River, 192

Wanika, the, 247

Wanyamwesi, the, 112, 330

Wanyoro (Banyoro), the, 278

War, continence in, 157, 158 7.’, 161,
163, 164, 165; rules of ceremonial
purity observed in, 157 sgg.; hair
kept unshorn in, 261

—— chief, or war king, 20, 21, 24

—— -dances, 169, 170, 178, 182

Warm food tabooed, 189

Warramunga, the, 384

Warriors tabooed, 157 sgg.

Washing the head, 253. See Bathing

Water poured as a rain-charm, 154 sg. ;
holy, sprinkling with, 285 sg.

-spirits, danger of, 94

Wax figure in magic, 74

Weapons of manslayers, purification of,
172, 182, 219


' Wedding ring, an amulet against witch-


craft, 314
Were-wolf, 42


Whale, solemn burial of dead, 223

Whalers, taboos observed by, 191 s¢.,
205 Sqq.

Wheaten flour, prohibition to touch, 13

White, faces and bodies of manslayers
painted, 175, 186 #.1;  lion-killer
painted, 220

—— clay, Caffre boys at circumcision
smeared with, 156

Whydah, king of, 129

Widows and widowers, customs observed
by, 142 sg., 144 sg., 182 x.”

Wied, Prince of, 96

Wife's mother, the savage’s dread of his,
83 sgg.; her name not to be pro-
nounced by her son-in-law, 337, 338,
343

name not to be pronounced by her
husband, 337, 338, 339

Wild beasts not called by their proper
names, 396 s¢g.

Wilkinson, R. J., 416 ~.*

Willow wands as disinfectants, 143

Windessi, in New Guinea, 169

Winds kept in jars, 5

Wine, the blood of the vine, 248; called
milk, 249 7.7

Wing-bone of eagle used to drink
through, 189

Winter, myths of gods and spirits to be
told only in, 385 sg.

Wirajuri, the, 269

Witch's soul departs from her in sleep,
39, 41, 42

Witches make use of cut hair, 270, 271,
279, 282

Wollunqua, a mythical serpent, 384

Wolofs of Senegambia, 323

Wolves, charms to protect cattle from,
307; not to be called by their proper
names, 396, 397, 398, 402

Women tabooed at menstruation and
childbirth, 145 sgg. ; abstinence from,
during war, 157, 158 2.1, 161, 163,
164; in childbed holy, 225 x. ; blood
of, dreaded, 250 sg.

Women’s clothes, supposed effects of
touching, 164 sg.

‘* Women's speech” among the Caffres,
335 59:

Words tabooed, 318 sgg. ; savages take
a materialistic view of words, 331

—— common, changed because they are
the names of the dead, 358 sgg., 375,
or the names of chiefs and kings, 375,
376 sqg. ; tabooed, 392 sgg.

Wounded men not allowed to drink
milk, 174 sg.

Wrist tied to prevent escape of soul, 32,
43) 51

—— bands as amulets, 315

Wurunjeri tribe, 42


446
Xenophanes, on the gods, 387


Yabim, the, 151, 306, 354, 386

Yakut shaman, 63

Yams, Feast of, 123

Yaos, the, 97 sg.

Yawning, soul supposed to depart in, 31
Yewe order, secret society in Togo, 383
Yorubas, rebirth of ancestors among the,


369


INDEX


Zapotecs of Mexico, the pontiff of the,
wind iste the, on cut hair and nails,
tine on Mount Lycaeus, sanctuary of,
a language, its diversity, 377

Zulus, names of chiefs and kings tabooed


among the, 376 sg. ; their superstition ~


as to reflections in water, 91


THE END


Printed by  & KR. Cuark, Limrrun, Ldinburgh.


bal


AA
Works by J. G. FRAZER, D.C.L., LL.D., Litt.D.


THE GOLDEN BOUGH


A STUDY IN MAGIC AND RELIGION
Third Edition, revised and enlarged. $8vo.


Part I. THE Macic ART AND THE EVOLUTION OF KINGs. Two
volumes. 20s. net.


II. TaBoo AND THE PERILS OF THE SOUL. Onevolume. 1os. net.
III. THe Dyinc Gop. One volume. ros. net.

IV. Aponis, ATTIS, OsiRIs. One volume. Second Edition. ros, net.
V. THE Man or Sorrows. [Zn preparation.
VI. BALDER THE BEAUTIFUL. [Jn preparation.


TIMES.—‘‘ The verdict of posterity will probably be that 7ke Golden Bough has
influenced the attitude of the human mind towards supernatural beliefs and symbolical
rituals more profoundly than any other books published in the nineteenth century
except those of Darwin and Herbert Spencer.”


LECTURES ON THE EARLY HISTORY OF
THE KINGSHIP. 8vo. 8s. 6d. net.


ATHENZUM.—*‘It is the effect of a good book not only to teach, but also to
stimulate and to suggest, and we think this the best and highest quality, and one that
will recommend these lectures to all intelligent readers, as well as to the learned.”


PSYCHE’S TASK. A Discourse concerning the Influence


of Superstition on the Growth of Institutions. 8vo. 2s. 6d. net.


TIMES.—“ Dr. Frazer has answered the question of how the moral law has been
safeguarded, especially in its infancy, with a wealth of learning and a clearness of
utterance that leave nothing to be desired. Perhaps the uses of superstition is not
quite such a new theme as he seems to fancy. Even the most ignorant of us were
aware that many false beliefs of a religious or superstitious character had had very
useful moral or physical, or especially sanitary, results. But if the theme is fairly
familiar, the curious facts which are adduced in support of it will be new to most
people, and will make the book as interesting to read as the lectures must have been


- to hear.”


MACMILLAN AND CO., Lrp., LONDON.


Works by J. G. FRAZER, D.C.L., LL.D., Litt.D.


TOTEMISM AND EXOGAMY. A Treatise on
Certain Early Forms of Superstition and Society. With-
Maps. Four vols. 8vo. 50s. net.


Mr. A. E. CRAWLEY in V4 TURE.—“ Prof. Frazer is a great artist as well as a
great anthropologist. He works ona big scale ; no one in any department of research,
not even Darwin, has employed a wider induction of facts. No one, again, has dealt
more conscientiously with each fact ; however seemingly trivial, it is prepared with
minute pains and cautious tests for its destiny as a slip to be placed under the
anthropological microscope. He combines, so to speak, the merits of Tintoretto and
Meissonier. . . . That portion of the book which is concerned with totemism (if we
may express our own belief at the risk of offending Prof. Frazer’s characteristic
modesty), is actually ‘The Complete History of Totemism, its Practice and its Theory,
its Origin and its End.’ . . . Nearly two thousand pages are occupied with an ethno-
graphical survey of totemism, an invaluable compilation. The maps, including that
of the distribution of totemic peoples, are a new and useful feature.”


THE SCOPE OF SOCIAL ANTHROPOLOGY.
8vo. Sewed. 6d. net.


OXFORD MAGAZINE.—‘ In his inaugural lecture the new Professor of Social
Anthropology in the University of Liverpool defines his Science, states its aims, and
puts in a spirited plea for the scientific study of primitive man while there is still time,
before the savage in his natural state becomes as extinct as the dodo,”


PAUSANIAS’S DESCRIPTION OF GREECE.


Translated with a Commentary, Illustrations, and Maps.
Six vols. 8vo. 126s. net.


ATHENAZUM.—* All these writings in many languages Mr. Frazer has read
and digested with extraordinary care, so that his book will be for years che book of
reference on such matters, not only in England, but in France and Germany. It isa
perfect thesaurus of Greek topography, archeology, and art. It is, moreover, far more
interesting than any dictionary of the subject ; for it follows the natural guidance of
the Greek traveller, examining every town or village which he describes; analysing
and comparing with foreign parallels every myth or fairy tale which he records ; citing
every information which can throw light on the works of art he admires.”


PAUSANIAS AND OTHER GREEK SKETCHES.
Globe 8vo. 4s. net.


GUARDIAN.—*“ Here we have material which every one who has visited Greece,
or purposes to visit it, most certainly should read and enjoy. . . . We cannot imagine
a more excellent book for the educated visitor to Greece.”’


MACMILLAN AND CO., Lrp., LONDON. —


O


BL Frazer, (Sir) James George
310 The golden bough. 3d ed.


PLEASE DO NOT REMOVE
CARDS OR SLIPS FROM THIS POCKET


UNIVERSITY OF TORONTO LIBRARY


= a eee a = = — ~~o


FOR USE IN
LIBRARY
ONLY


re eherep=s
+ be et


Tara
tia hisg


:


Heats
nea


ait

Gh {
4
Plbtone
aphid


baat
ie


A


Pere
reel ye
bed


Mai


Palit & |
TES
Hyon ra
uw Niet h


n
iy


‘
|


Hts
iat Dar tt tH tae
ret itt i i AN
,


}
|
}
;


ple
‘
ie ' t


a Mia


=)


——


_ | i
En UG


at


n
&
fa
i
Pres xt
= 4
z ee =
j
weer at ttt
:
i
: A
. Es
| ace
rr
: i
. .
—
=.
| =
8
a.
i : :
: e
2 po fia
7 oy
b 7 : :
- ‘
: “
s ; 7 +
i : ;
7 . -
7 7 ;
’ i ‘
H \e .
4
~
o
: ‘
5 if :
> :
i ,
7 F
a ‘ »
x
’
: : cnn :
we
« : :
im ‘
,
‘
. : p
P
; 4
a 4 .
, i
; =
ee | 7
7 “f 7
te i
.
it
Lae
> c
