FRAGMENT 


GRAICO-EGYPTIAN WORK 


UPON MAGIC. 


FROM A PAPYRUS IN THE BRITISH MUSEUM. 


EDITED FOR 
THE CAMBRIDGE ANTIQUARIAN SOCIETY, 
WITH 


A TRANSLATION AND NOTES, 


BY 


CHARLES WYCLIFFE GOODWIN, M.A., 


LATE FELLOW OF ST. CATHARINE S HALL, CAMBRIDGE. 


CAMBRIDGE: 
DEIGHTON ; MACMILLAN AND CO. 


J. W. PARKER, LONDON. 
J. H. PARKER, OXFORD. 


1852. 


PRINTED BY TAYLOR AND FRANCIS, 
RED LION COURT, FLEET STREET. 


INTRODUCTION. 


THE following fragment is taken from a Papyrus preserved in 
\%M Ythe-: British Museum (No. XLVI. Greek), purchased, among 
others, from M. Anastasi, formerly Swedish consul at Alexan- 
dria. The manuscript consists of six leaves of about eleven 
inches in height by five inches in width, written on both sides 
like the pages of a modern book. The handwriting is a kind of 
uncial, but affords no satisfactory clue to the age of the MS. 
On comparing it with the facsimiles of Greco-Egyptian Papyri 
given in the ‘ Paléographie’ of Champollion and Silvestre, the 
forms of the letters appear to approach most nearly to those in a 
‘Supplication to King Ptolemy’ of the second century 8.c., but 
the contents of the piece make it probable that it is not earlier 
than the second century after Christ. The page, of which a fac- 
simile is given, is not quite so well and neatly written as most of 
the others, but was chosen on account of its containing the cu- 
rious drawing, for which instructions are given in the text. 

This singular relic, which the sepulchral caves of Egypt have 
preserved to us, throws considerable light upon the Art of Magic, 
as practised in the 2nd, 3rd and 4th centuries of our era. It 
introduces us into the very arcana of those superstitious prac- 
tices, of which we find datk hints im the early fathers Irenseus, 

a 


iV 


Origen, Epiphanius and others, and which they laid to the 
charge of the heretics of their time. 

The Museum of Antiquities at Leyden contains several Papyri 
of a similar kind, all of which were obtained from M. Anastasi. 
- Though purchased by him from Arabs at different times, there is 
some reason to think that they were all found together. Our 
Papyrus may possibly have belonged to the same collection. 

Professor Reuvens gave a description of these MSS. in 1830! ; 
and of one of them, principally in the demotic character, a fac- 
simile has been published by Professor Leemans*. It is that de- 
scribed as No. 65 by Reuvens, but numbered 383 in the ‘ Descrip- 
tion Raisonnée des Monumens Egyptiens & Leide,’ published in 
1840. It contains numerous glosses and interlineations in Greek, 
and a few entire passages im the same language, which will be 
quoted in the Notes, and which leave no doubt that the work is 
of the same age and school as that here published. 

Another Papyrus, No. 75 of Reuvens, (384 of the ‘ Description 
Raisonnée’) bears in its contents a still closer similarity to ours. 
It is a long roll, having on one side a demotic text of twenty- 
two columns, of from thirty-two to thirty-four lines each. On 
the other side in the middle is a Greek text of fourteen columns 
of from thirty-two to thirty-six lines each, with two columns of 
demotic writing at one end, and four at the other, containing in- 
terlineations in Greek. There are also two drawings, one repre- 
senting a sceptred deity with an ass’s head, the other Anubis 
standing by a mummy stretched upon a bier. Leemans gives the 
following summary of the contents of the Greek text :—Sect. 1. 
Magical ceremonies by means of love, considered asa great thau- 
maturgic power. Sect. 2. Recipe for a remedy by one Hemerius. 
Sect. 3. Recipe for happiness or good fortune. Sect. 4. Recipe by 
Agathocles to produce a dream. Sect. 5. Another recipe to pro- 
duce a dream. Sect. 6. Recipe to procure a dream. Sect. 7. 

1 Lettres a M. Letronne sur les Papyrus bilingues et Grecs, etc. du Musée 
d’Antiquités de l’Université de Leide. Leide, 1830. 

* Monumens Egyptiens du Musée a Leide. Leide, 1839. 


Vv 


For consulting a divinity. Sect. 8. A means of checking a 
man’s anger. Sect. 9. Invocation of a divinity. Sect. 10. Re- 
cipe to procure dreams. Sects. 11, 12. Recipe to produce rust 
upon gold. Sect. 13. Recipe for making a ring, having the 
property of making every enterprise succeed, and of bringing 
good fortune. Sect. 14. Description of a similar ring. Sect. 15. 
The sphere of Democritus, for prognosticating by calculation the 
recovery or death of a sick person. Sect. 16. A means of se- 
paration; a formula to cause separation between husband and 
wife, or other persons. Sect. 17. Formula for causing sleepless 
nights to a person, until he dies. This section is embellished 
with a drawing of an Egyptian deity. Sect. 18. A charm to 
make oneself beloved, and always to have friends. Sect. 19. Ex- 
planation of certain mystical names of plants and other objects. 

No. 76 of Reuvens (895 of the ‘ Description Raisonnée’) 1s 
entirely in Greek, and is remarkable as being, like our Papyrus, 
not in the form of a roll, but in that of a modern book. It con- 
sists of six leaves and a half, containing twenty-five pages of 
writing, in an uncial hand, very closely written, some pages 
having as many as fifty-two lines. The work is divided into two 
parts, the second part being a repetition and amplification of the 
first. The piece is entitled, “The sacred book called the eighth 
Monad. of Moses concerning the sacred name.’ 

These works, which appear to have been found at Thebes, are 
attributed by Reuvens to some Gnostic of the Marcosian school, 
of the third or fourth century of our era. The reason for assign- 
ing them to the school of Marcus is the occurrence in them of 
mysterious combinations of the seven vowels, which are known 
to have entered into the system of that teacher. But a much 
closer affinity may be traced between them and the work 
recently published entitled ‘ Pistis Sophia!,’ the production of a 
Gnostic of uncertam denomination, possibly a species of Ophite, 


1 Pistis Sophia, opus Gnosticum Valentino adjudicatum, e codice Mato. 
Coptico Londinensi descripsit et Latine vertit M. J. Schwartze. Edidit 
J. H. Petermann, Berolini, 1851. 

a2 


PoM 


=a\\' 


vi 


but certainly not a Marcosian, in which not only vowel com- 
binations occur, but several of the mystical names which are 
found in the Leyden Papyn and in our own. 

A comparison however of the doctrines held by the author of 
our fragment, as far as they can be deduced from his work, with 
those developed at large in the ‘ Pistis Sophia,’ leads to the con- 
clusion that they were by no means identical. Our magician, not- 
withstanding the introduction of Moses in the fourth section, and 
the invocation to the God of Abraham in the 10th, appears to re- 
cognise the gods of Egypt, Persia and Greece more completely 
than the Gnostic would probably have done. In fact, he jum- 
bles up and identifies gods and demons of all then known mytho- 
logies and systems. The fundamental ideas seem to be derived 
from the old Egyptian religion. The author may have been a 
priest of Isis or Sarapis, addicted to that and of theurgy, which 
Porphyry, writing to Anebo (circa a.p. 270), severely criticises. 

‘“* How absurd a thing is it,” says Porphyry, “ that one sub- 
ject to all the infirmities of humanity, should affect by threats to 
terrify not merely demons or the spirits of the dead, but the Sun- 
god himself, the Moon, and other celestial beings! The magician 
hes in order to compel the heavenly powers to tell the truth : for 
when he threatens to shake the heavens, or to reveal the myste- 
ries of Isis, or the secret thing that lies hid at Abydos, or to 
stop the sacred boat, or to scatter the limbs of Osiris to Typhon, 
what a height of madness does it not imply in the man who thus 
threatens what he neither understands nor is able to perform; 
and what baseness does it not attribute to the beings who are 
supposed to be frightened by these vain bugbears and figments 
like silly children! And yet Cheremon!, the sacerdotal scribe, 
mentions these things as being in vogue among the Egyptians, 
and affirms that these practices and the like are of potent effi- 
cacy. And what sense is there in those invocations which refer 
to him who springs from the mud (i. e. the Sun-god), sits upon 
the lotus, sails in a boat, changes his form every hour, and varies 


1 Cheremon flourished in the beginning of the first century after Christ. 


vi 


with the Zodiac? For thus they say that he appears to the initiated 
(avrorreio Gas), ignorantly attributing to him the mere affections 
of their own fancy. And if these things be said symbolically, the 
phases of the Sun being thereby expressed, let them give us the 
interpretation of these symbols: for it is clear, that if these 
things were accidents of the Sun himself, as for instance eclipses 
are, they would be visible to every one who chose to look at him. 
Again, to what purpose are those meaningless and outlandish 
words which they use instead of the appropriate names of things ? 
For if the being who hears looks to the sense of what is uttered, 
the meaning remaining the same, what matters it what language 
is used? For the being who is invoked is not, I suppose, of 
Egyptian origin, or if he were, does not use the Egyptian lan- 
guage, nor indeed any human language at all. These things 
therefore must be the foolish inventions of conjurers (yorrwy), 
and must arise from attributing our own passions to the divine 
nature, of which we certainly must entertain notions very oppo- 
site to the truth.” 

Iamblichus, whose work on Egyptian Mysteries is written in 
reply to the letter of Porphyry, by no means disclaims these 
practices on the part of the Egyptian priests, but attempts to ex- 
plain and defend them. He supposes the world to be under the 
care of a host of Saijoves, who superintend the operations of na- 
ture, and that the priest or magician duly initiated becomes in- 
corporated with the divine and overruling powers of the universe, 
so as to acquire a certain authority over these subordinate mini- 
sters. He mentions that the Chaldzan magicians, whose invo- 
cations are addressed to the gods alone, use no threats, while 
the Egyptians occasionally do so, but only towards the Sai- 
poves. With regard to the outlandish formule, he says that the 
Egyptians and Assyrians being sacred nations, their languages 
have a peculiar sanctity which makes them an appropriate me- 
dium of communication with the deity. He also says that the 
divine names in use among these peoples have been handed down 
from remote antiquity and preserved inviolate and immutable, 


and that this character of immutability is peculiarly acceptable 
to the gods, as being themselves not the subjects of change. 
Iambl. de Myst. Sect. 7. 

Our fragment affords several illustrations of these passages. 
Sect. 6 contains a specimen of threatening language used to 
Osiris, the magician assuming the character of the god Thoyth 
to give weight to his threats. Of donua xai BépBSapa ovépara 
there are numerous instances: many of these are identical with 
those found upon the so-called Gnostic gems, and several, as be- 
fore remarked, are the names of personages mentioned in the 
‘Pistis Sophia.’ Of some of these words the explanation is to be 
looked for in Syriac; others are plain Hebrew; but it is likely 
that many of them are of Coptic or rather Old Egyptian origin. 
If the above-quoted statement of Iamblichus can be depended 
upon, some of them may be of great antiquity, and it is possible 
that they may be traceable to the ancient rituals of Egypt. 
The assumption of the name and character of a god, spirit, or 
prophet, of which instances occur in our fragment, and which 
appears to be alluded to by Iamblichus (sect. 7, cap. 6), where 
he speaks of the authority which the theurgist derives from union 
or identification with the deity, reminds us of the contents of the 
first chapter of the ‘ Book of the Dead,’ consisting, according to 
Lepsius (Introd. p. 8), of invocations by the departed spirit i 
the form of divers gods, to Osiris the Lord of the nether world. 

Much ingenuity has been expended by learned men in ex- 
plaining the mystical words found upon the Gnostic gems, and 
generally without very decisive success'. In some cases their 
explanations have proceeded upon erroneous readings, the en- 

1 See Bellermann, Ueber die Gemmen der Alten mit dem Abraxas-bilde, 
Berlin, 1818. Matter, Histoire du Gnosticisme, Paris 1828 (1st Edition, 
vol. ii.). Matter’s promised work, ‘Monumens du Gnosticisme,’ intended 
as an appendix to the 2nd Edition of his ‘ Histoire du Gnosticisme,’ has, so 
far as I know, not yet appeared. There is among the Proceedings of the 
York Philosophical Society, 1849, an interesting paper by the Rev. 
J. Kenrick, in which an inscription on a Gnostic amulet found at York is 
explained from the Coptic. 


ix 


gravings of these gems being often very imperfect. Our Pa- 
pyrus may be of considerable service in fixing the real reading 
of some of these doubtful legends, and together with those of 
Leyden and the ‘ Pistis Sophia,’ it affords materials for a much 
more complete analysis and comparison of these formule than 
has been yet made. 

A good many Greek words are here found unknown to the 
Lexicons, but of which the meaning is generally apparent. For 
¢ the diphthong ez is frequently found, and sometimes even 
for %, a8 in aiwvoBSeos. The letter v suffers no change in con- 
position before y, A, 7 and y. There is no sign of the aspirate 
breathing, except in one or two doubtful cases, and there is no 
tota adscriptum. 

Such illustrations as I have been able to collect are thrown 
together in the Notes; but several matters I am wholly unable 
to explain, and find myself reduced, as not unseldom happens 
to commentators, to pass over in silence the points which most 
need elucidation. : 

The British Museum possesses another portion of a magical 
work (Papyrus, XLVII. Greek), also obtained from M. Anastasi. 
This Papyrus is so mutilated that a complete line can hardly 
anywhere be made out. It is a single page containing about 
forty limes. Of these the greater part are hexameter verses, being 
an invocation to Apollo, to be pronounced towards the rising sun. 
Lines 24-28 of the first book of the Iliad are introduced, and 
vowel combinations and barbarous words occur, resembling those 
in our fragment, and indicating a kindred origin. 


C. W. G. 
London, 


August, 1852. 


Errata. 


p. 8, 1. 18 for rrepifoopévn read reprelwopevn. 


p. 12, 1. 16 for cpp read ppp. 
p- 20, 1. 10 for Savoy read iSaiov. 


FRAGMENT 


OF A 


GRACO-EGYPTIAN WORK 


UPON MAGIC. 


] e 
Mayr. Sapatruaxov. 


* * * cradds él Adyvou Kal giddns Kal BdOpov.— Em- 
canodual oe Zed, "Hryve, MiOpa, Zdpamt, avlenre, ped- 
oby»ye, Medixepra, peduyevérwp, aBpaarBaBayapPSnyt, BarBer- 
fw0, nBatBeBw8, cepraBcBwl, apedyuprOvovOiTr, Boo, avov- 
teviv, Onprnpov, tvevnow@, alnia, enola, Neat, EVNLE, WHDWO, 
evnotaw, at, Baxattyvy, Boowfpernd, poBn, BiB), 6 péyas 
péyas Ldpatis, ZapachpnO, odapyalas, odappayas, odadap, 
vaxiaBwb, edra, CercapOap, peOounw, Aapappepa, omrrnft, 
arnt, paptavov, avapdavnds xa Sos évtporny te pavevts wpd 
mupos Kal yiovos, Baivyawwy, od ydp et 6 xatadelEas pas xat 
xuova, ppiEwroBpovrakactpamrraxvToowKTe, TWiVTOVYE, ETO{L- 
Goovr, omowanax, apovpovyoa, trapba, evwoade, van, tawdt, 
aovaw, on V, B-yp. 

To a, dvepypévp TO oTdpate KumaToup. 

Td 0, év cvatpody impos mrvevparix. atreid.. 

Td vam, v9, dépt, ovpave. 

To e, cuvoxeharoti. 

To 0, éuolws as rpoxetras. 

Td 7, pe HSovns Sactvev. 

To vu, rrocpéve KaOws paxpoy ov. 

Eire! ére ypnuativw. Aéye "EvcepyécOm 6 Opdvos rod 
Geod, Opovou, Sarepaxupa, Kua, Avaryev, arprradpus, ynwoday- 
Spor, BovBAt, Nov, mrevypy. "Excevey Orta 6 Opdvos. “Eav otv 
iro § dvSpav Baordbyrat, od épwra tt éorepavwpévos eict 

1 MS. ec. 


1. 
A Sarapian divination. 
To be wrought by help of a boy, with a lamp, a bowl, and a 


pit.—I invoke thee, oh! Zeus, Helios, Mithra, Sarapis, uncon- 
querable, possessor of honey, Melicertes, father of honey, . . 


. e* e e @ © @ e@# 0 8 © ee e@ @® @® e© e© e@ e«# @® e# e© oe e« oe oe @e @ 


appear and give heed to him who was manifested before fire and _ 
snow, for thou art he who didst make manifest light and snow, 
terrible-eyed-thundering-and-lightning-swift-footed one. . . . 


Tell what I inquire of thee.—Say as follows :—Let the throne 
of the godenter ....-.+. eee - Bs sik Pat Gat ant teas 
ae ae ee ee let the throne be brought in. Then if it be 
borne by four men, inquire what they are crowned with and 

Az 


4 


kal Ti mpodyet Tod Opovov. “Kav réyn, 'EnXalas dorehavapévos 
cial nat Oupiaripiov mpodyer, adnOé[ver d|mrals. *Arrodvors. 
Xeper xv[pie] eis tov ov xdcpov Kab eis tovs idious 
Opovous eis tas iias arpeidas, nat Statyipnodv pe wal tov 
maioa TOUTOY amnpavrous ey ovopatt TOD iniorou Oeot Zapac- 
pn. Toles ( ovons ev orepe@ Cwdip peta ayaborodv, 7 
év opiow ayabois trapxyovons, wn TANBovens, éoTl yap apetvoy, 
cat orws 7 pavtela ebraxtos amepydberar. ‘Ev 8é dddois 
avtuypadors éyéypamro, rt wANDovens. 


2. 
Avtorr. Oyos. 


Eeuu, To, ex, adrarnt, BapBapta, peveBpew, apBabaw8, 
tounr, tandr,.ounvnie, pecoppias. “EpyécOw 0 Geos bv! ypn- 
patito por cal pn dtepyécOw aypis dv dmodvow atrov. Oup- 
vaoup, gourd, GagovrA, over, vooupSvaov, OaB8par, Pepiaov, 
ayOipt, papal, edpewv, TaBawl, Kipaciva, Naprpoupn, vaBoe, 
aBNavabavadBa, axpappayapape. év Trornpip yary@ ent 
é\aiov, evyp. 5é rov SeEvov ofOarpdv pel’ Baros mroiov ve- 
vavarynxoTos Kal Tov ev@vUpoV OTElLL KOTTTLTLKOV: ETA TOU 
HSaros. “Kay 5é pt) eipys ddwp do vevavaynxoros ardoiov, 
amo traxtavos PeBamricpévou. 


3. 


AaBov Bordyvny yéiyBet cal BovyNwocov, Dducov Kal Ta éx- 
miacpata Kadcov Kal peitov TO yuAw yp. Kal yp. Eis TOryoV 
xow, é€v avrois: xal AaBev travoupytKoy EtXNov yAtpov odipay, 
nat éy TavTy Kpove eis TO ods, Neyo [T]ov rdvyow *EEopKitw 
ge Kata TdY dylov dvoyaTwy Ta. T. KX. Tov dpavTd TL, yaX, 
NAK, KXAN, KOU, Xap, Xap, xpoup, CBap, Anpt, CBapKxop, ypn, 
xapwwB, papiBov, xal Kata TaV PpiKTdy ovoudtwv, acennnut 
O0000UVUUUUUW@WWWOW. 


1 MS. o. 


5 


what precedes the throne. If he say, They are crowned with 
olive and a censer precedes, the boy speaks true.—The Dis- 
missal :—Depart, lord, to thine own world, and to thine own 
thrones, to thy own orbits, and guard me and this boy unhurt, 
in the name of the most high god ZayacdpnO. Perform this 
divination when the moon is in a firm sign of the Zodiac in con- 
junction with beneficent planets, or when she is in favourable 
limits; not when she is at the full, for thus it is better, and thus 
is the divination most orderly performed. But in some copies it 
1s said that it ought to be done when the moon is at the full. 


2. 
A spell for immediate vision. 


ee ee ee ee Let the god whom I inquire 
of come to me, and let him not depart until I dismiss him 


oe ee ee - - . ina brazen cup with oil, and anoint your 
right eye with water taken from a boat that has been wrecked, 
and the left [mixing some] Coptic stibium with the water. And 
if youcannot find water from a boat that has been wrecked, take 
some from a wicker-wherry that has been submerged. 


8 


Take the herb yeAySer, and bugloss, press out the juice and 
burn the crushed leaves and mix the ashes with the juice. 
Anoint and wnte upon awall...... with these materials. 
And take a common piece of wood, and cut a hammer out of 
it, and strike with it upon the ear, pronouncing this spell :—I 
adjure thee by the holy names, render up the thief, who has 
carried away such a thing, ....... 2.2.2.2. 2 eee 


ee @ e© @ e e e© e ses e @ «© ® e@ @ ee e ee e¢ @ #8 e@ e@ 8© © e©§ #@ @ 


@ a 
vu €€ 
beee ann 
on bee 
EE EEEE | nnn 
aaaaaaa € €€ EEE 
aaaaaaa 


LAW, WL, LWA, ANW, NWA, wan. 
Ilapados tov Kréerrnvy tov KrepavTd Tt, Scov Kpotw Td 
ovariov opvpy talty 6 To Kdérrov OpOarpes KpovécOw Kai 
preypavecOw aypt ov avrov pnvion. Aéyov Taira xpove TH 
opupn. 
4A. 


UTHAN ToD Beov rod Cwyp. eis THY érucroAHy. 


Le Kado, Tov axéharoy, Tov KricavTa yhv Kai oupayoy, Tov 
KTicavta vueTa Kal npépay, oe Tov KTicavta das Kal oKOTOS. 
Xv ef "Ocopovvadpis, dv ovdels elde mrarrote, ov el “laBas, ov el 
"Idarws, od Stéxpewas 70 Sixavoy Kat To adixov, od éroinaas 
Onrv Kal dppev, od BerEas orropay Kal Kaptrovs, ov érrolncas 
tos avOpwrous GhAnrodireiv nal GdAnromselv. "Eyed eipus 
Movons 6 mpodyrns cov, 6 twapédwxas Ta pvoTnpid cou Ta 
cuvtedovpeva ‘lotpanr, od &derEas trypov nal Enpov nal Tacay 
tpopyy. '"Emdxovaov' pou: éyw eps dyyedos ToD Pampw 'Ocop- 
ovvwdpts, TOUTS éotiv cov TO dSvoxa TO AANOwwoy, TO Trapad:- 
Sdpuevoy roils wpodyras ‘lotpdnr. ‘Endxovoov pov, ap... 
Oram, peBer, abereBeponO, a..Braba, aBev, eBev, gu, 
yitacon, 18..Ovaw, eicdKxovody pov Kal aroatpeyrov 16 
Saipoveov toro. ‘Esricadobpal ce tov ev TH Kev@ Tvevpart 
Sewovy xal doparov Oedv, apoyoryopoBpaw, soyou, podopia, 
harapyaw, 000, atre, axépanre, arrddrdafov tov Seiva amd rob 
cuvéyovros abrov Salnovos. PovBpraw, papwwdap, BarBva- 
Baw), accarwvat, apviaw, t, dwrnO, aBpaca€, anowy, ioyupe, 
axépare, addXakov tov Selva aro Tov ovvéyortos avrov dai- 
povos. Ma, Bappaww, wr, xofa, abopnBarw, a8paw, 
amd\nafoy tov Seiva. Awl, aBawl, Bacup, icax, caBaw$, 


1 MS. enraxovoy. 


s. @ e@® ee ese @  @® @® @ @ @# @® @# @® @ ee oe @ @ 


Render up the thief who has stolen such a thing: as long as 
I strike the ear with this hammer, let the eye of the thief be 
smitten and inflamed, until it betrays him. Saying these words 
strike with the hammer. 


4. 
An address to the god drawn upon the letter. 


I call thee, the headless one, that didst create earth and 
heaven, that didst create night and day, thee the creator of light 
and darkness. Thou art Osoronnophris, whom no man hath 
seen at any time; thou art Iabas, thou art Iapds, thou hast 
distinguished the just and the unjust, thou didst make female 
and male, thou didst produce seeds and fruits, thou didst make 
men to love one another and to hate one another. I am Moses 
thy prophet, to whom thou didst commit thy mysteries, the 
ceremonies of Israel ; thou didst produce the moist and the dry 
and all manner of food. Listen to me: I am an angel of 
Phapro Osoronnophris; this is thy true name, handed down 
to the prophets of Israel. Listen tome, .........2.. 
rere ee Tree hear me and drive away this spirit. 

I call thee the terrible and invisible god residing in the 


empty WING, 6.68 aa aS were a ee 
thou headless one, deliver such an one from the spirit that 


ee ee re ae ee a eae strong one, headless one, 
deliver such an one from the spirit that possesses him. .... . 


8 


law, OTOS EoTWW 6 KUpios TOY Dewy, obTOS eoTLY 6 KUpPLOS TIS 
9 / @ 7 ew fe) @ 7 ? e 
oixoupévns, ovTds eorw by of aveuor hoBobvrat, otros éoTi 6 
momoas pwvnv mpootaypate éavTov, Tavtwv' Kupie, Bacired, 
dwvacta, Bonbe, cacov Wuyi, Lev, Tup, Lov, TUP, LAWT, Lana, 
toov, aBpacaft, caB8piap, 00, vu, €v, 00, vu, adwvase, nde, edu, 
adryryehos tov Beov, avNada, Aa, yata, ara, Siayavva, yopuy, 
éya cit 6 axédaros Salywv év toils troclv éywv THv Epacwy, 
? \ XN a“ N 9 LA ? , > e ? , @ ~ 
iayupos, TO Tip To aBavatoy, éyw eps 7 adnOeta, oO percav 
adicnpata yeiverOas ev TO KOTHH, YO Elyt 6 doTpaTTT@Y Kal 
Bpovrav, eyo eis ov dot 6 idpws SuBpos érumeirrwy éml 
Tv yn iva oyevy, ym eipt od TO oTopa Kalerat Bu’ Grov, eye 
cit O YyevvaY Kal atroyevvav, eyo ett 7 YdpiG TOD aidvos, 
Svopd por xapdla mepborwévn Sdiv. "E&eNOe nal axondov- 
Oncov. Terer? ris mpoxeyévns toujcews. Tpdapas ta ove- 
para eis Katwvov yaptdpwv Kal Siateivas amd Kpotadov eis 
xpotapov ceavtou, évrixyyave mrpés Bopéay Tois = ovopace, Né- 
e s J Ld ‘ , 2 e€ a? 
yov “Trrorafov pot wavra ta Satpovia, va pow 9? bry 
mas Saiuev otpavios Kal aiéptos kal erbyevos Kad brdyetos Kar 
xepoaios Kal évvdpos Kat waoa éruropty Kai paoriE® Beov. 
Kal gota cor ta Saypona mavta trjcoa. “Eotly 8 1d 


ayabov Gwbduov. 


5. 
KXérrrny milacat. 


“Epptv ce xara, Sedov adavaroy, ’s nar "OdAvproy atdaxa 
réwves, Baply 8 iepav, dwoddp’ "Idw, 6 péyas aiwvoBevos, 
dpicros pev ety dpieros Sé dxpodcbas, tapddos pap’ bv 
tnd. ABepapevOwovrepbeFevaFeOpedvowOveuapeBa. Odbros 
6 rovyos él tov xaBappod Aéyera. Adyos Tod aprorupod. 
"Epxov pol, Mocwvpatepva, “AV, EPTN, TPETTTEKTLOUV, bVTLKL, 
ous, ONOKOTOUS, TeptKAUcAaL, TO aTrONOpEVoY aydyns pot Kal 
Tov KAéIrTHV eubdvn toinoas ev TH onpepov Huépg. ‘Enm- 


1 MS. sayra. 2 MS. ny. 3 MS. paoregs. 


9 


This is the lord of the gods, this is the lord of the world, this 
is he whom the winds fear, this is he who made voice by his com- 
mandment, lord of all things, king, ruler, helper, save this soul 


sie shinaen eh Jon ease Big, Westy toe oh es EN ae angel of Gud. . 
ee ee ee ee ee a ee ee I am the headless 
spirit, having sight in my feet, strong, the immortal fire; I am 
the truth; I am he that hateth that ill-deeds should be done 
in the world; I am he that lighteneth and thundereth ; I am he 
whose sweat is the shower that falleth upon the earth that it 
may teem ; I am he whose mouth ever burneth ; I am the begetter 
and the bringer forth (?); I am the Grace of the World; my 
name is the heart girt with a serpent. Come forth and follow. 
—The celebration of the preceding ceremony.— Write the names 
upon a piece of new paper, and having extended it over your 
forehead from one temple to the other, address yourself turning 
towards the north to the six names, saying :—Make all the spirits 
subject to me, so that every spirit of heaven and of the air, upon 
the earth and under the earth, on dry land and in the water, 
and every spell and scourge of God, may be obedient to me.— 
And all the spirits shall be obedient to you: .......... 


5. 
To compel a thief [to confess}. 


I call thee, Hermes, immortal god, who cuttest a furrow down 
Olympus, and who [presidest over] the sacred boat, O! hght- 
bringing Iao, the great ever-living, terrible to behold and terrible 


to hear, give up the thief whom I seek... .........--- 
ar eee ee ee This spell is to be said at the purifica- 
tion.—The spell of bread and cheese. Come tome...... 
ee ee ee ee bring to me that which is lost, ia 


make the thief manifest on this very day. And I invoke Hermes, 
the discoverer of thieves, and the sun and the eye-pupils of the 
B 


10 


rarodpas Se ‘Epi crerrav eiperny, cat #uov cal jAlov xopas, 
abeplorwv mpaynatwv Svo dwraywyous, rai Ogu nat ‘Epec- 
vov xal “Appova cai Tlapdppova, eb te npatioas Tv TOU 
gwpos xararoow nal éudavn Ocivar év TH onpepov Hepa, ev 
ry aptt- dpa. Ilofgow. ‘O abrds Noxyos éml rod rafappod. 
AaBov dyyos xadAdivov Bare tdwp xat bp. nal xuvoxepanr. 
Bor. xa éuBpéyov kradov Sadvns va exactov drroxabalpov 
r. tpltroba émlOes, ériBes Bapmov yelvov—vov éribve Cp. rat 
ALBavov xal yrwTTay Batpayov cal AaBov cerbyniov dvadov 
xal rupov alyvov, SiSov éxdot@ ceduyviov <n, Tupod <n, émi- 
Aéyav Tov EFAs Aoyov. *Earlypade Sé Todro T6 dvopa Kai vro- 
KOAANTOY TO Tpltrodt. Aéorrora 'ldw dwoddpe trapados papov 
dv Sntd. “Kav 6é tus abtav py) xatarin To Sobev avt@ avros 


éoriv 6 KNéWas. 


6. 
“Eppod Saxtinos. Kav@apou troinots. 


AaBov xavOapov yeyAuppevov ws trroyéypamrat, emt tratrv- 
plyns -tparétns. és, xat dirdOes ind rhv tpdtefav ovvSéva Ka- 
Gapav nai édaiva Urootpwcas kai cis TO péoov TIS Tpatrélns 
pxpov Oupsarnpiov Kal ériOvaas bp. rotdr, Err 5é cot rrape- 
oKevacpévoy oxevdpiov KadAdivov pixpov eis 6 évéTa pdpov 
xplvvov 7 Suipvwov f xivvapedpwvov, Kal NaBov tov SaxtudLov 
Ges eis TO ppor, Tpoayvevoas amd tavtwy cal émriluvaas TH 
Ouptarnpl rd Koids wal Sp. gacov jpépas y, eal r. amrdbov 
év ror@ Kabap@. TlapaxelsOwoay eri ris tererhs dpros xa- 
Odpevor al boa axpater Tv OTropay, Troimaas Se GAAnV Ovalay 
emt EvAwv autrertvev rept tHv Ovciav émapov Tov daxTudov 
amd Tov pvpov, Kad mepirlBeco rdde ypeiwa tO am’ avToU. 
Xpelov xara mpwt, cal ords mpos avatoNds nAlov Néye TA U7r0- 
yeypappeva. TrAvppa xavOapov.—EKis Xov cudparysoy mro- 
AUTEAN YAtov xavOapov, Kal TpHaas Sietpov ypvo®@ eis 5é Ta 
wroxatw tod KavOapouv yAixpoy “low tepav Kai Tehéeoas ws 
Tpoyeyparrrat ypw. 


11 


sun, the two bringers to light of unlawful deeds, and Justice, 
and Erinnys, and Ammon and Parammon, to seize the throat of 
the thief and to manifest him this very day, at this present hour. 
~The ceremony.—The same spell [as that] pronounced at the 
purification. Take a chrysolite vessel and put water in it and 
myrrh and the herb cynocephalium, and dipping in it a branch of 
laurel, sprinkling each person with the water, take the tripod and 
place it upon an altar of earth . . . offer myrrh and frankincense 
and frog’s tongue, and taking some unsalted wheat-meal and 
goat’s cheese, give to each one eight drachms of meal and eight 
of cheese, pronouncing the spell at length. And write this name, 
and stick it beneath the tripod :—“ Lord Iao, light-bearer, give 
up the thief whom I seek.—And if any of them swallow not 
what is given him, he is the thief. 


6. 
The ring of Hermes.—The ceremony of the beetle. 


Take a beetle, sculptured as described beneath, place it on a 
paper table, and under the table a pure linen-cloth, and lay under 
it some olive [sticks], and place on the middle of the table a small 
censer, and offer myrrh and kyphi, and have in readiness a small 
chrysolite vessel, into which put ointment of lilies, or myrrh, or 
cinnamon, and take the ring and put it into the ointment, first 
purifying it from every defilement, and offer in the censer the 
kyphi and myrrh. Leave it three days, and take it and put it 
im a pure place.—At the celebration let there lie near at hand 
some pure loaves, and such fruits as are in season, and having 
made another sacrifice upon vine sticks, during the sacrifice take 
the ring out of the ointment, and anoint yourself with the unc- 
tion from it.—Anoint yourself early in the morning, and turning 
towards the east pronounce the words underwnitten.—The carving 
of the beetle.—Carve a beetle upon a precious emerald, bore it 
and pass a gold wire through, and beneath the beetle, carve the 
holy Isis, and having consecrated it as above-written, use it. 

B2 


Soe 


1%, : 


12 


“Hyépas év als Se? troveiv. "Amd dvatonis ©, 0, t, 8, 0, is, Ka, 


xd, xe. Tais Se ddXats Sreye. Adyos Neydpuevos mpds HALov. 

"Eyo eit @ov0, pappaxov xal ypauparov ebperis Kat Kqt- 
Orns, ENE pot 6 Ud yHv, &yeupé pow 6 peyas Saipwv 6 ra 
‘voybovios 4% Oi vouvoyOdvioL. "Eye eis owv evdoos, way 
iBews, wov lépaxos, Gaov hotvixos aepoporTytov, éywv Uird THY 
yraooav To TéApa Tod en, THY Sopay ToD Keb TeptBEBAnpaL. 
“Eay pt) yo ta év rais vpuyais arravrav Aiyvrrloy, “EXX7- 
veov, Lpav, Aidumrwv, mavtos te yévous Kal tavros éOvous, 
éav pa)! ye 1a yeyovota Kal Ta pédAAOVTA EcecOaL, Eay fH 
yve tas Téyvas avrav Kal Ta érurndevpara Kat Tas épyacias 
xal rovs Blous nal ta dvopata a’rav Kal mratépwy avTav Kal 
pntépwv Kat dedpov xal pirwv cal rdv TeTeNevTNKOTOY, KaTA- 
oTreicw 76 alua Tov pédavos Kuv@rTou eis Kany KVOpav aolvn, 
Kai eriOnow émt xasvov cvOporrobda, xal troxavaw dota ectnous, 
kal xexpafopas év T@ Bovoerpse dpu@ rovde ev wordyp peivavra 
huepas y, viKTas y, TOV Eoin, Tov éveyOévTa ev TH pevpate TOU 
motapou eis THY Oadaccay, TOV TrEpteyopevov UTrO TaV THS Ba- 
Aaoons Kupatav, Kal td Thy TOD dépos vedérnv. “Tard rev 
iyOdwv cov % Kotkia KarécOerar nal TO cha, od Mn Travow 
Tovs tyOvas Trois oTOpact pacwpévous, ovde nV KrElcovEL ot 
tyOues TO oTopa. ‘Adedoduas Tov arrdropa amo TIS pNTpOS, 
kateveyOnoeras 6 TéA0S Kal Ta duo 6pn & Eta. *Exradynow 
dvorEw ef tas xal 8 Oéret tromjoes. Ov py édow obre Oedv 
obre Oedv® ypnparivev Ews Sre éyw 6 Selva Stayva ta év tals 
Wuyais aravrev avOporrov, Atyurrriwv, Zvpev, ‘EXAjvev, Ad- 
GuoTrwv, mavrTos yévous Kat EOvous THY érrepwTravTav pe Kar 
cat pw pot épyopévov cal Nadovvtwv Kai orwmravtov, S7rws 
atrrots éEarryeikw Ta mpoyeyovora avtois xal everra@ta Kal Ta 
pédXdovra avrois EcecOat, eal ye Tas Téyvas a’rdv Kal Tovs 
Biovs nai Ta érirndedvpata xal ra Epya Kal Ta Gvopata avrav 
Kal Tov TeéOvedToOV Kal TavTMY, Kab avayva émioToAny éadpa- 
ytopevny, cal atrayyeikw avrots mavra é& adnGelas. 


1 MS. pev. 2 MS. Geor. 


oe 


| 
: 


13 


Days on which it is proper to celebrate. The 7th, 9th, 10th, 
12th, 14th, 16th, 21st, 24th, and 25th, from the beginning of 
the month. And on others abstain.—Spell pronounced turning 
towards the sun.—I am Thoyth, the inventor and founder of 
medicines and letters; come to me thou that art under the 

arth, rise up to me thou great spirit. . . . 2... 2 ee ee 
I am a famous hero, the ibis’s egg, the hawk’s egg, the young of 
the air-traversing phoenix, having under my tongue the . . . . 
of the. . . . ; I am clothed with the skin of the ..... 
Unless I know what is in the souls of all Egyptians, Greeks, 
Syrians, Ethiopians, every race and every nation, unless I know 
things which have happened and are to happen, unless I know 
their arts, their pursuits, their works, their lives, and their names 
and those of their fathers, mothers, sisters and friends, and of 
those who are dead, I will pour out the blood of the blatk dog- 
eared one into a new unpolluted vessel, and I will place it over a’ 
new chafing-dish, and I will burn under it the bones of ..... ; 
and I will proclaim in the haven of Busiris him who abode in the 
river three days and three nights, the . . . , him who was carried 
by the stream of the river into the sea, who was overwhelmed by 
the waves of the sea and by the clouds of the air. Thy belly shall 
be eaten by the fish, and also thy body, and I will not stop the 
fishes from gnawing it with their mouths, yea the fishes shall not 
shut their mouths. I will take from his mother him that is with- 
out father, the sky shall be brought down and the two mountains 
shall be one. I will let loose against you......... and it 
shall do what it will. I will not permit either god or goddess to 
give an oracle, until I, such an one, know what is in the souls of 
all men, Egyptians, Syrians, Greeks, Ethiopians, of every race and 
nation, of those who question me and who come into my sight, 
speaking or silent, that I may declare to them what has formerly 
happened to them and their present circumstances, and what is 
about to happen to them, and that I may know their arts, their 
lives, their pursuits, their works, and their names and the names 
of the dead, and of all men, and that I may read a sealed letter, 
and tell them all things truly. 


14 


7. 

AaBaov yaprny iepatixov 7 poruBobyv métadov Kat oidnpodv 
xpixov, Oés eri tov yaprnv tov xplxov, al Ecwbey xal éEwbev 
alpe TUTrov Tov Kpixov T@ Karam. Elra &. rv repipeplay, 
elra ypdrpov cis THv Tepiupepelay Tob Kpixov, eis TOV yapTHV 
érvypddav Td Svopa Tovs 58 yapaxrijpas eEwOev, elra § Bere 
&Ewbev! wh yéverOar, xal Ste xatadeOntw avrov  ppovnots 
emi T@ pn) TWounoas TO Seva Trpayua. Elta Gels tov xpleov éri 
THv avrod qmepupepelay iv érolncas Kai avedopmevos Ta Ew 
THs Twepipepelas elpas*® Katdpamrre Tov Kpixov &ws KxaTaxa- 
AVPOYS, KevT@v KaTA TOV YapaKTnpoV TP Karam, Kal deo- 
pevov eye Karadeopevtw rov Seiva mpos rov4 Setva pn Na- 
AnTdTw, [L1) AYTIOTTATO, f1) avTELTTaTO, uy Lot SUvatTO avTt- 
Br&pat, f avrivadijoat, iroreraypévos 5é por Aro éd’ Scov 
ovTos 6 xpixos xéywora. Karadecpedo 5é ad robroy voiv, 
Kar tas ppévas, thy évOdpmow, tas mpakews, ras voxyedis j 
m@pos wavras avOparrovs, gay é Twa Kab Srrws pt) yapuson 
tov® Setva 7) Setva. Korva. 

Elra amevéyxas aid eis dwpou pviua, Spvkov emt § Saxri- 
Nous Kal évOes wal rNeye Néxu Saluewv Goris ef ce tovTo ee 
wapadiiapi ‘cot tov Setva Sirws put) Toney To Seiva mpaypa. 
Elra ywoas drépyov. | 

Kpeiocov &é sroceis € prroupévys. "Eotiv 6 ta ypadopeva 
els TOV KUKANOV TaDTaXapoapabpa, Eeperyuyanry, edayTa, taSouvn, 
axn, aw, Sapuviw, wavinXy un mpayOnrw 76 Seva mpaypa éd’ 
Scov ypovoy Kéywortat O Kplxos obtos. Karadijcov Seopois 
qoujcas omdpta nal ottw xatdBov. ‘O Sé xplxos nad eis 
dpéap Badrerat aypnudriorov } mapa Gwpov. Mera &é rovs 
Xapaxrijpas ypadbe Kat Tatra vroxata Tod Kplxov as mdly- 
Gevov’‘apxoor, Nathap, TeperiNapdh, aupohopiwv, wan, pbovd, 
ewdpn, 6 peytotos Salpwv taw, caBawl, apBabiaw, Narap, 
ocopvodpt, eudpn, pon, P0a, ypwiw, caw, BaBoven, Owapev- 


1 qu.? érwéer. 7 MS. ewvas. ? MS. xaraxadugdn. 
‘ MS. ro. * MS. ro. 


15 


7. 


Take a sheet of hieratic paper, or a leaden plate, and an iron 
ring, and place the ring upon the paper, and mark both inside 
and out with a pen the form of the ring. Then having described 
the circular outline of the ring, write upon the said outline, 
inscribing upon the paper the name, and the characters on 
the outside, and inside the thing which you wish not to happen, 
or that such a man’s mind may be bound so as not to do such 
and such a thing. Then placing the ring upon its outline 
which you have made, and taking up the parts outside the out- 
line, sew up the ring with thread, so as to completely conceal 
it, piercmg through the characters with the pen, and when 
you wish to bind, say :—I bind such an one not to speak to such 
an one; let him not resist, let him not contradict, let him not be 
able to look mein the face, or to answer me, but let him be sub- 
ject to me, as long as this ring is buried. And again I bind his 


_ mind, and his senses, his desires, his actions, that he may be 


sluggish towards all men, ..... and let not such a woman 
marry such a man.—Common words. 

Then taking it to the grave of one untimely dead, dig four 
fingers deep and put it in and say :—O! departed spirit, whoso- 
everthouart ...... I deliver to thee such an one, that he 
may not do such a thing. Then having covered it up depart.— 
And you will do it best in the waning of the moon.—The words 
written within the circle are these,. . ........2.2.. 
let such a thing not be done, as long as this ring is buried. Bind 
it with knots, making strings for that purpose, and thus deposit 
it. The ring may also be cast into a disused well or into the 
grave of one untimely dead. And after the characters write also 
these words below the ring asa base, ........... 


16 


dp, pe, vovet, caBaw8, BapBabtaw, Gaypa, ovyecO, ecopvw- 
ps) ai Tov vOo NO av. dv Kal ow roveis. 


{Here follows in the MS. the figure referred to in the above 
directions, of which an accurate representation is given in 
the facsimile. See Plate. ] 


["H] S€ adr?) oixovopia ypaderas eri poruBod weradov Kad 
évOels Tov xpixov wepurrvEas yinricov, peta Sé TO troxdtw 
mrivOvov, eal To tacw, No. Kal Tavra’ Baxakvyvy, peveBa, vyvy, 
aBpacak, aw, catdoyes 70 Seiva mpayua. ‘Os bé ev Te avbev- 
TiK@ eupeOn Ta GvopaTa* apPood, NatNap, TepEdiNap, Lacw, do. 
Baxafiyvy, a8pacak, aw, apywpihan, peveriiap, taew, ove, 
Baxakiyvy, aBpaca€, wu, caradoryxes TO Setva Tpaypa. 


8. 


AaBav didra Sddvns eveapd. xn nab yis wap0. Kab dpre- 
pclas omrepp. adeup. Kal Kuvoxed. TOD yoptov. “Axyjoa Sé 
mapa ‘Hpaxdeorronsrixod Tivos, Sts NawBaver ard éd. dpte 
Brac. tod Sév8pou xoptc6. tov evros ov en, vd tratdos abOo- 
pov Bacrdferar, cuvdodrat Tois mpoKeipévots, Kal iypdov dod 
tBews eis Srov 1d pipapa, wat mA. “Epp. ydapvdndopor, 
€ obons advaron. év Kpe@ f AéovTe fH Trapévp 4 TokoTy. Ka- 
reyérm S¢ 6 ‘Epuis enpixiov, xat ypdapov rov do. els ydprnv 
ieparixoy Kal eis hicav ynvelay, xabws maXLv rapa Tob ‘Hpa- 
KNeoTroNLTiKOD, Kal evOes eis TO Gwd. Evrveupatwoews elvexer, 
kat drav Botdy xp. AaB8ev ydprny ypdapov 70 do. nal TO mp. 
Kat amroKeipdyevos éx Ths Kehadis cov tpiya ouvéditov re 
xaptn, Sioas Gypare dowixlyp, nat eEwbev atrod Kxrddov 


édalas wal Oes apds Tovs modas Tot $ , ot bé Aéyoues aire 
ériBes. KelcOwm 5& rd fwdvov &y vam didrupive, Srav Sé 


BovrAy xp.» pos xeharyns cov riPeu tov vacv civ TH Ded, nad 
Sloxe ériOvwv AiBavov éri Bopod Kai yiv did cevtopopov 


rr 2 


[The figure. See the Plate.] 


And the same arrangement may be written upon a leaden’ 
plate, and having put the ring in it fold it over and cement it, 
and afterwards the base beneath, upon which write caew, etc., 
and also these words. . . 2... 2... ee ee eee ene 


ee ee ee ee » . . prevent such athing. And 

in the original the names are found written thus. ...... 

Se ee ee ae ee eee ee prevent such a thing. 
8. 


Take of the inner leaves of laurel twenty-eight, and virgin 
earth, and wormwood seeds, flour, and the herb cynocephalium. 
And I have heard from a certain Heracleopolite, that he takes of 
the leaves of an olive-tree lately sprouted,...... twenty-eight : 
it is carried by a chaste boy, ground up with the before-mentioned 
materials, and the white of an ibis’s egg is mixed upwith thewhole. 
And take an image (?) of the cloaked Hermes, the moon’s rising 
being in the ram, the lion, the virgin, or the archer. And let 
Hermes hold the herald’s wand, and write the spell upon a sheet 
of hieratic paper, or on a goose’s bladder, as again I learnt from 
the Heracleopolite, and insert it into the figure (?) for the pur- 
pose of inflation ; and when you wish for an oracular response, 
take the paper and write the spell and the...... upon it, and 
having cut off a hair from your head, wrap it up in the paper, and 
tie it with a Phoenician knot, and place outside an olive branch, 
and put it at the feet of the ...., or as some say, place it upon 
it. And let the figure lie in a shrine of limewood ; and when you 
wish for an oracular response, place the shrine with the god at 
your head and invoke, offering frankincense upon an altar, and ~ 
some earth from a place where corn grows, and one lump of 

c 


18- 


xeplou nai Badov adhos dupwviaxot a. KelcOw mpos xe- 
parjv cov Kab now pera td cizeiy (undéve Sods arroKpt- 
ow)— 

“Epun xoopoxpdatap, evedpdie xvKNe oedrvns 

LrTpovyvre Kal rerpdywve, Noywv apyiyera yacons, 

TlesBodixaucuve, yrapvdndope, mrnvoTrédire, 


e \i 


Aibépuov Spdpov eitlocav iro! rdptapa yalys, 
IIvevpar’ nvloye 17 6pOarpe péyuore, 


Tlaudavou yAwrrns apynyera, Ndyrrace TéeptTrev 

Tovs iad Tdprapa yains re Bpdrous Biov éxredéoavras, 

Mopar rpoyvearns ov Néyn Kal Oetos Sverpos 

“Hyeplvous [xat] vuretepivous ypnopovs érurréutrov, 

Etaca: travra Bpotwy adynpata cais Oeparreiass, 

Acipo paxap pynyns teXecipovos ule peyote 

Xn pophy tapos te PavnOe irapos 7’ émlrecrov 

"AvOparre éaiy popdny 7 ikapov ériretrov (enol r@ Setve) 

“Odpa te pavtootvats tais sais dperaiot Ad Boup. 
Adopas xipte, Trews pros yévov Kat aypevdns pos pavels yp. 


Aiwxe nal mpos avaroNas 7 kal €. Urndrn &v Tots 


yaprece ypapopévn Tob fwd. Te, (sevveyadery, opm, Bav, Ba, 
von, odnpe, ToUpE, Totpe, cay, KavOapa, Eperyvyad, TavKLOTN, 
SwdexanxioTn, axpoupoBope, Kxodnpe, onpiea, KEVTEV, KOVTED, 
KEVTEV, » 2 ~~». €V, Kapvyx, AuKUvEUVTA .. . ATV, XPN; 
upivwTov, NoupavaTa, ... wv, Kopavdpoy, xpeBaya, vov- 
Ba ...@, vouptdrrov, epoudt, TeTpovdt, . . uBivou, vouptddoy, 
yavdapa, tov, dephepev, Spounp, papounp, yy, -€lra 6 xowos 
hoyos. » Eardvaryxos, ovxpa, vouxpa, tretpivode, Tuatola, po- 
Bepopare, Spvcadminy, Breuev, vilev, Bavdvodua, tpipasa, 


ats OD 
aptBa, Ta, xpatapva. Elra ro pyp y : 


1 MS. uo re raprapa. 


19 


sal ammoniac. Let it lie at your head, and lie down to sleep 
after first saying as follows (giving no answer to any one who 
may address you) :— 
Hermes, ruler of the world, central circle of the moon, 
Round and square, originator of the words of the tongue, 
Persuader of justice, mantle-bearing, with winged sandals, 
Rolling thy ethereal course under the lower regions of the earth, 
Wielder of spirits, greatest eye of the sun, 
Author of all manner of speech, cheering with lamps 
Those mortals who have ended their life and are in the lower 
regions of the earth, 
Thou art called foreteller of fates, and heavenly vision, 
- Sending oracles both by day and by night : 
Thou healest all the ills of mortals with thy medicimes : 
Come hither, blessed one, greatest son of perfect Memory, 
Appear propitiously in thine own shape, and propitiously send 
To a man of holiness (to me, such anone) ..... 
That by thy virtues I may receive an oracular response. 
I pray, lord, be favourable to me, and appear and answer me 
truly. 
Make the adjuration, turning towards the rising of the sun 
and of the moon. The inscription written upon the paper 
wrappers of the figure . 2... 1.2 - - eee ee eevee 


* ee e e® 8868 @ e@e@ @ @® @ @® @® j@  @ e® @® @e@ @ @e@ @® @&®  @  @ 
e ee e«© ¢ e® @ ee @# ® @ oe je @ ee @® @® je oe e® @® @® e® ® @ @® @® @ @ 


c2 


idatov 


20 


9. 
"AAAniou Kpatwviou mpds tov Avyvov Neyopevov. 
ONypappaya, Tovvoupat, ypn, pLtdrov, Sepxvov, viataw, Toup- 
wndicov, couprpnvis, cuacia, caw, 6 ceicas THY oiKoUpéevny, 
elaehOe xa xpnparticov trept rod Seivos mpdypatos, Soto, xoT00, 
dboupvouy, voveBovn, eractrayatou, d. y. Lapaw mpoxay- 


pevov éyovra Bacthjiov | ji Abybrrriov Kad eri tod oKnTrpou 


tBu, SaricGe tod AlOov 76 Svoma, Kal xataxdeloas eye eri 
pev THS ypeias. Kparer TH apiorépa cov rov Saxtudoyv, Ti 
é SeEla cov KAddov édalas xal Sadvns xatacciov TE MyVH 
dua Neyo Tov Noyov © Kad elpas adrov eis Tov Warov Ths apt 
orépas cou yetpos SdxtuNov éow Brérrovta Kal dyra, KOMAnTAS 
TOV Aiov TH apiorép@ cou wT), KOLULM AVATTOKPLTOS. 


10. 


"Emxarotpal oe tov xtivavta yiv Kal dota nal wicav 
cdapka Kat tray mvevma, Kal Tov oTnoayTa THV Oadaccay Kal 
cane[vovra] rdv ovpavov, 6 ywploas 76 Gas ard Tov aKOTOUS, 
6 péyas vous Ev[vo] nos, 6 TO Trav Svocav aiwvohO [ar] uos, Sal- 
pov Sapoveav, Feds Oedv, 6 xUpLOS THY TrYEUpLaTaV, O aTNAYNTOS 
aiwy, law ount, eiadxovady pou Tis pwvis. "Emixadodpai oe 
rov Suvaorny Tav Oca, inriBpéuera Zed, Zed rvpavve, adatvat, 
xvpte, law ovne. "Enyed eips 6 emixadrovpevos oe cuptoti Oedy 
péyav, Caaranp, ipdov, cal ov js) ge Tis pevijs 
é8patorl, aBravabavarf, aBpaciiwa. [Eya ydp eips otr- 
Oaywovy, Nathap, Bracarwb, aw, Lew, ~veBov8, caBiobap, 
Bw0, apBabtaw, aw), ca8awb, rarovpyn, fayoupyn, Bapovy, 
adwvat, edwat, waSpaap, BapBapave, vav, cid, trynrJ- 
ppove aiwvoBe, xoopov 76 Siabdjpa, wavros Karéyov, overn, 
caxtieTn, Biou= ogy =vover=crebo = yOebwvipryx, wnannwat, 
@, WNnlaw, aciad, capatnordcw, eOpoupnoiwt, cep, NAV, dov, 
Noupuyy. ledas Aver, auaupoi, cverporopmet, yapiTynovoy, 
xowa éf' & bérets. 


21 


9. 
A spell of Alletus Creonius spoken towards the lamp. 


Thou that shakest the world enter and give answer concerning 
suchathing .. 2... 6 ee et ee te te ee we ews 
ee ee ae eee Say it three times. [Carve] Sara- 
pis sitting in front holding the royal sceptre (?) of Egypt, and 
upon the sceptre an ibis. Behind the stone cut the name, and 
shut it up and keep it for use. Take the ring in your left 
hand, and a branch of olive and laurel in your right, shaking it 
over the lamp, at the same time pronouncing the spell seven 
times, and having drawn it upon the... . . finger of your 
left hand facing and turning inwards, having fastened the stone 
to your left ear, lie down to sleep, returning answer to none who 
may speak. 
10. 

I call upon thee that didst create the earth and bones and all 
flesh and all spirit, that didst establish the sea and that shakest 
the heavens, that didst divide the light from the darkness, the 
great regulative mind, that disposest everything, eye of the 
world, spirit of spirits, god of gods, the lord of spirits, the im- 
moveable Kon, Iao ount, hear my voice. I call upon thee, the 
ruler of the gods, high-thundering Zeus, Zeus, king, adonai, 
lord, Iao ovne. I am he that invokes thee in the Syrian tongue, 
the preat Pods. 6.04, 9g sep lars a, ee ee Se ke ow A and 
do thou not disregard the Hebrew appellation ........ 
ee ee ee Or Tain ie ok es a Be SS, eae 
ee ee ee eee ee ae ee a ee lofty-minded, 
ever-living one, crown of the world, upholding all things, . . . 


This spell loosens chains, blinds, brings dreams, creates favour ; 
it may be used in common for whatever purpose you will. 


NOTES. 


Sect. I. 


Title. Mayr.| The neuter Zapamaxoy compels us to read 
Mayreiov or Mdvrevza. Both of these words, however, mean 
rather an oracular response than an invocation, which appears 
to be intended here. The proper word would be pavrefa. In 
the Leyden Papyrus, No. 75, the 7th Section is entitled @eo- 
pavriov. (Reuvens, Lettre 1*¢ & Letronne, p. 9.) 

mavos.| A word is lost, probably wera. The following ex- 
tract from Robimson’s Grecian Antiquities will explain the use of 
the boy the lamp and the bowl:—“Sometimes divination by water 
was performed with a looking-glass, and thence called xaromrpo- 
pavreia. Sometimes also glasses were used, and the images of 
what was to happen were represented in water. Sometimes it 
was performed with a vessel of water, the middle of which was 
called yéorpy, and then the divination was denominated yaorpo- 
pavreia. The manner of performing it was as follows :—They 
filled certain round glasses with clear water about which were 
placed lighted torches. They then invoked a demon, praying in 
a low murmuring voice, and proposed the question to be solved. 
A chaste boy or a pregnant woman was appointed to observe with 
care and exactness all the alterations in the glasses, at the same 
time desiring and commanding an answer, which the demon re- 


23 


turned by images in the glasses, that by reflection from the water 
represented what should come to pass.” (p. 271.) See further 
Mr. Lane’s description of the proceedings of the modern Egyptian 
conjuror extracted below in note to the word eicepyécOm. Ori- 
gen (Philosophumena, IV. c. 28) explains some of the tricks by 
which the conjurors of his day deluded both the ears and eyes of 
the boys whom they employed. 

BeOpov.] In the magical operation described by Lucian in 
the dialogue entitled ‘ Philopseudes’ (vol. ii. p. 336, Ed. Greevii, 
1687), the sorcerer commences by digging a pit. In the ‘ Necy- 
omantia’ (vol. i. p. 331) the proceedings of a Chaldean magician 
are thus described :—“ Passing over the Euphrates we came to a 
wild, wooded and sunless place, where we landed, Mithrobarzanes 
(the magician) going first. We then dug a pit, and slaughtered 
a sheep, and sprinkled the blood all about the pit. In the mean- 
time the magician holding a lighted torch, no longer speaking in 
a low tone, but crying out at the very top of his voice, invoked all 
kinds of demons, the Avengers, the Furies, nocturnal Hecate, 
and the lofty Proserpine, mixing up with his invocation certain 
barbarous and unintelligible polysyllables.” 

persovye.] If intended for a compound of péd and éya, this 
should, according to the analogy of such compounds, be peru- 
rovxe. But such accuracy is not to be looked for in our MS. 
MeAleepra, the name of a Greek sea-deity having nothing to do 
with honey, is perhaps introduced here merely from the circum- 
stance of its containing the syllables were. MedAvyeverwp, though 
unknown to Greek writers, is a regular compound, and an appro- 
priate epithet for a bee. Is the allusion here to that insect as the 
well-known hieroglyphical symbol of sovereignty? Qu.? whether 
the bee ever occurs on Gnostic gems. Montfaucon, Antiq. Ex- 
pliquée, tom. 11. pl. cliv., gives an engraving of a gem, bearing an 
insect apparently intended for a bee. 

tvevjom@.| The last three vowels of this compound have 
the aspirate sign usually found in MSS., viz. the left half of the 
letter H. See Blomfield’s Matthiz, vol.i. p. 28. For the rest no 


24 


marks of accentuation occur in our MS., except perhaps in one 
instance to be noticed hereafter. See note on the word dactvev, 
infra. 

Baxakiyvy.| This word occurs in Sect.7. It seems to be a 
compound, as we find in the same section the syllables cyvy 
alone, and in the Leyden Papyrus No. 65, column xx. 1. 32, occur 
the words Bayvy, cvyvx, written over a scarabeeus and an eye in 
juxtaposition. ” 

ZapacdpnO.] This word occurs on many of the Gnostic 
gems, and has been supposed to be a compound of Heb. YDw, 
the sun, and Egyptian ¢-p7, which has the same meaning. Its 
identification here with Zaparris,” Hos, and Mi@pas, certainly 
confirms this idea. 

vaxtaBod.| Over this word and those which follow there is 
interlined in the MS., whether by way of correction or addition 
is not certain, the following formula, axpaBaewegralareapBa- 
pevoOinwoapacdpn8. Thesame is also interlined over the word 
paptayou, @ little further on. 

Basvyowory.| This word occurs on magical gems (see Matter, 
Hist. du Gnost. vol. i. pl. 5. fig. 7, 1st Edit.), and seems to be 
the name of a deity or power of great importance in some of the 
Gnostic systems. Pistis Sophia, p. 242. “Dixit Jesus: hominis 
hujusmodi quum tempus absolutum sit o¢aspa, venientes ad 
ejus yuyny trapadnutrras Bacvywooy, qui unus est in tribus 
diis rpduvapocs, ducent ejus yuynv in letitid et gaudio, etc.” 
Again, p. 225. “ Factum igitur est quum ligaret eos ita Jeou, 
trahens magnam dvvayuy e magno aopar@, ligavit eam in hunc, 
quem appellant Kpovoy, atque etiam trahens aliam vim ex Iyay- 
TaxYouvyatvyouxewy, qui unus est e tribus tpiduvayors diis, li- 
gavit eam in Ap», et trahens duvaywy e Barrywwoy [the MS. has 
Xawyowory, but .there cannot be a doubt of the true reading] 
qui unus est e tribus tpiduvayocs diis ligavit eam in Eppyny, ra- 
Mey iterum trahens duvauww e miore cogig, filii BapBndov, 
ligavit eam in Adpodcrnv.” This singular passage seems to 
identify Bawyywwoy with the genius residing in the planet 


29 


Mercury. The word is perhaps a mystical combination of letters, 
without meaning. Bellerman (Abraxas-bilder, Part I. p. 86) pro- 
pounds a derivation which does not seem satisfactory enough to 
be worth transcribing. The words Rasy, ywory, also occur in a 
charm for the gout given by Alexander Trallianus (Ed. Goupyli, 
p- 199; Ed. Guinteri, p. 657), which may as well be introduced 
here. IIpoduAacrixov roddypas. AaBov méradov xpucov, 
seAnvNS AIpyovons, ypade ev adT@ Ta Urroxelpeva, Kat évovoas 
eis veDpa yepdvou elra Suovov TH Terddkw coAnVapLoV TroLnoAS 
Kataxdelcov nal pope: aept rovs dotpayddous. Mel, Oped, 
pop, pop, revk, Sa, Sov, 02, Nov, ypl, ye, Fe, ov, as orepeovrar 
6 HALos év Trois Gvopace TOUTS Kal dvaxasvileras KaP éxaoTHV 
Huépay, ovTw oTEepemoaTte ToiTO TO TAdGLA KAOwS Hv TO TplY, 
Hon, 78n, Taxyd, tayv, ou yap Aéyo Td pwéya Svopa év @ ava- 
mavopeva otepeotvTar. “lat, atid, tiwv, Opevé, Baly, ywwy, 
orepe@oate TO TAdopa ToUTO KADMS Fv TO MpawTov, Hon, HON, 
TAYV, TAYV. 

d¢pi€wroBpovtakacrparraxuTrdéwxre.| The components of 
this monstrous word seem to be — ¢dpicow, ayy, Sporn, 
GOTPATTH, TOUS, WKUS. 

muvrovye.| Qu.? mavroty~e. 

aotaw, on'v, byp.] From what follows it seems that a letter 
is omitted here, and that we ought to read aotaweonv. yp 
perhaps stands for Oeoypadixov, or Oeoypdparoy. 

avewypévm.| These words and those which follow appear to 
contain directions for the pronunciation or application of the 
mysterious vowels. Kuyatouy. probably stands for cuparov- 
peevos. The verb «upareiy is not found in the lexicons, but «v- 
parovy and xupatifery occur, in the sense, ‘ to stir, agitate as a 
wave.’ The direction may perhaps mean, “ Enunciate the a with 
open mouth, rolling forth the sound like a wave.” 

avotpody.| Lvotpéperv Noyous means, ‘ to speak shortly, con- 
cisely ;’—€v cvotpody may therefore possibly mean, ‘in a short 
abrupt manner.’ IIpds wvevpatix. aed. The end of the last 
word is wanting through a flaw in the MS. The A seems to 

D 


26 


have been followed by an «. Probably however we must read 
m7 pos TrvevpaTsKas a7reiAas, i. e. to be used for menacing spirits. 
Upon the subject of menaces used in divination see notes on 
Sect. 6, infra. 

Yi, dépt, ovpav@.| It would seem from this that the three 
vowels in the mystical name Iaw, so often occurring on the 
Gnostic gems, and which has generally been identified with the 
Hebrew /Tii7’, have reference to the three great divisions of the 
universe, Earth, Air and Heaven, the first of which was considered 
the region of mortal souls (yrvyai), the second of demons and 
heroes (Saduoves, fpwes), and the third and highest of the gods. 
(Porphyrii Epist. ad Anebonem, prefixed to Gale’s Iamblichus de 
Mysteriis.) In the Pistis Sophia (p. 228, translation) we find :-— 
“Hee est ejus épunvela: swra: universum exiit; adda: re- 
vertentur intus ; wq@: erit finis finium.” 

kuvoxepadiori.] Literally, “after the manner of a cynoce- 
phalus.” Horapollo, Bk. i. chap. 14, tells us that the cynoce- 
phalus symbolized, letters, habitable world, moon, priest, augur, 
swimming. It also denoted the rising of the new moon. The 
ingenious reader may from these significations perhaps find some 
clue to the meaning of xuvoredadorl here. I have not been 
able to form any conjecture worth offering. 

Gpowuws ws rpoxeirat.| i.e. in the same way as directed with 
regard to the former letter o. 

pel HSoviis Sactvev.] “ Aspirating it softly (?).”” Two small 
strokes are placed over the 7, apparentlyto indicate this aspiration. 

Trowpeévt, xa0ws paxpoy éov.| “To the shepherd, to be pro- 
nounced long.” Perhaps zroujéve has reference to Hermes, as 
~puyayoryos, the shepherd or leader of souls. See Origen (Phi- 
losophumena, V. c. 7, p. 108), where we find that some of the 
Gnostics applied to Hermes the words of Ps. 2, Tlouuavets av- 
tovs év paBdq@ odnpa. 

xpnpatlte.| This word is used in Hellenistic writers in the 
sense, to give an oracular response or supernatural warning, but 
is generally found in the passive voice. Thus Matt. ii. 22, ypn- 


27 


paricbeis wat’ dvap. Acts, x. 22, éypnatioOn im’ ayyédouv 
dyiov. And in Romans, xi. 4, we find ypnyatiopos, an oracle. 
It here means, to consult a god or oracle. In the older Greek 
writers ypnuarifw was used to signify, to deliberate about a 
matter, and also, to give an answer after deliberation, but. with- 
out reference in either case to supernatural agency. 

eiaepyécOw.| The operator commands the throne or chair of 
the god invoked to be brought in. This is supposed to be visible 
to the eyes of the boy who is looking intently into the water in 
the basin. The whole of this operation bears a close analogy to 
that described by Mr. Lane in his ‘ Modern Egyptians’ (vol. 11. 
chap. 12), whose account may be properly introduced here :—“ In 
preparing for the experiment of the magic mirror of ink, which, 
like some other performances of a similar nature, is here termed 
‘ darb el-mendel,’ the magician first asked me for a reed-pen and 
ink, a piece of paper, and a pair of scissors; and having cut off 
a narrow strip of paper, wrote upon it certain forms of invoca- 
tion together with another charm, by which he professes to ac- 
complish the object of the experiment. He did not attempt to 
conceal these, and on my asking him to give me copies of them 
he readily consented, and immediately wrote them for me, ex- 
plaming to me at the same time that the object he had in view 
was accomplished through the influence of the two first words, 
‘Tarshun’ and ‘ Taryooshun!,’ which he said were the names 
of two genii, his familiar spirits. I compared the copies with 
the originals and found that they exactly agreed. * * * * 


‘* Magic invocation and charm.” 


“Tarshun ! Taryooshun ! come down ! 
Come down! be present! Whither are gone 
The prince and his troops? Where are El-Ahmar 
The prince and his troops? Be present, 
Ye servants of these names |” 
1 Or “ Tarsh”’ and “ Taryoosh” ; the final un being the infiexion which 


denotes the nominative case. 


D2 


28 


‘“‘ And this is the removal. And we have removed from thee 
Thy veil; and thy sight to-day 
Is piercing! Correct: correct.” 


“ Having written these, the magician cut off the paper contain- 
iug the forms of invocation from that upon which the other charm 
was written; and cut the former into six strips. He then ex- 
plained to me that the object of the latter charm (which contains 
part of the 21st verse of the Soorat Kaf, or 50th chapter of the 
Kuran) was to open the boy’s eyes in a supernatural manner, to 
make his sight pierce into what is to us the invisible world. 

‘‘ T had prepared by the magician’s direction some frankincense 
and coriander-seed and a chafing-dish with some live charcoal in 
it. These were now brought into the room, together with the 
boy who was to be employed: he had been called in by my desire 
from among some boys in the street, returning from a manufac- 
tory, and was about eight or nine years of age. In reply to my 
inquiry respecting the description of persons who could see in 
the magic murror of ink, the magician said that they were, a boy 
not arrived at puberty, a virgin, a black female slave, and a 
pregnant woman. The chafing-dish was placed before him and 
the boy, and the latter was placed on a seat. The magician now 
desired my servant to put some frankincense and coriander-seed 
into the chafing-dish ; then taking hold of the boy’s nght hand, 
he drew in the palm of it a magic square, a copy of which is given 
in p. 94. The figures which it contains are Arabic numerals!. 


1 “ The figures in this magic square are arranged thus :— 


It will be seen that the horizontal, vertical and diagonal rows give each the 
same sum, viz. 15.” 


29 


In the centre he poured a little nk, and desired the boy to look 
into it, and tell him if he could see his face reflected in it ; the boy 
replied that he saw his face clearly. The magician, holding the 
boy’s hand all the while, told him to continue looking intently 
into the ink, and not to raise his head. 

“‘ He then took one of the httle strips of paper inscribed with 
the forms of invocation, and dropped it into the chafing-dish, 
upon the burning coals and perfumes, which had already filled 
the room with their smoke; and as he did this he commenced 
an indistinct muttering of words, which he continued during the 
whole process, excepting when he had to ask the boy a question, 
or to tell him what he wasto say. The piece of paper containing 
the words from the Kuran he placed imside the fore part of the 
boy’s takeeyeh or skull-cap. He then asked him if he saw any- 
thing in the ink and was answered, ‘No’; but about a minute 
after the boy trembling and seeming much frightened said, ‘I see 
a man sweeping the ground.’ ‘ When he has done sweeping,’ 
said the magician, ‘tell me.’ Presently the boy said, ‘He has 
done.’ The magician then again interrupted his muttering to 
ask the boy if he knew what a ‘ beyrak’ (or flag) was ; and being 
answered, ‘ Yes,’ desired him to say, ‘ Bring a flag.’ The boy 
did so and soon said, ‘ He has brought a flag.’ ‘ What colour is 
it?’ asked the magician ; the boy replied, ‘Red.’ He was told 
to call for another flag, which he did ; and soon after he said that 
he saw another brought and that it was black. In like manner 
he was told to call for a third, fourth, fifth, sixth and seventh, 
which he described as being successively brought before him, 
specifying their colours, as white, green, black, red, and blue. 
The magician then asked him (as he did also each time a new 
flag was described as being brought), ‘ How many flags have you 
now before you?’ ‘Seven,’ answered the boy. While this was 
going on, the magician put the second and third of the small 
strips of paper upon which the forms of invocation were written 
into the chafing-dish ; and fresh frankincense and coriander- 
seed having been repeatedly added, the fumes became painful to 


80 


the eyes. When the boy had described the seven flags as ap- 
pearing to him, he was desired to say, ‘ Bring the Sultan’s tent 
and pitch it.’ This he did, and in about a minute after he said, 
‘Some men have brought the tent,—a large green tent ; they are 
pitching it.’ ‘ Now,’ said the magician, ‘order the soldiers to 
come, and to pitch their camp around the tent of the Sultan.’ 
The boy did as he was desired and immediately said, ‘I see a 
great many soldiers with their tents; they have pitched their 
tents.’ He was then told to order that the soldiers should be 
drawn up in ranks; and having done s0, he presently said that 
he saw them thus arranged. The magician had put the fourth 
of the little strips of paper into the chafing-dish, and soon after 
he did the same with the fifth. He now said, ‘ Tell some of the 
people to bring a bull.’ The boy gave the order required, and 
said, ‘I see a bull; it is red; four men are dragging it along, 
and three are beating it.’ He was told to desire them to lull 
it and cut it up, and to put the meat into saucepans and cook it. 
He did as he was directed, and deseribed these operations as 
apparently performed before his eyes. ‘Tell the soldiers,’ said 
the magician, ‘to eat it.’ The boy did so and said, ‘ They are 
eating it; they have done, and are washing their hands.’ The 
magician then told him to call for the Sultan, and the boy 
having done this said, ‘I see the Sultan riding to his tent, on a 
bay horse, and he has on his head a high red cap ; he has alighted 
at his tent, and sat down within it.’ ‘Desire them to bring 
coffee to the Sultan,’ said the magician, ‘ and to form the court.’ 
These orders were given by the boy, and he said that he saw them 
performed. The magician had put the last of the six little strips 
of paper into the chafing-dish. In his mutterings I distinguished 
nothing but the words of the written invocation, frequently re- 
peated, excepting on two or three occasions,-when I heard him 
say, ‘If they demand information, inform them, and be ye vera- 
cious.’ But much that he repeated was inaudible, and as I did 
not ask him to teach me his art, I do not pretend to assert that 
I am fully acquainted with his invocations.” 


$1 


Mr. Lane then proceeds to relate how sundry persons whom he 
named were called for by the boy, and described as appearing in 
the magic mirror, the descriptions given bemg in some cases 
astonishingly appropriate. How these apparent successes were 
obtained, has been in some measure explained in the latest edition 
of Mr. Lane’s work, 1846 (see Appendix to the third volume). 

But the preliminary objects seen, a description of which the 
magician elicits from the boy by leading questions, are evidently 
ancient and traditional, and their general resemblance to the ap- 
pearances mentioned in our MS. is obvious. The sultan and his 
suite have been substituted for the divinity borne on his throne 
by four men; the slaughtering of the red bull represents a sa- 
crifice symbolised by the Ouusarypeov or censer; possibly the 
man sweeping the ground may be derived from a vewxdpos or 
temple-sweeper, a very likely personage to have appeared as a 
precursor to the procession of the god, although not actually 
mentioned in our MS.; while the flags recall the sacred banners 
used in Egyptian ceremonials. 

Gxveidas.] Pliny informs us that the word dyis was used to 
signify the orbit of a star, but the lexicons do not furnish in- 
stances of its use in this sense by Greek writers. I cannot find 
the word in any of the Gnostic nomenclatures that have been 
handed down to us. It is here probably equivalent to odaipa 
as used in the Ophite theology. 

év otepe@ Swdly.] This term is thus explained by Proclus, 
Paraphrasis, lib. i. cap. 15:—Téy $2 Aowrdv’ deta [Codlwv] 
Téaoapa pév core oTeped, tTeccapa Se Slompa. Kat oteped 
pev dori & Trois Tpominois axodovbel, Kal Tots ionpepivois 
Slors Stray 6 Hdtos ev rovrouws yévnrat, ioyuporepov Kabarrrerat 
huov kal » ~puyporns nal % Oepporns Kal % Uyporns Kal 6 
Enpdorns Tav xaipay, oi EXaPov Thy apynyv HSn Tod HALovu ev Tots 
tpomiots Kal ionpeptwois yevouévov. Ka@arrera: S¢ jpov 
ioyuporepoy 1) TOY KaLpaw KaTdoTacis, ovy drt picet ToWdTOY 
dori 76 xaracrnpa ToTE, GAN Ere teis eyypovicaytes TO Ka- 
TacTnpatt, evarcOnrorepor éyevopeba Ths Suvdpews avTov. 


32 


From this it appears that the oreped Swd.a or confirmatory signs 
are Taurus, Leo, Scorpio and Aquarius, and that they are so called 
from their confirming the influences begun to be produced by 
planets, while in the signs immediately preceding. See also 
Ptolemy, Tetrabiblos, p. 82 (Ed. 1553, Basile), where the same 
account 1s given. 

pera ayaboromy.| i.e. in conjunction with beneficent 
planets. Which these were is explained by Proclus, Paraphrasis, 
lib. i. cap. 5 :—Tov reocapwv yupatwv S00 pev dort yevvntixa 
wal tomriua, TO Oepyov xal iypov Sia TovTwY yap Tavra 
cuvéyetas xal avferar’ Svo Sé dori Ta POaprina Kal waboTouw, 
Td Enpoy Kai TO uypoy Sia rovTwY yap wavta Svadveras Kat 
POelperas. Tots ovv mradaois dio yey Tv TNaYYTOV Os aya- 
Gorrovol évowlaeOnoay, 6 Tob ¥ (Ads), xal o THs 2 CAdpodérys) 
Sia Thy edxpaciay aitay, kal drt wreovaler év avrois 7d Oeppuov 
Kat 7d trypov. “Ere 56) p (LeAnn) dia ra adrd. ‘O dé tod 
h (Kpovov) xat 6 trod 3 (Apeos) ris evavtlas évoulobnoayv 
gioews, kat xaxotrovol’ 6 pev Sua Thy TOAAHV YpuEw, 6 5a dia 
THY TodAnY Enpotnta’ 6 Se © (“HXsos) wal 6 tod Y (Eppod) 
xowns Suvdpews, os audotepa Suvdpyevot nad cuvrpetropevot 
arpos obs dy yévevrat. 

* Of the four humours two are generative and creative, namely 
heat and moisture, for by them all things are sustained and nou- 
rished : and two are destructive and unhealthy, dryness and cold, 
for by these all things are dissolved and destroyed. The ancients 
reckoned two of the planets as beneficent, namely Jupiter and 
Venus, on account of their temperate quality and because heat 
and moisture predominate in them ; and so also the Moon for 
the same qualities. But Saturn and Mars were held to be of an 
opposite nature, and baneful; the one on account of its great 
coldness, the other for its dryness. The Sun and Mercury hold 
a middle place, as possessing both qualities and exerting both 
actions upon those whom they influence.” 

opiou.] The astrologers divided each sign of the zodiac into 
five portions of various lengths, termed dpca, Lat. fines, termini, 


33 


which were appropriated to the five planets. Each planet when 
in its owh proper Spa was supposed to exert its peculiar influ- 
ence in a more powerful degree than at other times.—Origen, 
Philosophumena, V. c. 18, p. 127. “A yap Spta rev dorépwy ot 
dotporoyo Aéyovaty, év ols wadrov Sivacbat pacKover Tovs 
dpyxovras aorépas, oloy & tit Se ayabotrovobcw, Ov Kai Twas 
KaxoTrowus N&yovet, tivas 5é, aya0orrovovs. See Procli Para- 
phrasis, book i. chap. 24,25. Also Manilii Astronomicon, p. 52, 
1. 11 (Ed. Scaligeri, 1600), and Scaliger’s note. 


Sect. II. 


- Title. Avromrr.| Read avrorrixos, i.e. a spell for producing 
avrowia or immediate vision of the god invoked by the operator, 
without the intervention of a boy.—This is perhaps the meaning 
here, but the word avroyla was also used by the theurgists of 
antiquity in another sense, namely, to express the appearance of 
the divine light to the magician without form or shape (a4cy7- 
peatiorov). See Joh. Clerici Op. Philosophica, tom. u. p. 290. 

SapBapia@.| In the Leyden Papyrus, No. 65, column ix. I. 6, 
the word BapBapacOov occurs. In Sect. 10, infra, BapBapavw. 

peveSpero.| Compare infra Sect. 7, weveSa, cyvy; and in 
Leyden Papyrus, No. 65, col. ix. 1. 7, meveBaperaxey, Also 
col. xx. lines 20 and 32, paveBaet. 

apPBabtaw0.] Infra Sect. 7, apBaftaw and BapBafiam, and 
in Sect. 10, apBa8taw occur. Leyden Papyrus, No. 65, col. ix. 
1. 12 we find apfn6; col. x. 1. 11 apBnOBawov0:. 

tounr, tanr.| Infra Sect. 4, cond. These words seem to be 
compounds of different forms of the name fT’, Wt’, 77. with 
ON: 

aBravabavad§8a, axpappayapaper.| These two words occur 
together in the Leyden Papyrus, No. 75. (Reuvens, 1'* Lettre a 
Letronne.) They are inscribed under the outstretched wings of 
a small scarabzeus of a bluish stone, in the British Museum. 
Upon the thorax of the same insect is inscribed the fallowing 
legend :—x@evreBepveyuprovoTpotu¢yyoverBepive 6 péyas év 

E 


34 


otpave apy dunv. ABdavabavad§a is of frequent occurrence 
on Gnostic gems. The word, it will be observed, reads the same 
both ways. Various explanations have been offered. Bellerman 
supposes it to be from the Hebrew MMN 199 38, Thou art our 
father. That the word is Hebrew seems to be implied by a pas- 
sage in Section 10 of our fragment: 20 7) wapaxovons Ths 
gdovis E8paoti aBNavabavadBa aBpacidwa. 
Axpappayapyaper occurs in Pistis Sophia, p. 359 original, 
p- 224 translation, where the word is erroneously written aypap- 
payapapey. See note p. 359 orig. The passage as translated 
by Schwartze runs thus :—® ITaAcy iterum exclamavit Jesus, quod 
aBepavevOwp [read aBepapevOw] est, dicens nomen patris 67- 
aavpov luminis et dixit: puornpia omnia apyovrwy et c£ovorac 
et ayyedoe et apyayyeAos et vires omnes et res omnes aopa- 
tev decorum axpappayayape: et BapBndw, BdedAn, adducunto 
eas seorsum, ut explicent eas ad dextram.” Not much light can 
be derived from this. See Matter’s speculations on this word, 
Hist. du Gnosticisme (1st Edition), vol. ii. pl. 3. no. 6. expl. p. 59. 
év wotnpiy yary@.| Some words are lost here, containing 
probably directions for mixing something with the oil. Peellus 
(quoted by Gale in Notes to Iamblichus, on Sect. III. cap. 13) 
says: “Ad divinas visiones percipiendas, parabant se Aigyptii, 
ut ferunt, vel farro, sic enim vocant, oculos oblinentes, vel thuris 
liquore, vel bdellio.” 
dvyp.| i.e. éyypie or éyypicov. Here as elsewhere in the 
MS. the letter v is retained in composition where in correctly. 
written Greek it would be changed into y. The letters yp are 
expressed by a contraction, figured by Montfaucon, Palsographia 
Greca, p. 344,—a P with along tail drawn through the letter X. 
atholoy vevavaynxétos.| A trace of the mysterious import- 
ance attached to things which had suffered shipwreck is found 
in the following receipt for epilepsy given by Alexander Trallianus 
(p. 30, 1. 24, ed. Goupylii) :-—’O@ovwov éx vavayjicavros motov 
Hon qemNevxoTos Kal tTetradawpevov Sijcov emi tov Sekwy 
Bpaylova émi erra éBdoudbas, x.7.2. 


35 


oreiut.| The black pigment used by the Orientals to darken 
the eyelids. This word is variously written orius, orlups, ori- 
pts, or (Bt, or(Bn, Lat. stibium. A word seems to have slipped 
out here; we should probably read wlEas orelus u.7.r. 

xomriTinov.| This adjective is formed from Komrirns (i. e. 
vowos), and means therefore strictly, not “of or belonging to 
Koptoa,” but “to the Koptic Nome.” It seems here to be merely 
synonymous with xomrsxdy. Compare the words sravoupysxor, 
Sect. 3, and ‘Hpaxdeo7roderexod, Sect. 9. Coptos was at one time 
a great seat of commerce, and a depét for oriental merchandize 
(Wilkinson’s Egypt and Thebes, vol. ui. p. 180), and the stibium 
sold there may have borne a reputation for fineness or some pe- 
culiarity of quality. In a list of botanical and chemical words, 
taken from a MS. in the Royal Library at Paris, printed by Du- 
fresne in the Second Appendix to his Glossarium Mediz et In- 
fimee Greecitatis, orlups xomrrixoy occurs, but without explanation. 

maxtaovos.| This was alight kind of boat in use on the Nile, 
made of wands, something after the manner of wicker-work. 
Strabo thus describes it (Book 17) :—Asé@ner 5é ets TAV vijcov 
éri maxta@vos: 6 5é wraxtov dia oxvradbov remnyos éott oxd- 
giov, wor éoxévas SiaTroxlyp éotares 5 ev date 4 Kal ca- 
vidlous tit mpooxabnpevor padiws émepawwOnuev ob SedvoTes’ 
dxlyduva yap éorw av un ts vrrépyopov Trounon TO TopOpEiov. 
This implies that submersions were not unfrequent. 


Sect. ITI. 


xérxyx8er.| In a list of plants contained in the Leyden Pa- 
pyrus, No. 65, the name. yeAXyeBe occurs (col. v. 1. 16) ; obvi- 
ously another form of our yéXyer. Professor Leeman seeks an 
explanation from the Coptic, but does not attempt to determine 
what particular herb is meant. The word bears some resem- 
blance to helbeh, the Modern Egyptian name for Trigonella Fe- 
numgrecum, a sort of clover (Wilkinson’s Ancient Egyptians, 
vol. iv. p. 72; and Egypt and Thebes, vol. i. p. 458), which, ac- 

E2 


36 


cording to Dioscorides, was used for making a certain kind of 
ointment. , 

xp. Kal yp.| These contractions seem to stand for ypicov and 
ypawrov. The passage is corrupt; yow, of which I can make 
nothing, seems to have arisen from the repetition of the last two 
letters of the preceding word, which in the MS. is written rocyo. 
It appears to be intended, that the figure of an eye, as delineated 
beneath, together with the letters pyramidally arranged on each 
side of it, should be drawn upon a wall with the ink made as 
above described. 

mavoupytxov.| Literally knavish or pertaining to a knave. I 
have translated it, common, capable of being applied to any pur- 
pose. ElvAov, however, was used to signify a collar of wood put 
round a prisoner’s neck to prevent him moving. To such an im- 
plement the epithet sravoupyixov would be appropriate enough. 
There is also an appropriateness in making a piece of the wood 
of the pillory conduce to the discovery of a thief. 

els TO ovs.| What ear is here intended? It perhaps means 
the curl-like appendage to the eye drawn below, which may be 
thought to represent an ear. 

Ta. T. KN.| i.e. wapddos Tov « v. 

Tav dpixtav ovodrev.| According to the doctrine of Mar- 
cus and the Marcosians (Gnostics of the 2nd century), the seven 
heavens were in some manner symbolized by the seven vowels, 
GQ, €, 1, ty 0, v, w—Origen, Philosophumena, VI. c. 48.—'O pév 
Tparos oupaves Pbéeyyerat TO AAa, 6 Se peta TovTOV TO El, 6 
Se rpiros To Hra, 6 5é rétaptos Kal 6 péoos THY Eta, THY Tot 
iara Suvapuw, 6 Sé wéurrros TO 6, Extos Sé Td UV, EBSomos 5é xad 
réraptos amo.Tov eco To @. Al te Svvdwers Tacas es by 
cupTrAaxcioat Hover Kal SoEdfovaw éxeivoy, bp ob mpoeBA7- 
Onoav. ‘H 8é d0ka ris nynoews avetréwhOn mpos Tov IIpoma- 
ropa. Tavrns pévroe Tis SofoNoyias Tov yor, els THY hv He- 
popevoyv, dyot, wrAaoTHy ylverOat, Kai yevviytopa Tay emi Tis 
yas’ tHv 8e drrodeckw ard tov dptt yevvapnévov Boehav, ov 4 
puyn, dua Te ex pntpas mpoenOeiv, emiBog spoiws évos éxa- 


37 


aTouv TY oTovyeimy TovTov Tov Hyov. Kalas ody ai énrdy 
dnor, Suvapes Sofdfover tov Adyov, obra Kat  Yuy? év Tos 
Bpégecs xralovaoa’ Sia rove 82, dnot, nai rev AaBis eipnxévac’ 
“Exe oropartos yytrlwv cat Onratovrov xarnpticw alvoy.”” Kal 
maduy “ Of odpavol Supyoivras Séfav Beod.” ’Enrdy 82 éy r0- 
yous yévntas 4) uy os ériBod obdéy Erepov 9 To @ ef @ 
dviarat, drlaw yvwploaca 4 dvw ~Wuynh Td ouyyeves aurijs, 
BonOov abra xatatrépryy. 

This passage throws some light upon the doctrines of Marcus 
concerning the mysterious powers and significance of the vowel 
sounds ; but it appears to me to afford no grounds for concluding 
that our fragment is the work of a Marcosian, or that the com- 
binations here given involve any of the doctrines of Marcus. 

In the Leyden Papyrus, No. 76, described by Prof. Reuvens 
in the Appendix to the Letters to Letronne, a sort of diagram 
is contained having reference to the significance of the vowels. 
It is as represented beneath (Reuvens, App. p. 157). 


oupavos 
a DWOWWOWW 77 
aTrnNwrT eee voT 
anp vuuuvU 
Bo p pa €é 00000 777 Mp 
yn 


For 777 at the right hand corner, read ¢:¢:, and then we shall 
have 
a=amrnMorns, the East. 
ee= Boppas, the North. 
nm= Map, the West. 
tt6t=v0Tos, the South. 
o0000=y7, the Earth. 
vuvuvy = anp, the Atmosphere. 
wanwwww = ovpavos, the Sky. 


38 


This does not accord with the signification given to ¢, a, w, in 
the first section of our fragment (rd caw, 77, aéps, ovpave), 
and another and quite different explanation is given in Pistis 
Sophia, quoted in the note above. Perhaps these letters had no 
fixed signification, but were made to stand for different ideas ac- 
cording to circumstances, like our algebraical symbols. Mar- 
cus merely borrowed a mode of notation which he found already 
in existence, to symbolize the personages of his own peculiar sy- 
atem. A comparison of the Marcosian doctrines as described by 
Irenseus, with the views developed in our fragment, will show that 
they have little more in common than this mode of notation by 
letters. ; 

ovatwy.| <A diminutive from ods, unknown to the Lexicons, 
which however give ovatios, adj. long-eared, with a handle, an- 
satus. 


Secr. IV. 


Title. otfdn.] The word commonly signifies a stone column 
or slab bearing an inscription, either dedicatory or commemorative 
of some event or of a public decree. It seems to be put here 
simply for an inscription or invocation, and it is again so used in 
Sect. 8. I have not been able to find any other instances of this 
usage. 

@cov.] The first letter of this word looks in the MS. more 
like an I than a @, but I think this arises from a defect in the pa- 
pyrus. It is however possible that the word intended may be 
Ieov, a name of importance in the Ophite theology, as appears in 
the Pistis Sophia, and which occurs in the present invocation, 
p. 8, 1. 4. 

taryp.| i. e. Gwypadoupévov, drawn or painted. 

érurroAnv.| No allusion is made in this section to a letter. 
In Sect. 6, the spirit is adjured to enable the magician to read a 
sealed letter. This title appears to be misplaced, and probably 
refers to some passage in the MS. now lost, in which directions 
were given to inscribe upon a letter a figure of a god, previously 


39 


to invoking his aid to discover its contents. It will be seen that 
the object of the present invocation is to cast a demon out of 
a possessed person. In the margin of the MS. immediately 
opposite this word is the following figure or symbol : 


The letters below are very obscure, but I imagine the 

whole to stand for ypnuaricpos eo, rapadod- 
Oxy "yas KNerrny, or some similar words, and that refer- 
K ence is intended to the preceding section. 


"Ocopovvwdpis.] i. e. Osiri-ouon-nofre, Osiris aperiens bona. 
This appellation of Osiris, Ouon-nofre, was commonly used as a 
surname in Egypt. See Brugsch, Lettre a M. Rougé sur un 
Manuscrit Bilingue sur Papyrus. Berlin, 1850. It was com- 
monly written in Greek "Ovovdpios. 

GAMpdogirely Kat ddAnroueceiv.| These compounds are un- 
known to the Lexicons. 

"Iotpand.] I have not been able to find any other examples 
of this capricious mode of spelling ‘Iopdyd. The letter 7 may 
perhaps be imserted for the sake of give a mystical numerical 
value to the letters of the word, according to the system of 
Basilides and Marcus. 

éya@ eiut Movons.] The magician assumes the name of the 
prophet Moses, with the view of compelling the attention and 
obedience of the god whom he is invoking. So in Section 1, the 
character of the demon Bawyowwwy is assumed,—(8és evtpompy 
7 havévts Trpo Tupos Kal ywovos Barvywwary), and in Sect. 6 that 
of the god Thoyth. An allusion to this practice appears to be 
made by Lucian, vol. i. p. 380, Necyomantia, where the Chal- 
dean magician Mithrobarzanes, counsels his disciple or dupe 
Menippus, in passing through the infernal regions, to clothe 
himself with a lion’s skin, and if asked his name to call himself 
Hercules, Ulysses or Orpheus, inasmuch as all of these personages 
had made successful descents into Hades and returned thence. 

@arrpw.| This is perhaps meant for Papdw, or Copt. da 
ovpo, hic rex. 


40 


To Svopa To adnOivov.] The importance attached by the 
ancient thaumaturgists to a knowledge and use of the true 
names of beings they wished to evoke, is well known, and the 
idea descended to the magicians of the middle ages. Hebrew 
names. were supposed to have a great effect; but if translated 
into Latin or Greek, they lost their efficacy. See Porphyrii 
Epist. ad Anebonem in Gale’s Iamblichus, and the answer of 
Iamblichus to Porphyry’s objections in Sect. vil. capp. 4 and 5 
de Myst., and Gale’s notes thereon. 

év 7G xev@ trvevpatt.] In the Leyden Papyrus, No. 65, col. 
Xv., an invocation in Greek occurs, contaming similar words; 
and as it offers several other pom of resemblance to this, I 
transcribe it here :— 

"Enrucadodpual oe tov ev T@ Keve~@ mrvevpart, Seivov, aoparoy, 
mavtroxpdatopa, Oedv Jeav, POopotroov Kai épnporroiy, 0 pucdv 
oixlay evorabodvaay, as éEeBpdcOns ex tis Aiyvrrou nal ew 
yopas. "ErrovoudoOns 6 wdvra pyoowy Kai pi) viKe@pevos. 
"Emucarodpal ce Tidwv 20, ras ods pavteias emeTend, Ste 
émixanodpal oe To cov avOevtixoy cov Svopua, ev ols ob Sivy 
mapaxovcas Iwep8nO, IwiraxepBy8, IwBorxwon8, lwrrara- 
Ovat, Incopw, IwveBovrocovadn™, Axriwdi, Epeoyvyad, Ne- 
Borromadn9, APepapevOwou, AcpOcFavaF, EOpedkuw6, Nepua- 
peBa, Acueva, Srov Heé por nai Bddioov nai xardBare Tov 
Selva 4 riv Seiva pbyet nal rrupelp. Adros ndlienoéy pe kat td 
alua tod duavos [Tupavos?] ekéyucey rap’ éavtg@ 4 adri. 
Aca rodro Tatra tro. Korva. 

The god here addressed is 270, the evil principle of the 
Egyptians. The name occurs apparently in the word afeNe- 
Bepon@ in 1. 12 of this section. 

aBpacaf.| This is the word, commonly but erroneously 
spelt aSpatas, which has become celebrated in the history of 
Gnosticism. It occurs frequently on magical gems, and is 
invariably spelt as in our papyrus, as it is also in the bilin- 
gual Leyden Papyrus, No. 65, where it is found written in the 
demotic character, the final £ being expressed by the letters ks. 


41 


Various have been the explanations given of this mysterious 
word, and the reader is referred to Bellerman’s tracts upon the 
subject, and to Matter’s Histoire du Gnosticisme, vol. i. p. 415 
(2nd ed.). The oldest and most generally received explanation 
is that given by Irensus, who points out that the sum of the 
numerical values of the letters in the word, according to the 
Greek notation, is 365, which was the number of heavenly intel- 
ligences forming the mAjpwpa of the system of Basilides. 
Afpaca§ would thus represent the totality of the divine es- 
sence. 

caf8aw9.| This word occurs several times in our MS., and 
is doubtless the Hebrew MINIY¥, hosts. Origen (quoted by 
Gale, notes to Iambl. sect. vii. cap. 5) says “ Nomen hoe Sa- 
baoth, si lingu&é Hebreed proferatur, in incantationibus valebit ; 81 
vertas in dominum exercituum, nihil ages.” 

Ieov.] The name Jeov occurs frequently in Pistis Sophia, and 
belongs to a personage of importance. “ Effatus est Jesus, quod 
aBepapevOm est, quod ézrevdn pater mei patris, qui hic est Jeov, 
iste est wpovontros dpyovrwv omnium et deorum et duvapewv, 
que facte sunt in dA” luminis @noaupou et Zopoxofopa Mel- 
chisedec : iste quoque est wpeoBeurns luminum omnium, que 
surgunt in apyovory, introducens eos in Oncaupov luminis,” etc. 
Pist. Soph. transl., p. 228. Mention is also made of a book of 
leou.— puornpia, que in libro Teov que curavi, ut Enoch 
scriberet in vrapadecom, quum loquerer cum eo ex arbore cogni- 
tionis et ex arbore vite; et qu curavi, ut poneret in zre7pa 
Ararad, et posui Kadazatavpw8 dpyovra, qui super Skem- 
mut, in quo est pes Ieou, et iste circumdat ai@vas omnes et e- 
pappevas; apyorra illum posui custodientem libros Ieou de 
Kataxduspem,” ete. — Pist. Soph. transl., p. 221. 

ardp.| The gods and demons were believed to make their ap- 
pearance to those who invoked them, clothed with fire, which 
was brighter and purer im proportion to the rank of the person- 
age. Iambl. De Myst., sect. ii.cap. 4. The highest revelation 
of all, was when the fire appeared alone without any form ; a no- 

F 


42 


tion, taken perhaps from the apparition of the divine flame to 
Moses in the bush. This is alluded to in the oracles of Zoroaster, 
1.320. Clerici Op., vol. ii. p. 398. 
“Hvixa pev Brdpys wopdijs drep ebtepov rip 
Aaprropevov oxiprndov Sdov kara BévOca xoopov, 
KAS6s srupos povny. 
xapis.| The word yapus was frequently made use of in the 
Marcosian system. Irenzus, i. 18, and Matter, Hist. du Gnost., 
vol. u. p. 824 (2nd edit.). 
xapdia treprelwopévn Sdiv.]| The serpent occurs frequently 
enough on Gnostic gems, but I am not aware of any case where 
it is found encompassing a heart. 
évriyyave.| évruyyavecy revi to converse with, talk to. In 
this passage it appears to mean “ to turn or address oneself in 
speaking.” 
énuroumn.| °Eareméwrresy means to send a visitation, infliction 
or punishment. Hence évuropm7 may mean a divine infliction. 
The lexicons tell us that it means “ spell, enchantment.” 
aryabov Sodsov.} This last sentence seems to be imperfect. 
It may mean éoras td ayabov CHdiov tmjxoov cot. But what is 
Tro aya0ov Codtov? In Sect. 8, Swdvov seems to be used as 
synonymous with Geds, and here dya@ov Cwdvov may be equiva~ 
lent to dya0es Salpwv, the agathodemon or principle of good. 
In the upper margin of the page of the MS. which contains 
the last 12 lines of this Section, are some unintelligible words 
and figures in a scrawling hand. I cannot tell to what they are 
meant to refer. As nearly as I can make them out they are as 


follows: ain, awt,....... an, aN, lw, WN, Aalnovevw, LwN, OV, 
aenuova,....yp. 2#0.+768..... TO €v 7H avatwrupnces 


tov xavOdpou yp. 40, mourKove .... 


Szcr. V. 


Title. KyYérrryyv wrlacas.| The species of ordeal described in 
this Section is alluded to by Horace, Epist. 1. 10, 1. 10.— Utque 
sacerdotis fugitivus liba recuso:” whereon the scholiast Acron 


43, 


remarks :—““ Cum in servis suspicio furti habetur, ducunt ad sa- 
cerdotem, qui crustum panis carmine infectum dat singulis, quod 
cum ederint, manifeste furti reum aperit.” 

xat’ “O\vptrov.}| These words seem to be phrases taken 
from some hymn similar to that in Section 8. The verb govern- 
ing Sapeyv has slipped out. 

aiwvoBeos.| For aiwvoBws: aiwvofve occurs in Section 10. 
This is a word quite peculiar to Egypt. It is found in the Ro- 
setta inscription, and seems to have been coined to express a 
royal epithet of frequent occurrence in hieroglyphical inscriptions. 
It is also used by Synesius, Hymn 3, 168. See Wilkinson’s 
Egypt and Thebes, vol. u. p. 584. 

ABepapevOw.| In the papyrus this formula was first written 
thus—aSepapevOw, ovrepOe, Eeva£. The remaining syllables 
were added subsequently with different ink and in a scrawling 
hand. It will be perceived that they are the first two words re- 
versed, so that the formula thus runs the same both ways, ex- 
cept that for Eevaf we must read Eava£. It is so written in the 
Leyden Papyrus, No. 65, in the fragment already quoted in a note 
to Sect. 4, where the whole formula stands thus divided :— 
aBepapevOwov, repOekEavak, eOpedvow9, veuapeBa. The first 
word afepapevOm occurs several times in Pistis Sophia, where it 
is used as an epithet of Jesus. “ Dixit Jesus, quod afepapevOw 
est, ad suos pa@ntas : dynyv, dix vobis: haud adduxi quidquam, 
in Koopov veniens, nisi hunc ignem, et hanc aquam, et hoc vinum 
et hunc sanguinem.” Pist. Soph., p. 288, transl. “ Effatus est 
Jesus, quod afSepavevOm (read aBepapevOw) est, quod dred 
pater mei patris, qui hic est Ieov, iste est’ mpovontos adpyovTav 
omnium et deorum et Suvapewv,” etc., p. 228, transl. “ Iladey 
iterum exclamavit Jesus, quod afepavevOwp (read aBSepapevOw) 
est, dicens nomen patris @ncavpov luminis,” etc., p. 224, transl. 
The word appears to contain the Egyptian word amentt, 1. e. 
Hades. 

aptrotupod.| This compound of dpros and rupos does not 
occur in the lexicons. Augustine De Heres., n. 28, mentions a 

F2 


44, 


sect called aptorvpira: from their using bread and cheese in the 
sacrifice of the altar. 

Tlapappova.| I leave it to Egyptologists to consider whether 
this word may possibly be equivalent to p. ra. amen, i.e. the 
sun-god Ammon. 

el tt xparnoat.] There is some corruption of the text here, 
which I do not attempt to correct. 

wolnous.] This is apparently a technical word, meaning the 
performance of a ceremony, sacrifice or divination. Accordingly 
in the title to Sect. 6, I have translated xavOdpou moinots, the 
ceremony of the beetle, not, the making of the beetle. 

kadndivov.| Kddais or xdXais was a precious stone of a 
greenish hue, Plin. 1. 87, c.10. The name is perhaps Egyptian. 
Ilap’ Aiyurriouw ypapa xadaivov, Hesychius. Stephens quotes 
the physician Actuarius, who speaks of “ vasa calaina seu Alex- 
andrina.” 

fp.] In the MS. these letters are indicated by a contraction, 
a P with a long stalk drawn across a Z. Dufresne, in the Second 
Appendix to his Glossarium medi et infime Gracitatis, gives 
several examples of this contraction from Greek astrological and 
chemical MSS. in the Parisian Library, and in these it is stated 
to stand for &&iBep, ginger, or &ifiwaks, probably gentian, i. q. 
&ivGava, which seems to be a mistake, as the word contains no 
p- In our MS. it is more likely to be put for Suvpva, and I have 
translated it accordingly. 

kuvoxepanr. Bor.| Kuvoxehadtov Botaynv. Pliny mentions 
this herb, book 30, chap. 2. ‘ Querat aliquis, que sint mentiti 
veteres Magi, cum adolescentibus nobis visus Apion grammatice 
artis prodiderit cynocephaliam herbam, que in Aigypto vocaretur 
Osynites, divinam et contra omnia veneficia utilem, sed si eruere- 
tur, statim eum qui eruisset mori.” This is the same story as is 
told by ancient authors of the mandrake. The xuvoxedddov 
was also called 'Ocipeos radn}. Dufresne, Gloss. med. et inf. Gr. 
p. 1060. | 

X. tpizroda.] In the MS. the A has a straight line drawn 


45 


from the interior angle. This sign occurs several times, and 
seems to stand for \éye, AaBe or AaBev, as the case may be. 
It is also used for AiSavos in chemical MSS. Dufresne, Gloss. 
med. et inf. Gr. App. p. 19. Here it is evidently put for Xa- 
Bov. 

ériBes.| The passage is corrupt, éwi@es being repeated by 
mistake. 

yelvov.| Inthe MS. the sentence ends with this word, and 
the title of Sect. 6 immediately follows. At the end of that 
section follow the words, Nov ériOve fp. «.7.d. This is evidently 
from the sense a continuation of Sect. 5, the syllable voy being 
apparently the last syllable of ye/vov, placed here as a catch- 
syllable to connect the sentence with the passage, where by 
some mistake it had been broken off. I have in the text restored 
the words to the place they evidently ought to occupy. 

yvarrav Barpayov.| The name of a herb probably. 

aedsyviov.| More properly otAsynioy, Lat. siligo. 

<y.] The mark < is used in Greek medical books for 
Spayun. 

g@apov.| We should probably read ¢wpa dy Sra. Hesy- 
chius and Suidas, however, give the word ¢a@pos, but explain it 
to mean caTdoKoTros, a spy, not a thief. 


Sect. VI. 


Title. Kav@apou arolyots.| lotnow, as before observed, 
seems here to mean ceremontal preparation, rather than merely 
the making of the beetle. 

tS. xoide.] Read Suvpvay nad xoig:. Koide was the sacred 
incense of the Egyptians. The word is usually written cide. Its 
ingredients are thus described by Plutarch De Isid. et Osir., 
ec. 81:—To 8 xids piyya pev éxxaidexa prev cvvribepévav 
€or, wérsTos Kal olvov nat aradidos nal xurrépov, pytivns re 
Kal opvpyns Kal aomadabov Kai cecedews, Ere 5é oxivou Te 
Kai acpartov Kal Opvov nal NatraGou, mpos Sé rovTows apKev- 


46 


OBov apyoiv (ov rnv pev peiLova tiv Sé éXarrova xadovct) 
xal capdapmpou Kal Kadapov. cuvribevras 8 ovy drrws Ervyev, 
GNA ypappadtov iepav Tois pupeois, Grav Taira peyviwoty, 
avayvyvwcxopévev. There were, however, many sorts of «ide, 
and Manetho is said to have written a treatise upon the subject 
of its preparation. Parthey, the recent editor of Plutarch De 
Isid. et Osir., mentions ten different recipes which are on record. 
Nicolaus Myrepsus, a Greek physician of the 13th eentury 
(quoted by Parthey, p. 280, notes), after giving the ingredients, 
concludes his recipe thus :—“ Arida contere una cum liquidis, 
et hee conficiendo dic, a. é. vt. od. @.” This is evidently 2 tradi- 
tional remnant of the incantation used by the Egyptian omtment- 
makers, as mentioned by Plutarch in the above quotation. Par- 
they had the curiosity to cause some «idx to be prepared accord- 
ing to the three different recipes of Plutarch, Dioscorides, and 
Galen: he pronounces that made according to Dioscorides to 
be the most agreeable. I refer the reader to his note on the 
subject. 

évérw.| The sense requires éves. 

amo avaronys.| I have translated these words, “from the 
beginning of the month,” as the sense appears to require. Per- 
haps “ from the day of the new moon,” would be more correct. 
LeAjvys avarody seems to be used in this sense by Horapollo, 
book i. chap. 15. 

6 dvouvoyGbvios 4 of vouvoyOdvies.]| In Coptic the word 
vouv means &Svacos, BvOds. See Tattam’s Lexicon. Prefixing 
the masculine article singular we have ¢-vovy, 6 d&Svacos. 
@vovvoyPov.os may therefore be equivalent to iroyPoveos, or 
dwelling in the depths of the earth. The Coptic plural article 
is vy, which in the plural word vovvoy@ovcoe may be supposed to 
vanish in the initial y of the root. | 

fjpwv.| The lexicons have no such form. It is probably a 
mere mistake of the scribe for jpws. 

depopoitnrov.| The lexicons have depogoirys, but not aepo- 


dhoirnros. 


47 


To Téhya Tou eu.] TéApua,a marsh or swamp, mud, slime, 
mortar. We learn from Iamblichus, de Myst., sect. vii. cap. 2, 
that mud or slime, ‘Ads, was among the Egyptians the em- 
blem of matter,—1ro cwparoedés mav nal UKov } Td Operrte- 
Kov Kad yovimov, h Bcov dati évunov eldos THs hicews peTa TOV 
aoTarev THs UAns pevpdrav cuphepopevov, 4 Scov Tov TroTa- 
pov THS yevérews ympet, cal avTo pet exelvou cuvitavoy, h TaV 
oroyeiwv, xad Tov trepi Tois oTovxelows Suvdpewv Tracey, ap- 
xmryov alriov év rruOpévos NOyp TpovTroxeiyevov. TedAywa may 
be here used for (Avs. I must leave the reader to his own con- 
jectures as to the contraction ey. 

tod xed.] I know not for what this contraction can stand, 
unless it be cuvoxedpdrov. 

xataorelow.| We here come to a specimen of those strange 
menaces by which the Egyptian magician sought to terrify the 
god whom he invoked into obedience, and the absurdity of which 
is pointed out by Porphyry in his letter to Anebo :—To yap ré- 
yewv, Ste Tov ovpavov mporapake, Kat ta xpuTrTa THs “Lodos 
éxpavel, nad to év "ABvdm aroppytov Sel~er, al riv Bdpw 
ornce, Kar ta pérAn tod ‘Ocipidos Svackedace Tuddn, tiva 
ovx trepBorny éumrnElas pev Te atretdovvre, & yjre elde pure 
Svvatat, catanelrret, traTrewvorntos 5é Tots Sedoixocty otra KEvov 
@oBov nai mracpata, ws Kody waides avonros; xalro. Kal 
Xaipypeov 6 iepoypappareds avaypaher tabra, ws map’ Aiy- 
arious OpudAnpeva’ Kal Taira ghacw elvat nal ta Toaira 
Bwacriuceyrara. ITamblichus defends and attempts to explain the 
practice. Sect. vi. chap. 6, he says,— The theurgist, by virtue 
of mysterious signs, commands the powers of nature, not as a 
mere man, or as possessing a human soul; but, as one holding 
pre-eminence in the rank of the gods, he gives orders such as be- 
long not to the station of aman. Not that he means to per- 
form all these mighty things ; but he shows, by using such words, 
of what kind and how great the power is which he possesses, 
through his union with the gods, which he attains by the know- 
ledge of these mysterious symbols.” He denies that these 


48 


threats are addressed to the gods, but only to the Salpoves, or 
powers, whose business it is to guard and preserve the order of 
the world, which depends upon the perpetual exertion of the be- 
neficent influence of Osiris, the daily revolutions of the sun, and 
the inviolate preservation of the secrets of Abydos. The least 
mention of the disturbance of any of these arrangements is hate- 
ful to the ears of the demons. He adds, that the Chaldzans, 
addressing their invocations solely to the gods, never use threats ; 
while the Egyptians employ them, because in their system the 
Salpoves, or subordinate powers, are mixed up with the gods. 

péXavos KuveTov.| This refers to Osiris, who is often painted 
of a black colour. Plut. De Iside et Osir.,c. 33. I cannot find 
to what the epithet xvvwros, dog-eared, refers. Qu.? «vavarou, 
or perhaps xvaverrov? The latter word is found in the lexicons. 

eaunous.| This appears to be a genitive case from a nomina- 
tive exuns, or more properly exuyns. The accusative occurs two 
lines further on, tov ecu. Some epithet of Osiris is intended. 
The Egyptian name of Isis was hes. Is downs or éouns equivalent 
to "Iovaxds ? 

Bovce:ps Spyug.| Bovoeipis, a town in the Delta, was by some 
said to be the true burial-place of Osiris. Plut. De Isid. et Osir. 
c.21. In this town, according to Herodotus, ii. 59, there was a 
very large temple of Isis. The legend of Osiris is related by 
Plutarch, Is. et Os., chap. 12 to 19. Ido not find that he 
mentions the number of days that the body of Osiris was in the 
water. The specification of three days and three nights here, 
is perhaps an allusion to the death and resurrection of Jesus. 

iy Pvwv.] The fishes lepidotus, phagrus and oxyrhynchus, were 
held in execration for the damage done by them to the body of 
Osiris. Plut. Is. et Os. c. 18. 

7a Svo 3py.] The two mountain chains lying on each side 
the Nile, the approximation of which would annihilate the whole 
land of Egypt. 

avocétv.| This word makes no sense. A proper name seems 
to be required. A very slight change of letters gives “Avoufvv, 


49 


but the attributes and character of Anubis, the faithful guardian 
and attendant of Isis (Plut. Is. et Os. c. 14) do not favour this 
reading. One is tempted to suggest ’Azromrey, the great serpent, 
the foe of Zeus and Osiris (Plut. Is. et Os. c. 86). 

ov 7 eacw ovre Gedy obre Oedy.| It is clear from this that 
the Egyptian magicians extended their threats much further 
than Iamblichus represents. 


Sscr. VII. 


xapTny ieparixov.| There were various kinds of papyrus, the 
quality varying with the breadth, the best being the broadest. 
That called hieratic came the second in rank, and was, Pliny tells 
us, eleven digits in breadth, while the commonest of all, used for 
purposes of every-day life, was not above six digits. Plin. 18. 
c. 24. 

alpe.} We should perhaps read aipee, take. 

&.] This contraction seems here to stand for Cwypddet, 1. e. 
describe, draw. 

to Svoza.| The mystical formula or name of the deity to be 
invoked. 

xapaxtipas.| These characters will be seen in the rude draw- 
ing which follows these directions, of which an accurate facsimile 
is given in the plate. 

&wbev pt) yéverOar.| It is pretty clear that we should here 
read éxwGey, as appears by the drawing. 

Secpevov.| This notion of binding by means of magic is a 
very old one. The Hebrew “IM, to exercise magic (used in 
Deuteronomy, xvii. 11), is literally fo bind. Plato uses xatd- 
Seous, and xatddecpos for witchery. The idea conveyed is well 
illustrated by this passage. 

Tovrov vouv.| Read tov Seivos tov vodv? 

edv 5é riva.| The passage is corrupt. Some words appear 
to be lost. 

Kowvd.] This word occurs at the end of the spell quoted in 
a previous note from the Leyden Papyrus, No. 65. It is also 

. G 


50 


found at the end of the formula written in the circumference of 
the ring. See Plate. Again in Sect. 8 at the end of a formula 
at the foot of p. 18 we find the words, elra 6 xowwds Noyos ; and 
at the end of Sect. 10, xowa éf’ 8 Oéreus. It appears to mean 
some common invocation which might be used indifferently for 
all sorts of purposes. 

ae tov to e.| The passage is corrupt. The easiest cor- 
rection is to expunge these meaningless words. 

apoayabpa.| The words written within the circle in the figure 
are :—apoapabpa, epecyvyadd, eOavra, sa8ouvn, Kayn, tao, 
Sapuvew, pavinr, pi) yevécOw 5 Bovropat, 47) yapelt@ % Seiva 
eis Tov drravra ypovov. The word epecyryad occurs in the 
spell quoted above from the Leyden Papyrus, No. 65, and also 
in that in Sect. 8 of our MS. In the text of this section it is 
written epeoyvyady, but in the inscription in the ring the final 
x is exchanged for ¢. So afterwards we find the double reading 
apyoon and apdoor. The letter d in our MS. is often little 
more than a mere cross, and if not written quite upright may 
easily be mistaken for a y. 

apyYoor, Nathap, cepecitiaud.| These words we are told in 
p- 16 are év t@ avevrixnw written apdoodr, AatrAap, cepe- 
otha. In Raspe’s Catalogue of Tassie’s Gems, No. 476 has 
the words pappapavw8a, athay, ceueciiay. The word AaW- 
Nap occurs again in Sect. 10 of our MS. in a spell which appears 
to consist principally of Hebrew words. If we look for its 
meaning to that language, the word px, for ever, suggests 
itself. Zeuertrap, cepeciiapyd or cepectAapy is found on 
several Gnostic gems, and has been thought to mean Wy, the 
sun, €Aaprpe, hath shone forth. 

vam, ca8aw8.] Heb. MINAY iit, Lord of hosts. In 
Pistis Sophia, however, and other Gnostic remains, Iao and 
Sabaoth are two distinct personages, and the collocation of the 
words here may be merely accidental. But compare the charm 
quoted from Alexander Trallianus in note to Sect. 10. | 

ooopvwdp:.| i.e. Osiris the good. Further on it is written 


51 


ecopvwgpt. The letters E and O are easily confounded in the 
text of our MS. 

tov vOo XO av.] A reference to the facsimile will show the 
reader how these words are written in the MS. I must confess 
my inability to make out the contraction vOo. 06 stands for 
Néyoy. The letters ay in the margin seem to me to mean 
dvwGev. In the opposite margin is a faint mark like an arrow 
or anchor, and a similar mark is placed opposite the two lines of 
writing at the top of the page (dvmfev). These then are the 
words intended to be introduced here. They are the same as 
those written in the circumference of the ring, and run thus :— 
taewBadpevepouvoliAapixpipiacvearhipxipadGovvo0peveppafo- 
eat. It will be observed that this formula reads the same both 
ways. It is found letter for letter upon a small flat engraved 
stone in the British Museum, followed by the words dora: yapiv 
Hpewviwa mpo travras, i.e. grant Heronima favour before all men. 
I can also trace the same formula on a gem figured by Mont- 
faucon, Antigq. Expliq. tom. ii. p. 164, but the letters are very 
obscure and imperfectly engraved. 

yowurov.| The lexicons have yuyrow, but not yuplfw. 

TO tzew o.| 1. €. the spell (Adyos) commencing with sew. 

peveBa, tyvy.] The word peveSapecayvy occurs in the Ley- 
den Papyrus, No. 65. col. ix. 7. 


Sect. VIII. 


“Hpaxdeorrodruxod.| An adjective formed from ‘Hpax)eo- 
woXiTns, meaning therefore properly a man of the Heracleopolite 
Nome, not of the city Heracleopolis. The termination sxos 
seems merely superfluous, as in the case of xomretixov before no- 
ticed. There were in Egypt two cities named Heracleopolis. 
The lesser, called also Sethron, was in the Delta near the Pelu- 
siac mouth. The greater was in Upper Egypt and gave its name 
to a Nome. 

amd €X.] i.e. amro édalas dpts BNactnodons. 

xoptad. Tov evros oy.| A corrupt passage, but the meaning 

G2 


52 


appears to be, to take the inner leaves, @udra éyxapoia, from 
the buds recently sprouted. 

ouvMouras.| For cvAXevovras. 

mr.) Qu.? mrdcpa. 

eis Gicav yvelav.] Pica means a pair of bellows, a blast 
of wind. vuoanis is a bladder or bubble; also a kind of pipe 
or wind instrument. Iam disposed to think that what is here 
intended is not the bladder, as I have translated it, but the wind- 
pipe of a goose. Origen mentions the employment by the con- 
jurers of his time of the wind-pipes (aprnpia) of long-necked 
cranes, storks and swans as tubes for conveying sound (Philoso- 
phumena, IV. c. 28). The passage in the text should probably 
be corrected thus :—ypayov roy Adyov cis yaprny iepatucoy 
nat NaBeov dicay ynvelav, xaaos wad wapa tod “Hpa- 
KNeoTroNTiKOD axnKoa, EvOes cis TO Cwdtoy evirveupaTacens 
elvexey. 

eis TO Cwd.] These directions are very mysterious. Zadcrov 
appears to be used to signify the image or wrAacpa of Hermes, 

BovaAn xp.] i.e. ypnuarifery or ypnpatiopor. . 

TO No. Kal TO Tp.] Qu. ? read Tov Adyov nal Td mwpoxelpe- 
voy. There seems to be some corruption here. The spell which 
is to be written on the paper is given at the end of the section. 

dowsxivy.) This adjective means according to the lexicons 
either, of or belonging to the palm-tree (go/ve£), or purple, pu- 
niceus. It is perhaps here equivalent to, or a mistake for, dor- 
vucixos, Phoenician: ua hoewixcxov may be a satlor’s knot. 

mpos Tovs Todas Tov.] The sign which follows these words 
in the text, of which the wood-engraver has made a tolerably ac- 
curate copy, appears to represent the caduceus or herald’s wand, 
borne by the Greek Hermes, and put here perhaps for the deity 
himself. 

Slwxe.] Avdxecy seems to be a technical word meaning ¢o 
adjure. The word occurs further down, Alwxe xal apes ava- 
toAds Alou Kai cedjvys. It is also found in the Leyden Pa- 
pyrus, No. 65, col. viii. pl. 25-28, in a singular minatory ad- © 


53 


juration which Reuvens reads thus :—M7 pe Simxe S5e. Avoy 
mamvtet [ou] petouBaves. Baorale riv tadny Tov ‘Oclpews, 
Kal urdyo Katacrioas aurny e[i]s “ABios, xatacricas «is 
tas tlaplds, nat xardBecOar eis [ulayds, dav poe 6 Seiva Ko- 
mous Tapacyy, tpocpéya avriv avr@. For mpocpeyw read 
wpocpinve. 

pndevi Sovs drréxpicw.| The same direction is contained in 
the words xouud avarroxpctos at the end of Sect. 9. 

évnapdte KvKAe cednvns.}) According to the Egyptian my- 
thology, Thoth, i. e. Hermes, is “the Lord of the Moon.” 
Bunsen’s Egypt, vol. i. p. 394. 

meodixatoouve.| A compound unknown to the lexicons. 

avevpat tvioxe.| The line is corrupt and it is difficult to 
see how it is to be altered. Qu.? avevpara 8 quoyov. In a 
fragment attributed to Aristobulus we find the same expression, 
applied to the Deity—Ilvedpara 6 iyoyet mepi t Hépa nat 
mepi yedpa Nauaros. Hermanni Orphica, vol. i. p. 450. 


The sign 7 stands for #)Adov or HeX/oLo, neither of which 


words can be brought into the line here. This symbol for the 
sun occurs in Greek MSS., but is seldom found in the printed 
editions, the more common sign © being substituted. It is used, 
however, in an edition of Ptolemy’s Tetrabiblos by Camerarius, 
Norimberge, 1535. | 

avOpam@ éoip.] The latter words of this line are apparently 
repeated by mistake of the copyist from that which precedes. 

éuol t@ Setve.] The supplicant would here of course insert 
his own name. 

pavroctvas.| Read pavrocvvas. 

xp] i.e. ypnudrete. 

xapreot.| As if from nom. sing. yapros, eos, a word not 
found in the lexicons. - 

onpea.| This and the six following words are found on 
some of the Gnostic gems. The word of which a part 1s lost in 


54: 


our MS. is enpidev. Montfaucon, Antiq. Expl. vol. u. pl. 148, 
and Matter, Hist. du Gnost. (1st edit.) vol. ii. pl. 5, give a 
drawing of an oval gem, bearing a lion into whose mouth a bee 
or fly is entering. Above are seven stars round which are written 
the names onpea, xevrev, xovrev, kovrev, enpidev, Sapuvew, dAv- 
xuv—. The words are very illegibly given by Montfaucon, but 
a comparison with our text enables us to determine them with 
tolerable certamty. They occur on another gem figured by 
Montfaucon, pl. 161. Ona Mithraic medal im Raspe’s Cata- 
logue, No. 683, the word «xoyrev is repeated thrice. Matter’s 
explanation proceeds upon an erroneous reading of the names, 
but it seems pretty certain that they refer to the seven planetary 
powers, who played an important part in the Mithraie and 
Ophite systems. See Matter’s Hist. du Gnost. Book 7, chap. 20. 

hoBepopatre—tprpada.| Read hoPepoypare. A gem men- 
tioned by Kopp, De Difficultate imterpretandi, lib. in. cap. 1. 
§ 629, has the words tpupapa (qu.? tpupada) poSepoppate 
Bptyeo apwpuppact. 

elra 70 pyp.| This contraction seems to stand for tepoypday- 
pearov or iepoypaduxov. The symbol which follows I am unable 
to explain. The small square perhaps means “name.” Reu- 
vens says that it is so used in the Leyden Papyrus, No. 75, 
Lettre 2 & Letronne, p. 10. 


Szcr. IX. 


my.) ie. Aéye thks. 

Xdpamiv.| A word appears to be lost here which may be 
ydinpoy or yparfor. 

Bacidniov.| The symbol here used appears from what fol- 
lows to stand for a sceptre, but not much resemblance is trace- 
able between it and any of the various sceptres found im the 
hands of deities on Egyptian monuments. 

rov iatov.| I cannot find that any finger was wont to be 
distinguished by this name. The Ad«rvaAoz ‘Idatoz or Dactyls 
of Mount Ida were mythical personages, to whom was ascribed 


55 


the invention of working in iron and also other useful arts. In 
later times they were looked upon as magicians and thaumatur- 
gists, and their names were invoked, it seems, in spells. It is 
therefore not surprising in a work like the present to find one of 
the fingers called, in a sort of punning allusion to their name, the 
Tdsean dactyl or finger. Athenzeus (lib. i. cap. 9) quotes from 
Crobylus, a comic poet, a jest upon these words. A hungry 
parasite is made to say, 
dye 52 mpos Ta Oepuad tadPl irrepBorg 
tous Saxrunous SirovGev ‘Idalous eyo. 

i.e. my fingers (Sd«rudor) are very Ideeans, for clutching these 
hot dainties. Perhaps iSatos Sdxrvdos may mean the thumb. 
Psellus, De Lapidibus (printed in Ideler’s Physici et Medici Greeci 
Minores, Berolini, 1841), mentions a stone of marvellous virtues 
bearing this name and resembling a man’s thumb. ‘O ‘Iéaios 
Adxrunos ev "1dn ris Kpnrns yiveras, wal dort 10 oyijpa Sax- 
TU avdpos eudepis Ta avrlyecpt. 

éow Brerovra.| The reader will scarcely require to be re- 
minded of the ring of Gyges, mentioned by Plato, de Republ. 
lib. 1. c. 3, of which the property was to make its wearer invisible 
whenever the stone was turned tnwards to the hand. 


Srcr. X. 


"Emixadovpa.) This invocation, addressed more particularly 
to the God of the Hebrews, bears some resemblance in the epi- 
thets and names introduced, to one given by Alexander Trallia- 
nus (p. 199, ed. Goupylii), which may be introduced by way of 
illustration here. 

‘Iepdv Bordavny, iris éotiv vooxvapos, ceAnvns obons év 
‘Spoyow 4 iyGict, epiopv—as riv Bordvny mpiv f Sivas Tov 
Bdov, pt) arpdpevos tHS Pl&ys, opvEas avbrois Trois S00 Saxrvdos 
Ths apiotépas yeipos TH avrlyeps kal Te latpix@ Saxtiro, 
réye’ Aéyw cot, yw cos, iepa Sordyvn aiptov Kado ce eis Tov 
olxov Tod girded, lva oThons To pedua Tav Todwv Kai rdv yeL- 


56 


pav rodde H Thode. “AAN cpkifw ce ro dvopa To péya lawd 
LaBawd, 6 Oeds 6 ornpléas Thy yhv Kal orhoas Thy OdrNaccay, 
peovrawy trorduwv mreovdtwv, 6 Enpdvas ri tod Aar yuvaixa 
Kal Trounoas abrnv ddNarlyny, NaBe 7d arvebua TIS pHTpos cou 
yns Kal Thy Siva abris Kat Enpavoy 76 petua tar w%av 7 
TeV ye~payv TobdE H THade. Kal rH atipwv mpd dvatonjs Aa- 
Sav ooréov oiovdirore Goov amroBavovros opvEas abrihy Trovr@ 
TS ooTép Kai AaBov ri pilav éye’ “Opaivwo ce xatd THY 
dylov ovoudtwv "lad LaBawd ’Adwvat *Ednot. Kal raBov 
avriv Bare ev rH plf& piav Spdna ddrav, Myov' ‘Os of Gres 
ovrot ove abEovras, pndé Td wdOos Tovbe 4} Thode. 

aiwvop0arpos.| This compound may mean either eye of the 
world, or everlasting-eyed. It is perhaps, like aiwvdBtos, coined 
to express some epithet used in the hieroglyphical writing ; it 
may be meant to correspond to the eye and throne by which the 
name of Osiris is represented on the monuments. 

adatvat.| The spelling of the magical names throughout the 
MS. appears to be rather careless, but I have thought it better 
not to introduce emendations in a matter where so much caprice 
evidently prevails. Here, for instance, I conclude we should 
read adwvat. Whether law oun: or law cove be the true read- 
ing, or whether a difference be really intended, there is no means 
of deciding. A little further on, a8davafavadBa, a word of 
which the spelling is well determined, loses its last vowel ; but 
who shall say whether this was intentional or not? In the charm 
quoted above from Trallianus we find both Iaw and Iaw6, and 
in our MS. both ap8aOtaw and apBabiawO occur. In this sec- 
tion we have also ehwas taSpaayp, clearly for Exo: ABpaap. I 
have before called attention to the singular spelling Iotpand for 
Iopand. Considering the great importance attached to pro- 
nouncing the veritable name, this meorrectness of spelling, sup- 
posing it to be the result of mere carelessness, is strange. But it 
must be recollected that among the ancients orthography was by 
no means 80 strict a science as with us, and particularly in en- 
deavouring to express foreign sounds in Greek letters, nothing 


57 


more than an approximation could be attempted, and provided a 
sound substantially representing the mysterious name was pro- 
duced, this may have been considered sufficient for the purpose 
of successful invocation. 

ov wort.| Several of the words in this section are doubtless 
Hebtéw or Syriac, but I must leave to others their identification. 
2tAGa ywovy perhaps contains the roots Ow, to mule, and 
f1D, strength, power; q. d. dominus potestatis. Ilaroupy and 
Caryoupn may be referred to "M5 (comp. “W5) and “VID open- 
ing and shutting. In Pistis Sophia, p. 223, trans., the words 
Caryoupn, mwayoupn (Qu.? warovpn) occur in an invocation. 
“Tore Jesus stans cum suis pabnrais ad mare Oxeavoy érrexa- 
decev hac mwrpocevyy, dicens: Audi me, mi pater, pater paterni- 
tatis omnis, dzrepavrov lumen : aeniova, taw, awt, wia, iveep, 
Bepvary, voriOep, Caryoupn, mayoupn, veOpopawb, veiropaw), 
papayayba, OaBappaBav, Gapvayayxav, CopoxoGopa, leov; Za- 
Baw0.”’ The words Bapovy, adwvai,-edwat, ta8paap, are 
plain Hebrew: Blessed Lord, God of Abraham. Bapovy how- 
ever is the name of a personage in one of the Gnostic systems, 
that namely of Justin, of which an account is given in Origen’s 
Philosophumena, Book V. chap. 23. 

xapirnotov.| This word is not found in the Lexicons as an 
adjective ; but the appellative Xaperjova (subint. tepa) i. e. the 
feast of the Xapzres, occurs. 


PINIS.
