THE CASE FOR THE SEA-SERPENT
By Lieut.-Commander Rupert T. Gould, R.N. (Retired) — London: Philip Allan, 1930
========================================================================

PROVENANCE NOTE (Tower of Babel staging): This text reproduces the 1930 first edition as scanned by the Internet Archive (identifier caseforseaseroen0000rtgo). The 1930 publication is in the public domain. The work is complete: preface, introduction, the full case histories, and index.

========================================================================

=


ee SES AS bee


Tr EEE NE WIEN


NA
P x Vete
BEER SS


Meu


ACT


BER
MIL
Sink


PT


A


* eS
CRISE SR wer
N e


ew E Ore
ers Feen


erat
=


SITES:


pinch ated y
"wy vea
VES S


waren


ee
Hay


City of Westminster.
Great Smith Street Lending Library.


Hours. Weekdays, 10 a.m. to 8 p.m., except Saturdays
(10 a.m. to 2 p.m.) Entrance barrier shut five minutes before
closing time. Closed on public holidays.


Fifteen days (including days of issue and return) allowed for
reading this book. Fine of one half-penny per day or portion of
a day if detained longer. Books cannot be exchanged on day of
issue.


Renewals. Any book (except a work of fiction) may, on
presentation at the Library, be re-borrowed for a further period of
fifteen days, unless required by another reader.


Care of books. Books must be kept clean, protected from
wet weather, and any damage reported on return. Books will not
be entrusted to messengers considered unfit to take proper care of
them.


Change of residence, either of borrowers or their
guarantors, must be notified immediately.


Lost tickets to be notified as soon as possible. Borrowers
are responsible for any books borrowed on their tickets.


Satchels or bags and, in wet weather, umbrellas must be
left with.the attendant.


Stocktaking.. ‘Allbooks must be returned on or before the
FIRST SATURDAY :IN JULY OF EACH YEAR, as the Lending
Library is then closed tor examination of stock. In default of
such return a fine of one shilling will be incurred.


Infectious disease. IF INFECTIOUS DISEASE @{OULD BREAK
OUT IN YOUR HOUSE DO NOT RETURN THIS BOOK, BUT AT
ONCE INFORM THE Li*7^77*v. PSNALTY FOR INFRINGEMENT
OF THIS REGY 4NOWINGLY PERMITTING ‘THE
Boo. mr tION, £5.

.


*


Sm


Kahle/Austin Foundation


oe,


THE CASE FOR THE SEA-SERPENT


BY THE SAME AUTHOR
THE MARINE CHRONOMETER: Its History


AND DEVELOPMENT
ODDITIES: A Book or ÜNEXPLAINED Facts
ENIGMAS : Anotuer Boox OF ÜNEXPLAINED Facts
NINE DAYS’ WONDERS (Iz preparation)


"(02 "31,7 oos) ssouztm-o40 ue Aq qojoxs e uodn pepunoj St Ir Ing *9oAmnejrujne JOU sr Zuraei1p stp T—' ALON
UYALSNOW VAS .S.V'TIVH'IVA» AHL


a0argsyuos Ty


THE CASE FOR THE
SEA-SERPENT


BY LIEUT.-COMMANDER


Rosie GOULD


R.N. (RETIRED)


AUTHOR OF SODDITIES”


| Ha
PHILIP ALLAN


TO
ARMOREL DAPHNE HERON-ALLEN
3 JULY 1930


I$ JUNE 1908


+


7


Srt SER


TO THE READER, IN MITIGATION
OF A THIRD OFFENCE


I FEEL that an apology, or at least an explanation, is neces-
sary for a book dealing with such a ‘ fo'c'sle yarn’ as the
sea-serpent.

My excuse must be, that I believe in the sea-serpent.
I have long been interested in the subject, and I should
have devoted an essay to it in one of my two former books,
Oddities and Enigmas, had I not become convinced that it
could not be adequately treated in so limited a space.

I do not suggest that it is adequately treated in this
monograph. I have no claim to be considered an expert
on questions of natural history and comparative anatomy ;
upon such matters I must beg to be regarded chiefly as
having the courage of other people's opinions. Still, I
have done my best to present the case for the real existence
of the creatures popularly called ‘ sea-serpents ' as fully
(and, I hope, as fairly) as I can ; and I have no quarrel
with my brief. I have done what I can to appeal against
a verdict of long standing, and I believe that such action 1s
justified : but if the appeal should be unsuccessful, this
must be attributed to the ineptitude of its advocate.

I have to thank the following for readily giving per-
mission to reproduce copyright matter :


Messrs. Constable & Co. (Plate VII).
The ZZustrated London News (Plates III and IV,
and the Frontispiece).


The National Magazine Co. (Plate II).
vii


viii TO THE READER
Messrs. Geo. Newnes & Co. (extract from The
Strand Magazine, Vol. X).

The Oxford University Press (extract from Herbert
Strang’s Annual, 1920).

Messrs. H. F. & G. Witherby (extract from M. J.
Nicholl’s Three Voyages of a Naturalist).

The Zoological Society of London (extract- from
Proceedings, 1906 - Fig. 20).


I should like also to express my thanks to the authori-
ties of the Natural History Museum and the Admiralty
Library: and to many friends and correspondents —
notably Dr. Helene Bargmann, Mr. J. Mackintosh Bell,
W.S., Mr. W. D. Campbell, Capt. R. J. Cringle, Capt.
F. W. Dean, R.N., Capt. F. E. B. Haselfoot, R.N.,
Dr. F. M. Matheson, Mr. E. G. B. Meade-Waldo, Mr.
T. A. R. Muir, Capt. Roger Pocock, Dr. James Ritchie,
Lt.-Commdr. R. M. Southern, R.N., and Mr. R.
Humphrey Eggar.


RUPERT'T. GOURD


ASHTEAD, 1930.


CONTENTS


PAGE
PREFACE . : : ; : : eun
INTRODUCTION . - : 3 ; I
TWO EIGHTEENTH-CENTURY REPORTS . S03 9
THE NEW ENGLAND SEA-SERPENT . : ; ag
UAE : SOME MISCELLANEOUS REPORTS y
H.M.S. ' DZEDALUS,' 1848 . : 94.
FURTHER MISCELLANEOUS REPORTS, 1848- 1872 127
H.M.S. “OSBORNE, 1877 . , : c Bigs
INTERLUDE : THE MOHA MOHA . : D
I893: DR. MATHESON AND CAPT. CRINGLE. 184
YACHT ‘VALHALLA, 1905 . : ; ao oh key
H.M.S. ' HILARY,’ 1917 ; : : 471204
SOME POST-WAR REPORTS . : 2 ls
WHAT BECOMES OF THE BODY? . 5 159226
THEORIES V. FACTS . ô : : 259
CONCLUSION. : : ; ; 20997
INDEX : ; : ; : : 7,291


LIST OF ILLUSTRATIONS


PLATES


Frontispiece — THE * VALHALLA'S' SEA MONSTER.


I. PONTOPPIDAN'S SEA-SERPENT . facing page


II. CREATURE SEEN BY H.M.S. ‘ FLY’ e ß
III. THE ‘ DAEDALUS’ ! SEA-SERPENT ; :


,


IV. ANOTHER DRAWING OF THE ‘ DZEDALUS' ' SEA-


SERPENT . . . . . .


V. DR. MATHESON'S SEA-MONSTER . . .


VI. SKULL AND STERNUM OF ‘THE ANIMAL OF


STRONSA' 1 : : x s


VII. A PLESIOSAURUS . . . . .


FIGURES


NO ONT QA Co b Hm


m
O


= m HB oH
Bown m.


EGEDE'S SEA-MONSTER, AS DRAWN BY BING page
LEE'S EXPLANATION OF EGEDE'S SEA-MONSTER .
MASSACHUSETTS BAY, AND VICINITY 3 -
GLOUCESTER HARBOUR ; j : :
MARSHAL PRINCE'S SKETCH 2 : :
CREATURE SEEN OFF ARISAIG, N.S., 1844

HEAD OF THE * DZEDALUS' ' SEA-SERPENT z
OWEN'S SKETCH (RESTORED) ; : :


LEE'S EXPLANATION OF THE ' DZEDALUS' ” SEA-
SERPENT . i 2 i . x


THE ‘ DZEDALUS'' SEA-SERPENT, RE-DRAWN TO

SCALE . s ^ , : :
H.M.S. ‘ PLUMPER’S ’ SEA-SERPENT : :
THE *IMOGEN's' SEA-SERPENT  . é :
SOUND OF SLEAT AND LOCH ALSH : ^


THE ‘ LEDA'S' SEA-SERPENT, 1872 . ; :
xi


28
84
98


122
188


248
274


14
21
30
34
62
88
104
IIO


I2I


126
129
132
142
143


LIST OF ILLUSTRATIONS


* RIDGE OF FINS,' SEEN FROM H.M.S, * OSBORNE’
H.M.S. ‘ OSBORNE'S ’ SEA-MONSTER j :
THE MOHA MOHA  . : : : .
THE * UMFULI'S ' SEA-SERPENT : :

PAGE FROM THE ' UMFULI'S' LOG ,

THE ' VALHALLA'S ' SEA-MONSTER : :
CREATURE SEEN BY H.M.S. ‘ HILARY,’ I9I7 3
CREATURE SEEN OFF HOY, I9IO . : :
THE HOY CREATURE, SEEN SWIMMING  . k
SEA-SERPENT SEEN FROM S.S. ‘ TYNE,’ 1920 i
CREATURE SEEN FROM H.M.S. ' KELLETT, 1923
THE ANIMAL OF STRONSA . j , :
THE FLORIDA CARCASE : : . ,
THE ‘ GIANT STURGEON ' THEORY . 3
OUDEMANS’ HYPOTHETICAL PINNIPED . ;


MAP SHOWING POSITION OF MOST OF THE RE-


157
158
174
190
192
197
273
217
219
239
224.
240
257
268
270


PORTS DISCUSSED . : : . End paper


INTRODUCTION


Tu sea-serpent has, of course, long been relegated by
that infallible arbiter, public opinion, to the limbo of
‘ silly season’ topics, in company with the giant goose-
berry, ‘Is Marriage a Failure?’ and ‘ Do we believe ?’,
while signs are not wanting that his vogue, even in such
humble surroundings, is not what it was. For example,
I have not seen any recent reference to the subject in the
writings of that very remarkable and imperfectly-informed
body, the occasional correspondents of the Sunday papers.
He is paying the penalty for over-exploitation in bygone
days, when there were still a few trusting folk who be-
lieved what they saw in print. To-day, I doubt whether
anything less than the installation of a living sea-serpent
at the Zoo — a contingency which I regard as extremely
improbable — would carry conviction with the public as a
proof of his existence. I am quite certain that the best-
authenticated narratives of unimpeachable eye-witnesses
would, singly, be insufficient : and when I make that
assertion I am on tolerably safe ground, for many such
narratives are on record, and have never been satisfac-
torily explained away.

I don't think that we are quite so dogmatic as we used
to be ; in fact, many instances might be cited to show
that the credulity of the present age, on certain subjects,
is almost unfathomable, and its motto Tertullian’s
t... certum est, quia incredibile, But I have no wish to
ask for a revision of the accepted view of the sea-serpent
merely on the ground that we are not quite so sure of


the extent of our knowledge as we were in the eighteenth
H


2, THE SEA-SERPENT


and nineteenth centuries. I rely more on the self-
evident fact that no one is properly qualified to express
an opinion on a complicated question without having
studied the evidence — and I submit that when the case
for the sea-serpent’s existence is examined in detail one
can scarcely fail to be struck with the consistent and
weighty character of the evidence, and the almost puerile
nature of many of the numerous (and inconsistent)
attempts to discredit and belittle it by supplying some
naturalistic explanation. Broadly speaking, it may be
said that those who don't know the facts of the case
regard the sea-serpent as an exploded myth — those who
do, don't.

Whatever the public view may be, it is heartening (if
one happens to be among the minority) to notice that of
late years writers on the subject have shown a distinct
tendency to ‘ hedge,’ and to replace a categorical denial
by a plea for suspended judgment — or even a cautious
and guarded affirmation. I need only give two instances
of this. ‘The article ' Sea-serpent' in the Encyclopedia
Britannica (eleventh edition, 1911): concludes thus :


“It would thus appear that, while, with very few
exceptions, all the so-called ‘ sea-serpents’ can be
explained by reference to some well-known animal or
other natural object, there is still a residuum sufficient
to prevent modern zoologists from denying the
possibility that some such creature may after all exist.’


And even the much shorter article: in the present edition
(1930) finds room to remark :


“ When, however, all these and similar possibilities have


1 See p. 203 for an excellent example.
* By Mr. J. T. Cunningham and the late Mr. W. E. Hoyle.
* By Mr. H. W. Parker, of the Natural History Museum.


INTRODUCTION 3


been explored, there still remain a number of indepen-
dent and apparently credible stories which are not
satisfactorily explained.’


While Mr. E. C. Boulenger, director of the Zoological
Society's aquarium, writing in 1926, remarks? :


* The very fact that in recent times sea-serpent stories
have been invariably received with derision is surely, in
many cases, evidence of their veracity, as only those
conscious of their own unimpeachable honesty would
be tempted to encounter the sneers of their incredu-
lous countrymen. ‘The sea-serpent should not be
hastily dismissed because he has not been actually
hooked. The yet unexplored areas of the ocean run
into many hundreds of square miles,* and it would be
almost surprising if the sea did not yield some hitherto
unknown creature of large size. I submit, therefore,
that we should at least give the sea-serpent the benefit
of the doubt, and not condemn him along with all
those who have testified to his existence.’


It can scarcely be contested that informed opinions
such as these are decidedly at variance with the popular
view of the subject — which, so far as I can judge, appears
to be that certain foolish persons, such as myself, are
credulous enough to believe in the existence of one
gigantic (and, presumably, immortal) ‘Great Sea-Serpent’
—and that this creature, like other mythical entities (such
as Davy Jones, the Flying Dutchman, and the Phoenix)
is a pure or adulterated myth.

Not improbably, I am credulous — certainly I entertain
a somewhat heterodox opinion about the general public,


1 Daily Telegraph, 16, viii. 26. *This is enormously under-stated.


4 THE SEA-SERPENT


I believe that if the evidence for the sea-serpent* could
ever be fairly appreciated by its more intelligent members,
they would come to the conclusion that, while the term
'sea-serpent' is a misleading one, there does exist,
although only in small numbers and infrequently seen,
a large marine monster of a type, or types, quite unlike
any living creature at present known to science.

It must be remembered that, as Mr. Boulenger
remarks, the effect of adverse public opinion has un-
doubtedly tended to restrict the amount of available
evidence. Many people like to see their names in print ;
but few, I imagine, would deliberately go out of their way
to invite ridicule. Before public opinion shifted so
definitely to the wrong side of the question there were, of
course, practical jokers who took a delight in hoaxing the
public with stories of sea-serpents ; but nowadays such
persons confine their perverted ingenuity to visiting
H.M. Ships in the guise of Oriental potentates, or
jettisoning bogus bottle-messages from missing flyers —
for the sea-serpent, as a hoax, is well-known even to the
Marines, and his ‘news value’ almost nil. Nothing, in
its way, could be more true to life than Kipling's story
“A Matter of Fact,» in which the death of a sea-serpent,
as the result of a submarine volcanic explosion, is wit-
nessed by a party of journalists : who subsequently find,

ı It may be noted that here, and henceforward, I use the term sea-
serpent, without inverted commas, to denote a large marine creature, with
serpentine head and neck, of the type frequently reported. ‘The term is


a misnomer, but one sanctioned by long use. It should not be taken as
referring to the known sea-snakes, such as Pelamys bicolor.


2 On this point, see the remarks on pp. 189 and 203.
® In Many Inventions (1893). It is one of Fate’s little ironies that the


s.s. Armadale Castle, with Mr. Kipling on board, should have been re-
ported, in 1904, as having been in collision with a sea-serpent. What she


hi. Bc MM diced d


WE ie)


we o


actually struck was either a large shark or a small whale. See the J//us- T M


trated London News, 11. ii. 1905.


INTRODUCTION 5


as might have been expected, that no editor will look at
their “stories.” I am convinced that many encounters
with sea-serpents have gone unchronicled, simply because
the witnesses were not prepared to make martyrs of them-
selves, as far as their own peace of mind and reputation
were concerned, in the cause of unpopular truth.

It is perfectly true that many reports of sea-serpents —
in fact, the majority of them — relate to creatures seen in
what is known as the ‘ silly season.’ For this somewhat
unfortunate coincidence — it is nothing more —there is
an excellent reason. The weight of evidence goes to show
that these creatures are generally seen basking on the
surface in warm and calm weather. Ifsuch is their habit, f
nothing could be more natural than that reports of them
should generally come to hand towards the end of summer.

Besides, if we assume as a working hypothesis that these
creatures are a rare and timid species, probably verging
on extinction, the chances are obviously much against
their coming under the notice of properly-qualified
scientific observers — although, as will appear, one of the
most recent appearances took place before two witnesses
who were both Fellows of the Zoological Society.

Similarly, since the screw-propeller ante-dates the
portable camera, and is audible (under water) for miles, it
is most unlikely that such creatures, if rare and timid,
should ever be photographed, except by accident. The
evidence relating to them is practically bound to consist of
statements made by casual witnesses, possessed of no
great scientific or artistic qualifications. It is for this
reason that too great stress should not be laid upon the
discrepancies between the sketches (by eye-witnesses)
illustrating this book. If, say, a dozen jurymen, not
trained to handle a pencil, were told to make a sketch of
the judge in court, or from memory soon after being

Bs


6 THE SEA-SERPENT


discharged, it is most improbable that there would be
any general measure of agreement between their results.
Yet each would honestly have endeavoured to depict
what he saw ; and it would surely be an unfair inference
— amounting almost to a contempt of court — to argue,
on the basis of such lack of agreement, that His Lordship
had no real existence.

So far as I am aware, only one attempt has been made
to collect a// the available evidence on the subject, and to
discuss it fairly and fully, with the object of framing a
theory to cover all the facts. This is a book entitled The
Great Sea-Serpent, and written by Dr. A. C. Oudemans
of Arnhem (published in October 1892"). The plan of
this book was an excellent one ; it was confessedly
designed in imitation of Chladni's great work on
meteorites.

Meteorites provide a leading example of a subject
upon which the dogmatism of sciolists has been ultimately
defeated, and the popular view confirmed, by the patient
accumulation and examination of evidence. Meteoric
stones have been known in all ages, and opinion as to their
origin was sharply divided until about a century ago, the
popular view (supported, it must be said, by a certain
number of learned men) being that they fell from the sky ;
while on the other hand a large number of ‘ natural
philosophers ’ roundly asserted, on a priori grounds, that
such a thing was impossible.

1THE GREAT SEA-SERPENT:/ An Historical and Critical
Treatise. / With the reports of 187 appearances (including / those of the
appendix) the suppositions and / suggestions of scientific and / non-scientific
persons, and the author's conclusions. / / With 82 Illustrations. / By / A.C.
Oudemans, Jzn., / Doctor of Zoology and Botany, Member of the Zoo-
logical Society of the / Netherlands, Director of the Royal Zoological and
Botanical / Society (Zoological Gardens) at the Hague. / / Published by


the Author, October 1892. (Leiden, E. J. Brill, Oude Rijn 33a.
London, Luzac & Co., Great Russell Street 46.)


INTRODUCTION 7


But at last there appeared a sagacious and patient
examiner of the whole subject, E. F. F. Chladni (1756 -
1827), a German scientist who is best remembered as one
of the founders of modern acoustics. Chladni took the
trouble to collect all available observations of meteoric
stones, from the earliest records to his own day : and ina
work published in 1819: he showed, first of all, the im-
mense amount of material available ; and, secondly, the
strikingly consistent character of the independent items
of evidence. The popular (and undoubtedly correct)
theory of the origin of meteorites has been generally
accepted ever since.

But, however worthily planned, I am much afraid that
Oudemans' book has not been so successful as Chladni's.
For this there are several reasons. In the first place, its
language — English — is foreign both to the author and
to his printer. Considered simply as a piece of English
prose, the book is by no means ill-written ; but it
is not easy reading, and its style has a peculiar
sharpness — approaching petulance. Occasionally, too,
there are amusing /aches, as when we are informed that
the whale is encased in a thick layer of ' bacon ' — for
blubber. The printer, of course, appears at his worst ;
hardly a page is free from a misprint of some kind.

More serious than mere misprints are the innumerable
errors of transcription, which make it quite impossible to
trust any of the extracts (with which the book abounds)
as exact copies of the originals. "The work's size and
format, too, are against it ; 592 closely-printed pages,
comprising some 280,000 words*, without an index.

But, in my submission, the book's principal defect is
twofold. The evidence has not been scrutinised carefully


ı Ueber Feuer-Meteore. Vienna, 1819.
? This book contains about 75,000.


8 THE SEA-SERPENT


enough — and upon his not exactly trustworthy founda- _
tions Dr. Oudemans has erected a vast superstructure
of theory which they are in no way fit to support. Of his
187 cases, I should reject at least half, either because the
evidence is insufficient, or because the facts admit of a
different explanation. And as to his deductions, it need
only be said that he devotes ninety pages to an elaborate
exposition of the sea-serpent's characteristics — including,
as well as its appearance and dimensions, sections upon its
eating, food, breathing, excretion ; the functions of its
five senses ; the operation of its muscular system ; the
mobility of its organs ; its thirteen psychical character-
istics such as ‘ curiosity, probably mixed with suspicion,’
'fury, and 'playsomeness' ; its enemies: and its
repose, sleep, and death! This meticulous discussion
would be surprising enough in the case of a creature whose
appearance and structure were known by many specimens
and preparations, and whose habits had long been closely
studied by competent observers ; in the case of one
unknown to science, and only glimpsed at rare intervals
by casual seafarers, such a proceeding seems not a little
ridiculous.

Still, with all its faults, Oudemans' book deserves to
be remembered as an honest, painstaking, and compen-
dious attempt to recall public interest to an undeservedly
discredited subject. I hardly expect that I shall succeed
where he failed ; but I should like to indicate in what
manner the lines and scope of this book differ from those
Which he adopted.

I have selected from the material available (some
of it of post-Oudemans date) about thirty reports of
sea-serpents. The principles governing this selection
have been, first, to admit no case concerning whose
provenance there is any doubt ; and, secondly, to reject


INTRODUCTION 9


. any in which there appears the slightest likelihood that
some known creature was mistaken for what was reported.

The details of each case have been verified as far as
possible. That is to say, if any collateral evidence (such
as a ship's log) was procurable, this was collated with the
report itself, and the result stated. Furthermore, the text
of each report is given, as far as possible, from its original
source, and not from any re-printed version. In general,
I have done my best to ensure that the texts of the evidence
given in this book are as accurate as I could make them,
whatever value may be placed upon that evidence itself.

I should explain that while I have divided the longer
quotations into paragraphs at my own discretion, I have
taken no other liberties with them, and that their spelling,
punctuation, etc., are unaltered in every case. An
occasional (sic) has, none the less, been used here and there
—for various reasons. The illustrations are, generally,
reproduced or copied from actual sketches made by
eye-witnesses. When a drawing (e.g. Bing’s) has been
copied and re-copied, I have given the earliest available
form of it, as being the most accurate. I have occasionally
included a modern drawing. In all cases, the source
of each illustration is indicated in the accompanying
letterpress; and when a drawing is not to be taken as
authoritative, the fact is so stated.

It is my hope that the following chapters may, at least,
provide a sound basis upon which those better qualified
than I am may erect their own theories. In the con-
cluding chapter I have, very briefly, indicated my per-


sonal opinions.
a a


Cu. I. TWO EIGHTEENTH -
CENTURY REPORTS


As originally planned, this book was not intended to
contain any reference to sea-monsters reported at an
earlier date than A.D. 1800. But, on reflection, I de-
cided that it would be a mistake to omit the reports of
Hans Egede (1734) and Lorenz von Ferry (1746).
Egede’s sea-monster finds a place in almost every work
dealing with the sea-serpent ; while Ferry’s is one of the
cases collected and published (in 1753) by Erik Pontop-
pidan, Bishop of Bergen — and a book on the sea-serpent
Which omitted some mention of Pontoppidan (who is
more closely associated with that creature than any other
man who ever lived) would indeed be like Hamlet
without the Prince.: While, therefore, I wish it to be
understood that I do not regard the two following reports
as quite reaching the standard of evidence aimed at in
the succeeding chapters, they are inserted on account of
their importance in the history of the subject. I will add,
that I see no reason to doubt the essential truth of the
particulars which they relate.


Hans Egede, 1734.

In 1740 Hans Egede, a Norwegian pastor who has
been justly styled “the apostle of Greenland,’ published
an account: of one of his missionary voyages to the

1] have read somewhere (although I cannot lay my hand on the
reference), that a version of the Hamlet story was actually published at


Amsterdam, early in the seventeenth century, in which the character of
Hamlet was, in fact, totally omitted — Laertes becoming the central figure.


2 I have not been able to consulta copy of this work. Its title, as trans-
lated by Oudemans, is 4 Full and Particular Relation of a Voyage to


II


12 THE SEA-SER PENG


settlement founded by him at Godthaab in Greenland ;
alandthenasremote from mankind as the Antarctic regions
are to-day. In this book he gave a short account of a sea-
monster seen by him off the west coast of Greenland, in


1734.


* Anno 1734, July. On the 6th. appeared a very terrible
sea-monster, which raised itself so high above the
water, that its head reached above our main-top. It
had a long sharp snout, and blew like a whale, had
broad, large flappers, and the body was, as it were,
covered with a hard skin, and it was very wrinkled and
uneven on its skin ; moreover on the lower part it
was formed like a snake, and when it went under water
again, it cast itself backwards and in so doing it raised
its tall above the water, a whole ship-length from its
body. That evening we had very bad weather.’


There is another account of this creature, also by Hans
Egede, in his Det gamle Grønlands nye Perlustration. . . 3
In the contemporary English translation? this runs as
follows :


* .. . As for other Sea Monsters . . . none of them have
been seen by us, or any of our Time, that ever I could
hear, save that most dreadful Monster, that showed
itself upon the Surface of the Water in the Year 1734,
off our New Colony in 64 Degrees.*


Greenland, in the year 1734. The passage here quoted is taken from
Povel (Paul) Egede's * Continuation ’ of his father’s journal, as translated
by Oudemans ; it agrees very closely with the (1755) English translation
of Pontoppidan, in which the same passage is quoted from Egede's
original work.

1 (Copenhagen, 1741).

* A Description of Greenland, London, 1745 (pp. 85-89).
: s EE E on the west coast of Greenland. It is actually in lat.

4°20" NC


TWO EIGHTEENTH-CENTURY REPORTS I3


This Monster was of so huge a Size, that coming out
of the Water, its Head reached as high as the Mast-
Head ; its Body was as bulky as the Ship, and three or
four times as long. It had a long pointed Snout, and
spouted like a Whale-Fish ; great broad Paws, and the
Body seemed covered with Shell-work, its skin very
rugged and uneven. The under Part of its Body was
shaped like an enormous huge Serpent, and when it
dived again under Water, it plunged backwards into
the Sea, and so raised its Tail aloft, which seemed a
whole Ship's Length distant from the bulkiest part of
the Body.’


About 1741 Egede’s son Povel published a continuation
of his father’s Greenland journal,: containing a map of
Godthaab and its vicinity, drawn by a brother-missionary
of his father’s, one Bing. On this map appears a figure
of the ‘ most dreadful Monster ' (fig. 1). This figure has
been several times redrawn — and, as a matter of course,
distorted. For example, an amplified, though recognis-
able, version appeared in the J//ustrated London News*
‚at the time (1848) when the Dedalus case was attracting
great attention ; while a plate in Hamilton’s Amphibious
Carnivora* shows the creature prancing like the horse on
the boiler of a steam-roller, and spouting a vertical jet
of water whose apparent volume is almost as great as that
of its whole body.

Egede's account, too, has been woefully garbled by
successive translators. For example, a French edition of


1 Continuation af Relationerne Betreffende Den Groenlandste Missions,
Copenhagen, n.d. (Oudemans gives the date as 1741, but the copy I have
examined (B.M.) is undated.)

2 28. x. 1848.

* Amphibious Carnivora (vol. VI of Jardine’s * Naturalist’s Library’).
Dr. R. Hamilton. Edinburgh, 1843.


I4 THE SEA-SERPENT


the Description of Greenland,“ published in 1763, relates _
that the animal was covered with scales, and plunged back
into the water with its belly upwards ; and a German
re-translation of this, in the same year, goes one better,


FIG. I. EGEDE’S SEA MONSTER


From Bing’s map


Norr.—In the original, the creature is shown as spouting a column o
water which supports a figure upholding the title of the map. In view of it
decorative character, this embellishment has been omitted.


and makes the monster float on the surface, belly
upwards |:

In considering this case, therefore, it is vitally necessary
to deal only with the original accounts written by Egede,

\ Description et Histoire naturelle de Groenland, Copenhagen and
Geneva, 1763.

® Beschreibung und Naturgeschichte von Groenland, Berlin, 1763.


TWO EIGHTEENTH-CENTURY REPORTS IS


supplemented by Bing’s figure. I am uncertain how
much authority the latter possesses. It has been stated:
that it was‘... made by Mr. Bing aboard his (Egede's)
ship, directly after the appearance of the animal) The
only authority I can find for this statement is Pontop-
pidan's remark, in a footnote:


€


... Mr. Bing, one of the missionaries that took a
drawing of it, informed his brother-in-law, Mr. Sylow,
minister of Houg in this diocese, that this creature's
eye seemed red, and like burning fire.’


This affords presumptive, but not quite conclusive evi-
dence that Bing saw the creature himself, and that his
drawing was based on his own observations ; but while
it is quite likely that he made it soon after the event, how
soon is entirely uncertain. I mention this point because,
as will be seen, a very ingenious attempt has been made to
explain Egede's monster on the basis of Bing's drawing —
which can scarcely be regarded as carrying the same
weight as Egede's description.

As already remarked, Egede's account of his ' very
terrible sea-monster ' has always commanded a good deal
of attention. This is deservedly due, in great measure,
to his very considerable qualifications as a trustworthy
witness, and to the truthfulness and nobility of his
character. Of his protracted and laborious labours as a
missionary in partibus infidelium this is not the place to
speak, although they won him the good will and respect of
all Europe ; but no one who has even cursorily examined
his books will deny that he was not only a zealous
missionary, but also a keen observer and patient recorder
of any new and striking facts (especially those of natural
history) which came under his notice. In general his

ı By Oudemans - on p. 117 of his book.


16 THE SEA-SERPENT


descriptions are most accurate, and free from exagger-
ation ; although it must be admitted that, in common
with most naturalists of his time, he occasionally goes
astray when relating matters of hearsay, uncritically
accepted.

In this case, however, he describes an event which he
himself witnessed. In effect he tells us that he saw a
creature of serpentine form, with a bulky body, raise a
pointed head, long neck, a pair of paddles and part of its
body, until its head was some thirty feet* above water.
Sinking again soon afterwards, it lifted a long tail in the
air at some distance from where its body was.

At first sight, it seems possible that what he saw was a
whale ‘ breaching.’ Whales, when irritated by parasites
(or for some other obscure reason) sometimes jump right
out of water — a very surprising and unusual sight. But
this theory does not square with the facts. In Egede's
Description of Greenland he gives a plate* showing, very
clearly and accurately, various species of whales — right
whale, rorqual, and ' killer.’ A later plate gives a very
accurate figure of a narwhal. It seems obvious that a man
so well acquainted with whales would not describe one,
of any species, as a ' very terrible sea-monster,' nor would
he use such a misleading expression as '. . . it blew like
a whale’ if it actually were one.

It may be noted that Egede’s account of the creature’s
* paws ’ (in conjunction with Bing’s drawing) is curiously
recalled by an account, published in 1891, of asea-monster
seen on July 24th of that year off East Cape, North


! For example, in his Description of Greenland . . . (p. 94 of the English
translation) he gravely re-tells, as fact, the old fable about the evolution of
the * Barnacle goose ’ from the barnacle.


* Assuming his ship to have been 250 tons or so.
* Opposite p. 37. ‘The plates are not numbered.


TWO EIGHTEENTH-CENTURY REPORTS 17


Island (New Zealand). Mr. A. F. Mathews. a surveyor
and (with several others) an eye-witness, remarks: :


“ It would from time to time lift its head and part of its
body to a great height perpendicularly, and when in
that position would turn its body round in a most
peculiar manner, displaying a black back, white belly,
and two armlet appendages of great length, which
appeared to dangle about like a broken limb on a
human being. It would then suddenly drop back into
the water....'


The same, or a very similar creature, was also seen, in the
same neighbourhood, on August ist following, by the
Rotomahana, of the Union Steam-Shipping Co. By the
accounts* of her chief officer (Mr. A. L. Kerr) and
quartermaster (Peter Nelson) it was undoubtedly no
whale, having a maximum girth, as far as could be seen,
of some ten or twelve feet — yet it rose out of the water to
a height of some thirty feet, looking like a huge conger
eel, but with two large fins, about ten feet long.

It should be noted, however, that while I have adduced
this case because of its resemblance to Egede's narrative,
I do not put it forward as absolutely indisputable evi-
dence — for two reasons. Mr. Mathews’ creature was
half a mile away when seen ; and while the Rotomahana
was within a hundred yards of hers, there is an internal
defect in her evidence. Both her witnesses agree that
the time was about 6.30 a.m., and that the sun was shining
brightly. But, for the date (August 1st) and position
given, the sun would not have risen until about half an
hour later. No doubt there is some simple explanation
of the discrepancy — she may have been keeping the time


! Standard, 22, ix. 1891.
? Newcastle Evening Chronicle, 23, ix. 1891.


18 THE SEA-SERPENT


of her port of departure, or arrival, for example — but I
have no means of arriving at it.

To return to Egede's monster. It was not, it would
seem, a whale ; and it was certainly too large for a shark
or any other known creature. That a living creature -
was seen, few who can form a just estimate of Egede's
character will deny. That it was of unknown type, would
also seem to require very little further demonstration.
Such, however, was not the view of Henry Lee-a
naturalist well-known in his day — who put forward in
1883 the singular theory that what Egede had taken for
the head and neck of a serpentine monster was, in reality,
the tail of a giant squid.

The story of how the ‘ decapod,' or giant ten-armed
squid — of which the octopus, beloved of Victor Hugo, is
a humbler relation — passed in fifty years or so from an
old-wives-tale to an accepted scientific fact 1s an interesting
one, which has considerable bearing on the analogous
case of the sea-serpent.

Stories of giant many-armed sea-monsters — beasts,
capable of attacking boats, and even ships, and carrying
off their crews — are to be found among the folk-lore of all
seafaring nations. Representations of such monsters are
to be fcund here, there, and everywhere ; on Mycenean
urns, in stained-glass windows, in Japanese colour-prints
and woodcuts. But until comparatively recent years no
specimens of any such creature had ever come under
scientific observation ; and the efforts of such writers
as Pontoppidan — of whom more anon and the even
more credulous Denys de Monfort: to compile such
stories and distil some residue of truth from them, only
succeeded in intensifying the popular view that the
“ Kraken ' was a myth.


! See his Histoire Naturelle des Mollusques, tom. 2, Paris, An. X. —1802.


TWO EIGHTEENTH-CENTURY REPORTS 19


Gradually, however, this view was overborne by the
weight of evidence. Reports, vague but persistent,
accumulated of instances in which such creatures had
been cast ashore ; dead and mutilated, in most cases,
but still recognisable. One was stranded off Zeeland in
or about 1847, another at the Skaw in 1854, and one in
the Shetland Isles in 1861. In the latter year, too,
occurred the famous case of the Zecton.

On November 30th, 1861, the French corvette of that
name encountered a giant squid swimming on the surface,
about 120 miles north-eastward of Tenerife. After
cannonading it ineffectually for some time, an attempt
(which naturally failed) was made to haul it on board.
The French officers estimated its length (less tentacles) at
fifteen feet, and its weight at two tons or so.

Nor was this all. Between 1870 and 1877 inclusive,
not less than a dozen or so of these strange monsters were
stranded on the shores of Newfoundland — a fact suggest-
ing a sudden change of habitat, for no previous visits to
that locality were recorded. One of them which turned
up in Conception Bay: on October 26th, 1873, was
attacked by two fishermen in an open boat. They got away
with their lives, plus part of one arm, severed by a lucky
blow with a hatchet. The creature's dimensions, com-
puted from this relic, were: body, 10 feet long, 21 feet
diameter ; head, 2 feet diameter; long arms, about
32 feet? ; total length, about 44 feet. Several museums
now possess more or less complete specimens.

The giant squid, therefore, became an accepted fact
in the ’seventies ; and it was natural that it should be
looked upon as a sort of ‘ universal solvent’ of all ‘ sea


ı A large bay at the S.E. extremity of Newfoundland.


2 The decapod has eight short arms and two disproportionately long ;
the octopus, eight of much the same length.


20 THE SEA-SERPENT


monster ' narratives. One might have thought that, since
naturalists had been brought to see that a so-called myth
had a real foundation, and that the sea held at least one
large creature of which they had no knowledge, they
might have gone a step further, and admitted that there
might be others also. Possibly, some did ; but the more
general attitude, I think, was that assumed by Lee in his
Sea Monsters Unmasked: — a somewhat optimistic title —
which endeavoured to show that such stories as Egede's,
and that of the Dedalus, were distorted narratives of an
encounter with a giant squid.

In the case of Egede's monster, Lee supported this
view by means of a most ingenious sketch (reproduced
in Fig. 2), which well repays close scrutiny. Com-
paring it with Bing's drawing (Fig. 1) it will be seen how
cleverly Lee has made the above-water portion of his
sketch agree with this. At first sight, it seems to carry
complete conviction. But, actually, it will not stand
examination.

In the first place, Lee's theory fits Bing’s drawing (up to
a point), but it does not square with a more authoritative
piece of evidence — Egede's own statement. Egede tells
us that the creature * blew like a whale' ; ze. from its
head — not from a submerged tube some thirty feet
distant.

In addition, the sketch contains two mechanical
impossibilities. A squid in the position shown would
have all its arms together and pointing downwards ; it
could not propel itself out of the water by its impulse tube
and simultaneously raise one of its long arms, as shown.
And secondly, the tube itself would also be pointing
downwards, and could not spout upwards as in the
sketch. Incidentally, for the body to rise thirty feet or

' Sea Monsters Unmasked, Henry Lee (London, 1883).


TWO EIGHTEENTH-CENTURY REPORTS 2I


so out of water, its length would have to be some fifty feet
or so— corresponding to a squid weighing some 200
tons, with arms about 160 feet long ! Most probably
we have not yet seen the full size to which the giant squid


FIG. 2. LEE’S EXPLANATION OF EGEDE’S SEA-MONSTER
Re-drawn (with amendments) from his Sea Monsters Unmasked


can attain — still, a creature of such size, even if it filled
the bill in other respects (which it does not) would
scarcely commend itself, I suggest, to the sceptic any more
than the alternative hypothesis : that Egede saw a large
creature of serpentine form and unknown type.

Cs


22 THE SEA-SERPENT


Lorenz von Ferry, 1746.

This case is taken from the Natural History of Norway:
written by the celebrated Erik Pontoppidan, Bishop of
Bergen from 1747 to 1764. Like James Bruce, the
explorer of Abyssinia,* it was Pontopiddan's fate to be
denounced in his own day as a modern Mandeville, on
account of the improbable nature of some of his state-
ments. It falls to be recorded, however, that in at least
one case those same derided statements (which, it should
be noted, did not profess to be based on his personal
knowledge) have been proved, long afterwards, to possess
a very considerable basis of truth. I refer to the “ Kraken.’
Pontoppidan devoted several pages to an account of this
‘mythical’ creature, compiled from the traditions respect-
ing it current among the Norwegian fishermen of his day.

As already stated, this giant many-armed sea-monster
was not entirely a myth ; and while many of Pontoppi-
dan's anecdotes respecting it must be classed as folk-lore,*
and not as natural history, it is hard not to admire his
moral courage in putting them on record, and the
earnestness with which he attempts to extract a nucleus of


1 Norges naturlige historie (Copenhagen, 1752, 1753).


* Bruce did not suffer fools gladly. After his return from Abyssinia,
one of the Edinburgh intelligentsia once referred, in company, to his
(perfectly true) account of how he had seen natives cutting, and devouring,
raw steaks from a living cow. ‘This the arm-chair traveller stigmatised as
‘absurd and impossible.’ Bruce immediately gave him the option of
eating a raw steak, then and there, or of giving him the usual satisfaction
(Bruce, by the way, could drill an ace at twelve paces). The steak was
eaten.

* Admittedly, some of these * Kraken ’ tales — such as its being a mile in
circumference — are wild exaggerations. Still, even this particular may
one day find a defender ; for in the British Museum (459 c. 3 — bound up
in a copy of the English translation of Pontoppidan) is a MS. copy of an
affidavit sworn in 1775, describing the rising and sinking, off the west
coast of Scotland, of an island of this size and some 30 feet high, believed
to be a veritable ‘ Kraken.’ I can only imagine that it was a peculiar
species of fog-bank.


TWO EIGHTEENTH-CENTURY REPORTS 23


truth from tales which he himself regarded as, prima
facie, almost incredible.

Pontoppidan, then, although possibly over-fond of the
marvellous (as we most of us are) was not thearrant romancer
which, most unjustly, he has been considered ; and while he
devoted a considerable section of his book to the sea-serpent
or Soe Orm (sea-snake) which, by his account, had often
been seen on the Norwegian coast, he seems to have done
all he could to verify, as far as possible, the accounts which
he received of it. (He does not claim to speak, either in
this case or that of the‘ Kraken,’ from personal observation.)

On the other hand, he greatly resembles Herodotus in
his style and cast of mind. All is fish that comes to his
net; any 'fisherman's yarn’ about the sea-serpent
detesting the smell of castoreum,' or being born on land
and taking to the sea when too big to hide in the forests,
or sloughing its skin, must find a place in his book,
however improbable he may admit that it appears to him.
It is for this reason — his uncritical compilation and
publication of a mass of statements differing greatly in
value, without making any attempt to sift the grain from
the chaff — that so many of his critics have laughed at the
worthy Bishop of Bergen's lucubrations.

At the same time, it should be remembered that, side
by side with such fables, Pontoppidan also prints a certain
amount of real evidence — the sworn statements of edu-
cated persons, holding responsible positions. From these,
I select the affidavit made by Pilot-General Lorenz von
Ferry, and two of his men. The following is Pontop-
pidan's version of this*:


1 A strong-smelling substance secreted by the beaver. It was formerly
esteemed as a medicine, but is now mostly used by perfumers.

2I have generally followed the translation given in Oudemans’ book,
pp. 122-124. The English version of Pontoppidan (London, 1755)
gives a very similar rendering.


24. THE SEA-SERPENT


* Last winter I happened to meet the Royal Commander
and Pilot-General at Bergen, M. Lorenz von Ferry,
and we spoke about this subject (the sea-serpent). He
told me that for a long time he had doubted the exist-
ence of the sea-serpent, but that at last his experiences
in 1746 had convinced him. And though I could
not say anything of importance against it, he ordered
to my satisfaction and that of others, two seamen, who
were with him in his boat, and had seen the animal
and its blood which coloured the water red after a shot
of von Ferry at it, to appear before the public court of
justice at Bergen. What these men confirmed on oath
may be found in the following instrument which I
received in original and which I therefore think
valuable enough to communicate 1n extenso.
““ ALBERT CunmisriaN Dass, His Royal Majesty’s
Stadtholder at Bergen, Hans CHRISTIAN GARTNER,
His Royal Majesty’s Councillor of Justice and Com-
merce, at the same time Secretary of the Town,
together with Jan CLies, OLE SIMENSEN, OLE BRINCH-
MAND, JOERGEN KoEnIG for Conrap von LANGE,
Matruias Gram for Erras Petrus Tucusen, Ciaus
Natier for Diprich Hastop, Jocuem Forcu for
Henrich Hiort, and Jorrcen Wiers for Hans
Curistian Byszinc, sworn citizens and additional
deniers: there, declare, that on February the 22nd,
1751, the Procurator Jouann Rzvurz appeared before
the public court of justice at Bergen, and presented a
paper he had received that day, and bearing the date
of the day before, from the honourable Captain and
Pilot-General Lorenz von Ferry.

*** And as the services of the appearer are requested
in it, to supply him a judicial hearing of witnesses, con-
cerning the event mentioned in the same paper, so the


! Jurymen.


TWO EIGHTEENTH-CENTURY REPORTS 25


appearer, being there for that purpose, pointed out two
men living in this town, named Nrets PETERSEN KOPPER
and Nırrs NIELSEN ANGLEWIGEN, begging that these
men might be admitted to a declaration on oath, that
all has happened in detail as is mentioned in the paper,
which he begged to be registered in the said instru-
ment. The above-mentioned paper was read to the
witnesses, and runs as follows :

Mr. Jouann Reurtz,

Sir;

In the latter end of August, in the year 1746, as I
was on a voyage, on my return from Trundheim,'on a
very calm and hot day, having a mind to put in at
Molde,* it happened that when we had arrived with
my vessel within a mile of the aforesaid Molde, being
at a place called Jule-Naess, as I was reading in a book,
I heard a kind of murmuring voice from amongst the
men at the oars,* who were eight in number, and
observed that the man at the helm kept off from the
land. Upon this I enquired what was the matter, and
was informed that there was a sea-serpent ahead of us.
I then ordered the helmsman to keep the land again,
and to come up with this creature of which I had heard
so many stories. Though the fellows were under some
apprehensions, they were obliged to obey my orders.

In the meantime the sea-snake passed by us, and
we were obliged to turn the vessel about in order to get
nearer to it. As the snake swam faster than we could
row, I took my gun, which was loaded with small shot,
and fired at it ; on this it immediately plunged under
water. We rowed to the place where it sank down
! Trondhjem.
* For a later report ofa sea-serpent in this vicinity, see p. 91.


* Making a passage from Trondhjem to Molde, he was evidently not in
a rowing-boat. No doubt his crew were * sweeping? their craft along,
there being no breeze blowing.


26 THE SEA-SERPENT


(which in the calm might be easily observed) and lay
upon our oars, thinking it would come up again to the
surface; however, it did not. Where the snake plunged
down, the water appeared thick and red ; perhaps the
small shot might have wounded it, the distance being
very little.

The head of this sea-serpent, which it held more
than two feet above the surface of the water, resembled
that of a horse. It was of a greyish colour, and the
mouth was quite black, and very large.‘ It had large
black eyes, and a long white mane, which hung down
to the surface of the water. Besides the head and neck,
we saw seven or eight folds, or coils, of this snake,
which were very thick, and as far as we could guess
there was a fathom's distance between each fold.

I related this affair in a certain company, where
there was a person of distinction* present, who desired
that I would communicate to him an authentic detail
of all that happened ; and for this reason two of my
sailors who were present at the time and place where I
saw this monster, namely, NıeLs PETERSEN KOPPER,
and Nigrs NiELSEN ANGLEWIGEN, will appear in court,
to declare on oath the truth of every particular herein
set forth ; and I desire the favour of an attested copy
of the said description.

I remain, Sir, your obliged servant,

L. von Ferry.

Bergen, 2 1st February, 1751.’

‘“ After this the above-named witnesses gave their

corporal oaths,* and, with their forefinger held up

1 Compare the cow-like, greyish-black head of the Hilary’s creature
(LOL FIR 207.

® Obviously, Pontoppidan.


* So in both translations. The term * corporal oath’ is new to me; no
doubt it implies a milder type of expression than that employed by
sergeant-majors.


TWO EIGHTEENTH-CENTURY REPORTS 27


according to law, testified and declared the aforesaid
letter or declaration, and every particular set forth
therein, to be strictly true. A copy of the said attesta-
tion was made out for the said Procurator Reutz,
and granted by the Recorder. That this was transacted
in our court of justice we confirm with our hand and
seals.

““ Done at Bergen, the day and place being as
above :


A. C. Dass H. C. GARTNER
J. Curs O. SIMENSEN
O. BRINCHMAND J. Kornice

M. Gram C. NATLER

J. Forcu JANN TERS M


The picture preserved for us by this affidavit — the
Stadtholder and Councillor, no doubt attired with some
little ceremony ; the solemn jurors and deputy-jurors ;
and the tarry mariners, each with his ' forefinger held up
according to law ' — ought really to form the subject of an
historical painting in the grand style. I commend the
notion to some of our brighter R.A.'s.

Von Ferry certainly appears to have done all he could to
put his experience on record as accurately and formally
as possible. It will be noted that, by his account, he was
so close to the creature that he could scarcely have mis-
taken its nature — at least, we may fairly assume that he
did not see the usual ‘ school of porpoises.’ With regard
to the mane of which he speaks, we shall find this appen-
dage mentioned in many later accounts, particularly
that of Capt. M’Quhae, commanding H.M.S. Dedalus,
in 1848. On this point Pontoppidan, speaking of the


1 See p. 99.


28 THE SEA-SERPENT


general characteristics of the Norwegian sea-serpent,
remarks :


*.. . about the neck... there is a kind of mane, which
looks like a parcel of sea-weeds hanging down to the
water...


And here for comparison, are M’Quhae’s words,
written before he ever saw Pontoppidan's book :


‘It (the creature seen by the D.edalus) had no fins, but
something like a mane of a horse, or rather a bunch of
seaweed, washed about its back... °:


Plate I shows a type-figure of the sea-serpent, taken from
Pontoppidan (he also gives a distorted version of Bing's
drawing). ‘This is stated to be drawn under the inspection
of the Rev. Hans Stroem, and to correspond exactly with
descriptions of the creature given him by two of his
neighbours at Heowe, MM. Reutz and Tuchsen. It
has probably been more frequently reproduced than any
other drawing of the sea-serpent. But, which is more
remarkable, one finds that the majority of later drawings,
produced from observation by persons who, it is
probable, had never seen or heard of it, resemble it
closely. See, for example, Figs. ; & 12. More explan-
ations than one might be offered of this resemblance ;
but at least it may be said that it is not inconsistent with
the supposition that all are attempted representations of
real creatures, closely similar in type and form.


1 The Times, 14, x. 1848.


é
h


86 "d Suv]


21403514 adyyangpu SABAON , MOAT


€


"I93suour-eos s,opesqy jo (o1oq poonpoudorz jou) o1n3y e sure3uoo SuraAvi1Suo [eurg110 əy}
JO Jey TOMO] JL ,ex?ug-eosS ueIdoMIoN JO SPUY OML, suveour uondrıosıodns wersomIoN oyL—'Z1oN


LNWdWHS-VHS S.NVAIddOLNOAI "I uivaiq


AUA() 206 ayero pP APP spurs


4
» a8


Cu. II. THE NEW ENGLAND
SEA-SERPENT


On August 18th, 1817, the Linnean Society of Boston
formed a committee ‘for the purpose of collecting any
evidence which may exist respecting a remarkable animal,
denominated a Sea Serpent, reported to have been seen in
and near the Harbour of Gloucester. :

Committees and similar bodies are not, as a rule,
remarkable for initiative or collective intelligence ; but
that of the Linnean Society affords, up to a point, a
refreshing exception. It numbered, fortunately, but
three members.* They set to work zealously and methodi-
cally ; and succeeded in collecting a considerable body of
sworn testimony which, although obtained from different
sources, was in close general agreement, and left little
doubt that some large sea-monster of unknown type had
most undoubtedly been seen off the New England coast
on numerous occasions. Unfortunately, as will appear
later, the Committee was not satished with merely
collecting the facts — it set to work to explain them, and
reached a somewhat ridiculous conclusion which tended,
in the eyes of competent naturalists, to cast considerable
doubt upon the worth of its labours.

The Committee's report was published as a small
pamphlet: (now very scarce) in December 1817. It

1 Massachusetts : 42° 36’ N., 70? 40’ W.

2 John Davis, Jacob Bigelow, and Francis C. Gray.

s REPORT /of a / COMMITTEE / of the / LINNEAN SOCIETY
OF NEW ENGLAND / relative / to a large marine animal / supposed
to be / A SERPENT, / seen near Cape Ann, Massachusetts, /in / August
1817.// BOSTON : / published by Cummings and Hilliard, / No. 1,
Cornhill. / / Univ. Press... Hilliard and Metcalf. / 1817.

Small 8vo., grey paper cover. 10}”x6}". 52 pp. 2 plates.


29


FIG. 3. MASSACHUSETTS BAY, AND VICINITY


30


THE NEW ENGLAND SEA-SERPENT 31


contained, inter alia, the sworn depositions of twelve
witnesses. Before giving extracts from these, it seems
worth while to reproduce the very excellent rules which
the Committee laid down to govern its investigations.


* Boston, Aug. 19, 1817.

‘ The Committee appointed by the Linnean Society . .

have concluded on the following method of suits

in the execution of their commission.

I. The examination to be confined to persons profess-
ing actually to have seen the animal in question.

II. Such persons to be examined as may be met with
by either of the Committee, or by Hon. Lonson
Nash of Gloucester, who is to be requested by a
letter addressed to him from the Committee to under-
take this service.

III. All testimony on the subject to be taken in
writing, and after being deliberately read to the
person testifying, to be signed by him, and sworn
to before a magistrate. The examinations to be
separate, and the matter testified by any witness not
to be communicated until the whole evidence be
taken.

IV. The persons testifying to be requested first to
relate their recollections on the subject, which being
taken down, the following questions to be proposed,
if not rendered unnecessary by the statement given.


QUESTIONS
I. When did you first see this animal ?
2. How often and how long at a time?


3. At what times of the day ?


1 Their names, reminiscent of Widecombe Fair, were: Amos Story,
Solomon Allen, Eppes Ellery, Wm. H. Foster, Matthew Gaffney, James
Mansfield, John Johnston, Wm. B. Pearson, Sewall Toppan, Robert
Bragg, Wm. Somerby, and Elkanah Finney.


32 THE SEA-SERPENT


4. At what distance ?
5. How near the shore ?
6. What was its general appearance ?
7. Was itin motion or at rest ?
8. How fast did it move, and in what direction ?
9. What parts of it were above the water and how
high ?
10. Did it appear jointed or only serpentine ?
11. If serpentine, were its sinuosities vertical or
horizontal ?
12. How many distinct portions were out of water at
one time?
13. What were its colour, length, and thickness ?
14. Did it appear smooth or rough ?
15. What were the size and shape of its head, and had
the head ears, horns, or other appendages ?
16. Describe its eyes and mouth.
17. Had it gills or breathing holes, and where ?
18. Had it fins or legs, and where ?
19. Had it a mane or hairs, and where?
20. How did its tail terminate ?
21. Did it utter any sound ?
22. Did it appear to pursue, avoid, or notice any
thing ?
23. Did you see more than one?
24. How many persons saw it ?
25. State any other remarkable fact.’


It will be conceded that these enquiries cover a good deal
of ground, and bear a family resemblance to those set by
Calverley in his ‘ Pickwick’ examination-paper.: But
while the Committee may be thought unduly optimistic

1“ Who little thinks that in which pocket, of what garment, in where,


he has left what, entreating him to return to whom, with how many what, -
and all how big?’


THE NEW ENGLAND SEA-SERPENT 33


in estimating the amount of information they expected to
obtain, and the powers of observation possessed by the
witnesses, it must be admitted that their questions were
at least designed to elicit the maximum amount of
available information, and that their plan of requiring
the witnesses to make independent affidavits was calcu-
lated to expose, without much difficulty, anything in the
nature of an attempted hoax.

To my mind, I confess that in this case the ‘ hoax’
theory is quite untenable. The evidence was taken on
oath ; it 1s at first-hand, full, clear, and in excellent general
agreement ; while the witnesses were not casual strangers,
but men of good character resident in the locality. I shall
return later to the supposition that they may have been
mistaken in what they actually saw.

And now to their story.

The ' strange marine animal,’ as it is cautiously termed
by the Committee, appears to have first been seen entering
Gloucester harbour on or about August 6th, 1817.
Gloucester, it may be remarked, was then (and is now)
one of the principal fishing-ports of the United States.
It stands at the head of a bay about two and a half miles
long by a mile wide, opening to the south-westward.:
'The shores of the bay form a series of small coves ; and
at its head, fronted by two or three small islands, 1s a
narrow inlet, forming an inner harbour. ‘Ihe town
stands on the north-western side of this inlet. In the
entrance to the main harbour are several dangerous
shoals ; one, close to the western shore, being Norman's
Woe Rock, famous as the (supposed) resting-place of
that singularly-navigated vessel the schooner Hesperus.*


1 See Fig. 4.
2 According to Longfellow, her captain (absorbed in smoking) failed to
observe signs of approaching bad weather, and (quite rightly) declined to


34 THE SEA-SERPENT


The date (August 6th) when the creature was first seen
entering the bay is an approximate one ; Its official
history, as given in the depositions, begins on August
roth.


GLOUCESTER HARBOUR
with apologies fo
Admiralty char! no. 1227


MEAK KLUNOT NND Gam MEES pere SASEN paea Oaa WE NECEM HEN cec Deme Eee HX MIDUN TREE si a Taner SS gam SOS Aum En
SOOO rrr niri uarie,


FIG. 4. GLOUCESTER HARBOUR


accept advice on the subject from his crew. Having somewhat miracu-
lously heard the E. Point fog-bell (dead to leeward of him, at such a
distance that he could not see the light), he endeavoured to beat off a rock-
bound coast against a strong gale which was blowing fair for the harbour
entrance. He then lashed himself to the wheel, and expired — presum-
ably of heart-failure, induced by excessive smoking.


THE NEW ENGLAND SEA-SERPENT 35


‘I, Amos Story of Gloucester, in the County of Essex,
mariner, depose and say, that on the tenth day of
August A.D. 1817, I saw a strange marine animal,
that I believe to be a serpent, at the southward and
eastward of Ten Pound Island, in the harbour in said
Gloucester. It was between the hours of twelve and
one o'clock when I first saw him, and he continued
in sight for an hour and half. I was setting on the
shore, and was about twenty rods: from him when he
was the nearest to me.

* His head appeared shaped much like the head of the
sea-turtle, and he carried his head from ten to twelve
inches above the surface of the water. His head at that
distance appeared larger than the head of any dog that
lever saw. From the back part of his head to the next
part of him that was visible, I should judge to be three
or four feet. He moved very rapidly through the
water, I should say a mile in two, or at most, in three
minutes. I saw no bunches? on his back. On this day
I did not see more than ten or twelve feet of his


Dx o


Not only was Story the first official witness to see the
creature in Gloucester Harbour, but also the last. He saw
it again a fortnight later, on the morning of the day when
he made his affidavit — which continues as follows :


* I likewise saw, what I believe to be the same animal

this day, viz. the twenty third of August, a.p. 1817.

This was in the morning, about seven o'clock. He

then lay perfectly still, extended on the water, and I

should judge that I saw fifty feet of him at least.

‘I should judge that I was forty rods* from him this
! IIO yards.


? For the explanation of this term, see the following deposition.
?* 220 yards.


36 THE SEA-SERPENT


day. Ihada good spy-glass both days when I saw him.
I continued looking at him about half an hour, and he
remained still and in the same position, until I was
called away. Neither his head nor tail was visible.
His colour appeared to be a dark brown, and when the
sun shone upon him, the reflection was very bright. I
thought his body was about the size of a man's body.


AMOS STORY?


* Essex. ss. Aug. 23, 1817. Personally appeared Amos
Story, and made oath that the foregoing deposition by -
him subscribed is true, according to his best knowledge
and belief.

Cor: Lonson Nasu, Jus. Pacis.’


It will be noticed that Mr. Nash did not subject Story
to the ordeal of the ‘ Twenty-five Points’ ; at least he
did not put them categorically, although the terms of the
deposition suggest that it is based, to some extent, on
interrogation. In taking a deposition two days earlier,
he had, as will be seen, put most of the questions specific-


ally.


“I, Solomon Allen 3d,* of Gloucester, in the County
of Essex, Ship master, depose and say ; that I have
seen a strange marine animal, that I believe to be a
serpent, in the harbour in said Gloucester.

“I should judge him to be between eighty and ninety
feet 1n length, and about the size of a half-barrel,
apparently having joints from his head to his tail.
I was about one hundred and fifty yards from him,
when I judged him to be of the size of a half barrel.
His head formed something like the head of the rattle


1 Abbreviation of * Coram’ — in the presence of.


This suffix denotes that he was the third of one family to bear the
same names, ‘The custom still, I believe, obtains in the United States,


THE NEW ENGLAND SEA-SERPENT 37.


snake, but nearly as large as the head of a horse. When
he moved on the surface of the water, his motion was
slow, at times playing about in circles, and sometimes
moving nearly straight forward. When he dis-
appeared, he sunk apparently directly down, and would
next appear at two hundred yards from where he
disappeared, in two minutes. His colour was a dark
brown, and I did not discover any spots upon him.
Question. When did you first see this animal ?
Answer. I saw him on the twelfth, thirteenth and four-
teenth of August, A.D. 1817.

Q. How often, and how long at a time ?

A. I was in a boat on the twelfth inst. and was around
him several times, within one hundred and fifty yards of
him. On the thirteenth inst. I saw him nearly all the
day, from the shore. I was on the beach, nearly on a
level with him, and most of the time he was from one
hundred and fifty to three hundred yards from me.
On the fourteenth, I saw him but once, and had not so
good a view of him.

Q. What parts of it were above the surface of the
water, and how high ?

A. Its joints or bunches, appeared about eight or ten
inches above the surface of the water.

Q. Did it bend its body up and down in moving, or
to the right and left ?

A. He moved to the right and left.

Q. How many distinct portions of it were out of water,
at one time ?

. I should say fifty distinct portions.

. Did it appear smooth or rough ?

. I should say rough and scaly.

Had it ears, horns, or any other appendages ?

. I perceived none.

How did its tail terminate ?


Ww ID ATO AIO &


38 THE SEA-SERPENT


A. He seemed to taper towards (what I thought) his
tail, though I had no distinct view of his tail.

Q. Did it utter any sound ?

A. Not in my hearing.

Q. Did it appear to pursue, avoid, or notice any
thing ?

A. It appeared to me to avoid the boat where I was,
though afterwards, I saw him make towards a boat, in
which was Mr. Gaffney and others.

Q. Did you see more than one ?

A. I did not.

Q. How many persons saw it ?

A. Twenty or thirty persons were in view of me.

Q. Did heopen his mouth when you saw him, and if so,
how wide ?

A. Yes, when I looked at him from the shore with a
glass at about two hundred yards distance, his mouth
appeared to be open about ten inches. I had no glass,
when I saw him from the boat.

O. Did he carry his head above the surface of the
water ?

A. Yes, at times, about two feet, then again he would
carry the top of his head just on the surface of the
water.

Q. Did heturn short and quick, and what was the form
of the curve that he made when he turned ?

4. He turned short and quick, and the first part of
the curve that he made in turning resembled the link
of a chain: ; but when his head came parallel with his
tail, his head and tail appeared near together.


SOLOMON ALLEN 3d.’


* Essex. ss. August 21, 1817. Personally appeared
Solomon Allen the third, and made oath that the


1 Misprinted * c ain’ in original.


THE NEW ENGLAND SEA-SERPENT 39


foregoing facts, by him subscribed, are true, accord-
ing to his best knowledge and belief.


Cor. Lonson Nasu, Jus. Pacis.’


It may be noted that Mr. Nash had himself seen the
creature, and that in consequence he joined issue with
one or two of Allen’s statements. In a letter to the Com-
mittee, dated August 28th, 1817, he remarks :

“u... I am confident, from my own observation, that

Mr. Allen is mistaken, as to the motion of the animal.
His motion is vertical. I saw him, on the 14th instant,
for nearly half an hour. I should judge he was two
hundred and fifty yards from me, when the nearest.
I saw him twice with a glass for a short time, and at
other times, with the naked eye. . . .
*I think Mr. Allen is likewise mistaken, as to the
distinct portions of the animal that were visible, at one
time. I saw, at no time, more than eight distinct
portions ; though more may have been visible ; still,
I cannot believe that fifty distinct portions were seen,
at one time. I believe the animal to be straight, and
that the apparent bunches were caused by his vertical
motion.'


These two points — the vertical or horizontal nature of
the creature's undulations when moving, and the apparent
‘bunches,’ or serrations exhibited by the outline of its
back — seem to have formed rather a bone of contention
among both the observers and the Committee. A short
digression may therefore be useful.

It was agreed on all hands that the creature, at first
sight, looked like a gigantic serpent. Now serpents,
of course, progress by curving their bodies laterally —
they have no power of humping them vertically, as a


40 THE SEA-SERPENT


caterpillar does. Yet the creature seen at Gloucester
seemed, to most observers, to progress by the latter
method — vertical undulations — and sometimes to exhibit
the same wavy outline of back even when motionless,
although at other times its back appeared smooth and
flat.

That it had great lateral flexibility is undeniable. Six _
of the twelve witnesses gave a detailed description of its
appearance when turning round in the water, and all of
these accounts agree exactly with Allen's : viz., that it
curved its body laterally until it assumed the shape of an
elongated U, the head and tail- both of which then
became visible — almost touching. It is interesting to
note that the creature seen by H.M.S. Hilary in 1917
did much the same.:

If, in addition to this extreme lateral flexibility, the
creature was also able to curve its back vertically into a
series of humps, the structure of its backbone must have
been truly astonishing — it must have looked like a series
of universal-joints. But the depositions do not actually
state this. They speak of the humps, or ‘ bunches’
of the creature's back as rising but a very few inches
above the water ; although extending, in a line, for fifty
feet and upwards. Coupled with the fact that the back
sometimes showed a smooth outline, devoid of ‘ bunches,’
it seems much more probable that the latter were curva-
tures of the skin, produced at will by muscular contrac-
tion, and not actual undulations of the backbone,:

Deep, 209,

* In the case of the once-celebrated * Animal of Stronsa ’ (see p. 246),
Everard Home, discussing a rough sketch of this (Fig. 26) and proceeding
on the assumption that it was really a basking-shark (as it probably was),
remarked (P4Ai/. Trans. 1809) *. . . The contortions towards the tail are
such, as the intervertebral joints could not admit of, they are therefore


imaginary! A summary, if scarcely scientific, method of dealing with
inconvenient evidence !


. THE NEW ENGLAND SEA-SERPENT 4I


although a small degree of vertical flexibility in this can
scarcely be said to be anatomically impossible.:

From the depositions, it appears that the creature
frequented Gloucester harbour for about a fortnight,
being repeatedly observed by many persons — sometimes
at exceedingly close range. Its visit was not entirely
- devoid of incident. It will be remembered that Solomon
Allen spoke of seeing it ‘ make towards a boat, in which
were Mr. Gaffney and others. Well, here is Mr.
Gaffney's account of its reception :


‘I, Marruew Garrney, of Gloucester in the County
of Essex, Ship carpenter, depose and say : That on the
fourteenth day of August, A.D. 1817, between the hours
of four and five o'clock in the afternoon, I saw a strange
marine animal, resembling a serpent, in the harbour in
said Gloucester. I was in a boat, and was within
thirty feet of him. . . . I fired at him, when he was the
nearest to me. I had a good gun, and took good aim.
I aimed at his head, and think I must have hit him.
He turned towards us immediately after I had fired,
and I thought he was coming at us ; but he sunk
down and went directly under our boat, and made his
appearance at about one hundred yards from where he
sunk. He did not turn down like a fish, but appeared
to settle directly down, like a rock. ...

Q. Did he appear more shy, after you had fired at
him ?

A. He did not; but continued playing as before. . . . '


Although Mr. Gaffney complacently remarks *. . . I
suppose there is no person in town, more accustomed to
shooting, than I am,’ he seems to have been somewhat
excited — at any rate, he could not definitely say whether


1 This appears to be borne out by Fig. 18.


42 THE SEA-SERPENT


the creature's skin was smooth or rough, although
sighting for it at thirty feet range — and it is quite on the
cards that he missed his mark altogether.: Or his bullet
may either have glanced harmlessly off the wet skin, or
perforated a non-vital portion ; just as one of H.M.
ships once spent an afternoon futilely bombarding with
every lethal weapon she possessed — from rifles to 4.7s, —
a mysterious object which finally proved to be the back-
fin and upperworks of an enormous sunfish.

Nothing daunted by Gaffney's lack of success (or
marksmanship) the sportsmen of Gloucester made,
somewhat after the manner of Mr. Snodgrass,* several
further attempts to kill or capture their strange, timid,
and harmless visitor. The Boston Weekly Messenger: tells
us :


*... A number of persons are engaged in making a
net of codlines, of sufficient strength and size to take
him. It is conjectured that he has resorted to this
harbour for the purpose of preying upon a very
numerous shoal of herrings, which have lately appeared
there. If he has been instrumental, as 1s supposed, in
driving these herring into the harbour, he has rendered
an essential service to the town.’


The town's method of requiting an ‘ essential service '
rendered to it would appear to be a somewhat peculiar
one.‘ The report continues :


1 Similarly, it is quite easy for a good revolver-shot, unused to close-
quarter fighting, to miss his man at point-blank range.

+“... (Mr. Snodgrass) announced in a very loud tone that he was going
to begin, and proceeded to take off his coat with the utmost deliberation.’

3 Thursday, 21, viii. 1817.

* Another seafaring town, Venice, treated her ex-Doges in a very
similar manner. The Gloucester natives would have done better to
imitate those of Languedoc, who (so Pliny says) were accustomed to
summon the porpoises to assist them in netting the herring, and subse-
quently to reward them with bread.


THE NEW ENGLAND SEA-SERPENT 43


‘


... It is to be hoped that some vigorous efforts will
be made to take this animal. If an attempt is to be
made, some precaution ought to be used, lest he be
frightened from the coast before the proper prepara-
tions are made for arresting (sic) him.

* We learn that... an attempt was to be made to take
him yesterday, should he make his appearance.’


* This animal ' appears to have learned, from the Messenger
or some other source, that he was imminently liable to
arrest — can a warrant have been issued against him? —
for he was not seen on the 21st, and a few days later we
find the same paper remarking? :


*. .. The people of Gloucester however intend to be
able to give a better account of him, if he should stay
longer in their harbour. Shark hooks, variously
baited, have been set afloat 1n the harbour, and several
boats, well manned and armed, were destined to attack
him on the 2oth inst., if he shewed himself.’


Although the creature came and went unscathed among
these nets, shark-hooks, Gaffneys, warrants, and other
nuisances, it had, on August 17th, a narrow escape of
being run down by a boat. Or, perhaps, it would be
more correct to say that the boat had the narrow escape.


“I, Jonn Jonnston, jun, of Gloucester, in the County
of Essex, of the age of seventeen years, depose and say :
'That on the evening of the seventeenth day of August,
A.D. I817, between the hours of eight and nine
o'clock, while passing from the shore in a boat, to a
vessel lying in the harbour of said Gloucester, I saw a
strange marine animal, that I believe to be a serpent,
lying extended on the surface of the water. His
ı Thursday, 28, viii. 1817.


44. THE SEA-SERPENT


length appeared to be fifty feet at least, and he appeared
straight, exhibiting no protuberances. Capt. John
Corliss and George Marble were in the boat with me.
We were within two oars length of him when we first
discovered him, and were rowing directly for him.
‘We immediately rowed from him, and at first con-
cluded to pass by his tail ; but fearing we might strike
it with the boat, concluded to pass around his head,
which we did by altering our course. He remained in
the same position, till we lost sight of him. We
approached so near to him that I believe I could have
reached him with my oar. ‘There was not sufficient
light to enable me to describe the animal.’

(Attested like the foregoing, before

Mr. Lonson Nash.)


On the 18th, the creature was reported off Cape Ann by
a passing vessel, which hurriedly cracked on all sail to
get away from it ; and in the afternoon of the same day
it was seen by William B. Pearson, one of the witnesses,
emerging from Webber's Cove,* Gloucester harbour. He
deposes :


*... I saw something coming out of the cove ; we:


hove to, not doubting but that it was the same creature
that had been seen several times in the harbour. .. ..
The serpent passed out under the stern of our boat,
towards Ten Pound Island ; then he stood in towards
us again, and crossed our bow. We immediately
exclaimed “ here is the snake." From what I saw of


1 Neither of these made a deposition. It is quite likely that, as they
were apparently on the way to their ship, the latter had sailed before
Nash made his enquiries.

* I have not been able to identify this cove with any certainty. There
isa * Webber's Rock ’ off Cape Ann.


* He had with him one James P. Collins.


THE NEW ENGLAND SEA-SERPENT 45


him, I should say that he was nothing short of seventy

feet in length. I distinctly saw bunches on his back,

and once he raised his head out of water. The top of

his head appeared flat, and was raised seven or eight

inches above the surface of the water. He passed by

the bow of the boat, at about thirty yards distance.
. His colour was a dark brown. I saw him at this time:
. about two minutes. . . ."'

(Attested 1n the usual form.)


The creature was also seen on the 18th by Colonel
T. H. Perkins, who had visited Gloucester for the pur-
pose. He did not tender his evidence at the time,
considering it to be of no great value on points of detail ;
since he had at no time been within a third of a mile of
the animal. The excitement caused by the Dedalus
case, however, caused him to publish (in 1848)* a letter
written on October 13th, 1820, giving a private account
of his experiences.


* Wishing to satisfy myself on a subject on which there
existed a great difference of opinion, I myself visited
Gloucester with Mr. Lee... . All the town was, as you
may suppose, on the alert ; and almost every indivi-
dual, both great and small, had been gratified, at a
greater or less distance, with a sight of him [the sea-
serpent].

‘ The weather was fine, the sea perfectly smooth, and

Mr. Lee and myself were seated on a point of land:

1 He states that he saw the creature on other occasions — particularly
that on which Gaffney shot at it — but was not so well placed for getting
a good view of it.

2 Boston Daily Advertiser, November 25, 1848. The letter (written
three years after the event) is dated * On board the ship Az» Marie, at sea,
lat. 46, long. 44, Oct. 13th, 1820. "The writer was returning from
England to the U.S.

® Eastern point, Cape Ann.


THE SEA-SERPENT


which projects into the harbour, and about 20 feet
above the level of the water, from which we were
distant about so or 6o feet...

* Whilst thus seated, I observed an agitation in the
water at the entrance of the harbour, like that which
follows a small vessel going five or six miles an hour
through the water. As we knew there was no shoal
where the water was thus broken, I immediately said
to Mr. Lee that I had no doubt that what I had seen
was the sea-serpent in pursuit of fish. Mr. Lee was
not directing his attention to the spot which I speak of,
and had not seen the foam of the water, the animal
having immediately disappeared.

‘In a few minutes after my exclamation, I saw on the.
opposite side of the harbour, at about two miles
distance from where I had first seen, or thought I saw,
the snake, the same object moving with a rapid motion
up the harbour, on the western shore. As he
approached us, it was easy to see that his motion was
not that of the common snake, either on the land or
in the water, but evidently the vertical movement of
the caterpillar. As nearly as I could judge, there was
visible at a time about 40 feet of his body. It was not,
to be sure, a continuity of body, as the form from head
to tail (except as the apparent bunches appeared as he
moved through the water) was seen only at three or
four feet asunder. It was very evident, however, that
his length must be much greater than what appeared,
as, in his movement, he left a considerable wake in his
rear.

‘I had a fine glass, and was within from one-third to
half a mile of him. The head was flat in the water,
and the animal was, as far as I could distinguish, of a
chocolate colour. I was struck with an appearance in
the front part of the head like a single horn, about


THE NEW ENGLAND SEA-SERPENT : 47


nine inches to a foot in length, and of the form of a
marline-spike. There were a great many people
collected by this time, many of whom had before seen
the same object, and the same appearance. From the
time I first saw him until he passed by the place where
I stood, and soon after disappeared, was not more than
fifteen or twenty minutes.

“I left the place fully satisfied that the reports in
circulation, although differing in details, were essenti-
ally correct.’


The famous geologist Sir Charles Lyell, in a work pub-
lished in 1850:, writes as follows :


©... Colonel Perkins, of Boston, had the kindness to lay
before me his notes, made in July (sic), 1817, when he
saw the animal. He counted fourteen projections, six
feet apart, on the back, which he imagined to be ver-
tical flexures of the body when in motion ; but he also
saw the body bent horizontally into the figure of the
letter S. It was of a chocolate brown colour, the head
flat, and about a foot across. . . .’


He also remarks (p. 140) :


* After the year 1817, every marvellous tale was
called in the United States a snake story ; and when
Colonel Perkins went to Washington twenty years ago,
and was asked if he had ever known a person who had
seen the sea serpent, he answered that he was one of
the unfortunate individuals who saw it himself.’


Perkins re-visited Cape Ann a few days later, but was
disappointed in his hopes of seeing the creature again.
But he obtained an interesting statement as to its habits :

1 A Second Visit to the United States of North America, vol. i., p. 138.


48 THE SEA-SERPENT


* While at Cape Ann I talked with many persons who
had seen the serpent, and among others with a person
of the name of Mansfield, one of the most respectable
inhabitants of the town. His account to me was, that
a few days before, as he was taking a ride with his wife
in a chair,: the road taking them close to a bank which
overlooks the harbour (and is nearly a perpendicular
precipice), he saw an uncommon appearance, which
induced him to descend from the carriage, when he
saw the sea-serpent, in which until then he had been
an unbeliever. The animal was stretched out, partly
over the white sandy beach, which had four to five
feet of water upon it, and lay partly over the channel.

* He desired his wife to get out of the chair, which she
did. He said that he had made up his mind as to the
length of the snake, but wished the opinion of his wife
on the same subject. He asked her what she would
consider his length ; she answered that she could not
undertake to say how many feet in length he was, but
that she thought him as long as the wharf behind their
house, an object with which she had always been
familar. Mr. Mansfield said he was of the same
opinion. The wharf is 100 feet in length. It is to be
observed that the person above spoken of had been
such an unbeliever in the existence of this monster,
that he had not given himself the trouble to go from
his house to the harbour when the report was first
made of such an animal being there.’


It is unfortunate that, having such opportunities for close
observation, Mr. Mansfield did not communicate further
details of the creature. Another, but much vaguer,
report of its having been seen on the shore? is referred to


! J.e.,a chaise — like the celebrated * One Hoss Shay.’
2 See also the account of the MoZa-Mo4a, p. 180,


THE NEW ENGLAND SEA-SERPENT 49


by Mr. Lonson Nash in his letter of August 28th to
the Committee :


* I have seen and conversed with the woman, who was
said to have seen the serpent dormant on the rocks...
but she can give no material evidence. She says that
she saw something, resembling a large log of wood, on
the rocks, on the extreme eastern point of Ten Pound
island (a small island in our harbour,) resting partly
on the rocks, and partly in the water. The distance
was about half a mile. She took a glass, looked at the
object and saw it move. Her attention was for a short
time arrested, by some domestic avocation, and when
she looked for the object again, it had disappeared.’


The last official witness to see the creature in or near
Gloucester harbour was Amos Story, who saw it on
August 23rd, and whose statement on the subject has
already been quoted. But what was, in all probability,
the same monster? was seen five days later eastward of
Cape Ann, heading away from Gloucester, and passing
rapidly north-eastward along the coast. It was first
observed by Robert Bragg, a seaman of the schooner
Laura of Boston, about 10 a.m. on August 28th, 1817.
Here is an extract from his deposition — to which he
made oath (as did another seaman, William Somerby,
and Sewall Toppan, the Laura’s master), at Suffolk,
Boston, on August 30th, 1817, before ‘Jos. May,
pus" Pacis."


‘... the vessel being becalmed, looking at the wind-
ward, I saw something break the water, and coming
very fast towards us ; I mentioned it to the man at
helm, William Somerby ; the animal came about 28


1 All the depositions agree that only one creature was ever seen at a time.


5o THE SEA-SERPENT


or 30 feet from us, and passed very swiftly by us ; he
left a very long wake behind him.

* About six inches in height of his body and head were
out of water, and as I should judge about 14 or r 5 feet
inlength. He had a head like a serpent, rather larger
than his body and rather blunt ; did not see his eyes ;
when astern of the vessel about 30 feet, he threw out
his tongue about two feet in length ; the end of it
appeared to me to resemble a fisherman's harpoon ; he
raised his tongue several times perpendicularly, or
nearly so, and let it fall again. He was in sight about
ten minutes.

* [ think he moved at the rate of 12 or 14 miles an hour ;
he was of a dark chocolate colour, and from what
appeared out of water I should suppose he was about
two and a half feet in circumference ; he made no
noise ; his back and body appeared smooth ; a small
bunch on each side of his head, just above his eyes ;
he did not appear to be at all disturbed by the vessel ;
his course was in the direction for the Salt Islands: ;
his motion was much swifter than any whale that I have
ever seen, and I have seen many — did not observe any
teeth ; his motion was very steady, a little up and
down.’


Somerby’s deposition agrees with Bragg’s in all essentials,
but he adds :


€


. .. I saw one of his eyes as he passed ; it appeared
very bright, and about the size of the eye of an ox.’


and he concludes :


‘


. . . Have often seen whales at sea. The motion of
this animal was much swifter than that of any whale.


1 Some two miles eastward of Gloucester town. See Fig. 4.


THE NEW ENGLAND SEA-SERPENT SI


The motion of the body was rising and falling as he
advanced, the head moderately vibrating from side to
side. The colour of his tongue was a light brown.’


The account given by Captain Toppan contains less
detail. He remarks :


€


... I heard one of my men call to the man at the

. helm “what is this coming towards us”; being
engaged forward, I took no further notice till they
called again — I then got on top of the deck load, at
which time: I saw a singular kind of animal or fish,
Which I had never before seen, passing by our quarter,
at distance of about forty feet, standing along shore.’


His details agree, as far as they go, with Bragg's ; but he


explains :


*... Isaw him much less time than either of the others,
and not in so favourable a position to notice his head.
“I have been to sea many years, and never saw any
fish? that had the least resemblance to this animal.’


The depositions made by the Laura’s crew are the last
sworn testimony printed by the Committee : but they
also gave, as an appendix to the main body of evidence, a
letter from one Thomas Hertell, of Long Island Sound,
stating that a creature very similar to the Gloucester
monster had been seen by a Mr. Guion near Rye Point,


1 Toppan gives the time and place of the encounter as 9 a.m., about
| 23 miles east of Cape Ann. Bragg says, about 10 a.m., 13 miles: Somerby,
about r0 a.m., 2 miles. For the crew of a small coaster, the discrepancies
are natural enough, the statements being based on rough personal estimates;
had the story been concocted, such details would probably have been in

| closer agreement.


2 A whale, of course (pace Herman Melville) is not a fish ; but, earlier,
| he remarks *. . . I have seen whales very often ; his motion was much more
rapid than whales, or any other fish I have ever seen.’


52 THE SEA-SERPENT


in that Sound, on Friday, October 3rd, 1817 ; and (this
time by Hertell himself) two days later.

It may also be mentioned that, as a preliminary to the
Gloucester evidence, the Committee inserted an affidavit
by Captain Elkanah Finney, of Plymouth (Mass.),
deposing that he and his son had seen the Gloucester
creature, or another of very similar appearance and size,
fishing off Warren's Cove, Plymouth, on or about June
20th, 1815. It was seen on two consecutive days ; and
was scrutinised for a considerable time, through a good
telescope, at a distance not exceeding a quarter of a mile.
While thus observed, it was very well placed for scrutiny,
lying ' entirely still on the surface of the water.” Here is
Finney's description :


‘ His appearance in this situation was like a string of
buoys. I saw perhaps thirty or forty of these protuber-
ances or bunches, which were about the size of a barrel.
The head appeared to be about six or eight feet long,
and where 1t was connected with the body was a little
larger than the body. His head tapered off to the size
of a horse's head. I could not discern any mouth.
But what I supposed to be his under jaw had a white
stripe extending the whole length of the head, just
above the water.

“While he lay in this situation, he appeared to be
about a hundred or a hundred and twenty feet long.
The body appeared to be of a uniform size. I saw no
part of the animal which I supposed to be a tail. I
therefore thought he did not discover to me his whole
length. His colour was a deep brown or black. I
could not discover any eyes, mane, gills, or breathing
holes. I did not see any fins or legs. The animal did
not utter any sound, and it did not appear to notice


i


THE NEW ENGLAND SEA-SERPENT 53


anything. It remained still and motionless for five
minutes or more.’


Finney swore to this deposition at Plymouth (which, it
may be noted, is about forty miles southward of
Gloucester) on October 2nd, 1817, before ‘ Nathaniel
M. Davis, Jus. Peace.' He had obviously been asked the
Committee's twenty-five questions ; anda letter enclosing
the deposition: specifically stated this, and also remarked:


“His (Capt. Finney's) deposition is impartial and
unbiassed — and agrees uniformly with his first declara-
tions in 1815*— besides he has not read, whatever he
may have heard, of the Cape Ann descriptions ; he
has been from his youth accustomed to a seafaring
life — in the fishing employ, and in foreign voyages —
has frequently seen whales, and almost every species


of fish.’


If we include Finney’s deposition with the others, and
analyse the whole, it is possible to make out fairly
accurately to what extent the Committee obtained satis-
factory answers to their twenty-five questions. I have
made a complete analysis, but it is dry reading, and I
propose only to give a few of the leading results.

One creature only was seen. It frequented Gloucester
harbour from August roth (or, possibly, a few days earlier)
to August 23rd, after which it proceeded northward,
being seen ez route on August 28th, and in Long Island
Sound on October 3rd and sth. It was observed by
many persons simultaneously, for periods ranging from


| - a few minutes to two hours and upwards, and at distances


varying from a few feet to a mile.


1 Signed * S. Davis’ — who may have been a son of the J.P.
? [ have not been able to trace these declarations.


Es


54 THE SEA-SERPENT


It was seen at all times of the day, sometimes in rapid |
motion, sometimes at rest. When moving, it appeared
to curve its back in vertical undulations ; when at rest, its
back seemed, at times, to be undulating, and at others
smooth. It presented the appearance of an enormous
serpent, of a black or dark-brown colour, its body (so far
as this could be seen) having a diameter of something
under three feet, tapering slightly towards the extremities.
Its length was variously assessed at from seventy to one
hundred and twenty feet. Its skin appeared smooth to
most of the witnesses, but rough to two.

The head was generally described as like a serpent's.
Three witnesses deposed to seeing a long tongue pro-
jected almost vertically from the mouth. One witness
only spoke of seeing the eye, bright and resembling that
of an ox. No legs, fins, gills or mane were observed.
There was great unanimity of opinion as to the monster's
extreme lateral flexibility.

It appeared to take little notice of surrounding objects,
human beings, and even gunshots. It was not heard to
utter any sounds. On two occasions it was seen, or
believed to be seen, lying partly on the shore and partly
in the water.

It 1s, I think, difficult for any person of unbiased mind
to read through the depositions without being struck by
their weight and general agreement. Something of the
latter, no doubt, must be regarded as artificial. Had the
witnesses made entirely independent statements, one
would not expect to find them all deposing, with only
the slightest of verbal changes, that they had seen ‘a
strange marine animal, which they ' believed to be a
serpent.' One imagines that this formula was submitted
to them — in substitution, possibly, for some much more
terse and vigorous description - by Mr. Lonson Nash ;


THE NEW ENGLAND SEA-SERPENT 55


and that they accepted it as sufficiently conveying their
meaning. Broadly speaking, one imagines that while
Nash probably acted up to the spirit of his instructions,
directing * the examinations to be separate, and the matter
testified by any witness not to be communicated until
the whole evidence be taken,' he performed (perhaps
unconsciously) the functions of a compiler and editor,
bringing the various accounts into a slightly misleading
state of general uniformity — uniformity of language, be
it noted, not of fact. I do not suggest that he took any
liberties with the reported facts — his comments on Allen's
evidence are sufficient proof that he did not.

The evidence afforded by the depositions is, as already
remarked, entitled to very serious consideration. Un-
fortunately, the Committee went out of their way to
stultify the valuable work which they had performed.
Not content with merely collecting testimony —a task
which they had accomplished most admirably — they cast
about for a hypothesis which should explain this, and
be incorporated in their report. Such an hypothesis,
accordingly, will be found appended to the depositions ;
and a very singular one it is.

About a month after the ‘ strange marine animal ' had
quitted Gloucester harbour, a small black snake of some-
what curious appearance was found by two boys on the
beach at Lobloly Cove.: Alarmed, they summoned
their father. This brave fellow attacked the savage
reptile — which was fully three feet long — with a pitch-
fork, and ultimately slew it. It was bought by a resident
named Beach, who presented it to the Committee ;
apparently on the slender chance that its appearance
might in some way be connected with the monster
recently seen in the harbour. It appears that the local


3 On the east side of Cape Ann peninsula. See Fig. 3.


56 THE SEA-SERPENT


pothouse-pundits were firmly of opinion that the latter
had visited Gloucester’s shores to deposit its eggs
thereon.

'The Committee received the snake, and the suggestion,
with great gravity. They examined and dissected the
carcase, and were delighted to find that its back exhibited
a series of small humps, or bunches. Nothing further,
surely, was necessary. Devoting some four pages of their
report to a minute comparison of the snake’s anatomy
with the reported characteristics of the ‘ strange marine
animal,’ they concluded as follows :


* On the whole, as these two animals agree in so many
conspicuous, important and peculiar characters, and
as no material difference between them has yet been
clearly pointed out, excepting that of size, the Society
will probably feel justified in considering them
individuals of the same species, and entitled to the
same name, until a more close examination of the great
Serpent shall have disclosed some difference of
structure, important enough to constitute a specific
distinction.’


Holding this remarkable opinion, they christened their
newly-acquired specimen Scioliophis Atlanticus, and
appended to their report an anatomical description of it,
illustrated by two plates. By so doing, they made a rod
for their own backs ; since European naturalists, headed
by H.M.D. de Blainville,: immediately pointed out to them
that their juvenile sea-serpent was nothing more than a
common black snake (Coluber constrictor) in a diseased
condition. Moreover, since the Committee had gone out
of their way to assert a close connection between their


1 Journal de Physique ..., vol. lxxxvi. (Paris, 1818).


THE NEW ENGLAND SEA-SERPENT 57


small, common land-snake and the huge sea-creature seen
off Gloucester, it is scarcely surprising that those com-
petent to form an opinion should have concluded that
persons capable of so egregious a blunder in a simple
point of identification were not the safest guides to
accurate information regarding a strange and huge
creature of unknown species which they had not person-
ally examined.

For good reason, therefore, scientific men in general
received the Committee's report with a ‘calmness
bordering on indifference. The vulgar, on the other
hand, were at no loss to suggest, in pretty plain language,
that the Gloucester monster was a myth, and that those
who professed to have seen it were drawing the long bow.
This, of course, was almost inevitable. The story was
strange and improbable;it rested on the assertions of a
comparatively small number of persons living in the same
town; and it provided their less-favoured neighbours
with a most excellent means of poking fun at Gloucester
credulity and vaunting their own superior perspicacity
and commonsense. In consequence, the sober tales of
the Gloucester witnesses were, in no long time, distorted,
parodied and (to a great extent) laughed out of court.
Practical jokers sent in marvellous reports of apocryphal
' sea-serpents' ; not supporting — or, indeed, designed
to support — the slightest examination. The Press, with
one or two honourable exceptions, followed on the same
side — after its fashion. And about a year after the
'sea-serpent's' last appearance off Gloucester an event
occurred which, designedly or not, helped materially to
throw ridicule on the whole matter.

I am uncertain whether it should be regarded as a
malicious hoax, a misfired practical joke, or an honest
blunder. Personally, I incline to the second hypothesis.


58 THE SEA-SERPENT


Here are the facts, as related by Colonel Perkins many
years afterwards? :


“,.. As it happened, a circumstance took place which
did not do much credit to the actors in it, but which
served to fortify the unbelief of our southern brethren.
Believing that the possession of the sea-serpent would
be a fortune to those who should have him in their
power, many boats were fitted out from Cape Ann and
other places in the neighbourhood of his haunts, armed
with harpoons and other implements, and manned
with persons used to the whale fishery, in hopes of
getting near enough to him to fasten their harpoons
in his side.

* Among others a Captain Rich..... of Boston, took
command of a party, which was fitted out at some ex-
pense, and wentinto the bay,* where they cruised along
shoretwo or three days without seeing theserpent. With
a view, however, to keeping the joke from themselves,
they . . . spread a report that they: had caught the
serpent, or what had been taken for one, and that he
was to be seen at a place* mentioned in the advertise-
ment. * cw

* 'Thousands were flocking to see this wonder, when it
was found to be no other than a large horse macquerel, §
which (though a great natural curiosity, weighing
sometimes 600 or 700 pounds) very much disappointed
those, who had been induced to visit it. Those who
had declared their disbelief of the existence of the Sea-
serpent amongst ourselves were delighted to find their
opinions were confirmed, and gave themselves great
! Boston Daily Advertiser, 25, xi. 1848.

Massachusetts Bay. See Fig 3.

* At Boston.


* In the Boston Daily Advertiser, and other local papers, 3, ix. 1819.
5 Or tunny.


THE NEW ENGLAND SEA-SERPENT 59


credit for their judgment and discrimination. The
report spread from Boston to New Orleans, that what
had been thought by some persons to be a sea-serpent
had proved to be a horse macquerel, and even those who
had been believers now supposed that those who had
reported that they had seen the serpent had either
misrepresented or had been themselves deceived. As
no report of the snake having been seen after the
capture of the macquerel was made, during that year,
Captain Rich had the laugh with him, until circum-
stances, which have transpired since, have borne
rather against him.’


It is fair to add, though, that Captain Richard Rich
protested in print, and immediately, against the general
impression that he had tried to perpetrate a silly hoax.
Writing in the Boston Weekly Messenger of September
17th, 1818, he contended that he had repeatedly observed,
in the course of his cruise in Massachusetts Bay, the
appearance of a creature similar to that seen off Gloucester
the year before — that he had finally captured it — and
that it had proved to be a tunny. He continues :


“... If I am asked — how is it possible for a Fish like
this to produce such a wonderful appearance, I can
only answer: “ His peculiar movement and his
velocity produced a greater deception than I ever saw
before, and the describing his body as being like kegs
fastened together, struck me so forcibly, that had I not
followed it up and discovered the deception, I should
have given my testimony to the long list already given,
of the existence of a Sea Serpent on our coast."

* [ now take my leave of the public, hoping they will
do me the justice to say that I used no deception.

* RICHARD RICH.’


60 THE SEA-SERPENT


I have a strong impression that the public took no such
action. The discrepancies between Rich's assertions —
and his tunny — and the Gloucester depositions are more
than Apella himself could stomach.

As Perkins notes, the dime-show staged by Rich put
an end, for a time, to the reports of sea-serpents off the
New England coast. Rich's joke, if it were a joke, had
obviously fallen exceedingly flat; the public was no
longer amused by hoaxes, and these in their turn had
effectually discredited, in advance, any further similar
reports. For two years, such reports are scarce and
vague. Oudemans has collected one or two (one of
which, to my mind, is most unquestionably a hoax?) but
with a single exception they are vague, and carry no
weight. ‘The exception is an affidavit made at Essex,
Mass., on June 9th, 1819, by Hawkins Wheeler, captain
of the sloop Concord, and Gersham Bennett, one of his
men. They deposed that on Monday, June 6th, 1819,
about 6 a.m., they passed, at a distance of a hundred
yards or so, a creature resembling, in almost every detail,*
that seen off Gloucester two years earlier. It was in view
for two periods of about five minutes, being sighted on the
weather bow and, after a period of submersion, re-appear-
ing on the weather quarter. The ship at this time was
about midway between Cape Cod and Cape Ann. The
depositions are in good agreement — I regard them as
inferior to those sworn at Gloucester only in that they
were probably not made independently.


1 His No. 52 (The Great Sea-Serpent, p. 195).


* I have paraphrased the evidence, to avoid repetition. The only dis-
crepancy is that the eyes, hardly visible to the Gloucester observers, are
stated to have been prominent, and to have *. . . stood out considerably
from the surface, resembling in that respect the eyes of a toad? The full
text of the deposition will be found in Silliman's American Journal of
Science, vol. ii. (Boston, 1820).


THE NEW ENGLAND SEA-SERPENT 61


Colonel Perkins’ somewhat obscure reference to the
* circumstances, which have transpired since,’ which bore
against the sceptical Captain Rich, probably relates to
the events at Nahant in August 1819 ; when a creature,
agreeing with the previously-quoted accounts, was re-
peatedly seen, and closely observed, by hundreds of
witnesses. The best account which I have found is that
given in a letter from James Prince, Marshal of the dis-
trict, to the Hon. Judge Davis.: It is dated Nahant,
August 16th, 1819 (Tuesday). Nahant, it may be stated,
like Gloucester, is within Massachusetts Bay (see Fig. 3).
Marshal Prince writes clearly, but somewhat copiously ;


I have abridged his letter a good deal.


“Dear Sir,


* [ presume I may have seen what is generally thought
to be the SzA-SERPENT . . . from a desire that my name
may not sanction anything beyond what was presented
and passed in review before me, I will now state that,
which, in the presence of more than two hundred other
witnesses, took place near the long beach of Nahant
on Saturday morning last*....

* Mr. Smith informed us, the Sea Serpent had been
seen the evening before at Nahant beach... I was glad
to find that I had brought my famous mast-head spy-
glass with me as it would enable me from its form and
size, to view him to advantage if I might be so fortunate
as to see him. On our arrival on the beach, we associ-
ated witha considerable number of personson foot and in
chaises ; and very soon an animal of the fish kind made
his appearance.


1 Boston Weekly Messenger, 26, viii. 1819.
* August I3th, 1819.


62 THE SEA-SERPENT


‘ His: head appeared about three feet out of water ; I
counted thirteen bunches on his back- my family
thought there were fifteen — he passed three times at
a moderate rate across the bay.... The first view of
the animal occasioned some agitation, and the novelty
perhaps prevented that precise discrimination which
afterwards took place — as he swam up the bay, we and
the other spectators moved on, and kept nearly abreast
of him ; he occasionally withdrew himself under water,
and the idea occurred to me that his occasionally raising
his head . . . was to take breath, as the time he kept
under water was on an average about eight minutes ;


FIG. 5. MARSHAL PRINCE’S SKETCH
From Tze Boston Weekly Messenger, 26, viii. 181
3 >


and after being accustomed to view him, we became more
composed, and his general appearance was as above
delineated... . I had seven distinct views of him from
the long beach so called, and at some of them the ani-
mal was not more than an hundred yards distance. . . .
I proceeded on towards Nahant ; but on passing the
second beach . . . we were again gratified beyond even
what we saw in the other bay ; which I concluded he
had left in consequence of the number of boats in the
offing in pursuit of him — the noise of whose oars must
have disturbed him, as he appeared to us to be a


1 Here, and elsewhere in this chapter, it may be noted that such use of
‘him’ and ‘his’ is a figure of speech. Oudemans considers that the
New England creature or creatures were females, as they had no mane !


Nee Pigh


THE NEW ENGLAND SEA-SERPENT 63


harmless timid animal. We had here more than a dozen
different views of him, and each similar to the other ;
one however so near, that the coachman exclaimed,
" Oh, see his glistning eye |”...

‘I feel satisfied . . . that he is sixty feet long, unless the
ripple of his wake deceived me — nor, my dear sir, do I
undertake to say he was of the Snake or Eel kind,
though this was the general impression. . . . Certain
it is, he is a very strange animal. I have been accus-
tomed to see Whales, Sharks, Grampuses,: Porpoises,
and other large fishes, but he partook of none of the
appearances of either of these. The Whale and the
Grampus would have spouted — the Shark never raises
his head out of the water, and the Porpoise skips and
plays ; neither have such appearances on their backs
or such a head as this animal. The Shark it is true
has a fin on his back, and often, the fluke of his tail is
out of the water ; but these appendages would not dis-
play the form, and certainly not the number of pro-
tuberances, which this animal exhibited ; nor 1s it the
habit of the Shark to avoid a boat.

‘The water was extremely smooth, and the weather
clear : we had been so habituated to see him, that we
were cool and composed — the time occupied was from
a quarter past eight to half past eleven — a cloud of
witnesses exceeding two hundred, brought together
for a single purpose, were all alike satisfied and united
as to appearances. . . . I must conclude there is a
strange animal on our coast... ."


Here is a similar statement* made by another witness of


standing, Mr. Nathan D. Chase, of Lynn.


1 Or * killer’ whales.

2 This, and the following three accounts, are taken from an article en-
titled *'T'he Great Unknown,’ by J. B. Holder, in the Century Magazine,
vol. xliv. (June 1892). He states that he was personally acquainted with


64. THE SEA-SERPENT


‘,.. I saw him on a pleasant, calm summer morning


of August, 1819, from Long Beach, Lynn, now called
Nahant. The water was smooth, and the creature
seemed about a quarter of a mile away ; consequently
we could see him distinctly, and the motion of his body.
Later in the day I saw him again off Red Rock. He
than passed along about one hundred feet from where I
stood, with head about two feet out of the water. His
speed was about that of an ordinary steamer.
* What I saw of his length was about sixty feet. It was
difficult to count the humps, or undulations, on his
back, as they did notallappearatonce. This accounts
in part for the varied descriptions given of him by other
parties. His appearance on the surface was occasional
and but for a short time. ... This is the best description
I can give of him from my own observation. I saw
the creature just as truly, though not quite as clearly,
as I ever saw anything. I have no doubt that this
uncommon, strange rover, which was seen by hundreds
of men and boys, is a form of snake, Plesiosaurus, or
some such form of marine animal.
“Five other persons have given definite testimony
besides myself. Hon. Amos Lawrence of Boston,
James Prince of Boston, Benjamin F. Newhall of
Saugus, and John Marston of Swampscott.

< NarHAN D. Chase.’


Prince's testimony has already been given. Ofthe others
mentioned by Chase, the Hon. Amos Lawrence writes :


“I have not any doubt of the existence of the sea-
serpent since the morning he was seen off Nahant. . . .'


all four witnesses, and had the highest opinion of their truthfulness and
reliability. It is fair to remark, though, that Chase's account is taken
from a letter written in 1881 — sixty-two years after the event.


THE NEW ENGLAND SEA-SERPENT 65


Newhall states :


©... As he approached the shore about 9 a.M., he raised
his head apparently about six feet, and moved very
rapidly. Icould see the white spray on each side of his
neck, as he plunged through the water. He came so
near as to startle many of the spectators, and then
suddenly retreated. As he turned short, the snake-
like form became apparent, the body bending like an
eel. I could see plainly what appeared a succession
of humps upon the back.'


And Marston, an experienced fisherman, relates :


* While walking over Nahant Beach in common with
many others who had been aroused by the excitement,
I saw 1n the water, within two or three hundred yards
of the shore, a singular-looking fish in the form of a
serpent. His head was out of water, and he remained
in view about twenty minutes, when he swam off
towards King's Beach. I should say that the creature
was at least eighty feet in length. I saw the entire
body, not his wake. It would rise in the water with
an undulating motion, and then all his body would sink
except his head. This would be repeated. The sea
was quite calm at the time.
“I have been constantly engaged in fishing since my
youth, but never saw anything like this before.'


I cannot discover that the creature was again seen off
Nahant, but the same, or a very similar one, was observed
in Gloucester harbour on August 26th (a fortnight later),
by a boat’s crew of the U.S. schooner Science, then
engaged in surveying the harbour. The following
account is from a letter written by one of the observers,


66 THE SEA-SERPENT


the Rev. Cheever Felch of the U.S.S. Independence, to the
editor of the Boston Centinel: :


Gloucester, August 26th, 1819.


'. .. we were proceeding this morning down the
harbor, in the schooner’s boat ; when abreast of
Dallivan's Neck, Willam T. Malbone, Esq. com-
mander of the schooner, seeing some appearance on the
water, said — “there is your Sea-Serpent," meaning it as
a laugh on me, for believing in its existence ; but it
proved to be no joke.

‘The animal was then between thirty and forty yards
distance from us. Mr. Malbone, Midshipman Blake,
myself, and our four boatmen, had a distinct view of
him. He soon sunk, but not so deep but we could
trace his course. He rose again within twenty yards
distance of us, and lay some time on the water. He
then turned, and steered for Ten Pound Island ; we
pulled after him, but finding that he was not pleased
with the noise of our oars, they were laid in, and the
boat skulled.* We again approached very near him.
He continued some length of time, plying between
Ten Pound Island and Stage Point.

* As he often came near the Point, we thought we could
get a better view of him there, than from the boat, of
which he seemed suspicious. Mr. Malbone and
myself landed ; and the boat was sent to order the
schooner down, for the purpose of trying what effect a
twelve pound carronade would have upon him.

* He did not remain long after we landed, so that I was
unable to effect my intention, of ascertaining, accur-
ately, his length, with my instruments. From my


Y Silliman’s Journal .. . , vol. ii.


* Sculled — propelled from the stern by a single oar, moved like a fish’s
tail.


THE NEW ENGLAND SEA-SERPENT 67


knowledge of aquatic animals, and habits of intimacy
with marine appearances, I could not be deceived.
We had a good view of him, except the very short
period while he was under water, for half an hour. —

* His colour is a dark brown, with white under the
throat. His size, we could not accurately ascertain,
but his head is about three feet in circumference, flat
and much smaller than his body. We did not see his
tail ; but from the end of the head to the fartherest
protuberance, was not far from one hundred feet.
I speak with a degree of certainty, from being much
accustomed to measure and estimate distances and
length. I counted fourteen bunches on his back, the
first one, say ten or twelve feet from his head, and the
others about seven feet apart. ‘They decreased in size
towards the tail. These bunches were sometimes
counted with, and sometimes without a glass. Mr.
Malbone counted thirteen, Mr. Blake thirteen and
fourteen, and the boatmen about the same number.

* His motion was sometimes very rapid, and at other
times he lay nearly still. He turned slowly, and took
up considerable room in doing it. He sometimes
darted under water, with the greatest velocity, as if
seizing prey. ‘The protuberances were not from his
motion, as they were the same whether in slow or rapid
movement. His motion was partly vertical and partly
horizontal... .

‘ I have given you in round numbers, one hundred feet,
for his length, that is, what we saw ; but I should say
he must be one hundred and thirty feet in length,
allowing for his tail. ‘There were a considerable
number of birds about the Sea Serpent, as I have seen
them about a Snake on shore. That there is an
aquatic animal in the form of a Snake, is not to be
doubted. Mr. Malbone, till this day, was incredulous.


68 THE SEA-SERPENT


No man would now convince him, there was not such
a being. The sketch or picture of Marshal Prince,
is perfectly correct. I could not, with my own pencil,
give a more correct likeness.
* With respect,
“ your obedient servant,


‘CHEEVER FELCH:
Major B. RUSSELL.


I think it will be admitted that this is a clear and valuable
statement. It is the work of a man of education, of some
nautical experience, interested in natural history, and
engaged in marine surveying —a job which calls for
accuracy and good eyesight. Moreover, it is written on
the spot and immediately after the event. It is to be
wished that Mr. Felch had collected and recorded the
observations of his companions ; the only collateral
evidence which I have been able to trace is a statement
made by Malbone's commanding officer, Captain W. C.
Bolton, U.S.N., many years afterwards — in 1846. It was
published in 1848,* soon after the Dedalus case had
stimulated public interest in the subject.

Here is Captain Bolton's statement, in a letter to
Colonel Perkins. It must be premised that it contains
one or two inaccuracies. ‘The actual sighting of the
monster, however, is well confirmed.


‘In the year 1817 I was first lieutenant of the Indepen-
dence, of 74 guns, then lying in the harbour of Boston.
“In the course of the spring or summer a party of
officers. were detailed, by order of Commodore Bain-
bridge, to survey the coast of the bay, to a limited
extent northeastward and outside of the lighthouse.


! See Fig. 5. ! Boston Daily Advertiser, 25, xi. 1848.


THE NEW ENGLAND SEA-SERPENT 69


The officers selected for this duty were the sailing-
master of the ship, Wm. T. Malbone, and the Rev.
Cheever Felch, the instructor of the midshipmen. . ..
Commodore Bainbridge Mr. Malbone and Mr.
Felch died some years ago.
“I recollect that on the first occasion, when the Lynx
returned to the Independence, of which ship she was
the tender, that Mr. Malbone reported as having seen
a monstrous sea-animal, not before known to him, of
the snake species ; the length doubtful, but estimated
at some eighty or more feet ; and added as an accident
(sic) that the officers and men employed in a small boat
to carry out the soundings had returned in haste, and
indeed alarm, to the Lynx, which wasatanchor. These
statements were corroborated by Mr. Felch, the officers
and crew.
* Subsequently it was seen several times, by some of the
party, who, being soon satisfied that it was harmless
approached comparatively near, and no doubt gave me
a minute description of its appearance as it presented
itself to them ; but if so, the particular details have
escaped my memory.
* 'These facts are all that I can with distinctness and
certainty mention.

c Wm. Compton Botton.’


Actually, the lapse of twenty-seven years had rendered
Captain Bolton’s memory a little more treacherous than
even he imagined. He dates the incident as 1817
instead of 1819, and speaks of the tender as the Lynx
instead of the Science—points on which Felch’s statement
is, of course, far better evidence. And his expression
‘detailed to survey the coast of the bay’ is elliptical —
I imagine that he means Gloucester Bay, but he may be


referring to Boston Bay. In the latter case, however, it
Fs


70 THE SEA-SERPENT


would scarcely have been necessary to use a schooner,
as tender to the Independence; a proceeding which
strongly suggests a detached survey, as that of Gloucester
would have been, and not one performed in the immediate
neighbourhood of the parent ship. Still, as already
remarked, Captain Bolton confirms the fact that Felch
and his other officers saw and reported the creature.

Such is, in outline, the story of a few leading events in
the career of the New England sea-serpent —or sea-
serpents. It is by no means the whole of the story. My
friend Mr. J. G. Lockhart, in his very entertaining
Mysteries of the Sea, has suggested that the occurrence of
many sea-serpent reports in certain years, and hardly
any before or afterwards, rather suggests that they had
their origin in some form of mass-hallucination. But the
facts are quite otherwise. Although it is undoubtedly
true that for the best and fullest evidence we must look to
the ‘ vintage’ years of 1817 and 1819, that is not to say
that other years were entirely barren. I have before me
a list of reports, all relating to the New England waters.
It contains particulars of appearances reported in the
following years (excluding 1817 and 1819).


1751, 1777 (or 1778), 1779, 1780, 1794, 1799, 1802,
1815, 1820, 1826, 1833 (2 reports), 1835, 1839 (2
reports), 1861 and 1890.


At the same time, it is fair to say that there is one
point which can justly be urged in favour of the theory
of mass-hallucination. The crowds which flocked to the
shore at Gloucester in 1817, and at Nahant two years
later, undoubtedly went there in a state of ' expectant
attention,’ Prince, for example, says?‘ .. . a vast number


"See p. Gr.


THE NEW ENGLAND SEA-SERPENT 71


of people from Lynn', had gone to the beach that morning
in hopes of being gratified with a sight of him. . . . On
our arrival on the beach, we associated with a considerable
number of persons . . . and very soon an animal of the fish
kind made his appearance.' It might be argued that here
was an excellent example of mass-delusion, for which the
conditions (as, presumably, in the analogous case of the
celebrated but nebulous 'Indian rope-trick") were
extremely favourable. In such circumstances a whale, a
shark, or a school of porpoises might well provide the raw
material out of which the excited imaginations of expec-
tant onlookers might conjure the creature which they so
greatly desired to see.

Granted. But, in this event, what are we to make
of the depositions taken at Gloucester and Essex, or of
such evidence as Felch's? Here the theory of the
“expectant crowd’ fails for two cogent reasons — there
was no expectancy, and there was no crowd. Unless
sheer prejudice induces us to reject this evidence alto-
gether, we must (I submit) concede that the witnesses
actually observed, sometimes at very close range and for
considerable periods, a single living creature quite unlike
any at present known to science. I have already given
my reasons for thinking that the depositions were not,
and could not have been, the work of hoaxers: and
the further evidence of such witnesses as Prince and Felch
amplifies the proof that the creature was not a whale, or a
shark, or anything with which naturalists, experienced
seamen, or fishermen were familiar. ‘This, indeed, is
obvious from the attention which the Gloucester reports
(of 1817) aroused. A town whose population chiefly
consists of fishermen is not usually electrified by the visit
of a whale, or a shark, or a school of porpoises, or any

Lose Fisos.


72 THE SEA-SERPENT


other common object of their daily life. There can be
no doubt at all that the thing seen, whatever its nature,
was a most unusual — a unique - sight.

If no other evidence had ever come to light elsewhere, I
for one should be inclined to hold that that afforded by
the appearances off Gloucester and Nahant in 1817 and
1819 would amply warrant the deduction that the exist-
ence of a marine animal of unknown species with serpen-
tine head and neck, and about a hundred feet in length,
was an established fact. But, as will be seen, there is a
large body of similar testimony also available from other
sources and later days. Let it at least be remembered
to the credit of the Linnean Society of Boston that they
had the scientific candour to form this conviction, and
the courage to proclaim it, upwards of a century ago.


Cu. III. 1820-1845 : SOME
MISCELLANEOUS REPORTS


Tue accounts of the New England sea-serpent form a
more or less connected whole : one complying, to a
considerable extent, with the three ‘ unities ' — time,
place, and action — so dear to the classical dramatists.
By comparison, I am afraid that the reports collected in
this chapter will be found disconnected to a bewildering
or even boring extent. They form, however, a useful link
in the chronological sequence of the evidence, connecting
the appearances off Gloucester and Nahant in 1817 and
1819 with thecelebrated case of H.M.S. Dedalus (1848).
The majority of them are taken from a mid-Victorian
paper, the Zoologist. Founded in 1843, it was conducted
for many years by Edward Newman, under whose
management it became a recognised medium for the
publication and exchange of a great deal of valuable
scientific information. Amongst other matters, Newman
had the courage to open his columns to current reports
of sea-serpents, and to the retrospective discussion of
similar reports. He expressed his views as follows: :


* It has been the fashion for so many years to deride all
records of this very celebrated monster, that it is not
without hesitation I venture to quote the following
paragraphs in his defence. . . . Naturalists, or rather
those who choose thus to designate themselves, set up
an authority above that of fact and observation, the
gist of their enquiries is whether such things ought to £e,
1 Zoologist, 1847, p. 1604.
73


74. THE SEA-SERPENT


and whether such things ought not to be ; now fact-
naturalists take a different road to knowledge, they
enquire whether such things are, and whether such
things are not. 'The* Zoologist,’ if not in itself the foun-
tain-head of this fact movement, may at least claim to
be the only public advocate of that movement... .
The only question therefore for the fact-naturalists to
decide, is simply, whether all of the records now
collected, can refer to whales, fishes, or any other
marine animals with which we are at present
acquainted.’


I am inclined to believe that this plea for scientific
humility has not entirely lost its point, even to-day ; but
there can be little question that in 1847 it had far more.
Authority in science, like respectability on the streets of
Boston, ‘ stalked unchecked.’ The Origin of Species only
existed as a short MS. sketch:; and even so really great
a man as Faraday could publicly commit himself to the
astounding statement that before commencing an investi-
gation, it was necessary to form clear ideas as to what is,
and what is not, possible. It took a bold man, whatever
his qualifications, to avow that he had an open mind on
an unpopular subject ; and it is in the nature of poetical
justice that Newman's appeal to facts should have
received, a year later, a reply — the Dedalus case — which
became world-famous.

With this, however, we are not at present concerned.
Here are a few cases, selected from a considerable number
occurring between 1820 and 1848.


1 Darwin drew this up in 1844 ; the book appeared in 1859.

* He was speaking of ‘ table-turning,’ which he proved to be due to
unconscious muscular action. But, however trivial the subject, his
attitude of mind was, in this instance, unworthy of him — or of any student
of nature.


1820-1845: MISCELLANEOUS REPORTS 75


* Lady Combermere ' (about 1820).

The evidence for this case is slight, but apparently
trustworthy. It is the statement of a naval officer, one
Lieutenant George Sandford, which was discovered (after
his death) in a memorandum-book, and communicated to
the Zoologist in 1849: by Dr. Scott of Exeter. It appears
to have been intended, by its author, for publication at
the time when it was written — which is believed to be
about 1820 : but I have not succeeded in finding any
earlier mention of it than 1849.


* What degree of confidence the following story may
gain is to me a subject of very little consideration ;
for as I can have no view of gaining anything by it, so it
certainly will appear that it would hardly be worth the
trouble of invention : but as a story of this sort has
made its appearance among our transatlantic friends,
without being at all credited, 1t 1s as likely in Europe
this may have the same fate ; yet if it can afford any
amusement or information for intelligent and scrutin-
izing minds, for their gratification I freely give it to
the press, assuring them, on my sacred honour, of the
truth of what I am about to describe.

‘On Sunday, about 5 p.m., being then in latitude 46,
longitude 3, by dead reckoning,* observed an immense
body on the surface of the water, apparently without
motion, but water spouting from it, not unlike the
blowing of a whale. Iimmediately got my glass ; and,
from its rugged appearance and showing nothing
Where the water issued from, I began to entertain some
doubts, that this must have been the vigia* laid down


! Pp. 2459, 2460.

2 J.e. by estimation, based on the distance covered, and direction taken,
by the ship since leaving her last-observed position.

* An oceanic shoal or rock whose position is not definitely known.


76 THE SEA-SERPENT


for Barenethy's rocks or the three chimneys, and, so
prepared in my own mind, I directed the steering sails
to be taken in and the ship prepared for going about.
‘Some of my ship's company were of opinion it was a
ship bottom-up : this I thought not unlikely, and went
into the main cat harpens: to look more distinctly at it:
the appearance then was still steady, but irregular. I
saw neither head nor tail above the water, but a hump
from one extreme resembling the rise or point of rather
a triangular rock: this tapered to a distance- I
certainly believe 70 or 100 feet, and the water broke
over it, a little beyond it: it discharged the spout ;
but nothing showing itself, undetermined in mind
what it could be, or whether I should tack the ship, it
all at once disappeared, and, to my great astonishment,
a head and neck — resembling something of a serpent's
— made its appearance, erected about six feet above the
surface of the water. After taking a survey towards
the vessel, it all at once vanished, leaving us full of
conjecture and surprise.

“It gives me more confidence in making the above
statement, as one of the seamen, whose name is
Jonathan Townsend, was in the main top, and saw the
creature I have described, and would feel no hesitation
in taking an oath to it.


“ GEORGE SANDFORD, Lieutenant R.N.’


This memorandum shows signs of having been hastily
jotted down. The position is inconclusive — there are
four spots on the earth's surface which satisfy the given
latitude and longitude. Oudemans assumed that the
latitude was north, and naturally deduced that the


1 Cat-harpings — horizontal ropes forming a platform a few feet below
the top of the mainmast.


1820-1845: MISCELLANEOUS REPORTS 77


position indicated was in the Bay of Biscay.: But the
reference to * Barenethy's Rocks or the Three Chimneys ’
shows clearly that there is some clerical or other error
in the longitude. It is obvious that Sandford was using
what would, in his day, have been regarded as an up-to-
date chart of the North Atlantic ; but at that time the
' vigia ' — a more or less imaginary shoal — was a leading
feature of such charts. If the captain of a modern liner
were to be supplied with them, he would be startled to
find deep-water routes which he had often traversed —
routes recommended for such ships as his — hedged about
with numbers of notes such as ' breakers reported, 17792,’
"dangerous shoal, position doubtful, and 'rocks here-
abouts.’ Such imaginary ' vigias ' — one or two, like the
Virgin Rocks, off Newfoundland, were genuine enough —
usually originated in such phenomena as a shoal of fish, a
floating tree, or a cloud-bank ; all of which sights were
duly, if perversely, reported as shoals and reefs by faint-
hearted or muddle-headed shipmasters of the eighteenth
and early-nineteenth centuries.

In the lists of these vigias — all of which have long
ceased to disfipure the North Atlantic charts — both
Barencthy's Rocks and the Three Chimneys are to be
found. Incidentally, the two are not identical.
Barencthy's Rocks were reported (in 1726) to lie in
about 46? N., 374° W.: : while the Three Chimneys, seen
or imagined by one ‘ M. de Merry’ at the end of the
eighteenth century, were charted in various positions
whose mean was approximately 47° 54’ N., 29° 40’ W.
It seems probable that Sandford — or Sanford ; the name
is variously spelt — found that his dead-reckoning, when


1 The Great Sea-Serpent, p. 224.
Captain de Clas Fernel reported having seen them, on July roth,
1829, in 45° 50’N., 37° 25’ W.


78 THE SEA-SERPENT


plotted on his chart, put him near Barencthy’s Rocks, in
which case we must read his ‘ latitude 46, longitude 3 ' as
‘latitude 46° N., longitude 37° W.’.

Apart from this venial error, I see little to cavil at in his
account. As he himself says, he had nothing to gain by
inventing it — and I imagine that he ultimately withheld
it from publication because he had something to lose.
He had been invalided out of the Navy in 1816, and was
in command of the Lady Combermere: from 1819 until
1822 inclusive. I cannot discover that he held any other
command or employment until October 1846, when he
was appointed to the Newgate Coast-guard station,
Margate, where he died on November 12th, 1848. The
fact that he does not refer to the case of the Dedalus,
accounts of which were published about a month before
his death, goes to confirm the supposition that he fell in
with his sea-monster, and drew up his memorandum,
soon after he took command of the Lady Combermere.


* Royal Saxon,’ 1829.


After some hesitation, I give this report here, and not
in the following chapter. This proceeding is chrono-
logically correct, but suffers from the disadvantage that
the report, while antedating the Dedalus case by eleven
years, was published after it — and is based, in its details,
upon it. It is sufficient here to say, that the Dedalus
was passed, at close range, by a creature of serpentine
form, with head and neck held above water, some sixty
feet in visible length, and swimming at the rate of twelve
to fifteen knots. The account was originally published
in the Bombay Times, in January 1849.

“ I see in your paper of the 30th December, a paragraph


1 She was a new ship, built in 1818.
* It is here quoted from the Zoo/ogist, 1849, pp. 2458, 2459.


1820-1845: MISCELLANEOUS REPORTS 79


in which a doubt is expressed of the authenticity of the
account given by Captain M'Quhae of the “ great
sea-serpent."

“When returning to India, in the year 1829, I was
standing on the poop of the Royal Saxon, in conversa-
tion with Captain Petrie, the commander of that ship.
We were at a considerable distance south-west of the
Cape of Good Hope, in the usual track of vessels to
this country, going rapidly along (seven or eight
knots) in fine smooth water : it was in the middle of
the day, and the other passengers were at lunch ;
the man at the wheel, a steerage passenger, and our-
selves, being the only persons on the poop.

“ Captain Petrie and myself at the same instant were
literally fixed in astonishment by the appearance, a
short distance ahead, of an animal of which no more
generally correct description could be given than that
by Captain M'Quhae.:

*[t passed within thirty-five yards of the ship, without
altering its course in the least ; but as it came right.
abreast of us, it slowly turned its head towards us.
Apparently about one-third of the upper part of its
body was above water in nearly its whole length, and
we could see the water curling up on its breadth? as it
moved along, but by what means it moved we could
not perceive.

“We watched it going astern with intense interest,
until it had nearly disappeared, when my companion,
turning to me with a countenance expressive of the
utmost astonishment, exclaimed, ''Good heavens |
what can that be?” It was strange that we never
thought of calling the party engaged at luncheon to
witness the extraordinary sight we had seen ; but the
fact is, we were so absorbed in it ourselves that we never


! See p. 98. 2 Mis-printed ‘ breath.’


8o i THE SEA-SERPENT


spoke, and scarcely moved, until it had nearly dis-
appeared.
* Captain Petrie, a superior and most intelligent man,
has since perished: in the exercise of his profession : of
the fate of the others then on deck I am ignorant, so
the story rests on my own unsupported word, but I
pledge that word to its correctness. Professor Owen's
supposition that the animal seen by the officers of the
Daedalus was a gigantic seal I believe to be incorrect,
because we saw this apparently similar creature in its
whole length, with the exception of a small portion of
the tail, which was under water ; and by comparing
its length with that of the Royal Saxon (about 600
feet), when exactly alongside in passing, we calculated
it to be in that, as well as 1n its other dimensions,
greater than the animal described by Captain M'Quhae.
* Should the foregoing account be of any interest to
you, it is at your service : it is an old story, but a true
one. lam not quite sure of our latitude and longitude
at the time, nor do I exactly remember the date, but
it was about the end of July.
* R. Davipson, Superintending Surgeon,
* Nagpore Subsidiary Force.
* Kamptee, 3rd January, 1849.'


This is a straightforward statement, but there is one fly
in the ointment — the preposterous length ascribed to the
Royal Saxon; not, be it noted, to the sea-serpent.
Actually, the Royal Saxon was 120 feet long overall.
I suspect a misprint in the Bombay Times original — where
the length is plainly printed “ 600.’


1 Misprinted ‘ perrshed.’


2? Or Dr. Davidson may have confused the ship'stonnage (510, register)
with her length,


1820-1845: MISCELLANEOUS REPORTS 81


Halifax, (N.S.), 1833.

The following account was published in the Zoologist,
1847.: According to an editorial note, it was forwarded
by Mr. W. H. Ince, who had received it from his brother,
Commander J. M. R. Ince, R.N. It was written by their
uncle, Mr. Henry Ince, Ordnance Storekeeper at Halifax,
N.S.

“On the ı5th of May, 1833, a party, consisting

of Captain Sullivan, Lieutenants Maclachlan and

Malcolm of the Rifle Brigade, Lieutenant Lyster of

the Artillery, and Mr. Ince of the Ordnance, started

from Halifax in a small yacht for Mahone Bay, some
forty miles to the westward, on a fishing excursion.

The morning was cloudy, and the wind at S.S.E.,

and apparently rising... .

* We had run about half the distance, as we supposed,

and were enjoying ourselves on deck... when we were

surprised by the sight of an immense shoal of gram-
puses, which appeared in an unusual state of excite-
ment, and which, in their gambols, approached so close
to our little craft, that some of the party amused them-
selves by firing at them with rifles.* . . . Our attention
was presently diverted from the whales and “such
small deer," by an exclamation from Dowling, our
man-of-war's-man, who was sitting to leeward, of “Oh!

Sirs, look here !” we were started into a ready com-

pliance, and saw an object which banished all other

thoughts save wonder and surprise.

‘At the distance of from 150 to 200 yards on

our starboard bow, we saw the head and neck of

some denizen of the deep, precisely like those of a

common snake, in the act of swimming, the head so

far elevated and thrown forward by the curve of


1
p. 1714.
2° Les Anglais s’amusaient tristement, selon le facon de leur pays.’


82 THE SEA-SERPENT


the neck as to enable us to see the water under and
beyond it. The creature rapidly passed, leaving a
regular wake, from the commencement of which, to
the fore part, which was out of water, we judged its
length to be about eighty feet ; and this within rather
than beyond the mark... ..
‘ There could be no mistake, no delusion, and we were
all perfectly satisfied that we had been favoured with a
view of the “true and veritable sea-serpent," which
had been generally considered to have existed only in
the brain of some Yankee skipper, and treated as a
tale not much entitled to belief... . It is most difficult
to give correctly the dimensions of any object in the
water. The head of the creature we set down at about
six feet in length, and that portion of the neck which
we saw, at the same ; the extreme length, as before
stated, at between eighty and one hundred feet. The
neck in thickness equalled the bole of a moderate-sized
tree. The head and neck of a dark brown or nearly
black colour, streaked with white in irregular streaks.
I do not recollect seeing any part of the body.
* Such 1s the rough account of the sea-serpent, and all
the party who saw it are still in the land of the living, —
Lyster in England, Malcolm in New South Wales
with his regiment, and the remainder still vegetating
in Halifax.’
Signed by W. SuLLivan, Captain, Rifle Brigade

A. MacLacHLAN, Lieutenant,

G. P. Matcoim, Ensign, S

B. O’Neat Lyster, Lieut., Artillery

Henry Ince, Ordnance Storekeeper at Halifax.


»


I have not traced any further correspondence or enquiries,
at the time, about this very definite and explicit report.
It has often been quoted by later writers on the subject.


1820-1845: MISCELLANEOUS REPORTS 83


H.M.S.'FIy, (about 1838).:
The following item of evidence, from the Zoologist’,
is tantalisingly brief and vague. I subjoin it, in full.


* Enormous undescribed Animal, apparently allied to the
Enaliosauri, seen in the Gulf of California.

* Captain the Hon. George Hope states that, when in
H.M.S. Fly, in the gulf of California, the sea being
perfectly calm and transparent, he saw at the bottom
a large marine animal, with the head and general figure
of the alligator, except that the neck was much longer,
and that instead of legs the creature had four large
flappers, somewhat like those of turtles, the anterior
pair being larger than the posterior? : the creature
was distinctly visible, and all its movements could be
observed with ease : it appeared to be pursuing its
prey at the bottom of the sea : its movements were
somewhat serpentine, and an appearance of annulations
or ring-like divisions of the body was distinctly
perceptible.

* Captain Hope made this relation in company, and as
a matter of conversation : when I heard it from the
gentleman to whom it was narrated, I inquired whether
Captain Hope was acquainted with those remarkable
fossil animals, Icthyosauri and Plesiosauri, the sup-
posed forms of which so nearly correspond with what
he describes as having seen alive, and I cannot find that
he had heard of them ; the alligator being the only
animal he mentioned as bearing a partial similarity
to the one in question. Edward Newman.


It may be noted that the Zoologist appeared in two forms :


1 See Plate II. ! 1849, p. 2356.


2 It would, of course, have been much less impressive to say that the
front ones were larger than the back ones.


84 THE SEA-SERPENT


in.monthly parts and as an annual volume. The latter
contained the preceding twelve parts, an index, and a
preface, written by Newman and constituting a review of
the year's information. In his preface to the 1849
volume,‘ he refers to this paragraph in no measured
terms :


‘In British Reptiles nothing remarkable has occurred ;
but I have been favoured with a communication,
published in the February number (Zool. 2356),
announcing the present existence of huge marine
animals closely related to the Enaliosauri of by-gone
ages, that appears to me in all respects the most
interesting Natural-History fact of the present century,
completely overturning as it does some of the most
favourite and fashionable hypotheses of geological
science. The published opinion of M. Agassiz:
(Zool. 2395) certainly favours the idea that Enalio-
saurians may still exist : he says it would be in precise
conformity with analogy that an animal should exist
in the American seas which has long been extinct and
fossilized in the eastern hemisphere : he instances the
gar-pike of the western rivers, and says that, in a recent
visit to Lake Superior, he has detected several fishes
belonging to genera now extinct in Europe.’


This 1s 'all werry capital': but geological theories,
however fashionable, are not, as a rule ‘ completely over-
turned’ by a second-hand version of a casual story, told
“in company ... as a matter of conversation.’ If the


*p. Xs Xl 400. CLA
_ `J. L. R. Agassiz (1807-73), a celebrated Swiss naturalist who settled
in the United States, where most of his best work was done. The re-
marks referred to appear on p. 2395 of the volume in much the same
words as those used by Newman above.


Prare IT. CREATURE, SEEN BY HMS S SRTEYZ


NoTE.— This is a modern (non-authoritative) drawing by Carton Moore Park, R.B.A.
From ‘The Pall Mall Magazine,’ October, 1901


[Facing p. 84


1820-1845: MISCELLANEOUS REPORTS 85


matter were so important, why (one wonders) did not
Newman get into touch with Captain Hope and obtain
a first-hand version of his experience (preferably in
writing) : with, if possible, some confirmatory evidence ?
As it stands, the most remarkable feature of the story
is the absence of such elementary data as the time, place
and date of the occurrence.

I have endeavoured to supply these, but without
success. All that I have succeeded in discovering is that
Hope, then a lieutenant,: served in H.M.S. Fly between
1836 and 1840, and that during this period the ship was
frequently in the Gulf of California - which, be it noted,
has an area of some 40,000 square miles. There is no
mention of the matter in her log ; but this is what might
be expected. The logs of the Dedalus and Osborne, for
example, contain no reference to the monsters seen
from them, although these formed the subjects of official
reports to the Admiralty. In this case, it does not
appear that the creature was seen by anyone except Hope,
and it is unlikely that he reported the incident officially.

With all its defects, the story 1s too interesting to omit ;
but it cannot be regarded as carrying very much weight.


Arisaig, N.S. (1844) : Merigomish, N.S. (1845).

‘Two other accounts of strange creatures seen in Nova
Scotian? waters are to be found in Sir Charles Lyell’s
Second Visit to the United States.” In his very entertaining


1 He was appointed to the F/y, as first lieutenant, on September 2nd,
1836, being promoted-to commander when she paid off in 1840.

2 Should this book ever be honoured by translation into French or
German, I trust that the translator will be warned by the curious blunder
committed by Dr. Baly in his translation of Müller’s Elements of Physiology,
wherein he refers to the cannibals of Nova Scotia, instéad of New Cale-
donia.

3 A Second Visit to the United States of North America, by Sir Charles
Lyell, F.R.S. (London, Murray, 1850, pp. 132-4).

Gs


86 THE SEA-SERPENT


eighth chapter, he discusses various sea-serpent reports,
which he relates with great fairness, admitting that ' when
I left America in 1846... I believed in the sea-serpent
without having seen it.’ On a later page, however, he
repents his rashness, and advances the theory that the
majority of the reported sea-serpents were actually
basking-sharks.

Here, however, I am only concerned with two cases
which he prints ; and which I transcribe because I have
not found equally good accounts of them in any other
authority.: It must be noted that they are at third-hand.


€


. . . I received. news of the re-appearance of the same
serpent? in a letter from my friend Mr. J. W. Dawson,
of Pictou, in Nova Scotia. This geologist, with whom
I explored Nova Scotia in 1842, said he was collecting
evidence for me of the appearance, in the month of
August, 1845, at Merigomish, in the Gulf of St.
Lawrence,* of a marine monster, about 100 feet long,
seen by two intelligent observers nearly aground in
calm water, within 200 feet of the beach, where it
remained in sight about half an hour, and then got
off witn difficulty.

“ One of the witnesses went up a bank in order to look
down upon it. They said it sometimes raised its head
(which resembled that of a seal) partially out of the
water. Along its back were a number of humps or
protuberances, which, in the opinion of the observer
on the beach, were true humps, while the other thought
they were produced by vertical flexures of the body.


1 Oudemans does not seem to have known of Lyell's accounts.
? This is a pure assumption.


* This is a mistake on Lyell’s part. Merigomish is not in the Gulf of
St. Lawrence, but close to Pictou, on the northernside of Nova Scotia and
at the eastern end of Northumberland Strait.


d n ee nr NND


1820-1845: MISCELLANEOUS REPORTS 87


Between the head and the first protuberance there was
a straight part of the back of considerable length, and
this part was generally above water. The colour
appeared black, and the skin had a rough appearance.
* The animal was seen to bend its body almost into a
circle, and again to unbend it with rapidity. It was
slender in proportion to its length. After it had
disappeared in deep water, its wake was visible for
some time. ‘There were no indications of paddles
seen. Some other persons who saw it, compared the
creature to a long string of fishing-net buoys moving
rapidly about.

“In the course of the summer, the fishermen on the
eastern shore of Prince Edward’s Island,: in the Gulf
of St. Lawrence, had been terrified by this sea monster,
and the year before, October, 1844, a similar creature
swam slowly past the pier at Arisaig, near the east end
of Nova Scotia, and, there being only a slight breeze
at the time, was attentively observed by Mr. Barry, a
millwright of Pictou, who told Mr. Dawson he was
within 120 feet of it, and estimated its length at sixty
feet, and the thickness of its body at three feet. It had
humps on the back, which seemed too small and close
together to be bends of the body.

* The body appeared also to move in Jong undulations,
including many of the smaller humps. In consequence
of this motion, the head and tail were sometimes both
out of sight, and sometimes both above water, as
represented in the annexed outline, given from
memory.’

‘The head... was rounded and obtuse in front, and


1 The eastern end of Prince Edward Island lies roughly northward of
Merigomish, and is separated from it by Northumberland Strait, about
thirty miles across.

2 See Fig. 6.


88 THE SEA-SERPENT


was never elevated more than a foot above the surface.
The tail was pointed, appearing like half of a mackerel's
tail. The colour of the part seen was black.

' It was suggested to Mr. Dawson that a swell in the
sea might give the deceptive appearance of an undu-
lating movement, as it is well known “ that a stick held


FIG. 6. SKETCH (from memory) OF THE CREATURE SEEN OFF ARISAIG, NOVA
SCOTIA, IN OCTOBER, 1844


Re-drawn from Lyell’s Second Visit to the United States.


horizontally at the surface of water when there is a
ripple seems to have an uneven outline." But Mr.
Barry replied that he observed the animal very atten-
tively, having read accounts of the sea serpent, and
feels confident that the undulations were not those of
the water.'


Romsdal Fjord, Norway (1845).

Leaving these very interesting reports, I turn to one —
of many — relating to appearances of the sea-serpent in
Norwegian waters. It is quite a mistake to suppose that
these ceased with the appearance of Pontoppidan's book.
Like the New England reports, they form a continuous
and lengthy series. As regards merely the first half of the
nineteenth century, I have before me a list of twenty-four
separate and well-attested appearances reported between
1800 and 1845 — and there have also been many since. I
have selected one of the year 1845 which is tolerably full


1820-1845: MISCELLANEOUS REPORTS 89


in detail; prefacing it by an extract from a letter:
addressed to the Secretary of the Admiralty (soon after
the Dedalus case) by ‘a gentleman long resident in
Norway,’ Mr. J. D. Morries Stirling.


‘


. my friend, the late Dr. Newmann, Bishop of
Bergen . . . made it (the question of the “ sea ser-
pent's" existence) the subject of enquiry within the
last twenty or twenty-five years among his clergy
and those of the adjoining dioceses.» The amount
of proof thus collected was sufficient to convince any
one, however sceptical, as it is not mere hearsay
evidence, but the testimony of known and respectable


persons in various walks of life.’


It is, perhaps, one of the most pathetic features in
connection with any unbiased enquiry into the subject of
the sea-serpent, to find that over and over again some
writer, looking at some particular portion of the enor-
mous mass of evidence which has slowly accumulated
and been shelved, is led confidently to assert that now, at
last, the available proof is ‘ sufficient to convince any one,
however sceptical.’ Proof implies a capacity for the
reception of proof ; as one of our greatest astronomers,
Horrox, once wrote, ‘... it is much easier to teach the
ignorant than those who will not learn.'*


* The size of the Sea-Serpents seen in the Norwegian
Fjords varies much ; and I do not now remember


3 Illustrated London News, 28, x. 1848.


2 Thus following strictly in the footsteps of his predecessor, Pontop-
pidan, who was Bishop of Bergen from 1747 to 1764.

: Quoted from his Venus in sole visa. He died at twenty-three ; having
crammed into his short life (1617—40) an amount of original work which
conclusively proves that, had he lived, he would have had few equals, in
any age, as a theoretical and practical astronomer,


90 THE SEA-SERPENT


what the dimensions of the largest are said to be. . ..
There are, I believe, several varieties of the reptile
known as the Sea-Serpent, but almost all the accounts
agree as to the existence of a mane, and as to the great
size of the eye. In several of the fossil reptiles some-
what approaching the Sea-Serpent in size and other
characteristics, the orbit is very large : and in this
respect, as well as in having short paws or flappers,
the descriptions of the Northern Sea-Serpents agree
with the supposed appearance of some of the antedi-
luvian species. ...

* In concluding this hurried statement, allow me to add
my own testimony as to the existence of a large fish or
reptile of cylindrical form (I will not say Sea-Serpent).
Three years ago, while becalmed in a yacht between
Bergen and Sogn,* in Norway, I saw (at abouta quarter
of a mile astern) what appeared to be a large fish
ruffling the otherwise smooth surface of the Fjord, and,
on looking attentively, I observed what looked like
the convolutions of a snake.

“ I immediately got my glass, and distinctly made out
three convolutions, which drew themselves slowly
through the water ; the greatest diameter was about
ten or twelve inches. No head was visible, and from
the size of each convolution I supposed the length to
be about thirty feet. The master of my yacht (who, as
navigator, seaman, and fisherman, had known the
Norwegian coast and North Sea for many years), as
well as a friend who was with me, an experienced
Norwegian sportsman and porpoise shooter, saw the


1 I imagine that the reference is to such creatures as the plesiosaurus and
ichthyosaurus. Thes atement as to the orbit is not true of either — but the
ichthyosaurus had a very large bony ring surrounding its eye.

2 This is of no value as a clue to the yacht’s position. By sea, Bergen
and Sogn are some ninety miles apart, and various routes might have been
adopted.


1820-1845: MISCELLANEOUS REPORTS 9I


same appearance at the same time, and formed the same
opinion as to form and size. I mention the fact of my
friend being a porpoise shooter, as many have believed
that a shoal of porpoises following each other has given
rise to the fable, as they called it, of the Sea-Serpent.’


This account, being anonymous, and relating to a some-
what indefinite appearance seen (although through a
telescope) at a distance of a quarter of a mile or so, is of no
great importance, except as relates to the perennial
“ porpoise theory.’ But its statement as to the collection
of evidence at Bergen is valuable. Here is what I take
to be a portion of that evidence, as it appeared in the
Zoologist.: Molde is a small town on the northern side
of Romsdal Fjord, in about 62° 50’ N.


“ The 28th of July, 1845, J. C. Lund, bookseller and
printer ; G. S. Krogh, merchant ; Christian Flang,
Lund's apprentice; and John Elgenses, labourer, were
out on Romsdale-fjord, fishing. The sea was, after a
warm, sunshiny day, quite calm.

* About seven o'clock in the afternoon,» a little
distance from shore, near the ballast place and
Molde Hooe, they saw a long marine animal, which
slowly moved itself forward, as 1t appeared to them,
with the help of two fins, on the fore-part of the body
nearest the head,* which they judged from the boiling
of the water on both sides of it.

* The visible part of the body appeared to be between


! 1847, p. 1606.

2 Sunset was at about 8.55 p.m.

2 I do not take this to mean that the flappers were just behind the head,
like a cherub's wings; but that they were on the fore end of the body —
i.e. the part of the body nearest the head — and separated from the latter
by the length of the neck.


THE SEA-SERPENT


forty and fifty feet in length, and moved in undula-
tions like a snake. The body was round, and of a dark
colour, and seemed to be several ells: . . . . in thickness.
As they discerned a waving motion in the water behind
the animal, they concluded that part of the body was
concealed under water. That it was one connected
animal they saw plainly from its movement. When
the animal was about one hundred yards from the
boat, they noticed tolerably correctly its fore-part,
which ended in a sharp snout ; its colossal head raised
itself above the water in the form of a semi-circle ; the
lower part was not visible. The colour of the head was
dark brown and the skin smooth. They did not notice
the eyes or any mane or bristles on the throat.

“When the serpent came about a musket-shot* near,
Lund fired at it, and was certain the shots hit it in the
head. After the shot he dived, but came up immedi-
ately. He raised his neck in the air like a snake prepar-
ing to dart on his prey. After he had turned and got his
body in a straight line, which he appeared to do with
great difficulty, he darted like an arrow against the
boat. They reached the shore, and the animal per-
ceiving it had come into shallow water, dived immedi-
ately, and disappeared in the deep.

* Such is the declaration of these four men, and no one
has any cause to question their veracity, or imagine
that they were so seized with fear that they could not
observe what took place so near them. There are not
many here, or on other parts of the Norwegian coast,
who longer doubt the existence of the sea-serpent.
The writer of this narrative was a long time
sceptical, as he had not been so fortunate as to see this
monster of the deep, but after the many accounts


1 A Norwegian ell is practically two English feet.
® Say fifty yards.


1820-1845: MISCELLANEOUS REPORTS 93


he has read, and the relations he has received from
credible witnesses, he does not dare longer to doubt
the existence of the sea-serpent.


* P. W. DziNBoLL.
‘Molde, the 29th Nov., 1845.’


As already remarked, many similar accounts to the fore-
going could be quoted, all relating to appearances seen in
Norwegian waters alone, and during the past century ;
but the limitations of space forbid. In such matters, a
sample — and the above is a fair sample — may, I think,
be regarded as sufficient for the purpose of showing that
there 1s good general agreement between the Norwegian
accounts and the others from New England, Nova
Scotia, and the North Atlantic.


Cu. IV. H.M.S.
*DJEDALUS,' 1848.


On October 4th, 1848, at 6.40 a.m., H.M. corvette
Daedalus, 19 guns, arrived at Plymouth, homeward-
bound from the East Indies to pay off.* With her came
rumours of a strange sea-creature which she had encoun-
tered in the South Atlantic ; and in no long time these
took the form of a paragraph which went the round of the
evening papers, and thence found its way into The Times.
Although - as will be seen — wildly exaggerated, it forms
a useful introduction to a very remarkable narrative.


NAVAL INTELLIGENCE.*


Plymouth, Oct. 7.
“When the Daedalus frigate, Captain M’Quhae, which
arrived here on the 4th inst., was on her passage home
from the East Indies, between the Cape of Good Hope
and St. Helena, her captain, and most of her officers
and crew, at 4 o'clock one afternoon saw a sea-
serpent. The creature was twenty minutes in sight
of the frigate, and passed under her quarter. Its head
appeared to be about four feet out of the water, and
there was about 60 feet of its body in a straight line
on the surface. It is calculated that there must have
been under water a length of 30 or 40 feet more, by
which it propelled itself at the rate of 15 miles an hour.
The diameter of the exposed part of the body was about
16 inches, and when it extended its Jaws, which were


ı She was commissioned for service on the East Indies Station in
October 1844.
2 The Times, 10, x. 1848.


94


HEMUSS  DWEDALUS, 1848 95


full of large jagged teeth, they seemed sufficiently
capacious to admit of a tall man standing upright
between them. The ship was sailing north at the rate
of eight miles an hour. The Daedalus left the Cape of
Good Hope on the 3oth of July, and reached St.
Helena on the 16th of August.’:


On the principle that one can't correct a false impression
too quickly, it may be pointed out that, in fact, the
creature was not seen (close to) by ' most of her officers
and crew,' but by seven persons only : that it was only
visible (to the naked eye) for about five minutes, not
twenty : and that no ' jagged teeth’ were observed, for
the simple reason that the creature was not seen to open
its mouth. Apart from these points and one or two
minor errors, the paragraph is tolerably correct.

If the matter had rested there, few could be blamed for
thinking the report a newspaper hoax ; but it was not
allowed to do so. On the same day (October ıoth) an
Admiralty minute directed the Commander-in-Chief,
Plymouth, to call upon Captain M’Quhae for an official
report as to the truth, or otherwise, of The Times para-
graph.

It is almost platitudinous to say that there is no duty
which our naval officers may not find themselves called
upon to undertake, and no form of activity which they
have not displayed. Their range is not even bounded by
the seven seas. Before now they have dictated terms to
the Pope, explored the interior of Africa, filled university
chairs, and stood at the South Pole. From their ranks
have come poets, painters, novelists, chess-players,
prophets, world-famous scientists, kings, gods, and even
Field-Marshals. Possibly heaving a sigh at the fuss


1 The Dedalus’ log confirms these dates.


96 THE SEA-SERPENT


which was being made over a comparatively small matter
(which he had not considered worth an entry in the ship's
log),: M'Quhae sat him down and drew up an excellent
report, accompanied by a sketch.

Unfortunately, this report is no longer extant. Its
fate was that of most things which have the misfortune
to lie a little off the beaten track. At an uncertain date
some Admiralty clerk, whom it would give me no pleasure
to meet, ‘ weeded’ it out of the Admiralty records as
being of insufficient importance to be kept on file. In
consequence it was pulped. All that there is to show for
it in the Admiralty records? is a series of entries as under :


‘Sea Serpent. Statement of one having been seen by
the *Daedalus" having appeared in the Evening
Papers ; Sir W. Gage to call upon Capt. MeQuhae
for report.

Minute, 10 Oct, 1848.

“Sir W. Gage states he has called upon Capt.
MeQuhae for report.

B 849 of 1848.
“ Capt MeQuhae sends description of this fabulous ?
Animal (The Phoenix of the Deep).

B 850 of 1848.
“ The Editor of the Zoologist requests a Copy of the
Drawing.


1 There is no question of the omission, but I am not certain of its
motive. It may have been prudence - see the case of H.M.S. Hilary,
p. 210. Or it may have been an attitude of mind analogous to that of
another Scottish officer, a subaltern, who noted in his guard-report :
* Nothing extraordinary occurred since mounting guard. It was sub-
sequently found that during this period the sergeant of the guard had
fallen from a 400-ft. cliff, and broken his neck. Questioned, the subaltern
replied that he saw nothing extraordinary in such a result — but had
the man survived uninjured, he would have reported this.


* In the appropriate * Digest,’ at ‘ cutting No. go A.’


H.M.S. SDEDALUSS 1848 97


“ Acqd.ı that the Copyright is in the hands of the
Editor of the Illustrated London News.
Pro N 148 of 1848.’


I cannot discover who was responsible for coining the
delightful expression ' Phoenix of the Deep’—a most
refreshing oasis in a desert of ofhcial verbiage.

Luckily the Admiralty communicated M’Quhae’s
report, forthwith, to The Times, and so rendered it
generally accessible. I may remark that there can be no
reasonable doubt that it was published verbatim. It was,
as will be seen, publicly and severely criticised by
Professor Owen ; and M'Quhae, in replying to this
attack, stated, equally publicly, that he adhered to its
terms. We may, therefore, accept The Times version as
practically equal in authority to the original report itself.
The sketch (or one based on it) seems, also, to have been
published, in the JZustrated London News.» Here is the
full text of Captain M'Quhae's report.*


‘Her Majesty’s Ship Daedalus, Hamoaze, Oct. 1 1.


‘Sir,—In reply to your letter of this day's date,
requiring information as to the truth of a statement
published in The Times newspaper, of a sea-serpent of
extraordinary dimensions having been seen from
Her Majesty’s ship Daedalus, under my command,
on her passage from the East Indies I have
the honour to acquaint you, for the information of my
Lords Commissioners of the Admiralty, that at ;
o'clock p.m. on the 6th of August last, in latitude 24?
44’ S., and longitude 9° 22’ E., the weather dark and
cloudy, wind fresh from the N.W., with a long ocean


1 J.e. ‘He has been acquainted.’ * On October 28th, 1848.
: From The Times, 14, x. 1848.


98 THE SEA-SERPENT


swell from the S.W., the ship on the port tack heading
N.E. by N., something very unusual was seen by
Mr. Sartoris, midshipman, rapidly approaching the
ship from before the beam.t The circumstance was
immediately reported by him to the officer of the
watch, Lieut. Edgar Drummond,* with whom and
Mr. William Barrett, the Master,» I was at the time
walking the quarter-deck. The ship's company were
at supper.

“On our attention being called to the object it was
discovered to be an enormous serpent, with head and
shoulders kept about four feet constantly above the
surface of the sea, and as nearly as we could approxi-
mate by comparing it with the length of what our main-
topsail yard would show in the water, there was at the
very least 60 feet of the animal 2 fleur d'eau, no portion
of which was, to our perception, used in propelling it
through the water, either by vertical or horizontal un-
dulation. It passed rapidly, but so close under our lee
quarter, that had it been a man of my acquaintance I
should have easily recognised his features with the
naked eye ; and it did not, either in approaching the
ship or after it had passed our wake, deviate in the
slightest degree from its course to the S. W., which it
held on at the pace of from 12 to 15 miles per hour,
apparently on some determined purpose.

‘The diameter of the serpent was about 15 or 16
inches behind the head, which was, without any doubt,
that of a snake, and it was never, during the 20 minutes
that it continued in sight of our glasses, once below .


-


! The beam is an imaginary line-of-reference, at right angles to a ship’s
keel.


? Lieutenant Edgar Atheling Drummond. He was promoted to lieu-
tenant on August 28th, 1846, and appointed to the Deda/us on the 13th
of the following November.


? J.e. what would now be called the navigating iger.


86 ‘FE 3u12»1]


gbgr x ‘gz ‘SMIN wopuoT peojpasnj HUL, MOAT


LNAANAS-VAS .SNIVAFG, AHL "III aıvıa


ue m


a
ge P y
ia 2 A^ a
^ a u -
AS
E 4 con
4
M
-
«
Va
UR in
3)
R I
* —~
: na


Le
=. DES Dap AU's,’ 1848 99
the surface of the water ; its colour a dark brown, with
yellowish white about the throat. It had no fins, but `
something like a mane of a horse, or rather a bunch of
seaweed, washed about its back. It was seen by the
quartermaster, the boatswain's mate, and the man
at the. wheel, in addition to myself and officers above
mentioned.

“I am having a drawing of the serpent made from a
sketch taken immediately after it was seen, which I
hope to have ready for transmission to my Lords
Commissioners of the Admiralty by to-morrow's post.

“aA have Ge
. * Perz& M’Quuagz, Captain.
‘To Admiral Sir W. H. Gage, G.C.H.,: Devonport.’


This celebrated report is the /ocus classicus of the sea-
serpent ; and in consequence it seems worth while to
give here the results of comparing it with the ship's
log — in which, as already noticed, there 1s no reference
to the “ enormous serpent ' seen on Sunday, August 6th.
There are one or two minor discrepancies, but nothing of
any note. The course steered from 4 to 5 p.m. is put
down as N. by E., whereas M’Quhae states that the ship

s 'heading N.E. by N.’- but as the wind between
2 and 7 p.m. is uniformly logged as ‘ variable’ it is quite
probable that M'Quhae's statement gives the correct
course being steered at the time of the encounter. On the
other hand, the log states ‘ 5 mustered at quarters ' — a
formality, occupying some ten minutes or so, during
which all hands must have been on deck, not at supper.
The day being Sunday, the men would have had the
afternoon off except for working sails, etc., and I imagine

i Grand Commander of the Guelphic Order of Hanover. ‘This


€coration was a favourite one with William IV; he gave it to several naval
officers, including Sir John Franklin.


IOO THE SEA-SERPENT .


v


that they were piped to supper at or about 4 o'clock. 5


In any event, it seems probable that the time of the
encounter was actually about 4.40 or so, and not 5 p.m.
as M’Quhae states. The log duly confirms the identity
of the officer of the watch — the first dog-watch (4-6
p.m.) is initialled by Drummond. The weather during
this watch is noted as ' CW.’ — cloudy, with wet dew.


The ship's position at the previous noon — lat. 24° 57’ S., E


long. 9? 37' E., St. Helena distant 1015 miles, bearing


N. 57° 57 W. — agrees well with that given by M’Quhae .
for 5 p.m. Incidentally, it may be noted that this last `
is in some 2,000 fathoms of water, and 330 miles from _


the African coast.


Two pieces of confirmatory evidence are available.


The Zoologist (which, as already noted, had failed to |
obtain the use of the official sketch) published the follow-


ing extract: from Drummond's private Journal :


‘ H.M.S. Daedalus, August 6, 1848, lat. 25° S., long. ©


9° 37' E. St. Helena rors miles.

“In the 4 to 6 watch, at about 5 o'clock, we observed
a most remarkable fish on our lee quarter, crossing the
stern in a S.W. direction ; the appearance of its head,
which, with the back fin, was the only portion of the
animal visible, was long, pointed, and flattened at the
top, perhaps ten feet in length, the upper jaw projecting
considerably : the fin was perhaps twenty feet in the


rear of the head, and visible occasionally ; the captain |
also asserted that he saw the tail, or another fin, about.


the same distance behind it ; the upper part of the
head and shoulders appeared of a dark brown colour,
and beneath the under jaw a, brownish white.

“ It pursued a steady undeviating course, keeping its


head horizontal with the surface of the water and in .


11. xii. 1848, p. 2306.


= re > zs >
TO MEE E ety, ae:


H.M.S. 'DUEDALUS,' 1848 IOI


rather a raised position, disappearing occasionally
beneath a wave for a very brief interval, and not
apparently for purposes of respiration. It was going
at the rate of perhaps from twelve to fourteen miles
an hour, and when nearest was perhaps one hundred
yards distant : in fact it gave one quite the idea of
a large snake or eel.

“ No one in the ship has ever seen anything similar, so it
is at least extraordinary. It was visible to the naked
eye for five minutes, and with a glass for perhaps
fifteen more. The weather was dark and squally at
the time, with some sea running.’


And here is another account, whose author I have not
identified. It appeared ten years after the event (in The
Times, February 16th, 1858).


ST
Observing in your paper of yesterday's date a letter
from a correspondent on the marine animal commonly
called the ‘‘ sea-serpent,” in the concluding paragraph
of which he mentions that he has no doubt the object
seen from Her Majesty's Ship Daedalus in the month
of August, 1848, when on the passage from the Cape
of Good Hope to St. Helena, was a piece of the same
seaweed observed by himself,: I beg to state that the
object seen from Her Majesty’s ship on that occasion
was, beyond all question, a living animal, moving
rapidly through the water against a cross sea, and
within five points of a fresh breeze, with such velocity
that the water was surging under its chest as it passed
along at a rate, probably, of not less than 10 miles
per hour.
* Captain M'Quhae's first impulse was to tack in
1 See p. 136.
Hs


IO2 THE SEA-SERPENT


pursuit, ourselves being on a wind on the larboard
tack,* when he reflected that we neither could lay up for
it nor overhaul it in speed. There was nothing to be
done, therefore, but to observe it as accurately as we
could with our glasses as it came up under our lee
quarter and passed away to windward, at its nearest
position being not more than 200 yards from us ; the
eye, the mouth, the nostril, the colour and form all
being most distinctly visible to us.

* We all felt greatly astonished at what we saw, though
there were sailors among us of 30 and 40 years stand-
ing, who had travelled most seas and seen many
marvels in their day. ‘The captain was the first to
exclaim : “ This must be that animal called the sea-
serpent," a conclusion we all at last settled down to.
My impression was that it was rather of a lizard than
a serpentine character, as its movement was steady
and uniform, as if propelled by fins, not by any
undulatory power. It was in sight from our first ob-
serving it about IO minutes, as we were fast leaving
one another on opposite tacks with a freshening breeze
and the sea getting up.


1A correspondent of the Naval and Military Gazette (18, xi. 48),
signing himself * S., suggested : * Why did not Capt. M’Quhae clear a
gun away, and give the stranger a shot ? If it had missed him, the report
and splash would have made him alter his position, and perhaps display his
form more distinctly.’

No doubt M’Quhae considered that, with the hands at supper and the
ports secured, time was lacking for this. As will be seen later (p. 208),
H.M.S. Hi/ary put this suggestion into practice some seventy years after.
See also p. 165.


2 J.e. the port tack.


* It is clear that, making eight knots to the creature's twelve or fifteen,
she could not have overhauled it ; but it is not so clear that she could not
bave lain up for it. She was steering N.E. b. N. with a N.W. wind (i.e.
lying seven points off the wind). Had she gone about, she could have
steered S.W. b. W.; or, without allowing for leeway, a point nearer the
wind than the monster, if this were heading S.W.


HMS DEDALUS, 1848 103


‘I feel, Sir, I have already occupied more of your time
and space than is justifiable, and have the honour to
remain your obedient servant

* An OFFICER or Her Mayesty’s Suir “ Darnaus.”


deb. r3


Finally, it should be mentioned that the J//ustrated London
News, which reprinted M’Quhae’s report, and repro-
duced three sketches to accompany it,' also published,
on November 4th, a letter from M'Quhae, in which he
says :


“I have observed with very great satisfaction the
Engravings of the “ Sea-Serpent " in the ILLUSTRATED
Lonpon News of the 28th. inst ; they most faithfully
represent the appearance of the animal, as seen from
Her Majesty's ship Dedalus on the 6th of August
last ; and it is evident that much care has been be-
stowed on the subject by the artist employed, to whom
I beg to acknowledge myself greatly indebted for the
patience and attention with which he listened to the
various alterations suggested by me during the progress
of the drawings.’


Such is the first-hand evidence in the Dedalus case ; and
it is hardly necessary to say that this became a nine-days-
wonder, and something more. Public opinion was
distracted between the unimpeachable character of the
witnesses, and the strangeness of the story they had to
tell. Never, before or since, has the world’s attention been
so sharply focused on the question of whether the sea-
serpent is a hoax, a delusion, or a reality. One might
imagine that anyone, coming to the evidence with an
open mind, would agree that the last of these theories was


1 Plates III and IV, and Fig. 7,


IO4 THE SEA-SERPENT


the only one justified by the evidence ; but, as a matter of
fact, both the others found supporters : and the second,
the assumption that the observers had been mistaken in
what they saw, became the contemporary verdict — one
still, in great measure, un-reversed.


FIG. 7. HEAD OF THE ' DADALUS’ °’ SEA-SERPENT


Re-drawn (outline only), from the J//ustrated London News, 28, x. 1848.
The existence of the ' crescentic mark’ indicating the nostril (see p. 112) is
doubtful : in the original, it might equally be a piece of fancy shading.


I turn first to the opinions of those who imagined that
the Dedalus’ reports were in the nature of a hoax. This
view, it is hardly necessary to say, was not put forward in
her officers’ hearing ; nor, indeed, did it find any very
explicit enunciation in print. But there can be no doubt
that an attempted hoax, closely connected with the


yes


H.M.S. 'DJEDALUS,' 1848 10%


Dedalus case, was played by or upon a London newspaper SUE
a week after M’Quhae’s report was published ; and the `


public can scarcely be blamed for supposing that both‘. EY «C 2


stories were horses from the same stable.

On October 21st the London G/obe published a letter
from one ‘ James Henderson, Master,’ of the Mary Ann,
dated from ' Broomielaw [Glasgow], Berth no. 4, Oct. 19.’
It is not worth giving in full. Ostensibly, Captain Hen-
derson, when clearing out of Lisbon on September 30th,
had fallen in with the American brig Daphne, and had
learned from her that on September 20th, in lat. 4? 11' S.,
long. 10? 15’ E. she had encountered a huge sea-serpent
with a dragon's head. Receiving, at forty yards range, a
charge of spike-nails and scrap-iron from one of the
deck-guns, it had made off at the rate of * 15 or 16 knots
an hour.”?

The story — which one still finds, occasionally, accepted
as genuine — appeared at an opportune moment. It was
widely regarded by the simple-minded as confirming the
Daedalus! report ; this, doubtless, was its author's inten-
tion. The Times republished ` Henderson's letter on
October 2 3rd, and thereby evoked a sarcastic letter? from
one ‘H. W. — apparently a member of Lloyd's. He
pertinently remarks :


*.. . How the brig Daphne, with the wind north (or
in any other direction) managed in ro days to run
from 4° 11’ S. to the latitude of Lisbon (38° 43’ N.)
Captain Henderson does not state— probably the
serpent took the brig in tow...’


1 One would like to be able to say that this phrase, in itself, showed its '
writer to be no seaman — but unfortunately, it 1s still often used by those
who ought to know better. A knot is a measure of speed, not a distance.
* 15 knots per hour’ is strictly equivalent to * 15 nautical miles per hour
per hour ' — the correct phrase is ‘ 15 knots,’ zou? court.


2 26, x. 1848.


106 THE SEA-SERPENT


Not improbably, this letter stimulated The Times to make
some enquiries as to the authenticity of the Henderson
letter. At all events, on October 3oth it published a
short extract from the North British Mail, showing
that the Henderson-Mary Ann-Daphne story was a
fabrication. ‘ Upon inquiry we find that there has been
no such ship, with the master's name as given, at the
Broomielaw since the month of August.'

Most probably the story had its origin in the brain
of some journalist of the Tom Garbage type, anxious to
lie profitably while he could. Or it may be a sample of that
perverted ingenuity which delights nowadays in jettison-
ing bogus messages from Nungesser, and other lost
airmen : a proceeding which, on the most charitable
supposition, has its origin in some obscure form of
mental disease.

I am doubtful whether this hoax actually did very
much towards discrediting M’Quhae’s report. As already
pointed out, the Daphne case was so inadequately exposed
that it is still sometimes quoted as genuine. But at least
it served to cast suspicion on the Dedalus story. In the
letter just quoted, * H. W.’ attacked the latter also, re-
marking :


‘,.. The spectacle of a homeward-bound ship in lat.
24^ 44' S., and long. 9? 22' E. (between the Cape and
St. Helena) with the wind N.W., steering N.E. by N.,
and on the port tack, far exceeds in novelty any serpent
hitherto discovered.’


This was where, to quote Uncle Remus, he ‘ bruk his
molasses jug.' He seems to have made the usual lands-
man's mistake, and confused the port and starboard tacks. '


1A ship on the port tack has her bow pointing to the szardoard side
of the quarter from which the wind is blowing.


H.M.S. 'DZEDALUS,' 1848 107


At least, if he did not, his criticism simply has no point at
all ; in the position given St. Helena was about dead to
windward, and from that point of view it was immaterial
to M'Ouhae whether he laid up for it on one tack or the
other. This was pointed out, in a sensibly-written letter
from one ' Zjetetes,' in The Times of October 30th ; while
another of the fraternity, ‘ A Friend to Truth,’ writing in
the same columns two days later, remarked that those
who knew M'Quhae would not for a moment doubt his
statements, even if these had not been supported by other
witnesses : a very proper assertion — which, however, was
not likely to carry much weight when made anony-
mously.

Actually, in spite of the Daphne hoax, M’Quhae’s
honesty was not— and, obviously, could not be -— ser-
iously called in question. That a British post-captain,
paying-off his ship and desirous of further employment,
should deliberately go out of his way to embroil himself
with the Board of Admiralty by playing off upon them a
purposeless hoax (requiring, for even a short-lived success,
the active co-operation of several of his officers, and the
tacit complicity of his whole ship's company) was not
merely improbable — it was frankly unthinkable. The
alternatives were therefore reduced to two — either he and
his officers had seen some creature unknown to mid-
Victorian science, or they had failed to appreciate, or
identify, what they had really observed. Needless to say,
the latter was the view taken by the scientific world,
following — perhaps unwittingly — in the footsteps of Sir
Everard Home, who, writing (in 1809) of the ‘ Animal
of Stronsa,': unconsciously revealed his attitude of mind
thus :


1 Philosophical Transactions, 1809, pp. 206-20. See p. 245.


108 THE SEA-SERPENT


‘It is of importance to-science, that it should be
ascertained, that this fish is not a new animal unlike any
of the ordinary productions of nature. . . .'


This view D i most able exponent in the famous Sir
Richard Owen, then Curator of the Hunterian Museum,
and already possessed of a European reputation as a
naturalist and paleontologist. He developed it in a long
and masterly letter which he originally addressed, as far
as can be gathered, to some un-named nobleman who
had asked for his views as to what the D.edalus’ monster
really was. The letter, however, does not read as though
it were intended to be confined to the family circle of any
nobleman, however exalted his rank ; at any rate, it
appeared afew days later in The Times,* with the following
prefatory letter to the editor :


“ Sir, — Subjoined is the answer to a question relative
to the animal seen from the Daedalus, addressed to me
by a nobleman distinguished in literature, and taking
much interest in science.
“ As it contains the substance of the explanation I have
endeavoured to give to numerous inquirers, in the
Hunterian Museum and elsewhere, and as I continue
to receive many applications for my opinion of the
“ Great Sea Serpent,” I am desirous to give it once for
all through the medium of your columns, if space of
such value may be allotted to it.

‘Iam, Sir, your very obedient servant

“ RicHARD Owen.

* Lincoln's-inn-fields, Nov. 9.’


As might be anticipated, The Times found no difficulty in
allotting the requisite space — nearly a column. But


114, xi. 1848. It was reprinted in the [//ustrated London News,
25, xi. 1848.


H.M.S. ‘DADALUSs, 1848 109


Owen's letter was, and remains, something more than
good current copy. It is a closely reasoned statement —
almost an anti-creed — of the views held by those persons
who, even after examining the evidence, disbelieve in the
existence of any sea-serpent. If such are required to
defend their position, hereisan arsenal of polished weapons
ready to their hand.

In view of its great importance, it becomes obviously
necessary to reproduce Owen’s letter, despite its length,
in full. But fortunately it divides itself, quite naturally,
into two fairly equal portions, the first relating to the
Dedalus creature, and the second to the general question


of whether any such creatures as the various reported


sea-serpents actually exist-a question which Owen
attempts to solve by proving a general negative. Conse-
quently, in this chapter I reproduce only the former part
of the letter, reserving the rest for quotation later.:
It may be noted that, as originally sent to the * nobleman,’
the letter accompanied, and referred to, a sketch not
reproduced in The Times. In its place was the following
footnote :


‘ This [the sketch] was a reduced copy of the drawing
of the head of the animal seen by Captain M'Quhae,
attached to the submerged body of a large seal, showing
the long eddy produced by the action of the terminal
flippers.’


I have not succeeded in tracing a copy of this sketch.
Fig. 8 is intended to indicate its probable outlines.


ı In Chapter XII.

2 [t may be noted that Owen was an excellent and resourceful draughts-
man. He gave a proof of the latter quality in his drawing of the extinct
diprodoton. At the time when this was made, the complete skeleton was
known, with the exception of the feet-so Owen drew the monster
standing ankle-deep in undergrowth.


IIO THE SEA-SERPENT


Here is the first half of Owen's letter.


‘The sketch will suggest the reply to your query
“whether the monster seen from the Daedalus be
anything but a saurian ?” If it be the true answer it
destroys the romance of the incident, and will be any-
thing but acceptable to those who prefer the excite-
ment of the imagination to the satisfaction of the
judgment.

“I am far from insensible to the pleasures of the dis-
covery of a new and rare animal, but before I can


FIG. 8. OWEN’S SKETCH, AS IT MAY HAVE APPEARED
(Not authoritative)


enjoy them certain conditions, e.g. reasonable proof or
evidence of its existence, must be fulfilled. I am also
far from undervaluing the information which Captain
M’Quhae has given us of what he saw. When fairly
analysed, it lies in a small compass ; but my know-
ledge of the animal kingdom compels me to draw other
conclusions from the phenomena than those which the
gallant captain seems to have jumped at.

' He evidently saw a large animal moving through the
water, very different from anything he had before
witnessed — neither a whale, a grampus, a great shark, an
alligator,' nor any other of the larger surface-swimming


! An alligator ' surface-swimming ' on the high seas would indeed be a
phenomenon.


H.M.S. 'DZEDALUS,' 1848 III


creatures which are fallen in with in ordinary
voyages. He writes : “ On our attention being called
to the object, it was discovered to be an enormous
serpent [read ' animal '], with the head and shoulders
kept about four feet constantly above the surface of the
sea. The diameter of the serpent [‘ animal ’] was about
15 or 16 inches behind the head ; its colour a dark
brown, with yellowish white about the throat." No
fins were seen (the captain says there were none ; but
from his own account he did not see enough of the
animal to prove the negative). “ Something like the
mane of a horse, or rather a bunch of sea-weed washed
about its back." So much of the body as was seen was
“ not used in propelling the animal through the water,
either by vertical or horizontal undulation.”: A calcu-
lation of its length was made under a strong precon-
ception of the nature of the beast. The head, e.g., 1s
stated to be, “‘ without any doubt, that of a snake " ;
and yet a snake would be the last species to which a
naturalist conversant with the forms and characters of
the heads of animals would refer such a head as that of
which Captain M'Quhae has transmitted a drawing to
the Admiralty, and which he certifies to have been
accurately copied in the J/ustrated London News for
October 28, 1848, p. 265.
* Your Lordship will observe that no sooner was the
captain's attention called to the object than “ it was
discovered to be an enormous serpent," and yet the
closest inspection of as much of the body as was visible,
à fleur d'eau, failed to detect any undulations of the
body, although such actions constitute the very charac-
ter which would distinguish a serpent or serpentiform
ı While preserving the sense, Owen's quotations, as will be seen by
comparing them with the original (p. 98), are not verbally exact, and


have been put together in a somewhat piecemeal fashion without any
indication of this process.


112 THE SEA-SERPENT


swimmer from any other marine species.“ "The fore-
gone conclusion, therefore, of the beast’s being a sea-
serpent, notwithstanding its capacious vaulted cran-
ium, and stiff, inflexible trunk, must be kept in mind
in estimating the value of the approximation made to
the total length of the animal, as “at the very least:
60 feet." This is the only part of the description,
however, which seems to me to be so uncertain as to be
inadmissible, in an attempt to arrive at a right con-
clusion as to the nature of the animal.*

‘ The more certain characters of the animal are these : —
Head, with a convex, moderately capacious cranium,
short obtuse muzzle, gape of the mouth not extending
further than to beneath the eye, which is rather small,
round, filling closely the palpebral aperture ; colour,
dark brown above, yellowish white beneath ; surface
smooth, without scales, scutes, or other conspicuous
modifications of hard and naked cuticle. And the
captain says, “ Had it been a man of my acquaintance
I should have easily recognized his features with my
naked eye." Nostrils not mentioned, but indicated in
the drawing by a crescentic mark at the end of the
nose or muzzle.*

“All these are the characters of the head of a warm-
blooded mammal; none of them those of a cold-
blooded reptile or fish. Body long, dark brown, not
undulating, without dorsal or other apparent fins ;
“ but something like the mane of a horse, or rather a


! "This is hypercriticism with a vengeance. Weare not all naturalists ;
and an ordinary man who saw only the serpentine head and neck of a
creature would naturally say, whatever its motion, that it looked like a
serpent.

® Or, to put it another way, ‘ This is the portion of the evidence which it
is imperatively necessary for me to reject, as otherwise no amount of
paring will make the facts fit my theory.’


? See note below Fig. 7.


H.M.S. 'DZEDALUS,' 1848 rr3


bunch of sea-weed washed about its back." The
character of the integuments would be a most import-
ant one for the zoologist in the determination of the
class to which the above defined creature belonged. If
an opinion can be deduced as to the integuments from
the above indication, it is that the species had hair,
Which, if it was too short and close to be distinguished
on the head, was visible where it usually is the longest,
on the middle line of the shoulders or advanced part of
the back, where it was not stiff and upright like the
rays of a fin, but “ washed about." Guided by the
"above interpretation, of the “‘ mane of a horse, or a
bunch of sea-weed," the animal was not a cetaceous
mammal, but rather a great seal.

* But what seal of large size, or indeed of any size,
would be encountered in latitude 24? 44' south, and
longitude 9? 22' east — viz., about three hundred miles
from the western shore of the southern end of Africa ?
The most likely species to be there met with are the
largest of the seal tribe, e.g. Anson's sea lion, or that
known to the southern whalers by the name of the
“Sea Elephant,” the phoca proboscidia, which attains
the length of from 20 to 30 feet. These great seals
abound in certain of the islands of the southern and
antarctic seas, from which an individual is occasionally
floated off upon an iceberg. The sea lion exhibited in
London last spring, which was a young individual of
the phoca proboscidia, was actually captured in that
predicament, having been carried by the currents that
set northward towards the Cape, where its temporary
resting place was rapidly melting away.

“When a... . phoca proboscidia or phoca leonina is
thus borne off to a distance from its native shore, it is
compelled to return for rest to its floating abode after
it has made its daily excursions in quest of the fishes or


TE THE SEA-SERPENT


squids that constitute its food. It is thus brought by
the iceberg into the latitudes of the Cape, and perhaps
further north, before the berg has melted away. Then
the poor seal is compelled to swim as long as strength
endures ; and in such a predicament I imagine the
creature was that Mr. Sartoris saw rapidly approaching
the Daedalus from before the beam, scanning, prob-
ably, its capabilities as a resting-place, as it paddled its
long stiff body past the ship. In so doing, it would raise
a head of the form and colour described and delineated
by Captain M’Quhae, supported on a neck also of the
diameter given ; the thick neck passing into an in-
flexible trunk, the longer and coarser hair on the upper
part of which would give rise to the idea, especially if
the species were the phoca leonina, explained by the
similes above cited. The organs of locomotion would
be out of sight. The pectoral fins being set on very low
down, as in my sketch, the chief impelling force would
be the action of the deeper immersed terminal fins and
tail, which would create a long eddy, readily mistake-
able by one looking at the strange phenomenon with a
sea-serpent in his mind's eye for an indefinite pro-
longation of the body.

* It is very probable, that no one on board the Daedalus
ever before beheld a gigantic seal freely swimming in
theopen ocean. Entering unexpectedly upon that vast
and commonly blank desert of waters it would be a
strange and exciting spectacle, and might well be inter-
preted as a marvel; but the creative powers of the
human mind appear to be really very limited, and, on
all the occasions where the true source of the “ great
unknown ” has been detected — whether it has proved
to be a file of sportive porpoises, or a pair of gigantic
sharks — old Pontoppidan's sea serpent with the mane
has uniformly suggested itself as the representative


H.M.S. "DUEDALUS,' 1848 IIs


of the portent, until the mystery has been un-
ravelled; .; .'


Such is Owen's ingenious attempt to explain away the
Dedalus story. He was obviously confident that he had
succeeded — although we find him, a little further on,
'emarking :


‘ I have no unmeet confidence in the exactitude of my
interpretation of the phenomena witnessed by the
captain and others of the Daedalus. I am too sensible
of the inadequacy of the characters which the oppor-
tunity of a rapidly passing animal, “ in a long ocean
swell," enabled them to note, for the determination
of its species or genus. Giving due credence to the
most probably accurate elements of their description,
they do little more than guide the zoologist to the class,
which, in the present instance, is not that of the serpent
or the saurian.’


As already remarked, the second half of his letter is given
in another chapter. But its rather curious ending may


find a place here :


‘In other words, I regard the negative evidence . . . as
stronger . . . . than the positive statements which have
hitherto weighed with the public mind. . .. A larger
body of evidence might be got together in proof of
ghosts than of the sea-serpent.’


Before examining Owen's theory, it will be best to give
M'Quhae's reply. This was prompt and categorical.


ı The Times, 21, xi. 1848. Also reprinted in the //uszrated London
News, 25, xi. 1848.


116 THE SEA-SERPENT


‘ Sir, — Will you do me the very great favour to give a
place in your widely circulating columns to the
following reply to the animadversions of “ Professor
Owen ” on the serpent or animal seen by me and others
from Her Majesty's ship Daedalus on the 6th of
August last, and which were published in The Times of
the 14th inst. ?
“I am, Sir, your obedient servant
‘P. M’Qunar.

‘late Captain of Her Majesty's ship Daedalus.

London, Nov. 18.’


‘Professor Owen correctly states that I ''evidently
saw a large creature moving rapidly through the water
very different from anything I had before witnessed,
neither a whale, a grampus, a great shark, an alligator,
nor any of the larger surface-swimming creatures
fallen in with in ordinary voyages.": I now assert —
neither was it a common seal nor a sea elephant, its
great length and its totally differing physiognomy
precluding the possibility of its being a '' Phoca ” of
any species. The head was flat, and not a “ capacious -
vaulted cranium " ; nor. had it a ''stiff inflexible
trunk " —a conclusion to which Professor Owen has
jumped, most certainly not justified by the simple -
statement, that “no portion of the 60 feet seen by us
was used in propelling it through the water, either by
vertical or horizontal undulation.”

* It 1s also assumed that the “ calculation of its length
was made under a strong preconception of the nature
of the beast " ; another conclusion quite contrary to
the fact. It was not until after the great length was
developed by its nearest approach to the ship, and until
! M’Quhae, also, does not quote his own letter verbatim, although he


appears to do so.. Nor does he always use Owen’s exact words, even when
he puts them between inverted commas.


H.M.S. 'DJEDALUS,' 1848 I17


after that most important point had been duly con-
sidered and debated, as well as such could be in the
brief space of time allowed for so doing, that it was
pronounced to be a serpent by all who saw it, and who
are too well accustomed to judge of lengths and
breadths of objects in the sea to mistake a real sub-
stance and an actual living body, coolly and dis-
passionately contemplated, at so short a distance too,
for the “eddy caused by the action of the deeper
immersed fins and tail of a rapidly moving gigantic seal
raising its head above the water," as Professor Owen
imagines, in quest of its lost iceberg.

* 'The creative powers of the human mind may be very
limited. On this occasion they were not called into
requisition, my purpose and desire being, throughout,
to furnish eminent naturalists, such as the learned
Professor, with accurate facts, and not with exagger-
ated representations, nor with what could by any
possibility proceed from optical delusion ; and I beg
to assure him that old Pontoppidan having clothed
his sea-serpent with a mane could not have suggested
the idea of ornamenting the creature seen from the
Daedalus with a similar appendage, for the simple
reason that I had never seen his account, or even heard
of his sea-serpent, until my arrival in London. Some
other solution must therefore be found for the very
remarkable coincidence between us in that particular
in order to unravel the mystery.

‘Finally, I deny the existence of excitement or the
possibility of optical illusion. I adhere to the state-
ments, as to form, colour, and dimensions, contained
in my official report to the Admiralty ; and I leave
them as data whereupon the learned and scientific
may exercise the “ pleasures of imagination " until
some more fortunate opportunity shall occur of making
Is


118 THE SEA-SERPENT


€


a closer acquaintance with the “ great unknown ” —
in the present instance assuredly no ghost.’


I may be biased, but I confess to a strong impression that
the honours of the controversy remained, and remain,
with M’Quhae. As he pointed out, he had confined
himself to recording the facts of the matter — the events
and appearances which he had actually seen. Owen, not
content with distorting some of these facts into conformity
with his own theory —a totally unscientific proceeding —
had gone out of his way to assert, ex cathedra, that the
remaining facts were not, and could not be, such ; that
they had originated in excitement, or credulity, or pre-
conception, or in memories of Pontoppidan’s stories —a
series of imputations for which there was neither justifica-
tion nor excuse.

It must be remembered that Owen, although a great
man in many ways, with an almost superhuman capacity
for investigation and an unrivalled power of exposition,
yet gave, in the course of his long and brilliant career,
sufficient proofs of possessing a singular and not entirely
“ scientific’ type of mind.

His attack upon the Origin of Species — particularly
upon Darwin’s theory of man’s gradual evolution from
lower forms! — is a case in point. Coming forward as the
great scientific gun of the anti-Darwinians, he asserted,
with all the weight of his then-unrivalled authority, that
the brain of man possessed certain anatomical features —
such as a convolution named the hippocampus major — for
which no analogue could be found in the brain of any ape,


1 [n case a copy of this book ever finds its way to Tennessee, it may not
be superfluous to point out, yet once more, that Darwin never suggested
that Man evolved from a monkey ; but merely that both types had, not
improbably, a common (remote) ancestor.


PEENE RP PET ARRES a EE


H.M.S. “DAEDALUS, 1848 II9


and which afforded ample ground for classifying and
regarding the human species as a genus entirely apart
from all other mammals. This view was at once contro-
verted by Huxley ; who soon afterwards showed, by a
series of dissections, that such structures are common both
to man and to all the higher apes, and are not confined
even to these.

Many other instances of Owen's peculiar mentality
might be adduced: — for example, his exploded theory
that the human skull 1s a modified atlas vertebra — but
none, I think, more completely illustrates his prejudiced
attitude in the face of inconvenient truth. It is difficult
to believe that he did not know the anatomical facts of
the case ; it is still more difficult to believe that, if he knew
them, he should have forsworn his allegiance to scientific
truth for the sake of a temporary popularity among the
orthodox. Still, other great men have done the same.

In comparison with his attitude on the subject of
human origins, his views on the subject of the sea-serpent
are a comparatively small matter ; and with regard to the
latter no doubt many people, at the time, considered
quite justifiably that he had satisfactorily explained away
the ‘ creature’ seen by the Dedalus, and resolved it into
a sea-lion or sea-elephant. But not for long. Within a
few years, it became apparent that Owen's hypothesis had
quite failed to win any measure of acceptance among
naturalists in general. A most able writer, R. A. Proctor,
summed up the objections to it thus®:


ı In a former book of mine — Oddities (1928) — is an account of his
remarks upon the * Devil's Hoofmarks’ seen in Devonshire in 1855. In
effect, he flatly denied that the witnesses — persons of standing and in-
telligence — could possibly have seen what they reported.

2 In an essay entitled.‘ Strange Sea Creatures.’ See his Pleasant Ways
in Science, pp. 220, 221. Part of this essay appeared as an article in the
Echo, 15,1. 1877.


120 THE SEA-SERPENT


©... few, I imagine, can readily accept the belief that
Captain M'Quhae and his officers had mistaken a sea-
elephant for a creature such as they describe and
picture. To begin with, although it might be probable
enough that no one on board the Daedalus had ever seen
a gigantic seal freely swimming in the open ocean — a
sight which Professor Owen himself had certainly
never seen — yet we can hardly suppose they would
not have known a sea-elephant under such circum-
stances. Even if they had never seen a sea-elephant
at all, they would surely know what such an animal is
like. No one could mistake a sea-elephant for any
other living creature, even though his acquaintance
with the animal were limited to museum specimens or
pictures in books. ‘The supposition that the entire
animal, that 1s, its entire length, should be mistaken
for 30 or 40 feet of the length of a serpentine neck,
seems, in my judgment, as startling as the ingenious
theory thrown out by some naturalists when they first
heard of the giraffe — to the effect that some one of
lively imagination had mistaken the entire body of a
short-horned antelope for the neck of a much larger
animal !’


One might imagine that if so celebrated a naturalist
as Owen could find no more probable hypothesis than
his sea-elephant to cover the reported facts, lesser fry
would have been well advised to accept the existence
of some unknown creature— or to remain silently
sceptical.

Such, however, is by no means the case. Several other
theories have been advanced ; but it is only necessary
here to give two specimens — one possessing some merit,
the other devoid of it.


In his Sea Monsters Unmasked (1883) Henry Lee


H.M.S. “DEEDALUS, 1848 181


suggested his favourite explanation — the giant squid —
as satisfying the descriptions given by Captain M'Quhae
and his officers. He supported his views by a sketch
(see Fig. 9). Itis ingenious, but little more. A giant


FIG. 9.  LEE'S EXPLANATION OF THE ‘ D/EDALUS' " SEA-SERPENT


Re-drawn from Sea Monsters Unmasked.


squid, swimming on the surface, would advance in a series
of jerks as it expelled water from its impulse-tube ; and,
when so advancing, its arms would be trailing astern of it.
Contrast this with the steady, uniform motion, and the
serpentine head and neck, of the Dedalus’ creature.

It was reserved for the late F. T. Bullen* — a practical
seaman and a vivid writer, but no naturalist — to outdo


ı He had already advanced this explanation in the case of Egede's
monster. See p. 20.

2 Most authors, even the most eminent, commit an occasional blunder —
for example, Coleridge speaks of a star visible between the crescent moon's
horns ; Macaulay (who knew his Faerie Queeze almost by heart) refers to
the death of the Blatant Beast, whom Spenser left alive and kicking ;
Scott makes one of Richard I’s knights converse with a contemporary of
William the Conqueror; and Shakespeare's blunders in geography and
chronology are notorious. Still, it is something of a shock to find Bullen,
a deep-water sailor, writing a story in which the full moon rises at midnight
— and that not in a casual reference, but constituting the whole point of
the tale. This is almost equal to the famous moon of Haggard’s King
Solomon’s Mines (early editions), which was full one night, new next day
(when a solar eclipse, lasting over an hour, took place) and full again two
nights later !


122 i THE SEA-SERPENT |


Owen both in the improbability of his explanation and the
contempt which he exhibited towards M’Quhae and the
other witnesses. In a popular book called Creatures of the
Sea he devoted a chapter to a rather scathing review of
Oudemans’ Great Sea-Serpent—a task for which he


was quite unqualified — and decided, inter alia, that the


Dedalus’ monster was probably a rorqual, or ‘ sulphur-
bottom’ whale | Feeling that his readers might possibly
consider there were one or two points of difference
between a creature with a long serpentine neck fifteen
inches in diameter and a whale with an enormously broad
head merging and broadening into a body some fifteen
feet across — and that, at a distance of about a hundred
yards, these differences were not unlikely to have been
remarked — he casually added that he had never met a
sailor who could tell one kind of whale from another, or
describe it correctly ! I have always wondered why he
didn't suggest, while he was about it, that Captain
M’Quhae had “spliced the main-brace' shortly before


the sea-serpent was sighted. ^


In fairness, however, it should be pointed out that there


is a discrepancy in the Dzda/us evidence which, although
capable of explanation, does afford, at first sight, some
support to the theories advanced by Owen and even by
Bullen. The drawings accompanying M’Quhae’s report
in the Id/ustrated London News differ considerably from
the text of that report. M’Quhae described the creature
as being about sixty feet in visible length, with a neck
about fifteen inches in diameter behind the head, this
being held about four feet above the water. Now, if one
compares this description with Plates III and IV, it
becomes obvious that both of them give a most misleading
impression of the animal's girth — or, at least, . of the
visible portion's girth — in proportion to its length. In


ZET 'd 8w1vI]


gbgr ‘x ‘gz ‘SMIN wopuoT pop4jsnj] PYL, MOAT
"AI S81VId


LNHdWHMS-VHS .SÉYIVQW/G» AHL JO ONIAVSIG WHHIONV


E
—
=


I Sn
Imm


ee


Sa eR
i SES bmc R TE
2 ER EE
= SSS


=


US


uec


| H.M.S. ‘DEDALUS,’ 1848 123


Plate III, if we assume the neck behind the head to be
sixteen inches diameter, the top of the head will be about
four feet above water, as stated by M'Quhae. But in such
case the total length shown is only about eighteen feet —
not sixty. Similarly, Plate IV only shows abouteleven feet
. of the creature's length. "This abbreviation was probably
due to the need for making the scale of the drawings large
enough to show detail, and yet keeping their extent within
reasonable limits. Plate IIl, as it appeared in the
Illustrated London News, occupied the full width of a page;
the actual length of the creature's body, as shown, being
just over seven inches. Had the whole extent — sixty
feet — of the body been shown on the same scale, the
drawing would have had to be folded : it could not have
been got in even as a  double-page feature.’

The provenance of the drawings is not very clear.
M’Quhae, it will be remembered, speaks in his report of
having 4 drawing made, which he would transmit to the
Admiralty shortly. But three drawings were actually
published in the Z//ustrated London News, and M’Quhae
speaks of them as drawn, under his supervision, by ' the
artist employed ' — presumably, by the paper. It would
appear from this that none of the three was that which
originally went to the Admiralty. On the other hand, the
Admiralty minute speaks of the copyright of this drawing
as now ‘in the hands of the Editor of the J/ustrated
London News. It seems most likely that it was used as
the basis, atleast, of Plate IV.: Incidentally, lam inclined
to believe, although there 1s no direct evidence, that this


1 This shows the creature as it might have been seen from the ship,
whereas the viewpoint of Plate III is that of an imaginary observer in
another vessel. It is true that, both are wood-engravings, and that if
Plate III had been drawn direct on the block (as was often done) it
would have been reversed when printed — but in that case the Deda/us,
in the background, would have been shown on the wrong tack.


124 THE SEA-SERPENF


drawing was made by Sartoris.: But, in any case, it must
be remembered that the drawings, as evidence, have less
value than the statements. Anyone whose mind’s eye is
in reasonable working order, and who is not absolutely
tongue-tied, can be trusted to give or write down (soon
after the event) a reasonably accurate account of some
unusual appearance which he has witnessed. Butto make
an accurate drawing, from memory, is another matter
altogether, a task beyond the powers of all except a few
great artists.» In such circumstances the drawing —
I speak from my own slight experience — tends, as it
takes shape on the paper, to distort and confuse the
memory. ‘The parts first drawn have a very definite
influence on the remainder — the need of making the work
look complete induces guesswork as to points not clearly
noted at the time — and the final product, which must of
necessity have been prominently before the eye while it
was in the making, submerges and supersedes the original
mental image.

Such being the case, it is obvious that not much
reliance could be placed even on the original sketch made
by an eye-witness (who was, presumably, not a trained
artist) and ‘ worked up’ two months after the event.
Still less can one regard as trustworthy a version of that
sketch re-drawn by another hand, even under M’Quhae’s
supervision. A drawing done jointly by two artists would
have a rather singular appearance — what is to be said of
one in which the original guess-work of an unskilled


1 Gosse, in his Romance of Natural History (p. 349), assumed that all
three Z//ustrated London News drawings were made by Sartoris. I can
find no authority for this, and it.is contradicted by M’Quhae’s letter to
the paper.

* William Blake’s power of visual memory was most exceptional ; yet
even he sometimes found it impossible to produce a recognisable likeness,
from memory, of someone well known to him.


H.M.S. 'DAEDALUS,' 1848 125


draughtsman is revised and amplified by a professional
anxious to produce a striking drawing, and subject only
to the corrective of further suggestions and guess-work
supplied by a third party ?

Bearing in mind the untrustworthy nature of the
evidence afforded by the drawings, the flimsy basis of
Owen's theory becomes apparent. The characteristics —
“convex, moderately capacious cranium,’ ' short obtuse
muzzle,’ ‘ nostrils indicated . . . by a crescentic mark,’
and the rest — which he relies on as proving the creature
to be a ' warm-blooded mammal,’ and hence probably
a sea-elephant, are to be found in the drawings, and in
them only — there 1s no mention of such points in the
reports. Admittedly, it was unfortunate that M’Quhae
should have warmly commended drawings which differed
so widely from his written statement : still, as already
explained, it was not altogether unnatural — particularly
if (as is quite possible) he did not compare the two before
publication. If he took an active share in the making of
the drawings, it is quite on the cards that he gradually
came to believe that, when finished, they ‘ most faithfully ’
represented the appearance of his sea-serpent.'

Similarly, Bullen endeavoured to support his sugges-
tion that the creature was a rorqual whale by two sketches,
one being a version of Plate III, and the other showing
a rorqual in much the same general position. Even as
they stand, the resemblance is very small, but if Plate III
had not shown the creature as about one-third of its
correct length, in proportion to the diameter of its neck,
it would at once have been, seen that the theory was
preposterous.


1 Here, and elsewhere, I refer to Plates III and IV. Fig. 7 is, I am
convinced, enlarged from these by the /.L.N. artist, and has no value as
original evidence.


Scale of Ret. er


10


126 THE SEA-SERPENT


Fig. ro shows an attempted re-drawing of Plate IV
corrected for scale from M’Quhae’s report. I have
subjoined a suggestion of what the under-water portions -
of the creature looked like.


Temm emm rmm 7i


Cu


FIG. IO. THE ' DJEDALUS'' SEA-SERPENT
Drawn to scale from Capt. M’Quhae’s report.


Here I must leave the still-famous Dedalus case.
I submit that the evidence 1s good and clear, that the
probity of the witnesses is unquestionable, and that
their narratives are inexplicable except on one assump-
tion ; namely, that they saw a living creature of unknown


‚species.


Cu. V. FURTHER MISCELLANEOUS
REPORTS : 1848-1872 |


In this chapter I have brought together, in chronological
order, four reports which, while not comparable in
importance with that of H.M.S. Dedalus, are still of
considerable interest. "They relate to the creatures seen
from H.M.S. Plumper in 1848 (soon after the Dedalus
case), from the ship /mogen in 1856, from the Castilian in
1858, and from the cutter Leda in 1872.


H.M.S. * Plumper, 1848.

In its issue of April 14th, 1849, the Z/ustrated London
News published the following letter, accompanied by
a sketch (Fig. 11):


* H.M.S. Plumper, Portsmouth Harbour,
* April 10, 1849.

* Not having seen a sketch of the extraordinary creature
we passed between England and Lisbon, and being
requested by several gentlemen to send you the rough
one I made at the time, I shall feel much obliged by
your giving it publicity in your instructive and
amusing columns.'

*On the morning of the 31st December, 1848, in
lat. 41? 13' N. and long. 12? 31' W., being nearly due
west of Oporto, I saw a long black creature with
a sharp head, moving slowly, I should think about two
knots, through the water, in the north westerly direction,
there being a fresh breeze at the time, and some sea on.
I could not ascertain its exact length, but its back was
about twenty feet 1f not more above water ; and its


ı Misprinted * olumns.’
127


128 THE SEA-SERPENT


head, as near as I could judge, from six to eight. I
had not time to make a closer observation, as the ship
was going six knots through the water, her head E.
half S., and wind S.S.E.
*'The creature moved across our wake towards a
merchant barque on our lee-quarter, and on the port
tack. I was in hopes she would have seen it also.
The officers and men who saw it, and who have
served in parts of the world adjacent to whale and
seal fisheries, and have seen them in the water, declare
they have neither seen nor heard of any creature
bearing the slightest resemblance to the one we saw.
* There was something on its back that appeared like
a mane, and, as it moved through the water, kept
washing about; but before I could examine it more
closely, it was too far astern.
‘I remain, yours very truly,
“A Navar OFFICER.’

[We have engraved our correspondent’s sketch,’
which coincides with one forwarded to the Lords of
the Admiralty previous to the return of H.M.S.
Plumper.—Ed.)


Being unsigned, this story does not carry very much
weight — on the other hand, it is not likely to have been
a hoax. It appeared before the public interest and
excitement over the Dedalus case had been forgotten, and
if a hoax had been perpetrated in the name of another of
H.M. ships it is most improbable that it would have
escaped detection for more than a very short time.

I have examined the P/umper'slog. Like that of the
Dedalus, it contains no reference to the incident. ‘This


1 I.e. bearing about N.W. from the Plumper.


*See Fig. rr. Ihave not succeeded in finding the Admiralty copy of
this sketch - it has probably been ‘ weeded.’


6vg1 "At HI SMAN uopuoT partazstg;y ow WOT


LNAIdAIS-VAS ¿ SATINATA |, SWH- “II “Old


129


130 THE SEA-SERPENT


presumably occurred between 9 a.m. and noon. The
noon portion is given as 40° 55’ N., 12° 34’ W. (by
observation). The position given in the letter (probably
jotted down approximately from memory, and „nôt
verified by the log) does not agree well with ihe hip
run between daylight and noon, and therefore does not
enable the time of the encounter to be determined : but
at 9 a.m. the log records ' One sail in sight N.W.' —
presumably the ' merchant barque' referred to. The
weather is logged as cloudy, and the wind strong (it
blew up into a gale the same afternoon?) The officers `
of the morning and forenoon watches — one of whom,
probably, wrote the letter — were respectively Lieutenant
Trevenen P. Coode, R.N., and Mr. Robert B. Batt,
Acting-Master, R.N.

The sketch is reminiscent of the Z//ustrated London
News’ Daedalus drawings, which had appeared before
the P/umper left England ; it is quite possible that it is
entirely independent of them, but one cannot assume this.
I imagine that the phrase '. . . its back was about
twenty feet if not more above water' does not mean
exactly what 1t says, for if the back, in the sketch, were
twenty feet out of water the head would be about a
hundred. I read it as equivalent to *. . . about twenty
feet or more of its back were above water, and, as near
as I could judge, from six to eight of its head’ (“and
neck,’ presumably).


* Imogen,’ 1856.
Ever since the Dzdalus case, the JJustrated London
News has shown a praiseworthy readiness to give space to
1 It is then logged as force 9 (10 being a hurricane). The log is full of
entries relating to reefs taken in, tackle and spars carried away, and


Government stores lost overboard. It must have been an unpleasant
(Sunday) afternoon, and a cheerless ending to the year.


FURTHER MISCELLANEOUS REPORTS 131


similar reports. Between 1848 and 1877 (the date of the
Osborne case) for example, it published ten such, includ-
ing that of the Plumper, already given, and the following ::


^ . ‘Imogen, Channel, 15th April, 1856.
* Sif We beg to hand you the inclosed sketch? of a
Sea-Serpent we had the good fortune to sight on the
3oth March last.
* Imogen, from Algoa Bay, towards London. Sunday
3oth March, 1856. Lat. 29 deg. 11 min. N. ; Long,
S4 dep. 36*7mim-W. s bar. 30.50 ; calm and clear.
Four vessels visible to southward and westward.
* About five minutes past eleven, a.m., the helmsman
drew our attention to something moving through the
water, and causing a strong ripple about 400 yards
distant from our starboard quarter.
“In a few moments it became more distinct, present-
ing the appearance represented in Fig. 1,* and showing
an apparent length of about forty feet (above the surface
of the sea), the undulations of the water extending on
each side to a considerable distance in its wake. Mr.
Statham immediately ascended to the maintopsail-
yard, Captain Guy and Mr. Harries watching the
animal from the deck with the telescope.
“ After passing the ship about half-a-mile, the serpent
* rounded to” and raised its head, seemingly to look
at us (Fig. 2), and then steered away to the northward
(N.E.), possibly to the neighbourhood of the Western
Islands, * frequently lifting its head (Fig. 3). We traced
its course until nearly on the horizon, from the topsail-
yard, and lost sight of it fromdeck about r 1h. 4 5 m. a.m.
* No doubt remained on our minds as to its being an
immense snake, as the undulations of its body were
1 Illustrated London News, 3, v. 1856. 3 See Fig. 12.
2 These reference numbers will be found in Fig. 12.


* The Azores, distant about 600 miles north-eastward.
^


FIG. I2. THE °IMOGEN’S” SEA-SERPENT


Re-drawn from the Z//ustrated London News, 3, v. 1856
Norte. — The sketch in the circle is intended to show the same aspect of the
creature as the sketch numbered 1, but seen through a telescope.

132


FURTHER MISCELLANEOUS REPORTS 133


clearly perceptible, although we were unable to dis-
tinguish its eyes. The weather being fine and the
glassy surface of the sea only occasionally disturbed by
slight flaws (catspaws) of wind we had a perfect oppor-
tunity of noticing its movements.
“In conformity to your regulations we inclose our
references, and remain,
* Sir, your obedient servants,

* James Guy, Commander.

‘J. H. SrATHAM,

< JuLıan B. Harries,

‘D. J. Wırrıamson, Passengers.’


Although having no great pretensions to artistic merit,
the figures are clear, and supplement the account admir-
ably. No. 2, showing the creature 'rounding to,'
combines, to my mind, the idea of vertical undulation
with horizontal curvature as well as this could be done in
a few lines.
Castilian, 1857.
The following letter appeared in The Times, February
4th, 1858.
Sir, —
“I beg to enclose you a copy of an extract from the
meteorological journal kept by me on board the ship
Castilian on a voyage from Bombay to Liverpool.
I have sent the original to the Board of Trade, for
whom the observations have been made during my
last voyage. I am glad to confirm a statement made
by the commander of Her Majesty’s ship Daedalus
some years ago as to the existence of such an animal
as that described by him. I remain, Sir, your obedient
servant *G. H. HARRINGTON, .
* 14 and 141, South Castle-Street, Liverpool,' Feb. 2.


1 I cannot quite follow this reasoning, and suspect a zoz-sequitur.


Ks


134 THE SEA-SERPENT


It may be noted here that, at this date, the Meteorological
Department of the Board of Trade (now merged into the
Meteorological Office) had not long been founded,: and
that, for the purpose of accumulating data, it had offered
to supply meteorological instruments to any captain of
a British merchant-vessel who would undertake to record
his observations in a log (also supplied) and return this to
the Department at the end of the voyage. The appear-
ance of a strange sea-creature is not, strictly speaking, a
meteorological phenomenon ; I imagine that Captain
Harrington welcomed the chance of making an official
record of the event elsewhere than in the ship's log — a
proceeding which might, possibly, involve him in trouble
with his owners. Here is his account.


* Copy of an Extract from the Board of Trade Meteoro-
logical Journal kept by Captain Harrington, of the
ship Castilian, from Bombay for Liverpool.

* Ship Castilian, Dec. 12, 1857, north-east end of St.
Helena, bearing north-west, distance 10 miles.

* At 6 30 p.m., strong breezes and cloudy, ship sailing
about 12 miles per hour. While myself and officers
were standing on the lee side of the poop, looking
towards the island, we were startled by the sight of a
huge marine animal which reared its head out of the
water within 20 vards of the ship, when it suddenly
disappeared for about half a minute, and then made its
appearance in the same manner again, showing us dis-
tinctly its neck and head about 10 or 12 feet out of the
water.

“Its head was shaped like a long nun buoy,? and I
suppose the diameter to have been seven or eight feet
in the largest part, with a kind of scroll, or tuft of


1 It was started in 1854, under Admiral FitzRoy.
* A buoy formed of two cones, united at their bases.


FURTHER MISCELLANEOUS REPORTS 135


loose skin, encircling it about two feet from the top ;
the water was discoloured for several hundred feet from
its head, so much so that on its first appearance, my
impression was that the ship was in broken water,
produced, as I supposed, by some volcanic agency
since the last time I passed the island, but the second
appearance completely dispelled those fears, and
assured us that it was a monster of extraordinary
length, which appeared to be moving slowly towards
the land.
* The ship was going too fast to enable us to reach the
mast-head in time to form a correct estimate of its
extreme length, but from what we saw from the deck
we conclude that it must have been over 200 feet long.
The boatswain and several of the crew who observed
it from the topgallant forecastle: state that it was more
than double the length of the ship, in which case it
must have been 500 feet ; be that as it may, I am con-
vinced that it belonged to the serpent tribe ; it was of
a dark colour about the head, and was covered with
several white spots. Having a press of canvass on the
ship at the time, I was unable to round to without
risk, and therefore was precluded from getting another
sight of this leviathan of the deep.

€ GEORGE Henry Harrincton, Commander.

* WiLLIAM Davies, Chief Officer.

‘Epwarp WHEELER, Second Officer.’


Captain Harrington’s letter elicited an immediate and
somewhat peculiar reply—in the shape of an attack
directed impartially upon himself and Captain M’Quhae.
In The Times of 12, ii. 1858, there appeared a letter from
a brother merchant-skipper, Captain Frederic Smith.


1 I.e. a forecastle rising, like a poop, above the level of the ship’s middle
portion.


156 THE SEA-SERPENT


‘In your paper of the sth: inst. is a letter from Captain .
Harrington, of the ship Castilian, stating his belief
that he had seen the great sea serpent near St. Helena.
His confidence is strengthened from the fact of
something similar having been seen by Her Majesty’s
ship Daedalus near the same position. The following
circumstance, which occurred on board the ship Pekin,
then belonging to Messrs. T. & W. Smith, on her
passage from Moulmein, may be of some service
respecting this “ queer fish.”

‘On December the 28th, 1848, being then in lat.
26 S., long. 6 E., nearly calm, ship having only steerage
way, saw about half-a-mile on port beam a very extra-
ordinary-looking thing in the water of considerable
length. With the telescope we could plainly discern
a huge head and neck, covered with a long shaggy-
looking kind of mane, which it kept lifting at intervals
out of the water. This was seen by all hands and
declared to be the great sea-serpent.

“I determined on knowing something about it, and
accordingly lowered a boat, in which my chief officer
and four men went, taking with them a long small line
in case it should be required.* I watched them very
anxiously, and the monster seemed not to regard their
approach. At length they got close to the head. They
seemed to hesitate, and then busy (sic) themselves
with the line, the monster all the time ducking its
head, and showing its great length. Presently the boat
began pulling towards the ship, the monster following
slowly.


1 This should have been ‘the 4th.’


* One would have thought that if Captain Smith really believed he was
sending a boat's crew, like Jonah, into the jaws ofa formidable sea-monster,
he would have done better to equip them with offensive weapons. ‘ Canst
thou draw out leviathan with an hook ? or his tongue with a cord which thou
lettest down ??


FURTHER MISCELLANEOUS REPORTS 137


“In about half-an-hour they got alongside ; a tackle

was got on the mainyard, and it: was hoisted on board.
It appeared somewhat supple when hanging, but so
completely covered with snaky-looking barnacles
about eighteen inches long, that we had it some time
on board before it was discovered to be a piece of
gigantic seaweed, 20 feet long, and 4 inches diameter ;
the root end of which appeared when in the water like
the head of the animal, and the motion given by the
sea caused it to seem alive. In a few days it dried up
to a hollow tube, and as it had a rather offensive smell
was thrown overboard.
“I had only been a short time in England when the
Daedalus arrived and reported having seen the great
sea-serpent — to the best of my recollection near the
same locality, and which I have no doubt was a piece of
the same weed. So like a huge living monster did this
appear, that had circumstances prevented my sending
a boat to it I should certainly have believed I had
seen the great sea snake.’


Captain Smith's recollection was not very good. The
Dedalus had arrived in England, and ‘ reported having
seen the great sea-serpent,’ on October 4th — nearly three
months before he hoisted in his piece of seaweed. His
encounter with this, however, was confirmed by an
earlier report of a very similar occurrence. A now-extinct
London daily, the Sur, published on July 9th, 1849, a
story very closely resembling Captain Smith’s.* By this
account, Captain Herriman, of the ship Brazilian, found
his vessel becalmed, on February 24th, 1849, in about


1 The ‘ monster ’ — not the main yard, or the tackle.
* Probably Lepas antifera.
* Republished in the Zoo/ogist, 1849, pp. 2541, 2542.


138 THE SEA-SERPENT


26° S, 8° E.: ; and perceived, about 8 a.m., an object
about half a mile to the westward, some thirty feet long
and moving with a ‘ sinuous motion.’ He armed himself
with a harpoon; and, manning a boat, proceeded to investi-
gate it. He discovered it to be an enormous piece of sea-
weed, evidently detached from a coral reef—the root,
which had appeared to be the head of an animal, still
having pieces of coral adhering to it. He hoisted it in, but
it decayed, and had to be jettisoned.

The accounts given by Smith and Herriman are so
singularly alike that one might be pardoned for thinking
that one was copied from the other. That two captains
of merchant vessels should both be becalmed at about
the same spot, in the same season (southern summer,
1848-9) ; that both should sight, on each occasion about
half a mile away, something which both took to be a sea-
creature ; that both should send a boat to it ; that both
should discover it to be a piece of seaweed ; that
both should hoist it on board ; and, finally, that both
should jettison it before reaching England - is, certainly,
a very remarkable string of coincidences. But I do not
suggest that it is more : nor do I think that there was
any real animus behind Smith's letter — although, in view
of the saying ' two of a trade can never agree,'* he may
not exactly have been averse from putting a spoke in a
colleague's wheel.

It is quite likely that Herriman and Smith honestly

1 The 8uz's account, written no doubt with an eye to effect, stated that
this position was *. . . about forty miles from the place where Captain
M'Quhae, R.N., is said to have seen the great sea serpent Actually,


this position (obviously given in round figures only) is about 120 miles
S.W. from M’Quhae’s, and that of the Pekin about 210 miles W.S.W.

_ * Or, to quote Mr. A. E. W. Mason’s hero, the great Hanaud — * What
is the strongest passion in the world?  Avarice? Love? Hatred?


None of these things. It is the passion of one public official to take a great
big club and hit his brother official on the back of the head."


FURTHER MISCELLANEOUS REPORTS 139


considered themselves justified, on the basis of their own
experiences, in believing that they had satisfactorily
explained away the Dedalus and Castilian sea-serpents.
But if so, they walked in a vain show. As regards the
Dedalus case, Smith was promptly answered by ‘ An
Officer of H.M.S. Dedalus,’ whose letter has already
‘been quoted. As he pointed out, no one in his right
senses could have mistaken a drifting piece of seaweed
for *a living animal, moving rapidly through the water
against a cross sea, and within five points of a fresh
breeze, with such velocity that the water was surging
under its chest as it passed along. He was seconded
by Harrington, who took up the cudgels with alacrity.
Here are some extracts from his reply to Smith: :


*I could no more be deceived than (as a seaman)
I could mistake a porpoise for a whale. If it had been
at a great distance it would have been different ; but
it was not above 20 yards from the ship. . . .

“I am informed by Messrs. Lamport and Holt,
shipowners of this place,* that one of their captains
reported a similar thing about two years ago, off the
Island of St. Helena ; but they took no further notice
of it, supposing . . . that he might have been
deceived.

‘ Twenty people, including Mrs. Harrington and my
two officers, saw it as distinctly as I now see the gas
light which I am writing by. I am well known in
London, having commanded a steam transport during
the Russian war. . ..

‘Captain Claxton, R.N., of the Priory, Battersea, is
a personal friend of mine. I am also well known to
Sir Colin Campbell, who is now in the East.* My


! See p. IOI. 2 The Times, 16,1. 1858.
® Liverpool. * As C.-in-C., India, during the Mutiny.


140 THE SEA-SERPENT


present ship is 1,064 tons new measurement, and
a new ship, of which I own a good part myself. There
are therefore many reasons (in addition to my holding
a first-class certificate in the mercantile marine) to
hinder me from propagating a report which can do me
no good, and, if untrue, do injury to science in the
room of assisting it to elicit the truth in so important
a matter as the discovery of the inhabitants of the
deep.’


He concludes with an intimation that he will shortly
be in London for a few days, and will be glad to meet
anyone who is interested in the subject. But although
this offer was backed up by a letter from no less a per-
sonage than the Secretary to the Admiralty,' suggesting
that. . . it might be worth the while of some of our
philosophers to examine a little into the question of what
Captain Harrington and his officers really did see,'* it
appears to have fallen on deaf ears. Smith made, or rather
attempted, a reply to his three adversaries in The Times
of 23, ii. 1858 — itis not worth quoting —and the con-
troversy ended.

That weed such as was met with by the Brazilian and
the Pekin may, when seen only at a distance, have given
rise to one or two sea-serpent stories is unquestionable ;
but to regard it as the foundation of the Dzda/us and
Castilian reports is an abuse of one's intelligence. One
could as easily imagine an Income-tax collector being
mistaken for a philanthropist.


1 Rear-Admiral W. A. B. Hamilton. In those days, and even later, it
was not unusual for a naval officer to hold what is now one of the jealously
guarded plums of the Civil Service. The last, and one of the best, of the
naval Secretaries was Sir George Tryon, afterwards drowned in the
Victoria.


! The Times, same day.


FURTHER MISCELLANEOUS REPORTS I4I
(Leda, 1872.


The following clear and detailed account of a sea-
creature seen in the Sound of Sleat, between Skye and
the mainland, in August, 1872, is taken from the
Zoologist of May, 1873.: Unfortunately, some of the
witnesses desired that their names might not appear in
print ; but those of the joint authors of the account are
available.


* Appearance of an Animal, believed to be that which is
called the Norwegian Sea Serpent, on the Western Coast
of Scotland, in August, 1872. By the Rev. Joun
Macraz, Minister of Glenelg, Inverness-shire, and
the Rev. Davip Tworeny, Vicar of Stockbury, Kent.
“On the 2oth of August, 1872, we started from
Glenelg? in a small cutter, the “ Leda,” for an ex-
cursion to Lochourn.* Our party consisted, besides
ourselves, of two ladies, F. and K., a gentleman,
G. B.,* and a Highland lad. Our course lay down
the Sound of Sleat, which on that side divides the
Isle of Skye from the mainland, the average breadth
of the channel in that part being two miles. It was
calm and sunshiny, not a breath of air, and the sea
perfectly smooth.

‘As we were getting the cutter along with oars we
perceived a dark mass about two hundred yards
astern of us, to the north. While we were looking at
it with our glasses (we had three on board) another
similar black lump rose to the left of the first, leaving
an interval between ; then another and another


ı Pp. 3517-22 of the volume for 1873.

i See Fig. 13.

* More usually written Loch Hourn.

* From a later report it appears that these were Miss Forbes Macrae,
Miss Kate Macrae, and Mr. Gilbert Bogle.


MAINLAND OF X
SCOTLAND =


STAN


5440W..


IGALE OF NAUTICAL MILES
4


FIG. I3. SOUND OF SLEAT AND LOCH ALSH


142


FURTHER MISCELLANEOUS REPORTS 143


followed, all in regular order. We did not doubt its
being one living creature : it moved slowly across our
wake, and disappeared. Presently the first mass,
which was evidently the head, reappeared, and was
followed by the rising of the other black lumps, as
before. Sometimes three appeared, sometimes four,
five, or six, and then sank again. When they rose,
the head appeared first, if it had been down, and the
lumps rose after it in regular order, beginning always
with that next the head, and rising gently ; but when


FIG. I4. SEA-SERPENT SEEN BY THE ‘LEDA, 1872
From The Zoologist, May 1873


they sank they sank all together rather abruptly,
sometimes leaving the head visible.

‘It gave the impression of a creature crooking up its
back to sun itself. There was no appearance of
undulation ; when the lumps sank, other lumps did
not rise in the intervals between them. The greatest
number we counted was seven, making eight with the
head, as shown in the sketch No. ı.: The parts were
separated from each other by intervals of about their
own length, the head being rather smaller and flatter
than the rest, and the nose being very slightly visible


ı See Fig. 14.


144. THE SEA-SERPENT


above the water ; but we did not see the head raised
above the surface either this or the next day, nor could
we see the eye. We had no means of measuring the
length with any accuracy ; but taking the distance
from the centre of one lump to the centre of the next
to be six feet, and it could scarcely be less, the whole
length of the portion visible, including the intervals
submerged, would be forty-five feet.


‘ Presently, as we were watching the creature, it began
to approach us rapidly, causing a great agitation in the
sea. Nearly the whole of the body, if not all of it,
had now disappeared, and the head advanced at a great
rate in the midst of a shower of fine spray, which was
evidently raised in some way by the quick movement
of the animal, — it did not appear how, — and not by
spouting. F. was alarmed and retreated to the cabin,
crying out that the creature was coming down upon us.
When within about a hundred yards of us it sank and
moved away in the direction of Skye, just under the
surface of the water, for we could trace its course by
the waves it raised on the still sea to the distance of ©
a mile or more. After this it continued at intervals to
show itself, careering about at a distance, as long as
we were in that part of the Sound, the head and a small
part only of the body being visible on the surface ; but
we did not again on that day see it so near nor so well
as at first. At one time F. and K. and G. B. saw a fin
sticking up at a little distance back from the head, but
neither of us were then observing.


* On our return the next day we were again becalmed
on the north side of the opening of Lochourn, where
it is about three miles wide, the day warm and sunshiny
as before. As we were dragging slowly along in the
afternoon the creature again appeared over towards
the south side, at a greater distance than we saw it the


FURTHER MISCELLANEOUS REPORTS 145


first day. It now showed itself in three or four rather
long lines, as in the sketch No. 2,: and looked con-
siderably longer than it did the day before ; as nearly
as we could compute, it looked at least sixty feet in
length. Soon it began careering about, showing but
a small part of itself, as on the day before, and appeared
to be going up Lochourn.

* Later in the afternoon, when we were still becalmed in
the mouth of Lochourn, and by using the oars had
nearly reached the island of Sandaig, it came rushing
past us about a hundred and fifty yards to the south,
on its return from Lochourn. It went with great
rapidity, its black head only being visible through the
clear sea, followed by a long trail of agitated water.
As it shot along, the noise of its rush through the water
could be distinctly heard on board. "There were no
organs of motion to be seen, nor was there any shower
of spray as on the day before, but merely such a com-
motion in the sea as its quick passage might be
expected to make. Its progress was equable and
smooth, like that of a log towed rapidly.

* For the rest of the day, as we worked our way home
northwards through the Sound of Sleat, it was
occasionally within sight of us until nightfall, rushing
about at a distance, as before, and showing only its
head and a small part of its body on the surface. It
seemed on each day to keep about us, and as we were
always then rowing, we were inclined to think it might
perhaps be attracted by the measured sound of the
oars. Its only exit in this direction to the north was
by the narrow Strait of Kylerhea, dividing Skye from
the mainland, and only a third of a mile wide, and we
left our boat, wondering whether this strange creature
had gone that way or turned back again to the south.


1 See Fig. 14.


146 THE SEA-SERPENT


‘ We have only to add to this narration of what we saw
ourselves the following instances of its being seen by
other people, of the correctness of which we have no
doubt :— l

‘The ferrymen on each side at Kylerhea saw it pass
rapidly through on the evening of the 21st, and heard
the rush of the water: they were surprised, and
thought it might be a shoal of porpoises, but could
not comprehend their going so quickly. Finlay
Macrae, of Bundaloch, in the parish of Kintail, was
within the mouth of Lochourn on the 21st, with other
men in his boat, and saw the creature at about the
distance of one hundred and fifty yards.

‘Two days after we saw it, Alexander Macmillan, -
boat-builder at Dornie, was fishing in a boat in the
entrance of Lochduich, halfway between Druidag and
Castledonan, when he saw the animal, near enough
to hear the noise and see the ripple it made in rushing
along in the sea. He says that what seemed its head
was followed by four or more lumps, or ''half-
rounds " as he calls them, and that they sometimes
rose and sometimes sank all together. He estimated
its length at not less than between sixty and eighty feet.
He saw it also on two subsequent days in Lochduich.
On all these occasions his brother Farquhar was with
him in the boat, and they were both much alarmed
and pulled to the shore in great haste.

* A lady at Duisdale, in Skye, a place overlooking the
part of the Sound which is opposite the opening of
Lochourn, said that she was looking out with a glass
when she saw a strange object on the sea which
appeared like eight seals in a row. This was just
about the time that we saw it.

* We were also informed that about the same time it
was seen from the island of Eigg, between Eigg and


FURTHER MISCELLANEOUS REPORTS 147


the mainland, about twenty miles to the south-west of
the opening of Lochourn.
€ . . . .
We have not permission to mention the names in
these two last instances.
Joun MacraAE
Davip Twopeny.”


To this very clear and specific report, Mr. Twopeny
added a postscript, as follows :


*P.S. The writers of the above account scarcely
expect the public to believe in the existence of the
creature which they saw. Rather than that, they look
for the disbelief and ridicule to which the subject
always gives rise, partly on account of the animal
having. been pronounced to be a snake, without any
sufficient evidence, but principally. because of the
exaggerations and fables with which the whole subject
is beset. Nevertheless they consider themselves bound
to leave a record of what they saw, in order that
naturalists may receive it as a piece of evidence, or not,
according to what they think it is worth.

* The animal will very probably turn up on these coasts
again,: and it will be always in that '' dead season "
| So convenient to editors of newspapers, for it is never
seen but in the still warm days of summer or early
autumn.?

* There is a considerable probability that it has visited
the same coasts before. In the summer of 1871 some
large creature was seen for some time rushing about
in Lochduich, but it did not show itself sufficiently for
any one to ascertain what it was. Also some years
back a well-known gentleman of the west coast, now
living, was crossing the Sound of Mull, from Mull to


1 It did. See p. 184. 5 See p. 5.


148 THE SEA-SERPENT


the mainland, “ on a very calm afternoon, when," as
he writes, “ our attention was attracted to a monster
which had come to the surface not more than fifty
yards from our boat. It rose without causing the
slightest disturbance of the sea, or making the slightest
noise, and floated for some time on the surface, but
without exhibiting its head or tail, showing only the
ridge of the back, which was not that of a whale, or
any other sea animal that I had ever seen. The back
appeared sharp and ridge-like, and in colour very dark,
indeed black, or almost so. It rested quietly for a few
minutes, and then dropped quietly down into the
deep, without causing the slightest agitation. I should
say that above forty feet of it, certainly not less,
appeared on the surface.

“It should be noticed that the inhabitants of that
western coast are quite familiar with the appearance
of whales, seals and porpoises, and when they see them
they recognise them at once. Whether the creature
which pursued Mr. Maclean's boat off the island of
Coll in 1808, and of which there is an account in the
* Transactions of the Wernerian Society” (vol. I.
P. 442)‘, was one of these Norwegian animals, it is
not easy to say. Survivors who knew Mr. Maclean
say that he could quite be relied on for truth.

‘The public are not likely to believe in the creature
till it is caught, and that does not seem likely to happen
just yet, for a variety of reasons, — one reason being that
it has, from all the accounts given of it, the power of
moving very rapidly. On the 20th, while we were
becalmed in the mouth of Lochourn, a steam launch
slowly passed us, and, as we watched it, we reckoned
its rate at five or six miles an hour. When the animal
rushed past us on the next day at aboutthe same distance,


3
1 For Mr. Maclean’s account of this creature, see p. 250.


FURTHER MISCELLANEOUS REPORTS I49


and when we were again becalmed nearly in the same
place, we agreed that it went quite twice as fast as the
steamer, and we thought that its rate could not be less
than ten or twelve miles an hour. It might be shot,
but would probably sink. . . .

‘It should be mentioned that when wesaw this creature
and made our sketches of it we had never seen Pontop-
pidan's * Natural History ” or his print of the Nor-
wegian sea-serpent, which has a most striking resem-
blance to the first of our own sketches. Considering
the great body of reasonable Norwegian evidence,
extending through a number of years, which remains
after setting aside fables and exaggerations, it seems
surprising that no naturalist of that country had ever
applied himself to make out something about the
animal. In the meantime, as the public will most
probably be dubious about quickly giving credit to
our account, the following explanations are open to
them, all of which have been proposed to me, viz : —
porpoises, lumps of seaweed, empty herring-barrels,
bladders, logs of wood, waves of the sea, and inflated
pig-skins ; but as all these theories present to our
minds greater difficulties than the existence of the
animal itself, we feel obliged to decline them.

* D. Tworeny.’


In Land and Water for September 1872 there appeared
an earlier account of tliis appearance, also written by
Mr. Twopeny. The following extracts are taken from
this account :


* When first we saw it, it was going on at a very leisurely
rate, and we saw it capitally, when it suddenly turned
and came towards us, but when about 100 yards (as
Mr. M.: computed, and he is a very accurate observer),


-


! Macrae.


Ls


150 THE SBA-SERPENS


it turned off. It was never nearer to us than this. They
were getting the cutter on with sweeps: both days ;
and it repeatedly came towards us, as if attracted by the
rowing. Once on the second day it rushed along at a
great rate, scarcely any of it visible, but making a
tremendous rush through the water, and the noise was
quite audible on board, the sea being quite still, and no
wind. As to the size, it must be a good deal guesswork,
but if one of the convolutions was six feet (and I can
hardly think they could be less) and the intervals
between the same, and six feet under water at the tail, -
it would be ninety-six feet. . . .

* When I saw it the second day a good way off in the
opening of Loch Hourn, I thought that if there was a
vessel of that length it would be a large one. From that
point it was on the second day more or less in sight of
us till dusk, going on northwards, as we were going,
towards the Kyle Rhea, Skye Ferry: ; and we heard
the next day that it passed the ferry with a rushing
sound, which was heard by the people on shore. The
creature is totally different from the animal which
Captain McQuhae saw in 1848. .. . There is scarcely
a probability that this is a serpent. I imagine it raises
its back to sun itself, and then straightens itself to go
quick. As it was approaching us at the nearest, I
plainly saw the sea running off its back and the back of
its head, as it does from a low flat rock which has been
submerged by a wave. ...

'Mr. M., who is a great naturalist, is greatly in-
terested about the creature. He has all his life been
going about on these seas, but never saw or heard (sic)


anything of the kind before. He knew Mr. Maclean,


1 Large oars.


* I.e. the ferry between Kylerhea and the nearest point of Skye, about
700 yards distant.


FURTHER MISCELLANEOUS REPORTS ISI


- the minister of Eigg, who saw it off Coll in June, 1805,
and says he was quite a man to be believed. They well
know all the sea creatures here, and say there is not the
slightest resemblance in them to this animal ; and I
have seen porpoises repeatedly, and very different
they are...

‘A word more about “the beast," as we call it here.
F. thought that the tumult of the water about the neck
was caused by a mane lashing about, and it might well
have been that, as far as the appearance of the water
went, but I saw no mane. The head appeared flattish,
and 1 saw distinctly under the chin, as shown in the
sketch.®... We could not see the eye. Mr. M. says,
very truly, that I shall get the curves more accurately
by drawing the whole of the curves, under water and
all. In the sketch they are mis-shapen, and a little too
high. These convolutions rose easily, and not with a
jerk — sometimes three, then four — always one after
the other, lying next the head. The largest number I
counted was six. Mr. M., who is very accurate, at one
time counted eight, including the head.

* On the second day, in the latter part of the day, as we
were going home in the Sound of Sleat, and the beast at
a distance, going about and about, but still the same
way, two of our party were both positive that they saw
a back fin stick up, when not a very great part of the
creature was visible. I did not see it, for I was per-
fectly tired out, and no longer observing. If the fin
exists, it must at other times have been in one of the
submerged parts. . .. The first day Mr. Lillingstone’s
large schooner yacht was becalmed all day in the Sound
with us, that is, from one to two miles off, and I think
the people on board must have seen it. They had with


1 This should be June 1808.
1 A slightly elaborated version of No. 1, Fig. 14.


152 THE SEA-SERPENT


them a steam launch, a noisy concern, with which they
were always going about, and that may have kept it off.
* At the distance we saw it the colour appeared black.
When the beast was first seen, Kate M. said that the
dark ridges were waves caused by the motion of the
animal, such as might be in the wake of a steamer, but
she soon abandoned this opinion, and was satisfied, as
I looked at it, that this was perfectly impossible. The
creature was to the north of us, opposite to the sun,
which was shining strongly at half-past twelve. No
wave could have looked like that on the light side, with
the sun shining upon it ; nor do I believe a wave could
have been nearly so black with the sun shining behind
it. The moment the least fragment appeared, it looked
inky black, like the head, as dark as a black slug, and
totally different from anything in the water, and I was
quite sure that no wave, even in shadow, could have
looked like that.

‘The next evening we had a ripple in the still sea in
long dark lines between us and the sun. I was curious
to see how far the creature would have been deeper in
tone than these lines if he had passed among them then;
but the only time he appeared just then was when he
passed with an audible rush ; scarcely any part of him
was visible, and that had water rushing over it.:
Throughout, whenever he appeared, there was the.
same blackness, like a black slug, different from any-
thing around. . . .'


I have not been able to trace any published accounts of
the appearances here given as hearsay evidence ; those at
Kylerhea, Duisdale, Lochduich, etc. "There seems no


1 This rather suggests a celebrated entry in the complaints-book of a
Dublin club : * The hot water in the lavatory was cold to-day, and more-
over there was none of it.’


FURTHER MISCELLANEOUS REPORTS 153


reason to doubt that they occurred substantially as
reported.


Several other accounts of the Loch Hourn creature
are extant— I have only given those which I regard .
as the best and fullest. A short narrative by Mr.
Macrae appeared in the Inverness Courier (August
1872) ; Oudemans gives two others, received from the
Misses Macrae: ; and one by Bogle was published in
the Newcastle Weekly Chronicle.» He estimates the
creature’s visible length at sixty feet, and regards the
succession of humps seen as being protuberances on the
back of a 'lizard-shaped reptile. He did not notice
any eye or mouth,* although watching the creature
through binoculars (the Leda had three pairs on
board). He emphasises that he is perfectly familiar
with the appearance and habits of whales, seals, por-
poises, &c., and that the creature seen by himself and
his party bore no resemblance to any of these.

1 Both of these are short, and one unimportant, while the other (Miss
K. Macrae's) chiefly refers to two sketches which Oudemans does not
reproduce. She states, however, that on one occasion, when the crea-


ture was about a mile off, she saw a triangular fin sticking up from it,
which she estimated to be ten feetin height; See The Great Sea-Serpent,
PP- 578, 579.

ESI xd, 1877.

*Capt. Dean makes the same remark about Hilary’s sea-serpent
(1917).- See p. 215.


Gre Vi,
H.M.S. ‘OSBORNE, 1877


In June 1877, Commander H. L. Pearson, R.N., com-
manding the Royal Yacht Osborne, transmitted to the
Admiralty a report relating to a ‘ Sea Monster seen off the
North Coast of Sicily ' — such is the description of it in the
Admiralty records. This report is of particular interest,
since it can safely be assumed that officers serving in the
Royal yachts are not in the habit of seeking newspaper
publicity.

Unfortunately, the original report, like Captain
M’Quhae’s, is no longer available. It has not been delib-
erately destroyed — ‘weeded ’—as its predecessor was,
but appears to have been lost. Its history, so far as I can
trace it, is as follows.

It was forwarded to the Admiralty on June 11th, 1877,
by Admiral Sir George Elliott, Commander-in-Chief at
Portsmouth. Apparently, it was not, as in the Dedalus
case, specifically asked for by Their Lordships. It was
minuted in office by the Hydrographer,: to this effect :


‘ This is a subject of interest, but before further action
is taken, I would suggest that the papers be sent to the
Home Office for an expression of opinion from the
Inspector of Fisheries, Mr. F. Buckland.’


I cannot imagine what ‘further action’ the Hydrographer
proposed to take — nor do I think that he had any clear
ideas on the subject himself. The reference to Buckland


1 Captain F. J. O. Evans, R.N., C.B., F.R.S.
154


H.M.S. ‘OSBORNE, 1877 155


was a judicious move. He had made a name as a versatile
writer and lecturer on natural history, and was at the
time in active Government employment as an Inspector of
Fisheries under the Home Office — a department of which
then undertook some of the work now performed by the
Ministry of Agriculture and Fisheries. At the same time,
it is difficult to understand why the papers were not sub-
mitted in the first place to Owen, who was still alive (he
did not die until 1892, aged 88) — and who, also, held a
Government appointment, that of Superintendent of the
Natural History Museum.: As will be seen, Buckland
consulted him on the point, and transmitted his opinion
to the Admiralty.

On July 3oth the Home Office returned Pearson's
report to the Admiralty, together with Buckland's com-
ments. I imagine (although it does not appear from the
papers) that Buckland wrote a private letter, asking
Admiralty permission to publish the correspondence in his
paper, Land and Water. On August 7th the Admiralty
replied, asking that their thanks might be conveyed to
Buckland for his ‘ very interesting report, and that he
might be informed that they had no objection to his
publishing the correspondence — for which purpose they
sent back the original enclosures, requesting that these
might be returned when done with.

Unfortunately, they were not-at least, there is no
trace of them in the Admiralty files. I am still uncertain
whether they remained at the office of Land and Water —
which is now defunct ; whether they were shelved, in
error, at the Home Office ; or whether Buckland (oå.
1880) retained them. In any case, it does not seem very
likely that they are still in existence ; and they are cer-
tainly not available for reference.


ı He resigned this six years later, in 1883.


156 THE SEA-SERPENT


In consequence, it is necessary to fall back upon the
extracts, from the reports, which appeared in Land and
Water ; and to supplement these by contemporary ac-
counts appearing in other papers. Here, in the first
place, is the Land and Water + version. The text of the
reports, as summarised by Buckland, runs :


* Commander Pearson, of the royal yacht Osborne, in
forwarding the accounts of the three officers of that
yacht, who saw the sea monster off the coast of Sicily
on the 2nd of June last, writes : — “ I myself saw the
fish» through a telescope, but at too great a distance
(about 400 yards) to be able to give a detailed descrip-
tion ; but distinctly saw the * seal-shaped head, of
immense size, large flappers, and part of huge body.”
* Lieutenant Haynes? writes, under date, '* Royal Yacht
Osborne, Gibraltar, June 6 : — On the evening of that
day, the sea being perfectly smooth, my attention was
first called by seeing a ridge of fins above the surface
of the water, extending about thirty feet, and varying.
from five to six feet in height. On inspecting it by
means of a telescope, at about one and a-half cables'
distance, I distinctly saw a head, two flappers, and
about thirty feet of an animal's shoulder. The head, as
nearly as I could judge, was about six feet thick, the
neck narrower, about four to five feet, the shoulder
about fifteen feet across, and the flappers each about
fifteen feet in length. The movements of the flappers
were those of a turtle, and the animal resembled a
huge seal, the resemblance being strongest about the
back of the head.e I could not see the length of the
head, but from its crown or top to just below the


1 Brix, 1877,
b-k For the explanation of these reference-letters, see p. 163.
* Navigating Lieutenant William P. Haynes, R.N.


DHUMISS OSBORNE, 1877 157


shoulder (where it became immersed), I should reckon
about fifty feet. The tail end I did not see, being under
water, unless the ridge of fins to which my attention
was first attracted, and which had disappeared by the
time I got a telescope, were really the continuation of
the shoulder to the end of the object’s body.

The animal’s head was not always above water, but


FIG. I5. RIDGE OF FINS, seen from H.M.S. Osborne, 2, vi. 1877
From Land and Water, 8, ix. 1877


was thrown upwards, remaining above for a few seconds
at a time, and then disappearing.f There was an
entire absence of ‘ blowing’ or ‘spouting.’ I here-
with beg to enclose a sketch (A)! showing the view of
the ‘ ridge of fins,’ and (B)* of the animal in the act of
propelling itself by its two fins." -

‘Mr. Douglas M. Forsyth? writes, under date, Royal


1 See Fig. 15. 2 See Fig. 16. ? Lieutenant R.N.


158 THE SEA-SERPENT


Yacht Osborne, at sea, June 4, 1877 :—“ At five
p.m. on the 2nd inst., while passing Cape St. Vito, north
coast of Sicily, I observed a large, black-looking
object on the starboard quarter, distant about two
cables, and on examining it with a telescope, I found


FIG. 16. H.M.S. OSBORNE’S ’ SEA MONSTER


From Land and Water, 8, ix. 1877


Norr.— The creature is represented as seen ‘ end-on,’ and swimming directly
away from the observer.


it to be a huge monsters, having a head about fifteen to
twenty feet in length. The breadth I could not ob-
serve. ‘The head was round, and full at the crown. The
animal was slowly swimming in a south-easterly
direction, propelling itself by means of two large
flappers or fins, somewhat in the manner of a seal.h


1 400 yards.


m


H.M.S. “OSBORNE, 1877 159


I also saw a portion of the body of the animal, and that
part was certainly not under forty-five or fifty feet in
length.”

‘ Mr..Moore,: engineer of the royal yacht Osborne,
writes ; — " When looking over the starboard quarter
of the ship, my attention was called by observing an
uneven ridge of what appeared to me to be the fins of
a fish above the surface of the water, about a cable's
lengthi distance from the ship. They varied in height,
and, as near as I can judge, from seven to eight feet
above water, and extended about forty feetk along the
surface. Not having a telescope with me, I regret I am
unable to give you a further description."


Here is another account, from The Times of June 14th.*


‘The Osborne, 2,* paddle Royal yacht, Commander
Hugh L. Pearson, which arrived at Portsmouth from
the Mediterranean on Monday, * and at once proceeded
to her moorings in the harbour, has forwarded an
official report to the Admiralty, through the Comman-
der-in-Chief (Admiral Sir George Elliott, K.C.B.),
respecting a sea monster which she encountered during
her homeward voyage.

* At about 5 o'clock in the afternoon of the 2d inst.,
the sea being exceptionally calm, while the yacht was
proceeding round the north coast of Sicily towards
Cape Vito, the officer on the watch observed a long
ridge of fins, each about six feet long, moving slowly
along. He called for a telescope, and was at once joined
by other officers. The Osborne was steaming westward
at 104 knots an hour, and, having along passage before
her, could not stay to make minute observations.

ı William Moore, second engineer of the ship.


2 Quoted from the Portsmouth Times.
* J.e. mounting two guns (for saluting purposes). — *rr, vi. 1877.


160 THE SEA-SERPENT


‘ The fins were progressing in an eastwardly direction,
and as the vessel more nearly approached them, they
were replaced by the foremost part of a gigantic sea
monster. Its skin was, so far as could be seen, alto-
gether devoid of scales, appearing rather to resemble
in sleekness that of a seal. The head was bullet-shaped,
with an elongated termination, being somewhat
similar in form to that of a seal, and was about six
feet in diameter. Its features were only seen by one
officer, who described them as like those of an alli-
gator. ‘The neck was comparatively narrow, but so
much of the body as could be seen developed in form
like that of a gigantic turtle, and from each side ex-
tended two fins, about 1sft. in length, by which the
monster paddled itself along after the fashion of a
turtle.

‘ The appearance of the monster is accounted for by a
submarine volcano, which occurred (sic) north of
Galita, in the Gulf of Tunis, about the middle of May,
and was reported at the time by a steamer which was
struck by a detached fragment of submarine rock. The
disturbance below water, it is thought probable, may `
have driven up the monster from its “ native element,”
as the site of the eruption is only 100 miles from
where it was reported to have been! seen.’


The suggestion about the submarine volcano, of course,
is sheer ‘ post hoc, ergo propter hoc.’ Incidentally, Galita is
not in the Gulf of Tunis.

Finally, the Graphic of June 3oth* published another
account by Lieutenant Haynes, accompanied by what
appear to be fairly close copies of the two sketches


1 Misprinted ‘ beeen.’

The Illustrated London News says nothing whatever about the
Osborne’s sea-serpent. Apparently, it was piqued that its newly-founded
rival, the Graphic, had got there first.


HeM.S, OSBORNE, 1877 161


enclosed in Pearson's report and subsequently repro-
duced in Land and Water. limagine that Haynes re-
tained his original sketches, and supplied copies of them
both to Pearson and to the Graphic. His account is short,
and as it differs somewhat from his Admiralty version
I give it in full :


“ My attention was first called by seeing a long row of
fins appearing above the surface of the water at a
distance of about 200 yards from the ship, and “ away
on our beam.” They were of irregular heights, and
extending about 30 or 40 feet in line (the former
number is the length I gave, the latter the other
officers), in a few seconds they disappeared, giving
place to the foremost part of the monster.

“By this time it had passed astern, swimming in an
opposite direction to that we were steering, and as we
were passing through the water at 101 knots, I could
only get a view of it, “ end on,” which I have shownin
the sketch. The head was bullet-shaped, and quite 6
feet thick, the neck narrow, and 1ts head was occasion-
ally thrown back out of the water, remaining there for
a few seconds at a time. It was very broad across the
back or shoulders, about 15 or 20 feet, and the flappers
appeared .to have a semi-revolving motion, which
seemed to paddle the monster along. They were about
15 feet in length. From the top of the head to the part
of the back where it became immersed, I should con-
sider 50 feet, and that seemed about a third of the
whole length. Allthis part was smooth, resembling
a seal. I cannot account for the fins unless they
were on the back below where it was immersed.’


I have examined the Osborne’s log : but, as in the case
of H.M.S. Dedalus, it contains no mention of the


162 THE SEA-SERPENT


encounter with the ‘Sea Monster.’ Itaffords, however, a
good deal of collateral information. |

It is apparent, from the wording of the three accounts
given in Land and Water, that the Osborne’s commander
had called for reports (in writing) from such officers as
had seen the creature closely. It is also apparent, from
The Times’ account, that Haynes was officer of the watch
at the time when it was seen. Yet the Osborne’s log for
the first dog-watch (4—6 p.m.) 1s not initialled by Haynes,
but by Lieutenant Hugh G. Gough, the ship's first lieu-
tenant. Haynes signs for the 'last-dog ' (6-8 p.m.).
I imagine that, owing to some private arrangement be-
tween Gough and Haynes, the latter was relieving him,
temporarily, when the monster was sighted. This may
possibly account for the fact that there is no entry of this
incident in the log — although I incline to believe that, as
also in the case of the Dedalus, such was designedly
omitted.

According to the log, the Osborne was steaming 10i
knots, with a jib and fore trysail set — no doubt to steady
her.: Her position at 5 p.m., so far as can be worked out
from her noon-position, was about 38° 17’ N., 12? 53’ E.
— half-way across the Gulf of Castellamare, and about
eight miles from land, in some 450 fathoms of water.

The ' remarks ' column of the log merely records :


3412. Passed C. De Gallo.
* 5.45. Passed C. De Vito.’


The weather, both at 4 p.m. and at 6 p.m., is logged as
'bc'- bright, with detached clouds.


1 It should be remembered that the OsZorze was a paddle steamer, and
that a little canvas might steady her appreciably, and so greatly improve
her steaming. Itis of very little value, as I can testify from experience, to
à screw steamer.


HUNTSEA OSBORNE, 1877 , 163


So far as I can trace, the incident did not arouse any-
thing like the universal interest excited by the Dædalus
story. It occurred when the public mind and the illus-
trated Press were chiefly occupied with the Russo- Turkish
war ; and its “ news-value ’ suffered in consequence. But
it received a good deal of critical examination. Buckland,
to whom the Admiralty had applied for his opinion as to
the “ monster's ' nature, consulted several other authorities

— Owen, A. D. Bartlett (Superintendent of the Zoo-
logical Gardens), Captain David Gray (a well-known
whaler) and Henry Lee, a brother naturalist.: These
opinions, together with his own, he published in Land
and Water: and, since they represent a body of informed
opinion based upon better material than appears to be
now available, I propose to give extracts from them.

The interest attaching to Owen's views is chiefly
psychological. They throw no light on the nature of the
animal, but a good deal upon his own mentality, and the
changes which it had undergone during the twenty-nine
years which had elapsed since he wrote his letter on the
Daedalus case. ‘Then, he had discussed the evidence
carefully, and had put forward a theory (unwarranted, but
plausible) to cover the reported facts. Now, he wrote
a short, sneering letter, which can be boiled down to ‘I
can't trust the observers, who were ignorant and lazy.'

In case it may be thought that I am not presenting the
matter fairly, here is the full text of his opinion. I should
premise that it consists largely of comments upon various
points, distinguished by letters, in the original reports —
which are not now available. Still, I think that most of the
points can be identified. I have inserted, in the text of the ©


1 Buckland transmitted Owen’s opinion, and Bartlett’s, to the Ad-
miralty ; the others, apparently, were obtained later.
2 8, ix. 1877.


164 THE SEA-SERPENT


reports as given by Buckland, Owen’s reference-letters
(except a and d, for which no apposite text is available),
placing them in what seem to be the most likely positions.


* I have carefully perused and considered the docu-
ments from the Admiralty and Home Office which
you submitted to me, and have added to them initial
letters which refer to the following remarks :—

* (Capt. Pearson's letter of June 11)

a. The object or phenomena may have been of
a nature unknown to the observers, but were
not necessarily caused by a monster.

b. The appearances may not have been caused by
a fish.

c. The words between “—” denote rather a
cetacean than a.“ fish.” or "monsters bun
viewed at the distance given, the ideas thereby
excited and expressed are of no help or value to
the naturalist.

d. See note a.

* (Lieut. Haynes' letter.)

e. Phenomena noted through a telescope, at the
distance given, by one not conversant with
natural history, are very seldom available to one
who is ; the present case is no exception.

f. The period during which the object was watched,
or uninterrupted observation of the phenomena
made, should have been noted, in order to found
an opinion of the bearing of this remark.

* (Lieut. Forsyth's letter.)

g. See note a.

h. A seal propels itself chiefly by its hind pair of
flippers, which stretch backward beyond the tail,
to part of which they are attached.


! Land aud Water, 8, ix. 1877.


H.M.S. 'OSBORNE, 1877 16;


* (Mr. Moore's letter.)’

i. compare with Lieut. Forsyth's statement.

k. Compare with Lieut. Haynes' statement.
* The discrepancies in the records of the watchers of
the same phenomena show the difficulty of exact
observation at the distances and under the circum-
stances of the case, both ship and object or objects
being on the move ; and remarks thereon by observers
not conversant with natural history, and so situated,
preclude the formation of any opinion worth record-
ing of the nature of the object or objects causing
the phenomena as interpreted by the foregoing
Witnesses.
‘ But although the statements and terms applied be
insufficient to enable the naturalist to recognise the
subject thereof, they by no means afford ground for
concluding that what was seen was afforded by an
object unknown and unrecorded in natural history ;
there are no grounds for calling it a ‘sea monster.’ I
beg to call attention to the paragraph concluding the
‘Manual of Zoology’ in the ‘ Admiralty Manual of
Scientific Enquiry,’ 12mo, 3rd. ed., 1859 :—
“When an object is seen afloat, and attracts notice by
its magnitude or other peculiarity, and is not captured,
its nearest approach to the ship, its mode, course, and
rate of progression, and the parts actually recognisable
should be noted at the time with the utmost accuracy.
If practicable, a boat should be put off for close
observation and possible capture.
* If the observer has not the zoological knowledge, or
the opportunity for exact inspection, requisite for
determining the species from the phenomena, he
should abstain from giving the object any special name.
Supposing it to be an animal, a shot fired, if even it do
not hit, may so alarm the creature as to cause some


*


166 THE SEA-SERPENT


sudden movement which may reveal more of its true
nature.’


This, be it noted, is not written by an Admiralty clerk,
but by a scientist of international reputation. Its peevish
tone is perhaps less difficult to understand when one
learns that the instructions which Owen cites were drawn
up by himself: Apart from this, it should be re-
membered that he was seventy-three.

Still, his ‘opinion,’ even then, discredits him (I submit)
more than it does those observers whom he stigmatises as
ignorant and negligent. What man, in his sober senses,
would expect to get better conditions for observing
a freely-swimming creature on the high seas than fine
weather, broad daylight, a calm sea, a nearest approach
of two hundred yards or so, and the use of a telescope ?
Yet these are the exact circumstances of the case — and,
according to Owen, they preclude the taking of any
observations which would be of value to a naturalist !

Again, it is surely hypercritical to complain that one
observer saw the fins extending ' about thirty feet' and
another ‘about forty’ ; or that one thought that they
were about a cable and a half distant, and the other
a cable. Such eye-estimates would be within ordinary
limits of error even if they had been made at exactly the
same instant— an assumption for which there is no
evidence at all; while it is undisputed that the OsZorze
was steaming at ten knots or so, and that the creature
was also swimming in the opposite direction. And it is
almost childish to complain that the witnesses spoke of
a huge, strange-looking creature as a ‘ monster.’

1 Owen does not quote them quite accurately — for example, he has
inserted the words “and possible capture They originally appeared in


1849. I cannot dissociate the instructions, about not giving such crea-
tures a name, from M’Quhae’s ' serpent’ of the preceding year.


>


H.M.S. 'OSBORNE, 1877 167


* Monster ' is not a “special name’ : it is not a name at
all, but a general term — and, in the circumstances, a very
suitable one.

One wonders whether Owen found special cause for
irritation in the fact that the Osdorne’s monster 're-
sembled a huge seal.’ Here was the very creature into
which (to his own satisfaction, at least) he had resolved
the Dzdalus’ sea-serpent — but, unfortunately, this time it
was much too large. If its length had been given at, say,
forty feet instead of a hundred and fifty or so, who can
doubt that, despite the intrinsic rarity of sea-elephants
in the Mediterranean, it would have been hailed as con-
clusive proof that Owen had been brilliantly right in
1848? But although he had made no bones about re-
ducing the Dzdalus’ monster from a part-length of sixty
feet to a total length of thirty, he may well have thought
that this plan, in view of the numerous dimensions given
for various parts of the body, was scarcely applicable now.
In any case, he declined the task. His 'opinion' is
a confession of failure — nominally, failure to form any
opinion about the reported facts; actually, failure
to explain them away.

Buckland, a friend and to some extent a disciple of
Owen, followed on the same tack. He begins by quoting
Owen to the effect that there has never been a case of
a sea-serpent which could not be explained by natural
causes, such as a line of porpoises or other creatures,
ribbon-fish, giant squid, floating logs, seaweed, etc.
With an impartiality which is most praiseworthy, but
slightly confusing, he next proceeds to give an account
of the appearances in the Sound of Sleat in 1872,:
without a word of criticism or suggested explanation.
Having thus contrived to sit — somewhat insecurely — on


1 See pp. 141—153.


168 THE SEA-SERPENT


the fence, he suggests that the ' ridge of fins ' seen from
the Osborne may have been the back fins of four basking-
sharks swimming in single file. He explains this theory
by a sketch, but omits to state that the basking-shark is
not a native of the Mediterranean. As an alternative, he
suggests a ‘herd’ of swordfish. The main item of the
Osborne reports — the huge seal-like creature seen after
the ‘ ridge of fins’ had disappeared — he does not men-
tion at all: there is not a line in his report to suggest
that he had ever heard of it. !

Captain David Gray, of Peterhead, a whaler of thirty
years’ Arctic experience, expressed the opinion! that what
the Osborne saw was a whale ; or, rather (in view of the
dimensions reported), more than one, swimming close
together. He based this view on Fig. 16, but
attempted no explanation of the slender neck and round


head.


Lee, who had hitherto held a strong opinion that the.


so-called sea-serpents, when not otherwise explicable,
were actually giant squid,* admitted that neither the
Daedalus nor Osborne cases could be covered by this
supposition. He continues :


‘I believe, therefore, that in both of these instances an
animal has been seen which is either totally unknown
to science, or which has hitherto been believed to be
extinct.

‘Other appearances described cannot be explained
away as having been produced by sharks, whales, seals,
cuttles, ribbon-fish, or logs of wood covered with
1 In conversation with Buckland. It is fair to note that Gray was a


man very much above the average of his calling as regards the interest he
took in matters scientific.


® See, on this point, his Sea Monsters Unmasked (London, 1883),
passim. He re-affirmed, here, his former view of the Dedalus case.


H.M.S. ‘OSBORNE, 1877 169


barnacles and seaweed ; and to insist on attributing
them to one of these, or some other familiar object, is to
assume that the stay-at-home naturalist has perfect
cognisance of every existing marine animal of large
size, and that the sea-going eye-witness is so inex-
perienced and uninstructed that his assertion that what
he saw was none of these, is worthless. I cannot
regard such an assumption in either case as warrant-
ci. MD

“The evidence is, to my mind, conclusive that
enormous animals, with which zoologists are at
present unacquainted, exist in the '' great and wide
sea," and I look forward hopefully to the capture of
one or more of them, and the settlement of this vexed
question.’


I am not sure whether this was written after reading
-Owen’s opinion, already quoted ; from internal evidence,
I should be inclined to suppose that it was.

Finally, I should like to summarise the opinion sent in
by A. D. Bartlett, Superintendent of the Zoological
Gardens. Admittedly, he was not of Owen's scientific
standing, but he was probably as expert a practical
naturalist as Buckland, and he seems to have possessed
the gift of a temperate and open mind ; although not,
unfortunately, that of a clear style in writing. He begins,
quite logically, by enquiring as to the character and
credibility of the witnesses. A hoax played by Queen's
officers is unthinkable — he takes it for granted that they
describe, as well as they can, what they saw. He also
assumes that, from their trained habits of observation,
they are not likely to have been misled by porpoises,
sharks, whales, etc. Conceding that they saw ‘some
large animal, he is quite baffled to identify it. It is


170 THE SEA-SERPENT


obviously not a serpent, which has no flippers ; nor is
it a monster turtle, which could hardly exhibit a row of
fins; whales and porpoises are ruled out; and no
number of sharks, he thinks, could cover all the reported
appearances. He finds no difficulty in concluding that
it was a single living sea-creature of unknown species.
The following passage epitomises his views, and illus-
trates his style :


“In conclusion, I cannot shut my eyes to the many
reports and statements made from time immemorial by
persons far above suspicion of fraud or deception, and
whose lives have been, for the most part, spent at sea,
and whose knowledge of the appearances of marine
animals commonly seen entitles them to our most
serious consideration.

‘These more recent instances recorded by honest and
trustworthy persons satisfy me that it is not only
unfair, unwise and a great mistake, to disregard and
throw overboard, as it were, the evidence brought by
these different observers, simply because we cannot at
present define exactly by specimens or otherwise, the
exact nature of the creatures observed.’


So much for the Osborne case, as discussed at the time.
The Admiralty, of course, took no ‘ further action’ as
to Buckland's report ; and I have failed to discover any
official notice taken of Commander Pearson's. If Their
Lordships passed on to him Owen's remarks about the
‘Admiralty Manual of Scientific Enquiry'—a book
which it is quite possible that, like many other naval
officers, he had never had either the time or the in-
clination to read — I should much have liked to hear his
comments. All the same, it is quite true that, as Owen


H.M.S. “OSBORNE, 1877 171


(and David Gray) remarked, it would have been of great
advantage if he had put his helm over, and tried to get
closer to the monster. This was moving but slowly, and
Osborne, steaming 104 knots, apparently had the advan-
tage in speed. But to ‘’bout ship’ at sea takes time — and
it calls for some explanation in the log; itis a thing not
done without sufficient reason. Pearson would, as
a matter of course, have done it to pick up a man fallen
overboard, or a shipwrecked boat’s crew ; but it is one
thing to save life, and another to gratify curiosity; par-
ticularly when you are making a long passage in a paddle-
steamer, and have the advantage of present fine weather,
with the chance of worse later. Even if Pearson had been
on deck — he obviously wasn't — when the creature was
sighted, I question whether he would have turned round
to close it.


Yet it is much to be regretted that he didn’t, for while
the conditions for observation (or, at least, most of them)
were excellent, the observations themselves were made
from a very unfavourable view-point — almost right
astern of the animal, which was seen end-on. Hence the
curious appearance which it presents in Fig. 16. A closer
approach, preferably giving a broadside view of the
creature, would have cleared up several very perplexing
points in the description — particularly the relation, if
any, of the ‘ ridge of fins ’ to the subsequent appearances.
As Lee well remarks, ‘the combination of them (the
fins) with long flippers, and the turtle-like mode of
swimming, forms a zoological enigma which I am unable
to solve.’ Oudemans: goes the length of suggesting that


1 As to Owen’s complaint that no gun was fired, it is sufficient to point
out that the OsZorze's total armament consisted of two signal-carronades
and a supply of blank ammunition.

2 In his Sea Monsters Unmasked. ? The Great Sea-Serpent, p. 350.


172 THE SEA-SERPENT


the fins first seen had no connection with the creature
which rose into sight immediately afterwards. This
merely gives us two enigmas instead of one. The fins —
seven or eight in a line, and standing six or seven feet out
of the water — were, in themselves, as unusual a sight,
and one as difficult to explain, as the creature with huge
seal-ike head, slender neck, and giant flippers, which
replaced them. One such sight was remarkable enough :
that two should occur — in precisely the same spot — at an
interval not exceeding a few seconds, and that the two
should yet be completely independent, defies belief.
However inconvenient theorists may find the ' ridge of
fins,’ these cannot, I suggest, be dismissed in this airy
fashion, for they formed an integral portion of the
evidence — and, presumably, of the ‘ sea-monster.":


! See p. 273.


Cu. VII. INTERLUDE :
THE MOHA MOHA


Ir may be thought that this chapter — describing what
seems to have been a monster turtle, observed on shore —
is somewhat out of place in a book dealing with reported
appearances of the sea-serpent. But, as already explained,
it is not clarmed that such appearances were, in every
case, those of the same, or even a similar creature ; there
is at least a suggestion in the Osborne case, and that of the
Valhalla (related in the following chapter) that what was
seen somewhat resembled a monster turtle ; the creature
now to be described, the * Moha Moha’ of Queensland,
falls under the same description, and would, if met with
afloat, exhibit similar characteristics ; and the account
given of it (which is not, apparently, too well known) 1s
very interesting and appears to be authentic. On the
other hand, it must be noted that it depends largely on
the evidence of a single witness.

The witness in question was a Miss S. Lovell, a school-
teacher living at Sandy Cape, Great Sandy Island, Queens-
land. 'The island, which is some seventy miles long north
and south, forms the eastern shore of Hervey Bay, and
Sandy Cape is its northern extremity. A lighthouse
stands on the cape, and forms the nucleus of a small white
community. It was in this vicinity that the * Moha Moha '
was seen in June 1890.

I believe that accounts of the event appeared soon
afterwards in the local Press, but the earliest which I have
been able to consult is one in Land and Water for
3, i. 1891. A ‘constant reader,’ cautiously signing

173


174 THE SEA-SERPENT


himself * TEMPUS OMNIA MONSTRAT, forwarded a drawing
of the creature, copied by himself from a sketch sent
home by Miss Lovell. I have not reproduced this draw-
ing, because Miss Lovell afterwards objected to it as
being inaccurate — although it does not differ markedly
from her own sketch, which is shown in Fig. 17. But
accompanying the drawing was an extract from Miss.
Lovell's letter, as follows (no date or address) :


*... We have had a visit from a monster turtle fish.
I send a sketch of it. It let me stand for half an hour


FIG. I7. THE MOHA MOHA


Re-drawn from Savile-Kent's Great Barrier Reef
Norz.—The dome-shaped central portion is intended for the creature’s carapace.


within five feet of it. When tired of my looking at it,
it put its large neck and head into the water and swept
round seaward, raising its huge dome-shaped body
about five feet out of water, and put its twelve feet of
fish-like tail over the dry shore, elevating it at an angle.
Then, giving its tail a half twist, it shot off like a flash of
lightning, and I saw its tail in the air about a quarter
of a mile off, where the steamers anchor.

“It has either teeth or serrated jaw-bones. Native
blacks call it * Moka, moka,’: and say they like to eat
it, and that it has legs and fingers. I did not see its
legs, as they were in the water. What I saw of it was


1 It appeared later that the recipient had misread this name — itshould
be‘ Moha Moha.’


INTERLUDE: THE MOHA MOHA 175


about 27 ft. or 28 ft., but I think it must be 30 ft. in
all. Whilst its head was out of water it kept its mouth
open, and, as I could not see any nostrils, I fancy it
breathes through its mouth. The jaws are about 18 in.
in length ; the head and neck greenish white, with
large white spots on the neck, and a band of white
round a very black eye and round upper and lower
jaws.

“ The body was dome-shaped, about 8 ft. across and
5 ft. high, smooth, and slate-grey in colour. Tail about
12 ft., the fish part wedge-shaped, and fin of chocolate-
brown. Then beautiful silver shading to white scales
size of thumb nail.'


The editor of Land and Water felt it incumbent on him
to remark upon this anomalous and polychromatic crea-
ture ; and, fortifying himself with expert authority, he
appended the following :


“... In the opinion of the authorities (at the Natural

History Museum) this turtle is the Carettochelys, a

monster turtle known to exist at the mouth of the Fly

River, New Guinea, which has a very long neck. The

museum at Sydney possesses the only known
- specimen. . . .'


He must have misunderstood what he was told. The
specimen in question, a published description of which
was then available,» is considerably smaller than an
ordinary turtle, its total length not exceeding thirty
inches.


* 'The length and shape of the tail, as described, are,


1 "The Fly River is some 1,100 miles from Sandy Cape.
2 Proceedings of the Linnean Society of New South Wales, 1886. The
account is by a competent naturalist, Dr. E. P. Ramsay.


176 THE SEA-SERPENT


however, impossible,: as no turtles have caudal append-
ages corresponding to the description, and the fair
observer must have been mistaken on this very
important point. .. .'


The ‘fair observer’ was not long in replying,* with
justifiable indignation, to this very unfair comment.


‘,.. I received from my sister your account and draw-
ing of the Moha Moha, which is not correctly drawn.
I send a rough sketch. You speak of the impossible
length of its tail I beg to state this is a most
astounding statement* from people who have never seen
this monster, half fish, half tortoise. The tail was over
the dry shore for half an hour, so close to me, that five
footsteps would have enabled me to put my hand
üpon-dEk s.


After repeating, in much the same words, her description
of the tail's appearance, she continues :


“... The blacks, who had not seen it on the day I did,
named it at once from my sketch, which must, there-
fore, be pretty accurate, and called it “ Moha, Moha,”
and laughed and said “ Saucy fellow, Meebee,” in
English, “ dangerous turtle.”

“ It is eight years since it attacked the black's camp. It
can stand upright, and it put its legs on the shoulders
of a powerful black, 6ft. high, and knocked him down.
That year it invaded their camp, and nearly caught
one man by the leg. For months after the blacks
camped inland. . . . It is not a turtle, but a monster,


ı My italics. * Land and Water, 25, iv. 1891. * My italics.


INTERLUDE: THE MOHA MOHA 177


half fish, half tortoise, with the Ber perfectly
round in front.
S. Lovett.’


“Sandy Cape, Maryborough, March 4.’


Nothing daunted, the editor returned to the fray, with
more random assertions and a somewhat peculiar syntax.


“With no wish to cast any doubt on our fair corre-
spondent’s veracity and powers of observation, we
must adhere to the editorial remarks made in our
issue of January 3, and point out to her that from a
scientific point of view, the existenceof acreature com-
bining the characteristics of a fish, together with those
of a tortoise, are (sic) absolutely impossible. . . .'


His knowledge of paleontology, apparently, was slight.
The extinct Prerichthys and Drepanaspis seem to have
existed for the express purpose of refuting his assertion.


. A large and very fierce variety of turtle (Trio/ix)
are (sic) well known to inhabit Queensland, and several
instances have been known of their attacking men... .'


* Triolix,’ presumably, is a misprint for Trionyx. But
while it may be ' well-known’ in London that these, and
other Australian chelonia, are very fierce and sometimes
attack men, this fact (singularly enough) is still unknown
in Australia. Savile-Kent, in his Great Barrier Reef,
remarks ‘... while these may be long-necked . . . they
are by no means of large size, and, though exhibiting
a certain amount of defensive pugnacity when captured,
they can scarcely be styled ferocious, man-attacking
species.’

ı The Great Barrier Reef of Australia, by W. Savile-Kent, F.L.S.,
F.Z.S. (London, z.2. — about 1893).


178 THE SEA-SERPEN'T


The editor goes on to suggest that Miss Lovell should
study Gould's Mythical Monsters: :


“In this she will find all sorts of supposed monsters
figured, including the sea serpent, and . . . form an
opinion as to how difficult and well-nigh impossible it
is for the scientific world to place any credence in mere
statements and descriptions without any tangible
material to enable them to identify the supposed
creatures... .'


(How does one ' identify ' a creature new to science ?)


‘Our correspondent must not suppose that we doubt
her having seen some abnormal monster, but we
cannot believe that it is ‘ half fish half tortoise ' as she
describes, and the only solution we can offer is that
the monster tortoise had clasped by its nether limbs,
and had pressed against its abdomen some very large
fish, the upper part of whose body was thus concealed,
while the tail projected behind, and gave the tortoise
the appearance of having a fish’s tail. . . .’


Why tne ‘ tortoise’ should clasp the (20-foot or so) fish,
except to eat it ; why the latter should endure this pro-
cess with absolute calm for half an hour and then sud-
denly come to life ; and why it should still remain so
gripped by the ‘ tortoise,’ when the latter was swimming,
as to give the impression of a single creature, he does not
attempt to explain. But he makes one sensible remark :


©... We lay no stress on the evidence of the d/acks, as
all coloured races are greatly given to exaggeration and
invention.’


* Mythical Monsters, by Charles Gould [no relation] (London, 1886).


INTERLUDE: THE MOHA MOHA 179


and he concludes by assuring his ‘ fair correspondent '
that :


* We shall be very glad to hear further from her at any
time, and trust she may be able to throw some ad-
ditional light on, and produce some satisfactory evidence
as to, the existence of these marine monsters.’


In view of the unfortunate remark which I have
italicised, it 1s scarcely surprising that his expectations
were disappointed.

Savile-Kent included an account of Miss Lovell's
experience in his Great Barrier Reef.» I am not sure that
she was exactly pleased with his discussion of it. The
editor of Land and Water had been serious, even if
dogmatic and sciolistic: Savile-Kent waxed gently
facetious over the potentialities, financial and otherwise,
of a ! new and alderman-enthralling brand of turtle soup,’
prepared from what he proposed to call Chelosauria
Lovelli. But at least he performed a distinct service by
obtaining from Miss Lovell an expanded account of her
adventure, and corroborative evidence from white wit-
nesses. l |

Here is her account, which was illustrated by the
sketch from which Fig. 17 is taken. It should be noted
that it gives her considered views, but was written at
a considerable time after the event, while that already
quoted is an extract from a contemporary letter.


*[ was (while walking on the Sandy Island beach)

admiring the stillness of the sea, it being a dead calm,

when my eye caught sight of the head and neck of

a creature I had never seen before.*

! Pp. 322-7.

2 Savile-Kent remarks (p. 323) : * She (Miss Lovell) takes a keen in-
terest in all local natural history matters...’


180 THE SEA-SERPENT


‘I went to the edge of the water and saw a huge animal,
lying at full length, which was not at all disturbed by
my close proximity to it, enabling me to observe the
glossy skin of the head and neck, smooth and shiny
as satin.ı Its great mouth was wide open all the time
it was out of the water.

‘In about a quarter of an hour or so it put its head and
neck slowly into the sea, closing its Jaws as it did so.
I then saw what a long neck it had, as it moved round
in a half circle, and also perceived that the head and
neck were moving under a carapace. When the head
was pointing out to sea it rose up, putting a long
wedge-shaped fish-like tail out of the water over the
dry shore, parallel to myself, and not more than five
feet from me, not touching the sand, but elevated.
I could have stood under the “ flukes of its tail."

* The only part of the body that had marks like joints
(like in size and shape to a common brick) was also on
the dry shore, but reszing on the sand ; the great
dome-shaped carapace, dull slate-grey, was standing
quite five feet high, and so hid its long neck and head
from my view, which before it rose I could see as a long
shadow on the water. The carapace was smooth and
without marks of any sort. The fish-like part of the
tail was as glossy and shiny as the head and neck, but
of a beautiful silver-grey, shading to white, with either
markings or large scales, each bordered with a ridge
of white, but if scales, not like those of a fish in
position, as the fishes’ scales lie horizontally, while the
Moha’s, if scales, lie perpendicularly, each the size `
of a man’s thumbnail. It had a thick fleshy fin near
the end, about three feet from the flukes, and, like
them, chocolate-brown. The flukes were semi- .
transparent ; I could see the sun shining through


1 Quality and price not stated.


INTERLUDE: THE MOHA MOHA 181


them, showing all the bones! very forked. One of the
girls* asked me if a shark had bitten a piece out of its
tail, and the other wanted to know if I thought it
was an alligator! ‘The fish-like part was quite twelve
feet long.
“All the time the animal was on shore it was perfectly
motionless ; at last it gave a curious half-twist to the
fluke part of its tail, the movement only just reaching
beyond the fleshy fin, and, without disturbing the water
in the slightest degree,* vanished. I seemed only to
have taken one breath when I saw its tail out of the
water about the place where the steamer anchors,
sending a quantity of fish into the air. I then saw it
give a twist of its tall, and it disappeared altogether.
The black boy saw it on shore the previous Monday,
the 9th inst.*
* As I was so close to it for at least half an hour, I was
able to study its shape and colouring. In moving
about, head and tail were seen alternately above water,
but not even the shadow of its great body, and, from
the length of that, a spectator could not guess that the
head and tail belonged to the same creature, particularly
as the colouring is so different. The parts I did not see
were thelegs. I stooped down and tried, but in vain,
to see them, though the Moha was standing in only
a foot of water, but the Black described them as being
lıke ancalligator.*5.:4
1 Presumably, bony rays, as in a fish’s tail.
2 She had two with her, Jemima and Jessie Alsbury.
? Savile-Kent was inclined to accept this suggestion.
* This is not meant, I imagine, to be taken absolutely literally.
5 June 9th, 1890. The month is nowhere stated by Miss Lovell, but
the 9th did not fall on a Monday in any other month of 1890.
¢ There are no alligators in Australia, although two species of crocodile
(C. Porosus and C. Fohnstoni) are found in the northern regions. No
doubt the meaning here is :‘..,, described them as being (what I should


call) like those of an alligator.’
Ns


182 THE SEA-SERPENT


Savile-Kent continues :


* .. In reply to the author's application to Miss
- Lovell for the fullest information and, if possible,
corroborative testimony concerning the appearance of
this remarkable creature, he was furnished with the
foregoing account ; and, in addition, with a document
setting forth that it had been seen by seven' white
people and a black youth either on the same occasion,*
or within a few days interval of the time that Miss
Lovell saw and sketched it on the beach. The signed
testimony is as follows :
‘“ We, the undersigned, saw the Moha-Moha (as
described by Miss Lovell) making for the shore of
Sandy Cape on June 8th, 1890 :
James Alsbury, Ist. assistant, Sandy Cape
Lighthouse.
William H. Lees, 3rd. assistant, Sandy Cape
Lighthouse.
Mrs. Lees.
Donald Henderson.
Jemima Alsbury | daughters of James
Jessie Alsbury . Alsbury."


* Robert, the black boy, sets his “ mark ” against it, it
having been seen by him on the shore on the previous
Monday. The two girls, Jemima and Jessie Alsbury
and the black boy were present on the shore, having
gone down there previously, when Miss Lovell inter-
viewed (sic) the monster, the former, as mentioned in
the narrative, addressing to her a pertinent question
concerning the contour of the creature's tail. . . .’


! Actually, six.


* Obviously it was some days earlier. The document is dated June
8th. Miss L. says “the black boy saw it . . . the previous Monday, the
oth? She must have seen it about the r 1th — rth.


INTERLUDE: THE MOHA MOHA 183


Such is the story of the Moha Moha. I have not
succeeded in finding any further accounts of its appear-
ing either on the Queensland coast or on the Barrier
Reef itself.

Miss Lovell seems to have had an almost unique
experience, and to have done her best to describe it in
detail — perhaps a little too much detail. Had she been
less explicit — had she said, for example, that her monster
Jooked as if it were half fish, half tortoise, and not that it
definitely was so — she would have afforded less ground
for cavil. But I cannot think that, whatever her deduc-
tions, she was much mistaken in what she actually
observed — nor do I think that her report was quite fairly
treated, in scientific or quasi-scientific circles, on its
original appearance.


Cu. VIII. 1893: DR. MATHESON
AND CAPTAIN CRINGLE


In this chapter I propose to discuss two appearances
observed in 1893 ; one in the Kyle of Loch Alsh, N.B.,
and the other off the west coast of Africa. The raw
material of both accounts has been obtained from an
article, ‘ The Sea-Serpent, by Alfred T. Story, which
appeared in the Strand Magazine for August, 1895:
but, as will appear, I have supplemented this in both
cases by further enquiries.


Dr. Matheson’s sea-monster.

In September 1893, a sea-serpent again‘ appeared in
Loch Alsh, the narrow strait dividing the Isle of Skye
from the mainland. The event was witnessed by Dr.
Farquhar Matheson, of London; who, with his wife, was
sailing on Loch Alsh in a small boat. The weather was
fine, but the wind gusty, and there was some sea running.
Here is Dr. Matheson’s description of the encounter :


“It was a beautiful day, clear as possible, the sun

shining brightly, and without clouds. The time was

between one and two.

* Our sail was up and we were going gaily along, when

suddenly I saw something rise out of the Loch in front

of us —a long, straight, neck-like thing as tall as my

mast. I could not think what it was at first. I fancied

it might be something on land, and directed my wife’s
$ See p. i4I eż seg. for an account of the creature seen hereabouts in

1872.
184


1893: DR. MATHESON AND CAPTAIN CRINGLE 186


attention to it. I said, “ Do you see that ? " She said
she did, and asked what it could be, and was rather
scared. It was then 200 yds. away, and was moving
towards us.

* Then it began to draw its neck down, and I saw clearly
that it was a large sea-monster — of the saurian type,
I should think. It was brown in colour, shining, and
with a sort of ruffle at the junction of the head and
neck. I can think of nothing to which to compare it
so well as the head and neck of the giraffe, only the
neck was much longer, and the head was not set upon
the neck like that of a giraffe ; that is, it was not so
much at right-angles to it as a continuation of it in the
same line. It moved its head from side to side, and
I saw the reflection of the light from its wet skin.'


The creature had no visible scales, its skin appearing
perfectly smooth. It was in sight for about two minutes,
and then sank — subsequently appearing three times more,
at intervals of two or three minutes. As it had done
originally, it raised its head and neck perpendicularly out
of the water, and appeared to be looking round.


* When it appeared the second time, it was going from
us, and was travelling at a great rate. It was going in
the direction of the northern outlet: of the Loch, and
we were sailing in its wake ; I was interested, and fol-
lowed it. From its first to its last appearance we
travelled a mile, and the last time we saw it it was about
a mile away.

: . I saw no body — only a ripple of water where
the it of the body should be. I should judge, how-
ever, that there must have been a large base of body


1 I.e. The Kyle of Loch Alsh. See Fig. 13.


186 THE SEA-SERPENT


to support such a neck. It was not a sea-serpent,'
but a much larger and more substantial beast — some-
thing of the nature of a gigantic lizard, I should think.
An eel could not lift up its body like that, nor could
a snake.' i


The possibility of an optical illusion being mooted, he
remarks :


*. . . That is a common theory. But what I saw
precludes all possibility of such an explanation. In the
case of an optical illusion, what the eye sees becomes
attenuated, and thus gradually disappears. But in
the case of the creature I saw, it slowly descended into
the water; it reappeared the same way, gradually
ascending. I saw it move its head from side to side,
and I noticed the glistening of the light on its smooth,
wet skin.’


Apparently, Dr. Matheson mentioned his strange
experience to some of his friends, who received it so
sceptically that he ceased to speak of it ; although he
drew up a short account which he ‘ released ' for publi-
cation two years later.* He died in 1905, and his wife
in 1927.

When collecting material for this book, I com-
municated with his son, Dr. F. M. Matheson, who
supplied me with some additional information which is


1 Meaning, possibly, one of the well-known small sea-snakes, of which
there are several species — none, however, inhabiting British waters. Or
Dr. Matheson may have had the popular conception of a sea-serpent,
founded on Pontoppidan, in mind.

2 This is true of optical illusions in general ; but it is by no means true of
hallucinations. However, I do not for a moment suggest that such could
have been the explanation of what Dr. Matheson saw.


3 [n the Strand Magazine.


1893: DR. MATHESON AND CAPTAIN CRINGLE 187


reproduced here. After relating that his father was born
at Kintail (on Loch Alsh) and practised in Soho Square,
he continues :

©... We were only children at the time. But I well
remember my Father & Mother telling us of it... but
we rather made fun of it.

* It is only fair to say, however, that my Father was of
a very fine, intellectual & even-balanced mind... one
of the earliest specialists in disease of the Ear, Nose
& Throat.

“I cannot quite recall all the particulars . . . but the
occasion was one on which he and my Mother were
sailing in a rowing boat from Dornie in Kintail, to a
farm of Ardintoul, in Glenshiel & on Loch Alsh.:
The day was gusty & the sea somewhat rough. One
occasionally sees in those parts in such weather a
whirlwind catching a spray of waves & carrying it up
in a column in the air as it drives it along, & I only
suggest that this might have been an explanation of
a strange phenomenon, were it otherwise not true.
But, on the contrary, both my Father & Mother were
positive about it, declaring it to be distinct & raising
its head & part of its neck & body well out of the
water, 2 or 3 times I believe.’


I shall return, in a later chapter, to the elder Dr. Mathe-
son's very apposite deduction from his experience :
namely, that the creature which he saw must, to support
the neck which he observed, have had a comparatively
‘ large base of body.’ As the production of a disinterested
and trained observer, his whole narrative is of great
value.

As originally published, his account was illustrated by

ı See Fig. 13.


188 THE SEA-SERPENT


a sketch (Plate V) of what he saw. I do not know on
what authority, if any, it is based : but it is given here for
the sake of completeness, and because several subsequent
observers (see chapter x1) speak of it as exactly repre-
senting the creature seen by them.


S.S. Umfuli, Dec. 1893.

Three months later the s.s. Umfuli of the Natal Line,
Captain R. J. Cringle, fell in with a similar creature. If
it were not for the prejudice with which the subject is
generally regarded, .I should have been inclined to ex-
pect that her commander's report of the encounter
would, alone, have decided the question of whether the
creatures popularly termed *sea-serpents' really exist.
But it met with the usual fate — and so did its author.
When, in January 1929, I first applied to Captain Cringle
for some supplementary information about his experience
(I had not then made his acquaintance) I received the
following very natural reply : |

Jany 24th, 1929.

* Dear Sir

* Re the matter of Sea Serpent.

‘ I have suffered so much ridicule on this that I must

decline to have anything more to do with it.

“Whatever unbelief there is in such a monster's

existence, I am certainly convinced that what I saw

was a living creature capable of moving at the rate of
ten knots. I chased it for twenty minutes at that speed

& had got no nearer to it. I had at that time 23 years

experience in Sail & Steam & was not likely to mistake

what I saw.
Yours faithfully
* R. J. Crıncre.’
‘ Dropped the chase as sun was setting.’


PLATE V. Dr. MATHESON'S SEA-MONSTER


NorEÉ.—The authority for this drawing is
uncertain (see p. 188).


From ‘The Strand Magazine, August, 1895


2 [Facing p. 188


1893: DR. MATHESON AND CAPTAIN CRINGLE 189


This letter did not in the least surprise me. I know,
personally, five naval officers who have all, at one time or
another, seen what they considered to be a sea-serpent,
and who, to avoid ridicule, have deliberately said nothing
about it—a very prudent course to take. Apart from
these, here is a statement very much in point, from a book
of reminiscences: by the late Vice-Adml.* H. L. Fleet :


* At last we... returned to Bermuda. On the passage
Moubray* and I saw what we considered to be a sea-
serpent, but decided to say nothing about it, having due
regard to the scepticism of the British public... .'


Quite so. Prophesy acceptable things unto us...

In the Umfuli’s case, however, I was fortunately able to
convince Captain Cringle that I had no intention of ridi-
culing his story ; but that I was anxious to put on record
a version of it which should be as correct as possible. In
consequence, he was good enough to go through the
original account with me - and, while confirming it in all

essentials, to make some slight amplifications and cor-
rections. Subject to these modifications, here is his
account as it was published in 1895.

On December 4th, 1893, about 5.30 p.m., the Umfuli,
steaming southward at 104 knots on her way to the Cape
of Good Hope, was in approximately lat. 21? 40' N.,
long. 17° 30’ W.* The sea was absolutely calm, without
a ruffle or a catspaw on it,

On the starboard side of the ship, and about 400 yards


ı My Life and a Few Yarns (London, 1922), p. 229.

2 He was a Commander (in command of H.M.S. Tartar, N. America
and W. Indies station) atthe date (1892) of the incident.

Lieutenant E. H. Moubray, R.N., was the Tartar’s navigator.

t About 30 miles 264° from Cape.Corveiro, and roughly on the
100-fathom line.


e[2urz)) *( "w de) Aq yoroys £ uro1j umeip-oy
LNAGUAS-VAS , S ITOAAWA , AHL “gi ‘Old


190


1893: DR. MATHESON AND CAPTAIN CRINGLE IQI


away,' there rose into sight a large creature, with a ser-
pentine head and neck, moving rapidly through the
water on an opposite course to the Umfuli’s. Its general
appearance is shown in Fig. 18, which is from a sketch
by Captain Cringle. The body, which exhibited three
distinct humps, is described as looking like a hundred-ton
gun partially submerged.


In Captain Cringle's original account, he remarks :


* It was rushing through the water at great speed, and
was throwing water from its breast as a vessel throws
water from her bows. I saw full 1 cft. of its head and
neck on three several occasions. . . . The body was all
the time visible... . The base, or body, from which the
neck sprang, was much thicker than the neck itself,
and I should not, therefore, call it a serpent. Had it
been breezy enough to ruflle the water, or hazy, I
should have had some doubt about the creature ; but
the sea being so perfectly smooth, I had not the
slightest doubt in my mind as to its being a sea-
monster.

‘I turned the ship round to get closer to it, and got
much nearer than we were at first ; but the sun was
then setting and the light gone, so that to have run the
ship further off her course would have been folly . . . this
thing, whatever it was, was in sight for over half an
hour. In fact, we did not lose sight of it until darkness
came on.'


The creature appeared to have a smooth skin, dark
brown in colour. It dipped its head under water several
times, sending the spray flying in all directions. Captain
Cringle could see its eyes; and the jaws, which occasion-
ally opened, appeared to be toothed.


1 This is Captain Cringle’s estimate : the log gives it as 500 yards.


192 THE SEA-SERPENT


The monster was seen by several of the Umfuli’s crew
and passengers.: It is sad to relate that one of the latter,
a Mr. Okell of Durban, had a camera on board — in these
days of home-made cine-colour movies, it is difficult to
realise that in 1893 a hand-camera was a comparative
rarity — but he was so excited that he forgot all about it.

The following entry, describing this event, appears in
the Umfuli's log (see also Fig. 19). It is signed by her
mate, Mr. C. A. W. Powell (now dead) who was on
watch at the time.


Log of the 2! Undue from Londen towards Nas 4


sa l un dow Ke pe Tha a ell In


=
LER.
K. | F. | COURSES. | WINDS | Way.


| E


ole
o D
oye LU
D
|

cn
M
i

I5
1

K
Ò

D


-|q


Toma P


z|S|e|e| s, e| *|*]«
ahhh


9
i

€

E

E

E

3

g

Y

(5 eee esd
E

ef

>

*

H

3

eo

y


Lot a Pa =
: ed m Lang. by Acct | Long. by Obe.
Se | aas IE: Barometer. | Sympicioavier. Thermooete, ie phase
nee yore hess at lan ig |
ll „a alu dem art 9
D.C S FREI RU ea Ea
: u — b Sarre dreasa Gh ds |
Star a ae Rees ES OUR a Sikes Eis ui ONE

"us I I e c 2

8 I BES CNRC MORI 1
Ne cep wu | Ku bach. lan en, ecke 1
= = -H 4 Rates} elm ett Der Ra fre


FIG. IQ. PAGE FROM THE ' UMFULI's" LOG


From the Strand Magazine, Vol. X.


! She was carrying about eighty passengers.


1893: DR. MATHESON AND CAPTAIN CRINGLE 193


(Monday, Dec. 4th, 1893.)

“2. Calm & smooth sea.

“4. Same weather. PL 43.:

“5.30. Sighted and passed about 500 yards from ship
a Monster Fish of the Serpent shape, about
80 ft. long with slimy skin and short fins at
about 20 feet apart on the back and in cir. about
the size dimension of a full sized whale. I
distinctly saw the fish's mouth open & shut
with my glasses. The jaw appeared to me
about 7 feet long with large teeth. In shape
it was just like a Conger Eel. There-were
two-etihem-in-

* C. A. W. POWEL


I imagine that Mr. Powell was, temporarily, under the
impression that he saw two of the creatures together; and
then, considering that he had been misled by spray or
other appearances, erased that portion of his entry.
The news of the Umfuli’s adventure filtered into print
some three weeks before she returned to England, and
was sceptically received. As Captain Cringle remarks :


“I have been so ridiculed about the thing that I have
many times wished that anybody else had seen that
sea-monster rather than me. I have been told that it
was a string of porpoises, that it was an island of sea-
weed, and I do not know what besides. But if an
island of seaweed can travel at the rate of fourteen
knots, or if a string of porpoises can stand 1 5ft. out of
the water, then I give in, and confess myself deceived.
Such, however, could not be.'


ı’The reading of the patent-log at the end of the watch, indicating,
approximately, the number of miles run since noon.


194 THE SEA-SERPENT


As already remarked, I cannot help regarding this
encounter, alone, as affording proof of the existence of
some sea-creature about the size of a common whale, but
having a very long and slender neck —something, in
fact, on the lines of the supposedly-extinct Plesiosaurus.
I do not see how, granting the correctness of the re-
ported facts— the observing conditions were good and
the witnesses experienced and reliable — they can be
explained on any other supposition. It is, however, much
easier to pooh-pooh such stories than to explain them:
and in this case it seems to have been the only course open
to the sceptically-minded.


CH. 12. YACHT
* VALHALLA,' 1905


SINCE the Dzdalus case of 1848, no reported appearance
of a sea-serpent has excited so much public surprise as
that witnessed from the yacht Valhalla, off Parahiba
(Brazil), in 1905. It is safe to say that it is generally recog-
nised, even by those who are profoundly sceptical of other
sea-serpent stories, as a piece of evidence which cannot
be disregarded — and yet which cannot be explained by
supposing that any known creature was seen. It may be
added that the Valhalla was engaged upon a cruise
devoted to scientific research, and that her ‘ sea-monster '
was observed by two very competent witnesses ; one of
whom was acting as the naturalist, and the other the
entomologist, of the expedition. Both were Fellows of
the Zoological Society.

In accordance with my plan of presenting the facts as
far as possible from original documents, I subjoin, in the
first place, the report on the subject which was presented
to the Zoological Society (jointly) by the two witnesses —
Mr. E. G. B. Meade-Waldo and the late Mr. M. J.
Nicoll —and which was printed in the Society's Pro-
ceedings for 1906. It may be as well to remark that the
Valhalla was a large auxiliary yacht, of 1,700 tons,
capable of steaming ten to eleven knots, and of somewhat
exceeding this speed under full sail.: She was owned by
the late Earl of Crawford.* His state of health rendered it

1 She is stated to have occasionally /ogged sixteen knots under all plain
sail. Jama little dubious about her having actually reached such a speed.

* He was well known for his scientific tastes, particularly in the direction


ofastronomy. As Lord Lindsay, he equipped an expedition to Rodriguez
195


196 THE SEA-SERPENT


imperative that he should winter in a warm climate, and
it was his practice to take a small party of friends for a
long voyage, and to pass the time in scientific research.
The cruise now in question was the third of these. The
party consisted of Lord Crawford himself, the Hon.
Walter Lindsay, Dr. A. Dean, Mr. M. J. Nicoll, and
Mr. E. G. B. Meade-Waldo.


‘(From “Proceedings of the Zoological Society, 1906” —
PP: 719, 721.)
“7. Description of an unknown Animal seen at Sea off
the Coast of Brazil. By E. G. B. Meade-Waldo, F.Z.S.,
and Michael J. Nicoll, F.Z.S.
(Received June 19, 1906)
(Text-figure 114)
‘ The following are accounts of a large marine animal
(text fig. 114, p. 720)! seen off the coast of Brazil,
copied from the journals made by us during our cruise
in the Earl of Crawford's yacht ‘ The Valhalla’ : —
““ On Dec. 7th, 1905, at 10.15 A.M., I was on the
poop of the * Valhalla’ with Mr. Nicoll, when he drew
my attention to an object in the sea about 100 yards
frora the yacht ; he said : ' Is that the fin of a great
fish ?'
* * I looked and immediately saw a large fin or frill
sticking out of the water, dark seaweed-brown in
colour, somewhat crinkled at the edge. It was ap-
parently about 6 feet in length and projected from
18 inches to 2 feet from the water.
*" I got my field-glasses on to it (a powerful pair of
Goerz Triéder), and almost as soon as I had them on
in 1874 to observe the transit of Venus of that year ; and he also established
a private observatory at Dun Echt, near Aberdeen, where (especially under
Gill, its first director) much valuable work was done. He was President


of the Royal Astronomical Society in 1878-9. He died in 1913.
1 See Fig. 20, and also Frontispiece.


9061 “4131909 721807007, 341 fo s3utpa2204q WOIT
AALSNOW-VAS | $,|VTIVHTVA , IHL OZ 'DI4


Em
[E EE | SEES


RSIS SSS


—


197


Os


198 THE SEA-SERPENT


the frill, a great head and neck rose out of the water in
front of the frill ; the neck did not touch the frill in the
water, but came out of the water in front of it, at a
distance of certainly not less than 18 inches, probably
more. The neck appeared about the thickness of a
slight man's body, and from 7 to 8 feet was out of the
water; head and neck were all about the same
thickness.
* “The head had a very turtle-like appearance, as had
also the eye. I could see the line of the mouth, but we
were sailing pretty fast, and quickly drew away from
the object, which was going very slowly. It moved its
head and neck from side to side in a peculiar manner :
the colour of the head and neck was dark brown
above, and whitish below — almost white, I think.
When first seen it was about level with the poop of the
yacht, and on the starboard side.
* * [ made it out by the chart to be in about S. lat.
7° 4', long. 34? 20', but I think this is not quite
correct. Mr. Nicoll got the correct position from the
captain. The depth of the water where we saw it was
about 300 fathoms, but quickly went to as much
as 1300 fathoms.
* * Since I saw the creature I consider on reflection
that it was probably considerably larger than it
appeared at first, as I proved that objects, the size with
(sic) which I was well acquainted, appear very much
smaller than they really are when seen on the ocean
at a similar distance with nothing to compare them
with.

E. G. B. Mrzaprz-Warpo."'


! The correct position appears to have been 7? 14' S., 34? 25’ W. This
puts the ship about 23 miles 106? from C. Branco (near Parahiba, Brazil),
and just outside the roo-fathom line. Two miles landward from this
position, there is a charted sounding of 37 fathoms ; three miles seaward,
one of 1,340 fathoms (Admiralty Chart No. 528).


YACHT VALHALLA, 1905 199


For convenience, I insert here some further details with
which Mr. Meade-Waldo has recently furnished me.

The remainder of the account in the Proceedings of the
. Zoological Society will be found quoted in a longer narra-
tive (given on pp. 201, 2) which Mr. Nicoll published two
years later.


Mr. Meade-Waldo writes (27.1.29) :

*, . . I don't know that I have much to add to what
has already been published . . . we were about
200 yards from the creature, which appeared on our
starboard beam, going the same way as we were but
more slowly. I got my field glasses on it at once.
Nicoll who was with me had not got his. The colour
was dark seaweed brown ; the frill at the back of the
head and along the back crinkled at the edge. About
8ft. of neck was out of the water, and the under side
was dirty white. It made a wave as it went along, and
under water behind the neck I could see a good-sized
body. As we drew ahead we could see it swing its
neck from side to side and it lashed the sea into foam.
‘The eye and the edge of the neck had a turtle-like
appearance to us both. We were so astonished at the
time that we could neither of us speak We then
visited (late) Lord Crawford, and he said he would stop
the yacht if it was any use ; but we decided as we
were making about 14 knots it would not be much
use.

* 'The creature seen from H.M.S. Daedalus . . . and
figured in the “ Illustrated London News”... might


easily be the same. . . .’


1 In a later letter to me, Mr. Meade-Waldo remarks :‘... I shall never
forget poor Nicoll’s face of amazement when we looked at each other after


we had passed out of sight of it...’


200 THE SEA-SERPENT


And here is Mr. Nicoll's account, as given in his book,
Three Voyages of a Naturalist 3:


(pp. 21-26)
* . . Before describing our doings at Bahia, I must
refer in detail to an important incident which occurred
on the high seas during our second voyage thither.
‘On the 7th December, 1905, when in latitude
7? 14’ S., longitude 34° 25’ W., and about fourteen
miles from the coast of Brazil near Para, a creature of
most extraordinary form and proportions was sighted
by two of us. At the time we were under sail only,
and were slowly making our way to Bahia.
* [t was at about 10 o'clock in the morning, and I was
leaning on the rail of the poop deck, when a large fin
suddenly appeared close to the ship at a distance of
about fifty yards. This fin resembled that of no fish —
I had previously seen, and I pointed it out im-
mediately to Mr. E. G. B. Meade-Waldo, who was
on deck with me at the time, and we watched it together
for several minutes.
' As we passed slowly by, a long eel-like neck sur-
mounted by a head, shaped somewhat like that of
a turtle, rose out of the water in front of the fin. This
creature remained in sight for a few minutes, but we
soon drew ahead of it, and it became lost to view,
owing to the ripple of the water. Owing to the fact
that we were under sail at the time, it was not possible
to go about and make a closer inspection,* and with
| Three Voyages of a Naturalist (London, Witherby & Co., 1908). To
my surprise, I discovered that (in May 1930) there was no copy of this


book in the British Museum Library — at least I could find none catalogued
under any of the numerous variant spellings of the name * Nicoll.’

2 This, of course, is an over-statement. A sailing ship can always be
put about — but it takes a little time. No doubt Mr. Nicoll meant that it


was impossible to go about quickly enough to keep within close view of the
creature.


YACHT ‘VALHALLA, I90; 201


great regret we had to be content with the view we
had had of this remarkable monster.’


A full account of it was given at a meeting of the
Zoological Society of London on June 19th, 1906, and
I quote below from the report which was printed in
the Proceedings of that Society. . .


* At 10.15 A.M. on Thursday, December 7, 1905, when
in lat. 7° 14' S., long. 34° 25’ W., in a depth of from
322 to 1340 fathoms, Meade-Waldo and I saw a most
extraordinary creature about 100 yards from the ship
and moving in the same direction, but very much
slower than we were going.

‘At first, all that we could see was a dorsal fin about
four feet long, sticking up about two feet from the
water ; this fin was of a brownish-black colour and
much resembled a gigantic piece of ribbon seaweed.
Below the water we could indistinctly see a very large
brownish-black patch, but we could not make out the
shape of the creature. Every now and then the fin
entirely disappeared below the water.

* Suddenly an eel-like neck about six feet long, and of
the thickness of a man's thigh, having a head shaped
like that of a turtle, appeared in front of the fin. This
head and neck, which were of the same colour above
as the fin, but of a silvery-white below, lashed
up the water with a curious wriggling movement.
After this it was so far astern of us that we could make
out nothing else.

‘During the next fourteen hours we “ went about ”
twice and at about 2 A.m. the following day (Dec. 8th)
in lat. 7° 19’ S. long. 34° 04’ W.,: the first and third
mates, Mr. Simmonds and Mr. Harley, who were on


«c


ı No soundings have been made within several miles of this position,
but the depth is probably 2,000 fathoms or so.


202 THE SEA-SERPENT


the bridge at the time, saw a great commotion in the
water. At first they thought it was a rock awash about
100-150 yards away on the port side, just aft of the
bridge, but they soon made out that it was something
moving and going slightly faster than the ship, which
at that time was doing about 81 knots. Mr. Simmonds
hailed the deck, and one of the crew who was on the
“ look-out " saw it too."

* Although there was a bright moon at the time they
couldn't make out anything of the creature itself,
owing to the amount of wash it was making ; but they
say that from the commotion in the water it looked as
if a submarine was going along just below the surface.
They both say most emphatically that it was not
a whale, and that it was not blowing, nor have they
ever seen anything like it before. After they had
watched it for several minutes, it “‘ sounded " off the
port bow, and they saw no more of it.

MicHAzL J. Nicorr.” ’


‘This creature was an example, I consider, of what
has been so often reported, for want of a better name,
as the “‘ great sea-serpent." I feel sure, however,
that it was not a reptile that we saw, but a mammal.
It is, of course, impossible to be certain of this, but the
general appearance of the creature, especially the soft,
almost rubber-like fin, gave one this impression. It is
often said that, if there were such a monster, remains
of it would have been found long ago, but this is not
necessarily so. Supposing the “ sea-serpent " lives in
deep holes, such as there were in the spot where we
saw our “‘ monster,” then there would be little chance
of remains being washed ashore, and the amount of
deep-sea dredging that has yet been done is very small,


* This incident is very typical of the vigilant watch kept by the average
* look-out man.’


YACHT VALHALLA, I905 203


so that it 1s not surprising that no parts of this creature
have been obtained in that way.

‘That it is not more often reported is not to be
wondered at, when one realizes how often it is that
a ship may sail for days together, without sighting
another ship, even in seas where there is considerable
traffic.:

* Also, it must be remembered that such ridicule is
generally bestowed on the reports of sea-monsters that
many persons hesitate to describe what they have seen.
I know myself of several instances of unknown sea-
monsters having been seen by reliable witnesses, who,
to avoid the inevitable '' chaff,” would not publicly
state their experiences.’


I have little to add to these remarks — valuable as those
of a trained naturalist who had himself seen a ‘ sea-
monster. But I feel that I can scarcely omit the
* explanation ' of the Va/halla’s creature advanced — quite
seriously — in a recent work.* Here itis:


*. .. One wonders whether this was possibly a sword-fish
(which has a large square dorsal-fin) and whether the
long neck was not the sword at the end of which was
an impaled fish which was being macerated by violent
wrigglings in the water . . .'


I really do not feel equal to commenting on this
theory.


1 The German raider Wo/f left Germany on November 3oth, 1916,
was absent for fourteen months (visiting the Indian Ocean and Australian
waters, laying mine-fields and capturing several vessels), and returned
unscathed to Germany. During the whole of this period, although our
Navy and others were not exactly idle in searching for enemy craft, she
was never challenged by an Allied man-of-war.

? Nature Notes for Ocean Voyagers, by Captain A. Carpenter, R.N., and
Captain Sir David W. Barker, R.N.R. (London, 1926), p. 133.


Cu xs Ed

<HILARY 197

Ir is significant of the small attention which reports of
sea-serpents now attract, that although I had been
collecting published notices of these for a good many
years past I had never, until this year, heard of the
singular occurrence which preceded the sinking of H.M.
armed merchant cruiser Hilary: in May 1917. There
are, however, mitigating circumstances to be pleaded.
Such an event was not likely to attract much attention
during the War ; and, although an account of it was
published in 1920, it only saw the light in a *' Boys’
Annual,’ and was no doubt regarded as being merely
an effort of 1magination.

Such, however, was by no means the case. The facts,
"which I propose to give, are well authenticated ; as well,
that is, as can be expected in the absence of the ship's log.
She was torpedoed two days after she sighted her sea-
monster ; and those who have served afloat will have
no difficulty in understanding that, in the minds of many
of her ship's company, the one event was a natural con-
sequence of the other.

In Parliamentary Paper No. 200 of 1919, ' Naval
Losses,’ the Hilary’s fate is recorded with a complete and
natural absence of emotion, thus :


“ARMED MERCHANT CRUISERS.
(Name) (Tonnage) (Built) (Sunk) (Remarks)
“Hilary 6,329 1908. 25 May Sunk by submarine
(gross) [1917] in Atlantic.
1 Formerly of the Booth Line.


204


MvM.IS. HILARY, 1917 205


Behind all such entries, if one could recover it, is
a story of fine work well done, and ending tragically but
gallantly ; but in this case there is, also, an element of the
bizarre and grotesque. Hilary’s commander, Captain
F. W. Dean, R.N., subsequently wrote an excellent
account of the occurrence, which appeared in Herbert
Strang’s Annual, 1920. Before giving it, I ought to
mention that, with Captain Dean’s consent, I have inter-
polated (in square brackets) one or two pieces of informa-
tion which he has since supplied. Apart from these, and
my notes, the account is now given exactly as originally
written. It will be seen that the creature was passed at
such close range that there could be little doubt as to its
appearance and character.


'* Many a good yarn could be told of the adventures of
those whose privilege it was to serve in the armed
merchant cruisers which, during the greater part of the
war, maintained the blockade from the Scottish coast
to the Arctic ice-line. With the title I have given to -
this one: I naturally do not expect it to be believed,
though it is in fact true to the last detail, as many of
those who were serving in the Hilary during her last
few days above water can confirm.

* After a stormy winter we enjoyed some wonderfully
fine weather during May 1917. On the morning of,
I think, the 22nd the conditions were perfect — brilliant
sunshine and not a cat's paw to ruffle the sea. Beyond
the horizon to the northward the peaks of Iceland
could be seen,? the only breaks in our all-round view
of sea and sky.


1 ¢ The Sea-Serpent Again : A Yarn of the North Sea Patrol,’ by F. W.
Dean (Herbert Strang’s Annual, 1920).


*The Hilary was some seventy miles S.E. of the S.E. extremity of
Iceland. I am not certain whether this distance is in nautical or statute


206 THE SEA-SERPENT


* [t was about 9 a.m., and I was sitting at the writing-
table in my cabin, which was immediately under the
bridge, when a report was shouted down to me:
“ Object on the starboard quarter." In three seconds
I was on the bridge, asking, “ Was it a periscope ?
AX heres it 54

‘“ No, not a periscope,” replied the officer of the
watch. “ It looks more like a living thing, but it is
not a whale," and he pointed at an object which at
first glance suggested to my mind a tree trunk with
only the knobby ends (from which branches and roots
had been cut) visible. A careful look through my
glasses, however, made it clear that the thing was alive,
and that the “ knobby ends" were in fact its head
and dorsal fin.

* We never missed a chance in those days to do a bit of
anti-submarine practice, and it at once struck me that
here was a good target ; so I turned to the Ist. lieu-
tenant, Lieutenant-Commander Charles M. Wray
R.N.R., and told him to get our three 6-pounder guns'
crews up, so that each one in turn should have a run.
Like most of the armed merchant cruisers on that
patrol, we had, in addition to our heavier guns, two
6-pounders placed one each side, just abaft the bridge,
and part of our defence scheme was to have three guns'
crews, one of which was always on watch between
these two guns, ready to close up instantly starboard
or port, according to which side a submarine might be
sichten" isos
“Before taking the liberty of using the stranger as
a target, however, I thought it would be a good thing


miles. In the weather conditions reported, however, Oraefajókull
(6,947 feet), and possibly some of its neighbours, would certainly have
been visible at a distance of seventy nautical (eighty-two statute) miles,
and even more.


HeM.S. “HILARY, I9I7 207


to have a closer look at it, so told Lieutenant Harris,:
the navigator, to turn the ship round and head towards
it. In due course we approached our object end on,
and when we were about a cable from it, it quietly
moved out of our way, and we passed it about thirty
yards off on our starboard side, getting a very good
view of it while doing so.
‘The head was about the shape of, but somewhat
larger than that of, a cow, though with no observable
protrusions such as horns or ears, and was black, ex-
cept for the front of the face, which could be clearly
seen to have a strip of whitish flesh, very like a cow
has, -between its nostrils. As we passed, the head
raised itself two or three times, apparently to get a good
look at the ship. From the back of the head to the
dorsal fin no part of the creature showed above water,
but the top edge of the neck was just level with the
surface, and its snake-like movements could be clearly
seen. [It curved to almost a semi-circle as the creature
moved its head round as if to follow us with its eyes.]
‘ The dorsal fin appeared like a black triangle, and
when the creature was end on, this fin was seen to be
very thin and apparently flabby, as the upper part
turned over sometimes like the top of a terrier's ear
when cocked. The fin was estimated to be about four
feet high when in the position highest out of the
water.
* I was anxious to get as good an estimate as possible of
the length of the neck, i.e. the distance from the head
to the fin, so asked the rst. lieutenant, the navigator
and the officer of the watch each to note, as I did, the
length, and we compared with following results :
* rst. Lieutenant.—"' The length of one of our boats ”
(2 8 ft. );


1 Lieutenant Frederick C. P. Harris, R.N.R.


208 THE SEA-SERPENT


‘ Navigator.—‘‘ Not less than fifteen feet.”

* Officer of Watch.—‘‘ Length of one of our boats."

* Myself.— ‘Twenty feet.”

From which it may fairly be assumed that the true
length of the neck was probably not less than twenty
feet ; and, assuming that the dorsal fin would be just
behind the junction of neck and body, the total length

of the creature would be about 60 feet.

‘ The creature did not seem to be in the least alarmed

by the presence of the ship, but continued to bask on
the surface, now sinking down till only the tip of its
nose and fin were visible, and anon rising again till the
whole head and the fin to a height of four feet were
above water.

‘The ship was steaming at twelve knots all the time,

so the creature was soon I000 yards astern, and we
then turned round, and I gave the order, when the-
range- was approximately 1200 yards, for the first @
gun's crew to fire five rounds rapid.

‘The gunlayer straddled his object [with the third
and fourth rounds], but his best shot was some twenty
yards off being a hit, and the creature ignored the
performance entirely.

“ The second gun’s crew were now closed up, the helm
was put over, and the range opened again to about
1200 yards, and the five rounds rapid repeated. This
time two shots seemed to fall very close to the object,
but still quite failed to disturb its equanimity.

* The third gun's crew was now closed up, and on my
order, " Five rounds rapid," the first shot fell very
close to the creature, the second was a clean hit, and
produced at once a furious commotion, which re-
minded me more than anything else of a bather lying


-


1 Ie. one shot fell slightly beyond the creature, and the other slightly
short of it.


Bes, HILARY, 1917 209


on his back in smooth water and kicking out with all
his force to splash the water, only of course the com-
motion on this occasion was on a vastly greater scale.
It continued for perhaps three seconds, and then
stopped, and we saw no more of the creature, though
we passed close to the spot where it was last seen, so
I gave orders for the ship to be put back on her patrol
course, and left the bridge, telling the navigator to
make a brief notation of the whole circumstance in
the log.

* [t was soon after 7 a.m. on the second (or maybe the
third, I am not certain) day after this that brother Hun
gotus. A sitting shot we gave him, it being a bright,
smooth morning, and the low sun right in our eyes.
Our fires were extinguished at once, and when the
ship had lost her way: and was steadily settling down,
it became necessary to take to the boats. In due course
our poor old ship went under ; the boats made for the
land, which was fifty miles away, and during the after-
noon all were picked up by a patrol drifter except
one, which was found by a destroyer early next
morning. I noticed when one of the boats came
alongside the drifter that a little brown hand-bag was
passed on board.

* A day or two later I was walking on the quarter-deck
of the depot ship in the port where we were all landed,
and was talking to Wray and Harris. I asked them if
they knew who the little brown hand-bag belonged to,
and was told that it belonged to D »? who was
officer of the watch at the time of the sea-serpent
episode. This officer had been brought up at sea as


1 This does not imply any reflection on the navigator ; it means * when
the Hilary had practically come to a standstill.’

2 I have thought it best to omit the name of this officer (now dead), ‘ as
not being sufficiently known by all to give point, but well enough remem-
bered by some to give pain.’


210 THE SEA-SERPENT


a youngster by a captain who had an extensive
knowledge of, and a firm belief in, many old sea
superstitions, and apparently had adopted to some
extent his old captain's views, for I was told that after
I left the bridge he made a vehement appeal to Harris
not to make the entry, in the log, which I had ordered.
““ Nonsense," said Harris: “of course I must log
the matter as the captain has ordered." And he did
so.

= “OW ell? “sard © D , “that makes it a certainty
anyhow — we shall never reach port again.” And when
he was relieved at the end of his watch, his first action
was to go to his cabin and pack up his valuables ready
for the coming event !

‘Though some thirty-five years had elapsed between
the time I first put on the blue uniform and this final
disaster of my career, I had never up to that day heard
that any bad luck was associated with the seeing of
a sea-serpent. Now, however, if you ask me “ Am
I superstitious about seeing a sea-serpent ?" I only
reply, “ Well, if ever I found myself again at sea in
command of a ship, and anything of the sort was
sighted, I should leave it alone and make no entry in


the log 1^


I confess that, like Captain Dean, I had never before
heard that it was held unlucky, by seamen, to sight
a 'sea-serpent. But it sounds very probable indeed.
Sailors, as a class, are conservative and pessimistic ; they
take a delight in dark forebodings ; like the Fat Boy,
they itch to make one’s flesh creep; and anything
unusual is generally hailed as a portentous omen, pregnant
with mischief. It was this somewhat irritating trait — one -
of the hardy mariner's less pleasing peculiarities — which
induced a Commander of my acquaintance to announce,


mess. TEU Age, £9.17 OE


-tersely and with emphasis, that any seaman or marine
who shouldeutter in his hearing the hackneyed formula
“ Well, we didn't do it that way last commission, Sir ”
should receive ten days ' 10 A.’»

Whether avenging Fate (incarnate in the prosaic form
of a prowling U-boat) sank the Hilary, may justifiably
be doubted. It may be as well to point out that Captain
Dean, in opening fire on his sea-monster, was complying
strictly with the instructions laid down in the ‘ Admiralty
Manual of Scientific Enquiry’ *; in addition, it was
war-time, and plenty of anti-submarine practice was
undoubtedly necessary. I mention this, because I have
no sympathy with wanton cruelty in any form, ' sporting '
or otherwise.

As they may help to clear up one or two points in
connection with the Hilary’s creature, I subjoin extracts
from letters which I exchanged with Captain Dean on
the subject.


(R. T. G. to F. IF. D.)


€


. . . In making my selection of cases, my first
principle has been to exclude all in which there is any
possibility that what was seen could have been any
known creature. Now I am sure, from your account,
that what you saw was not open to this objection — but
a confirmed sceptic might, unless headed off, take a
different view. He might allege that what you saw
was, in reality, a large basking-shark.

.' I can speak from experience on this point, since I have
a vivid recollection of seeing a huge one, some thirty
feet and upwards in length, swimming lazily about in


the Irish Channel - when I was serving in H.M.S.


1 A form of punishment, now abolished.


? See p. 165.


212 THÉ SEA-SERPENT


Achates, just before the War.: We passed it as near
as you did your creature ; it was swimming just flush
with the surface, its large triangular back-fin showing,
and was curving itself easily and gracefully as it swam.
On the other hand, so close an approach left no doubt
as to its being a shark ; and no doubt your obser-
vations left you in no doubt that your creature was
not à shark.

“I gather that your creature did not lift its neck out
of water. But could you say :


‘1. Was the neck clearly seen to be comparatively
small in diameter along its length ?

“2. What was its diameter, as compared with the
head ?

“3. Was there any indication of a junction of the
neck with a larger body ?

* 4. Were any paddles or fins, other than the dorsal,
seen ; or anything to indicate how the creature
progressed ?

‘5. Was there any sign of a mane on the back ?

* 6. Were any teeth visible ?

“I subjoin a little sketch of a basking-shark, for com-
parison with yours, to illustrate the points at issue.'*


(F. W. D. to R. T. G)


‘, « « . Your questions—


1. I was unable to see at all the shape or size of the
neck, only that the top of it was just exactly
awash all along and at times bent to almost a
semi-circle.


1 If our ship’s company regarded this encounter as a bad omen, they
werenotsofar wrong. During the night (we sighted our shark just before
sunset) news came that the hospital-ship Maine was ashore on Lockwood’s
Island (Mull), and early next morning I had the doubtful pleasure of
navigating the ship at thirty knots through the north end of Jura Sound.

a See Bio, am


HsM.Si HILARY,” 1917 213


Zu Ge Ts

3. No, conditions were such that everything below
surface was totally obscured.

4. No.

5. No.


FIG. 21. CREATURE SEEN BY H.M.S. ‘ HILARY, IQI7
NoTE.—(a) is from a rough sketch by Capt. F. W. Dean, R.N. ; (4) shows a
suggested, but impossible, explanation of it.


6. No. The head was lifted once or twice as shewn
in my rough sketch which you reproduce, the
surface was of seal-like appearance, the pale flesh
in front like a cow's nose was very noticeable but
I was struck by the invisibility of mouth, eyes or
CT RS


It was most certainly mot a shark.* Sorry my in-
formation is so negative.’


! See also p. 153. 2 My italics.
Ps


214 THE SEA-SERPENT


Negative or not, one point seems clearly established —
namely, that the creature was not a shark or a whale.
Apart from Captain Dean’s very decided statement on
the point, neither of these could lift a comparatively
small, seal-like head while keeping a long neck flush with
the water - or curve the latter into a semi-circle.:
And yet its computed length — sixty feet — precludes the
supposition that it was a ribbon-fish ; and I do not
think that the most hardened sceptic would seriously
assert, like Owen, that it must have been a sea-elephant,
or perhaps a school of porpoises. ‘The only creature to
which it bears any resemblance is that seen by the
Valhalla : which, also, exhibited a dorsal fin rising some
four feet out of water, and a long, snake-like neck. In
both cases, there seems to be no doubt that the observers
saw a single living sea-creature of unknown species.


3 This recalls the extreme flexibility noted by the observers at Gloucester
and Nahant a century earlier. Seep. 40.


Cu. XI. SOME
POST-WAR REPORTS


In concluding my budget of cases, I should like to put
on record four reports which have come to my personal
knowledge, and which have not, so far as I know, been
published before. Their dates are respectively 1919,
1020 I921, and 1923,


Island of Hoy, Orkneys, 1919.

Early this year I was shown, by an acquaintance,
a copy of a letter describing a long-necked sea-creature
which had been seen in the Pentland Firth in 1919.
I got into touch with its writer, Mr. J. Mackintosh Bell,
Writer to the Signet, of Roundstonefoot, Moffat ; and
he has very kindly furnished me with the statement which
I subjoin.

It will be noted that the creature seen by Mr. Bell
appears to be much smaller than any of those described
in former chapters, its total length being estimated at
eighteen to twenty feet, and its weight at six tons or so.
As in the case of the Moha Moha,: however, I consider
that, as the creature 1s apparently unknown to science,
and exhibits several features characteristic of most sea
serpent reports, some account of it may well find a place
in this book.

The following is Mr. Mackintosh Bell's account
(slightly abbreviated) :


uin 1919 after demobilisation, I went as had been my
custom for years to Brims Walls, Orkneys, to spend


1 See chapter vii.
215


216 THE SEA-SERPENT


a month's holiday by taking my place as one of the
crew in a cod-line fishing boat, belonging to fishermen
friends. . . . The very first day I was there, I think
it was about 5 August, I went afloat with a crew of four
at about 9.30 a.m. for the purpose of firstly lifting
lobster creels and then for cod fishing. On making
our way to the creels, which had been set in a line
between Brims Ness and Tor Ness, my friends said
“ We wonder if we will see that sea monster which we
often see, and perhaps you will be able to tell us what
it is,”
“We got to the creels, hauled some, and were moving
slowly with the motor to another, when my friends |
said very quietly ‘‘ There he is.”
“I looked, and sure enough about 25-30 yards from
- the boat a long neck as thick as an elephant's fore leg,
all rough-looking like an elephant's hide, was sticking:
up. On top of this was the head which was much
smaller in proportion, but of same colour. The head
was like that of a dog, coming sharp to the nose. The
eye was black and small, and the whiskers were black.
The neck, I should say, stuck about 5-6 ft., possibly
more, out of the water.
‘The animal was very shy, and kept pushing its head
up then pulling it down, but never going quite out of
sight.: The body I could not then see. Then it dis-
appeared, and I said ''If it comes again I'll take
a snapshot of it." Sure enough it did come and I took
as I thought a snap of it, but on looking at the camera
shutter, I found it had not closed owing to its being
swollen, so I did not get a photo. I then said “ Pll
shoot it " (with my .303 rifle) but the skipper would not
hear of it in case I wounded it, and it might attack us.


1 This action is strongly suggestive of a seal ; but no known seal has a
neck of the proportions described by Mr. Mackintosh Bell.


Y L

Ue à p
ut 7,7
S iu,


WEN ee
EEE


M


N


RE SEEN OFF HOY, IQ
r. J. Mackintosh Bell,
217


TU
M


218 THÉ SEA-SERPENT


“It disappeared, and as was its custom swam close
alongside the boat about 10 feet down. We all saw it
plainly, my friends remarking that they had seen it
many times swimming just the same way after it had
shown itself on the surface. My friends told me that
they had seen it the year before just about the same
place. It was a common occurrence, so they said.
‘That year (1919) was the last of several years in
which they saw it annually. It did not show itself
again for two or three years, and then it was only
seen once. As to its body, it was, seen below the
water, dark brown, getting slightly lighter as it got to
the outer edge, then at the edge appeared to be almost
grey. It had two paddles or fins on its sides and two
at its stern. My friends thought it would weigh 2 or
3 tons, some thinking 4 to 6. Not only my friends,
but others, lobster fishing, got many chances of seeing
ES ones

“ I may say that since 1919 all cod and other deep-sea
coarse fish have left the Pentland Firth. I think the
reason is that such monsters frequent the rocky caves,
which are always covered by deep water. My friends
think the animal may have been killed by a passing
steamer, but I think it is possibly a native of warmer
seas, and that if we get a really hot summer it will be
seen again.’


Mr. Mackintosh Bell also furnished me with two sketches
ofthe creature (Figs. 22 and 23), and with a map showing
approximately the spot where he and his companions saw
it. The position is on the northern side of the Pentland
Firth, approximately 1.6 miles north-westward of Tor
Ness, the southern point of Hoy I., Orkneys, and about

an eighth of a mile off shore, in some twenty fathoms.
In reply to an enquiry as to the creature's approximate


FIG. 23. THE HOY CREATURE, SEEN SWIMMING UNDER WATER


From a sketch by Mr. J. Mackintosh Bell, W.S.


219


220 THE SEA-SERPENT


dimensions, Mr. Mackintosh Bell subsequently wrote
as follows :


*... Dimensions. Neck, so far as seen, say 6—7 feet.
Body never seen when neck straight up, but just covered
by the water. You could detect the paddles causing the
water to ripple. When under water, swimming, the
body, I think, to the end of the tail flappers would be
about 12ft. long — and, if the neck were stretched to say
8ft., the neck and body 18-20 ft. long. The skipper of
the boat remarked that sometimes the top of the head,
when seen from a boat vertically, was a bright red. `=
Neck thickness say 1 foot diameter : Head very like a
black retriever —say 6” long by 4” broad. Whiskers
black and short. Circumference of body say 10-11 feet,
but this I am not sure of, as I never saw all round it,
but it would be 4-5 ft. across the back. . . .’


I may mention that, from a number of the figures illus-
trating this book, Mr. Mackintosh Bell selected Plate V
(Dr. Matheson's sea-monster) as most resembling what he
saw. Heremarks :


“...(it) depicts the animal we saw, very closely, but the
head of ours was much smaller — more like a black or
dark brown retriever, withsmall beady black eyes. . . .?


St. Paul Rocks, 1920.
In July, 1929 — appropriately enough, at the beginning
of the ‘silly season ' — I published an article on the


1 Mr. Bell remarks, as to this estimate . . . “ possibly that is extreme,
I8 feet being, as far as I could judge, the length."


? I have given the name of these rocks, as a sub-heading, to form a point
d'appui for this account ; but they are actually distant some fifty miles from
the position given, and are only a barren cluster of volcanic rocks, over
500 miles from S. America, the nearest mainland.


SOME POST-WAR REPORTS 221


sea-serpent in the Evening News.‘ Its appearance brought
me a certain amount of correspondence, including the
following letter :


*. - . In 1920 I was Third Officer of the Royal Mail
Steam Packet Company's steamer “ Tyne," on a
voyage from the U.K. to the Plate, and in April we
left Casablanca for Rio de Janeiro.
* When in the latitude of St. Paul's Rocks, I was
standing on the deck about 3 o'clock one afternoon
towards the end of April, when I saw on the starboard
side what appeared to be a spar projecting from the
sea : I drew the attention of the Second Officer, who
was on watch, to the object, and he also observed what
he first took to be a spar attached to wreckage. On
watching it closely with binoculars, I saw that it was
moving in the same direction as the ship, and about
the same speed, and also that there was a moving head
on top of what I knew was a long neck.
‘It was clearly a creature of some description, and the
head, like an umbrella handle, turned and looked at the
ship, then the creature closed in towards us to a dis-
tance of about 400 yards. It kept speed with the ship,
and appeared to be looking at us. For roughly five
minutes it travelled parallel with us, then the neck
curved over like a swan, and 1t dived out of sight.
* At the time I wondered what the body was like, there
being considerable spray behind the neck, with flashes
of dark body like a whale ; but I was not sure whether
it was a long sinuous body like a snake, or round like
a whale.
* As soon as I saw the illustration accompanying your
1 The editorial department prefixed a little introduction of their own,
which remarked, rather charmingly: ‘. . . This is the Sea-Serpent season,


and here Commander Gould, who is quite serious about the matter, quotes
some of the evidences for the creature’s existence.’ (My italics.)


222 THE SEA-SERPENT ©


article, I at once recognised the type of head : I told
a number of people on my return of the occurrence,
but, I think, was politely disbelieved ; while my
suggestion that the event be entered in the Log was
refused on the ground that we should have our wine
bills stopped. Enclosed is a rough sketch of what


I saw.


* Yours faithfully,
*'THoMas A. R. Murr.’


FIG. 24. SEA-SERPENT SEEN FROM 8.8. ‘ TYNE, 1920
From a sketch by Mr. 'T. A. R. Muir.


I have reproduced Mr. Muir's sketch as Fig. 24. On
the original are typed some notes, as follows :


“Neck projected about 30 to 35 feet.
“ Body appeared to extend back behind neck for about
50 to 60 feet, in very disturbed water.’


1 Plate V. (Dr. Matheson's sea-monster.)


OME POST-WAR REPORTS 223


‘ Swam at speed of 12 knots, for about ie minutes,
closing in on ship to 400 yards.’
* Turned head towards and away from ship a number
of times.’
“ April 1920. Position approx. Lat. 1° 30’ North ;
Long. 28° o' West.’


Back Bay, Bombay, 1921.

Here is another specimen from my letter-bag. In this
ase, as will be seen, the writer himself regards his story as
o intrinsically improbable that he asks for his name to be
uppressed ; an attitude of mind which I deplore — but
with which, I must say, I sympathise.


* While sailing a small boat in Back Bay, Bombay, at
high tide, at midday in October 1921, I was amazed to
see suddenly emerge from a calm sea, something very
much like your illustration attached.*
* The upright neck stood some 10 feet, I should say,
perpendicularly from the sea surface, tapering very
slightly towards the head. The diameter of this column
appeared to be about 18 inches near the water. It
seemed to be covered with large scales and, in colour,
was a light olive green at the back, shading off to a
dirty yellow in front. The head was like that of a gigan-
tic tortoise, or turtle, but any body to correspond with
that head and neck would be, at least, fifty feet long,
I should judge.
* Being practically on the water line myself, I could see
no sign of any body beneath the surface. The creature
remained upright for possibly 30 seconds, swaying
slightly, and then sank back beneath the sea. I was
comparatively close, certainly not more than 150 yards
away, and I do not mind admitting that I made for
shore with all speed.

1 Plate V., as reproduced in the Evening News.


224 THE SEA-SERPENT


* The amazing thing is, that the encounter took place
not more than a mile from shore in an enclosed bay.?
Unfortunately, I was alone, and you can, of course,
guess the nature of the remarks made on my narrating
the incident.

‘ Should you refer to this at any time publicly, I should
be obliged if you would suppress my name.

* Yours faithfully,


FIG 25. CREATURE SEEN FROM H.M.S. ‘KELLETT, 1923


From a sketch by Capt. F. E. B. Haselfoot, R.N.


Black Deep, 1923.

Finally, mention should be made of a curious creature
seen by two officers of H.M. Surveying Ship Keleti
in 1923, when carrying out surveying operations in the
Black Deep, Thames Estuary.

I have obtained some particulars of this event from two


1 Not, of course, totally land-locked. Back Bay is about three miles long
by two miles wide.


SOME POST-WAR REPORTS 225


of the Ke//eit's officers, Captain F. E. B. Haselfoot, R.N.
(her captain) and Lt. Commander R. M. Southern, R.N.,
(her navigator). Unfortunately, neither of them took a
detailed note of it at the time. first learned of the
event from Captain Haselfoot in 1927. Lt. Commander
Southern recently furnished me with some further
details.

According to his account, the time of day was about
9 a.m. It was in summer (he thinks, August), the weather
calm and clear. He is not certain whether the sun was
shining. He twice observed, rising out of the water,
about 200 yards from the ship, a long, serpentine neck,
projecting some six to seven feet above the surface. It
'emained up, in each case, for four or five seconds.
Viewing it with the naked eye only, he did not perceive
inything that could positively be said to be a head.

Captain Haselfoot, who saw it once, has furnished me
with a rough sketch (Fig. 25) of the appearance, with
which Lt. Commander Southern concurs (except as to the
ead, concerning which heis not positive). Captain Hasel-
oot estimated the head's height out of water as from
ight to ten feet. The Kellett was working in the outer
nd of the Black Deep at the time, about ten miles off


hore.
In a recent letter to me, Captain Haselfoot remarks :


«, , . Black Deep was closed to navigation during
the war, and at the time of the survey it was still
closed, all the buoys being removed. In consequence
no ship or-vessel had been in this long reach for at
least eight years : its waters were thus entirely se-
cluded for the private activities of any sea-monster |”


Cu. XII. WHAT BECOMES
OF THE BODY?


Tuer foregoing chapters contain a selection of the positive
evidence which goes to prove the real existence of the so-
called sea-serpent. As against this, however, there is at
least one weighty, if negative, argument now to be con-
sidered.

It has often been urged, by those who deny, a priori,
that sea-serpents do or can exist, that, in such case, their
species must of course have been perpetuated by suc-
cessive generation. A large number of the individuals
must, therefore, have left their remains to bear witness,
after their death, to the fact of their quondam existence.
Yet no dead sea-serpents have ever been met with afloat ;
none has been cast on shore ; and the coasts of the Atlantic
— which is, by all accounts, their principal habitat — have
never, although carefully searched, yielded a single
vestige of their remains.

Before discussing this view in detail, it may be as well
to traverse it generally. It rests on a single and in-
correct assumption. There is no evidence tending to
prove that such creatures would necessarily float after
death — and upon this unproven assertion rests the whole
negative argument.

Nor is this all. There is much to be said on the
positive side. There is evidence which goes to show that
other rare species exist (not only in the sea, but even on
land) which have never come under scientific observation ;
there is evidence to show that some types of living sea-


creatures are known only by asingle specimen, accidentally
226


iz

|

WHAT BECOMES OF THE BODY? 227
stranded ; and there is evidence showing that, on one
or possibly more occasions, carcases have been washed
ashore which can scarcely be identified with any known
creature, and which exhibit marked affinity with the
reports of sea-serpents.

In order to present the adverse case fairly, I will quote
here the second portion of Owen's celebrated letter of
1848 upon the Dzda/us case.* It constitutes a most clear
and able attempt to do the impossible : namely, to prove
a general negative.*

*. . . I am usually asked, after each endeavour to
explain Captain M’Quhae’s sea-serpent, “ Why should
there not be a great sea-serpent ? " — often, too, in a
tone which seems to imply, “Do you think, then, there
are not more marvels in the deep, than are dreamt of in
your philosophy ?" And, freely conceding that point,
I have felt bound to give a reason for scepticism as well
as faith.

' If a gigantic sea-serpent actually exists, the species
must, of course, have been perpetuated through suc-
cessive generations, from its first creation and intro-
duction in the seas of this planet. Conceive, then, the
number of individuals that must have lived and died
and have left their remains to attest the actuality of the
species during the enormous lapse of time from its
beginning, to the 6th of August last !*

* Now, a serpent, being an air-breathing animal with
long vesicular and receptacular lungs, dives with an


1 The first half of this letter will be found on pp. 110-115. Two
connecting paragraphs —short, and of no particular importance — are
omitted.

* Oddly enough, in an earlier portion of his letter Owen censures
Captain M'Quhae for trying, so he asserts, to do the very same thing !


* The date on which the Deda/us’ sea-serpent was seen in 1848.


228 THE SEA-SERPENT


effort and commonly floats when dead ; and so would
the sea-serpent, until decomposition or accident had
opened the tough integument, and let out the im-
prisoned gases. Then it would sink, and, if in deep,
water, be seen no more until the sea rendered up its

dead, after the lapse of the eons requisite for the

yielding of its place to dry land — a change which has -
actually revealed to the present generation the old
saurian monsters that were entombed at the bottom of
the ocean of the secondary geological periods of our
earth's history. During life the exigencies of the
respiration of the great sea-serpent would always |
compel him frequently to the surface ; and when dead
and swollen —


Prone on the flood, extended long and large


he would


As whom the fables name of monstrous size,


|
Lay floating many a rood ; in bulk as huge, |
Titanian or Earth-born, that warr'd on Jove.!


existed, has not hitherto met the gaze of any of the
countless voyagers who have traversed the seas in so
many directions.*

“ Considering, too, the tides and currents of the ocean,
it seems still more reasonable to suppose that the dead
sea-serpent would be occasionally cast on shore. How-
ever, I do not ask for the entire carcase. The structure
of the back-bone of the serpent tribe is so peculiar, that
a single vertebra would suffice to determine the exis-
tence of the hypothetical Ophidian ; and this will not


‘Such a spectacle, demonstrative of the species if it |
?


1 Paradise Lost, book i., lines 195-8.


2? Sam Weller, it will be remembered, held the same opinion ee
dead donkeys on land.


WHAT BECOMES OF THE BODY? 229


be deemed an unreasonable request, when it is remem-
bered that the vertebre are more numerous in serpents
than in any other animals. Such large blanched and
scattered bones on any sea-shore would be likely to
attract even common curiosity ; yet there is no vertebrze
of a serpent larger than the ordinary pythons and boas
in any museum in Europe.

* Few sea-coasts have been more sedulously searched,
or by more acute naturalists (witness the labours of
Sars and Lovén), than those of Norway. Krakens and
sea serpents ought to have been living and dying
thereabouts from long before Pontoppidan's time, to
our day, if all tales were true ; yet have they never
vouchsafed a single fragment of their skeleton to any
Scandinavian collector ; while the other great denizens
of the seas have been by no means so chary. No mus-
eums, in fact, are so rich in the skeletons, skulls, bones
and teeth of the numerous kind of whales, cachalots,
grampuses, walruses, sea unicorns, seals, &c., as those
of Denmark, Norway, and Sweden ; but of any large
marine nondescript or indeterminable monster they
cannot show a trace.

“I have inquired repeatedly whether the natural
history collections of Boston, Philadelphia, or other
cities of the United States, might possess any un-
usually large ophidian vertebre, or any of such
peculiar form as to indicate some large and unknown
marine animal; but they have received no such
specimens.

‘The frequency with which the sea-serpent has been
supposed to have appeared near the shores and har-
bours of the United States has led to its being specified
as the ‘‘ American sea-serpent" ; yet, out of the
200 vertebra of every individual that should have
lived and died in the Atlantic since the creation of the


Os


230 THE SEA-SERPENT


species, not one has yet been picked up on the shores
of America. The diminutive snake, less than a yard
in length, “killed upon the sea-shore," apparently
beaten to death, “ by some labouring people of Cape
Ann"... (see the 8vo. pamphlet, 1817, Boston,
page 38) and figured in the J//ustrated London News,
October 28, 1848, from the original American memoir,
by no means satisfies the conditions of the problem.
Neither do the saccopharynx of Mitchell, nor the ophiog-
nathus of Harwood -the one 41 feet, the other 6 feet
long : both are surpassed by some of the congers of our
own coasts, and, like other muraenoid fishes and the
known small sea snakes (Hydrophis) swim by undulatory*
movements of the body.

* The fossil vertebre and skull which were exhibited by
Mr. Koch in New York and Boston as those of the
great sea-serpent, and which are now in Berlin, be-
longed to different individuals of a species which
I had previously proved to be an extinct whale ;
a determination which has subsequently been con-
firmed by Professors Muller and Agassiz. Mr.
Dixon, of Worthing, has discovered many fossil
vertebre in the Eocene tertiary clay at Bracklesham,
which belong to a large species of an extinct genus of
serpent (Palzophis), founded on similar vertebre from
the same formation in the Isle of Sheppey. The
largest of these ancient British snakes was 20 feet in
length ; but there is no evidence that they were
marine.

* The Sea Saurians of the Secondary periods of geology
have been replaced in the Tertiary and actual seas by
marine Mammals. No remains of Cetacea have been
found in Lias or Oolite, and no remains of Plesiosaur,
or Ichthyosaur, or any other secondary reptile, have


1See p. 55.


WHAT BECOMES OF THE BODY? 251


been found in Eocene or later tertiary deposits, or
recent, on the actual sea-shores, and that the old air-
breathing saurians floated when they died has been
shown: in the Geological] Transactions (vol. v., second
series, p. 512). Ihe inference that may reasonably
be drawn from no recent carcase or fragment of such
having ever been discovered, is strengthened by the
corresponding absence of any trace of their remains
in the tertiary beds.

“Now, on weighing the question, whether creatures

meriting the name of “ great sea serpent" do exist,

or whether any of the gigantic marine saurians of the

* secondary deposits may have continued to live up to
the present time, it seems to me less probable that no
part of the carcase of such reptiles should have ever
been discovered in a recent or unfossilized state, than
that men should have been deceived by a cursory view
of a partly submerged and rapidly moving animal,
which might only be strange to themselves. In other
words, I regard the negative evidence from the utter
absence of any of the recent remains of great sea
serpents, krakens, or Enaliosauria, as stronger against
their actual existence than the positive statements
which have hitherto weighed with the public mind in
favour of their existence. A larger body of evidence
from eye-witnesses might be got together in proof
of ghosts* than of the sea-serpent.’

1 This should have read ‘has been suggested. The reference is
(naturally) to a paper by Owen, in which he advances a theory — based
upon half-a-dozen separate suppositions — to explain why some (fossil)
Ichthyosauri are, and some P/esiosauri are not, found with their tails
partly dislocated. As a demonstration, of anything more than its author's
complacency, it is of no value.

2 This argument is unsound. See p. 272.

This is not a book about the ‘supernatural’; but I should like to draw


attention to the fallacy of this remark. No amount of ‘ evidence from
eye-witnesses ’ would prove the existence of ghosts—all that it could


232 THE SEA-SERPENT


So far Owen — dithyrambic, but cogent. To his con-
temporaries, his arguments may well have seemed
unanswerable : many readers may still find them so —
some of them, atleast. For one of the hypotheses under-
lying them has long been abandoned.

I refer, of course, to the immutability of species. For
Owen, there is no such thing as evolution, or even
modification by environment. As a species was at its
'first creation,’ so it must ever remain through the
‘lapse of the zons.” Should a serpentine land-creature
change its habitat for the sea (as the whales did long ago)
it is inconceivable that it should become modified in even
the smallest particular ; it must always have two hundred
vertebr& ; it must always float high, and ‘ dive with an
effort, even in the element which is its new home ; it
can never develop fins, or ampler girth, or even alter the
structure or capacity of the ‘ long, vesicular ' lungs which
handicap it so seriously when seeking food below the
surface.

This reads somewhat curiously, to-day. But Owen's
views are not merely old-fashioned ; they indicate a use
of controversial methods more suitable to a barrister than
a scientist. Note the play which he makes with the word
‘serpent.’ The witnesses whose statements, barrister-
like, he accepts, twists, or poohpoohs as may best suit
prove would be that certain persons, in certain circumstances of place,
time, etc. (often such as to induce a state of ! expectant attention °), ex-
perienced certain impressions — visual, auditory, or as it may be. To my
mind, * ghosts ’ exist only in the mind of the person ‘ seeing’ them — they
have no independent existence outside of such minds — and the really
interesting question is, What is the nature of the (often persistent) source
which can produce a similar impression upon different and successive
witnesses ?

I am aware that these remarks might be applied, mutatis mutandis, to
reports of sea-serpents. But the cases are not parallel ; since, in the latter,


there can be no doubt as to the independent physical existence of what is
observed.


x


EEE ZELL at DE N DET TEE nn nn un nn


WHAT BECOMES OF THE BODY? 233


his purpose (which is to win his case, not to arrive at the
truth) speak of what they saw as a ‘serpent’ ; meaning,
that it looked like one. Here is an opportunity not to
be neglected. The serpents (with a few inconsiderable
exceptions) are ill-adapted for life in water ; and, if they
died therein, their remains would probably be washed
ashore. Consequently, by accepting the term ‘ serpent’
in its literal meaning, the witnesses can easily be dis-
credited. Nothing could be simpler — or less worthy of
a great naturalist.

As a counterblast to that portion of Owen's letter which
deals with the absence of sea-serpent remains, let me
quote some remarks by Philip Henry Gosse, F.R.S., in
his Romance of Natural History.“ A chapter of this book,
which first appeared in 1860, 1s devoted to a very careful
and well-balanced examination of such evidence as was
then available. Although hampering himself with one
or two rather unnecessary restrictions as to what evidence
he would accept,* Gosse went into the question very fully
and fairly ; reaching the conclusion that,


‘, . . there exists some oceanic animal of immense
proportions, which has not yet been received into the
category of scientific zoology ; and my strong opinion
(is) that it possesses strong affınities with the fossil
Enaliosauria of the lias.’


His theory as to the survival of some Enaliosaurian
type — such as the plesiosaurus — is discussed in the


ı The Romance of Natural History, by Philip Henry Gosse, F.R.S.
(London, 1860). ‘The chapter in question is the last in the book, and is
entitled ‘ The Great Unknown.’

2 He confined himself ‘ to English witnesses of known character and
position, most of them being officers under the Crown . . > (doc. cit.,


PP- 344, 345)-


234 THE SEA-SERPENT


following chapter. He employs it, as will be seen, in his
remarks upon Owen ; but their critical value is inde-
pendent of this theory.


*. . . Professor Owen presses also the absence of any
recognised recent: remains of such animals. Let us
test this evidence first by hypothesis, and then by
actual fact.

“It may be that a true serpent, with large vesicular
lungs, would float when dead, and be liable to be seen
by navigators in that condition, or to be washed ashore,
when its peculiar skeleton would be sure to attract
notice. But, as I have before said, I do not by any
means believe that the unknown creature is a serpent
in the zoological sense. Would a Plesiosaurus float
when dead ? I think not. It is supposed to have had
affinities with the whales. Now, a whale sinks like
lead as soon as the blubber is removed ; the surface-
fat alone causes a whale to float.

“But we have no warrant for assuming that the
Plesiosaur was encased in a thick blanket of blubber ;
no geologist has suggested any such thing, and the
long neck forbids it ; and if not, doubtless it would
sink, and not float, when dead. Therefore the stranding
of such a carcase, or the washing ashore of such a
skeleton, would most probably be an extremely rare
occurrence, even if the animal were as abundant as
the sperm-whale ; but, on the supposition that the
species itself is almost extinct, we ought not to expect
such an incident, perhaps, in a thousand years. If we
add to this the recollection, how small a portion of the
border of the ocean is habitually viewed by persons


1 One wonders what deductions Owen would have drawn from the


almost fresh remains of a mylodon found in a cave at Last Hope Inlet, -


Patagonia, in 1897-8.


|
|
|
|


WHAT BECOMES OF THE BODY? 235


able to discriminate between the vertebrae of an
Enaliosaur and those of a Cetacean, we shall not,
I think, attach great importance to this objection.

* The only region of the globe, in which the unknown
monster is reputed to be in any sense common, is the
coast of Norway. Now this, it is true, is fortunately
within the ken of civilised and scientific man ; and,
confessedly, no enormous ophidian or saurian carcases
have ever been recognised on that shore. But the
shore of Norway is, perhaps, the least favourable in
the world for such a jetsam. Such a thing as a sand
or shingle beach is scarcely known ; the coast is almost
exclusively what is called iron-bound ; the borders of
the deeply indented fjords rise abruptly out of the
sea, so that there is generally from fifty to three
hundred fathoms' depth of water within a boat's
length of the shore. How could a carcase or a skeleton
be cast up here, even if it floated ?

‘ But, secondly, as to facts. Is it true, that of all the
larger oceanic animals we find the carcases or skeletons
cast up on the shore? Is it true even of the Cetacea,
whose blubber-covered bodies invariably ensure their
floating,: and whose bones are so saturated with oil
that they are but little heavier than water ?

“In September, 1825, a cetacean was stranded on the
French coast which was previously unknown to
naturalists. It was so fortunate as to fall under the
examination of so eminent a zoologist as De Blainville ;
and hence its anatomy was well investigated. It has
become celebrated as the Toothless Whale of Havre


1'This is an over-statement. As any whaler can testify, a newly-
killed whale will not float unless inflated with compressed air. After
natural death, a whale first sinks; then rises, when decomposition has
advanced somewhat ; and finally explodes! Hence the rarity of stranded
carcases.


256 THE SEA-SERPENT


(Aodon Dalei). Yet no other example of this species is
on record ; and, but for this accident, a whale
inhabiting the British Channel would be quite un-
recognised.

‘ Of another whale (Diodon Sowerbyi*) likewise British,
our entire knowledge rests on a single individual which
was cast on shore on the Elgin coast, and was seen
and described by the naturalist Sowerby. *

‘There is a species of sperm-whale (Physeter tursio)
affirmed to be frequently seen about the Shetland
islands ; a vast creature of sixty feet in length, and
readily distinguishable from all other Cetacea by its
lofty dorsal, and, according to old Sibbald, by other
remarkable peculiarities in its anatomy. Yet no
specimen of this huge creature has fallen under modern
scientific observation ; and zoologists are not yet agreed
among themselves, whether the High-finned Cachalot
is a myth or a reality |«

* M. Rafinesque Smaltz, a Sicilian naturalist, described
a Cetacean which, he said, he had seen in the Medi-
terranean, possessing two dorsals. ‘The character was
so abnormal that his statement was not received *; but
the eminent zoologists attached to one of the French
exploring expeditions - MM. Quoy and Gaimard —
saw a school of cetacea around their ship in the South


1 This is still the case: but it must be recorded that one or two
authorities consider Aodon Dalei to have been merely an aged and
toothless specimen of Mesoplodon bidens, which has very few teeth at
any time.


2 Mod. Mesoplodon bidens.


* Some twenty occurrences are now (1930) known; but this cetacean
is still an exceedingly rare visitant to the British Islands.


* This question is still undecided.


* I understand that the R.R.S. William Scoresby recently reported
sighting a new species of dolphin, having two dorsal fins.


WHAT BECOMES OF THE BODY? 237


Pacific, having this extraordinary character — the super-
numerary fin being placed on the back of the head.
Here is the evidence of competent naturalists to the
existence of a most remarkable whale, «o carcase of
which, zo skeleton, has ever been recognised.

‘The last example I shall adduce is from my own
experience. During my voyage to Jamaica, when in
lat. 19° N., and long. from 46° to 48° W., the ship was
surrounded for seventeen continuous hours with a troop
of whales, of a species which is certainly undescribed.
.I had ample opportunity for examination, and found
that it was a De/phinorhynchus, thirty feet in length,
black above and white beneath, with the swimming
paws white on the upper surface, and isolated by the
surrounding black of the upper parts,—a very re-
markable character. This could not have been the
'Toothless Whale of Havre ; and there is no other with
which it can be confounded. Here, then, is a whale of
large size, occurring im great numbers im the North
Atlantic, which on no other occasion has fallen under
scientific observation.

“Are not these facts, then, sufficiently weighty to
restrain us from rejecting so great an amount of
testimony to the so-called sea-serpent, merely on the
ground that its dead remains have not come under
examination ?’


Little need be added to Gosse’s remarks, which effect-
ively undermine Owen’s main positions. As regards the
established existence of rare animals, known only by a
very few specimens, it may be pointed out that Bartlett,
writing in 1877, notes that the (then) only known speci-
men of the two-horned, hairy-eared Indian rhinoceros


1 In the light of later knowledge, it seems possible that this may
have been the Lesser Rorqual (Balænoptera rostrata).


238 THE SEA-SERPENT


(R. Lasiotis) was accidentally captured at Chittagong,
India, in 1868 ; in the heart of a district where collectors
and naturalists had worked for years previously without
even hearing of it. And who, thirty years ago, knew of the
Okapi — another land animal ?

Despite the well-meant efforts of various Naval
Conferences - which have added considerably to the
gaiety and armaments of nations — there are at present
about four hundred and fifty: submarines in existence.
Yet, out of every thousand seafarers — I say nothing of
landsmen — I much doubt whether there are three who
have seen a submarine. Should we conclude from this
that reports of submarines originate in ‘a cursory view
of a partly submerged and rapidly moving animal...’ as
Owen puts it? Had the nations always treated their
submarines as they did originally — secluded them
behind dockyard walls under conditions of strict secrecy,
allowed no details or photographs of them to be pub-
lished, and only permitted them to exercise at infrequent
intervals - I imagine that anyone who claimed to have
seen a submarine would have been told that no such craft
existed, and that what he had seen must have been a
whale : or, possibly, a sea-serpent.

I turn to the cases — admittedly rare, and generally
suspect even then — of anomalous carcases, claimed to be
those of sea-serpents, which have been washed ashore or
otherwise brought to notice.


It may be held that this is an unfair argument, since no species could
survive long in such small numbers. Actually, it is a mere analogy - still,


it may be pointed out that the Gibraltar wild monkeys have numbered |


twenty or so for many years past; that the last colony of the Great Auks,


breeding unmolested on the Geirfuglaskeir (Iceland), numbered only a |
few hundreds when that islet sank in 1830; and that the similar community |
of Rhytina gigas (Steller's sea-cow ; unknown to man until 1741, and |


extinct by 1775) at Bering Island is believed not to have numbered, at its
maximum, more than 1,500 individuals.


THAT BECOMES OF THE BODY? 239


"he Animal of Stronsa.

The classic instance of such is the famous ‘ Animal of
Xtronsa,' which was stranded on the island of Stronsay,:
Irkneys, in 1808. There can be little doubt that this
reature was, actually, an enormous basking-shark,
yartly decomposed ; but the original reports are so
urious, and the accepted explanation so much at variance
vith them, that the case deserves more than a cursory
nention, if only as an instance of how misleading it is
'ossible for honest testimony to be.

It should be explained that the carcase was never
xamined by any person of education, and that the evi-
lence relating to 1t, although given on oath, is that of the
ocal fishermen and crofters. Similarly, the only extant
lrawing of it (Fig. 26) was made, by an amateur who had
iot seen the creature, from an exceedingly rough sketch
upplied by one of the witnesses and amended according
o his verbal description of it. Finally, it should be noted
hat the body was already half putrefied when found, and
hat many of the soft portions were missing.

Yet, on reading the depositions, one might be par-
loned for thinking that the creature was, most un-
loubtedly, a modern plesiosaurus — or a specimen of
Pontoppidan’s sea-serpent, complete with mane. I sub-
oin a few extracts, premising that the originals* are very
verbose, and rather irksome reading.


At Kirkwall, Nov. 10, 1808.
‘In presence of Dr. Roserr Groat, Physician in
Kirkwall, and Marcorw Larne, Esq. ; M.P. Two of
his Majesty's Justices of the Peace of the County of
Orkney.
1 Formerly written ‘ Stronsa.’


2 Printed in Memoirs of the Wernerian Natural History Society, vol. i.
1808-10). Edinburgh, 1811 (pp. 431-441).


D


6ogi “sworzsvsuo4], pootydosopiyg ow3 wol (4[uo ourpno) uavip-ow


VSNOULS dO TVWINV AHL  '9QC ‘Old


d 114359511425
0% cZ


240


|
|
WHAT BECOMES OF THE BODY? 241
|


‘Compeared: Joun Pracer, tenant in Dounatoun in
Rothiesholm ; and being interrogated, solemnly de-
clares, That on the 26th day of September last, he
went a fishing off the east part of Rothiesholm-head,
when he perceived, as he imagined, a dead whale, on
some sunken rocks about a quarter of a mile from the
Head :
‘ That his attention was first directed to it by the sea-
. fowl screaming and flocking about it; and on ap-
proach of it, in his boat, he found the middle, part of it
above the surface of the water : That he then observed
it to be different from a whale, particularly in having
fins or arms, one of which he raised with his boat-hook
above the surface of the water : That this was one of
the arms next the head, which was larger and broader
than the others nearer the tail ; and at that time the
fin-or arm was edged all around, from the body to the
extremity of the toes, with a row of bristles about ten
inches long, some of which he pulled off and examined
in the boat :
‘That about ten days afterwards, a gale of south-east
wind came on, and the surge drove the fish ashore on
Rothiesholm-head : That he measured it by fathoms,
and found it . . . about fifty-four or fifty-five feet
in length...


*. . . Compeared Mr. GEORGE SHERAR, tacksman? of
Rothiesholm, in the island of Stronsa ; who being
interrogated, solemnly declared, That on the 2oth of
October, being in Rothiesholm-head, he saw the crew of
John Peace's boat examining something on the water,
which he took to be a dead whale :

‘That about ten days afterwards, a gale of east wind


1 Appeared. 2 Tenant-farmer.


242 THE SEA-SERPENG@


driven ashore, and found it in a creek, lying on its |
back, about a foot under water ; and from the view 4
which he had of its figure, length and limbs, his |
curiosity induced him to return a day or two after the A
gale had abated, when he found it thrown upon the |
beach, a little below high water mark, and lying on its |
belly, as represented in the drawing : T


having taken place, he went to see if the whale was !
|
1
|
l


N,
‘That he returned next morning with a foot-rule,
purposely to measure it, and found it to be exactly -
fifty-five feet in length, from the hole in the top of the
skull (which he has brought to town with him), to the
extremity of the tail : That the length of the neck was
exactly fifteen feet, from the same hole to the begin- -
ning of the«mane : That he measured also the circum-
ference of the animal as accurately as he could, which
was about ten feet, more or less ; and the whole body,
where the limbs were attached to it, was about the same
circumference : That the lower jaw or mouth was
awanting ; but there were some substances or bones of
the jaw remaining, when he first examined it, which are
now aWay....


‘ That the mane or bristles were about fourteen inches
in length each. . . . That the upper part of the limbs,
which answers to the shoulder-blade, was joined to the
body like the shoulder-blade of a cow, forming a part
of the side : Thata part of the tail was awanting, being
incidentally broken off at the extremity ; where the
last joint of it was bare, was an inch and a half in
breadth : That the bones were of a gristly nature, like
those of a halibut, the back-bone excepted, which was
the only solid bone in the body ; That the tail was
quite flexible, turning in every direction, as he lifted it ;
and he supposes the neck to have been equally so, from .
its appearance at the time. . . .


"HAT BECOMES OF THE BODY? 243


©... That a few days thereafter, a gale of wind came on,
and drove it to another part of the shore, where it was
broken to pieces by the surge, and when Mr. Petrie
came out to take a drawing of it, no part of the body
remained entire :
* That he endeavoured to convey an idea of the animal
to Mr. Petrie, by drawing the figure of it as accurately
as he could with chalk, on the table, exactly as it lay on
the shore, after which Mr. Petrie made six or seven
different sketches or plans of the fish, before he could
bring it to correspond, 1n each minute particular, with
the strong idea which he retains of its appearance :
That he was the more attentive to its shape, dimensions
and figure, in order to be able to give an accurate
account of it to any travellers that might come to
Rothiesholm ; and that he is ready to make oath, that
the drawing 1s an exact resemblance of the fish, as it
appeared when he measured it ; and corresponds in all
particulars with the idea which he entertains of the
figure, dimensions and proportions of the fish... . .
‘That ... strong easterly wind had prevailed, before
the body was discovered upon the shore, and that he
saw the body on two or three different occasions, after
he had measured it, and before it went to pieces. And
all this he declares to be truth, &c.

' (Signed) Gro. SHERAR.’


Sherar’s testimony was supported by two very
milar affidavits, made by ' Thomas Fotheringhame,
juse-carpenter in Kirkwall,’ and ‘ William Folsetter,
cksman of Whitehall.’ There were some discrepancies
their evidence — Fotheringhame put the neck at ten
et long or so, as against Sherar's fifteen : and the former


1 He was not connected with the Inland Revenue Department, but
ld the farm of Whitehall on Stronsay Island.


244 THE SEA-SERPENE


also deposed to having ‘ examined the throat, which was
too narrow to admit his hand, although,’ Sherar states,

. the aperture of the throat appeared to be so wide,
that he might have put his foot down through it.’ But
in general, the accounts are in good agreement: ; and
a concise description of the creature, compiled from
them, would have run somewhat as follows :


‘Length about fifty-five feet. Maximum girth about
twelve feet. Neck slender, and about fifteen feet long.
Tail the same. Head small, not exceeding a foot in
length and six inches in width. From the shoulders, a
bristly mane extended to near the end of the tail. Skin


smooth and grey. Organs of motion, three pairs of |


fins, one of which may have been a caudal fin.’


These statements, and the natural deduction from
them — the existence of a new genus, for which the name
Halsydrus Pontoppidani was suggested — were long ac-
cepted by many Scottish naturalists ; such, however,
was not the case south of the Border.

Little care seems to have been taken to preserve any
portion of the carcase, but Malcolm Laing of Kirkwall,
who was one of the J.P.s before whom the depositions
were sworn, and who was the ground-landlord of


1 One J. C. Howden, of Musselburgh, writing on this subject to the
Zoologist (1849, p. 2396), remarked “ . . . as there is nothing to prove that
Thomas Fotheringhame’s hand was larger than George Sherar’s foot, we
are led to the conclusion that one or other had made a mistake in his
calculation.’ Actually, the putrid state of the body explains the dis-
crepancy — the lower jaw, it will be remembered, was absent.


* Except in the date of the event. Peace says he saw the body first on
September 26th, 1808, and that it went ashore about October 6th. Sherar
states that he saw Peace examining it on October 20th, and that it went
ashore about October 30th. Everard Home, on no authority that I can
discover, says that it was washed ashore on October 7th.


WHAT BECOMES OF THE BODY? 245


Rothiesholm, came into possession of a few specimens,
preserved for his information by Sherar. These relics
he transmitted (by request) to Sir Everard Home, of
London.

Home was a celebrated surgeon, who built up
a considerable reputation as an anatomist upon in-
formation filched from John Hunter’s unpublished MSS.:
(which last he subsequently burned to avoid detection).
At the time when the strange carcase came ashore in
Rothiesholm Bay, he was planning an elaborate memoir
-on the basking-shark ; and, having seen copies of the
Kirkwall depositions in the hands of Sir Joseph Banks,
he applied to Laing for the loan of his relics. ‘These —
part of the skull, several vertebrae, part of a pectoral fin,
and some of the gill-cartilages — were accordingly for-
warded to him ; and by their aid he at once identified the
“Animal of Stronsa' as a basking-shark, the Sgualus
maximus of Linneus (mod. Selache maxima).

Accordingly, he added to his memoir* a note of the
events at Rothiesholm and a detailed criticism of the
depositions. These he treated in a rather off-hand style,
remarking that the accuracy of the measurements was
‘at least doubtful,’ and giving it as his opinion that the
creature’s actual length must have been about thirty feet.
This dogmatic rejection of inconvenient evidence — an
excess of Pyrrhonism, since basking-sharks of sixty feet
length are not unheard-of — went a long way to obscure
the real worth of his paper. He gave a clear explanation
of the facts, showing that the witnesses had honestly
done their best to describe what they saw, but had over-
looked that they were dealing with a mutilated and


1 He was Hunter's brother-in-law and literary executor.

? * An anatomical account of the 8qua/us maximus... — Philosophical
Transactions (1809), pp. 206-20.

Rs


246 THE SEA-SERPENT


putrefied body, not with a perfect one. Speaking of the
drawing (Fig. 26) which he reproduced, he says? :


‘It is deserving of remark, that there is no one struc-
ture represented in the drawing, which was not
actually seen. The skeleton of the holders corresponds
with the legs in the drawing, the margin of the dorsal
fin in a putrid state with the mane ; so that the only
errors are in the contortions towards the tail . . . and
the number of the holders, which were mistaken for
legs. ... . And when we recollect that the drawing
was made from memory six weeks after the fish had
been seen by those who describe it, during which
interval it had been their principal subject of con-
versation, we may conclude that so extraordinary an
object as the mutilated fish would appear, when
believed to be a perfect one, would, in their different
discourses, have every part exaggerated, and it 1s only
remarkable that the depositions kept so close to the
truth as they have done.’


The Edinburgh naturalists, probably and naturally
irritated by Home's de haut en bas style, joined issue as
to this identification, and defended the anomalous nature
of the ‘Animal’ with dogged pertinacity for many
years. Thus, we find Dr. John Barclay, in 1811,* asking
pathetically :


“Now what evidence had Mr. Home that this animal
was a squalus, and even to suppose that it was a
squalus maximus ? '


to which, of course, the answer would have been: * The


VLoj.cit, ppxatOnery:
? Memoirs of the Wernerian Society, vol. i. (Edinburgh, 1811), p. 427.
° Home did not answer this attack.


WHAT BECOMES OF THE BODY? 247


evidence afforded by its remains. Dr. Hibbert wrote
in 18221 :


“The existence of the sea-snake, a monster fifty-
five feet long, is placed beyond a doubt, by the


animal that was thrown on shore in Orkney. . . .’


And as late as 1854 Dr. T. S. Traill, who had spent some
time in 1809 collecting information with regard to the
celebrated ‘ Animal,’ remarked, in a paper read to the


Royal Society of Edinburgh: :


“ Everything proves the Orkney animal to have been
a chondropterygious® fish, different from any described
by naturalists . . . certainly, it cannot be confounded
with any known shark ; nor does it belong to the


family of Squalide.’


Unfortunately, there is no doubt that it does. The
arguments put forward by Barclay, Traill, and others were
largely founded upon false assumptions, or upon sheer
ineptitude — for example, Barclay (and Traill after him)
mistook the front of the skull for its base, and the
cartilaginous nose-tip for the first cervical vertebra !
(Sce. Plate VI.)

Professor Goodsir of Edinburgh, who examined the
vertebrae in 1849 (the skull, by then, had apparently
been lost) gave it as his decided opinion that they were
those of a shark — and many anatomists since his time
have confirmed this ascription. In a recent letter to me,


Dr. James Ritchie* of Edinburgh states :


! Description of the Shetland Islands (Edinburgh, 1822), p. 565, foot-
note.

2 Proceedings, vol. iil., No. 44. 3 I.e. cartilaginous.

* Keeper of the Natural History Department, Royal Scottish Museum.


248 THE SEA-SERPENT


“As regards the identity of the animal of Stronsa,
I should say that no competent zoologist, who ex-
amined the figures in the Wernerian Society's Volume I
of 1811, would have had any hesitation in saying that
the representations . . . belonged to a cartilaginous
fish. The remarks by Dr. Barclay onthe remains . . .
show a zoological incompetence so great that I am
surprised that the Society published them.

* Apart from this, we possess in the Museum, preserved
in spirit, a series of three of the vertebrae of the
* animal of Stronsa," of 1808, and they are, as Mr.
Home apparently suggested long ago, the vertebrae of
the Basking Shark, Se/ache maxima.’


So much, then, for the ‘ Animal of Stronsa' — or,
rather, the ‘Shark of Stronsa' ; but I should like, in
fairness, to give the concluding portion of Dr. Ritchie's
letter.


*I fancy other records of Sea-serpents and other
unlikely monsters could be reduced to nonsense, if
portions were retained and examined, as in this case.
Had you the opportunity of seeing the specimens,
which are sent here for identification, supposed to be
the remains, not of sea-serpents, but of as monstrous
land animals, and which turn out to be very ordinary
things after all, you would place very little faith in
the casual observations, often in difficult conditions, of
sea-men and others, even when the observations were


1 Surely this is a hard saying. Who the ‘ others’ may be, I am un-
certain ; but seamen, as a class, are not particularly prone (I submit) to
making ‘ casual’ observations of matters within their experience. The
phrase reminds one of the retired admiral who contemplated an action for
general libel against the Western Morning News, this paper having stated, in
connection with an absconding cashier, *. . . the prisoner was arrested in
the company of several seamen, and other disreputable characters."


qu 7.


PLATE VI. SKULL AND STERNUM OF THE ‘ANIMAL OF STRONSA’


Nore. Letter 4, Fig. 1, indicates the cartilaginous nose-tip (see p. 247).


From ‘Memoirs of the Wernerian Society,’ vol. I.


[Facing p. 248


e"


LS


WHAT BECOMES OF THE BODY? 249


supported with affidavits. The sworn statements about
the Stronsa animal . . . should be sufficient warning.’


I must say that I dissent from this opinion. Ne sutor
ultra crepidam . . . is a sound adage, but it works both
ways. Admittedly, the Orkney witnesses were found
wanting when they attempted to give a detailed descrip-
tion of a partially decomposed carcase lying on the
shore — that is the province of the zoologist ; but I have
no doubt that if they had fallen in with the * Animal of
Stronsa ' alive and swimming freely in open water, they
would immediately have recognised it for what it was.
And I would go so far as to say that they could probably
have given a more accurate description of its appearance,
in such circumstances, than could the majority of land-faring
zoologists.

In connection with this celebrated case, there is a final
point to be noted. Soon after news of the Stronsa carcase
had reached Edinburgh, rumours also began to arrive of
an apparently similar creature which had been met with,
somewhere among the inner Hebrides and not long
before, by a Scottish minister named Maclean. The
secretary of the Wernerian Natural History Society,
which was then collecting all relevant information (and
otherwise) with regard to the Stronsa creature, com-
municated with Mr. Maclean, and received the subjoined
reply.: The passage of his letter respecting ‘shining
filaments ’ (the alleged ‘ mane’ — really the decayed back-
fin — of the Stronsa animal) shows that the Edinburgh
enquirers naturally considered that his creature, seen
alive in (as appeared) June 1808, was probably identical
with the one washed ashore, dead, in October of the same


year.


1 Memoirs of the Wernerian Society, vol. 1. (1811), pp. 442-444.


250 THE SEA-SERPENT


‘ Figg: Island, 24th April, 1809.
SSIR
* Your letter of the rst instant I received, and would
have written in answer thereto sooner, had I not
thought it desirable to examine others relative to the
animal.of which you wish me to give a particular
account.
* According to my best recollection, I saw it in June
1808, not on the coast of Eigg, but on that of Coll.
Rowing along that coast, I observed, at about the
distance of half a mile, an object to windward, which
gradually excited astonishment.
* At first view, it appeared like a small rock. Knowing
there was no rock in that situation, I fixed my eyes on
it close. ‘Then I saw it elevated considerably above the
level of the sea, and after a slow movement, distinctly
perceived one of its eyes.
* Alarmed at the unusual appearance and magnitude
of the animal, I steered so as to be at no great distance
from the shore. When nearly in a line betwixt it and
the shore, the monster directing its head (which still
continued above water) towards us, plunged violently
under water. Certain that he was in chace of us, we
plied hard to get ashore. Just as we leaped out on
a rock, taking a station as high as we conveniently
could, we saw it coming rapidly under water towards
the stern of our boat. When within a few yards
of the boat, finding the water shallow, it raised its
monstrous head above water, and by a winding course
got, with apparent difficulty, clear of the creek where
our boat lay, and where the monster seemed in danger
of being imbayed. It continued to move off, with its


! In the Inner Hebrides, between Skye and Coll. Close to it are two:
other singularly-named islands - Rum and Muck.


ud


WHAT BECOMES OF THE BODY? 251


head above water, and with the wind, for about half
a mile, before we lost sight of it.
‘— Its head was rather broad, of a form somewhat oval.
Its neck somewhat smaller. Its shoulders, if I can so
term them, considerably broader, and thence it tapered
towards the tail, which last it kept pretty low in the
water, so that a view of it could not be taken so dis-
tinctly as I wished. It had no fin that I could perceive,
and seemed to me to move progressively by undulation
up and down. Its length I believed to be from 70 to
80 feet.
* When nearest to me, it did not raise its head wholly
above water, so that the neck being under water,
I could perceive no shining filaments thereon, if it
hadany. Its progressive motion under water I took to
be rapid, from the shortness of the time it took to
come up to the boat. "When the head was above
water, its motion was not near so quick ; and when
the head was most elevated it appeared evidently to
take a view of distant objects.
* About the time I saw it, it was seen about the Isle
of Canna. The crews of thirteen fishing boats, I am
told, were so much terrified at its appearance, that they
in a body fled from it to the nearest creek. . . . On the
passage from Rum to Canna, the crew of one boat saw it
coming towards them, with the wind, and its head
high above water . . . the monster offered them no
molestation. - From those who saw it, I could get no
interesting particulars additional to those above
mentioned.
- I remain, Sir, Occ.
“ DonaLp Mac ean.”!
ı] have failed to find any further information about this minister — a
fact not altogether surprising. Mull is the seat of the Maclean clan ; and


''the Inner Hebrides, at any given epoch, must (I should imagine) number
Donald Macleans in their hundreds.


252 THE SEA-SERPENT


It will, I think, be conceded that, whatever Mr.
Maclean's monster may have been, it was not a basking-
shark. In fact, the combination of oval head, slenderer
neck, and broad shoulders, tapering to a tail, bars the
assumption that any known creature was seen. Were
it not for the conclusive evidence afforded by the
Stronsa vertebre, there would certainly be some slight
ground for supposing that the two creatures were the
same — or of similar species ; as it is, one must regard
the events off Coll and Rothiesholm as connected merely
by the arm of coincidence.


Koch’s ‘ Hydrarchos.’

In the case of the ‘ Animal of Stronsa,’ there was no
suspicion of fraud attaching to its discoverers. Their
obvious honesty was admitted even by those who, like
Home, questioned the accuracy of their reports. Such,
however, was not the case with regard to the skeleton,
alleged to be that of a gigantic fossil sea-serpent, con-
structed and exhibited by ‘ Dr.’ Albert C. Koch in 1845.

Koch seems to have been a curious mixture of Hugh
Miller and Barnum — a man who devoted a great deal of
time, labour, and money to collecting fossil remains iz
situ : subsequently assembling them, either in ignorance
or defiance of anatomy and paleontology, into fantastic
monsters designed for public and remunerative exhibi-
tion. In 1842 and 1843 we find him at the Egyptian
Hall, London, with his ' Missouri Leviathan, an
enormous skeleton built up from bones which Koch
had discovered (or so he asserted) in Benton County,
Missouri. It was composed of the assorted remains of
several mastodons and elephants ; and, after serving its
purpose as a side-show, was purchased by the British
Museum — whose authorities, of course, were under no


WHAT BECOMES OF THE BODY? 253


illusions as to its composite character, and at once reduced
it into its component parts. The type-skeleton of the
American Mastodon, now at South Kensington, origin-
ally formed part of Koch's ‘ Missouri Leviathan.’

Encouraged by his success, Koch returned to America,
and prospected far and wide for more material, which
soon came to hand — or, rather, spade. Excavations in
Alabama put him in possession of most of the vertebrae,
and some other portions, of two specimens of Zeug/odon,:
an extinct marine cetacean of great size. These he ar-
ranged in the form of a serpentine creature 114 feet long,
for which he manufactured, from any spare bones that
were handy, a corresponding skull, ribs and paddles.
This masterpiece of synthesis he christened ' Hydrarchos?
Sillimani ' in honour (?) of Professor Benjamin Silliman,
the eminent American naturalist ; and he exhibited it in
New York and Boston with, I believe, considerable profit
to himself.

By this time, however, naturalists on both sides of the
Atlantic had become definitely suspicious of Koch ; or,
at least, they had already concluded that while the
separate remains he excavated were genuine, he was far
from scrupulous in the use that he made of them. How-
ever loudly he might assert that he had dug up the verte-
bre of his Hydrarchos in one spot, and in the very self-
same order in which they were assembled for exhibition,
no one of any standing could be found to believe this. He
abandoned his intention of revisiting London with his
latest prodigy, and Hydrarchos Sillimani, after undergoing
strange vicissitudes and metamorphoses, found a last
resting-place in Berlin, - correctly labelled Zeuglodon.


1 Harlan's Basilosaurus (1824).


2 A neologism, signifying * monarch of the waters.’


4


254 THE SEA-SERPENT


The Coffin Bay carcase.

In strict chronological order, an account ought here to
be given of the carcase washed ashore at New River,
Florida, in 1885, which is still a zoological enigma. But
it seems hard that it should be closely associated, even
through pagination, with an obvious fraud like Koch’s
Hydrarchos ; and I propose, in order to get rid of all my
pseudo-sea-serpents at once, to give some account here
of a blunder, committed in 1891, which caused some
amusement at the time.

On November 6th, 1891, The Times announced the
death of the Bishop of Adelaide, the Right Rev. Dr.
G. W. Kennion, D.D.; a regrettable item of news
which, however, was promptly denied by its subject.
Explanations followed. It appeared that the original
report emanated from Dalziel’s News-agency, who had
received from an Australian agent the following obscure
and gloomy cablegram :


“INFLUENZA EXTENSIVELY PREVALENT WALES VICTORIA
NUMEROUS DEATHS BISHOP ADELAIDE FOUND DEAD SEA
SERPENT SIXTY FEET COFFIN BAY.’


Slightly embarrassed by the absence of any punctuation
in this morbid message, its recipients decided to delete,
before transmitting it to The Times, the last six words ;
making it end‘... Bishop Adelaide found dead.’

In a subsequent letter,* they explained their course of
action thus :


©... We read the last six words as a separate sentence,


and, judging that it was not suitable for The Times, we


omitted it in the Copy sent to you.


! See The Times, 9, xi. 1891. CEU Times 3T, Xl 1891.


n


WHAT BECOMES OF THE BODY? 255


“ We can only now assume that the Bishop of Adelaide,
or, possibly, a Mr. Bishop of Adelaide, found some-
thing in Coffin Bay which our correspondent describes
as a dead sea-serpent.’


The Saturday Review, in a light-hearted article, com-
mented very pertinently on their behaviour :


©... Taking their own account of the matter, one would
have expected them to be rather surprised by the words
“found dead." Bishops are not generally “ found
dead," but die- when they cannot help it— in a
decorous manner, and in the presence of witnesses.
And what on earth did they understand by “ the last
six words " taken separately ? Did they suppose that
a sea-serpent had come within sixty feet of Coffin Bay,
or had devastated sixty feet of the shore, or that a sea-
serpent with sixty feet had invaded that cheerfully-
named locality ? ‘‘ Sea-serpent sixty feet Coffin Bay "
seems, on the face of it, about as unintelligible a
“ separate sentence " as one could well imagine. And
yet one cannot help admiring the discretion of those
who “judged” that any mention of a sixty-footed
sea-serpent, or a sea-serpent indefinitely connected
with twenty yards, and with Coffin Bay, was “ not
suitable for ” the austere dignity of the Times.’


I have not had much success in tracing further information
about who found what in Coffin Bay ; but I understand
that the Bishop discovered a carcase on the shore there,
which he took to be a sea-serpent, and which proved, like
the ‘Animal of Stronsa, to have been a gigantic


basking-shark.


UTA, Xi 1891.


256 THE SEA-SERPENT


The Florida carcase.

An event which occurred in 1885, however, is not so
easily explicable. I take the following account of it from
an article (which I have already had occasion to quote) by
Mr. J. B. Holder. I ought, I think, to remark that this
article is temperately and carefully written, and is obviously
the production of someone who weighs his words and
writes from personal information. Here is the account.


* We now have to make the first record of the actual
presence on our coast of a marine — probably saurian —
creature of the nature of the so-called sea-serpent.

* The facts are as follows.

“In the spring of 1885 the Rev. Mr. Gordon of
Milwaukee, President of the United States Humane
Society, chanced to visit, in the course of his duties, a
remote and obscure portion of the Atlantic shores of
Florida.

* While lying at anchor in New River Inlet? the flukes
of the anchor became foul with what proved to be a
carcass of considerable length. Mr. Gordon quickly
observed that it was a vertebrate, and at first thought it
probably a cetacean. But, on examination, it was seen
to have features more suggestive of the saurians. Its
total length was forty-two feet. Its girth was six feet.
The head was absent ; two flippers, or fore-limbs,
were noticed, and a somewhat slender neck .. . six feetin
length. The carcass was in a state of decomposition ;
the abdomen was open, and the intestines protruded.
‘ The striking slenderness of the thorax as compared
with the great length of body and tail very naturally
suggested to Mr. Gordon, whose reading served him


| Century Magazine, vol. xliv. (New York, 1892).


* On the E. coast of Florida—approximately in 26° 03’ N, 80° 05”


een Tree e tere
mtr ie ah


TEE meet tcd d ior 7),


WHAT BECOMES OF THE BODY? 257


well, the form of some of the great saurians whose bones
have so frequently been found in several localities
along the Atlantic coast. No cetacean known to science
has such a slender body and such a well-marked and
slender neck. All indications were suggestive of the
great Enaliosauria, and, appreciating the great import-
ance of securing the entire carcase, Mr. Gordon had it
hauled above high-water mark, and took all possible
precautions to preserve the bones until they could be
removed. Through his love of science, Mr. Gordon
very kindly reported these facts, and our arrangements
were most ample for the recovery and transport of the
bones to New York. Most unfortunately their
presence was all too short.


FIG. 27. THE FLORIDA CARCASE
Re-drawn from the Century Magazine, vol. xliv.


* Mr. Gordon was impressed with the conviction that
he had found the first flesh and frame of the hitherto
elusive creature, which has been regarded as a tardy
example of an extinct race. With no suitable imple-
ments at hand, he was obliged to trust its safe-keeping
to the shore above tides. He counted without the
possible treacherous hurricane ; the waters of the
* Still-vexed Bermoothes," envious of their own,
recalled the strange waif. This was as unexpected as
undesirable. The facts, however, remain.’


Fig. 27, showing the general appearance of this carcase, is
taken from an illustration accompanying Mr. Holder’s


258 THE SEA-SERPENT


article. In the absence of further information (probably
no longer procurable) it is difficult to appraise this report.
At first sight, it would certainly seem that some unknown
creature was discovered and examined; but, in view of
the decomposing nature of the remains, and the precedent
of the Stronsa reports, 1t cannot be denied that a strong
case could be made out for supposing this carcase, also,
to have been that of a basking-shark. Such, however, is
not my own opinion.

I have notes of one or two similar cases — notably one
of a creature washed ashore at Santa Cruz, California, in
1926, ' thirty-seven feet long, with a long thin neck and
a huge distended head ' — but not in sufficient detail to
present them here. Broadly speaking, it may be said that
with one doubtful exception — the Florida carcase — no
remains of a definitely and unequivocally ‘ sea-serpentine '
character have yet been found. But I suggest that, in
view of what has been put forward earlier in this chapter,
the chances against such remains being washed ashore
are so great that it would be unreasonable, now or here-
after, to expect such an event,


Seat THEORIES
2 FACTS


In this chapter I should like to indicate the conclusions
which, I suggest, arise out of an unbiased examination of
the evidence contained in chapters r—xir.

It should be remembered that these cases, broadly
speaking, form something less than ten per cent. of the
material available — but, on the other hand, I readily
admit that they constitute, in my Judgment, the cream of
the evidence. Those unbelievers who see in them no
cause for abating their scepticism are not likely to alter
this opinion on consulting the hundred-odd reports which,
although I regard them as genuine, I have discarded as
less valuable.

I propose to enumerate, in the first place, the various
theories which have, from time to time, been advanced
as explaining away such reports. I have tried to make
the list as complete as possible ; z.e. I have not re-
stricted it merely to the explanations suggested for the
cases summarised in chapters i—xir. Classified, they
are as follows :


A. General theories.
1. Deliberate deception.
2. Collective hallucination.
B. Inanimate objects.
3. Floating seaweed.
4. " tree-trunks.
C. Living oceanic creatures of known spectes.
(a) Swimming in line.
259


260 THE SEA-SERPENT


5. Porpoises.
6. Killer whales.
(P) Seen singly.:
7. Rorqual.
8. Sperm whale.
9. Basking-shark.
10. Tunny.
II. Sea-elephant.
I2. Giant squid.
13. Manatee.
I4. Sea-snake.
15. Ribbon-fish.
D. Other living creatures of known species.
16. Black snake.
17. Boa.
18. Flight of birds.
E. Supposed gigantic examples of known species.
19. Giant sea-snake.
20. E CONE
4140 3, | fibbon-fish:
22. » sturgeon.
83.1: turtle.
GA Ay | pinniped
F. Supposed survivals of ‘ extinct’ reptiles.
25. Ichthyosaurus.
26. Elasmosaurus.
27. Plesiosaurus.


And now, with a choice of at least twenty-seven
theories, it will be well to take stock of the facts.

I propose to begin by rejecting, at once, the theories of
deliberate deception, and of collective hallucination.
There is, I submit, no case in this book which deserves

1 [n this section I have omitted one or two ludicrous suggestions, such as


Saccopharynx and Ophiognathus (see Owen's remarks, p. 230), neither of
which is as big as an average conger eel.


THEORIES UV. FACTS 261


to be regarded, by any fair-minded person, as a de-
liberate hoax. Such a supposition involves more
difficulties than it removes.

There is a little more to be said for the hypothesis of
collective hallucination. Such things have occurred.
Le Bon: cites the case of the French frigate Be//e Poule,
engaged in searching for a missing consort. In full day-
light, the whole crew believed that they saw a raft and
boats, crowded with men. A nearer approach disclosed
that these were, in reality, some floating branches of
trees.

But there 1s no real analogy between incidents such as
this, and the cases here collected. One vital element of
such delusions 1s almost entirely lacking ; a previously-
induced state of ‘ expectant attention.’ It is quite true
that if you are eagerly on the look-out for something,
and expect to see it, you are very likely to be misled by
anything bearing even a faint resemblance to the thing
which you expect to see ; and this illusion 1s facilitated
by the presence of a crowd, whose comments and sugges-
tions powerfully affect the imagination. Such was the
case with the men of the Belle Poule — but such was not
the case (if we except the crowds at Cape Ann and
Nahant)* with the witnesses now in question. Hear
M'Quhae, for example :


*. . . an actual living body, coolly and dispassionately
contemplated. . . . I deny the existence of excite-
ment, or the possibility of optical illusion. . . .'


Generally, none of the observers expected beforehand
to see anything whatever of an unusual nature ; and, in
1 Gustave Le Bon, Psychologie des Foules (Paris, 1895).
2 See chapter 11.
s The Times, 21, xi. 1848.
Ss


>
262 THE SEA-SERPENT


the majority of cases, the witnesses were few in number.
No less-favourable subjects for a collective hallucination
could well be imagined.

Conceding, then, that there was some actual external
foundation for the reports, and that the witnesses did
their best to describe what they actually saw, we can
(I suggest) also discard the assumptions that they saw
floating seaweed, or dead trees. Whatever illusions such
objects (seen a long way off) might originate, it is frankly
impossible to suppose that they could, at the distance of
a cable or so, not only pass unrecognised but give the
impression of a living creature, moving rapidly through
the water. To a seaman, such a suggestion is
ludicrous.

For the same reason —the incongruity between the
appearances and the suggested cause — we can also,
I think, set aside the ' flight of birds' theory, and the
very common suggestion that a school of porpoises, or
killer whales, or small sharks, etc., swimming in line,
had, in each case, produced the impression of a single
creature. It is quite true that such a school, seen at
a distance with the naked eye by an inexperienced
observer, might perhaps at first produce that impression
on his mind; but not for long. A nearer approach, or
a glance through a telescope, would explain the illusion ;
and, after all, few seamen — whatever naturalists may
think — are such born fools that they cannot tell a school
of porpoises when they see one. This is a typical lands-
man's theory. And how, on such a supposition,
to explain the serpentine head and neck so often
reported ?

Our theories, then, are already somewhat reduced in
number. Those classifed as A and B (and no. 18
of class D) fall to be rejected, and the remainder all


ee


THEORIES ®. FACTS 263


postulate a common nucleus of fact—the presence of
a single living creature. It remains, then, to compare
the leading characteristics of the creatures reported to
have been observed, with those of the creatures put
forward as satisfying them.

I say ‘creatures’ in both instances; because, as
already explained, I do not go so far as to assert that
precisely the same type of creature was seen on every
occasion. This seems an unwarrantable inference. The
reports range from the eighteen-foot animal seen by
Mr. Mackintosh Bell, and the thirty-foot Moha Moha, to
the Osborne’s 150-foot monster. But, reserving these
exceptional instances for further remark, I suggest that,
very roughly, it may be said that the remainder show (in
essentials) a very considerable measure of agreement.
There emerges a more or less consistent picture of
a creature some sixty to ninety feet long. It has a long
and slender neck, sometimes lifted out of water to
a considerable height and terminating in a snake-like
head. ‘The body, which is probably much larger in
girth than the neck, is propelled by four submerged
flippers, or paddles, and tapers off to a slender tail.
Neck and tail are exceedingly flexible, and the skin of
the body, normally smooth in appearance, can be con-
tracted into a series of large wrinkles or humps. The
colouring is, in general, dark brown above and white
below.

Such is, I suggest, a reasonable abstract of the reported
appearances, in general. I do not propose here to discuss
each case in detail ; but it will, I think, be found, on
comparing the foregoing outline with the particulars of
each case, that the general agreement is close, and the
discrepancies slight. Let us examine the remaining
theories on this basis.


264 THE SEA-SERPENT


C. Living oceanic creatures of known species.

7. Rorgual whale. 'The rorqual is comparatively slender
in form, of great length (sometimes exceeding 100 feet)
and coloured black, or nearly so, above and yellowish
below. On the other hand, it could not possibly exhibit
a serpentine head and/or long slender neck.

8. Sperm whale. 'The same remarks, as to head and
neck, apply even more forcibly. A sperm whale, swim-
ming on the surface, looks like a submarine. Its head
is relatively enormous, and it has nothing which could
be called a neck at all.

9. Basking-shark. As already related, nes basking-
sharks have, in more than one instance, been taken for
sea-serpents. This, however, was after putrefaction had
greatly changed their appearance. Normally, a basking-
shark swimming on the surface would exhibit a large
dorsal fin, and would otherwise much resemble a small
whale. Here, also, the head and neck could not by any
stretch of imagination be called serpentine. In outline,
the body resembles a fat cigar.

IO. Tunny. This is not so much a serious theory, as
the reminiscence of a hoax. The tunny’s maximum
length 1s about ten feet.

1I. Sea elephant. This was Owen’s ‘ explanation ' of
the Dedalus report,* and has already been discussed. It
has never met with, or deserved, general or even limited
acceptance.

12. Giant squid. As stated in chapters 1 and rv, this
explanation has been advanced, ingeniously but un-
successfully, to cover the Egede and Dedalus cases. Its
originator, Lee, was confident that practically all reported
sea-serpents could be accounted for in this manner — but
that can scarcely be called an unbiased opinion. As


! See p. 58. 3 See p. 115.


THEORIES V. FACTS 265


already shown, it fails in the cases to which he most
confidently applied it ; it would be a waste of time to
discuss it further in detail.

In fairness, I should add that I have little doubt that
some reported sea-serpents were, actually, giant squid.

13. Manatee. Another valueless suggestion. The
manatee (and its near relative, the dugong) resembles
a seal in appearance, and does not exceed twelve feet in
length. A larger type, Steller’s Sea-cow, was as big as
a male sea-elephant (say twenty feet long) but this has
been extinct for over a century and a half; and having
a large head and short, thick neck it could not, in any
event, satisfy the reports.

I4. Sea-snake. The known sea-snakes (Hydrophidie)
do not exceed a few feet in length, and a few inches in
diameter. Incidentally, their range is confined to the
Indian and Pacific oceans ; and, generally, to the tropics.*
They are unknown in the Atlantic, from which the
great majority of sea-serpents have been reported.

15. Ribbon fish. 'Thistheory, like No. 12 (giant squid),
has, at first sight, a good deal to be said for it. It has
often been advanced — notably by Dr. Andrew Wilson‘
and (quite recently) by Sir J. A. Thompson.*

The ribbon fish (also called tape-fish and ' King of
the Herring’) is undoubtedly serpentine in form, and

1 For instance, an appearance reported in the Wide World Magazine
for March ıgor — and I almost think I should add the Pauline case of
1875, affidavits notwithstanding.


2 The Indian Ocean is their principal habitat- but they are not
unknown in Australia. See, for example, the Sydney Morning Herald of
May 4th and June 6th, 1927.

? I have only come across one (doubtful) report : a Pe/amys bicolor seen
from the ship General Coole, on August rst, 1786, in lat. 42° 44' N., long.
22^ 10. W.:

* Leisure Time Studies (London, 1879).

* See the J//ustrated London News, 19, ii. 1921.


266 THE SEA-SERPENT


carries a peculiar back-fin which might easily be mistaken
for a mane. It is a deep-water creature, very rarely met
with.

No known specimen, however, has exceeded twenty-
five feet in length, although there are vague reports of
forty-foot ones having been encountered. In view of its
very slender body, it would be a mechanical impossibility
for such a creature to swim with its head ' held con-
stantly ' more than a very few inches above water. In
addition, its coloration resembles polished steel, or
silver.


D. Other living creatures of known species.


16. Black snake. This theory, put forward by the
Linnean Society of Boston in 1817, has already been
discussed.: It is obviously untenable.

17. Boa. In view of the known fact that some of the
large snakes, such as boas, are strong swimmers, it has
sometimes been suggested that, if carried to sea by
off-shore currents, or while coiled round floating trees
or other wreckage, they might easily give rise to reports
of sea-serpents.

There is a case on record? of a cedar-trunk which,
accompanied by a large and living boa, was washed ashore
at St. Vincent Island, West Indies, having presumably
come from South America. But such accidents can
scarcely be common, and the chances of such a snake
surviving attacks by sharks, etc., are very small indeed.
Moreover, to fit the facts we must assume that, when seen,
it was swimming freely and unsupported ; and then,
while it might elevate its head and neck a few inches, the
rest of its body would be in wide Aorizontal undulation.

1 Seep. $6.
* Zoological Journal, December 1827.


THEORIES V. FACTS 267


Apart from this, no known snake is nearly large enough
to fill the bill as regards observed length and girth.


E. Supposed gigantic examples of known species.

Leaving the known creatures, amongst whom (I sug-
gest) none can be found which adequately fills the bill,
we turn to the theory, or group of theories, holding that
gigantic variant forms of some such creatures, hitherto
unknown to science, may exist- and that inthis manner an
explanation can be obtained.

It is unquestionably true that this is not, a priori, im-
possible. The case of the giant squid, already mentioned,
affords ample proof of this. Here one has a small, quite
normal sea-creature — the common squid, or loligo —
suddenly found to possess exceedingly close relatives of
enormous size ; inhabiting the deep seas, very rarely
seen, and, until quite recently, regarded as mythical.

On this assumption —

I9. Giant sea-snake.

20. Giant conger.

21. Giant ribbon-fish.

I have grouped these theories together, because of one
element which is common to all three. They all postu-
late the existence of a large sea-creature whose girth 1s
practically uniform from head to tail. Such being the
case, it is possible, from the reported facts, to arrive at
an approximate conclusion as to the length of such a
creature ; and we reach the rather startling result that
this must equal, if not exceed, that of an Atlantic liner.

The line of reasoning is as follows. I cannot hope to
put it better than was done by R. A. Proctor.


* A seacreature... whatever 1ts nature, which keeps any


1 In his ‘ Strange Sea Creatures’ (Pleasant Ways in Science, pp. 216,
217)


268 THE SEA-SERPENT


considerable volume of its body out of water con-
stantly, while travelling a long distance, must of
necessity have a much greater volume all the time
under water, and must have its propelling apparatus
under water.

* Moreover, if the propulsion is not effected by fins,
paddles, a great flat tail, or these combined, but by the
undulations of the animal's own body, then the part
out of water must of necessity be affected by these
undulations, unless it is very small in volume and
length compared with the part under water.

‘I assert both these points as matters depending on


.oooccoOooOCQQOoOQcCQOoOooooo


FIG. 28. THE ‘ GIANT STURGEON’ THEORY


physical laws, and without fear that the best informed
zoologist can adduce any instances to the contrary. It
is in fact physically impossible: that any such cases
should exist.’


It follows, that if such creatures as those seen (for
example) from the Dedalus and Umfuli were gigantic
sea-snakes, congers, or ribbon-fish they would be, at
least, upwards of five hundred feet long. To those who


! At the same time, * impossible’ is a dangerous word to use. Lactantius
declared that those who credited the existence of antipodes were mad, and
St. Augustine added that, in any event, it was physically impossible for
such territories to be inhabited.


ZA
EN:


THEORIES V. FACTS 269


are inclined to make such an assumption I have nothing
to say, except that no creature could be better entitled to
the discredited name of ‘ sea-serpent.'


22. Giant Sturgeon. 1 have not seen this theory
suggested before. I put it forward, not as a serious
hypothesis, but more or less as a parody upon the in-
genious theories, with equally ingenious illustrations,
evolved by Lee. As shown in Fig. 28, if we imagine
a sturgeon a hundred feet or so in length, swimming
with its snout and back above water, the curved snout
and the scutes on the crest of the back may be thought to
resemble the Gloucester monster quite nicely. But, as
with all suggestions of the kind, this fits one case well :
and, by reason of being made to fit it, fails lamentably to
cover the remainder.


23. Giant turtle. 'The hypothesis of a giant turtle may
be said to have some positive evidence in its favour. The
case of the Moha Moha can scarcely be explained in any
other manner. And the creature seen by the Valhalla,
apart from the fin on its back, might also be regarded as
an enormous long-necked turtle. The body of the
Osborne’s monster, again, was ‘in form like that of a
gigantic turtle. . .'* Altogether, this seems a promising
hypothesis — but it would not cover many of the remain-
ing cases.


24. Giant pinniped. As in the last case, there is some
positive evidence for this theory. The creature seen and
sketched by Mr. Mackintosh Bell is, in essentials,
a long-necked seal — of unknown type, it is true, but still


* Mr. Nicoll, however, (who saw it) considered — albeit somewhat
dubiously — that its nature was mammalian. See p. 202.


2 The Times, 14, vi. 1877.


7u34439-039 17245) IY J, uro1j pardoy


AAdINNId TVOILAHLOdAH SNVW38no


"6z ‘ola


270


THEORTES- U, FACTS 271


recognisably a seal. On the other hand, his creature
was of comparatively small dimensions : and, as ex-
plained, I have included it as affording a valuable side-
light on the remaining cases — not as being quite on all-
fours with them.

Oudemans, as the result of his examination of some
160 reports (up to 1890) deduced therefrom the existence
of a quite gigantic member of the Pinnipeds (the seal
family). He worked his conclusions out in most elaborate
detail, giving a table of presumed dimensions for ten
specimen individuals — varying in total length from
18 to 249 feet !

Fig. 29 shows his hypothetical Pinniped in outline.
Personally, I am inclined to view this theory slightly
askance, because I regard it as founded on fallacious
premises. In the first place, I should certainly cut his
list of accepted cases down to one-half, or even less — for
some of them, to my mind, are hoaxes ; some admit of
other and more probable explanations ; and many are
so lacking in accurate detail as to be almost valueless.
And, secondly, he assumes that, in every one of the
hundred and sixty, exactly the same type of creature was
seen — so that he has to reconcile all the reported details
of every case with those of every other. It is not sur-
prising, therefore, that some of his results — such as the
amazing length of tail, nearly as long as that of head,
neck, and body combined — should appear far-fetched.
On the other hand, it must be admitted that he has
worked out his theory with immense diligence — but to
my mind this is somewhat mis-applied, while the theory
itself is based upon several assumptions which are flatly
contradicted by the evidence.'


! See p. 276.


272 THE SEA-SERPENT .


F. Supposed survivals of ‘ extinct’ reptiles.

Lastly, I come to a group of theories which assume that
the reported sea-serpents are, actually, surviving speci-
mens (or, close relations) of the Enaliosauria, or Marine
Lizards ; creatures generally regarded as having become
extinct long before the appearance of man on this planet.

It is quite true that there is good reason for believing
that the Enaliosauria were originally land reptiles which,
in course of time, took to the sea as a permanent habitat ;
it is also true that, in all probability, the whales did the
same, and have survived to our own day. But it should
be remembered that the two occurrences are separated by
a vast interval of time ; and that, while it is barely
possible that a Mesozoic reptile, living in the sea and
thereby safeguarded from many of the secular changes
fatal to its land contemporaries, might have survived to
our own day, the chances against this run into almost
astronomical figures.

Against this, it has been replied that several existing
creatures, such as the Chimera (or sea-cat), the long-
necked river-tortoise, and the iguana are closely analogous
to forms which existed in the Mesozoic era, and of which
no intermediate examples are known. By analogy, it
would seem at least possible that forms closely related to,
if not lineal successors of, the Enaliosauria may still exist,
even though (like the Chimera itself) rarely met with :
and that the absence of links in the chain is not a com-
plete disproof of its existence. A dictum of Agassiz, the
American naturalist, upon this point is often quoted. It
would, he remarked, be in precise conformity with
analogy that a creature of Enaliosaurian type should
exist in the American seas, since he had found numerous
instances (such as the gar-pike) in which the fossil forms
of the Old world were represented by living types in the


THEORIES V. FACTS 272


New. It should, however, be mentioned that this opinion
was not, apparently, delivered in writing: ; and it has
a faintly patriotic flavour suggestive of an after-dinner
speech in pre-Volstead times.

I turn to the three Enaliosaurians suggested as models
from which the present-day sea-serpent may have
developed.

25. Ichthyosaurus.*

Also termed the ' Great Fish-Lizard, this creature
resembled a whale in general outline, with a large head
and jaws, and enormous bony eye-sockets. As with
a whale, its lack of any definite neck puts it, or any
successor resembling it, out of court as an adequate
explanation. It may be noted though, as a minor point of
interest, that types are known which have a ridge of fins,
along the rear half of the back, curiously suggestive of
that seen from the Osborne.

26. Elasmosaurus.
27. Plesiosaurus.

These two theories relate to creatures so closely
similar that they can best be discussed under one head.
The Elasmosaurus was an American variant of the
Plesiosaurus, differing chiefly in the arrangement of the
breast-bones.

The suggestion that the sea-serpent may be a survival
of the Plesiosaurus, or a creature closely similar to it, has
often been made ; an occurrence which, considering
how closely it squares with the reported facts, is ex-
ceedingly natural. It was put forward by several of the
writers who discussed the ‘ Animal of Stronsa' ; and,

1 It first appeared, so far as I can trace, in the Zoo/ogisz, 1849, p. 2395 ;
in a letter from an unnamed correspondent.


2 Commemorated in rousing verse by Sir Edward Parry. See his
Butter Scotia, chap. ix.


274 THE SEA-SERPENT


later, by Newman, editor of the Zoo/ogist, and others.
But its ablest advocate was Philip Gosse, and the follow-
ing is his exposition of it. Describing the Plesiosaurus,
he remarks: : i


*. , . The head was fixed at the extremity of a neck,
composed of thirty to forty vertebrae, which, from its
extraordinary length, slenderness, and flexibility, must
have been the very counterpart of the body of a serpent.
This snake-like neck merged insensibly into a com-
pact and moderately slender body, which carried two
pairs of paddles, very much like those of a sea-turtle,
and terminated behind in a gradually attenuated tail.
* Thus, if the P/esiosaur could have been seen alive,*
you would have discerned nearly its total length at
the surface of the water, propelled at a rapid rate,
without any undulation, by an apparatus altogether
invisible, — the powerful paddles beneath ; while the
entire serpentine neck would probably be projected
obliquely, carrying the reptilian head, with an eye of
moderate aperture, and a mouth whose gape did not
extend beyond the eye.

* Add to this a covering of the body not formed of
scales, bony plates, or other form of solidified integu-
ment, but a yielding, leathery skin, probably black
and smooth, like that of a whale ; give the creature
a length of some sixty feet or more, and you would
have before you almost the very counterpart of the
apparition that wrought such amazement on board
the Dedalus. The position of the nostrils at the
summit of the head indicates, that, on first coming to
the surface from the depths of the sea, the animal
would spout in the manner of the whales, — a circum-
stance reported by some observers of the sea-serpent.


1 The Romance of Natural History, pp. 357,358. — *See Plate VII.


xs 43


PLATE VII. A PLESIOSAURUS


NorE.—Although partly conjectural, this drawing of the creature as it
would have appeared when swimming is probably not far from the truth.


From Lankester’s * Extinct Animals’


[Facing p. 274


THEORIES V. FACTS | 275


“ I must confess that I am myself far more disposed to
acquiesce in this hypothesis than in any other that has
been mooted. Not that I would identify the animals
seen with the actual Plesiosaurs of the lias. None of
them yet discovered appear to exceed thirty-five feet
in length, which is scarcely half sufficient to meet the
exigencies of the case. I should not look for any
species, scarcely even any genus, to be perpetuated
from the oolitic period to the present. Admitting the
actual continuation of the order Exaliosauria, it would
be, I think, quite in conformity with general analogy
to find important generic modifications. . . .'


It will be noted that Gosse wrote with the Dedalus
case chiefly in mind ; but his words are equally applicable
to later reports, such as those of Dr. Matheson, Captain
Cringle, and Captain Dean. Of all the theories here
stated, it will, I think, be admitted that that of a modified
Plesiosaurus covers the facts (or the great majority of
them) better than any other.

It should be noted, however, that it was discussed: and
rejected by Oudemans. I hope, however, that he will
pardon me for saying that I regard his reasons for so
doing as slightly fanciful.

He gives only two, as follows :


‘1. The neck of the Plestosaurus must have been fit
to be bent in all directions, but I think no paleontologist
will ever admit that its trunk or backbone could be
bent in such vertical undulations, as is the case with
the sea-serpents.

‘2. The Plesiosaurus may have been destitute of
scales, and may have had a smooth skin, it can never


1 The Great Sea-Serpent, pp. 401-34. .


*


276 THE SEA-SERPENT


have been provided with a hairy skin as seals have,
and at all events it had no mane, and no whiskers.’


As already mentioned in chapter ir, it seems quite
likely that the reported ‘vertical undulations’ are, in
great measure, due to wrinkling or humping of the
creature’s skin, produced at will by muscular contraction.
Some part of them may also be due to the deceptive
effect of slight ripples — an effect which, if the sea were
assumed to be perfectly calm, would be put down to;
undulations of the body rather than of the water in which
it was moving. Lastly, a creature with so very flexible |
a neck and tail is not likely to have had a perfectly,
inflexible body.

Secondly, it is remarkable that, out of all Oudemans’
162* reports, there is mot one, as he admits, which
specifically states that the creature observed had a hairy
Skin — and there are many which state that it appeared
smooth ! Yet he discards this overwhelming weight of
evidence with the utmost calmness, merely remarking that
such a creature must have a hairy skin, because it has
whiskers ! And his sole authority for the whiskers is
Pontoppidan, who wrote from hearsay! As before,
there is zot one of his 160 reports in which any mention
is made of whiskers having been observed. Surely,
dogmatism could scarcely go further. Compared with
this, his ex cathedra assertion that the Plesiosaurus had
no mane —a point on which we are, at present, in com-
plete ignorance — is a mere trifle.


1 He gives, actually, 187, but only discusses 162 — the remaining 25
forming an appendix of lately received reports.

* Admittedly, Mr. Mackintosh Bell’s creature is described as having
whiskers — but, as already explained, I do not class this as exactly a typical
case. I know of no other in which whiskers are mentioned.


CONCLUSION


Hiruerto, I have done my best to present the facts of
the case, and (avoiding more than incidental comment) to
supplement them by the opinions, pro and coz, of critics
much better qualified than myself. But I should like, in
conclusion, to put on record my own views — not as of
any intrinsic value, but as affording a fair target for
future writers on the subject.

To my mind, the evidence available at present — and
even the selection of that evidence given in these pages —
goes all the way to demonstrate the real existence of more
than one type of creature not yet scientifically described.
I should be inclined to say that it gave ground for
believing in three — a long-necked seal, such as that seen
by Mr. Mackintosh Bell ; a gigantic turtle-like creature
(the Moha Moha, and possibly the Yalhalla’s monster) :
and (deducible from the majority of the reports) a creature
larger than either, and much resembling in outline and
structure the Plesiosaurus of Mesozoic times. I do not
suggest that the last-named is actually a Plesiosaurus,
but that it is either one of its descendants or has evolved
along similar lines.

In either case, I suggest that there 1s little doubt that
it has much the same characteristics — a slender neck
and tail and a comparatively large body with propelling
flippers. Its colour is dark brown above and lighter
below, its skin smooth, and some specimens probably
possess a mane. Its principal habitat is the Atlantic

Ts 277


278 THE SEA-SERPENT


Ocean, both North and South: — and it appears to like
sunshine and hot weather, and to be migratory.

Let us hope that, one day, its existence will be more
definitely established by the capture of an actual speci-
men ; or, equally to the point and far better, by a photo-
graph or film of one. I say ‘ far better,’ because while
I imagine that the sea-serpent's principal enemies, at
present, are the sperm-whale and the ‘killer,’ it has
another potential enemy who, if he ever comes to believe
in it, will be its worst.

That enemy is Man himself. In these days the lot of
any rare creature is a hard one. If, for any conceivable
reason, it 1s of the slightest commercial value — whether
by reason of its beauty, or its utility, or even its rarity
alone — its rapid extinction is practically certain. The list
of creatures which Man has swept out of existence for
no reason but his own greed and selfishness — the Great
Auk, the Dodo, Steller's sea-cow, the passenger pigeon,
and the like-is a pitiable one. Even his brother man has
not escaped — witness the fate of the Tasmanian Bush-
men, and the steady degeneration of savage communities
under the influence of 'civilised' man's inseparable
comrades — drink and disease. Nothing is safe from him


on land, and even the seven seas give no real protection |


against him — he has already exterminated, or almost
exterminated, some species of whales and seals : at least,
he has driven them from all their known haunts.


to. . Above all others, we should protect and hold
sacred those types, Nature’s masterpieces, which are first
singled out for destruction on account of their size, or
splendour, or rarity, and that false detestable glory which is
accorded to their most successful slayers. In ancient


1 See Fig. 30 (end-paper of this volume).


1


5


CONCLUSION 279


times the spirit of life shone brightest in these ; and when
others that shared the earth with them were taken by
death they were left, being more worthy of perpetuation.
Like immortal flowers they have drifted down to us on the
ocean of time, and their strangeness and beauty bring
£o our imaginations a dream and a picture of that un-
known world, immeasurably far removed, where man
was not: and when they perish, something of gladness
goes out from Nature, and the sunshine loses something of
its brightness.


I could wish that these words of W. H. Hudson —
the charter of all wild creatures verging upon extinction —
might be brought home to those ‘ sportsmen,’ traders,
and collectors who, for personal gain, wantonly destroy
what Man can never, by any belated effort, replace.


ı The Naturalist in La Plata, p. 29.


E


i


kes See Sha cask da


EE VOS MET = diee em
eG res. ae tonem ote i A ee ce
dia we ik corte karl ar rn aeri
SIA ah bid side See uen came je im
2m te See beh MUI Me ils
4 S Sacro 5j A ra iinet? een
“ a er d WA ehr te, DET
Us o gie : y ae: aby: he: eas soak, ig by
e nosui tt M io eben. E s Le.
- Bótdonixe nen aw ty uy Lax Un io
embat E ^x? Une j sc E sport b A
zia M JUS [PHOS eet, AiR Ph 1122
d = tatslod qae xd sian er


E Ades 54 o wr te^. bic REM so


é


L3 wi. D
Í
e
c v
sie
= P
3 Y
\
"
3
Ji
M " M"
- »
ye y
E m
" T r
ER
\ -


INDEX


(Ss.  Sea-Serpent, f.=footnote)


A, 10,’ term explained, 211f.
Achates, H.M.S., 212
Adelaide, Bishop of, reported dead,


254
ADMIRALTY, BOARD OF:
mentioned, 85
call for M'Quhae's report, 95


receive » 00
destroy 9
receive Plumper sketch, 128
destroy is nu res


Secretaryship of, 140f.
Com. Pearson's report to, 154
3 z 3: action on,
154, 155, 170
Admiralty Manualof Scientific Enquiry,
165, 166, 170, 211
AFFIDAVITS re Ss. :
sworn at Bergen, 24-27
Gloucester, 35-38, 41, 43-
45, 49-52
Plymouth, 52, 53
Essex, 38, 60
» »,, Kirkwall, 239-243
in Pauline case, 265f.
AGASSIZ, J. L: R.:
on ‘ extinct’ animals, 84
quoted,


LE »


2» LE
39 2)


32 2 » 272,

273

mentioned, 230
Alecton, French corvette, encounters

giant squid, 19
Algoa bay, 131
Allen, Solomon, 31f.

his "deposition, 36, 37, 38

Bs criticised, 39

Alligator not found in Australia, 181f.
Alligator, Owen's sea-going, 11of.
Alsbury, James, 182
Alsbury, Jemima, 181f., 182
Alsbury, Jessie, 181f., 182
ALSH, LOCH :

Ss. seen in, 184, 185

mentioned, 187
Anglewigen, N. N., 25, 26
Animal of Stronsa, see Stronsa.
Animals, rare, 237, 238
Ann, Cape, 45f., 51f., 60
Ann Marie, 45f.
Annulations of Fly’s Ss., 83
Anson's sea lion, 113
Antipodes, their possibility denied,

268f.
Aodon Dalei, 235, 236, 237


281


Ardintoul, 187
Arisaig (N.S.), Ss. seen off, 85, 87
Armadale Castle, 4f.
Arrest of Ss., attempted, 4
Atlantic principal habitat of Ss., 278
Atlantic, sea-snake seen in, 265f.
ATTENTION, EXPECTANT:
mentioned, 70, 71
denied by M’Quhae, 117
Auk, Great, 238f., 278
Australian sea-snakes, 265f.
Azores, the, 131f.


Back bay, Ss. seen in, 223, 224
Bacon, whale encased in, 7
Bahia, 200
Bainbridge, Commdre., U.S.N., 68, 69
Balenoptera rostrata, 237
Baly, Dr., blunder made by, 85f.
Banks, Sir Joseph, 245
Barclay, Dr. John, on Stronsa animal,
246
mentioned, 248
Barencthy’s rocks :
mentioned, 76, 78
positions given for, 77
Barenethy should be Barencthy
Barker, Capt. Sir D. W., R.N.R., 203
Barnacle goose, 16f.
Barnacles, large, 137
Barrett, Mr. W., Master, R.N., 98
Barrier Reef of Australia, The Great,
177f., 179
Barry, Mr., sees Ss., 87, 88
BARTLETT, A. D. :
mentioned, 163
on Osborne case, 169, 170
on rare animals, 237, 238
Basilosaurus, 253f.
BASKING-SHARK :
as explaining Osborne case, 168
seen in Irish Channel, 211, 212
» » Coffin Bay, 255
as general explanation of Ss., 264
mentioned, 252
Batt, R. B., Master R. N., 130
Beach, Mr., 55
: Beam,’ term explained, 98f.
BELL, "MR. jim MACKINTOSH, W.S.:
on creature seen by him, 215, 216,
218, 220
mentioned, 263, 269, 276, 277
Belle Poule, frigate, 261
Bennett, Gersham, sees Ss., 60


282


BERGEN:
affidavits sworn at, 24
mentioned, 11, 89f., 90, 9I
Bering island, 238f.
Bermuda, 189
Bigelow, Jacob, 29f.
BING, REV. MR.:
drawing of Ss. by, 9, 13
mentioned, 15, 20
Biscay, Bay of, 77
Bishop, premature obituary of a, 254,
255
Black Deep, 224, 225
Black snake, as explaining, Ss. 266
BLAINVILLE, H. M. D. DE:
on Sciohiophis Atlanticus, 56
examines Aodon Dalei, 235
Blake, William, 124f.
Blue-book of Naval losses, 204
Blunders of authors, 85f., 121f.
Boa, as explaining Ss., 266, 267
BOGLE, GILBERT :
mentioned, 141f.
his account of Ss., 153
BOLTON; CAPT. WAG.
on Gloucester Ss., 68, 69
defective memory of, 69
Bombay, 223
Bombay Times :
mentioned, 78
supposed misprint in, 80
Booth Line, 204
Boston, Linnean Society of, see
Linnean Society
Boston Daily Advertiser, 45f., 58f., 68f.
Boston Weekly Messenger, 42, 59, 61f.
Boulenger, Mr. E. C., quoted, 3
Bracklesham, 230
BRAGG, R.:
mentioned, 31f., 49, 51f.
his deposition, 49, 50
Branco Cape, 198f.
Brazilian, 137
BullE:sJq5 6f.
Brims Ness, 216
Brims Walls, 215
Brinchmand, Ole, 24, 27
Broomielaw, 105, 106
Bruce, James, intolerant of fools, 22f.
BUCKLAND, FRANK:
mentioned, 154, 163f.
consulted by Admiralty, 155
consults other experts, 163
on Osborne case, 167, 168
Bull, home- “grown, 152f.
BULLEN, BOE
blunder made by, 121f.
attacks Oudemans, 122
his ‘explanation’ of Dedalus’ Ss.,


122
“BUNCHES” =

on back of snake, 56

on back of Ss., at Gloucester, 35,

37-40, 44-47

at Nahant, 62-65, 67
in Nova Scotia, 86, 87
in N. Atlantic, 133


U.S.N. :


» ”
” LE
” M


E


INDEX


* BUNCHES’:
on back of Ss., in Sound of Sleat,
141, 143, 145, 146,
150, ISI

33 m in S. Atlantic, 191
2 remarks on, 275, 276
on head of Ss. , 50

Bundaloch, 146

Buoy, nun, term explained, 134f.

Bushmen, Tasmanian, 278

Butter Scotia, 273].

Byszing, HC. 24, 27


Cachalot, high-finned, 236
California, Gulf of, 83, 85
Calverley, C. S., 32
Camera overlooked, 192
Campbell, Sir Colin, 139
Canna island, 251
Carcase at Santa Cruz, 258
Carcase, Coffin Bay, 254, 255
Carcase, Florida, 256-258
Carettochelys, 175
Carnivora, Amphibious, 13
Carpenter, Capt. A., R.N., 202f.
Castellamare, Gulf of, 162
CASTILIAN :
mentioned, 133, 139
Ss. seen from, 134, 135
meteor. log of, 134
ownership of, 139, 140
Castledonan, 146
Castoreum, 23
* Cat-harpings,’ term explained, 76f.
Century Magazine, 63f., 256f.
* Chair,' term explained, 48f.
Chase, N. D., statement made by, 63,
64
Chelosauria Lovelli, 179
Chimera, 272
Chimneys, Three, 76, 77
Chittagong, 238
Chladni, E. F. F., 7
Clan Maclean, 251f.
Claxton, Capt., R.N., 1
Clies, Jan, 24, 27
Cod, Cape, 60
Cofün Bay carcase, 254, 255
Coleridge, blunder made by, 121f.
COLL, OBR:
Ss. seen off, 148, 250
mentioned, 250f., 252
Coluber constrictor, 56
Committee, see Linnean Society
Committees, usual defects of, 29
‘ Compeared,’ term explained, 241f.
Conception Bay, giant squid in, 19
Conferences, Naval, results of, 238
Conger, giant, as explaining Ss., 267, 268
Continuation af Relationerne . . ., 13f.
Coode, Lt. T. P5 R.N., 130
$ Coram,’ term explained, 36f.
Corliss, Capt. John, 44
Corveiro, Cape, 18of.
CRAWFORD, (26th) EARL OF:
mentioned, 195, 196, 199
scientific labours of, 195f.


INDEX


* Creatures, Strange Sea,’ 1rof.
CRINGLE, CAPT. R. ies
letter from, to author, 188
his account of SS: 189, 191
remarks by, 193
mentioned, 275
Crocodiles, Australian, 181f.
Cunningham, Mr. J. T., 2f.


* Dedalus, An Officer of H.M.S.,'


139

DAEDALUS, H.M.S.:
arrives at Plymouth, 94
when commissioned, 94f.
log of, 95f., 99, 100
speed of, 102f.

D/EDALUS’ SEA-SERPENT :
official report on, 96, 97, 98, 99
drawings of, 99, 103, 122-125, 130
other accounts of, 100, IOI, 102, 103
‘explained ' by Owen, 110-115

33 by Lee, 121
by Bullen, 121/122
defended by Capt. M’Quhae,
118
mentioned, 27, 28, 68, 73, 74, 78,
94f., 98f., 103, 109, II4, II5, 116,
1710, 120, 121,122, 120, 127, 125;
133, 137, 139, 154, 161, 162, 163,
167, 195, 199, 227f.

Dallivan's Neck, 66

Dalziel’s News-agency, 254, 255

Daphne hoax, 105, 106

DARWIN, CHARLES:
mentioned, 74f.
his theory 'of Man's origin, 118f.

Dass, A. C.n 24, 27

Davidson, Dr. R., sees Ss., 79, 80

Davies, William, 135

Davis, John, 29f.

Davis, N. M., J.P., 53

Davis, S., 53 f.

Dawson, J. W., 86, 87, 88

* Dead- -reckoning,’ "term explained, 75f.

DEAN, CAPT. F. W., R.N.:
on Hilary: S Ss., 205-210
letter from, 212—214
mentioned, 275

Dean, Dr. A., 196

Decapod, 18, rof.

E Deep, Phoenix of the,' 96, 97

mob P. W., on Norwegian Ss., 91-


103,


116-


Delphinorhynchus, 237

* Deniers,’ term explained, 24f.

Description of the Shetland Islands, 247f.

* Devil's Hoofmarks,’ 119f.

Diodon Sowerbyi is "Mesoplodon bidens

Diprodoton, 1o9f.

Dixon, Mr., 230

Dodo, 'the, '278

Donkeys, few dead, 228f.

2 many living.

alism

Dornie, 146, 187

Dorsal fin, double, 236

Dounatoun, 241


See Spiritu-


283


Dowling, a seaman, 81
DRAWINGS OF SEA-SERPENT:
natural discrepancies, in, 5, 6, 124
remarks on, in Dedalus case, 122-
125
BST et Imogen case, 133
how "produced, in Stronsa, 239, 243
Drepanaspis, 177
Druidag, 146
DRUMMOND, TT Sey We Sos Sean
mentioned, 98
initials log, 100
his journal quoted, 100, IOI
Duich, Loch, 146, 147, 152
Duisdale, 146, 152
Dun Echt, 196f.


East Cape, N.Z., Ss. seen off, 16, 17
East Point, Mass., 34f.
Eclipse, singularly prolonged, r21f.
EGEDE, HANS:
mentioned, II
SEESISSHT2, 15
character of, 15
his Ss. not a whale, 16
Egede, Povel, mentioned, 12, 13
Egyptian Hall, Koch at, 252
EIGG, I. OF:
Ss. seen off, 146
mentioned, 250
Elasmosaurus, as explaining Ss., 273
Elements of Physiology, 85f.
Elephant, Sea, see Sea Elephant
Elgenses, John, 91
Ell, Norwegian, term explained, 92f.
Ellery, Eppes, 31f.
Elliott, Adml. Sir George, 154, 159
ENALIOSAURI :
did not float when dead, 226, 231f.,
234
as explaining Ss., 272-276
mentioned, 83, 233, 257
Encyclopedia Britannica, on Ss., 2
England, New, see New England
Enquiry, Admiralty Manual of Scienti-
fic, 165, 166, 170, 211
Eocene clay, 230
Essex, affidavits sworn at, 38, 60
Essex county, 35
Evans, Capt. F. J. O., R.N., 154
EVENING NEWS, THE:
article on Ss. in., 220, 22I
mentioned, 223f.
Evolution, Owen rejects, 232
Explanation of Ss., world’s funniest,
203
‘Extinct’ animals, Agassiz on, 84


Faraday, Michael, on table-turning, 74
FELCH, REV. CHEEVER:
on Ss. seen by him, 66-68
value of his evidence, 68, 71
mentioned, 69
Fernel, Capt. de Clas, 77f.
Ferry, Lorenz von, Ss. seen by, 23-27
Feuer-Meteore, Ueber, Ff:


284


Fin, back-, of Ss., 153f., 196, 198, 199,
200, 20I, 206, 207, 214
FINNEY, ELKANAH :
mentioned, 31f., 53
his deposition, 52, 53
Fins, Ss. propelled by, 102
Fins, singular ridge of, 156, 160, 161,
166, 168, 170, 171, 172273
Fisheries, Inspector of, 154, 155
Fisheries, Ministry of Agriculture and,


155
FitzRoy, Adml. Robert, 134f.
Flang, Christian, 91
Fleet, Vice-Adml. H. L., sights Ss., 189
Flexibility of Ss., 40, 54, 87, 207, 214
FLORIDA CARCASE:
mentioned, 254
Mr. Holder on, 256, 257
Fly, H.M.S., 85, 85
Fly River, 175
Foegh, J., 24, 27
Folsetter, William, 243
* Forecastle, topgallant, term explain-
ed, 155f.
FORSYTH, EF. D. Mc; RNS
his account of Ss., 157, 158
mentioned, 164
Foster, W. M., 31f.
Fotheringhame, Thomas, 243, 244f.
Franklin, Sir John, K.C.H., gof.
“Friend to Truth, A,’ 107


GAFFNEY, MATTHEW:
shoots at Ss., 41
markmanship of, 42
mentioned, 31f., 45f.
(See also Lund)
Gage, Adml. Sir W. H., 95, 96, 99
Gainard, M., 236
Galita, 160
Gallo, C. de, 162
Gar-pike, survival of, 84, 272
Gartner, H. C., 24, 27
Geirfuglaskeir, 238f.
General Coole, 265f.
Geological Transactions, 231
Ghosts, Owen's views on, 1I5, 231
Ghosts, remarks on, 231f.
Giant (hypothetical) creatures, see
wnder proper name
Giant squid, see Squid, Giant
Gibraltar, monkeys at, 238f.
Gill, Sir David, 196f.
Giraffe, absurd theory about, 120
Glenshiel, 187
Globe, The, 105
GLOUCESTER, MASS. :
remarks on, 29f., 33
Ss. first seen at, 33
evidence taken at, summarised, 53,


54
snake killed at, 55, 56
fun poked at, 57
Ss. again seen at, 65-70
mentioned, 269
Godthaab, 12
Goodsir, Prof., on Stronsa animal, 247


INDEX


Goose, Barnacle, 16f.
Gooseberry, giant, 1
Gordon, Rev. Mr., and Florida car-
case, 256, 257
GOSSE, PHILIP H.:
on Ss., 233-237
», Plesiosaurus, 274, 275
mentioned, 124f.
Gough, Lt. H. C., R.N., 162
Gould, Charles, 178f.
GOULD, R T. :
on Hilary Ss., 211, 212
serious allegation against, 221f.
Gram, M., 24, 27
Grampus is Killer whale
Graphic, The :
mentioned, 160
quoted, re Osborne's Ss., 161
GRAY, CAPT. DAVID:
mentioned, 163, 171
on Osborne case, 168
Gray, F. C., 29f.
Greenland, 12
Greenland, A Describtion of:
mentioned, 12f.
translations of, 13, I4
Groat, Dr. Robert, 239
Grénlands, Det gamle ..., 12
Guelphic Order, see Hanover
Guion, Mr., 51
GUN, USE OF AGAINST SS.:
suggested, 102
alleged, 105
officially enjoined, 165, 166
practised, 208
Guns, Osborne’s, 159f., 171f.
Guy, Capt. James, 131, 132


Hus Sir H. R., blunder by,
I2I
Halifax, N.S., Ss. seen near, 81,82
Hallucination, 186f.
Hallucination, collective, 70, 71, 261
Halsydrus Pontoppidani, 244
Hamilton, Dr. R., on Egede's Ss., 13
Hamilton, R.-Adml. W. A. B., 140f.
Hamoaze, 97
Hanaud, 138/.
Hanover, Order of, 99f.
Harlan, 253f.
Harley, Mr., 201
Harries, J. B., 131, 132
HARRINGTON, CAPT. G. H.:
his letter to The Times, 133
sees Ss., 134, 135
attack on, 135-137
replies to attack, 139, 140
Harrington, Mrs., 139
Harris, Lt. F. C. P., R.N.R., 207; 2097
210
Haseltoot, Capt. F. E. B., R.N., 225
Haslop, D., 24
Havre, Toothless Whale of, 235, 236,


237
HAYNES, NAV. LT. W. P., RNS:
his account of Ss., 156, 157


INDEX


HAYNES, NAV. LT. W. P., R.N.:
his other account, 161
» Sketches, 160, 161
mentioned, 162, 164
Henderson, Donald, 182
* Henderson, James,’ IOS
Heowe, 28
Herbert Strang’s Annual, 204, 205
Herriman, Capt., 137, 138
* Herring, King of the,’ is Ribbon fish
Hertell, Thomas, on Ss., 51,52
Hesperus :
wreck of, 33
singular navigation of, 33f.
Hervey bay, 173
Hibbert, Dr., on Stronsa animal, 247
HILARY, H.M.S.:
Ss. seen from, referred to, 26f., 102f.
55 described, 206-208
log of, 96f., 209, 210
sunk by submarine, 204, 209
Hiort, H., 24, 27
Hippocampus major, x18
HOAX, as explaining Ss. :
this theory generally untenable, 33,
71, 104, 107, 128, 169, 260, 261
this theory suggested, 57, 104, 106
», justified in certain cases,
"58, 59, 60, 105, 106
y Hoofmarks, Devil’s,’ 1rof.
Holder, J. B. ,on Ss., 63f., 256, 257
Holt, Messrs. ’ Lamport &, 139
HOME, SIR EVERARD:
on Stronsa animal, 40f., 108, 245, 246
character of, 245
mentioned, 244f., de LE
HOPE, CAPT. GEO.,
Ss. seen by, 83
service on H.M.S. Fly, 85
Horrox, Jeremiah, quoted, 89
Houg, 15
Hourn, Loch, Ss. seen in, I4If., 144-
146, 148, 150, 153
Howden, J. C., on Stronsa animal, 244f.
Hoy, I. of, 215, 218
Hoyle, W. E., 2f.
Hudson, W. H., quoted, 278, 279
Hugo, Victor, 18
* Humps ' of Ss., see * Bunches’
Hunter, John, 245
Hunterian Museum, 108
Huxley refutes Owen, 119
* H. W.’ (pseudonym), 105, 106
* Hydrarchos Silliman, 253, 254
mens of the Navy, fatuity of,


Hydrophis, 230, 265


Icebergs, seals on, 113, 114
Iceland, 238f.
Iceland, Ss. seen off, 205
ICHTHYOSAURUS :
mentioned, 83
as explaining Ss., 273
in song, 273
Illusion, optical, 186


285


op PE. TED LONDON NEWS,
drawings of NM Ss. in, 103, 122-


» Plumber s Ss.in, 127,128
publishes numerous Ss. reports, 130,
I3I
5 Imogen report, 131, 132
regulations of, 133
omits Osborne case, 160f.
mentioned, 4f., 13, 89f., 97, 108f.,
115, 199, 265f.
Imogen :
mentioned, 130
Ss. seen from, 731,132
* Impossible,’ a "word to avoid, 268f.
Ince, Commdr. J. M. R., R.N., '81
Ince, Henry, sees Ss., 81, 82
Ince, W. H., 81
Independence, U.S.S., 66, 68, 69, 70
Indian Ocean, sea-snakes in, 265f.
Inverness Courier, 153


Jardine, publisher, 13f.
Johnston, J., mentioned, 31f.

his deposition, 43, 44
Journal de Physique, 56f.
Journal, meteorological, 133, 134
Jule-Naess, 25
Jura sound, 212f.


Kamptee, 80
Kellett, H.M.S., Ss. seen from, 224, 225
Kennion, Rt. Rev. Dr. G. W., 254
Kerr, A. L., sees Ss., 17
* King of the Herring ' ts Ribbon fish
King Solomon’s Mines, moon’s antics
in, 121f.
King's Beach, 65
Kintail, 146, 187
Kipling, Rudyard, mentioned, 4f.
Kirkwall, affidavits sworn at, 239
2 Knot ferm explained, 105f.
KOCH, EDRZASC.:
mentioned, 230
character of, 252
his ‘ Missouri Leviathan,’ 252, 253
finds Zeuglodon, 253
his ‘ Hydrarchos Sillimani, 253
Koenig, Jan, 24, 27
Kopper, N. P., 25, 26
KRAKEN, THE:
mentioned, 18, 231
reported ren of, 22f.
Krogh, G. S.,
Kyle of Loch Aich? 184, 185f.
Kyle Rhea, 145, 146, 150, 152


Lactantius on antipodes, 268f.
Lady Combermere, 75
Laing, Malcolm, 239, 244, 245
Lamport & Holt, Messrs., 139
LAND AND WATER:
quoted, re Loch Hourn Ss., 149-152
» re Osborne case, 156-159
» re Moha Moha, 174
remarkson  ,, 175-178
mentioned, 155, 162, "163, 164f., 176f.


286


Lange, C. von, 24, 27
Languedoc, considerate natives of, 42f.
* Larboard,' term explained, 102f.
Last Hope Inlet, mylodon remains at,
234f.
Laura, schooner, 49, 51
Lawrence, Hon. "Amos, 64
Le Bon, Gustave, on ledere halluci-
nation, 261
Leda, Ss. seen from, 141—153
LEE, HENRY:
on Egede's Ss., 18, 20, 21
» Daedalus’ Ss., 120, 121
», Osborne's Ss., 168, 169, 171
mentioned, 163, 269
Lee, Mr., 45, 4
Lees, Mrs., 182
Lees, W. H., 182
Leisure Time Studies, 265f.
Length, of Royal Saxon, 80
Letter, Owen's, 108-115, 227-231
Leviathan, Job on, 136f.
* Leviathan, Missouri, Koch's, 252, 253
Libel on seamen, a, 248f.
‘ Library, Naturalist’s,’ 13f.
Lillingstone, Mr., 151
Lincoln’s-inn-fields, 108
Lindsay, Hon. W., 196
Lindsay, Lord, see Crawford
LINNEAN SOCIETY (Boston) :
Committee of, is convened, 29
prepares report, 29f.
rules adopted by, 31,


2 25
2 3»
32
= 2. stupidity of, 56
courage of, 72
Loblolly Cove, 55
Loch, see under proper name
Lochourn is Loch Hourn
Lockhart, Mr. J. G., 70
Lockwood's I., 212f.
LOG:
of Dedalus mentioned, 85, 95f., 162
» F, examined, 99, 100
» Hilary mentioned, 96f., 210
» Osborne er 85
5 „ examined, I6I, 162
» Plumper ES 128, 129
» Umfuli quoted, 192, 193
Log, meteorological, 133, 134
Log, patent-, 193f.
Long Beach, 64
Long I. Sound, Ss. in, 51, 52
Look-out, efficiency of, 202f.
Losses, Naval, list of, 204
LOVELL, MISS S. :
mentioned, 173
her first account of Moha Moha, 174,
175
criticisms on this, 175, 176
her reply, 176, 177
» Second account, 179-181
unfairly treated, 183
Lovén, M., 229
Lund, J. C., mentioned, 9r
fires at Ss., 92
(See also Gafiney)


INDEX


Luzac & Co., 6f.
EYELE SIR CHARLES:
on Gloucester Ss., 47
END SS 86-88
Lynn, 63, 64, 71
Lynx, mistake for Science, 69
Lyster, Lt. B. O’n., R.A., 81, 82


Macaulay, blunder made by, 121f.
Mackerel, horse, is tunny
Maclachlan, Lt. A., 81, 82
Maclean clan, 251f.
MACLEAN, REV. DONALD:
veracity of, attested, 148, 151
Ss. seen by, 249-251
Macmillan, Alexander, 146
Macmillan, Farquhar, 146
M’ QUHAE, CAPT. BETER, R.N.:
his report re Ss., 97-99
commends I.L.N. drawings, 103
replies to Owen, 116-118
quoted, 261
mentioned, 27, 79, 94, 95, 96, 122,
124f., 126, 138f., 150, 166f., 227
Macrae, Finlay, 146
Macrae, Miss Forbes, 141f., 153
Macrae, Miss Kate, 141f., 152, 153
MACRAE, REV. JOHN:
Ss. seen by, 141-147
mentioned, 149, 150, I5I, 153
Mahone Bay, 81
Maine, H.M. Fleet Auxiliary, 212f.
Malbone, W. T., U.S.N., 66, 67, 68, 69
Malcolm, Ens. G. P., 81, 82
Man the exterminator, 278, 279
Manatee, as explaining Ss., 264
MANE OF SS.:
Pontoppidan on, 28
M'Quhae on, 28, 117
Owen on, 113
Stronsa reports of, 239, 243
mentioned, 27, 90, 114, 136
Mansfeld, J., 31f.
Mansfield, Mr. (not J.), 48
Marble, George, 44
Marston, John :
mentioned, 64
statement by, 65
Mary Ann, 105
Maryborough, 177
Mason, Mr. A. E. W., quoted, 138f.
$ Master, RNg term explained, 98f.
Mastodon, American, 253
Matheson, Dzrzb. M.
mentioned, 186
on Loch Alsh Ss., 187
MATHESON, DR. FARQUHAR :
on Ss. seen by him, 184-186
character of, 187
sketch of his Ss., 188, 220, 222, 275
Matthews, A. F., sees Ss., 17
MEADE-WALDO, MR. E. G. B.:
mentioned, 195, 200, 201
on Valhalla case, 196, 198, 199
Melville, Herman, 'contends whale is a
fish, 51f.
Memory, visual, 124


INDEX


Merigomish, N. S.:
Ss. seen off, 86, 87
situation of, 86f.
Merry, M. de, 77
Mesoplodon bidens, 236
Meteorites, origin of, 6
Meteorological logs, 133, 134
Misprint :
supposed, in Bombay Times, 80
(in originals quoted), 38f., 79f., 127f.
* Missouri Leviathan, Koch's, 252, 253
Moffat, 215
MOHA MOHA, THE:
first account of, 174, 175
second X 179381
corroboration of these, 182
not seen since 189o, 183
mentioned, 48f., 173, 215, 263, 269,


277

‘Moka, moka’ (erroneous name), 174f.
Molde :

mentioned, 25

Ss. seen off, 91, 92, 93
Molde Hooe, 91
Mollusques, Histoire Naturelle des, 18f.
Monfort, Denys de, 18
Monkeys, Gibraltar, 238f.
* Monster,’ use of term, 167
Moon in literature, 121f.
Moore, William :

on Osborne's Ss., 159

mentioned, 165
Morries Stirling, see Stirling
Moubray, Lt. E. H., R.N., 189
Moulmein, 136
Muck island, 250f.
MUIR, MR. T. A. R.:

sees Ss., 221

letter from, 221, 222

sketch by, 222, 223
Mull:

native tribes of, 251f.

Sound of, 147
Müller, 85f.
Müller, Prof., 230
Museum, British (Nat. Hist.), 175, 252
Museum, Hunterian, 108
Museum, Royal Scottish, 247f.
* Musket-shot, term explained, 92f.
Mylodon, recent remains of, 234f.
M ysteries of the Sea, 70
Mythical Monsters, 178


NAHANT:

situation of, 60

Ss. seen at, 61-65
NASH, LONSON, J.P.:

attests affidavits, 36, 39

on Ss. seen ashore, 49

mentioned, 44, 54, 55
Natler, C., 24, 27
Naturalist in La Plata, The, 279f.
Nature Notes for Ocean Voyagers, 203f.
Naval and Military Gazette, 102f.
* Naval Losses,' blue-book, 204
Naval officers, activities of, 95
Negative, attempted proof of, 227


287


Nelson, Peter, sees Ss., 17
New England coast, reports of Ss. off
70
New England Ss., see
Nahant
New River Inlet, 256
Newcastle Evening Chronicle, referred
to, 17f.
Newcastle Weekly Chronicle, 153
Newtoundland, giant squid off, 19
Newhall, B. F.:
mentioned, 64
statement by, 65
NEWMAN, EDWARD:
editor of Zoologist, 73
his views on Ss., 73, 74
on Fly’s creature, 84
refused Dedalus sketch, 96, 97
mentioned, 274
Newmann, Bishop, collects Ss. evid-
ence, 89
NICOLESM IE
mentioned, 195, 196, 199
on Valhalla’s Ss., 200-203
„ existence of SS., 202, 203
mentioned, 269f.
Nobleman, Owen's letter to un-named,
108
Norman's Woe reef, 33
North British Mail, 106
Northumberland strait, 86f., 87f.
Norway:
Ss. reports from, 22-28, 88-93
iron-bound coast of, 235
* Nun buoy,’ term explained, 134f.
Nungesser, bogus messages from, 4, 106


?


Gloucester,


Oath, corporal, 26
Octopus, 18, 19f.
Oddities, 119f.
Office, Home, 154, 155
Office, Meteorological, 134
* Officer, A Naval,' 128
* Officer of H.M.S. Dedalus, An,’ xor,
139
Officers, naval, activities of, 95
Okapi, 238
Okell, Mr., loses chance of lifetime, 192
Ophiognathus, 230, 260f.
Oraefajökull, 206f.
Origin of Species :
first sketch of, 74
attacked by Owen, 118
attack refuted, 119
OSBORNE, H.M. ROYAL YACHT:
Ss. seen from, 156-161
” 3» 39 mentioned, I3I, 154,
166, 167, 168, 170, 173, 263,
269, 273
speed of, 159, 161, 162, 166, 171
log of, examined, 161, 162
sail used by, 162
OUDEMANS, DR. A. C.:
his book on Ss. described, 6-8
55 JN as , referred to, 23f., 6of.,
77f., 153f.
on New England reports, 60


288


OUDEMANS, DR. A. C.:
on sex of Ss., 62f.
su pandtord’s:Ss:,.76, 77
omits Lyell’s accounts, 86f.
on Osborne case, 171, 172
, giant pinniped, 271, 272
rejects Plesiosaurus theory, 275, 276
OWEN, SIR RICHARD :
mentioned, 80, 97
Curator, Hunterian Museum, 108
his letter to The Times,
first half, 108-115
second half, 227-231
his sketch of a seal, 109
, draughtsmanship, roof.
,, character, 118, 119
attacks Origin of Species, 118
refuted by Huxley, 119
Superintendent, Natural
Museum, 155
consulted by Buckland, 163
on Osborne case, 163-167
‘demonstration’ by, 231f.
rejects evolution, 232


History


Palzophis, 230
Para, 200
Paradise Lost, quoted, 228
Parahiba :
Ss. seen off, 195
mentioned, 198
Parker, H..W., 2f-
Parry, Sir Edward, 273f.
Passenger pigeon, 278
Pauline, barque, 265f.
Peace, John, on Stronsa animal, 241,


244f.
PEARSON, COMMDR. H. L., R.N.:
sights Ss., 154
his report to Admiralty, 154
, account of Ss., 156
calls for reports of Ss., 162
and Owen, 170
mentioned, 159, 164, 170-171
Pearson, W. B.:
mentioned, 31f.
his deposition, 44, 45
Pekin, 136, 138f.
Pelamys bicolor in Atlantic, 265f.
Pentland Firth, 218
PEREKINS;COLVEI. HE
his deposition re Ss., 45, 46
further information by, 47, 48
on Rich's hoax, 58, 59
mentioned, 68
Petrie, Capt. :
mentioned, 79
death of, 80
Petrie, Mr., 243
PR Transactions, 40f., xo7f.,
245f.
Phoca leonina, 113, 114
Phoca proboscida, 113
* Phoenix of the Deep,’ 96, 97
Physeter tursio, 236
* Pickwick ' examination-paper, 32
Pictou, N.S., 86, 87


INDEX


Pigeon, passenger, 278
*Pinniped,' term explained, 271
Pinniped, giant, as explaining Ss., 269,
271
Pleasant Ways in Science, 119f., 267f.
PLESIOSAURUS:
as ancestor of Ss., 64, 194, 273-276,


277
did not float when dead, 234
mentioned, 83
Pliny, quoted, 42f.
Plumper, H.M.S. :
Ss. seen from, 127
log of, 128, 129
mentioned, 131
Plymouth, 94
Plymouth (U.S.), Ss. seen off, 52
PONTOPPIDAN, BISHOP ERIK:
his Natural History of Norway, 22
on Kraken, 23
s SS., 23
his credulity, 23
, figure of Ss., 28
mentioned, 11, 18, 26f., 88, 89f., 114,
117, 149, 186f., 229, 239, 244, 276
PORPOISES, LINE OF:
as explaining Ss., 27, 146, 167, 262
an untenable theory, 63, 71, 149, 153,
170, 193, 262
* Port tack,’ term explained, ro6f.
Portsmouth Times, 159f.
Powell, Mr. C. A. W., 192, 193
Prince, Marshal James:
on Ss. seen by him, 61-63
his famous telescope, 61
„ Sketch of Ss., 62, 68
mentioned, 64
Prince Edward Island (N.S.), 87
PROCTOR RR:
on Dedalus’ Ss., 120
» Structure of Ss., 267, 268
Psychologie des Foules, 261
Pterichthys, 177


Queensland, 173, 183
Quoy, M., 236


Ramsay, Dr. E. P., 175f.
Red rock, 64
Report, Capt. M'Quhae's, 96
Respectability, flagrant, 74
Reutz, J., 24, 25, 28
Rhinoceros Lasiotis, 237, 238
Rhytina gigas, 238f.
Ribbon fish, as explaining Ss., 265, 266
Ribbon fish, giant, 267, 268
RICH, RICHARD:
searches for Ss., 58
hoax played by, 58, 59
” ” 2 denied, 59
letter from, 59
Ritchie, Dr. James, on Stronsa animal,
247, 248
River-tortoise, 272
Robert the black boy, 181, 182
* Rod,’ term explained, 35/.
Rodriguez, 195f.


INDEX


Romance of Natural History, The, 233,


274f.
Romsdal fjord, Ss. seen in, 91-93
Rope-trick, Indian, 71
Rorqual:

as Dedalus’ Ss., 122

as explaining Ss., 264

lesser, 237
Rothiesholm, 241, 245, 252
Rotomahana, S.S., 17
Roundstonefoot, 215
ROYAL SAXON:

Ss. seen from, 79, 80

length of, 80

tonnage of, 80f.
Rum island, 250f., 251
Russell, Major B., 68


St. Augustine on antipodes, 268f.
St. Helena:
Ss. seen off, 134, 139
mentioned, 94, 95, 100, IOI, 106, 107,
136
St. Paul rocks, 220, 221
St. Vito, see Vito
Saccopharynx, 230, 260f.
Sail, use of in steamers, 162f.
Salt islands, 50
Sandaig I., 145
SANDFORD, LT. GEORGE, R.N.:
Ss. seen by him, 75, 76
his account discussed, 77, 78
history of, 78
Sandy Cape, 173
Sandy I., Great, 173, 179
Sanford, see Sandford
Santa Cruz, carcase at, 258
Sars, Michael, 229
SARTORIS, MR. MIDSHIPMAN :
sights Ss., 98
may have made Dedalus drawing,
124
mentioned, 114
Saturday Review, quoted, 255
Saugus, 64
SAVILE-KENT, W.:
mentioned, 177f., 181f.
on Moha Moha, 179, 182
SCEPTICISM, PUBLIC, re Ss. :
general remarks on, I
less dogmatic than formerly, 2, 3
against weight of evidence, 4, 89,
147, 183
bad effect of, 4, 5, 186, 189, 204, 222,


223
in New England, 57, 60
Newman on, 73, 74
Bartlett on, 170

Science, U.S.S., 65, 69

Scientific Enquiry, Admiralty Manual
0f, 165, 166, 170, 211

Sciolophis Atlanticus, 56

Scott, blunder made by, 121f.

Scott, Dr., 75

* Sculling,’ term explained, 66

Sea-cow, Steller's, 238f., 278


289


SEA ELEPHANT:
as explaining Dedalus’ Ss., 113
rare in Mediterranean, 167
as general Ss. explanation, 264
Sea lion, Anson's, 113
Sea Monsters Unmasked, 20, 120, 168f.,


IT ae
* Sea-Serpent, The,’ 184
Sea-snake
as explaining Ss., 264
giant, 267, 268
Seal:
Owen’s sketch of a, 109
seal theory, Owen’s, 113-114 7%
> 35 a mentioned, 167
Season, silly, mentioned, 1
Seaweed mistaken for Ss., ror, 136-138
Second Visit to the United States, A
85
Selache maxima, see Basking-shark
Sergeant, death of a, 96f.
Serpents, progression of, 39, 40
Sex of Ss., 62f.
Shakespeare's blunders, 121f.
Shark, basking, see Basking-shark
Sheppey, I. of, 230
Sherar, George, on Stronsa animal, 241,
242, 243, 244f.
Shetland Islands, Description of the,


,


247f.
Shetlands, giant squid at the, 19
Ship towed by Ss., 105
Sibbald, Sir Robert, 236
Sicily, Ss. scen off, 154, 156-161
* Sillimani, Hydrarchos,’ 253
Silliman’s Journal, 6of., 66f.
Simensen, Ole, 24, 27
Simmonds, Mr., 20I, 202
Skaw, The, giant squid at, 19
Skull of Stronsa animal, 245, 247
Skye, Isle of, 145, 146, 250f.
Sleat, sound of:
Ss. seen in, 141
mentioned, 145, I5I, 167
Smaltz, R., 236
SMITH, CAPT. FREDERIC :
encounters floating seaweed, 136, 137
answered by Harrington, 139, 140
attempts reply, 140
Smith, Messrs. T. & W., 136
Snake, black :
killed at Gloucester, 55, 56
as explaining Ss., 266
Snodgrass, Mr., pugnacity of, 42f.
Soe Orm is Norwegian Ss.
Sogn, 90
SOMERBY, WILLIAM:
sees Ss., 50, 51
mentioned, 31f., 49, 51f.
Southern, Lt. Commdr. R. M., R.N,,
275
Species, survival of, in small numbers,
238f.
Sperm whale, as explaining Ss., 264
Squalis maximus, see Basking-shark
SQUID, GIANT:
history of, 18, 19


290


SQUID, GIANT :
suggested as explaining Egede's Ss.,
19,1204 21
Dedalus’ Ss.
I21
» „ generalexplanation,264
Stage point, 66
Standard, The, 17f.
Statham, J. H. 131.132
Steller's sea- cow, 238f, 278
STIRLING, J. D.
on Norwegian Ss: we 90
sees anomalous creature, 90, 91
STORY, AMOS:
his depositions, 34, 35
mentioned, 31f.,49
Story, A. T., on Ss., 184
* Straddle,' term explained, 208f.
Strand Magazine, 184, 186f.
* Strange Sea Creatures,' 267f.
Stroem, Rev. H., 28
STRONSA, ANIMAL OF :
depositions concerning, 239—243
alleged characteristics of, 244
drawing made of, 243
date of its stranding, 244f.
relics of, 245, 248
controversy re, 246-248
mentioned, 107
Stronsay is Stronsa
Sturgeon, giant, as explaining Ss., 269
Subaltern, a Scottish, calmness of, 96f.
Submarines, ‘ global’ total of, 238
Sullivan, Capt. W., 8r, 82
Sumph, a specimen, 96f.
Sun, The, 137
Sunfish, futile bombardment of, 42
Sunrise, time of, 17
Sunset; i. "or.
Superior, Lake,'84
Swampscott, 64
* Sweeps,' term explained, 150
Sword-fish, as explaining Ss., 203
Sylow, Rev. Mr., 15


LI » LE


Table-turning, Faraday on, 74f.
“Tack, port,’ term explained, 106f.
4 Tacksman, term explained, 241f.
Tape-fish is Ribbon fish
Tartar, H.M.S., 189f.
Tasmanian Bushmen, 278
Teeth of Ss. seen, 191
Telegraph, Daily, quoted, 3
Ten Pound island, 35, 44, 66
Tenerife, 19
Tennessee, error current in, 118f.
Tertullian, quoted, 1
Thompson, Sir J. A., 265
Three Voyages of a N. aturalist, 200
Times, The :
first Dedalus report in, 94, 95
official Dedalus report in, 97-99
letters to, on Dedalus case, from :
‘Officer of H.M.S. Dedalus,’ IOI,
102
Professor Owen, 108—115, 227-231
Capt. M'Quhae, 116-118


INDEX


Times, The:
letters to, on Castilian case, from:
Capt. Harrington, 133-135, 139 I40
Capt. Smith, 136, 137
report of Osborne case in, 159, 160
on Bishop of Adelaide, 254, 255
mentioned, 97, 105, 106, 162, 269f.
Tongue of Ss. seen, 50, 51
Toothless Whale, 235, 236, 237
* Topgallant forecastle,' term explained,


135f.
TOPPAN, SEWALL :
his deposition, 51
mentioned, 31f., 51f.
Tor Ness, 216, 218
Tortoise, river-, 272
Townsend, Jonathan, 76
Trade, Board of, 133, 134
Traill, Dr. T. S., on Stronsa animal, 247
Triolix should be Trionyx
Trionyx, 177
Trundheim is Trondhjem, 25f.
* Truth, A Friend to,’ 107
Tryon, Vice-Adml. Sir George, 140f.
Tuchsen, E. P., 24, 27, 28
Tunis, Gulf of, 160
Tunny as pseudo-Ss., 58, 59, 264
Turtle, giant, as explaining Ss., 170,


173, 269

TWOPENY, REV. DAVID:
sees Ss., 141
his account of it, 141-147
» postscript to this, 147-149
», other account, 149-152


U-boat sinks Hilary, 204, 209, 211
UMFULI, S.S.:
Ss. seen from, IgI, 192
log of, quoted, 193
mentioned, 188, 189, 268
* Unknown, the great’:
phrase used by Owen, II4
article entitled, 63f.
chapter entitled, 233f.


VALHALLA, YACHT:
described, 195
Ss. seen from, 196-203
mentioned, 173, 195,
196, 214, 269, 277
Venice, gratitude of, 42f.
Venus, transit of, 196f.
Venus in sole visa, 89f.
Victoria, H.M.S., 140f.
Victoria, 254
‘ Vigia,' term explained, 75f.
Virgin rocks, 77
Vito, Cape, 158, 159, 162


» ” ”


Wales, Victoria, 254

Walls, Brims, 215

Warren’s Cove, 52

Webber’s Cove, 44

‘t Weeding’ of records, 96, 128f., 154

Weller, Sam, as zoologist, 228f.

Wernerian Society, Memoirs of, 230f.,
246f., 248f., 249f.


INDEX


Western Islands are Azores

Western Morning News, 248f.

Whale, dead, flotation of, 235f.

Whale, killez, 63

Whales, as explaining Ss., 16, 122, 264

Whales, Egede's figures of, 16

Wheeler, Edward, sees Ss., 135

Wheeler, Hawkins, sees Ss., 60

Whiskers, Ss. has no, 276

Whitehall, Stronsay, 243

Wide World ers 265f.

Wiers, J., 24, 2

William Iv, H. 1. King, 9of.

William Scoresby, R.R.S., 236

Williamson, D. J., 133

Wilson, Dr. Andrew, 265

Witherby & Co., Messrs., 200f.

Wolf, S.S., exploits of, 202f.

Wray, Lt. Commdr. C. M., R.N.R., 206,
207, 209


291


Zeeland, giant squid at, 19
Zeuglodon :
mentioned, 230
found by Koch, 253
* Zjetetes,' 107
ZOOLOGICAL SOCIETY :
mentioned, 195
Proceedings of, mentioned, 195, 196
S » quoted, 196, 198,201,
202
ZOOLOGIST, THE:
quoted re Sandford case, 75, 76
Royal Saxon, 78, 80
Halifax case, 81, 82
Hope case, 83, 84
Dedalus case, 100, 101
» Leda case, 141- 149
refused Dedalus sketch, 96, 97
mentioned, 73, 74, 137f., "273f.
* Zoology, Manual of,’ 165


R
a
b
€
d
€
f
g
h
j
1
m
n
o


EFERENCE LETTERS


Egede, 1754.
L.. von. gr
Maclean ,


DNE


New England f az-a. j


Sandford, 1820


ROYAL SAXON ,1829.


Ince, 1833.
Nova Scotia ‚1844.
1 1845.
Stirling. 18 lade
Lund, 184
DETA 1848.
PLUMPER, 1848.
IMOGEN, 1856
CASTILIAN, 1857.


Macrae, 1872.
OSBORNE, 1877
Gordon, 1882.
Matheson, 1893,
UMFULI, 1893.
VALHALLA, 1905.
HILARY, 1917.


KELLETT, 1922. `


"Jes donee n "0 Ue ep


JA,


REFERENCE LETTERS
Egede, 1754.
L.von ane A
Maclean , E
New England, ^ er7-Io. 4
Sandford, 1820.


187a.


ROYAL SAXON ‚1829. E Macrae,
Ince, 1833. q OSBORNE, 1877
Nova Scotia ‚1844. | Y^ Gordon, 1882.

» 1845. S Matheson, 1895,
Stirling. 18 "m E UMFULI, 1893. 4
Lund, 184 u VALHALLA,I905. 5
DEDALUS, 1848. v HILARY, 1917.
PLUMPER, 1848. w TYNE ,I920
IMOGEN, 1856 x Mackintosh Bell. 1920
CASTILIAN, 1857, uy KELLETT, 322.


eye ars


ZI ca.


AME:
