PART II
Tbe intimate recollections of
From ber fortbcoming book Twenty Letters to a Friend'
by Svetlana Alliluyeva
The years from 15 to 17 can
be difcult for any young per-
corted by soldiers and armored
son and they were critical ones
cars. She comes home and sits
inSvetlanas strangeand lonely
down to supper—-to hear her
life. In the winter of 1941;
uncle pleading for the life of a
when Hitler's armies were
friend. She dines with berib-
turning their full force toward
boned generals whenthebombs
Russia, she was sent to safety
arc falling-and her fathcr
in a school in Kuibyshev. It
asks her about school. Shc
was, she writes, “a time of
gives a man a kiss——he gcts
dreams and doubts." Svetlana
10 years in prison. Through-
felt “terribly alone,”turned
out it all, one by one, her
to classical music, and was
friends and relatives disappear.
shocked to discover the real
She knows who caused the
cause of her mother's death.,
disappearances. Even this be-
Next winter she fell in love;
gins to sem normal, and when
and when her furious father
it happens to one particularly
broke up the affair, she, by
closefamily friendsh sily
now conditioncd to his whims;
Scetlana in a Georgia courtyard
remarks,“I'll never believe
was able to accept it stoically.
my father was responsible for
In last week's issue Svetlana wrote of the death of
this particular death.Finally
both her parents and about her relatives in their genera-
thelastprops fallaway.BrotherYakovis captured by the
tion.In this second instalment taken from herbook which
Germans.And within her horror story，brother Vasily
Harper & Row will publish in October, she calmly re-
enacts one of his own. Only the children are left.
calls the weird details of her day-to-day existence. As
That she could survive all this and keep her head is in
she grows up,abnormal situations begin to scem normal
itself remarkable. That she should write it down is for-
in her eyes.Sheis sometimes coddled,sometimes raged
tunate.As Professor James Billington of Princeton Uni-
at, often totally ignored. She goes to the movies-es-
versity says in his assessment at the end of her story,t
is vivid testimony to the loneliness of absolute power."mes Billington of Princeton Uni-
at, often totally ignored. She goes to the movies-es-
versity says in his assessment at the end of her story,t
is vivid testimony to the loneliness of absolute power."

--- PAGE BREAK ---THEY PERISHED
by
Beria played on my father's bitterness and
clothesman was to follow at my hecls every-
sense of los.Once he was First Secretary in
where I went.He was supposcd to protect me.

Georgia,itdidnotakehimlong torcachos
though from whom and what I never had the
faintest idea.

SVETLANA
From then on he saw my father every day.

The first was an emaciatedaundiced-look
I speak advisdly of his influence on my fa
ing man,Ivan Krivenko by name.When I saw
ALLILUYEVA
ther and not the othcr way around.

Beria was
him rummaging in my schoolbag and reading
more trcacherous,more practiced in perfdy
my diary, conceived a hatred for him.

He
and cunning,morc insolcnt and singlcmindcd
was quickly replaced by afat, self-important
than my fathcr.

He was a stronger character.

man named Alcksandrolkov,who bitby bit
ater allthe time.But the conservatory left him
My father had his weaker sides.He was capa
terrorizcd the whole school.

Instcad of using
cold."Whereare wegoing today.Svetochka
ble of sclf-doubt.

He could be led up the gar-
the same cloakroom as cverybody elsc,I had
he would ask.

If I told him we were going to a
den path.Beria was aware ofmy father's weak-
touseaspecial littleroomnexttothe schoolof
concert he would clutchhis hcad.Oh,thm
nesses.

He flattered my father with a
fice, blushing with embarrassmcnt.I had to
se
shamelessness that caused ld frindsaccus-
havea lunch brought from home and catina lit-
much bravura he would fall quietly asleep.

tomed to looking on my father as an cqual, to
tlc corner screencdoff frommy fricnds.Istood
Iremember vividly the last time Uncle Alck-
wince with cmbarrassment.

How my mother
it a while and then rebelled.

[61u ous6u p] zpgpues
feared and hated him!And it was her friends
Nexthad a kindquietmanbythenamef
came to the apartment at the Kremin.

He
who were the first to fall the moment Beria
Mikhail Klimov.

He and I werc friends in a
looked sad and depresscd.Hemust have known
was able to convincemy father that they were
way.He
who were the first to fall the moment Beria
Mikhail Klimov.

He and I werc friends in a
looked sad and depresscd.Hemust have known
was able to convincemy father that they were
way.

He trudged faithfully bchind me from
all too well what was going on.People were
hostilc.

1940 to 19+4, when the job was abolished.

1
being arrested in Gcorgia,where Beria got his
I have said that in a good many things Beria
was in my first year at the university and 1
start.He sat inmy room a long time waiting
and my fathcr wcre guilty together.At somc
toldmyfatherIwasashamedtogotherewith
formy father.Myfather arrived.He generally
sq
p,
inseparablc.

absurd thewhole thingwas.He was just back
Beria's role in the Civil War in the Caucasus
from the Tcheran Conferencc held in Decem-
Aleksandr to talk to him in front of the othcrs.

[after the 917 Bolshevik takc-over] was high-
swey poos Apened e ui se.s pue t6i q
It was as if my father was making a point
nd pue Ads uoqe sen s snonsique 
ofmind.He simply said:Tohell with you,
cateur.

He worked first for the Dashnaks (thc
then.Get killed if you like.Its no business of
family and all their conccrns.

My mothet's
Armcnian nationalists) and thcn for the Rcds
mine." I was over’7 before I was allowed to
death destroyed his faith in his friends.He
as power swung back and forth.Once the Reis
goo ththaterorthemovis bymyelfor
viewed herdeathasabetraval.Probably when-
caughthim in thc act of trcason and had himar-
cven walk down the strcet.

cver he saw any member of her familyit was a
rested.

He was in prison awaiting sentence
Klimov liked the fact that we went to the the-
painful reminder.--- PAGE BREAK ---

cver he saw any member of her familyit was a
rested. He was in prison awaiting sentence
Klimov liked the fact that we went to the the-
painful reminder. when a telegram arrived from Kirov, who was
Remembered moments of ber fatber's
The yersberweenherothesde
litte sparrow.Stalin liked to swoop
and sotth to Sochi (nis facwrite Black
in1932and the outbreakofWorld
yotngSelana upin isarmshg
Sea resort) during her summmer cacr-
WarreSlnrealls
lerandplant loud kisses on her
s
yearsthatleemeiththememory
cheeks.Ofhis three children,Scetia-
belindthesenes,rarelyappeing
of my father’s loce.ToSelana
aahsfariteShaccompied
with Stalin in public.BtScetlana
SralinsPopochkaandhecalled
hin to the theater and the movies,
did stand with her father (riglit) in a
t,pdys ,
ot to lnis country dacha at Kamtseco
box at Aloscow's BolshoiThenter
92

--- PAGE BREAK ---LIKESHADOWS
chiefofallperationsintheCaucasusemand
ing that he be shotas a traitor.However,the
had she summoned up strcngth to leave my fa-
about 9ntheevening.Itwas lateform,of
fighting startedupagainand nobodygotaround
ther,wmslovedfwouldhaveen
even worse, becausc he would surely have tak-
course,but Ibeggedso hard that my fathcr
to dealing with him.But all the oldBolsheviks
en his revenge.

couldn’t refuse.He would push me in front and
in the Caucasus knew of the telegram’s cxist-
enceand Beria knew ofit.Isntitperhapshere
time wasdivided betwecn schoolthePioneers
there,Housekeeper.Without you to guideus
that one should seck anexplanationof Kirovs
we'd neverfind it!I would lead a whole long
 se s sop
[the Communist children’s organization], my
roomathomeandmybooks.Itwasatinyworld
procession to the other end of the deserted
SergeiKirowasagreatfriendof thefami
Kremlin.Behind us came the many members
ly,probably from carly days in the Caucasus.

in which my nurse warmed me like a Russian
stove.I read a great deal,formy father had a
of the bodyguard and the heavy armored cars.

KirovusedtoliinourouseMyfatherliked
him and was attached to him.

vast library.

and stayedilockintemoing.would
ss
Thosc are the years that leave me with the
memory of my father's love.Every night,be
be up at 7 the next day for school.

as in previous years.[He was then considered
freheaanffhivrcatul
Sometimes after school was out in the sum-
Stalin’shrapae.ThninDem
down the corridor past my room and shout:
mer my father would take me to Kuntsevo.

He
“Housckeeper!”I would put down my home-
enjoyed having me around.But it didnt work
laterliquidated] shothim.I'llneverbelievemy
work and rush to the dining room.There was
out because it wasimpossible for anybody to
fatherwasinvolved inthis particular dearh.1
o
alargecarved ideboardwithmymotherscups
remember when we got the news that Kirov
onit anda table with the latcstnewspapers and
liked was our walks in the garden and woods.as in previous years.[He was then considered
freheaanffhivrcatul
Sometimes after school was out in the sum-
Stalin’shrapae.ThninDem
down the corridor past my room and shout:
mer my father would take me to Kuntsevo.

He
“Housckeeper!”I would put down my home-
enjoyed having me around.But it didnt work
laterliquidated] shothim.I'llneverbelievemy
work and rush to the dining room.There was
out because it wasimpossible for anybody to
fatherwasinvolved inthis particular dearh.1
o
alargecarved ideboardwithmymotherscups
remember when we got the news that Kirov
onit anda table with the latcstnewspapers and
liked was our walks in the garden and woods.

was dead and how shakcn everybody was.

magazines.Above it wasalargeportrait ofmy
He would askme the names of variousflowers
mother.

I would sit on my father's right.I just
ing?All this Ihad learned frommy nurse.But
After a while my fathcr would ask how I had
then he would sit down in the shade with his
rigory Ordzhonikidzc,another of our
donc in school that day.Sincc my marks were
newspapersandoffcial papersandI wouldget
oldfriendsdidin96.susthahiso
excellentnilgotothecighthgradeewas
restless and bored.

was a result ofBeriasmachinations.He was a
My father thought it was bcing with him
fairlymassive obstacle onBerias path to pow
me and send me off to bed.Sometimes before
that boredme,and that hurt his felings.We
er-
particularly in Gcorgia.In Fcbruary 1936
my father left he would come to my room to
hadonequarrelthatlastedquiteawhile.asked
heshot himslf.Foralongtehisdeathwas
kiss me goodnight as I lay slecping
s
Go”came the brusque repiy.After thathe
In those years people vanished like shadows
It was in these years that my father started
didn't speak tome or callme up fora long
in the night.Could my mother have halted the
taking me to movies and the thcater.--- PAGE BREAK ---

I would sit on my father's right.I just
ing?All this Ihad learned frommy nurse.But
After a while my fathcr would ask how I had
then he would sit down in the shade with his
rigory Ordzhonikidzc,another of our
donc in school that day.Sincc my marks were
newspapersandoffcial papersandI wouldget
oldfriendsdidin96.susthahiso
excellentnilgotothecighthgradeewas
restless and bored. was a result ofBeriasmachinations.He was a
My father thought it was bcing with him
fairlymassive obstacle onBerias path to pow
me and send me off to bed.Sometimes before
that boredme,and that hurt his felings.We
er-
particularly in Gcorgia.In Fcbruary 1936
my father left he would come to my room to
hadonequarrelthatlastedquiteawhile.asked
heshot himslf.Foralongtehisdeathwas
kiss me goodnight as I lay slecping
s
Go”came the brusque repiy.After thathe
In those years people vanished like shadows
It was in these years that my father started
didn't speak tome or callme up fora long
in the night.Could my mother have halted the
taking me to movies and the thcater. The mov-
ies thrilled me most.There was a theater in
time.Itwasnt until I asked his forgiveness un-
terrible process had she livedI doubt it.She
theKremlinonthe siteofwhat hadoncebeen
der the prodding ofmy wise old nurse that hc
would never have bena match for Beria.Even
the Winter Gardcn. Weused togoafterdinner,
was willing to make up. I heard him mutter an-
CONTINUED
ction
onthe 2othaierary of the Bel
them.fromlefareGeorgif.Dini
tro,Cointerngeneral secretary
PremierVyaceslaM.olotand
Nikolai l.Shrernik,general set
93

--- PAGE BREAK ---“Hello, little Housekeeper!

The last humorous message I wrote tohim is
SvetlaalcONTINUED
dated May 94,the eve ofthe war[Hitler at-
and some candied fruit.

Eat and enjoy them,
tacked Russia on June ]:
my littleHousekeeper!I'mnot sending anyto
Mydliys
old father like that!

Says she's bored!

But
Vasya becausc he's still doing badly at school
youthatyourHousckeepergotanexcellent
without me he had been lonelier than ever.

daus
in her composition!.

Eat and drink to your
heart's content....Housckeeper."
balovo.

Grandfather and Grandmother would
I'llbelieveVasyaonlywhenhereally startsto
A “minut”was written across the top of
both come down from their rooms.Then wed
srudy, even if his marks are only good.

I re-
thisone:"WesendgreetingstoourHousckccp-
all have a picnic.

There would be shashlik siz-
ortoyouComraouskehawa
zling over a fire, and an excellent light Geor-
in Tifis for one day.

I was at my mother's and
Stalin."
gian wine.My father used to sendme to the
Igave her regards from you and Vasya..

My father loved and rcspeeted his mother.

spod
give you a kiss.I'lsec you soon.

Hc said she was an intelligent woman.Some-
thegrownupwouldcookthemnthchotashes.

times he would tell us how she used to spank
Wechilrengenerallyhadoodmenhe
Hello,my Little Sparrow!

him when he was little and how she used to hit
picnics,but I'm not sure about the grownps.

gotyourleterThankyouforthfsh.

his father when he drank too much.

[His fa-
Once Grandmother wept loudly andmy father
lyn
ther died in a drunken brawl after somebody
went away angry and upset.

me any more fish....

stabbed him with a knife.] She was exrremely
Grandmother was forever making scenes.

devout.Whenmyfather went o sce her short
Grandfather would scold and try to make her
“Grectingstomy Houskepr,Setank
ly before shediedshe toldhim:Whatapiy
sec thar shedidnnderstand.Yourequt
Thank you for the letters!I didn'an-
you never became a priest.stabbed him with a knife.] She was exrremely
Grandmother was forever making scenes.

devout.Whenmyfather went o sce her short
Grandfather would scold and try to make her
“Grectingstomy Houskepr,Setank
ly before shediedshe toldhim:Whatapiy
sec thar shedidnnderstand.Yourequt
Thank you for the letters!I didn'an-
you never became a priest.

right,Grandmother would exclaim.There
swer the lerters becausc Iwas very busy.What
He was delighted by her scom for what he
are some things I'll never understand!With
are you up to,how is your English,and how
had accomplished，forthc clamor andworldly
that she'd founcc off to her room,muttering
are you?

Iamhealthy and in good spirits as al-
glory.Shenever wanted to leave Georgia and
about “lazy good-for-nothings"[the servants].

ways.It’s a bit loncly without you but what
liveinMoscow,thoughmyfatherandmother
Onceoniningnfrqrih
can I do Ill be paticnt.

I givemy little House-
both asked her.

Shc was about So when she
Grandfaherhsramedloudlynmy ir
keeper a kiss.'
died in 936.My father was deeply upset.But
he was a bad and negleful son, ashewas a fa-
many times did I'tellher she was a foolbut
“Hello,my litte Housekeeper!

ther and husband.Pcople who werentpersonal-
shewouldn'tlistenShepaidforitoo!Istat-
"I got both yourleters.'mglad youhaven't
ly close were always more important to him
ed to cryandyelled:You'reafoolyourself"
forgotten your little papa.I couldn't answer
than thosc who were.

you right away.

I was busy.

As a rule my father didn't nag or find fault
was16Ibelieved whatthegrownups toldme,
with me.From time to time he indulged in pet-
thamymtraddidfappndiiisand
ty carping.

Once in Sochi when I was o he
couldn’t bear tohear anunkindword about her.

youWelthres nthingwrongwihthaR
glanced atme (I was a rather big child and re
Without her,thefamilyatZubalovo started
tsa isnice,specially f youhave ayoungman
marked:What's thisare you going around
squabbling.UncleFyodorquarreledwithmy
along,my Litte Sparrow.Once in Sochi when I was o he
couldn’t bear tohear anunkindword about her.

youWelthres nthingwrongwihthaR
glanced atme (I was a rather big child and re
Without her,thefamilyatZubalovo started
tsa isnice,specially f youhave ayoungman
marked:What's thisare you going around
squabbling.UncleFyodorquarreledwithmy
along,my Litte Sparrow.

naked I had no idea what' the marter might
older brother Yakov.Yakov didn't get along
Come toMoscowbyAug.5.orevcn
be.It'shat,，wenonning athhm
with Vasily.

Yakov's wife was at odds with
the zoth.Write me what you think of this.1
of my dress.

It was above the knces, the nor-
my grandparents.

[Uncle] Pavel’s wife had a
don't plan to come south this year.

I'm busy.

1
mallengthforachild ofmyage.Tohellwith
sharp tongue that made matrers worse.

p
su
All the hostile factions soughtmyfather's
8,1939,and Stalin was indeed busy; he was n
support.They enlised me to“go tell Papa”
gotiating anonaggressionpact withHitler.t
go in for sport！What an outrage!

such-and-such.I went, but my father toldme
was signed on Aug.

23.]
He went off to his room and came back with
you likeancmpty drumHe orderedmenot
to dare come to him any more with requests on
My father signed all his letters to me the
behalf of others.Sometimes at school people
same way:
"From Setanka-Housckceper's
gave me letters for him.

He ordered me not to
wretched Secretary,the poor peasantI.Sa-
bring letters from anybody.

lin.I answered in the same vein and sent him
“orders” like the one below.He thought up
the form of these,too.

"Oet.21,1934.To Comrade 1.

V.Stalin,
stillhavea lotof lettersmyfathersentme
Secretary No.1
from Sochior tome at Sochi orin the Crimca.

Order No.4
Here are a few exccrpts.

I order you to take me with you.

Signed: Setanka-Housckceper.

Hello, my Little Sparrow!

Seal.

q
Signed:Secretary No.: I submit.1.Stalin."
right away.

I was very busy.

I'm aliveand well.

Apparently they had forgortten to take me
I fcel fine.--- PAGE BREAK ---

I'm aliveand well. Apparently they had forgortten to take me
I fcel fine. withthem to thetheater oramovic on some oc-
“I give my Little Sparrow a big hug. casion. One time it was:I order you to let
mc go to Zubalovo tomorrow.—May 10,
"My dear Setanka! 1934Another time:“Iorder youto letme
gotyourleterofSepemberthhank
goto themovies.Askthemto show Chapayev
Soetlana recalls that Stalin as al-
youfornforgttingyurlilepapamall
and an American comedy.-Oct.28,1934
ways cery hard on her halfbroth-
right.Im well,but Imiss you.Did you getthe
Under the order my father would write,“
er.Yakoc(aboce).When Yakov
peachesand pomegranates?llsendyou some
more if youordermeto.TelVasyaVasily]
be done."
sneered,Ha!He couldntecen
towritemetoo.Goodbythen,Igiveyouabig
Since my father was forever re,ing new
shoot straightYakovwas captured
kiss. Your littlce papa. “ordersandIwasgeting tiredfine
oos
dnes
War I and spent the war years in a
"Little Housekeeper! me to send you an order only once a week.-
German prison camp (center,in pic-
“I got your lettr and postcard.1'm glad you
Feb. 26,1937. tureat right).After the war Stalin
haven'tforgorenyoulilapamsning
WhenIgot olderIvaricdmy demands:
and Scetlana heard he had been shot. youafweaplfdysnd a-
Papanghaitsfingsid
gerines.Fat hmand njyyourself.Imnt
der you towearyour fur overcoat.Sctanka-
sending Vasya any. . . Housekceper.—Dec. 15, 1938. 94

--- PAGE BREAK ---rwo corton undershirts.“Come on.he com-
manded me.“Here, Nurse.”he said to my
had been abandoned byherhusband.Yulia was
formwihouthisbltrfficerstabsasily
nurse,whose aceregisereno supris w
Jewish,and hatdisleased myfather.H
r likedJews,thoughin those days he was not
broughtsomcleafetshome.Weexaminedthem
soever.You make her some pantaloons to
along time,hoping they were forgerics.Butit
cover up her knees.And see that her dress is
asblatant about expressing hishatrcdforthem
was Yakov all righr.

below the knees!Certainly,certainly,an-
as he was after the war.

But Yakov stood firm.

After Stalingradn he winter of 9+
eg,up.s
Herespected our father'sjudgment and opin-
ions;it was athiswish that Yakovchosc to
my father said to me during one of ourrare
They mademe a pair of long,foolish-look-
bccomca soldicr.Butthey werctoounlikeeach
other to be comparible.“Father speaks in
we exchange one of their prisoners for Yasha.

ing pantaloons and a dress that came below my
ready-made formulas,”Yakov complained to
They want me to make a deal with them!I
knees.

I shortened the dress little by little and
won't do it.

WVar is war.” I could tell by his
my father never noticed.I had only to bewear-
me once.

Yakov left for the front the day after the
tonc that he was upset.

He wouldn't say an-
ing socks instead of stockings in the summer-
otherwordaboutitandjust shovedsomething
s
innglisemyosmthngfrm
baregan.ssdh
daughter] stayed with us.

I've no idea why (in
the first months of the war no one,not evcn
correspondence with Roosevelt，with the
dresses that hung like sacks and were not
words:Translate!Here you've bcen study-
nipped in at the waist.

Or he would rip the
my father.

had any clear idea what to do)， but
ing all this English.Canyou transate any-
beret off my head:What sort of pancake is
we were all sent to Sochi.At the cnd of Au-
thingI translated it, to his pleasurc.Or he would rip the
my father.

had any clear idea what to do)， but
ing all this English.Canyou transate any-
beret off my head:What sort of pancake is
we were all sent to Sochi.At the cnd of Au-
thingI translated it, to his pleasurc.

sn pe s sep su 
gust Italked tomy fathcr onthetelcphonefrom
He spoke to me about Yakov again inthe
all there was to it.

Sochi.

I asked why we hadn’t heard from Ya-
kov.

Slowly and distinetly he uttered the
summer of 945,when the war was over.The
Germans shotYasha.Ihad a letter of condo-
words,Yasha has becn taken prisoner.” Be-
peyqoudopnoo
lence fromaBelgianofficerPrinceSomcbody
say anything to his wife for the time bcing.

or-other.

He was an cyewitness.

The Amer-
n looks my brother Yakov had my father's
Yulia couldseefrommyfacethat something
eses
almond-shaped Gicorgianeves but thatwas
 ueAes on uem 2upp pue
about all.He was more like his mother,Yeka-
was wrong and started asking me questions.

Latermyfather toldme thatwhen the direc
terina Svanidze, who died when he was 2.

tor Mikhail Chiaureli was making The Fall of
himself."
Buttheconsiderationsthatguidedmyfather
Berlinamovic that urned out tobealifelss
anger was occasioned byVasily’s profanity in
spectacularhcapproachd myfatherabout
front of me and other women.Yakov couidn't
werc not humane.

Somchow hc had the idca
showing Yakov as a war hero.My father did
stand it.

They had a fist fight.

notgivehis conscntandIthinkhe wasrig.

s
trayed’ hm intentionally.notgivehis conscntandIthinkhe wasrig.

s
trayed’ hm intentionally.

Might not Yulia
havebeena party toitWhenwegotback to
Chiaureli had to haveYakov's story only to
Georgian form of Tifis].He came to Mos-
magnify my father.Of course,justice toYa-
cow to study as ayoung man.My farher didn
s
want himhereYakalwaysfllkast
daughtercanstaywithyouwhileButit sms
He was unwilling to thrust his relatives to the
oi u  ou anq ue u  p
that his wife is dishonest.Well have to look
fore because he considered every onc of them
es
into it." So Yulia was arrested in the fall of
194 and was imprisoned until the spring of
to be unworthy.

lied Yakov and picked on him.After Yakov
upepnopu
In 19+ we had to leave Moscow and go to
shot himsclf he was illa long time.Mynursc
school somewherc else.They packed us off to
told me that my father reated himworse than
ing to do with Yakov's capture and when his
ever and heaped contempt on him for bcing a
conduct asa prisoner convincedmyfather that
goodsandchatelsntoapcialvanobody
"weakling.

hc had not surrendered on purpose.

During the aurumn ofi941leafets were
knew whether my father would be coming or
Yakov'sfirsmarriagewasafilureandsoon
dropped onMoscowwithYakov's phorograph.

not,but thcy loaded his library just tobe on
broke up.

Later he married a fine woman who
the safe side.

He looked dark and thin.

He was in his uni-
Vasily’srstwifecame,oo.hwasan
younggirlnamed Galia.InOctober94 she
gavebirhsonshommhw
madc for everyone.Grandmothcr cven kept
Yakov was captured and sbot
squabbling with thc housekeepcr as usual.

Grandfather was the only onc who wasn't
there.He preferred to be in Tbilisi.

InKuibyshev we were all assigncd toa small
nye
grcat hurry.The whole place stillsmelled of
paint and the corridors of mice.

In late Oc-
tober Iwent toMoscow to sce my father.He
didn't write and it was dificult to talk with
him over the phone because he got tcnsc and
angry and kept saying he didn't have time.--- PAGE BREAK ---

InKuibyshev we were all assigncd toa small
nye
grcat hurry.The whole place stillsmelled of
paint and the corridors of mice. In late Oc-
tober Iwent toMoscow to sce my father.He
didn't write and it was dificult to talk with
him over the phone because he got tcnsc and
angry and kept saying he didn't have time. got toMoscow onOct.8.theday bombs
were dropped on the BolshoiThearer,the uni
Central Commitce Buildingon Staraya Plo
shchad.My father was inthe Kremlin shelter
and I went there to join him. There was the
same long table set for dinner with the same
peoplehreexcphanowthyrallin
uniforms. My father didn’t notice me—I was just in
the way.There were maps on the tables and
on all the walls.Finally he caught sight ofme
ess pe
tingonthereHaveyoumadefriends withany-
body in Kuibyshev"
No,”I said.Theyve set up a speal
CONTINUED
95

--- PAGE BREAK ---maps on the tables and
on all the walls.Finally he caught sight ofme
ess pe
tingonthereHaveyoumadefriends withany-
body in Kuibyshev"
No,”I said.Theyve set up a speal
CONTINUED
95

--- PAGE BREAK ---

overand overagain.Who could have thought
Her first love
she would ever have done such a thing?*
Itried ro remember everything could.[
school there for children who've bccn evac-
thought about my fathcr and what he was like
uated."
and about the fact that he really was hard to
My father suddenly rurned a pair of darting
get along with. Yakov's wife Yulia had van-
ss.
ished just beforewe lftMoscow.People said
she had bccn arrestcd on suspicion of *betray-
hind a word that wasn't too improper—Ah,
ing” him to the Germans. Thc words my fa-
you damned caste! Look at that? The govern-
ther had told me ovcr the telephonc—"Don't
ment and the pcople from Mfoscow come and
say anything to Yasha's wifebegan to seem
they give them their own school. That scoun-
strangc to mc.I startcd wondcring about somc-
drel 'lasik-I bet he's behind it
thing that had never occurrcd to mc-was my
He was quite right. It was a caste that had
father always right after all It was blasphemy
come to Kuibyshe.Half the population had to
even to think such a thing then.
be evictcd to make room for these familics, Our
In June 194Iwent back toMoscow with
evacuce school was fullof the children of well-
my nurse, V'asily's wife and child and Aleksan-
known Mloscow peoplc. Some of the tceachers
dra Nakashidzc, the housckeepcr. I was dis-
were too intimidatedeven to go into the class-
tressed to find that Zubalovo had bccn blown
room. I snt only one year there,thank heav-
up in the autumn when the Germans had becn
cn, and went back to Moscow in June 1942.
cxpccted at any moment. The thick old walls
 felt terribly alone that winrer [1g4-42].
stood there like ugly shells. A new house was
Maybe it wasmy age16.a time of deams
bcing built that was a simplifed version of thc
and doubts. It was in Kuibyshev that I first
old onc; by October we werc able to move
started listening to serious music;it was there
into itt was anabsurdhidous thing,paintd
that Shostakovich's Secenth Syunphony was
dark grecn for camouflage.
performed for the first time.made a terrible discovery that winter.

I
sphere of drunkenncss and debauchcry.

V'ari-
uscd to read English and Amcrican magazines
ous guests came to sce Vasily-famous ath-
like Live.FoRres and Tle Illustrated Lon
Ictcs, actors and pilots.A tremcndous amount
does.bothfor the information they con-
ofdrinkingand revelry wentonasif there were
tained and topracticercading English.One day
no war.

were all invited to a film preview.

We talked
I came across an article about my father.

It
In August 19+= Winston Churchill came to
about movies.

mentioncd, not as news but as a fact well known
Moscow.

Churchill was having dinner in our
Kapler,or Lyusia as he was known, was su-
to everyone, that his wif,Nadezhda Sergeyev-
aparmenandmyfaherhadgivenordersthat
na Allluyeva, had killed herself.

I was to be home.

I went in wondering wheth-
pleased that I didn't like Amcrican hits with
Irushed to Grandmother and said,“I know
er it would be all right to say a few words of
tap dancing and chorus giris.The next time he
ceverything.Why did you hide it from me?

English or better simply to be quiet.

came to Zubalovo he showed us Queen Churisti
"{V'ho could have thought it?’ she repcated
Mlyfather wasinanunusually cordial frame
 with Greta Garbo.

I was tremeniously im
ofmind.aingmnadhid
presscd, and that plcascd Kapler.

ismy daughter.”and added，“She'sa redhcad!”
Churchill smiled and rcmarked that he had bcen
red-haired when he was a young man but now
look——and he waved a cigar in the dircction of
ncxr met during the November
his head.

He said that his daughter was in the
holidays.

A lot of pcople had come to the da
Royal Air Force.

I understood what he was
cha.

Kapler turned to mc uncxpectedly:Can
saying but was too shy to say anything myself.

you do the fox-trot?

I was wcaring my first
1 wasn't allowed to listen long.

My father
good dress from a dressmaker.I also had my
kissedmc and told me to go on about my own
mother's old garnet brooch and a pair of flat-
business.I was wcaring my first
1 wasn't allowed to listen long.

My father
good dress from a dressmaker.I also had my
kissedmc and told me to go on about my own
mother's old garnet brooch and a pair of flat-
business.

I couldn't understand why he had
hceled shoes.

I was probably very awkward.

wantcd to show off, but now I think I sce why.

but Kapler assurcd me that I was a good dane-
He wanted to scem at least a lirtle like anor
er.

I was so much at case and I felt so peaceful
dinary human being.You could sce he liked
and warm besidc him!

I wantcd to put my head
Churchill.[After Svetlana lef.however, Sta
on his shoulder and quietly close my eyes.

lin and Churchill got into a bad quarrel about
Whyare you sounhappy todayhasked
the second front and the evening cndcd badly.1
mc.Ikept ondancing but I started telling him
It was in the winter of 1942-1943 that Imet
evcrything.I told him how loncly I was at
Aleksei Yakovlevich Kapler.

Bccause of him,
home.

I told him it was to years to the day
my relationship with my father was never the
since my mother's death, yet nobody seemed
same again.

to remember.Itall came pouring out,and the
Aleksei Kapler is all right now and is liv-
ing in Mloscow.

He is one of the recognized
playing rccords and no one paid any attcntion
masters of film-making.

In late Oetober 194
to us.

Vasily brought Kapler to Zubalovo; he was ad-
Kapler had just come back from an arca
vising Kapler on a projected film about pilots
where guerrila warfare was being waged in
in the air force.

At first.

I gucss, we made no
Byelorussia.

He uscd to come to my school
special impression on each other.

Later we
and stand in the doorway of the building next
door watching formetocome out.Icould fcel
my heart tighten with joy, knowing he was
there.Weused togoto theTreryakov Gallery
In a playfl odStalin tlbs is
and look at the exhibition on the war.overand overagain.Who could have thought
Her first love
she would ever have done such a thing?*
Itried ro remember everything could.[
school there for children who've bccn evac-
thought about my fathcr and what he was like
uated."
and about the fact that he really was hard to
My father suddenly rurned a pair of darting
get along with. Yakov's wife Yulia had van-
ss.
ished just beforewe lftMoscow.People said
she had bccn arrestcd on suspicion of *betray-
hind a word that wasn't too improper—Ah,
ing” him to the Germans. Thc words my fa-
you damned caste! Look at that? The govern-
ther had told me ovcr the telephonc—"Don't
ment and the pcople from Mfoscow come and
say anything to Yasha's wifebegan to seem
they give them their own school. That scoun-
strangc to mc.I startcd wondcring about somc-
drel 'lasik-I bet he's behind it
thing that had never occurrcd to mc-was my
He was quite right. It was a caste that had
father always right after all It was blasphemy
come to Kuibyshe.Half the population had to
even to think such a thing then.
be evictcd to make room for these familics, Our
In June 194Iwent back toMoscow with
evacuce school was fullof the children of well-
my nurse, V'asily's wife and child and Aleksan-
known Mloscow peoplc. Some of the tceachers
dra Nakashidzc, the housckeepcr. I was dis-
were too intimidatedeven to go into the class-
tressed to find that Zubalovo had bccn blown
room. I snt only one year there,thank heav-
up in the autumn when the Germans had becn
cn, and went back to Moscow in June 1942.
cxpccted at any moment. The thick old walls
 felt terribly alone that winrer [1g4-42].
stood there like ugly shells. A new house was
Maybe it wasmy age16.a time of deams
bcing built that was a simplifed version of thc
and doubts. It was in Kuibyshev that I first
old onc; by October we werc able to move
started listening to serious music;it was there
into itt was anabsurdhidous thing,paintd
that Shostakovich's Secenth Syunphony was
dark grecn for camouflage.
performed for the first time.

He uscd to come to my school
special impression on each other. Later we
and stand in the doorway of the building next
door watching formetocome out.Icould fcel
my heart tighten with joy, knowing he was
there.Weused togoto theTreryakov Gallery
In a playfl odStalin tlbs is
and look at the exhibition on the war. We also
went to the theater.Aleksandr Korncichuk's
Several years later、len Scetlan
play TheFrout had just opcned.Kaplcr said it
was 16.she learned more alut the
had nothing to do with art. We also saw Mac-
circustances suroumding lher motl-
terlinck'sThe Blue Bird and The Queen of
et's death. It szas then that she first
Spades at theBolshoi.Kapler showedme Walt
began to questionlerfatler'sactions. Disney’s SnoWhite and the Seven Durfs and
96inck'sThe Blue Bird and The Queen of
et's death. It szas then that she first
Spades at theBolshoi.Kapler showedme Walt
began to questionlerfatler'sactions. Disney’s SnoWhite and the Seven Durfs and
96

--- PAGE BREAK ---

was exiled by ber angry fatber
Seela as ly6hen seell n
loewithfilmmakerAlekseiKapler.
Beause ofhinshe writes,my
 s md
er the same again.Stalin sentKapler
into exilefor io years. After his
(   s 
the wonderful Youg .fr. Lincoln in the view-
ingroomof theMinistry ofCinemarography
NewYear's,94.As soon as wemet Ibeggd
on Gnezdnikovsky Strect.There we could sit
him noto sceme or callme on the phonc any
was undcr arrest; he had had contacts with for-
more.He was worried too and said he hadnt
cigerhintrd 
side by side and alone.
times and knew practically every forcign cor-
Kapleralsobroughtmebooks.HehadHem
played a trick on him. He agreed we would
respondentinMoscow.Myname.of course,
ingway's For Whom the Bell Tolls.[The Rus-
siantranslarionwasalreadycirculatingprivate
have to parr.
never came up.
I was the first to weaken. 1 called him on
On the morning ofMarch3，asIwas get-
ly.Yet it hasn't been published to this day！
S.A.HealsobroughtJames Aldington'sAll
the telephone and the whole thing started up
ting ready for schoolmyfather showedupat
Menre Enemies andHemingway'sToHre
theapatmntuncxpectdlysomthinghhad
the phone.Everyonc inmy housc was ina state
never done before.He was choking with an-of terror.

Wewalked the snowy strects ofMoscow,
A decision was taken to bring Kapler to his
senses.Colonc Rumyantsev,Gencral Vlasik’s
writer'I cannot tellyou the contempr in
other.y hapless warchdogMikhailKlmov,
right hand and another of my fathcr's body-
his voice as he spat out the word “writer.

brought up the rear.

He was utterly demoral-
ized bywhat was happening and by the fact
I know the whole story!I've got allyour
Rumyanrsevsuggested toKaplerinadiplomat-
tclephone conversaionsrighthereH pat-
that Kaplerneverfailed togreethim withamia
bility and give him a light for his cigarettes.

ic way that he should go as far away as possi-
ted his pocket as he said it.All right Hand
bleonanassgnmen.Kaplerold himhecould
them over!YourKapler is a British spy.He's
Tomearwasthlveretinand
most wonderful person on carth.He helpedme
go to hell and hung up.

under arrest!

discover the world of art.

I was a continual
 took everything Kapler had ever written
source ofsurpriseto him.Hefound itexrraor
me outofmydeskhisletters and theinseribed
dinary that I listend and drank inallhis words.

photographs he had brought me.

Lhe last day of February was my 17th
“But Ilovehim！protested at lasthaving
Kapler soon left for Stalingrad.It was the
eve of the battle.He knew  would want ro
father.orthesttinhislifehe lapd
know everything he was seeing and he took a
Sration where some air forccfricnds ofVasi-
me across the face-wice.“Just think,Nursc.

step that was staggering nits chivalry and its
ly's used togather.After school that day my
how low she's sunk!He could no longer re-
recklessness.AsTlooked through Prda onc
watchdog,Klimov,was terrifiedwhen‘I set
spn
day in lateNovember 94.

I cameacross an ar-
outinawholly different direction.He sat in
busy the whole time..

ticle cntitled “Ltters of Licutenant L.

from
He used the coarsc
Stalingrad-—Letter Oneby Special Corre-
an adjoining room prctending to rcad a paper
pcasant word.

spondent A.

Kapler.was exiled by ber angry fatber
Seela as ly6hen seell n
loewithfilmmakerAlekseiKapler.
Beause ofhinshe writes,my
 s md
er the same again.Stalin sentKapler
into exilefor io years. After his
(   s 
the wonderful Youg .fr. Lincoln in the view-
ingroomof theMinistry ofCinemarography
NewYear's,94.As soon as wemet Ibeggd
on Gnezdnikovsky Strect.There we could sit
him noto sceme or callme on the phonc any
was undcr arrest; he had had contacts with for-
more.He was worried too and said he hadnt
cigerhintrd 
side by side and alone.
times and knew practically every forcign cor-
Kapleralsobroughtmebooks.HehadHem
played a trick on him. He agreed we would
respondentinMoscow.Myname.of course,
ingway's For Whom the Bell Tolls.[The Rus-
siantranslarionwasalreadycirculatingprivate
have to parr.
never came up.
I was the first to weaken. 1 called him on
On the morning ofMarch3，asIwas get-
ly.Yet it hasn't been published to this day！
S.A.HealsobroughtJames Aldington'sAll
the telephone and the whole thing started up
ting ready for schoolmyfather showedupat
Menre Enemies andHemingway'sToHre
theapatmntuncxpectdlysomthinghhad
the phone.Everyonc inmy housc was ina state
never done before.He was choking with an-

spondent A. Kapler. It was a letter from an
while strainingtocarchwhatwasgoing onin
"No, no, no,” was all my nurse could say,
the next room,the door of whichwas opcn. standing in her corner. unknown licurenant to the woman he loved de-
scribing everything going onin Stalingrad. Westood toetherandkissedoncanotherin
ounp
silencewingitwastlase.Ka
still inrabwin
I could imagine my father's reaction whcn
and started spcaking more calmly.What d
formedofmpuliarconducthhadhind
you mcan no, whenI know the whole story! thatIwas bchaving inamannerthat couldnot
Helookedatmeand said.Takealookatyour-
Alas,those who were watching had wisted
s
bc tolerated.Nou he would sce the article;
cverything. And so on that day,my birthday,
womenallaround him!Withthathewentto
cvn our walks in the Tretyakov were de-
Feb.8,thedecision-whattodohad becn
thediningroomandtookalmyletterstad. ser.o d in minute detail. The article ended:
"i.'s probably snowing now in Moscow. You
taken. Ifelturterlybroken.Irealizedno one could
cnsthecrenclatedwallof theKremlin from
Kapler went home to get his things. On
possibly want me. Could Kaplcr really have
yr window.Whaton carth would happen
Marchawaabot
lovedme?CouldIreallyhavemeant anything
men appearedinhisroomand told himro come
to him? no? Kapler got back from Stalingrad just before
along.They tookhim straight to theLubvan-
Aftermy fathcrhad gone I went onmechani-
ka [prison].Kapler was scarched and told he
that I realized what had happened to Kapler. G
97Stalingrad just before
along.They tookhim straight to theLubvan-
Aftermy fathcrhad gone I went onmechani-
ka [prison].Kapler was scarched and told he
that I realized what had happened to Kapler. G
97

--- PAGE BREAK ---not giveus: his love,his warmth, a real family
versity,again living n our deserted aparent
Svetlana coNTINUED
relationship.

in the Kremlin.

I had a letter from my father
He's too calculating,that young man of
that fall [1947], the first in a long time.

"Hello,Svetka!

WhenIgobackfromschoolthatafteroon
at the front.People are getting shot.And look
gotyourletertsgoodyouhavenr
ss
at him.

He's sitting it out at home.

gotten your father.1'm well.Everythingsfinc.

the dining room.I went in silence.Myfather
After urmecting inthe springitwashalfa
I'mnotlonely.I'msendingyou some litl pres-
was tearing up Kapler's letters and photo-
graphs.Wri!eured.Hcani
year before we saw one another again.

I told
ents-—tangerines.

I send you a kiss.

Your I.

decent Russian!She couldn't even find herself
himIwasgoing tohave a child.He softened
Stalin."
aRussian!Apparenty the fact that Kapler
ee o ono o osnpoe pue
was a Jew bothered him most of all.

"You need country air,he sad.

Kapler was sent to the North for five years.

Early onthemoring ofMay9,1945,whn
He lived in Vorkuta and was allowed to work
the radio announced the war was over, I tel-
Lhesc years,1947 to 1949, werc a
in the theater.After finishing his sentence,he
phoned my father.

I was tremendously excit-
drcary time.

I frequently went to the Zhda-
d.“Congraulationsnurvitory，Pa
novsouseespecially afterAndreiZhdanovs
decided to go to Kiev,where his parents were,
Barelyable to speak,I wanted toweep forjoy.

deathin1948.Every Sunday YuriZhdanov's
since he was forbidden to go back to Moscow.

In spitf enormousriskoweverecam
s,weve won,，he replied.“Thank you.

friends used to come there.

And congrarulationstoyoutoo!Howareu
My father had becn very fond of Andrei
Moscow for a very brief stay.

The year was
feelingLikeeverybody else inMoscow that
Zhdanov.

He respected Yuri and had always
1948.

Aftera few daysinMoscow,he boarded the
day, I was feeling fine!He respected Yuri and had always
1948.

Aftera few daysinMoscow,he boarded the
day, I was feeling fine!

hoped the rwo families might be linked in mar-
 didn't eemy fathcruntil August,whene
riage.Thishappenedin thc spring of 949asa
train forKiev.Some plainclothesmen came af
got back from the Porsdam Conference.Thc
matter of hard common sense butwithout any
ter him and took him off at the next station.

This time he was sentenced to work for five
day I was out athis dacha he had the usual vis-
special loveoraffction.I thought Iwould gain
at least a littlc freedom by moving to Yuris
years in the mines in the terrible camps near
dropped thefirst atombomb overJapan.My fa-
house.

Inta [far to the northeast, near the Urals].

In March 953,when his term was coming
ther paid hardly any artention to me.

My father showed up one day at Zubalovo.

And I had such important news!

I had a son.

He inquired:What do you want tomove to
toanndheasked permissiontoreurntoVr-
He was already thre months old.His name
the Zhdanovs'for?You'l be caten alive by the
kuta.Instead he was unexpectedly taken to the
was losif.But this was such a little thing com
women there..

Thcre are too many wom-
Lubyanka in Moscow again.

HewassreequiklyinJlya
pared to thc great events going on around us.

cn in that housc.My father knew everyone in
 s  s s
Nobody cared.

the Zhdanov houschold and couldnt stand ci-
are freenow.You can gohome.What's yourad
Itwas some time before we saw each other
thcr the widow or the sisters.

I was alarmed,
after thatMyfatherfellilandwasquite sick
becausc I had no desire to live in my father's
formonths.Idon'tremember sceing him in thc
house and knew that Yuri would never agrce.

[Svetlana sawKapfer again only once,brify
winter of 1945-46.

I went south to sce him later, in Novcmber
and by accident, in 195+-]
He never asked me to divorce my husband.[Svetlana sawKapfer again only once,brify
winter of 1945-46.

I went south to sce him later, in Novcmber
and by accident, in 195+-]
He never asked me to divorce my husband.

1948.Myfahwasangry.Hebawledo
We broke up after three years, in the spring of
and called me a“parasite” in front of every-
1947,forrcasons of a personal nature.Lat
one.

He told me “no good had come” of mec
ubalovo was closcd in the spring of
was surprised to hear it rumored that my fa
yet.

Everyone was silent and cmbarrassed.

ther had insisted on a divorce.

The next dayhe suddenly started talking to
1943,bauseasmyftremarkdad
My father went southinthe summer of1946
me for the first time aboutmy mother and the
tuned it ntoa denof iniquity.Yakov's little
on his first vacation since 1937.

He traveled
wayshdidWewtinalongl
daughter Gulia was reunited with her mother,
by car.The procession stopped in towns along
alonc.

As always, there was good wine and
sdss
the way.

They all stayed overmight with the
plenty of fruit.What amiscrable little pistol
ute providing for punishment of relatives of
secrectaries of the district and province com-
it was, he remarked, showing me with his fin-
mittces of the Communist Party.My father
who was takcn prisoner, cven if he had been
wanted to seeforhimself howpeople were liv-
toy.PavlushkaUnclePavelbroughtittohr.

wounded,as Yakov was,was considered to
have“surrendercd voluntarily to the cnemy."
  sms  e 
war.The housckeeper Valcchka,who accom-
He cast about for other culprits.Suddenly
The government thereby washed its hands of
panied my father on all his journeys, told me
he remembered Polina Zhemchuzhina,Molo-
millions of its own officers and men.

Is it any
how upset he was.

She also told me how somc
tovs wife,and how close she had beenomy
wonder thar when the war ended many of them
Partyleaders who laterrose very highcamc to
mothcr, and dcided that she had had a bad in
did not want to come home?

sce him in the South and report on agricultural
fuence on her.She also told me how somc
tovs wife,and how close she had beenomy
wonder thar when the war ended many of them
Partyleaders who laterrose very highcamc to
mothcr, and dcided that she had had a bad in
did not want to come home?

sce him in the South and report on agricultural
fuence on her.

Then he started cursing the
Vasily was banished from Zubalovo, as I
conditions in the Ukraine.They brought mel
last book my mother had read.

It was The
was,for“moral depravity.Inadditionhe was
esss
Green Hat, by Michacl Arlen.

given o days in a punishment cell by personal
them.They brought fruit andvegetables and
WeraveledtoMoscowtogethronthran
order of my father.

that November.

I was sitting in my compart-
I was married in the spring of 194My first
husband,Grigoryorozov，was a student at
ment glancing at photographs of paintings in
the Instiute of International Relations.I had
NikitaKhrushchev,told the scrvants there was
the magazine Art when my father came in.

a famine in the Ukraine.

"What's that?” he asked.“That'” was draw-
known him from our school days togcther.He
"t's a wonder they weren't ashamed,”
ings and sketches by the painter Repin.

“And
was Jewish, and my father didn’t like it.

How
wailed Valechka.To deceive your father,of
I've never even scen them,he remarked sud
ever, he somchowaccepted the marriage and
all pcople!"
denly with such sadness in his voicc.

gave his consent.

It was May.Flowers were in bloom outside
He invited me to SochiinAugust 1947.We
As we pulled in at the various stations and
were there for threc wceks.

It was pleasant
would go for a stroll my father walked as far
the dacha.

The bird cherry trees were a daz-
and sad and tremendously taxing.He was dif
as the engine, greeing the railway workers.

zling white,bees were buzzing, and it was still.

ficult to talk to.Ialways felt as though I were
You couldn't sce a single passenger.--- PAGE BREAK ---

zling white,bees were buzzing, and it was still. ficult to talk to.Ialways felt as though I were
You couldn't sce a single passenger. It was a
Soyouwatgetmarrddoyouher-
markedForalongtmehstaredatther
standing at the foot ofa highmountain.He
special rainandno onewas allowed ontheplat-
ue anquy o Sunous st.m I pue aoqe dn se. form.Whoeverthought suchathingup?ho
and said nothing.Yes,it's spring,，”h r
marked all of a sudden.To hell with you.Do
isolated word was all that got through. Only
had contrived all these stratagemsNot he. scattered words of his got through to mc,too. It was the system of which he himself was a
as you like."
Wewere well provided for.Wewenton with
It was easicr when we went walking. And he
prisoner. Outside Moscow somewhere thc train
our studies in peace. I was able to have a child
magazines aloud. He had aged.He wanted
stpd
peace and quict.Rather,he didnt now just
ment outside the Kremlin.My father sct only
what he wanted. sn
onc conditionthat my husband never set foot
I soon went back to Moscow and the uni-
tance, was fussing and running back and forth. in the house.There was just one thing he would
CONTINUED
98

--- PAGE BREAK ---

Rare and carefree bours by tbe sed
AsayomgomanSctlaaften
spenthercacations at the Black
Searesorts lier father likedso
mch.Here she shorws lher com-
petence at huandling an aquaplane
(aborce)andatright,back in the
speedbotstitm
Herfather had on occasion spoken
o,
uu ods of !

--- PAGE BREAK ---rts lier father likedso
mch.Here she shorws lher com-
petence at huandling an aquaplane
(aborce)andatright,back in the
speedbotstitm
Herfather had on occasion spoken
o,
uu ods of !

--- PAGE BREAK ---

Peace found with friends in
1
Scetlana frequelywrites ofher
lorceforatreandoftespecal
relaxationand senseofrefresh
ment she found inthe Russian
contryside. Tlhis is zhere I be-
longt in the cityshe says.
s
alosrwapartmen but often
tonk losif and baby Katya tote
( iddn m)u
Sheenjoedlabrte picisith
lerbrtherVasily (sednextto
SvetlUnLl CONTINUED
your way by the Zionists,my father told me.
“PapaItrid tbjc,“theyoungerns
Zhdanovsmy father had notbeen far wrong.
foundmyselfinahouseholdwhereahypocrit-
The generals and colonels of the bodyguard
couldn't care less about all thisZionism.
You don't understand,”was the sharp answer.
"No!
ical show was made of what was called “Par-
were also puffing and blowing. My father nev-
ty spiriton the one hand; on the other hand
When I asked him,he told me what my aunts
there was themost dyed-in-the-wool spirit of
were guilty of.They talked a lot.They knew
shout crude words in their direction.He never
p  n p o pe y oo
bourgcois acquisitiveness that the minds of
spoke to his houschold servants in that tone.
women could contrive. The whole setting
helped our enemies."
A new wave of arrests got under way.My
Hesawenmiescverywhere.Youyoursf
vascs, antimacassars and worthless stillifes
wo aunts, the widows of Cncle Pavel and R
make anti-Soviet statemcnts, he told’me one
-was vulgar.
dens, were scnt to prison.I. G.Morozov,the
fahemysshandwasarrst
day-—angrily and in complere carnest.
1tookmy final examinations in the spring of
ven arrested olotovs wife Polina. Ail were
Jumpexd together in a single alleged Zionist
1949 and married Yuri Andreyevich Zhdanov,
uring the winter of 1949-5o I was ex-
Litte losif and I went to the Zhdanovs'apart-
peting achild and was having alotoftrouble.
center.
"That first husband of yours was rhrown
ment in the Kremlin to live.
 went to the hospital in the spring. I finally re
It was by no means casy and plcasant at the
no ouep osuds opou
100ouble.
center.
"That first husband of yours was rhrown
ment in the Kremlin to live.
 went to the hospital in the spring. I finally re
It was by no means casy and plcasant at the
no ouep osuds opou
100

--- PAGE BREAK ---first husband of yours was rhrown
ment in the Kremlin to live.
 went to the hospital in the spring. I finally re
It was by no means casy and plcasant at the
no ouep osuds opou
100

--- PAGE BREAK ---

tbe Russian countryside
her in picture at upper rigit)and
his friends.She took her clhildren
as Stalin lhad taken her—sotth
tothe Black Sea resorts.At far
left,Scetlana (left,top row）and
her clildren stand rzith her life-
longfrindstheMikyfily
outsideailla atSochiShend
lsifofensiingtget
er (near lft）.Atuearriglt、s
sits with losif by a lake,and far
rigt,posesit brtherVasily.
house] in the summer with my tiny, weak lit-
premarurely.Be patient a little longerwell
tle Katva. I was worn out from being lonely
see cach other soon. 1 kiss my Svetochka.
tion was that he had stayed here with my moth-
and sad, from the rcalization that my second
"Your“little papa.'
64
cr in 19: after Vasily was born.
marriage was a failure. I wrote my' father a
(May10,i950)
My father had unpleasant memories of his
wocbegone letter. I recived a reply rwo days
In the summer of 95:my father summoned
journey becausehe couldnt stand the sight of
later. It was the last letter I was ever to re-
a crowd applauding him. At the Kutaisi rail.
ceive from him.
his vacation, and I went for rwo weeks. He
way station his Gcorgian countrymen had
"Dear Svetochka!
was 7= bur his stride was brisk as he walked
given him such a receptionthat he had been un-
gotyour lerter.mvery glad you got
through the park with fat generals of the body-
able to leave the train and get into his car.Po-
off so lightly. Kidney trouble is a serious busi-
guard panting to keep up with him.
ple literally threw themsclves under the wheels.
ness. To say nothing of having a child. here
He had lunch and dinner under a tree in the
Father was angry. He was accustomed to hav-
 e   no. p
garden.He asked the servants to catch him
ing the stations cleared for his arrival.
youIl'sthorofhingpopledreamup.
some fresh fish.He could remember from his
Vhen we lefBorzhomiVasilvand I stopped
vise you not to believe your dreams.Take care
childhood the Georgian names for the various
off atmy father's birthplaccin GoriThehouse
of yourself.Take care of your daughter.too.
fish. But he didn’t like talking about his feel-
is nothing but a poor cobbler's hut.But Beria
The stateeds pcople,even those whoareborn
ings and usd to remark that that kind of thing
had a marble pavilion built over it that makes
CONTINUED
101eel-
is nothing but a poor cobbler's hut.But Beria
The stateeds pcople,even those whoareborn
ings and usd to remark that that kind of thing
had a marble pavilion built over it that makes
CONTINUED
101

--- PAGE BREAK ---

Her student son wbo stayed in Moscow
sisssso
msymmosw u 
Yelena and studying tobeadoe-
tor.In these pictures taken this
year he is shorwn performing his
military service,marchinginthe
greeing Yelena (left and above)
when she comes to visit him.losif
remembershislast briefmeeting
psy uoydeds

--- PAGE BREAK ---

Svetlanla coNTINUED
Everything was the same as ever at the table
Vasily stoppdatnothing.Anybodywhohad
-—not a singic new word. It was as though the
fallenoutof favorwithhimwaskickedoutof
outside world didn't even cxist.
his path, and some even went to jail. V'asily
the place look like onc of the minor subway sta-
As I was leaving,my father called me asidetions in Moscow.

togiveme somemoney.Hehad started doing
  g peg 
I thought back to the time when Yakov, V’a-
it after the war and the currency reform of
rwisted him around their littie fingers.

Thcy
sily and I were sent to call onmy grandmother
1947.

My father would ask on the rare oca-
d
Ieges—everything.They spoiled and corrupted
in a beautiful old palace witha park.Herroom
him as long as they needed him.

But oncc my fa-
was small and dark with a low ceiling and lit-
op
ther was dead and they didn't nced him any
tle windows facing on a courtyard.

The room
need He didn't know what the new moncy
more,they abandoned him.

was full of old women wcaring black, as old
 o s.

In r95my father himself had had Vasily
women doin Gcorgia,and a littl old lady was
only values he kncw were the old prerevolu-
removed from his post in the Moscow Mil
half-scated on the narrow iron cot.

Awkward
tionary ones, whereby oo rubles was a mag-
itary District.

It was windy and overeast on
Iy, she embraced us with hands that were knot-
nificent sum.

So when he handed me 2,ooo ru-
May Day that year and the fly-past over Red
tcd and bony.

She kissed us and spoke a fcw
bles,he thought he was giving me a million.

Square was canceled.

But Vasily ordered the
words in Georgian.

Yakov was the only one
He let his salary pile up in packets on his
fy-past on his own authority.

The pilots
who undcrstood.1remember that her pale face
desk.

I have no idea whether he had a savings
couldn't stay in formation and vcry nearly
was covered with freckles.

She was wearing a
account; probably not.

He ncver spcnt any
brushed the spires of the Historical Museum.

kerchicf but I knew Grandmother uscd to have
money—he had nothing to spend it on.

Every-
Several crash-landcd.

Both pilots and planes
red hair.

1 knew, bccausc my fathcr told mc
thinghededhisfoodhis otng,his
were destroyed.

so.

Gcorgians consider red hair to be a sign of
twasanunheard-ofviolation of discipline.

beauty.

the government.beauty.

the government.

Sometimes he would pounce on his comman-
chiefaviation officcr of the MoscowMilitary
dants or the generals ofhis bodyguard, some-
District.

one likeVlasikand srart cursing:You par-
My father wanted him to graduate from the
yfather's trip south in the autumn
asites!You're making a fortunc here.

Don't
Gencral Staff Academy.

"I'm 7o years old."
of 1951 was the last he took anywhere.

He
think I don’t know how much money is run-
my father said.YetIgo on leaning just
never lft Moscow again.He spent days at a
ning through your fingers!" He knew no such
the same.Vasily agreed to cnter the Acade-
time in the big room with thc fireplace.

As for
thing.His intuition told him huge sums were
my.But he didntsetfootin theplace one.He
e  uq on us uq p y ssd
goingoutthewindowbuthatwasall.

stayedhome and drankuntil thedeathofmy fa-
corersof thearthhehadhemcolltedand
d s  s
donated to a museum.

He had no idea what to
nccd ofmoney.When I divorcedmy second
He was convinccd that our father had been
do with this avalanche of valuable,even price-
husband and left thc Zhdanov family, my fa-
“poisoned”or“killed.”He accused the gov-
less obj: painting china,uniture, wea-
ther gave me permission to live in the cityrath-
ernment, the doctors and everybody in sight.

ons, clothing.

er than the Kremlin.

He ranted and raved like the crown prince who
I've already told you how I took my chil-
He made only one stipulation.All right,he
had just inheritcd the throne.

dren to his dacha in the aurumn of 195 for
said.You can live on your own if you like.But
He was summoned to the Ministry of IDc-
the Nov.

7 anniversary.

I also went there for
fenseanditwassuggesrd thathequitdw.

his 73rd birthday on Dec.

21 of that year.

It
any more.“Here's some money.

Go buy a car
They offered him command of one of the mil-
was the last I saw him.

I was worried about
and drive yourself, but show me your driver's
how badly he looked.

license first," he said.I was worried about
and drive yourself, but show me your driver's
how badly he looked.

license first," he said.

would take nothing but Moscow and thc avi
He had given up smoking and was very
My father didn’t objcct when I told him I
ation command of theMoscow Military Dis-
pleased with himseff.

It must have taken a lot
was feaving the Zhdanovs.“Do as you like，
trict.othing lesswould doThey ordcred him
of will power, because he had smoked for o
was alldtlhwahapa
toapostawayfromMoscow.Oneagainh
or 60 years.

He was probably aware of an in-
divorce.

Sometimcs he asked me angrily:
fused.

They asked: Do you rcfuse to accept an
crease nhis blood pressure,but he hadn’t any
oudAe n e 
order from'the Minister of DefcnscYou don’t
doctor to take care of him.

Vinogradov, the
what you're givenWhcn he found out that 1
consider yoursclf an army officer any more?

only onc he trusted, had bcen arrested and he
paid for my meals and for my apartment he
No, I do not, was his reply.

Take off your
wouldn't let any other doctor near him.

He
calmed down a bit.

stars, then,the minister concluded in anger.

would take some pills or pour a few drops ofio-
Vasily was also summoned on March 2,
[The minister at the time was Bulganin.] And
dine into a glass of water.

Moreover, he him-
195.Htoospentseveralourssitinginth
so Vasily left the army, a retired general ith
self did a thing no doctor would ever have al-
big room that was so crowded.

But he was
nothing to do but sit home and drink.

He had
lowed.

T’wo months after I last saw him and
drunk, as he often was by thcn, and he soon
thrown his third wife out and persuaded his sec-
just 24 hours before his stroke he went ro thc
Ieft.

In the servants quarters he gave the doc-
ond wife to come back.

By now he was so im-
bathhousc and rook a stcam bath.

tors hell and shouted that they were killing our
possible, however, that evcn she left.

“The case of the Kremlin doctors" was un-
father.

Finally he went home.“The case of the Kremlin doctors" was un-
father.

Finally he went home.

He was arrested on April 8, 1953, after a
der way that last winter.My father's house-
He was attending the General Staff Acad-
drinking bout with foreigners.

keeper told me my father was exccedingly dis-
cmy at the time.

But my brothcr no longer was
tresed.

She was waiting on the table, as usual,
capable of study.

He was an alcoholic.

when my father remarked that he didn't be-
Hestaredthwarasacapranof oand n
licve the doctors were “dishonest”and that the
ished it as a lieutenant general of 4.

Those
verything came out in the pretrial in-
only evidence against them, after all, were the
responsible couldn't have cared less about his
vestigation:the shady deals,thc sending,th
"reports" of Dr.

Timashuk [Dr.

Lidia Tima-
strengths and iweaknesses.Thcir onc thought
exploitationofVasily’spowerandrankbeyond
shuk, an obscure medical worker who wrote
was to curry favor withmy father.

Yet he could
any reasonable limit.He had used his fists on
anineriminating letter o Stalin].Everyone,as
no longer fy his own plane.

subordinates while on duty.

Everybody gave
usual, was silent.

Myfather saw the statehewasin.He scold
his evidence against him—his former adjutants,
The last time I was there we sat at the table
cd him unmercifully.

Vasily was ill and what
aides who had served under him, even the Min-
as usual and theusualpeople were present.To-
he nceded was to be cured.

But he didn't want
ister of Defense himself.

ward the end the “usual" people were Beria,
to bc cured.

He was surrounded by masscurs
A Military Collegium sentenccd him to cight
Malenkov,Bulganin andMikoyan.

Khru-
dnqnd osd,pe s pe
yearsinjailVasily couldn'belicveit.Hebom-
shchev also appcared from time to time.] There
to all kinds of “deals,” such as tampering with
barded thegovcrnment with lerters.Hehad lost
was the usual tralk-the sharp asides, the old
hockey and socer games.

Moncy was never
sight of who he was; he was a nobody now.Svetlanla coNTINUED
Everything was the same as ever at the table
Vasily stoppdatnothing.Anybodywhohad
-—not a singic new word. It was as though the
fallenoutof favorwithhimwaskickedoutof
outside world didn't even cxist.
his path, and some even went to jail. V'asily
the place look like onc of the minor subway sta-
As I was leaving,my father called me aside

Khru-
dnqnd osd,pe s pe
yearsinjailVasily couldn'belicveit.Hebom-
shchev also appcared from time to time.] There
to all kinds of “deals,” such as tampering with
barded thegovcrnment with lerters.Hehad lost
was the usual tralk-the sharp asides, the old
hockey and socer games. Moncy was never
sight of who he was; he was a nobody now. jokes.My father's face had a ruddy look.His
any object. He was given anything he wanted. He was sent to a military hospital in thc
blood pressure must have been terribly high. Even Vlasik drank with him. At the right mo-
winter of 195+-55. From there on he was sup-
Buthewas taking little sips oflight Georgian
ment, afterall,asilycould putinagodword
posed togo first to a civilian hospital,then to
wine as he always did. for him with my father. the Barvikha Sanatorium and finally,home. lt
CONTINUED
103

--- PAGE BREAK ---SvetlanacONTINUED
was Nikita Khrushchev who told me all this in
Deccmber1954
Noncofiworked.Vasilysoldfriends stat-
cd coming to the hospital' to see him.

They
brought him vodka andhe went to pieces again.

Hedidntgohomefromthehospitalbuttola-
dimir Prison.

InJanuary956Iwent to Vladimir to sce
him.His third wife.Kapitolinawho had done
all she could to help him, came with me.

We met in the warden's ofce.

A huge por-
trait ofmyfatherwashanging onthe wail.The
warden stolea glance at us now and then as we
talked.

Evidently the wheels were tuming
slowly in his brain.

Vasily told Kapitolina and me to pull every
Vasily grewupintahd-dinking.

wire we could.He had written one member of
the governmcnt after another,reminding them
of the old days and swcaring that he would be-
his arm aramdhis third wife.Kapi-
have better now.

Kapitolina told him to behave himself, to
tolnaand at rigltle hoists e
keephisdigniy and bequiet.Hepouneedon
of his yamg sons.

He as made a
lieutenmgeeralhileleuasstill
her:I ask you for help, and you advise me to
be quiet?Then he told me the names of peo-
in hisentesbutafSal did
was imprisned by the new gocerm
ple he thought might help.

“It'll be better if
ment.

An alconoli.

he died in 1962.

own wordwill carry awholelot more weight
than anything I can say."
He even thoughtof geting in touch with the
and I suspet that he was not far wrong.

Vasilydidn'tgetout ofVladimirunilanu-
ary 96o.

That month Khrushchev called me
In April g61Vasily went toKislovodsk for
My nurse, Aleksandra Andreyevna.was
inagain.

He was trving to think what to do
“reatment.”His daughter Nadya went with
withme for the first o years ofmy life.Ifit
and how he could help.Somconc had thought
him.

She wrore that his drinking was as bad as
of suggesting toVasily that he leaveMoscow
had not been for the warmth givenoff by this
cver.

Some crooks drove thcir cars up from
large andkindlyersnmighlongagohav
and go somewhere clse to live.She wrore that his drinking was as bad as
of suggesting toVasily that he leaveMoscow
had not been for the warmth givenoff by this
cver.

Some crooks drove thcir cars up from
large andkindlyersnmighlongagohav
and go somewhere clse to live.

I told Khru-
Georgiatotakehimdown withthcm.Hedidnt
shchev that I didnt think my brother would
gonc out of my mind.“Grannydied in1956
go.butevanished andreappeared affv
after witnessing the return of my aunts from
agree.

daysinKislovodsk wretd out.ad
Shortly afterward,Khrushchev summoned
prison and going through the death of my fa-
been living in the house of a switchwoman on
Vasily and spent more than an hour with him.

therandgradparersWcelbred hh
the railroad.

By the end of April he was back
EvcnV'asily said later that Khrushchev had
birthday a year or so before she dicd.

It was a
serving the same old term in jail.

He had now
treated himlikea father.

They kissed one an-
happy oceasion.

one that brought all my rel
been“requestedto serveout histerm since
atives togethcr, cven those who had bcen at
his behavior had been unsatisfactory.

V'asily was to stay in Moscow and was given
odds for years.

He wasreleased in the spring of96:from
anaparrment on the Frunze Embankment and a
LefortovoPrison in Moscow on grounds ofil
dacliu at Zhukovka near mine.

His general's
health.

He was suffering from a liver ailment,
sse su
a stomach ulcer and total debilitation.

He had
asked in return that he get a job and live in
ranny was born in Ryazan province.

never eaten muchhe just filled his stomach
Before the Revolution she workcd as maid,
peace.

Vasily requested thathe be allowed to go to
with alcohol.

housekceper.

cook and nally as a nurse.

This time he was allowed to live anywhere
Gcorgia.

Khrushchev asked him not to.

Gorky once came to sce my father at Zu-
he liked excepr Moscow and Georgia.He
He lived inMoscow for three months—Jan-
balovoin9o,whilemymotherwas stillalive.--- PAGE BREAK ---

Khrushchev asked him not to. Gorky once came to sce my father at Zu-
he liked excepr Moscow and Georgia.He
He lived inMoscow for three months—Jan-
balovoin9o,whilemymotherwas stillalive. chose to go to Kazan.He took a woman he had
uary,FeuryandMach.hadytm
met by chance, a nurse named Masha. He was
Gcorgia were quick to gather around him. sncakinga look into the room,she toldhin she
They dragged him to the Aragvi restaurant
given a one-room apartmentand received hisre
“wanted so much to have a peek at Giorky.”
tired gencral’s pension. But he was brokcn
Voroshilovdaggedherintotheroom.iorky
and drank with him. They praised him to the
phvsically and mentally. skies.Once againhe stared thinking ofhim-
asked her which of his books she had read and
He didMarch 9.196.He had bcen ona
self as the crown prince.Did the Georgians
strenuous drinking bout and never regained
was astonishcd when she rcelcd off the titles of
want him?By god.hedgo to live there then! consciousness. He was only 41. practically every one."Which did you like
best? he asked her.The story in which you
He'd live in the style to which he was accus-
DidIknowaingleersonwhoselifued
tomcd.A Gcorgian woman ofuncertain age
tell howyou helpedawoman defiverherbaby,
out well It was as though my father was at
e u u sepue us  uo pedde
my nure replied. Birth was, in fact, herfa
the center of a black circle;anyone who
before she suggested that he marry her and
vorite. Gorky was very pleascd. venrured inside vanished or perishcd or was
The youngerof herwosons died inoneof
comc to live in Sukhumi. destroyed. the famincs that swept the countryside during
104

--- PAGE BREAK ---a drunkard
Kremlin at that time, she met a wholly dif
Wedecided tobury Grannynextomymother
ferent group of pcople.Shehadmarvelous sto
riestotellabout theKremlinin those days
at Novo-Devichi, but we had no idea how to
goabout it.Novo-Devichi is considered a gov
wives.”She was a chronicle of her age.

ernment cmetery.]Finally I telephonedVo
roshilov'swife.Voroshilov himself cameto the
Every day whenIgot home from school she
tclephone,obviously upsct.“Of course,of
saw that I had my dinner.

As I was sitting do-
ing myhomework she sat inher roomnexto
tobury her.l'il give the order and it willbeall
mine, doing the things she had to do.At night
right."
she put mc to bed.

It was her kisses and words
Ifellaslpatnigh(liberrylireas-
ure,litte birdand herkissesIwokeup toin
the morning (Get up,little berry，get up,lit-
hose of our pcople who have bccn
tle bird").

through the war and the concentration camps
Before the Revolution she had bcen mar-
(bothGerman and Soviet)，who have knoun
ried and had a family of her own.

Then her hus-
prison bothunderthe czars and inSovietmes,
band went off to the war and during the dif-
these people who have seen every horror the
ficult years of the famine he didn't want to
2oth Century has unleashed on mankindthey
come back.Later,when herhusband found out
never forget the kindly faces of childhood.

Fach
she was working in the Kremlin, he suddenly
has smal sunny corners he can remcmbcr.

remembered her and started bombarding her
It is not for me but for history to decide
with letters hinting he would like to comc back
who served the cause of good andwho served
to her.

vanity and vainglory.

Let the judging be donc
What do you think of that she comment-
by later generations,by men andwomen who
2upp 1pue seA oy ou piey e peq 1, p
did not know the times we knew.Let it be left
hear a peep out of him.

Now he misses me all
to new people to whom the ycars I have de-
of a sudden.

Let him miss me.Now he misses me all
to new people to whom the ycars I have de-
of a sudden.

Let him miss me.

I have a son to
scribed wilf be as remote and incxplicable as
bring up.I can get along better without him.

the reign of Ivan the Terriblc.

I do not think
She died with only a few rubles to her name.

Granny had enormous dignity.One of thc
say it was allfor the“good of Russa"
thingsmyfatherliked herforwasthefactthat
They will have their say.

They will turn
there was nothing servile about her.No onc
s s  u d s 
but the Zhdanovs dared call her an“ignorant
pain, contrition and bewilderment.

ndssosnouo
the 1gzos.She had to spend several years in
on a military footing, Granny was officially
good iseteralthatitlivedoninthehearts of
listed asanemployee of the secret policeShe
her native villagebut she considered the coun-
men even in the darkest times and was hidden
was highly amused to bc given the rank of jun-
try nothing but “mud and filth.”
where no one thought to look for it,that it
So she came toMoscow,which shealways
ior scrgeant.She saluted the cook with “Atten-
never died out or disappcared completcly.

tion!”or “Aye, aye, sir!”First they abol-
looked down on.“Moscow's justa vilage next
ished ranks,”sheliked topoint out,“and thn
to Leningrad，”she kept saying.They can
they brought them back."
keeprebildingosowallhylikebuit
Toward the end of her life she was constant-
never compare."
lyillShadqnar paf
She came to us in the spring of 1926, just
weight went over o pounds， she stopped
after I was born.

There were three people in
the houschold whom she worshiped.The first
weighing herself because it only upset her.Even
then she keptright on cating.She could reada
was my mother.

The second was Bukharin,
cookbook like anovel,exclaiming as she went
ous uaa puds o psn o
in Zubalovo with his wife and little girl.Final-
ly,my nurse adored GrandfatherAlluyev.

of brandy in, too.--- PAGE BREAK ---

The second was Bukharin,
cookbook like anovel,exclaiming as she went
ous uaa puds o psn o
in Zubalovo with his wife and little girl.Final-
ly,my nurse adored GrandfatherAlluyev. of brandy in, too. Then we lit it up and when
Iremember how she raughtme to count.She
we carried it to the table it was faming
had litteballsofclayofvariouscolorsallstuck
s 
said they were about to showthe arrival of the
themall backtogetherand thenseparatedthem
prime minister of Burma, U Nu, and that Vo-
again. roshilov would mect him at the airport.Gran-
She had amagnificent commandof language. ny was curious to see what U Nu was like and
Her Russian was pure,beautifuland grammati
whether Voroshilov had aged.Forgetting her
cally perfect as you rarely hcar it today. She
age,her weight,hr hear and her ailing g,
hadamarvclouscombinationofcorrect spccch
she started running infrom the next room.She
StP
srumbled and fllon thc threshold. Her arm
o ssps
where she got them； maybe she made themup
was broken. I saw her a week before she died. She asked
herself. She had adopred the Soviet vocabulary and
d  o,   
called the ladies she used to work for bour-
weeping:Grandmother asked me toopen the
u o g. window. I just turned away for a second. stories she had to tell about them.Later on,in
And by the time I turned back,she'd stopped
the more or less democratic atmosphcre of the
breathing!"
Scetlandsmrse.Aleksandra A-
dreyeBychacaredforhefor
30years.She is burednextto
Nadya inNoco-Deichi.If it had
long ago lrce gone out of my mind. SOI

--- PAGE BREAK ---A Historian's Assessment
'Soviet Family Cbronicle'
or those who try to chart Russia’s rurbulent
historyvetlanaAllluyevasbookisautomatial
by James H.Billington
s,
lya document of high importance and special
cytoglorify the original,“pure”revolutionary
fascination.Perhaps no period of comparabie im-
porrance inmodern European history has rcceived
PrincetnUniersity，offersthisappraisal
and her family).Thereis a depernostalgia for
lessadequate and less detailedanalysisthan the
ofTwentyLeterstoaFriendbased
the personal rediscovery of an even older and
fatefulquarter-centuryinwhichStalinruledRussa
hisreadingofbothEnglishamdRussaner
more rcmote Russia: thc narural,rural world
until his deathin953.The systematic falsifea
sions.Professor Billington,theauthrof
and theolderspiritualcururewhichhadsomhow
tions and omissions of the official Sovict pres,
The Icon and the Axc,an interpretice
both been violated by forced urbanization.

col-
the fragmentary nature and frequent unreliability
histryfussianctureaseenl
lectivization andatheistic indoctrination.espite
of testimony by those who escaped or survived
theU.S.S.R.on the cultural exchange.

qualifications and uncertainties, she appcars to
and the intrusion of cold war polemics into so
have rejected her fathcr for her mother; her
much poswar scholarshipin both East andWest
all have left the serious history of the Stalin
her in-laws fora time.We are told that she heard
hcr now powerful fathrland,for Rusthe poeti
cra largely unwriten.

Expectrations have been
mother figure of Russia’s past.

high for this long-awaited word of one who
the “same old stories”at her father’s dinner ta-
f thehisoriancannot peerintoeitherheror
ble, but we don't know what the storics were.Expectrations have been
mother figure of Russia’s past.

high for this long-awaited word of one who
the “same old stories”at her father’s dinner ta-
f thehisoriancannot peerintoeitherheror
ble, but we don't know what the storics were.

lived through the entire era within the Krem-
Russias fuure,he can find in thisher firs lit
Some of the figures thought to have been closest
lin and ics inner network of secluded and heavy-
toStalin-Yenukidze,theGeorgianfriend ofearly
erary effort,distant echoes and perhaps somc m
ly guarded dachas.

tation of past tradition.

The tale of decciving
The book is gcnerally most valuable whenit
years, and Kaganovich,a lifelong intimate who
Stalin during his postwar tour of the country
even imitaredSralins appearancearc barely
concretely describes heruniqueand ragicfamily
faintly recalls Catherine the Great or Gogols
mentioned.There also scems to be serious distor-
circle.Here is vivid new testimony to the loncli
Inspetor General.The intcrjccted descriprions
tion in the shifting of blame for the purges and
ness of absolute power and the tragic death or
of narure seem to copy a device of Turgcnev
alienationofthechildrenoftyrans.Thpopular
prison campsofthemid-93osfrom her father to
Beria.

There is no indication of the role played
and Tolstoy; the effort to characterize her writ-
image of Stalin living in Byzantine splendor with-
ing as“lyrical reporing”bearsresemblance to
in the Kremlin mustnow be modified to show the
thefashion among earlyoth Century Russan
dictator with unopened paychccks on his desk,
writers to devise and proclaim newforms of
living larglyinainrmfhisdch
complcted by thetimeBeria took over as headof
the secret police late in 938.It seems improbablc
artistic cxpression.

s s os euoo 
that hermother washaving premonitions of Beria
ment warched by the secret police: the Franken-
steinmonsterhehad createdandcouldnotscape.There is no indication of the role played
and Tolstoy; the effort to characterize her writ-
image of Stalin living in Byzantine splendor with-
ing as“lyrical reporing”bearsresemblance to
in the Kremlin mustnow be modified to show the
thefashion among earlyoth Century Russan
dictator with unopened paychccks on his desk,
writers to devise and proclaim newforms of
living larglyinainrmfhisdch
complcted by thetimeBeria took over as headof
the secret police late in 938.It seems improbablc
artistic cxpression.

s s os euoo 
that hermother washaving premonitions of Beria
ment warched by the secret police: the Franken-
steinmonsterhehad createdandcouldnotscape.

in1929,or that he couid have been responsible
for the murder ofKirov in1934 when he was
ut the most intriguing resemblances are to
Her critical butrelatively sympathetic picrure of
largely preoccupied with party duties in the dis-
much older artistic forms.As jn old Russian lives
herfatherpouting hathccannotvisitartgalleries
of saints there is a strict insistence on relating
lieandinynwhnsu
tant Caucasus.

In shifting majorreponsibility toBeria
only what the writer had seen or heard; a sense
his terrace and encouraging his daughter to give
lin's only surviving childehoesinparttheration-
ofalmost preternatural struggle between the
idealizedgoodidentiedwiththeMotherofGcd
alization used by Stalin’s political survivors in the
seem at least human again.Anew generation of
years before the sccret speechofFebruary1956
（the rcaland remembered wife of Stalin）and
social.

psychological and culruralhistorians in
launched the ostentatious “de-Stalinization”of
dark,demonic forces （the satanic Beria and minor
devils like the hunchbacked governess）.Her
theKhrushchev era.More profoundly,however,
mother is described in the manncr of Russian
donot attibute everything simply to the peculiar-
saintsseatuand wemllingnd
ities of one man and hiscult of personality.In shifting majorreponsibility toBeria
only what the writer had seen or heard; a sense
his terrace and encouraging his daughter to give
lin's only surviving childehoesinparttheration-
ofalmost preternatural struggle between the
idealizedgoodidentiedwiththeMotherofGcd
alization used by Stalin’s political survivors in the
seem at least human again.Anew generation of
years before the sccret speechofFebruary1956
（the rcaland remembered wife of Stalin）and
social.

psychological and culruralhistorians in
launched the ostentatious “de-Stalinization”of
dark,demonic forces （the satanic Beria and minor
devils like the hunchbacked governess）.Her
theKhrushchev era.More profoundly,however,
mother is described in the manncr of Russian
donot attibute everything simply to the peculiar-
saintsseatuand wemllingnd
ities of one man and hiscult of personality.

minions not only replaced her and the family as
served like an icon in thc blown-up photograph
the focus of the dictator's attention in thelate
in Stalin's room.As in the traditional gathering
chronicl.isrianswiltfcousxp
years ofhis reign,but also viewed the family as
a kind ofrival forcetobe systematicallyharassed
of followers in anticipation of final miracles or
stant solutionsto the great cnigmasofthisperiod
and purged.

messages from the saint,thedacha deathwatchby
heresnsforhugalsazivit
Likeanyhistricrellctionsheel
the dying dictatorisdepicted inlugubriousde
pact,and the rum to aggression and renewed
tail.Instead of a blessing with the right-handed
terror in the postwar years.They will recognize
something about the time in which they were
written as well as the period that they describe.

sign of the cross,we are given a final curse in-
that Mrs.messages from the saint,thedacha deathwatchby
heresnsforhugalsazivit
Likeanyhistricrellctionsheel
the dying dictatorisdepicted inlugubriousde
pact,and the rum to aggression and renewed
tail.Instead of a blessing with the right-handed
terror in the postwar years.They will recognize
something about the time in which they were
written as well as the period that they describe.

sign of the cross,we are given a final curse in-
that Mrs.

Aliluyeva tells us about as much as a
vokedbyStalinsraised lefthand.Instead of see
They were written,she tlls us,in 6,ande
young daughter usually can about her father's
fect the generaldisilusionment that haddevel
ing him after death for the first time as a trans-
business.ut since Stalin'sbusiness was theexer-
figured saint,his daughter sces him for the first
cise of power on a terrifying.

global scale,one
oped in the decade since Stalin's death with the
timc as a naked man.

entire system of thought control and bureaucratic
cannot help but hope that there may be more to
repression that still lingered on.

This was a
Despiteits historical andhuman interest,s
come: subsequent writings tharwillprovide added
year in which Khrushchev was retightening cul
Alliluyeva's document seems to be giving us nci-
information and more systematicreflection on
turalcontrols and dampcning theexpcctations of
ther critical history nor imaginative literature,
figures and issues of high policy.

but somethingratherliketheoralfolkloreof the
The present chronicle provides only brief
greater freedom that hiscarlier criticisms ofSta-
tere.These were isolared chambers to which the
lin had helped raise.

Mrs.

Alliluyeva’s disturbed
glimpses of the inncr circleeven of the Molo-
noble women of old Russia were traditionally
and at times confusing search for new belicfs in-
tovs, who were lifelong friends, or the Zhdanovs,
corporates some artitudes held then and now by
confined.--- PAGE BREAK ---

Mrs. Alliluyeva’s disturbed
glimpses of the inncr circleeven of the Molo-
noble women of old Russia were traditionally
and at times confusing search for new belicfs in-
tovs, who were lifelong friends, or the Zhdanovs,
corporates some artitudes held then and now by
confined. In any Kremlin (forress or citadel）) of
an old Russian city, there were usually sccure
CONTINUED
106A

--- PAGE BREAK ---Nutrament
A puzzle about traamatic
family relationsbips
can help
ASSESSMENTCONTINUED
upperroomsin which nurses and grandmothers avemuch-ed
cd affection and security to the wives and daughters ofthe great.

you gain
and relayed tales about events unfolding in the distant.li
understood mens world.The terem of the Moscow Krem-
lin is even today a restful retreatits dimly lit walls covered with
ceramic leaves and trees.

If Stalin increasingly admired and 
weight.

sembled the paranoid Muscovite Czar Ivan the Terrible.it
seems appropriate that his daughter should write about himnot
like the sophisticated, modern woman she appcared to be in
interviews and press conferencesburmore like a frightcned and
perplexed girl slowly cmerging from the terem.

Mrs.Aliluyeva obviously idealized her nurse and the other
her in carly adulthood, and unconsciously reverts at times to
their childlike mode of explanation and illustration.

Evil pcople
At last, all you forgotten
are always hunchbacked,bloated or squint-eyed.Suggestions of
death.Just asagreat prmiumwas placedintheteron ong
underweight people
suffering loyalty to the man beyond—and above all the Czar-
Batiushka, thelittle fatherat the head of the Mluscovite
hierarchyso Mrs.

Alliluyeva trics to remain sympathetic to-
ward her father.She follows a childlike old-Russian tradition
have been remembered
of blaming evil spirits or evil adviscrs rather than an evil czar.

and her final insistence that all are guilty secms to ccho thc
Dostoevsky of The Brothers Karanazoe.

Asa former princess in the East who has now becomea celebri
Now there's Nutrament-
anutritionally complete food that's
ty in theWest, Mrs.Alliluyeva is likely to remain a troubld
good news for skinny people who are tired of looking
woman within and the focus of many resentments and suspicions
without.Psychologists as well asKremlinologists will havemany
less than best.--- PAGE BREAK ---

and her final insistence that all are guilty secms to ccho thc
Dostoevsky of The Brothers Karanazoe. Asa former princess in the East who has now becomea celebri
Now there's Nutrament-
anutritionally complete food that's
ty in theWest, Mrs.Alliluyeva is likely to remain a troubld
good news for skinny people who are tired of looking
woman within and the focus of many resentments and suspicions
without.Psychologists as well asKremlinologists will havemany
less than best. questionstoask ofarecordwhichincludes so many traumatic
In each fat little can: Plenty of protein, balanced amounts of
ss
fat and carbohydrate, plus essential vitamins cnd minerals. for instance, that a woman who often writes in lyric outbursts
and identifies with traditional Russian family artitudes mentions
Supplies 375 calories to help you build up your weight. the birth and upbringing of her own children (a supremc cx-
Try it—drink Nutrament with meals or in between. There's
chocolate, vanilla, cherry and rich Dutch chocolate.And
manner. But sheltered Western commentators should perhaps
they all taste like a milkshake. nor judge too summarily one who has lived in a world thev can
Ask for it at food or drug stores. fromStalin’s policies (and told less about his terror),have lit-
tlercason to ridicule his daughtcr as anunstable secker of ncw
wealth and adventure. The outside world will not expect too many sweeping revela-
tionsfromgirlislated inthrebutwillhope pehapsfor
littlefuller pictureof thoseforces ofinllcrualpsychological
and spiritual growth which slowly led hcr out. lament
Yagoda
Yeslur
Former N.K.V.D.cefsGehYagoda dikai I
ho,larelyigored by Mrs.Alllreainher b
1050