Documenting Iran-U.S. Relations, 1978-2015

Published: Dec 19, 2019 | Briefing Book # 692 | Edited by Malcolm Byrne

Every U.S. President Tried – at Some Point and for Different Reasons – to Engage with Iran
New Digital National Security Archive Collection of 14,000 pages Covers the 1978-79 Revolution to the 2015 Nuclear Deal (JCPOA)

[This cable from National Security Advisor Zbigniew Brzezinski to U.S. Ambassador William Sullivan in Tehran comes as the revolutionary tide in Iran was cresting. Even at this late date, less than 10 weeks before the Shah would flee the country, many at the top levels of the U.S. government believed he would survive. Indicating the cable’s extreme sensitivity, it was sent through “privacy channels” and marked “exclusively eyes only” for the ambassador (delivered “in a sealed envelope” for good measure). Brzezinski’s instructions come from “the highest authority” and call on Sullivan to inform the Shah that “the United States supports him without reservation in the present crisis.” Within a week Sullivan would shock the White House with his famous “Thinking the Unthinkable” message (also in this collection), doubting the Shah’s future viability and advising the administration make plans for his abdication.]

Shah Mohammad Reza Pahlavi and Farah Pahlavi left Iran for the last time on January 16, 1979 (photo from Wikipedia).

Ayatollah Ruhollah Khomeini disembarks from an Air France flight in Tehran after 15 years in exile in Turkey, Iraq, and France, February 1, 1979 (photo from Wikipedia).

U.S. Embassy officials taken hostage in Tehran, November 4, 1979, an image that continues to haunt American views of relations with Iran. (Reuters).

Presidential special envoy Donald Rumsfeld meets Iraqi dictator Saddam Hussein in Baghdad, December 20, 1983, symbolizing the U.S. tilt toward Iraq in its eight-year war against Iran.

President Mohammad Khatami made a powerful impression on U.S. officials during a rare interview on American television with CNN’s Christiane Amanpour, January 7, 1998 (CNN screenshot).

Akbar Hashemi Rafsanjani, a powerful figure in Iranian politics for almost four decades, repeatedly showed his interest in repairing the fractured U.S.-Iran relationship (photo by Morteza Nikoubazl, Reuters).

Iran and the United States faced off at the 1998 World Cup in Lyon, France, one of a handful of sporting events (including a celebrated visit to Iran by American wrestlers the same year) that many on both sides hoped would help improve the relationship. (Iran beat the U.S. soccer team 2-1.) (Photo by Patrick Kovarik AFP/Getty Images)

President George W. Bush delivers the State of the Union address on January 29, 2002, in which he labeled Iran, Iraq, and North Korea parts of an Axis of Evil (photo from The Economist).

President Mahmoud Ahmedinejad takes a highly publicized tour of the Natanz uranium enrichment facility on April 8, 2008, a period when Iran was accelerating work on its nuclear program (photo from NTI.org).

Washington, D.C., December 19, 2019 – For 40 years, since the first year of the founding of the Islamic Republic of Iran in 1979, the United States and Iran have been the bitterest of political adversaries. Yet, every U.S. president has at a certain point reached out to the theocratic regime in Tehran, either for a short-term policy objective or a longer-term improvement of relations, according to declassified records published this month by the National Security Archive. Furthermore, while Tehran rejected most of these probes, usually denounced as interference by “The Great Satan,” Iran’s own rulers have periodically found it in their interests to seek out the United States for a variety of reasons.

These conclusions, perhaps surprising given the abysmal state of affairs between the two governments, are among the main findings gleaned from a major new publication of once-classified documents on U.S.-Iran relations from the non-governmental National Security Archive through the scholarly publisher ProQuest.

The collection, U.S. Policy toward Iran: From the Revolution to the Nuclear Accord, 1978-2015 , published on December 12, 2019, consists of 1,760 documents and almost 14,000 pages of materials mostly obtained via the Freedom of Information Act (FOIA) or culled from years of research at the U.S. National Archives and Records Administration and its associated presidential library system. Additional records come from British archives and other sources and include selected Iranian materials.

Among the topics and themes highlighted in the collection:

U.S. reactions to the unfolding Iranian revolution, 1978-1979

U.S.National Archives and Records Administration and its associated presidential library system. Additional records come from British archives and other sources and include selected Iranian materials. Among the topics and themes highlighted in the collection: U.S. reactions to the unfolding Iranian revolution, 1978-1979 U.S. planning and responses to the 444-day hostage crisis, 1979-1981 Reagan administration support to Baghdad during the Iran-Iraq War, 1980-1988 The Lebanon hostage crisis that led to the infamous arms-for-hostages deals with Iran, 1984-1986 The Khobar Towers bombing, attributed to Iran by U.S. intelligence, 1996 U.S. tracking of Iran’s relations with other Persian Gulf states, 1990s and after Russia-Iran negotiations over nuclear energy, missiles, and other deals, 2000s Iranian involvement in Afghanistan and Iraq, 2001 onwards Western concerns over Iran’s nuclear program, 2002-2010 Background to talks leading to the JCPOA nuclear deal, 2013-2015 The new materials complement but do not duplicate previous DNSA collections on the period of the revolution ( Iran: The Making of U.S. Policy, 1977-1980 ) and Iran-Contra ( The Iran-Contra Affair: The Making of a Scandal, 1983-1988 ). On the theme of presidential interest in Tehran noted above, U.S.tracking of Iran’s relations with other Persian Gulf states, 1990s and after

U.S. planning and responses to the 444-day hostage crisis, 1979-1981

Reagan administration support to Baghdad during the Iran-Iraq War, 1980-1988

The Lebanon hostage crisis that led to the infamous arms-for-hostages deals with Iran, 1984-1986

The Khobar Towers bombing, attributed to Iran by U.S. intelligence, 1996

U.S. tracking of Iran’s relations with other Persian Gulf states, 1990s and after

Russia-Iran negotiations over nuclear energy, missiles, and other deals, 2000s

Iranian involvement in Afghanistan and Iraq, 2001 onwards

Western concerns over Iran’s nuclear program, 2002-2010

Background to talks leading to the JCPOA nuclear deal, 2013-2015

The new materials complement but do not duplicate previous DNSA collections on the period of the revolution ( Iran: The Making of U.S. Policy, 1977-1980 ) and Iran-Contra ( The Iran-Contra Affair: The Making of a Scandal, 1983-1988 ). On the theme of presidential interest in Tehran noted above, U.S.tracking of Iran’s relations with other Persian Gulf states, 1990s and after

The new materials complement but do not duplicate previous DNSA collections on the period of the revolution ( Iran: The Making of U.S. Policy, 1977-1980 ) and Iran-Contra ( The Iran-Contra Affair: The Making of a Scandal, 1983-1988 ). On the theme of presidential interest in Tehran noted above, U.S. Policy toward Iran traces the opportunities and setbacks experienced by each American president in attempting to reach across the political divide to the Islamic Republic.

For example, from the earliest days after Ayatollah Ruhollah Khomeini’s return to Iran – and ascension to political power – in February 1979, President Jimmy Carter sought to curry favor with the country’s provisional government, although attempts to establish ties to clerics rising to positions of political prominence failed badly because of the stigma of associating with the United States.

President Ronald Reagan talked tough about combatting terrorists and at one point gave approval to military strikes against Iranian targets in the event of harm coming to American hostages in Lebanon in the mid-1980s, yet was eager to pursue supposed moderates in Tehran, using American weapons as currency, in hopes of freeing the captives. (Some in his administration also banked on achieving a political rapprochement with those elements.)

President George H.W.Policy, 1977-1980 ) and Iran-Contra ( The Iran-Contra Affair: The Making of a Scandal, 1983-1988 ). On the theme of presidential interest in Tehran noted above, U.S. Policy toward Iran traces the opportunities and setbacks experienced by each American president in attempting to reach across the political divide to the Islamic Republic.

President George H.W. Bush, despite being tainted by Reagan’s Iran-Contra scandal, continued to harbor hopes of winning freedom remaining hostages in Lebanon (held by allies of Tehran), until he was duped by an unknown Iranian who managed to speak to him over the phone pretending to be Iran’s Parliament Speaker Akbar Hashemi Rafsanjani. Bush soon turned his attention to Iraq.

President Bill Clinton was much more wary of contacts with Iran after his predecessors’ humiliating experiences, colored further by evidence of Iran’s involvement in terrorist acts such as the Khobar Towers bombing in 1996. But with the surprise election of the reform-oriented Mohammad Khatami as president in 1997, Clinton went virtually all in on signaling to Tehran his desire for a breakthrough in relations. After numerous communications and policy measures aimed at showing good intentions, however, domestic politics on both sides overwhelmed the two leaders’ best efforts.

Even President George W.Policy toward Iran traces the opportunities and setbacks experienced by each American president in attempting to reach across the political divide to the Islamic Republic.

Even President George W. Bush entertained the prospect of better relations with Tehran. In the wake of September 11, Iran’s leaders were among the first to convey well wishes to the American people. More concretely, Iranian and American envoys to the Afghanistan talks in late 2001 worked effectively together to advance the writing of Afghanistan’s new constitution.Bush, despite being tainted by Reagan’s Iran-Contra scandal, continued to harbor hopes of winning freedom remaining hostages in Lebanon (held by allies of Tehran), until he was duped by an unknown Iranian who managed to speak to him over the phone pretending to be Iran’s Parliament Speaker Akbar Hashemi Rafsanjani. Bush soon turned his attention to Iraq.

Even President George W. Bush entertained the prospect of better relations with Tehran. In the wake of September 11, Iran’s leaders were among the first to convey well wishes to the American people. More concretely, Iranian and American envoys to the Afghanistan talks in late 2001 worked effectively together to advance the writing of Afghanistan’s new constitution. Despite acknowledgements in Washington of the positive results, other political forces in the administration held sway, producing the famous “Axis of Evil” reference in Bush’s 2002 State of the Union address. That in itself did not immediately doom the outlook for closer cooperation, as witnessed by the May 2003 “fax” to the State Department ghost-written by Switzerland’s ambassador to Tehran (the United States’ official intermediary with the IRI), and offering a “road map” for better ties, which the U.S. Bush entertained the prospect of better relations with Tehran. In the wake of September 11, Iran’s leaders were among the first to convey well wishes to the American people. More concretely, Iranian and American envoys to the Afghanistan talks in late 2001 worked effectively together to advance the writing of Afghanistan’s new constitution. Despite acknowledgements in Washington of the positive results, other political forces in the administration held sway, producing the famous “Axis of Evil” reference in Bush’s 2002 State of the Union address. That in itself did not immediately doom the outlook for closer cooperation, as witnessed by the May 2003 “fax” to the State Department ghost-written by Switzerland’s ambassador to Tehran (the United States’ official intermediary with the IRI), and offering a “road map” for better ties, which the U.S. government rebuffed out of hand. Even after that, American and Iranian officials met several times to discuss developments in Iraq and Afghanistan.

Of all the presidents since 1979, Barack Obama is most closely identified with attempts to break through decades of mistrust with Tehran. In his first year, the Cairo speech and Noruz (Iranian New Year) message set the tone. By 2011, preparations had reportedly already started for secret negotiations that the two sides hoped would lead to a nuclear agreement. President Hassan Rouhani’s 2013 election was a major boost to the process and by July 2015 an accord had been signed. The American side went to pains to insist they had no aims or expectations for anything more than a nuclear deal. But as the documents in this new collection make clear, solving the Iran problem – if possible through a new era of rapprochement (or at a minimum reduced tensions) – was on the agenda of every president at one time or another, whether acknowledged publicly or not.

The following documents are a small sample of the 1,760 records in the new ProQuest collection. To arrange for a free trial of the full set, click here if your library does not currently have a subscription to DNSA.

National Archives (United Kingdom). PREM 19/276. Iran (Part 6)

The Carter administration communicated frequently with its British allies about the revolutionary situation in Iran and many of these records are available in the British archives. They offer an interesting, generally sympathetic though not always eagerly supportive, angle on U.S. policy that often includes slightly disdainful remarks about the personalities involved. This cable from the British Embassy in Washington follows a few days after a major moment in U.S.-Iran relations – the American hostage rescue attempt that ended disastrously in the Iranian desert. The document relates separate conversations Secretary of State for Foreign and Commonwealth Affairs David Owen had with Secretary of State Cyrus Vance and National Security Advisor Zbigniew Brzezinski. Vance resigned after the failed mission, which he sharply opposed, though he confirms to Owen that this was only part of his motivation. Brzezinski, as usual, held the polar opposite view, leaving Owen with the impression he hoped the United States might go one step further and lay mines in Iranian waters. Owen includes some of his own opinions in this note which was copied to 10 Downing Street and bears Margaret Thatcher’s initials indicating the prime minister read the document.

Documents

Cable, Zbigniew Brzezinski to Ambassador William Sullivan, instructions on U.S. support for Shah of Iran (best available copy), Top Secret, November 3, 1978
Nov 3, 1978 | Source Jimmy Carter Library and Museum. Records of the Office of the National Security Advisor. Zbigniew Brzezinski Material--Country Files (NSA 6). Iran, 9/78-11/16/79. Box 29. Iran, 11/78

Memorandum, Zbigniew Brzezinski to President Carter, “General Huyser’s Report,” Top Secret, [attaching Eyes Only cable from Huyser to Harold Brown and Gen. David Jones], January 13, 1979
Jan 13, 1979 | Source Jimmy Carter Library and Museum. Remote Archives Capture. NLC-6-29-3-25-4
In the tumult of early 1979, President Carter decided to send a senior military figure, Gen. Robert Huyser, to Iran to engage chiefly with the military and help determine both their mood and the best course of action for the United States. He remained in Iran from early January to early February, a period that encompassed the Shah’s departure and Ayatollah Ruhollah Khomeini’s arrival from years of exile. Huyser, who was deputy commander of the Supreme Allied Command, was chosen in part because he had developed a relationship with Iranian military leaders – and to some extent with the Shah – over the course of several recent visits to the country. His mission became a topic of deep suspicion within and outside of Iran, with many Shah supporters suspecting the Carter administration of seeking to undermine the monarch while others believed his role was to foment a coup, along the lines of the 1953 overthrow of Mohammad Mosaddeq. (See some of the history of that event here .) This memo from Brzezinski to the president, which attaches a reporting cable from Huyser, shows that multiple options were being considered, each depending on a highly fluid and confusing situation. The Archive’s new collection contains every available record of Huyser’s numerous conversations with senior Pentagon officials during his mission, along with related materials that show how utterly baffling the political scene was to outside observers.

Memorandum, Cyrus Vance to President Carter, “White Paper on Iran,” Secret, c. March 25, 1980
Mar 25, 1980 | Source National Archives and Records Administration, Record Group 59, State Department Policy Planning Staff Directors Files, Anthony Lake files
After the U.S. Embassy takeover in Tehran in November 1979, a host of not just policy and political but legal issues arose that absorbed countless hours of U.S. government time. The Carter administration, anticipating intense congressional scrutiny over past U.S. policy as well as the involvement of entities such as the International Court of Justice at the Hague, decided to compile a record consisting of government records and a narrative history of U.S.-Iran relations. The project included the National Security Council and the State Department primarily and its output came to be dubbed the “White Paper,” even though it was not technically a policy statement. The Archive’s U.S.-Iran collection contains drafts and a variety of supporting materials from the White Paper, which took years to be made public. Here, Secretary of State Cyrus Vance updates President Carter on the project and offers some warnings about problems connected with it – which may partly explain the government’s reluctance to release the full record.

Telegram, U.K. Embassy in Washington to the Foreign and Commonwealth Office in London, “For Private Secretary,” Confidential, April 29, 1980

Information Memorandum, Jonathan T. Howe to the Secretary of State, “Iraq Use of Chemical Weapons,” Classification unknown, November 1, 1983
Nov 1, 1983 | Source Freedom of Information Act appeal
The Iran-Iraq War was a landmark event not just for Iran and the Middle East but for the United States relationship with Iran. At first choosing neither side, Washington eventually backed Iraq, albeit reluctantly, fearing even greater threats to American and Western interests from a dominant Islamic Republic than from an emboldened Saddam Hussein. Beginning in mid-1982 when Tehran decided to push into Iraq and become the aggressor rather than the defender (against Baghdad’s initial invasion), American support spanned the political, diplomatic, commercial, intelligence, and military spheres. This approach had numerous critics inside the U.S. government, largely because of the many compromises – political and moral – it required in the face of Saddam Hussein’s repeated outrages. Using chemical weapons against both Iranians and his fellow Iraqis was perhaps Saddam’s most reviled act and is the subject of this memo. It shows that the U.S. knew that Saddam was relying on chemical warfare “almost daily” and while the author is expressing a widely held view within the U.S. government that Washington needed to do something to stop the practice, other records in the National Security Archive’s new Iran collection show that decision-makers never undertook the steps necessary to do that. This was one of the consequences of the war that deeply embittered Iran’s rulers and made it more difficult for the two sides to reach the common ground each sought at various times.

Memorandum of Conversation, President George H.W. Bush and Sultan Qaboos, “Telephone Conversation with Sultan Qaboos of Oman,” Confidential, August 3, 1989
Aug 3, 1989 | Source George H.W. Bush Presidential Library
This phone call between President Bush and the Sultan of Oman follows the murder of an American hostage, Lt. Col. William Higgins, in Lebanon. Higgins was one of several Americans still being held captive after a spree of kidnappings in Beirut in the mid-1980s by Islamic radical organizations with ties to Iran. The infamous Iran-Contra scandal had roots in President Ronald Reagan’s efforts to gain the release of American hostages in Lebanon and the issue continued to cloud the administration of his successor, George H.W. Bush. Interestingly, Reagan (according to documents in the National Security Archive’s published Iran collection) was prepared to conduct military strikes against Iranian targets if any Americans were executed by their captors. Here, Bush is clearly not prepared for such a line of attack – unless another American were to be killed. Instead, he looks for assistance to a regional political actor who would come to play a regular role in mediating between Iran and the United States, including helping to stage the initial talks that led to the Joint Comprehensive Plan of Action (JCPOA) in 2015. Also of interest here is Bush’s awareness that at least some officials in Iran, including Akbar Hashemi Rafsanjani, were “trying to be helpful.”

Memorandum of Telephone Conversation, President Bill Clinton and President Boris Yeltsin, Confidential, October 5, 1993
Oct 5, 1993 | Source Freedom of Information Act release from William J. Clinton Presidential Library and Museum
A frequent concern of American policymakers over the years has been the relationship between Russia and Iran – specifically, Moscow’s willingness to sell military materiel, especially missiles, to Tehran. In this memcon between Presidents Clinton and Yeltsin, the subject is near the top of the American leader’s agenda. It would continue to figure in their conversations till the end of their terms, along with other regional issues as noted here, such as the Caspian oil pipeline and political instability in the Caucasus. While those concerns persist today, the high level of cooperation between the U.S. and Russia on display here would soon largely evaporate – except notably on the 2013-2015 negotiations over Iran’s nuclear program.

Message, President Bill Clinton to President Mohammad Khatami, Classification unknown, June 1999
Jun 1, 1999 | Source Freedom of Information Act release from William J. Clinton Presidential Library and Museum
This letter from President Clinton reflects his desire to forge a better relationship with Iran’s reform-minded leader, Mohammad Khatami who had surprisingly won election to the presidency two years earlier. The problem standing in the way was the conclusion of the U.S. Intelligence Community that members of the Iranian Revolutionary Guard Corps (Islamic Revolutionary Guard Corps) had taken part in the terrorist bombing of the Khobar Towers complex in Saudi Arabia in 1996, which killed 19 American servicemen and a number of Saudis. The FBI and others had pressured Clinton sharply to take retaliatory action but the lack of conclusive evidence at first made him hesitate. By the time the Saudi authorities produced confessions from the alleged perpetrators, Khatami’s election had altered the prospects for a rapprochement so dramatically that Clinton decided to forgo a harsh response. That goal notwithstanding, the president was hardly immune to continuing political pressure to hold someone in Iran accountable for Khobar (a view he agreed with at some level himself). He therefore agreed to the decidedly mixed message that is contained in the letter he finally sent to Tehran. Instead of an unalloyed statement of interest in better relations, the letter opens with an accusation of complicity in a terrorist attack and a demand that Khatami “bring those in Iran responsible ... to justice.” Predictably, the Iranian leadership, of which Khatami was just one component (and far from the most powerful), reacted angrily – in a response that is also part of the Archive’s new Iran publication – and the initiative came to nothing.

Cable, “Afghan Conference Proceeding on Interim Administration Formation, Mood Remains Optimistic,” Confidential, November 29, 2001
Nov 29, 2001 | Source Freedom of Information Act release from State Department
The September 11, 2001, terrorist attacks opened an unlikely opportunity for the United States and Iran to cooperate. The Islamic Republic was apparently never seriously considered to be behind the attacks and in fact was among the first governments to express public sympathy for the victims. As it happened, the Bush administration’s decision to invade Afghanistan created specific grounds for cooperation with Tehran in the form of ensuring a new regime and system in Afghanistan that suited both countries’ needs. At the Bonn conference in late 2001, two counterparts, James Dobbins from the United States and Mohammad Javad Zarif from Iran, formed a positive working relationship and Dobbins later openly credited Zarif for his role in developing useful proposals and leveraging Iran’s relations with the Northern Alliance to push those ideas through. This cable from Dobbins, though heavily redacted in parts, gives a flavor of the talks in Bonn and a sense of how he came to lobby the Bush administration to encourage further bilateral cooperation with Iran. Events such as the Karine A seizure and President Bush’s “Axis of Evil” speech (all documented in the Archive’s new compilation) helped to solidify a general disinclination within the administration to take up the opportunity.

Memorandum (Snowflake), Donald Rumsfeld to Lt. Gen. Bantz Craddock, “Iran,” Secret, June 2, 2003
Jun 2, 2003 | Source Defense Department release to Donald Rumsfeld
Defense Secretary Donald Rumsfeld’s preferred method of communicating with staff was via brief notes that he produced in such volume that they became known as “snowflakes.” This one to his senior military adviser is typically succinct yet opens a potentially very large topic – what is Iran’s strategy in Iraq and specifically when will they start killing “uncooperative Iraqis” and, more to the point, Americans?

Cable, Secretary of State to various diplomatic posts, “Conveying the Updated P5+1 Package for Iran,” “Sensitive but Unclassified,” June 16, 2008
Jun 16, 2008 | Source Freedom of Information Act release from the State Department
The George W. Bush administration never fully warmed to the idea of negotiating with Iran about its nuclear program, but under Secretary of State Condoleezza Rice the U.S. began to work somewhat more cooperatively with European, Russian, and Chinese partners under the rubric of the P5+1. The process became mired over issues such as whether Iran had a right to enrich uranium but the talks helped prepare the ground for the subsequent Obama administration’s more successful approach. This cable provides details of the latest P5+1 offer package to Iran, then under the administration of President Mahmoud Ahmedinejad.

E-mail, Secretary of State to various diplomatic posts, “Secretary Sherman’s Briefing for the Diplomatic Corps on ISIL and Iran,” “Sensitive but Unclassified,” September 16, 2014
Sep 16, 2014 | Source Freedom of Information Act release from the State Department
Under Secretary of State Wendy Sherman was the lead negotiator for the United States in the P5+1 talks with Iran that led to the Joint Comprehensive Plan of Action (JCPOA) in 2015. A small handful of other members of the Obama administration, led by her predecessor William Burns, had been engaged in secret bilateral talks with Iran since at least 2013. Other than official statements and press releases, very little internal documentation has come to light about this subject because of how recent it is and the nature of sensitive diplomatic negotiations. This e-mail provides a window into both the substance of the talks and some of the process involved. Sherman would remark later how much time was taken up with briefing allies and the Congress and soliciting international support from all corners to persuade Iran to agree to the eventual nuclear deal.
