78th Anniversary of Hiroshima and Nagasaki Bombings: Revisiting the Record

Published: Aug 7, 2023 | Briefing Book # 835 | Edited by William Burr

Contemporaneous Japanese Reports of Deaths and Lingering Sickness from Radiation Confounded Manhattan Project Leaders Who Treated them as “Propaganda”
General Groves Told U.S. Senate Radiation Sickness Was “A Very Pleasant Way to Die”
But A U.S. Navy Report Found the “Atomic Bomb is the Most Terrible Agent of Destruction Known to Man”
Reexploring the Manhattan Project and the Problem of Radiation Effects, 1944-1945

[With the first atomic test approaching, doctors and scientists at Los Alamos began looking closely at precautions and radiation safety measures. Dr. Louis Hempelmann—the director of medical and health affairs at Los Alamos—prepared the first part of a memorandum that described the weapons effects that could pose dangers, such as blast, radiation, and radioactive materials. Discussing what later became known as fallout, Hempelmann wrote that the “worst possible hazard from radioactive dust would seem to be the one in which the explosion is of sufficient energy to only get the material in the form of a cloud of fine dust.” If it landed on the shelter it would be "dangerous … to breathe for more than 6 minutes.” To make it possible for real-time measurements of beta and gamma radiation and airborne fission products and to protect staff from radiation, the second part of the memorandum, prepared by electronics specialist Richard Watts, recommended deploying measuring instruments at shelters and mobile units and the organizational structure needed for this work.]

Identification photo for Dr. Louis Hempelmann, the director of medical and health affairs at Los Alamos, who expressed concern about the “hazards” of the first atomic test and supported precautionary health and safety measures. (Photo from Voices of the Manhattan Project )

Identification photo for Manhattan Project physicist Joseph Hirschfelder, who predicted the fallout effects from the first atomic test (Trinity) on 16 July 1945. (Photo from Wikiwand )

Dr. Stafford Warren, a colonel in the Army Medical Corps, was the Manhattan Project’s chief medical officer. He oversaw safety planning for the first atomic test (Trinity) and was a key figure in the survey teams that traveled to Hiroshima and Nagasaki in September 1946. Warren is shown standing during a briefing for the Operation Crossroads atomic test series, July 1946. (Photo from Wikipedia)

Trinity test mushroom cloud sixty seconds after detonation. Photo of the atomic test, Alamogordo, N.M., 16 July 1945 (Image courtesy of Alex Wellerstein)

Estimated density of radioactive fallout during the ten days after the Trinity test. According to a new study, led by Sébastien Philippe, the fallout reached the entire United States (except for Oregon and Washington states) along with Canada and Mexico [ArXiv.org (Cornell University)]

Lt. Gen. Leslie R. Groves, director of the U.S. Army’s Manhattan Engineer Project, and J. Robert Oppenheimer, director of Los Alamos laboratory (Site Y) at the Trinity Test site on 11 September 1945, standing by remnants of the test tower. (Photo from Atomic Archive )

Atomic bomb damage in Nagasaki, Japan. (Photo: U.S. Air Force from National Archives Website )

Manhattan Project chief General Leslie R. Groves speaking to Service Personnel at Clinton Engineer Works, Oak Ridge, Tennessee, on 29 August 1945, During his talk, Groves referred to Japanese reports of deadly radiation effects as “propaganda.” [Photo by Ed Wescott, Department of Energy, Oak Ridge (via Wikimedia Commons )]

Dr. Masao Tsusuki, a leading authority on the biological effects of radiation, was affiliated with Tokyo Imperial University, where he had conducted research using rabbits. During the visits of the U.S. military survey missions, Tsuzuki worked cooperatively with the Americans, but he could be caustic. At one point, he said: “Yesterday it was rabbits; today it’s Japanese.” (Photo from National Library of Medicine )

Photo ID for William Penney when he was at Los Alamos Laboratory during and after World War II (Source: Los Alamos National Laboratory via Wikipedia)

Dr. Shields Warren, a Harvard University pathologist and a Captain in the U.S. Navy reserves, conducted studies of radiation effects in Hiroshima and Nagasaki for his work as director of the Medical Section of the U.S. Navy Technical Mission to Japan. (Photo from RG 38, Records of U.S. Navy Technical Mission to Japan, box 8, History of the Mission , 1 November 1946)

Update

See the August 8, 2022, posting below this update

First Manhattan Project Report on “Biological Effects” of Atomic Bombs Confirmed Radiation Deaths Gen. Groves “Stuck His Neck Out a Mile” in Denying Radiation Effects Los Alamos Official: Bombs “Could Not Have Done More Damage,” Extent of Destruction “Exactly That Predicted”

Washington, D.C., August 7, 2023 – A newly declassified memorandum from the weeks after the atomic bombings of Hiroshima and Nagasaki confirmed early reports of fatal radiation disease even as Manhattan Project director General Leslie Groves characterized the accounts from Japan as “propaganda.” The September 1, 1945, report from staffers at Los Alamos Laboratory on the “Calculated Biological Effects” of the atomic bombings listed death by exposure to gamma ray radiation as one of several possible lethal consequences of the bombings.

Senior Los Alamos scientist George Kistiakowsky wrote that Groves had “stuck his neck out a mile” when he denied reports of radiation deaths and apparently refrained from sending him the September 1 memo (Document 21), which contradicted Groves’ assertion.

The memo was published today for the first time as part of an update to last year’s Electronic Briefing Book on how Manhattan Project scientists estimated and calculated the harmful impacts of nuclear radiation while Groves continued to downplay and make misleading statements about its effects. Update See the August 8, 2022, posting below this update First Manhattan Project Report on “Biological Effects” of Atomic Bombs Confirmed Radiation Deaths Gen. Groves “Stuck His Neck Out a Mile” in Denying Radiation Effects Los Alamos Official: Bombs “Could Not Have Done More Damage,” Extent of Destruction “Exactly That Predicted” Washington, D.C., August 7, 2023 – A newly declassified memorandum from the weeks after the atomic bombings of Hiroshima and Nagasaki confirmed early reports of fatal radiation disease even as Manhattan Project director General Leslie Groves characterized the accounts from Japan as “propaganda.” The September 1, 1945, report from staffers at Los Alamos Laboratory on the “Calculated Biological Effects” of the atomic bombings listed death by exposure to gamma ray radiation as one of several possible lethal consequences of the bombings. Senior Los Alamos scientist George Kistiakowsky wrote that Groves had “stuck his neck out a mile” when he denied reports of radiation deaths and apparently refrained from sending him the September 1 memo (Document 21), which contradicted Groves’ assertion. The memo was published today for the first time as part of an update to last year’s Electronic Briefing Book on how Manhattan Project scientists estimated and calculated the harmful impacts of nuclear radiation while Groves continued to downplay and make misleading statements about its effects. That posting included declassified internal reports on the deadly impact of radiation in the aftermath of the August 1945 bombings. The U.S.Groves “Stuck His Neck Out a Mile” in Denying Radiation Effects Los Alamos Official: Bombs “Could Not Have Done More Damage,” Extent of Destruction “Exactly That Predicted” Washington, D.C., August 7, 2023 – A newly declassified memorandum from the weeks after the atomic bombings of Hiroshima and Nagasaki confirmed early reports of fatal radiation disease even as Manhattan Project director General Leslie Groves characterized the accounts from Japan as “propaganda.” The September 1, 1945, report from staffers at Los Alamos Laboratory on the “Calculated Biological Effects” of the atomic bombings listed death by exposure to gamma ray radiation as one of several possible lethal consequences of the bombings. Senior Los Alamos scientist George Kistiakowsky wrote that Groves had “stuck his neck out a mile” when he denied reports of radiation deaths and apparently refrained from sending him the September 1 memo (Document 21), which contradicted Groves’ assertion. The memo was published today for the first time as part of an update to last year’s Electronic Briefing Book on how Manhattan Project scientists estimated and calculated the harmful impacts of nuclear radiation while Groves continued to downplay and make misleading statements about its effects. That posting included declassified internal reports on the deadly impact of radiation in the aftermath of the August 1945 bombings. The U.S. National Nuclear Security Administration recently released a copy of the memorandum in response to a Freedom of Information Act (FOIA) request by the National Security Archive. Also included in today’s update are transcripts of telephone conversations from September 7, 1945, in which Groves continued to deny that the bombings had caused radiation sickness (Document 22); congressional testimony by Los Alamos scientist Philip Morrison on the deadly radiation effects of the atomic bombings (Document 28); and a January 1946 report by William Penney, a British member of the Los Alamos Laboratory staff, who found that the blast damage to Hiroshima and Nagasaki, was “exactly that predicted” by target planners (Document 30). Washington, D.C., August 8, 2022 – After years of research and planning, U.S.That posting included declassified internal reports on the deadly impact of radiation in the aftermath of the August 1945 bombings. The U.S. National Nuclear Security Administration recently released a copy of the memorandum in response to a Freedom of Information Act (FOIA) request by the National Security Archive. Also included in today’s update are transcripts of telephone conversations from September 7, 1945, in which Groves continued to deny that the bombings had caused radiation sickness (Document 22); congressional testimony by Los Alamos scientist Philip Morrison on the deadly radiation effects of the atomic bombings (Document 28); and a January 1946 report by William Penney, a British member of the Los Alamos Laboratory staff, who found that the blast damage to Hiroshima and Nagasaki, was “exactly that predicted” by target planners (Document 30). Washington, D.C., August 8, 2022 – After years of research and planning, U.S. officials and scientists overseeing the Manhattan Project were startlingly unprepared for the emergence of evidence of the long-term effects of radiation generated by the atomic bomb – even after the Trinity test in July 1945 and the bombings of Hiroshima and Nagasaki 77 years ago this week, according to documents posted today by the National Security Archive. Moreover, the head of the project, Gen. Leslie R. Groves, was so worried about public revulsion over the terrible effects of the new weapon – which a Navy report later in 1945 called “the most terrible agent of destruction known to man” – that he cut off early discussion within the MED of the problem. Later, he misleadingly told Congress there was “no radioactive residue” in the two devastated cities. In doing so, he contradicted evidence from his own specialists whom he had sent to Japan to investigate.Later, he misleadingly told Congress there was “no radioactive residue” in the two devastated cities. In doing so, he contradicted evidence from his own specialists whom he had sent to Japan to investigate. Groves even insisted that those who had been exposed to radiation from the atomic explosions would not face “undue suffering. In fact, they say it is a very pleasant way to die.” This publication supplements an earlier National Security Archive posting on “The Atomic Bomb and the End of World War II.” It incorporates records on the radiation problem as perceived during 1945 that have been declassified for decades but are not easily available. Included are the initial secret and top secret Manhattan Project and U.S. Navy reports on the medical effects of the atomic bombings. Using information from U.S. investigations in Hiroshima and Nagasaki and from Japanese doctors and scientists, they were the first official U.S. reports to discuss in detail the terrible course of radiation sickness. Reexploring the Manhattan Project and the Problem of Radiation Effects, 1944-1945 By William Burr When the Roosevelt administration began the Manhattan Project in 1942, the goal was a deliverable atomic weapon that could be used in World War II to defeat Germany and possibly Japan. The project raised tremendously complex political, scientific, engineering and logistical challenges but by spring of 1945 the objective was in sight. As preparations for the first atomic test were underway, medical experts raised the special dangers of radioactivity—that the test would create health hazards. Thus, when the U.S. tested the first bomb on 16 July 1945, Manhattan Project Chief Medical Officer Dr.Thus, when the U.S. tested the first bomb on 16 July 1945, Manhattan Project Chief Medical Officer Dr. Stafford Warren stated in a top secret report that, “the dust outfall from the various portions of the [mushroom] cloud was potentially a very serious hazard over a band almost 30 miles wide extending almost 90 miles northeast of the site.” Warren further reported that a few days later there was still “a tremendous amount of radioactive dust floating in the air.” On 6 August 1945, the U.S. dropped an atomic bomb on Hiroshima. Three days later, it exploded an atomic bomb over Nagasaki. Soon reports from Japan disclosed deaths and disease from unknown causes that turned out to be radiation sickness. Distressed by news that cast a bad light on the new weapon, Manhattan Engineer District (MED) chief General Leslie R. Groves told an adviser that the reports were “propaganda” that had to be dispelled. Whether he had read Stafford Warren's report or not, Groves could no longer claim that there were no deaths from radiation sickness, but he continued to mislead. Thus, he told U.S. Senators that there was “no radioactive residue” at the bombed cities and that radiation sickness was a “very pleasant way to die.” In contrast to Groves, Los Alamos Laboratory director J. Robert Oppenheimer was silent on the problem of radiation injuries, although he was aware of their likelihood.Senators that there was “no radioactive residue” at the bombed cities and that radiation sickness was a “very pleasant way to die.” In contrast to Groves, Los Alamos Laboratory director J. Robert Oppenheimer was silent on the problem of radiation injuries, although he was aware of their likelihood. Discussing safety measures to protect bomber crews from the effects of atomic explosions, Oppenheimer wrote to General Thomas Farrell in May 1945 that the radiation effects would be “injurious within a mile” and “lethal within a radius of about six-tenths of a mile” [See document 2]. But making sensitive information public was another matter. After the bombing of Hiroshima, when inaccurate information concerning the long-run impact was published in the U.S., the Manhattan Project issued a denial quoting Oppenheimer as saying there “would be no appreciable [radioactive] activity on the ground,” [See documents 12 and 13]. Oppenheimer made that assessment far too hastily because the situation on the ground was far from clear. When Groves denied Japanese reports of radiation sickness as “propaganda," Oppenheimer kept his silence. [1] This published collection supplements the previous National Security Archive posting “The Atomic Bomb and the End of World War II” by presenting key documents from 1944-1946 that provide a close look at the problem of radiation effects of the atomic detonations—from the first weapons test (“Trinity”) to military use in Japan. The documents in this collection were declassified years ago, some as far back as the 1970s, but not all are readily available online. Oppenheimer made that assessment far too hastily because the situation on the ground was far from clear. When Groves denied Japanese reports of radiation sickness as “propaganda," Oppenheimer kept his silence. [1] This published collection supplements the previous National Security Archive posting “The Atomic Bomb and the End of World War II” by presenting key documents from 1944-1946 that provide a close look at the problem of radiation effects of the atomic detonations—from the first weapons test (“Trinity”) to military use in Japan. The documents in this collection were declassified years ago, some as far back as the 1970s, but not all are readily available online. A review of these records offers fresh insights on a number of important issues that are relevant to this day. One theme in the collection is how MED leaders, who were planning for the first atomic test at Alamogordo, New Mexico, found it necessary to authorize health and safety protocols to ensure that the event did not contaminate project workers or anyone living nearby. Top officials such as General Groves initially pushed back against the warnings of radioactive fallout, but the uncertainty about the physical effects of the test and pressure from Stafford Warren prompted him to approve recommended safety measures. Another topic in the collection concerns U.S. government reactions to radiation sickness in post-attack Hiroshima and Nagasaki. U.S. reactions to reports from Japan ranged from outright denial of radiation disease to acknowledgement that the reports were accurate. The scientists who worked to produce the first atomic bomb were preoccupied with building a weapon of extraordinary power with massive explosive yield . That its effects could produce long-term illness was surprising to many, who thought that the blast effects would be the primary cause of deaths. Within a month after the bombings, U.S.That its effects could produce long-term illness was surprising to many, who thought that the blast effects would be the primary cause of deaths. Within a month after the bombings, U.S. teams were in Hiroshima and Nagasaki collecting evidence of radiation sickness. Nevertheless, General Groves remained in denial as indicated by his later Senate testimony. Also included in today’s posting is the report of a witness to the bombing of Hiroshima, Johannes Siemes, a German Jesuit priest and university professor. Siemes met MED scientists in Tokyo and his first-hand account, which discussed the impact of radiation sickness and raised questions about the ethics of using atomic weapons, was circulated among U.S. officials in Japan. The posting also publishes the initial MED and U.S. Navy reports on the medical effects of the atomic bombings, using information from Japanese doctors and scientists. Both reports included the Siemes narrative, which journalist John Hersey would later use as a source for his famous New Yorker article, “ Hiroshima .” Radiation Safety in the Manhattan Project For the Manhattan Project leadership, radiation safety was never a priority compared to the foremost goal of producing a deliverable weapon, but plans to produce large quantities of fissile material made health and safety protocols essential. Plutonium, which had never existed before in nature, was especially dangerous, although the press of wartime work led some scientists to take fatal risks. Early in the history of the MED, project leaders organized a Health Division at the Chicago Metallurgical Laboratory (Metlab), the unit that had responsibility for fissile materials production at Site X (Clinton, Tennessee) and Site W (Hanford, Washington).Plutonium, which had never existed before in nature, was especially dangerous, although the press of wartime work led some scientists to take fatal risks. Early in the history of the MED, project leaders organized a Health Division at the Chicago Metallurgical Laboratory (Metlab), the unit that had responsibility for fissile materials production at Site X (Clinton, Tennessee) and Site W (Hanford, Washington). The division established a standard of 0.1 roentgen (r) per day as an upper limit for full-body exposure, the standard that had been widely accepted in the radiation industry. It was a more or less arbitrary number and a relatively high level of exposure compared to standards adopted in 1946 and later. In any event, most workers at those sites did not know the secret purpose of their work or what the hazards were, but they were monitored nevertheless. By 1944, if not earlier, MED health officials developed safety standards for Site Y (Los Alamos) where scientists were working with plutonium to develop implosion bomb technology. [2] Months before the Trinity test, some MED experts understood the “hazards” of radioactive fallout, which encouraged them to recommend special precautions to minimize risk to the public and to avoid legal problems. While General Groves had worried about legal issues, his main concern was security and preventing leaks, and he was exasperated when MED officials argued for special precautions for the first test.By 1944, if not earlier, MED health officials developed safety standards for Site Y (Los Alamos) where scientists were working with plutonium to develop implosion bomb technology. [2] Months before the Trinity test, some MED experts understood the “hazards” of radioactive fallout, which encouraged them to recommend special precautions to minimize risk to the public and to avoid legal problems. While General Groves had worried about legal issues, his main concern was security and preventing leaks, and he was exasperated when MED officials argued for special precautions for the first test. Thus when a MED doctor brought the radiation safety plan to Groves, the latter complained, “What's the matter with you, are you a Hearst propagandist?” It took more convincing before Groves signed off on the plan. [3] The precautions taken in July 1945 were necessary but insufficient as long as an atmospheric test was being staged. Not only did the Trinity test produce radioactive fallout that endangered nearby people, recent research has revealed that it spread across much of the United States, as well as to Canada and New Mexico. The state of knowledge at the time was such that the possibility of fallout spreading beyond nearby areas was not understood, nor were the possible health effects of low doses of radiation. [4] U.S. Teams Sent to Japan to Investigate Weapons Effects After a uranium bomb, “Little Boy,” was dropped on Hiroshima on 6 August 1945, President Harry S. Truman announced to the world that the U.S. had used an atomic weapon. A few days later, on 9 August, a plutonium implosion weapon was dropped on Nagasaki.had used an atomic weapon. A few days later, on 9 August, a plutonium implosion weapon was dropped on Nagasaki. Very quickly, Groves and his advisers authorized plans to send MED medical experts to Japan to investigate weapons effects in both cities and to determine whether occupation troops could safely enter those cities. In early September, a few weeks after the surrender, an MED group led by Brigadier General Thomas Farrell arrived in Japan, with a medical team led by Colonel Stafford Warren. Motivated to some degree by interservice rivalry, the Navy and the Army also sent teams, led respectively by Naval intelligence officer Captain C.G. Grimes and Colonel Ashley W. Oughterson . For the Navy team, the last to arrive, Captain Shields Warren , (unrelated to Stafford Warren) directed medical studies. [5] In the weeks after the atomic bombings, reports emanated from Japan about mysterious lingering deaths of survivors who had not been injured by blast or fire effects. While not initially described as radiation sickness, the Japanese were soon discussing “a-bomb disease,” although occupation authorities would clamp down on media coverage. MED health experts were well aware of the biological consequences of radiation exposure, but there were many unknowns about the impact of ionizing radiation on living tissues. And MED physicists were far from well versed on the problem.MED health experts were well aware of the biological consequences of radiation exposure, but there were many unknowns about the impact of ionizing radiation on living tissues. And MED physicists were far from well versed on the problem. Physicist Norman Ramsey (Scientific and Technical Deputy to Captain William “Deak” Parsons) initially dismissed the Japanese reports as “propaganda.” Like others at Los Alamos, his priority had been building a deliverable weapon with huge explosive effects which, he assumed, would kill instantly anyone who otherwise might have died from radiation exposure. As Ramsey later put it, they would have been “killed with a brick first.” Ramsey and others learned that some near ground zero were in strong structures that made them “accidental survivors of the blast effects” and vulnerable to radiation. [6] The reports from Japan gave a damage control aspect to the MED team sent to Japan. Groves’ deputy, General Thomas Farrell expected to prove that the reports were groundless and in a press briefing on 8 September, he reportedly dismissed Australian journalist Wilfred Burchett’s accounts of radiation sickness as “propaganda.” [7] Nevertheless, Farrell’s reports and the more detailed studies by doctors on his staff, confronted Groves with uncomfortable facts. According to Farrell, “Summaries of Japanese reports previously sent are essentially correct, as to clinical effects from single gamma radiation dose.” Moreover, Stafford Warren’s interim study on the medical effects of the explosions reported that “delayed effects” involving severe symptoms “were due to radiation.” Reports from the Navy team provided information on radiation effects, including “residual radioactivity” produced by fission products deposited on the ground.Groves’ deputy, General Thomas Farrell expected to prove that the reports were groundless and in a press briefing on 8 September, he reportedly dismissed Australian journalist Wilfred Burchett’s accounts of radiation sickness as “propaganda.” [7] Nevertheless, Farrell’s reports and the more detailed studies by doctors on his staff, confronted Groves with uncomfortable facts. According to Farrell, “Summaries of Japanese reports previously sent are essentially correct, as to clinical effects from single gamma radiation dose.” Moreover, Stafford Warren’s interim study on the medical effects of the explosions reported that “delayed effects” involving severe symptoms “were due to radiation.” Reports from the Navy team provided information on radiation effects, including “residual radioactivity” produced by fission products deposited on the ground. With the MED denying some information to the Navy team, the latter found ways to compensate—for example, by using reasonably accurate Japanese estimates of the height of burst of the detonations at Hiroshima and Nagasaki and Japanese measurements of potentially dangerous residual radioactivity in Nagasaki’s Nishiyama’s district. All of this information was marked as top secret in the Navy reports, although the estimated heights of burst, along with other weapons effects information, were officially declassified in 1948 by the Atomic Energy Commission. [8] The “residual radioactivity” problem was associated with what became a controversy In Japan over the impact of fallout. While not as severe as the fallout from the Trinity test, the blasts produced what became known as “black rain”—radiation-laced raindrops that fell on residents of Hiroshima and Nagasaki. That was a theme in Masuji Ibuse’s extra or dinary novel, Black Rain (1969).While not as severe as the fallout from the Trinity test, the blasts produced what became known as “black rain”—radiation-laced raindrops that fell on residents of Hiroshima and Nagasaki. That was a theme in Masuji Ibuse’s extra or dinary novel, Black Rain (1969). During the decades that followed the atomic bombings, people who had been exposed to black rain, but who were outside the geographic zones that had been the basis for determining survivor benefits, made compensation claims nonetheless. When their claims were denied, they filed lawsuits, which dragged on eventually producing a major court victory in July 2021 (a decision that the Japanese government did not appeal ). Elements of the investigative teams sent by the Army, Navy, and MED eventually merged into what became known as the “Joint Commission for the Investigation of the Effects of the Atomic Bomb in Japan,” which also included Japanese scientists and other staff. In 1946 the Joint Commission produced a secret six-volume report, which the Atomic Energy Commission published in 1951, with a first volume that included detailed eyewitness accounts by residents of Hiroshima and Nagasaki. The work of the Joint Commission set the stage for the long-term research conducted by the Atomic Bomb Casualty Commission (ABCC), which developed from an authorization signed by President Truman in November 1946. [9] Based in Japan, the ABCC conducted additional studies on the medical and biological effects of the bombings.In 1946 the Joint Commission produced a secret six-volume report, which the Atomic Energy Commission published in 1951, with a first volume that included detailed eyewitness accounts by residents of Hiroshima and Nagasaki. The work of the Joint Commission set the stage for the long-term research conducted by the Atomic Bomb Casualty Commission (ABCC), which developed from an authorization signed by President Truman in November 1946. [9] Based in Japan, the ABCC conducted additional studies on the medical and biological effects of the bombings. The ABCC lasted until 1975 when it became a private organization, the RERF , the Radiation Effects Research Foundation. [10] Uncertain Knowledge of Atomic Bomb Casualties Studies of the health effects of the atomic bombings would continue, but knowledge about key issues remain uncertain. The total number of deaths in both cities is unknowable, with only guesswork possible for totals in the higher and the lower ranges. The lower estimates are based on reports prepared after the bombings; the higher estimates are from a 1977 re-estimate. For Hiroshima, the estimated deaths are in the range of 70,000 to 140,000, while for Nagasaki, the number is between 40,000 and 110,000. The fatalities include American and Allied prisoners-of war who were held in Hiroshima and Nagasaki at the time. [11] Just as uncertain is knowledge of the numbers in both cities who died or suffered from radiation sickness in the weeks, months, and years that followed the bombings.For Hiroshima, the estimated deaths are in the range of 70,000 to 140,000, while for Nagasaki, the number is between 40,000 and 110,000. The fatalities include American and Allied prisoners-of war who were held in Hiroshima and Nagasaki at the time. [11] Just as uncertain is knowledge of the numbers in both cities who died or suffered from radiation sickness in the weeks, months, and years that followed the bombings. In 1946, Stafford Warren estimated that radiation sickness were six to eight percent of the deaths, but the U.S Strategic Bombing Survey projected even more, 15 to 20 percent, although the numbers could be higher. In 1984, the journalist Peter Wyden published an estimate of 20,000 deaths from radiation sickness and 20,000 additional injuries. That exposed people experienced a greater than usual incidence of leukemia mortality in the years that followed is incontestable. [12] While official medical reports about radiation sickness would remain classified for years, ongoing events reduced the secrecy. Philip Morrison, a scientist at Los Alamos, who was a member of the U.S. group that traveled to Hiroshima and Nagasaki in September 1945, gave candid testimony about the devastating effects of gamma rays before the Special Committee on Atomic Energy, which was quoted in The New York Times [See Document 28]. In June 1946, the White House released the U.S. Strategic Bombing Survey report on the atomic bombings, and its disclosures about radiation sickness and its course provided the substance for articles in The Washington Post and The New York Times .group that traveled to Hiroshima and Nagasaki in September 1945, gave candid testimony about the devastating effects of gamma rays before the Special Committee on Atomic Energy, which was quoted in The New York Times [See Document 28]. In June 1946, the White House released the U.S. Strategic Bombing Survey report on the atomic bombings, and its disclosures about radiation sickness and its course provided the substance for articles in The Washington Post and The New York Times . Only weeks later, on 31 August, the writer John Hersey put faces on the victims of radiation disease, when the New Yorker published “ Hiroshima ” based on his recent research and interviews in Japan. With its striking treatment of the impact of radiation sickness on the lives of individuals, Hersey's report became an international sensation. In Japan, however, the article circulated only among a few readers; U.S. military censors held up its translation and publication for three years. [13] Behind the veils of secrecy, President Truman had already imagined human faces when confronted with the fact of massive civilian casualties in Hiroshima and Nagasaki.With its striking treatment of the impact of radiation sickness on the lives of individuals, Hersey's report became an international sensation. In Japan, however, the article circulated only among a few readers; U.S. military censors held up its translation and publication for three years. [13] Behind the veils of secrecy, President Truman had already imagined human faces when confronted with the fact of massive civilian casualties in Hiroshima and Nagasaki. After reading about “ all those kids” that had been killed in the attack, Truman decided that no more atomic weapons would be dropped over Japan without his express approval, Suspecting that atomic bombs were not even usable and deciding that they were too terrible to be left under military control, Truman secretly asserted his commander-in-chief authority so that he would have final decision-making power over any proposals for combat use. [14] President Truman’s atomic command-and-control decisions in the last days of World War II remained secret for years, as did the records of the MED. It was not until the 1960s, 70s, and 80s that sufficient archival material became available for historians and social scientists to write knowledgeably about the first use of atomic weapons and their radiation effects. It also took years for U.S. government officials to publicly acknowledge that nuclear weapons tests and explosions produced harmful radioactive fallout.It also took years for U.S. government officials to publicly acknowledge that nuclear weapons tests and explosions produced harmful radioactive fallout. The Atomic Energy Commission insisted that fallout posed no health risks, but its position was undermined by another incident involving Japan, the exposure of the crew members of the fishing boat Lucky Dragon to the effects of the 1954 multi-megaton Castle Bravo test . That incident played a key role in bringing the fallout problem to light, though not without more denials. It would take almost another decade, however, before the U.K., the U.S., and the Soviet Union did something about the problem by agreeing to halt atmospheric testing in 1963 (although China and France continued for years). [15] That was all in the future. In Japan, the survivors of the attacks would struggle for recognition and social support. In the United States the “Hiroshima maidens” would stir public interest but looking back at the bombings had little appeal. While the Truman administration would release some information about radiation sickness—such as in reports of the U.S. Strategic Bombing Survey—it, along with former officials, had little interest in a searching examination of the first use of nuclear weapons. The Hersey article had encouraged others, including Saturday Review editor Norman Cousins and journalist Leland Stowe , to raise questions about the morality of the bombings and the decisions to use the bomb, thus distressing Harvard University President James B. Conant, a former top MED adviser, who firmly supported combat use of the bomb. The Hersey article had encouraged others, including Saturday Review editor Norman Cousins and journalist Leland Stowe , to raise questions about the morality of the bombings and the decisions to use the bomb, thus distressing Harvard University President James B. Conant, a former top MED adviser, who firmly supported combat use of the bomb. Stimulated by Conant (and former MED adviser) Karl Compton and former Secretary of War Henry Stimson hoped to curb debate by publishing major articles in The Atlantic and Harper s that argued in favor of the necessity and legitimacy of the bombings. While eventual releases of primary sources would complicate the picture, the Compton and Stimson arguments held sway for years. [16] Note: Thanks to Professor Barton J. Bernstein, emeritus, Department of History, Stanford University, for helpful comments; Professor Alex Wellerstein, Stevens Institute of Technology, for sharing insights and information; and Alan Brady Carr, historian, Los Alamos National Laboratory, for his counsel. Special acknowledgements to the Department of Energy’s Nuclear Testing Archive, and to librarians at Special Collections, University of California Los Angeles Libraries, and the Medical Historical Library, Harvey Cushing/John Hay Whitney Medical Library, Yale University, for providing copies of documents.

The memo was published today for the first time as part of an update to last year’s Electronic Briefing Book on how Manhattan Project scientists estimated and calculated the harmful impacts of nuclear radiation while Groves continued to downplay and make misleading statements about its effects. That posting included declassified internal reports on the deadly impact of radiation in the aftermath of the August 1945 bombings.

The U.S.Groves “Stuck His Neck Out a Mile” in Denying Radiation Effects Los Alamos Official: Bombs “Could Not Have Done More Damage,” Extent of Destruction “Exactly That Predicted” Washington, D.C., August 7, 2023 – A newly declassified memorandum from the weeks after the atomic bombings of Hiroshima and Nagasaki confirmed early reports of fatal radiation disease even as Manhattan Project director General Leslie Groves characterized the accounts from Japan as “propaganda.” The September 1, 1945, report from staffers at Los Alamos Laboratory on the “Calculated Biological Effects” of the atomic bombings listed death by exposure to gamma ray radiation as one of several possible lethal consequences of the bombings. Senior Los Alamos scientist George Kistiakowsky wrote that Groves had “stuck his neck out a mile” when he denied reports of radiation deaths and apparently refrained from sending him the September 1 memo (Document 21), which contradicted Groves’ assertion. The memo was published today for the first time as part of an update to last year’s Electronic Briefing Book on how Manhattan Project scientists estimated and calculated the harmful impacts of nuclear radiation while Groves continued to downplay and make misleading statements about its effects. That posting included declassified internal reports on the deadly impact of radiation in the aftermath of the August 1945 bombings. The U.S. National Nuclear Security Administration recently released a copy of the memorandum in response to a Freedom of Information Act (FOIA) request by the National Security Archive. Also included in today’s update are transcripts of telephone conversations from September 7, 1945, in which Groves continued to deny that the bombings had caused radiation sickness (Document 22); congressional testimony by Los Alamos scientist Philip Morrison on the deadly radiation effects of the atomic bombings (Document 28); and a January 1946 report by William Penney, a British member of the Los Alamos Laboratory staff, who found that the blast damage to Hiroshima and Nagasaki, was “exactly that predicted” by target planners (Document 30).

The U.S. National Nuclear Security Administration recently released a copy of the memorandum in response to a Freedom of Information Act (FOIA) request by the National Security Archive.

Also included in today’s update are transcripts of telephone conversations from September 7, 1945, in which Groves continued to deny that the bombings had caused radiation sickness (Document 22); congressional testimony by Los Alamos scientist Philip Morrison on the deadly radiation effects of the atomic bombings (Document 28); and a January 1946 report by William Penney, a British member of the Los Alamos Laboratory staff, who found that the blast damage to Hiroshima and Nagasaki, was “exactly that predicted” by target planners (Document 30).

Washington, D.C., August 8, 2022 – After years of research and planning, U.S.That posting included declassified internal reports on the deadly impact of radiation in the aftermath of the August 1945 bombings.

Washington, D.C., August 8, 2022 – After years of research and planning, U.S. officials and scientists overseeing the Manhattan Project were startlingly unprepared for the emergence of evidence of the long-term effects of radiation generated by the atomic bomb – even after the Trinity test in July 1945 and the bombings of Hiroshima and Nagasaki 77 years ago this week, according to documents posted today by the National Security Archive.

Moreover, the head of the project, Gen. Leslie R. Groves, was so worried about public revulsion over the terrible effects of the new weapon – which a Navy report later in 1945 called “the most terrible agent of destruction known to man” – that he cut off early discussion within the MED of the problem. Later, he misleadingly told Congress there was “no radioactive residue” in the two devastated cities. In doing so, he contradicted evidence from his own specialists whom he had sent to Japan to investigate.Later, he misleadingly told Congress there was “no radioactive residue” in the two devastated cities. In doing so, he contradicted evidence from his own specialists whom he had sent to Japan to investigate. Groves even insisted that those who had been exposed to radiation from the atomic explosions would not face “undue suffering. In fact, they say it is a very pleasant way to die.”

This publication supplements an earlier National Security Archive posting on “The Atomic Bomb and the End of World War II.” It incorporates records on the radiation problem as perceived during 1945 that have been declassified for decades but are not easily available. Included are the initial secret and top secret Manhattan Project and U.S. Navy reports on the medical effects of the atomic bombings. Using information from U.S. investigations in Hiroshima and Nagasaki and from Japanese doctors and scientists, they were the first official U.S. reports to discuss in detail the terrible course of radiation sickness.

By William Burr

When the Roosevelt administration began the Manhattan Project in 1942, the goal was a deliverable atomic weapon that could be used in World War II to defeat Germany and possibly Japan. The project raised tremendously complex political, scientific, engineering and logistical challenges but by spring of 1945 the objective was in sight. As preparations for the first atomic test were underway, medical experts raised the special dangers of radioactivity—that the test would create health hazards. Thus, when the U.S. tested the first bomb on 16 July 1945, Manhattan Project Chief Medical Officer Dr.Thus, when the U.S. tested the first bomb on 16 July 1945, Manhattan Project Chief Medical Officer Dr. Stafford Warren stated in a top secret report that, “the dust outfall from the various portions of the [mushroom] cloud was potentially a very serious hazard over a band almost 30 miles wide extending almost 90 miles northeast of the site.” Warren further reported that a few days later there was still “a tremendous amount of radioactive dust floating in the air.”

On 6 August 1945, the U.S. dropped an atomic bomb on Hiroshima. Three days later, it exploded an atomic bomb over Nagasaki. Soon reports from Japan disclosed deaths and disease from unknown causes that turned out to be radiation sickness. Distressed by news that cast a bad light on the new weapon, Manhattan Engineer District (MED) chief General Leslie R. Groves told an adviser that the reports were “propaganda” that had to be dispelled. Whether he had read Stafford Warren's report or not, Groves could no longer claim that there were no deaths from radiation sickness, but he continued to mislead. Thus, he told U.S. Senators that there was “no radioactive residue” at the bombed cities and that radiation sickness was a “very pleasant way to die.”

In contrast to Groves, Los Alamos Laboratory director J. Robert Oppenheimer was silent on the problem of radiation injuries, although he was aware of their likelihood.Senators that there was “no radioactive residue” at the bombed cities and that radiation sickness was a “very pleasant way to die.”

In contrast to Groves, Los Alamos Laboratory director J. Robert Oppenheimer was silent on the problem of radiation injuries, although he was aware of their likelihood. Discussing safety measures to protect bomber crews from the effects of atomic explosions, Oppenheimer wrote to General Thomas Farrell in May 1945 that the radiation effects would be “injurious within a mile” and “lethal within a radius of about six-tenths of a mile” [See document 2]. But making sensitive information public was another matter. After the bombing of Hiroshima, when inaccurate information concerning the long-run impact was published in the U.S., the Manhattan Project issued a denial quoting Oppenheimer as saying there “would be no appreciable [radioactive] activity on the ground,” [See documents 12 and 13]. Oppenheimer made that assessment far too hastily because the situation on the ground was far from clear. When Groves denied Japanese reports of radiation sickness as “propaganda," Oppenheimer kept his silence. [1]

This published collection supplements the previous National Security Archive posting “The Atomic Bomb and the End of World War II” by presenting key documents from 1944-1946 that provide a close look at the problem of radiation effects of the atomic detonations—from the first weapons test (“Trinity”) to military use in Japan. The documents in this collection were declassified years ago, some as far back as the 1970s, but not all are readily available online. Oppenheimer made that assessment far too hastily because the situation on the ground was far from clear. When Groves denied Japanese reports of radiation sickness as “propaganda," Oppenheimer kept his silence. [1]

This published collection supplements the previous National Security Archive posting “The Atomic Bomb and the End of World War II” by presenting key documents from 1944-1946 that provide a close look at the problem of radiation effects of the atomic detonations—from the first weapons test (“Trinity”) to military use in Japan. The documents in this collection were declassified years ago, some as far back as the 1970s, but not all are readily available online. A review of these records offers fresh insights on a number of important issues that are relevant to this day.

One theme in the collection is how MED leaders, who were planning for the first atomic test at Alamogordo, New Mexico, found it necessary to authorize health and safety protocols to ensure that the event did not contaminate project workers or anyone living nearby. Top officials such as General Groves initially pushed back against the warnings of radioactive fallout, but the uncertainty about the physical effects of the test and pressure from Stafford Warren prompted him to approve recommended safety measures.

Another topic in the collection concerns U.S. government reactions to radiation sickness in post-attack Hiroshima and Nagasaki. U.S. reactions to reports from Japan ranged from outright denial of radiation disease to acknowledgement that the reports were accurate. The scientists who worked to produce the first atomic bomb were preoccupied with building a weapon of extraordinary power with massive explosive yield . That its effects could produce long-term illness was surprising to many, who thought that the blast effects would be the primary cause of deaths. Within a month after the bombings, U.S.That its effects could produce long-term illness was surprising to many, who thought that the blast effects would be the primary cause of deaths. Within a month after the bombings, U.S. teams were in Hiroshima and Nagasaki collecting evidence of radiation sickness. Nevertheless, General Groves remained in denial as indicated by his later Senate testimony.

Also included in today’s posting is the report of a witness to the bombing of Hiroshima, Johannes Siemes, a German Jesuit priest and university professor. Siemes met MED scientists in Tokyo and his first-hand account, which discussed the impact of radiation sickness and raised questions about the ethics of using atomic weapons, was circulated among U.S. officials in Japan. The posting also publishes the initial MED and U.S. Navy reports on the medical effects of the atomic bombings, using information from Japanese doctors and scientists. Both reports included the Siemes narrative, which journalist John Hersey would later use as a source for his famous New Yorker article, “ Hiroshima .”

Radiation Safety in the Manhattan Project

For the Manhattan Project leadership, radiation safety was never a priority compared to the foremost goal of producing a deliverable weapon, but plans to produce large quantities of fissile material made health and safety protocols essential. Plutonium, which had never existed before in nature, was especially dangerous, although the press of wartime work led some scientists to take fatal risks. Early in the history of the MED, project leaders organized a Health Division at the Chicago Metallurgical Laboratory (Metlab), the unit that had responsibility for fissile materials production at Site X (Clinton, Tennessee) and Site W (Hanford, Washington).Plutonium, which had never existed before in nature, was especially dangerous, although the press of wartime work led some scientists to take fatal risks. Early in the history of the MED, project leaders organized a Health Division at the Chicago Metallurgical Laboratory (Metlab), the unit that had responsibility for fissile materials production at Site X (Clinton, Tennessee) and Site W (Hanford, Washington). The division established a standard of 0.1 roentgen (r) per day as an upper limit for full-body exposure, the standard that had been widely accepted in the radiation industry. It was a more or less arbitrary number and a relatively high level of exposure compared to standards adopted in 1946 and later. In any event, most workers at those sites did not know the secret purpose of their work or what the hazards were, but they were monitored nevertheless. By 1944, if not earlier, MED health officials developed safety standards for Site Y (Los Alamos) where scientists were working with plutonium to develop implosion bomb technology. [2]

Months before the Trinity test, some MED experts understood the “hazards” of radioactive fallout, which encouraged them to recommend special precautions to minimize risk to the public and to avoid legal problems. While General Groves had worried about legal issues, his main concern was security and preventing leaks, and he was exasperated when MED officials argued for special precautions for the first test.By 1944, if not earlier, MED health officials developed safety standards for Site Y (Los Alamos) where scientists were working with plutonium to develop implosion bomb technology. [2]

Months before the Trinity test, some MED experts understood the “hazards” of radioactive fallout, which encouraged them to recommend special precautions to minimize risk to the public and to avoid legal problems. While General Groves had worried about legal issues, his main concern was security and preventing leaks, and he was exasperated when MED officials argued for special precautions for the first test. Thus when a MED doctor brought the radiation safety plan to Groves, the latter complained, “What's the matter with you, are you a Hearst propagandist?” It took more convincing before Groves signed off on the plan. [3]

The precautions taken in July 1945 were necessary but insufficient as long as an atmospheric test was being staged. Not only did the Trinity test produce radioactive fallout that endangered nearby people, recent research has revealed that it spread across much of the United States, as well as to Canada and New Mexico. The state of knowledge at the time was such that the possibility of fallout spreading beyond nearby areas was not understood, nor were the possible health effects of low doses of radiation. [4]

U.S. Teams Sent to Japan to Investigate Weapons Effects

After a uranium bomb, “Little Boy,” was dropped on Hiroshima on 6 August 1945, President Harry S. Truman announced to the world that the U.S. had used an atomic weapon. A few days later, on 9 August, a plutonium implosion weapon was dropped on Nagasaki.had used an atomic weapon. A few days later, on 9 August, a plutonium implosion weapon was dropped on Nagasaki. Very quickly, Groves and his advisers authorized plans to send MED medical experts to Japan to investigate weapons effects in both cities and to determine whether occupation troops could safely enter those cities. In early September, a few weeks after the surrender, an MED group led by Brigadier General Thomas Farrell arrived in Japan, with a medical team led by Colonel Stafford Warren. Motivated to some degree by interservice rivalry, the Navy and the Army also sent teams, led respectively by Naval intelligence officer Captain C.G. Grimes and Colonel Ashley W. Oughterson . For the Navy team, the last to arrive, Captain Shields Warren , (unrelated to Stafford Warren) directed medical studies. [5]

In the weeks after the atomic bombings, reports emanated from Japan about mysterious lingering deaths of survivors who had not been injured by blast or fire effects. While not initially described as radiation sickness, the Japanese were soon discussing “a-bomb disease,” although occupation authorities would clamp down on media coverage. MED health experts were well aware of the biological consequences of radiation exposure, but there were many unknowns about the impact of ionizing radiation on living tissues. And MED physicists were far from well versed on the problem.MED health experts were well aware of the biological consequences of radiation exposure, but there were many unknowns about the impact of ionizing radiation on living tissues. And MED physicists were far from well versed on the problem. Physicist Norman Ramsey (Scientific and Technical Deputy to Captain William “Deak” Parsons) initially dismissed the Japanese reports as “propaganda.” Like others at Los Alamos, his priority had been building a deliverable weapon with huge explosive effects which, he assumed, would kill instantly anyone who otherwise might have died from radiation exposure. As Ramsey later put it, they would have been “killed with a brick first.” Ramsey and others learned that some near ground zero were in strong structures that made them “accidental survivors of the blast effects” and vulnerable to radiation. [6]

The reports from Japan gave a damage control aspect to the MED team sent to Japan. Groves’ deputy, General Thomas Farrell expected to prove that the reports were groundless and in a press briefing on 8 September, he reportedly dismissed Australian journalist Wilfred Burchett’s accounts of radiation sickness as “propaganda.” [7] Nevertheless, Farrell’s reports and the more detailed studies by doctors on his staff, confronted Groves with uncomfortable facts. According to Farrell, “Summaries of Japanese reports previously sent are essentially correct, as to clinical effects from single gamma radiation dose.” Moreover, Stafford Warren’s interim study on the medical effects of the explosions reported that “delayed effects” involving severe symptoms “were due to radiation.”

Reports from the Navy team provided information on radiation effects, including “residual radioactivity” produced by fission products deposited on the ground.Groves’ deputy, General Thomas Farrell expected to prove that the reports were groundless and in a press briefing on 8 September, he reportedly dismissed Australian journalist Wilfred Burchett’s accounts of radiation sickness as “propaganda.” [7] Nevertheless, Farrell’s reports and the more detailed studies by doctors on his staff, confronted Groves with uncomfortable facts. According to Farrell, “Summaries of Japanese reports previously sent are essentially correct, as to clinical effects from single gamma radiation dose.” Moreover, Stafford Warren’s interim study on the medical effects of the explosions reported that “delayed effects” involving severe symptoms “were due to radiation.”

Reports from the Navy team provided information on radiation effects, including “residual radioactivity” produced by fission products deposited on the ground. With the MED denying some information to the Navy team, the latter found ways to compensate—for example, by using reasonably accurate Japanese estimates of the height of burst of the detonations at Hiroshima and Nagasaki and Japanese measurements of potentially dangerous residual radioactivity in Nagasaki’s Nishiyama’s district. All of this information was marked as top secret in the Navy reports, although the estimated heights of burst, along with other weapons effects information, were officially declassified in 1948 by the Atomic Energy Commission. [8]

The “residual radioactivity” problem was associated with what became a controversy In Japan over the impact of fallout. While not as severe as the fallout from the Trinity test, the blasts produced what became known as “black rain”—radiation-laced raindrops that fell on residents of Hiroshima and Nagasaki. That was a theme in Masuji Ibuse’s extra or dinary novel, Black Rain (1969).While not as severe as the fallout from the Trinity test, the blasts produced what became known as “black rain”—radiation-laced raindrops that fell on residents of Hiroshima and Nagasaki. That was a theme in Masuji Ibuse’s extra or dinary novel, Black Rain (1969). During the decades that followed the atomic bombings, people who had been exposed to black rain, but who were outside the geographic zones that had been the basis for determining survivor benefits, made compensation claims nonetheless. When their claims were denied, they filed lawsuits, which dragged on eventually producing a major court victory in July 2021 (a decision that the Japanese government did not appeal ).

Elements of the investigative teams sent by the Army, Navy, and MED eventually merged into what became known as the “Joint Commission for the Investigation of the Effects of the Atomic Bomb in Japan,” which also included Japanese scientists and other staff. In 1946 the Joint Commission produced a secret six-volume report, which the Atomic Energy Commission published in 1951, with a first volume that included detailed eyewitness accounts by residents of Hiroshima and Nagasaki. The work of the Joint Commission set the stage for the long-term research conducted by the Atomic Bomb Casualty Commission (ABCC), which developed from an authorization signed by President Truman in November 1946. [9] Based in Japan, the ABCC conducted additional studies on the medical and biological effects of the bombings.In 1946 the Joint Commission produced a secret six-volume report, which the Atomic Energy Commission published in 1951, with a first volume that included detailed eyewitness accounts by residents of Hiroshima and Nagasaki. The work of the Joint Commission set the stage for the long-term research conducted by the Atomic Bomb Casualty Commission (ABCC), which developed from an authorization signed by President Truman in November 1946. [9] Based in Japan, the ABCC conducted additional studies on the medical and biological effects of the bombings. The ABCC lasted until 1975 when it became a private organization, the RERF , the Radiation Effects Research Foundation. [10]

Uncertain Knowledge of Atomic Bomb Casualties

Studies of the health effects of the atomic bombings would continue, but knowledge about key issues remain uncertain. The total number of deaths in both cities is unknowable, with only guesswork possible for totals in the higher and the lower ranges. The lower estimates are based on reports prepared after the bombings; the higher estimates are from a 1977 re-estimate. For Hiroshima, the estimated deaths are in the range of 70,000 to 140,000, while for Nagasaki, the number is between 40,000 and 110,000. The fatalities include American and Allied prisoners-of war who were held in Hiroshima and Nagasaki at the time. [11]

Just as uncertain is knowledge of the numbers in both cities who died or suffered from radiation sickness in the weeks, months, and years that followed the bombings.For Hiroshima, the estimated deaths are in the range of 70,000 to 140,000, while for Nagasaki, the number is between 40,000 and 110,000. The fatalities include American and Allied prisoners-of war who were held in Hiroshima and Nagasaki at the time. [11]

Just as uncertain is knowledge of the numbers in both cities who died or suffered from radiation sickness in the weeks, months, and years that followed the bombings. In 1946, Stafford Warren estimated that radiation sickness were six to eight percent of the deaths, but the U.S Strategic Bombing Survey projected even more, 15 to 20 percent, although the numbers could be higher. In 1984, the journalist Peter Wyden published an estimate of 20,000 deaths from radiation sickness and 20,000 additional injuries. That exposed people experienced a greater than usual incidence of leukemia mortality in the years that followed is incontestable. [12]

While official medical reports about radiation sickness would remain classified for years, ongoing events reduced the secrecy. Philip Morrison, a scientist at Los Alamos, who was a member of the U.S. group that traveled to Hiroshima and Nagasaki in September 1945, gave candid testimony about the devastating effects of gamma rays before the Special Committee on Atomic Energy, which was quoted in The New York Times [See Document 28]. In June 1946, the White House released the U.S. Strategic Bombing Survey report on the atomic bombings, and its disclosures about radiation sickness and its course provided the substance for articles in The Washington Post and The New York Times .group that traveled to Hiroshima and Nagasaki in September 1945, gave candid testimony about the devastating effects of gamma rays before the Special Committee on Atomic Energy, which was quoted in The New York Times [See Document 28]. In June 1946, the White House released the U.S. Strategic Bombing Survey report on the atomic bombings, and its disclosures about radiation sickness and its course provided the substance for articles in The Washington Post and The New York Times . Only weeks later, on 31 August, the writer John Hersey put faces on the victims of radiation disease, when the New Yorker published “ Hiroshima ” based on his recent research and interviews in Japan. With its striking treatment of the impact of radiation sickness on the lives of individuals, Hersey's report became an international sensation. In Japan, however, the article circulated only among a few readers; U.S. military censors held up its translation and publication for three years. [13]

Behind the veils of secrecy, President Truman had already imagined human faces when confronted with the fact of massive civilian casualties in Hiroshima and Nagasaki.With its striking treatment of the impact of radiation sickness on the lives of individuals, Hersey's report became an international sensation. In Japan, however, the article circulated only among a few readers; U.S. military censors held up its translation and publication for three years. [13]

Behind the veils of secrecy, President Truman had already imagined human faces when confronted with the fact of massive civilian casualties in Hiroshima and Nagasaki. After reading about “ all those kids” that had been killed in the attack, Truman decided that no more atomic weapons would be dropped over Japan without his express approval, Suspecting that atomic bombs were not even usable and deciding that they were too terrible to be left under military control, Truman secretly asserted his commander-in-chief authority so that he would have final decision-making power over any proposals for combat use. [14]

President Truman’s atomic command-and-control decisions in the last days of World War II remained secret for years, as did the records of the MED. It was not until the 1960s, 70s, and 80s that sufficient archival material became available for historians and social scientists to write knowledgeably about the first use of atomic weapons and their radiation effects. It also took years for U.S. government officials to publicly acknowledge that nuclear weapons tests and explosions produced harmful radioactive fallout.It also took years for U.S. government officials to publicly acknowledge that nuclear weapons tests and explosions produced harmful radioactive fallout. The Atomic Energy Commission insisted that fallout posed no health risks, but its position was undermined by another incident involving Japan, the exposure of the crew members of the fishing boat Lucky Dragon to the effects of the 1954 multi-megaton Castle Bravo test . That incident played a key role in bringing the fallout problem to light, though not without more denials. It would take almost another decade, however, before the U.K., the U.S., and the Soviet Union did something about the problem by agreeing to halt atmospheric testing in 1963 (although China and France continued for years). [15]

That was all in the future. In Japan, the survivors of the attacks would struggle for recognition and social support. In the United States the “Hiroshima maidens” would stir public interest but looking back at the bombings had little appeal. While the Truman administration would release some information about radiation sickness—such as in reports of the U.S. Strategic Bombing Survey—it, along with former officials, had little interest in a searching examination of the first use of nuclear weapons. The Hersey article had encouraged others, including Saturday Review editor Norman Cousins and journalist Leland Stowe , to raise questions about the morality of the bombings and the decisions to use the bomb, thus distressing Harvard University President James B. Conant, a former top MED adviser, who firmly supported combat use of the bomb. The Hersey article had encouraged others, including Saturday Review editor Norman Cousins and journalist Leland Stowe , to raise questions about the morality of the bombings and the decisions to use the bomb, thus distressing Harvard University President James B. Conant, a former top MED adviser, who firmly supported combat use of the bomb. Stimulated by Conant (and former MED adviser) Karl Compton and former Secretary of War Henry Stimson hoped to curb debate by publishing major articles in The Atlantic and Harper s that argued in favor of the necessity and legitimacy of the bombings. While eventual releases of primary sources would complicate the picture, the Compton and Stimson arguments held sway for years. [16]

Note: Thanks to Professor Barton J. Bernstein, emeritus, Department of History, Stanford University, for helpful comments; Professor Alex Wellerstein, Stevens Institute of Technology, for sharing insights and information; and Alan Brady Carr, historian, Los Alamos National Laboratory, for his counsel. Special acknowledgements to the Department of Energy’s Nuclear Testing Archive, and to librarians at Special Collections, University of California Los Angeles Libraries, and the Medical Historical Library, Harvey Cushing/John Hay Whitney Medical Library, Yale University, for providing copies of documents.

In this memorandum, Robert Oppenheimer discussed the consequences of an air burst of an atomic weapon and the precautions that the bomber crew needed to take. The weapon was composed of toxic material and the explosion would emit radiation that would be “injurious within a mile” and “lethal within a radius of about six-tenths of a mile.” Moreover, “most of the [radioactive] activity will rise to a considerable height above the target and will remain as a fairly compact cloud for a period of hours after the detonation.” Because of that danger, he recommended safety measures for aircrews to take after the detonation. Oppenheimer did not mention any possibility that the bomb could produce radiation sickness, but he was aware of the problem. [17]

RG 77, MED Records, ,Top Secret Documents of Interest to General Groves, box 3, Folder 5B, Memos, Directives, etc

Groves’ report to General Marshall on Trinity to General Marshall emphasized blast effects but made a strikingly misleading statement about radiation effects, especially in light of what Stafford Warren had already written to him (Document 10). As Sean Malloy has noted, when Groves wrote that “No damaging effects are anticipated on the ground from radioactive materials,” he “stripped away virtually all of Warren's caveats and precautions (as well as his estimates of safe and unsafe dosages for occupying troops)." [28]

With Japan’s surrender expected, the U.S. high command accelerated planning for the occupation. Marshall informed General Douglas MacArthur that General Groves had directed MED officials on Tinian (where they had supervised the atomic bombing operations), to send investigative groups to Hiroshima and Nagasaki to assess the impact of the bombings and to determine whether conditions there were safe enough to admit U.S. forces. In addition, Groves wanted Farrell to send a team to Tokyo to check the status of Japanese nuclear research. When Japan surrendered, moving these plans forward was a complex task because the teams required optimum numbers of scientific and technical experts. By 5 September the first group had arrived in Japan. [30]

Interested in having the press visit the Trinity test site but concerned about the Japanese reports of radiation sickness, Groves telephoned Louis Hempelmann and asked him about the present level of radioactivity. Groves then requested that Hempelmann write a short memorandum on radioactivity “stating how long it is in the general area covered and showing how it diminishes from time to time.” With respect to the crater, Hempelmann said there was a “fair amount” of radioactivity around it and that it was “fairly intense” for 100 feet (probably from ground zero). When Groves asked if it was safe for reporters to visit, Hempelmann replied that “they wouldn’t be so safe.” Thus, when Groves and Oppenheimer brought reporters to the site on September 11, 1945, everyone in the group wore protective white booties as a safety measure.

To develop new legislation governing the use of atomic energy in the United States, the U.S. Senate created a Special Committee that held a series of public hearings in late 1945 and early 1946. In his testimony on 28 November 1945, General Leslie Groves discussed the scope of the Manhattan Project, the problem of international control, and the destructive effects of atomic explosions. He did not provide a factual account of radiation effects, however, although the information provided by Stafford Warren would have made reasonably informative answers entirely possible. Perhaps wanting to preserve secrecy or possibly unwilling to admit uncertainty, Groves made bizarre and misleading statements to the Senators.

When Senator Warren Austin (R-VT) asked Groves if there was any radioactive “residue” at Hiroshima or Nagasaki, Groves ignored Warren’s report with a definitive answer: “there is none. That is a very positive ‘none.’” While the Senators did not believe there was anything morally wrong about the radioactive effects, Sen. Richard Russell (D-GA) observed that there was “tremendous fear” in the United States of atomic energy and its use, which made him want to know more. On radioactivity and the bombings generally, Groves said that he saw no choice between inflicting radioactivity on a “few Japanese” and saving “10 times as many American lives.” He claimed that no one suffered radiation injury “excepting at the time that the bomb actually went off, and that is an instantaneous damage.”

Groves continued to go out on a limb by declaring that it “really would take an accident for … the average person, within the range of the bomb to be killed by radioactive effects.” Going further out on a limb, Groves stated that the victims of radiation whose exposure was not enough to kill them instantly would die “without undue suffering. In fact, they say it is a very pleasant way to die.” Groves’ testimony has received scathing criticism as an “outrageous untruth” (Peter Wyden) and “patently untrue” (Eileen Welsome). [43]

Groves briefly quoted several passages from Johannes Siemes’ account, noting that the Jesuits have been among the “most accurate reporters of world events.” The final excerpt covered the philosophical debates between Siemes and his colleagues as to whether the atomic bomb was “in the same category as poison gas,” not to be used against civilians, or whether “total war in its present form is justifiable even when it serves a just purpose. Does it not have material and spiritual evil as its consequences which far exceed whatever good might result?”

While the Washington Post and the New York Times published accounts of the hearings, neither discussed Groves’ unusual testimony on radiation effects. By contrast, the Washington Evening Star provided a more detailed account of Groves’ testimony, although the reporter trustingly repeated and minimized the radiation claims: “Army inspections have shown convincingly, [Groves] said, that no one will be killed by radiation left after the bomb exploded, although such radiation may have been fatal to a few at the moment of the explosion.” [44]

The U.S. Navy sent an intelligence group -- a “technical mission”-- to do a wide-ranging investigation of a variety of topics, mainly involving naval technology but also the impact of the atomic bombings. Coordinated by Captain Clifton G. Grimes, Fleet Intelligence Officer in Charge of Intelligence for the Joint Intelligence Center, Pacific Oceans Area (JIC-POA), the technical mission to Japan had a staff of nearly 300 (including Japanese-Americans) who prepared dozens and dozens of reports based on captured documents and field work involving interviews/interrogations. The medical team led by Naval Reserve Captain Shields Warren, a Harvard pathologist, produced two reports on the atomic bombings, including this report, which contains the striking finding: “The atomic bomb is the most terrible agent of destruction known to man.” [45]

Illustrated with culturally insensitive graphs, the Navy report provided broad coverage of radiation exposure, including “secondary” or “residual radiation” and their effects. The report provided detailed information on the fallout problem, with a finding of “physiologically significant” levels of “residual radiation” in outlying areas after the bombings, including potentially dangerous levels in Nagasaki’s Nishiyama district. One of the data points was a reference [see page 45] to what became known in Japan as “black rain” – radioactive “droplets of yellow-brown liquid” that fell after the explosion. [46]

The official guidance given to the MED, Army, and Navy teams was to investigate but not to participate in treatment because that could have been seen as an admission of “moral responsibility.” In practice, however, the situation was complex: doctors for all three groups gave advice to their Japanese colleagues, sometimes provided medical supplies, and gave their evaluation of specific cases, which had implications for treatment regimens. This pattern continued during the work of the Atomic Bomb Casualty Commission. [47]

Like Stafford Warren, Shields Warren found the Siemes narrative compelling and presented it in its entirety. The report included first-hand accounts by various Japanese who had been in Hiroshima and Nagasaki at the time of the bombings. In addition, the report had the benefit of collaboration with Japanese university-based researchers, who provided maps and other information, such as estimates of blast pressure. The report also drew on interviews with scientists for a brief estimate of Japanese wartime nuclear physics research. One of them, Professor Masao Tsuzuki with Tokyo Imperial University (now University of Tokyo), had used rabbits in radiation effects research in the 1920s. Tsuzuki worked closely with members of the U.S. survey teams, but as has been noted he could be caustic. When Philip Morrison, with Los Alamos’ Weapons Physics Division, met Tsuzuki in Tokyo, the latter slapped him on the knee, saying, to the effect: “the Americans—they are wonderful. It has remained for them to conduct the human experiment.” [48]

“The Atom Strikes.” (Source: Internet Archive)

This 1945 Army Signal Corps film reported on the atomic bombings and their impact on Hiroshima and Nagasaki. Produced during the 1945 visit of the MED survey team, the film emphasized the blast effects of the weapons, with virtually no discussion of radiation sickness or harmful radiation. According to the narration, the Hiroshima bomb was “intentionally exploded well above its target in order to dissipate its radioactive material,” a claim that is not supported by primary sources, which emphasized air burst as a way to maximize blast effects. The film included an interview with Johannes Siemes, where he described his personal experience and then received a few questions. One question was about the “stories of the ruins emitting deadly rays.” That, according to Siemes, was “just rumor,” although his narrative [See document 22] indicated more knowledge of the problem.

U.S. Army Signal Corps, “ Japanese Film of Atomic bomb Damage on Hiroshima and Nagasaki, “Effects on the Human Body ” (Source: National Archives on-line catalog )

“ Hiroshima Blast Effects ,” U.S. Strategic Bombing Survey film, color outtakes from a longer USSBS documentary , over two hours in length, on the effects of the bombings of Hiroshima and Nagasaki. (Source: National Archives on-line catalog )

U.S. Strategic Bombing Survey color outtakes on “ Medical Aspect .” This is also material for the longer documentary . The material begins with nurses in front of the Hiroshima Red Cross Hospital and then shows burns and scar damage on patients. (Source: National Archives on-line catalog ).

U.S. Navy film on “ Nagasaki Ruins ,” with military personnel taking measurements. (Source: National Archives on-line catalog )

[1] . Alex Wellerstein, Restricted Data: The History of Nuclear Secrecy in the United States (Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 2021), 53, 129. On Oppenheimer and radiation, see also Barton J. Bernstein, “Christopher Nolan’s Forthcoming ‘Oppenheimer’ Movie: A Historian's Questions, Worries, and Challenges,” Washington Decoded , 11 July 2023.

[2] . For the Manhattan Project’s health and safety program, see an official history by Barton C. Hacker, The Dragon’s Tail: Radiation Safety in the Manhattan Project, 1942-1946 (Berkeley: University of California Press, 1987). See also an official history by George T. Mazuzan and J. Samuel Walker, Controlling the Atom: The Beginnings of Nuclear Regulation (Washington, D.C: Nuclear Regulatory Commission, 1997), 38-39 and 54.

[3] . Hacker, The Dragon’s Tail , 102-108. For perspective on Groves, the radiation secrecy problem, and the effects of nuclear weapons, see Sean Malloy, “‘A Very Pleasant Way to Die’: Radiation Effects and the Decision to Use the Atomic Bomb against Japan,” Diplomatic History 36 (2012): 515-545. See also Janet Farrell Brodie, “Radiation Secrecy and Censorship after Hiroshima and Journal of Social History 48 (2015): 842–864

[4] . Sebastien Philippe et al., " Fallout from U.S. Atmospheric Nuclear Tests in New Mexico and Nevada (1945-1962) ," n.d.[July 2023]; Leslie M. M. Blume, "Trinity Nuclear Test's Fallout Reached 46 States,, Canada, and Mexico, Study Finds," The New York Times , 20 July 2023.

[5] . James L.Blume, "Trinity Nuclear Test's Fallout Reached 46 States,, Canada, and Mexico, Study Finds," The New York Times , 20 July 2023.

[5] . James L. Nolan, Atomic Doctors: Conscience and Complicity at the Dawn of the Nuclear Age (Cambridge: Harvard University Press, 2020), 80.

[6] . Malloy, “‘A Very Pleasant Way to Die,’” 515-516, 525-526. Medical information about the atomic bomb casualties was more easily shared among Japanese medical professionals, although U.S. censors sometimes interfered with publication. See Sey Nishimura, “Medical Censorship in Occupied Japan, 1945-1948,” Pacific Historical Review 58 (1989): 11-13.

[7] . Nolan, Atomic Doctors , 86, 90; Hacker, The Dragon’s Tail, 109-110. For Burchett’s initial reporting, see Richard Tanter, “Voice and Silence in the First Nuclear War: Wilfred Burchett and Hiroshima,” Asia-Pacific Journal Japan Focus, 3 August 2005.

[8] . Nolan, Atomic Doctors , 132. An AEC committee made the decision to release the height of burst information but there was no mechanism in place to inform the public. In February 1949, the Mayor of Hiroshima announced that investigators had estimated the height over the city and the U.S. press treated it as new information. See “Atom Bomb Burst 1900 Ft. Up, Japs [Sic] Say," Washington Post , 18 February 1949. (Information from Alex Wellerstein).

[9] .Up, Japs [Sic] Say," Washington Post , 18 February 1949. (Information from Alex Wellerstein).

[9] . On 26 November 1946 Truman approved Secretary of Navy James Forrestal’s 18 November 1946 memorandum recommending that the National Research Council/National Academy of Sciences begin long-range studies of the biological/medical effects of the bomb. Those studies led to the creation of the ABCC. The Forrestal memorandum may be one of the few federal records directed specifically to Truman indicating that he received information about the possible extent of radiation sickness among survivors of the explosions: the studies would focus on the “14,000 Japanese [who] were exposed to the radiation of atomic fission.”

[10] . For the ABCC and the efforts to track the health of the survivors, see M. Susan Lindee, Suffering Made Real: American Science and the Survivors at Hiroshima (Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1994).

[11] . Alex Wellerstein, “Counting the Dead at Hiroshima and Nagasaki,” The Bulletin of the Atomic Scientists , 4 August 2020. For prisoners of war, see Peter Wyden, Day One: Before Hiroshima and After (New York: Simon and Schuster, 1984), 269, 279-281; Hibiki Yamaguchi, "U.S. Prisoners of War in Hiroshima: A 40-Year Investigative Journey of a Japanese Atomic Bomb Survivor," Journal for Peace and Nuclear Disarmament 2 (2019): 82-96; and Yuichiro Yoneda, "Cenotaph Tribute to POWs Killed in A-Bombing of Nagasaki," The Asahi Shimbun , 5 May 2021.

[12] . Wyden, Day One , 325-326.Prisoners of War in Hiroshima: A 40-Year Investigative Journey of a Japanese Atomic Bomb Survivor," Journal for Peace and Nuclear Disarmament 2 (2019): 82-96; and Yuichiro Yoneda, "Cenotaph Tribute to POWs Killed in A-Bombing of Nagasaki," The Asahi Shimbun , 5 May 2021.

[12] . Wyden, Day One , 325-326. For an overview of long-term health problems, see Dan Listwa, “Hiroshima and Nagasaki: The Long Term Health Effects,” Columbia University K=1 Project, 9 August 2012, and Stuart C. Finch, “Leukemia: Lessons from the Japanese Experience,” Stem Cells 15 (1997) (Supplement 2): 135-139.

[13] . Lesley M. M. Blume, Fallout; The Hiroshima Cover-up and the Reporter Who Revealed It to the World (New York: Simon & Schuster, 2020).

[14] . For Truman’s decision to halt the atomic bombings, see Alex Wellerstein, “The Kyoto Misconception: What Truman Knew and Didn’t Know About Hiroshima,” in Michael D. Gordin and G. John Ikenberry, eds., The Age of Hiroshima (Princeton: Princeton University Press, 2020), 49-50. Truman’s “all those kids” statement became widely available with the publication of John Morton Blum, The Price of Vision: The Diary of Henry A. Wallace, 1942-1946 (Boston: Houghton Mifflin, 1973), 474. At page 97 of Robert Donovan’s , Conflict and Crisis: The Presidency of Harry Truman, 1945-1948 (New York: W.W. Norton, 1977), Truman was quoted as saying, in October 1945, that he was “not sure that [the bomb] can ever be used.”

[15] . For the fallout problem, see Toshihiro Higuchi, Political Fallout: Nuclear Weapons Testing and the Making of a Global Environmental Crisis (Stanford, Stanford University Press, 2020).Norton, 1977), Truman was quoted as saying, in October 1945, that he was “not sure that [the bomb] can ever be used.”

[15] . For the fallout problem, see Toshihiro Higuchi, Political Fallout: Nuclear Weapons Testing and the Making of a Global Environmental Crisis (Stanford, Stanford University Press, 2020). See also Walter Pincus, Blown to Hell: America’s Deadly Betrayal of the Marshall Islanders (New York: Diversion, 2021).

[16] . James Hershberg, James B. Conant: Harvard to Hiroshima and the Making of the Nuclear Age (New York: Knopf, 1993), 279-303; Barton J. Bernstein, “Seizing the Contested Terrain of Early Nuclear History: Stimson, Conant, and Their Allies Explain the Decision to Use the Atomic Bomb,” Diplomatic History 17 (1993): 35-72.

[17] . In 1943, Oppenheimer and Enrico Fermi had discussed the possibility of conducting radiological warfare against Germany. See Barton J. Bernstein, “Oppenheimer and the Radioactive Poison Plan,” Massachusetts Institute of Technology Alumni and Alumnae Association, Technology Review May-June 1985, 14-17, and Martin Sherwin and Kai Bird, American Prometheus: The Triumph and Tragedy of J. Robert Oppenheimer (New York: Vintage Books, 2006), 221-222.

[18] . For Hirschfelder’s account of how he and Magee concluded that the detonation would produce fallout, see his “The Scientific and Technological Miracle at Los Alamos,” in Lawrence Badash et all., eds., Reminisces of Los Alamos, 1943-1945 (Dordrecht, the Netherlands: D. Riedel, 1980), 73-75.

[19] . Nolan, Atomic Doctors , 49.

[20] . Nolan, Atomic Doctors , 40, 46

[21] .Nolan, Atomic Doctors , 49.

[21] . For the creation of the 0.1 r standard, see Hacker, The Dragon’s Tail, 23-28.

[22] . Nolan, Atomic Doctors , 41-43.

[23] . See Nolan, Atomic Doctors , 43-48, for a review of the issues involving his grandfather’s memorandum and the legal claims problem.

[24] . Nolan, Atomic Doctors , 42.

[25] . In Atomic Doctors , at pages 51-52, Nolan quotes the Warren letter, which is in his personal collection and unavailable to researchers. For further detail on fallout spread after Trinity, see Higuchi, Political Fallout, 19-22, and Hacker, The Dragon’s Tail , 102-108.

[26] . Stafford Warren, “Radiology and the Atomic Bomb,” in Lorentz Ahnheldt, ed., Radiology in World War II ( Washington, D.C.; U.S. Army, Office of the Surgeon General, 1966), 885; Nolan, Atomic Doctors , 56. For the dangers to nearby people, see Lesley M. M. Blume, "Collateral Damage: American Civilian Survivors of the 1945 Trinity Test," The Bulletin of the Atomic Scientists , 17 July 2023.

[27] . For “ease their minds,” see Hacker, The Dragon’s Tail, 5.

[28] . Sean Malloy, "A Very Pleasant Way to Die", 539. For radiation exposure to U.S.Sean Malloy, "A Very Pleasant Way to Die", 539. For radiation exposure to U.S. prisoners-of-war in Hiroshima and Nagasaki, see Harvey Wasserman and Norman Solomon, Killing Our Own: The Disaster of America’s Experience with Atomic Radiation (New York: Delta, 1982).

[29] . Wellerstein , Restricted Data ,122-123; Malloy, “A Very Pleasant Way to Die,” 540-541.

[30] . See James Nolan’s detailed account of the survey groups and their work in Atomic Doctors, chapters Four and Five.

[31] . See Malloy, “A Very Pleasant Way to Die,” 541-542.

[32] . For Groves and the problem of radiation sickness, see Robert S. Norris, Racing for the Bomb , 438-440; Barton J. Bernstein, “Reconsidering the ‘Atomic General’: Leslie R. Groves,” Journal of Military History 67 (2003), 907-908 (“moral threshold” at 908), Malloy, “A Very Pleasant Way to Die,” 513-518 and 539-54, Brodie, “Radiation Secrecy,” 854, and Wellerstein, Restricted Data, 129-130.

[33] . Stories in the national press on 23 and 25 August 1945 reported on “delayed deaths” and the impact of radiation.Groves,” Journal of Military History 67 (2003), 907-908 (“moral threshold” at 908), Malloy, “A Very Pleasant Way to Die,” 513-518 and 539-54, Brodie, “Radiation Secrecy,” 854, and Wellerstein, Restricted Data, 129-130.

[33] . Stories in the national press on 23 and 25 August 1945 reported on “delayed deaths” and the impact of radiation. For example, on 25 August, the New York Times published “Japanese Stress Hiroshima ‘Horror’,” based on reports by Japanese state radio, which stated that Hiroshima was peopled by a “ghost parade” where the “living [was] doomed to die of radioactivity burns.” The reported results of blood tests done on Japanese soldiers showed white corpuscles “diminished by half and also a severe deficiency of red corpuscles.”

[34] . See “Japanese Reports Doubted,” The New York Times , 31 August 1945, and “Japanese Reports on Atom Bomb Held Propaganda,” Washington Post , 31 August 1945.

[35] . Nolan, Atomic Doctors , 36.

[36] . Several articles, such as “Atom Victims’ Delayed Deaths Stir Debates,” The Chicago Tribute , 23 August 1945, quoted a Japanese military source saying that in Hiroshima “from five to ten minutes after the atomic bomb exploded a black shower rained” that “left black stains on white shirt clothing.”

[37] . Nolan, Atomic Doctors, 96-97; Wyden, Day One, 325-326.. For more on the survey team and its activities, see Warren, “Radiology and the Atomic Bomb,” 886-901, and Averill A.For example, on 25 August, the New York Times published “Japanese Stress Hiroshima ‘Horror’,” based on reports by Japanese state radio, which stated that Hiroshima was peopled by a “ghost parade” where the “living [was] doomed to die of radioactivity burns.” The reported results of blood tests done on Japanese soldiers showed white corpuscles “diminished by half and also a severe deficiency of red corpuscles.”

[37] . Nolan, Atomic Doctors, 96-97; Wyden, Day One, 325-326.. For more on the survey team and its activities, see Warren, “Radiology and the Atomic Bomb,” 886-901, and Averill A. Liebow, “Hiroshima Medical Diary, 1945,” Yale Journal of Biology and Medicine 38 (October 1965): 61-239. For Burchett, Farrell, and "Japanese propaganda," see George Weller, First Into Nagasaki; The Censored Eyewitness Dispatches on Post-Atomic Japan and Its Prisoners of War, Anthony Weller, ed., (New York: Crown Publishers, 2006), 258.

[38] . For Siemes’ background, see Susan E. Swanberg, “Under the Influence: The Impact of Johannes A. Siemes, SJ’s Eyewitness Report on John Hersey’s ‘Hiroshima,” Literary Journalism Studies 13 (2021): 136-137.Swanberg, “Under the Influence: The Impact of Johannes A. Siemes, SJ’s Eyewitness Report on John Hersey’s ‘Hiroshima,” Literary Journalism Studies 13 (2021): 136-137. On Hersey's New Yorker article and its creation, see Leslie M. M. Blume's major account, Fallout.

[39] . In a 1946 article published in Jesuit Missions , Siemes wrote that [t]here cannot be any doubt but that the rays, whatever they were, had some effect on the blood.” Swanberg, Under the Influence,” 142.

[40] . Nolan, Atomic Doctors , 107-111.

[41] . Liebow, “Hiroshima Medical Diary, 1945,” 121-122.

[42] . For further discussion, see Swanberg, “Under the Influence,” passim.

[43] . Peter Wyden, Day One, 161-162. For Nolan’s account of the testimony and the quotation from Eileen Welsome, see Atomic Doctors , at 138-139.

[44] . “Groves Warns Nation Against Scrapping of Atomic Bomb Plants,” W ashington Evening Star, 28 November 1945.

[45] . For the Navy report, see also Brodie, “Radiation Secrecy and Censorship,” 850.

[46] . Nolan, Atomic Doctors , 162.

[47] . Warren, Atomic Doctors, 129-131; Lindee, Suffering Made Real , 117-142.

[48] . For Tsuzuki’s cooperation with the U.S. team, see Nolan, Atomic Doctors , chapter 4. Quotation from Daniel Lang, “A Fine Moral Point,” New Yorker, 8 June 1946, 62.

[49] . [41] . For Tsuzuki’s cooperation with the U.S. team, see Nolan, Atomic Doctors , chapter 4. Quotation from Daniel Lang, “A Fine Moral Point,” New Yorker, 8 June 1946, 62. team, see Nolan, Atomic Doctors , chapter 4. Quotation from Daniel Lang, “A Fine Moral Point,” New Yorker, 8 June 1946, 62.

[41] . For Tsuzuki’s cooperation with the U.S. team, see Nolan, Atomic Doctors , chapter 4. Quotation from Daniel Lang, “A Fine Moral Point,” New Yorker, 8 June 1946, 62.

[49] . Malloy, “‘A Very Pleasant Way to Die,’” 538,

[50] . An early Manhattan Project history suggested the direction of ongoing research to calculate the explosive yields: “the final analysis by Group T-1 [prepared during 1946] gave as the most probable values for the nuclear energy release the TNT equivalents of 20,000 tons for Trinity, 15,000 tons for Hiroshima, and 50,000 tons for Nagasaki; the value for Nagasaki was more uncertain than the others.” Thanks to Alex Wellerstein for this and related references.

Documents

“Hazards of Trinity Experiment,” 12 April 1945, Secret
Apr 12, 1945 | Source Department of Energy Open-Net, Nuclear Testing Archive (NTA)

Memorandum from J. R. Oppenheimer to Brigadier General Farrell, May 11, 1945
May 11, 1945 | Source National Archives, RG 77, MED Records, Top Secret Documents, File no. 5G (copy from microfilm)

J. O. Hirschfelder and John Magee to K[enneth] O. Bainbridge, “Danger from Active Material Falling from Cloud – Desirability of Bonding Soil Near Zero with Concrete and Oil,” 16 June 1945, Secret
Jun 16, 1945 | Source Department of Energy Open-Net, Nuclear Testing Archive
With their knowledge of the radiation effects of a nuclear detonation, Joseph Hirschfelder (a physicist working in Los Alamos’ Ordnance and Engineering Division), the physical chemist John Magee, and others recognized the safety hazards associated with a test. Reinforcing Louis Hempelmann’s message, in a memorandum to Kenneth Bainbridge, the physicist in charge of Trinity, they cited the “definite danger of dust containing active material and fission products falling on towns near Trinity and necessitating their evacuation.”- [18] Looking at what could happen to people in the area, they suggested that an individual could receive “approximately 22 R” in the hours after the explosion. That was over a 100 times higher than the then-current official safety standard of 0.1 R. [19] To mitigate the risk and curtail the lofting and transport of radioactive dust, they proposed deploying crushed rock, concrete slurry and a film of oil. Hirschfelder and Magee experienced organizational pushback very quickly—no one wanted to believe their bad news, but their estimate of the danger was prescient [See document 9]. Later observing that “very few people believed us when we predicted radiation fallout from the atom bomb,” Hirschfelder declared that the government “acted very cavalierly toward the danger.” [20]

“Medical Hazards of TR # 2,” circa 19 June 1945, no classification markings, but treated as Top Secret, excised copy
Jun 20, 1945 | Source Department of Energy Open-Net, Nuclear Testing Archive
Captain James F. Nolan, the Deputy Director of the Los Alamos Medical Group, prepared a report on the plans for monitoring radiation and the evacuation of nearby towns in the event of an emergency during the Trinity Test. The premise of the arrangements was that no individual should “receive more than five (5) r at one exposure.” Five was an arbitrary figure and possibly dangerous in itself, as it was fifty times higher than the prevailing safety standard. [21]

Lansing Lamont Interview with James Findlay [Sic] Nolan, n.d.
Dec 31, 1969 | Source Harry S. Truman Presidential Library, Lansing Lamont Papers, box 1, Notes (Rough Research)
Requiring high-level approval for the safety plan, Los Alamos Medical Group Deputy Director Nolan flew to Site X, the gaseous diffusion plant in Clinton, Tennessee, to meet with General Groves on 19 June 1945. Years later, Nolan recounted the unpleasant encounter to Lansing Lamont (author of Day of Trinity ). After sitting in a room outside Groves’ office while the General "held court" with his assistants, Nolan was ushered in. According to Nolan, after Groves read the report, he “sniffed,” saying, “What's the matter with you, are you a Hearst propagandist?” Nolan recounted that Groves “seemed genuinely sore at [him] for bringing up the prospects of radioactive contamination.” It later took the intervention of the higher-level Stafford Warren to convince Groves to approve the plan. [22] What had probably upset Groves was the prospect that evacuations could put MED security at risk by attracting the attention of the media, although he may also have been unsettled by the subject of bomb-connected radiation.

L.H. Hempelmann and J.F. Nolan to K.T. Bainbridge, “Danger to Personnel in Nearby Towns Exposed to Active Material Falling from Cloud,” 22 June 1945, Secret
Jun 22, 1945 | Source Department of Energy Open-Net, Nuclear Testing Archive
A few days after meeting with Groves, Los Alamos Medical Group Deputy Director Nolan and health group director Hempelmann jointly responded to the Hirschfelder/Magee memorandum (Document 3). The Nolan-Hempelmann response has been controversial, with some historians finding it downplayed the radiation danger while others took the opposite view. Compared to Hirschfelder and Magee, Nolan and Hempelmann saw “less likelihood of serious damage to individuals in neighboring towns,” but they allowed for the possibility of “serious” hazards and the necessity for evacuation. Certainly Nolan’s efforts to get Groves’ approval of a monitoring system suggested recognition of the need for safeguards, but it is possible that the higher-level pooh-poohing of the radiation dangers encouraged Nolan and Hempelmann to find a middle-ground position. Informing the decisions to monitor Trinity-produced radiation was the need to gather evidence in the event of future legal claims against the government. [23]

J.O. Hirschfelder and John Magee to K.T. Bainbridge, “Improbability of Danger from Active Material Falling from Cloud,” 6 July 1945, Secret
Jul 6, 1945 | Source Department of Energy Open-Net, Nuclear Testing Archive
Perhaps also seeking a middle-ground (see headnote to Document 6), Hirschfelder and Magee updated their assessment of the radioactive danger. They argued that “the amount of active material sedimenting into a nearby town may be less by a factor of from 2 to 10 than the amount estimated in our previous memorandum.” Although that still meant high radiation levels, the prospects were less dire than the earlier projections and less of an obstacle to going ahead with the test. [24]

“Conference About Contamination of Countryside Near Trinity with Radioactive Materials,” 10 July 1945, Annotated Draft, No Classification Markings
Jul 10, 1945 | Source Department of Energy Open-Net, Nuclear Testing Archive
A week before the test, Los Alamos director Robert Oppenheimer met with radiation experts, including Stafford Warren, James F. Nolan, Louis Hempelmann, and physicist Victor Weisskopf. After reviewing the mechanisms that produced fallout and its dispersal, they heard a briefing on optimum weather conditions: the wind velocity should not be too “too high” and a wind to the south would be best because there were no nearby towns and the mountains that would block the spread. A tolerance dose (maximum level) of up to a 100 roentgens was acceptable unless there was further exposure. If the total “integral dose” (total amount absorbed by the body) was in the 60-100 roentgen range, however, evacuations would then be necessary.

Stafford Warren to Major General Groves, “Report on Test II at Trinity 16 July 1945,” 21 July 1945, Top Secret [Tables cited in report not available]
Jul 21, 1945 | Source Department of Energy Open-Net, Nuclear Testing Archive
While the Trinity test did not involve evacuation orders, Stafford Warren’s report suggested some alarm about radioactive debris produced by the detonation on the ground: : “the dust outfall from the various portions of the cloud was potentially a very serious hazard over a band almost 30 miles wide extending almost 90 miles northeast of the site.” Warren was getting close to using the term “fallout,” but “outfall” conveyed the idea. He also observed that there was still “a tremendous amount of radioactive dust floating in the air.” These problems informed the recommendation that any future tests should take place not in Alamogordo but in a region “with a radius of at least 150 miles without population.” floating in the air.” These problems informed the recommendation that any future tests should take place not in Alamogordo but in a region “with a radius of at least 150 miles without population.” In a letter, dated 22 July 1945, that Warren sent to James F. Nolan, he provided a far more alarming impression, writing that radiation monitors “found radiation at levels as high as thirty to forty roentgens ‘near a lot of houses’ and, in ‘one hot canyon’ northeast of Bingham, radiation ‘totaling 230r.’” According to Warren, “Boy what a narrow escape. If we had laid it down in a steady wind as planned when you left we would have had a high mortality!! It was terrific.” [25] Yet, nobody had been evacuated, the dangers notwithstanding. Warren and others discovered later more information that validated his alarm—that there had been “significant fallout” up to 100 miles from the test site where cattle with white hair from beta burns on their backs were found. Moreover, five years later, more research showed that “fallout in the mountainous desert was much more widespread than had been suspected.” [26] According to a recent study , fallout from the Trinity test spread across large parts of the United States.

Stafford Warren to Leslie Groves, “The Use of the Gadget as a Tactical Weapon Based on Observations Made during Test II,” July 25, 1945, Top Secret [Partial transcript prepared by Aaron Gimpel]
Jul 25, 1945 | Source Department of Energy Open-Net, Nuclear Testing Archive
The experience of the Trinity detonation influenced Stafford Warren’s report to Groves about the military use of the “gadget.” (MED officials referred to “Gadget,” instead of bomb, partly for security reasons but perhaps also to “ease their minds” about the purposes of their work [27] ). Warren discussed the impact of an explosion over a city, ranging from the radiation hazards to the production of fires. The fireball would require pilots to use special goggles to protect their eyes and the radiation produced by the bomb could endanger troops entering a city after an explosion. Warren was giving advice on how to use the “gadget” as an “assault weapon” and he recommended specific tactics to do so. At the end of the memo, Warren included a chart showing the dangers to “normal active troops” in terms of levels of exposure and the possibility of injuries. The range of exposure was from thirty to five-hundred roentgens depending on how long a person was in the danger zone. At the highest levels of exposure, Warren estimated that many troops could experience “permanent damage.”

Major General L.R. Groves to Chief of Staff [General George C. Marshall], 30 July 1945, Top Secret

Groves Diary, 8 August 1945, unclassified
Aug 8, 1945 | Source National Archives, Donated Records of General Leslie R. Groves, Visitations and Telephone Call Diaries, box 3
A few days after the Hiroshima bombing, Harold Jacobson , a New York city-based scientist who had briefly worked for the MED, wrote a widely distributed report, first published in the San Francisco Examiner , asserting erroneously and sensationally that the radiation would render Hiroshima uninhabitable for seventy years. Groves telephoned Oppenheimer about Jacobson’s article. Oppenheimer had not seen it, and said “this is of course lunacy.” Oppenheimer also said that “based on the test in New Mexico there would be no appreciable activity on the ground and what little there was would decay very rapidly.” He authorized Groves to use that statement. Under pressure from federal agents, Jacobson disowned his report, but it received wide publicity and reached Japanese audiences very quickly, on whom it had a significant impact. [29]

Dr. Robert Stone [Health Division, Metlab], to Colonel Hymer Friedell, 9 August 1945, unclassified
Aug 9, 1945 | Source Department of Energy Open-Net, Nuclear Testing Archive
Soon after the atomic bombings, Robert Stone, director of the health division at the Metlab, expressed concern about radiation effects in a letter to a former student, Hymer Friedell, Stafford Warren’s deputy based at Site X. Wondering whether the “Japanese were warned that radiation hazards would remain after the explosion hazard had passed away," Stone worried that health workers would be dangerously exposed. He wrote that failure to warn raised the possibility of guilt of “unnecessary destruction of life." Especially distressing to him was Oppenheimer’s response to the Jacobson report (as quoted above). "I could hardly believe my eyes when I saw a news release said to be quoting Oppenheimer and giving the impression that there is no radioactive hazard. Apparently all things are relative."

“Toxic Effects of the Atomic Bomb,” 12 August 1945, Top Secret
Aug 12, 1945 | Source RG 77, MED Records, Top Secret Documents of Interest to General Groves, box 3, File 5G (copy from microfilm, courtesy of Alex Wellerstein)
A few days after the bombing of Nagasaki, a report from persons unknown went to General Groves on the “toxic effects” of the bomb. With Groves’ aversion to associating the idea of toxins and poisons with the bomb, he may have disliked this report, if he read it. It described in detail the creation of fallout and the biological impact of radiation doses at various levels and periods of time. It is possible that the report was prepared as background for Groves’ decision to approve the dispatch of a survey team to Japan to assess the damage and determine safety conditions before U.S. occupation troops arrived. In that connection, the table on page 4 concerning levels of exposure is similar to the table on page 3 of Stafford Warren’s memo to Groves on 25 July (see Document 10).

Chief of Staff To Commander-in-Chief, Army Forces, Pacific Command, 12 August 1945, Top Secret
Aug 12, 1945 | Source George C. Marshall Papers, George C. Marshall Library, Lexington, VA (copy courtesy of Barton J. Bernstein)

General Groves to Chief of Staff [George C. Marshall], 24 August 1945,Top Secret
Aug 24, 1945 | Source RG 77, MED Records, Top Secret Documents of Interest to General Groves, box 3, folder 5B Directives, Memos, etc.
Reminding Marshall that he had sent “teams of investigators” to Japan, Groves further informed him in this memo that he wanted the teams to determine the impact of radioactivity on the Japanese. He believed that Japanese casualties from radiation were “unlikely,” but the “facts” had to be established.

P[aul] L. Henshaw and R[obert] R. Coveyou to H.J. Curtis and K. Z. Morgan, “Death from Radiation Burns,” 24 August 1945, Confidential [Control sheet attached]
Aug 24, 1945 | Source Department of Energy Open-Net, Nuclear Testing Archive
Truman’s announcement that the U.S. had dropped an atomic bomb on Hiroshima enabled Japanese scientists to make sense of otherwise mysterious reports of mysterious casualties that soon emerged in Hiroshima and then Nagasaki. Two scientists at Oak Ridge’s Health Division, Paul Henshaw, a physicist (later a leader of the U.S. Atomic Bomb Casualty Commission [ABCC]), and Robert Coveyou, a mathematician, drew some conclusions about the health effects of the bombings as reported by United Press International: people who had looked healthy weakened, “for unknown reasons,” and many died. Henshaw and Coveyou’s review of atomic bomb effects led them to find that “it seems highly plausible that a great many persons were subjected to lethal and sub-lethal dosages of radiation in areas where direct blast effects were possibly non-lethal.” It was “probable,” therefore, that radiation “would produce increments to the death rate and “even more probable” that a “great number of cases of sub-lethal exposures to radiation have been suffered.” [31]

Groves Diary, 25 August 1945, unclassified
Aug 25, 1945 | Source National Archives, Donated Records of General Leslie R. Groves, Visitations and Telephone Call Diaries, box 3

Memorandum of Telephone Conversation Between General Groves and Lt. Col. Rea, Oak Ridge Hospital, 9:00 a.m., 25 August 1945, Top Secret
Aug 25, 1945 | Source RG 77, Top Secret Correspondence/Manhattan Project, box 3, folder 5H Damage Reports
Radio broadcasts from Japan reported the effects of radiation sickness, but General Groves and Dr. Charles Rea, a surgeon who was head of the base hospital at Oak Ridge, dismissed them as “propaganda.” Both agreed that the injuries were nothing more than “good thermal burns.” Rea had no specialized knowledge of radiation, but if Groves had read the secret memoranda on that subject that he had received, he may have been speaking disingenuously. Perhaps he was in denial about the radiation and was seeking assurance from Rea. If Groves was worried about the broader implications of bomb-caused radiation sickness, a strategy of denial was a way to protect the new weapon from charges that it, like poison gas, was on the other side of a “crucial moral threshold.” [32] What further upset Groves, as he disclosed at the end of the conversation, was that an “American started them [the Japanese] off,” referring to the report by Harold Jacobson.

G[eorge]. B. Kistiakowsky [Director of Los Alamos X Division] to J. Robert Oppenheimer, “My Activities During Your Absence,” n.d. [circa 1 September 1945], Confidential
Sep 1, 1945 | Source Department of Energy Open-Net, Nuclear Testing Archive
In this memorandum to Oppenheimer, George B. Kistiakowsky — who led explosives research at Los Alamos--reviewed pending issues, including the expansion of Los Alamos’s Site-S (production of special lenses for plutonium bombs) and the future of the “Project,” but began by briefly recounting the internal discussion over how to respond to Japanese reports about radiation sickness. [33] Kistiakowsky described how, in response to queries from General Groves about the reports, he had teletyped recommendations that the Manhattan Project director had rejected. Kistiakowsky then asked Louis Hempelmann and others to prepare a memorandum for Groves on the effects of the bombings but seems to have hesitated in sending it after Groves said, during a press conference at Oak Ridge, Tennessee, that the accounts from Japan were “propaganda” and that radiation had not caused any deaths. [34] In light of the Hempelmann team’s findings, Kistiakowsky observed that Groves had “stuck his neck out by a mile.” A FOIA request and subsequent appeal to the National Nuclear Security Administration led to the unearthing of the Hempelmann memo [See Document 21, below] but not Kistiakowsky’s teletype.

Inter-Office Memorandum, V[ictor] Weisskopf, P[aul] Aebersold, L[ouis] H. Hempelmann, F[rederick] Reines to G[eorge] Kistiakowsky, “Calculated Biological Effects of Atomic Explosion in Hiroshima and Nagasaki,” with table attached, 1 September 1945, Secret
Sep 1, 1945 | Source National Security Archive Freedom of Information Act request and appeal to National Nuclear Security Administration; document found in archives of Los Alamos National Laboratory
With U.S. With U.S. scientists and medical doctors on their way to Japan to study the impact of the bombings, more information and analysis on the impact of radiation would become available, but the results of those investigations would be classified for years, just like this preliminary assessment. The memo that Kistiakowsky requested but was hesitant to send to Groves -- prepared by Victor Weisskopf , Paul Aebersold , Louis H. Hempelmann , and Frederick Reines -- did not mention the news reports from Japan about burn injuries and lingering deaths and suffering (thus avoiding any risk of being seen as sympathetic to the Japanese), but the authors estimated that radiation exposure was a probable cause of some fatalities, essentially confirming those accounts. The four Los Alamos scientists and medical doctors who prepared the memorandum explained how an atomic explosion would have deadly “biological effects,” not only from the blast but also from gamma radiation and thermal energy, with other possible effects, such as those caused by radioactive “dust particles,” not calculable. With U.S. scientists and medical doctors on their way to Japan to study the impact of the bombings, more information and analysis on the impact of radiation would become available, but the results of those investigations would be classified for years, just like this preliminary assessment. The memo that Kistiakowsky requested but was hesitant to send to Groves -- prepared by Victor Weisskopf , Paul Aebersold , Louis H. Hempelmann , and Frederick Reines -- did not mention the news reports from Japan about burn injuries and lingering deaths and suffering (thus avoiding any risk of being seen as sympathetic to the Japanese), but the authors estimated that radiation exposure was a probable cause of some fatalities, essentially confirming those accounts. The four Los Alamos scientists and medical doctors who prepared the memorandum explained how an atomic explosion would have deadly “biological effects,” not only from the blast but also from gamma radiation and thermal energy, with other possible effects, such as those caused by radioactive “dust particles,” not calculable. They presented their findings in a table attached to an explanatory memorandum.scientists and medical doctors on their way to Japan to study the impact of the bombings, more information and analysis on the impact of radiation would become available, but the results of those investigations would be classified for years, just like this preliminary assessment. The memo that Kistiakowsky requested but was hesitant to send to Groves -- prepared by Victor Weisskopf , Paul Aebersold , Louis H. Hempelmann , and Frederick Reines -- did not mention the news reports from Japan about burn injuries and lingering deaths and suffering (thus avoiding any risk of being seen as sympathetic to the Japanese), but the authors estimated that radiation exposure was a probable cause of some fatalities, essentially confirming those accounts. The four Los Alamos scientists and medical doctors who prepared the memorandum explained how an atomic explosion would have deadly “biological effects,” not only from the blast but also from gamma radiation and thermal energy, with other possible effects, such as those caused by radioactive “dust particles,” not calculable. They presented their findings in a table attached to an explanatory memorandum. For many Los Alamos scientists this memorandum may have been a reminder of what they already knew. The writers did not explain their methodology but may have been generalizing from the effects of weapons with an explosive yield in the range of 10 kilotons of T.N.T., which was Enrico Fermi’s initial estimate for the July 16, 1945, Trinity test.They presented their findings in a table attached to an explanatory memorandum. For many Los Alamos scientists this memorandum may have been a reminder of what they already knew. The writers did not explain their methodology but may have been generalizing from the effects of weapons with an explosive yield in the range of 10 kilotons of T.N.T., which was Enrico Fermi’s initial estimate for the July 16, 1945, Trinity test. Whatever their methodology was, the table developed by the authors showed the impact on the ground metrically in terms of the radius and the distance from ground zero. The avoidance of references to yield estimates may have kept the classification level down. The authors calculated the deadly impact of the blast itself (“flying debris, falling buildings, violent displacement, etc.”) and the extreme heat, which were the two primary effects contemplated by Los Alamos scientists who developed the bomb. [35] Blast effects were “lethal” within the radius of a half mile to a mile and even further, projecting overpressures of 27 pounds per square inch at 800 meters (about one-half mile) and 23 p.s.i. at 1000 meters (at 0.62 miles). The blast would not kill everyone within the range: “Freak survivals of individuals within this area would certainly occur,” according to the report, such as people who were inside hardened structures. But those who lived through the initial blast would be exposed to “gamma radiation emitted within a few seconds after the explosion,” according to the report, which estimated that levels of 500 to 900 roentgen, found 800 to 900 meters from ground zero, would be lethal.at 1000 meters (at 0.62 miles). The blast would not kill everyone within the range: “Freak survivals of individuals within this area would certainly occur,” according to the report, such as people who were inside hardened structures. But those who lived through the initial blast would be exposed to “gamma radiation emitted within a few seconds after the explosion,” according to the report, which estimated that levels of 500 to 900 roentgen, found 800 to 900 meters from ground zero, would be lethal. “Freak survivors of the blast within this area would be killed by radiation,” the scientists said, although “death … might be delayed for a period of weeks.” Similarly, a 1945 U.S. Navy report found that people who were inside Hiroshima’s Bankers Club building survived the initial blast but “died later from radiation reaction, due in large part to scattered rays of secondary type.” As the Navy report explained, “This is at first difficult to understand, until one remembers that radiation entering through a window or other opening will strike floor[s] and wells and induce much secondary radiation.” “Severe thermal burns (third degree) of the exposed skin” were expected within a mile of the blast site, although clothing or even “light shelter” would offer “considerable protection” from them. The “short intense exposure” to thermal radiation meant that the burns, later called “flash burns” were likely to be “even more serious than the most severe sunburns.” The authors used calories for measuring the levels of heat and light that people would experience at various distances.Navy report found that people who were inside Hiroshima’s Bankers Club building survived the initial blast but “died later from radiation reaction, due in large part to scattered rays of secondary type.” As the Navy report explained, “This is at first difficult to understand, until one remembers that radiation entering through a window or other opening will strike floor[s] and wells and induce much secondary radiation.” “Severe thermal burns (third degree) of the exposed skin” were expected within a mile of the blast site, although clothing or even “light shelter” would offer “considerable protection” from them. The “short intense exposure” to thermal radiation meant that the burns, later called “flash burns” were likely to be “even more serious than the most severe sunburns.” The authors used calories for measuring the levels of heat and light that people would experience at various distances. Because 8 calories/CM 2 was enough to cause third-degree burns, people exposed to 11 calories/CM 2 at 1400 meters would suffer burns that penetrated one millimeter of skin (the thickness of a credit card). One incalculable effect was exposure to “radioactive material deposited on the ground.” While the memo said it would probably be “insignificant,” the authors noted the possibility of “unusual meteorological phenomena resulting in local precipitation or deposition of active material on falling dust particles.” Even Oppenheimer, in a statement cited by Dr. Robert Stone [See Document 13], had denied the possibility of radiation on the ground in Hiroshima or Nagasaki, but such effects would continue to be discussed in the media and in classified reports. [36] Other “biological effects” of the bombings, such as “suffocation” or “burning to death,” could not be predicted, according to the memo. Source National Security Archive Freedom of Information Act request and appeal to National Nuclear Security Administration; document found in archives of Los Alamos National Laboratory Because 8 calories/CM 2 was enough to cause third-degree burns, people exposed to 11 calories/CM 2 at 1400 meters would suffer burns that penetrated one millimeter of skin (the thickness of a credit card). One incalculable effect was exposure to “radioactive material deposited on the ground.” While the memo said it would probably be “insignificant,” the authors noted the possibility of “unusual meteorological phenomena resulting in local precipitation or deposition of active material on falling dust particles.” Even Oppenheimer, in a statement cited by Dr. Robert Stone [See Document 13], had denied the possibility of radiation on the ground in Hiroshima or Nagasaki, but such effects would continue to be discussed in the media and in classified reports. [36] Other “biological effects” of the bombings, such as “suffocation” or “burning to death,” could not be predicted, according to the memo. With so much emphasis placed on the blast, radiation, and thermal effects of the bombs, there is little to suggest that anyone predicted that mass fires would cause many deaths in Hiroshima and Nagasaki. With U.S. scientists and medical doctors soon in their way to Japan to study the impact of the bombings, more information and analysis on the impact of radiation would become available, but the results of those investigations would be classified for years, just like this preliminary assessment. ormation and analysis on the impact of radiation would become available, but the results of those investigations would be classified for years, just like this preliminary assessment.

Groves Diary, 7 September 1945, excerpts, unclassified
Sep 7, 1945 | Source National Archives, Donated Records of General Leslie R. Groves, Visitations and Telephone Call Diaries, box 3
In several conversations on September 7 Groves continued to dismiss reports of Japanese deaths from radiation effects. Speaking with Harvard University President James B. Conant, who was also a top Manhattan Project official, Groves said there was “no basis” to reports of deaths from radiation, but said that Col. Stafford Warren, the chief medical officer, was going to Japan to look into the problem. Groves also had a conversation with Dr. Charles Rea, head of the Oak Ridge base hospital, who explained to him the difference between leukemia, an increase in white blood cells, and leukopenia, a decrease in white cells that was experienced by people exposed to radiation effects. Groves mentioned a document discussing “three different causes of casualties,” possibly a reference to the recent Los Alamos memorandum (which may have eventually reached Groves, despite Kistiakowsky’s hesitations). When Groves asked whether “diet” could be a cause of leukopenia, Rea said it wasn’t, but suggested that “it could be caused by some medicines like benzidrine [sic].” As in an earlier conversation [See Document 19], Rea believed that post-explosion deaths in Japan were caused by “heat” but he added that deaths that occurred later “could be caused from the blast,” noting, for example, the cases of “people who are in accidents and who walk away apparently unharmed and die the next day.” added that deaths that occurred later “could be caused from the blast,” noting, for example, the cases of “people who are in accidents and who walk away apparently unharmed and die the next day.” Speaking with Oppenheimer later that morning, it was evident that Groves bought into Rea’s story not the findings of the Los Alamos staff. When Oppenheimer mentioned “delayed effects from radiation,” Groves said that Rea had accounted for the deaths as “delayed heat and blast cases.” On that, Oppenheimer made no comment. Groves would eventually accept that delayed radiation effects caused deaths [See Document 27].

USS Teton CAX 51813 to Commander in Chief Army Forces Pacific Administration, Farrell to Groves, 10 September 1945, Secret
Sep 10, 1945 | Source RG 77, Tinian Files, April-December 1945, box 17, Envelope B
With Groves seeking information that would refute the accounts of radiation sickness, General Farrell sent back reports that deemphasized the radiation problem. While recognizing that the “Japanese reports …. are essentially correct, as to clinical effects from single gamma radiation dose,” Farrell qualified that statement by reporting that Stafford Warren found that only a “small percentage of injured survivors” had radiation sickness. He did not mention that when meeting with the U.S. and international press in Tokyo, he had derided accounts of radiation sickness as “Japanese propaganda.” Farrell also reported that “Warren found no measurable radioactivity on preliminary measurements under detonation site or elsewhere on ground, streets, ashes or other materials.” In fact, however, Warren and James Nolan were finding a “very slight amount of radioactivity on the ground.” [37]

Commander in Chief Army Forces Pacific Advance Yokohoma, Japan CAX 51948 to Commander in Chief Army Forces Pacific Administration, Farrell to Grove, 14 September 1945, Secret
Sep 14, 1945 | Source RG 77, Tinian Files, April-December 1945, box 17, Envelope B
In this follow-up report on the destruction, Farrell focused on the blast damage. Without referring specifically to radiation, he cited Japanese reports that “anyone who entered the blast area from outside after the explosion has become sick.” Farrell’s report also included this information concerning Nagasaki from Japanese officials: “a number have died up to September 1st who did not seem to be wounded originally” and that “each day about twenty wounded were dying.”

“Atomic Bomb on Hiroshima [--] Eyewitness Account of P. Siemes,” n.d. [Translated from the German by Averill A. Liebow, 27 September 1945]
Sep 27, 1945 | Source Yale University, Medical Historical Library, Harvey Cushing/John Hay Whitney Medical Library, Averell A. Liebow Papers, box 3, folder 36
One of the witnesses to the attack on Hiroshima that members of the U.S. survey team met was Johannes Siemes, a German Jesuit priest, a Ph.D. historian who taught philosophy at Sophia University. [38] Escaping firebombed Tokyo, Siemes traveled to Hiroshima where he stayed in a Jesuit novitiate located in a suburb, Nagatsuke. According to his eye-witness account, he felt the immediate blast effects of the bomb, witnessed the mass fires, and the devastation and the human toll, which he tried to alleviate with the small resources that were available. Noting that Japanese newspapers were reporting on an “atomic bomb,” Siemes discussed the connections between radiation sickness and the “gamma rays that had been sent out” by the explosion: there “seems to be some truth in the statement that the radiation had some effect on the blood” (an article published by Siemes in 1946 was more definitive on the relationship). [39] truth in the statement that the radiation had some effect on the blood” (an article published by Siemes in 1946 was more definitive on the relationship). [39] During the weeks after the attack Siemes wrote a moving account of his experience that he provided to Stafford Warren (under unclear circumstances), who took it to Dr. Averill Liebow, one of the members of the U.S. survey team. A U.S. immigrant, Liebow spoke German and on 27 September 1945 translated Siemes’ account, dictating it to a U.S. Army Sergeant who typed it up. Liebow later modestly wrote that his translation “did less than full justice …to the style, excitement, and literary merit of the original German.” [40] When Stafford Warren sent a secret report to General Groves on the effects of the atomic bombings he included a copy of the translation “for its value as background material” [See document 23]. [41] Siemes’ account led the U.S. doctors to another priest, Wilhelm Kleinsorge, who had been in Hiroshima and was in a Tokyo hospital suffering from radiation sickness. He may have been the first such patient that the U.S. doctors met. Later, when the journalist John Hersey visited Tokyo to research the atomic bombings, he acquired a copy of Siemes’ narrative, which had a significant impact on the article that he published in the New Yorker. [42] . bombings, he acquired a copy of Siemes’ narrative, which had a significant impact on the article that he published in the New Yorker. [42] . For its historical interest and importance, this is very likely an original, or certainly a very early copy, of Liebow’s translation as dictated in September 1945, the typescript of which made its way into the hands of John Hersey. This rendition is not wholly legible, however, and tidier versions of Siemes’ account are available, such as this online version, in the nicely typed format that went to General Groves and the Chief of Naval Operations (see Documents 23 and 25], but also in the 1946 MED public report on the atomic bombings. Why Siemes’ report attracted such interest among U.S. officials is worth considering; such aspects as his straightforward narration, his raising of philosophical questions, and his European background may have been elements.

Stafford Warren to Major General L. R. Groves, “Preliminary Report – Atomic Bomb Investigation,” 27 November 1945, Secret
Nov 27, 1945 | Source Stafford Warren Papers, University of California Los Angeles Libraries Special Collections, box 68, Folder 7
After returning from Japan, Warren, with the assistance of James F. Nolan, prepared a detailed preliminary report on the results of the atomic attacks on Hiroshima and Nagasaki. More information would be gleaned by the Navy’s team and later through the preparation of the report by the U.S.-Japan “Joint Commission of the Investigation of the Effects of the Atomic Bomb in Japan.” Even more data would be gathered by the Joint Commission’s successor, the Atomic Bomb Casualty Commission. Japan “Joint Commission of the Investigation of the Effects of the Atomic Bomb in Japan.” Even more data would be gathered by the Joint Commission’s successor, the Atomic Bomb Casualty Commission. The report focused on medical findings, radioactivity measurements, and estimates of damage to structures. On casualties, Warren provided detailed information on the kinds of injuries suffered, including thermal burns and those caused by blast effects, and the delayed symptoms of radiation poisoning, which showed up after three to thirty days. He reported that of the “approximately 4000 patients admitted to hospitals [in both cities], 1300 or 33% showed effects of radiation and of this number approximately one-half died.” Warren found persisting low levels of radiation at ground zero and several kilometers away. While finding that the “intensity of radiation is quite low [it] is measurable with the very sensitive instruments used.” In some cases, the acceptable tolerance dose “is exceeded slightly.” Referring to the spread of fallout, he cited Japanese data “that patients in Nagasaki as far away as 4 kilometers [showed] effects of radiation.” The MED’s 1946 public report made similar points, denying any health injuries from induced or residual radiation. “Black rain” was not yet on Warren’s mental map, although the phenomenon is mentioned in the Navy report.

Testimony of Manhattan Project Director General Leslie R. Groves before U.S. Senate Special Committee on Atomic Energy, November 30, 1945
Nov 30, 1945 | Source Atomic Energy: Hearings before the Special Committee on Atomic Energy, United States Senate, Seventy-Ninth Congress, First Session, Part 1 (Washington, D.C.: United States Government Printing Office, 1945), excerpt

Testimony of Los Alamos Laboratory scientist Philip Morrison before U.S. Senate Special Committee on Atomic Energy, December 6, 1945
Dec 6, 1945 | Source Atomic Energy: Hearings before the Special Committee on Atomic Energy , United States Senate, Seventy-Ninth Congress, First Session, Part 2, 6 December 1945 (Washington, D.C.: United States Government Printing Office, 1946), excerpt
In striking contrast to Groves’ testimony was the statement of Los Alamos physicist Philip Morrison, who had been with the U.S. group surveying weapons damage in Hiroshima and Nagasaki during September-October 1945. He gave the Senate Special Committee a thorough and affecting presentation of the damage inflicted by the initial blast, thermal effects, radiation and fire. In contrast to Groves, who said radiation sickness was “a very pleasant way to die,” Morrison described how those who survived the blast and heat “died anyway … from a further effect, the effects of radiumlike rays emitted in great number from the bomb at the instant of the explosion.” Highly impressed by the testimony, one of the Committee members, Senator Edwin Johnson (D-Co) said that “I should like to say to the witness, to Mr. Morrison, that he is the most eloquent witness that I have ever heard since I have been around Congress.” That would be far from the last public praise for Morrison who became a well-known and respected advocate for the cause of nuclear disarmament.

Captain C[lifton] G. Grimes, Chief, Naval Technical Mission to Japan, to Chief of Naval Operations, “Target Report - Atomic Bombs, Nagasaki and Hiroshima Article I Medical Effects,” 15 December 1945, Top Secret [Enclosures (Maps) C, D, and G included]
Dec 15, 1945 | Source NARA, Record Group 38, Records of the Chief of Naval Operations, Naval Technical Mission to Japan, box 6.

Dr. W[illiam] C. Penney, C.S.A.R. [Chief Superintendent of Armament Research], “A Report on the Pressure Wave Caused by the Atomic Bomb Explosion in Hiroshima and Nagasaki,” 23 January 1946, Secret, excerpt, with enclosing memorandum from D.G. Sturges to J.A. Derry, 6
Jan 23, 1946 | Source National Archives, RG 77, MED Records, General Administrative Files: Reports Pertaining to the Effects of the Atomic Bomb, 1945–1946, box 91
A leading member of the British mission to the Manhattan Project, physicist and mathematician William Penney conducted research that helped establish the optimum height of burst for the detonations above Hiroshima and Nagasaki to maximize their destructiveness. As a member of the team of scientists and medical doctors who traveled to the two cities during September-October 1945, Penney collected evidence on the physical destruction cause by the bombs, which he analyzed in this report. Through visual inspection of flagpoles, shrines, cans, glass panels, wooden floors, and other things damaged in the blasts, and noting the distance of each from ground zero, Penney estimated the peak pressure, in pounds per square inch (p.s.i.), experienced by various objects and structures. Summarizing his results on pages 59-60, Penney estimated a peak pressure of 100 p.s.i. in Nagasaki based on damage to an earthenware drainpipe found 1200 feet from ground zero. For Hiroshima, Penney estimated a peak pressure of 35 p.s.i. at ground zero based on damage to the door of a safe. Penney’s report was probably the first systematic look at the problem of peak pressure, which would be a subject of continuing interest for war planners and civil defense specialists. r of a safe. Penney’s report was probably the first systematic look at the problem of peak pressure, which would be a subject of continuing interest for war planners and civil defense specialists. Penney’s summary of his major conclusions tacitly credited the calculations of Los Alamos scientists: Not only did “the bombs [perform] exactly according to design in their height of burst,” they were “placed in such positions that they could not have done more damage by any alternative bursting point.” Thus, the “extent of the blast damage was exactly that predicted.” In other words, the point of aerial detonation was to maximize damage, not to reduce radioactive fallout, as some later claimed. [49] Penney explained that his report could guide any future use of atomic weapons: “the information collected would enable reasonably accurate predictions to be made of the blast damage likely to be caused in any city where an atomic explosion was conceivable.” On destruction by fire, Penney observed that it was “tremendous” in both cities, but he did not attach any “special significance” to it, because he believed that it was a “property more of the cities themselves than of the bomb.” Writing that the explosions did not start any fires “instantly,” Penney said that “straw and many grass mats which were hanging outside to air, were ignited immediately and no doubt some fires were started in this way.” A “more likely cause” of fires, in his view, were “charcoal braziers, one of which was to be found in nearly every house.” He further added that the Japanese observed “many peculiar effects due to ‘fire winds’” that were not accurately recorded. Commenting on radioactivity in a brief section about the “morale” effect of the bombings, Penney observed that the “danger of radioactive contamination on the ground terrified the whole population and had resulted in only spasmodic elements at clearing debris.” effect of the bombings, Penney observed that the “danger of radioactive contamination on the ground terrified the whole population and had resulted in only spasmodic elements at clearing debris.” Among Penney’s “Main Results” were his estimates of the explosive yields for the Hiroshima and Nagasaki detonations. Penney estimated 5 kilotons (kt) of T.N.T. for Hiroshima and 20 kt for Nagasaki. The latter estimate would turn out to be roughly accurate, but 5 kt for Hiroshima was quite low. Years later, Penney and British colleagues produced an estimate of 12 kt for Hiroshima. In 1946, when Penney prepared this report, other Los Alamos scientists and officials were trying to establish yield estimates, but this was difficult for lack of precise data, such as the Enola Gay ’s “true altitude” when it dropped the weapon. [50] During the 1980s, Los Alamos published estimates of 15 kt for Hiroshima and 21 kt for Nagasaki, acknowledging that “the outside limits of uncertainties in these values are believed to be 20 percent for Hiroshima and 10 percent for Nagasaki.”

Captain C[lifton] G. Grimes, Chief, Naval Technical Mission to Japan, to Chief of Naval Operations, “Miscellaneous Targets [-] Atomic Bombs, Nagasaki and Hiroshima Article 2 Medical Effects, Supplementary Studies,” 29 May 1946, Index No. X-28-2, Top Secret
May 29, 1946 | Source NARA, Record Group 38, Records of the Chief of Naval Operations, Naval Technical Mission to Japan, box 6.
Prepared by Shields Warren, this is a study in the histology, or microscopic anatomy, of atomic bombing victims based on data from autopsies conducted by Japanese and U.S. medical specialists. Written for the use of specialists, the report provides detailed coverage of the impact of ionizing radiation on the body’s organs. Slightly more accessible are the conclusions, which include a chronological presentation of the “pattern of injuries” from the moment of detonation through the weeks that followed, as more and more sickened or died from radiation exposure. s, which include a chronological presentation of the “pattern of injuries” from the moment of detonation through the weeks that followed, as more and more sickened or died from radiation exposure. Part II of the report discussed residual radioactivity at Nagasaki on the basis of the research of Japanese scientists with Kyushu Imperial University (now Kyushu University) and the Institute of Physical and Chemical Research in Tokyo. Their data, evaluated by Warren as “essentially sound,” was the basis of diagrams at the close of the report, including the “detailed location of the explosion center” and the “pattern of deposition of fission products.”
