I 
20734 
July 14, 1965 
Mr, Melvin M, Belli 
Belli, Ashe and Gerry 
San £>ranoisco, California 
Dear Mr. Bellii 
r .1 
*4" * 
• | i IT 
® flaw Juat finished reading your book, "Dallas Justice". I found It 
quite interesting and am writing you, even though you no longer have 
any connection with the case, beclusi I think ySu may be in 
some pertinent Information in the appended volumes of the Warren Com. 
mission, whloh I have studied and analyzed. 
Possibly you are aware of what I am about to call to your attention. 
i- have no way of knowing. 
On pages 166-7, with respect to Sergeant Dean and res gestae, and on 
page 240, with reference to Officer Archer, the sworn Fels'timony at the 
trial seems to be in less than complete accord with the sworn testimony 
before the Commission, J 
In vplume XII page 412, the testimony of Officer Barnard S. Clardy of 
:-Tarch 24, 1964, taken in the office of the United States Attorney. 
O..aro.y testified to the Interrogation of Ruby unstairs after the shoot- 
ing of Oswaid, saying, *Did you Intend to* — or, »Did you think you 
could kill the man with one shot?* And he said, »I intended to iret off 
l'hr®e^»fb?LS* * Said» *1 didn»t think that I could be stopped before I 
got off three shots,* " 
tv. 
• • • 
^arne page: Mr. Clardy. Further stated, said, »If I had planned this 
1 couldn't have had my timing better.* Said, 'It was one chance in a 
million.* Or something to that effect. Said, »If I had planned this. 
I couldn't have had ray timing any bettor.1” 
Sgt. Dean's testimony, really a deposition taken 8 p.m. March 24, 1964 
also in the U. 3, Attorney's office, begins on page 4l5, Volume XII, * 
Subsequently, at his own demand, Sgt. Dean appeared before the Commis- 
sion In Washington. On June 8 he was preceded by Henry Wade and fol- 
lowed by Waggoner Carr. Dean's testimony begins on page 254, Volume V. 
On page 255, Dean declared, ... the main reason I wanted to appear 
before the Commission was about the 20 or 25 minutes that was off the 
re'“0f^, that I feel I would like the Commission to havo on the record, 
atl ~ri3 between Mr. Griffin and I. He was the original one who 
started my deposition."the 20 or 25 minutes that was off the 
re'“0f^, that I feel I would like the Commission to havo on the record, 
atl ~ri3 between Mr. Griffin and I. He was the original one who 
started my deposition."

--- PAGE BREAK ---that was off the 
re'“0f^, that I feel I would like the Commission to havo on the record, 
atl ~ri3 between Mr. Griffin and I. He was the original one who 
started my deposition."

--- PAGE BREAK ---

Mr. B®m - 2 
On the bottom of othis page and the top of the next. Dean told the 
S'jory about the Assistant Counsel, Griffin, chasing the 'court reporter 
from the room and of then accusing Dean of perjury: 
"Well, Mr. Griffin had oquestioned me about 2 hours, or may- 
be a little longer. There was no problems at all, no difficulties. 
And after that length of time, a little over 2 hours, Mr. Griffin 
desired to get off the record, and he advised the court reporter 
that he would be off the record and he oould go smoke a cigarette 
or get a Coke, and he would let him know when he wanted him to get 
back on the record. 
Well, after the court reporter left, Mr# Griffin started 
talking to me in a manner of gaining my confidence in that he 
would help me and that he felt 1 would probably need some help in 
the future. 
My not knowing what he was building up to, I asked Mr. 
Griffin to go ahead and ask me what he was going to ask me. He con- 
tinued to advise me that he wanted me to listen to what he had to 
say before he asked me whatever question he was going to ask me. 
I finally tolfl him that whatever he wanted to ask me he could just 
ask me, and if I knew I would tell him the truth or if I didn't 
know, I would tell him I didn't know. 
#• 
+. 
"Mr. Griffin took my reports, one dated February 18, the 
subject of it was an interview with Jack Ruby, and one dated Wo- '* 
vember 26, which was my assignment in the basement. : 
• 
"He aald there were things in these statements which were 
not true and, in fact, ho said both these statements, he said there 
were particular things in there that were not true, and I asked him 
what portions did he consider not true, and then very dogmatically 
h<:' said that,^ • Jack Ruby didn't tell you that he enterejt the base- 
ment via the Main Street ramp.* 
"And, of course, I was shocked at this. This is what I tes- 
tified to, in fact, I was cross-examined on this, and he, Mr. Grif- 
fin, further said, 'Jack Ruby did not tell you that he had thought 
03? planned to kill Oswald two nights prior#* 
"And he said, *Your testimony was false, and these reports 
to your chief of police are false.» 
"So this, of course, all thiso was off the reoord. I told 
nr. Griffin then this shocked me, and I told him it shocked me; 
that i couldn't imagine what he was getting at or why he would ac- 
cuse me of this, and I asked him, and Mr. Griffin replied he didn't 
or he wasn't at liberty to discuss that particular part of it with 
me, and that he wasn't trying to cross-examine me here, but that 
under cross-examination he could prove that my testimony was false, 
and that is when I told Mr. Griffin that these are the fact3 and I 
can't change them. This is what I know about it.ere, but that 
under cross-examination he could prove that my testimony was false, 
and that is when I told Mr. Griffin that these are the fact3 and I 
can't change them. This is what I know about it.

--- PAGE BREAK ---Mr.

Belli - 3 
"I quoted Ruby just about verbatim, and since he didn't 
believe r.ie, and I was saying they were true, we might as well 
terminate the interview.

"Mr.

Griffin then got baok on the record, or before he did 
get back on the record, he said, *Well, now.

Sergeant Dean, I re- 
spect you as a witness, 1 respect you in your profession, but I 
have oiiered my help and assistance, and I again will offer you my 
assistance, and that don't feel you will be subjecting pyourself 
to loss of your job,' or some words to that effect, 'If you will 
go ahead and tell me the truth about it.' 
”l again told Mr.

griffin that these were the facts and I 
couldn't ohange them, so with that we got back on the record." 
On page 257* Dean reiterated testimony included in his deposition that 
it was he who had assigned Officer Vaughn to his post.

V 
Ohis is .especially interesting because all the police agencies had been 
warned of a planned attaok by 100 armed men.

Dean stationed Vaughn all 
alone at the most vulnerable single point in the entire building.

There 
were 70-some men watching the press inside the building.

You may be interested in Doan's account of why he and not Sorrels testi- 
Lied at the criul about what Ruby allegedly said.

This also is on page 
257 where Dean quotes Curry as saying, "Well, you are going to have to 
testify to it because Hr.

Sorrels can't because he says he didn't warn 
Mr.

Ruby when he was questioning him." Sorrels oame into this group 
after the police had taken Ruby upstairs and had begun questioning him.

Also on this page the Commission finds it has no criticism of Dean for 
not having included this information in his February 18 report because 
he was not asked for any explanation as to why he didn't give it at any 
earlier time," referring to the deposition taken by Griffin.

This depo- 
sition was after the trial.

A glanoe at the index of the Report indicates Griffin was never called 
upon to testify before the Commission.--- PAGE BREAK ---

This depo- 
sition was after the trial. A glanoe at the index of the Report indicates Griffin was never called 
upon to testify before the Commission. Dean's demand to know, "I would like to know why Mr. Griffin had accused 
me of perjury," is unanswered. At the end of -'ean's appearance before the Commission (page 258), the 
Commission's Counsel Rankin says, "Waggoner, do you want to take the 
stand for a minute about that conversation? apparently referring to 
what Dean had been testifying to and apparently this is confirmed by the 
Chairman. Carr testified about a different question. This had to do 
with a White House telephone inquiry about rumors of a conspiracy. Dean did not go immediately to the fifth floor. Wor did he have only 
a single television interview. In Volume XII, on Rage 430, he said he 
staged in the basement "some few minutes" and that he was interviewed 
by_ several newsmen". lie named Tom Pettit of NBC, then Bob Huffaker of 
ICHLD-TV, then said, "but there were several. I don't know - ". At this 
point he was interrupted by Mr. Griffin, so if he bad intended to make 
a hotter estimate of the total number of interviews or the total elapsed 
time, he wasn't given the opportunity. From the basement he went to

--- PAGE BREAK ---riffin, so if he bad intended to make 
a hotter estimate of the total number of interviews or the total elapsed 
time, he wasn't given the opportunity. From the basement he went to

--- PAGE BREAK ---

Mr. Belli - 4 
the third floor where he met Curry and Sorrels and after a brief con- 
versation took Sorrels to the fifth floor. By the time he got to the 
fifth floor. Ruby had been stripped. 
Sorrels interrogated Ruby for about ten minutes, according to Dean, 
but the subject matter "wasn't relative to what I wanted to find out 
from Ruby, and I Just disregarded thi3 #rom my mind." (See also below, 
from page 442). 
Dean testified that it wasn't until after Sorrels had left that Dean 
interrogated Ruby about his manner of entrance into the building. 
After the interview with Ruby, Dean returned to the basement and then 
went to the hospital where he arrived about 1 o'clock. He left after 
receiving a telephone call from Lt. Pierce (the radio log should shou 
his times of departure). At no time did he think it important to re- 
count his interview with Ruby to any of his superiors. 
The information elicited allegedly from Ruby on the fifth floor was not 
spontaneously offered by Ruby but "... we interviewed him up in the 
Jail" (Page 438). The Commission also understood this to be the nature 
of the exchange because on page 439 Mr. G-riffin asked, "When was the 
next time that you saw Jack Ruby afterp your interview session with him 
up there?". 
On page 441 at the end of a justification of his off-duty visits to the 
Carousel ("I knew it was a safe place for an off-duty officer to go ..."^ 
Dean revealed that prior to going to the fifth floor he had a further 
interruption, a conversation with R. C. Nelson. 
As to why Dean, an experienced police officer, made no notes of the al- 
leged statement by Ruby prior to February, whereas almost all the various 
police and sheriff's personnel immediately made statements, all of which' 
are dated within a day or two of the actual assassination. Dean's expla- » 
nation on page i|42 in part reads, "I knew that this would probably be 
later used as testimony. I felt since it was - did make an impression 
on me, that 1 could remember it, and it's written as I do remember, just 
about as it happened, it correlates pretty well, «rven though we didn't 
get together with Mr, Sorrels' report. ... I did feel at ,the time that I 
would probably testify to this in court, I did witness nr« Sorrels tak- 
ing his notes, and I felt if I had to, since I did witness it, I could 
use the notes." 
The point at which the reporter was dispatched from the room probably 
occurred on page 443. The remainder of the deposition dealt with an 
alleged film from Canada. 
When the deposition-taking was resumed on April 1, also in the office 
of the TJ. S*. Attorney, Leon D, Hubert, Jr., Assistant Counsel, had re 
placed Griffin and Dean was accompanied by hi3 lawyor. Tod licllastors. 
Of coui’se, there are many contradictions between the various versions 
of the various cops on different occasions.el, had re 
placed Griffin and Dean was accompanied by hi3 lawyor. Tod licllastors. 
Of coui’se, there are many contradictions between the various versions 
of the various cops on different occasions.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

Hr. Belli - 5 
On page 166 of your book you say, "Texas law is particularly touchy 
about ths manner in which a defendant’s own words may be used in tcs- 
timony against, bin. ^ -he warning that he is under arrest and that any- 
thing he says might bo used against him must be made formally in writing 
rn ioXQS» ^ sign an acknowledgment that he has 
received it before anything he says may become the subject ofo future 
uestxmony. Can you please supply me the exact language of the otstute 
or the citation? »wa.«uM. 
1 ^ve written an unpublished - perhaps unpublishable 0 book on this 
"vi \ i0S3lbl7 f'bere are some o questions in your mind that I rai'-ht 
ue able to answer. All of my information is official" - from the 
record, which very few have read and even fewer have analyzed. What 
happened to £0U and your client in Dallas is nothing in comparison to 
vhe as yet untold story. 
Sincerely yours. 
• f 
a » 
Harold Weigbor^