Sanitized Copy Approved for Release 2011/04/27 : CIA-RDP91-00587R000100110002-9


Ww nage S Pood u y) |


U.S. Training of Foreign Police Backfires -


By MARTHA HUGGINS
Congress is expected to vote next month


This type of training is not new. In the
1930s police from various Latin American
countries came to learn detective skills at

urban


LOS ANGELES TIMES
25 March 1986


tighten South Vietnam's security appar-
atus.


g = Pd close)
various organizations to develo
polles-training programe: CLA office
Casoned thi it since “the brains” for polic:
“areintheClA.. . we'll
over to ; e


mov ween and
ae we government’s involvement in


Many USS. groups have trained foreign
police. Under President t D. Eisen-
hower, much of this in the United


States was carried out by the International
Assn. of Chiefs of Police. Training in this
country and abroad also was conducted by
public-administration and police-science
departments at North American universi-
ties. The most active, Michigan State,
worked closely with the Diem regime to


promised.
Williams, U.S. ambassador to El Salvador
during the Kennedy Administration, told
me in an interview last month that U.S.
training of Salvadoran police in the early


United States as favoring progressive
change and democracy if it was training


STAT


7


have fallen outside our sphere of infiuenee: .
Yet one of the claims made most frequently
by the State Department for police training
is that it secures the loyalty of foreign
Police and security forces to the United
States. But one need only look at Libya,
Iran, South Vietnam and Nicaragua— ai!
recipients of almost two decades of police
—to recognize the error of that

assumption. cee
One serious flaw in these programs is
that it is almost impossible to moniter
how our training and equipment are used
locally. Portable radios have been used for


But some members of Congress still have
faith in the program. In a Dec. 25 letter to
the New York Times, Sen. Richard G..
Lugar (R-Ind.), chairman of the Senate
Foreign Relations Committee, said that his
committee was “painfully aware of past
abuses” attributed to our Police- assistance
programs. But he argued that today condi-
tions have changed substantially because
Guatemala and El Salvador recently elect-
ed presidents who had been targets of -
pelice abuses. Thus Lugar believes that
these leaders now may want U.S. assist -
ance in reforming police practices. The.
irony is that the police forces that used
unsavory tactics against these men had
undergone many years of U.S. training.

What USS. police training has done, and
will continue to do, is alienate the very
segments of Central American societies—
students, mothers of the “di ered,”
religious workers, progressive politicians—
who want to create democratic societies.
History teaches us many lessons. Congress
should look carefully at the lessons that we
should have learned from previous police-
training programs.


Martha Huggins, a professor of sociolegy
at Union College in Schenectady, N.Y., is
writing a book covering 40 years of police
training in Latin America.


_—_—_—_— eee


Sanitized Copy Approved for Release 2011/04/27 : CIA-RDP91-00587R000100110002-9
