May 27, 1975


Mr. Harold Weisberg

Rt. # B

Frederick, Maryland
Dear ?tr. l^eisberg:

With ref^-rence to my phone call to you on Sunday, virile I agree that Osvald
probably did not operate at a level as high as that of the FBI Director’s office,
on the other hand, certain considerations I believe must be taken into account and
thought through befSi’e one can completely dismiss the idea. These considerations
are the following:

1. There are only two names on page 6S of Oswald’s notebook - one is the name of
Special Agent James P. Hosty of the DalL'is Field Office of the FBI. The other name
precedes Host2''’s on the page as if it were perhaps the source of Hosty’ s name. That
name is listed as ’’Gandy or Gondya”, as if it had been heard (over the phonefHHB
perhaps by direct call) and could not be checked for spelling.

2. A Miss Gandy was J.Rdgarrf Hoover’s secretary. She apf'arently handled certain
contacts for Hoover. You know about that better than I.

3. It was reltxted shortly after the assassination in M 1963 how Bobby Kennedy re-
ceived at poolside "at hds home in McLean a"^hone call directly from Hoover telling
him in a very terse, cruel tone that ’’your brother is dead” apparently said in such
a way as t^arry the meanir-g ’’your brother is* dead now and
I v;on be taking any more orders fran you.”

4. On May 25, 1975 • ex-FRI agent ^Joseph Schott describr-s a Hooveij^rip to Texas
in 1959 to check out a st favorite ^Residential aspirant of his - LBJ,

5. In the some article above, Schott winds up a JJBB light-hearted narrative with

a very sober note - that when Jack Ruby knocked off Oswald, and Bobby

Kenn»^dy buzzed Hoover’s phone. Hoover knew he no longer h'ld to answer. And he ordered
that the phone be r^^turned to ?LLss Gandy’s possession, she having been the one to


- 2 -


whan previous AG*s had reported, as a Haldeman-wall to be pierced if possible?

6. Th;it if Hoover had planned JFK*s assassination in collusion vath LBJ or "whomever,

talla//ed very >

he verir likely would haveV^ff^ew FBI agents to know about it. Thus, a phone call
from a **Candy or Gondy'* instnicting Oswald to fhone or contact Hosty in the Dallas
field office or whatever could have been a possible method of contact

obviating the ne^d for many others in the Dallas field office to know.

7. It is interesting too that Gordon Shanklin is still Special Agent in Charge of

the Dallas Field Office. He apparently is the one who was SAC on Nov. 22 , 1963 > unles:
I am mistaken. I believe that is noted somewhere in your book ff 4. Shanklin was
reported in last Friday's l<\fe.sh Star (May 23,1975) saying that the Rockefeller
Commission had asked his office to inte:»"view^ various police officers in Dallas
a few weeks ago and they were still doing it - police officers who had been in
Dealey Plaza on Nov. 22 , 1963. Shanklin was quoted further as saying that if
the RockefeUbr Commission should decide to re-open the investig^ion into the
assassination of PresidentKennedy , he (Shanklin) didN't know who would be asked
to handle the invest ignition or re-investigation.


I would be pleased to know your reaction to the above considerations, if you
have the time to pen a short note letting me know if I'm off base or not. (By the
way, a very fine article in US News and World "Report out today, dated June 2, 1975
titled "Assassination - Behind Moves to Reopen JFK Case."


Bill Durham
