V 
IHTII CONUMKMM 
ted .SVunion 
SION AT 10 
lCtvil'OIlT 
No IW 7RA 
TilK INVESTIGATION OF THE 
ASSASSINATION OF PRESIDENT 
JOHN F. KENNEDY: PERFORMANCK 
OF THE INTELLIGENCE AGENCIES 
HOOK V 
FI N AG REPORT 
Ui' '1*11t£ 
SKKUOT COMMITTER 
TO STUDY OOVKKNMKNTALOPERATIONS 
WITH maiiHccr TO 
INTKEUOENOK ACTIVITIES 
IfOte omission of Legat 3A Eldon 
t0 JJ“llaa 311(1 M'a 
n/O/63 viewing of alleged LHO 
n/r-/U^ii10nini' of tuP® 40(1 JEH’a 
to Secret Service 
reporting the agwnts auy it is 
not the reul Oswald. K0te also 
S Vitl^ld flF0 "/23/63 
7 also returned to Dallas 
at this general time. 
ApttiL 2Ji (utulJr authority l>r f.m> mriiyr m ATTmrr»,r^.H 
U.a. GOVERNMENT PRINTING OFFICE 
WASHINGTON . 1076 
Kur -ulo by the Superintendent of DocuitMtiilM, U.8. Goveroment Printing Office 
Washington, D.C. 20*02 Prlee $1.40 
Htack Number 002 071 -004N7- 4 
■... . J ■ ■ 
IjjiifrtyWV i <»»»*■■>—»>*»■■>., ■ e«

--- PAGE BREAK ---rintendent of DocuitMtiilM, U.8. Goveroment Printing Office 
Washington, D.C. 20*02 Prlee $1.40 
Htack Number 002 071 -004N7- 4 
■... . J ■ ■ 
IjjiifrtyWV i <»»»*■■>—»>*»■■>., ■ e«

--- PAGE BREAK ---

APPENDIX C 
OunONOlXKIY 
1060 
.January 7—Kick*! Castro takes over the C\than government. Batista 
ami his personal aides leave Cuba. 
December tl—Dulles approves “thorough consideration be given to 
the elimination of Fidel Castro.” 
1960 
Late September llissell and Edwards brief Dulles and Cubcll 
about operations ugainsl Castro. . 
Initial meeting between Rosselli, Malien und CIA Suppoit Chief. 
A subsequent meeting takes place in Florida. 
1961 
January 22—President Kennedy succeeds President Eisenhower. 
March—President Kennedy raises subject of assassination with 
Senator Smothers, indicating his disapproval. 
A pril—Rosselli passes poison pills to a Cuban in Miami. 
April 16-17—Bay of Pigs invasion fails. 
May 22— Hoover memorandum to Attorney General Robert 
Kennedy noting CIA hud used Giancana in “clandestine efforts” 
against Castro. 
November 16—President gives speech mentioning opposition to 
assassination. 
November SO—John McCone succeeds Allen Dulles as Director, 
CIA. 
November—Operat ion MONGOOSE is created. 
December—FBI meets with Lansdale re: MONGOOSE. 
1962 
February 10—Helms succeeds Bussell as Deputy Director, Plans, 
CIA. 
April—Harvey establishes contact with Rosselli. 
Late April—Harvey passes poison pills to Rosselli in Miami. 
May 7 Houston und Edwards brief Attorney General on pre-Buy 
of Pigs underworld assassination [dot. 
May HI—Atlorney General Kennedy tells Hoover that the CIA has 
used underworld figures in uu effort to assassinate Castro. 
(DO)

--- PAGE BREAK ---\ 
September 7—Kosselli tells Harvey the.

pills me still in Cuba.

October SS-SH-—Cuban missile crisis.

Nocewber—0|Htint.ion MONGOOSE emls.

nm 
ICttrhj nm—WiIIinni Harvey lolls underworld (inures Hie CGA is 
no longer interested in assassinating ('astro.

Atarvh IS—Attach on a Soviet vessel oil’ the northern coast of Culm 
hy metliInn's of Alpha (Hi, assisted by meniUns of the Second National 
h rout of Kscuinbray reportedly occurs.

Mfircb.

Sb Attack on a Soviet vessel hy incndx*rs of Commandos 
T/~ti<», another auti-Cnst rogroup, reportedly occurs.

A f>ri!

Special Group iIiscoases the cont ingency of Castro's death.

May Xcpte7nher—\A'v Harvey Oswaltl moves to New Orleans; be- 
comes involved with FPCC.

lie contacts anti-Castro (’nlmns as well.

J/o/ nm—Series of meetings among major loaders of the anti- 
Castro movement.

June Special Group decides to step up covert operations against 
( libit.

July %—Ten Cuban exiles arrive in New Orleans from -Miami and 
join the ‘’training camp” north of New Orleans.

Tltia “I ruining rump” 
is directed by the same individuals who were previously involved in 
pitM oriog dy,inmite.

”A’\ a life long friend of AMGASII, had IICIIHMI 
procure t lie dynamite, 
/.^c Jnhf—Carlos Hriiiguier is requested to assist exiles at the 
training camp” in returning to Miami.

July J/—The FBI seizes more than a Ion of dynamite, tit) bombeus- 
mgs.

napalm material and ot her devices at a home in the New Orleans 
area.

Articles appear in the.

New Orleans Time /O’rt/umne.

on Amnis!

1 
2, and 4,19(13.

• r> > 
A vmtfil in—(Jhicaf/o Sun Times carries an art icle that reports CIA 
had dealings with the underworld figure Sam Giancana.

I fchos informs MeCoiu* of the CIA operation involving Giancana, 
and fells linn it, involved assassination.

August—According to FTU report, a Gatin American military offi- 
cer attends a Cuban exile group meeting and talks of assassination.I fchos informs MeCoiu* of the CIA operation involving Giancana, 
and fells linn it, involved assassination.

August—According to FTU report, a Gatin American military offi- 
cer attends a Cuban exile group meeting and talks of assassination.

/Cuvh/ Septnnher—TaIks between the Dublin delegate to the United 
Nations, I A Clmga, and a U.S.

delegate, William Atwood, are pro- 
posed by the Cubans.

1 
7“riA n,Sl‘ °^ers, after their first meeting with 
AMGA.Mf since prior tn the Oeloher BMW missile crisis, cable head- 
quarters that, AM GASH i* interested in attempting an “inside job” 
against Castro and is awaiting a U.S.

plan of action.

(’astro giv<K mi impromptu, three-hour interview with AP reixirtcr 
Daniel darker, lie warns that U.S.

lenders aiding terrorist, plans to 
eliminate (‘uhaii leaders will t hemselves not lie sa IV.

September /2?—< ’nban Coordinating Committee meets to conduct a 
broad review of the U.S.

(Jovermnent\s Cuban contingency plaits.

They 
agree there is a strong likelihood that ('astro would retaliate in sonic 
way against, the rash of cove 
U.S.

officials within the U.S.

Late September—Os w a I d 
Oub»ui and Soviet ('nnauhttej> 
September 27—The coordi 
minium listing assignments 
retaliatory actions by the Co 
for attacks on IGS.

officials w 
October (i—FBI Ilcudqua 
City.

1 
October 10—The FRY is 
meeting with AM GASH.

October H/,—Jean Daniel 
interview wit h President ICc 
in Cuba.

President Kenned 
betrayed the revolution.

October SO—Desmond F 
AMAGSII.

Fitzgerald tells 
support.

Fitzgerald is intro* 
sentat.ive of Attorney Gencro 
November 1—Diem is ossa* 
November- Case Officer it 
l»n fold the rifles, telescopic 
Nor ember 17- According 
the home, of a member of tl 
telephone call from Cuba w 
to leave the TT.S.

November IS—President 
Tampa and deli vet's a speech 
Novcmlier 10—Castro conf 
to him about.

U.S.—Cuban re 
NovemJterSO—CIA officer* 
will IKS a meeting on No vein 
meeting he has requested.--- PAGE BREAK ---

November IS—President 
Tampa and deli vet's a speech 
Novcmlier 10—Castro conf 
to him about. U.S.—Cuban re 
NovemJterSO—CIA officer* 
will IKS a meeting on No vein 
meeting he has requested. According to FBI reports 
tourist ciiiil at the Consulate i 
November SS—President K 
^Tho Case Oflieer meets iw 
Kennedy’s .speech of Novcml 
gerald helped write the spaec 
rifles with telescopic sights 
offers AMGASII the poison 
with it. As the meeting bren 
has been assassinated. Daniel spends the. day wit] 
news of the ussassiiiat ion. McCone requests all Agenc 
Mexico Station cables Cl. them of Oswald’s October visi 
% 
ll 
' * V, • 
. A- V ^ U. ■ "m* 
:*■ 
•Vw. •SA

--- PAGE BREAK ---101 
till in ('ulm.

i'll res the CIA is 
■m const of Culm 
Second National 
s of Commandos 
• T (’nslm*H tliMilh.

Sew Orleans; he 
.» Cubans ns well, 
tlera of the anti- 
•perations against 
from-Miami ami 
i “training camp” 
otisly involved in 
ASII, had helped 
sist exiles til the 
»lito, ‘20 bomb cus- 
t l he New Orleans 
t/ime on August l, 
that reports OTA 
urn.

olving Giancana, 
•ican military offi- 
of assassination, 
rate to the United 
Atwood, are pro- 
rst.

meeting with 
crisis, enlde head 
g an ‘‘inside job” 
with AP reporter 
terrorist plaits to 
• iccts to conduct, a 
irency plans.

They 
I retaliate in some 
way against the.

rash of covert activity in Cuba; however, an attack on 
l J.S.

officials within the U.S.

is con tidered unlikely.

Late September—Oswald is in Mexico City and visits both the 
Cuhiin and Soviet Consulates.

Scptanbc.r27—
iThe et ami i mil or of Cuban A Hairs circulates a memo- 
randum list ing assignments Tor coni ingtmrv |>apei*s relat ing to possible 
retaliatory actions by the (’astro regime.

No responsibility is assigned 
for attacks on U.S.

officials within the United States.

October 0—FBI Headquarters learns of Oswald contacts in Mexico 
City.

October 10—'Pirn FIU is told by an informant that the CIA is 
meeting with AM LAS 11.

October £Jt—Jean Daniel, the French reporter, conducts a brief 
interview wit h Privsidenl Kennedy Is*fore setting off on an assignment 
in Cuba, President Kennedy expresses his feeling that CmU.ro Inul 
bclmyed the revolution.

October 20—Desmond Fitzgerald, a senior CIA officer, meets 
AM ALSU.

Fitzgerald tells A ML A SIT that a coup would receive U.S.

support.

Fitzgerald is introduced to A ML ASH as a personal repre- 
sentative of Attorney General Kennedy.

November /—Diem is assassinated following a coup.

November—C\vm'.

Officer is told by Fitzgerald that AMLASTT may 
he.

told the rifles, telescopic sights aud explosives will he provided.--- PAGE BREAK ---

Officer is told by Fitzgerald that AMLASTT may 
he. told the rifles, telescopic sights aud explosives will he provided. November 77—According to FBI reports, the Cuban-American is at 
the home of a member of the Tampa FPCC. Ho is there awaiting a 
telephone call from Cuba which is to give him the ugo-fthead order” 
to leave the U.S. November IS—President Kennedy makes a public appearance in 
Tampa and delivers a spee.Hi on Cuba policy in Miami. November /!)—Castro contacts Daniel and spends six hours talking 
to him HIMUII. U.S.—Cuban relations. November20—OTA officers telephones AMLASH and tells him there 
will U* a meeting on November ‘2‘2. AMLASH is told that it was the 
meet ing he has requested. According to FBI reports, the. Cuban American obtains a Mexican 
tourist card at the Consulate in Tampa. Novembe.r 22—President Kennedy is assassinated. The Oilso Officer meets with AMLASH. He refers to President 
Kennedy’s speech of November IK in Miami and indicates that Fitz- 
gerald helped write the. speech. TTo tells AMLASTT the explosives and 
rifles with telescopic sights will be provided. 'Hie Case Officer also 
offers AMLASI! the poison pen device but. AMLASH is dissatisfied 
with it. As tin* meeting breaks up, they are told President Kennedy 
has been assassinated. Daniel spends the. day with Castro and later reports his reaction to 
news of the. assnssinul ion. McCone requests nil Agency material on Oswald. Mexico Station cables CTA Headquarters, 1730 hours, to inform 
them of Oswald’s October visit t.o Mexico City.

--- PAGE BREAK ---rrm^ wjts^*v.

102 
KRT Headquarters dispatches a teletype at 0:40 p.in.

to all field 
olliees requesting contact of all informants for information lM*nring on 
the assassin u I ion.

KIH IIrmlquurlcr-s dispatches a teletype at 11:00 p.m.

|<, nil field 
olliees requesting they resolve all allegations pertaining lo the 
assassination.

November 83—Director McCone meets with President.

Johnson and 
McXh>orgc Bundy and briefs them on information CIA Ileadqmirters 
had received from Mexico Station.

CIA ITeadcpiuders cables the AMLASTT Case Ofiieer and orders 
him to break contact with AMLASIf because of the President’s as- 
sassination and to return to Headquarters.

CIA personnel on the CT Staff prepare a memnmmlnm suggesting 
that Oswald’s contacts in Mexico City with Soviet personnel might 
have sinister iinidie4itions.

This information is transmitted to CIA’s 
liaison with FBI by telephone at.

10:80 a.m.

Desk officer is put in charge of CIA investigation of the 
assassination.

CIA Headquarters telephones the Mexico Station to get the planned 
arrest of Duran called off, but learns the arrest could not 1** called off.

KarHineHsinoH rends a cable In Mexico Nhtlinn saving.

Hie HITCH!

“could 
jeopardize I I.S, freedom of action on the whole, question of Cuban 
restMmsiIrilit v.” 
Legal informs FRf Headquarters that the U.S.

Ambassador to 
Mexico is eoncemed that Cubans were behind Oswald’s assassination 
of President Kennedy.

The Ambassador requests both the CIA and 
FBI do everything possible to establish or refute this Cuban con- 
nect ion.

FR1 Headquarters dispatches a teletype to all field offices rescinding 
the early teletype of November 22,1968.

Noremf>r.r 81+—Mexico Station dispatches a cable to Headquarters 
with the names of ad I known contacts of certain Soviet personnel in 
Mexico Citv.

Among the mimes in the cable is that of AM RASH.

At 10:00 a.m..

Director McCone meets with the President, and briefs 
him about.

CTA’s o|irrational plans against Culm.Director McCone meets with the President, and briefs 
him about.

CTA’s o|irrational plans against Culm.

Cablegram w sent from Mexico to CTA Ileadquarters stating that 
the IT.S.

Ambassador to Mexico feels that, the Soviets an* too sophis- 
ticated to participate in a direct, assassination of President Kennedy, 
but.

the Cubans would be stupid enough to have participated with 
Oswald.

Oswald is murdered at.

12:21 p.m.

EST.

Novemlicr 25- The Case Officer prepares a “contact report” on the 
Novemlmr 22 meeting with AMLASH.

On Fitzgerald’s orders, no 
ment ion is made of tin* poison pen Dung offered to A M DASH.

At.

noon, “D” shows up at.

the IT.S.

Embassy in Mexico City.

He 
bdls Embassy personnel that he was in the Cuban Consulate on Sep- 
tember 18 ami saw Culmns pay Oswald a sum of money and talk about 
Oswald’s assassinating someone.

At 12:00 p.

rn., Mexico dispatches a cable, to PI\ Hendqmu-ters re- 
minding licitdrmnrters of Castro’s September 7,1963 statement threat- 
ening IT.S.

leaders.

^ A senior U.S.

Embassy official in Mexico Citv tells a senior Mexican 
Government, official known facts client Oswald’s visit to Mexico City 
and raises questions of Cuban involvement 
November McCone 
President tells him the FR 
the President’s death and 
able to assist t lie.

FBI’s invi 
The American AUIIMISHI 
Department, through CIA 
Cubans were involved in I h 
CIA Headquarters cabh 
all information on the as 
fully examine material oh 
Deputy Attorney Generi 
Rill Moyers, stating “thn
1 
a way as lo sat isfy the pe 
have been told mid a stn 
public should 1M* satisfied 
lion about his motive ought 
November 87- -Legal cn 
release referencing to Cast 
One CIA Station cable 
resources that.

AM LASH 
FRI rendu a Htipervisor 
galion ami to pursue it 
obi allied.

November 88—CIA Hoi 
Station to “follow all lead 
bility of Cuban or Soviet it 
CIA Headquarters warn 
bassaclor was pushing the 
to a “flap” with the Cubans 
November 8.9—Preside!--- PAGE BREAK ---

AM LASH 
FRI rendu a Htipervisor 
galion ami to pursue it 
obi allied. November 88—CIA Hoi 
Station to “follow all lead 
bility of Cuban or Soviet it 
CIA Headquarters warn 
bassaclor was pushing the 
to a “flap” with the Cubans 
November 8.9—Preside! Warren Commission after 
tor Hoover. November 30—Director 
11:00 a.m. and they discus 
December /—MeCdne. m 
son. McCone’s meinoramli 
CIA Headquarters cable 
information from a sensiti 
Havana had been delayed 
p.m. on the day of the. ass; 
passenger who arrived in 
through customs. The pas* 
Havana. December 8—At 10:00 a 
Bundy. At 3 : 00 a,m., McCone’s c 
CIA with the subject, being 
December 3—CTA Head- 
that. the. Cuban—American 
Mexico City to Havana on £ 
I ...... L - -

'• + > . *’■ . '■& *v

--- PAGE BREAK ---I<> all field 
bearing on 
to all field 
mg to tin* 
*»l 1 IISOIt and 
ead((uartei*s 
and orders 
sident’s as- 
suggesting 
»mu‘l might 
d to CIA’s 
on of the.

• lie planned 
a- called Off.

rrest ueould 
i of Cuban 
•assador to 
sassination 
<• CIA and 
i ’uban con- 
rescinding 
lulqnarters 
cisonnel in 
ML AS FI.

and briefs 
fating Unit 
Ion so phi.s- 
i Kennedy.

Iiiifctl wit*h 
ort” on tin* 
orders, no 
Sll.

0 (’it y.

I le 
ite on *Sep- 
1 talk about 
tnuirfers re- 
tent threat- 
»nr Mexican 
lexico City 
103 
/VO'uc.mhvr SO*—McCone again meets with President Johnson.

The 
President, tells him the PH!

hits responsibility for the investigation of 
llu' President*s death and directs him to make CIA resources avail- 
able to assist the KHPs invest igaf ion.

Tim American Auilwtssador in Mexico sends a euhle.

to the State* 
Department through (’!.\ elninnels.

lie gives his opinion that the 
CiiI>IIns were involved in I he assnssituil ion.

CIA 11 em Ii pin rtei^s cables CIA stations in Kurope and Canada for 
all in formation on the assassination issue, noting they should care- 
fully examine material obtained from a specified resource.

Deputy Attorney Heneral ICuf/.enlmch writes Presidential Assistant 
Hill Moyers, stating “that the facts should be made public in such 
a way as to satisfy tlie people of the U.S.

and abroad, that the facts 
have been told ami a statement to this effect lx* made now.” The 
public should be satisfied that Oswald was the assassin and specula- 
tion alxnit his mot ive ought to he cut off.

JVo'ocmhrr S7 Legal cables PHI I feadqtmriers and notes a press 
release referencing to Cast ro’s s|H*eeh of September 7, 11)03.

One.

(’IA Station eables information received from the specified 
resources (hat AMLASII hud been indiscreet in bis eonvci*sations.

PHI sends a supervisor to Mexico City to coordinate tJie investi- 
gation and to pursue it vigorously until the desired results are 
obtained.--- PAGE BREAK ---

(’IA Station eables information received from the specified 
resources (hat AMLASII hud been indiscreet in bis eonvci*sations. PHI sends a supervisor to Mexico City to coordinate tJie investi- 
gation and to pursue it vigorously until the desired results are 
obtained. November £8—CIA Headquarters cables a reminder to the Mexico 
Stat ion to “follow all leads ’ and to continue to investigate the possi- 
bility of Cuban or Soviet, involvement. CiA Headquarters warns the Station Chief in Mexico that the Am- 
bassador was pushing the ease too hard ami his proposals could lend 
to a “flap” with the Cubans. Not’fivibtiv &9—-President Johnson announces formation of the 
Warren Commission after dismissing other possibilities with Direc- 
tor I loover. No-iwmhvr $0—Director McCone meets with President Johnson at 
1! :<><> a.m. and they dismiss I he Cuba question. “D” is mentioned. f>rrrmOrr / McCone meets with both Humly and President John- 
son. McCone'* memorandum indicates they discussed “D’a” story. ( 1 A ! Imulqmirlers cables Mexico Station indicating it has received 
in format ion from a sensitive source, that a Column Airlines Might to 
Havana had been delayed in (Mexico Cit-.v from 11:00 p.m. until 11 :(M) 
p.m. on fin* day of the assassination. It. was awaiting an unidentified 
passenger who arrived in the twin engine aircraft and failed to go 
through customs. Tim passenger rode in the cockpit on the flight to 
Havana, * 
I0 i‘,mlh r S At. 10:00 ii.m., McCotui meets with the President and 
Hand v. Ai 3: f Hi a.m., Mo.( one s ea lendnr reveals ho attended a meeting at the. (IA wit It I he. subject Itritig Culm. ftccnnOn' .> ( TA Headquarters receives information from Mexico 
that f lie (’uban— Amerinm left the C.S.on November 23 and flew from 
Mexico City to Havana on Novrml>er27.

--- PAGE BREAK ---104 
December 4—OTA receives a report from one of its Cuban agents 
that, he thought hr.

had met Oswald in Cuba, Mexico City or the United 
Stub's.

This agent, believes that, the Cuban government, employed 
assassinstutd had carried out.at least one assassination in Mexico.

FBI memorandum from Sullivan to Belmont.

indicates them is no 
evidence that Oswald’s assassination of the President was inspired 
or directed by fpro-Castrol organizations or by any foreign country.

December 5—Mexico Station cables that someone who saw the 
Cuban-American hoard the.

aircraft to Havana on November 27 re- 
port ml that, be “looked suspicious.” 
December 6—Warren Commission holds its first, meeting, as the 
FBI and CIA are completing I heir own investigations.

December S—CTA Headquarters cables its Miami Station ordering 
a halt, to an operation to supply weapons to AMLAS1T, landing a high- 
level policy review.

December f)—A memorandum to Director McCone discusses U.S.

operations against Cuba, but docs not mention the AM PAST [ opera- 
tion.

or any other speed fir openition.

FBI’s 5-volume report.

on theiussassi nation is completed.

Deputy Attorney General ICiitzenbaeh writes the.

Warren Commis- 
sion and recommends that, the Commission immediately state that the 
FMT report clearly shows Oswald was a.

loner.

December 10 Ifoover receives report on the investigative deficien- 
cies in the handling of the tue-assassimilion Oswald case.

Results in 
disciplinary aelion against 17 Bureau officials.

Director McCone meets with CTA stall* and the subject of the meet- 
ing is Cuba.

December 12—CTA Mexico Station reports the FBI is‘pushing to 
wind up the Mexican aspects of the case.

Late December—CIA desk officer completes a brief report on his 
investigation, which is submit ted to the President.

The CIA derides to have, the Comitcrintelligcnce Division continue 
the investigation.

7964.--- PAGE BREAK ---

The CIA derides to have, the Comitcrintelligcnce Division continue 
the investigation. 7964. Jawuari/ 26—A subordinate to the Chief of Counterintelligence is 
designated the “point, of record” for all matters relating to the assas- 
sination and the Warren Commission. January 24—FBI liaison is told by CTA official that there are no 
act ive plots against, Castro. January 26—Rankin meets with Hoover and they discuss the alle- 
gation that Oswald was an FBI informant. January 61—Hoover indicates in his memorandum of the Janu- 
ary 28, 1964 meeting, that he did not appreciate the statement by 
Chief Justice Warren that the Bureau’s report was a “skeleton report.” 
March 26—-TIM* President’s Commission requests the FBI to re- 
spond to 52 questions. In a subsequent memorandum T( 4/3/64) by 
a Bureau Supervisor to William Sullivan, he states the Commission is 
cross-examining (he Bureau in regard to its investigation of the Presi- 
dent’s assassination. Rankin requests tlwi 
matiou on certain pre 
May 14—Both Hoo 
open. May 20—Rankin n 
Castro and ant i-Castr< 
June 11—Warren C 
tions from the, field ol 
letter informs the 1 
of the. Army “may 
organizations.” 
July—The FBI lea 
tion from one of the F 
September 0—The 
ing Attorney General 
accurate insofar us its 
Septeml)er 25—Bur 
Report. September 60—Ass 
that reviewed the C 
shortcomings.” Burea 
October l—An FB 
informs him that “he 
McCarthy’d McCarth 
Late 1064—AML A 
tion of Cuban leadei 
Government, cannot b 
contact with B-l and 
plotting. May—“A” contacts 
operation. He is turn 
forms the CIA about “ 
J\me—Both ogencii 
who was involved in i 
June 26—CIA Ilea 
AM LASH group is ii 
to CIA operations. July 2—FBI writei 
the CIA were sernt to 
DCI. Late January—Dre’ 
informs Warren that 
that Castro planned H 
January 31—Rowle, 
lawyer’s story.

--- PAGE BREAK ---ASH group is ii 
to CIA operations. July 2—FBI writei 
the CIA were sernt to 
DCI. Late January—Dre’ 
informs Warren that 
that Castro planned H 
January 31—Rowle, 
lawyer’s story.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

105 
»n agents 
i* United 
in ployed 
eo. 
ere is no 
inspired 
eonnt ry. 
saw the 
•er 27 re- 
g, as the 
ordering 
g a high- 
>ses TJ.S. 
II opera- 
Commis- 
thatthe 
dcficien- 
iesults in 
ihe meet* 
ushing t4> 
rt on his 
(continue 
I igenre is 
lie. annus- 
re. are no 
the alle- 
lic Janu- 
incnt by 
i.re|M>rt.” 
Ill to rr- 
:/IH) by 
• nission is 
• he 1 * re-si- 
Rankin requests that the FBI furnish the Commission with infor- 
mation on certain pro-Castro and anti-Castro organizations. 
May H—Moth Hoover and Helms testify the case will always be 
open. 
May £0—Rankin requests additional information on certain pro- 
Castro and anti-Castrogroups. 
June, //—Warren Commission receives a summary of the organiza- 
tions from the field ofiires hut not from FBI I leudquarters. Hoover’s 
letter informs the Commission that the CIA and Department 
of the Army “may have pertinent information concerning these 
organizat ions.” 
July—The FBI learns some details of the CIA’s AMLASH opera- 
tion from one of the FB I’s informants. 
September 0—The Bureau informs the White House and the Act- 
ing Attorney General that “the Commission’s report is seriously in- 
accurate. insofar as its treatment, of the FBI is concerned.” 
September £6—Burcuu receives a copy of the Warren Commission’s 
Report. 
September 30—Assistant. Director Gale presents a memorandum 
that reviewed the Commission Report “as it pertained to FBI 
shortcomings.” Bureau again disciplines agents. 
October 1—An FBI insjHsetor telephonirally contacts Rankin and 
informs him that “he did the Bureau a great disservice and he’d out- 
McCarthy’d McCarthy.” 
Late t!)tH—AMLASH becomes more insistent that the assassina- 
tion of Cuban leadership is a necessity. lie is told that the U.S. 
Government cannot become involved in the “first step.” He is put in 
contact with IV—1 and the CIA through B-l is kept informed of the 
plotting. 
1966 
May—“A” contacts IANS with information about the AMLASH 
operat ion. He is turned over to the FBI for handling. The FBI in- 
forms the Cl A about “A”. 
Juirw—-Both agencies interrogate “A” and establish that he knew 
who was involved in the AMLASH operation, including the CIA. 
June £3—CIA Headquarters rabies its Stations stating the entire 
AMLASH group is insecure and further contact constitutes a menace 
to CIA o|Munitions. 
Jvlv £—FBI writes that the details of the meeting with “A” and 
the CIA were scant to the. White House, the Attorney General and the 
DCI. 
1967 
f.ate January- Drew Pearson meets with Chief Justice Warren and 
informs Warren Ilutl. a lawyer was (old by an underworld contact, 
tlml <'list ro planned Kennedys iissiiKsination. 
January .it Kowley meets with Warren, Kowley is informed of the 
lawyer’s story.d 
informs Warren Ilutl. a lawyer was (old by an underworld contact, 
tlml <'list ro planned Kennedys iissiiKsination. 
January .it Kowley meets with Warren, Kowley is informed of the 
lawyer’s story.

--- PAGE BREAK ---utl. a lawyer was (old by an underworld contact, 
tlml <'list ro planned Kennedys iissiiKsination. 
January .it Kowley meets with Warren, Kowley is informed of the 
lawyer’s story.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

-2t.be ; 4 
I.'-u. 
i 
106 
February 2—Warren calls Rowley and informs Rowley that lie 
spoke with Pearson who said the lawyer winder to see. Warren. 
February #—Tcitltif ivr dale sei by Pearson with Warren for the 
lawyer to meet with Secret Service. Neither Pearson nor the lawyer 
contacted Seorot Service. 
February 70—Rowley advises Warren that neither Pearson nor 
Warren have eoulaeled Secret Service. Rowley tells Warren I,lie in- 
formal ion would IK*, passed to the FBI. 
February Fi—FBI is informed by James .1. Rowley that Chief 
Justice Warren had mmntly been informed of IT.S. attempts to as- 
sassinate ('astro in IiXi‘2 and 1903, that Caslro had decided to utilize 
tlm same procedure anil that Warren wants these allegations looked 
into. 
February 75—Hoover informs Rowley that the Bureau “is not con- 
iha-lm^: any investigation” but would accept, volunteered information. 
March !, — Rolierl Kennedy’s secretary rails Hoover and ret|iieslH a 
ropy of Kdward’s memo of May 7, 11)11*2 at which time Robert Kennedy 
was hrie.fod on ussassimil ion plots. 
March7—Drew Pearson’s coin urn is published. 
March 17—Presidential Assistant Marvin Watson advises DeLoaeh 
that President Johnson has instructed the FBI to interview the lawyer 
concerning any knowledge he had in the assussination of Kennedy. 
Watson says ramiest “stemmed from a communication the FBI had 
sent the White I louse some weeks ago.” 
March tO—The lawyer interviewed bv the Washington Field Oflice 
would not identify his source of the information that Castro plotted 
to kill Kennedy. Agents interviewing the lawyer were instructed to 
make it clear the FBI was “not interfering with any current investiga- 
tion in New Orleans. 
March tt—The FBI forwards results of the interview with the 
lawyer to t.he While. House. The informal ion indicates that the lawyer’s 
sources allegedly were used by the OTA in attempts against Castro, 
d im While House also receives information originally from CIA re- 
lating to CIA’s use of Malum and Giancana in a plot against (’astro. 
Material also includes in formation (hat Koheii. Kennedy advised on 
May 'J, PJU‘2 that (•! A should never take such steps without first check- 
ing with the Department of Justice. Helms meets the President at the 
White House in early evening. 
March t'1—Helms assigns I lie Inspector General the task of report- 
ing on (11A assassination attempts against Castro. 
April 4—Watson calls DeLoaeh and advises that the President is 
convinced there was a plot in connection with Kennedy’s assassination. 
April tJjf—l.G. Rejani. is delivered to Helms in installments. 
May tt—Helms returns copy of report to l.G. 
May IW—All notes and other derived source material of the l.G. 
Report are destroyed.