Nuclear Weapons and the Law of War

Published: Jun 6, 2023 | Briefing Book # 832 | Edited by William Burr

Negotiation of Additional Protocol I to the 1949 Geneva Conventions, 1974-1977
Pentagon Feared Agreement Would Be Read as Prohibiting Nuclear Use
Joint Staff: Not “Feasible” to Protect Civilians in “General Nuclear War”

[A message to Secretary of State Kissinger (then in the Middle East) from his Executive Assistant Lawrence Eagleburger, and transmitted by Brent Scowcroft, reported on a problem at the law of war conference. A key issue was whether to allow the Provisional Revolutionary Government ( PRG ) of Vietnam and the Royal Government of the National Union of Kampuchea [Cambodia] ( GRUNK ) to participate. The question posed by Eagleburger was that, if the two “puppet governments” were seated, should the U.S. walk out or “protest and stay.” Eagleburger explained why the U.S. was participating: to have a voice in decisions on the treatment of prisoners of war and “to refute the many criticisms that will be made of our tactic in Vietnam and elsewhere.” If the U.S. lost the vote and walked out, it would mean “forsaking our objectives” at the conference and “irritating Switzerland and a lot of other countries,” among other problems. As it turned out, the PRG and GRUNK failed in their bid to participate in the conference, so Kissinger did not have to decide about continued U.S. participation.]

Swiss jurist Jean Pictet (1914-2002) spent his career with the International Committee of the Red Cross, eventually becoming its vice president. He helped draft the 1949 Geneva Conventions for the protection of victims of war and had a lead role in the creation and negotiation of the 1977 Additional Protocols ( Protocol I and Protocol II ). (Photo Source: ICRC Twitter feed).

State Department Deputy Legal Adviser George H. Aldrich (1932-2019) was chief of the U.S. delegation to the International Humanitarian Law conference that met in Geneva, Switzerland, during 1974-1977. (Photo source: Obituary , MyEasternShore)

Washington, D.C., June 6, 2023 - U.S. officials and NATO allies feared that international talks meant to strengthen the protection of civilians during conflicts could lead to a ban on the use of nuclear weapons, according to a September 1975 memorandum by the Pentagon’s Joint Staff posted today by the National Security Archive. Published as part of a new Electronic Briefing Book on the negotiations that produced Additional Protocol I to the 1949 Geneva Conventions, the Defense Department memo reveals some of the concerns that underlay the initial U.S. position that Protocol I would not apply to nuclear weapons use.

Negotiated during the mid-1970s, in the shadow of the Vietnam War and anti-colonial rebellions, a major purpose of “International Humanitarian Law” was to create rules of war that shielded civilians from intentional attack. Seeking better arrangements for the protection of prisoners of war and wanting to improve the U.S. reputation after the Vietnam War, U.S. negotiators participated in the talks that produced Protocol I, but the results troubled U.S. officials and NATO allies because of their implications for nuclear weapons use. It was not “feasible” to apply the provisions for the protection of civilians “in the event of general nuclear war,” according to the Pentagon.

Today’s posting focuses on U.S. government and inter-allied discussions of nuclear weapons during the 1974-1977 negotiations. The story of the negotiations themselves are too complex to take on here, but documents on the nuclear aspects shed light on some of the innovative features of Protocol I and their broader implications.government and inter-allied discussions of nuclear weapons during the 1974-1977 negotiations. The story of the negotiations themselves are too complex to take on here, but documents on the nuclear aspects shed light on some of the innovative features of Protocol I and their broader implications. A West German aide-memoire reveals Bonn’s concern that, if Protocol I prohibitions went into effect, they could call into question the “first use of nuclear weapons [which] is an element contained solely in NATO’s concept of deterrence.” Other declassified documents included in the posting disclose U.S. efforts to placate West German officials, whose concerns about the nuclear use issue persisted.

Also included in the posting are major reviews of Protocol I by NATO’s Military Committee and by a Defense Department working group, both of which assumed that the rules did not apply to nuclear weapons use. The Pentagon report expressed concern about prohibitions of “attacks against the civilian population or civilians by way of reprisals.” Defense officials saw the threat of reprisals “as an essential means for deterring violations of the law of war” and wanted “to preserve the right of reprisal in some types of widespread conventional warfare.” The State Department rejected the Defense proposal, but the problem of reprisals would be a continuing issue in U.S. government discussions of Protocol I.

From the onset of the Protocol I negotiations, U.S. officials did not believe that the limitations and prohibitions would apply to nuclear weapons, and they had a tacit understanding with the Soviet Union on that issue. [1] To make that point absolutely clear, State Department lawyer and U.S. delegation chief George H. Aldrich proposed that when the U.S.delegation chief George H. Aldrich proposed that when the U.S. signed Protocol I it should disclose an “understanding … to the effect that the rules established by the protocol are not intended to have any effect on and do not apply to the use of nuclear weapons.” Aldrich crafted the understanding when he was working for Secretary of State Henry Kissinger, and the Jimmy Carter administration adopted the same language when it signed the Protocol in December 1977.

An important element of the discussions was the continuing West German concern about nuclear weapons. A front-line state in the Cold War housing nuclear weapons delivery systems and U.S. and British nuclear stockpiles, Bonn was wary about any rules that could conceivably weaken the threats that underlay NATO’s deterrence strategy. Thus, West German defense officials wanted to avoid any interpretations of the Protocol that could cast doubt on nuclear deterrence. To alleviate such concerns, U.S. negotiators assiduously tried to assure Bonn about the need for, and the U.S. commitment to, interpretive language on Protocol I. Although the State Department was wary that German defense officials were trying to scuttle Protocol I for domestic legal reasons, they were confident that the Foreign Ministry would support the new rules on political and diplomatic grounds, which it did.

The reasons for the West German and U.S. worries were clear enough given the far-reaching implications of the new rules for military operations detailed in the 1977 Additional Protocol .Although the State Department was wary that German defense officials were trying to scuttle Protocol I for domestic legal reasons, they were confident that the Foreign Ministry would support the new rules on political and diplomatic grounds, which it did.

The reasons for the West German and U.S. worries were clear enough given the far-reaching implications of the new rules for military operations detailed in the 1977 Additional Protocol . For example, Protocol I declared that “The civilian population as such, as well as individual civilians, shall not be the object of attack.” Following the principle of distinction, the Protocol prohibited indiscriminate attacks, including those using a “method or means of combat the effects of which cannot be limited as required by this Protocol.” Article 35 limited the “right of the Parties to the conflict to choose methods or means of warfare.” In particular, they could not use “weapons, projectiles and material and methods of warfare of a nature to cause superfluous injury or unnecessary suffering.”

Also constrained by Protocol I was collateral damage and excessive harm to civilians (the principle of proportionality).worries were clear enough given the far-reaching implications of the new rules for military operations detailed in the 1977 Additional Protocol . For example, Protocol I declared that “The civilian population as such, as well as individual civilians, shall not be the object of attack.” Following the principle of distinction, the Protocol prohibited indiscriminate attacks, including those using a “method or means of combat the effects of which cannot be limited as required by this Protocol.” Article 35 limited the “right of the Parties to the conflict to choose methods or means of warfare.” In particular, they could not use “weapons, projectiles and material and methods of warfare of a nature to cause superfluous injury or unnecessary suffering.”

Also constrained by Protocol I was collateral damage and excessive harm to civilians (the principle of proportionality). It barred an “attack which may be expected to cause incidental loss of civilian life, injury to civilians, damage to civilian objects, or a combination thereof, which would be excessive in relation to the concrete and direct military advantage anticipated.”

It is worth noting that Article 56 of Protocol I specifically excluded from attack “works or installations containing dangerous forces, namely dams, dikes and nuclear electrical generating stations.” Even if the targets were “military objectives,” they could not be attacked if that would “cause the release of dangerous forces and consequent severe losses among the civilian population.” In addition, military objectives located near such installations were proscribed if an attack “may cause the release of dangerous forces from the works.”

Russia’s dangerous military activities at and around nuclear reactors in Ukraine, along with air and ground attacks on civilians and their facilities, raise questions about breaches of Additional Protocol I.For example, Protocol I declared that “The civilian population as such, as well as individual civilians, shall not be the object of attack.” Following the principle of distinction, the Protocol prohibited indiscriminate attacks, including those using a “method or means of combat the effects of which cannot be limited as required by this Protocol.” Article 35 limited the “right of the Parties to the conflict to choose methods or means of warfare.” In particular, they could not use “weapons, projectiles and material and methods of warfare of a nature to cause superfluous injury or unnecessary suffering.”

Russia’s dangerous military activities at and around nuclear reactors in Ukraine, along with air and ground attacks on civilians and their facilities, raise questions about breaches of Additional Protocol I. To verify allegations of violations of the rules, Article 90 includes provisions for an “International Fact-Finding Commission.” One of the Commission’s main purposes would be to “Enquire into any facts alleged to be a grave breach as defined in the Conventions and this Protocol or other serious violation of the Conventions or of this Protocol.” While the former Soviet Union had signed and ratified Protocol I, in 2019 Russia withdrew the declaration under which it recognized the “competence” of the International Fact-Finding Commission.It barred an “attack which may be expected to cause incidental loss of civilian life, injury to civilians, damage to civilian objects, or a combination thereof, which would be excessive in relation to the concrete and direct military advantage anticipated.”

Russia’s dangerous military activities at and around nuclear reactors in Ukraine, along with air and ground attacks on civilians and their facilities, raise questions about breaches of Additional Protocol I. To verify allegations of violations of the rules, Article 90 includes provisions for an “International Fact-Finding Commission.” One of the Commission’s main purposes would be to “Enquire into any facts alleged to be a grave breach as defined in the Conventions and this Protocol or other serious violation of the Conventions or of this Protocol.” While the former Soviet Union had signed and ratified Protocol I, in 2019 Russia withdrew the declaration under which it recognized the “competence” of the International Fact-Finding Commission. That left no accepted mechanism in place for investigating Russian violations of the Protocol.

Part II of this posting will focus on developments after the December 1977 signing of Protocol I.To verify allegations of violations of the rules, Article 90 includes provisions for an “International Fact-Finding Commission.” One of the Commission’s main purposes would be to “Enquire into any facts alleged to be a grave breach as defined in the Conventions and this Protocol or other serious violation of the Conventions or of this Protocol.” While the former Soviet Union had signed and ratified Protocol I, in 2019 Russia withdrew the declaration under which it recognized the “competence” of the International Fact-Finding Commission. That left no accepted mechanism in place for investigating Russian violations of the Protocol.

Part II of this posting will focus on developments after the December 1977 signing of Protocol I. During the early 1980s, the Joint Chiefs of Staff conducted a major policy review that opposed ratification of the Protocol. The nuclear weapons issue was one consideration, but also important was the question of reprisals and the rules concerning guerilla movements. Pentagon official Douglas Feith publicly and successfully attacked the Protocol’s rules on wars of national liberation, saying that they provided legal protection for terrorists. The Reagan administration decided against ratification, although it favored working with other countries to develop a “common understanding” of the “positive features” of Additional Protocol I.

The extent to which the Reagan administration pursued a “common understanding” needs to be elucidated. So does the extent to which nuclear planners during the 1970s and the following years explored the implications of Additional Protocol I to military operations. While top U.S.So does the extent to which nuclear planners during the 1970s and the following years explored the implications of Additional Protocol I to military operations. While top U.S. policymakers had been asking defense planners for nuclear targeting options that had less than catastrophic implications for human survival and would minimize “collateral damage,” those plans took years to develop. Even if defense officials of this period were not ready to apply new rules of war to nuclear operations, over time pressures to do so would emerge, especially with military lawyers (Judge Advocates General) becoming embedded in all of the services, including the U.S. Strategic Command. A key development was in 2013, when the Obama administration established a requirement for strategic planners to begin applying provisions of Protocol I to nuclear operations. Someday, the lead-up to this decision and the longer story of the impact of Protocol I on nuclear weapons policy may become possible to tell when relevant documents become available.

Background to Protocol I

For decades during the twentieth century, the rules of war only minimally protected civilian populations from attack. By the time of the atomic bombings of Japan, no internationally accepted rules governed aerial attacks on cities, whether from conventional bombs or weapons of greater destructiveness. After the bombing of Dresden, U.S. Army Air Force General George McDonald characterized Allied bombing policy as one of “homicide and devastation.” During the following years, when U.S. officials developed nuclear weapons target plans they assumed that industrial and military facilities were legitimate targets.Army Air Force General George McDonald characterized Allied bombing policy as one of “homicide and devastation.” During the following years, when U.S. officials developed nuclear weapons target plans they assumed that industrial and military facilities were legitimate targets. While the 1949 Geneva Conventions and their antecedents forbade intentional attacks against civilian populations as such, civilians were at risk as long as targets included “political control” and “industrial facilities which provide immediate support to military operations during wartime,” any of which would have substantial populations nearby. [2]

Driving the negotiation of new rules during the 1970s was the convergence of several trends. One was the long-standing efforts of Jean Pictet, a senior official with the International Committee of the Red Cross in Geneva, who believed that if war could not be ended, at least fighting could be constrained to protect civilians. Especially motivating him was the lack of protection for civilians exposed to aerial bombardment. Since World War II, Pictet and his colleagues had pressed for international rules that would forbid indiscriminate attacks where collateral damage outweighed military advantage. Also influencing Pictet’s quest were the developments of the 1960s—the Vietnam war and the violence against anti-colonial national liberation movements. Generalized public concern about these issues helped Pictet and the ICRC win worldwide support for a proposal to supplement the 1949 Geneva Conventions with prohibitions on the “direct targeting of civilians” and “excessive collateral damage.” [3]

Pictet and the ICRC initiated the project by hosting two conferences of experts, with hundreds of representatives from many nations, including the U.S., which met at Geneva in 1971 and 1972.Also influencing Pictet’s quest were the developments of the 1960s—the Vietnam war and the violence against anti-colonial national liberation movements. Generalized public concern about these issues helped Pictet and the ICRC win worldwide support for a proposal to supplement the 1949 Geneva Conventions with prohibitions on the “direct targeting of civilians” and “excessive collateral damage.” [3]

Pictet and the ICRC initiated the project by hosting two conferences of experts, with hundreds of representatives from many nations, including the U.S., which met at Geneva in 1971 and 1972. Those discussions crystallized thinking about major agenda items, with the ICRC developing a concrete proposal for supplements to the Geneva Conventions: Additional Protocol I on laws of war for international conflicts, including wars of national liberation; and Additional Protocol II on rules for internal conflicts. The widely accepted ICRC concept was that Protocol I would stipulate methods and means of combat, including provisions for greater protection of civilians in combat situations. Those proposals became the basis for the formal negotiations that began when the Diplomatic Conference met in Geneva in early 1974. [4]

State Department lawyer George Aldrich led the U.S. delegation at Geneva. Aldrich had been Henry Kissinger’s chief legal adviser during the negotiation of the 1973 peace agreement that ended U.S. fighting in Vietnam. The tough conditions that U.S. prisoners of war experienced in North Vietnam put protections for POWs high on the agenda of Aldrich and his military advisers. They also believed that the negative impact of the Vietnam War on the U.S. image around the world made it necessary for Washington to play a role in developing new rules for international conflict.They also believed that the negative impact of the Vietnam War on the U.S. image around the world made it necessary for Washington to play a role in developing new rules for international conflict. As Aldrich wrote some years later, accusations of “indiscriminate bombardment, attacks on civilians, attacks on dikes and the environment” contributed to “[a] pervading sense of defensiveness, if not guilt, about the suffering caused by the war, and by aerial warfare.” Those concerns “resulted … in an increased [U.S.] willingness to participate in the … improvement of that part of international law that deals with the conduct of hostilities.” [5]

What Henry Kissinger thought of the Diplomatic Conference has not surfaced, at least as far as the editor can tell. Given Kissinger’s “realist” predilections, he was probably skeptical and critical but likely approved U.S. participation so that Washington could influence the outcome. That was the gist of a message that Kissinger received from his executive assistant, Lawrence Eagleburger, early in the conference’s proceedings [See Document 1]. Aldrich was probably Kissinger’s choice for chief of delegation to ensure that that the U.S. negotiating role was in reliable hands.

When Jimmy Carter became president in early 1977, substantial progress had been made toward reaching agreement on the text of Protocol I, but there was more fine tuning to be done. If there is a paper trail on the interactions between negotiators like George Aldrich and senior officials in the national security bureaucracy, it has not yet surfaced, at least in the available record. [6] As noted, when it came to the matter of the Protocol and nuclear weapons use, the Carter administration took the same basic stance as the Ford White House. Thus, when the U.S. If there is a paper trail on the interactions between negotiators like George Aldrich and senior officials in the national security bureaucracy, it has not yet surfaced, at least in the available record. [6] As noted, when it came to the matter of the Protocol and nuclear weapons use, the Carter administration took the same basic stance as the Ford White House. Thus, when the U.S. signed the Additional Protocol I in December 1977, it published this limitation: “It is the understanding of the United States of America that the rules established by this Protocol were not intended to have any effect on and do not regulate or prohibit the use of nuclear weapons.”

Official concern about nuclear weapons use notwithstanding, defense officials understood that the times were changing and that precautions to protect civilians were becoming a necessity requiring a new look at military law. As the Diplomatic Conference began meeting in 1974, the Pentagon was establishing a Law of War Program, in large part to prevent future atrocities such as the My Lai massacre . Moreover, over time, younger military lawyers attached to the uniform services—Judge Advocates General (JAGS)—began to think about how to apply Protocol I to military operations, although it would be some years before they had an operational role. And it would be even longer before U.S. military lawyers and defense officials began trying to apply some elements of Protocol I to the use of nuclear weapons. [7]

Note : Thanks to the NATO Archives for identifying and providing copies of documents; to the National Declassification Center at the National Archives for arranging the release of George Aldrich’s State Department records and other relevant material; and to Colonel Theodore T. Richard for his counsel.

I. Early Concerns

This report by the U.S. delegation gives perspective on how the “Diplomatic Conference” did its work in the opening months. Aldrich’s confidential discussion explained how the U.S. prevailed on the PRG issue, in part by not objecting to the seating of other “national liberation movements,” which conciliated African and Arab delegations enough to not support the PRG. While Aldrich saw a “politicization” of the conference, with developing countries voting as a bloc to force through a text “applying Protocol 1 to wars of national liberation,” he believed that some delegations, such as Egypt’s, could prove “helpful in getting other states in the same camp off their more extreme positions.” Not sure whether “many states are really serious about drawing up new humanitarian law and in becoming parties to the resulting treaties,” Aldrich believed that it would be “necessary for the United States to consider what advantages and disadvantages may lie in participation in the second session of the Conference and whether it would wish to become a party to the Protocols.”

II. Continued West German Worries

III. Arranging the NATO Review and Persistent West German Concerns

IV. NATO and Pentagon Review and Heading Toward Signature

[4] . Lovat , Negotiating Civil War , 143-147.

[5] . George Aldrich, “Some Reflections on the Origins of the 1977 Geneva Protocols,” in Christopher Swinarski, Etudes et Essais Sur Le Droit International Humanitaire et sur Les Principles de la Croix-Rouge (Martinus Nijhoff Publishers,1984), 132, also quoted in Moyne, Humane , 211.

[6] . A folder on international law and nuclear weapons in the Jimmy Carter Library’s National Security Files is classified, although it is under request.

[7] . Frederic Borch , Judge Advocates in Combat: Army Lawyers in Military Operations from Vietnam to Haiti (U.S. Army Office of the Judge Advocate General and Center of Military History, 2001), 319; Moyn, Humane , 209-210.

[8] . Lovat, Negotiating Civil War , 160 note 89.

[1] . Henry Lovat , Negotiating Civil War: The Politics of International Regime Design (Cambridge University Press, 2020), 159.

[2] . McDonald quoted in Ronald Schaffer, Wings of Judgment: American Bombing in World War II (New York: Oxford University Press, 1985), 100. Among the significant studies on nuclear targeting and the laws of war, are Scott Sagan and Allen Weiner, “The Rule of Law and the Role of Strategy in U.S. Nuclear Doctrine ,” International Security 45 (2021):126-166; the same authors, “The Illegality of Targeting Civilians by Way of Belligerent Reprisal: Implications for U.S. Nuclear Doctrine,” Just Security , 10 May 2021; and Theodore Richard, “Nuclear Weapons Targeting: The Evolution of Law and U.S. Policy,” Military Law Review 224 (2016): 862-978. For the ban on targeting civilians, see David Alan Rosenberg, "Nuclear War Planning," in Michael Howard, George J. Andreopoulos, and Mark R. Shulman, eds., The Laws of War: Constraints on Warfare in the Western World (New Haven: Yale University Press, 1994), 165.

[3] . Samuel Moyn , Humane: How the United States Abandoned Peace and Reinvented War (New York Farrar Strauss and Giroux 2021), 200-202, 210-214. Moyn’s book does not consider the nuclear issue but provides a helpful overview of the negotiation of Protocol I, the U.S. decision to not ratify it, and the practical adoption by the U.S. military of its elements.

[4] .

Documents

Brent Scowcroft to Henry Kissinger, “U.S Policy With Regard to the Law of War Conference, “ 27 February 1974, Secret
Feb 27, 1974 | Source Henry Kissinger Papers, Library of Congress, CIA FOIA Reading Room

“Executive Summary of a Classified Report of the U.S. Delegation to the Diplomatic Conference on the Reaffirmation and Development of International Humanitarian Law Applicable in Armed Conflicts,” Confidential, with Unclassified report attached, June 10, 1974, Excerpt
Jun 10, 1974 | Source U.S. Department of State, Foreign Relations of the United States, Volume E-3, Documents on Global Issues, 1973–1976 (Washington, D.C. : U.S. Government Printing Office, 2009), Document 235 ; U.S. National Archives, Department of State Records, Record Group (RG) 59, 1974 P-Reels, Box 100A

George H. Aldrich to Deputy Secretary of State Robert Ingersoll, “Response to Deputy Secretary of Defense on Laws of War Conference,” with letters and memos attached, 15 January 1975, Confidential
Jan 15, 1975 | Source RG 59, George H. Aldrich Records, box 7, Human Rights in Armed Conflict 1975
The ongoing negotiations at the “Diplomatic Conference” led to a Pentagon review of the issues, ranging from prisoners of war to treatment of the “wounded, sick, and shipwrecked.” On the treatment of civilian populations, the Pentagon had no objection to rules that provided “reasonable protection … against the effects of hostilities,” but questioned language forbidding the targeting of civilians in reprisal attacks. On that point, Deputy Secretary of Defense William Clements had written to Deputy Secretary of State Robert Ingersoll that the Joint Chiefs believed that threat of reprisals was an “essential means for deterring serious violations of the laws of war.” The Chiefs recommended the inclusion of language permitting “reprisals against the enemy’s civilian population, but only in response to grave unlawful attacks on the other party’s civilian population.” Aldrich informed Ingersoll that recent discussions had led to the reworking of the text so that the right of reprisal was “carefully restricted … for egregious cases.” It should be “quite acceptable to Defense.” Aldrich further emphasized the need to “preserve the decision-making authority of the chief of delegation.” With support from Secretary of State Kissinger, Aldrich was in a strong position to ward off such Pentagon moves. [8]

Department of State telegram 181655 to Department of State Delegation, “Daily Activity Reports—Thursday, July 31,” 1 August 1975, Secret
Aug 1, 1975 | Source RG 59, Access to Archival Databases (AAD)
Secretary of State Kissinger received daily reports from State Department bureau chiefs to demonstrate how successfully they were doing their jobs. Kissinger received this one telegraphically when he was in Helsinki with President Ford for the signing of the agreement on European security and cooperation. According to Legal Adviser Monroe Leigh’s report, Aldrich had consulted with Defense and arms control officials on laws of war issues, in part to prepare for meetings with the West Germans on the Geneva negotiations. The Germans had “expressed concern that the negotiations may restrict the use of nuclear weapons.” According to Aldrich, those “concerns are groundless, and we shall try to persuade them of this.”

U.S. Embassy West Germany telegram 12867 to State Department, “International Humanitarian Law in Armed Conflict – US/FRG Consultations,” 8 August 1975, Confidential
Aug 8, 1975 | Source AAD
According to the U.S. Embassy’s report, the consultations with Bonn went smoothly. The West Germans believed that their ratification of the Protocols would require “some type of public interpretive statement … at least insofar as nuclear weapons are concerned.” According to the U.S. account, “they were gratified by our assurances that the USG would be very clear in submitting any protocol to the Senate that it would have no effect on the use of weapons of mass destruction.”

Memo to George Aldrich from Dwayne S. Anderson, Deputy Director, Negotiations and Arms Control, Office of the Secretary of Defense, enclosing Memo from Lt. General John Elder to Deputy Assistant Secretary of Defense (International Security Affairs), “Diplomatic Conference on the Reaffirmation and Development of International Humanitarian Law Applicable in Armed Conflicts (Short Title: Diplomatic Conference), ” 23 September 1975, MJCS 328-75, with “Assessment of Impact of Articles on Commanders and Military Operations” attached, 26 September 1975, Confidential
Sep 26, 1975 | Source RG 59, George H. Aldrich Records, box 7, Human Rights in Armed Conflict 1975
In this memo the Joint Staff expressed its doubts about the implications for nuclear weapons policy of the proposed positions on laws of war. Besides raising earlier concerns about policy toward reprisals, the Joint Staff noted that it was not “feasible” to apply the Protocol’s provisions for the protection of civilians “in the event of general nuclear war.” Some of the articles in Parts III and IV could be read as “prohibiting nuclear weapons,” according to the Joint Staff, unless the United States took a clear and emphatic position on this matter. Also raising problems was an article referring to “long term major health problems,” which had implications for the effects of nuclear fallout, such as genetic effects. That provision, in the Joint Staff’s view, called for additional language stating that “provisions of the Protocol dealing with methods and means of combat are not intended to affect nuclear weapons.”

Paper to Dwayne Anderson, Defense, 21 October 1975, sent by LDX (Long Distance Xerox)
Oct 21, 1975 | Source RG 59, George H. Aldrich Records, box 1, GeoHAldrich Chron 1975 Oct-Nov
Aldrich sent the Pentagon the language for a position on nuclear weapons mentioned in the report to Kissinger (Doc 4. Noting that the Protocol had been drafted “with conventional weapons in mind,” Aldrich said that it was “wisely not designed to affect the use of [nuclear] weapons.” Restraints on the “acquisition, stockpiling and use of such weapons must be, and are being, sought elsewhere in other negotiations.”

Department of State telegram 252741 to U.S. Embassy in United Kingdom et al., “Consultations on International Humanitarian Law,” 23 October 1975, Limited Official Use
Oct 23, 1975 | Source AAD
The Department asked the embassies to invite host government representatives to attend an “inner core” meeting (U.S., U.K., France, Canada and West Germany) in Washington during mid-November to discuss draft protocol issues, with a “tentative” agenda to include reprisals, liberation movements, and the “use of nuclear weapons and other weapons of mass destruction,” among other questions. So far, no U.S. record of these “inner core” deliberations has turned up.

West German aide memoire, 28 September 1976, Confidential
Sep 28, 1976 | Source RG 59, George H. Aldrich Records, box 7, Diplomatic Conference on Human Rights in Armed Conflict 1976
Concerned about the potentially “negative” aspects of the Geneva talks, West Germany asked for a conversation between Foreign Minister Hans-Dietrich Genscher and Secretary Kissinger. Especially troubling, in the West German view, were the implications of the “prohibitions of indiscriminate attacks on military objectives, the civilian population, and civilian [objects],” including “attacks the effects of which cannot be limited to the military objectives,” such as with nuclear weapons. According to the memo, such restrictions could have “negative effects on NATO’s concepts of deterrence.” fects of which cannot be limited to the military objectives,” such as with nuclear weapons. According to the memo, such restrictions could have “negative effects on NATO’s concepts of deterrence.” The West Germans worried that, if the Protocol I rules went into effect, NATO strategy would face “strong political and legal pressure” that could even call into question the “first use of nuclear weapons [which] is an element contained solely in NATO’s concept of deterrence.” Leaving the conference was not an option, but the FRG was considering the possibility of a “declaration of understanding” to make it clear that the additional protocols would not have an impact on “the international rules on the use of nuclear weapons.” The West Germans were also looking at the possibility of “making reservations regarding individual provisions of protocol 1 upon” ratification. While the reservations would not mention nuclear warfare specifically, they should “restore the overriding validity of the principle of proportionality.”

Department of State telegram 259265 to U.S. Delegation, “Daily Activity Reports from the Bureaus Oct. 19, 1976,” 20 October 1976, Confidential,
Oct 20, 1976 | Source AAD
In a report to Kissinger, who was traveling, Monroe Leigh related that Aldrich had drafted an “understanding/reservation for possible use in conjunction with the protocols on the laws of war” negotiations “to the effect that the rules established by the protocol are not intended to have any effect on and do not apply to the use of nuclear weapons.” The U.S. would consult with a few allies on this language, but it would not “surface it in the conference until such time as we have decided to sign the Protocol.”

U.S. Mission to NATO telegram 07019 to State Department, “NATO Consideration of Draft Protocol on International Law in Armed Conflict,” 28 December 1976, Confidential
Dec 28, 1976 | Source AAD, declassified at request of National Security Archive
The Mission recommended an early start for NATO Military Committee [MC] review of Protocol I. The Mission asked the State Department to keep in mind that “the process of producing an agreed NATO study and allied consensus on an issue of this complexity can be slow, cumbersome, and delayed by unforeseen snags.” Such problems made it better to begin the review sooner rather than later.

State Department telegram 00066 to U.S. Mission to NATO, “NATO Consideration of Draft Protocol on International Law in Armed Conflict,”
Dec 31, 1969 | Source 1977-01-03
RG 59, George H. Aldrich Records, box 7, Conventional Weapons Folder # 2, Human Rights in Armed Conflict 1975 me-field-description field--type-text-with-summary field--label-hidden field__item"> RG 59, George H. Aldrich Records, box 7, Conventional Weapons Folder # 2, Human Rights in Armed Conflict 1975 Instead of early review by the NATO MC, the Department favored consultations to begin with the “inner core” countries and then commence with NATO political advisers, adding that an MC study should not begin until the conclusion of the diplomatic conference. Reviewing the history of discussions with the “inner core” NATO member governments, the Department saw a good record of consultations. Of the NATO members, West Germany had posed the most problems. The U.S. recognized the West German concern about its domestic law and was “doing utmost to accommodate concern.” The Department was also concerned that “certain FRG officials may be trying to derail [the] draft protocol by using NATO as mechanism.” According to Aldrich, it was in the U.S. “interest to see [the protocols] interpreted reasonably, whether or not we become parties to them,” which was a consideration that the FRG seemed “thus far unable to understand, but we must keep trying to explain it.” The Department believed it was better to initiate consultations of the “inner core” group during the conference and begin formal NATO consultations once the conference has concluded.

U.S. Embassy West Germany telegram 00233 to State Department, “FRG Position on Draft Protocol on International Law in Armed Conflict,” 5 January 1977, Confidential
Jan 5, 1977 | Source AAD
Answering the State Department’s concerns about the “extreme” views of FRG defense officials, the Embassy reported on Defense Ministry misgivings that German soldiers could go to military and administrative courts and “question the legality of NATO-agreed strategy and tactics and their conformity with internationally established rules, including the Protocol should it come into force.” An adverse judgement by the courts could “decisively affect FRG ability to play an effective role in NATO defense planning.” Moreover, given Bonn’s status as a non-nuclear weapons state, “some might interpret the protocol as prohibiting certain conventional [sic] weapons systems or their effective employment.” Making Germany’s defense problem all the “more intractable” was that “so many villages and cities are packed into a relatively limited geographic area, making it difficult if not impossible to defend against an aggressor’s invasion without involving areas where civilians are concentrated.” The German Foreign Office believed that defense officials were “using a worst case analysis,” but that was attributable to the concern about the World War II experience where the Nazi regime “forced” German soldiers to violate rules of war. Nevertheless, both ministries agreed that West Germany has “built a humanitarian, functioning democracy since the Second World War and must be concerned about continuing to project a corresponding image.” This made U.S. embassy officials believe that Bonn would accept the Protocol for “diplomatic and political reasons.”

U.S. Mission to NATO telegram 04533 to Department of State, “NATO Consideration of Draft Protocol on International Law in Armed Conflict,” 27 January 1977, Confidential
Jan 27, 1977 | Source AAD, declassified at request of National Security Archive
During a meeting of NATO Political Advisers, Bonn’s representative, supported by France, asked for a Military Committee study of the implications of the Protocols for alliance military strategy. The German representative’s “speaking notes” indicated that previous U.S. assurances about the non-applicability of the Protocols to nuclear weapons had not been wholly calming. According to the “speaking notes,” some of the Protocol’s articles may “call into question the admissibility under international law of our present defence planning.” Some articles prohibited “attacks not directed at a specific objective” and “attacks whose effects cannot be limited to the military objectives.” It was unlikely that the final session of the negotiations in Geneva would make any “decisive changes” in these provisions. From the German perspective, those and other articles would have “negative” implications for the alliance’s “concept of deterrence and defense, including its nuclear component.” There could be calls for a “ban on the use of nuclear weapons, especially in the densely-populated region of Central Europe” and “a drastic reduction of possibilities of conventional warfare.” The speaking notes also included a point about West German law: that a soldier can lodge complaints with the courts “against the service and training regulations of the federal armed forces.” That would put the “compatibility of NATO’s defence concept with the new rules of international law” as a subject before a supreme court.”

U.S. Mission to Geneva telegram 2051 to State Department, “Laws of War – German Concerns with Draft Protocol,” 17 March 1977, Limited Official Use
Mar 17, 1977 | Source AAD
The U.S. learned from West German Ambassador Horst-Krafft Robert that the West German foreign office had alleviated defense ministry concerns. U.S. interpretations had been “most helpful” in the “tough fight.” The “price” for wining over the defense ministry was “agreement that FRG would be prepared, during final plenaries and time of signature, to make a number of statements of understanding, covering most difficult issues.” Bonn hoped that Washington and “all NATO allies would make identical statements.” Aldrich assured Robert “that we would try to work out agreed texts of these statements and convince other allies to accept them.” Another understanding was that “these agreed statements will also provide much of the necessary interpretive basis for a study by the NATO Military Committee of the implications of the Protocol.”

U.S. Mission to Geneva telegram 2092 to State Department, “NATO Consideration of Draft Protocol on International Law in Armed Conflict,” 18 March 1977, Confidential
Mar 18, 1977 | Source AAD
Representatives of NATO governments met and agreed to Aldrich’s proposal that they recommend to their governments early approval of a study by the NATO military committee once the Geneva delegations have “produced agreed interpretations of the relevant articles,” and the conference had concluded that the “final structure of the protocol can be seen.” NATO political advisers would prepare the directive to the military committee but “there was consensus … that it should be simple and nonprejudicial.”

U.S. Mission to NATO telegram1814 to Department of State, “NATO Consideration of Draft Protocol on International Law in Armed Conflict,” 30 March 1977, Confidential
Mar 30, 1977 | Source AAD, declassified at request of National Security Archive
The NATO Political Advisers have agreed to a British proposal for the language of the directive to the Military Committee requesting a study of the “new law of warfare” and its compatibility with NATO military plans. While the U.S. had originally expressed support for a completion date later than August 31, the West Germans wanted the study completed by that date, and the representative of the International Military Staff indicated that the deadline was feasible. The study would not begin until delegations in Geneva had produced agreed interpretations. The U.S. Ambassador asked for instructions by April 5 on whether to accept the proposal.

State Department telegram 075282 to U.S. Mission to NATO, “NATO Consideration of Draft Protocol on International Law in Armed Conflict,” 5 April 1977, Confidential
Apr 5, 1977 | Source AAD
Believing that the Protocol might not be signed until early 1978 and on the grounds that the “quality of the [Military Committee] study would be enhanced by allowing an additional month,” the State Department preferred a September 30 due date but would accept August 31 on “clear understanding, stated for record, that date is tentative.”

1977-04-06
Dec 31, 1969 | Source The Mission reported that a “large majority” of NATO political advisers accepted August 31 as a “target date for completion” of the MC study. The U.S. and Norwegian representatives “expressed reservations about [the] desirability of such an early date.” The “draft mandate has been forwarded to North Atlantic Council for final approval under silence procedure, by April 13.”

U.S. Mission to Geneva telegram 4637 to State Department, “Conference on International Humanitarian Law – Final Statement,” 10 June 1977, unclassified
Jun 10, 1977 | Source AAD
In a statement at the Geneva conference, Ambassador Aldrich summarized U.S. “views of the delegations on the accomplishment of the conference.” That was probably one of the agreed statements that would inform the Military Committee study. According to Aldrich, the U.S. looked “with satisfaction” on the “important advances in the law made in the Protocol, “such as the prohibition on indiscriminate attacks, including target area bombardment in cities, the clear and helpful definition of military objectives [and], the prohibition of starvation of civilians as a method of warfare.” One problem was enforcing prohibitions on reprisals because, if a nation’s civilian population is the subject of “massive and continuing attacks,” that nation may not be able to avoid a “response in kind.“ As for the problem of nuclear weapons, “it has been our understanding that the rules to be developed have been designed with a view to conventional weapons.” Nuclear weapons “are the subject of separate negotiations and agreements, and … their use in warfare is governed by the present principles of international law.”

Memorandum from Major General R. Torp, Acting Director General, International Military Staff, to Secretary General, North Atlantic Treaty Organization, “Humanitarian Law—Review of Articles 35-60 of Protocol 1,” MCM-76 -77, 31 October 1977, Confidential
Oct 31, 1977 | Source NATO Archives
The Military Committee’s study, completed past the August 31 deadline, spelled out the implications of Protocol I for alliance military operations. The MC found much of it “militarily acceptable,” as long as the rules did not preclude NATO’s “options to use nuclear weapons.” The literal meaning of Protocol articles 35, 51 and 55 “would inhibit essential uses of nuclear weapons, if they were held to apply to” them. Thus, the detailed review of the Protocol was “based on the understanding that the rules introduced by the Protocol do not affect the use of nuclear weapons, and that member states of the Alliance will coordinate and consult to ensure that their national positions are in harmony and that this understanding shall be legally effective throughout the Alliance.” The detailed analysis of Articles 35, 51, 55 and 66 made it clear enough why NATO members found them problematic because of their implications for nuclear weapons use. Thus, Article 35 constrained signatories from using “weapons, projectiles and material and methods of warfare of a nature to cause superfluous injury or unnecessary suffering.” Annexes to the Military Committee report included statements made by various NATO country delegates—such as the previously cited statement by George Aldrich—explaining their votes on specific articles and general statements about the work of the conference.

Walter Slocombe, Principal Deputy Assistant Secretary of Defense, International Security Affairs, Memorandum to the Chairman, Joint Chiefs of Staff, “Protocols I and II — Humanitarian Law during Armed Conflict,” 7 November 1977, enclosing draft State Department memorandum to Acting Secretary of State and report by “Department of Defense Law of War Working Group Review and Analysis of Protocols I And II Adopted by the Diplomatic Conference on International Humanitarian Law 1977,” n.d. unclassified
Oct 7, 1977 | Source Anonymous contribution
In the weeks before the signing of Protocol I in Geneva, a Department of Defense working group led by Deputy Assistant Secretary of Defense Walter Slocombe prepared a comprehensive analysis of the Protocol and its negotiating history, the position on each section taken by the U.S., other Western countries, and “Third World” nations, beginning with the preamble and proceeding article by article. The report found much that was beneficial and positive in Protocol I but, like the NATO analysts, the working group was concerned about articles 35 and 55 because of their implications for nuclear weapons use. Such concerns supported the conclusion on the need for an “express understanding that the Rules of the Protocol do not affect the use of nuclear weapons.” Like the NATO analysts, the working group saw Articles 51 (paragraph 5B) and 57 as affirming the rule of proportionality. Thus, incidental civilian casualties were not prohibited, as long as it was evident that they would not be “excessive in relation to the concrete and direct military advantage anticipated.” Also prohibited was the “indiscriminate” use of weapons that could cause casualties that were “excessive in relation to the concrete and direct military advantage anticipated.” Besides codifying the rule of proportionality, the Article “gives to military commanders uniformly recognized guidance on this responsibility to civilians and the civilian population in carrying out attacks against military objectives.” ality, the Article “gives to military commanders uniformly recognized guidance on this responsibility to civilians and the civilian population in carrying out attacks against military objectives.” While Defense officials saw the articles as “a major step in the reaffirmation and development of humanitarian law applicable in armed conflict,” they also recognized the implications for nuclear weapons use. Also worrisome was language about weapons causing “long term major health problems.” The Defense group did not believe that nuclear weapons would necessarily cause “excessive casualties,” but they concluded that “in a situation of general nuclear warfare it would be impracticable to apply the rules of the Protocol relating to protections of civilians.” That further supported the view that the Protocol did not apply to nuclear weapons. As before, the prohibitions against reprisals concerned Pentagon officials, and the report discussed the possibility of lodging a formal reservation on this point when the U.S. signed Protocol I. While the report found it “unlikely that the U.S. would have to resort to reprisals against civilian populations, as such, except in situations involving nuclear weapons,” it expressed interest in a reservation if it could be made without weakening the U.S. understanding that excluded the Protocol's application to nuclear weapons. None of this, however, would be the Pentagon’s last word on reprisals and other issues raised by Protocol I because the Joint Chiefs of Staff had not yet given it a full review, which would have great bearing on any Defense Department recommendations on ratification.

Department of State Action Memorandum to the Acting Secretary from L -Herbert J. Hansell [and] S/AR – George H. Aldrich, “Circular 175 Procedure: Request for Authorization to Sign Two Protocols to the Geneva Conventions of 1949 for the Protection of Victims of War,” 9 December 1977, Unclassified
Dec 9, 1977 | Source RG 59, George H. Aldrich Records, box 3, GHAldrich Chron April-December 1977
This request for authorization to sign Protocols I and II reviewed their history and included two understandings, one concerning nuclear weapons, which would be declared at the time of the signing. The Defense Department wanted to include a reservation on reprisals, but both the Arms Control and Disarmament Agency and the State Department believed that would be “unworkable in the event of massive and continuing violations of the Convention.” (The Pentagon would continue to treat that as a sticking point). As regards the attitude of the U.S. Congress, the State Department anticipated “no significant” objection.
