I 
Harold Weisberg 12/7/ t>8 
YW \ 
,/Y'W U S vi1 
Memo on Boxley reports 
Just before midnight Thursday I was given tmac is said to kh* be the 
Herrin file and read it hastily, »idat mucn conversation and confusion, fast 
night I was Bivea a few of hi3 other memei'and the transcripf”of a jnene con- 
versation with "B", i make brief comment on a few of these.

ihe 5-17—68 memo "RSUH" quotes one "BR—I", wno 1 take to he onJjpf the 
iiallas researchers, to the effect that "the 'true head* of the Rational 
States nightg Party* was a certain KEflRKu AuftlHAh JUHa CROMEELIE".

She 
admiral i3 a we<Jlfknowa fascist, a violent anti-Semite, anu there can oe 
no connection Detween the appearance of his name in the "Thunderbolt” 
and his membership in or leadership ef tne RSRH.

That he had net there 
been "designated as head of the R3RPn is not sinister but factual.

The 
officers are publicly known ana identified.

If lie i.ere head if would be public.

This small party does hold State conventions and meetings, doea run candidates 
for public office, ete.

gneraliy what is lacking here is lacking everywhere ^aside from fact).

That is 
any appraisal whatsovever of tne depenability of the source.

Any official receiving 
what is presented as information from one he krxaatat trust!is entitled to believe 
tnaf, in me absence of indication to the contrary, only wnat ia responsible is 
bafng reported, tnat tne reporter ia satisfied asout the dependaDilitty of his 
source, me fact is tnat the quoted sources are, from reading of the reports 
aloHc, neither dependable nor impartial.That is 
any appraisal whatsovever of tne depenability of the source. Any official receiving 
what is presented as information from one he krxaatat trust!is entitled to believe 
tnaf, in me absence of indication to the contrary, only wnat ia responsible is 
bafng reported, tnat tne reporter ia satisfied asout the dependaDilitty of his 
source, me fact is tnat the quoted sources are, from reading of the reports 
aloHc, neither dependable nor impartial. Even where tnere was darrrogatoiy informa- 
tion avaiiaele about key sources, it was withheld from the memos, as 1 wilx cite 
imlthe K^ruschdvsiqfc ease, in somefcases, tne contenkt of tneae reports ia an obij- 
vious feedback of wnat Jim GarriJoa had been saying anu was tnen in the news, aa 
with the sewers,,wheye an* entirely unevaluated source in the 2-19-68 memo is 
quoted with a straight face 83 having heard "j^radley propose the use ef the 
storm drain system aa a location for tne prospective assassination of President 
Kennedy and had suggested a manhole eaeape route from the system." 
Rowhere in this memo, headed "Supplement to BIL.u TURRER'S memorandum of 
EiKinR EUUEHK BRAnhEX" is there any indication tnat tne aydlotte's were sworn 
enemie3 0f Bradley and were suing him, or vice versa. This is in the files, was well 
knowuliiu California. 1 personalty .applied this information, in some detail, having 
been given it for tuia purpose by Art Kevin. Ufa. A is "certain" she saw Gordon hovel 
Viait Clint Wheat with Loran Hail - at precisely the time tnere was radio and 
pfintea -news utten tionixato tnese tames in her area ^some of it then coming from 
my own intensive appearances tnere;. These i3 mucu of this, and any is too much. the July 1, 1968 memo inaccurately entitled BARBARA REIn interview”, actually 
a joint interview with her ofSam Brandenoerg and "Chris" Christian ^and J suggest

--- PAGE BREAK ---■g&ne of the consequences of this “error- could oe its misfiling) is too incomplete 
from what Barbara has independently tola me of this interview.

Before knowing of 
this memorandum of it, i had asiced her to write a complete account for Seiambra.

me M^rch 19, 19<8 memo is entitied "miscellaneous notes for futuj^ reference".

I’hio is the kind of memorandum tnatu is often essential, and it is diJfcjulty in 
tnem to be inclusive and complete, however, I suggest that calling the slip of 
paper uswald had in nis pocket wnes he was arrested as hia “name list" is neither 
accurate no descriptive.

It ia a paper he prepared that would immediately tell 
any officer seeing it he bad Russian connections.

To cite a n3kip" in referring te 
Oswald as "Harvey Bee Oswald" as “similar to that made in Balias by H.n.

Hunt" is 
both prejudicial and meaningless.

It ia designed to suggest that hunt is involved, 
ef whien there is here or elsewhere no evidence.

It is also the "slip" made by 
Clay Shaw, wnieh is more relevant and is net" xigrT'cited.

This same memo concludes 
by pointing out that Secret Service Agent Vial apella nis name like (ana here a^ain 
the phraiiafe is, I think, erroneous "JACK iitlBI's Balias lawyer friend Hobart S.

Vial." 1 doubt the suggestion would have been made nad both seen named Smith.

I 
also douet Vial waa Buby's lawyer in Balias.

The phone conversation is worth attention tnere ia nere no time for.

It ia 
an excellent example of a designed deception, an exciting pretense of evidence 
tnat does not exist, of evidence in hand that is not, of deep meaning wnere there 
is none, of fact tha"t is not.

it ia the kind of tuing that fixes and mtsinforms a 
busy ofticial*3 mind.iajBe means oy whicn he establishes an "intelligence net" are JB a 
me®aa by wnieh the selection of any names at ranaon eaula witn as much validity 
establish the existence of such a "net".It ia 
an excellent example of a designed deception, an exciting pretense of evidence 
tnat does not exist, of evidence in hand that is not, of deep meaning wnere there 
is none, of fact tha"t is not.

it ia the kind of tuing that fixes and mtsinforms a 
busy ofticial*3 mind.iajBe means oy whicn he establishes an "intelligence net" are JB a 
me®aa by wnieh the selection of any names at ranaon eaula witn as much validity 
establish the existence of such a "net".

(This conversation was recorded 5^*16-67.) 
Thera is not even reasonable suspicion that this could be true, as a careful 
reading snows, but a listening likely would not, particularly with tne empbiasis 
of the hjtaan voice.

Who could possibly xx believe that the Gehlen apparatus would 
i irstp^nd an agent to the United ijtatea and then train ni^or' tne other improbable® 
required to consider this young man an “agent", he would be trained before he left, 
tnertsby assuring tnose for whom he worked that he was trained and increasing nis 
chances of survival and performance of assigned duties.

Everything said of this 
man, wno becomes an agent on presumption alone and in the abs^jSee of any reasonable 
*®a3ia for the presumption, can be maid of almost anyone.

About tne same things can 
be said for his connection with Shaw as an agent.

Where tnere ia in this conversation 
clear inference of homosexual involvement (page b) that is ignored, the fiction of 
Genlen connection obviously being more exciting to the intended audience.

He knows 
■oajlittle of the Gealen organization he is not even certain of its name.

He says it 
Mas taken over by the CIA.

where, then, is tnere any need to send an unskilled 
nonentity of an "agent" from Germany to Texas to ao notning?

Incidently, where it 
is necessary to seem to provide a basis for connecLion, it is manufactured.

The 
Gehlen organization is said "of course", to be "strongest in Mexico, South 
America and Spain", which ia very convenient, if not supported.--- PAGE BREAK ---

Incidently, where it 
is necessary to seem to provide a basis for connecLion, it is manufactured. The 
Gehlen organization is said "of course", to be "strongest in Mexico, South 
America and Spain", which ia very convenient, if not supported. Gehlefc "was the

--- PAGE BREAK ---t is manufactured. The 
Gehlen organization is said "of course", to be "strongest in Mexico, South 
America and Spain", which ia very convenient, if not supported. Gehlefc "was the

--- PAGE BREAK ---

chief intelligence officer, a generalender Hitler ana he has a worldwide intelligence 
operation". Mew this was not true under Hitler, if taat is the import, and it is 
“0t trUe there WS3 thi3 ®rou^ under Hitler iwho.e major aatin,American operation 
was through such groups as tne Ibere^merikanisehes Institute (iehlen's maior 
operation was in Eastern Europe, not in DM tin America or Spain. However, how 
°°aveniently this fiction serves to intreduoa this:“How Shaw's notebook has very 
strong Madrid* Mexiean and South American contacts in it." Tiurra is hero a concerted 
affort to tie Shaw to the Cehlon operation, with this and other invented naans. 
i'his sort of nothing winds him up, and when M returns to it (p.iQ) and 
asks, "Can you support xkxxxxnxany that any. Bill," ho aays “Veil, no more than 
we've got (and wo've got, from thi*, absolutely nothing! i£t I think it is torrifio 
support we*ve got already". Both are nonexistent, nothing to oeaiu with, nothing 
in support, describee as "terrific". 
J«’rom here it is simple for him to say, as he does on page 12, of this nothing, 
"personally, 1 think it's the oast* thing we've got so far as to who this guy 
associated with ana why***". Even the association is presumed. The oest, a fine 
ana impressiTe WQrd, remains absolutely nothing 
'£ri9 Perrin*Hich file assumes there is only one feungblood ana that he is 
Bertram koroood roungblood, 
l& aa3Uma ta“ aa* •«“ reasonable, out woula it oo ao assumenTt^TaT^ 
Brown? roungblood is a very common name in Texas. It was also the maiden name of 
Hose Cheramie, from which, it is surprising, no inferences were drawn. 
It seems unnecessary to describe Haney as a liar, but until this is established 
*a °ne aflti oaly ^au^blood to whom she might have talked, can this »— 
language (page 2 of 11415-68 memo "Haney Herrin naanae") bAccepted: 
"BBHTHaE HUKWOOB roURUBDOUn of 1039 Blalock,Irving, Texas, states the faro- 
going assertion by MBS. PERRIS ia false". Her statement 4* that 
She had contacted "roungblood". 
Much worse, on tne same page, is this paragraph: 
Me. t?Q^3A'S *** and Uol 26, p. 628; that she went to Dallas in 
4ri T, JU 1961’ 8eekln« HUBERT iSHRIM; that she had telephoned OPPICEH J D 
ITPPIT of the Dallas Police Department .jouncing her intended trip and ar^.d bins." 
How she aiu not testify that "she lad telephoned QTPICER J Jj. TIPPIT". Using tka 
thi:J lan«ua«e wa3 a direct assault on dim Harrison's aina ana seliefa. She said she 
PHoned the poliee. However, any mature ana respoasible assessment of her statement 
that she spoke to T'ippit when she called, in the light of what is now known, has to 
discount it entirely, particularly because there is no suggestion tuat she knew of 
his existence at that time. Moreover, tuis man, perhaps the only one to go for so 
^°ng a time on tne Dallas police force without promotion, was never,f rom what is 
, itnei inside or i^ headquarters. He seems to have been entirely an outsideman, perhaps the only one to go for so 
^°ng a time on tne Dallas police force without promotion, was never,f rom what is 
, itnei inside or i^ headquarters. He seems to have been entirely an outside

--- PAGE BREAK ---4 
officer.

Youngblood is said to oe-ee.

tain of tne date "because it was just prior to 
toe la8t mobile home show helc^injithe Dallas City auditorium September 46-30, 1964,'* 
iiow this is the kind of incident' oy wnich it is possible to fir recollections, 
what is laeking ia authentication ©f the date.

If there is ns reason to presume 
it wrong, that his recollection ia in.

error, there likewise i3 none to assume him 
infallible or his recollection uaflawed.

it should hare seen checked and authenticated 
More, the date en wnich T£S» is said then, to haws seen in Dallas ia at a time wnen 
there seems to oe no evidenee ahe was and pretty strong evidence she was in Hew 
Orleans or Maine, my recollection is unclear.

It was September 1964, a month 
after Perrin’s 8-28-62 death.

At the bottom of page 3 is the beginning of a discussion of Eddie Brawner.

He 
is refferred tl in a quoAAiion from the Commission material (2hHb33 as "Edward 
Bannaer", to which Boxley has appended "Sic", thereafter he goes into a big thing 
about tne FBI “finally centers upon hOHAnd EDWARD BEOWilBR then in Atlanta, Georgia".

there is no indication here of any search for any unpublished material on Browder, 
ana there are now indexes availaole.

There is no indication any of us working in 
tnese files were asked if we had any information.

I oan not be certain there is such, 
but it ia my recollection there is and t have it.

this is not nearly as significant 
ns Wuat 1 yesterday learned from Joel Palmar, that Boxley had and withheld frem the 
memo and the files other information and documentation he had.

It is not consistent 
with what he here says.

Bgarwner was also known as dr was addressed as "BKAHHEH".

He 
%ave Boxley a telegram addressed to him under taat name.

Palmer snowed it to me 
and jjjjui Pemsterwald and I read it.

It was a request taat he join the Bay of Pigs 
perparationg and activities.--- PAGE BREAK ---

Palmer snowed it to me 
and jjjjui Pemsterwald and I read it. It was a request taat he join the Bay of Pigs 
perparationg and activities. Although there was tne inferenee (1.believe Palmer maae 
it Specific), tna-t this telegram origiaatecfe in Miami, tne interoal evidence is that 
it originated in Dallas ana was sent to a Dallas aadress. kith the interesting part 
of ganey’s story that her husband had been offered & job to take a boat to Cuba, 
amuggled arms In ana get a Big price, it is simply incredible that this significant 
evidence was omitted by accident, particular because of tne big deal Boxley made of 
the pax 3witching of names. 1 cheeked witu ivon today and there is no. copy of this 
telegram in the files. Boxley had it, withheld it, gave a ($py apparently Xeroxed 
on tne office machine to Palmer, ana no one else knew of it {I also checked with 
SciambraA. It seems to me tnat certain inferences are here uneacapaele: he ia 
holding out, especially what is inconsistent with what he is contriving, amd all 
°f this work ia thereby suspect. I wilt return to this estpeeialiy in discussing my 
long session yesterday afternoon with raiser. This is particularly poisonous in^ the light of this language : “There is 
nothing to indicate that trie FBI ever called on EDDIE BKAbbER (®r fOUKGBhOO) 
either, for that matter^in connection with KAHCY’a statements ana

--- PAGE BREAK ---light of this language : “There is 
nothing to indicate that trie FBI ever called on EDDIE BKAbbER (®r fOUKGBhOO) 
either, for that matter^in connection with KAHCY’a statements ana

--- PAGE BREAK ---

testimony". 
This telegram indicates it han the same motive aa Bexley, jpjir;> 
eliminating what was inconsistent with ita preconception. The telegram supports 
inferences of Cuban involvements. neither the i>BI aer BoxleY fi iii riml > 
find this congenial. • 
Lucking, he re is any reason far tt the naila3 approach to the Peri'ins 
or any consideration th*t Haney mi;ht, inaeed be psycho or a liar 
(||»her than on a aloetive Basis, tne sipctiea ay Bexley). 
fnere are also internal inconsistencies bordering on rieoeptien. There is 
muen tliat without reason or reason oeing aougat. Seme of too ignored 
Contradictions bring into question the dependability of the witnesses on which 
wnat I oelieve to be a contrivance is eased. 
The Brawnsrs, from whom the telegram tnat is denied the files was obtained, 
place tne date Raney was in nallas in lyt.J, As cited above, Youngblood ( and here hie 
wife), place the date in 196a and seem firm about it. „abey ala© nave a small 
daughter with Haney, as aa one else does, "her could tney explain td their own 
satisfaction why they would have known JiAJtCY and BOB omy as Starr while 
f'dOjjiGBi.OOv knew them as 3tarr-dorr«eted-te - HJRE1H". 
One obvious possibility tnat is destructive to the prefabrication ia that 
this Starr and Perrin are not tne same ^particularly with the fourteen year difference 
in ages that becomes apparent). 
The cited "anomol^s" are not exhausted ^p.4) Som. of thu people knew the pair 
as Starr, others as Perrin. The clear possibility tnat this ail derives from 
fancy’s falsehoods is avoided because, as I learned from Joel Palmer, he and 
Bexley are determine® flot to acknowienge that# sne is a liar. What kino of people were 
K#ing kg into a big deal with a pair wnose names they coula not even oe sure of? 
gu<sn this comment, "It was all PKTUiX.il could do to write a one—page loller" is 
not bracketed with the quotation from nancy’s testinony it follows, to the effect 
tilat he was a writer, as she was, without emphasizing the undependability of any- 
thing coming from her, the motive ia suspect. 
Jiext we have Brawner attending "meetings" with the Perrin’s. Boxley says 
the possibility.*.is good". Yet at the bottom of this page, he acknowledges that 
Brawner "was unable to pinpoint the house”. Proa his report, tnat seems to be 
a considerable understatement, for he seems not to have been a&le to even guess 
the street on which it was. This is precisely as it was with fiancy in her testinony. 
Bramner was taken on " a field reconnaisance”. Penn ® nes eoulu not some clone 
to any location from Raney's description when 1 asked him. 
Brawner is said to have backed out of whatever unspecified thing was tne 
subject ol his attendance at tnese "meetings" because of a tale tnat tne Colonel 
had but tons by whicn he made a pnone-Dell ring in another room. Palmer's explanation 
ol this is to give him an excuse for conferring with confederates in another room.se of a tale tnat tne Colonel 
had but tons by whicn he made a pnone-Dell ring in another room. Palmer's explanation 
ol this is to give him an excuse for conferring with confederates in another room.

--- PAGE BREAK ---6 
If there was any need fez suea conference, it is not suggested in the memo, which 
offers cops ana roboers but botning else, no explanation at ail, or by Palmer, of m 
w^fom I sought it.

ihe fieiu reeonnaisance bit is concluded with the statement that "residents of 
tne area saia tnat a large house had ueon demolished three or four years pawei 
pxevi©usdyH, which would indieate that Bexley knew the address, wnich he doe, not 
gire.

It also indicates he could hare taken Brawaer there, which he do«3 not 
8«y* »nd that Brawner could not identify the address, newerer, this in the memo 
is uuQ*r thexixk data October 10, 1968 a£ the earliest, when , at 3 p.m., the 
Brawners were "contacted".

Yet it was noatha before that that Boxiey told me about 
this .

He was then quite positive that he haa located precisely the right house.

Prom this it would seem that Bexley had the address of the house and his 
trusted iniormants could not identify the neighborhood or surroundings, despite 
his saying they had attended "nestings" there, and he withheld this intelligence 
from hia memorandum, or he fabricated the knowledge that he did hare the location.

Here also there is seeming significance in ni8 holding out on me, eren asking me, 
*a be did.

a month ago, to stay off tuis aspect because it was so "tender” when he 
knew i had people who haa spoken to ftancy ana who woula go eaek to her, and when 
1 nad asked identification pictures of ham to show to her, as she tad agreed.

It 
is difficult to regard the formulations, the omissions, the blanks in this 
Brawner—Youngblood part of his report as innocence or simple incompetence.

To me 
amounts to wilful!

misrepresentation to Jim, who would be acting on the basis 
of hia trust in noxley ail; the dependability of his reports.--- PAGE BREAK ---

To me 
amounts to wilful! misrepresentation to Jim, who would be acting on the basis 
of hia trust in noxley ail; the dependability of his reports. Me^liiso there is 
is 
faejciag wnat ia always missing, his appraisal of the reliability oi the witnesses, 
instead he exudes confidence while carefully aaimxa not enuorsing his sources, "jjyrriV 
almost aa though laying the founaationxf for escaping responsibility When the 
entire thing blew apart by saying, "ail I do is report, netning else”. Generally 
and specifically this ia not true. He knows hia reports hare control ever Jim's 
thinking and he knows he mx is responsible for pointing out the weaknesses of 
di-s information and hia witnesses. this aviftdance of the reliability ©f the witnesses becousj more obviously dal ibar 
deliberate innx the Hew Orleans part, which then follows tbeginning at tne top 
of pase b). It begins with accurate quotation from Haney's testimony, that on leaving 
lialias in the fali of 1961 they lived "part of the time down in one of tne Sisters' 
places, down in the Preach quarter on St. Phillip St. and tnen 1713 Calhoun...and 
various othe. places which 1 cannot remember, sir.” The only error I can recall 
from this quotation, without the testimony in front of me, is the position of the 
apostropne, and my recolxeetioa can oe in error. fruiu tuis Boxiey, with autnoritativenesa, quotes Hew Orleans rublic Seivice 
re<-mvia ra-rnwirMTRobert Perrin lived on tne third floor of 637 St. Bhil^Lb Street

--- PAGE BREAK ---*t aa unspecified time prior to March iSix 9, IjbZ, and left -wing a bill ©f J1R.4H 
wjook ^whieh?) was turned over to tne retail Credit Bureau on April 13, 1962, after 
atoempta to collect it at 633t.

Phiixip St were unsuccessful on Karen 9-10 and.

April 13, 19&2.* 
Inis ia impressively specific to the eye of tne busy reader, such aa Jim, but 
strangely unspecific an analysis.

It seams unlikely ttuu tne utility has no 
record showing wnen sarvicu began, and it is important to know this date because 
xt might indicate when the Herrin's reached hew Orleans ana it would certainly indica- 
te whether there is another void in their hew urleans careers.

intent to dissemble becomes more clear to am with the following paragraph!

"fne 1962 and 1964 city directories for hew Orleans disclose occupants of 637 
St.

Hhiilip Street, where i»AkOX and hob resided upon arrival here from hallaa 
(emphasis aadod^, for there is no indication this is where they lived "on arrival 
from i)allaa ana reason to suspect it is not).

to have been JnMhS BVOdA (owner- no 
occupation); baiter A.

Hammond (plumber); and FhMUtL COMGKMBI (U.S.

Internal Revenue 
e 
Service Officer).

It would be comforting te here nave a report of interviews with these people, 
but alas they are missing.

It is not because no effort was made to obtain auen 
knowledge, beeause 1 learned from Palmer that tae owner was dead and that Jhia wife 
stiii owned the property, tfroai this it would also seem that the date > of the Herria 
oceupeincy presented nd problem to a determined professional investigator.

Moreover, 
because of tne manner ia qhich.

the city directories in hew title ana are prepared, 
once every two years, with a single address, that of oecupaney at vhe time of 
inquiry being the only one given, is it not unusual that no city directory address 
ft>r the Herrin's ia given - or that their absence fron the directory ie noted?--- PAGE BREAK ---

Moreover, 
because of tne manner ia qhich. the city directories in hew title ana are prepared, 
once every two years, with a single address, that of oecupaney at vhe time of 
inquiry being the only one given, is it not unusual that no city directory address 
ft>r the Herrin's ia given - or that their absence fron the directory ie noted? Is it 
aet strange Jfeo that there ia no notation hs re of consultation with the phone books, 
whicn would digclose whether or not they tad phones, er that tne phone company records 
were not consulted to determine not oniy whether they had phones, but the addresses 
* t which the phones might have beau listed? Because 1 was troubled by a this glaring void in the seemingly thorough and 
authoritative mama, whicn achieves an impressive tone with the inclusion of all the 
unnecessary triviality that ia not essential and the omission, of dll the oovious that 
is and should have seen readily available, and because the capitalization offt he 
"S" in “Sister’s", which is in the typed version of tne memo aa well aa the printed 
one of the Oomaission, 1 consulted Barbara Held about this. Here let me note that 
for the editor in Washington, as well as the court reporter in Washington, to have 
known that Aaacy was referring to tne ownership of this property by the Mother 
Cabrini sisters without cueek ia entirely ualineiy. Homebody in Washington nad to hm 
have Had this knowledge, therefore, a search in tne nrc.ives was in order, it coulu 
have been gone by hethe11 or Hoxley by phone. Mere,. <n +n nnfn * irt ** v  
v. , . *. .. . ^ & u-.. — 4

--- PAGE BREAK ---Her® * higreaa ts note toat Barbara’s concern aaout tne intogx'ity of the investi- 
gation is onu ©x taa things that got a© worried.

aa« eemaunieatea it to me fa very 
early November, on my first meeting with her when 1 waa toen in hew .xrieaaa.

1 arrived 
tna Friday before aleetion aay ana Believe 1 saw nar ext at day.

Win, a ay re ad lag of 
taia aeae told a© that 637 St.

^niillp 3t.

might aot have ©*ea tost of toe property 
owaad by toe Sisters, an© it disclosed ae iaquiriea of any Bisters to iearn whea 
tae FarrinlaliveJ in twsir property, 1 askedhar&bar xj\she was aware of any property 
®wned by any auaa in the siaok next to taat in vales ad© lives.

Site immediately told 
this property i* toat of toe Cabriai order an© is two blocs further away.

She also 
eat© sfB hod raised this question ana had been tola it made no difference.

It aot 
only Bake© &grk4i4ti?i8;fl a differenee ana a very big one, out it ia fatal to the 
integrity ®f this ao-aliied investigation.

when I raised this question with falaer i get no satisfactory answer.

JSe 
‘ekaovioujee knowing toe Sisters* property was net 637, claimed on the basis of no 
exted authority or investigation that baccy lived there at a later and aot significant 
peried, alone, or that the "various ether place a I cannot now remember" included this 
unaoecified address so close to toe one she did give thi exact address on.

At this point floxiey goes into the ferric neve to 1713 Calhoun.

From needlessly 
unspecified '•other sources", when he had access to toe property owner whoso names is 
spelled in variouc ways, her as abrahaa kduahEWSia, he ylaces the ante of occupancy 
®s «aiiy/nayl962".

here toere ia an onderlining in din’s handwriting reading "time 
haehvilie Ave.--- PAGE BREAK ---

From needlessly 
unspecified '•other sources", when he had access to toe property owner whoso names is 
spelled in variouc ways, her as abrahaa kduahEWSia, he ylaces the ante of occupancy 
®s «aiiy/nayl962". here toere ia an onderlining in din’s handwriting reading "time 
haehvilie Ave. speech", bithout inspiration, toere oesaa to have been no reason 
for hiffl to have mane suexi a natation, however, fro a #ai*er I learned ills his and 
hoXiWy'a toeory that the t’errin*a planned an assassination there, and that the area 
ia "another J/aaley Fia*»«. when I asked him on vast basis, he wan silent aau shrugged, 
for tiiBy had and there aeeaa to be u© auca seals. her© agaxn, wh*r« is missing wito the crucial importance of Khuaaewaid., 
£rushewshi ia the paon© book, “Krusevki in tty© next sentence, is any appraisal of 
him. a© is listed as “hew* in toe phone book., as Bexley says. With all to© nut 
P^eacuera around, for example, ia h« one? X^is memo does not stay, and not because it 
cannot, it ia set foita in a memo "From biixiaia Boxlej and Joel Palmer", unostted 
hut "ite: kev. A kruschevaki". 2he importance of the weight hi3 credibility bears ia 
at tne top of page 7, where he is quoted aa saying "that at approximately the same 
tiae HA SCI x'KMIM rented 1713 Calhoun, an older woman ©f'45 years or 30, who looked 
like a waitress or a auras rented ho. 1715, toe apartment accross the hall from the 
PBitdlh residence". K is town quoted aa saying “tuia unxnetn tenant of 1715 Calhoun 
came to him about two montoa after renting toe apartment anu tola him a man would 
be moving into it, ana she was muvi.,g out”. Unknown? She landlord has no recordaY She Fiat Office has none? Tne paone 
68lpfiny none, toe gaa ana electric records do net exist? filers i3 no indication

--- PAGE BREAK ---9 
any effort, even tne minimal, was maae to learn her nuentity, if 3ne ever 
ejti3ted* inis natation i8 pivotal.

Everythin* in the entire structure being 
bunt depends upon it.

failure to identify the"unknown woman uenant", of any 
•ffort to learn her identity, makes tne suspSoion she either does not exist or 
*°uld be destructive to tne prefabrieation an unavoidable possibility.

Me 
less suspect is the elimination from the summary memorandum for Garrison of 
tne xnown aubioUs enaracter of the -reverend- landlord when it was known and 
is recorded elsewhere.

The man ultimately is aaid to have moved in.

£ ie said never to have seen him 
"butpan at least two occasions he - JUUSCifliVSEL - 'brol* into* the apartment 
m an effort to collect rent from the man." Pretty good.

He doesn't knew who 
•wee him money, has no records, and creaks in wnen tne man obviously is not there 
to collectr ent from tne missing man.

If he aaw anytning but "radio equipment", 
described as "several sets of", that is not recorded, hor is it that, having 
seen this equipment of imputed value, did net hola it hostage 
f°r his money.

for what ocher purpose could he have broken in?

hven the idea 
*hat this was radio equipment seems to have been planted in £>a mindr from the mther 
Memorandum.

Un this and related aspects that memo is both interesting ana in 
contradiction.

with this summary for Garrison tey Bexley: 
«r.

k says that he went over several times Ueig- not that he oroke in) to 
the man whom he 3ays was not known to him by name and to collect the 
rent (confrontation f0r anf ot,faer purpose?) .

Mr.

K says tnat he 'wrote several 
times to Mr.

Walker U» obvious slip)* tp demand tne rent.

He finally served an *** 
«Action notice on tnxs unknown gentleman ana forced him to move-.--- PAGE BREAK ---

Walker U» obvious slip)* tp demand tne rent. He finally served an *** 
«Action notice on tnxs unknown gentleman ana forced him to move-. Boxley and Palraer 
are not exeestsiveiy shrewd in noting pereuthetieaxiy " (»n obvious slip)" and they 
are not ex«eBsivol*|diligent in not having traced out Walker through the various 
available sources or through the court record of tthe alleged eviction notice. Should 
more comment on this oe necessary? This, like the rest, is not traced by the moat 
°leoeatary police methods for a reason that would seem to be apparent: it would 
end the fabricated case Jhat is entirely without substance. The ait on the "radio equipment-; "Mr. k. stated that he thought he man was 
*n engineer because he had equipment in the apartment. When we inquired as to wheth* V 
waa radio equipment, Mr. k. answered affirmatively." 
hiu tnay first ask him if tnere were transits or levels or any other kinh 
of engineering equipment"? There is noj^suggestion of this. Any metering or 
measure equipment of any kind? ho, only "radio-, and "several sets", which is 
consistent with tneplanting of tne notion that|tais waa communication equipment 
i assassins, some thing not said but certaintly intended to se concluded. Why 
elae waa he aakea about only rauio equipment? What, bfc tnus time, could bo more credible that these two excerpts from the

--- PAGE BREAK ---11 
*iyJhout any preliminaries, this appears near tne middle of page 9: 
to September 2f, I9b8 (underlining, in original, beginning with s only; 
MASoa Aiin BIAIML KITi'LSS were ahtbwn the photograph of "fhe Walking Man* and " 
"Prencny" taken in Healey Plaza Havember 22, 1963".

1 asked Joel falser about this.

Why, i wanted to know, was a picture was 
«®nvinced was e^Bradiey shown to those people.

His reply was aeeause it was 
suggested 'oy the description previously given of this “55-year-old" man.

if thi|_is the case, and i nave no reason to believe it was, there is no 
suggestion ©f any kind of a deseription of this man, not from anyone, that 
picture seems to Be of a man less than 55, witn blond hair.

In any event, the 
■“•ittesaea were shown these six described pictures and no other, in ftoxiey’s 
words, as though they had meaning, "simultaneously"'.

/it should bo born in mind that this was a±±*i3Bat*af ter ward, 38 days late^ 
nawrenoe Howard, Hill Seymour, Jack Starr(twe) and Perrin ^iaa two).Later 
a Picture of noran Hall was said to have been added.

Seymour was witn a beard and 
mUased hair, the others are dark and connected with another story -j’icot known to 
have spent any time in Mew^>rleans.

In any event, there is n£ similarity between them 
ana Perrin or Starr, who Boxley claims was substituted for Perrin.

'.This selection 
is contrived to make Starr-Perrin identification automatic.

If this is dubious, designed to elicit predetermined response ana undependable 
"ide.itij-ioation“f what can sa said of what was done 38 day3 earlier, on what from 
the ineai0 waB the first meeting witn tne aitteases, wnen tney were shown a picture 
°f "The Walking Man" alone - meaning Bradley, as far as Jim ana Boxley are concerned?

There is no explanationnfrom Boxley ana Palmer's is palpably false, There wa3 no other 
picture used on this occasion.

I made a mistake in.

going into this with 
Balmer, anu he did not correct me.--- PAGE BREAK ---

I made a mistake in. going into this with 
Balmer, anu he did not correct me. 1 said that including "i'he Walking man" with 
Hali^Howard-Seymour (and I mentioned no others) made his selection automatic. Palmer merely smiled. When, thereafter, on November 4i the kittesses were again shown the Walking Man 
picture, naturally t«)hey identified him again. "Bssitive ana forceful" are the words 
Boxley uses to describe tneix* "ideutification". Once he had gotten them to commit 
XhemaexVes again, "Both then were shown the B.d.Coimner’s office Phote +2c27 *md 
asked if it le.ked lime the dead man who occupied 1713 Calhoun. Heither witness said 
t hat i0 did”. ^ 
Previously, Lianne iCitteas had ^lentified a picture of Perrin as "resembling" 
tne man va0 died, who Boxley wants not to be considered to have been Perrin. What he dared noTom.it is this; "Bo th agreed tney had never seen the deceased closely 
anougn to remember him." So, withall, no identification was at all dependable. Xjjis type of photographic manipulation should require no further comment. But it did not end there. " On Snturdav. HnvanWer 0. 1068. tne WlfPKSS familv...

--- PAGE BREAK ---10 
Same sentence: "..

.itHitUSCHEVOiO.

stated jfeaat he had not seen the man" and “he 
said the man waa 'about fifty-fire years old’.'' I3 it necessary to say that if 
Khruschevski did net know the name of the man he knee waa named Walker, he had 
to harve had some way of knowing the alleged age?

If he had not seen hi/) as he 
did not kne* his name, he certainly must hare known someone who had seen him.

the 
indication of any quest for this person is totally nonexistent.

yurtuituou ly, the unnamed Walker "finally uisarpe«red4 the same time as 
BfihKIh's death ana within a week afeter UkU ft;Mil's departure!

r©m the apartment, 
whicw wa3 ea August 18—30, ISfc-B.’* 
With the know/relationshiy oetween the death and the aepasture, the emphasis 
*daed is unnecessary, a literary device that is here a propaganda device.

But the 
glaring lack of even the most* cursory search for the unnamed named or the named 
Walker, mo matter how rudimentary cneek on the very obvious sources, is amyle 
indication no .act was wanted.

It would he interesting to have ordinary police 
do what was net done here, not intelligence agents of suyer skills.

Where this 
was done, the results are ayectactlar - and loyjii opposite to the statements 
of Bexley's reports, as we snail see.

With this eonatruetion, we are left to assume that there was a connection between 
Jtancy in 1713 and nameless Walker in 1715 (earlier described as "the apartment 
a coress tne hall from the PfchUll residence"^ Langwc^^mrfe-^Ja-aa.7-.W...require 
K is quoted as having volunteered that "the woman in Mayor Morrison's 
0ffic®" ana here, in parens, Boxley adds" (Presumeably Mrs.

GradJ"- only he said f'jhfrl^ 
"Gruba" and Jim corrected it to Graa^ “once tried to r ent an apartment from me 
f or GDI BAMISI'EK".

i^is is a real wierdo and more oait for Jim.

Banisi-er and 
Morrison were, political, antipodal.--- PAGE BREAK ---

i^is is a real wierdo and more oait for Jim. Banisi-er and 
Morrison were, political, antipodal. It is scareeely possible to bracket two 
prominent men in hew Orleans who were more politically opposite each other, with 
less in common, or anything less likely that Mrs. Grad, whose name brought other 
things to aim's mind, having any interest in Banister for Morrison or any other reason. Be^husband*s printing suop, Jim notes, “waa adjacent to Caries Bringuier's". It 
was actually a closer relationship, nringuier rented frorn Grad the front of the 
building in which Grad had his snap. fhe d^ttess 3tory hnat here follows is worth much more analysis that there 
is now time for. It,too, is carefully eontrived, with the same ais3ing pieces not 
sought, the same absence of testing, etc. Bernaps, because of the crucial importance 
of tne introducing of the picture ana the identification of the " walking man", 
read Bradley, by Boxley, if I restrict myself to that aspect it ean be regarded 
as a fair sample. time 
Introducing Bradley at tne Jiia was having serious legal reverses about him 
in California waa obviously designed to nave special appeal for him, for there is 
no • +- hin-?o h-im whfl /vot fcrnov how &ittor Jim VAA about tills*

--- PAGE BREAK ---I 
12 
• .

.were shown the portrait photograph..

.of EBGAR EUGEJin JMUi>iJ3I..

With" this 
vvkj- 
Preconaitioa,/^he Kittesses, quite naturally made "positive" identification 
9t him as the man from overhead.

ana did they add detailI 
■There is more, hut is it neo&ed?

Because of time requirement, I skip now tothe Boxley *A lfix- 10-1-68 memo 
"Identification of Robert Bee Perrin".

This is designed to cast doubt on the 
i^ontifieation of Perrin as the dead man.

If, as I would hope ia not tae case, it 
requirea further analysis, it can be provided later.

All of these things have seen euilain^ up to the 11*22-68 (what a vei&eful 
*\ /VWftV' 
force selected this aate’.Wn "Arsenic death of EGBERT BEE PBREIH, August 2b, 1962".

it has tae same purpose.

It is the vital "proof" that someone else was murdered, 
not Perrin ^without support of any kind, Palmar told me it was a "seaman").

It 
would aeem that the entire contrived ease immediately falls apart when what 
was obvious and should have been done — and wasn't - was, belatedly, dene.

Boxloy 
says the call, from whoever, to the State Selice, was at i, 1:35 a.m.

^deviously 
he seeks to =place it even earlierj.

Then he says, "The &oroaer's Office Bay Record 
Item 14040 spates the victim was received at Charity Hospital at 4s15 a.m.

and died 
at 6:05 a.m.

war is ID IT ttBiiriRB APPROAIMA'ISJUT TWO HOURS jUih PORTr-PIViS HIHOTBS 
to get the victim to the hospital?" 
I am confident this question impressed "im very much when he raad it.

With tbe 
careful assembling of non-information, misinformation and distortion, by the time 
he got this he was ready to accept anything, as perhaps most buqyt men dependant upon 
■jrusted aubordintes wouiu have been.

, The rest of trie memo is of similar poison, so I r estrict myself to this.

I do 
noIA, however, no indication that the morgue record book was consulted ana studied.

|,o days after j(ihce and I got here, Prank Heloche was sent to consult the 
7eeorda of Chaiirty hospital.--- PAGE BREAK ---

I do 
noIA, however, no indication that the morgue record book was consulted ana studied. |,o days after j(ihce and I got here, Prank Heloche was sent to consult the 
7eeorda of Chaiirty hospital. They disclose that what Bexley said is false 
and explain why he dia not cdnsult the only original source. The ambulance carrying 
Perrin reached the hospital at 2:45 a.m., a seemingly net unreasonable time when it 
ia considered tuat the wrong ppolice were called, they then called theright 
police, they got an ambulance, things were none at the scene, etc. The 4:15 time 
Bexley misquites is the time emergency treatment was ended in the emergency 
room and Perrin waa transferred to the ward. Had the morgue book been, consulted (Bexley’u memos contain no such reference, 
but Palmer assure^me Boxley told aim tftey-ohad been), it would become immediately 
apparent that this page and every item on it was ia order. Perrin ia listed as number 
^627. There are nd skipped lines, no erasures, no changes, ana a number of us 
Tnsoectea the book when ^suis Ivon personally got it the same day. He says the 
officials say there has been no previous inspection of this. If Palmer is right, 
Boxley woula seem to have perpetrated a deliberate fraud on Garrison and perhaps

--- PAGE BREAK ---13 
jjgd it not oeen atoned, on history.

If Palmer ia wrong aau the morgue officials 
are right, he deliberately avoided the required investigation that would have destroyed 
the fraudulent ease he had carefully contrived anu foisted off on the trusting 
Garrison.

; 
jhere are many other dubious aspects of this file, things said to be in 
it are not.

Other witnesses are similarly undependable, leadj twiatea, etc.

1 would thin^that at this point no mere is necessary.

1 emphasize this is a 
AA3ty analysis, with no opportunity for aeareful reading of tne file and that ^ 
under adverse circumstances.

Insre has not seen time for a reartfading or the 
making 01 ^tea or the outlining of this commentary.

1 suggest that if this 
immediately apparent to me, a realty earuiul analysis would »e mutfi more / 
0Terwhelming.

ixuagb (/!

in passing, I want to note that wmle a great deal hangs on tne story given ; 
boxley by a Mrs.

Teissier, there is, consistently, no appraisal of her reliability , 
and judgement.

It nonetheless may have inadvertently provided by her opinion of , >.

-j 
Perrin.

He “musThave boen an educated man"..."because ^he had said) this is my King 
i"'i 
Arthur table...0 
She second memo quoted from, that on tne autopsy, etc., makes a major point of i 
the absence of this mnd aiT »ii other similar records for the year 19b2.

1 nave no 
knowledge of this, but on reading it I was reminued of something havid Chandler had 
told me a month ago, that he was doing a story on unsolved aeatha.

Shile I was with 
him the chief of police phoned him to let him know t-e files were ready for hia 
examination.

1 phonea bevid.

he told me that these old files are all stored rather 
haphazardly in & basement area.

He checked to aee if he has this one.

He does not.--- PAGE BREAK ---

He checked to aee if he has this one. He does not. nut in any event, it seems as though there is nothing unusual in tne absence of all 
the file far this year, because tney are automatically moved into a storage area, 
ft would seem not to be beyond tne capacity of a akiiien intelligence agent to loam 
aa <A report the normal uistiifeution of olu files. because haroara had early flagged my interest in what Hoxley and Palmer were 
doing, anu because the reactions of ea<^n 01 them galvanized my attention, 1 made it 
a point to look up Joel Palmar. First.? pnoaed him before lunch on Friday end began 
talking to him. Here I learned they had not made tne slightest effort to give the 
3Eraifcht information on the ^t. Philip .correct spelling) St. residences. They did 
know the owner of o37, told me tne man wno then had owned tae ouiluing was dead and 
it waa now owned oy Admix his wife. Clearly, not the Sisters, Thereiore, aside from 
tnose otner ignoreu addressee, this manna there ia a dwilaerate history of Haney and 
probably parrm in Hew Orleans they nave deliberately reft out. The obvious reason 
is that it would ba incdnaietent with the case taey were building out of nothing. In the course of this conversation, Joel made uints about the iapj^rtknco ol 
Haney in tae story oi* the JFK assassination. i asked aim what it was. He asked il 1 
wanted it in two or three woitta. i aaiu in whatever lorm he preferred . When he indi—

--- PAGE BREAK ---cated a reluctance to scenic over tne pnone 1 immediately akie a date to gif to hi a home.

Without telling nim in advance, 1 took Bu~<?

i’enaterwaid with a®.

I spoke to Joel frankly, telling him no liea ana in no way hiding my purposes.

He seemed uneasy, and I said I was net accusing him of being an agent.

I also 
pointed out taut busy and h arrassed as Jim Harrison was, he aid not have time to 
mak« his own, independent analyse*, aid not have time to examine every word of 
•very memo, ana, in effect, could beeome the creature of tnose he tiusted.

I asked 
him tne rnetorical question, wnat voula happen to Harrison if he was fed and used 
°aa information that was very Bad.

Joel agreed it w~uld ruin eve rything.

1 3aid I 
had not made tne investiaent of time ana money, suffered tne sacrifices 1 have for' 
anything li-^e tuat to happen, and that I was, therefore, also deelpy concerned for 
Harrison's security.

We then proceeded.

1 Began ay expressing the preference for taping wnat we said, saying I»d not 
be able to recall all of It and I nia not want the risk of inaccurate recall.

1 also 
°-^d nim that I woula ©e saying, things of which I thougnt ne should have a record, 
ana 1 encouraged him to taps it, too.

ne said ne prefered that 1 not tape, s© I 
diurn'** *aa he did not uimself, at least not visibly.

’ 
la eaaenee, there is no case.

He and Boxley have Been making this up as they g®.

He had no satisfactory answer to a single thing I asked or said.

As we left, Bud said 
he had never aeon a man so anredaed.

Uf course, it was all quit® and polite.

I took 
most of the so-called faet of the memos and Bit oy Bit he acknowledged they were 
wrong or incomplete or untested.

1‘he stJory tney worse contriving , in essence, is 
this: 
it is not Perrin out a sailor who was killed.

Perrin went to hallas and was 
part of tne assassination, he dia not specify what part.

Prior to this it iad been 
plan to do the job at tne dedication of t/’e Washvilie Ave.--- PAGE BREAK ---

Perrin went to hallas and was 
part of tne assassination, he dia not specify what part. Prior to this it iad been 
plan to do the job at tne dedication of t/’e Washvilie Ave. Wharf, a perfect 
®ontrivanee for tne Shaw case (Russo's testimony). 1 aslodd wny there and he said, 
"It is a second heal^ry Plaza" ( a year ana a calf ahead of time.). He explained that 
after going under the ori dge, the motorcade cauls not turn around. He also insisted 
that escape would be easy, x'his point was preferable to suea obvious alternatives 
as tne raiiroaa tracks along Airline highway. Perrin was an excellent siiot ana an assassin. He apparently Became Starr once 
ne was uead. Haney was, without doubt, an accomplice or an accessory in his 
“urder. I aakea for the eviaence ana the answer was it had to be. 1 aaid she la d a 
perfect alibi, whoever she was sleeping with at Baton Rouge, ana he corrected me to 
taestweg-, whieh he said was aoout 5f/ miles awsjy ( I unaerstand it is really 
quite close). He was entirely unable to .produce any suggestion of how she could 
possibly be involved on tile eviaence they aaa yau unbenaing on his insistence it was 
aa they said ana that sne shoula oe charged oy Jim. 1 asked ^im wny uoxley iiaa called me off when 1 was inerested ana wanted to bsup
-'

--- PAGE BREAK ---aaa yau unbenaing on his insistence it was 
aa they said ana that sne shoula oe charged oy Jim. 1 asked ^im wny uoxley iiaa called me off when 1 was inerested ana wanted to bsup
-'

--- PAGE BREAK ---

15 
trusted friends apeak to <*aney, anu tne only explanationnxhe could 
offer was tne statement she would not talk. evidence he produced the 
tran3eript of a short conversation he tan hau with her, recently. I asked him 
ho* this in any way precluded a personal visit, where she could not a© as ane could 
by phone, and he hau ne answer. He also could not explain hew this required hoxley 
'to asic me to keep out, unless it was Because my getting itne it might destroy what 
they were buildiag trou nothing. 
He readily agreed that finding ana quoting one Youngblood aid not is am 
tllat the one in fancy's testimony was found. He said on the one hanri that the FBI 
wa3 wrong in calling her a considerable liar, yet pretended there was ne 
B1£nifieance in neijcertaia lie that Perrin had been a pil^t and gun-runner for 
I’^aneo, a teen-age ^mercenary. He finds her a selective liar, truthful when he and 
Hoxley want to believe her, a liar otherwise. 
1 was able to make a few notes but at thiiwriting i do not have them with me. 
He acknowledged it is odd they da not nave the name of the mysterious man- * •V- 
upstairs from the H-ittesaea, that it wa3 possible the married Kiteesa girl had 
made those identifications she did afteryconsultation witn her people, making what 
she said consistent with what tney had. He at first aeniea there had been a delay 
between vhe time sne had oeen shown the pictures and ^hen jaei^parents had been, but 
acknowledged the truth when I gave him th& dates. He a»L Jtetftwhen I ticked off who 
had been selected as comparison pictures. He falsely said the de®eri?tion of Brad- 
ley had been given in mdxanee ana Bradley's picture ^vaikingman, rather) had been 
selected on this basis. X did not tell him the file proved otherwise. 
i'he strange thing is he was not audibly embarrassed oy having nothing 
and pretending they had a soliuc ase. 1 kep/ asking for suostantiation on every 
l*aint and at no point got any tiling. M^o\ a single thing stacked up and on most 
he made no pretense of having anything. He said it was not Bexley's responsibility 
*n*t Harrison did with anything he provided put Garrison's, and that it was 
B®t B.'s need to substantiate, to accredit Sir point out tne weaknesses of the 
witneU3a3 or their stories. 
He had a karoxoi the autopsy report, i'he files do not. He insisted they 
must. He had a Xerox of the Brenner telegram, insists one is in tne files. It is 
not. He was untrouBied by the delay between Perrin’s death and JPk’s murder, is 
certain the same people made these elaborate plans in August of 196B that were carried 
°ut in Balias when it was not known tne President would i.e going there at all. The 
difxarence in age between tne 41-year-ola Perrin ana the 55 year old substitute 
is no problem to him or Hoxley, anu they see no problem in acceptance of the 
substitute. They acknowledge the autopsy report does have a description of his-ola Perrin ana the 55 year old substitute 
is no problem to him or Hoxley, anu they see no problem in acceptance of the 
substitute. They acknowledge the autopsy report does have a description of his

--- PAGE BREAK ---55 year old substitute 
is no problem to him or Hoxley, anu they see no problem in acceptance of the 
substitute. They acknowledge the autopsy report does have a description of his

--- PAGE BREAK ---

16 
tatoos Du'*: insist one on an aria was miasin,, in this description. 
He insists Boxley told him he had cileeked tile morgue book, tnat tne autopsy vaa 
attached to tne file \,and tne £3 letters of tne mother’s also are a ot in itj[. 
In tlie non-explanation 1 got, this was a murder for no reason, without any 
profit, by people who had nothing in it, and regardless wnere she was, how far 
away or otherwise occupied, Haney wa3 in on her husband’s murder. It jU3t had to 
be tnat way, anu if there wa3 no evidence, ns crediting any of it, if none of it 
was in any way SoliJ, it still had to be tnat way. 
Me acknowledsed I was one of the few who had bean interested in ^ancy'aistoryi? 
from the first, had written jot her, an<J had continued that interest. acknowledged 
having interested me in the deck ^oumgbleod possibility and that at the rery 
least it had to be checked out - ana wasn't. 
Although he had originally tola me he was doing a oeokaon Banister, forget- 
ting this he told me his book was en the "probe". Whoa i pointed out the discre- 
pancy t ne pretended it wao enough to say there would be mention of Banister in it. 
lie still dees not hare the alyea film for me, this tiflie bacua se it is i n a 
Hex somewnere in California, with his a~\uff. 
Originally ne was igoing a story, fhen he was uoiag a bo..-k, aa 1 understand 
it, to we done in 4-b weeks. Baring oeen in Hev Orleans several months, he now 
aaya he has moved his residence here, fie lacks risible means of support. 1'he 
top price Opnfident.ial pays is $200. With an occasional repeat in another of the 
same house’s properties, the yield per story is email. His tnavel expenses on that 
story, tnoae of which 1 know on a single trip, consumed that and more. If he got 
wljat is, for today, a good advance, it was gone oefore he got to work here and 
lacks visiole means of supporting nimeelf in this new city and on a very decent 
level, from the norms of tms kina of writing. 
He agreed it was oda for hoxley to be turning me off when I was in 
town and made inquiries, yet when 1 was available he used Turner aa a corroborating 
Witness, and the rCport of that interview has disproportionate length on that. Ho 
acknowledged"turner served no special pitipose, that he knew of no knowledge of this 
a ape ct lurner had, and that he did know I dia haveknowledge. He acknowledge this dia 
®ake it seem that Boxley was t failing on iurner'3 name ana feared having me with him 
and fja a position to see what was going on, X ^old aim of the letter 1 ia d 
wxitten ^oxley ana why, ana that I'd had no response.