AT THE BOOK DEPOSITORY - THE SHOTS Rachley 
Statements outnesses - Mne. Bcnald .lS) 
The assistant to the bookkeeper, she was employed by the Deposi- 
tory July 16, 1963, and was married February 1, 1961*. She had seen 
Oswald and fchought he Jf'was awful quiet". Other than that, she knew 
nothing and had no impression about him. 
At the time of the motorcade, she saw a shot hit the pavement 
at a place Liebeler makes it difficult for her to locate. His simple 
technique is to use a picture which can't show what she's talking 
about. He used Exhibit 354 and after he and she marked it, it became 
Baker Exhibit No. 1. (19 H112) As he knew, because she had previously 
been interviewed, she would locate this^y means of signs. So he 
showed her a picture taken from the wrong angle and from very close 
to the ground, hence distorting everything, looking toward the Deposi- 
tory instead of away from it. He is polite, almost patronising, leaus 
her^ and testifies a little bit for her, but since she can't see the 
signs, she can't very well orient anything by the signs. She repeats 
it was near the first sign. 
She also says the first shot came from the area to the west of 
and behind the Book Depository. In fact, she and others ran there 
immediately. She said she saw something hit the pavement and saw 
sparks fly. With the second shot, she became aware that these were 
shots. She heard three, and thought the first might have been a fire- 
cracker and that some kids would get in trouble. She also said that 
at the time of the shots "there was a train that looked like a circus 
train as well as I can remember now back there ... meaning in the are.- 
to which they ran. I recall no other reference to a train of this 
description. Several trains were in the area, some in motion, some 
stopped. (510)

--- PAGE BREAK ---here ... meaning in the are.- 
to which they ran. I recall no other reference to a train of this 
description. Several trains were in the area, some in motion, some 
stopped. (510)

--- PAGE BREAK ---

2 - Baker 
In a statement to the FBI on November 24, she re±erred to a man 
"who had been sitting on a wall directly across the street" and who 
"came up and said he saw everything", as Liebeler referred to or quoted 
from her statement. She agreed and said she didn't know the man's name 
and never saw him after that. She doesn't remember the man's saying 
what he had seen; she thinks it was lfeter that afternoon and "he told 
us he had seen everything". 
It does sound like Brennan letting people know just how important 
he was, doesn't it? (p.5ll) 
After the second shot, she began to smell gunsmoke. (p.5>12) 
It turns out that Liebeler marked the picture for her, saying 
as he did, "but you think it might have been right along here or some- 
where farther down." That's one way to get information from a witness. 
Lieberler also admits he doesn't know where Exhibit 354 was taken 
from, and he says if it was taken from one place, then what they have 
been testifying to and marking would mean thing, and if it was taken 
from another place, then the markings and testimony would mean some- 
thing else. And that's another way to conduct a hearing! (p.5l3) 
Liebeler didn't have to do this for too long/before Mrs. Baker 
said, "This is confusing." (p.5l4) It may have been to Mrs. Bakef>, 
but it wasn't to Liebeler. 
But Liebeler helped make it confusing for other people, too, 
because he did not use Exhibit 354, an aerial view taken from to the 
west of the triple overpass and looking east, but an entirely different 
photograph which I believe is one of a sefies in the FBI sequence 
dealing with the "missed" bullet. Baker Exhibit is 19 H 112, and 
Exhibit 354 is 16 H 949.