ro-itt in»«> 
FEDERAL BUREAU OF INVESTIGATION 
D.U 4/13/6^ 
P»trolun TZRNON VERNABJ) DOUUAHITS, Patrol 
Division, Sbelbf County Sheriff's Office, residence- 
3330 Dawn Drive, Aparteont 12, hose telephone 
358-8067, Memphis, Tenoesoee, was interviewed by 
Lieutenant W. 8. SCHUl/TZ, Homicide Bureau, Memphis 
Police Department, and SA FRANKLIN L. JOHNSON, at which 
time he re-enacted his movements on the afternoon of 
April 4, 1968, after be learned that Dr. MARTIN LOTHER 
KING bad been shot at the Lorraine Motel. He furnished 
the following information; 
On Thursday, April 4, 1968, be was assigned 
to Tactical Unit Mo. 10, consisting of 12 men, half of 
whom were Deputy Sheriffs and half of whom were police 
officers, which unit was located at the fire station at 
Main and Butler around 6;00 p.w., when be learned that 
Dr. KING bad been shot. 
Around 6:00 p.m., bo and other officers were 
Inside the fire station when be beard someone yell that 
Dr. KING had been shot. He jjuaedlatoly ran out of the 
door on the north side of the fire station, then ran 
east toward the Lorraine Hotel, Jumping over a fence, 
and then dropping down about a 10-foot concrete retaining 
wall which runs along the went side of Mulberry Street. 
He then ran to the driveway on Mulberry Street, which 
leads into the Lorraine Hotel,to a point beneath the 
balcony where Dr. KING'S body was lying. He stated that 
bo heard an unknown Negro male at the scene say, 
dirty a—— f—— pollco shot him. 
"The 
As be ran into the driveway, he dropped bis 
firearm and bad to stop monentnrily and pick up the 
firearm, chocking it briefly, and then continuing,. After 
going to the scene near where the body was lying and 
determining that other officers were converging on the 
area, be inmedlately ran out of the driveway, running 
north on Mulberry Street to Uullng and west on Huling 
Street to Main Street, then south on Main Street. As he 
Od 4/11768 .t Memphis. yenpcKiiee. 
SA PRANKI.IN L. JOlt^CONzwp 
.File ff Memphis 44-1987A- ^ 
4/12/68 
-Date dictated  • . ■ ■ ■ ■» 
— 
titti ContaIN iMlUiDr Nco&miDdHll|ni oor concltulong of Uid PBt. Il U tba propoity of Iho FBI and 1§ loaaad t4 
aioaojTi U mad lU oooUnia tn mat i^sUtbiaod outsido your nf oacir.ted  • . ■ ■ ■ ■» 
— 
titti ContaIN iMlUiDr Nco&miDdHll|ni oor concltulong of Uid PBt. Il U tba propoity of Iho FBI and 1§ loaaad t4 
aioaojTi U mad lU oooUnia tn mat i^sUtbiaod outsido your nf oacir.

--- PAGE BREAK ---titti ContaIN iMlUiDr Nco&miDdHll|ni oor concltulong of Uid PBt. Il U tba propoity of Iho FBI and 1§ loaaad t4 
aioaojTi U mad lU oooUnia tn mat i^sUtbiaod outsido your nf oacir.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

/ 
c 
o 
I 
E 44-19B7 
1 
ran out of the driveway at the Lorraine Motel, be was 
Joined by an officer named MALEY, who ran along with him 
to a driveway on the south side of Hullng Street between 
Mulberry and South Main Street. Officer MALEY stopped 
at that point to observe, and DOUJ^HITB kept running 
toward Main. 
Upon reaching Main Rtrcet and turning south 
on Main Street, he saw no pf^dentriau traffic whatever. 
He continued running south on Ifiin Street until he cane ' 
to Jim's Grill, a rentnurant at 41tt South Main Street. 
The door was standing open. Ho utep[ied inolde, looked 
around briefly, seeing cuotomors uitiing around eating 
and drinking, and he announced to all present that no one 
should leave that restaurant until tlK> police bad arrived 
and approved their leaving the presioen. He then 
pulled the door to the restaurant shut and continued 
running south on Main Street. 
AH ho came out of Jim's Grill and started 
running south again, he observed uom^ Items lying In the 
doorway to Canlpe Amusenont Company at 424 South Main. 
At the time, he bad no idea as to the olgnlflcance of 
these items lying in that doorway. He did not stop but 
kept running south on Main past Canipe's, going a distance 
of some 20 to 30 feet before stopping. His purpose in 
running past Canlpe's was in order to look east around 
the corner of the building in which Canlpe's is located 
to 800 if he could observe anyone running or any other 
nusplcious activity, DOIJAHITE stating that at this time 
he, of course, did not know the point from which the gun 
had been fired resulting in the killing of Dr. XING. 
Upon running 20 or 30 feot south of Canlpo.'s, 
he observed that there was no area at that location whore 
anyone could run or conceal hlmoelf, there being some 
large outdoor signs and a fence located Just south of 
Canlpe's. In addition, ho ebserved other officers running 
}rth on Main on the oast side of the sidewalk, coming 
:om tlB direction of the fire station, so that these 
'fleers would have bcou In a ponition to seo anyone 
inning or any other suspluloua activity in the general 
aVea in which DOIJLAHITE was proceeding. He then turned 
around and walked north on tho east side of Main to the 
: t<; 
r . 
• • 
V*yo anyone 
inning or any other suspluloua activity in the general 
aVea in which DOIJLAHITE was proceeding. He then turned 
around and walked north on tho east side of Main to the 
: t<; 
r . 
• • 
V*y

--- PAGE BREAK ---any other suspluloua activity in the general 
aVea in which DOIJLAHITE was proceeding. He then turned 
around and walked north on tho east side of Main to the 
: t<; 
r . 
• • 
V*y

--- PAGE BREAK ---

/- 
( 
C’ 
^7^ 
f 
R 44-1987 
vicinity »f the dcMriray to Caiilre AouneBent CoBpnny. 
About thin tine other ofXlc-ern arrived on the ncene 
and took up a peoltlon around the lte«u» lying In front 
of the doot-way to Canlro A«uiicwent Covnpauy. Patrolnan 
DOLIAIIITK then walked went acrotts Vain Street In front 
of Canlpe AJau.eement Conpany and stationed hlnself 
near a blue Camaro parked on the went side of Halo 
opposite Canlpe AMunement Company. 
Patrolr^tJi lad.MMlTi: »dvlr:eil that ho In positive 
that aftor ho arrived on K^in 2it4.cot, and iintll the officers 
bad given I heir approval , no l''.Ci the area on foot, 
lie in equally positive tlv>t no vehJ«'-le oped away from the 
area around Cw.nlpe ABUoe(a*‘nt (iompany aXt*sr he arrived on 
Ualn Street. Ilo stated that tho only time he was not in 
a position to ohoerwe tho activity In the 400 block of 
South Main after he firnt arrived there wan during the 
time that he ntepped into Jim's Grill. Ilo stated, however^ 
that he wao In this grill only mt>menlavlly and he is 
certain in liln mm nlnd that lie wan not in Jim's Grill 
l»»ng enough for anyone to have run from either of the 
exits to a rooming houae at 422^ SouCh Main and thereafter 
run to an autowohlle and Leave the scene without bla 
having seen such activity. 
With regard to the owner of Canlpe AMUsement 
Company, a white man, and two cust'jmera inside Canlpe 
Amusement Company, two Negro malco, he stated that he saw all 
three of these persons and wan with a group of officers wuo 
were talking to these Indlvldunln. lie stated, however, 
that as ho ran south on Main before leaving Canlpe 
Amusement Company, he did not see tho white male. Hr. 
CANIPE, step out onto ,tho sidewalk. He ntated that since 
ho was alone and one c*f the firnt officers to arrive in 
this area, his essential purpose wan flrut to attempt to 
observe and locate any uucpicloun person who might be 
attempting to leave the area, and ncct.ndly, wherever ho 
saw any people In bunlnenn hourics or otherwlne, he 
instructed them to remain where they were no that officers _ 
inter checking the area would have an opportunity to i 
iitcrvlew everyone who w»« li| Ihe area ati noon as poeslbleJ 
Patrolman LH)U.ftHJTK advlnod that alter other f 
officers had arrived In front of Canlpe Amusement Company, 
and after he had learned during the conversation that 
p.)Ihe area ati noon as poeslbleJ 
Patrolman LH)U.ftHJTK advlnod that alter other f 
officers had arrived In front of Canlpe Amusement Company, 
and after he had learned during the conversation that 
p.)

--- PAGE BREAK ---poeslbleJ 
Patrolman LH)U.ftHJTK advlnod that alter other f 
officers had arrived In front of Canlpe Amusement Company, 
and after he had learned during the conversation that 
p.)

--- PAGE BREAK ---

f \ 
( 
o 
MK«44ia987 
j 
ouo or Bore of the throo por»oiio laitido Canlpe ABUsement 
Company reported hearing tbe "oqueallng*' of tires as a 
white Muotang oped away from the area, he olwerved what 
be regarded to bo okld aarks at a point approximately 
one car length eouth of the doorway to Canlpe Amusement 
Company. In pointing out the general area where he 
observed these skid marks. Patrolman DOLLAHITE observed 
that there is space for throo aiitomobiloa to park between 
the first driveway south of Canlpe Ammieaent Company 
(on the east side of Main) and a no parking zone around 
a fire plug Just to the north of 4hls driveway. He 
stated that be would entJmato that the skid marks which 
ho observed wore mado by an automobile parked In the 
center parking area, assuming all three parking spaces 
wore filled at the time. * 
As to automobiles parked on the east side of 
front of Canlpe Awateaent Company at 
the time he arrived on the scene, ho stated he cannot 
now recall a donerIption of the vehicles which ho did 
see. However, ho docfs recall observing about a 1062 
rod Cbovrolot station wagon which he bcylleves was parked 
in the first space south of tho above-mentioned driveway. 
Ho advised that he was also under th-o Inpreoslon he had 
seen this station wagon at another point Just north of 
this driveway and possibly the owner bad moved the car 
later on during tho evening. Ho stated that there was an 
automobile parked directly in front of Canipo Amusement 
company, but no automobile parked in tho space immediately 
behind the car in front of Canlpe Amkisoment Company. 
It was in this blank space, or the n>uiber two position 
south of Canlpe Ajauucm»}nt Company, that he saw what be 
thought to bo skid marks and which appeared to have been 
made as a car pulled away from that position going north 
on Main Street. 
Patrolman POI.UAHXTK advised that ho bad his 
firearm in his hand at all limes when he was In tho 400 
block of Main Street, and if the WHIH>KS«>O In Canlpe 
^usemont Company reported seeing » Deputy running south 
Oh Main carrying a firearm, then undoubtedly these 
wLtnooses wore referring to him, Putrolman DOLLAHITE,