TRANSCRIPTOFCANALE SPEECH BEFORE
THE TENNESSEE BAR ASSOCIATION ON
JANUARY.15,1971
CANALE:
422 and a half South Main Street in Memphis,Tennessee.
Uhuh for those of you familiar with Memphis,uh.uh this is.uh
this will be uh North down down this way.This is South this
way
and‘the uh uh uh Illinois.Central Station is about
uhis about.uh two'blocks Southdown this way and on the other
side of the street, for those .of you that are familiar with
Main Street in Memphis.
Now,this rooming house is'divided intotwo sections.
Un
door.
The rooming house is divided intotwosections.
This is
uh this is an ancient (?) stairway here from the rooming house
and
uh you will see that uh you.can't see it in this picture but
but but this this portion here'is.is'the isthe roof overthe
stairwell.:
This part ofthe roof does not goentirely back this
way.
in this.direction.
James Earl Ray came to Memphis on April the third,uh So
far as we know, uh of'1968, the day before Dr. King was killed.
On the on the night of April the third,Ray's Ray under the name
of Eric Starvo Galt spent the night at the Rebel Motel out on
LaMar Avenue on the out on the outskirts of Memphis.·Uh and we
had we had uh much proof that'we could introduce that we thought
wouldprovethese
things beyond a reasonable doubt,and I'll be
gladtogive.youranydetails that you might want toknow.
On on April fourth the the uh the day when Martin Luther
King was killed,l
Dr.:King was killed at approximately--6--p.m.,.on
April the fourth.
On April the fourth in the early afternoon,
James Ear1 Ray; under the,name of John Willard uh rented a room
in this rooming house.
The Lorraine Motel,.where Dr.King was
staying during these during these marches in Memphis is immediate-
ly behind this rooming house across Mulberry Street.
This rooming

--- PAGE BREAK ---ng house.
The Lorraine Motel,.where Dr.King was
staying during these during these marches in Memphis is immediate-
ly behind this rooming house across Mulberry Street.
This rooming

--- PAGE BREAK ---

2
Motel on Mulberry Street.Uh uh Ray uh entered the rooming
housethroughthisdoorhere and went up intothis section and
and rented uh spoke to the landlady, Mrs. Brewer, about renting
a room,as I say，under'the.name of John Willard.
Uhsheshowed
him a room. in this section of the rooming house, back acouple
of rooms,.I'ilshowyouallaboutthatlater，uhmoreaccurately
in this section of the rooming house she offered him a room'but
hedeclined that.room and asked her if_she didnothaveone
uhuh on·the other side of the house above theback.porch at
thebackofthe roominghouse.
As.a’resultof that,Mrs.Brewer and.Ray crossed’this little
walkover right here'into this section of the rooming.house and
uh and uh Ray rented a room on the North'side of the rooming
house.‘Nowyouwillnoticeuh Canipe's Amusement Companyhere
and a.little offset.This.is about.asix footoffset，six or
eight foot offset,going back from the sidewalk into the entrance
ofCanipe'sAmusementCompany.
This'is a most important
thing.torememberbecausewhatuhI refertoas thebundlewas
uh it was theState's contention that when after Ray had fatally
shot Dr.King, that he came down these steps right here and out
of this door,came South on Main Street and.and uhdropped a
bundle here which was wrapped in a green bedspread and wrapped
inthis bedspread was Ray's suitcase containing.vrious items and a
and a box containing.the rifle which was. used to kill Dr. King:
So this is the little offset in Canipe's Amusement Company..All
right.
QUEsTIoN:When was that picture takenin relation to the
CANALE:
This picture uh this picture I'd explained to you.
Thispicture
pictorialof the of the scene.I'llshow you some pictures that
were taken the night of the uhof the uh of the shooting.Go to
the next one uh I believe.we've lost one'somewhere along the
line. No, go forward, go forward. Sorry, there's supposed tome pictures that
were taken the night of the uhof the uh of the shooting.Go to
the next one uh I believe.we've lost one'somewhere along the
line. No, go forward, go forward. Sorry, there's supposed to

--- PAGE BREAK ---e taken the night of the uhof the uh of the shooting.Go to
the next one uh I believe.we've lost one'somewhere along the
line. No, go forward, go forward. Sorry, there's supposed to

--- PAGE BREAK ---

3
be a picture in.there of the.car aome iight(?).
That's al1
right I can'I can
POWELL:
It dropped down in there ...(unintelligible)
CANALE:
0.K..
Well go ahead. I can go on .without it.l
Nowthe next
picture whichhas dropped downin there which'we can't see:was
anactualphotograph of this area·here.taken bythe police
when they got to the scene on'the night ‘of the killing.
Now
theactual photograph of the nightofthe kitling shows a
chair sitting by this window.This window was open and the uh
screen was pushed out and was found on the ground.Now.this
is the room that that James Earl Ray rented in this rooming
house.
Uh.the'whenRay rentedthe room,therewasachiffonier
infront of thiswindow.
When the policegotthere after Dr.
King was killed this chiffonier had been moved over in another
part of the room, there was a chair.sitting by this window, and,
as I say,.this window was open and the screen was out.
Now, you'll
notice some quick uh some quick work over here, this is uh the
south section of the rooming house. In between this window, uh
the North section of the rooming house and the South section where
the entrance is,there'is a space of about 15 feet，which is an
direction to your left,you can lean out.this window and see
practically the .entire Lorraine Motel on Mulberry Street.
Uh
uhitwasthetheoryofthe'Statethat Rayhadhaduh
(unintelligible）"...that in tne morning paper on April the
fourth in Memphis there was
an
1articlethat Dr.King hadbeen
found byfederal marshalls to
serve a.civil summons'on him,
that Dr.King-hadbeen found bythe federal marshalls at the
LorraineMotel.
It was the theory of the State that uh that
uh Raywas observing the Lorraine Moteloutof thiswindow
looking back to yourleft uh and uh that was the reason forthe
chair being there,the chiffonier being moved,the chair being
there and the window being open and.the screen pushed out.
Now this is an actual photographof the same room taken
the the night of the killing by the police photographers.
Uh
this is the chiffonier which had been moved, according to thethe screen pushed out.
Now this is an actual photographof the same room taken
the the night of the killing by the police photographers.
Uh
this is the chiffonier which had been moved, according to the

--- PAGE BREAK ---

7
landlady, away from the window uh after Ray rented the: roon.
Nowuhonthisonthissofayou'llnoticealittlesofasofa
piilow here.:Now this pillow, along with much other evidence,
was sent.to the.FBI laboratories in Washington.Uh,on this on
this.pillowwasfoundfiberswhichwasdefinitelyidentifiedas
being fibers:from thebedspread whichwaswhich which was.wrapped
around the bundle which was dropped on Main Street, which I
referred:to....
Also,on the sheet of the bed in this room uh
foundon thesheetonthebed inthis bedroom.
This'bedspread
didnotcomefromthisroom.
As far as we can determine, the
'bedspread was brought from the State of. California.1
Now uh you
you.cannot'see it well in in this picture but but this item here
isthe was new leather straps from auh afield glasscase.On
the floor over here,which does not show in the picture,were the
leather straps for the field glasses themselves.
Ontheafternoon.ofAprilthefourth,afterRayrented
this room, and üh, prior to the time Dr. King was killed, Ray
GoodsCompany which is approximatelyfive blocks North of the
rooming houseon Main Street and had purchasedanew pair of
fieldbinoculars.
Uh,these these straps here in.the room found
on' the floor were similar to the ones'which which belonged 'to
the fieldbinoculars themselves and'tothe case the field
binoculars came in..Now,when I say that he went to the store
afternoon.
In this suitcase of Ray's which was found on Main Street,
by Canipe's Amusement Company after the killing, the binoculars
and the binocular·case were found in the suitcase.Rayis
fingerprints were on these binoculars, which Irll show you in
a moment.
The uh the York Arms bag, the sporting goods. uh sack
uh
which the clerk had put the binoculars in were found'in

--- PAGE BREAK ---erprints were on these binoculars, which Irll show you in
a moment.
The uh the York Arms bag, the sporting goods. uh sack
uh
which the clerk had put the binoculars in were found'in

--- PAGE BREAK ---

5
the suitcase. Ray's fingerprints were on these binoculars,
which I'llshowyouin amoment.
The uh the York Arms bag, the sporting goods uh sack uh
suitcase.
The the sriting ofthe clerk whofiguredoutthe
price and the tax.was,.uh was uh'uh,written on the box con-
taining the the binoculars and the uh.the uh sales slip from
York Arms was found in Ray's suitcase.So that's the reason
I.say that we feel Ray bought the binoculars at York Arms.
All right,.John.
Now this this this picture is the back of the rooming
house.
This is the entrance to the rooming house at this
section which you just·saw.
ThisistheNorthsectionof the
This is abathroom
rooming house where Ray rented the room.
，
windowfrom which the State contends'the fatal shot was fired
whichkilled Dr.King who' was standrng in the exact spot from
which this picture was taken.1
Inotherwords,thispicture
was taken from theSecondfloorbalconyoftheLorraineMotel
-in the exact spot where they.placed Dr. King when when he was
fatally shot.
This is the bathroom,a common bathroom window
right here.These two windows are the are the kitchen area of
a witness named Stevens., who had lived in this rooming house
for.quite.sometime.
Thisis this windowhere belongs tothe
Stevens room.You cannot see it clearly in this picture,but
the but the room,you'll see the, here's the separation between
the two buildings here.
There's about a 15,a 12 or 15 foot
gap in between the buildings.
The room that Ray rented from
which we feel he was uh spying on uh Dr. King with field
glasses is the second, second or third window down,you can't
See it,we'll be able to see it in a minute.Down this little
alleyway right in here.By leaning out of this window'in Ray's
room,you can see practically the the entire front part.of the
Lorraine Motel.As I say, this picture was taken from the
exact spot where Dr. King was standing when he was kiiled,
looking to the back part of the'rooming house on Main Street.tire front part.of the
Lorraine Motel.As I say, this picture was taken from the
exact spot where Dr. King was standing when he was kiiled,
looking to the back part of the'rooming house on Main Street.

--- PAGE BREAK ---he
Lorraine Motel.As I say, this picture was taken from the
exact spot where Dr. King was standing when he was kiiled,
looking to the back part of the'rooming house on Main Street.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

6
Nowthisis thebathroomwindowwhich.youjustsawfrom
which wefeelthatthe·thatuh the shot was fired.We feeluh
itisthe State's'theorythat us that
Raystoodin this bathtub,
that he laid his rifle,it was a uh a uh thirtyought, Remmington
thirty ought six rifle with a telescopic sight, that he laid it
across thewindowsillofthisbathroom.andfireduhdownat
Dr.King.
Now when Dr. King was killed, he was leaning he was leaning
overthe balcony in this fashion.with his arms resting on the
balcony speaking to people down in the parking lot of the motel.
Now,.of course,·we had we had the whole area uh uh uh calli-
brated toshowtheanglesandto show theheightofthis window
in.comparison.withthedownward（?）angleofthe balconywhere
Dr.King was·standing uh and uh all.the terrainhas been has
beenuhcallibratedbyengineers including uhwe were going to
introduce' in the trial as to the range of the bullet.I might
add it's two hundred'and seven feet from this bathroom window
to the spot where.Dr:King was standing when he was killed.
Now,you will note that that this window sill has been
removed,uh,.this portion of the window sill across here has
been removed.
The reason that was'removed uh one of the first
investigating officersof the Memphis PoliceDepartment to arrive
on the scene, noted that there was a·fresh indentation mark,
asmallbut fresh indentation mark on this window sill in the
bathroom.
Thiswindowwas
（?)..for（?） the police
officers·toarrive.
This window sillwas removed and sent to the
FBI laboratories in Washington along with the , all the other
evidence andalong withtheriflewhichwas recovereddownon.
Main Street.The FBI laboratoryuh uh personnel would have
testifiedin atrialthatthisidentationmark onthiswindow
sill hadthesamemachinemarkings'astheunderpartofthe
barrelof the.rifle and would have testified that that those
machine markson thewindowsill·werecausedbythe recoil.of
therifle barrelwhen the shot wasfired.hadthesamemachinemarkings'astheunderpartofthe
barrelof the.rifle and would have testified that that those
machine markson thewindowsill·werecausedbythe recoil.of
therifle barrelwhen the shot wasfired.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

Uh now this is'looking from the.bathroom window,this is
the window sill here. Am I in your way?..
..(unintelligible)
This is the window sill here.Dr. King was standing at this
point right here, leaning over this balcony speaking to people
down in this parking lot when he was shot.Now, you will notice
uh this is.the this is the entrance to his room, room 306, 206
   d  sa    e a o
this.section had beenenclosed in glass and had been made.as a
shrine uh to Dr. King..You'll. see the you'll see the wreath
hanging on the ‘door there. But Dr. King was standing right in
this position here when the shot was fired uh which uh which uh
fatally uh was fatal to him.All right.
Now this is a picture.of Dr.King taken at the uh at'the
hospitalorthe orthe morgue.
Nowallallofthisinthis
VM
done on him when they attempted to save his life at the hospital.
The ,bullet entered his right lower cheek right here, the builet
ranged downward uh shattering his uh his uh jugular and his uh
spinal column uh and, go to the next picture,.John. ^That's
his right lower cheek and the and the bullet or the major(?)
portion of the bullet, if you.can see that little hump right
there,ended up right under his skin in the left lower shoulder
blade.
You could you could could just take your fingers and
feel the bullet right here'under his skin, So he was shot in the
right in that position there.
Now, now this is looking down the hallway in the rooming
house, this is the bathroom, the tub is over this way of course,
you can see the commode there.This is the room right here that
Ray rented.Uh around around this corridor and immediately to
your right is the witness Stevens' room.He had two rooms, one
as you go inthe door and then the one that faces.outon the
back.

--- PAGE BREAK ---ted.Uh around around this corridor and immediately to
your right is the witness Stevens' room.He had two rooms, one
as you go inthe door and then the one that faces.outon the
back.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

8
The the, as you can see, this is a rather cheap boarding
house，the walls are very thin.1
UhthewitnessStever.s，atthe
time the shot was fired,was uh uh working
onaradioona
on a table up.against.this .bathroom partition wall.And,of
course, he said it sounded like an 88 milimeter cannon going
off in the in the bathroom when uh when that rifle went off.
Uh I might add I might add here, when Ray rented·this
room,which he immediately uh said was all right with him as
soon as she showed him.the room,uh Stevens, the witness who
lady's voice..
He was having.trouble with his hot water heater,
Sohecameout tosee.thelandlady'abouthis hot waterheater.
Uh Stevens.stood right by this bannister. These steps go
nowhere.
Uh uh these these steps had gone out onto the back
porch of the rooming house towards. the Lorraine Motel; they had
been/boarded upforuhuhforuh many.monthsbecauseof people
coming up the back way instead of the front way and getting
free rooms.Uh (laughter）So that had been boarded up for
months and was boarded up,of course, when this happened.
But uh when Stevens heard.his landlady's voice out in the
hall,.he cmae out.and stood by.this bannister and identified
Ray,who was standing in the hallway right here.looking into
the room,.the landlady was standing in the doorway showing Ray
the room.Uh he‘uh Stevens identified Ray·as beiiig the person
theroom.
QUESTIoN: Did the landlady recognize him and identify him?
CANALE:
The the landlady uh did not.Uh she said that uh she wasn't
.paying too much attention to him.We feel that she could,we
feel that if. she got on the stand she would.Uh we feel that she
didn't want hardly anything to'do with it,and uh she said that
uh she was looking at his money and uh (laughter), said he was
well dressed,which was unusual for heruh for her uh type offeel that she
didn't want hardly anything to'do with it,and uh she said that
uh she was looking at his money and uh (laughter), said he was
well dressed,which was unusual for heruh for her uh type of

--- PAGE BREAK ---

9
business.But uh the'landladystill did not positively
identifyRayasbeingthepartywho rentedthe room underthe
name'of Willard.We feel'that if she got on the witness
stand.as a' state witness she would.Uh,due to things that
happenedevenaftertheguiltyplea.
QUESTIoN:.How long after he bought the binoculars...(unintellible)..?
CANALE:
It was the uh next day，was it not?
QUERY:
Did theclerkidentifyhim?
CANALE:
No'.
No,they didn't bring his picture in,they couldn't
Uh
uhit wasitwasseveralweeksbefore'theybeforetheygotuh
ofRayandofcoursepassed them around andheidentifieda
pictureof Rayas being theone who purchased the binoculars.
Of course theyhad,the police had talked to the clerk the day
afterr the.shooting happened..
They might have talked to him
thatnrght..In fact,I think they.got him down there that
night,'the night of the killing.
Now.thisis
slooking from the bathroom...Uh this is your
.1
bannister here, Ray's room is right here, Stevens' room is in
this little....(unintelligible)...this is looking down the
hall.Uh uh when when the shot was fired and uh Stevens was in
hisback room;heheard allthecommotionout hisback window
out on Mulberry. Street,'cause Stevens went to his window and
raised.the window and looked out his back window.
Bythattime thethe police were werecoming ontothe
scene..
Theyhadbeenataatanearbyfirestation.
Dr. King,!
bythe way,'had refused a personal bodyguard.1
Hetoldthe
police he didn't want them guarding him closely. But naturally,
with the'difficulties going on there the police were
watching
the situation very closelyand there'sa fire station right
adjacent to this propertywhichI'ilshow you.

--- PAGE BREAK ---. But naturally,
with the'difficulties going on there the police were
watching
the situation very closelyand there'sa fire station right
adjacent to this propertywhichI'ilshow you.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

10
Now,after the shotwas fired,it was just a matter'of
uh'of uh·several minutes,a minute or.two,before the police
gotouton MulberryStreet.
.When·when Stevensopened his
window and heard all the commotion out on Mulberry Street,he
raised the window and was looking out,some policemen ran up
heads back in..At that time，Stevens came back to this,to his
frontroom and waikedout thisdoor and sawtheperson whohe
identified. as, although he could. not see his face, he identified
him as being the,same person, as far as.he could tell, from
clothing,height and so forth,as the person who had.rented the
room,saw him walking in this direction with a large bundle
under his arm.
Uh when you"get down to.these steps'here you take a short
left' and then you go down the exit,steps which which uh. exit
:on Main Street.which I showedyou in.the.firstpicture.Now
this is:the exit here, uh the room of Ray was in this section
of the building,I had shown you.this section of the building
towardsthe.entrance.
This istheexit tothe rooming house.
Uh:when Raycame'down the the uh theuh hallway afterthe shot
was fired,with the bundle under his arm,he just made a little
turnthere andcome down these steps and outontoMain Street.
This is, go back. just a minute, John. This doesn't have anything
to do with the case,but this is Jim's Grill here, and the only
reason I point thatout is uh uh uh for some engineering work
I'll show you in a few minutes.
All"right, John.
All right, this is looking from approximately the the place
.where Ray's car was parked. He had a white Mustang.
Uhthis
car was parked at approximatelythis meter.
Here's your
entrance to the rooming house here.
Here's.yourexitunder
this canopy here.
This is Canipe's Amusement Company.Uh when
whenwhenRayleftthebuiiding uhuhandofcoursewe'wehaveimatelythis meter.
Here's your
entrance to the rooming house here.
Here's.yourexitunder
this canopy here.
This is Canipe's Amusement Company.Uh when
whenwhenRayleftthebuiiding uhuhandofcoursewe'wehave

--- PAGE BREAK ---ere's your
entrance to the rooming house here.
Here's.yourexitunder
this canopy here.
This is Canipe's Amusement Company.Uh when
whenwhenRayleftthebuiiding uhuhandofcoursewe'wehave

--- PAGE BREAK ---

11
nobody who,that,saw him left the building,it's the State!s
theorythat.he came down thesestepsand turneduh South on
MainStreet andstartedinthisdirectiontowardshiscarhere:
All.All right, now this is looking, we were looking North on
Main Street in the last picture.This is thisis the sidewalk
looking South on Main Street past the rooming house.Here's
your Illinois Central Station here, if if that'll help any of you
acclimateyourselvestothe:areahere.
This is Main Streetout
here.:Now this is the fire station here uh this is a large
concrete apron forthe fire station here.·Uh this picture was
made some several months uh after the,well,"many months after
the shooting.At the time of the of the killing there were
why they took 'em out,I don't know,but you can see where these
this: uh you'll notice this fireplug right here and this is your
.apron to you to your fire station.Ray's carwas parked at
the parking meter right. behind. this·car here.In in in.this
vicinity right here.Now this is looking South on Main Street
and'there's your fireplug in the fire station apron, which I
justshowedyou.
And this is your alcove where the bundlewasdropped right
here.outsideCanipe's Amusement Company-off the sidewalk.
Now，
the reason,'the State's theory as towhy as to why Ray uh
dropped his uh suitcase and the rifle andthe box wrapped in
this bedspread in this in this'alcove here was uh,at this
time' there was, of course, a lot of civil disorder'in in Memphis.
The squad cars, uh which included city police, deputy sheriffs,
highway patrolmen and so forth were riding in TAc units, which
consisted of.three squad cars,four men to acar.
Theywere
usingthefire stations as rest pointsand coffeebreak points'.
About l0 minutes to six, before uh Dr. King was.slain,a TAC
unit consisting of three squad cars had come had come uh South
on Main Street，had come North on Main Street,had gone up onto
the onto the fire station apron,turned around and come.out,had
come out heading out onto Main Street.The lead car wasparkedcome uh South
on Main Street，had come North on Main Street,had gone up onto
the onto the fire station apron,turned around and come.out,had
come out heading out onto Main Street.The lead car wasparked

--- PAGE BREAK ---in Street，had come North on Main Street,had gone up onto
the onto the fire station apron,turned around and come.out,had
come out heading out onto Main Street.The lead car wasparked

--- PAGE BREAK ---

12
The lead car was parked halfway across this sidewalk...The
othertwo cars were more or less hidden by this shrubbery which
was here.
You might have been able to see the top of them,
butit is rather doubtful.Buthe uh thelead squad carwas
parked by this fire plug about haifway across the sidewalk.
These officers hadgotten out and gone into the fire station
to take:a rest break and get some coffee. A.ten minute break.
Wefeel that when Raycameoutof.the rooming housedown here
and started towards his car here, that he saw this.lead squad
car.or at least half of it,the dome light and so forth, parked
in this position here, and uh could not tell.whether anybody
was inthat car or not.And.we feel that rather than being
caught with this evidence,that he ducked into this alcove
and dropped his bundle and thengot'intohis carand took off.
At the time this bundle was dropped here, Mr.Canipe, the uh
proprietor of this Amusement Company: was standing standing in
the Amusement Company with two customers, uh sorting out some
usedrecords.
The the three people in the Amusement Company
did not see uh anybody drop this bundle. They heard a thud.
When they looked up they saw a person who they describe, they
do not identify Ray, uh they describe him as a white man, they
just saw the back of him, walk out of this alcove and turn in
this.direction'on Main Street. Uh the person answers all the
physical'characteristics of Ray.But they could not identify
him from the back as being Ray.Uh within a within:a matter
ofsecondsafter the.theyheardthe thudandsawthisperson
walk out back on the sidewalk and turn in this direction,this
white Mustang took.offf at a high rate of speed from this
position here' going this way North on Main Street with a lone
male.white at·thewheel.
QUERY:
Who saw that，General?
CANALE:
The three people in the Amusement Company, who heard
the thud,they didn't see the bundle at that time.
QUERY:
They saw the Mustang ..（indistinct） ...?
CANALE:
They heard the thud, saw this man walk back onto the
sidewalk, turn left and within 15 or 20 or 30 seconds theyn't see the bundle at that time.
QUERY:
They saw the Mustang ..（indistinct） ...?
CANALE:
They heard the thud, saw this man walk back onto the
sidewalk, turn left and within 15 or 20 or 30 seconds they

--- PAGE BREAK ---t that time.
QUERY:
They saw the Mustang ..（indistinct） ...?
CANALE:
They heard the thud, saw this man walk back onto the
sidewalk, turn left and within 15 or 20 or 30 seconds they

--- PAGE BREAK ---

13
saw this,, heard this Mustang take off at a high rate·of speed
and saw it pass that store. with uh a lone male white,.as they
observed,thedriverof the car.
Now this is an actual photograph of the bundle before it
was disturbed..Uh this is.Canipe's Amusement Company right
Here's'youroffset'off the sidewalk.
This is this is
here.
the suitcase,uh this is uh no this is your bedspread, this is
your suitcase, and this is a a Browning shotgun box. Uh in
this box was the.rifle which uh we contend was the rifle which
killed Dr. King...Uh in this.rifle there was one spent shell.
Uh uh the the rifle was a Remington thirty ought six..Uh I'd
like to go into'that right at this time.
Thisisa Browning
uh uh shotgun box.
This rifle was purchased at the Aeromarine
uh uh Supply or Hardware Company in Birmingham, Alabamba.It
was purchased，according to the people.there,who negotiated
the·sale, and they had occassion to deal with him twice,it
was purhcased by James Earl Ray.,The people at this uh uh
 s  g s e 1  s o
person who purchased this rifle in this box.
QUERY:
(Unintelligible)
Remington.
CANALE:
It was a pump, uh pump thirty ought'six.
Uh·it just had one' shell in the chamber..Uh no other shell,
one spent shell in the chamber,no other shells in it.‘Now
the people at the HardwareCompany in Birmingham say.that the
reason they put this rifle in a Browning shotgun box was that
the rifle was not equipped-with'a scope,when they when they
instalied a telescopic sight.on the rifle,it would not go
back into the original box, so they say that they placed it.in
this larger Browning box.
QUERY:
How long di he have the rifle before [he used it (?)]?
CANALE:
Was it a matter of a week, John?
POWELL:
7 Yes, sir.
CANALE:
Just about seven days.: Now he had purchased, the day
before he purchased this rifle,he had purchased a uh a uh 243
rifle and had a scope mounted on.it.Uh the next day he brought:
7 Yes, sir.
CANALE:
Just about seven days.: Now he had purchased, the day
before he purchased this rifle,he had purchased a uh a uh 243
rifle and had a scope mounted on.it.Uh the next day he brought

--- PAGE BREAK ---:
Just about seven days.: Now he had purchased, the day
before he purchased this rifle,he had purchased a uh a uh 243
rifle and had a scope mounted on.it.Uh the next day he brought

--- PAGE BREAK ---

14
.243 back to'the same uh uh uh I'll call it a hardware company,
uh sporting goods company, in Birmingham and advised them that his
brother said he was going hunting up north,and his brother had
told him that uh that uh that was not the type rifle he'd need,
he should get this other kind of rifle uh uh a thirty ought six.
six..I,.I might mention, I,I think and believe that uh that
his stating that tothe'uhto the uh people at that uh uh sporting
goods store was the reason that the. Federal Government got out a a
federal comspiracy warrant against him. Uh the FBI, when when
the first，when we recovered the first rifle be bought from the
uh uh sporting goods company in Birmingham,then that rifle was
forwarded to the·FBI.The FBI would have testified,the laboratory
would have testified,that the first rifle purchased would not
boltashellbecausethecosmolenehad-becomehardenedinthere
and ititwouldtake anawfulamountof forcetoboltashell
into that rifle.·We feel that that Ray had.trouble bolting the
thing and wasn't'satisfied with it and took it back..That's
ourtheory.
This is the rifle.itself,this is your Browning box which the
rifle was found in on Main Street,this.is.your uh your Remington
thirty oughtsix rifle.
Thispieceofpaperherecoversa
fingerprint. Uh uh one of Ray's fingerprints was uh raised,
a latent fingerprint was raised offa·this portion of this rifle.
All right.Uh this is another shot of the rifle.. There was
another fingerprint of Ray's, a a latent print raised off·of
thisscopehere.
Now this is the suitcase which was brought with the. rifle
wrapped in the bedspread on Main Street.Uh it,uh there were
many items in this suitcase.Uh amongst them was this'uh uh
April the 4th Commercial Appeal. .Uh uh which, from which.Ray's,
oneof.Ray's fingerprints was raised.Uh this uh uh beer can uh
uh alatent print of Ray's was.raised off this beercan in his
suitcase. .These beer, this beer was purchased in Mississippi.
Uh we.could trace the beer to the State.of Mississippiuh uh weh beer can uh
uh alatent print of Ray's was.raised off this beercan in his
suitcase. .These beer, this beer was purchased in Mississippi.
Uh we.could trace the beer to the State.of Mississippiuh uh we

--- PAGE BREAK ---tent print of Ray's was.raised off this beercan in his
suitcase. .These beer, this beer was purchased in Mississippi.
Uh we.could trace the beer to the State.of Mississippiuh uh we

--- PAGE BREAK ---

15
could not telluhdefinitelyin.what in what store it was
bought. Uh these are your binoculars, there there's a finger-
uh Ray's fingerprint on the top.of these binoculars.Uh this
uhthis shaving kit was purchased by Ray uh by identification
of'the person who sold it to him at a Rexall Drugstore in
Whitehaven....（unintelligible）..`.（laughter）"..
Uh
uh.of coursethere was there was a Rexall uh Rexall uh price
sticker'on here with the with the drugstore on it uh and the
      a  a  
been the one who. purchased it on, on, that was April the third.
Right，John?· Not April the fourth? I forget, it was either
April the third, the day he got to Memphis, or the morning of
the shooting, on the morning of the fourth.
Uh now this little uh. uh shaving lotion bottle uh was also
uh raised a latent fingerprint of Ray's.. All right. Uh this
this box of shells was found in Ray's suitcase on Main Street.
raised it up atthe laboratoryin Washington on the rifle.
Uh
this box of shells was found.Now here's that box of shells
uh,by the way,this is the spent shell which uh which was taken
from the rifle‘after it was found on Main Street.Now this
bullet here，these are the two portions of the bullet uh uh
taken from Dr:King's body.Now uh due to the mutilation of
the bullet,uh the FBI would'not say definitely that this
bullet was fired from this gun..They would go so far as to
say that it had.the same lands and grooves,it had the same
twist,but they want more to.go on than that.They say that
that this is the type of bullet which comes from this type of
shelicasing and that and that uh that the lands and grooves and
twists on this on this noseof the bullet(?),are the same as
the barrel of the gun.Now this is a lead-nosed·bullet which
hit Dr. King. These, there were lead-nosed builets found in
this inthiscartridge box in thesuitcase.
Therewereal.soullet(?),are the same as
the barrel of the gun.Now this is a lead-nosed·bullet which
hit Dr. King. These, there were lead-nosed builets found in
this inthiscartridge box in thesuitcase.
Therewereal.so

--- PAGE BREAK ---

16
these things or what I call military or copper-coated bullets.
These were not the type bullet，although he had 'em in this box
along with the the lead-nosed bullets,these were not the type
which which killed Dr.King, it was a lead a lead-nosed
bullet which killed Dr. King. As you can uh if you come up
binocularswhich were identified as asoneof Ray's uhuhfinger-
prints.
It's a very good print they got off the top the
binoculars.
Now this is aa T-shirt which was found inthe suitcase
dropped on Main Street..You'll notice this laundry mark right
here uh.‘All. right,.go to the next one, John.
This is apair of shorts found in the.suitcase.. You'll
notice this.is.thesame type laundry mark as on the T-shirt.
   4    4    
marks, which led the investigation to to Los Angeles, California.
Uh and got it to Ray's activities there.Through these laundry
marks andchecking with the manufacturersof these laundry
marks,and and and uh laundry marks are sort of like a finger-
print, they're very distinctive. These laundry marks were traced
to a certain laundry in Los Angeles,California,where where
Ray lived for a while,and the people there identified Ray as
of course by name under Eric Starvo Galt,under his account
name there and identified him as being the person who.had
traded withthis laundry in California and and uh the the
laundry which put these laundry marks on these on on these
clothes.All right.
Now this is the bedspread here that,two color green bed-
spread,uh in in which in which the bundle was wrapped that that
wasdroppedon'MainStreet.AsI mentionedbefore，fibersfrom
sofapillow in the in'the boarding room on Main Street‘onthe
sheet on the bed at Main Street.Fibers from this uh bedspread

--- PAGE BREAK ---hat
wasdroppedon'MainStreet.AsI mentionedbefore，fibersfrom
sofapillow in the in'the boarding room on Main Street‘onthe
sheet on the bed at Main Street.Fibers from this uh bedspread

--- PAGE BREAK ---

17
were also uh,I'might mention, on.on uh April the fifth,he
morning after the shooting,Ray's car was abandoned in a in an
Uhwhenhiscarwas
apartment parking lot in Atlanta, Georgia.
found in Atlanta,uh the the.car.was swept our,all evidence.was
taken out of it. Fibers from this bedspread were also found
of his.car,.and also found on a styrofoam,empty styrofoam
Uhthis hair
camera case which was in.the.trunk of his.car.
brush was in his suitcase which he was dropped on Main'Street.
Uh, after uh, Bob, I might uh give you a little little
rundown on a on a little secret here. .After Ray got, was
he needed a haircut.And, it so happens,a few of his, the
Those
hairs cut off his head were picked up off the floor.
hairs,along with this brush, which was already in Washington,
.Uhuh
those hairs were sent to the:laboratory in Washington.
hairs are not iike uh fingerprints..Uh nobody will testify
thatthis hair.uhisis.uh'identicalis the'identical hair"that
Or this woman's head. They will say
came off this man's head.
suitcase and the hair which was cut off of Ray!s headin the
same
jail and sent.to Washington,that the hair was of the same
substance,the same characteristics,the same color and
(unintelligible)
Now this radio,this transistor radio was found in Ray's
suitcase..'Ray escaped from the Missouri State Penitentiary uh
in'uh April·of 1967.As far as we know,when he éscaped, the
only.material·thing he took with him besides the clothes·on his
back was was this radio.
Uh this radio was purchased at the
One of the rules, Ray was in the Missouri pen serving a 20
years sentence for armed robbery.He had'served seven years
beforehe escaped.
Oneof the rules ofthepenitentiaryup
his initials must be scratched,imbedded into the casing .of the

--- PAGE BREAK ---20
years sentence for armed robbery.He had'served seven years
beforehe escaped.
Oneof the rules ofthepenitentiaryup
his initials must be scratched,imbedded into the casing .of the

--- PAGE BREAK ---

18
item.
Uh it's it's interesting to.note,that when were
presenting this evidence to the jury on the guilty plea, t.e
onlyitemofevidenice'thatRayaskedtoseeandaskedtobe
/passed tohim.was this radio.:.
Andthereasonwefeelthathe
asked to see it is, that there'd been a very good job of
trying to obiiterate the prisonserialnumberof Ray.on this
radio.'Uh the uh I might not have made myself clear a minute
ago，I might not want..
.（unintelligible）:
.the
these items.
The,FBI under its ultraviolate rays and so forth,
eventhoughsomebodyhadattemptedto.obliteratethetheuh
scratched numbers in the case of this radio,they were able
toraisea number andtheyturned out to be Ray's prison
serial number at Missouri.And I feel that the reason Ray
wanted.tosee this is he wantedto findout how in theworld
uh uh anybody couid tell that that was his prison serial
number.
Uh this.is just uh Ray purchased this Mustang in
Birmingham, Alabamba.·Uh This was a license plate,uh '68
plate found on the Mustang,and this was a'67 plate which
belonged to the former owner of'the car who sold it to'Ray,
foundinthetrunk ofthe'car.
Now'this is.an actual picture of the car asitwas found
in the parking lot of this apartment complex in'Atlanta,
Georgia.You will note that the car has been backed into the
bumper strip uh instead of like these other cars just pulling
in frontwards.. Uhof course, in Alabamba as in other states,
there is no front license plate,only a rear plate.
Uhwe
wouldhavetheorizedthat.thereasonhethecarwasbackedin
this waywasthat Raydid not uhwant toalert anybody
immediately,that uhuh thatmight have seen an Alabamba
license plate in this parking lot and start inquiring about
who they.was and he backedit in sothat.he could,to'keep from
being uh uh ascertained in a short period of time.tmight have seen an Alabamba
license plate in this parking lot and start inquiring about
who they.was and he backedit in sothat.he could,to'keep from
being uh uh ascertained in a short period of time.

--- PAGE BREAK ---Alabamba
license plate in this parking lot and start inquiring about
who they.was and he backedit in sothat.he could,to'keep from
being uh uh ascertained in a short period of time.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

19
Uh, had something else to say about that. Oh! When
complexes uh say that they saw this car pull into this parking
lot uh onthe morning of April the fifthat'around 8:30inthe
morning and saw a lone‘male white,they don't identify Ray
and the:
".(interruption:.
...unintelligible)
QUESTION:
(indistinct)...identify Ray?
CANALE:
But thiscar was parked here and a.lone male white got out
and and took off across,and walked across theparking lot.
These are the two license plates(?)
Uh:theonlyreason
bath(???）tire,call it,on here.There were three tires alike
andonenotalike,uhI'don'trecallnowwhetherhehadthree
sidewalls and.this one or three like this and a sidewall,but
therewasonetirethatwasnotliketheotherones.
Uh uh,Ray
in his uh uh his writings to uh Atlanta was goint to write his
storytoWilliamBradfordHuieuhuhstatedthatuhthathewas
running contraband jewelry out of Texas,so after he got to
Mexico'and was running jewelry back into the uh into the United
States;
We know that Ray purchased a new tire uh in in Mexico
anduh one of the favorite ways of running jewelryout of Mexico,
and into.Mexico if you wanted to get it in,is to put it inside
the inside the tire ofan an automobile and run itin that
fashion..There'werealso.twoMexicanstickersorthiscar.
Uh
whichbecame
eimportant'tous.notonlyinintracingRay'suhuh
Mexican uh·uh stay,but the the'uh night watchman at the Rebel
Motel in Memphis·on the night of April the third uh and and by
the way,the FBI identified the signature card of Eric.S.Galt
as being that of James Earl Ray at the Rebel Motel.`’Also,the
uh the'uh night watchman in making his rounds on several
occasions noticed this white Mustang parked there in the parking
lotoftheRebelMotelwiththeseMexicanstickerson'theon the
window.
the laundry marks in the in the investigation,it was disclosedn several
occasions noticed this white Mustang parked there in the parking
lotoftheRebelMotelwiththeseMexicanstickerson'theon the
window.
the laundry marks in the in the investigation,it was disclosed

--- PAGE BREAK ---

20
thatEricStarvoGaltuhhad attendedabartendingschooland
had graduated from a bartending.school in Los Angeles.This
manover hereis.theuhtheuhowneranduh managerofthe
bartending school. He takes great pride in uh having his
picture taken with his graduates,Un you can't you can't read
this from where.you are but this is a certificate of graduation
for Eric Starvo Galt from bartending school..This is.James
Earl Ray.Uh you wili'note.that his eyes are closed in this
picture.
All right.
This is'the first flyer that was put out by the FBI when
murder of Dr. King. These two pictures are mug shots of of
Ray in the'Missouri penitentiary.:This picture,if you can
read underneath it, it·says "photograph taken 1968, eyes
drawn by artist"..
Thisis the pictureof the bartending school
and the FBI added, in order to put it on this flyer, "opens
Ray's eyes."
In order to. let people know more what he looked
like as far as his his eyes were concerned.. Uh when when Ray
was arrested at the airport in London, England, amongst his
possessions was this pistol which he had purehased.from an
individual in Birmingham on October the first of uh of 1967.
Uh he had two passports, this one is marked cancelled.
(unintelligible）:
a lot of records for himself to get a
passport.under a different'name.
.But heuheventuallyassumed
the name of Ramon George Sneyd..S N E Y D.
When.thepassport
was issued.to Ray in Canada to go to Portugal,uh the uh the
typist mispelled the name Sneyd and put in S N E Y A.
When
Ray got to to Portugal, uh he was he expected to catch a uh-a
ship,he wanted to get to Rhodesia,to fight as a mercenary uh
eventually.
And he went to Portugal for that purpose,to catch a ship,
add,afterhe got back to England he'robbed a bank.But uh

--- PAGE BREAK ---e wanted to get to Rhodesia,to fight as a mercenary uh
eventually.
And he went to Portugal for that purpose,to catch a ship,
add,afterhe got back to England he'robbed a bank.But uh

--- PAGE BREAK ---

21
passport,of course with the same picture,uh issued with the
name spelled correctly with a "D" rather than "A".
Both`these
passports were in his possession.when he was arrested in
London.·He was on his way to Brussels uh when he was arrested
in 'London.
All right.This is just uh we had over over 3oo items
of physical evidencein the case uh uh these are just some of
the items.
These were all boxed,each box contains a number
of items and and they were allchecked out by the FBIin
Washington anduhthis isjustaafew ofthe piecesofevidence
whichwecould haveintroduced.
This is just a personal note.This is John Powell out
 o    d  o    
gator.:You might recognize Judge Dwyer of the Criminal Court
of Appeals..He was the executive assistant down there.And
this is Jim Beasley, uh who is now a criminal court judge in
Shelby county. This was your your this was your
QUESTION:
Who'stheotherone?
CANALE:
I say, well, you can cut those out, these’ three were the
were the physical working team in the trial,the whole trial
of James Earl Ray.
O.K. Now these things these things are uh are of a lot
of interest..
These are set up，as we set them up in the'court-
room, uh uh.to to explain the facts of the case
【？
thematerials.together.
They would have been set up during the
course of a trial, too.. Uh these mockups were made·according
to'scale..I'll tell you what,if some of you some of you
some
of
plaintiff's damage.lawyers couldget'the FBI to do
(laughter)
these for you, you'd be in good shape，I'll tell you..
But uh these were done according to scale, these FBI men
find a lamppost and measure the lamppost.:And you can you can
take their ruler that they gave you and if that lamppost was.
28 feet 6 inches you can take that ruler and put it on this
mockup and it'1l come out 28 feet 6 inches..
Everythings according to scale.n
take their ruler that they gave you and if that lamppost was.
28 feet 6 inches you can take that ruler and put it on this
mockup and it'1l come out 28 feet 6 inches..
Everythings according to scale.

--- PAGE BREAK ---hat they gave you and if that lamppost was.
28 feet 6 inches you can take that ruler and put it on this
mockup and it'1l come out 28 feet 6 inches..
Everythings according to scale.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

22
Now'now these these are these were done on magneticboards,
so that if you wanted to take to,they made these littlecars
for us. here and people, you can place people and cars on this
ing house and this one is of the entire area..
These mockups
would tilt at'a forty-five degree angle, so that the jury
wouldn!t have to get up and come out and look, you'could tilt
Andof course thetops comeoff these mockups.here.
And
it.
and to show the rooming house, the sides fall in.
You see,
this side is down here now,you.can·look into the rooming
house.You can raise the roof off·and it shows the inside with
the roof."
But but yau can tilt these mockups uh so the .jury
can see it,andand these and these cars and the people they
made us are magneticand when youtilted ituptheywould stay
back exactly where a witness had placed 'em, so they wouldn't
slip off.
This this is the mockup.of the entire scene,that's your
rooming house,. this. is your fire station, this is your Lorraine
Motel over here, and this is a large mockup of.the'rooming
house..
This is your rooming house here, this is a large mockup
of this rooming househere.
All right..Now hereis the front part of you of your room-
ing house."
your entrance and your exits there.Ray's car was parked in
this position:here. As you can see,'that's Canipe's Amusement
There's your fireplug
Company there,his car wasparked here.
on the filling station, on your fire station, and here's your
This is a close-up
here's your apron of the fire station here.
of the.front'of it..
Now the reason.I put that in,there's your Amusement
Company, here's your entrance, here's your exit, and uh you'll
note, you'll remember,I said that our theory was that Ray came
down this.hail and hit these steps and came down here to Main
Street. All right, John, go to the next one.ere's your exit, and uh you'll
note, you'll remember,I said that our theory was that Ray came
down this.hail and hit these steps and came down here to Main
Street. All right, John, go to the next one.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

23
Ad these mockups werefixed so that you couid.lift
the
lift the roof off the steps and show this section up
here', this little cross-over.
These are your steps crossing
over from.thissection ofthebuilding tothatsectionand
these are.yousteps coming down.
Uh this is looking from the Lorraine Motel,this is the
the tothebathroom window.rightherefromwhich theshot was
fired over to this 'position here.
QUESTION:
See that third window,General,you might want to point
thatout.
.（indistinct)
CANALE:
Oh, yeah. This this window right here, if you can see
it,'is the window to to the room that Ray rented..Right there.
glasses that time.
Now,this is the Lorraine Motel，uh this is where Dr.
King was standing.
The reason I have this picture in,just to
show you a little detail work.
You'll notice part of the rail-
ing is missing here.
Ontheonthebalconyofthe Lorraine
Motel.:
When when this mockup was made they madeit exactlyas
they saw'it at the time,which was some months after the
killing..
And this shrine had been built, as I showed you,
thisglassshrinehad·been
built in this portion to Dr.
King.
The the agents made this as they saw it at the time,
many months later,but they also made it from photographs as
it was at the time of Dr.King's killing..You can pull that
section of the railing out and slip in your your isinglass
shrine,and.then put your piece of railing back in.
There
wasanawfuliotofdetailonthis.Thisjustshowshow
the roof lifts off this rooming house, so that the jury could
be.shown various rooms.
Your entrance tothe rooming house is here.
Mrs
Brewer's,the landlady's reom was in this section.here..She
towards the front or Main Street part of the building.
He

--- PAGE BREAK ---n various rooms.
Your entrance tothe rooming house is here.
Mrs
Brewer's,the landlady's reom was in this section.here..She
towards the front or Main Street part of the building.
He

--- PAGE BREAK ---

24
didn'twantthat.room,so
（unintelligible）
..towards
the.roof off of the mockup.
Here'shere's the landlady's room
overhere..
You·cross over here.to this section,this was
this was uh the room that Ray eventually rented here,this is the
window that we're talking aboutthat he looked out..This is
thewitness Stevenstworooms here and here's yourbathroom.
Uh and you can.see that this side comes down.
Uh I think it
does in the next'one, John.
All right,·the side's down now.
This just showsyou the
that thisis the bathroom here and shows you those.steps.
You'llnotice'two rungs outof this uhbannister missing.
Well,that's the eay'it was....They even left the two bannisters
outthat weremissingwhen.theymadethismockup.
All right, John.The only reason I've got this.in
here is to show you·some other detail work.This is Jim's
Grill.It supposedly has nothing to do with it,but they even
put the stools. in Jim's Grill in this section..You see, the
side comesoff this wayand you can see thestools.
Now where I'm pointingtonowisthe doorcoming down
this hall'after the shot was fired,this is where this is
where Rayturned andwent down these.steps.
QUESTION:
With that kind of detail,how come they didn't reproduce
the shrubs on the.
..（indistinct）.
we saw?
CANALE:
Well uh that that uh:..(unintelligible）..
`. give
you the FBI? .Well, I don't know about' the shrubs.
Ofcourse
wehad-pictures taken
POWELL:
They only reproduced it as they found it, General, and
the shrubbery was not 'there.
CANALE:
Weli, they, on the·building they reproduced it as they
found it，then as we caught'em'up.(?)But we had pictures
of the of the shrubbery, the'cars parked. there; everything
ofthat nature the uhtheday afterthe killing and we could've

--- PAGE BREAK ---they
found it，then as we caught'em'up.(?)But we had pictures
of the of the shrubbery, the'cars parked. there; everything
ofthat nature the uhtheday afterthe killing and we could've

--- PAGE BREAK ---

25
shown that in photographs.
Why they.didn't，maybe we didn't
tell
'em toputthe shrubs
in,
don't know.
Uh this
istre
bathroom window and
lthe
only
theonly
reason
I've
got this
in
is·is
forall
the
detail
work
They
made
that
windowout
of
isinglass and
double-sashed
SO
you
could
slide
it
upand
down
SO
witness
could
say
well
工
thought
.the window was closed
or
it
wasopen
this
much
and
theyalso made us,
case,some
body
stuck
their
finger
through the isinglass,
made
us
an
extra
window.
(laughter)
Sothey went toa lot of. detail.
A11
right....
APPLAUSE.
THE END
心