CONFIDENTIAL 
&%. 12, Frederick, Kd. 21701 
7/26/76 
Mr. Bon Hessen PERSONAL, 
The White iiouam 2LSA3B 
Washington, D.C. 
Dear Ron, 
Fzon what I haw- and I'B not talking about interpretations of meanings or auy- 
♦MBJ nh> that - what 1 Xak» to ha Kea^gsn'o fairly smart aot of desperation nay he, 
I'B aura oau be, hia undoing. 
It «i« proaonta no with the oonfliot of which I'B euro you are aware. 
Except for tbs trueted friend* who have coplea and will eay nothing, as of now 
nobody known*. 
If I can't reaolve the conflict nobody will know at leant AntU after the cone 
vention. 
I'B sorry about the allipeia and I do know the position in which it port* you aa 
I'ai aure you eaa understand what X mean by a conflict and ny need to be able to reaolve 
it honorably - and what that oan Man to other*, not Just me. 
Unfortunately 1 van not aware of Keegan'a announcement until the evening news. So 
I've not really had a chance think this through. 
I be in Washington port of Wednesday, In court in the morning and thereafter, 
until I return, through ny lawyer, ^ia Lesar, 434-6023. Beginning then he will have * 
copy of what I'B talking about. 
Since last year's phlebitis I do not drive that far unlesa 1 oust. I'll be using 
poor publio transportation. X expect to leave Washington about 2. I’ll be In again 
Friday for <=■.<«*< 0*1 and. dental appointments and *omlay Burning for ay annual checkup. 
There is no reaeon to believe that the spooks have lost their Improper interest 
in either M or the work X do. I would duoeive you to gLve you aasurancea about ay 
jbtaa. However, I could return a call on another phone and in your JLntereot 1 d taka 
the tin*. 
Events eatetlaea have thair own way of working themselves out. There la a dif- 
ferent vulnerability of different nature on the sens general subject only your end. 
1 have been and I will be ailent about this until after th* convention. I bold old- 
faabioned beliefs. With this, on which ay lawyer is already fully informed, wy belief 
ia that in serving self-interest your eon's vulnerability has been magnified. There is 
no doubt in ay Bind that it will be Jublie prior to tha election without a word from ae. 
iwA th"° not easy to contend with. 
1. goon as we leave oourt Wednesday morning Z will dlsouae this oonfliot with 
Loser. My belief la that it oan be resolved, and honorably. 
If I do not Jpear from you I'll try to remember to send you a oopy after the con- 
vention, however it turna out. If I forget, remind mo. Aou have eeoretarloa, I don't. 
Whatever does or does not happen, you'll need the good luck I wish you, personally. 
And sincerely. 
Harold Veisberg