C6


Wednesday, Dec. 28. 1977 THE WASHINGTON POST


W.L. Langer, Harvard Professor


By Richard Pearson

Waahlnf tan Pont Staff WrtUsr

William L. Langer, professor emeri-
tus of history at Harvard University,
who was a U.S. intelligence officer
and adviser during World War II, died
Monday at the New England Baptist
Hospital in Boston. He was 81.

Dr. Langer was Coolidge professor
of hisotory at Harvard from 1936 until
he retired in 1964. During this time he
wrote more than a dozen books on Eu-
ropean diplomatic and Middle Eastern
history and served a one-year term as
president of the American Historical
Association.

During World War H, he became
chief of the research and analysis
branch of the Office of Strategic Serv-
ices (OSS). Earlier in the war, he had
worked as a member of the board of


analysts in the Office of the Coordina-
tor of Information in 1941 and 1942.

Dr. Langer continued his work in
intelligence after World War II, serv-
ing as assistant director for national
estimates with the Central Intelli-
gence Agency from 1950 to 1952. He
was a member of the President’s for-
eign intelligence advisory board from
1961 to 1969.

As a historian. Dr. Langer was
known for his early advocacy of what
came to be known as “psycho-history.”
In his 1957 presidential address to the
American Historical Association he
caused something of an uproar by ar-
guing that historians should explore
modern psychology.

“Nowadays, it almost goes without
saying that biography, whether liter-
ary or historical, must take moden
psychology into account,” he said at a


conference on psychology and history
at the Graduate Center of the City
University of New York in 1971.

Dr. Langer became interested in the
application of phsyehology to his his-
torical work through the influence of
his brother, Walter C. Langer, a psy-
choanalyst It was the intention of the
brothers to write a diplomatic history
of Europe in the 19th and 20th centu-
ries combining the tools of the con-
ventional historian with those of the
psychologist and psychoanalyst. Their
purpose was to explain some of the
events of diplomacy through the psy-
chological make up of some of the
larger historical figures.

The book never was written, be-
cause World War II interrupted. A by-
product of this embryonic collabora-
tion was Walter Langer’s “The Mind
Of Adlof Hitler,” a study of Hitler’s
life done for the OSS during the war.
(The book was classified for security
reasons and was not issued to the gen-


Ex-CIA Aide, Dies


eral public until 1972, when it became
a best-seller.)

The major works' of Dr. Langer, the
history professor, include the
“Encyclopedia of World History, first
published in 1940 and now in its sixth
edition, “Europear. Alliances and
Alignments 1871-1890“ “The Rise of
Modern Europe,” “The Diplomacy of
Imperialism “ and most recently,
“Political and Social Upheaval, 1832-
1952“ published in 1969, and “Our Vi-
chy Gamble ” which came out in 1971.
His autobiography. “In and Out of the
Ivory Tower, “ is scheduled for publi-


Dr. Langer was born in Boston and
earned bachelor’s, master’s and doc-
tor’s degrees at Harvard University.
From 1923 to 1927, he taught at Clark
University in Worchester, Mass. He
returned to Harvard as an assistant
professor in 1927. . .

Among the other schools at which
Dr. Langer taught were Yale Univer-


sity, the University of Chicago, Co-
lumbia University, and the Fletcher
School of Law and Diplomacy at Tufts
University.

Besides teaching, he also was direc-
tor of the Russian Research Center
and Center for Middle Eastern Stud-
ies at Harvard and a fellow of the
Center for Advanced Study in Beha-
vioral Sciences, also at Harvard.

t » n no,' corvoH in the Army in


France in World War I.

In addition to his membership in
the American Historical Society, he
was a member of the Society of Amer-
ican Historians, the Academy of Arts
and Sciences, and the Council on For-
eign Relations.

Dr. Langer is survived by his wife,
Rowena, of the home in Cambridge,
Mass.; two sons; four step-children; 15
grandchildren; two great-grandchil-
dren; and his brother, Walter C., of
Sarasota, Fla.


........ ..... , . .r.vTv^w ••;« r< v ■■ - • . * 1
