February24.1scA
11:5SAM
MEMIOHANDUN:FOEAI.TOLSON
XR.BELMONT
MR.nCSEN
LR.SULLIVAN
SITR.LVANS
MR.DE LOACH
Honorabiq J.Loo Paniin, Gtnoral Councel of tho Prcel:ient'
Coainiicslon on the aseassinction ot reciccnt F.ennedy. called anu statcd
Lheso mattcis in regard to bira. Siarina Cewald and Jatics Herbort artin,
et cetora, are developing very rapiuiy and tho Lureau has bcen very gcod
about getting reports to tho Cocimluaion. Hle stated tho thlrg bo wanted to
askmo about seeincd to bo soincthing he felt he ought to tako up wlth rio
directly. le stated tho probiou la tkal arlna Cvald ic noy livingat the
Ford's and prcsuaably tha Cou:niceloa is gcing to vant her back one ol
those days and ho, Tankin, presued I kne alout tho lLxon ratter, too,
becauco Ihad written tben about lt. Xir.Barkia etated he would hate to have
Lalla8, and be waa wondering about a slnkc out on her wbich would watch
ber and sce wbo is vlsiting hcr fora while. ir.liankin statei ha latedto
recomacnd it or urge lt in vlcw oi tio expensolnvoirei. Iaskcd him how
long ho would anticipite it reainlng on, and ir.Inkin Etated ho thoughu
it would be accordlng to my judgraent.
I told lr. Fiankin that wc plan to intervlew her toiny, tbal we had,
wanted to do so last weck but the lawyer for liobart Ucvald was up bere in
Wasiington and ackod us beiorc he leit Dallas ff wg would poctrono any inter-
view with Lirs.Rarina Cowald wtll tc gdt iaekirora tl:a hcaringup hcre in
Washington aa 6he was exhausted. I stated Iwoul: surrilse that ha ould to
bacl: thero this morningag I thought Rloiert Cswali linishci up wlth the
Coinnlosion lact Friday. I stated we will want to intcrviow fobert,too,as
wo aro intorcctcd in the Nixon anglo tlat dovoloped and also tho afiair she
bad wlth tartin; that we planned to conduct the intcrviow ol hcr today if ets
is ayailable and also of Robert Csnald uf ho ls availablo. Mr. lankin ctatcd
im they asked kiobort Cewald whg ho did not tell theni about t ond ho said he fell
eathe Coriiaglon would probably know about that, but in all his nnswers wore
42-1226)-
E--genorally vcry good.
Sale
NOT RECORDED
Ros
256
Sulli-en
1-:iog liolmes
17FE8-271954 199FE0271964
Tevol
JEH:odm (10)
irotior
Tole.Roon
Holmooy know about that, but in all his nnswers wore
42-1226)-
E--genorally vcry good.
Sale
NOT RECORDED
Ros
256
Sulli-en
1-:iog liolmes
17FE8-271954 199FE0271964
Tevol
JEH:odm (10)
irotior
Tole.Roon
Holmoo

--- PAGE BREAK ---ut in all his nnswers wore
42-1226)-
E--genorally vcry good.
Sale
NOT RECORDED
Ros
256
Sulli-en
1-:iog liolmes
17FE8-271954 199FE0271964
Tevol
JEH:odm (10)
irotior
Tole.Roon
Holmoo

--- PAGE BREAK ---

ietruary24,1064
eaorandua for Messrs. Tolscn, iohi.ont, toscn,Sullivan, Evans, DeLoach
Ictatcd thio taiag fu the NLxon uaiter whicn coca rot cactly ring souns
with ne Is kno/lng tho bacsground oi Leo Lurvey Usuald and bis makeu?
te.nperaocntally,ct cctera, bow th:o wlie oul be aole to lock hlci n a baturoom
all day vlthout hls klcking tha door down because ho gavc evideace ohaving a
violent tewpcr. Mr. Rankia coriiented also that he had beat her uy on occation.
Istatcd that ls the only augleoi that story hich Gidi not seora to hold wate.1
ctatpd she Dever mcntioned it to ue at any ticic nor did Fobert Csvau cention
it to us and that ia vhy we wanted to quostlon hier again because wa have not talkod
to her slnce chc appeared betore thc Coziniisslou and, of couree,F.cbert Uevald
was bore in Vachinglon. Istated it isa fact tout Richard Nixon was in Dallas
80aietime in 19u3, end Rir.Raniin statcu it was Kovcaber 2ist, tho day beicre
the assaeslcation.I stated Nixon was Lnvited to receive some avard and ladto
carcel out and he got doan to Dallas juct thc Gay before the cesaesination aDd
the question Is, was lt at that particzlar time, as brs. Cswalu's story purpcrts,
that che locked Lee Cswald In the batdrooi. I stated that did nct aiake senee
1etated we can, of ccurce, stako ou: tho placo whcre kiarina Csvaid
ls now livingand fInd out cho ls golng ln aid out to eco her at thils new place,
but my quectlon ie, approxlately bou long cees hir.erki anticigaio vulting.
Mr. liankin stuted he woula leave that to ziy judgment.I etaled I would thins
vo can Lnterview her tou2y,if the nc Liyerallowsus to Co co andeo bave
no objccticn 1l be vants to be prceent evea,und also llobertsald, that ae
sooa as we finish those two Intervlews and cct the facte ncd unlcss.tliere arc
somo other anglcs, that particulur angle vill then be pretty well botiled up tad
we could set the informatlon to the Coiinlscion certuinly by the ailucle of this
weck. &r. Rankin etatcd that would bo vczy helpiul as they havo i.artin coining
volurtarily before the Ccninlcsion on Thursday eo if ho cculd get that in!orr:ation
belore that, it.wculd be tolprul. Istated ve can do tnat and in the meantlrce we
can put the surveillaacg cn I.arina Csald.
Bir. Ranin stated that one thing the now lawyer, Rickcnrie (horclic).
didwas to bringtho cortractswlth both otert end Marica cad while tcey hcvetb
ucual proyisions, ho also Jas the right to disclosc anythirg la regard to tt:is
matter ho shoul.i lcarn irrcspoctivo of tho clicnt-lawycr relatlonenip, anu
cXenzio assured Mir.Faakin ard the Corin.isslon ho would ciaie full cnd
coaiplcte disclosure of aaything he discovcred, so ir.Rankin thinks o will
get full coopcration from LicKenzlo.I slatcd this fellow John x.Thoruo s
contending be la hor lawyer.ho would ciaie full cnd
coaiplcte disclosure of aaything he discovcred, so ir.Rankin thinks o will
get full coopcration from LicKenzlo.I slatcd this fellow John x.Thoruo s
contending be la hor lawyer.

--- PAGE BREAK ---cnd
coaiplcte disclosure of aaything he discovcred, so ir.Rankin thinks o will
get full coopcration from LicKenzlo.I slatcd this fellow John x.Thoruo s
contending be la hor lawyer.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

15
seorae foricsrs.Tolsn,elt:ost,o.en,cil:,xn,lvane,Deioach
Ar.lankin ctatedbchas coicsolctterc fron Thorne to artln and
inone he ls terciinatingA:artin'srelatlonshiyanl therc ieanotierpno to
3rs. Miarina Cswald irom Thorne in wiich he prctcsts tho terrifntlon of his
er:ploymenl and one from k.artin to coth Tborno and rs. Osvald eaying ho
can't be Iired. I statod I thought be had lesued a statement thio marning that
be ie still horcontractural lavycr,uhat while she hasa rlght to hire asmany
advlsore as she secs iit, ho is etill hor 'contractural lawyer."
Mix.Fankin continued that in aartin's lettor he sayo he bas sold
yarioia interasts sucb as Ty rlghts to Tex-italia Eilm (chonotic)&nd her
nienioirs to & magazine oi Har.burg, Gorninny, and he has eold the picture
rights,ot cetera. Mir.Hankin slatcd Thorne's lettor says they have enterod
into coatracts involvingan cxccss ol Si5o,6uo,so it can be 6een what is Inzol
Icounented this is just a nasty sbzketown,notwithstanding her cbaracter;
that theso two indlylduals are dolng evcrything in their power to mako as n:uch
money as they can out oher and tnls applies to tue other fello in NewYork
connocted witd Lce Cunald's auother.
Mir. Fankin stated that while worklng on this, be wold libe me to
Auus
keep an ego on this thing to scc whetier it looks at all lieihio
was within the rcalra of possibility.iar.Fankin etated it looks like Aiarlnz
Oswald was pretty qulck to do that, but on the otler hans, Fobert Cocald, iroa
the reports,Is pretty straight lacei and yir.ianin thcught if she did not want
to get rid of then,ho wouid not have tolercted this. r. iankln etated he tbou
maybe Bhe got In with Cevald over in lugsia that Fay and riaybo other tliiags
have happened over here, au Mr. Fankin stateit loois like from our reorts
it ie possiclo sonicthing went oa bcfore thoy caiid up to Vachington alticugh tho
Secret Service did not think there was any opportunity, but he vas certainly loo
at her any chance ho hadI stated there wag plenly o opzoriuaity here in atn
inton,asaccording to thio Sccret Servicc,Ciartin nnd ehe staycd up to vlev
tclevision until the early bours Ln tho morning ard tine Secret Servico riin was
in the corridor,so what wcnt on in tae rooci noboiy kcovs] Ietatcdit is
those angles we hope to cxplore with her loday. r. liankin statod Gita  artic
chasing hsr and coing all those things with hia wile arcucd, ho can imagine
what ho did hen he was freo fron his wile. I etateu he had no compunction Bo
far as his wuo was ccncerned as thoy were open and abovo board with the wlle
In the bouge I stated it is an unfortunate thing, but wbat worries ne ls tha
possibliily of a leakgclting out on thls ag lo the background of tho Cswald woai
and xartin,et cetera, because thoso peoplc are talking around dovn therc ia
Ella, bui l wauli hg unlortunate to have lt get out before the Commlssionut on thls ag lo the background of tho Cswald woai
and xartin,et cetera, because thoso peoplc are talking around dovn therc ia
Ella, bui l wauli hg unlortunate to have lt get out before the Commlssion

--- PAGE BREAK ---background of tho Cswald woai
and xartin,et cetera, because thoso peoplc are talking around dovn therc ia
Ella, bui l wauli hg unlortunate to have lt get out before the Commlssion

--- PAGE BREAK ---

Feb2ry2
Nersorardue for i.cssrs. Toluon, LeL.ont, Iosen, Sullivan,Evans,
lleu it down bcre aa to thcse activities and anybody clse vho may have knowlego
olit.
air.Fanln askcd ifIgicn't think that business atout ber boing
willing to oAartia's uilstrces basastrange thlag.andI stated I did;that
saows certaialy the couiplctolack of uuy character and the thing that clso
lupressed no was,Lf you lookat tho plcture of Rrs. Niarina Oswald vhen
Uis happcned aad tbe picture of herafterards,it iu almoct llke too difleret
people, as in tha second picturo of her sho  nct unettractlvc, but the firzt
picturo ln Eallas, when this occurred, shows her as sloppy and unaltractivo;
but somebody got hold ol bcr aadgct ber fixed up and that probatly put ideas
into hor head also. I stated there is no caestion tbiu fellow Miartinas r:ariog
love to her,and tho thing about buy inga house.and divorcing hio wife, although
Idldnot know i he was sorlous, was a proposition and,ol couroe, h sas
probably courting u2on ber money to buy the house. I etated there vas no lorce,
but co.nplete willingnesg upoa ber aad Liupart,ard this just maikes hor cut s
8prctty questicnable character.Ietated that kind of thing H it gets out pelore
it iscalled down and tho ConiTsslon reachc accncluslon co to vht an&u
not to beliovc,ould be bad.Ieteted way sh Gid nct tell us cbout tnis Nv:on
Batter, I dld not kucw as sho told us about the General Waler c.atter.1
stated ry reacticn to thig business about locking Leo Ceuaid in the tatircon
ls that tacre lo Boinetiing fieby hcrc because she just vould not bo able to do
thls bccause he had beat her u2 on occasion, was nasty to ber, had a bad
AS
dispcsitlon,and could have goltcn eut by brcaking the winlo or kickingie
door down and she wouid bave boen periectly belplovs and,further, ehe left
out whet he did thon, asI don't thiahe would bave taion it cally.I steted
it ie a fact Nixon wae there the cay cciore the acsausinaticn and lt will be a
censational story bccauso ba is a fori:or Vice Presitert ond vory anti-
carnmunist and Ccneral Walker is anticon.iunlst and thien tho I'recidert o!
the Uaited States was there. I steted it is such a thing tlat you could cnlago on
 and havo sowe sensatlonal stories, just like tho stcry of Dorothy kilgallea
about the FBl furnishing asslstance to Kuby, tat upon reuding the article, you
could sce lt coes not oupyort the heaaline, but you have down thcre in Daliag
tbeso "blceding hearts"and"ccbslsterslc illgallen,who vill blow eiery-
thinguy ag much as they can. Iconentcd I had alao wondcred where Llfe
Magazino got thit photograpa of Lco Uowald wltn the cuns, but I undorstand
thoy got it from the Dalias Polico Eepartmeat. I stated ay lirst krowledge
alt wag when ay altentioa was called to t by tho Hicaret pcopio who had anrapa of Lco Uowald wltn the cuns, but I undorstand
thoy got it from the Dalias Polico Eepartmeat. I stated ay lirst krowledge
alt wag when ay altentioa was called to t by tho Hicaret pcopio who had an

--- PAGE BREAK ---ltn the cuns, but I undorstand
thoy got it from the Dalias Polico Eepartmeat. I stated ay lirst krowledge
alt wag when ay altentioa was called to t by tho Hicaret pcopio who had an

--- PAGE BREAK ---

.o:ani ior .cssra.Telcn,el.ont,r.oa,sliivan,Evans, Ccioach
atrnce copy as on cf thcn called :e and wanted to knoy who xas glving lt
oit and hcw it coulu bo copyrlghted.liirs. Csvela sold lt, tlat is one thing,
but if the Dallas Police gave it to Llie, it was publie propcrty,aud Iagvised
tho iicarel pcople lhez ougat rot to etlr anything up on it,as we dld not kno
Hbether the Dallas Polico gavo it out cr if Mrs. Cowali sold it and ll cho eold
t,lt would bo subject to copyrigit, but  glzon out by a law enforcement agency.
itould not Le Bubject to copyrighit.
Lir.Iankin stated ho unieietood froa uiy letler ttat the Nixon alfzir
really seenied to originato fron Liariln who had bcen told that by k.arica Cswala.
I statod aleo iarina told it to Foiort when hewent to the grave with her,so 
canie from tbose two sources.I stated I didnot thinkwe got lt fron Xartin but
frou Robert. Mir.Fankin slatcd tat Lartin the sacie day told Fobert, bct dld
not cay how long be tad knowa it. I etatcd thu origial in'ormetion agIrocall,
Bas froni Ricbert who was tole il byibrinuend eleo byartin as shetold
Aartin about lt. I coinuented that xhy they did aot tell te Conaission,
did ndt know. Iasked  Rcberl Cswald was qucstioned as to ttat a3ect,ad
2.r.Rankin Gtated he was and ba saia he thougnt the Coramisslon kaow it.I
stated thoy are coing too much on acsunption all tho uay through. I statcd
that is hat wcrries mo ng it epreats out cnd gets to be a veb aluost.Ietatod
Fe baye been checking carefully In:exico City 2nd baye aduitional agents cowa
thera and every one we run out fizzles out, but the aycrage iexican ln my
opiniou isa psychological liar as tboy bare vlsions prcbibly oi gctting woney
or baing brouzht up for testiziony, but so far tiere l3 no confirL:aticn of the
within the next wecr or ten daye, but socicthing aore coaios up every day。
Mr. Faniin stated in connoclion vith the ctake out, to uco ny own
judyuent,but bolore torcilnating it,to let hl knox. Fe atatcd agaln he id
not want to run up too much exycnse.I etated lf vo can get tho interylew toiay
we will get that anc we mzy wart to tali to lbis lauy cr that ehe now has and
as soon us we gct that we will have thc facts which nlll bo sent in by wire.I
stated o will tien get it to hin,r.Fankin, and I ticught the Corumission 
then wart lo considor getting her bacis gulcily and gciting it on record, bcau.:
in tho nicantim.a sho is going to be vriting artielcs and books and ehe ia boini
to include this Lxon thing in lt and f the（oinaiesloa cocg nct have lt nalle
down, it wlll bccocie xnown.I stated Leo Cawald yas nct aa lndividual who a
to digcuss thingg with his wife other than the Walker cltuation. I stated that
did occur and whilo wo are not able ccflnitoly to Bwcar that tho sauae gun was.ed Leo Cawald yas nct aa lndividual who a
to digcuss thingg with his wife other than the Walker cltuation. I stated that
did occur and whilo wo are not able ccflnitoly to Bwcar that tho sauae gun was.

--- PAGE BREAK ---t aa lndividual who a
to digcuss thingg with his wife other than the Walker cltuation. I stated that
did occur and whilo wo are not able ccflnitoly to Bwcar that tho sauae gun was.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

.15
osen
aa,F:vaas,Eoioach
in tne aler cace as in the ascassiation, bocause ofthe ciutilationof the
bullet, there aro many slunilar c.ars and-you certainly ccla dractbo coacluslon
it sas the same gun, but it is onc oi thane lcstancos where you can't say you
arolooEsura。
r. Fankin stated there was one other thing -cenie told hla that
they had mada a sugcestion to the Iords that Decla Ford be hcr new raneger.
Istated cvGrybody is going to niove In on her and thcre will probably be so:ie
othars niove in froai other parts of tae country,and bcing tio character 8te
is they nced only to inzite ber out aud cntertain hcr a litlle and 6be would
probably go because sbo ie ber Own irco 2yent now.
Lir. Kankin stated he tbought it woll to check froa a stake out uhat
kind of pcople are vislting her vhen she docs not know sho is uncer surveillance.
Istated we can also consider gettlng a telcpbono tap In there because tlicre can't
be any trial eo any inorwation would not be excluded in a trial, but ff cometaiy
were going to be tried lt would boa dliforent tning. Islated we will get on it
rightaway.
12:15P21
I called Mr.Joseph Sirco in the Lomestie Inteliigcnce Dlvielon and
sdvised hlm ol air. Fankin's call and bic cesire to have, L pocsiblga stake oit
ot tic place whero Mirs.arina Covald is ncw living and be isvery anslois to
lroz rho ray beolnz In end coeiing out ol that glace seclng her Ia vier o!
andalso Ithinkwo ought to ccaslder placing
a technical oa thc pcone whore sheis now living. Ialso stalcd that Lallas
should be adviscd thal we want to get r8.Oswald intervicued today, trat wo
had hold ofl because or the requect o her nez Lawyer und I cnderctand froni
Ianin bo 6couio to be a prctty dccent fellow, that we oughi to cec her today and
got tho detalls ol tho Nixon thinz.
I stated the Comnisoion wantc to bring her back beru bcioro tas: and
they wlll just as soon as wo get thls Informntion ironl our inlerview with ier.I
stated I thonlit ve ought to iatcrview Hiobsrt Csvala also as to the Nlxon tlsng
becauso she told him about it whcn he went out to the grave with hor. Istated
tho first person sho told cas iartln who was ber businccs taanager and wbo
had relation3 with hor. Ietated Aartin is unier subpocaa to be backhere
belore the Conimiosion so I doubt il we can intervlew hin or ill ve did whetier
he would say anything, but I ttink vo chould interviow her and Rcbort and hayed Aartin is unier subpocaa to be backhere
belore the Conimiosion so I doubt il we can intervlew hin or ill ve did whetier
he would say anything, but I ttink vo chould interviow her and Rcbort and haye

--- PAGE BREAK ---

Saii、an,
,Esuas,Doicaca
LullasirethntInatonceasveougttogettisriterialtothcCocpicslonnot
letcr tncn Wcuncscay so our cianpoxcrwill not be tled down withsurveillingher
aod toalco trs tu gct atechnical tn.Itoldir.Sinoo it will rua until Licg sub-
poena her back beioro the Cotisslon as I'eugcceted to larkin it cught to last
only as long ag it tukes us to get tne inforuation to the Co:nniics!oe.Istated
sho did nct tcll thoCo.anissionanythingatot l,at rcert did,but eho ld
not and they want to sall i Gown an this co-called
thattockylace
detailsve.can iro iobert and then we cughtogctlhat bylcttcrto the
Cosiission not later thanii'ednecdy.r.bfcoo stated itvoul bea discrect
survelllance unknown to her tobce who conlesandgoes to eceher.Istated
also f she coies out,whero ebe goes,tnat lt requlred scretion. Itold
Sizoo toalao scu tiat Dalias has suiiclentranpoverSortho physicalsur-
veillanco of hor anti uiepvoplecoalng totba loise ougbtto befollowedto ce3
uho they are.Ietated her neylawyer,iccnzie,bas sugsested this n.an
ehe Is livicwith nowbecouo her bjsloessagent. Isteted what tie Coiiciission
Is concorned about ls this suuden deveiopcieut as to her seddctioa and Nixon,
as itm2y leak out. Ltold sioc to gci hold o Dallas aad to get ctartod on
rlght auay. Lir. Sizoo etated Le would.
Vcry truly.sour8,
H
UE!!
John EcgarLioorer
Liructor
SENT FRON D.O.
TIME
DATE_UFO,!
BY