Purgatory Explained by tke Lives and Legends of tbe Saints


Author's Preface


Object of the Work - To what Class of Readers it is Addressed
- What we are Obliged to Believe, what we may Piously
Believe, and what we are at Liberty not to Admit - Visions
and Apparitions - Blind Credulity and Exaggerated
Incredulity

The Dogma of Purgatory is too much forgotten by the
majority of the faithful; the Church Suffering, where they
have so many brethren to succor, whither they foresee that
they themselves must one day go, seems a strange land to
them.

This truly deplorable forgetfulness was a great sorrow to
Saint Francis de Sales. "Alas!" said this pious doctor of the
Church, "we do not sufficiently remember our dear departed;
their memory seems to perish with the sound of the funeral
bells."

The principal causes of this are ignorance and lack of faith;
our notions on the subject of Purgatory are too vague, our
faith is too feeble.

In order, then, that our ideas may become more distinct and
our faith enlivened, we must take a closer view of this life
beyond the tomb, this intermediate state of the just souls,
not yet worthy to enter the Heavenly Jerusalem.

This is the object of the present work: we propose not to
prove the existence of Purgatory to skeptical minds, but to
make it better known to the pious faithful who believe with a
divine faith this dogma revealed of God. It is to them,
properly speaking, that this book is addressed, to give them
a less confused idea of Purgatory. I say purposely a clearer


idea than people generally have, by placing this great truth
in the strongest possible light.

To produce this effect we possess three very distinct sources
of light: first, the dogmatic doctrine of the Church; then the
doctrine as explained by the doctors of the Church; in the
third place, the revelations and apparitions of the saints,
which serve to confirm the teachings of the doctors.

1. The dogmatic doctrine of the Church on the subject of
Purgatory comprises two articles, of which we shall speak
later on. These two articles are of faith, and must be
believed by every Catholic.

2. The teaching of the doctors and theologians, or rather
their opinions on several questions relative to Purgatory,
and their explanations of them, are not imposed as articles
of faith; we are free to reject them without ceasing to be
Catholic. Nevertheless, it would be imprudent, and even
rash, to reject them, and it is the spirit of the Church to
follow the opinions commonly held by the doctors.

3. The revelations of the saints, called also particular
revelations, do not belong to the deposit of faith confided by
Jesus Christ to His Church; they are historical facts, based
upon human testimony. It is permitted to believe them, and
piety finds wholesome food in them. We may, however,
disbelieve them without sinning against faith; but they are
authenticated, and we cannot reject them without offending
against reason; because sound reason demands that all men
should give assent to truth when it is sufficiently
demonstrated.

To illustrate this subject more clearly, let us, in the first
place, explain the nature of the revelations of which we
speak.


Particular revelations are of two kinds: the one consists in
visions, the other in apparitions. They are called particular,
because they differ from those found in Holy Scripture, not
forming part of the doctrine revealed for mankind, and not
being proposed by the Church to our belief as dogmas of
faith.

Visions, properly so called, are subjective lights, infused by
God into the understanding of His creatures, in order to
discover to them His mysteries. Such are the visions of the
prophets, those of Saint Paul, of Saint Bridget, and many
other saints. These visions usually take place when the
subject is in a state of ecstasy; they consist in certain
mysterious representations, which appear to the eyes of the
soul, and which must not always be taken literally.

Frequently they are figures, symbolic images, which
represent in a manner proportionate to the capacity of our
understanding, things purely spiritual, of which ordinary
language is incapable of conveying an idea.

Apparitions, at least frequently, are objective phenomena
which have a real exterior object. Such was the apparition of
Moses and Elias on Mount Thabor; that of Samuel evoked by
the Witch of Endor; that of the Angel Raphael to Tobias;
those of many other angels; in fine, such are the apparitions
of the souls in Purgatory.

That the spirits of the dead sometimes appear to the living is
a fact that cannot be denied. Does not the Gospel clearly
suppose it? When the risen Jesus appeared for the first time
to His assembled apostles, they supposed they saw a spirit.
Our Saviour, far from saying that spirits appear not, spoke to
them thus: Why are you troubled, and why do thoughts arise
in your hearts? See My hands and My feet, that it is I Myself;
handle and see; for a spirit has not flesh and bones, as you
see Me to have. {Luke 24:37, etc.).


Apparitions of the souls that are in Purgatory are of frequent
occurrence. We find them in great numbers in the "Lives of
the Saints"; they happen sometimes to the ordinary faithful.
We have collected those which appear best qualified to in
struct or to edify, and we now present them to the reader.
But, it may be asked, are all these facts historically certain?
We have selected the best authenticated. If, among the
number, the reader finds any which he thinks could not
stand the rigor of criticism, he need not admit them In order
to avoid an excessive severity, one which is akin to
incredulity, it is good to remark that, generally speaking,
apparitions of souls occur, and that they frequently occur
cannot be doubted. "Apparitions of this kind," says the Abbe
Ribet, "are not uncommon. God permits them for the relief of
souls in order to excite our compassion, and also to make us
sensible of how terrible are the rigors of His Justice against
those faults which we consider trivial." (La Mystique Divine,
distinguee des Contrefaqons Diaboliques et des Analogies
Humaines. Paris, Poussielgue). Saint Gregory in his
Dialogues cites several examples, of which, it is true, we
may dispute the full authenticity; but which, in the mouth of
this holy doctor, prove at least that he believed in the
possibility of the existence of these phenomena. A great
number of other authors, not less reliable than Saint
Gregory, both on account of sanctity and learning, relate
similar instances. Moreover, incidents of this sort abound in
the lives of the saints. To be convinced of this, it suffices to
peruse the Acta Sanctorum.

The Church Suffering has ever implored the suffrages of the
Church Militant; and this intercourse, bearing the impress of
sadness, yet also full of instruction, is for the one a source of
inexhaustible relief, and for the other a powerful incitement
to sanctity.


The vision of Purgatory has been granted to many holy
souls. Saint Catherine de Ricci descended in spirit into
Purgatory every Sunday night; Saint Lidwina, during her
raptures, penetrated into this place of expiation, and,
conducted by her angel guardian, visited the souls in their
torments. In like manner, an angel led Blessed Osanne of
Mantua through this dismal abyss.

Blessed Veronica of Binasco, Saint Frances of Rome, and
many others had visions exactly similar, with impressions of
terror.

More frequently it is the souls themselves that appear to the
living and implore their intercession. Many appeared in this
manner to Blessed Margaret Mary Alacoque, and to a great
number of other holy persons. The souls departed frequently
besought the intercession of Denis the Carthusian. This
great servant of God was one day asked how many times the
holy souls appeared to him "Oh! hundreds of times," he
replied.

Saint Catherine of Siena, in order to spare her father the
pains of Purgatory, offered herself to the Divine Justice to
suffer in his stead during her whole life. God accepted her
offer, inflicted the most excruciating torments upon her,
which lasted until her death, and admitted the soul of her
father into eternal glory. In return this blessed soul
frequently appeared to his daughter to thank her, and to
make to her many useful revelations.

When the souls in Purgatory appear to the living, they
always present themselves in an attitude which excites
compassion; now with the features which they had during
life or at their death, with a sad countenance and imploring
looks, in garments of mourning, with an expression of
extreme suffering; then like a mist, a light, a shadow, or


some kind of fantastic figure, accompanied by a sign or word
by which they may be recognized. At other times they
betray their presence by moans, sobs, sighs, or hurried
respiration and plaintive accents. They often appear
enveloped in flames. When they speak, it is to manifest their
sufferings, to deplore their past faults, to ask suffrages, or
even to address reproaches to those who ought to succor
them Another kind of revelation, adds the same author, is
made by invisible blows which the living receive, by the
violent shutting of doors, the rattling of chains, and the
sounds of voices.

These facts are too multiplied to admit of doubt; the only
difficulty is to establish their connection with the world of
expiation. But when these manifestations coincide with the
death of persons dear to us, when they cease after prayers
and reparations have been made to God in their behalf, is it
not reasonable to see therein signs by which the souls make
known their distress?

In the various phenomena to which we have just drawn
attention we recognize the souls in Purgatory. But there is a
case when the apparition should be held in suspicion; it is
when a notorious sinner, unexpectedly carried away by a
sudden death, comes to implore the prayers of the living
that he may be delivered from Purgatory. The devil is
interested in making us believe that we can live in the
greatest disorders until the moment of our death and yet
escape Hell. However, even in such instances, it is not
forbidden to think that the soul which appears has repented,
and that it is in the temporary flames of expiation; nor,
consequently, is it forbidden to pray for it, but it is proper to
observe the greatest caution in regard to visions of this kind,
and the credit which we give to them.


The details into which we have entered suffice to justify in
the eyes of the reader the quotation of facts which he will
find in the course of this work.

Let us add that the Christian must guard against too great
incredulity in supernatural facts connected with dogmas of
faith. Saint Paul tells us that Charity believes all things (1
Corinthians 13:7), that is to say, as interpreters explain it, all
that which we may prudently believe, and of which the
belief will not be prejudicial. If it is true that prudence
rejects a blind and superstitious credulity, it is also true that
we must avoid another extreme, that with which our Saviour
reproached the Apostle Saint Thomas. You believe. He said
to him, because you have seen and touched; it were better
to have believed the testimony of your brethren. In exacting
more, you have been guilty of incredulity; this is a fault that
all My disciples should avoid. Blessed are they that have not
seen, and have believed. Be not faithless, but believing.
(John 20:27,29).

The theologian who expounds dogmas of faith must be
severe in the choice of his proofs; the historian must proceed
with rigorous circumspection in the narration of facts, but
the ascetic writer, who cites examples to illustrate truths
and edify the faithful, is not held to this strict rigor. The best
authorized persons in the Church, such as Saint Gregory,
Saint Bernard, Saint Francis de Sales, Saint Alphonsus
Liguori, Bellarmine, and many others, as much distinguished
for their learning as for their piety, when writing their
excellent works knew nothing of the fastidious requirements
of the present day - requirements which in nowise constitute
progress.

In fact, if the spirit of our fathers in the faith was more
simple, what is the cause of the disappearance of that
ancient simplicity in the present time? Is it not the


Protestant Rationalism with which, in our day, so many of
our Catholics are infected? Is it not the spirit of reasoning
and criticism that emanated from the Lutheran Reformation,
propagated by French Philosophism, which, leading them to
consider the things of God from a purely human point of
view, makes them cold, and alienates them from the Spirit of
God? The Venerable Louis of Blois, speaking of the
Revelations of Saint Gertrude, says: "This book contains
treasures. Proud and carnal men," he adds, "who understand
nothing of the Spirit of God, treat as reveries the writings of
the holy virgin Gertrude, of Saint Mechtilde, Saint
Hildegarde, and others; it is because they are ignorant of the
familiarity with which God communicates Himself to humble,
simple, and loving souls, and how in these intimate
communications He is pleased to illumine these souls with
the pure light of truth, without any shadow of error." (Louis
of Blois, Epist. ad Florentium).

These words of Louis of Blois are serious. We did not wish to
incur the reproach of this great master in the spiritual life,
and, whilst avoiding a blameworthy credulity, we have
collected with a certain kind of liberty those which seem to
us at once the best authenticated and the most instructive.
May they increase in those who read them devotion towards
the faithful departed. May they profoundly inspire all who
read them with a holy and salutary fear of Purgatory.

Note: It is from the lives of the saints, honored as such by
the Church, and other illustrious servants of God, that we
have taken the greater part of the examples herein cited.

The reader who wishes to investigate these facts, in order to
give them their just value, may without difficulty have
recourse to the originals by the aid of our references. If the
incident is drawn from the life of a saint, we indicate the day
on which his name is entered in the martyrology, which is
sufficient for consulting the Acta Sanctorum. If we mention


any venerable personage, such as Father Joseph Anchieta,
Apostle and Thaumaturgus of Brazil, whose life is not
inserted in the volumes of the Bollandists, they must then
have recourse to biographies and particular histories. For
the examples borrowed from Father Rossignoli, Merveilles
Divine dans les Ames du Purgatoire (trans. Postel; Toumai,
Castennan), we content ourselves by marking the number of
the Merveille. because the author has there indicated one or
more sources whence he himself has drawn.


Translator's Preface

The author of this work is the well-known writer, Father
Francis Xavier Schouppe, of the Society of Jesus. The
reverend author scarcely needs any introduction to English
readers, as several of his valuable works have been already
translated from French into English. To the reverend clergy
the author is best known through his works on Dogmatic
Theology and Sacred Scripture, which, in the judgment of
competent critics, possess the very highest order of merit. In
this work on Purgatory they will find the same fullness and
solidity of thought and judgment, joined with wonderful
clearness and simplicity of diction, which distinguish the
above works. We are confident that the reverend clergy will
hail with delight the appearance of this work in an English
garb, and will give it their esteemed encouragement.

A profound theologian and Scriptural scholar, acquainted as
only very few are with the writings of the Fathers, the author
was specially equipped for writing a work of this kind. A
faithful and devoted son of the Church, his works are ever
guided by a Catholic instinct, which keeps them in harmony
with Catholic faith and Catholic practice.

The subject of this book is at once dear and interesting to
every Catholic heart. About the existence of this
intermediate state Catholics have no more doubt than of the
existence of Heaven or Hell. The Church, by her
authoritative teaching, has decided the matter for all time.
"The Catholic Church," says the Council of Trent, "instructed
by the Holy Ghost, has, from the sacred writings and the
ancient tradition of the Fathers, taught in sacred councils,
and very recently in the Ecumenical Synod, that there is a
Purgatory, and that the souls there detained are helped by


the suffrages of the faithful, but principally by the
acceptable Sacrifice of the Altar." (Sess. 25).

The pious reader cannot fail to have his faith nourished and
strengthened after reading a chapter of this book; and
realizing how much help and comfort he can bring to the
poor souls, his charity will prompt him to come to their
assistance and rescue. Their cries, wafted hither on the
wings of faith from the shore of eternity, will not appeal to
him in vain. A new interest will spring up within him for that
realm of pain yet also of hope, where those not wholly pure
are cleansed and prepared for everlasting joys.

This work has been translated into English at the earnest
request of the author. Wishing that devotion for the holy
souls might grow and flourish in many hearts, he considered
that his purpose would be best attained by having this work
translated into English, for the benefit of English-speaking
readers. It may also interest the readers of this book to know
that the learned author is at present laboring for the
salvation of souls among the pagan people of India.

The translator has specially aimed at giving the exact sense
of the author, without any attempt at style or literary finish.
Such an attempt, she believes, would detract from the value
of the work as a whole.

For the rest, should this work contribute even in a small
measure to the greater glory of God and of Holy Church;
should it make the doctrine of Purgatory better understood;
should it convince its readers of the excellence of devotion
for the holy souls, and inspire at least some of them with a
holy zeal to practice it, then indeed would the ambition of
the author and translator be realized.


-J.J. 5.


Protestation of the Author


In conformity to the decree of Urban VIII, Sanctissimum, of
March 13, 1525, we declare that if in this work we have cited
facts represented to be supernatural, nothing but a personal
and private authority is to be attached to our opinion; the
discernment of facts of this kind belongs to the supreme
authority of the Church.

CANON XXX. SESSION VI. THE COUNCIL OF TRENT. 13
JANUARY 1547

If anyone says that after the reception of the grace of
justification the guilt is so remitted and the debt of eternal
punishment so blotted out to every repentant sinner, that no
debt of temporal punishment remains to be discharged,
either in this world or in Purgatory, before the gates of
Heaven can be opened, let him be anathema.

DECREE CONCERNING PURGATORY. THE COUNCIL OF
TRENT. SESSION XXV. 4 DECEMBER 1563

Since the Catholic Church, instructed by the Holy Ghost,
has, following the sacred writings and the ancient tradition
of the Fathers, taught in sacred councils and very recently in
this ecumenical council, that there is a Purgatory, and that
the souls there detained are aided by the suffrages of the
faithful and chiefly by the Acceptable Sacrifice of the Altar,
the Holy Council commands the bishops that they strive
diligently to the end that the sound doctrine of Purgatory,
transmitted by the Fathers and sacred councils, be believed
and maintained by the faithful of Christ, and be everywhere
taught and preached.


CANONS CONCERNING THE SACRAMENT OF PENANCE.
THE COUNCIL OF TRENT. SESSION XIV, 25 NOVEMBER
1551

Canon 12. If anyone says that God always pardons the whole
penalty together with the guilt and that the satisfaction of
penitents is nothing else than the faith by which they
perceive that Christ has satisfied for them, let him be
anathema.

Canon 13. If anyone says that satisfaction for sins, as to their
temporal punishment, is in no way made to God through the
merits of Christ by the punishments inflicted by Him and
patiently borne, or by those imposed by the priest, or even
those voluntarily undertaken, as by fasts, prayers,
almsgiving or other works of piety, and that therefore the
best penance is merely a new life, let him be anathema.

Canon 14. If anyone says that the satisfactions by which
penitents atone for their sins through Christ are not a
worship of God but traditions of men, which obscure the
doctrine of grace and the true worship of God and the
beneficence itself of the death of Christ, let him be
anathema.

Canon 15. If anyone says that the keys have been given to
the Church only to loose and not also to bind, and that
therefore priests, when imposing penalties on those who
confess, act contrary to the purpose of the keys and to the
institution of Christ, and that it is a fiction that there remains
often a temporal punishment to be discharged after the
eternal punishment has by virtue of the keys been removed,
let him be anathema.

CHAPTER IX - ON THE WORKS OF SATISFACTION.
SESSION XIV. THE COUNCIL OF TRENT. 25 NOVEMBER


1551


It [the Council] teaches furthermore that the liberality of the
divine munificence is so great that we are able through Jesus
Christ to make satisfaction to God the Father, not only by
punishments voluntarily undertaken by ourselves to atone
for sins, or by those imposed by the judgment of the priest
according to the measure of our offense, but also, and this is
the greatest proof of love, by the temporal afflictions
imposed by God and borne patiently by us.


Part One - Purgatory, The
Mystery of God's Justice

"But I say unto you, that every idle word that men
shall speak, they shall render an account for it in the
day of judgment." - Matthew 12:36


Chapter 1


Purgatory in the Divine Pian

Purgatory occupies an
important place in our holy
religion: it forms one of the
principal parts of the work of
Jesus Christ, and plays an
essential role in the economy
of the salvation of man.

Let us call to mind that the
Holy Church of God,
considered as a whole, is
composed of three parts: The
Church Militant, the Church Triumphant, and the Church
Suffering or Purgatory. This triple Church constitutes the
mystical body of Jesus Christ, and the souls in Purgatory are
no less His members than are the faithful upon earth and the
elect in Heaven. In the Gospel, the Church is ordinarily
called the Kingdom of Heaven; now Purgatory, just as the
heavenly and terrestrial Church, is a province of this vast
kingdom.

The three sister Churches have incessant relations with each
other, a continual communication which we call the
Communion of Saints. These relations have no other object
than to conduct souls to eternal glory, the final term to
which all the elect tend. The three Churches mutually assist
in peopling Heaven, which is the permanent city, the
glorious Jerusalem.

What then is the work which we, members of the Church
Militant, have to do for the souls in Purgatory? We have to


alleviate their sufferings. God has placed in our hands the
key of this mysterious prison: it is prayer for the dead,
devotion to the souls in Purgatory.


Chapter 2


Prayer for the Dead - Fear and
Confidence I


Prayer for the departed,
sacrifices, and suffrages for
the dead fornn a part of
Christian worship, and
devotion towards the souls in
Purgatory is a devotion which
the Holy Ghost infuses with charity into the hearts of the
faithful. It is a holy and wholesome thought, says Holy
Scripture, to pray for the dead, that they may be loosed
from sins. (2 Machabees 12:46).


In order to be perfect, devotion to the souls in Purgatory
nnust be animated both by a spirit of fear and a spirit of
confidence. On the one hand, the Sanctity of God and His
Justice inspires us with a salutary fear; on the other. His
infinite Mercy gives us boundless confidence.

God is Sanctity itself, much more so than the sun is light,
and no shadow of sin can endure before His face. Thine eyes
are pure, says the prophet, and thou canst not look on
iniquity. (Habbakuk 1:13). When iniquity manifests itself in
creatures, the Sanctity of God exacts expiation, and when
this expiation is made in all the rigor of justice, it is terrible.
It is for this reason that the Scripture says again. Holy and
terrible is His name (Psalm 110); as though it would say. His
Justice is terrible because His Sanctity is infinite.

The Justice of God is terrible, and it punishes with extreme
rigor even the most trivial faults. The reason is that these
faults, light in our eyes, are in nowise so before God. The


least sin displeases Him infinitely, and, on account of the
infinite Sanctity which is offended, the slightest
transgression assumes enormous proportions, and demands
enormous atonement. This explains the terrible severity of
the pains of the other life, and should penetrate us with a
holy fear.

This fear of Purgatory is a salutary fear; its effect is not only
to animate us with a charitable compassion towards the poor
suffering souls, but also with a vigilant zeal for our own
spiritual welfare. Think of the fire of Purgatory, and you will
endeavor to avoid the least faults; think of the fire of
Purgatory, and you will practice penance, that you may
satisfy Divine Justice in this world rather than in the next.

Let us, however, guard against excessive fear, and not lose
confidence. Let us not forget the Mercy of God, which is not
less infinite than His Justice. Thy mercy. Lord, is great above
the Heavens, says the prophet (Psalm 107); and elsewhere.
The Lord is gracious and merciful: patient, and plenteous in
mercy (Psalm 144). This ineffable mercy should calm the
most lively apprehensions, and fill us with a holy confidence,
according to the words. In te, Domine, speravi, non
confundar in ceternum- "In Thee, O Lord, I have hoped; let
me never be put to confusion." (Psalm 70).

If we are animated with this double sentiment, if our
confidence in God's Mercy is equal to the fear with which His
Justice inspires us, we shall have the true spirit of devotion
to the souls in Purgatory.

This double sentiment springs naturally from the dogma of
Purgatory rightly understood - a dogma which contains the
double mystery of Justice and Mercy: of Justice which
punishes, of Mercy which pardons. It is from this double


point of view that we are about to consider Purgatory and
illustrate its doctrine.


Chapter 3


The Word Purgatory - Catholic Doctrine - Council of Trent -
Controverted Questions

The word Purgatory is sometimes taken to mean a place,
sometimes as an intermediate state between Hell and
Heaven. It is, properly speaking, the condition of souls
which, at the moment of death, are in the state of grace, but
which have not completely expiated their faults, nor
attained the degree of purity necessary to enjoy the vision
of God.

Purgatory is, then, a transitory state which terminates in a
life of everlasting happiness. It is not a trial by which merit
may be gained or lost, but a state of atonement and
expiation. The soul has arrived at the term of its earthly
career; that life was a time of trial, a time of merit for the
soul, a time of mercy on the part of God. This time once
expired, nothing but justice is to be expected from God,
whilst the soul can neither gain nor lose merit. She remains
in the state in which death found her; and since it found her
in the state of sanctifying grace, she is certain of never
forfeiting that happy state, and of arriving at the eternal
possession of God. Nevertheless, since she is burdened with
certain debts of temporal punishment, she must satisfy
Divine Justice by enduring this punishment in all its rigor.

Such is the signification of the word Purgatory, and the
condition of the souls which are there.

On this subject the Church proposes two truths clearly
defined as dogmas of faith: first, that there is a Purgatory;
second, that the souls which are in Purgatory may be


assisted by the suffrages of the faithful, especially by the
Holy Sacrifice of the Mass.

Besides these two dogmatic points, there are several
doctrinal questions which the Church has not decided, and
which are more or less clearly solved by the Doctors. These
questions relate

1) to the location of Purgatory;

2) to the nature of the sufferings;

3) to the number and condition of the souls which are in
Purgatory;

4) to the certainty which they have of their beatitude;

5) to the duration of their sufferings;

6) to the intervention of the living in their behalf, and the
application of the suffrages of the Church.


Chapter 4


Location of Purgatory - Doctrine of
Theoiogians - Catechism of the
Councii of Trent - Saint Thomas

Although faith tells us nothing
definite regarding the location of
Purgatory, the most common
opinion, that which most accords
with the language of Scripture, and
which is the most generally
received among theologians, places
it in the bowels of the earth, not far from the Hell of the
reprobates. Theologians are almost unanimous, says
Bellarmine, in teaching that Purgatory, at least the ordinary
place of expiation, is situated in the interior of the earth,
that the souls in Purgatory and the reprobate are in the
same subterranean space in the deep abyss which the
Scripture calls Hell. (Catech. Rom., chap. 6, § 1).

When we say in the Apostles' Creed that after His death
Jesus Christ descended into Hell, the name Hell, says the
Catechism of the Council of Trent, signifies those hidden
places where the souls are detained which have not yet
reached eternal beatitude. But these prisons are of different
kinds. One is a dark and gloomy dungeon, where the
damned are continually tormented by evil spirits, and by a
fire which is never extinguished. This place, which is Hell
properly so called, is also named Gehenna and abyss.

There is another Hell, which contains the fire of Purgatory.
There the souls of the just suffer for a certain time, that they
may become entirely purified before being admitted into


their heavenly fatherland, where nothing defiled can ever
enter.

A third Hell was that into which the souls of the saints who
died before the coming of Jesus Christ were received, and in
which they enjoyed peaceful repose, exempt from pain,
consoled and sustained by the hope of their redemption.
They were those holy souls which awaited Jesus Christ in
Abraham's bosom, and which were delivered when Christ
descended into Hell. Our Saviour suddenly diffused among
them a brilliant light, which filled them with infinite joy, and
gave them sovereign beatitude, which is the vision of God.
Then was fulfilled the promise of Jesus to the good thief: This
day thou shalt be with me in Paradise.

"A very probable opinion," says Saint Thomas, "and one
which, moreover, corresponds with the words of the saints in
particular revelation, is that Purgatory has a double place for
expiation. The first will be destined for the generality of
souls, and is situated below, near to Hell; the second will be
for particular cases, and it is from thence that so many
apparitions occur." (Suppl., part. 3, ques. ult.).

The holy Doctor admits, then, like so many others who share
his opinions, that sometimes Divine Justice assigns a special
place of purification to certain souls, and even permits them
to appear either to instruct the living or to procure for the
departed the suffrages of which they stand in need;
sometimes also for other motives worthy of the wisdom and
mercy of God.

Such is the general view concerning the location of
Purgatory. Since we are not writing a controversial treatise,
we add neither proofs nor refutations; these can be seen in
authors such as Suarez and Bellarmine. We will content
ourselves by remarking that the opinion concerning a


subterranean Hell has nothing to fear from modern science.
A science purely natural is incompetent in questions which
belong, as does this one, to the supernatural order.
Moreover, we know that spirits may be in a place occupied
by bodies, as though these bodies did not exist. Whatever,
then, the interior of the earth may be, whether it be entirely
of fire, as geologists commonly say, or whether it be in any
other state, there is nothing to prevent its serving as a
sojourn of spirits, even of spirits clothed with a risen body.
The Apostle Saint Paul teaches us that the air is filled with a
multitude of evil spirits: We have to combat, says he,
against the spirits of wickedness in the high places.
(Ephesians 6:12)

On the other hand, we know that the good angels who
protect us are no less numerous in the world. Now, if angels
and other spirits can inhabit our atmosphere, whilst the
physical world is not in the least degree changed, why
cannot the souls of the dead dwell in the bosom of the
earth?


Chapter 5


Location of Purgatory - Revelations of the Saints - Saint
Teresa - Saint Louis Bertrand - Saint Mary Magdalen de Pazzi

Saint Teresa had great charity
towards the souls in Purgatory, and
assisted them as much as lay in her
power by her prayers and good
works. In recompense, God
frequently showed her the souls she
had delivered; she saw them at the
moment of their release from
suffering and of their entrance into
Heaven. Now, they generally came
forth from the bosom of the earth. "I
received tidings," she writes, "of the death of a Religious
who had formerly been Provincial of that province, and
afterwards of another. I was acquainted with him, and he
had rendered me great service. This intelligence caused me
great uneasiness. Although this man was commendable for
many virtues, I was apprehensive for the salvation of his
soul, because he had been Superior for the space of twenty
years, and I always fear much for those who are charged
with the care of souls. Much grieved, I went to an oratory;
there I conjured our Divine Lord to apply to this Religious the
little good I had done during my life, and to supply the rest
by His infinite merits, in order that this soul might be freed
from Purgatory.

"Whilst I besought this grace with all the fervor of which I
was capable, I saw on my right side this soul come forth from
the depths of the earth and ascend into Heaven in
transports of joy. Although this priest was advanced in years.


he appeared to me with the features of a man who had not
yet attained the age of thirty, and with a countenance
resplendent with light.

"This vision, though very short, left me inundated with joy,
and without a shadow of doubt as to the truth of what I had
seen. As I was separated by a great distance from the place
where this servant of God had ended his days, it was some
time before I learned the particulars of his edifying death; all
those who were witnesses of it could not behold without
admiration how he preserved consciousness to the last
moment, the tears he shed, and the sentiments of humility
with which he surrendered his soul to God.

"A Religious of my community, a great servant of God, had
been dead not quite two days. We were saying the Office for
the Dead for her in choir, a sister was reading the lesson,
and I was standing to say the versicle. When half of the
lesson had been said, I saw the soul of this Religious come
forth from the depths of the earth, like the one of which I
have just spoken, and go to Heaven.

"In this same monastery there died, at the age of eighteen or
twenty years, another Religious, a true model of fervor,
regularity, and virtue. Her life had been but a tissue of
maladies and sufferings patiently endured. I had no doubt,
after having seen her live thus, that she had more than
sufficient merits to exempt her from Purgatory. Nevertheless,
whilst I was at Office, before she was interred, and about a
quarter of an hour after her death, I saw her soul likewise
issue from the earth and rise to Heaven." Behold what Saint
Teresa writes.

A like instance is recorded in the Life of Saint Louis Bertrand,
of the Order of Saint Dominic. This Life, written by Father
Antist, a Religious of the same Order, and who lived with the


saint, is inserted in the Acta Sanctorum
on the 10th of October. In the year
1557, whilst Saint Louis Bertrand
resided at the convent of Valentia, the
pest broke out in that city. The terrible
plague spread rapidly, threatening to
exterminate the inhabitants, and each
one trembled for his life. A Religious of
the community, wishing to prepare
himself fervently for death, made a
general Confession of his whole life to
the saint; and on leaving him said,
"Father, if it should now please God to
call me, I shall return and make known
to you my condition in the other life." He
died a short time afterwards, and the
following night he appeared to the saint. He told him that he
was detained in Purgatory on account of a few slight faults
which remained to be expiated, and begged the saint to
recommend him to the community. Saint Louis
communicated the request immediately to the Prior, who
hastened to recommend the soul of the departed to the
prayers and Holy Sacrifices of the brethren assembled in
chapter.

Six days later, a man of the town, who knew nothing of what
had passed at the convent, came to make his Confession to
Father Louis, and told him "that the soul of Father Clement
had appeared to him. He saw, he said, the earth open, and
the soul of the deceased Father come forth all glorious; it
resembled, he added, a resplendent star, which rose through
the air towards Heaven."

We read in the Life of Saint Magdalen de Pazzi, written by
her confessor. Father Cepari, of the Company of Jesus, that
this servant of God was made witness of the deliverance of a


soul under the following
circumstances: One of her sisters in
religion had died some time
previous, when the saint being one
day in prayer before the Blessed
Sacrament, saw issue from the earth
the soul of that sister, still captive in
the dungeons of Purgatory. She was
enveloped in a mantle of flames,
under which a robe of dazzling
whiteness protected her from the
fierce heat of the fire; and she
remained an entire hour at the foot
of the altar, adoring in inexpressible
annihilation the hidden God of the
Eucharist.

This hour of adoration, which Magdalen saw her perform,
was the last of her penance; that hour passed, she arose and
took her flight to Heaven.


Chapter 6


Location of Purgatory - Saint Frances of Rome - Saint
Magdaien de Pazzi

It has pleased God to show in
spirit the gloomy abodes of
Purgatory to some privileged
souls, who were to reveal the
sorrowful mysteries thereof fo
the edification of the faithful.

Of this number was the
illustrious Saint Frances,
foundress of the Oblates, who
died in Rome in 1440. God favored her with great lights
concerning the state of souls in the other life. She saw Hell
and its horrible torments; she saw also the interior of
Purgatory, and the mysterious order -1 had almost said
hierarchy of expiations - which reigns in this portion of the
Church of Jesus Christ.

In obedience to her superiors, who thought themselves
bound to impose this obligation upon her, she made known
all that God had manifested to her; and her visions, written
at the request of the venerable Canon Matteotti, her spiritual
director, have all the authenticity that can be desired in
such matters. Now, the servant of God declared that, after
having endured with unspeakable horror the vision of Hell,
she came out of that abyss and was conducted by her
celestial guide into the regions of Purgatory. There reigned
neither horror nor disorder, nor despair nor eternal darkness;
there divine hope diffused its light, and she was told that
this place of purification was called also sojourn of hope. She


saw there souls which suffered cruelly, but angels visited
and assisted them in their sufferings.

Purgatory, she said, is divided into three distinct parts,
which are as the three large provinces of that kingdom of
suffering. They are situated the one beneath the other, and
occupied by souls of different orders. These souls are buried
more deeply in proportion as they are more defiled and
farther removed from the time of their deliverance.

The lowest region is filled with a fierce fire, but which is not
dark like that of Hell; it is a vast burning sea, throwing forth
immense flames. Innumerable souls are plunged into its
depths: they are those who have rendered themselves guilty
of mortal sin, which they have duly confessed, but not
sufficiently expiated during life. The servant of God then
learned that, for all forgiven mortal sin, there remains to be
undergone a suffering of seven years. This term cannot
evidently be taken to mean a definite measure, since mortal
sins differ in enormity, but as an average penalty. Although
the souls are enveloped in the same flames, their sufferings
are not the same; they differ according to the number and
nature of their former sins.

In this lower Purgatory the saint beheld laics and persons
consecrated to God. The laics were those who, after a life of
sin, had had the happiness of being sincerely converted; the
persons consecrated to God were those who had not lived
according to the sanctity of their state. At that same
moment she saw descend the soul of a priest whom she
knew, but whose name she does not reveal. She remarked
that he had his face covered with a veil which concealed a
stain. Although he had led an edifying life, this priest had
not always observed strict temperance, and had sought too
eagerly the satisfactions of the table.


The saint was then conducted into the intermediate
Purgatory, destined for souls which had deserved less
rigorous chastisement. It had three distinct compartments;
one resembled an immense dungeon of ice, the cold of
which was indescribably intense; the second, on the
contrary, was like a huge caldron of boiling oil and pitch; the
third had the appearance of a pond of liquid metal
resembling molten gold or silver.

The upper Purgatory, which the saint does not describe, is
the temporary abode of souls which suffer little, except the
pain of loss, and approach the happy moment of their
deliverance.

Such, in substance, is the vision of Saint Frances relative to
Purgatory.


he following is an account of that
of Saint Magdalen de Pazzi, a
Florentine Carmelite, as it is related
in her Life by Father Cepari. It gives
more of a picture of Purgatory,
whilst the preceding vision but
traces its outlines.


Some time before her death, which
\took place in 1607, the servant of
God, Magdalen de Pazzi, being one
evening with several other Religious
■^^in the garden of the convent, was
;ravished in ecstasy, and saw
[Purgatory open before her. At the
*same time, as she made known
later, a voice invited her to visit all the prisons of Divine
Justice, and to see how truly worthy of compassion are the
souls detained there.


At this moment she was heard to say, "Yes I will go." She
consented to undertake this painful journey. In fact, she
walked for two hours round the garden, which was very
large, pausing from time to time. Each time she interrupted
her walk, she contemplated attentively the sufferings which
were shown to her. She was then seen to wring her hands in
compassion, her face became pale, her body bent under the
weight of suffering, in presence of the terrible spectacle with
which she was confronted.

She began to cry aloud in lamentation, "Mercy, my God,
mercy! Descend, O Precious Blood, and deliver these souls
from their prison. Poor souls! you suffer so cruelly, and yet
you are content and cheerful. The dungeons of the martyrs
in comparison with these were gardens of delight.
Nevertheless there are others still deeper. How happy should
I esteem myself were I not obliged to go down into them"

She did descend, however, for she was forced to continue
her way. But when she had taken a few steps, she stopped
terror-stricken, and, sighing deeply, she cried, "What!
Religious also in this dismal abode! Good God! how they are
tormented! Ah, Lord!" She does not explain the nature of
their sufferings; but the horror which she manifested in
contemplating them caused her to sigh at each step. She
passed from thence into less gloomy places. They were the
dungeons of simple souls, and of children in whom
ignorance and lack of reason extenuated many faults. Their
torments appeared to her much more endurable than those
of the others. Nothing but ice and fire were there. She
noticed that these souls had their angel guardians with
them, who fortified them greatly by their presence; but she
saw also demons whose dreadful forms increased their
sufferings.


Advancing a few paces, she saw souls still more unfortunate,
and she was heard to cry out, "Oh! how horrible is this place;
it is full of hideous demons and incredible torments! Who, O
my God, are the victims of these cruel tortures? Alas! they
are being pierced with sharp swords, they are being cut into
pieces." She was answered that they were the souls whose
conduct had been tainted with hypocrisy.

Advancing a little, she saw a great multitude of souls which
were bruised, as it were, and crushed under a press; and she
understood that they were those souls which had been
addicted to impatience and disobedience during life. Whilst
contemplating them, her looks, her sighs, her whole attitude
betokened compassion and terror.

A moment later her agitation increased, and she uttered a
dreadful cry. It was the dungeon of lies which now lay open
before her. After having attentively considered it, she cried
aloud, "Liars are confined in a place in the vicinity of Hell,
and their sufferings are exceedingly great. Molten lead is
poured into their mouths; I see them burn, and at the same
time tremble with cold."

She then went to the prison of those souls which had sinned
through weakness, and she was heard to exclaim, "Alas! I
had thought to find you among those who have sinned
through ignorance, but I am mistaken; you burn with an
intenser fire."

Farther on, she perceived souls which had been too much
attached to the goods of this world, and had sinned by
avarice.

"What blindness," said she, "thus eagerly to seek a
perishable fortune! Those whom formerly riches could not


sufficiently satiate, are here gorged with torments. They are
smelted like metal in the furnace."

From thence she passed into the place where those souls
were imprisoned which had formerly been stained with
impurity. She saw them in so filthy and pestilential a
dungeon that the sight produced nausea. She turned away
quickly from that loathsome spectacle. Seeing the ambitious
and the proud, she said, "Behold those who wished to shine
before men; now they are condemned to live in this frightful
obscurity."

Then she was shown those souls which had been guilty of
ingratitude towards God. They were a prey to unutterable
torments, and, as it were, drowned in a lake of molten lead,
for having by their ingratitude dried up the source of piety.

Finally, in a last dungeon, she was shown souls that had not
been given to any particular vice, but which, through lack of
proper vigilance over themselves, had committed all kinds
of trivial faults. She remarked that these souls had a share in
the chastisements of all vices, in a moderate degree,
because those faults committed only from time to time
rendered them less guilty than those committed through
habit.

After this last station the saint left the garden, begging God
never again to make her witness of so heartrending a
spectacle: she felt that she had not strength to endure it.

Her ecstasy still continued, and, conversing with Jesus, she
said to Him, "Tell me. Lord, what was Your design in
discovering to me those terrible prisons, of which I knew so
little, and comprehended still less? Ah! I now see; You
wished to give me the knowledge of Your infinite sanctity,
and to make me detest more and more the least stain of sin,
which is so abominable in Your eyes."


Chapter 7

Location of Purgatory - Saint Lidwina of Schiedam

Let us narrate a third vision relating
to the interior of Purgatory, that of
Saint Lidwina of Schiedam, who
died 11 April 1433, and whose
history, written by a contemporary
priest, has the most perfect
authenticity. This admirable virgin,
a true prodigy of Christian patience,
was a prey to all the pains of the
most cruel maladies for the period
of thirty-eight years. Her sufferings
rendering sleep impossible to her,
she passed long nights in prayer,
and then, frequently wrapt in spirit,
she was conducted by her angel
guardian into the mysterious
regions of Purgatory. There she saw dwellings, prisons, divers
dungeons, one more dismal than the other; she met, too,
souls that she knew, and she was shown their various
punishments.

It may be asked, "What was the nature of those ecstatic
journeys?" and it is difficult to explain; but we may conclude
from certain other circumstances that there was more reality
in them than we might be led to believe. The holy invalid
made similar journeys and pilgrimages upon earth, to the
holy places in Palestine, to the churches of Rome, and to
monasteries in the vicinity. She had an exact knowledge of
the places which she had thus traversed. A Religious of the
monastery of Saint Elizabeth, conversing one day with her.


and speaking of the cells, of the chapter room, of the
refectory, etc., of his community, she gave him as exact and
detailed a description of his house as though she had
passed her life there. The Religious having expressed his
surprise, "Know, Father," said she, "that I have been through
your monastery; I have visited the cells, I have seen the
angel guardians of all those who occupy them" One of the
journeys which our saint made to Purgatory occurred as
follows:

An unfortunate sinner, entangled in the corruptions of the
world, was finally converted.

Thanks to the prayers and urgent exhortations of Lidwina,
he made a sincere Confession of all his sins and received
absolution, but had little time to practice penance, for
shortly after he died of the plague.

The saint offered up many prayers and sufferings for his
soul; and some time afterwards, having been taken by her
angel guardian into Purgatory, she desired to know if he was
still there, and in what condition. "He is there," said her
angel, "and he suffers much. Would you be willing to endure
some pain in order to diminish his?" "Certainly," she replied,
"I am ready to suffer anything to assist him." Instantly her
angel conducted her into a place of frightful torture. "Is this,
then. Hell, my brother?" asked the holy maiden, seized with
horror. "No, sister," answered the angel, "but this part of
Purgatory is bordering upon Hell." Looking around on all
sides, she saw what resembled an immense prison,
surrounded with walls of a prodigious height, the blackness
of which, together with the monstrous stones, inspired her
with horror. Approaching this dismal enclosure, she heard a
confused noise of lamenting voices, cries of fury, chains,
instruments of torture, violent blows which the executioners
discharged upon their victims. This noise was such that all


the tumult of the world, in tempest or battle, could bear no
comparison to it. "What, then, is that horrible place?" asked
Saint Lidwina of her good angel. "Do you wish me to show it
to you?" "No, I beseech you," said she, recoiling with terror;
"the noise which I hear is so frightful that I can no longer
bear it; how, then, could I endure the sight of those horrors?"

Continuing her mysterious route, she saw an angel seated
sadly on the curb of a well. "Who is that angel?" she asked of
her guide. "It is," he replied, "the angel guardian of the
sinner in whose lot you are interested. His soul is in this well,
where it has a special Purgatory." At these words, Lidwina
cast an inquiring glance at her angel; she desired to see that
soul which was dear to her, and endeavor to release it from
that frightful pit. Her angel, who understood her, having
taken off the cover of the well, a cloud of flames, together
with the most plaintive cries, came forth.

"Do you recognize that voice?" said the angel to her. "Alas!
yes," answered the servant of God. "Do you desire to see
that soul?" he continued. On her replying in the affirmative,
he called him by his name; and immediately our virgin saw
appear at the mouth of the pit a spirit all on fire, resembling
incandescent metal, which said to her in a voice scarcely
audible, "O Lidwina, servant of God, who will give me to
contemplate the face of the Most High?" The sight of this
soul, a prey to the most terrible torment of fire, gave our
saint such a shock that the cincture which she wore around
her body was rent in twain; and, no longer able to endure
the sight, she awoke suddenly from her ecstasy.

The persons present, perceiving her fear, asked her its
cause. "Alas!" she replied, "how frightful are the prisons of
Purgatory! It was to assist the souls that I consented to
descend thither. Without this motive, if the whole world were


given to me, I would not undergo the terror which that
horrible spectacle inspired."

Some days later, the same angel whom she had seen so
dejected appeared to her with a joyful countenance; he told
her that the soul of his protege had left the pit and passed
into the ordinary Purgatory. This partial alleviation did not
suffice the charity of Lidwina; she continued to pray for the
poor patient, and to apply to him the merits of her
sufferings, until she saw the gates of Heaven opened to him.


Chapter 8


Location of Purgatory - Saint Gregory the Great - The
Deacon Paschasius and the Priest of Centumceiiae - Biessed
Stephen, a Franciscan, and the Reiigious in his Staii -
Theophiius Renaud and the Sick Woman of Doie

According to Saint Thomas and
other doctors, as we have previously
seen, Divine Justice, in particular
cases, assigns a special place upon
earth for certain souls. This opinion
we find confirmed by several facts,
among which we quote the two
mentioned by Saint Gregory the
Great in his Dialogues. (Dialog., 4,

40). "Whilst I was young and still a
layman, I heard told to the seniors,
who were well-informed men, how
the Deacon Paschasius appeared to Germain, Bishop of
Capua. Paschasius, Deacon of the Apostolic See, whose
books on the Holy Ghost are still extant, was a man of
eminent sanctity, devoted to works of charity, zealous for
the relief of the poor, and most forgetful of self. A dispute
having arisen concerning a pontifical election, Paschasius
separated himself from the Bishops, and joined the party
disapproved by the Episcopacy. Soon after this he died, with
a reputation for sanctity which God confirmed by a miracle:
an instantaneous cure was effected on the day of the funeral
by the simple touch of his dalmatic. Long after this,

Germain, Bishop of Capua, was sent by the physicians to the
baths of Saint Angelo. What was his astonishment to find the
same Deacon Paschasius employed in the most menial
offices at the baths! "I here expiate," said the apparition.


"the wrong I did by adhering to the wrong party. I beseech of
you, pray to the Lord for me: you will know that you have
been heard when you shall no longer see me in these
places."

Germain began to pray for the deceased, and after a few
days, returning to the baths, sought in vain for Paschasius,
who had disappeared. "He had but to undergo a temporary
punishment," says Saint Gregory, "because he had sinned
through ignorance, and not through malice."

The same Pope speaks of a priest of Centumcellae, now
Civita Vecchia, who also went to the warm baths. A man
presented himself to serve him in the most menial offices,
and for several days waited upon him with the most extreme
kindness, and even eagerness. The good priest, thinking
that he ought to reward so much attention, came the next
day with two loaves of blessed bread, and, after having
received the usual assistance of his kind servant, offered
him the loaves. The servant, with a sad countenance,
replied, "Why, Father, do you offer me this bread? I cannot
eat it. I, whom you see, was formerly the master of this
place, and, after my death, I was sent back to the condition
in which you see me for the expiation of my faults. If you
wish to do me good, ah! offer up for me the Bread of the
Eucharist."

At these words he suddenly disappeared, and he, whom the
priest had thought to be a man, showed by vanishing that
he was but a spirit.

For a whole week the good priest devoted himself to works
of penance, and each day offered up the Sacred Host in
favor of the departed one; then, having returned to the
same baths, he no longer found his faithful servant, and
concluded that he had been delivered.


It seems that Divine Justice sometimes condemns souls to
undergo their punishment in the same place where they
have committed their sins. We read in the chronicles of the
Friars Minors that Blessed Stephen, Religious of that Order,
had a singular devotion to the Blessed Sacrament, so that
he passed a part of the night in adoration before it. On one
occasion, being alone in the chapel, the darkness broken
only by the faint glimmer of the little lamp, he suddenly
perceived a Religious in one of the stalls. Stephen
approached him, and asked if he had permission to leave his
cell at such an hour. "I am a deceased Religious," he replied.
"Here, by a decree of God's Justice, must I undergo my
Purgatory, because here I sinned by tepidity and negligence
at the Divine Office. The Lord permits me to make known my
state to you, that you may assist me by your prayers." (Book
4, chap. 30; cf. Rossignoli, Merveilles du Purgatoire).

Touched with these words. Blessed Stephen immediately
knelt down to recite the De Profundis and other prayers; and
he noticed that whilst he prayed, the features of the
deceased bore an expression of joy. Several times, during
the following nights, he saw the apparition in the same
manner, but more happy each time as it approached the
term of its deliverance. Finally, after the last prayer of
Blessed Stephen, it arose all radiant from the stall,
expressed its gratitude to its liberator, and disappeared in
the brightness of glory.

The following incident is so marvelous, that we should
hesitate to reproduce it, says Canon Postel, had it not been
narrated by Father Theophilus Renaud, theologian and
controversialist, who relates it as an event which happened
in his time, and almost under his very eyes.

The Abbe Louvet adds that the Vicar General of the
Archbishop of Besancon, after having examined all the


details, recognized its truth. In the year 1629, at Dole, in
Franche-Compte, Hugette Roy, a woman of the middle
station in life, was confined to bed by inflammation of the
lungs, which endangered her life. The physician considering
it necessary to bleed her, in his awkwardness cut an artery
in the left arm, which speedily reduced her to the last
extremity. The following day, at dawn, she saw enter into her
chamber a young girl clad in white, of most modest
deportment, who asked her if she was willing to accept her
services and to be nursed by her. The sick person, delighted
with the offer, answered that nothing could give her greater
pleasure; and instantly the stranger lighted the fire,
approached Hugette, and placed her gently on the bed, and
then continued to watch by her and serve her like the most
devoted infirmarian. But, oh wonder! contact with the hands
of the unknown one was so beneficial that the dying person
found herself greatly relieved, and soon felt entirely cured.
Then she would absolutely know who the amiable stranger
was, and called her that she might question her; but she
with drew, saying that she would return in the evening. In
the meantime astonishment and curiosity were extreme
when the tidings of this sudden cure spread abroad, and
nothing was spoken of in Dole but this mysterious event.

When the unknown visitor returned in the evening, she said
to Hugette, without trying to disguise herself, "Know, my
dear niece, that I am your aunt, Leonardo Collin, who died
seventeen years ago, leaving you an inheritance from her
little property. Thanks to the Divine bounty, I am saved, and
it was the Blessed Virgin, to whom I had great devotion, who
obtained for me this happiness. Without her I was lost. When
death suddenly struck me, I was in the state of mortal sin,
but the merciful Virgin Mary obtained for me perfect
contrition, and thus saved me from eternal damnation. Since
that time I am in Purgatory, and our Lord permits me to
finish my expiation by serving you during fourteen days. At


the end of that time I shall be delivered from my pains if, on
your part, you have the charity to make three pilgrimages
for me to three holy sanctuaries of the Blessed Virgin."

Hugette, astonished, knew not what to think of this
language. Not being able to believe the reality of the
apparition, and fearing some snare of the evil spirit, she
consulted her confessor. Father Antony Roland, a Jesuit, who
advised her to threaten the unknown person with the
exorcisms of the Church. This menace did not disturb her;
she replied tranquilly, that she feared not the prayers of the
Church, "They have no power," she added, "but against the
demons and the damned; none whatever against
predestined souls, who are in the grace of God as I am."
Hugette was not yet convinced. "How," said she to the
young girl, "can you be my Aunt Leonarde? She was old and
worn, disagreeable and whimsical, whilst you are young,
gentle, and obliging?" "Ah, my dear niece," replied the
apparition, "my real body is in the tomb, where it will remain
until the resurrection; this one which you see is one
miraculously formed from the air to allow me to speak to
you, to serve you, and obtain your suffrages. As regards my
irritable disposition, seventeen years of terrible suffering
have taught me patience and meekness. Know, also, that in
Purgatory we are confirmed in grace, marked with the seal of
the elect, and therefore exempt from all vice."

After such explanation, incredulity was impossible. Hugette,
at once astounded and grateful, received with joy the
services rendered during the fourteen days designated. She
alone could see and hear the deceased, who came at certain
hours and then disappeared. As soon as her strength
permitted, she devoutly made the pilgrimages which were
asked of her.


At the end of fourteen days the apparition ceased. Leonarde
appeared for the last time to announce her deliverance; she
was then in a state of incomparable glory, brilliant as a star,
and her countenance bore an expression of the most perfect
beatitude. In her turn, she testified her gratitude to her
niece, promised to pray for her and her whole family, and
advised her ever to remember, amid the sufferings of this
life, the end of our existence, which is the salvation of our
soul.


Chapter 9


The Pains of Purgatory, their Nature, their Rigor - Doctrine of
Theoiogians - Beiiarmine - Saint Francis ofSaies - Fear and
Confidence

There is in Purgatory, as in Hell, a double pain - the pain of
loss and the pain of sense.

The pain of loss consists in being deprived for a time of the
sight of God, who is the Supreme Good, the beatific end for
which our souls are made, as our eyes are for the light. It is a
moral thirst which torments the soul. The pain of sense, or
sensible suffering, is the same as that which we experience
in our flesh. Its nature is not defined by faith, but it is the
common opinion of the Doctors that it consists in fire and
other species of suffering. The fire of Purgatory, say the
Fathers, is that of Hell, of which the rich glutton speaks. Quia
cruder in hac fJamma, "I suffer," he says, "cruelly in these
flames."

As regards the severity of these pains, since they are
inflicted by Infinite Justice, they are proportioned to the
nature, gravity, and number of sins committed. Each one
receives according to his works, each one must acquit
himself of the debts with which he sees himself charged
before God. Now these debts differ greatly in quality. Some,
which have accumulated during a long life, have reached
the ten thousand talents of the Gospel, that is to say,
millions and ten of millions; whilst others are reduced to a
few farthings, the trifling remainder of that which has not
been expiated on earth. It follows from this that the souls
undergo various kinds of sufferings, that there are
innumerable degrees of expiation in Purgatory, and that
some are incomparably more severe than others. However,


speaking in general, the Doctors
agree in saying that the pains are
nnost excruciating. The same fire,
says Saint Gregory, torments the
damned and purifies the elect. (In
Psalm 37). "Almost all theologians,"
says Bellarmine, "teach that the
reprobate and the souls in Purgatory
suffer the action of the same fire."

(De Purgat., i. 2, cap. 6).

It must be held as certain, writes the
same Bellarmine, that there is no
proportion between the sufferings of
this life and those of Purgatory. (De
Gemitu Columbae, lib. 2, cap. 9).

Saint Augustine declares precisely
the same in his commentary on
Psalm 31: Lord, he says, chastise me not in Thy wrath, and
reject me not with those to whom Thou hast said. Go into
eternal fire; but chastise me not in Thine anger: purify me
rather in such manner in this life that I need not to be
purified by fire in the next. Yes, I fear that fire which has
been enkindled for those who will be saved, it is true, but
yet so as by fire. (1 Cor. 3:15). They will be saved, no doubt,
after the trial of fire, but that trial will be terrible, that
torment will be more intolerable than all the most
excruciating sufferings in this world. Behold what Saint
Augustine says, and what Saint Gregory, Venerable Bede,
Saint Anselm, and Saint Bernard have said after him Saint
Thomas goes even further; he maintains that the least pain
of Purgatory surpasses all the sufferings of this life,
whatsoever they may be. Pain, says Blessed Peter Lefevre, is
deeper and more acute when it directly attacks the soul and
the mind than when it reaches them only through the
medium of the body. The mortal body, and the senses


themselves, absorb and intercept a part of the physical, and
even of moral pain. (Sentim. du B. Lefevre sur la Purg., Mess,
du S. Coeur, Nov. 1873).

The author of the Imitation explains this doctrine by a
practical and striking sentence. Speaking in general of the
sufferings of the other life: There, he says, one hour of
torment will be more terrible than a hundred years of
rigorous penance done here. (lib. 1, chap. 24).

To prove this doctrine, it is affirmed that all the souls in
Purgatory suffer the pain of loss. Now this pain surpasses the
keenest suffering. But to speak of the pain of sense alone,
we know what a terrible thing fire is, how feeble soever the
flame which we enkindle in our houses, and what pain is
caused by the slightest burn; how much more terrible must
be that fire which is fed neither with wood nor oil, and which
can never be extinguished! Enkindled by the breath of God
to be the instrument of His Justice, it seizes upon souls and
torments them with incomparable activity. That which we
have already said, and what we have still to say, is well
qualified to inspire us with that salutary fear recommended
to us by Jesus Christ. But, lest certain readers, forgetful of
the Christian confidence which must temper our fears,
should give themselves up to excessive fear, let us modify
the preceding doctrine by that of another Doctor of the
Church, Saint Francis of Sales, who presents the sufferings of
Purgatory soothed by the consolations which accompany
them.

We may, says this holy and amiable director of souls, draw
from the thought of Purgatory more consolation than
apprehension. The greater part of those who dread
Purgatory so much think more of their own interests than of
the interests of God's glory; this proceeds from the fact that
they think only of the sufferings without considering the


peace and happiness which are there enjoyed by the holy
souls. It is true that the torments are so great that the most
acute sufferings of this life bear no comparison to them; but
the interior satisfaction which is there enjoyed is such that
no prosperity nor contentment upon earth can equal it.

The souls are in a continual union with God, They are
perfectly resigned to His Will, or rather their will is so
transformed into that of God that they cannot will but what
God wills; so that if Paradise were to be opened to them,
they would precipitate themselves into Hell rather than
appear before God with the stains with which they see
themselves disfigured. They purify them selves willingly and
lovingly, because such is the Divine good pleasure.

They wish to be there in the state
wherein God pleases, and as long as
it shall please Him. They cannot sin,
nor can they experience the least
movement of impatience, nor
commit the slightest imperfection.

They love God more than they love
themselves, and more than all
things else; they love Him with a
perfect, pure, and disinterested
love. They are consoled by angels.

They are assured of their eternal
salvation, and filled with a hope
that can never be disappointed in
its expectations. Their bitterest anguish is soothed by a
certain profound peace. It is a species of Hell as regards the
suffering; it is a Paradise as regards the delight infused into
their hearts by charity - Charity, stronger than death and
more powerful than Hell; Charity, whose lamps are all fire
and flame. (Canticle 8). "Happy state!" continues the holy
Bishop, "more desirable than appalling, since its flames are


flames of love and charity." (Esprit de Saint Frangois de
Sales, chap. 9, p. 16).

Such are the teachings of the doctors, from which it follows
that if the pains of Purgatory are rigorous, they are not
without consolation. When imposing His cross upon us in
this life, God pours upon it the unction of His grace, and in
purifying the souls in Purgatory like gold in the crucible. He
tempers their flames by ineffable consolations. We must not
lose sight of this consoling element, this bright side of the
often gloomy picture which we are going to examine.


Chapter 10


Pains of Purgatory - The Pain of Loss - Saint Catherine of
Genoa - Saint Teresa - Father Nieremberg

After having heard the theologians
and doctors of the Church, let us
listen to doctors of another kind;
they are saints who speak of the
sufferings of the other life, and who
relate what God has made known to
them by supernatural
communication. Saint Catherine of
Genoa in her treatise on Purgatory
says, "The souls endure a torment
so extreme that no tongue can
describe it, nor could the
understanding conceive the least
notion of it, if God did not make it
known by a particular grace." (Chap. 2, 8). "No tongue," she
adds, "can express, no mind form any idea of what Purgatory
is. As to the suffering, it is equal to that of Hell."

ISaint Teresa, in the Castie of the
\Soui, speaking of the pain of loss,
expresses herself thus: "The pain of
loss, or the privation of the sight of
God, exceeds all the most
excruciating sufferings we can
imagine, because the souls urged
on towards God as to the center of
their aspiration, are continually
repulsed by His Justice. Picture to
lyourself a shipwrecked mariner who.


after having long battled with the waves, comes at last
within reach of the shore, only to find himself constantly
thrust back by an invisible hand. What torturing agonies! Yet
those of the souls in Purgatory are a thousand times
greater." (Part 6, chap. 1 1).

Father Nieremberg, of the Company of Jesus, who died in the
odor of sanctity at Madrid in 1658, relates a fact that
occurred at Treves, and which was recognized, says Father
Rossignoli (Merveilles, 69), by the Vicar General of the
diocese as possessing all the characteristics of truth.

On the Feast of All Saints, a young girl of rare piety saw
appear before her a lady of her acquaintance who had died
some time previous. The apparition was clad in white, with a
veil of the same color on her head, and holding in her hand
a long rosary, a token of the tender devotion she had always
professed towards the Queen of Heaven. She implored the
charity of her pious friend, saying that she had made a vow
to have three Masses celebrated at the altar of the Blessed
Virgin, and that, not having been able to accomplish her
vow, this debt added to her sufferings. She then begged her
to pay it in her place. The young person willingly granted
the alms asked of her, and when the three Masses had been
celebrated, the deceased again appeared, expressing her
joy and gratitude. She ever continued to appear each month
of November, and almost always in the church. Her friend
saw her there in adoration before the Blessed Sacrament,
overwhelmed with an awe of which nothing can give an
idea; not yet being able to see God face to face, she seemed
to wish to indemnify herself by contemplating Him at least
under the Eucharistic species. During the Holy Sacrifice of
the Mass, at the moment of the elevation, her face became
so radiant that she might have been taken for a seraph
descended from Heaven. The young girl, filled with


admiration, declared that she had never seen anything so
beautiful.

Meanwhile time passed, and, notwithstanding the Masses
and prayers offered for her, that holy soul remained in her
exile, far from the Eternal Tabernacles. On December 3,

Feast of Saint Francis Xavier, her protectress going to
receive Communion at the Church of the Jesuits, the
apparition accompanied her to the Holy Table, and then
remained at her side during the whole time of thanksgiving,
as though to participate in the happiness of Holy
Communion and enjoy the presence of Jesus Christ.

On December 8, Feast of the Immaculate Conception, she
again returned, but so brilliant that her friend could not look
at her. She visibly approached the term of her expiation.
Finally, on December 10, during Holy Mass, she appeared in
a still more wonderful state. After making a profound
genuflexion before the altar, she thanked the pious girl for
her prayers, and rose to Heaven in company with her
guardian angel.

Some time previous, this holy soul had made known that she
suffered nothing more than the pain of loss, or the privation
of God; but she added that that privation caused her
intolerable torture. This revelation justifies the words of
Saint Chrysostom in his 47th Homily: "Imagine," he says, "all
the torments of the world, you will not find one equal to the
privation of the beatific vision of God. "

In fact, the torture of the pain of loss, of which we now treat,
is, according to all the saints and all the doctors, much more
acute than the pain of sense. It is true that, in the present
life, we cannot understand this, because we have too little
knowledge of the Sovereign Good for which we are created;
but, in the other life, that ineffable Good seems to souls


what bread is to a man famished with hunger, or fresh water
to one dying with thirst, like health to a sick person tortured
by long suffering; it excites the most ardent desires, which
torment without being able to satisfy them.


Chapter 11


The Pain of Sense - Torment of Fire and Torment ofCoid -
Venerabie Bede and Dritheim

If the pain of loss makes but a
feeble impression upon us, it is far
different with the pain of sense; the
torment of fire, the torture of a
sharp and intense cold, affrights our
sensibility. This is why Divine Mercy,
wishing to excite a holy fear in our
souls, speaks but little of the pain of
loss, but we are continually shown
the fire, the cold, and other
torments, which constitute the pain
of sense. This is what we see in the
Gospel, and in particular
revelations, by which God is pleased to manifest to His
servants from time to time the mysteries of the other life. Let
us mention one of these revelations. In the first place, let us
see what the pious and learned Cardinal Bellarmine quotes
from the Venerable Bede. England has been witness in our
own days, writes Bede, to a singular prodigy, which may be
compared to the miracles of the first ages of the Church. To
excite the living to fear the death of the soul, God permitted
that a man, after having slept the sleep of death, should
return to life and reveal what he had seen in the other world.
The frightful, unheard-of details which he relates, and his life
of extraordinary penance, which corresponded with his
words, produced a lively impression throughout the country.

I will now resume the principal circumstances of this history.


There was in Northumberland a man named Drithelm, who,
with his family, led a most Christian life. He fell sick, and his
malady increasing day by day, he was soon reduced to
extremity, and died, to the great desolation and grief of his
wife and children. The latter passed the night in tears by the
remains, but the following day, before his interment, they
saw him suddenly return to life, arise, and place himself in a
sitting posture. At this sight they were seized with such fear
that they all took to flight, with the exception of the wife,
who, trembling, remained alone with her risen husband. He
reassured her immediately: "Fear not," he said; "it is God
who restores to me my life; He wishes to show in my person
a man raised from the dead. I have yet long to live upon
earth, but my new life will be very different from the one I
led heretofore." Then he arose full of health, went straight to
the chapel or church of the place, and there remained long
in prayer. He returned home only to take leave of those who
had been dear to him upon earth, to whom he declared that
he would live only to prepare himself for death, and advised
them to do likewise. Then, having divided his property into
three parts, he gave one to his children, another to his wife,
and reserved the third part to give in alms. When he had
distributed all to the poor, and had reduced himself to
extreme indigence, he went and knocked at the door of a
monastery, and begged the Abbot to receive him as a
penitent Religious, who would be a servant to all the others.

The Abbot gave him a retired cell, which he occupied for the
rest of his life. Three exercises divided his time - prayer, the
hardest labor, and extraordinary penances. The most
rigorous fasts he accounted as nothing. In winter he was
seen to plunge himself into frozen water, and remain there
for hours and hours in prayer, whilst he recited the whole
Psalter of David.


The mortified life of Drithelm, his downcast eyes, even his
features, indicated a soul struck with fear of the judgments
of God. He kept a perpetual silence, but on being pressed to
relate, for the edification of others, what God had
manifested to him after his death, he thus described his
vision:

"On leaving my body, I was received by a benevolent
person, who took me under his guidance. His face was
brilliant, and he appeared surrounded with light. He arrived
at a large deep valley of immense extent, all fire on one
side, all ice and snow on the other; on the one hand braziers
and caldrons of flame, on the other the most intense cold
and the blast of a glacial wind.

"This mysterious valley was filled with innumerable souls,
which, tossed as by a furious tempest, threw themselves
from one side to the other. When they could no longer
endure the violence of the fire, they sought relief amidst the
ice and snow; but finding only a new torture, they cast
themselves again into the midst of the flames.

"I contemplated in a stupor these continual vicissitudes of
horrible torments, and as far as my sight could extend, I saw
nothing but a multitude of souls which suffered without ever
having repose. Their very aspect inspired me with fear. I
thought at first that I saw Hell; but my guide, who walked
before me, turned to me and said, 'No; this is not, as you
think, the Hell of the reprobate. Do you know,' he continued,
'what place this is?' 'No,' I answered. 'Know,' he resumed,
'that this valley, where you see so much fire and so much
ice, is the place where the souls of those are punished who,
during life, have neglected to confess their sins, and who
have deferred their conversion to the end. Thanks to a
special mercy of God, they have had the happiness of
sincerely repenting before death, of confessing and


detesting their sins. This is why they are not damned, and
on the great day of judgment will enter into the Kingdom of
Heaven. Several of them will obtain their deliverance before
that time, by the merits of prayers, alms, and fasts, offered
in their favor by the living, and especially in virtue of the
Holy Sacrifice of the Mass offered for their relief.'"

Such was the recital of Drithelm. When asked why he so
rudely treated his body, why he plunged himself into frozen
water, he replied that he had seen other torments, and cold
of another kind.

If his brethren expressed astonishment that he could endure
these extraordinary austerities, "I have seen," said he,
"penances still more astonishing." To the day when it
pleased God to call him to Himself, he ceased not to afflict
his body, and although broken down with age, he would
accept no alleviation.

This event produced a deep sensation in England; a great
number of sinners, touched by the words of Drithelm, and
struck by the austerity of his life, became sincerely
converted.

This fact, adds Bellarmine, appears to me of incontestable
truth, since, besides being conformable to the words of Holy
Scripture, Let him pass from the snow waters to excessive
heat (Job 29:19), Venerable Bede relates it as a recent and
well-known event. More than this, it was followed by the
conversion of a great number of sinners, the sign of the work
of God, who is accustomed to work prodigies in order to
produce fruit in souls.


Chapter 12


Pains of Purgatory - Bellarmine and Saint Christine the
Admirabie

The learned and pious Cardinal then
proceeds to relate the history of
Saint Christine the Admirable, who
lived in Belgium at the close of the
twelfth century, and whose body is
preserved today in Saint Trond, in
the church of the Redemptorist
Fathers. The Life of this illustrious
virgin was, he says, written by
Thomas de Cantimpre, a Religious of
the Order of Saint Dominic, an
author worthy of credit and
contemporary with the saint.

Cardinal James de Vitry, in the

preface to the Life of Maria d'Ognies, speaks of a great
number of holy women and illustrious virgins; but the one
whom he admires above all others is Saint Christine, of
whom he relates the most wonderful deeds.

This servant of God, having passed the first years of her life
in humility and patience, died at the age of thirty-two. When
she was about to be buried, and the body was already in the
church resting in an open coffin, according to the custom of
the time, she arose full of vigor, stupefying with amazement
the whole city of Saint Trond, which had witnessed this
wonder. The astonishment increased when they learned from
her own mouth what had happened to her after her death.
Let us hear her own account of it.


"As soon," said she, "as my soul was separated from my
body, it was received by angels, who conducted it to a very
gloomy place, entirely filled with souls. The torments which
they there endured appeared to me so excessive, that it is
impossible for me to give any idea of their rigor. I saw among
them many of my acquaintances, and, deeply touched by
their sad condition, I asked what place it was, for I believed
it to be Hell. My guide answered me that it was Purgatory,
where sinners were punished who, before death, had
repented of their faults, but had not made worthy
satisfaction to God. From thence I was conducted into Hell,
and there also I recognized among the reprobates some
whom I had formerly known.

"The angels then transported me into Heaven, even to the
throne of the Divine Majesty. The Lord regarded me with a
favorable eye, and I experienced an extreme joy, because I
thought to obtain the grace of dwelling eternally with Him.
But my Heavenly Father, seeing what passed in my heart,
said to me these words: 'Assuredly, My dear daughter, you
will one day be with Me. Now, however, I allow you to
choose, either to remain with Me henceforth from this time,
or to return again to earth to accomplish a mission of charity
and suffering. In order to deliver from the flames of
Purgatory those souls which have inspired you with so much
compassion, you shall suffer for them upon earth; you shall
endure great torments, without, however, dying from their
effects. And not only will you relieve the departed, but the
example which you will give to the living, and your life of
continual suffering, will lead sinners to be converted and to
expiate their crimes. After having ended this new life, you
shall return here laden with merits.'

"At these words, seeing the great advantages offered to me
for souls, I replied, without hesitation, that I would return to
life, and I arose at that same instant. It is for this sole object.


the relief of the departed and the conversion of sinners, that
I have returned to this world. Therefore be not astonished at
the penances that I shall practice, nor at the life that you
will see me lead from henceforward. It will be so
extraordinary that nothing like to it has ever been seen."

All this was related by the saint herself; let us now see what
the biographer adds in the different chapters of her Life.
"Christine immediately commenced the work for which she
had been sent by God. Renouncing all the comforts of life,
and reduced to extreme destitution, she lived without house
or fire, more miserable than the birds of the air, which have
a nest to shelter them. Not content with these privations,
she eagerly sought all that could cause her suffering. She
threw herself into burning furnaces, and there suffering so
great torture that she could no longer bear it, she uttered
the most frightful cries. She remained for a long time in the
fire, and yet, on coming forth, no sign of burning was found
upon her body. In winter, when the Meuse was frozen, she
plunged herself into it, staying in that cold river not only
hours and days, but for entire weeks, all the while praying to
God and imploring His mercy. Sometimes, whilst praying in
the icy waters, she allowed herself to be carried by the
current down to a mill, the wheel of which whirled her round
in a manner frightful to behold, yet without breaking or
dislocating one of her bones. On other occasions, followed
by dogs, which bit and tore her flesh, she ran, enticing them
into the thickets and among the thorns, until she was
covered with blood; nevertheless, on her return, no wound
or scar was to be seen."

Such are the works of admirable penance described by the
author of the Life of Saint Christine. This writer was a Bishop,
a suffragan of the Archbishop of Cambray; "and we have,"
says Bellarmine, "reason for believing his testimony, since
he has for guarantee another grave author, James de Vitry,


Bishop and Cardinal, and because
he relates what happened in his
own tinne, and even in the province
where he lived. Besides, the
sufferings of this adnnirable virgin
were not hidden. Everyone could
see that she was in the midst of the
ames without being consumed,
and covered with wounds, every
race of which disappeared a few
moments afterwards. But more than
this was the marvellous life she led

_ for forty-two years after she was

^raised from the dead, God clearly
^showing that the wonders wrought
'in her were by virtue from on high.
The striking conversions which she
effected, and the evident miracles which occurred after her
death, manifestly proved the finger of God, and the truth of
that which, after her resurrection, she had revealed
concerning the other life."


Thus, argues Bellarmine, "God willed to silence those
libertines who make open profession of believing in nothing,
and who have the audacity to ask in scorn, 'Who has
returned from the other world? Who has ever seen the
torments of Hell or Purgatory?' Behold two witnesses. They
assure us that they have seen them, and that they are
dreadful. What follows, then, if not that the incredulous are
inexcusable, and that those who believe and nevertheless
neglect to do penance are still more to be condemned?"


Chapter 13


Pains of Purgatory - Brother Antony Pereyra - The Venerable
Angela Tholonnei

To the two preceding facts we shall add a third, taken from
the Annals of the Company of Jesus. We speak of a prodigy
which was wrought in the person of Antony Pereyra, Brother
Coadjutor of that Company, who died in the odor of sanctity
at the College of Evora, in Portugal, 1 August 1645. Forty-six
years previous, in 1599, five years after his entrance into the
novitiate, this brother was attacked by a mortal malady on
the island of Saint Michael, one of the Azores. A few
moments after he had received the Last Sacraments, in
presence of the whole community, who assisted him in his
agony, he appeared to breathe forth his soul, and soon
became as cold as a corpse. The appearance, though almost
imperceptible, of a slight beating of the heart, alone
prevented them from interring him immediately. He was
therefore left for three entire days upon his bed, and his
body already gave evident signs of decomposition, when
suddenly, on the fourth day, he opened his eyes, breathed,
and spoke.

He was then obliged by obedience to relate to his superior.
Father Louis Pinheyro, all that had passed within him since
the last terrible moments of his agony. We here give an
abridged account of it, as written by his own hand.

"I saw first," he says, "from my deathbed my Father, Saint
Ignatius, accompanied by several of our Fathers from
Heaven, who came to visit his sick children, seeking those
whom he thought worthy to be offered by him and his
companions to Our Lord. When he drew near to me I
believed for a moment that he would take me, and my heart


thrilled with joy; but soon he pointed out to me that of which
I must correct myself before obtaining so great a happiness."

Then, nevertheless, by a mysterious disposition of Divine
Providence, the soul of Brother Pereyra separated itself
momentarily from his body, and immediately a hideous
troupe of demons rushing towards him filled him with terror.
At the same moment his guardian angel and Saint Antony of
Padua, his countryman and patron, descended from Heaven,
put to flight his enemies, and invited him to accompany
them to take a glimpse of, and taste for a moment, the joys
and sufferings of eternity. "They led me then by turns," he
adds, "towards a place of delights, where they showed me a
crown of incomparable glory, but which I had not as yet
merited; then to the brink of an abyss, where I saw the
reprobate souls fall into the eternal fire, crushed like the
grains of wheat cast upon a millstone that turns without
intermission. The infernal gulf was like one of those lime
kilns where, at times, the flames are, as it were, stifled by
the mass of materials thrown into them, but which feeds the
fire that it may burst forth with more terrible violence." Led
from thence to the tribunal of the Sovereign Judge, Antony
Pereyra heard himself condemned to the fire of Purgatory;
and nothing, he assures us, can give an idea of what is
suffered there, nor of the state of agony to which the souls
are reduced by the desire and the delay of the enjoyment of
God and of His sacred presence.

When, by the command of God, his soul had been reunited
with his body, the renewed tortures of his malady for six
entire months, with the additional torture of fire and iron,
caused the flesh (already incurably tainted with the
corruption of his first death) to fall in pieces; yet not this, nor
the frightful penances to which he unceasingly delivered
himself, so far as obedience permitted, during the forty-six
years of his new life, could appease his thirst for suffering


and expiation. "All this," he said, "is nothing in comparison
with what the justice and infinite mercy of God has caused
me not only to witness, but also to endure."

In fine, as an authentic seal upon so many marvels. Brother
Pereyra discovered to his superior in detail the secret
designs of Providence regarding the future restoration of the
kingdom of Portugal, more than half a century before it
happened. But we may add without fear that the highest
guarantee of all these prodigies was the astonishing degree
of sanctity to which Brother Pereyra ceased not to elevate
himself from day to day.

Let us relate a similar instance which confirms in every point
that which we have just read. We find it in the Life of the
venerable servant of God, Angela Tholomei, a Dominican
nun. She was raised from the dead by her own brother, and
gave a testimony of the rigor of God's judgments exactly
conformable to the precedent.

Blessed John Baptist Tholomei, whose rare virtues and the
gift of miracles have placed on our altars, had a sister,
Angela Tholomei, the heroism of whose virtue has also been
recognized by the Church. She fell dangerously sick, and her
holy brother by earnest prayer besought her cure. Our Lord
replied, as He did formerly to the sister of Lazarus, that He
would not cure Angela, but that He would do more; He would
raise her from the dead, for the glory of God and the good of
souls. She died, recommending herself to the prayers of her
holy brother.

Whilst she was being carried to the tomb. Blessed John
Baptist, in obedience, no doubt, to an inspiration of the Holy
Spirit, approached the coffin, and, in the name of our Lord
Jesus Christ, commanded his sister to come forth.


Immediately she awoke as from a profound slumber, and
returned to life.

That holy soul seemed struck with terror, and related such
things concerning the severity of God's judgments as make
us shudder. She commenced, at the same time, to lead a life
which proved the truth of her words. Her penance was
frightful. Not content with the ordinary practices of the
saints, such as fasting, watching, hair shirts, and bloody
disciplines, she went so far as to cast herself into flames,
and to roll herself therein until her flesh was entirely burnt.
Her macerated body became an object of pity and of horror.
She was censured and accused of destroying, by her excess,
the idea of true Christian penance. She continued,
nevertheless, and contented herself with replying, "If you
knew the rigors of the judgments of God, you would not
speak thus. What are my trifling penances compared with
the torments reserved in the other life for those infidelities
which we so easily permit ourselves in this world? What are
they? What are they? Would that I could do a hundred times
more!"

There is no question here, as we see, of the tortures to which
great sinners converted before death are subjected, but of
the chastisements which God inflicts upon a fervent
Religious for the slightest faults.


Chapter 14


Pains of Purgatory - Apparition of Foiigno - The Dominican
Reiigious of Zamora

The same rigor reveals itself in a more recent apparition,
where a Religious who died after an exemplary life makes
known her sufferings in a manner calculated to inspire all
souls with terror. The event took place on 16 November
1859 at Foligno, near Assisi, in Italy. It made a great noise in
the country, and besides the visible mark which was seen,
an inquiry made in due form by competent authority
establishes it as an incontestable fact.

There was at the convent of Franciscan Tertiaries in Foligno,
a sister named Teresa Gesta, who had been for many years
mistress of novices, and who at the same time had charge of
the sacristy of the community. She was born at Bastia, in
Corsica, in 1797, and entered the monastery in the year
1826.

Sister Teresa was a model of fervor and charity. We need not
be astonished, said her director, if God glorifies her by some
prodigy after her death.

She died suddenly, 4 November 1859, of a stroke of
apoplexy.

Twelve days later, on 16 November, a sister named Anna
Felicia, who succeeded her in office, went to the sacristy and
was about to enter, when she heard moans which appeared
to come from the interior of the room. Somewhat afraid, she
hastened to open the door; there was no one. Again she
heard moans, and so distinctly that, notwithstanding her
ordinary courage, she felt herself overpowered by fear.


"Jesus! Mary!" she cried, "what can that be?" She had not
finished speaking when she heard a plaintive voice,
accompanied with a painful sigh, "Oh! my God, how I suffer!
Oh! Dio, che peno tanto!" The sister, stupefied, immediately
recognized the voice of poor Sister Teresa. Then the room
was filled with a thick smoke, and the spirit of Sister Teresa
appeared, moving towards the door, and gliding along by
the wall. Having reached the door, she cried aloud, "Behold
a proof of the mercy of God. " Saying these words, she struck
the upper panel of the door, and there left the print of her
right hand, burnt in the wood as with a red-hot iron. She
then disappeared.

Sister Anna Felicia was left half dead with fright. She burst
forth into loud cries for help. One of her companions ran,
then a second, and finally the whole community. They
pressed around her, astonished to find a strong odor of burnt
wood. Sister Anna Felicia told what had occurred, and
showed them the terrible impression on the door. They
instantly recognized the hand of Sister Teresa, which had
been remarkably small. Terrified, they took to flight and ran
to the choir, where they passed the night in prayer and
penance for the departed, and the following morning all
received Holy Communion for the repose of her soul. The
news spread outside the convent walls, and many
communities in the city united their prayers with those of
the Franciscans. On the third day, 18 November, Sister Anna
Felicia, on going in the evening to her cell, heard herself
called by her name, and recognized perfectly the voice of
Sister Teresa. At the same instant a globe or brilliant light
appeared before her, illuminating her cell with the
brightness of daylight. She then heard Sister Teresa
pronounce these words in a joyful and triumphant voice: "I
died on a Friday, the day of the Passion, and behold, on a
Friday, I enter into eternal glory! Be strong to bear the cross,
be courageous to suffer, love poverty." Then adding.


affectionately, "Adieu, adieu, adieu!" she became
transfigured, and like a light, white, and dazzling cloud, rose
towards Heaven and disappeared.

During the investigation which was held immediately, 23
November, in the presence of a large number of witnesses,
the tomb of Sister Teresa was opened, and the impression
upon the door was found to correspond exactly with the
hand of the deceased. "The door, with the burnt print of the
hand," adds Monsignor Segur, "is preserved with great
veneration in the convent. The Mother Abbess, witness of
the fact, was pleased to show it to me herself."

Wishing to assure myself of the perfect exactitude of these
details related by Monsignor Segur, I wrote to the Bishop of
Foligno. He replied by giving me a circumstantial account,
perfectly according with the above, and accompanied by a
facsimile of the miraculous mark. This narrative explains the
cause of the terrible expiation to which Sister Teresa was
subjected. After saying, "Ah! how much I suffer! Oh! Dio, che
peno tanto!" she added that it was for having, in the
exercise of her office of Sacristan, transgressed in some
points the strict poverty prescribed by the Rule.

Thus we see Divine Justice punishes most severely the
slightest faults. It may here be asked why the apparition,
when making the mysterious mark on the door, called it a
proof of the mercy of God. It is because, in giving us a
warning of this kind, God shows us a great mercy. He urges
us, in the most efficacious manner, to assist the poor
suffering souls, and to be vigilant in our own regard.

Whilst speaking of this subject, we may relate a similar
instance which happened in Spain, and which caused great
rumors in that country. Ferdinand of Castile thus relates it in
his History of Saint Dominic. (Malvenda, Annal. Ord.


Praedic.). A Dominican Religious led a holy life in his
convent at Zamora, a city of the kingdom of Leon. He was
united in the bonds of a pious friendship with a Franciscan
brother like himself, a man of great virtue. One day, when
conversing together on the subject of eternity, they
mutually promised that, if it pleased God, the first who died
should appear to the other to give him some salutary advice.
The Friar Minor died first; and one day, whilst his friend, the
son of Saint Dominic, was preparing the refectory, he
appeared to him. After saluting him with respect and
affection, he told him that he was among the elect, but that
before he could be admitted to the enjoyment of eternal
happiness, there remained much to be suffered for an
infinity of small faults of which he had not sufficiently
repented during his life. "Nothing on earth," he added, "can
give an idea of the torments which I endure, and of which
God permits me to give you a visible proof." Saying these
words, he placed his right hand upon the table of the
refectory, and the mark remained impressed upon the
charred wood as though it had been applied with a red-hot
iron.

Such was the lesson which the fervent deceased Franciscan
gave to his living friend. It was of profit not only to him, but
to all those who came to see the burnt mark, so profoundly
significant; for this table became an object of piety which
people came from all parts to look upon. "It is still to be seen
at Zamora," says Father Rossignoli (Mervelles, 28), "at the
time at which I write; to protect it the spot has been covered
with a sheet of copper." It was preserved until the end of the
last century. Since then it has been destroyed, during the
revolutions, like so many other religious memorials.


Chapter 15


Pains of Purgatory - The Brother of Saint Magdaien de Pazzi -
Stanisiaus Chocosca - Biessed Catherine de Racconigi

Saint Magdalen de Pazzi, in her
celebrated vision where the
different prisons of Purgatory were
shown to her, saw the soul of her
brother, who had died after having
led a most fervent Christian life.

Nevertheless, this soul was detained
in suffering for certain faults, which
it had not sufficiently expiated upon
earth. These, says the saint, are the
most intolerable sufferings, and yet
they are endured with joy. Ah! why
are they not understood by those
who lack the courage to bear their
cross here below? Struck with this
frightful spectacle which she had
just contemplated, she ran to her Prioress, and casting
herself upon her knees, she cried out, "O my dear Mother,
how terrible are the pangs of Purgatory! Never could I have
believed it, had not God manifested it to me. And,
nevertheless, I cannot call them cruel; rather are they
advantageous, since they lead to the ineffable bliss of
Paradise." To impress this more and more upon our minds, it
has pleased God to give certain holy persons a small share
in the pains of expiation, like a drop of the bitter cup which
the poor souls have to drink, a spark of the fire which
consumes them.


The historian Bzovius, in his History of Poland, under the
date 1598, relates a miraculous event which happened to
the Venerable Stanislaus Chocosca, one of the luminaries of
the Order of Saint Dominic in Poland. (Cf. Rossign., Merv.,

67). One day, whilst this Religious, full of charity for the
departed, recited the Rosary, he saw appear near him a soul
all enveloped in flames. As she besought him to have pity on
her, and to alleviate the intolerable sufferings which the fire
of Divine Justice caused her to endure, the holy man asked
her if this fire was more painful than that of earth? "Ah!" she
cried, "all the fires of earth compared to that of Purgatory
are like a refreshing breeze" (Ignes alii levis aurce locum
tenent si cum ardore meo comparentur). Stanislaus could
scarcely believe it. "I wish," he said, "to have a proof. If God
will permit, for your relief, and for the good of my soul, I
consent to suffer a part of your pains." "Alas! you could not
do this. Know that no human being could endure such
torment and live. However, God will permit you to feel it in a
light degree. Stretch forth your hand." Chocosca extended
his hand, and the departed let fall a drop of sweat, or at
least of a liquid which resembled it. At the same instant the
Religious uttered a piercing cry and fell fainting to the
ground, so frightfully intense was the pain. His brethren ran
to the spot and hastened to give him the assistance which
his condition required. When restored to consciousness, he
related the terrible event which had occurred, and of which
they had a visible proof. "Ah! my dear Fathers," he
continued, "if we knew the severity of the Divine
chastisements, we should never commit sin, nor should we
cease to do penance in this life, in order to avoid expiation
in the next."

Stanislaus was confined to his bed from that moment. He
lived one year longer in the most cruel suffering caused by
his terrible wound; then, for the last time, exhorting his
brethren to remember the rigors of Divine Justice, he


peacefully slept in the Lord. The historian adds that this
example reanimated fervor in all the monasteries of that
province.


We read of a similar fact in the Life
of Blessed Catherine de Racconigi.
(Diario Dominicano, Sept. 4; cf.
Rossig., Merv., 63). One day, when
suffering so intensely as to need the
assistance of her sisters in religion,
she thought of the souls in
Purgatory, and, to temper the heat
of their flames, she offered to God
'^he burning heat of her fever. At
that moment, being rapt in ecstasy,
she was conducted in spirit into the
place of expiation, where she saw
;he flames and braziers in which the
Isouls are purified in great torture,
“whilst contemplating, full of
compassion, this piteous spectacle, she heard a voice which
said to her, "Catherine, in order that you may procure most
efficaciously the deliverance of these souls, you shall
participate, in some manner, in their torments." At that same
moment a spark detached itself from the fire and settled
upon her left cheek. The sisters present saw the spark
distinctly, and saw also with horror that the face of the sick
person was frightfully swollen. She lived several days in this
state, and, as Blessed Catherine told her sisters, the
suffering caused by that simple spark far surpassed all that
she had previously endured in the most painful maladies.
Until that time Catherine had always devoted herself with
charity to the relief of the souls in Purgatory, but from
thenceforward she redoubled her fervor and austerities to
hasten their deliverance, because she knew by experience
the great need in which they stood of her assistance.


Chapter 16


Pains of Purgatory - Saint Antoninus and the Sick Reiigious -
Father Rossignoii on a Quarter of an Hour in Purgatory -
Brother Angeiicus

That which shows still more the rigor of Purgatory is that the
shortest period of time there appears to be of very long
duration. Everyone knows that days of enjoyment pass
quickly and appear short, whilst the time passed in suffering
we find very long. Oh, how slowly pass the hours of the night
for the poor sick, who spend them in sleeplessness and pain.
We may say that the more intense the pain the longer
appears the shortest duration of time. This rule furnishes us
with a new means of estimating the sufferings of Purgatory.

We find in the Annais of the Friar Minors, under the year
1285, a fact which is also related by Saint Antoninus in his
Summa. (Part 4, § 4). A religious man suffering for a long
time from a painful malady, allowed himself to be overcome
by discouragement, and entreated God to permit him to die,
that he might be released from his pains. He did not think
that the prolongation of his sickness was a mercy of God,
who wished to spare him more severe suffering. In answer to
his prayer, God charged his angel guardian to offer him his
choice, either to die immediately and submit to the pains of
Purgatory for three days, or to bear his sickness for another
year and then go directly to Heaven. The sick man, having
to choose between three days in Purgatory and one year of
suffering upon earth, did not hesitate, but took the three
days in Purgatory. After the lapse of an hour, his angel went
to visit him in his sufferings. On seeing him, the poor patient
complained that he had been left so long in those torments.
"And yet," he added, "you promised that I should remain


here but three days." "How long," asked the angel, "do you
think you have already suffered?" "At least for several
years," he replied, "and I had to suffer but three days."
"Know," said the angel, "that you have been here only one
hour. The intensity of the pain deceives you as to the time; it
makes an instant appear a day, and an hour years." "Alas!
then," said he with a sigh, "I have been very blind and
inconsiderate in the choice I have made. Pray God, my good
angel, to pardon me, and permit me to return to earth. I am
ready to submit to the most cruel maladies, not only for two
years, but as long as it shall please Him. Rather six years of
horrible suffering than one single hour in this abyss of
unutterable agonies."

The following is taken from a pious author quoted by Father
Rossignoli. (Merv 17). Two Religious, of eminent virtue, vied
with each other in leading a holy life. One of them fell sick,
and learned in a vision that he should soon die, that he
should be saved, and that he should remain in Purgatory
only until the first Mass should be celebrated for the repose
of his soul. Full of joy at these tidings, he hastened to impart
them to his friend, and entreated him not to delay the
celebration of the Mass which was to open Heaven to him.

He died the following morning, and his holy companion lost
no time in celebrating the Holy Sacrifice. After Mass, whilst
he was making his thanksgiving, and still continuing to pray
for his departed friend, the latter appeared to him radiant
with glory, but in a tone sweetly plaintive he asked why that
one Mass of which he stood in need had been so long
delayed. "My blessed brother," replied the Religious, "I
delayed so long, you say? I do not understand you." "What!
did you not leave me to suffer for more than a year before
offering Mass for the repose of my soul?" "Indeed, my dear
brother, I commenced Mass immediately after your death;
not a quarter of an hour had elapsed." Then, regarding him


with emotion, the blessed soul cried out, "How terrible are
those expiatory pains, since they have caused me to mistake
minutes for a year. Serve God, my dear brother, with an
exact fidelity, in order that you may avoid those
chastisements. Farewell! I fly to Heaven, where you will soon
join me."

This severity of Divine Justice in regard to the most fervent
souls is explained by the infinite Sanctity of God, who
discovers stains in that which appears to us most pure. The
Annals of the Order of Saint Francis speak of a Religious
whose eminent sanctity had caused him to be surnamed
Angelicus. (Chronique des Freres Min., p. 2, 1, 4. c. 8; cf.
Rossign.). He died in odor of sanctity at the monastery of the
Friars Minor in Paris, and one of his brethren in religion, a
doctor in theology, persuaded that, after a life so perfect, he
had gone directly to Heaven and that he stood in no need of
prayers, omitted to celebrate for him the three Masses of
obligation which, according to the custom of the Institute,
were offered for each departed member.

After a few days, whilst he was walking and meditating in a
retired spot, the deceased appeared before him enveloped
in flames, and said to him, in a mournful voice, "Dear
master, I beg of you have pity upon me!" "What! Brother
Angelicus, do you need my assistance?" "I am detained in
the fires of Purgatory, awaiting the fruit of the Holy Sacrifice
which you should have offered three times for me." "Beloved
brother, I thought you were already in possession of eternal
glory. After a life so fervent and exemplary as yours had
been, I could not imagine that there remained any pain to
be suffered." "Alas! alas!" replied the departed, "no one can
believe with what severity God judges and punishes His
creatures. His infinite Sanctity discovers in our best actions
defective spots, imperfections which displease Him. He


requires us to give an account even to the last farthing.
Usque ad novissimium quadrantem


Chapter 17


Pains of Purgatory - Blessed Quinziani - The Emperor
Maurice

In the Life of Blessed Stephana
Quinziani, a Dominican nun
(Auctore Franc. Seghizzo; cf. Merv.,

42; Marchese, 2 Jan.), mention is
made of a sister named Paula, who
died at the convent of Mantua, after
a long life of eminent virtue. The
body was carried to the church and
placed uncovered in the choir
among the Religious. During the
recitation of the Office, Blessed
Quinziani knelt near the bier,
recommending to God the deceased
Religious, who had been very dear
to her. Suddenly the latter let fall the crucifix which had
been placed between her hands, extended the left arm,
seized the right hand of Blessed Quinziani, and pressed it
tightly, as a poor patient in the burning heat of fever would
ask the assistance of a friend. She held it for a considerable
time, and then, withdrawing her arm, sank back lifeless into
the coffin. The Religious, astonished at this prodigy, asked
an explanation of the Blessed Sister. She replied that, whilst
the deceased pressed her hand, an inarticulate voice had
spoken in the depths of her heart, saying, "Help me, dear
sister, succor me in the frightful torture which I endure. Oh!
if you knew the severity of the Judge who desires all our
love, what atonement He demands for the least faults before
admitting us to the reward! If you knew how pure we must


be to see the face of God! Pray! pray, and do penance for
me, who can no longer help myself."

Blessed Quinziani, touched by the prayer of her friend,
imposed upon herself all kinds of penances and good works,
until she learned, by a new revelation, that Sister Paula was
delivered from her sufferings, and had entered into eternal
glory.

The natural conclusion which follows from these terrible
manifestations of Divine Justice is that we must hasten to
make satisfaction for our sins in this life. Surely a criminal
condemned to be burned alive would not refuse a lighter
pain, if the choice were left to him. Suppose it should be said
to him: You can deliver yourself from that terrible
punishment on condition that for three days you fast on
bread and water; should he refuse it? He who should prefer
the torture of fire to that of a light penance, would he not be
regarded as one who had lost his reason? Now, to prefer the
fire of Purgatory to Christian penance is an infinitely greater
folly. The Emperor Maurice understood this and acted wisely.
History relates that this prince, notwithstanding his good
qualities, which had endeared him to Saint Gregory the
Great, towards the close of his reign committed a grave
fault, and atoned for it by an exemplary repentance.

(Berault, Histoire Eccles., annee 602).

Having lost a battle against the Khan or King of the Avari, he
refused to pay the ransom of the prisoners, although he was
asked but the sixth part of a gold coin, which is less than a
dollar of our money. This mean refusal put the barbarous
conqueror into such a violent rage that he ordered the
immediate massacre of all the Roman soldiers, to the
number of twelve thousand. Then the Emperor
acknowledged his fault, and felt it so keenly, that he sent
money and candles to the principal churches and


monasteries, to beg that God would be pleased to punish
him in this life rather than in the next. These prayers were
heard. In the year 602, wishing to oblige his troops to pass
the winter on the opposite bank of the Danube, a mutiny
arose among them; they drove away their general, and
proclaimed as Emperor, Phocas, a simple centurion. The
imperial city followed the example of the army. Maurice was
obliged to fly in the night, after having divested himself of
all marks of royalty, which now served but to increase his
fears. Nevertheless, he was recognized. He was taken,
together with his wife, five of his sons, and three daughters -
that is to say, his entire family with the exception of his
eldest son, whom he had already caused to be crowned
Emperor, and who, thus far, had escaped the tyrant. Maurice
and his five sons were unmercifully slaughtered near
Chalcedon. The carnage began with the youngest of the
princes, who was put to death before the eyes of the
unfortunate father, without uttering a word of complaint.
Remembering the pains of the other world, he esteemed
himself happy to suffer in the present life, and throughout
the massacre he spoke no other words than those of the
Psalmist, Thou art just, O Lord, and Thy judgment is right.
(Psalm 118)


Chapter 18


Pains of Purgatory - Saint Perpetua - Saint Gertrude - Saint
Catherine of Genoa - Brother John de Via

As we have already said, the pain of sense has different
degrees of intensity, It is less terrible for those souls that
have no grievous sins to atone for, or who, having already
completed the most rigorous part of their expiation,
approach the moment of their deliverance. Many of those
souls suffer then no more than the pain of loss, and even
begin to perceive the first rays of heavenly glory, and to
have a foretaste of beatitude.


When Saint Perpetua (Cf. Mar., eh. 7)
saw her young brother Dinocrates in
Purgatory, the child did not seem to be
subjected to any cruel torture. The
illustrious martyr herself writes the
account of this vision in her prison at
Carthage, where she was confined for
the faith of Christ during the
persecution under Septimus Severus in
the year 205. Purgatory appeared to her
under the figure of an arid desert, where
she saw her brother Dinocrates, who had
died at the age of seven years. The child
face, and, tormented by thirst, he tried in vain to drink from
the waters of a fountain which was before him, but the brim
of which was too high for him to reach. The holy martyr
understood that her brother was in the place of expiation,
and that he besought the assistance of her prayers. She
then prayed for him, and three days later, in another vision,
she saw the same Dinocrates in the midst of lovely gardens.


had an ulcer on his


His face was beautiful, like that of an angel; he was clad in a
shining robe; the brink of the fountain was beneath him, and
he drank copiously of those refreshing waters from a golden
cup. The saint then knew that the soul of her young brother
now enjoyed the bliss of Paradise.

We read in the Revelations of Saint Gertrude that a young
Religious of her convent, for whom she had a special love on
account of her great virtues, died in the most beautiful
sentiments of piety. (Revelationes Gertrudiana ac
Mechtildiana. Henri Oudin, Poitiers, 1875). Whilst she was
fervently recommending this dear soul to God, she was rapt
in ecstasy and had a vision. The deceased sister was shown
to her standing before the throne of God, surrounded by a
brilliant halo and in rich garments. Nevertheless, she
appeared sad and troubled; her eyes were cast down, as
though she were ashamed to appear before the face of God;
it seemed as though she would hide herself and retire.
Gertrude, much surprised, asked of the Divine Spouse of
Virgins the cause of this sadness and embarrassment on the
part of so holy a soul. "Most sweet Jesus," she cried, "why
does not Your infinite goodness invite Your spouse to
approach You, and to enter into the joy of her Lord? Why do
You leave her aside, sad and timid?" Then Our Lord, with a
loving smile, made a sign to that holy soul to draw near; but
she, more and more troubled, after some hesitation, all
trembling, withdrew.

At this sight the saint addressed herself directly to the soul.
"What! my daughter," she said to her, "do you retire when
our Lord calls you? You, that have desired Jesus during your
whole life, withdraw now that He opens His arms to receive
you!" "Ah! my dear Mother," replied the soul, "I am not
worthy to appear before the Immaculate Lamb. I have still
some stains which I contracted upon earth. To approach the
Sun of Justice, one must be as pure as a ray of light. I have


not yet that degree of purity which He requires of His saints.
Know, that if the door of Heaven were to be opened to me, I
should not dare to cross the threshold before being entirely
purified from all stain. It seems to me that the choir of
virgins who follow the Lamb would repulse me with horror."
"And yet," continued the Abbess, "I see you surrounded with
light and glory!" "What you see," replied the soul, "is but the
border of the garment of glory. To wear this celestial robe we
must not retain even the shadow of sin."


been


/ision shows a soul very near to
lory of Heaven; but her
htenment concerning the
te Sanctity of God was of a
ent order from that which has
given to us. This clear
ledge causes her to seek, as a
ing, the expiation which her
ition requires to render her
ly of the vision of the thrice
God. This is precisely the exact
ling of Saint Catherine of
0 . We know that this saint
received particular light from God
concerning the state of the souls in Purgatory. She wrote a
work entitled A Treatise on Purgatory, which has an
authority equal to that of Saint Teresa. In chapter 8 she thus
expresses herself: "The Lord is all-merciful. He stands before
us. His arms extended in order to receive us into His glory.
But I see also that the Divine Essence is of such purity that
the soul, unless she be absolutely immaculate, cannot bear
the sight. If she finds in herself the least atom of
imperfection, rather than dwell with a stain in the presence
of the Divine Majesty, she would plunge herself into the
depths of Hell. Finding in Purgatory a means to blot out her
stains, she casts herself into it. She esteems herself happy


that, by the effect of a great mercy, a place is given to her
where she can free herself from the obstacles to supreme
happiness."

The History of the Seraphic Order {Part 4., n. 7; cf. Merv., 83)
makes mention of a holy Religious named Brother John de
Via, who died piously in a monastery on the Canary Islands.
His infirmarian. Brother Ascension, was in his cell praying
and recommending to God the soul of the departed, when
suddenly he saw before him a Religious of his Order, but
who appeared to be transfigured. So radiant was he, that the
cell was filled with a beautiful light. The brother, almost
beside himself with astonishment, did not recognize him,
but ventured to ask who he was and what was the object of
his visit. "I am," answered the apparition, "the spirit of
Brother John de Via. I thank you for the prayers which you
have poured forth to Heaven in my behalf, and I come to ask
of you one more act of charity. Know that, thanks to the
Divine mercy, I am in the place of salvation, among those
predestined for Heaven - the light which surrounds me is a
proof of this. Yet I am not worthy to see the face of God on
account of an omission which remains to be expiated.

During my mortal life I omitted, through my own fault, and
that several times, to recite the Office for the Dead, when it
was prescribed by the Rule. I beseech you, my dear brother,
for the love you bear Jesus Christ, to say those offices in
such a manner that my debt may be paid, and I may go to
enjoy the vision of my God."

Brother Ascension ran to the Father Guardian, related what
had happened, and hastened to say the offices required.
Then the soul of Blessed Brother John de Via appeared
again, but this time more brilliant than before he was in
possession of eternal happiness.


Chapter 19


Pains of Purgatory - Saint Magdaien de Pazzi and Sister
Benedicta - Saint Gertrude - Biessed Margaret Mary and
Mother de Montoux


We read in the Life of Saint
Magdalen de Pazzi that one of her
sisters, named Maria-Benedicta, a
Religious of eminent virtue, died in
her arms. During her agony she saw
a multitude of angels which
surrounded her with a joyful air,
waiting until she should breathe
forth her soul, that they might bear
it to the Heavenly Jerusalem; and at
the moment she expired, the saint
saw them receive the soul under the
form of a dove, the head of which
was of a golden hue, and disappear
with her. Three hours later,
watching and praying near the
remains, Magdalen knew that the soul of the deceased was
neither in Paradise nor Purgatory, but in a particular place
where, without suffering any sensible pain, she was deprived
of the sight of God.

The following day, whilst Mass was being celebrated for the
soul of Maria-Benedicta, at the Sanctus Magdalen was again
rapt in ecstasy, and God showed her that blessed soul in the
glory to which she had just been admitted. Magdalen
ventured to ask our Saviour why He had not allowed this
dear soul to enter sooner into His holy presence. She
received for an answer that in her last sickness Sister


Benedicta had shown herself too sensitive to the cares
bestowed upon her, which interrupted her habitual union
with God and her perfect conformity to His Divine Will.

Let us return to the Revelations of Saint Gertrude, to which
we have just alluded. There we shall find another instance
which shows how, for certain souls at least, the sun of glory
is preceded by a dawn which breaks by degrees. A Religious
died in the flower of her age in the embrace of the Lord. She
had been remarkable for her tender devotion to the Blessed
Sacrament. After her death Saint Gertrude saw her, brilliant
with a celestial light, kneeling before the Divine Master,
whose glorified wounds appeared like lighted torches, from
whence issued five flaming rays that pierced the five senses
of the deceased. The countenance of the latter, however,
was clouded by an expression of deep sadness. "Lord Jesus,"
cried the saint, "how comes it that whilst You thus illumine
Your servant, she does not experience perfect joy?"

"Until now," replied the good Master, "this sister has been
worthy to contemplate My glorified humanity only, and to
enjoy the sight of My five wounds, in recompense for her
tender devotion to the mystery of the Holy Eucharist; but
unless numerous suffrages are offered in her favor, she
cannot yet be admitted to the beatific vision, on account of
some slight defects in the observation of her holy rules."

Let us conclude what we have said concerning the nature of
these pains by some details which we find in the Life of
Blessed Margaret Mary of the Visitation. They are taken in
part from the Memoir of Mother Grefifier, who, wisely
diffident on the subject of the extraordinary graces granted
to Blessed Sister Margaret, recognized the truth only after a
thousand trials. Mother Philiberte Emmanuel de Montoux,
Superior at Annecy, died 2 February 1683, after a life which
had edified the whole Order. Mother Grefifier recommended


her specially to the prayers of Sister
Margaret. After some time the latter
told her superior that Our Lord had
made known to her that this soul
was most dear to Him on account of
her love and fidelity in His service,
^and that an ample recompense
awaited her in Heaven when she
should have accomplished her
purification in Purgatory.


The Blessed Sister saw the departed
in the place of expiation. Our Lord showed her the sufferings
which she endured, and how greatly she was relieved by the
suffrages and good works which were daily offered for her
throughout the whole Order of the Visitation. During the
night from Holy Thursday to Good Friday, whilst Sister
Margaret was still praying for her. He showed her the soul of
the departed as placed under the chalice which contained
the Sacred Host on the altar of repose. There she
participated in the merits of His agony in the Garden of
Olives. On Easter Sunday, which that year fell on April 18,
Sister Margaret saw the soul enjoying the commencement,
as it were, of eternal felicity, desiring and hoping soon to be
admitted to the vision and possession of God.


Finally, a fortnight after, on 2 May Sunday, Feast of the Good
Shepherd, she saw the soul of the departed as rising sweetly
into eternal glory, chanting melodiously the canticle of
Divine Love.


Let us see how Blessed Margaret herself gives the account of
this last apparition in a letter addressed on the same day, 2
May 1623, to Mother de Saumaise at Dijon: "Jesus forever!

My soul is filled with so great a joy that I can scarcely
restrain myself Permit me, dear Mother, to communicate it to


your heart, which is one with mine in that of Our Lord. This
morning, Sunday of the Good Shepherd, on my awakening,
two of my good suffering friends came to bid me adieu.
Today the Supreme Pastor receives them into His eternal fold
with a million other souls. Both joined this multitude of
blessed souls, and departed singing canticles of joy. One is
the good Mother Philiberte Emmanuel de Montoux, the other
Sister Jeanne Catherine Gacon. One repeated unceasingly
these words: Love triumphs, love rejoices in God; the other.
Blessed are the dead who die in the Lord, and the Religious
who live and die in the exact observance of their rules. Both
desired that I should say to you on their part that death may
separate souls, but can never disunite them. If you knew
how my soul was transported with joy! For whilst I was
speaking to them, I saw them sink by degrees into glory like
a person who plunges into the vast ocean. They ask of you
in thanksgiving to the Holy Trinity one Laudate and three
times Gloria Patri. As I desired them to remember us, their
last words were that ingratitude is unknown in Heaven."


Chapter 20


Diversity of the Pains - King Sancho and Queen Guda - Saint
Lidwina and the Soui Transpierced - Biessed Margaret Mary
and the Bed of Fire

According to the saints, there is great diversity in the
corporal pains of Purgatory. Although fire is the principal
instrument of torture, there is also the torment of cold, the
torture of the members, and the torture applied to the
different senses of the human body. This diversity of
suffering seems to correspond to the nature of the sins, each
one of which demands its own punishment, according to
these words: Quia per quce peccat quis, per hcec et
torquetur- "By what things a man sins, by the same also is
he tormented." (Wisdom 11:17). It is just that it should be so
with regard to the chastisement, since the same diversity
exists in the distribution of the reward. In Heaven each one
receives according to his works, and, as Venerable Bede
says, each one receives his crown, his robe of glory. For the
martyr this robe is of a rich purple color, whilst that of the
confessor has the brilliancy of a dazzling whiteness.

The historian John Vasquez, in his chronicle of the year 940,
relates how Sancho, King of Leon, appeared to Queen Guda,
and by the piety of this princess was delivered from
Purgatory. Sancho, who had led a truly Christian life, was
poisoned by one of his subjects. After his death. Queen
Guda passed her time in praying and causing prayers to be
offered for the repose of his soul. Not content with having a
great number of Masses offered for his release, in order that
she might weep and pray near the dear remains, she took
the veil in the convent of Castile, where the body of her
husband had been deposited. One Saturday, whilst praying


at the feet of the Blessed Virgin, and recommending to her
the soul of her departed husband, Sancho appeared to her;
but in what condition! Great God! he was clad in garments
of mourning and wore a double row of red-hot chains around
his waist. Having thanked his pious widow for her suffrages,
he conjured her to continue her work of charity. "Ah! if you
knew, Guda, what I suffer," said he to her, "you would do still
more. By the bowels of Divine Mercy, I conjure you, help me,
dear Guda; help me, for I am devoured by these flames."

The Queen redoubled her prayers and good works; she
distributed alms among the poor, caused Masses to be
celebrated in all parts of the country, and gave to the
convent a magnificent ornament for use on the altar.

At the end of forty days the King again appeared. He had
been relieved of the burning cincture and of all his other
sufferings. In place of his robes of mourning, he wore a
mantle of dazzling whiteness, like the sacred ornament
which Guda had given to the convent. "Behold me, dear
Guda," said he, "thanks to your prayers, delivered from all
my sufferings. May you be forever blessed. Persevere in your
holy exercise; often meditate upon the severity of the pains
of the other life, and upon the joys of Paradise, whither I go
to await you." With these words he disappeared, leaving the
pious Guda overflowing with consolation.

One day a woman, quite disconsolate, went to tell Saint
Lidwina that she had lost her brother. "My brother has just
died," she said, "and I come to recommend his poor soul to
your charity. Offer to God for him some prayers and a part of
the sufferings occasioned by your malady." The holy patient
promised her to do so, and some time after, in one of her
frequent ecstasies, she was conducted by her angel
guardian into the subterranean dungeons, where she saw
with extreme compassion the torments of the poor souls


plunged in flames. One of them in
particular attracted her attention.

She saw her transpierced by iron
pins. Her angel told her that it was
the deceased brother of that woman
who had asked her prayers. "If you
wish," he added, "to ask any grace
in his favor, it will not be refused to
you." "I ask then," she replied, "that
he may be delivered from those
horrible irons that transpierce him"

Immediately she saw them drawn
from the poor sufferer, who was
then taken from this special prison
and placed in the one occupied by
those souls that had not incurred
any particular torment. The sister of the deceased returning
shortly after to Saint Lidwina, the latter made known to her
the condition of her brother, and advised her to assist him
by multiplying her prayers and alms for the repose of his
soul. She herself offered to God her supplications and
sufferings, until finally he was delivered. (Vie de Sainte
Lidvine).


We read of the Life of Blessed
^Margaret Mary that a soul was
Wortured in a bed of torments on
^account of her indolence during life;
cat the same time she was subjected
^o a particular torture in her heart,
^on account of certain wicked
ntiments, and in her tongue, in
punishment of her uncharitable
words. Moreover, she had to endure
a frightful pain of an entirely
different nature, caused neither by


fire nor iron, but by the sight of a condemned soul. Let us
see how the Blessed Margaret describes it in her writings.


"I saw in a dream," she says, "one of our sisters who had died
some time previous. She told me that she suffered much in
Purgatory, but that God had inflicted upon her a suffering
which surpassed all other pains, by showing her one of her
near relatives precipitated into Hell.

"At these words I awoke, and felt as though my body was
bruised from head to foot, so that it was with difficulty I
could move. As we should not believe in dreams, I paid little
attention to this one, but the Religious obliged me to do so
in spite of myself. From that moment she gave me no rest,
and said to me incessantly, 'Pray to God for me; offer to Him
your sufferings united to those of Jesus Christ, to alleviate
mine; and give me all you shall do until the first Friday in
May, when you will please communicate for me.' This I did,
with permission of my superior.

"Meanwhile the pain which this suffering soul caused me
increased to such a degree that I could find neither comfort
nor repose. Obedience obliged me to seek a little rest upon
my bed; but scarcely had I retired when she seemed to
approach me, saying, 'You recline at your ease upon your
bed; look at the one upon which I lie, and where I endure
intolerable sufferings.' I saw that bed, and the very thought
of it makes me shudder. The top and bottom was of sharp
flaming points which pierced the flesh. She told me then
that this was on account of her sloth and negligence in the
observance of the rules. 'My heart is torn,' she continued,
'and causes me the most terrible sufferings for my thoughts
of disapproval and criticism of my superiors. My tongue is
devoured by vermin, and, as it were, torn from my mouth
continually, for the words I spoke against charity and my
little regard for the rule of silence. Ah! would that all souls


consecrated to God could see me in these torments. If I
could show them what is prepared for those who live
negligently in their vocation, their zeal and fervor would be
entirely renewed, and they would avoid those faults which
now cause me to suffer so much.'

"At this sight I melted into tears. 'Alas!' said she, 'one day
passed by the whole community in exact observance would
heal my parched mouth; another passed in the practice of
holy charity would cure my tongue; and a third passed
without any murmuring or disapproval of superiors would
heal my bruised heart; but no one thinks to relieve me.'

"After I had offered the Communion which she had asked of
me, she said that her dreadful torments were much
diminished, but she had still to remain a long time in
Purgatory, condemned to suffer the pains due to those souls
that have been tepid in the service of God. As for myself,"
adds Blessed Margaret Mary, "I found that I was freed from
my sufferings, which I had been told would not diminish
until the soul herself should be relieved." (Languet, Vie de la
B. Marguerite).


Chapter 21


Diversity of the Pains - Biasio Raised from the Dead by Saint
Bernardine - Venerabie Frances of Pampeiuna and the Pen of
Fire - Saint Corpreus and King Maiachy

The celebrated Biasio Massei, who
was raised from the dead by Saint
Bernardine of Siena, saw that there
was great diversity in the pains of
Purgatory. The account of this
miracle is given at length in the
Acta Sanctorum.

A short time after the canonization
of Saint Bernardine of Siena, there
died at Cascia, in the kingdom of
Naples, a child aged eleven years,
named Biasio Massei. His parents
had inspired him with the same
devotion which they themselves
had towards this new saint, and the
latter was not slow to recompense
it. The day after his death, when the
body was being carried to the grave, Biasio awoke as from a
profound slumber, and said that Saint Bernardine had
restored him to life, in order to relate the wonders which the
saint had shown him in the other world.

We can easily understand the curiosity which this event
produced. For a whole month young Biasio did nothing but
talk of what he had seen, and answer the questions put to
him by visitors. He spoke with the simplicity of a child, but
at the same time with an accuracy of expression and a
knowledge of the things of the other life far above his years.


At the moment of his death, he said, Saint Bernardine
appeared to him, and taking him by the hand, said, "Be not
afraid, but pay great attention to what I am going to show
you, so that you may remember, and afterwards be able to
relate it."

Now the saint conducted his young protege successively
into the regions of Hell, Purgatory, Limbo, and finally
allowed him to see Heaven.

In Hell, Blasio saw indescribable horrors, and the diverse
tortures by which the proud, the avaricious, the impure, and
other sinners are tormented. Amongst them he recognized
several whom he had seen during life, and he even
witnessed the arrival of two who had just died, Buccerelli
and Frascha. The latter was damned for having kept ill-
gotten goods in his possession. The son of Frascha, struck by
this revelation as by a thunderbolt, and knowing well the
truth of the statement, hastened to make complete
restitution; and not content with this act of justice, that he
might not expose himself to share one day the sad lot of his
father, he distributed the rest of his fortune to the poor and
embraced the monastic life.

From thence conducted into Purgatory, Blasio there saw the
most dreadful torments, varied according to the sins of
which they were the punishment. He recognized a great
number of souls, and several begged him to acquaint their
parents and relatives with their suffering condition; they
even indicated the suffrages and good works of which they
stood in need. When interrogated as to the state of a
departed soul, he answered without hesitation, and gave the
most precise details. "Your father," said he to one of his
visitors, "has been in Purgatory since such a day; he charged
you to pay such a sum in alms, and you have neglected to
do so." "Your brother," he said to another "asked you to have


so many Masses celebrated; you agreed to do so, and you
have not fulfilled your engagement; so many Masses remain
to be said."

Blasio also spoke of Heaven, the last place into which he had
been taken; but he spoke almost like Saint Paul, who, having
been ravished to the third Heaven, whether with his body or
without his body he knew not, there heard mysterious words
which no mortal tongue could repeat. What most attracted
the attention of the child was the immense multitude of
angels that surrounded the throne of God, and the
incomparable beauty of the Blessed Virgin Mary, elevated
above all the choirs of angels.

The life of Venerable Mother Frances of the Blessed
Sacrament, a Religious of Pampeluna (La Vie par le F.
Joachim; cf. Merv., 26), presents several facts which show
that the pains of Purgatory are suited to the faults to be
expiated. This venerable servant of God had the most
intimate communication with the souls in Purgatory, so that
they came in great numbers and filled her cell, humbly
awaiting each one in turn to be assisted by her prayers.
Frequently, the more easily to excite her compassion, they
appeared with the instruments of their sins, now become the
instruments of their torture. One day she saw a Religious
surrounded by costly pieces of furniture, such as pictures,
armchairs, etc., all in flames. She had collected these things
in her cell contrary to her vow of religious poverty, and after
her death they became her torment.

A notary appeared to her one day with all the insignia of his
profession. Being heaped around him, the flames which
issued therefrom caused him the most intense suffering. "I
have used this pen, this ink, this paper," said he, "to draw up
illegal deeds. I also had a passion for gambling, and these
cards which I am forced to hold continually in my hands now


constitute my punishment. This flaming purse contains my
unlawful gains, and causes me to expiate them." From all
this we should draw great and salutary instruction. Creatures
are given to man as a means to serve God; they must be the
instruments of virtue and good works. If he abuse them, and
make them instruments of sin, it is just they should be
turned against him, and become the instruments of his
chastisement.

The Life of Saint Corpreus, an Irish Bishop, which we find in
the Bollandists on March 6, furnishes us with another
example of the same kind. One day, whilst this holy prelate
was in prayer after the Office, he saw appear before him a
horrible specter, with livid countenance, a collar of fire about
his neck, and upon his shoulders a miserable mantle all in
tatters. "Who are you?" asked the saint, not in the least
disturbed. "I am a soul from the other life." "What has
brought you to the sad condition in which I see you?" "My
faults have drawn this chastisement upon me.
Notwithstanding the misery to which I now see myself
reduced, I am Malachy, formerly King of Ireland. In that high
position I could have done much good, and it was my duty
to do so. I neglected this, and therefore I am punished." "Did
you not do penance for your faults?" "I did not do sufficient
penance, and this is due to the culpable weakness of my
confessor, whom I bent to my caprices by offering him a gold
ring. It is on this account that I now wear a collar of fire
about my neck." "I should like to know," continued the
Bishop, "why you are covered with these rags?" "It is another
chastisement. I did not clothe the naked. I did not assist the
poor with the charity, respect, and liberality which became
my dignity of king and my title of Christian. This is why you
see me clothed like the poor and covered with a garment of
confusion." The biography adds that Saint Corpreus with his
chapter united in prayer, and at the end of six months


obtained a mitigation of the suffering, and somewhat later
the entire deliverance of King Malachy.


Chapter 22

Duration of Purgatory - Opinions of the Doctors - Beiiarmine
- Caicuiations of Father Mum ford

Faith does not teach us the precise
duration of the pains of Purgatory.

We know in general that they are
measured by Divine Justice, and
that for each one they are
proportioned to the number and
gravity of the faults which he has
not yet expiated. God may,
however, without prejudice to His
Justice, abridge these sufferings by
augmenting their intensity; the
Church Militant also may obtain
their remission by the Holy Sacrifice
of the Mass and other suffrages
offered for the departed.

According to the common opinion of
the doctors, the expiatory pains are
of long duration. "There is no doubt," says Beiiarmine (De
Gemitu, lib. 2, c. 9), "that the pains of Purgatory are not
limited to ten and twenty years, and that they last in some
cases entire centuries. But allowing it to be true that their
duration did not exceed ten or twenty years, can we account
it as nothing to have to endure for ten or twenty years the
most excruciating sufferings without the least alleviation? If
a man was assured that he should suffer some violent pain
in his feet, or his head, or teeth for the space of twenty
years, and that without ever sleeping or taking the least
repose, would he not a thousand times rather die than live in


such a state? And if the choice were given to him between a
life thus miserable and the loss of all his temporal goods,
would he hesitate to make the sacrifice of his fortune to be
delivered from such a torment? Shall we then find any
difficulty in embracing labor and penance to free ourselves
from the sufferings of Purgatory? Shall we fear to practice
the most painful exercises: vigils, fasts, almsgiving, long
prayers, and especially contrition, accompanied with sighs
and tears?"

These words comprise the whole doctrine of the saints and
theologians.

Father Mumford of the Company of Jesus, in his Treatise on
Charity towards the Departed, bases the long duration of
Purgatory on a calculation of probability, which we shall give
in substance. He goes out on the principle that, according to
the words of the Holy Ghost, The just man falls seven times a
day (Prov . 24:16), that is to say, that even those who apply
themselves most perfectly to the service of God,
notwithstanding their good will, commit a great number of
faults in the infinitely pure eyes of God. We have but to
enter into our own conscience, and there analyze before God
our thoughts, our words, and works, to be convinced of this
sad effect of human misery. Oh! how easy it is to lack
respect in prayer, to prefer our ease to the accomplishment
of duty, to sin by vanity, by impatience, by sensuality, by
uncharitable thoughts and words, by want of conformity to
the will of God! The day is long; is it very difficult for even a
virtuous person to commit, I do not say seven, but twenty or
thirty of this kind of faults and imperfections?

Let us take a moderate estimate, and suppose that you
commit about ten faults a day; at the end of 365 days you
will have the sum of 3,650 faults. Let us diminish, and, to
facilitate the calculation, place it at 3,000 per year. At the


end of ten years this will amount to 30,000, and at the end
of twenty years to 60,000. Suppose that of these 60,000
faults you have expiated one half by penance and good
works, there will still remain 30,000 to be atoned for.

Let us continue our hypothesis: You die after these twenty
years of virtuous life, and appear before God with a debt of
30,000 faults, which you must discharge in Purgatory. How
much time will you need to accomplish this expiation?
Suppose, on an average, each fault requires one hour of
Purgatory. This measure is very moderate, if we judge by the
revelations of the saints; but at any rate this will give you a
Purgatory of 30,000 hours. Now do you know how many
years these 30,000 hours represent? Three years, three
months, and fifteen days. Thus a good Christian who
watches over himself, who applies himself to penance and
good works, finds himself liable to three years, three
months, and fifteen days of Purgatory.

The preceding calculation is based on an estimate which is
lenient in the extreme. Now, if you extend the duration of
the pain, and, instead of an hour, you take a day for the
expiation of a fault; if, instead of having nothing but venial
sins, you bring before God a debt resulting from mortal sins,
more or less numerous, which you formerly committed; if
you assign, on the average, as Saint Frances of Rome says,
seven years for the expiation of one mortal sin, remitted as
to the guilt, who does not see that we arrive at an appalling
duration and that the expiation may easily be prolonged for
many years, and even for centuries?

Years and centuries of torments! Oh! if we only thought of it,
with what care should we not avoid the least faults! with
what fervor should we not practice penance to make
satisfaction in this world!


Chapter 23


Duration of Purgatory - The Cistercian Abbot and Pope
Innocent Hi - John de Lierre

In the Life of Saint Lutgarda, written
by her contemporary, Thomas de
Cantimpre, mention is made of a
Religious who was otherwise
fervent, but who for an excess of
zeal was condemned to forty years
of Purgatory. This was an Abbot of
the Cistercian Order, named Simon,
who held Saint Lutgarda in great
veneration. The saint, on her part,
willingly followed his advice, and in
consequence a sort of spiritual
friendship was formed between
them. But the Abbot was not as mild
towards his subordinates as he was
towards the saint. Severe with
himself, he was also severe in his administration, and carried
his exactions in matters of discipline even to harshness,
forgetting the lesson of the Divine Master, who teaches us to
be meek and humble of heart. Having died, and whilst Saint
Lutgarda was fervently praying and imposing penances
upon herself for the repose of his soul, he appeared to her,
and declared that he was condemned to forty years of
Purgatory. Fortunately he had in Lutgarda a generous and
powerful friend. She redoubled her prayers and austerities,
and having received from God the assurance that the
departed soul should soon be delivered, the charitable saint
replied, "I will not cease to weep; I will not cease to
importune Your Mercy until I see him freed from his pains."


Since I am mentioning Saint
Lutgarda, ought I to speak of the
celebrated apparition of Pope
Innocent III? I acknowledge the
perusal of this incident shocked me,
and I would fain pass it over in
silence. I was reluctant to think that
a Pope, and such a Pope, had been
condemned to so long and terrible a
Purgatory. We know that Innocent
III, who presided at the celebrated
Council of Lateran in 1215, was one
of the greatest Pontiffs who ever
filled the chair of Saint Peter. His

(VCttARSi and zeal led him to

^^^^j^^'accomplish great things from the
Church of God and holy discipline.
How, then, admit that such a man was judged with so great
severity at the Supreme Tribunal? How reconcile this
revelation of Saint Lutgarda with Divine Mercy? I wished,
therefore, to treat it as an illusion, and sought for reasons in
support of this idea. But I found, on the contrary, that the
reality of this apparition is admitted by the gravest authors,
and that it is not rejected by any single one. Moreover, the
biographer, Thomas de Cantimpre, is very explicit, and at
the same time very reserved. "Remark, reader," he writes at
the end of his narrative, "that it was from the mouth of the
pious Lutgarda herself that I heard of the faults revealed by
the defunct, and which I omit here through respect for so
great a Pope."


Aside from this, considering the event in itself, can we find
any good reason for calling it into question? Do we not know
that God makes no exception of persons - that the Popes
appear before His tribunal like the humblest of the faithful -
that all the great and the lowly are equal before Him, and


that each one receives according to his works? Do we not
know that those who govern others have a great
responsibility, and will have to render a severe account?
Judicium durissimum his qui praesunt fiet- "A most severe
judgment shall be for them that bear rule." (Ms. 6:6). It is
the Holy Ghost that declares it. Now, Innocent III reigned for
eighteen years, and during most turbulent times; and, add
the Bollandists, is it not written that the judgments of God
are inscrutable, and often very different from the judgments
of men? Judicia tua abyssus muita. (Psalm 35:7)

The reality of this apparition cannot, then, be reasonably
called in question. I see no reason for omitting it, since God
does not reveal mysteries of this nature for any other
purpose than that they should be made known for the
edification of His Church.

Pope Innocent III died 16 July 1216. The same day he
appeared to Saint Lutgarda in her monastery at Aywieres, in
Brabant. Surprised to see a specter enveloped in flames, she
asked who he was and what he wanted. "I am Pope
Innocent," he replied. "Is it possible that you, our common
Father, should be in such a state?" "It is but too true. I am
expiating three faults which might have caused my eternal
perdition. Thanks to the Blessed Virgin Mary, I have
obtained pardon for them, but I have to make atonement.
Alas! it is terrible; and it will last for centuries if you do not
come to my assistance. In the name of Mary, who has
obtained for me the favor of appealing to you, help me."

With these words he disappeared. Lutgarda announced the
Pope's death to her sisters, and together they betook
themselves to prayer and penitential works in behalf of the
august and venerated Pontiff, whose demise was
communicated to them some weeks later from another


source.


Let us add here a more consoling fact, which we find in the
life of the same saint. A celebrated preacher, named John de
Lierre, was a man of great piety and well known to our saint.
He had made a contract with her, by which they mutually
promised that the one who should die first, with the
permission of God, should appear to the other. John was the
first to depart this life. Having undertaken a journey to Rome
for the arrangement of certain affairs in the interest of the
Religious, he met his death among the Alps. Faithful to his
promise, he appeared to Lutgarda in the celebrated cloister
of Aywieres, On seeing him, the saint had not the slightest
idea that he was dead, and invited him, according to the
Rule, to enter the parlor that she might converse with him. "I
am no more of this world," he replied, "and I come here only
in fulfillment of my promise." At these words Lutgarda fell on
her knees and remained for some time quite confounded.
Then, raising her eyes to her blessed friend, "Why," said she,
"are you clothed in such splendor? What does this triple
robe signify with which I see you adorned?" "The white
garment," he replied, "signifies virginal purity, which I have
always preserved; the red tunic implies the labors and
sufferings which have prematurely exhausted my strength;
and the blue mantle, which covers all, denotes the
perfection of the spiritual life." Having said these words, he
suddenly left Lutgarda, who remained divided between
regret for having lost so good a Father, and the joy she
experienced on account of his happiness.

Saint Vincent Ferrer, the celebrated wonder worker of the
Order of Saint Dominic, who preached with so much
eloquence the great truth of the Judgment of God, had a
sister who remained unmoved either by the words or
example of her saintly brother. She was full of the spirit of
the world, intoxicated with its pleasures, and walked with
rapid strides towards her eternal ruin. Meanwhile, the saint
prayed for her conversion, and his prayer was finally


answered. The unfortunate sinner fell mortally sick; and, at
the moment of death, entering into herself, she made her
confession with sincere repentance.

Some days after her death, whilst her brother was
celebrating the Holy Sacrifice, she appeared to him in the
midst of flames and a prey to the most intolerable torments.
"Alas! my dear brother," said she, "I am condemned to
undergo these torments until the day of the Last Judgment.
Nevertheless, you can assist me. The efficacy of the Holy
Sacrifice is so great: offer for me about thirty Masses, and I
may hope the happiest result." The saint hastened to accede
to her request. He celebrated the thirty Masses, and on the
thirtieth day his sister again appeared to him surrounded by
angels and soaring to Heaven. Thanks to the virtue of the
Divine Sacrifice, an expiation of several centuries was
reduced to thirty days.

This example shows us at once the duration of the pains
which a soul may incur, and the powerful effect of the Holy
Sacrifice of the Mass, when God is pleased to apply it to a
soul. But this application, like all other suffrages, does not
always take place, at least not always in the same plenitude.


Chapter 24


Duration of Purgatory - The Duellist - Father Schoofs and the
Apparition at Antwerp

The following example shows not only the long duration of
the punishment inflicted for certain faults, but also the
difficulty to inclining Divine Justice in favor of those who
have committed faults of this nature.

The history of the Order of the Visitation mentions, among
the first Religious of that Institute, Sister Marie Denise,
called in the world Mdlle. Marie Martignat. She was most
charitably devoted to the souls in Purgatory, and felt herself
particularly drawn to recommend to God in a special manner
those who had held high positions in the world, for she knew
by experience the dangers to which their positions exposed
them. A certain prince, whose name is not given, but who it
is believed belonged to the House of France, was killed in a
duel, and God permitted him to appear to Sister Denise to
ask of her the assistance of which he stood so greatly in
need. He told her that he was not damned, although his
crime merited damnation. Thanks to an act of perfect
contrition which he had made at the moment of death, he
had been saved; but, in punishment for his guilty life and
death, he was condemned to the most rigorous chastisement
in Purgatory until the Day of Judgment.

The charitable sister, deeply touched by the state of this
soul, generously offered herself as a victim for him. But it is
impossible to say what she had to suffer for many years in
consequence of that heroic act. The poor prince left her no
repose, and made her partake of his torments. She
completed her sacrifice by death; but before expiring she
confided to her Superior that, in return for so much


expiation, she had obtained for her protege the remission of
but a few hours of pain. When the Superior expressed her
astonishment at this result, which seemed to her entirely
disproportionate with what the sister had suffered. Sister
Denise replied, "Ah! my dear Mother, the hours of Purgatory
are not computed like those of earth; years of grief,
weariness, poverty, or sickness in this world are nothing
compared to one hour of the suffering of Purgatory. It is
already much that Divine Mercy permits us to exercise any
influence whatever over His Justice. I am less moved by the
lamentable state in which I have seen this soul languish,
than by the extraordinary return of grace which has
consummated the work of his salvation. The act in which the
prince died merited Hell; a million others might have found
their eternal perdition in the same act in which he found his
salvation. He recovered consciousness but for one instant,
just time sufficient to co-operate with that precious
movement of grace which disposed him to make an act of
perfect contrition. That blessed moment seems to me to be
an excess of the goodness, clemency, and infinite love of
God."

Thus spoke Sister Denise; she admired at once the severity
of God's Justice, and His infinite Mercy. Both one and the
other shone forth in this example in the most striking
manner.

Continuing the subject of the long duration of Purgatory, we
will here relate an instance of more recent occurrence.

Father Philip Schoofs, of the Company of Jesus, who died in
Fouvain in 1878, related the following fact, which happened
in Antwerp during the first years of his ministry in that city.
He had just preached a mission, and had returned to the
College of Notre Dame, then situated in the Rue I'Empereur,
when he was told someone asked for him in the parlor.


Descending immediately, he found there two young men in
the flower of their age, with a pale and sickly child of about
ten years. "Father," said they, "here is a poor child that we
have adopted, and who deserves our protection because he
is good and pious. We feed and educate him and, for more
than a year that he has formed part of our family, he has
been happy and enjoyed good health. It is only for the last
few weeks that he has commenced to grow thin and pine
away, as you now see him." "What is the cause of this
change?" asked the Father. "It is fright," they replied; "the
child is awakened every night by apparitions. A man, he
assures us, presents himself before him, and he sees him as
distinctly as he sees us in full daylight. This is the cause of
his continual fear and uneasiness. We come. Father, to ask of
you some remedy." "My friends," replied Father Schoofs,

"with God there is a remedy for all things. Begin, both of
you, by making a good Confession and Communion, beg
God to deliver you from all evil, and fear nothing. As for you,
my child, say your prayers well, then sleep so soundly that
no ghost can awake you." He then dismissed them, telling
them to return in case anything more should happen. Two
weeks passed, and they again returned. "Father," said they,
"we have followed your orders, and yet the apparitions
continue as before. The child always sees the same man
appear." "From this evening," said Father Schoofs, "watch at
the door of the child's room, provided with paper and ink
with which to write the answers. When he warns you of the
presence of that man, ask in the name of God who he is, the
time of his death, where he lived, and why he returns."

The following day they returned, carrying the paper on
which was written the answers which they had received. "We
saw," they said, "the man that appears to the child." They
described him as an old man, of whom they could but see
the bust, and he wore a costume of the olden times. He told
them his name, and the house in which he had dwelt in


Antwerp. He had died in 1636, had followed the profession
of banker in that same house, which in his time comprised
the two houses which today may be seen situated to the
right and left of it. Let us remark here that certain
documents which prove the accuracy of these indications
have since been discovered in the archives of the city of
Antwerp. He added that he was in Purgatory and that few
prayers had been said for him. He then begged the persons
of the house to offer Holy Communion for him, and finally
asked that a pilgrimage might be made for him to Notre
Dame des Fievres, and another to Notre Dame de la Chapelle
in Brussels. "You will do well to comply with all these
requests," said Father Schoofs, "and if the spirit returns,
before speaking to him, require him to say the Pater, Ave,
and Credo."

They accomplished the good works indicated with all
possible piety, and many conversions were effected. When
all was finished, the young men returned. "Father, he
prayed," they said to Father Schoofs, "but in a tone of
indescribable faith and piety. We never heard anyone pray
thus. What reverence in the Our Father! What love in the
Hail Mary! What fervor in the I Believe! Now we know what it
is to pray. Then he thanked us for our prayers; he was
greatly relieved, and would have been entirely delivered had
not an assistant in our shop made a sacrilegious
Communion. We have," they continued, "reported these
words to the person. She turned pale, acknowledged her
guilt, then running to her confessor, hastened to repair her
crime."

"Since that day," adds Father Schoofs, "that house has never
been troubled. The family that inhabit it have prospered
rapidly, and today they are rich. The two brothers continue
to conduct themselves in an exemplary manner, and their


sister became a Religious in a convent, of which she is at the
present time Superior."

Everything leads us to believe that the prosperity of that
family was the result of the succor given to the departed
soul. After two centuries of punishment there remained to
the latter but a small part of the expiation, and the
performance of some good works which he asked. When
these were accomplished, he was delivered, and wished to
show his gratitude by obtaining the blessings of God upon
his benefactors.


Chapter 25


Duration of Purgatory - The Abbey of Latrobe - A Hundred
Years of Suffering for Deiay in the Reception of the Last
Sacraments

The following incident is related with authentic proof by the
journal, The Monde, in the number of April 1860. It took
place in America, in the Abbey of the Benedictines, situated
in the village of Latrobe. A series of apparitions occurred
during the course of the year 1859. The American press took
up the matter, and treated those grave questions with its
usual levity. In order to put a stop to scandal, the Abbot
Wirnmer, superior of the house, addressed the following
letter to the newspapers.

"The following is a true statement of the case: In our Abbey
of Saint Vincent, near Latrobe, on 10 September 1859, a
novice saw an apparition of a Benedictine in full choir dress.
This apparition was repeated every day from 18 September
until 19 November, either at eleven o'clock, at noon, or at
two o'clock in the morning. It was only on the 19th of
November that the novice interrogated the spirit, in
presence of another member of the community, and asked
the motive of these apparitions. He replied that he had
suffered for seventy-seven years for having neglected to
celebrate seven Masses of obligation; that he had already
appeared at different times to seven other Benedictines, but
that he had not been heard, and that he would be obliged to
appear again after eleven years if the novice did not come to
his assistance. Finally, the spirit asked that these seven
Masses might be celebrated for him; moreover, the novice
must remain in retreat for seven days, keep strict silence,
and during thirty days recite three times a day the psalm


Miserere, his feet bare, and his arms extended in the form of
a cross. All the conditions were fulfilled between 20
November and 25 December, and on that day, after the
celebration of the last Mass, the apparition disappeared.

"During that period the spirit showed itself several times,
exhorting the novice in the most urgent manner to pray for
the souls in Purgatory; for, said he, they suffer frightfully,
and are extremely grateful to those who co-operate in their
deliverance. He added, sad to relate, that of the five priests
who had died in our Abbey, not one had yet entered Heaven,
all were suffering in Purgatory. I do not draw any conclusion,
but this is correct."

This account, signed by the hand of the Abbot, is an
incontestable historical document.

As regards the conclusion which the venerable prelate
leaves us to draw, it is evident.

Seeing that a Religious is condemned to Purgatory for
seventy-seven years, let it suffice for us to learn the
necessity of reflecting on the duration of future punishment,
as well for priests and Religious as for the ordinary faithful
living in the midst of the corruption of the world.

A too frequent cause of the long continuance of Purgatory is
that many deprive themselves of a great means established
by Jesus Christ for shortening it, by delaying, when
dangerously sick, to receive the last Sacraments. These
Sacraments, destined to prepare souls for their last journey,
to purify them from the remains of sin, and to spare them
the pains of the other life, require, in order to produce their
effects, that the sick person receive them with the requisite
dispositions. Now, the longer they are deferred, and the
faculties of the sick person allowed to become weak, the


more defective do those dispositions become. What do I say?
Very often it happens, in consequence of this imprudent
delay, that the sick person dies deprived of this absolutely
necessary help. The result is, that if the deceased is not
damned, he is plunged into the deepest abysses of
Purgatory, loaded with all the weight of his debts.

Michael Alix speaks of an ecclesiastic who, instead of
promptly receiving the Extreme Unction, and therein giving
a good example to the faithful, was guilty of negligence in
this respect, and was punished by a hundred years of
Purgatory. Knowing that he was seriously ill and in danger of
death, this poor priest should have made known his
condition, and immediately had recourse to the succors
which the Mother Church reserves for her children in that
supreme hour. He omitted to do so; and, whether through an
illusion common among sick people, he would not declare
the gravity of his situation, or whether he was under the
influence of that fatal prejudice which causes weak
Christians to defer the reception of the last Sacraments, he
neither asked for nor thought of receiving them. But we
know how death comes by stealth; the unfortunate man
deferred so long that he died without having had the time to
receive either the Viaticum or Extreme Unction. Now, God
was pleased to make use of this circumstance to give a great
warning to others. The deceased himself came to make
known to a brother ecclesiastic that he was condemned to
Purgatory for a hundred years. "I am thus punished," he
said, "for delaying to receive the grace of the last
purification. Had I received the Sacraments as I ought to
have done, I should have escaped death through the virtue
of Extreme Unction, and I should have had time to do
penance."


Chapter 26


Duration of Purgatory - Venerable Catherine Paiuzzi and
Sister Bernardine - Brothers Finetti and Rudolfini - Saint
Peter Ciaver and the two Poor Women

Let us cite some other examples which will serve to convince
us still more of the long duration of the sufferings of
Purgatory. We shall see therein that Divine Justice is
relatively severe towards souls called to perfection, and who
have received much grace. Does not Jesus Christ say in the
Gospel, Unto whom much is given, of him much shall be
required: and to whom they have committed much, of him
they will demand the more? (Luke 12:48)

We read in the Life of Venerable Catherine Paiuzzi that a
holy Religious, who died in her arms, was not admitted to
eternal beatitude until after she had passed an entire year in
Purgatory. Catherine Paiuzzi led a holy life in the diocese of
Nepi, in Italy, where she founded a convent of Dominicans.
There lived with her a Religious named Bernardine, who was
far advanced in the ways of the spiritual life. These two
saints emulated each other in fervor, and helped each other
to progress more and more in the perfection to which God
called them.

The biographer of Venerable Catherine compares them to
two live coals that communicate heat to each other; and
again, to two harps tuned to harmonize together in one
perpetual hymn of love to the greater glory of God.

Bernardine died; a painful malady, which she bore with
Christian patience, carried her to her grave. When about to
expire, she told Catherine that she would not forget her
before God, and, if God so permitted, she would return to


converse with her on such spiritual matters as would
contribute to her sanctification.

Catherine prayed much for the soul of her friend, and at the
same time besought God to allow her to appear to her. An
entire year elapsed and the deceased did not return. Finally,
on the anniversary of the death of Bernardine, Catherine
being in prayer, saw a pit from whence issued volumes of
smoke and flames; then she perceived coming out of the pit
a form surrounded by dark clouds. By degrees these vapors
were dispersed, and the apparition became radiant with an
extraordinary brilliancy. In this glorious personage Catherine
recognized Bernardine and ran towards her. "Is it you, my
dearest sister?" said she. "But when do you come? What
signifies this pit, this fiery smoke? Does your Purgatory end
only today?" "You are right," replied the soul; "for a year I
have been detained in that place of expiation, and today, for
the first time, shall I enter Heaven. As regards yourself,
persevere in your holy exercises: continue to be charitable
and merciful, and you will obtain mercy."

The following incident belongs to the history of the Society
of Jesus. Two scholastics or young Religious of that Institute,
Brothers Finetti and Rudolfini, pursued their studies at the
Roman College towards the end of the sixteenth century.

Both were models of piety and regularity, both also received
a warning from Heaven, which they disclosed, according to
the Rule, to their spiritual director. God made known to them
their approaching death and the suffering that awaited them
in Purgatory. One was to remain there for two years; the
other, four. They died, in fact, one after the other. Their
brethren in religion immediately offered the most fervent
prayers and all kinds of penances for the repose of their
souls. They knew that if the Sanctity of God imposes long
expiations upon His elect, they may be abridged and
entirely remitted by the suffrages of the living. If God is


severe towards those who have received much knowledge
and grace, on the other hand He is very indulgent towards
the poor and the simple, provided they serve Him with
sincerity and patience.

Saint Peter Claver, of the Company of
Jesus, Apostle of the Negroes of
Carthagena, knew of the Purgatory of
two souls, who had led poor and humble
lives upon earth; their sufferings were
reduced to a few hours. We find the
following account of it in the Life of this
great servant of God. He had persuaded
a virtuous woman, named Angela, to
take into her house another woman
named Ursula, who had lost the use of
her limbs and was covered with sores.

One day when he went to visit them, as
he did from time to time, to hear their
Confessions and to carry them some
little provisions, the charitable hostess
told him with grief that Ursula was at
the point of death. No, no, replied the
Father, consoling her, she has yet four
days to live, and she will not die until Saturday. When
Saturday came, he said Mass for her intention, and went out
to prepare her for death. After spending some time in prayer,
he said to the hostess with an air of confidence. Be consoled,
God loves Ursula; she will die today, but she will be only
three hours in Purgatory. Let her remember me when she
shall be with God, that she may pray for me and for the one
who until now had been a mother to her. She died at noon,
and the fulfillment of one part of the prophecy gave great
reason for belief in the accomplishment of the other.


Another day, having gone to hear the Confession of a poor
sick person whom he was accustomed to visit, he learned
that she was dead. The parents were extremely afflicted, and
he himself, who had not believed her to be so near her end,
was inconsolable at the thought of not having been able to
assist her in her last moments. He knelt down to pray by the
corpse, then suddenly rising, with a serene countenance he
said. Such a death is more worthy of our envy than of our
tears; this soul is condemned to Purgatory, but only for
twenty-four hours. Let us endeavor to shorten this time by
the fervor of our prayers.

Enough has been said on the duration of the pains. We see
that they may be prolonged to an appalling degree; even
the shortest, if we consider their severity, are long. Let us
endeavor to shorten them for others and to mitigate them
for ourselves, or better still to prevent them altogether.

Now we prevent them by removing the causes. What are the
causes? What is the matter of expiation in Purgatory?


Chapter 27


The Cause of Suffering - Matter of the Expiations of
Purgatory - Doctrine of Suarez - Saint Catherine of Genoa

Why must souls thus suffer before being admitted to see the
face of God? What is the matter, what is the subject of these
expiations? What has the fire of Purgatory to purify, to
consume in them? It is, say the doctors, the stains left by
their sins.

But what is here understood by stains? According to most
theologians, it is not the guilt of sin, but the pain or the debt
of pain proceeding from sin. To understand this well, we
must remember that sin produces a double effect on the
soul, which we call the debt (reatus) of guilt and the debt of
pain; it renders the soul not only guilty, but deserving of
pain or chastisement. Now, after the guilt is pardoned, it
generally happens that the pain remains to be undergone,
either entirely or in part, and this must be endured either in
the present life or in the life to come.

The souls in Purgatory retain not the slightest stain of guilt;
the venial guilt which they had at the moment of their death
has disappeared in the order of pure charity, with which
they are inflamed in the other life, but they still bear the
debt of suffering which they had not discharged before
death.

This debt proceeds from all the faults committed during
their life, especially from mortal sins remitted as to the guilt,
but which they have neglected to expiate by worthy fruits of
exterior penance.


Such is the common teaching of theologians, which Suarez
sums up in his Treatise on the Sacrament of Penance. "We
conclude then," he says, "that all venial sins with which a
just man dies are remitted as to the guilt, at the moment
when the soul is separated from the body, by virtue of an act
of love of God, and the perfect contrition which it then
excites over all its past faults. In fact, the soul at this
moment knows its condition perfectly, and the sins of which
it has been guilty before God; at the same time, it is mistress
of its faculties, to be able to act. On the other hand, on the
part of God, the most efficacious helps are given to her, that
she may act according to the measure of sanctifying grace
which she possesses. It follows, then, that in this perfect
disposition, the soul acts without the least hesitation. It
turns directly towards its God, and finds itself freed from all
its venial sins by an act of sovereign loathing of sin. This
universal and efficacious act suffices for the remission of
their guilt.

All stain of guilt has then disappeared; but the pain remains
to be endured, in all its rigor and long duration, at least for
those souls that are not assisted by the living. They cannot
obtain the least relief for themselves, because the time of
merit has passed; they can no longer merit, they can but
suffer, and in that way pay to the terrible justice of God all
that they owe, even to the last farthing. Usque ad
novissimum quadrantem. (Matthew 5:26)

These debts of pain are the remains of sin, and a kind of
stain, which intercepts the vision of God, and places an
obstacle to the union of the soul with its last end. Since the
souls in Purgatory are freed from the guilt of sin, writes Saint
Catherine of Genoa, there is no other barrier between them
and their union with God save the remains of sin, from which
they must be purified. This hindrance which they feel within
them causes them to suffer the torments of the damned, of


which I have spoken elsewhere, and
retards the moment when the
instinct by which they are drawn
towards God as to their Sovereign
Beatitude will attain its full
perfection. They see clearly how
serious before God is even the
slightest obstacle raised by the
remains of sin, and that it is by
necessity of justice that He delays
the full gratification of their desire
of everlasting bliss.

This sight enkindles within them a
burning flame, like that of Hell, yet without the guilt of sin.


Chapter 28


Matter of Expiation - The Remains of Mortai Sin - Lord
Stourton - Sins of Lust not fuiiy Expiated upon Earth - Saint
Lid win a

We have said that the total amount of the debt of suffering
for Purgatory comes from all the faults not atoned for upon
earth, but especially from mortal sins remitted to their guilt.
Now men who pass their whole lives in a habitual state of
mortal sin, and who delay their conversion until death,
supposing that God grants them that rare grace, will have to
undergo the most frightful punishment. The example of Lord
Stourton gives them good cause for reflection. Lord
Stourton, an English nobleman, was at heart a Catholic,
although, to retain his position at court, he regularly
attended the Protestant service. He kept a Catholic priest
concealed in his house, at the risk of great danger,
promising himself to make good use of his ministry by being
reconciled with God at the hour of his death. But he met
with a sudden accident, and, as often happens in such
cases, by a just decree of God, he had not the time to realize
his desire of tardy conversion. Nevertheless Divine Mercy,
taking into consideration what he had done for the
persecuted Catholic Church in England, vouchsafed him the
grace of perfect contrition, and consequently secured his
salvation. But he had to pay dearly for his culpable
negligence.

Years passed by. His widow married again and had children.

It was one of her daughters. Lady Arundel, who relates this
fact as an eyewitness:

"One day my mother asked F. Cornelius, a Jesuit of much
merit, and who later died a martyr (he was betrayed by a


servant of the Arundel family, and was executed at
Dorchester in 1594), to say Mass for the repose of the soul of
John, Lord Stourton, her first husband. He promised to do so;
and whilst at the altar, between the Consecration and the
Memento for the dead, he paused for a long time as if
absorbed in prayer. After Mass, in an exhortation which he
addressed to those present, he told them of a vision which
he had just had during the Holy Sacrifice. He had seen an
immense forest stretched out before him, but entirely on
fire, forming one vast cauldron. In the midst of it was the
deceased nobleman, uttering lamentable cries, bewailing
the guilty life he led in the world and at court. Having made
a full Confession of his faults, the unfortunate man ended
with these words, which Holy Scripture places in the mouth
of Job: Have pity on me! Have pity on me, at least you my
friends, for the hand of the Lord hath touched me. He then
disappeared.

"Whilst relating this, F. Cornelius shed abundance of tears,
and we all, members of the family, to the number of twenty-
four persons, wept also. Suddenly, whilst the Father was still
speaking, we perceived upon the wall against which the
altar stood what seemed to be the reflection of burning
coals."

Such is the recital of Dorothy, Lady Arundel, which may be
read in the History of England by Daniel.

Saint Lidwina saw in Purgatory a soul that suffered also for
mortal sins not sufficiently expiated on earth. The incident is
thus related in the Life of the saint. A man who had been for
a long time a slave of the demon of impurity, finally had the
happiness of being converted. He confessed his sins with
great contrition, but, prevented by death, he had not time to
atone by just penance for his numerous sins. Lidwina, who
knew him well, prayed much for him Twelve years after his


death she still continued to pray,
when, in one of her ecstasies, being
taken into Purgatory by her angel
guardian, she heard a mournful
voice issuing from a deep pit. "It is
the soul of that man," said the
angel, "for whom you have prayed
with so much fervor and constancy."

She was astonished to find him so
deep in Purgatory twelve years after^
his death. The Angel, seeing her so
greatly affected, asked if she was
willing to suffer something for his
deliverance. "With all my heart,"
replied the charitable maiden. From
that moment she suffered new pains
and frightful torments, which appeared to surpass the
strength of human endurance. Nevertheless, she bore them
with courage, sustained by a charity stronger than death,
until it pleased God to send her relief. She then breathed as
one restored to a new life, and, at the same time, she saw
that soul for which she had suffered so much come forth


from the abyss as white as snow and take its flight to
Heaven.


Chapter 29


Matter of Expiation - Woridiiness - Saint Bridget - The Young
Person - The Soidier - Biessed Mary Viiiani and the Woridiy
Lady

Souls that allow themselves to be
dazzled by the vanities of the world,
even if they have the good fortune
to escape damnation, will have to
undergo terrible punishment. Let us
open the Revelations of Saint
Bridget, which are held in such
esteem by the Church. We read
there in Book six that the saint saw
herself transported in spirit into
Purgatory, and that, among others,
she saw there a young lady of high
birth who had formerly abandoned
herself to the luxury and vanities of
the world. This unfortunate soul
related to her the history of her life, and the sad state in
which she then was. "Happily," said she, "before death I
confessed my sins in such dispositions as to escape Hell, but
now I suffer here to expiate the worldly life that my mother
did not prevent me from leading! Alas!" she added, with a
sigh, "this head, which loved to be adorned, and which
sought to draw the attention of others, is now devoured with
flames within and without, and these flames are so violent
that every moment it seems to me that I must die. These
shoulders, these arms, which I loved to see admired, are
cruelly bound in chains of red hot iron. These feet, formerly
trained for the dance, are now surrounded with vipers that
tear them with their fangs and soil them with their filthy


slime; all these members which I have adorned with jewels,
flowers, and divers other ornaments, are now a prey to the
most horrible torture. O mother, mother!" she cried, "how
culpable have you been in my regard! It was you who, by a
fatal indulgence, encouraged my taste for display and
extravagant expense; it was you that took me to theaters,
parties, and balls, and to those worldly assemblies which are
the ruin of souls. If I have not incurred eternal damnation, it
was because a special grace of God's mercy touched my
heart with sincere repentance. I made a good Confession,
and thus I have been delivered from Hell, yet only to see
myself precipitated into the most horrible torments of
Purgatory." We have remarked already that what is said of
the tortured members must not be taken literally, because
the soul is separated from the body; but God, supplying the
want of corporal organs, makes the soul experience such
sensations as have just been described. The biographer of
the saint tells us that she related this vision to a cousin of
the deceased, who was likewise given to the illusions of
worldly vanity. The cousin was so struck that she renounced
the luxuries and dangerous amusements of the world, and
devoted the remainder of her life to penance in an austere
religious order.

The same Saint Bridget, during another ecstasy, beheld the
judgment of a soldier who had just died. He had lived in the
vices too common in his profession, and would have been
condemned to Hell had not the Blessed Virgin, whom he had
always honored, preserved him from that misfortune by
obtaining for him the grace of a sincere repentance. The
saint saw him appear before the judgment seat of God and
condemned to a long Purgatory for the sins of all kinds
which he had committed. "The punishment of the eyes," said
the Judge, "shall be to contemplate the most frightful
objects; that of the tongue, to be pierced with pointed
needles and tormented with thirst; that of the touch, to be


plunged in an ocean of fire." Then the Holy Virgin
interceded, and obtained some mitigation of the rigor of the
sentence.

Let us relate still another example of the chastisements
reserved for worldlings in Purgatory, when they have not,
like the rich glutton of the Gospel, been buried in Hell.

Blessed Mary Villani, a Dominican Religious, had a lively
devotion to the holy souls, and it often happened that they
appeared to her, either to thank her or to beg the assistance
of her prayers and good works. One day, whilst praying for
them with great fervor, she was transported in spirit to their
prison of expiation. Among the souls that suffered there she
saw one more cruelly tormented than the others, in the
midst of flames which entirely enveloped her. Touched with
compassion, the servant of God interrogated the soul. "I
have been here," she replied, "fora very long time, punished
for my vanity and my scandalous extravagance. Thus far I
have not received the least alleviation. Whilst I was upon
earth, being wholly occupied with my toilet, my pleasures,
and worldly amusements, I thought very little of my duties
as a Christian, and fulfilled them only with great reluctance,
and in a slothful manner. My only serious thought was to
further the worldly interests of my family. See now how I am
punished: they bestow not so much as a passing thought
upon me: my parents, my children, those friends with whom
I was most intimate - all have forgotten me."

Mary Villani begged this soul to allow her to feel something
of what she suffered, and immediately it appeared as though
a finger of fire touched her forehead, and the pain which she
experienced instantly caused her ecstasy to cease. The mark
remained, and so deep and painful was it that two months
afterwards it was still to be seen, and caused the holy
Religious most terrible suffering. She endured this pain in


the spirit of penance, for the relief of the soul that had
appeared to her, and some time later the same soul came to
announce her deliverance.


Chapter 30


Matter of Expiation - Sins of Youth - Saint Catherine of
Sweden and the Princess Gida

It often happens that Christians do
not sufficiently reflect on the
necessity of doing penance for the
sins of their youth: they nnust one
day be atoned for by the most
rigorous penance of Purgatory. Such
was the case with the Princess Gida,
daughter-in-law of Saint Bridget, as
we read in the Lives of the Saints,

March 24, Life of Saint Catherine.

Saint Bridget was in Rome with her
daughter Catherine, when the latter
had an apparition of the soul of her
sister-in-law, Gida, of whose death
she was ignorant. Being one day in
prayer in the ancient basilica of
Saint Peter, Catherine saw before
her a woman dressed in a white robe and black mantle, and
who came to ask her prayers for a person who was dead, "It
is one of your countrywomen," she added, "who needs your
assistance." "Her name?" asked the saint. "It is the Princess
Gida of Sweden, the wife of your brother Charles." Catherine
then begged the stranger to accompany her to her mother
Bridget, to impart to her the sad tidings. "I am charged with
a message for you alone," said the stranger, "and I am not
allowed to make any other visits, for I must depart
immediately. You have no reason to doubt the truth of this
fact; in a few days another messenger will arrive from
Sweden, bringing the gold crown of Princess Gida. She has
bequeathed it to you by testament, in order to secure the


assistance of your prayers; but extend to her from this very
moment your charitable aid, for she stands in most urgent
need of your suffrages." With these words she withdrew.

Catherine would have followed her; but although her
costume would have easily distinguished her, she was
nowhere to be seen.

Struck and surprised with this strange adventure, she
hastened to return to her mother, and related all that had
happened. Saint Bridget replied with a smile, "It was your
sister-in-law Gida herself that appeared to you. Our Lord has
been pleased to reveal this to me. The dear departed died in
the most consoling sentiments of piety; that is why she
attained the favor of appearing to you asking your prayers.
She has still to expiate the numerous faults of her youth. Let
us both do all in our power to give her relief. The gold crown
which she sends you imposes this obligation upon you."

A few weeks later an officer from the court of Prince Charles
arrived in Rome, carrying the crown, and believing himself
to be the first to convey the tidings of the death of Princess
Gida. The beautiful crown was sold, and the money used for
Masses and good works for the repose of the soul of the
deceased Princess.


Chapter 31


Matter of Expiation - Scandai given - Immodest Paintings -
Father Zucci and the Novice

Those who have had the misfortune to give bad example,
and to wound or cause the perdition of souls by scandal,
must take care to repair all in this world, if they would not be
subjected to the most terrible expiation in the other. It was
not in vain that Jesus Christ cried out. Woe to the world
because of scandals! Woe to that man by whom the scandal
cometh! (Matthew 18:7).

Hear what Father Rossignoli relates in his Merveilles du
Purgatoire. A painter of great skill and otherwise exemplary
life had once made a painting not at all conformable to the
strict rules of Christian modesty. It was one of those
paintings which, under the pretext of being works of art, are
found in the best families, and the sight of which causes the
loss of so many souls.

True art is an inspiration from Heaven, which elevates the
soul to God; profane art, which appeals to the senses only,
which presents to the eye nothing but the beauties of flesh
and blood, is but an inspiration of the evil spirit; his works,
brilliant though they may be, are not works of art, and the
name is falsely attributed to them. They are the infamous
productions of a corrupt imagination.

The artist of whom we speak had allowed himself to be
misled in this point by bad example. Soon, however,
renouncing this pernicious style, he confined himself to the
production of religious pictures, or at least of those which
were perfectly irreproachable. Finally, he was painting a
large picture in the convent of the discalced Carmelites,


when he was attacked by a mortal malady. Feeling that he
was about to die, he asked the Prior to allow him to be
interred in the church of the monastery, and bequeathed to
the community his earnings, which amounted to a
considerable sum of money, charging them to have Masses
said for the repose of his soul. He died in pious sentiments,
and a few days passed, when a Religious who had stayed in
the choir after Matins saw him appear in the midst of flames
and sighing piteously.

"What!" said the Religious, "have you to endure such pain,
after leading so good a life and dying so holy a death?"
"Alas!" replied he, "it is on account of the immodest picture
that I painted some years ago. When I appeared before the
tribunal of the Sovereign Judge, a crowd of accusers came to
give evidence against me. They declared that they had been
excited to improper thoughts and evil desires by a picture,
the work of my hand. In consequence of those bad thoughts
some were in Purgatory, others in Hell. The latter cried for
vengeance, saying that, having been the cause of their
eternal perdition, I deserved, at least, the same punishment.
Then the Blessed Virgin and the saints whom I had glorified
by my pictures took up my defense. They represented to the
Judge that that unfortunate painting had been the work of
youth, and of which I had repented; that I had repaired it
afterwards by religious objects which had been a source of
edification to souls.

"In consideration of these and other reasons, the Sovereign
Judge declared that, on account of my repentance and my
good works, I should be exempt from damnation; but at the
same time. He condemned me to these flames until that
picture should be burned, so that it could no longer
scandalize anyone."


Then the poor sufferer implored the Religious to take
measures to have the painting destroyed. "I beg of you," he
added, "go in my name to such a person, proprietor of the
picture; tell him in what a condition I am for having yielded
to his entreaties to paint it, and conjure him to make a
sacrifice of it. If he refuses, woe to him! To prove that this is
not an illusion, and to punish him for his own fault, tell him
that before long he will lose his two children. Should he
refuse to obey Him who has created us both, he will pay for
it by a premature death."

The Religious delayed not to do what the poor soul asked of
him, and went to the owner of the picture. The latter, on
hearing these things, seized the painting and cast it into the
fire. Nevertheless, according to the words of the deceased,
he lost his two children in less than a month. The remainder
of his days he passed in penance, for having ordered and
kept that immodest picture in his house.

If such are the consequences of an immodest picture, what,
then, will be the punishment of the still more disastrous
scandals resulting from bad books, bad papers, bad schools,
and bad conversations? Vce mundo a scandalis! Vce homini
illi per quern scandalum venit! "Woe to the world because of
scandals! Woe to that man by whom the scandal cometh!"
(Matthew 18:7)

Scandal makes great ravages in souls by the seduction of
innocence. Ah! those accursed seducers! They shall render
to God a terrible account of the blood of their victims. We
read the following in the Life of Father Nicholas Zucchi,
written by Father Daniel Bartoli, of the Company of Jesus.

The holy and zealous Father Zucchi, who died in Rome, 21
May 1670, had drawn to a life of perfection three young
ladies, who consecrated themselves to God in the cloister.


One of them, before leaving the world, had been sought in
marriage by a young nobleman. After she had entered the
novitiate, this gentleman, instead of respecting her holy
vocation, continued to address letters to her whom he
wished to call his betrothed, urging her to quit, as he said,
the dull service of God, to embrace again the joys of life. The
Father, meeting him one day in the streets, begged him to
give up such conduct. "I assure you," he said, "that before
long you will appear before the tribunal of God, and it is
high time for you to prepare yourself by sincere penance."

In fact, a fortnight afterwards, this young man died, carried
away by a rapid death, that left him little time to put the
affairs of his conscience in order, so that there was
everything to fear for his salvation.

One evening, whilst the three novices were engaged
together in holy conversation, the youngest was called away
to the parlor. There she found a man wrapped in a heavy
cloak, and with measured steps pacing the room. "Sir," she
said, "who are you? and why did you send for me?" The
stranger, without answering, drew near and threw aside the
mysterious mantle which covered him. The Religious then
recognized the unfortunate deceased, and saw with horror
that he was entirely surrounded by chains of fire that
clasped his neck, wrists, knees, and ankles. "Pray for me!" he
cried, and disappeared. This miraculous manifestation
showed that God had had mercy upon him at the last
moment; that he had not been damned, but that he paid for
his attempt at seduction by a terrible Purgatory.


Chapter 32


Matter of Expiation - The Life of Pieasure - The Pursuit of
Comfort - Venerabie Frances of Pampeiuna and the Man of
the Worid - Saint Eiizabeth and the Queen, her Mother

In our days there are Christians who are total strangers to
the Cross and the mortification of Jesus Christ. Their
effeminate and sensual life is but one chain of pleasures;
they fear everything that is a sacrifice; scarcely do they
observe the strict laws of fasting and abstinence prescribed
by the Church. Since they will not submit to any penance in
this world, let them reflect on what will be inflicted upon
them in the next. It is certain that in this worldly life they do
nothing but accumulate debts. Since they omit to do
penance, no part of the debt is paid, and a total is reached
that affrights the imagination. The venerable servant of God,
Frances of Pampeiuna, who was favored with several visions
of Purgatory, saw one day a man of the world, who, although
he had otherwise been a tolerably good Christian, passed
fifty-nine years in Purgatory on account of seeking his ease
and comfort. Another passed thirty-five years there for the
same reason; a third, who had too strong a passion for
gambling, was detained there for sixty-four years. Alas!
these injudicious Christians have allowed their debts to
remain before God, and those which they might so easily
have acquitted by works of penance they have had to pay
afterwards by years of torture.

If God is severe towards the rich and the pleasure-seekers of
the world. He will not be less so towards princes,
magistrates, parents, and in general towards all those who
have the charge of souls and authority over others.


A severe judgment, says He Himself, shall be for them that
bear rule. (Wisdom 6:6)

Laurence Surius relates how an
illustrious queen, after her death,
bore witness to this truth. In the Life
of Saint Eiizabeth, Duchess of
Thuringia, it is said that the servant
of God lost her mother, Gertrude,

Queen of Hungary, about the year
1220. In the spirit of a holy
Christian daughter, she gave
abundant alms, redoubled her
prayers and mortifications,
exhausted the resources of her
charity for the relief of that dear
soul. God revealed to her that she
had not done too much. One night
the deceased appeared to her with
a sad and emaciated countenance;
she placed herself on her knees
next to the bed, and said to her, weeping, "My daughter, you
see at your feet your mother overwhelmed with suffering. I
come to implore you to multiply your suffrages, that Divine
Mercy may deliver me from the frightful torments I endure.
Oh! how much are those to be pitied who exercise authority
over others? I expiate now the faults that I committed upon
the throne. Oh! my daughter, I pray you by the pangs I
endured when bringing you into the world, by the cares and
anxieties which your education cost me, I conjure you to
deliver me from my torments." Elizabeth, deeply touched,
arose immediately, took the discipline to blood, and
implored God, with tears, to have mercy on her mother,
Gertrude, declaring that she would not cease to pray until
she had obtained her deliverance. Her prayers were heard.


Let us here remark that, in the preceding example, there is
spoken of a queen only; how much more severely will kings,
magistrates, and all superiors be treated whose
responsibility and influence are much greater!


Chapter 33

Matter of Expiation - Tepidity - Saint Bernard and the
Reiigious of Citeaux - Venerabie Mother Agnes and Sister de
Haut Viiiars - Father Surin and the Reiigious of Loudun

Good Christians, Priests, and Religious, who wish to serve
God with their whole hearts, must avoid the rock of tepidity
and negligence. God will be served with fervor; those who
are tepid and careless excite His disgust; He even goes so
far as to threaten with His malediction those who perform
holy actions in a careless manner - that is to say. He will
severely punish in Purgatory all negligence in His service.

Among the disciples of Saint
Bernard, who perfumed the
celebrated valley of Clairvaux with
the odor of their sanctity, there was
one whose negligence sadly
contrasted with the fervor of his
brethren. Notwithstanding his
double character of Priest and of
Religious, he allowed himself to sink
into a deplorable state of tepidity.

The moment of death arrived, and
he was summoned before God
without having given any token of
amendment.

Whilst the Mass of Requiem was
being celebrated, a venerable
Religious of uncommon virtue learned by an interior light,
that though the deceased was not eternally lost, his soul was
in a most miserable condition. The following night the soul
appeared to him in a sad and wretched condition.


"Yesterday," he said, "you learned my deplorable fate;
behold now the tortures to which I am condemned in
punishment for my culpable tepidity." He then conducted
the old man to the edge of a large, deep pit, filled with
smoke and flames. "Behold the place," said he, "where the
ministers of Divine Justice have orders to torment me; they
cease not to plunge me into this abyss, and draw me out
only to precipitate me into it again, without giving me one
moment's respite."

The next morning the Religious went to Saint Bernard to
make known to him his vision. The holy Abbot, who had had
a similar apparition, received it as a warning from Heaven to
his community. He convened a Chapter, and with tearful
eyes related the double vision, exhorting his Religious to
succor their poor departed brother by their charitable
suffrages, and to profit by this sad example to preserve their
fervor, and to avoid the least negligence in the service of
God.

The following instance is related by M. de Lantages in the
Life of Venerable Mother Agnes of Langeac, a Dominican
Religious. Whilst this Religious was one day praying in choir,
a Religious whom she did not know suddenly appeared
before her, miserably clad and with a countenance
expressive of the deepest grief. She looked at her with
astonishment, asking herself who it might be; when she
heard the voice say distinctly, " It is Sister de Haut Villars."

Sister de Haut Villars had been a Religious in the monastery
at Puy, and had died about ten years previous to this vision.
The apparition said not a word, but showed sufficiently by
her sad countenance how greatly she stood in need of
assistance.


Mother Agnes understood this perfectly, and began from
that day to offer most fervent prayers for the relief of this
soul. The deceased was not content with the first visit; she
continued to appear for the space of three weeks, almost
everywhere and at all times, especially after Holy
Communion and prayer, manifesting her sufferings by the
doleful expression of her countenance.

Agnes, by the advice of her confessor, without speaking of
the apparition, asked her Prioress to allow the community to
offer extra prayers for the dead, for her intention. Since,
notwithstanding these prayers, the apparitions continued,
she greatly feared some delusion. God, however, deigned to
remove this fear. He clearly made known to His charitable
servant, by the voice of her angel guardian, that it was really
a soul from Purgatory, and that she thus suffered for her
negligence in the service of God. From the moment these
words were uttered, the apparitions ceased, and it is not
known how long that unfortunate soul may have had to
remain in Purgatory. Let us cite another example, qualified
to stimulate the fervor of the faithful. A holy Religious
named Mary of the Incarnation, of the convent of the
Ursulines, in Loudun, appeared some time after her death to
her Superior, a woman of intelligence and merit, who wrote
the details of the apparition to Father Surin of the Company
of Jesus. "On November 6th," she wrote, "between three and
four o'clock in the morning. Mother of the Incarnation stood
before me, with an expression of sweetness on her
countenance that appeared more like that of humility than
of suffering; yet I saw that she suffered much. When I first
perceived her near me, I was seized with great fright, but as
there was nothing about her that inspired fear, I soon felt
reassured. I asked her in what state she was, and if we could
render her any service. She replied, 'I satisfy Divine Justice
in Purgatory.' I begged her to tell me why she was detained
there. Then with a deep sigh she answered, 'It is for being


negligent in several common exercises; a certain weakness
by which I allowed myself to be led by the example of
imperfect Religious; finally, and especially, the habit which I
had of retaining in my possession things of which I had no
permission to dispose, and of making use of them to suit my
needs and natural inclinations. Ah! if Religious knew,'
continued the good Mother, 'the wrong they do their souls
by not applying themselves to perfection, and how dearly
they shall one day expiate the satisfactions which they give
themselves contrary to the light of their consciences, their
efforts to do violence to themselves during life would be
very different. Ah! God's point of view is different from ours.
His judgments are different.'

"I asked her again if we could do anything to relieve her
sufferings. She replied, 'I desire to see and possess God, but
I am content to satisfy His Justice as long as it shall please
Him ' I asked her to tell me whether she suffered much. 'My
pains,' she replied, 'are incomprehensible to those who do
not feel them.' Saying these words, she drew near my face to
take leave of me. It seemed as though I was burned by a
coal of fire, although her face did not touch mine; and my
arm, which had barely grazed her mantle, was burned and
caused me considerable pain."

A month later she appeared to the same Superior to
announce her deliverance.


Chapter 34


Matter of Expiation - Negiigence in Hoiy Communion - Louis
of Biois - Saint Magdaien de Pazzi and the Departed Soui in
Adoration

To tepidity is allied negligence in
the preparation for the Eucharistic
Banquet. If the Church unceasingly
calls her children to the Holy Table,
if she desires that they
communicate frequently, she
always intends that they should do
so with that fervor and piety which
so great a mystery demands. All
voluntary neglect in so holy an
action is an offense to the Sanctity
of Jesus Christ, an offense which
must be repaired by a just
expiation. Venerable Louis of Biois,
in his Miroir Spirituei, speaks of a
great servant of God who learned in
a supernatural manner how severely these faults are
punished in the other life. He received a visit from a soul in
Purgatory imploring his aid in name of the friendship by
which they had formerly been united. She endured, she said,
horrible torments, for the negligence with which she had
prepared for Holy Communion during the days of her earthly
pilgrimage. She could not be delivered but by a fervent
Communion which would compensate for her former
tepidity.

Her friend hastened to gratify her desire, received Holy
Communion with great purity of conscience, with all the


faith and devotion possible; and then she saw the holy soul
appear, brilliant with an incomparable splendor, and rise
towards Heaven.

In the year 1589, in the monastery
of Saint Mary of the Angels, in
Florence, died a Religious who was
much esteemed by her sisters in
religion, but who soon appeared to
Saint Magdalen de Pazzi to implore
her assistance in the rigorous
Purgatory to which she was
condemned. The saint was in prayer
before the Blessed Sacrament when
she perceived the deceased
kneeling in the middle of the church
in an attitude of profound adoration.

She had around her a mantle of
flames that seemed to consume her,
but a white robe that covered her
body protected her in part from the action of the fire. Greatly
astonished, Magdalen desired to know what this signified,
and she was answered that this soul suffered thus for having
had little devotion toward the August Sacrament of the
Altar. Notwithstanding the rules and holy customs of her
Order, she had communicated but rarely, and then with
indifference. It was for this reason Divine Justice had
condemned her to come every day to adore the Blessed
Sacrament, and to submit to the torture of fire at the feet of
Jesus Christ. Nevertheless, in reward for her virginal purity,
represented by the white robe, her Divine Spouse had
greatly mitigated her sufferings.

Such was the revelation which God made to His servant. She
was deeply touched, and made every effort to assist the
poor soul by all the suffrages in her power. She often related


this apparition, and made use of it to exhort her spiritual
daughters to zeal for Holy Communion.


Chapter 35


Matter of Expiation - Want of Respect in Prayer - Mother
Agnes of Jesus and Sister Angeiique - Saint Severin of
Coiogne - Venerabie Frances of Pampeiuna and the Priests -
Father Streit, SJ.

We should treat holy things in a holy
manner. All irreverence in religious
exercises is extremely displeasing to
God. When the Venerable Agnes of
Langeac, of whom we have already
spoken, was Prioress of her convent, she
very much recommended to her
Religious respect and fervor in their
relations with God, reminding them of
these words of Holy Scripture, Accursed
be he that doth the work of God with
negligence. A sister of the community
named Angeiique died. The pious
Superior was praying near her tomb, when she suddenly saw
the deceased sister before her, dressed in the religious
habit; she felt at the same time as though a flame of fire
touched her face. Sister Angeiique thanked her for having
stimulated her to fervor, and particularly for having
frequently made her repeat during life these words.

Accursed be he that doth the work of God with negligence.
"Continue, Mother," she added, "to urge the sisters to fervor;
let them serve God with the utmost diligence, love Him with
their whole heart, and with all the power of their soul. If they
could but understand how rigorous are the torments of
Purgatory, they would never be guilty of the least neglect."


The foregoing warning regards in a special nnanner priests,
whose relations with God are continual and more sublime.
Let them, therefore, remember it always, and never forget it,
whether they offer to God the incense of prayer, whether
they dispense the Divine Treasures of the Sacraments, or
whether at the altar they celebrate the mysteries of the
Body and Blood of Jesus Christ. See what Saint Peter Damian
relates in his 14th Letter to Desiderius.


Saint Severin, Archbishop of
Cologne, edified his church by an
example of all virtues. His apostolic
life, his great labors for the
extension of God's kingdom in
fcsouls, have merited for him the
[honors of canonization.
[Nevertheless, after his death he
[appeared to one of the canons of his
[cathedral to ask for prayers. This
[worthy priest not being able to
[understand that a holy prelate, such
[as he had known Severin to be,
[could stand the need of prayers in
;he other life, the deceased Bishop
[replied, "It is true God gave me
grace to serve Him with all my heart
and to labor in His vineyard, but I often offended Him by the
haste with which I recited the Holy Office. The occupations
of each day so absorbed my attention, that when the hour of
prayer came, I acquitted myself of that great duty without
recollection, and sometimes at another hour than that
appointed by the Church. At this moment I am expiating
those infidelities, and God permits me to come and ask your
prayers." The biography adds that Severin was six months in
Purgatory for that one fault.


Venerable Sister Prances of Pampeluna, whom we have
before mentioned, one day saw in Purgatory a poor priest
whose fingers were eaten away by frightful ulcers. He was
thus punished for having at the altar made the Sign of the
Cross with too much levity, and without the necessary
gravity. She said that in general priests remain in Purgatory
longer than laymen, and that the intensity of their torments
is in proportion to their dignity. God revealed to her the fate
of several deceased priests. One of them had to undergo
forty years of suffering for having by his neglect allowed a
person to die without the Sacraments; another remained
there for forty-five years for having performed the sublime
functions of his ministry with a certain levity. A Bishop,
whose liberality had caused him to be named almoner, was
detained there for five years for having sought that dignity;
another, not so charitable, was condemned for forty years
for the same reason.

God wills that we should serve Him with our whole heart,
and that we should avoid, in so far as the frailty of human
nature will permit, even the slightest imperfections; but the
care to please Him and the fear of displeasing Him must be
accompanied by a humble confidence in His mercy.

Jesus Christ has admonished us to hear those whom He has
appointed in His place to be our spiritual guides as we
should Himself, and to follow the advice of our superior or
confessor with perfect confidence. Thus an excessive fear is
an offense against His Mercy.

On 12 November 1643, Father Philip Streit, of the Society of
Jesus, a Religious of great sanctity, died at the Novitiate of
Briinn in Bohemia. Every day he made his examination of
conscience with the greatest care, and acquired by this
means great purity of soul. Some hours after his death, he
appeared all radiant to one of the Fathers of his Order,


Venerable Martin Strzeda. "One single fault," he said,
"prevents me from going to Heaven, and detains me eight
hours in Purgatory; it is that of not having sufficiently
confided in the words of my Superior, who, in the last
moments of my life, strove to calm some little trouble of
conscience. I ought to have regarded his words as the voice
of God Himself."


Chapter 36


Matter of Expiation and Chastisement - Immortification of
the Senses - Father Francis ofAix - Immortification of the
Tongue - Durand

Christians who wish to escape the rigors of Purgatory must
love the mortification of their Divine Master, and beware of
being delicate members under a Head crowned with thorns.
On February 10, 1656, in the province of Lyons, Father
Francis of Aix, of the Society of Jesus, passed away to a
better life. He carried all the virtues of a Religious to a high
degree of perfection. Penetrated with a profound veneration
towards the Most Blessed Trinity, he had for particular
intention in all his prayers and mortifications to honor this
August Mystery; to embrace by preference those works for
which others showed less inclination, had a particular charm
for him. He often visited the Blessed Sacrament, even during
the night, and never left the door of his room without going
to say a prayer at the foot of the altar. His penances, which
were in a manner excessive, gave him the name of the man
of suffering. He replied to one who advised him to moderate
them, "What day which I should allow to pass without
shedding some drops of my blood to offer to my God would
be for me the most painful and the severest mortification.
Since I cannot hope to suffer martyrdom for the love of Jesus
Christ, I will at least have some part in His sufferings."

Another Religious, Brother Coadjutor of the same Order, did
not imitate the example of this good Father. He had little
love for mortification, but, on the contrary, sought his ease
and comfort, and all that could gratify the senses. This
brother, some days after his death, appeared to Father d'

Aix, clothed in frightful haircloth, and suffering great


torments, in punishment for the faults of sensuality which he
had committed during life. He implored the assistance of his
prayers, and immediately disappeared.

Another fault against which we must guard, because we so
easily fall into it, is the unmortification of the tongue. Oh!
how easy it is to err in words! How rare a thing it is to speak
for any length of time without offending against meekness,
humility, sincerity, or Christian charity! Even pious persons
are often subject to this defect; when they have escaped all
the other snares of the demon, they allow themselves to be
taken, says Saint Jerome, in this last trap - slander. Let us
listen to what is related by Vincent de Beauvais.

When the celebrated Durand, who, in the eleventh century,
shed luster on the Order of Saint Dominic, was yet a simple
Religious, he showed himself a model of regularity and
fervor; yet he had one defect. The vivacity of his disposition
led him to talk too much; he was excessively fond of witty
expressions, often at the expense of charity. Hugh, his
Abbot, brought this under his notice, even predicting that, if
he did not correct himself of this fault, he would certainly
have to expiate it in Purgatory. Durand did not attach
sufficient importance to this advice, and continued to give
himself, without much restraint, to the disorders of the
tongue. After his death, the prediction of the Abbot Hugh
was fulfilled. Durand appeared to a Religious, one of his
friends, imploring him to assist him by his prayers, because
he was frightfully punished for the unmortification of his
tongue. In consequence of this apparition, the members of
the community unanimously agreed to observe strict silence
for eight days, and to practice other good works for the
repose of the deceased. These charitable exercises produced
their effect; some time after Durand again appeared, but
now to announce his deliverance.


Chapter 37


Matter of Expiation - intemperance of the Tongue - The
Dominican Father - Sisters Gertrude and Margaret - Saint
Hugh of Ciuny and the infringer of the Ruie of Science

We have just seen how immoderation in the use of words is
expiated in Purgatory. Father R Rossignoli speaks of a
Dominican Religious who incurred the chastisements of
Divine Justice for a like defect. This Religious, a preacher full
of zeal, a glory to his Order, appeared after his death to one
of his brethren at Cologne. He was clad in magnificent robes,
wearing a crown of gold upon his head, but his tongue was
fearfully tormented. These ornaments represented the
recompense of his zeal for souls and his perfect exactitude
in all the points of his Rule. Nevertheless, his tongue was
tortured because he had not been sufficiently guarded in his
words, and his language was not always becoming the
sacred lips of a priest and a Religious.

The following instance is drawn from Cesarius. In a
monastery of the Order of Citeaux, says this author, lived
two young Religious, named Gertrude and her sister
Margaret. The former, although otherwise virtuous, did not
sufficiently watch over her tongue; she frequently allowed
herself to transgress the rule of silence prescribed,
sometimes even in choir, before and after the chanting of
the Office. Instead of recollecting herself with the reverence
due to that holy place, she addressed useless words to her
sister, who was placed next to her, so that, besides her
violation of the rule of silence and her lack of piety, she was
a subject of disedification to her companion. She died whilst
still young, and a very short time after her death. Sister


Margaret, on going to Office, saw her come and place herself
in the same stall she had occupied whilst living.

At this sight the sister was almost about to faint. When she
had sufficiently recovered from her astonishment, she went
and told the Superior what she had just seen. The Superior
told her not to be troubled, but, should the deceased appear
again, to ask her, in the name of God, why she came.

She reappeared the next day in the same way, and,
according to the order of the Prioress, Margaret said to her,
"My dear Sister Gertrude, whence do you come, and what do
you want?" "I come," she said, "to satisfy the Justice of God
in this place where I have sinned. It was here, in this holy
sanctuary, that I offended God by words, both useless and
contrary to religious respect, by disedification to all, and by
the scandal which I have given to you in particular. Oh, if
you knew," she added, "what I suffer! I am devoured by
flames, my tongue especially is dreadfully tormented." She
then disappeared, after having asked for prayers.

When Saint Hugh, who succeeded Saint Odilo in 1049,
governed the fervent monastery of Cluny, one of his
Religious, who had been careless in the observance of the
rule of silence, having died, appeared to the holy Abbot to
beg the assistance of his prayers. His mouth was filled with
frightful ulcers, in punishment, he said, for idle words. Hugh
imposed seven days of silence upon his community. They
were passed in recollection and prayer. Then the deceased
reappeared, freed from his ulcers, his countenance radiant,
and testifying his gratitude for the charitable succor he had
received from his brethren. If such is the chastisement of
idle words, what will be that of words more culpable?


Chapter 38


Matter of Expiation - Faiiure in Matters of Justice - Father
d'Espinoza and the Payments - Biessed Margaret of Cortona
and the Assassinated Merchants

A multitude of revelations show us that God chastises with
implacable rigor all sins contrary to Justice and Charity; and
in matters of Justice He seems to exact that reparation be
made before the penalty is remitted; as in the Church
Militant her ministers must exact restitution in order to remit
the guilt, according to the axiom. Without restitution no
remission.

Father P. Rossignoli speaks of a Religious of his Order, named
Augustin d'Espinoza, whose saintly life was but one act of
devotion to the souls in Purgatory. A rich man who went to
him to Confession, having died without having sufficiently
regulated his affairs, appeared to him, and asked him first if
he knew him.

"Certainly," replied the Father; "I administered the
Sacrament of Penance to you a few days before your death."
"You must know, then," added the soul, "that I come to you
by a special grace of God, to conjure you to appease His
Justice, and to do for me that which I can no longer do for
myself. Follow me."

The Father first went to see his Superior, to tell him what
was asked of him, and to obtain permission to follow the
strange visitor. The permission obtained, he went out and
followed the apparition, who, without uttering a single word,
led him to one of the bridges of the city. There it begged the
Father to wait a little, disappeared for a moment, then
returned with a bag of money, which it begged the Father to


carry, and both returned to the cell of the Religious. Then
the deceased gave him a written note, and showed him the
money. "All this," said he, "is at your disposal. Have the
charity to take it, that you may satisfy my creditors, whose
names are written upon this paper, with the amount due to
each. Be pleased to take what remains and use it for good
works at your own discretion, for the repose of my soul."
With these words he disappeared, and the Father hastened
to carry out his wishes.


Eight days had scarcely elapsed
when Father d'Espinoza received
another visit from the same soul. He
thanked the Father most heartily.

"Thanks to the charitable
exactitude," he said, "with which
you have paid the debts that I left
on earth, thanks also to the Holy
Masses which you have celebrated
for me, I am delivered from all my
sufferings, and am admitted into
eternal beatitude." We find an
example of the same kind in the Life of Blessed Margaret of
Cortona. This illustrious penitent also distinguished herself
by her charity towards the departed souls. They appeared to
her in great numbers, to implore her assistance and
suffrages. One day, among others, she saw before her two
travellers, who begged her to assist them in repairing the
injustices left to their account. "We are two merchants," they
told her, "who have been assassinated on the road by
brigands. We could not go to Confession or receive
absolution; but by the mercy of our Divine Saviour and His
Holy Mother, we had the time to make an act of perfect
contrition, and we have been saved. But our torments in
Purgatory are terrible, because in the exercise of our
profession we have committed many acts of injustice. Until


these acts are repaired we can have no repose nor
alleviation. This is why we beseech you, servant of God, to
go and find such and such of our relatives and heirs, to warn
them to make restitution as soon as possible of all the
money which we have unjustly acquired." They gave the
holy penitent the necessary information and disappeared.


Chapter 39


Matter of Expiation - Sins against Charity - Biessed Margaret
Mary - Two Persons of Rank in the Pains of Purgatory -
Severai Sou is Punished for Discord

We have already said that Divine Justice is extremely severe
in regard to sins against Charity. Charity is, in fact, the virtue
which is dearest to the Heart of our Divine Master, and which
He recommends to His disciples as that which must
distinguish them in the eyes of men. By this. He says, shall
all men know that you are My disciples, if you have love one
for another. (John 13:35). It is, then, not astonishing that
harshness towards our neighbor, and every other fault
against Charity, should be severely punished in the other
life.

Of this we have several proofs,
taken from the Life of Blessed
Margaret Mary. "I learned from Sister
Margaret," says Mother Greffier in
her Memoirs, "that she one day
prayed for two persons of high rank
in the world who had just died. She
saw them both in Purgatory. The one
was condemned for several years to
those sufferings, notwithstanding
the great number of Masses which
were celebrated for her. All those
prayers and suffrages were by Divine Justice applied to the
souls belonging to some of the families of her subjects,
which had been ruined by their injustice and lack of charity.
As nothing was left to those poor people to enable them to
have prayers offered for them after their death, God


compensated these poor people in the manner we have
related. The other was in Purgatory for as many days as she
had lived years upon earth. Our Lord made known to Sister
Margaret that, among the good works which this person had
performed, He had taken into special consideration the
Charity with which she had borne the faults of her neighbor,
and the pains she had taken to overcome the displeasure
they had caused her."

On another occasion Our Lord showed Blessed Margaret a
large number of souls in Purgatory, who, for not having been
united with their Superiors during their life, and for having
had some misunderstanding with them, had been severely
punished and deprived after death of the aid of the Blessed
Virgin and the Saints, and also of the visits of their angel
guardians. Several of those souls were destined to remain
for a long time in horrible flames. Some even among them
had no other token of their predestination than that they did
not hate God. Others, who had been in religion, and who
during life showed little charity towards their sisters, were
deprived of their sufferings, and received no assistance
whatsoever.

Let us add one more extract from the Memoirs of Mother
Greffier. "It happened whilst Sister Margaret was praying for
two deceased Religious, that their souls were shown to her in
the prisons of Divine Justice, but one suffered incomparably
more than the other. The former regretted greatly that by
her faults against mutual Charity, and the holy friendship
that ought to remain in religious communities, she had in
part deprived herself, among other punishments, of the
suffrages which were offered for her by the community. She
received relief only from the prayers of three or four persons
of the same community for whom she had had less affection
and inclination during her life. This suffering soul
reproached herself also for the too great facility with which


she took dispensations from the rules and exercises of the
community. Finally, she deplored the care which she had
taken upon earth to procure for her body so many comforts
and commodities. She made known at the same time to our
dear Sister that, in punishment for three faults, she had to
undergo three furious assaults of the demon during her last
agony, and that each time believing herself lost, she was on
the point of falling into despair, but by the Blessed Virgin,
towards whom she had borne great devotion during her life,
she had been snatched three times from the claws of the
enemy."


Chapter 40


Matter of Expiation - Lack of Charity and of Respect towards
our Neighbor - Saint Louis Bertrand and the Departed Soui
asking Pardon - Father Nieremberg - Biessed Margaret Mary
and the Benedictine Reiigious

True Charity is humble and indulgent towards others,
respecting them as though they were their superiors. Her
words are always friendly, and full of consideration for
others, having nothing of bitterness nor coldness, nothing
savoring of contempt, because she is born of a heart that is
meek and humble like that of Jesus. She also carefully
avoids all that could disturb unity; she takes every means,
makes every sacrifice to effect a reconciliation, according to
the words of our Divine Master, If thou offer thy gift at the
altar, and there thou remember that thy brother hath
anything against thee, leave there thy offering before the
altar, and go first to be reconciled to thy brother, and then
coming thou shalt offer thy gift. (Matthew 5:23).

A Religious having wounded Charity in regard to Saint Louis
Bertrand, received a terrible chastisement after death. He
was plunged into the fire of Purgatory, which he had to
endure until he had made satisfaction to Divine Justice; nay,
more, he could not be admitted into the abode of the elect
until he had accomplished an act of exterior reparation,
which should serve as an example to the living. The fact is
thus related in the Life of the saint:

When Saint Louis Bertrand, of the Order of Saint Dominic,
resided at the convent of Valencia, there was a young
Religious in the community who attached too much
importance to profane science. Doubtless letters and
erudition have their value, but, as the Holy Ghost declares.


they should yield to the fear of God
and the science of the saints. Non
super timentem Dominion - "There
is none above him that fears the
Lord." (Ecclus. 25:13). This science
of the saints, which Eternal Wisdom
came to teach us, consists in
Humility and Charity. The young
Religious of whom we speak, while
but little advanced in Divine
science, allowed himself to reproach
Father Bertrand with his little
knowledge, and said to him, "One
can see. Father, that you are not
very learned!" "Brother replied the
saint with meek firmness," Lucifer
was very learned, and yet he was
damned.

The brother who had committed this fault did not think of
repairing it. Nevertheless, he was not a bad Religious, and
some time after, falling dangerously sick, he received the
last Sacrament in very good dispositions, and expired
peacefully in the Lord. A considerable time elapsed, and
meanwhile Louis was nominated Prior. One day, having
remained in choir after Matins, the deceased appeared to
him enveloped in flames, and prostrating humbly before
him, said, "Father, pardon me the offensive words which I
formerly addressed to you. God will not permit me to see His
face until you shall have pardoned my fault and offered Holy
Mass for me." The saint willingly forgave him, and the next
morning celebrated Mass for the repose of his soul. The
following night, being again in choir, he saw the deceased
brother reappear, but radiant with glory and going up to
Heaven.


Father Eusebius Nieremberg, Religious of the Company of
Jesus, author of the beautiful book, Difference between Time
and Eternity, resided at the College of Madrid, where he died
in the odor of sanctity in 1658. This servant of God, who was
singularly devout towards the souls in Purgatory, was
praying one day in the church of the college for a Father
who had recently died. The deceased, who for a long time
had been a professor of theology, had proved himself to be
as good a Religious as he was a learned theologian; he had
been distinguished for his great devotion to the Blessed
Virgin, but one vice had crept in among his virtues - he was
uncharitable in his words, and frequently spoke of the faults
of his neighbor. Now, whilst Father Nieremberg was
recommending his soul to God, this Religious appeared, and
revealed to him the state of his soul. He was condemned to
frightful torments for having frequently spoken against
charity. His tongue, the instrument of his fault, was tortured
by a devouring fire. The Blessed Virgin, in recompense for
the tender devotion which he had cherished towards her,
had obtained permission for him to come and ask for
prayers; he was, at the same time, to serve as an example to
others, that they might learn to be guarded in all their
words. Father Nieremberg, having offered many prayers and
penances for him, finally obtained his deliverance.

The Religious of whom mention is
made in the /.//eof Blessed Margaret
Mary, and for whom that servant of
God suffered so terribly for the
space of three months, among other
faults, was also punished for his sins
against Charity. The revelation is
thus related:

Blessed Margaret Mary, we read in
her Life, being one day before the


Blessed Sacrament, suddenly saw before her a man totally
enveloped in fire, the intense heat of which seemed about to
consume herself The wretched state in which she saw this
poor soul caused her to shed tears. He was a Benedictine
Religious of the monastery of Cluny, to whom she had
formerly confessed, and who had done good to her soul by
ordering her to receive Holy Communion. In reward for this
service, God had permitted him to address himself to her,
that he might find some alleviation in his sufferings.

The poor departed asked that all she should do and suffer
for the space of three months might be applied to him. This
she promised, after having obtained permission. Then he
told her that the principal cause of his intense suffering was
for having sought his own interests before the glory of God
and the good of souls, by attaching too much importance to
his reputation. The second was his want of charity towards
his brethren. The third, the natural affection for creatures to
whom, through weakness, he had yielded, and to which he
had given expression in his spiritual intercourse with them,
"this being," he added, "very displeasing to God."

It is difficult to say all that the Blessed Sister had to suffer
during the three months following. The deceased never left
her. On the side where he stood she seemed all on fire, with
such excruciating pain, that she could not cease to weep.

Her Superior, touched with compassion, ordered her
penances and disciplines, because pain and suffering
greatly relieved her. The torments which the Sanctity of God
inflicted upon her were insupportable. It was a specimen of
the suffering endured by the poor souls.


Chapter 41


Matter of Expiation - Abuse of Grace - Saint Magdaien de
Pazzi and the Dead Reiigious - Biessed Margaret Mary and
the Three Sou is in Purgatory

There is another disorder in the soul which God punishes
severely in Purgatory, to wit, the abuse of grace. By this is
understood the neglect to correspond to the aids which God
gives us, and to the invitations which He presses upon us to
the practice of virtue for the sanctification of our souls. This
grace which He offers us is a precious gift, which we may not
throw away; it is the seed of salvation and of merit, which it
is not permitted to leave unproductive. Now, this fault is
committed when we do not respond with generosity to the
Divine invitation. I receive from God the means of giving
alms; an interior voice invites me to do so. I close my heart,
or I give with a miserly hand; this is an abuse of grace. I can
hear Mass, assist at the sermon, frequent the Sacraments;
an interior voice urges me to go, but I will not give myself
the trouble. This, again, is an abuse of grace.

A young Religious must be obedient, humble, mortified,
devoted to her duties; God requires this, and gives her the
grace in virtue of her vocation. She does not apply herself
thereto; she does not labor to overcome herself, in order to
cooperate with the assistance which God gives her; this is
an abuse of grace.

Now this sin, as we have said, is severely punished in
Purgatory. Saint Magdalen de Pazzi tells us that one of her
sisters in religion had much to suffer after death for not
having on three occasions corresponded to grace, it
happened that on a certain feast day she felt inclined to do
some little work; it was only some simple piece of


embroidery, but it was not at all
necessary, and could be
conveniently postponed to some
other time. The inspiration of grace
told her to abstain from it.


Part Two - Purgatory, The
Mystery of God's Mercy

"It is therefore a holy and wholesome thought to
pray for the dead, that they may be loosed from
sins." -2 Machabees 12:46


Chapter 1


Fear and Confidence - The Mercy of God - Saint Lidwina and
the Priest - Venerable Claude de la Colonnbiere

We have just considered the rigors of Divine Justice in the
other life; they are terrific, and it is impossible to think of
them without trembling. That fire, enkindled by Divine
Justice, those excruciating pains, compared to which all the
penances of the saints, all the sufferings of the martyrs put
together, are as nothing, who is there that thinks he will be
able to look upon them and not shudder from very fear?

This fear is salutary and conformable to the spirit of Jesus
Christ. Our Divine Master desires that we should fear, and
that we should fear not only Hell, but also Purgatory, which
is a sort of mitigated Hell. It is to inspire us with this holy
fear that He shows us the dungeons of the Supreme Judge,
whence we shall not depart until we have paid the last
farthing. (Matthew 5:26). We may say of the fire of Purgatory
that which is said of Hell fire: Fear ye not them that kill the
body and are not able to kill the soul, but rather fear him
that can cast both soul and body into Hell. (Matthew 10:28).
Yet it is not the intention of Our Lord that we should have an
excessive and barren fear, a fear which tortures and
discourages, a gloomy fear without confidence. No; He
wishes that our fear should be tempered with great trust in
His mercy; He desires that we should fear evil in order to
prevent and avoid it; He desires that the thought of those
avenging flames should stimulate us to fervor in His service,
and cause us to expiate our faults in this world rather than
in the other. " Better is it to purge away our sins, and cut off
our vices now, " says the author of the Imitation, "than to
keep them for purgation hereafter." (I mil. 1, 24). Moreover,


if, notwithstanding our endeavors to live well, and to satisfy
for our sins in this world, we have well-grounded fears that
we shall have to undergo a Purgatory, we must look forward
to that contingency with unbounded confidence in God, who
never fails to console those whom He purifies by sufferings.

Now, to give our fear this practical character, this
counterpoise of confidence, after having contemplated
Purgatory in all the rigor of its pains, we must consider it
under another aspect and from a different point of view -
that of the Mercy of God, which shines forth therein no less
than Hisjustice.

If God reserves terrible chastisements in the other life for the
least faults. He does not inflict them without, at the same
time, tempering them with clemency; and nothing shows
better the admirable harmony of the Divine perfection than
Purgatory, because the most severe Justice is there
exercised, together with the most ineffable Mercy. If Our Lord
chastises those souls that are dear to Him, it is in His love,
according to the words. Such as I love I rebuke and chastise.
(Apocalypse 3:19) With one hand He strikes, with the other
He heals. He offers mercy and redemption in abundance:
Quoniam apud Dominum misericordia, et copiosa apud eum
redemptio. (Psalm 129)

This infinite Mercy of our Heavenly Father must be the firm
foundation of our confidence; and, after the example of the
saints, we must keep it always before our eyes. The saints
never lost sight of it; and it was for this reason that the fear
of Purgatory never deprived them of their peace and joy of
the Holy Ghost.

Saint Lidwina, who so well knew the frightful severity of
expiratory suffering, was animated with that spirit of
confidence, and endeavored to inspire others with the same.


One time she received a visit from a
pious priest. Whilst he was seated at
her bedside, together with other
virtuous persons, the conversation
turned on the sufferings of the other
life. Seeing in the hands of a woman
a vase filled with grains of mustard
seed, the priest took occasion to
remark that he trembled when
thinking of the fire of Purgatory.

"Nevertheless," he added, "I should
be satisfied to go there for as many
years as there are grains of seed in
this vase; then, at least, I should be
certain of my salvation." "What do
you say. Lather?" replied the saint.

"Why so little confidence in the Mercy of God. Ah! if you had
a better knowledge of what Purgatory is, of what frightful
torments are there endured!" "Let Purgatory be what it
may," he replied. "I persist in what I say."

Some time after, this priest died, and the same persons who
had been present during his conversation with Saint
Lidwina, questioning the saint as to his condition in the
other world, she replied, "The deceased is well off, on
account of his virtuous life; but it would be better for him if
he had had more confidence in the Passion of Jesus Christ,
and if he had taken a milder view of the subject of
Purgatory."

In what consisted this lack of confidence which met the
disapproval of our saint? In the opinion which this good
priest had that it is almost impossible to be saved, and that
we shall enter Heaven only after having undergone
innumerable years of torture. This idea is erroneous, and
contrary to Christian confidence. Our Saviour came to bring


peace to men of good will, and to impose upon us, as a
condition of our salvation, a yoke which is sweet and a
burden which is not heavy. Therefore, let your will be good,
and you will find peace, you will see all difficulties and
terrors vanish. Good will! that is everything. Be of good will,
submit to the Will of God, place His Holy Law above all else,
serve the Lord with all your heart, and He will give you such
powerful assistance that you will enter Paradise with an
astonishing facility. I could never have believed, you will
say, that it was so easy to enter Heaven! Again, I repeat, to
effect in us this wonder of Mercy, God asks on our part an
upright heart, a good will.

Good will consists, properly speaking, in submitting and
conforming our will to that of God, who is the rule of all good
will; and this good will attains its highest perfection when
we embrace the Divine Will as the sovereign good, even
then when it imposes the greatest sacrifices, the most acute
suffering. Oh, admirable state! The soul thus disposed
seems to lose the sensation of pain, and this because the
soul is animated with the spirit of love; and, as Saint
Augustine says, when we love we suffer not, or, if we suffer,
we love the suffering. A at si laboratur, labor ipse amatur.

Venerable Claude de la Colombiere, of the Society of Jesus,
possessed this loving heart, this perfect will, and in his
Retrait Spirituelle he thus expresses his sentiments: "We
must not cease to expiate the past disorders of our life by
penance; but it must be done without anxiety, because the
worst that can befall us, when our will is good and we are
submissive and obedient, is to be sent for a long time to
Purgatory, and we may say with good reason that this is a
great evil. I do not fear Purgatory. Of Hell I will not speak, for
I should wrong the Mercy of God by having the least fear of
Hell, although I have merited it more than all the demons
together. Purgatory I do not fear. I wish I had not deserved it.


since I could not do so without
displeasing God; but, as I have
nnerited to go there, I am delighted
to go and satisfy His Justice in the
most rigorous manner it is possible
to imagine, and that even to the
pay of Judgment. I know that the
torments there endured are horrible,
but I know that they honor God, and
cannot prove an injury to the souls;
that there we are certain never to
oppose the Will of God; that we
shall never resent His severity; that
we shall even love the rigors of His
justice, and await with patience
[until it shall be entirely appeased.
Therefore, I have given with my whole heart all my
satisfactions to the souls in Purgatory, and even bequeath to
others all the suffrages which shall be offered for me after
my death, in order that God may be glorified in Paradise by
souls who shall have merited to be raised to a higher degree
of glory than myself."

Behold to what an excess of Charity, the love of God and our
neighbor transports us when it has once taken possession of
the heart; it transforms, transfigures suffering in such a
manner, that all its bitterness is changed into sweetness.
"When thou shalt arrive thus far, that tribulation shall be
sweet to thee, and thou shalt relish it for the love of Christ:
then think that it is well with thee, for thou hast found a
Paradise upon earth." (Imit. 2,12). Let us therefore have
great love for God, great Charity, and we shall have little
fear of Purgatory. The Holy Ghost bears testimony in the
depths of our hearts that, being children of God, we have no
need to dread the chastisements of a Father.


Chapter 2


Confidence - Mercy of God towards Souls - He Consoles
them - Saint Catherine of Genoa - The Brother of Saint
Magdalen de Pazzi

It is true that all have not attained this high degree of
Charity, but there is no one that cannot have confidence in
the Divine Mercy. This Mercy is infinite, it imparts peace to
all souls that keep it constantly before their eyes and
confide therein. Now the Mercy of God is exercised with
regard to Purgatory in a threefold manner:

1) in consoling the souls;

2) in mitigating their sufferings;

3) in giving to ourselves a thousand
those penal fires.

In the first place, God consoles the
souls in Purgatory; He Himself
consoles them; He also consoles
them through the Blessed Virgin
and through the holy angels. He
consoles the souls by inspiring them
with a high degree of faith, hope,
and Divine love - virtues which
produce in them conformity to the
Divine Will, resignation, and the
most perfect patience. "God," says
Saint Catherine of Genoa, "inspires
the soul in Purgatory with so ardent
a movement of devoted love, that it
would be sufficient to annihilate her were she not immortal.


means of avoiding


Illumined and inflamed by that pure charity, the more she
loves God, the more she detests the least stain that
displeases Him, the least hindrance that prevents her union
with Him. Thus, if she could find another Purgatory more
terrible than the one to which she is condemned, that soul
would plunge herself therein, impelled by the impetuosity of
the love which exists between God and herself, in order that
she might be the sooner delivered from all that separates
her from her Sovereign God."


"These souls," says again the same saint, "are intimately
united to the Will of God, and so completely transformed
into it, that they are always satisfied with its holy
ordinances. The souls in Purgatory have no choice of their
own; they can no longer will anything other than what God
wills. They receive with perfect submission all that God gives
them; and neither pleasure, nor contentment, nor pain can
ever again make them think of themselves."


ISaint Magdalen de Pazzi, after the
[death of one of her brothers, having
[gone to the choir to offer prayers for
[him, saw his soul a prey to intense
'Suffering. Touched with compassion,
^she melted into tears and cried out
in a piteous voice, "Brother,
miserable and blessed at the same
time! O soul afflicted and yet
;contented! these pains are
intolerable and yet they are
^endured. Why are they not
^understood by those here below,
^who have not the courage to carry
[their cross? Whilst you were in this
world, my dear brother, you would
not listen to my advice, and now you desire ardently that I


should hear you. O God, equally just and merciful, comfort
this brother, who has served You from his infancy. Have
regard to Your clemency, I beseech You, and make use of
Your great mercy in his behalf. O God most just, if he has not
always been attentive to please You, at least he has not
despised those who made profession of serving You with
fidelity."

The day on which she had that wonderful ecstasy, during
which she visited the different prisons of Purgatory, seeing
again the soul of her brother, she said to him, "Poor soul,
how you suffer! and nevertheless you rejoice. You burn and
you are satisfied, because you know well that these
sufferings must lead you to a great and unspeakable felicity.
How happy shall I be, should I never have to endure greater
suffering! Remain here, my dear brother, and complete your
purification in peace."


Chapter 3


Consolations of the Souls - Saint Stanislaus of Cracow and
the Resuscitated Peter Miles

This contentment in the midst of the
most intense suffering cannot be
explained otherwise than by the Divine
consolations which the Holy Ghost
infuses into the souls in Purgatory. This
Divine Spirit, by means of faith, hope,
and charity, puts them in the disposition
of a sick person who has to submit to
very painful treatment, but the effect of
which is to restore him to perfect health.

This sick person suffers, but he loves his
salutary suffering. The Holy Ghost, the
Comforter, gives a similar contentment
to the holy souls. Of this we have a
striking example in Peter Miles, raised
from the dead by Saint Stanislaus of
Cracow, who preferred to return to
Purgatory rather than to live again upon
earth.


The celebrated miracle of this resurrection happened in
1070. It is thus related in the Acta Sanctorum on May 7.
Saint Stanislaus was Bishop of Cracow when the Duke
Boleslas II governed Poland. He did not neglect to remind
this prince of his duties, who scandalously violated them
before all his people.

Boleslas was irritated by the holy liberty of the Prelate, and
to revenge himself he excited against him the heirs of a
certain Peter Miles, who had died three years previously


after having sold a piece of ground to the church of Cracow.
The heirs accused the saint of having usurped the ground,
without having paid the owner. Stanislaus declared that he
had paid for the land, but as the witnesses who should have
defended him had been either bribed or intimidated, he was
denounced as a usurper of the property of another, and
condemned to make restitution. Then, seeing that he had
nothing to expect from human justice, he raised his heart to
God, and received a sudden inspiration. He asked for a delay
of three days, promising to make Peter Miles appear in
person, that he might testify to the legal purchase and
payment of the lot.

They were granted to him in scorn. The saint fasted,
watched, and prayed God to take up the defense of his
cause. The third day, after having celebrated Holy Mass, he
went out accompanied by his clergy and many of the
faithful, to the place where Peter had been interred. By his
orders the grave was opened; it contained nothing but
bones. He touched them with his crosier, and in the name of
Him who is the Resurrection and the Life, he commanded the
dead man to arise.

Suddenly the bones became reunited, were covered with
flesh, and, in sight of the stupefied people, the dead man
was seen to take the Bishop by the hand and walk towards
the tribunal. Boleslas, with his court and an immense crowd
of people, were awaiting the result with the most lively
expectation. "Behold Peter," said the saint to Boleslas; "he
comes, prince, to give testimony before you. Interrogate
him; he will answer you."

It is impossible to depict the stupefaction of the Duke, of his
councillors, and of the whole con course of people. Peter
affirmed that he had been paid for the ground; then turning
towards his heirs, he reproached them for having accused


the pious prelate against all rights of justice; then he
exhorted them to do penance for so grievous a sin.

It was thus that iniquity, which believed itself already sure of
success, was confounded. Now comes the circumstance
which concerns our subject, and to which we wished to refer.
Wishing to complete this great miracle for the glory of God,
Stanislaus proposed to the deceased that, if he desired to
live a few years longer, he would obtain for him this favor
from God. Peter replied that he had no such desire. He was
in Purgatory, but he would rather return thither immediately
and endure its pains, than expose himself to damnation in
this terrestrial life. He entreated the saint only to beg of God
to shorten the time of his sufferings, that he might the
sooner enter the abode of the blessed. After that,
accompanied by the Bishop and a vast multitude, Peter
returned to his grave, laid himself down, his body fell to
pieces, and his bones resumed the same state in which they
had first been found. We have reason to believe that the
saint soon obtained the deliverance of his soul.

That which is the most remarkable in this example, and
which should most attract our attention, is that a soul from
Purgatory, after having experienced the most excruciating
torments, prefers that state of suffering to the life of this
world; and the reason which he gives for this preference is,
that in this mortal life we are exposed to the danger of being
lost and incurring eternal damnation.


Chapter 4


Consolations of Souls - Saint Catherine de Ricci and the Soul
of a Prince

Let us relate another exannple of the
interior consolations and mysterious
contentment which the souls experience
in the midst of the most excruciating
sufferings: we find it in the Life of Saint
Catherine de Ricci, a Religious of the
Order of Saint Dominic, who died in the
convent of Prato, February 2, 1590. This
servant of God cherished so great a
devotion towards the souls in Purgatory
that she suffered in their place on earth
that which they had to endure in the other^^"
world. Among others, she delivered from the expiatory
flames the soul of a prince, and suffered the most frightful
torments in his place for forty days.

This prince, whose name is not mentioned in history, in
consideration, no doubt, of his family, had led a worldly life,
and the saint offered many prayers, fasts, and penances that
God would enlighten him as to the condition of his soul, and
that he might not be condemned. God vouchsafed to hear
her, and the unfortunate prince before his death gave
evident proofs of a sincere conversion. He died in good
sentiments and went to Purgatory. Catherine learned this by
Divine revelation in prayer, and offered herself to satisfy
Divine Justice for that soul. Our Lord accepted the charitable
exchange, received the soul of the prince into glory, and
subjected Catherine to pains entirely strange to her for the
space of forty days. She was seized with a malady which.


according to the judgment of the physicians, was not
natural, and could neither be cured nor relieved. According
to the testimony of eyewitnesses, the body of the saint was
covered with blisters filled with humor and inflammation,
like water boiling upon the fire. This occasioned such heat
that her cell was like an oven, and seemed filled with fire; it
was impossible to remain there for a few moments without
going outside to breathe.

It was evident that the flesh of the patient was boiling, and
her tongue resembled a piece of red hot metal. At intervals
the inflammation ceased, then the flesh appeared roasted;
but soon the blisters arose again and sent forth the same
heat.

Nevertheless, in the midst of this torture the saint did not
lose the serenity of her countenance nor the peace of her
soul; she seemed to rejoice in her torments. Her sufferings
sometimes in creased to such a degree that she lost her
speech for ten or twelve minutes. When her sister Religious
told her that she seemed to be on fire, she replied simply,
"Yes," without adding anything more. When they
represented to her that she carried her zeal too far, and that
she ought not to ask of God such excessive suffering,

"Pardon me, my dear sisters," she said to them, "if I answer
you. Jesus has so much love for souls, that all we do for their
salvation is infinitely agreeable to Him; that is why I gladly
endure any pain, whatsoever it may be, as well for the
conversion of sinners as for the deliverance of the souls
detained in Purgatory."

The forty days having expired, Catherine returned to her
ordinary state. The relations of the prince asked where his
soul was. "Have no fear," she replied; "his soul is in the
enjoyment of eternal glory." It was thus known that it was for
his soul that she had suffered so much.


This example teaches us many things, but we have cited it
to show that the greatest sufferings are not incompatible
with interior peace. Our saint, whilst visibly enduring the
pains of Purgatory, enjoyed an admirable peace and a
superhuman contentment.


Chapter 5


Consolations of Souls - The Blessed Virgin - Revelations of
Saint Bridget - Father Jerome Carvalho - Blessed Renler of
Citeaux


The souls in Purgatory receive also
great consolation from the Blessed
Virgin. Is she not the Consolation of
the Afflicted? and what affliction
can be compared to that of the poor
souls? Is she not the Mother of
Mercy? and is it not towards these
holy suffering souls that she must
show all the mercy of her heart? We
must not, therefore, be astonished
that in the Revelations of Saint
Bridget the Queen of Heaven gives
herself the beautiful name of Mother
of the Souls in Purgatory. "I am," she|
said to that saint, "the Mother of all
those who are in the place of expiation; my prayers mitigate
the chastisements which are inflicted upon them for their
faults."


On 25 October 1604, in the College of the Society of Jesus at
Coimbra, Father Jerome Carvalho died in the odor of
sanctity, at the age of fifty years. This admirable and humble
servant of God felt a lively apprehension of the sufferings of
Purgatory. Neither the cruel macerations which he inflicted
upon himself several times every day, not counting those
prompted each week by the remembrance of the Passion,
nor the six hours which he devoted morning and evening to
the meditation of holy subjects, seemed sufficient, in his


estimation, to shield him from the chastisement which he
imagined awaited him after death. But one day the Queen of
Heaven, to whom he had a tender devotion, condescended
herself to console her servant by the simple assurance that
she was a Mother of Mercy to her dear children in Purgatory
as well as to those upon earth. Seeking, later, to spread this
consoling doctrine, the holy man accidentally let fall, in the
ardor of his discourse, these words: "She told me this
herself."

It is related that a great servant of Mary, Blessed Renier of
Citeaux, trembled at the thought of his sins and the terrible
Justice of God after death. In his fear, addressing himself to
his great Protectress, who calls herself Mother of Mercy, he
was rapt in spirit, and saw the Mother of God supplicating
her Son in his favor. "My Son," she said, "deal mercifully with
him in Purgatory, because he humbly repents of his sins."
"My Mother," replied Jesus, "I place his cause in your hands,"
which meant to say, be it done to your client according to
your desire. Blessed Renier understood with unutterable joy
that Mary had obtained his exemption from Purgatory.


Chapter 6


Consolations of Purgatory - The Blessed Virgin Mary -
Privilege of Saturday - Venerable Paula of Saint Teresa -
Saint Peter Damian and the Deceased Marozi

It is especially on certain days that the Queen of Heaven
exercises her mercy in Purgatory. These privileged days are,
first, all Saturdays, then the different feast days of the
Blessed Virgin, which thus become as festivals in Purgatory.
We see in the revelations of the saints that on Saturday, the
day specially consecrated to the Blessed Virgin, the sweet
Mother of Mercy descends into the dungeons of Purgatory to
visit and console her devoted servants. Then, according to
the pious belief of the faithful, she delivers those souls who,
having worn the holy scapular, enjoy this Sabbatine
privilege, and afterwards gives relief and consolation to
other souls who had been particularly devout to her. A
witness to this was the Venerable Sister Paula of Saint
Teresa, a Dominican Religious of the Convent of Saint
Catherine in Naples.

Being rapt in ecstasy one Saturday, and transported in spirit
into Purgatory, she was quite surprised to find it transformed
into a Paradise of delights, illuminated by a bright light,
instead of the darkness which at other times prevailed.
Whilst she was wondering what could be the cause of this
change, she perceived the Queen of Heaven surrounded by
a multitude of angels, to whom she gave orders to liberate
those souls who had honored her in a special manner, and
conduct them to Heaven.

If such takes place on an ordinary Saturday, we can scarcely
doubt that the same occurs on feast days consecrated to the
Mother of God. Among all her festivals, that of the glorious


Assumption of Mary seems to be the chief day of
deliverance. Saint Peter Damian tells us that each year, on
the day of the Assumption, the Blessed Virgin delivers
several thousands of souls.

The following account of a miraculous vision illustrates this
subject: "It is a pious custom," he says, "which exists among
the people of Rome to visit the churches, carrying a candle
in the hand, during the night preceding the Feast of the
Assumption of Our Lady." Now it happened that a person of
rank, being on her knees in the basilica of the AraCoeli in
the Capitol, saw before her, prostrate in prayer, another
lady, her godmother, who had died several months previous.
Surprised, and not being able to believe her eyes, she
wished to solve the mystery, and for this purpose placed
herself near the door of the church. As soon as she saw the
lady go out, she took her by the hand and drew her aside.
"Are you not," she said to her, "my godmother, who held me
at the baptismal font?" "Yes," replied the apparition
immediately, "it is I." "And how comes it that I find you
among the living, since you have been dead more than a
year?" "Until this day I have been plunged in a dreadful fire,
on account of the many sins of vanity which I committed in
my youth, but during this great solemnity the Queen of
Heaven descended into the midst of the Purgatorial flames
and delivered me, together with a large number of other
souls, that we might enter Heaven on the Feast of her
Assumption. She exercises this great act of clemency each
year; and, on this occasion alone, the number of those whom
she has delivered equals the population of Rome."

Seeing that her goddaughter remained stupefied and
seemed still to doubt the evidence of her sense, the
apparition added, "In proof of the truth of my words, know
that you yourself will die a year hence, on the feast of the


Assumption; if you outlive that period, believe that this was
an illusion."

Saint Peter Damian concluded this recital by saying that the
young lady passed the year in the exercise of good works, in
order to prepare herself to appear before God. The year
following, on the Vigil of the Assumption, she fell sick, and
died on the day of the feast itself, as had been predicted.

The feast of the Assumption is, then, the great day of Mary's
mercy towards the poor souls; she delights to introduce her
children into the glory of Heaven on the anniversary of the
day on which she herself first entered its blessed portals.
This pious belief, adds Father Louvet, is founded on a great
number of particular revelations; it is for this reason that in
Rome the Church of Saint Mary in Montorio, which is the
center of the arch-confraternity of suffrages for the dead, is
dedicated under the title of the Assumption.


Chapter 7


Consolations of Purgatory - The Angels - Saint Bridget -
Venerable Paula of Saint Teresa - Brother Peter of Basto

Besides the consolations which the souls receive from the
Blessed Virgin, they are also assisted and consoled by the
holy angels, and especially by their guardian angels. The
doctors of the Church teach that the tutelary mission of the
guardian angels terminates only on the entrance of their
clients into Paradise. If, at the moment of death, a soul in the
state of grace is not yet worthy to see the face of the Most
High, the angel guardian conducts it to the place of
expiation, and remains there with her to procure for her all
the assistance and consolations in his power.

It is an opinion common among the holy doctors, says Father
Rossignoli, that God, who will one day send forth His Angels
to assemble the elect, also sends them from time to time
into Purgatory, there to visit and console the suffering souls.
No doubt there cannot be any relief more precious than the
sight of the inhabitants of Heaven, that blessed abode
whither they will one day go to enjoy its glorious and eternal
felicity. The Revelations of Saint Bridget are filled with
examples of this nature, and the Lives of several saints also
furnish a great number. Venerable Sister Paula of Saint
Teresa, of whom we have spoken above, had an
extraordinary devotion towards the Church Suffering, for
which she was rewarded here below with miraculous visions.
One day, whilst saying a fervent prayer for this intention,
she was transported in spirit into Purgatory, where she saw a
great number of souls plunged in flames. Close to them she
saw our Saviour, attended by His Angels, who pointed out,
one after the other, several souls which He desired to take to


Heaven, whither they ascended in transports of unutterable
joy. At this sight the servant of God, addressing herself to
her Divine Spouse, said to Him, "O Jesus, why this choice
among such a vast multitude?" "I have released," He
deigned to reply, "those who during life performed great
acts of charity and mercy, and who have merited that I
should fulfill My promise in their regard. Blessed are the
merciful, for they shall obtain mercy."

In the Life of the servant of God, Peter de Basto, we find an
example which shows how the holy angels, even whilst they
are watching over us upon earth, interest themselves in
behalf of the souls in Purgatory. And since we have
mentioned the name of Brother de Basto, we cannot resist
the desire to make known this admirable Religious to our
readers; his history is as interesting as it is edifying.

Peter de Basto, brother coadjutor of the Society of Jesus, and
whom his biographer calls the Alphonsus Rodriguez of
Malabar, died in the odor of sanctity at Cochin, March 1,
1645. He was born in Portugal, of the illustrious family of
Machado, united by blood to all the nobility of the whole
province between the Douro and the Minho. The Dukes of
Pastrano and Hixar were among the number of his relatives,
and the world held out to him a career of the most brilliant
prospects. But God had reserved him for Himself, and had
endowed him with the most marvellous spiritual gifts. Whilst
still a very little child, when taken to the church, he prayed
before the Blessed Sacrament with the fervor of an angel. He
believed that all the people saw as he did, with the eyes of
the body, the legions of celestial spirits in adoration near the
altar and the tabernacle, and from that time forward the
Saviour, hidden under the Eucharistic veil, became by
excellence the center of all his affections and the
innumerable prodigies which characterized his long and
holy life.


It was there that, later, as in a divine sun, he discovered
without veils the future and its most unforeseen details. It
was there also that God showed him the mysterious symbols
of a ladder of gold which united Heaven and earth,
supported by the tabernacle, and of the lily of purity
shooting forth its roots and drawing its nourishment from
the flour of the wheat of the elect and the wine which alone
can bring forth virgins.

Towards his seventeenth year, thanks to that purity of heart
and that strength of which the Sacrament of the Eucharist
was for him the inexhaustible source, Peter made at Lisbon a
vow of perpetual chastity at the feet of Our Lady of
Perpetual Succor. He did not yet, however, think of quitting
the world, and some days later embarked for the Indies, and
for two years followed the military profession.

But at the end of that time, on the point of perishing by
shipwreck, being tossed about at the mercy of the waves for
five entire days, supported and saved by the Queen of
Heaven and her Divine Son, who appeared to him, he
promised to consecrate himself entirely to their service in
the religious state for the remainder of his life. As soon as he
returned to Goa, being then but nineteen years of age, he
went and offered himself in the quality of lay brother to the
Superiors of the Society of Jesus. Fearing that his name
might procure for him some mark of distinction or esteem,
he adopted henceforward that of the humble village where
he had received Baptism, and was called simply Peter de
Basto.

It was a short time afterwards, during one of the trials of his
novitiate, that this wonderful incident occurred which is
recorded in the Annals of the Society, and which is so
consoling for all the children of Saint Ignatius. Brother
Peter's novice master sent him on a pilgrimage with two


young companions in the island of Salsette, ordering them
not to accept hospitality from any of the missionaries, but to
beg from village to village for their daily bread and their
night's lodging. One day, fatigued with their long journey,
they met a humble family, consisting of an old man, a
woman, and a little child, who received them with the
greatest charity, and pressed them to partake of a frugal
repast. But at the moment of the departure, after having
returned them a thousand thanks, when Peter de Basto
begged his hosts to tell him their names, wishing, no doubt,
to recommend them to God, "We are," replied the mother,
"the three founders of the Society of Jesus," and all three
disappeared at the same instant.

The whole religious life of this holy man until his death - that
is to say, almost fifty-six years - was but a tissue of wonders
and extraordinary graces; but we must add that he merited
them, and purchased them, so to say, at the price of virtue,
labors, and the most heroic sacrifices. Charged by turns with
care of the laundry, the kitchen, or the door, in the colleges
of Goa, of Tuticurin, of Coulao, and of Cochin, Peter never
sought to withdraw himself from the hardest labors, nor to
reserve a little leisure time at the expense of his different
offices that he might enjoy the delights of prayer. Serious
infirmities, the sole cause of which was excessive labor,
were, he said smilingly, his most pleasant distractions.
Moreover, abandoned, so to speak, to the fury of the demon,
the servant of God enjoyed scarcely any repose. These
spirits of darkness appeared to him under the most hideous
forms. They often beat him severely, especially at that hour
each night when, as was his custom, he interrupted his sleep
to go and pray before the Blessed Sacrament.

One day whilst travelling, his companions fled at the sound
of a troop of formidable-looking men, horses, and elephants,
who appeared to approach them with furious gestures. He


alone remained calm; and when his companions expressed
their astonishment that he had not manifested the least sign
of fear, he replied, "If God does not permit the demons to
exercise their rage against us, what have we to fear? and if
He gives them the permission, why then should I endeavor
to escape their blows?" He had only to invoke the Queen of
Heaven, when she appeared immediately and put the
infernal troop to flight.

Often it seemed as though all was confusion, even to the
very depths of his soul, and he found calm, peace, and
victory only near his ordinary refuge, Jesus present in the
Holy Eucharist. Loaded one day with outrages, which caused
him some little disturbance, he prostrated himself at the foot
of the altar and asked of our Divine Saviour the gift of
patience. Then Our Lord appeared to him covered with
wounds, a purple mantle about His shoulders, a rope around
His neck, a reed in His hands, and a crown of thorns upon
His head; then addressing Himself to Peter, He said, "See
what the true Son of God has suffered to teach men how to
suffer."

But we have not touched the point we wished to illustrate by
this holy life -1 mean to say, the devotion of Peter de Basto
towards the souls in Purgatory, a devotion encouraged and
seconded by his good angel guardian. Notwithstanding his
numerous labors, he daily recited the rosary for the dead.
One day having forgotten it, he retired without having
recited it, but scarcely had he fallen asleep when he was
awakened by his angel. "My son," said this heavenly spirit,
"the souls in Purgatory await the benefit of your daily alms."
Peter arose instantly to fulfill that duty of piety.


Chapter 8


Consolations of Purgatory - The Angels - Blessed Emilia of
Vercelli - The Saints In Heaven

If the holy angels interest themselves in behalf of the souls
of Purgatory in general, it is easy to understand that they
have particular zeal for those of their clients. In the convent
of Vercelli, where Blessed Emilia, a Dominican Religious, was
Prioress, it was a point of the Rule never to drink between
meals, unless with express permission of the Superior. This
permission the Blessed Prioress was not accustomed to
accord; she advised her sisters to make that little sacrifice
cheerfully, in memory of the burning thirst which our
Saviour had endured for our salvation upon the Cross; and
to encourage them to do this, she suggested to them to
confide those few drops of water to their guardian angels,
that he might preserve them until the other life, to temper
the heat of Purgatory. The following incident shows how
agreeable this pious practice was to God.

A sister named Cecilia Avogadra came one day to ask
permission to refresh herself with a little water, for she was
parched with thirst. "My daughter," said the Prioress, "make
this little sacrifice for the love of God and in consideration of
Purgatory." "Mother, this sacrifice is not little; I am dying
with thirst," replied the good sister; nevertheless, although
somewhat grieved, she obeyed the advice of her Superior.
This double act of obedience and mortification was precious
in the sight of God, and Sister Cecilia soon received its
reward. A few weeks later she died, and after three days she
appeared, resplendent in glory, to Mother Emilia. "O
Mother!" she said, "how grateful I am to you! I was
condemned to a long Purgatory for having had too great


affection for my family, and behold, after two days, I saw my
angel guardian enter my prison, holding in his hand the
glass of water which you caused me to offer as a sacrifice to
my Divine Spouse; he poured that water upon the flames
which devoured me, they were extinguished immediately,
and I am delivered. I take my flight to Heaven, where my
gratitude will never forget you."

It is thus that the angels of God console the souls in
Purgatory. It may be here asked how the saints and blessed
already crowned in Heaven can assist them? It is certain,
says Father Rossignoli, and such is the teaching of all
masters in theology. Saint Augustine and Saint Thomas, that
the saints are very powerful in this respect by way of
supplication, or, as we say, by imprecation, but not by
satisfaction. In other words, the saints in Heaven may pray
for the souls, and thus obtain from Divine Mercy a
diminution of their suffering; but they cannot satisfy for
them, nor pay their debts to Divine Justice; that is a
privilege which God reserves to the Church Militant.


Chapter 9


Assistance given the Hoiy Souis - Suffrages - Meritorious,
Impetratory, and Satisfactory Works - God's Mercy - Saint
Gertrude - Judas Machabeus

If God consoles the souls with so much goodness, His mercy
shines forth still more clearly in the power which He gives to
His Church to shorten the duration of their sufferings.
Desiring to execute with clemency the severe sentence of
His Justice, He accords abatement and mitigation of the
pain; but He does so in an indirect manner through the
intervention of the living. To us He gives all power to succor
our afflicted brethren by way of suffrage, that is to say, by
means of impetration and satisfaction.

The word suffrage in ecclesiastical language is a synonym of
prayer, yet, when the Council of Trent declares that the souls
in Purgatory are assisted by the suffrages of the faithful, the
sense of the word is more comprehensive; it includes in
general all that we can offer to God in behalf of the
departed. Now, we can thus offer to God, not only our
prayers, but all our good works, in so far as they are
impetratory or satisfactory.

To understand these terms, let us recall to mind that each of
our good works, performed in the state of grace, ordinarily
possesses a triple value in the sight of God.

1. The work is meritorious, that is to say, it increases our
merit; it gives us right to a new degree of glory in Heaven.

2. It is impetratory (impetrate, obtain), that is to say that,
like a prayer, it has the virtue of obtaining some grace from
God.


3. It is satisfactory, that is to say that as having, as it were, a
pecuniary value, it can satisfy Divine Justice and pay our
debts of temporal punishment before God.

The merit is inalienable, and remains the property of the
person who performs the action. On the contrary, the
impetratory and satisfactory value can benefit others, in
virtue of the communion of saints. This understood, let us
put this practical question - What are suffrages by which,
according to the doctrine of the Church, we may aid the
souls in Purgatory?

To this question we answer: They consist of prayers, alms,
fasts, and penances of any kind, indulgences, and above all
the Holy Sacrifice of the Mass. All the works performed in the
state of grace Jesus Christ allows us to offer to the Divine
Majesty for the relief of our brethren in Purgatory, and God
applies them to those souls according to Hisjustice and
Mercy. By this admirable arrangement, whilst protecting the
rights of Hisjustice, our Heavenly Father multiplies the
effects of His Mercy, which is thus exercised at the same
time in favor of the Church Suffering and of the Church
Militant. The merciful assistance which He allows us to give
to our suffering brethren is of excellent profit to ourselves. It
is a work not only advantageous to the departed, but also
holy and salutary for the living. Sancta et salubris est
cogitatio pro defunctis exorare.

We read in the Revelations of Saint Gertrude that a humble
Religious of her community, having crowned an exemplary
life with a very pious death, God deigned to show the saint
the state of the deceased in the other life. Gertrude saw her
soul adorned with ineffable beauty, and dear to Jesus, who
regarded her with love. Nevertheless, on account of some
slight negligence not yet atoned for, she could not enter
Heaven, but was obliged to descend into the dismal abode


of suffering. Scarcely had she disappeared into its depths,
when the saint saw her come forth and rise towards Heaven,
transported thither by the suffrages of the Church. Ecclesiae
precibus sursum ferri. (Le gains Div. Pietatis, lib. 5., c. 5).

Even in the Old Law prayers and sacrifices were offered for
the dead. Holy Scripture relates as praiseworthy the pious
action of Judas Machabeus after his victory over Gorgias,
general of King Antiochus. The soldiers had committed a
fault by taking from among the spoils some objects offered
to the idols, which by law they were forbidden to do. Then
Judas, chief of the army of Israel, ordered prayers and
sacrifices for the remission of their sin, and for the repose of
their souls. Let us see how this fact is related in Scripture. (2
Machabees 12:39).

"After the Sabbath, Judas went with his company to take
away the bodies of them that were slain, and to bury them
with their kinsmen in the sepulchres of their fathers.

"And they found under the coats of the slain some of the
donaries of the idols of Jamnia, which the law forbiddeth to
the Jews; so that all plainly saw that for this cause they were
slain.

"Then they all blessed the just judgment of the Lord, who
had discovered the things that were hidden.

"And so betaking themselves to prayers, they besought Him
that the sin which had been committed might be forgotten.
But the most valiant Judas exhorted the people to keep
themselves from sin, for so much as they saw before their
eyes what had happened, because of the sin of those that
were slain.

"And making a gathering, he sent twelve thousand drachms
of silver to Jerusalem for sacrifice to be offered for the sins of


the dead, thinking well and religiously concerning the
resurrection.


"(For if he had not hoped that they that were slain should
rise again, it would have seemed superfluous and vain to
pray for the dead. And because he considered that they who
had fallen asleep with godliness had great grace laid up for
them).

"It is therefore a holy and wholesome thought to pray for the
dead, that they may be loosed from sins."


Chapter 10


Assistance given to the Hoiy Souis - Hoiy Mass - Saint
Augustine and Saint Monica

In the New Law we have the Holy Sacrifice of the Mass, of
which the divers sacrifices of the Mosaic Law were but feeble
figures. The Son of God instituted it, not only as a worthy
homage given by the creature to the Divine Majesty, but
also as a propitiation for the living and the dead; that is to
say, as an efficacious means of appeasing the Justice of God,
provoked by our sins.

The Holy Sacrifice of the Mass was celebrated for the
departed, even from the time of the foundation of the
Church. "We celebrate the anniversary of the triumph of the
martyrs," writes Tertu I Nan in the third century, "and,
according to the tradition of our fathers, we offer the Holy
Sacrifice for the departed on the anniversary of their death."
(De Corona, c. 5)

"It cannot be doubted," writes Saint Augustine, "that the
prayers of the Church, the Holy Sacrifice, and alms
distributed for the departed, relieve those holy souls, and
move God to treat them with more clemency than their sins
de serve. It is the universal practice of the Church, a practice
which she observes as having received it from her
forefathers - that is to say, the holy Apostles." (Serm. 34, De
Verbis Apost.)

Saint Monica, the worthy mother of Saint Augustine, when
about to expire, asked but one thing of her son, that he
would remember her at the altar of God; and the holy
Doctor, when relating that touching circumstance in the
Book of his Confessions, entreats all his readers to unite with


him in recommending her to God during the Holy Sacrifice of
the Mass. (Liv. 9., c. 5)

Wishing to return to Africa, Saint Monica went with Saint
Augustine to Ostia, in order to embark; but she fell sick, and
soon felt that her end was approaching. "It is here," said she
to her son, "that you will give burial to your mother. The one
thing I ask of you is that you will be mindful of me at the
altar of the Lord." Ut ad altare Domini memineritis mei.

Saint Augustine continues: "May I be pardoned for the tears
I then shed, for that death should not be mourned which was
but the entrance to true life. Yet, considering with the eyes
of faith the miseries of our fallen nature, I might shed before
You, O Lord, other tears than those of the flesh, tears which
flow at the thought of the peril to which every soul is
exposed that has sinned in Adam.

"It is certain that my mother lived in such manner as to give
glory to Your Name, by the activity of her faith and the
purity of her morals; yet dare I affirm that no word contrary
to Thy law has ever escaped her lips? Alas! what will become
of the holiest life if Thou dost examine it in all the rigors of
Thy justice? For this reason, O God of my heart, I leave aside
the good works which my mother has performed to ask of
Thee only the pardon of her sins. Hear me, by the wounds of
Him who died for us upon the Cross, and who, now seated at
Thy right hand, is our Mediator.

"I know that my mother always showed mercy, that she
pardoned from her heart all offenses, and forgave all the
debts owing to her. Cancel then her debts, if during the
course of her long life there are any owing to Thee. Pardon
her, O Lord, pardon her, and enter not into judgment against
her; for Thy words are true; Thou hast promised mercy to the
merciful.


"This mercy, I believe, Thou hast already shown to her, O my
God; but accept the homage of my prayer. Remember that
on her passage to the other life Thy servant desired for her
body neither pompous funeral nor precious perfumes, she
asked not a magnificent tomb, nor that she should be
carried to that which she had caused to be constructed at
Tagaste, her native place; but only that we should remember
her at Thy altar, whose mysteries she prized.

"Thou knowest. Lord, all the days of her life she took part in
those Divine Mysteries which contain the Holy Victim whose
blood has effaced the sentence of our condemnation. Let her
repose then in peace with my father, her husband, with the
spouse to whom she was faithful during all the days of her
union, and in the sorrows of her widowhood with him whose
humble servant she made herself, to win him for Thee by her
meekness and patience. And Thou, O my God, inspire Thy
servants, who are my brethren, inspire all those who read
these lines to remember at Thy altar Monica, Thy servant,
and Patricius, who was her spouse; that all who still live in
the false light of this world may piously remember my
parents, that the last prayer of my dying mother may be
heard beyond her expectations."

This beautiful passage of Saint Augustine shows us the
opinion of this great Doctor on the subject of suffrages for
the departed, and it makes us see clearly that the greatest
of all suffrages is the Holy Sacrifice of the Mass.


Chapter 11


Assistance rendered to the Souls - Holy Mass - Jubilee of Leo
XIH - Solemn Commemoration of the Dead on the Last
Sunday in September

We have witnessed the holy enthusiasm with which the
Church celebrated the Sacerdotal Jubilee of her venerated
head, Pope Leo XIII. The faithful from all parts of the world
went to Rome, either in person or in heart, to offer their
homage and gifts at the feet of the Vicar of Jesus Christ. The
entire Church Militant rejoiced in the midst of her long trials.

The Church Triumphant in Heaven shared in this rejoicing by
the canonization and beatification of a large number of her
glorious members. Was it not fitting that the Church
Suffering should also participate therein?

Could our dear brethren in Purgatory be forgotten? Should
not those souls so dear to the heart of Jesus also experience
the happy effects of that glorious feast?

Leo XIII understood this. Always guided by the Holy Spirit,
when acting as Supreme Pastor, the Pope, by an Encyclical
Letter dated April 1, 1888, decreed that, throughout the
entire Christian world, there should be a solemn
Commemoration of the Dead on the last Sunday of the
month of September. Calling to mind with what admirable
love the Church Militant has manifested her joy, and how the
Church Triumphant rejoiced with her, "To crown, in a certain
sense," says our Holy Father, "this general exultation, we
desire to fulfill, as perfectly as possible, the duty of our
apostolic charity by extending the fullness of infinite
spiritual treasures to those beloved sons of the Church who,
having died the death of the just, have quitted this life of


combat with the sign of faith, and have become offshoots of
the mystic vine, although they are not permitted to enter
into eternal peace until they shall have paid the last farthing
of the debt which they owe to the avenging justice of God.

"We are moved thereto both by the pious desires of
Catholics, to whom we know our resolution will be
particularly dear, and by the agonizing intensity of the pains
suffered by the departed souls; but we are especially
inspired by the custom of the Church, who, in the midst of
the most joyful solemnities of the year, forgets not the holy
and salutary commemoration of the dead that they may be
loosed from their sins.

"For this reason, since it is certain from Catholic doctrine
that the souls detained in Purgatory are relieved by the
suffrages of the faithful, and especially by the august
Sacrifice of the Altar, we think we can give no more useful
nor more desirable pledge of our love than by everywhere
multiplying, for the mitigation of their pains, the pure
oblation of the Holy Sacrifice of our Divine Mediator.

"We therefore appoint, with all necessary dispensations and
derogations, the last Sunday of the month of September
next as a day of ample expiation; on which day there shall
be celebrated by us, and likewise by our brethren the
Patriarchs, Archbishops, Bishops, and by all other Prelates
exercising jurisdiction in a diocese, each in his own
patriarchal church, metropolitan or cathedral, a special Mass
for the dead, with all possible solemnity, and according to
the rite indicated by the missal for the Commemoration of
all the Faithful Departed. We approve that the same be done
in the parochial and collegiate churches, secular as well as
regular, provided the Office proper for the Mass of the day
everywhere where such obligation exists be not omitted.


"As regards the faithful, we earnestly exhort them, after
having received the Sacrament of Penance, to devoutly
nourish themselves with the bread of angels by way of
suffrage for the souls in Purgatory.

"By our apostolic authority, to those of the faithful who do so
we grant a plenary indulgence, to be applied to the souls
departed, and the favor of the privileged altar to all those
who, as we have said above, shall celebrate Mass.

"Thus the holy souls who expiate the remains of their faults
by those sharp pains will receive special and efficacious
relief, thanks to the Saving Host which the Universal Church,
united to her visible Head, and animated with the same
spirit of charity, will offer to God, that He may admit them
into the abode of consolation, of light, and of eternal peace.

"Meanwhile, venerable brethren, we grant you affectionately
in the Ford, as a pledge of these heavenly gifts, the apostolic
benediction to you, to all the clergy, and to all the people
confided to your care.

"Given at Rome, under the seal of the Fisherman, on the
solemnity of Easter, in the year 1888, the eleventh of our
Pontificate."


Chapter 12


Means of Assisting the Souis in Purgatory - Hoiy Mass - The
Reiigious of Citeaux deiivered by the Sacred Host - Biessed
Henry Suso

No; of all that we can do in favor of the souls in Purgatory,
there is nothing more precious than the immolation of our
Divine Saviour upon the altar. Besides being the express
doctrine of the Church, manifested in her Councils, many
miraculous facts, properly authenticated, leave no room for
doubt in regard to this point. We have already spoken of the
Religious who was delivered from Purgatory by the prayers
of Saint Bernard and his community. This Religious, whose
regularity was not all that could be desired, had appeared
after his death to ask the assistance of Saint Bernard. The
holy Abbot, with all his fervent disciples, hastened to offer
prayers, fasts, and Masses for the poor departed brother. The
latter was speedily delivered, and appeared, full of
gratitude, to an aged Religious of the community who had
specially interested himself in his behalf. Questioned as to
the suffrage which had been most profitable to him, instead
of replying, he took the old man by the hand, and,
conducting him to the church where Mass was being
celebrated, "Behold," said he, pointing to the altar, "the
great redeeming power which has broken my chains; behold
the price of my ransom: it is the Saving Host, which takes
away the sins of the world." (L'Abbe Postel, Le Purgatoire,
chap. 5; cf. Rossign., Merv., 47)

Here is another incident, related by the historian Ferdinand
of Castile, and quoted by Father Rossignoli. There was at
Cologne, among the students in the higher classes of the
university, two Dominican Religious of distinguished talent.


one of whom was Blessed Henry Suso. The same studies, the
same kind of life, and above all the same relish for sanctity,
had caused them to contract an intimate friendship, and
they mutually imparted the favors which they received from
Heaven.

When they had finished their studies, seeing that they were
about to be separated, to return each one to his own
convent, they agreed and promised one another that the
first of the two who should die should be assisted by the
other for a whole year by the celebration of two Masses each
week - on Monday a Mass of Requiem, as was customary,
and on Friday that of the Passion, in so far as the Rubrics
would permit. They engaged to do this, gave each other the
kiss of peace, and left Cologne.

For several years they both continued to serve God with the
most edifying fervor. The brother whose name is not
mentioned was the first to be called away, and Suso
received the tidings with the most perfect sentiments of
resignation to the Divine will. As to the contract they had
made, time had caused him to forget it. He prayed much for
his friend, imposing new penances upon himself, and many
other good works, but he did not think of offering the Masses
which he had promised.

One morning, whilst meditating in retirement in the chapel,
he suddenly saw appear before him the soul of his departed
friend, who, regarding him with tenderness, reproached him
with having been unfaithful to his word, given and accepted,
and which he had a perfect right to rely upon with
confidence. Blessed Suso, surprised, excused his
forgetfulness by enumerating the prayers and mortifications
which he had offered, and still continued to offer, for his
friend, whose salvation was as dear to him as his own. "Is it
possible, my dear brother," he added, "that so many prayers


and good works which I have offered to God do not suffice
for you?" "Oh! no, dear brother," replied the suffering soul,
"that is not sufficient. It is the Blood of Jesus Christ that is
needed to extinguish the flames by which I am consumed; it
is the August Sacrifice which will deliver me from these
frightful torments, I implore you to keep your word, and
refuse me not that which injustice you owe me."

Blessed Suso hastened to respond to the appeal of the
suffering soul; and, to repair his fault, he celebrated, and
caused to be celebrated, more Masses than he had
promised.

On the following day several priests, at the request of Suso,
united with him in offering the Holy Sacrifice for the
deceased, and continued this act of charity for several days.

After some time the friend of Suso again appeared to him,
but now in a very different condition; his countenance was
joyful, and surrounded with beautiful light. "Oh! thanks, my
faithful friend," said he; "behold, by the Blood of my Saviour
I am delivered from my sufferings. I am now going to Heaven
to contemplate Him whom we so often adored together
under the Eucharistic veil." Suso prostrated himself to thank
the God of all mercy, and understood more than ever the
inestimable value of the August Sacrifice of the Altar.
(Rossignoli, Merv., 34, and Ferdinand de Castile).


Chapter 13


Relief of the Souls - Holy Mass - Saint Elizabeth and Queen
Constance - Saint Nicholas of Tolentino and Pellegrino
d'Osimo

We read in the Life of Saint Elizabeth of Portugal that after
the death of her daughter Constance she learned the pitiful
state of the deceased in Purgatory and the price which God
exacted for her ransom. The young princess had been
married but a short time previous to the King of Castile,
when she was snatched away by sudden death from the
affection of her family and her subjects. Elizabeth had just
received these tidings, and set out with the King, her
husband, for the city of Santarem, when a hermit, coming
forth from his solitude, ran after the royal cortege, crying
that he wished to speak to the Queen. The guards repulsed
him, but the saint, seeing that he persisted, gave orders that
the servant of God should be brought to her.

As soon as he came into her presence, he related that more
than once whilst he was praying in his hermitage Queen
Constance had appeared to him, urgently entreating him to
make known to her mother that she was languishing in the
depths of Purgatory, that she was condemned to long and
terrible suffering, but that she would be delivered if for the
space of a year the Holy Sacrifice of the Mass was celebrated
for her every day. The courtiers who heard this
communication ridiculed him aloud, and treated the hermit
as a visionary, an impostor, or a fool.

As to Elizabeth, she turned towards the King and asked him
what he thought of it. "I believe," replied the Prince, "that it
is wise to do that which has been pointed out to you in so
extraordinary a manner. After all, to have Masses celebrated


for our dear deceased relatives is nothing more than a
paternal and Christian duty." A holy priest, Ferdinand
Mendez, was appointed to say the Masses.

At the end of the year Constance appeared to Saint
Elizabeth, clad in a brilliant white robe. "Today, dear
mother," said she, "I am delivered from the pains of
Purgatory, and am about to enter Heaven." Filled with
consolation and joy, the saint went to the church to return
thanks to God. There she found the priest Mendez, who
assured her that on the previous day he had finished the
celebration of the three hundred and sixty-five Masses with
which he had been charged. The Queen then understood
that God had kept the promise which He had made to the
pious hermit, and she testified her gratitude by distributing
abundant alms to the poor.

But thou hast saved us from them that afflict us, and thou
hast put them to shame that hate us. (Psalm 43). Such were
the words addressed to the illustrious Saint Nicholas of
Tolentino by the souls that he had delivered in offering for
them the Holy Sacrifice of the Mass. One of the greatest
virtues of that admirable servant of God, says Father
Rossignoli, was his charity, his devotion to the Church
Suffering. (Merv., 21; Vie de Saint Nic. de Tolentino, Sept.
10). For her he frequently fasted on bread and water,
inflicted cruel disciplines upon himself, and wore about his
loins a chain of sharp-pointed iron. When the sanctuary was
thrown open to him, and his superiors wished to confer the
priesthood upon him, he hesitated a long time before that
sublime dignity, and nothing could make him decide to
receive holy orders but the thought that by daily celebrating
the Holy Sacrifice he could most efficaciously assist the
suffering souls in Purgatory. On their part, the souls whom
he relieved by so many suffrages appeared to him several


times to thank him or to recommend themselves to his
charity.

He lived near Pisa, entirely occupied with his spiritual
exercises, when one Saturday during the night he saw in a
dream a soul in pain, who besought him to celebrate Holy
Mass on the following morning for her and several other
souls that suffered most terribly in Purgatory. Nicholas
recognized the voice, but could not distinctly call to mind
the person who spoke to him. "I am," said the apparition,
"your deceased friend Pellegrino d'Osimo. By the Divine
Mercy I have escaped eternal chastisement by repentance;
not so the temporal punishment due to my sins. I come in
the name of many souls as unfortunate as myself to entreat
you to offer Holy Mass for us tomorrow; from it we expect our
deliverance, or at least great alleviation." The saint replied,
with his usual kindness, "May Our Lord deign to relieve you
by the merits of His precious Blood! But this Mass for the
dead I cannot say tomorrow; I must sing the Conventual
Mass in choir." "Ah! at least come with me," cried the
departed soul, amid sighs and tears; "I conjure you, for the
love of God, come and behold our sufferings, and you will no
longer refuse; you are too good to leave us in such frightful
agonies."

Then it seemed to him that he was transported into
Purgatory. He saw an immense plain, where a vast multitude
of souls, of all ages and conditions, were a prey to divers
tortures most horrible to behold. By gestures and by words
they implored most piteously his assistance. "Behold," said
Pellegrino, "the state of those who sent me to you. Since you
are agreeable in the sight of God, we have confidence that
He will refuse nothing to the oblation of the Sacrifice offered
by you, and that His Divine Mercy will deliver us."


At this pitiful sight the saint could not repress his tears. He
immediately betook himself to prayer, to console them in
their sorrow, and the following morning went to the Prior,
relating to him the vision he had had, and the request made
by Pellegrino concerning the Mass for that day. The Father
Prior, sharing his emotion, dispensed him for that day, and
for the rest of the week, from saying the conventual Mass,
that he might offer the Holy Sacrifice for the departed, and
devote himself entirely to the relief of the suffering souls.
Delighted with this permission, Nicholas went to the church
and celebrated Holy Mass with extraordinary fervor. During
the entire week he continued to celebrate the Holy Sacrifice
for the same intention, besides offering day and night
prayers, disciplines, and all sorts of good works.

At the end of the week Pellegrino again appeared, but no
longer in a state of suffering; he was clad in a white garment
and surrounded with a celestial light, in which he pointed
out a large number of happy souls. They all thanked him,
calling him their liberator; then rising towards Heaven, they
chanted these words of the Psalmist, Salvasti nos de
affligentibus nos, et odientes nos confudisti - "Thou hast
saved us from them that afflict us, and thou hast put them to
shame that hate us." (Psalm 43). The enemies here spoken
of are sins, and the demons who are their instigators.


Chapter 14


Relief of the Holy Souls - Holy Mass - Father Gerard - The
Thirty Masses o f Saint Gregory

Let us now consider the supernatural effects of a different
kind, but which prove no less clearly the efficacy of the Holy
Sacrifice of the Mass offered for the departed. We find them
in the Memoirs of Father Gerard, an English Jesuit and
Confessor of the Faith during the persecutions in England in
the sixteenth century. After relating how he had received the
abjuration of a Protestant gentleman, married to one of his
cousins. Father Gerard adds, "This conversion led to another
under the most extraordinary circumstances. My new
convert went to see one of his friends who was dangerously
ill. This was an upright man, detained in heresy more by
illusion than by any other motive. The visitor urgently
exhorted him to be converted, and to think of his soul; and
obtained from him the promise that he would make his
Confession. He instructed him in everything, taught him how
to excite himself to contrition for his sins, and went to seek
for a priest. He had great difficulty in finding one, and in the
meantime the sick person died. When about to expire, the
poor dying man asked frequently whether his friend had not
yet returned with the physician whom he had promised to
bring; it was thus he called the Catholic priest.

"What followed showed that God had accepted the good will
of the deceased. The nights following his death, his wife, a
Protestant, saw a light moving in her room, and which came
even within the curtains of her bed. Being afraid, she
desired one of her servant maids to sleep in her room; but
the latter saw nothing, although the light continued to be
visible to the eyes of her mistress. The poor lady sent for the


friend whose return her husband had awaited with so much
anxiety, related to him what had happened, and asked what
was to be done.

"This friend before giving an answer consulted a Catholic
priest. The priest told him that the light was, for the wife of
the deceased, a supernatural sign by which God invited her
to return to the True Faith. The lady was deeply impressed
by these words; she opened her heart to grace, and in her
turn was converted.

"Once a Catholic, she had Mass celebrated in her chamber
for some time; but the light always returned. The priest
considering these circumstances before God, thought that
the deceased, though saved by his repentance accompanied
by the desire of Confession, was in Purgatory, and stood in
need of prayers. He advised the lady to have Mass said for
him during thirty days, according to an ancient custom of
English Catholics. The good widow followed this advice, and
on the thirtieth day, instead of one light, saw three, two of
which seemed to support another. The three lights hovered
over her bed, then rose heavenward, never more to return.
These three lights appear to have signified the three
conversions, and the efficacy of the Holy Sacrifice of the
Mass to open Heaven to the departed souls."

The thirty Masses which were said for thirty consecutive
days is not an English custom only, as it is called by Father
Gerard, it is also widely spread in Italy and other Christian
countries. These Masses are called the Thirty Masses of Saint
Gregory, because the pious custom seems to trace its origin
back to this great Pope. It is thus related in his Dialogues
(Book 4, chap. 40): A Religious, named Justus, had received
and kept for himself three gold pieces. This was a grievous
fault against his vow of poverty. He was discovered and
excommunicated. This salutary penalty made him enter into


himself, and some time afterwards he died in true
sentiments of repentance. Nevertheless, Saint Gregory, in
order to inspire the brethren with a lively horror of the sin of
avarice in a Religious, did not withdraw the sentence of
excommunication: Justus was buried apart from the other
monks, and the three pieces of money were thrown into the
grave, whilst the Religious repeated all together the words of
Saint Peter to Simon the Magician, Pecunia tua tecum sit in
perditionem - "Keep thy money to perish with thee."

Some time afterwards, the holy Abbot, judging that the
scandal was sufficiently repaired, and moved with
compassion for the soul of Justus, called the Procurator and
said to him sorrowfully, "Ever since the moment of his death,
our brother has been tortured in the flames of Purgatory; we
must through charity make an effort to deliver him. Go,
then, and take care that from this time forward the Holy
Sacrifice be offered for thirty days; let not one morning pass
without the Victim of Salvation being offered up for his
release."

The Procurator obeyed punctually. The thirty Masses were
celebrated in the course of thirty days. When the thirtieth
day arrived and the thirtieth Mass was ended, the deceased
appeared to a brother named Copiosus, saying, "Bless God,
my dear brother, today I am delivered and admitted into the
society of the saints."

Since that time the pious custom of celebrating thirty
Masses for the dead has been established.


Chapter 15


Relief of the Holy Souls - Eugenie Wybo - Lacordaire and the
Polish Prince

Nothing is more conformable to the Christian spirit than to
have the Holy Sacrifice offered up for the relief of the souls
departed, and it would be a great misfortune should the zeal
of the faithful cool in this respect. God seems to multiply
prodigies in order to prevent us from falling into so fatal a
relaxation. The following incident is attested by a worthy
priest of the diocese of Bruges, who received it from its
primitive source, and whose testimony bears all the
certainty of an eyewitness with regard to the fact: On 13
October 1849, there died at the age of fifty- two, in the
parish of Ardoye, in Flanders, a woman named Eugenie Van
de Kerckove, whose husband, John Wybo, was a farmer. She
was a pious and charitable woman, giving alms with a
generosity proportionate to her means. She had, to the end
of her life, a great devotion to the Blessed Virgin, and
abstained in her honor on the Friday and Saturday of each
week. Although her conduct was not free from certain
domestic faults, she otherwise led a most exemplary and
edifying life.

A servant named Barbara Vennecke, aged twenty-eight
years, a virtuous and devoted girl, and who had assisted her
mistress in her last sickness, continued to serve her master,
John Wybo, the widower of Eugenie.

About three weeks after her death, the deceased appeared
to her servant under circumstances which we are about to
relate. It was in the middle of the night; Barbara slept
soundly, when she heard herself called distinctly three times
by her name. She awoke with a start, and saw before her her


mistress, sitting on the side of her bed, clad in a working
dress, consisting of a skirt and short jacket. At this sight,
strange to say, although seized with astonishment, Barbara
was not at all frightened, and preserved her presence of
mind. The apparition spoke to her: "Barbara, " she said,
simply pronouncing her name. "What do you desire,
Eugenie?" replied the servant. "Take," said the mistress, "the
little rake which I often told you to put in its place; stir the
heap of sand in the little room; you know to which one I
refer. You will there find a sum of money; use it to have
Masses said, two francs for each, for my intention, for I am
still suffering." "I will do so, Eugenie," replied Barbara, and
at the same moment the apparition vanished. The servant,
still quite calm, fell asleep again, and reposed quietly until
morning.

On awaking, Barbara believed herself the sport of a dream,
but she had been so deeply impressed, so wide awake, she
had seen her old mistress in a form so distinct, so full of life,
she had received from her lips such precise directions, that
she could not help saying, "It is not thus that we dream I saw
my mistress in person; she presented herself to my eyes and
spoke to me. It is no dream, but a reality."

She therefore went and took the rake as directed, stirred the
sand, and drew out a purse containing the sum of five
hundred francs.

In such strange and extraordinary circumstances the good
girl thought it her duty to seek the advice of her pastor, and
went to relate to him all that had happened. The venerable
Abbe R., then parish priest of Ardoye, replied that the
Masses asked by the departed soul must be celebrated, but,
in order to dispose of the sum of money, the consent of the
farmer, John Wybo, was necessary. The latter willingly
consented that the money should be employed for so holy a


purpose, and the Masses were celebrated, being given two
francs for each Mass.

We call attention to the circumstance of the fee, because it
corresponded with the pious custom of the deceased. The
fee for a Mass fixed by the diocesan tariff was about a franc
and a half, but the wife of Wybo, through consideration for
the clergy, obliged at that time of scarcity to relieve a great
number of the poor, gave two francs for each Mass she had
been accustomed to have celebrated.

Two months after the first apparition, Barbara was again
awakened during the night. This time her chamber was
illuminated with a bright light, and her mistress, beautiful
and fresh as in the days of her youth, dressed in a robe of
dazzling whiteness, appeared before her, regarding her with
an amiable smile. "Barbara, " she said in a clear and audible
voice, "I thank you; I am delivered. " Saying these words,
she disappeared, and the chamber became dark as before.
The servant, amazed at what she had seen, was transported
with joy. This apparition made the most lively impression
upon her mind, and she preserves to this day the most
consoling remembrance of it. It is from her that we have
these details, through the favor of the venerable Abbe L.,
who was curate at Ardoye when these facts occurred.

The celebrated Father Lacordaire, in the be ginning of the
conferences on the immortality of the soul, which he
addressed a few years before his death to the pupils of
Soreze, related to them the following incident:

The Polish prince of X., an avowed infidel and materialist,
had just composed a work against the immortality of the
soul. He was on the point of sending it to press, when one
day walking in his park, a woman bathed in tears threw
herself at his feet and in accents of profound grief said to


him, "My good Prince, my husband has just died. ... At this
moment his soul is perhaps suffering in Purgatory. I am in
such poverty that I have not even the small sum required to
have a Mass celebrated for the dead. In your kindness come
to my assistance in behalf of my poor husband."

Although the gentleman was convinced that the woman was
deceived by her credulity, he had not courage to refuse her.
He slipped a gold piece into her hand, and the happy
woman hastened to the church, and begged the priest to
offer some Masses for the repose of her husband's soul. Five
days later, towards evening, the prince, in the seclusion of
his study, was reading over his manuscript and retouching
some details, when, raising his eyes, he saw, close to him, a
man dressed in the costume of the peasants of the country.
"Prince," said the unknown visitor, "I come to thank you, I
am the husband of that poor woman who besought you the
other day to give her an alms, that she might have the Holy
Sacrifice of the Mass offered for the repose of my soul. Your
charity was pleasing to God: it was He who permitted me to
come and thank you."

These words said, the Polish peasant disappeared like a
shadow. The emotion of the prince was indescribable, and in
consequence he consigned his work to the flames, and
yielded himself so entirely to the conviction of truth that his
conversion was complete. He persevered until death.


Chapter 16


Relief of the Holy Souls - Liturgy of the Church -
Commemoration of the Dead - Saint Odilo

Holy Church possesses a special liturgy for the dead: it is
composed of vespers, matins, lauds and of the Mass
commonly called the Mass of Requiem. This liturgy, as
touching as it is sublime, through mourning and tears
unfolds to the eyes of the faithful the consoling light of
eternity. This liturgy she reads at the funerals of her
children, and particularly on the solemn day of the
Commemoration of the Dead. Holy Mass here holds the first
place; it is like the divine center round which all other
prayers and ceremonies cluster. The day following All Saints'
Day, the great solemnity of All Souls, all priests must offer
the Holy Sacrifice for the dead; at which the faithful make it
their duty to assist, and even to offer Holy Communion,
prayers and alms, for the relief of their brethren in Purgatory.
This feast of the departed is not of very ancient origin. From
the beginning the Church has always prayed for her
departed children: she sang psalms, recited prayers, offered
Holy Mass for the repose of their souls. Yet we do not see
that there was any particular feast on which to recommend
to God all the dead in general. It was not until the tenth
century that the Church, always guided by the Holy Ghost,
instituted the Commemoration of all the faithful departed, to
encourage the faithful to fulfill the great duty of prayer for
the dead, prescribed by Christian charity.

The cradle of this touching solemnity was the Abbey of
Cluny. Saint Odilo, who was Abbot there at the close of the
tenth century, edified all France by his charity towards his
neighbor. Extending his compassion even to the dead, he


ceased not to pray for the souls in Purgatory. It was this
tender charity which inspired him to establish in his
monastery, as also in its dependencies, the feast of the
commemoration of all the souls departed. We believe, says
the historian Berault, that he had received a revelation to
that effect, for God manifested in a miraculous manner how
pleasing to Him was the devotion of His servant. It is thus
related by his biographers. Whilst the holy Abbot governed
his monastery in France, a pious hermit lived in a little island
off the coast of Sicily. A French pilgrim was cast upon the
shore of this little island by a tempest. The hermit, whom he
went to visit, asked him if he knew the Abbot Odilo.
"Certainly," replied the pilgrim, "I know him, and am proud
of his acquaintance; but how do you know him, and why do
you ask me this question?" "I often hear," replied the hermit,
"the evil spirits complain of pious persons who, by their
prayers and alms deeds, deliver the souls from the pains
which they endure in the other life, but they complain
principally of Odilo, Abbot of Cluny, and his Religious. When,
therefore, you shall have returned to your native country, I
beg of you, in the name of God, to exhort the holy Abbot and
his monks to redouble their good works in behalf of the poor
souls."

The pilgrim betook himself to the monastery and did as he
was directed. In consequence. Saint Odilo gave orders that
in all the monasteries of his Institute, on the day following
All Saints, a commemoration of all the faithful departed
should be made, by reciting the vespers for the dead on the
eve, and on following morning matins; by ringing all the
bells and celebrating Mass for repose of the holy souls. This
decree, which was drawn up at Cluny, as well for that
monastery as for all those dependent upon it, is still
preserved. A practice so pious soon passed over to other
churches, and in course of time became the universal
observance of the whole Catholic world.


Chapter 17


Relief of the Souls - The Sacrifice of the Mass - Brother John
ofAlvernia at the Altar - Saint Magdalen de Razz! - Saint
Malachy and his Sister

The annals of the Seraphic Order tell us of a holy Religious
named John of Alvernia. He ardently loved Our Lord Jesus
Christ, and embraced in the same love the souls ransomed
by His Blood and so dear to His Heart. Those who suffered in
the prisons of Purgatory had a large share in his prayers, his
penances, and his sacrifices. One day God was pleased to
manifest to him the admirable and consoling effects of the
Divine Sacrifice offered on All Souls' Day upon every altar.
The Servant of God was celebrating Mass for the departed
on that solemnity when he was rapt in ecstasy. He saw
Purgatory opened, and souls coming forth delivered by
virtue of the Sacrifice of Propitiation; they resembled
innumerable sparks which escaped from a burning furnace.
We shall be less astonished at the powerful effects of holy
Mass if we call to mind that it is identically the same as that
offered by the Son of God Himself upon the Cross. It is the
same Priest, says the Council of Trent, it is the same Victim,
the only difference is in the manner of immolation; on the
Cross the immolation was bloody, on our altar it is unbloody.

Now, that sacrifice of the cross was of infinite value; that of
the altar is, in the eyes of God, of equal value. Let us remark,
however, that the efficacy of this Divine Sacrifice is only
partially applied to the dead, and in a measure known only
to the justice of God. The Passion of Jesus Christ and His
Precious Blood shed for our salvation are an inexhaustible
ocean of merit and satisfaction. It is by virtue of that Passion
that we obtain all gifts and mercies from God. The mere


commemoration which we make of it by way of prayer, when
we offer to God the Blood of His only-begotten Son, to
implore His mercy, this prayer I say, thus strengthened by
the Passion of Jesus Christ, has great power with God. Saint
Magdalen de Pazzi learned from Our Lord to offer to the
Eternal Lather the Blood of His Divine Son. It was a simple
commemoration of the Passion. She did it fifty times a day,
and in one of her ecstasies she saw a large number of
sinners converted, and of souls delivered from Purgatory by
this practice. "Each time," He added, "that a creature offers
to my Lather the Blood by which she has been redeemed,
she offers Him a gift of infinite value." If such be the value of
an offering commemorative of the Passion, what must be
said of the Sacrifice of the Mass, which is the actual renewal
of that same Passion?

Many Christians do not sufficiently know the greatness of
the Divine Mysteries accomplished upon our altars; the
feebleness of their faith, together with their lack of
knowledge, prevents them from appreciating the treasure
which they possess in the Divine Sacrifice, and causes them
to look upon it with a sort of indifference. Alas! they will see
later on, with bitter regret, how they have deceived
themselves. The sister of Saint Malachy, Archbishop of
Armagh, in Ireland, affords us a striking example of this.

In his beautiful Life of Saint Malachy Saint Bernard highly
praises that prelate for his devotion towards the souls in
Purgatory. When he was as yet deacon, he loved to assist at
the funerals of the poor, and at the Mass which was
celebrated for them; he even accompanied their remains to
the cemetery with as much zeal as he ordinarily saw those
unfortunate creatures neglected after their death. But he
had a sister, who, filled with the spirit of the world, thought
that her brother degraded himself and his whole family by
thus associating with the poor. She reproached him, showing


by her language that she understood neither Christian
Charity nor the excellence of the Holy Sacrifice of the Mass.
Malachy, notwithstanding, continued the exercise of his
humble Charity, contenting himself with replying to his
sister that she had forgotten the teaching of Jesus Christ,
and that she would one day repent of her thoughtless words.

In the meantime the imprudent rashness of this woman was
not to remain unpunished; she died whilst still young, and
went to render an account to the Sovereign Judge of the
worldly life she had led.

Malachy had reason to complain of her conduct, but when
she was dead he forgot all the wrongs she had done him,
and thinking only of the needs of her soul, he offered the
Holy Sacrifice and prayed much for her. In the course of
time, however, having many others to pray for, he neglected
his poor sister. "We may believe," says Lather Rossignoli,
"that God permitted that she should be forgotten, in
punishment for the want of compassion which she showed
towards the dead."

However this may be, she appeared to her holy brother
during his sleep. Malachy saw her standing in the middle of
the area before the church, sad, clad in mourning, and
entreating his compassion, complaining that for the last
thirty days he had neglected her. He thereupon awoke
suddenly, and remembered that in reality it was thirty days
since he had celebrated Mass for his sister. On the following
day he began anew to offer the Holy Sacrifice for her. Then
the deceased appeared to him at the door of the church,
kneeling upon the threshold, and lamenting that she was
not allowed to enter. He continued his suffrages. Some days
later he saw her enter the church and advance as far as the
middle of the aisle, without being able, notwithstanding all
her efforts, to approach the altar. He saw, therefore, it was


necessary to persevere, so he continued to offer the Holy
Sacrifice for the repose of her soul. Finally, after a few days
he saw her near the altar, clad in magnificent attire, radiant
with joy, and free from suffering.

"By this we see," adds Saint Bernard, "how great is the
efficacy of the Holy Sacrifice to remit sins, to combat the
powers of darkness, and to open the gates of Heaven to
those souls which have quitted this earth."


Chapter 18


Relief of the Souls - Holy Mass - Saint Malachy at Clairvaux -
Sister Zenal'de - Venerable Joseph Anchieta and the
Requiem Mass

We must not omit to recount the special grace which the
great charity of Saint Malachy towards the holy souls
procured for him One day, being in the company of several
pious persons, and conversing familiarly on spiritual
matters, they came to speak of their last end. "If," said he,
"the choice were given to each one of you, at what hour and
in what place would you like to die?" At this question one
mentioned a certain feast, another such an hour, others,
again, at such a place. When it came to the saint's turn to
express his thoughts, he said that there was no place where
he would more willingly end his life than in the Monastery of
Clairvaux, governed by Saint Bernard, in order that he might
immediately enjoy the benefit of the sacrifices of those
fervent Religious; and as to the time, he preferred, he said,
the day of All Souls, that he might have part in all the
Masses and all the prayers offered throughout the entire
Catholic world for the faithful departed.

This, his pious desire, was gratified in every point. He was on
his way to Rome to visit Pope Eugenius III, when, arriving at
Clairvaux a little before All Saints, he was overtaken by a
serious malady, which obliged him to remain in that holy
retreat. He soon understood that God had heard his prayers,
and cried out with the prophet. This is my rest for ever and
ever; here will I dwell, for I have chosen it. (Psalm 131). In
fact, the day following. All Saints', whilst the whole Church
was praying for the departed, he rendered his soul into the
hands of his Creator.


"We have known," says the Abbe Postel, "a holy Religious,
Sister Zenaide, who, afflicted with a frightful malady for
several years, asked Our Lord the grace to die on the Feast
of All Souls, towards whom she had always had great
devotion. Her desire was granted. On the morning of
November 2, after two years of suffering endured with truly
Christian courage, she began to sing a hymn of
thanksgiving, and calmly expired a few moments before the
celebration of the Masses.

We know that in the Catholic liturgy there is a special Mass
for the dead; it is celebrated in black vestments, and is
called Mass of Requiem. It may be asked whether this Mass
is more profitable to the souls than any other? The Sacrifice
of the Mass, notwithstanding the variety of its ceremonies, is
always the same infinitely holy Sacrifice of the Body and
Blood of Jesus Christ; but as the Mass for the Dead contains
special prayers for the holy souls, it also obtains special
assistance for them, at least at those times when the
liturgical laws permit the priest to celebrate in black. This
opinion, based on the institution and practice of the Church,
is confirmed by a fact which we read in the Life of Venerable
Fatherjoseph Anchieta.

This holy Religious, justly surnamed the Wonder-worker of
Brazil, had, like all the saints, great charity towards the holy
souls in Purgatory. One day during the Octave of Christmas,
when the Church forbids the celebration of Requiem Masses,
on the 27th of December, Feast of Saint John the Evangelist,
this man of God, to the great astonishment of all, ascended
the altar in black vestments, and offered the Holy Sacrifice
for the Dead.

His superior. Father Nobrega, knowing the sanctity of
Anchieta, doubted not that he had received a Divine
inspiration; nevertheless, to remove from such conduct the


character of irregularity which it appeared to have, he
reprimanded the holy man in presence of all the brethren.
"What, Father," said he to him, "do you not know that the
Church forbids the celebration of Mass in black today? Have
you forgotten the Rubrics?"

The good Father, quite humble and obedient, replied with
respectful simplicity that God had revealed to him the death
of a Father of the Society. This Father, his fellow student at
the University of Coimbra, and who at that time resided in
Italy, in the College of the holy House of Loreto, had died
that same night. "God," he continued, "made this known to
me, and gave me to understand that I should offer the Holy
Sacrifice for him immediately, and do all in my power for the
repose of his soul." "But," said the Superior, "do you know
that the Mass celebrated as you have done will be of any
benefit to him?" "Yes," modestly replied Anchieta,
"immediately after the memento for the dead, when I said
these words: To Thee, God the Father Almighty, in the unity
of the Holy Ghost, all honor and glory! God showed me the
soul of that dear friend, freed from all its sufferings and
ascending to Heaven, where his crown awaited him."


Chapter 19


Relief of the Souls through the Holy Sacrifice of the Mass -
Venerable Mother Agnes and Sister Seraphique - Margaret of
Austria - The Archduke Charles - Father Mancinelli

We have just spoken of the efficacy of the Holy Sacrifice in
relieving the poor souls. A lively faith in this consoling
mystery inflames the devotion of the true faithful, and
smoothes the bitterness of their grief. Does death deprive
them of a father, a mother, a friend? They turn their tearful
eyes towards the altar, which affords the means of testifying
their love and gratitude towards their dear departed ones.
Hence the numerous Masses which they cause to be
celebrated; hence also that eagerness to assist at the Holy
Sacrifice of Propitiation in favor of the dead.

Venerable Mother Agnes de Langeac, a Dominican Religious
of whom we have already spoken, assisted at Holy Mass with
the greatest devotion, and encouraged her Religious to a
like fervor. She told them that this Divine Sacrifice was the
holiest act of religion, the work of God by excellence, and
reminded them of Holy Scripture: "Cursed be he that doth
the work of the Lord deceitfully." (Jeremiah 48:10)

A sister of the community, named Sister Seraphique, died;
she had not paid sufficient attention to the salutary advice
of her Superior, and was condemned to a severe Purgatory.
Mother Agnes knew this by revelation. In an ecstasy she was
taken in spirit into the place of expiation, and saw many
souls in the midst of flames. Among them she recognized
Sister Seraphique, who, in piteous accents, entreated her
assistance. Touched with the most lively compassion, the
charitable Superior did all in her power for the space of eight
days; she fasted, communicated, and assisted at Holy Mass


for the dear departed sister. Whilst in prayer, with many
tears and sighs, imploring the Divine Mercy through the
precious Blood of Jesus, that He would be pleased to deliver
her dear daughter from those dreadful flames and admit her
to the enjoyment of His presence, she heard a voice which
said to her, "Continue to pray; the hour of her deliverance
has not yet come." Mother Agnes persevered in prayer, and
two days later, whilst assisting at the Holy Sacrifice, at the
moment of the elevation, she saw the soul of Sister
Seraphique ascend to Heaven in a transport of joy. This
consoling sight was the reward of her charity, and inflamed
anew the ardor of her devotion towards the Holy Sacrifice of
the Mass.

Christian families, which possess a spirit of lively faith, make
it their duty, according to their rank and means, to have a
large number of Masses celebrated for the dead. In their holy
liberality, they exhaust their resources in order to multiply
the suffrages of the Church, and thus give relief to the holy
souls. It is related in the Life of Queen Margaret of Austria,
wife of Philip III, that in one single day, which was that of her
obsequies, there were celebrated in the city of Madrid nearly
eleven hundred Masses for the repose of her soul. This
princess had asked for one thousand Masses in her last will;
the King caused twenty thousand to be added to it. When
the Archduke Albert died at Brussels, the pious Isabella, his
widow, had forty thousand Masses offered for the repose of
his soul, and for an entire month she herself assisted with
the greatest piety at ten each day. (Lather Mumford, Charite
envers les Defuncts).

One of the most perfect models of devotion to the Holy
Sacrifice of the Mass, and of charity towards the souls in
Purgatory, was Father Julio Mancinelli of the Society of Jesus.
The Masses offered by this worthy Religious, says L.
Rossignoli, appeared to have a particular efficacy for the


relief of the faithful departed. The souls frequently appeared
to him to beg the favor of a single Mass. (Merv 23).

Caesar Costa, the uncle of Lather Mancinelli, was Archbishop
of Capua. One day meeting his holy nephew very poorly
clad, notwithstanding the severity of the weather, he with
the greatest charity gave him an alms to procure for himself
a cloak. A short time afterwards, the Archbishop died; and
the Lather going out to visit the sick, wrapped in his new
cloak, met his deceased uncle coming towards him
enveloped in flames, and begging him to lend him his
mantle. The Lather gave it to him; and no sooner had the
Archbishop folded it about him, than the flames were
extinguished. Mancinelli understood that this soul was
suffering in Purgatory, and that it asked his assistance, in
return for the charity exercised in his regard. Then taking
back his cloak, he promised to pray for the poor suffering
soul with all possible fervor, especially at the altar.

This fact became noised abroad, and produced such a
salutary impression, that after the death of the Father, it was
represented in a painting, which is preserved at the College
in Macerata, his native place. Father Julio Mancinelli is there
seen at the altar clad in the sacred vestments, he is elevated
a little above the steps of the altar, to signify the raptures
with which he was favored by God. From his mouth issue
sparks, the emblem of his burning prayers, and of his fervor
during the Holy Sacrifice. Linder the altar is seen Purgatory,
and the souls receiving the benefit of the suffrages. Above,
two angels pour forth from costly vases a shower of gold,
which indicates the blessings, graces, and ransoms granted
to the poor souls in virtue of the Holy Sacrifice. We also see
the mantle spoken of, and an inscription in verse, which
translated reads: "O miraculous garment, given as a
protection against the severity of the cold, and which
afterwards served to temper the heat of fire. It is thus that


charity gives warmth or refreshment according to the
sufferings which it relieves."


Chapter 20


Relief of the Souls through the Holy Sacrifice of the Mass -
Saint Teresa and Bernardino de Mendoza - Multiplicity of
Masses - Pomp of the Obsequies

Let us conclude what we have said relative to the Holy
Sacrifice by what Saint Teresa relates concerning Bernardino
de Mendoza. She gives this fact in the Book of Foundations,
Chapter 10.

"On the Feast of All Souls, Don Bernardino de Mendoza had
given a house and beautiful garden, situated in Madrid, to
Saint Teresa, that she might found a monastery in honor of
the Mother of God." Two months after this, he was suddenly
taken ill, and lost the power of speech, so that he could not
make a Confession, though he gave many signs of
contrition. "He died," says Saint Teresa, "very shortly
afterwards, and far from the place where I then was. But Our
Lord spoke to me, and told me he was saved, though he had
run a great risk; that mercy had been shown to him because
of the donation to the convent of His Blessed Mother; but
that his soul would not be freed from suffering until the first
Mass was said in the new house. I felt so deeply the pains
this soul was enduring, that although I was very desirous of
accomplishing the foundation of Toledo, I left it at once for
Valladolid on Saint Lawrence's Day.

"One day, whilst I was in prayer at Medina del Campo, Our
Lord told me to make all possible haste, for the soul of De
Mendoza was a prey to the most intense suffering.

"I immediately ordered the masons to put up the walls of the
convent without delay; but as this would take considerable
time, I asked the Bishop for permission to make a temporary


chapel for the use of the sisters which I had brought with
me. This obtained, I had Mass offered; and at the moment I
left my place to approach the Holy Table, I saw our
benefactor, who, with hands joined and countenance all
radiant, thanked me for having delivered him from
Purgatory. Then I saw him enter Heaven. 1 was the more
happy as I did not expect this. For although Our Lord had
revealed to me that the deliverance of this soul would follow
the celebration of the first Mass in the house, I thought that
it must mean the first Mass when the Blessed Sacrament
should be reserved there."

This beautiful incident shows us not only the efficacy of the
Holy Sacrifice of the Mass, but also the tender goodness with
which Jesus interests Himself in favor of the holy souls, even
condescending to solicit our suffrages in their behalf.

But since the Divine Sacrifice is of such value, it may here
be asked if a large number of Masses procures for the souls
more relief than a smaller number, whose defect is supplied
only by magnificent obsequies and abundant alms? The
answer to this question may be inferred from the spirit of the
Church, which is the spirit of Jesus Christ Himself, and the
expression of His Will.

Now the Church advises the faithful to have prayers said for
the dead, to give alms, and perform other good works, to
apply indulgences to them, but especially to have Holy Mass
celebrated, and to assist thereat. Whilst giving the first
place to the Divine Sacrifice, she approves and makes use of
various kinds of suffrages, according to the circumstances,
devotion, or social condition of the deceased or his heirs.

It is a Catholic custom religiously observed from the
remotest antiquity to have Mass celebrated for the dead
with solemn ceremonies, and a funeral with as much pomp


as their means will allow. The expense of this is an alms
given to the Church, an alms which, in the eyes of God,
greatly enhances the price of the Holy Sacrifice, and its
satisfactory value for the deceased.

It is well, however, so to regulate the funeral expenses, that
a sufficient sum be left for a certain number of Masses, and
also to give alms to the poor.

That which must be avoided is, to lose sight of the Christian
character of funerals, and to look upon the funeral service
less as a great act of religion than a display of worldly vanity.

What must be further avoided are the profane mourning
emblems which are not comformable to Christian tradition,
such as the wreaths of flowers, with which, at a great
expense, they load the coffins of the dead. This is an
innovation justly disapproved by the Church, to which Jesus
Christ has entrusted the care of religious rites and
ceremonies, not excepting funeral ceremonies. Those of
which she makes use at the death of her children are
venerable by their antiquity, full of meaning and
consolation. All that presents itself to the eyes of the faithful
on such occasions, the cross and the holy water, the lights
and the incense, the tears and prayers, breathe compassion
for the poor souls, faith in the Divine Mercy, and the hope of
immortality.

What is there of all this in the cold wreaths of violet? They
say nothing to the Christian soul; they are but profane
emblems of this mortal life, that contrast strangely with the
cross, and which are foreign to the rites of the Catholic
Church.


Chapter 21


Relief of the Souls - Prayer - Brother Corrado d'Offida - The
Golden Fishhook and the Silver Thread

After the Holy Sacrifice of the Mass, we have a multitude of
secondary though most efficacious means of relieving the
holy souls, if we employ them with spirit, faith, and fervor.

In the first place comes prayer, prayer in all its forms. The
Annals of the Seraphic Order speak with admiration of
Brother Corrado d'Offida, one of the first companions of
Saint Francis. He was distinguished by a spirit of prayer and
charity, which contributed greatly to the edification of his
brethren. Among the latter there was a young monk whose
relaxed and disorderly conduct disturbed the holy
community; but, thanks to the prayers and charitable
exhortations of Corrado, he entirely corrected himself and
became a model of regularity. Soon after this happy
conversion, he died, and his brethren gave him the ordinary
suffrages. A few days elapsed, when Brother Corrado being
in prayer before the altar, heard a voice asking the
assistance of his prayers. "Who are you?" said the servant of
God. "I am," replied the voice, "the soul of the young
Religious whom you reanimated to fervor." "But did you not
die a holy death? Are you still in so great need of prayers?"

"I died a good death, and am saved, but on account of my
former sins, which I had not the time to expiate, I suffer the
most terrible chastisement, and I beseech you not to refuse
me the assistance of your prayers." Immediately the good
brother prostrated himself before the tabernacle, and recited
a Pater, followed by the Requiem JEternam. "Oh, my good
Father," cried the apparition, "what refreshment your prayer
procures for me! Oh, how it relieves me! I entreat you to


continue." Corrado devoutly repeated the same prayers.
"Beloved Father," again repeated the soul, "still more! still
more! I experience such great relief when you pray." The
charitable Religious continued his prayers with renewed
fervor, and repeated the Our Father a hundred times. Then,
in accents of unspeakable joy, the deceased soul said unto
him, "I thank you, my dear Father, in the name of God. I am
delivered; behold! I am about to enter the Kingdom of
Heaven."

We see by the preceding example how efficacious are the
smallest prayers, the shortest supplications, to alleviate the
sufferings of the poor souls. "I have read," says Father
Rossignoli, "that a holy Bishop, rapt in ecstasy, saw a child,
who, with a golden fishhook and a silver thread, drew forth
from the bottom of a well a woman who had been drowned
therein. After his prayer, and whilst on his way to the church,
he saw the same child praying at a grave in the cemetery.
'What are you doing there, my little friend?' he asked. 'I am
saying the Our Father and Hail Mary,' answered the child,

'for the soul of my mother, whose body lies buried here.' The
prelate immediately understood that God had wished to
show him the efficacy of the most simple prayer; he knew
that the soul of that woman had been delivered, that the
fishhook was the Pater, and that the Ave was the silver
thread of that mystic line."


Chapter 22


Relief of the Holy Souls - The Holy Rosary - Father
Nieremberg - Mother Frances of the Blessed Sacrament and
the Rosary

We know that the Holy Rosary holds the first place among all
the prayers which the Church recommends to the faithful.
This excellent prayer, the source of so many graces for the
living, is also singularly efficacious in relieving the dead. Of
this we have a touching proof in the Life of Father
Nieremberg, whom we have mentioned elsewhere. This
charitable servant of God imposed upon himself frequent
mortifications, accompanied by devotions and prayers for
the relief of the poor suffering souls. He never omitted to
recite the Rosary each day for their intention, and gained for
them all the indulgences in his power; an offering which he
recommended to the faithful in a special work which he
published on this subject. The chaplet which he used was
ornamented with pious medals and enriched with numerous
indulgences. It happened one day that he lost it, and he was
inconsolable; not that this holy Religious, whose heart was
not fettered by anything upon earth, had any material
attachment to these beads, but because he saw himself
deprived of the means of procuring the relief he was
accustomed to give to the poor souls. He sought
everywhere, tried to recollect where he could have put his
precious treasure: all was useless, and when evening came,
he found himself obliged to replace his indulgenced chaplet
by ordinary prayers.

Whilst thus engaged and alone in his cell, he heard a noise
in the ceiling like that of his beads, which was well known to
him, and raising his eyes, he saw in reality his chaplet, held


by invisible hands, descending towards him and fall at his
feet. He did not doubt that the invisible hands were those of
the souls who were relieved by this means. We can imagine
with what renewed fervor he recited his accustomed five
decades, and how much this wonder encouraged him to
persevere in a practice so visibly approved by Heaven.

Venerable Mother Frances of the Blessed Sacrament had
from her infancy the greatest devotion towards the suffering
souls, and persevered therein as long as she lived. (Sa Vie
par le R Joachim; Vid. Rossignoli, Merv., 26). She was all
heart, all devotion towards those poor and holy souls. To
assist them she daily recited her Rosary, which she was
accustomed to call her almoner, and she ended each decade
with the Requiescant in pace. On feast days, when she had
more free time, she added the Office of the Dead. To prayer
she joined penances. The greater part of the year she fasted
on bread and water, and on vigils she practiced other
austerities. She had to endure much labor and fatigue, pain
and persecution. All these works were turned into profit for
the holy souls, Frances offering all to God for their relief.

Not content with assisting them herself as far as was in her
power, she engaged others to do the same. If priests came to
the convent, she begged for Masses for them; if they were
laymen, she advised them to distribute abundant alms for
the faithful departed. In recompense for her charity, God
frequently permitted the souls to visit her, either to solicit
her suffrages or to return her thanks. Witnesses have
testified that several times they visibly waited for her at the
door when she was going to the Office of Matins, that they
might recommend themselves to her prayers. At other times
they entered her cell in order to present their request to her;
they surrounded her bed, waiting until she awoke. These
apparitions, to which she was accustomed, caused her no
fear, and that she might not think herself the sport of a


dream or a dupe of the devil, they said on entering, "Hail,
servant of God, spouse of the Lord! may Jesus Christ be ever
with you!" Then they testified their veneration for a large
cross and the relics of the saints which their benefactress
kept in her cell. If they found her reciting the Rosary, add
the same witnesses, they took her hands and kissed them
lovingly, as the instrument of their deliverance.


Chapter 23


Relief of the Holy Souls - Fasts, Penances, and Mortifications,
however Trifling - A Glass of Cold Water - Blessed Margaret
Mary

After prayer comes fasting, that is to say, not only fasting
properly so called, which consists in abstaining from food,
but also all penitential works of what nature soever they
may be. It must here be remarked that this is a question not
only of the great austerities practiced by the saints, but of
all the tribulations, all the contradictions of this life, as also
of the least mortifications, the smallest sacrifices which we
impose upon ourselves or accept for the love of God, and
which we offer to His Divine Mercy for the relief of the holy
souls.

A glass of water, which we refuse ourselves when thirsty, is a
trifling thing, and if we consider this act in itself, we can
scarcely see the efficacy it possesses to alleviate the
sufferings of Purgatory. But such is the Divine Goodness that
it deigns to accept this as a sacrifice of great value. "If I am
permitted," says the Abbe Louvet, speaking of this subject,

"I will relate an example which came almost under my own
personal experience. One of my relations was a Religious in
a community which she edified, not by that heroism of virtue
which shone forth in the saints, but by an ordinary virtue
and great regularity of life. It happened that she lost a friend
whom she had formerly known in the world, and from the
time she heard of her death, she made it her duty to
recommend her to God. One evening, being very thirsty, her
first impulse was to refresh herself with a glass of water, this
being allowed by her Rule; but she remembered her
deceased friend, and, for the benefit of her soul, refused


herself this little gratification. Instead, then, of drinking this
glass of water which she held in her hand, she poured it out,
praying God to show mercy to the departed. This good sister
reminds us of King David, who, finding himself with his army
in a place without water and oppressed with thirst, refused
to drink the refreshing water which was brought to him from
the cisterns of Bethlehem. Instead of raising it to his parched
lips, he poured it out as a libation to the Lord, and Holy
Scripture cites this act of the holy King as one most
agreeable to God. Now, this slight mortification which our
holy Religious imposed upon herself by denying herself this
draught of water was so pleasing to God, that He permitted
the departed soul to make it manifest by an apparition. On
the following night she appeared to the sister, heartily
thanking her for the relief she had received. Those few drops
of water, which, in the spirit of mortification she had denied
herself, were changed into a refreshing bath, to temper the
heat of Purgatorial fires.

We wish to remark that what we here say is not restricted to
acts of supererogatory mortification; it must be understood
of obligatory mortification; that is to say, of all that we have
to undergo in the fulfillment of our duties, and in general to
all those good works to which our duties as Christians or
those of our particular state of life oblige us.

Thus every Christian is bound by virtue of the law of God to
refrain from wanton words, slander, and murmuring; thus
every Religious must observe silence, charity, and
obedience as prescribed by the Rule. Now, these
observances, though of obligation, when practiced in the
true spirit of a Christian, with a view to please God, in union
with the labors and sufferings of Jesus Christ, may become
suffrages and serve to relieve the holy souls.


In that famous apparition where Blessed Margaret Mary saw
the deceased Religious suffering intensely for her tepidity,
the poor soul, after having related in detail the torments
which she endured, concluded with these words: "Alas! one
hour of exactitude in silence would cure my parched mouth;
another passed in the practice of charity would heal my
tongue; another passed without murmuring or
disapprobation of the actions of the Superior would cure my
tortured heart."

By this we see that the soul asked not for works of
supererogation, but only the application of those to which
the Religious are obliged.


Chapter 24


Relief of the Holy Souls - Holy Communion - Saint Magdalen
de Pazzi delivering her Brother - General Communion in the
Church

If ordinary good works procure so much relief for the souls,
what will not be the effects of the holiest work a Christian
can accomplish, I mean Holy Communion? When Saint
Magdalen de Pazzi saw her brother in the sufferings of
Purgatory, touched with compassion, she melted into tears
and cried in a lamentable voice, "Oh, afflicted soul, how
terrible are your pains! Why are they not understood by
those who lack the courage to carry their cross here below?
Whilst you were still in this world, my dear brother, you
would not listen to me, and now you desire so ardently that I
should hear you. Poor victim! what do you require of me?"
Here she stopped and was heard to count up to the number
one hundred and seven; then she said aloud that this was
the number of Communions which he begged in a tone of
supplication. "Yes," she said to him, "I can easily do what you
ask, but, alas! what a length of time it will take me to pay
that debt! Oh, if God permitted, how willingly would I go
where you are, to deliver you, or to prevent others from
descending into it."

The saint, without omitting her prayers and other suffrages,
made with the greatest fervor all the Communions which her
brother desired for his deliverance.

It is, says Father Rossignoli, a pious custom established in
the churches of the Society of Jesus to offer each month a
general Communion for the benefit of the souls in Purgatory,
and God has deigned to show by a prodigy how agreeable
this practice is to Him.


In the year 1615, when the Fathers in Rome celebrated this
monthly Communion in the church of Our Lady in Trastevere,
a crowd of persons was present. Amongst the fervent
Christians there was one great sinner, who, although taking
part in the pious ceremonies of religion, had for a long time
led a very wicked life. This man, before entering the church,
saw coming out and advancing towards him a man of
humble appearance, who asked of him an alms for the love
of God. He at first refused, but the poor man, as is customary
with beggars, persisted, asking for the third time in a most
pitiful tone of supplication. Finally, yielding to a good
inspiration, our sinner recalled the mendicant and gave him
a piece of money.

Then the poor man changed his entreaties into other
language. "Keep your money," said he; "I stand in no need of
your liberality; but you yourself greatly need to make a
change in your life. Know that it was to give you this
salutary warning that I came from Mount Gargano to the
ceremony which was to take place in this church today. It is
now twenty years since you have been leading this
deplorable life, provoking the anger of God instead of
appeasing it by a sincere Confession. Hasten to do penance
if you would escape the stroke of Divine Justice ready to fall
upon your head."

The sinner was struck by these words: a secret fear took
possession of him when he heard the secrets of conscience
revealed, which he thought were known to God alone. His
emotion increased when he saw the poor man vanish like
smoke before his eyes. Opening his heart to grace, he
entered the church, cast himself upon his knees and shed a
torrent of tears. Then sincerely repenting, he sought a
confessor, made an avowal of his crimes and asked pardon.
After Confession, he related to the priest what had happened
to him, begging him to make it known in order that devotion


towards the holy souls might be increased; for he had no
doubt that it was a soul just delivered that had obtained for
him the grace of conversion.

It may here be asked who was that mysterious mendicant
that appeared to this sinner in order to convert him? Some
have believed that it was none other than the Archangel
Michael, because he said that he came from Mount Gargano.
We know that this mountain is celebrated throughout Italy
for an apparition of Saint Michael, in whose honor a
magnificent shrine has been erected. However this may be,
the conversion of this sinner by such a miracle, and at the
same moment when prayers and Holy Communion were
being offered for the faithful departed, shows plainly the
excellence of this devotion and how pleasing it must be in
the sight of God.

Let us therefore conclude in the words of Saint Bernard,

"May charity lead you to communicate, for there is nothing
more efficacious for the eternal repose of the dead."


Chapter 25


Relief of the Holy Souls - The Stations of the Cross -
Venerable Mary d'Antigna

After Holy Communion we shall speak of the Stations of the
Cross. This holy exercise may be considered in itself, and in
the indulgences with which it is enriched. In itself, it is a
solemn and very excellent manner of meditating on the
Passion of our Saviour, and consequently the most salutary
exercise of our holy religion.

In its literal sense, the Way of the Cross is the distance
traversed by the Man-God whilst carrying the weight of His
Cross from the palace of Pilate, where He was condemned to
death, to the summit of Calvary, where He was crucified.
After the death of her Divine Son, the Blessed Virgin, either
alone or in company with the holy women, frequently visited
that dolorous path. After her example, the faithful of
Palestine, and in the course of ages numerous pilgrims from
the most distant countries, went to visit those holy places,
bedewed with the sweat and blood of Jesus Christ; and the
Church, to encourage their piety, opened to them her
treasures of spiritual blessings. But as everyone cannot go to
the Holy Land, the Holy See allows to be erected in the
churches and chapels in other countries, crosses, paintings,
or bas-reliefs representing the touching scenes which took
place on the real road to Calvary at Jerusalem.

In permitting the erection of these holy Stations, the Roman
Pontiffs, who understood all the excellency and all the
efficacy of this devotion, deigned also to enrich it with all
the Indulgences which they had granted to a real visit to the
Holy Land. And thus, according to the Briefs and
Constitutions of the Sovereign Pontiffs Innocent XI, Innocent


XII, Benedict XIII, Clement XII, and Benedict XIV those who
make the Stations of the Cross with proper dispositions gain
all the Indulgences granted to the faithful who visit in
person the Holy Places of Jerusalem, and these Indulgences
are applicable to the dead.

Now it is certain that numerous Indulgences, whether
plenary or partial, were granted to those who visited the
Holy Places of Jerusalem, as may be seen in the Bullarium
Terrae Sanctae, so that as regards Indulgences we may say
that of all practices of piety the Way of the Cross is the most
richly endowed.

Thus this devotion, as well on account of the excellence of
its object as by reason of the Indulgences, constitutes a
suffrage of the greatest value for the Holy Souls.

We find an incident relating to this subject in the Life of
Venerable Mary d'Antigna. (Louvet, Le Purgatoire, p. 332).
For a long time she had the pious custom of making the
Stations of the Cross each day for the relief of the souls
departed; but later, for motives more apparent than solid,
she did it but rarely, and finally omitted it altogether. Our
Lord, who had great designs in regard to this pious virgin,
and who desired to make her a victim of love for the
consolation of the poor souls in Purgatory, vouchsafed to
give her a lesson which serves as an instruction to us all. A
Religious of the same convent, who had died a short time
previously, appeared to her, complaining sorrowfully, "My
dear sister," she said, "why do you no longer make the
Stations of the Cross for the souls in Purgatory? You were
formerly accustomed to relieve us every day by that holy
exercise; why do you deprive us of that assistance?"

Whilst the soul was still speaking Our Lord Himself appeared
to His servant, and reproached her with her negligence.


"Know, My daughter," He added, "that the Stations of the
Cross are very profitable to the souls in Purgatory, and
constitute a suffrage of the greatest value. This is why I have
permitted this soul, for her own sake and for the sake of
others, to implore this of you. Know also that it was on
account of your exactitude in practicing this devotion that
you have been favored by frequent communication with the
dead. It is for this reason also that those grateful souls never
cease to pray for you, and to plead your cause at the
tribunal of My Justice. Make known this treasure to your
sisters, and tell them to draw from it abundantly for
themselves and for the dead."


Chapter 26


Relief of the Holy Souls - Indulgences - Blessed Mary of
Quito and the Heaps of Gold

Let us pass to those indulgences applicable to the dead.

Here Divine Mercy reveals itself with a sort of prodigality. We
know that an indulgence is the remission of the temporal
punishment due to sin, granted by the power of the Keys,
outside of the Sacrament of Penance.

In virtue of the power of the Keys, which she has received
from Jesus Christ, the Church may free the faithful from
every obstacle to their entrance into glory. She exercises this
power in the Sacrament of Penance, where she absolves
them from their sins; she exercises it also outside of the
Sacrament, in remitting the debt of temporal punishment
which remains after the absolution; in this second instance it
is the indulgence. The remission of temporal punishment by
indulgences is granted to the faithful in this life only; but
the Church may authorize her children whilst still living to
transfer to their departed friends the remission accorded to
themselves; this is the indulgence applicable to the souls in
Purgatory. To apply an indulgence to the dead is to offer it to
God in the name of His Holy Church, that He may deign to
employ it for the benefit of the suffering souls. The
satisfactions thus offered to the Divine Justice in the name of
Jesus Christ are always accepted, and God applies it either
to some soul in particular or to certain souls which He
Himself wishes to benefit, or to all in general. Indulgences
are either plenary or partial. A plenary indulgence is, to such
as gain it, a remission of all the temporal punishment which
it deserves in the sight of God. Suppose that, in order to
acquit ourselves of this debt, we should be obliged to


perform a hundred years of canonical penance upon earth,
or suffer for a still longer time in Purgatory, by the virtue of a
plenary indulgence properly gained all this punishment is
remitted, and the soul no longer retains in the sight of God
any shadow of sin, which prevents it from seeing His Divine
face.

The partial indulgence consists in the remission of a certain
number of days or years. These days and years in no way
represent days and years of suffering in Purgatory; it must
be understood of days and years of public canonical
penance, consisting principally in fasts, and such as were
formerly imposed upon sinners, according to the ancient
discipline of the Church. Thus, an indulgence of forty days or
seven years is a remission such as was merited before God
by forty days or seven years of canonical penance. What
proportion exists between those days of penance and the
duration of the sufferings of Purgatory? This is a secret
which it has not pleased God to reveal to us.

Indulgences are, in the Church, a true spiritual treasure laid
open to all the faithful; all are permitted to draw therefrom,
to pay their own debts and those of others. It was under this
figure that God was one day pleased to show them to
Blessed Mary of Quito. One day, rapt in ecstasy, she saw in
the midst of a large space an immense table covered with
heaps of silver, gold, rubies, pearls, and diamonds, and at
the same time she heard a voice saying, "These riches are
public property; each one may approach and take as much
as he pleases." God made known to her that this was a
symbol of indulgences. (Rossignoli, Merv., 29). We may say
with the pious author of the Merveilles how culpable we are
if in such abundance we remain poor and destitute ourselves
and neglect to assist others. Alas! the souls in Purgatory are
in such extreme necessity, they supplicate us with tears in
the midst of their torments; we have the means of paying


their debts by indulgences, and we make no endeavor to do
so.

Does access to this treasury demand painful efforts on our
parts, such as fastings, journeys, and privations
insupportable to nature? "Even though such were the case,"
says with reason the eloquent Father Segneri, "we should
submit to them" Do we not see how men for love of gold, in
order to preserve a work of art, to save a part of their fortune
or a precious fabric, expose themselves to the flames of a
fire? Ought we not then to do at least as much to save from
expiatory flames those souls ransomed by the Blood of Jesus
Christ? But Divine goodness asks nothing so painful: it
requires only such works as are ordinary and easy - a Rosary,
a Communion, a visit to the Blessed Sacrament, an alms or
the teaching of the elements of the Catechism to abandoned
children. And we neglect to acquire the most precious
treasures by such easy means, and have no desire to apply
them to our poor relatives languishing in the flames of
Purgatory.


Chapter 27


Relief of the Holy Souls - Indulgences - Mother Frances of
Pampeluna and the Bishop de Ribera - Saint Magdalen de
Pazzi - Saint Teresa

Venerable Mother Frances, of the Blessed Sacrament, of
whose charity towards the holy souls we have already
spoken, was also most zealous in relieving them by
indulgences. One day God showed her the souls of three
prelates who had previously occupied the See of Pampeluna,
and who still languished in the sufferings of Purgatory. The
servant of God understood that she must employ every
means to effect their deliverance. As the Holy See had then
granted to Spain the Bulls of the Crusade, which permitted
the gaining of a plenary indulgence under certain
conditions, she believed that the best means of assisting
those poor souls would be to procure for each of them the
advantage of a plenary indulgence.

She spoke to her Bishop, Christopher de Ribera, acquainting
him with the fact that three of his predecessors were still in
Purgatory, and urging him to procure for her three
indulgences of the Crusade. She fulfilled all the conditions
required, and applied a plenary indulgence to each of the
three Bishops. The following night they all appeared to
Mother Frances, delivered from all their sufferings. They
thanked her, and begged her to thank also the Bishop
Ribera for the indulgences which had opened Heaven to
them. (Vie de Franqoise du Sacrem., Merv., 26).

The following is related by Father Cepari in his Life of Saint
Magdalen de Pazzi. A professed Religious, who, during her
last sickness, had been most tenderly cared for by Saint
Magdalen, died, and as it was the custom to expose the


body in the church, Magdalen felt herself inspired to go and
look upon it once more. She went, therefore, to the grid of
the chapter room, whence she could see it; but scarcely had
she done so, than she was ravished in ecstasy, and saw the
soul of the departed sister take its flight to Heaven.
Transported with joy, she was heard to say, "Adieu, dear
sister; adieu, blessed soul! Like a pure dove, you fly to your
celestial home, and leave us in this abode of misery. Oh, how
beautiful and glorious you are! Who can describe the glory
with which God has crowned your virtues? What a short time
you have passed in Purgatory! Your body has not yet been
consigned to the tomb, and behold! your soul is already
received into the sacred mansions. You now know the truth
of those words I so lately addressed to you. That all the
sufferings of this life are nothing in comparison with the
reward which God has reserved for His friends.' " In the same
vision. Our Lord revealed to her that this soul had passed
but fifteen hours in Purgatory, because she had suffered
much during life, and because she had been careful to gain
the indulgences granted by the Church to her children, in
virtue of the merits of Jesus Christ.

Saint Teresa in her works speaks of a Religious who set the
highest value on the smallest indulgence granted by the
Church, and endeavored to gain all in her power. She led
otherwise a very ordinary life, and her virtue was of a very
common order. She died, and the saint, to her great surprise,
saw her soul ascend to Heaven almost immediately after her
death, so that she had, so to say, no Purgatory. When Saint
Teresa expressed her astonishment at this. Our Lord made
known to her that it was due to the great care she had taken
to gain all the indulgences possible during life. "It was by
that means," He added, "that she had discharged almost the
whole of her debt, which was quite considerable, before her
death; and had therefore appeared with great purity before
the tribunal of God."


Chapter 28

Relief of the Holy Souls - Indulgences - Indulgenced Prayers

There are certain indulgences which are easy to be gained,
and are applicable to the dead. We hope to afford pleasure
to the reader by indicating the principal ones.

1) The prayer: Oh, good and most sweet Jesus - A plenary
indulgence for those who, having confessed and
communicated, recite this prayer before an image of Christ
crucified, and adding some other prayer for the intention of
the Sovereign Pontiff.

2) Indulgenced Rosary Beads - Great indulgences are
attached to the recitation of the Holy Rosary, if we make use
of beads indulgenced either by our Holy Father, the Pope, or
by a priest who has received the faculties.

3) The Stations of the Cross - As we have said elsewhere,
several plenary indulgences, and a great number of partial
indulgences, are attached to the Stations of the Cross. These
indulgences do not require Confession and Communion; it
suffices to be in the state of grace, and to have a sincere
sorrow for all our sins. As to the exercise itself of the Stations
of the Cross, it requires but two conditions - 1st, to visit the
fourteen Stations, passing from one to the other, as much as
circumstances will permit; 2nd, to meditate at the same time
on the Passion of Jesus Christ. Persons who do not know how
to make connected meditation may content themselves with
thinking affectionately of some circumstance of the Passion
suited to their capacity. We exhort them, without, however,
imposing it as an obligation, to recite a Pater and Ave before
each cross, and to make an act of contrition for their sins.


4) The Acts of Faith, Hope, and Charity - An indulgence of
seven years and seven quarantines each time they are
recited.

5) The Litany of the Blessed Virgin - Three hundred days
each time.

6) The Sign of the Cross - Fifty days each time; with holy
water, a hundred days.

7) Diverse prayers. My Jesus, mercy! - A hundred days each
time. Jesus, meek and humble of heart, make my heart like
unto Thine. - Three hundred days, one a day. Sweet Heart of
Mary, be my salvation. - Three hundred days each time.

8) Praised be Jesus Christ. R. Forever and ever. Amen, - Fifty
days each time that two persons salute each other with
these words.

9) The Angelus - An indulgence of a hundred days each time
it is recited, either in the morning, at noon, or in the
evening, at the sound of the bell, kneeling, and with a
contrite heart.


Chapter 29


Relief of the Holy Souls - Alms, Raban-Maur and Edelard at
the Monastery of Fulda

It remains for us to speak of a last and very powerful means
of relieving the poor souls: viz., almsgiving. The Angelic
Doctor, Saint Thomas, gives the preference to alms before
fasting and prayer, when there is a question of expiating
past faults. "Almsgiving," he says, "possesses more
completely the virtue of satisfaction than prayer, and prayer
more completely than fasting. This is why the great servants
of God and the great saints have chosen it as a principal
means of assisting the dead. Amongst them we may
mention as one of the most remarkable the holy Abbot
Raban-Maur, first Abbot of Fulda, in the tenth century, and
afterwards Archbishop of Mayence.

Father Trithemius, a well-known writer of the Order of Saint
Benedict, caused abundant alms to be distributed for the
dead. He had established a rule that whenever a Religious
died, his portion of food should be distributed among the
poor for thirty days, that the soul of the deceased might be
relieved by the alms. It happened in the year 830 that the
monastery of Fulda was attacked by a contagious disease,
which carried off a large number of the Religious. Raban-
Maur, full of zeal and charity for their souls, called Edelard,
the Procurator of the monastery, and reminded him of the
rule established regarding the alms for the departed. "Take
great care," said he, "that our constitutions be faithfully
observed, and that the poor be fed for a whole month with
the food destined for the brethren we have lost."

Edelard failed both in obedience and charity. Under pretext
that such liberality was extravagant, and that he must


economize the resources of the monastery, but in reality
because he was influenced by a secret avarice, he neglected
to distribute the food, or did so in a manner far short of the
command he had received. God did not leave this
disobedience unpunished.

A month elapsed, when one evening, after the community
had retired, he walked across the chapter room with a lamp
in his hand. What was his astonishment when, at an hour
that the room should be unoccupied, he found there a great
number of Religious. His astonishment turned into fear
when, looking at them attentively, he recognized the
Religious lately deceased. Terror seized him, an icy coldness
ran through his veins and riveted him to the spot like a
lifeless statue.

Then one of the dead brothers addressed him with terrible
reproaches. "Unfortunate creature," said he, "why didst thou
not distribute the alms which were destined to give relief to
the souls of thy departed brethren? Why hast thou deprived
us of that assistance amid the torments of Purgatory?
Receive, from this moment, the punishment of thy avarice;
another and more terrible chastisement is reserved for thee,
when, after three days, thou shall appear before thy God."

At these words Edelard fell as though struck by a
thunderbolt, and remained immovable until after midnight,
at the hour when the community went to choir. There they
found him half dead, in the same condition as was
Heliodorus of old, after he had been scourged by the angels
in the temple of Jerusalem. (2 Machabees 3).

He was carried to the infirmary, where all possible care was
lavished upon him, so that he recovered consciousness. As
soon as he was able to speak, in the presence of the Abbot
and of all his brethren, he related with tears the terrible


occurrence to which his sad condition but too evidently bore
witness. Then adding that he was to die within three days,
he asked for the last Sacraments, with all signs of humble
repentance. He received them with sentiments of piety, and
three days later expired, assisted by the prayers of his
brethren.

Mass for the dead was immediately sung, and his share of
food was distributed to the poor, for the benefit of his soul.
Meanwhile, his punishment was not at an end. Edelard
appeared to Abbot Raban, pale and disfigured. Touched with
compassion, Raban inquired what he could do for him. "Ah!"
replied the unfortunate soul, "notwithstanding the prayers of
our holy community, I cannot obtain the grace of my
deliverance until all my brethren, whom my avarice
defrauded of the suffrages due to them, have been released.
That which has been given to the poor for me has been of no
profit but to them, and this by order of Divine Justice. I
entreat you, therefore, O venerated and merciful Father,
redouble your alms. I hope that by these powerful means
Divine clemency will vouchsafe to deliver us all, my brethren
first, and afterwards myself, who am the least deserving of
mercy."

Raban-Maur increased his alms, and scarcely had another
month elapsed, when Edelard again appeared; but clad in
white, surrounded with rays of light and his countenance
beaming with joy. He thanked, in the most touching manner,
his Abbot and all the members of the monastery for the
charity exercised towards him (Vie de Raban-Maur,

Rossignoli, Merv., 2).

What instruction does not this history contain! In the first
place, the virtue of almsgiving for the dead shines forth in a
most striking manner. Then we see how God chastises, even
in this life, those who through avarice fear not to deprive the


dead of their suffrages. I speak not here of those heirs who
render themselves culpable, by neglecting to make the
endowments which devolve upon them by last will and
testament of their deceased relatives, a negligence which
constitutes a sacrilegious injustice; but of those children or
relatives who, through miserable motives of interest, have as
few Masses as possible celebrated, are sparing in the
distribution of alms, having no pity for the souls of their
departed relatives, which they leave to languish in the
horrible torments of Purgatory. It is the blackest ingratitude,
a hardness of heart entirely opposed to Christian charity,
and which will meet its punishment perhaps even in this
world.


Chapter 30


Relief of the Holy Souls - Almsgiving - Christian Mercy - Saint
Francis de Sales and the Widow at Padua

Christian almsgiving, that mercy which Jesus Christ so much
recommends in the Gospel, comprises not only corporal
assistance given to the needy, but also all the good we do
for our neighbor by working for his salvation, supporting his
defects, and pardoning his offenses. All these works of
charity may be offered to God for the dead, and contain
great satisfactory virtue. Saint Francis de Sales relates that
at Padua, where he pursued part of his studies, there existed
a detestable custom The young men amused themselves by
running through the streets at night armed with arquebuses,
and crying out to all those they met, "Who goes there?"

People were obliged to answer, for they fired upon those who
gave no reply, and many persons were thus wounded or
killed. It happened one evening that a student, not having
responded to the question, was struck in the head by a ball
and mortally wounded. The perpetrator of this deed, seized
with terror, took to flight and sought refuge in the house of a
good widow whom he knew, and whose son was his fellow
student. He confessed to her with tears that he had just
killed someone unknown to him, and begged her to give him
an asylum in her house. Touched with compassion, and not
suspecting that she had before her the murderer of her son,
the lady concealed the fugitive in a place of safety where
the officers of justice would be unable to discover him.

Half an hour had not elapsed, when a tumultuous noise was
heard at the door; a corpse was carried in and placed before
the eyes of the widow. Alas! it was her son who had been
killed, and whose murderer now lay concealed in her house.


The poor mother broke forth into heart rending cries, and
entering the hiding place of the assassin, "Miserable man,"
said she, "what had my son done to you that you should
thus cruelly have murdered him?"

The guilty wretch, learning that he had killed his friend,
cried aloud, tearing his hair, and wringing his hands in
despair. Then throwing himself upon his knees, he asked
pardon of his protectress, and besought her to deliver him
up to the magistrate, that he might expiate so horrible a
crime.

The disconsolate mother remembered at this moment that
she was a Christian, the example of Jesus Christ praying for
His executioners stimulated her to heroic action. She replied
that provided he asked pardon of God and amended his life,
she would let him go, and stay all legal proceedings against
him.

This pardon was so agreeable to God, that He wished to give
the generous mother a striking proof thereof. He permitted
that the soul of her son should appear to her, resplendent
with glory, saying that he was about to enjoy eternal
beatitude. "God has shown mercy to me, dear mother," said
the blessed soul, "because you showed mercy towards my
assassin. In consideration of the pardon which you granted, I
have been delivered from Purgatory, where, without the
assistance which you have afforded me, I should have had to
undergo long years of intense suffering."


Chapter 31


Relief of the Holy Souls - The Heroic Act of Charity towards
the Holy Souls - Father Mumford - Denis the Carthusian and
Saint Gertrude

Thus far we have spoken of the different kinds of good works
which we may offer to God as suffrages for the dead. It
remains for us to make known an act which comprises all
works and means, whereby we can most effectually assist
the poor souls; it is the heroic vow, or, as others call it, the
Heroic act of Charity towards the souls in Purgatory.

This act consists in ceding to them all our works of
satisfaction, that is to say, the satisfactory value of all the
works of our life and of all the suffrages which shall be given
to us after our death, without reserving anything wherewith
to discharge our own debts. We deposit them in the hands of
the Blessed Virgin, that she may distribute them, according
to her good pleasure, to those souls which she desires to
deliver from Purgatory.

It is an absolute donation in favor of the souls of all that we
can give them; we offer to God in their behalf all the good
we do, of what kind soever, either in thought, words or
works, all that we suffer meritoriously during this life,
without excepting anything that we may reasonably give
them, and adding even those suffrages which we may
receive for ourselves after death.

It must be well understood that the matter of this holy
donation is the satisfactory value of our works (See Chap. 9),
and in no way the merit which has a corresponding degree
of glory in Heaven; for merit is strictly personal, and cannot
be transferred to another.


Formula of the Heroic Act: "O Holy and Adorable Trinity,
desiring to co-operate in the deliverance of the souls in
Purgatory, and to testify my devotion to the Blessed Virgin
Mary, I cede and renounce in behalf of those holy souls all
the satisfactory part of my works, and all the suffrages which
may be given to me after my death, consigning them
entirely into the hands of the most Blessed Virgin, that she
may apply them according to her good pleasure to those
souls of the faithful departed whom she desires to deliver
from their sufferings. Deign, O my God, to accept and bless
this offering which I make to Thee at this moment. Amen."

The Sovereign Pontiffs, Benedict XIII, Pius VI, and Pius IX
have approved this heroic act, and have enriched it with
indulgences and privileges, of which the principal are the
following:

1) To priests who have made this act the indult of a
privileged altar every day in the year.

2) The simple faithful can gain a plenary indulgence,
applicable to the souls in Purgatory only, each time they
communicate, provided they visit a church or public oratory,
and there pray for the intention of His Holiness.

3) They may apply to the holy souls all those indulgences
which are not otherwise applicable by virtue of concession,
and which have been granted up to the present time, or
which shall be granted in the future. (Pius IX, Deer. 30
September 1852).

"I advise all true Christians," says Father Mumford (Charity
to the Departed), "to cede with holy disinterestedness to the
faithful departed all the fruit of their good works which are
at our disposal. I do not believe that they can make a better
use of them, since they render them more meritorious and


more efficacious, as well for obtaining grace from God as for
expiating their own sins and shortening the term of their
Purgatory, or even of acquiring an entire exemption
therefrom."

These words express the precious advantages of the Heroic
Act; and in order to dissipate all subsequent fear which
might arise in the mind, we add three remarks:

1) This act leaves us perfect liberty to pray for those souls in
whom we are most interested; the application of these
prayers is subject to the disposition of the adorable will of
God, which is always infinitely perfect and infinitely loving.

2) It does not oblige under pain of mortal sin, and can at any
time be revoked. It may be made without using any
particular formula; it suffices to have the intention, and to
make it from the heart. Nevertheless it is useful to recite the
formula of offering from time to time, in order to stimulate
our zeal for the relief of the holy souls by prayer, penance,
and good works.

3) The Heroic Act does not subject us to the direful
consequences of having to undergo a long Purgatory
ourselves; on the contrary, it allows us to rely with more
assured confidence on the mercy of God in our regard, as is
shown by the example of Saint Gertrude.

Venerable Denis, the Carthusian, relates that the Virgin,
Saint Gertrude, had made a complete donation of all her
works of satisfaction in favor of the faithful departed,
without reserving anything wherewith to discharge the
debts which she herself might have contracted in the sight
of God. Being at the point of death, and, like all the saints,
considering with much sorrow the great number of her sins
on the one hand, and, on the other, remembering that she


had employed all her works of satisfaction for the expiation
of the sins of others, she was afflicted, lest, having given all
to others and reserved nothing for herself, her soul, on its
departure from this world, should be condemned to horrible
suffering. In the midst of her fears Our Lord appeared to her
and consoled her, saying: "Be reassured. My daughter, your
charity towards the departed will be no detriment to you.
Know that the generous donation you have made of all your
works to the holy souls has been singularly pleasing to Me;
and to give you a proof thereof, I declare to you that all the
pains you would have had to endure in the other life are now
remitted; moreover, in recompense for your generous
charity, I will so enhance the value of the merits of your
works as to give you a great increase of glory in Heaven."


Chapter 32


Relief of the Holy Souls - Which of them should be the
Objects of our Charity - All the Faithful Departed - Saint
Andrew Avellino - Sinners dying without the Sacraments -
Saint Francis de Sales

We have seen the resources and the numerous means which
Divine Mercy has placed in our hands for relieving the souls
in Purgatory; but what souls are in those expiatory flames,
and to what souls should we give our assistance? For what
souls should we pray and offer our suffrages to God? To
these questions we must answer that we should pray for the
souls of all the faithful departed, omnium fidelium
defunctorum, according to the expression of the Church.
Although filial piety imposes special duties upon us with
regard to parents and relations, Christian charity commands
us to pray for all the faithful departed in general, because
they are all our brethren in Jesus Christ, all are our
neighbors, whom we must love as ourselves.

By these words, faithful departed, the Church means all
those actually in Purgatory, that is to say, those who are
neither in Hell, nor as yet worthy to be admitted into the
glory of Paradise. But who are these souls? Can we know
them? God has reserved this knowledge to Himself, and,
except so far as He is pleased to show us, we should remain
in total ignorance of the state of souls in the other life. Now,
He rarely makes known that a soul is in Purgatory or in the
glory of Heaven; still more rarely does He reveal the
reprobation of a soul. In this uncertainty we must pray in
general, as does the Church, for all the departed, without
prejudice to those souls whom we wish to aid in particular.


We may evidently restrict our intention to those among the
dead who are still in need of our assistance, if God grants us
the privilege which He accorded to Saint Andrew Avellino, of
knowing the condition of souls in the other life. When this
holy Religious of the Order of Theatines was, according to
his pious custom, praying with angelic fervor for the
departed, it sometimes happened that he experienced
within himself a sort of resistance, a feeling of invincible
repulsion; at other times it was, on the contrary, a great
consolation and a particular attraction. He soon understood
the meaning of these different impressions; the first
signified that his prayer was useless, that the soul which he
desired to assist was unworthy of mercy, and condemned to
eternal fire; the other indicated that his prayer was
efficacious for the relief of the soul in Purgatory. It was the
same when he wished to offer the Holy Sacrifice for someone
deceased. He felt, on leaving the sacristy, as though
withheld by an irresistible hand, and understood that that
soul was in Hell; but when he was inundated with joy, light,
and devotion, he was sure of contributing to the deliverance
of a soul.

This charitable saint prayed, therefore, with the greatest
fervor for the dead whom he knew to be suffering, and
ceased not to apply his suffrages until the souls came to
thank him, giving him the assurance of their deliverance.
(Life of the Saint).

As for us, who have not these supernatural lights, we must
pray for all the departed, even for the greatest sinners and
the most virtuous Christian. Saint Augustine knew the great
virtue of his mother. Saint Monica; nevertheless, not content
with offering his own suffrages for her to God, he asked his
readers not to cease recommending her soul to Divine Mercy.


As regards great sinners, who die without being outwardly
reconciled with God, we may not exclude them from our
suffrages, because we have not the certainty of their interior
impenitence. Faith teaches us that all men dying in the state
of mortal sin incur eternal damnation; but who are those
that in reality die in that state? God alone, who reserves to
Himself the judgment of the living and the dead, knows this.
As to ourselves, we can but draw a conjectural conclusion
from exterior circumstances, and from [even] this we must
refrain. It must, however, be confessed that there is
everything to be feared for those who die unprepared for
death, and all hope seems to vanish for those who refuse to
receive the Sacraments . The latter quit this life with exterior
signs of reprobation. Nevertheless, we must leave the
judgment to God, according to the words, Dei judicium est -
"To God belongs judgment." (Deuteronomy 1:17). There is
more to be hoped for those who are not positively hostile to
religion, who are benevolent towards the poor, who retain
some practice of Christian piety, or who at least approve and
favor piety; there is more, I say, to hope for such persons
when it happens that they die suddenly, without having had
the time to receive the last Sacraments of the Church.

Saint Francis de Sales will not have us despair of the
conversion of sinners until their last breath, and even after
their death he forbids us to judge evil of those who have led
a bad life. With the exception of those sinners whose
reprobation is made manifest by Holy Scripture, we may not,
he says, conclude that a person is damned, but must respect
the secret of God. His principal reason was, that as the first
grace is gratuitous, so also is the last, which is final
perseverance or a good death. This is why we must hope for
the departed, how sad soever his death may have been,
because our conjectures can be based on the exterior only,
whereby the most clever may be deceived.


Chapter 33


Relief of the Holy Souls - For whom are we to Pray? - Great
Sinners - Father Ravignan and General Exelmans - The
Widow in Mourning and the Venerable Cure d'Ars - Sister
Catherine of Saint Augustine and the Sinner Dead in a
Grotto

Father Ravignan, an illustrious and holy preacher of the
Society of Jesus, also cherished great hope for the welfare of
sinners carried away by a sudden death, when otherwise
they had borne no hatred in the heart for the things of God.
He lived to speak of the supreme moment, and it seems to
have been his opinion that many sinners are converted in
their last moments, and are reconciled to God without being
able to give any exterior sign thereof. In certain deaths there
are mysteries of Mercy where the eye of man sees nothing
but strokes of Justice. As a last glimmer of light, God
sometimes reveals Himself to those souls whose greatest
misfortune has been to ignore Him; and the last sigh,
understood by Him who penetrates hearts, may be a groan
that calls for pardon; that is to say, an act of perfect
contrition. General Exelmans, a relative of this good father,
was suddenly carried to the tomb by an accident, and
unfortunately he had not been faithful in the practice of his
religion. He had promised that he would one day make his
Confession, but had not had the opportunity to do so. Father
Ravignan, who, for a long time had prayed and procured
prayers for him, was filled with consternation when he heard
of such a death. The same day, a person accustomed to
receive supernatural communications thought he heard an
interior voice, which said to him, "Who then knows the
extent of God's mercy? Who knows the depth of the ocean.


or how much water is contained therein? Much will be
forgiven to those who have sinned through ignorance."

The biographer from whom we borrow this incident, Father
de Ponlevoy, goes on to say, "Christians, placed under the
law of Hope no less than under the law of Faith and Charity,
we must continually lift ourselves up from the depths of our
sufferings to the thought of the infinite goodness of God. No
limit to the grace of God is placed here below; while there
remains a spark of life there is nothing which it cannot effect
in the soul. Therefore we must ever hope and petition God
with humble persistency. We know not to what a degree we
may be heard. Great saints and doctors have gone to great
lengths in extolling the powerful efficacy of prayer for the
dear departed, how unhappy soever their end may have
been. We shall one day know the unspeakable marvels of
Divine Mercy. We should never cease to implore it with the
greatest confidence."

The following is an incident which our readers may have
seen in the Petit Messager du Coeur de Marie, November
1880. A Religious, preaching a mission to the ladies at
Nancy, had reminded them in a conference that we must
never despair of the salvation of a soul, and that sometimes
actions of the least importance in the eyes of man are
rewarded by God at the hour of death. When he was about
to leave the church, a lady dressed in mourning approached
him and said, "Father, you just recommended to us
confidence and hope; what has just happened to me fully
justifies your words. I had a husband who was most kind and
affectionate, and who, although otherwise leading an
irreproachable life, entirely neglected the practice of his
religion. My prayers and exhortations remained without
effect. During the month of May which preceded his death, I
had erected in my room, as I was accustomed to do, a little
altar of the Blessed Virgin, and decorated it with flowers.


which I renewed from time to time. My husband passed the
Sunday in the country, and each time he returned he
brought me some flowers, which he himself had plucked,
and with these I used to adorn my oratory. Did he notice
this? Did he do this to give me pleasure, or was it through a
sentiment of piety towards the Blessed Virgin? I know not,
but he never failed to bring me the flowers.

"In the beginning of the following month he died suddenly,
without having had time to receive the consolations of
religion. I was inconsolable, especially as I saw all my hopes
of his return to God vanish. In consequence of my grief, my
health became completely shattered, and my family urged
me to make a tour in the south. As I had to pass through
Lyons, I desired to see the Cure d'Ars. I therefore wrote to
him asking an audience, and recommending to his prayers
my husband, who had died suddenly. I gave him no further
details.

"Arrived at Ars, scarcely had I entered the venerable Cure's
room than, to my great astonishment, he addressed me in
these words: 'Madame, you are disconsolate; but have you
forgotten those bouquets of flowers which were brought to
you each Sunday of the month of May?' It is impossible to
express my astonishment on hearing M. Vianney remind me
of a circumstance that I had not mentioned to anyone, and
which he could know only by revelation. He continued, 'God
has had mercy on him who honored His Holy Mother. At the
moment of his death your husband repented; his soul is in
Purgatory; our prayers and good works will obtain his
deliverance.'"

We read in the Life of a holy Religious, Sister Catherine of
Saint Augustine (Saint Alphonsus, Paraph, of the Salve
Regina), that in the place where she lived there was a
woman named Mary, who in her youth had given herself up


to a very disorderly life, and as age brought no amendment,
but, on the contrary, she grew more obstinate in vice, the
inhabitants, no longer willing to tolerate the scandal she
gave, drove her from the city. She found no other asylum
than a grotto in the forest, where, after a few months, she
died without the assistance of the Sacraments. Her body was
interred in a field, as though it were something contagious.

Sister Catherine, who was accustomed to recommend to God
the souls of all those of whose death she heard, thought not
of praying for this one, judging, as did everyone else, that
she was surely damned.

Four months later the servant of God heard a voice saying,
"Sister Catherine, how unfortunate I am! You recommend to
God the souls of all; I am the only one upon whom you take
no pity!" "Who then are you?" replied the sister. "I am poor
Mary, who died in the grotto." "What! Mary, are you saved?"
"Yes, by the Divine Mercy I am At the point of death, terrified
by the remembrance of my crimes, and seeing myself
abandoned by all, I called upon the Blessed Virgin. In her
tender goodness she heard me, and obtained for me the
grace of perfect contrition, with a desire of confessing, had it
been in my power to do so. I thus recovered the grace of God
and escaped Hell. But I was obliged to go to Purgatory,
where I suffer terribly.

My time will be shortened, and I shall soon be liberated, if a
few Masses are offered for me. Oh! have them celebrated for
me, dear sister, and I shall ever remember you before Jesus
and Mary."

Sister Catherine hastened to fulfill this request, and after a
few days the soul again appeared, brilliant as a star, and
returning thanks for her charity.


Chapter 34


Motives for Assisting the Hoiy Souis - Exceiience of this Work
- Saint Francis de Saies - Saint Thomas ofAquin - Saint
Bridget

We have just passed in review the means and resources
which Divine Mercy has placed in our hands for the relief of
our brethren in Purgatory. These means are powerful, the
resources rich; but do we make an abundant use thereof?
Having it in our power to assist the poor souls, have we zeal
enough to do so? Are we as rich in Charity as God is rich in
mercy? Alas! how many Christians do little or nothing for the
departed! And those who forget them not, those who have
sufficient Charity to aid them by their suffrages, how often
are they not lacking in zeal and fervor! Compare the care we
bestow upon the sick with the assistance which we give to
the suffering souls. When a father or mother is afflicted with
some malady, when a child or any person dear to us is a
prey to suffering, what care, what solicitude, what devotion
on our part! But the holy souls, who are no less dear to us,
languish under the weight, not of a painful malady, but of
expiatory torments a thousand times more cruel. Are we
equally fervent, solicitous, eager to procure them relief?

"No," says Saint Francis de Sales, "we do not sufficiently
remember our dear departed friends. Their memory seems to
perish with the sound of the funeral bells, and we forget that
the friendship which finds an end, even in death, was never
genuine friendship."

From whence this sad and culpable forgetfulness? Its
principal cause is want of reflection. Quia nullus est qui
recogitat corde - "Because there is none that considers in
the heart." (Jeremiah 12:2). We lose sight of the great


motives which urge us to the exercise of this Charity towards
the dead. It is, therefore, to stimulate our zeal that we are
about to recall to mind these motives, and to place them in
the strongest possible light.

We may say that all these motives are summed up in these
words of the Holy Ghost: It is a holy and wholesome thought
to pray for the dead, that they may be loosed from their sins,
that is, from the temporal punishment due to their sins. (2
Maccabees 12:46). In the first place, it is a work, holy and
excellent in itself, as also agreeable and meritorious in the
sight of God. Accordingly, it is a salutary work, supremely
profitable for our own salvation, for our welfare in this world
and the next.

"One of the holiest works, one of the best exercises of piety
that we can practice in this world," says Saint Augustine, "is
to offer sacrifices, alms, and prayers for the dead." (Homil .
16). "The relief which we procure for the departed," says
Saint Jerome, "obtains for us a like mercy."

Considered in itself, prayer for the dead is a work of Faith,
Charity, and frequently even of Justice.

First, who are, indeed, the persons whom there is question of
assisting? Who are those holy, predestined souls, so dear to
God and Our Ford Jesus Christ, so dear to their Mother, the
Church, who unceasingly recommends them to our charity;
souls who are dear also to ourselves, that were, perhaps,
intimately united to us upon earth, and who supplicate us in
these touching words: Have pity on me, have pity on me, at
least you my friends. (Job 19:21). Second, in what
necessities do they find themselves? Alas! their necessities
being very great, the souls who thus suffer have a right to
our assistance proportionate to their utter helplessness to do
anything for themselves. Third, what good do we procure for


the souls? The greatest good, since we put them in
possession of eternal beatitude.


"To assist the souls in Purgatory," says Saint Francis de
Sales, "is to perform the most excellent of the works of
Mercy, or rather it is to practice in a most sublime manner all
the works of Mercy together: it is to visit the sick; it is to give
drink to those who thirst for the vision of God; it is to feed
the hungry, to ransom prisoners, to clothe the naked, to
procure for poor exiles the hospitality of the Heavenly
Jerusalem; it is to comfort the afflicted, to instruct the
ignorant - in fine, to practice all works of Mercy in one." This
doctrine agrees very well with that of Saint Thomas, who
says in his Summa, "Suffrages for the dead are more
agreeable to God than suffrages for the living; because the
former stand in more urgent need thereof, not being able to
assist themselves, as are the living." (Supplem, Q. 71, art.

5).

Our Lord regards every work of Mercy exercised towards our
neighbor as done to Himself. "It is to Me," says He, "that you
have done it," - Mi hi fecistis. This is most especially true of
Mercy practiced towards the poor souls.

It was revealed to Saint Bridget that he who delivers a soul
from Purgatory has the same merit as if he delivered Jesus
Christ Himself from captivity.


Chapter 35


Motives for Aiding the Hoiy Souis - Exceiience of the Work -
Controversy between Brother Benedict and Brother Bertrand

When we so highly extol the merits of prayer for the dead,
we do not in any way infer that other good works must be
omitted; for all other works must be exercised according to
time, place, and circumstances. The only intention we had in
view was to give a correct idea of Mercy towards the dead,
and to inspire others with a desire to practice it.

Moreover, the spiritual works of Mercy, which have for object
the salvation of souls, are all of equal excellency, and it is
only in certain respects that we may place the assistance of
the dead above zeal for the conversion of sinners.

It is related in the Chronicles of the Friars Preachers (Cf.
Rossign., Merv. I), that a spirited controversy arose between
two Religious of that Order, Brother Benedict and Brother
Bertrand, on the subject of suffrages for the departed. It was
occasioned by the following: Brother Bertrand often
celebrated Holy Mass for sinners, and prayed continually for
their conversion, imposing upon himself the most severe
penances; but he was rarely seen to say Mass in black for
the dead. Brother Benedict, who had great devotion towards
the souls in Purgatory, having remarked this conduct, asked
him why he thus acted.

"Because," replied he, "the souls in Purgatory are sure of
their salvation, while sinners are continually exposed to the
danger of falling into Hell. What more deplorable condition
than that of a soul in the state of mortal sin? She is in
enmity with God, and bound in the chains of the devil,
suspended over the abyss of Hell by the frail thread of life.


that may be broken at any moment. The sinner walks in the
way of perdition; if he continues to advance, he will fall into
the eternal abyss. We must, therefore, come to his
assistance, and preserve him from this, the greatest of
misfortunes, by laboring for his conversion. Moreover, was it
not to save sinners that the Son of God came upon earth
and died upon a cross? Saint Denis also assures us that the
most divine of all divine things is to work with God for the
salvation of souls. As regards the souls in Purgatory, they are
safe, their eternal salvation is secure. They suffer, they are a
prey to great torments, but they have nothing to fear from
Hell, and their sufferings will have an end. The debts they
have contracted diminish each day, and they will soon enjoy
eternal light; whilst sinners are continually menaced with
damnation, the most terrible misfortune that can befall one
of God's creatures."

"All that you have said is true," replied Brother Benedict,

"but there is another consideration to be made. Sinners are
slaves of Satan, of their own free will. Their yoke is of their
own choosing, they could break their chains if they pleased;
whereas the poor souls in Purgatory can but sigh and
implore the assistance of the living. It is impossible for them
to break the fetters which hold them captive in those penal
flames. Suppose you met two beggars, the one sick,
maimed, and helpless, absolutely incapable of earning his
livelihood; the other, on the contrary, although in great
distress, young and vigorous; which of the two would
deserve the greater share of your alms?"

"Assuredly the one who was unable to work," answered
Brother Bertrand.

"Well, my dear Father," continued Benedict, "this is just the
case with regard to sinners and the holy souls. They can no
longer help themselves. The time of prayer. Confession, and


good works is past for them; we alone are able to relieve
them. It is true they have deserved these sufferings in
punishment for their sins, but they now bewail and detest
those sins. They are in the grace and friendship of God;
whereas sinners are His enemies. Certainly we must pray for
their conversion, but without prejudice to that which we owe
to the suffering souls, so dear to the heart of Jesus. Fet us
compassionate sinners, but let us not forget that they have
all the means of salvation at their disposal; they must break
the bonds of sin and fly the danger of damnation which
threatens them. Does it not appear evident that the
suffering souls are in greater need and merit a larger share
in our charity?"

Notwithstanding the force of these arguments. Brother
Bertrand persisted in his first opinion. But the night
following he had an apparition of a soul from Purgatory,
which made him experience for a short time the pain which
she herself endured. This suffering was so atrocious that it
seemed impossible to bear it. Then, as Isaias says, torture
gave him understanding: Vexatio intellectum dabit (Is.
28:19), and he was convinced that he ought to do more for
the suffering souls. The next morning, filled with
compassion, he ascended the altar steps vested in black,
and offered the Holy Sacrifice for the dead.


Chapter 36


Motives for Assisting the Hoiy Souis - intimate Ties which
Unite us to them - Fiiiai Piety - Cimon of Athens and his
Father in Prison - Saint John of God saving the Sick from the
Confiagration

If we are obliged to assist the holy souls because of the
extreme necessity in which they are, how much greater does
this motive become when we remember that these souls are
united to us by the most sacred ties, the ties of blood, by the
Blood of Jesus Christ, and by the ties of human flesh and
blood, whence we have been brought forth according to the
flesh?

Yes, there are in Purgatory souls united to us by the closest
family ties. It may be a father or a mother, who, languishing
in those horrible torments, extend their arms in supplication
towards me. What would we not do for our father or for our
mother, if we knew they were pining away in some
loathsome dungeon? An ancient Athenian, the celebrated
Cimon, had the grief to see his father imprisoned by
heartless creditors whom he was unable to satisfy. What was
worse, he could not raise a sum sufficient to effect his
father's ransom, and the old man died in prison. Cimon
hastened to the prison and requested that they would at
least grant him the body of his father that he might give it
burial. This was refused him, under pretext that, not having
had wherewith to pay his debts, he could not be set at
liberty. "Allow me first to bury my father," cried Cimon, "I will
then return and take his place in prison."

We admire this act of filial piety, but are we not also bound
to imitate it? Have we not also, perhaps, a father or a mother
in Purgatory? Are we not obliged to deliver them at the cost


of the greatest sacrifices? More fortunate than Cimon, we
have wherewith to pay their debts; we need not take their
place; on the contrary, to deliver them is to purchase our
own ransom.

We admire, also, the charity of Saint John of God, who
braved the fury of the flames to save the poor sick during a
conflagration. This great servant of God died at Granada in
the year 1550, kneeling before an image of Jesus crucified,
which he embraced and continued to hold clasped tightly
within his arms, even after he had breathed forth his soul to
God. Born of very poor parents, and obliged to support
himself by tending flocks, he was rich in faith and
confidence in God. He took great delight in prayer and
hearing the Word of God; this was the foundation of the
great sanctity which he afterwards attained. A sermon by
the Venerable Father John d'Avila, the Apostle of Andalusia,
made such an impression upon him, that he resolved to
consecrate his entire life to the service of the sick poor.
Without other resource than his charity and confidence in
God, he succeeded in purchasing a house, in which he
assembled all poor abandoned sick, that he might give them
nourishment for soul and body. This asylum soon developed
into the Royal Hospital of Granada, an immense
establishment, filled with a multitude of the aged and infirm.
One day a fire having broken out in the hospital, many of
the sick were in danger of perishing by a most horrible
death. They were surrounded on all sides by flames, so that
it was impossible for anyone to attempt their rescue. They
uttered the most heartrending cries, calling Heaven and
earth to their assistance. John sees them, his charity is
inflamed, he rushes into the fire, battles through flame and
smoke until he reaches the beds of the sick; then raising
them upon his shoulders, he carries these unfortunate
creatures one after another to a place of safety. Obliged to
traverse this vast furnace, working in the heat of the fire for


a whole half-hour, the saint had not sustained the least
injury; the flames respected his person, his clothing, and
even the least hair of his head, God wishing to show by a
miracle how pleasing to Him was the charity of His servant.
And those who save, not the body, but souls from the flames
of Purgatory, is their work less agreeable to God? Are the
necessities, the cries and moans of those souls less touching
to a heart of faith? Is it more difficult to aid them? Is it
necessary to cast ourselves into the flames in order to
rescue them?

Assuredly, we have every facility in our power for affording
them relief, and God does not demand great efforts on our
part. Yet the charity of fervent souls inspires them to make
the most heroic sacrifices, and even to share the torments of
their brethren in Purgatory.


Chapter 37


Motives for Assisting the Hoiy Sou is - Faciiity in Reiieving
them - The Exampie of the Saints and ofaii Fervent
Christians - The Servant of God, Mary Viiiani - The Burned
Forehead

We have already seen how Saint Catherine de Ricci and
several others carried their heroism so far as to suffer
instead of the souls in Purgatory. Let us add a few more
examples of this admirable Charity. The servant of God Mary
Villani, of the Order of Saint Dominic, whose life was written
by Father Marchi (Cf. Rossignoli, Merv., 41) applied herself
day and night to the practice of satisfactory works in favor of
the departed.

One day - it was the Vigil of the Epiphany - she remained a
long time in prayer, beseeching God to alleviate their
sufferings in consideration of those of Jesus Christ, offering
to Him the cruel scourging of our Saviour, His crown of
thorns. His cords, the nails and cross - in a word, all His bitter
pains and all the instruments of His Passion. The following
night God was pleased to manifest how agreeable to Him
was this holy practice.

During her prayer she was rapt in ecstasy, and saw a long
procession of persons robed in white garments and radiant
with light. They were carrying the emblems of the Passion
and entering into the glory of Paradise. The servant of God
knew that they were the souls delivered by her fervent
prayers and by the merits of the Passion of Jesus Christ.

On another occasion, the Feast of All Souls, she was ordered
to work at a manuscript, and to pass the day in writing. This
task, imposed by obedience, was a trial to her piety: she


experienced some repugnance to obey, because she wished
to devote that whole day to prayer, penance, and pious
exercises for the relief of the suffering souls. She forgot for a
moment that obedience should take precedence over all
else, as it is written, Mel i or est obedientia quam victimce -
"Obedience is better than sacrifice." (1 Kings 15:22). Seeing
her great charity towards the poor souls, God vouchsafed to
appear to her, in order to instruct and console her. "Obey,

My daughter," He said to her; "do the work imposed upon
you by Obedience, and offer it for the souls: each line which
you shall write today in the spirit of Obedience and Charity,
will procure the deliverance of a soul." It will be easily
understood that she labored with the greatest diligence, and
wrote as many as possible of those lines, so acceptable to
God.

Her charity towards the holy souls did not confine itself to
prayer and fasting; she desired to endure a part of their
sufferings. One day, whilst praying for that intention, she
was rapt in spirit and led into Purgatory. There, amongst the
multitude of suffering souls, she saw one more grievously
tormented than the others, and which excited her most
tender compassion. "Why," she asked, "have you to suffer
such excruciating torture? Do you receive no alleviation?" "I
have been," replied the soul, "a great length of time in this
place, enduring the most frightful torments, in punishment
for my former vanity and scandalous extravagance. Thus far
I have not received the least relief, because God has
permitted that I should be forgotten by my parents, my
children, my relatives, and friends: they offer not a single
prayer for me. When I was upon earth, being exclusively
occupied with my extravagant toilet and worldly vanities,
with feasting and pleasure, I cast but a passing thought
upon God and my duties. My only serious desire was to
further the worldly interests of my family. I am well
punished; for you see I am entirely forgotten by all."


These words made a painful impression upon Mary Villani.
She begged this soul to allow her to feel something of what
she suffered; and at the same instant it seemed as though a
finger of fire touched her forehead, and the pain which she
felt was so acute as to cause her ecstasy to cease. The mark
remained so deeply impressed upon her forehead, that two
months afterwards it was still visible, and caused her
intolerable suffering. The servant of God offered this,
together with prayers and other good works, for the soul to
which we have just referred. This soul appeared to Mary at
the end of two months, and said that having been delivered
by her intercession, she was about to enter Heaven. At the
same moment the scar on the forehead disappeared.


Chapter 38


Motives for Assisting the Hoiy Souis - Exampies of Hoiy
Persons - Father James Laynez - Father Fabricius - Father
Nieremberg, a Victim of his Charity

He who forgets his friend, after death has taken him away
from his sight, never had a true friendship." These words
Father Laynez, second General of the Society of Jesus,
continually repeated to the sons of Saint Ignatius. He
desired that the interests of souls should be as dear to them
after death as they were during life. Joining example to
precept, Laynez applied to the souls in Purgatory a large
part of his prayers, sacrifices, and the satisfaction which he
merited before God by his labors for the conversion of
sinners. The Fathers of the Society, faithful to his lessons of
charity, ever manifested particular zeal for this devotion, as
may be seen in the book entitled Heroes and Victims of
Charity in the Society of Jesus, from which I will here
transcribe but one page.

"At Munster, in Westphalia, towards the middle of the
seventeenth century, an epidemic broke out which each day
swept away innumerable victims. Fear paralyzed the charity
of the greater part of the inhabitants, and few were found to
devote themselves to the relief of the unfortunate plague-
stricken creatures. Then Father John Fabricius, animated
with the spirit of Laynez and Ignatius, rushed into the arena
of self-sacrifice. Putting aside all personal precaution, he
employed his time in visiting the sick, in procuring remedies
for them, and in disposing them to die a Christian death. He
heard their Confessions, administered the other Sacraments,
buried them with his own hands, and finally celebrated the
Holy Sacrifice for the repose of their souls.


"In fact, during his whole lifetime this servant of God had
the greatest devotion towards the holy souls.

"Among all his exercises of piety, the one most dear to him,
and which he always earnestly recommended, was that of
offering the Holy Sacrifice of the Mass for the departed
whenever the Rubrics permitted. As a result of this counsel,
all the Fathers in Munster resolved to consecrate one day in
each month to the faithful departed; they draped their
church in black, and prayed with all solemnity for the dead.

"God deigned, as He often does, to recompense Father
Fabricius, and encouraged his zeal by several apparitions of
the suffering souls. Some besought him to hasten their
deliverance, others thanked him for the relief he had
procured for them; others, again, announced to him the
happy moment of their deliverance.

"His greatest act of Charity was that which he accomplished
at the moment of his death. With a generosity truly
admirable, he made a sacrifice of all the suffrages, prayers,
Masses, indulgences, and mortifications which the Society
applies to her deceased members. He asked God to deprive
him of them for the relief of the suffering souls most
pleasing to His Divine Majesty."

We have already spoken of Father Nieremberg, renowned as
well for the works of piety which he published as for the
eminent virtue which he practiced. His devotion for the holy
souls, not content with sacrifices and frequent prayers,
urged him to suffer for them with a generosity which often
amounted to heroism.

There was among his penitents at the court of Madrid a lady
of rank, who, under his wise direction, had attained a high
degree of virtue in the midst of the world, but she was


tormented with an excessive fear of death in view of
Purgatory which follows it. She fell dangerously ill, and her
fears increased to such a degree that she almost lost her
Christian sentiments. Her holy confessor employed every
means that his zeal could suggest, but to no purpose; he
could not succeed in restoring her to tranquillity, nor could
he prevail upon her even to receive the last Sacraments.

To crown this misfortune, she suddenly lost consciousness,
and was reduced to the last extremity. The Father, justly
alarmed at the peril of this soul, retired into a chapel near
the chamber of the dying woman. There he offered the Holy
Sacrifice with the greatest fervor to obtain for the sick
person time sufficient to receive the Sacraments of the
Church. At the same time, prompted by truly heroic charity,
he offered himself as a victim to Divine Justice, to undergo
during this life all the sufferings reserved for that poor soul
in the next.

His prayer was heard. The Mass was no sooner ended than
the sick lady regained consciousness, and found that she
was entirely changed. She was so well disposed that she
asked for the last Sacraments, which she received with the
most edifying fervor. Then her confessor, having told her
that she had nothing to fear from Purgatory, she expired
perfectly calm, and with a smile upon her lips.

From that hour. Father Nieremberg was afflicted with all
manner of suffering, both of body and soul. The remaining
sixteen years of his life was one long martyrdom and a most
rigorous Purgatory. No human remedy could give him relief;
his only consolation was in the remembrance of the holy
cause for which he endured them. Finally, death came to
terminate his terrible sufferings, and at the same time, we
may reasonably believe, to open to him the gates of


Paradise, since it is written, Blessed are the merciful, for they
shall obtain mercy.


Chapter 39


Motives and Incentives to Devotion towards the Holy Souls -
Examples of Generosity - Saint Peter Damian and his Father
- A Young Annamite - The Doorkeeper at the Seminary and
the Propagation of the Faith

Examples of generous Charity towards the departed are by
no means rare, and it is always useful to recall them to mind.
We may not omit the beautiful and touching example of
Saint Peter Damian, Bishop of Ostia, Cardinal and Doctor of
the Church, an example which never wearies by repetition.
Whilst still young, Peter had the misfortune to lose his
mother, and soon afterwards his father marrying again, he
was left to the care of a stepmother. Although he showed all
possible affection for her, this woman was incapable of
returning the love of this dear child; she treated him with
barbarous severity, and, in order to rid herself of him, sent
him away to her eldest brother, who employed him to take
care of the swine. His father, whose duty it was to have
prevented this, left him to his unhappy fate. But the child
lifted up his eyes to Heaven, where he saw another Father, in
whom he placed all his confidence. He accepted all that
happened as corning from His divine hands, and resigned
himself to the hardships of his situation. "God," he said, "has
His designs in all that He does, and they are designs of
mercy; we have but to abandon ourselves into His hands. He
will direct all things for our good." Peter was not deceived; it
was in this painful trial that the future Cardinal of the
Church, he who was to astonish his age by the extent of his
learning, and to edify the world by the luster of his virtues,
laid the foundation of his future sanctity.


Barely covered with rags, his biographer tells us that he had
not always sufficient to appease his hunger, but he prayed
to God and was satisfied.

Meanwhile his father died. The young saint forgot the
harshness with which he had been treated, and, like a good
son, prayed continually for the repose of his father's soul.
One day he found upon the road a gold piece, which
Providence seemed to have placed there for him. It was
quite a fortune for the poor child. But, instead of making use
of it to relieve his own misery, his first thought was to carry
it to a priest, and beg him to celebrate the Holy Sacrifice of
the Mass for the soul of his deceased father. Holy Church
considers this trait of filial devotion so touching that she has
inserted it at length in the Office of the feast.

"May I be allowed," says the missionary. Father Louvet, "to
add one more incident of my own personal experience?
When I was preaching the faith in Cochin-China, a poor little
Annamite girl, who had just been baptized, lost her mother.
At the age of fourteen she saw herself obliged to provide for
her own support and that of her two younger brothers from
her scanty earnings, which amounted to about eight sous, or
about seven cents a day. What was my surprise when, at the
end of the week, I saw her bring me the earnings of two
days, that I might say Mass for the repose of their dear
mother's soul. Those poor little ones had fasted during a
part of the week to procure this humble suffrage for their
departed mother. Oh, holy alms of the poor and the orphan!
If my own heart was so deeply touched by it, how much
more so the heart of our Heavenly Father, and what
blessings it will have called down upon that mother and
upon her children.

"Behold the generosity of the poor! What an example and
reproach to so many of the rich, extravagant in luxury and


pleasure, but miserly when there is question of giving an
alms to have Masses celebrated for their deceased relatives.

"Although before all other intentions they should devote
part of their alms to have Masses offered for their own souls,
or those of their friends, it is proper to use a portion for the
relief of the poor, or for other good works, such as for the
benefit of Catholic schools, the Propagation of the Faith, and
other purposes, according to circumstances. This is a holy
liberality, conformable to the spirit of the Church, and very
profitable to the souls in Purgatory."

The Abbe Louvet, from whom we have taken the above,
relates another incident which de serves a place here. It
concerns a man in humble circumstances who made a
generous sacrifice in favor of the Propagation of the Faith,
but under circumstances which rendered this act particularly
valuable for the future needs of his soul in Purgatory.

A poor porter at a seminary during his long life had, penny
by penny, amassed the sum of eight hundred francs. Having
no family, he destined this sum for the celebration of Masses
after his death. But what can charity not effect when once it
has inflamed the heart with its sacred fire? A young priest
was on the point of quitting the seminary for the foreign
missions. The old man felt himself inspired to give him his
little treasure for the beautiful work of the Propagation of the
Faith. He therefore gave it and said, "Dear sir, I beg you to
accept this small alms to aid you in the work of spreading
the Gospel. I kept it to have Masses said after my death, but
I would rather remain a little longer in Purgatory that the
name of the good God be glorified." The seminarian was
moved even to tears. He would not accept the too generous
offer of the poor man, but the latter insisted so earnestly
that he had not the heart to refuse him.


A few months later the good old man died. No apparition has
revealed his fate in the other world. But is he in need? Do we
not know that the Heart of Jesus cannot allow itself to be
surpassed in generosity? Do we not understand that a man
who was generous enough to consign himself to the flames
of Purgatory in order that Jesus Christ might be made known
to infidel nations will surely have found abundant mercy
before the Sovereign Judge?


Chapter 40


Motives for Assisting the Hoiy Souis - Obiigation not oniy of
Charity, but aiso of Justice - Pious Legacies - Father
Rossignoii and the Devastated Property - Thomas of
Cantimpre and the Soidier of Chariemagne

We have just considered devotion to the souls in Purgatory
as a work of Charity. Prayer for the dead, we have said, is a
holy work, because it is a very salutary exercise of that most
excellent of virtues. Charity. This Charity towards the
departed is not only optional and of counsel, but it is also of
precept, no less than to give alms to the poor. As there exists
a general obligation of Charity for almsgiving, with how
much greater reason are we not bound by the general law of
Charity to assist our suffering brethren in Purgatory?

This obligation of Charity is often joined to an obligation of
strict Justice. When a dying person, either by word of mouth
or by written testament, expresses his last wishes in regard
to works of piety; when he charges his heirs to have a
certain number of Masses celebrated, to distribute a certain
sum in alms, for any good work what so ever, the heirs are
obliged in strict justice, from the moment they come into
possession of the property, to fulfill without delay the last
wishes of the deceased.

This duty of Justice is the more sacred as these pious
legacies are frequently but disguised restitutions. Now, what
does daily experience teach us? Do people hasten with
religious exactitude to acquit themselves of these pious
obligations which concern the soul of the departed? Alas!
quite the contrary. A family which comes into possession of a
considerable fortune doles out to its poor departed relative
the few suffrages that he has reserved for his own spiritual


benefit; and if the subtilities of the civil law favor them, the
members of this family are not ashamed, under the pretext
of some informality, to fraudulently set aside the will in
order to rid themselves of the obligation of making those
pious legacies. It is not in vain that the author of the
Imitation counsels us to make satisfaction for our sins during
our life and not to depend too much upon our heirs, who
often neglect to execute the pious endowments made by us
for the relief of our poor souls.

Let such families beware! This is sacrilegious injustice
combined with atrocious cruelty. To steal from a poor person,
says the Fourth Council of Carthage, is to become his
murderer. (Egentium necatores). What, then, shall we say of
those who rob the dead, who unjustly deprive them of their
suffrages, and leave them without assistance in the terrible
torments of Purgatory?

Moreover, those who render themselves guilty of this
infamous theft are frequently most severely punished by
God even in this life. We are sometimes astonished to see a
considerable for tune melt away, as it were, in the hands of
certain heirs; a sort of malediction seems to hover over
certain inheritances. In the Day of Judgment, when that
which is now hidden shall be made manifest, we shall see
that the cause of this ruin has frequently been the avarice
and injustice of the heirs, who neglected the obligations
imposed upon them in regard to pious bequests when they
succeeded to the property.

It happened in Milan, says Father Rossignoli, that a
magnificent estate, situated a short distance from the city,
was completely devastated by hail, whilst the neighboring
fields remained uninjured. This phenomenon attracted
attention and astonishment; it reminded one of the plagues
of Egypt. The hail ravaged the fields of the Egyptians and


respected the land of Gessen, inhabited by the children of
Israel. This was looked upon as a similar scourge. The
mysterious hail could not have confined itself exclusively
within the limits of one property without obeying an
intelligent cause. People knew not how to explain this
phenomenon, when an apparition of a soul from Purgatory
revealed that it was a chastisement inflicted upon
ungrateful and culpable children, who had neglected to
execute the last will of their departed father relative to
certain works of piety.

We know that in all countries and in all places there are
spoken of haunted houses, rendered uninhabitable, to the
great loss of their proprietors. Now, if we try to fathom the
cause of this, we shall generally find that a soul forgotten by
its relatives returns to claim the suffrages justly due to it.
Whether it be attributed to credulity, to the excitement of
imagination, to hallucination, or even to deception, it will
ever remain a well-proved fact to teach unfeeling heirs how
God punishes such unjust and sacrilegious conduct even in
this life.

The following incident, which we borrow from Thomas of
Cantimpre (Rossign., Merv., 15), proves clearly how culpable
in the sight of God are those heirs who defraud the dead.
During the wars of Charlemagne, a valiant soldier had
served in the most important and honorable positions. His
life was that of a true Christian. Content with his pay, he
refrained from every act of violence, and the tumult of the
camp never prevented him from the fulfillment of his
essential duties, although in matters of minor importance he
had been guilty of many little faults common to men of his
profession. Having reached a very advanced age, he fell ill;
and seeing that his last hour had come, he called to his
bedside an orphan nephew, to whom he had been a father,
and expressed to him his dying wishes. "My son," he said.


"you know that I have no riches to bequeath to you: I have
nothing but my weapons and my horse. My weapons are for
you. As to my horse, sell it when I shall have rendered my
soul to God, and distribute the money among the priests
and the poor, that the former may offer the Holy Sacrifice for
me, and the others may assist me by their prayers." The
nephew wept, and promised to execute without delay the
last wishes of his dying uncle and benefactor. The old man
dying soon after, the nephew took possession of the
weapons and led away the horse. It was a very beautiful and
valuable animal. Instead of selling it immediately, as he had
promised his deceased uncle, he began by using it for short
journeys, and as he was well pleased with it, he did not wish
to part with it so soon. He deferred under the double pretext
that there was nothing that urged the prompt fulfillment of
his promise, and that he would await a favorable opportunity
to obtain a high price for him. Thus delaying from day to
day, from week to week, and from month to month, he
ended by stifling the voice of conscience, and forgot the
sacred obligation which he had towards the soul of his
benefactor.

Six months had elapsed, when one morning the deceased
appeared to him addressing him in terms of severe reproach.
"Unhappy man," he said, "thou hast forgotten the soul of thy
uncle; thou hast violated the sacred promise which thou
didst make at my deathbed. Where are the Masses which
thou oughtest to have had offered? Where the alms that
thou shouldst have distributed to the poor for the repose of
my soul? Because of thy guilty negligence I have suffered
unheard-of torments in Purgatory. Finally, God has taken pity
on me; today I am to enjoy the company of the blessed in
Heaven. But thou, by a just judgment of God, shalt die in a
few days, and be subjected to the same tortures which
would have remained for me to endure had God not shown
mercy to me. Thou shalt suffer for the same length of time


that I should have suffered, after which thou shalt
commence the expiation of thine own faults."

A few days later the nephew fell dangerously ill. He
immediately called a priest, related to him the vision, and
confessed his sins, weeping bitterly. "I shall soon die," said
he, "and I accept death from the hands of God as a
chastisement which I have but too well merited." He expired
in sentiments of humble repentance. This was but the least
part of the sufferings which had been announced to him in
punishment of his injustice; we tremble with horror at the
thought of the remaining portion which he was about to
undergo in the other life.


Chapter 41


Motives of Justice - Saint Bernardine of Siena and the
Lin faith fui Widow - Disguised Restitutions - Negiect to
Execute the Last Wiii

Saint Bernardine relates that a married couple having no
children made a contract that in case one should die before
the other, the one who survived was to distribute the
property left by the other, for the repose of the soul of the
deceased. The husband died first and his widow neglected
to fulfill her promise. The mother of the widow was still
living, and the deceased appeared to her, begging her to go
to her daughter and urge her in the name of God to fulfill
her engagement. "If she delays," he said, "to distribute in
alms the sum which I have destined for the poor, tell her on
the part of God that in thirty days she will be struck by a
sudden death." When the impious widow heard this solemn
warning, she had the audacity to treat it as a dream, and
persisted in her sacrilegious infidelity to her promise. Thirty
days passed and the unfortunate woman having gone to an
upper room in the house, fell through the window and was
killed on the spot.

Injustice towards the dead, of which we have just spoken,
and fraudulent maneuvers to escape the obligation of
executing their pious legacies, are grievous sins, crimes
which merit the eternal punishment of Hell. Unless a sincere
Confession and at the same time due restitution be made,
this sin will meet its chastisement not in Purgatory but in
Hell.

Alas! yes, it is especially in the other life that Divine Justice
will punish the guilty usurpers of the property of the dead.
Judgment without mercy to him that hath not done mercy.


says the Holy Ghost. (James 2:13). If these words be true,
how rigorous a judgment awaits those whose detestable
avarice has left the soul of a parent, a benefactor, for
months, years, perhaps even for centuries, in the frightful
torments of Purgatory. This crime, as we have said above, is
the more grievous, because in many cases these suffrages
which the deceased asks for his soul are but disguised
restitutions. This fact is in some families but too often
overlooked. People find it very convenient to speak of
intrigue and clerical avarice. The finest pretexts are made
use of to invalidate a last will and testament, which often,
perhaps in the majority of cases, involves a necessary
restitution. The priest is but a medium in this indispensable
act, bound to absolute secrecy by virtue of his sacramental
ministry.

Let us explain this more clearly. A dying man has been guilty
of some injustice during his life. This is of a more frequent
occurrence than we imagine, even in regard to men who are
most upright in the eyes of the world. At the moment when
he is about to appear before God, this sinner makes his
Confession; he wishes to make a full reparation, as he is
bound to do, of all the injury which he has caused his
neighbor, but he has not the time left to do so himself, and
is not willing to reveal the sad secret to his children. What
does he do? He covers his restitution under the veil of a
pious legacy.

Now, if this legacy is not paid, and consequently the
injustice not repaired, what will become of the soul of the
deceased? Will it be detained for an indefinite length of time
in Purgatory? We know not all the laws of Divine Justice, but
numerous apparitions serve to give us some idea of them,
since they "all declare that they cannot be admitted into
eternal beatitude so long as any part of the debt of Justice
remains to be cancelled." Moreover, are not these souls


culpable for having deferred until their death the payment
of a debt of Justice which they had owed for so long a time?
And if now their heirs neglect to discharge it for them, is it
not a deplorable consequence of their own sin, of their own
guilty delay? It is through their fault that these ill-gotten
goods remain in the family, and they will not cease to cry
out against them as long as restitution be not made. Res
clamat domino, property cries out for its lawful owner; it
cries out against its unjust possessor.

If, through the malice of the heirs, restitution is never made,
it is evident that that soul cannot remain in Purgatory
forever; but in this case a long delay to his entrance into
Heaven seems to be a fitting chastisement for an act of
injustice, which the soul has retracted, it is true, but which
still abides in its efficacious cause. Let us therefore think of
these grave consequences when we allow days, weeks,
months, and perhaps even years to elapse before
discharging so sacred a debt.

Alas! how feeble is our faith! If a domestic animal, a little
dog, falls into the fire, do you delay to draw it out? And see,
your parents, benefactors, persons most dear to you, writhe
in the flames of Purgatory, and you do not consider it your
urgent duty to relieve them; you delay, you allow long days
of suffering to pass for those poor souls, without making an
effort to perform those good works which will release them
from their pains.


Chapter 42


Motives of Justice - Barren Tears - Thomas of Cantimpre and
his Grandmother - Biessed Margaret of Cortona

We have just spoken of the obligation of Justice which is
incumbent upon heirs for the execution of pious legacies.
There is another duty of strict Justice which regards children;
they are obliged to pray for their deceased parents.
Reciprocally in their turn parents are bound by natural right
not to forget before God those of their children who have
preceded them into eternity. Alas! there are parents who are
inconsolable at the loss of a son or of a dearly beloved
daughter, and who, instead of praying for them, bestow
upon them nothing but a few fruitless tears. Let us hear
what Thomas of Cantimpre relates on this subject; the
incident happened in his own family.

The grandmother of Thomas had lost a son in whom she had
centered her fondest hopes. Day and night she wept for him
and refused all consolation. In the excess of her grief she
forgot the great duty of Christian love, and did not think of
praying for that soul so dear to her. The unfortunate object
of this barren tenderness languished amid the flames of
Purgatory, receiving no alleviation in his sufferings. Finally
God took pity on him. One day, whilst plunged in the depths
of her grief, this woman had a miraculous vision. She saw on
a beautiful road a procession of young men, as graceful as
angels, advancing full of joy towards a magnificent city. She
understood that they were souls from Purgatory making
their triumphal entry into Heaven. She looked eagerly to see
if among their ranks she could not discover her son. Alas!
the child was not there; but she perceived him approaching
far behind the others, sad, suffering, and fatigued, his


garments drenched with water. "Oh, dear object of my grief,"
she cried out to him, "how is it that you remain behind that
brilliant band? I should wish to see you at the head of your
companions."

"Mother," replied the child in a plaintive tone, "it is you, it is
these tears which you shed over me that moisten and soil
my garments, and retard my entrance into the glory of
Heaven. Cease to abandon yourself to a blind and useless
grief. Open your heart to more Christian sentiments. If you
truly love me, relieve me in my sufferings; apply some
indulgences to me, say prayers, give alms, obtain for me the
fruits of the Holy Sacrifice of the Mass. It is by this means
that you will prove your love; for by so doing you will deliver
me from prison where I languish, and bring me forth to
eternal life, which is far more desirable than the life
terrestrial which you have given me."

Then the vision disappeared, and that mother, thus
admonished and brought back to true Christian sentiments,
instead of giving way to immoderate grief, applied to the
practice of every good work which could give relief to the
soul of her son.

The great causes of this forgetfulness, this indifference,
guilty neglect, and injustice towards the dead, is lack of
faith. For do we not see that true Christians, those animated
by a spirit of faith, make the most noble sacrifices in behalf
of their departed friends? Descending in spirit into those
penal flames, there contemplating the rigors of Divine
Justice, listening to the voice of the dead who implore their
compassion, they think only how to give relief to those poor
souls, and consider it their most sacred duty to procure for
their parents and departed friends all the suffrages possible,
according to their means and condition. Happy are those


Christians; they show their faith by their works; they are
merciful, and in their turn they shall obtain mercy.

Blessed Margaret of Cortona was at first a great sinner; but
after she had been sincerely converted, she blotted out her
past disorders by great penances and works of mercy. Her
charity towards the poor souls knew no bounds; she
sacrificed everything, time, repose, satisfactions, to obtain
their deliverance from Almighty God. Understanding that
devotion towards the holy souls, when well directed, has for
its first object our parents, her father and mother being
dead, she never ceased to offer for them her prayers,
mortifications, vigils, sufferings. Communions, and the
Masses at which she had the happiness to assist. In reward
for her filial piety, God revealed to her that by all her prayers
she had shortened the long term of suffering which her
parents would have had to endure in Purgatory; that she had
obtained their complete deliverance and entrance into
Paradise.


Chapter 43


Motives of Justice - Prayer for Departed Parents - Saint
Catherine of Siena and her Father, Jacomo

Saint Catherine of Siena has left us a similar example. It is
thus related by her biographer, Blessed Raymond of Capua.
"The servant of God," he writes, "had an ardent zeal for the
salvation of souls. I will first speak of that which she did for
her father, Jacomo, of whom we have already made mention.
This excellent man had remarked the sanctity of his
daughter, and was filled with respectful tenderness towards
her; he advised everyone in his house never to oppose her
in anything, but to leave her perfect liberty in the practice of
her good works. Thus the affection which united father and
daughter increased day by day. Catherine constantly prayed
for her father's salvation; Jacomo took a holy delight in the
virtues of his daughter, hoping through her merits to obtain
favor before God.

"The life of Jacomo finally approached its end, and he was
confined to bed by a dangerous illness. Seeing his condition,
his daughter, as was her custom, betook herself to prayer,
beseeching her Heavenly Spouse to cure him whom she so
tenderly loved. He answered that Jacomo was at the point of
death, and that to live longer would not be profitable to him.
Catherine then went to her father, and found him so
perfectly resigned to leave this world, and without any
regret, that she thanked God with all her heart.

"But her filial love was not content; she re turned to prayer
in order to obtain from God, the Source of all grace, to grant
her father not only the pardon of all his faults, but also that
at the hour of his death he might be admitted into Heaven,
without so much as passing through the flames of Purgatory.


She was answered that Justice could not sacrifice its rights;
that the soul must be perfectly pure to enter the glory of
Paradise. 'Your father,' said Our Lord, 'has led a good life in
the married state, and has done much that was very
pleasing in My sight; above all, his conduct towards you has
been most agreeable to Me; but My Justice demands that his
soul should pass through fire, in order to purify it from the
stains which it contracted in the world.' 'O my loving
Saviour,' replied Catherine, 'how can I bear the thought of
seeing him who has nourished me, who has brought me up
with such tender care, who has been so good to me during
his whole life, tormented in those cruel flames? I beseech
Your Infinite Goodness not to permit his soul to leave his
body until in some way or another it shall have been so
perfectly cleansed that it shall have no need to pass through
the fires of Purgatory.'"

Admirable condescension! God yielded to the prayer and
desire of His creature. The strength of Jacomo was
exhausted, but his soul could not depart as long as the
conflict lasted between Our Lord, who alleged His Justice,
and Catherine, who implored His Mercy. Finally, Catherine
resumed: "If I cannot obtain this grace without satisfying
Thy Justice, let, then, that Justice be exercised upon me; I
am ready to suffer for my father all that Thy Goodness may
be pleased to send me." Our Lord consented. "I will accept
thy proposal," He said," on account of thy love for Me I
exempt thy father's soul from all expiation, but thou shaft
suffer as long as thou livest the pain that was destined for
him." Full of joy, Catherine cried out, "Thanks for Thy word,

O Lord, and may Thy will be done!"

The saint immediately returned to her father, who had just
entered upon his agony. She filled him with courage and joy
by giving him, on the part of God, the assurance of his


eternal salvation, and she left him not until he had breathed
forth his soul.

At the same moment that the soul of her father was
separated from the body, Catherine was seized with most
violent pains, which remained until her death, without
allowing her one moment of repose. "She herself," adds
Blessed Raymond, "often assured me of this, and indeed it
was evident to all who saw her. But her patience was greater
than her malady. All that I have related I learned from
Catherine, when, touched at the sight of her sufferings, I
asked her the cause thereof. I must not forget to say that at
the moment her father expired she was heard to cry out, her
face beaming with joy and a smile upon her lips, 'May God
be praised! My dear father, how I wish I were like you.'

During the celebration of the funeral obsequies, when all
were in tears, Catherine seemed transported with delight.
She consoled her mother and everyone as though
unaffected by her father's death. It was because she had
seen that beloved soul come forth triumphant from the
prison of the body and pass without any hindrance into
eternal beatitude. This sight had inundated her with
consolation, because a short time previous she herself had
tasted the joys of eternal light.

"Let us here admire the wisdom of Providence. The soul of
Jacomo could surely have been purified in another manner,
and have been immediately admitted into Heaven, like the
good thief who confessed our Saviour on the Cross. But God
willed that his purification should be effected through the
sufferings of Catherine, as she herself had requested, and
this not to try her, but to increase her merits and her crown.

"It was fitting that this holy maid, who so ardently loved the
soul of her father, should receive some recompense for her
filial affection; and since she had preferred the salvation of


his soul to that of her own body, her bodily suffering
contributed to the happiness of her soul. Thus she always
spoke of her sweet, her dear sufferings. And she was right,
for these afflictions augmented the sweetness of grace in
this life and the delights of glory in the next. She confided to
me that long after his death her father Jacomo continually
came to thank her for the happiness she had procured for
him. He revealed many hidden things to her, warned her of
the snares of the demon, and preserved her from all danger."


Chapter 44


Motives and Incentives to Devotion towards the Holy Souls -
Saint John of God - Give Alms for your Own Sake - Saint
Bridget - Blessed Peter Lefevre

We have just seen how holy and meritorious Charity towards
the holy souls is before God - Sancta cogitatio. It remains to
show how salutary, at the same time, it is for ourselves -
Salubris cogitatio. If the excellence of the work in itself is so
powerful an incentive, the precious advantages which we
derive from it are no less a stimulus. They consist, on the
one hand, of the graces which we receive in recompense for
our generosity, and, on the other, of the Christian fervor with
which this good work inspires us.

Blessed, said our Saviour, are the merciful, for they shall
obtain mercy. (Matthew 5:7). Blessed is he, says the Holy
Ghost, that understands concerning the needy and the poor:
the Lord will deliver him in the evil day. (Psalm 40). As long
as you did it to one of these My brethren, you did it to Me.
(Matthew 25:40). The Lord deal mercifully with you, as you
have dealt with the dead. (Ruth 1:8). These different
sentences express, in their strongest sense. Charity towards
the departed.

All that we offer to God in Charity to the dead, says Saint
Ambrose in his book of Offices, is changed into merit for
ourselves, and we shall find it after our death increased a
hundredfold - 0/nne quod defunctis impenditur, in nostrum
tandem meritum commutatur, et illud post mortem
centuplum recipimus duplicatum. We can say that the spirit
of the Church, the sentiments of the doctors and the saints,
are expressed in these words: What you do for the dead, you
do in a most excellent manner for yourself. The reason of this


is, that this work of mercy will be returned to you increased
a hundredfold, in the day when you yourself shall be in
distress. We may here apply the celebrated words of Saint
John of God when he asked the inhabitants of Granada to
give him an alms for the love of themselves. To provide for
the needs of the sick whom he took into his hospital, the
charitable saint traversed the streets of Granada, crying,
"Give alms, my brethren, give alms for the love of yourselves
." People were astonished at this new form of expression,
because they had always been accustomed to hear: alms for
the love of God. "Why," said they to the saint, "do you ask us
to give alms for the love of ourselves?" "Because," replied
he, "it is the great means of redeeming your sins, according
to the words of the Prophet: Redeem thou thy sins with alms,
and thy iniquities with works of mercy to the poor. " (Dan.
4:24). In giving alms, you labor in your own interest, since
you thereby diminish the terrible chastisements which your
sins have merited. Must we not conclude that all this is true
of alms bestowed upon the souls of Purgatory? To assist
them is to preserve ourselves from those terrible expiations
which we shall not otherwise escape. We may, therefore, cry
with Saint John of God, Give them the alms of your
suffrages: assist them for the love of yourself. Generosity
towards the departed is always repaid; it finds its
recompense in all kinds of graces, the source of which is the
gratitude of the holy souls and that of Our Lord, who
considers as done to Himself all that we do for the suffering
souls.

Saint Bridget declares in her Revelations, and her testimony
is quoted by Benedict XII (Serm. 4, 12), that she heard a
voice from the depths of the Purgatorial flames pronouncing
these words: "May those be blessed, may those be rewarded,
who relieve us in these pains!" And on another occasion: "O
Lord God, show Thy Almighty power in recompensing a
hundredfold those who assist us by their suffrages, and


make the rays of the divine light to shine upon us." In
another vision the saint heard the voice of an angel saying:
"Blessed be upon earth those who, by their prayers and
good works, come to the assistance of the poor suffering
souls!"

Blessed Peter Lefevre, of the Company of Jesus, so well
known for his devotion towards the holy angels, had also a
special devotion towards the souls in Purgatory. "Those
souls," he said, "have bowels of Charity, which are ever open
to those who still walk amidst the dangers of this life; they
are filled with gratitude towards those who assist them. They
can pray for us, and offer up their torments to God in our
behalf. It is a most excellent practice to invoke the souls in
Purgatory, that we may obtain from God, through their
intercession, a true knowledge of our sins and a perfect
contrition for them, fervor in the exercise of good works, care
to produce worthy fruits of penance, and in general, all
virtues, the absence of which has been the cause of their
terrible chastisement.


Chapter 45


Advantages of Devotion towards the Holy Souls - Their
Gratitude - Saint Margaret of Cortona - Saint Philip Neri -
Cardinal Baronius and the Dying Woman

Is it difficult to understand the gratitude of the holy souls? If
you had ransomed a captive from the galling yoke of
slavery, would he be grateful for such a benefit? When the
Emperor Charles V took possession of the city of Tunis, he
restored to liberty twenty thousand Christian slaves, who
before his victory had been reduced to a most deplorable
condition. Penetrated with gratitude towards their
benefactor, they surrounded him, blessing him and singing
his praises. If you gave health to a person dangerously sick,
fortune to an unhappy creature who had been reduced to
poverty, would you not receive in return their gratitude and
their benedictions? And those souls, so holy and so good,
will they conduct themselves differently with regard to their
benefactors - those poor souls whose captivity, poverty,
suffering, and necessity far surpass all captivity, indigence,
or malady to be found upon earth? They come especially at
the hour of death, to protect them, to accompany and
introduce them into the happy abode of their eternal rests.

We have already spoken of Saint Margaret of Cortona, and of
her devotion to the holy souls. It is related in her biography
that at her death she saw a multitude of souls that she had
delivered from Purgatory form in procession to escort her to
Paradise. God revealed this favor granted to Margaret of
Cortona through the medium of a holy person in the city of
Castello. This servant of God, rapt in ecstasy at the moment
when Margaret departed this life, saw her soul in the midst
of this brilliant cortege, and on recovering from her rapture


she related to her friends what Our Lord had been pleased to
manifest to her.

Saint Philip Neri, founder of the Congregation of the Oratory,
had a most tender devotion towards the holy souls in
Purgatory, and he felt a particular attraction to pray for
those who had been under his spiritual direction. He
considered him-self under greatest obligation to them,
because Divine Providence had confided them in a special
manner to his zeal. It seemed to him that his charity ought
to follow them until their final purification was
accomplished, and they were admitted into the glory of
Heaven. He confessed that many of his spiritual children
appeared to him after their death, either to ask his prayers
or to return him thanks for what he had already done for
them He declared also that by this means he had obtained
more than one grace.

After his death, a Franciscan Father of great piety was
praying in the chapel in which the venerated remains of the
saint had been deposited, when the latter appeared to him
surrounded with glory and in the midst of a brilliant train.
Encouraged by the air of amiable familiarity with which the
saint regarded him, he ventured to ask the meaning of that
bright band of blessed spirits which accompanied him. The
saint replied that they were the souls of those whose
spiritual guide he had been during life, and whom by his
suffrages he had delivered from Purgatory. He added that
they had come to meet him on his departure from this world,
that in their turn they might introduce him into the
Heavenly Jerusalem.

"There is no doubt," says the devout Father Rossignoli, "that
on their entrance into eternal glory the first favors which
they ask of the Divine Mercy are for those who have opened
to them the gates of Paradise, and they will never fail to


pray for their benefactors, whenever they see them in any
necessity or danger. In reverses of fortune, sicknesses, and
accidents of all kinds they will be their protectors. Their zeal
will increase when the interests of the soul are at stake; they
will powerfully assist them to vanquish temptation, to
practice good works, to die a Christian death, and to escape
the sufferings of the other life."

Cardinal Baronius, whose authority as historian is well
known, relates that a person who was very charitable
towards the holy souls was afflicted with a terrible agony
when on her death bed. The spirit of darkness suggested to
her the most gloomy fears, and veiled from her sight the
sweet light of Divine Mercy, endeavoring to drive her into
despair; when suddenly Heaven seemed to open before her
eyes, and she saw thousands of defenders fly to her aid,
reanimating her courage, and promising her the victory.
Comforted by this unexpected assistance, she asked who
were her defenders? "We are," they replied, "the souls which
you have delivered from Purgatory; we, in our turn, come to
help you, and very soon we shall conduct you to Paradise."
At these consoling words the sick person felt that her fears
were changed into the sweetest confidence. A short time
afterwards she tranquilly expired, her countenance serene
and her heart filled with joy.


Chapter 46


Advantages - Gratitude of the Souls - The Return of an
Exiled Priest - Father Mumford and the Printer, Williann
Freyssen

In order to understand the gratitude of the souls, it is
necessary that we should have a most clear conception of
the benefit they receive from their liberators; that we should
know what it is to enter Heaven. "Who will make known to
us," says the Abbe Louvet, "the joys of that blessed hour!
Represent to yourself the happiness of an exile who at
length returns to his fatherland. During the Reign of Terror, a
poor priest of La Vendee was condemned to be drowned.
Having escaped by miracle, he was obliged to emigrate in
order to save his life. When peace was restored to the
Church and to France, he hastened to return to his beloved
parish.

"It was a festival day in the village. All the parishioners went
to meet their pastor and father; the bells in the old tower
rang joyously, and the church was decorated as upon days
of great solemnity. The old man advanced smiling in the
midst of his children, but when the doors of the holy place
opened before him, when he beheld again the altar that had
so long rejoiced the days of his youth, his heart, too weak to
bear such transports of joy, broke within his bosom With a
trembling voice he intoned the Te Deum, but it was the Nunc
Dimittis of his priestly life; he fell dying at the foot of the
altar. The exile had not the strength to support the joys of
his return."

If such are the joys of the return of an exile to his terrestrial
fatherland, who will make known to us the transports we
shall experience upon entering Heaven, the true home of


our souls? And how can we wonder at the gratitude of the
blessed whom we have caused to enter there?

Father James Mumford, of the Society of Jesus, who was born
in England in 1605, and who struggled during forty years in
the cause of the Church in that country, given up to heresy,
composed a remarkable work on Purgatory, which he had
printed at Cologne by William Freyssen, a well-known
Catholic publisher. This book obtained a large circulation,
and effected a great good among souls, the publisher,
Freyssen, being one of those who derived the greatest
advantage from it. This is what he wrote to Father Mumford
in 1649:

"I write. Father, to inform you of the miraculous and twofold
cure of my son and my wife. During the holidays, whilst my
office was closed, I set to work reading the book, Mercy
Exercised towards the Souls in Purgatory , which you have
sent me to print. I was still engaged in reading the work
when I was informed that my young son, four years of age,
showed symptoms of a serious illness. The malady made
rapid progress, the physician lost hope, and preparations for
his burial were already thought of. It occurred to me that I
might perhaps save him by making a vow in favor of the
souls in Purgatory.

"I went to church early in the morning, and fervently
besought God to have pity on me, promising by a vow to
distribute a hundred copies of your book among the
ecclesiastics and Religious free of charge, in order to remind
them of the zeal with which they should interest themselves
in behalf of the Church Suffering, and of the practices that
are best suited to fulfill this duty.

"I acknowledge that I was full of hope. Upon my return home
I found the child better. He already asked for nourishment.


although for several days he had been incapable of
swallowing even a single drop of liquid. The following day
his cure was complete; he arose, went out for a walk, and ate
with as good an appetite as if he had never been sick.
Penetrated with gratitude, my most urgent desire was to
fulfill my promise. I went to the College of the Society of
Jesus and besought the Fathers to accept my hundred
copies, to keep what they wanted for themselves, and to
distribute the remainder among the other communities and
ecclesiastics of their acquaintance, that the suffering souls,
my benefactors, might be comforted by new suffrages.

"Three weeks later, another and not less serious accident
happened to me. My wife upon entering the house was
suddenly seized with a violent trembling in all her limbs,
which caused her to fall insensible to the ground. She soon
lost her appetite and the power of speech. All manner of
remedies were employed, but in vain. The malady only
increased, and all hope seemed lost. Her confessor, seeing
her reduced to this condition, sought words to console me,
exhorting me to be resigned to the will of God. As for myself,
after the protection I had experienced from the good souls in
Purgatory, I could not think of despairing. I returned to the
same church, prostrated myself before the Blessed
Sacrament, and renewed my supplication with all the fervor
of which I was capable. 'O my God,' I exclaimed, 'Thy mercy
is without limit! In the name of Thine Infinite Goodness,
permit not that the restoration of my son to health be
atoned for by the death of my wife!' I then made a vow to
distribute two hundred copies of your book in order to obtain
copious relief for the suffering souls. At the same time I
besought the souls that had formerly been delivered to unite
their prayers to those of the others still retained in
Purgatory. After this prayer I returned home, and saw my
servants running to meet me. They told me that my dear
wife was considerably better, that the delirium had ceased


and her speech had returned. I hastened to her side and
found all was true. I offered her nourishment, which she took
with relish. A very short time afterwards she was so
completely restored that she accompanied me to the church
to return thanks to God for all His mercy.

"Your Reverence may place entire confidence in this
statement. I pray you to aid me in thanking Our Lord for this
double miracle. - FREYSSEN"


Chapter 47


Advantages - Temporal Favors - L'Abbe Postel and the
Servant of Paris

The following is related as a fact by the Abbe Postel, the
translator of F. Rossignoli's work. It took place in Paris, he
says, about the year 1827, and is inserted as No. 27 in the
Merveillesdu Purgatoire.

A poor servant, who had been brought up as a good
Christian in her native village, had adopted the pious
practice of having a Mass said every month for the suffering
souls. Her employers, having taken her with them to the
capital, she never once neglected it, and furthermore made
it her rule to assist at the Divine Sacrifice, and to unite her
prayers with those of the priest, especially for the soul that
had most nearly completed its expiation. This was her
ordinary intention.

God soon tried her by a long illness, that not only
occasioned her cruel suffering, but also caused her to lose
her place and draw upon her last resources. On the day that
she was able to leave the hospital, she had but twenty sous
left. After addressing a fervent prayer to Heaven, full of
confidence, she went in search of a situation. She was told
that she would probably find employment in a certain family
at the other end of the city, whither she went, and as she
was obliged to pass by the Church of Saint Eustache, she
entered. The sight of a priest at the altar reminded her that
this month she had forgotten her usual Mass for the dead,
and that this was the very day upon which, for many years,
she had been accustomed to do this good work. But what
was she to do? If she disposed of her last franc, she would
have nothing left, even to satisfy her hunger. It was a


struggle between devotion and human prudence. Devotion
gained the day. "After all," she said to herself, "the good God
knows it is for Him, and He will not forsake me!" Entering the
sacristy, she gave her offering for a Mass, at which she
assisted with her usual fervor.

A few moments after, she continued on her way, full of
anxiety as may be readily understood. Being absolutely
destitute of means, what was she to do if she failed to obtain
employment? She was still occupied with these thoughts
when a pale young man of a slight figure and distinguished
appearance approached her and said, "Are you in search of a
situation?" "Yes, sir." "Well, go to a certain street and
number, to the house of Madam . I think you will suit her,
and that you will be satisfied there." Having spoken these
words, he disappeared in the passing crowd, without waiting
to receive the poor girl's thanks.

She found the street, recognized the number, and ascended
to the apartments. A servant came out carrying a package
under her arm and uttering words of complaint and anger.

"Is Madame there?" asked the newcomer. "She may or she
may not be," replied the other. "What does it matter to me?
Madame will open the door herself if it suits her; I will
trouble myself no longer about it. Adieu!" And she
descended the steps.

Our poor girl rang the bell with trembling hand, and a sweet
voice bade her to enter. She found herself in the presence of
an old lady of venerable appearance, who encouraged her to
make known her wishes.

"Madame," said the servant, "I learned this morning that you
are in need of a servant, and I came to offer my services. I
was assured that you would receive me kindly." "Oh, but, my
dear child, what you tell me is very extraordinary. This


morning I had no need of one; it is only within the last half-
hour that I have discharged an insolent domestic, and there
is not a soul in the world except her and myself who know it.
Who sent you, then?" "It was a gentleman, Madame; a
young gentleman whom I met on the street, who stopped me
for this purpose, and I praised God for it, for it is absolutely
necessary for me to find a place today; I have not a penny in
my pocket."

The old lady could not understand who the person was, and
was lost in conjecture, when the servant raising her eyes to
the furniture of the little parlor, perceived a portrait. "Wait,
Madame," she said immediately, "do not puzzle yourself any
more; this is the exact picture of the young man who spoke
to me. It is on his account that I am come."

At these words the lady uttered a loud cry and seemed to
lose consciousness. She made the girl repeat the story of her
devotion to the souls in Purgatory, of the morning Mass, and
her meeting with the stranger; then throwing herself on the
neck of the girl, she embraced her amid a flood of tears and
said, "You shall not be my servant from this moment; you are
my daughter. It is my son, my only son, whom you saw - my
son, dead for the past two years, who owes to you his
deliverance, whom God directed to send you here. I cannot
doubt it. May you, then, be blessed, and let us pray
continually for all those who suffer before entering into a
blessed eternity."


Chapter 48


Advantages - Temporal Favors - The Neapolitan Woman and
the Mysterious Note

To prove that the souls in Purgatory show their gratitude
even by temporal favors, Father Rossignoli relates a fact that
happened at Naples, which bears some resemblance to that
which we have just read.

If it is not given to all to offer to God the abundant alms of
Judas Machabeus, who sent twelve thousand drachms to
Jerusalem for sacrifices and prayers to be offered in behalf of
the dead, there are very few who cannot at least make the
offering of the poor widow of the Gospel, who was praised by
our Saviour Himself She gave only two mites, but, said Jesus,
"these two mites were of more value than all the gold of the
rich, because she of her want cast in all she had, even her
whole living. " (Mark 12:44). This touching example was
imitated by a humble Neapolitan woman, who had the
greatest difficulty in providing for the wants of her family.
The resources of the house depended upon the daily
earnings of the husband, who each evening brought home
the fruit of his labors.

Alas! one day this poor father was imprisoned for debt, so
that the responsibility of supporting the family rested upon
the unhappy mother, who possessed nothing but her
confidence in God. With faith she besought Divine
Providence to come to her aid, and especially to deliver her
husband, who languished in prison for no other crime than
his poverty.

She went to a wealthy and benevolent gentleman, and,
relating to him the sad story of her woes, entreated him with


tears to assist her. God permitted that she should receive
but a trifling alms, a carlin, a piece of money worth about
ten cents of our coin. Deeply afflicted, she entered a church
to implore the God of the indigent to succor her in her
distress, since she had nothing to hope from earth. She was
absorbed in prayers and tears, when, by an inspiration, no
doubt, of her good angel, it occurred to her to interest the
sympathy of the holy souls in her behalf, for she had heard
much of their sufferings, and of their gratitude towards
those who befriend them. Full of confidence, she went to the
sacristy, offered her little piece of money, and asked if a
Mass could be celebrated for the dead. The good priest, who
was there, hastened to say Mass for her intention, and
ascended the altar for that purpose, whilst the poor woman,
prostrate on the pavement, assisted at the Holy Sacrifice,
offering her prayers for the departed.

She returned quite consoled, as though she had received
the assurance that God had heard her prayer. Whilst
traversing the populous streets of Naples, she was accosted
by a venerable old man, who inquired whence she came and
whither she was going? The unfortunate woman explained
her distress, and the use she had made of the small alms she
had received. The old man seemed deeply touched by her
misery, spoke some words of encouragement, and gave her
a note enclosed in an envelope, which he directed her to
take to a gentleman whom he designated, and then left her.

The woman went in all haste to deliver the note to the
gentleman indicated. The latter, on opening the envelope,
was seized with astonishment, and was on the point of
fainting away; he recognized the handwriting of his father,
who had died some time previous. "Where did you get this
letter?" he cried, quite beside himself. "Sir," replied the good
woman, "it was from an old man who accosted me in the
street. I told him of my distress, and he sent me to give you


this note in his name. As regards his features, he very much
resembles that portrait which you have there over the door."
More and more impressed by these circumstances, the
gentleman again took up the note, and read aloud: "My son,
your father has just been delivered from Purgatory, thanks
to a Mass which the bearer has had celebrated this morning.
She is in great distress, and I recommend her to you." He
read and reread those lines, traced by that hand so dear to
him, by a father who was now among the number of the
elect. Tears of joy coursed down his cheeks as he turned
towards the woman. "Poor woman," he said, "by your trifling
alms you have secured the eternal felicity of him who gave
me life. In my turn I will secure your temporal happiness. I
take upon myself to supply all the needs of yourself and
your whole family."

What joy for that gentleman! What joy for that poor woman!
It is difficult to say on which side was the greatest
happiness. What is most important and most easy is, to see
the instruction to be derived from this incident; it teaches us
that the smallest act of charity towards the members of the
Church Suffering is precious in the sight of God, and draws
down upon us miracles of mercy.


Chapter 49


Advantages - Spiritual and Temporal Favors - Christopher
Sandoval at Louvain - The Lawyer Renouncing the World -
Brother Lacci and Dr. Verdiano

Let us here cite another example, the more worthy of
mention as a great Pope, Clement VIII, saw therein the finger
of God, and recommended its publication for the edification
of the Church. "Several authors," says Father Rossignoli,
"have related the marvellous assistance which Christopher
Sandoval, Archbishop of Seville, received from the souls in
Purgatory. Whilst still a child, he was accustomed to
distribute part of his pocket money in alms for the benefit of
the holy souls. His piety increased with his age; for the sake
of the poor suffering souls he gave away all that he could
dispose of, and even went so far as to deprive himself of a
thousand little things which were useful or necessary. When
he was pursuing his studies at the University of Louvain, it
happened that some letters which he expected from Spain
were delayed, in consequence of which he found himself
reduced to such pecuniary straits that he had scarcely
wherewith to purchase food. At this moment a poor person
asked of him an alms for love of the souls in Purgatory, and,
what had never happened to him before, he was obliged to
refuse.

"Afflicted by this circumstance, he went into a church. 'If,'
said he, 'I cannot give an alms for my poor souls, I can at
least give them the assistance of my prayers.'

"Scarcely had he finished his prayer when, on leaving the
church, he was accosted by a beautiful young man, dressed
as a traveller, who saluted him with respectful affability.
Christopher experienced a feeling of religious awe, as


though he were in the presence of a spirit in human form.
But he was soon reassured by his amiable interlocutor, who
spoke to him with the greatest gentleness of the Marquis of
Dania, his father, his relatives and friends, just as a Spaniard
who had recently arrived from the Peninsula. He ended by
begging him to accompany him to a hotel, where they could
dine together and be more at their ease. Sandoval, who had
not eaten anything since the previous day, gladly accepted
the gracious offer. They therefore seated themselves at
table, and continued to converse most pleasantly together.
After the repast, the stranger gave Sandoval a sum of
money, entreating him to accept it, and to make use of it for
any purpose he pleased, adding that the Marquis, his father,
would make him compensation on his return to Spain. Then,
under pretext of transacting some business, he withdrew,
and Christopher never saw him again. Notwithstanding all
his inquiries concerning the stranger, he never succeeded in
obtaining any information regarding him. No one, neither in
Louvain nor Spain, had ever seen or known a young man
corresponding to his description. As regards the sum of
money, it was exactly the amount which the pious
Christopher needed to defray expenses until the arrival of
his letters, and this money was never afterwards claimed
from his family.

He was, therefore, convinced that Heaven had worked a
miracle in his favor, and had sent to his assistance one of
those souls that he himself had relieved by his prayers and
alms. He was co nfi rmed in this opinion by Pope Clement
VIII, to whom he related the incident when he went to Rome
to receive the Bulls raising him to the Episcopate. This
Pontiff, struck by the extraordinary circumstances of the
case, advised him to make it known for the edification of the
faithful; he looked upon it as a favor from Heaven, which
proved how precious in the sight of God is charity towards
the departed.


Such is the gratitude of the holy souls which have left this
world, that they testily it even for favors bestowed upon
them whilst they were still in this life. It is related in the
Annals of the Friars Preachers that among those who went to
receive the habit from the hands of Saint Dominic in 1221,
there was a lawyer who had quitted his profession under
extraordinary circumstances. He was united by ties of
friendship to a young man of great piety, whom he
charitably assisted during the sickness of which he died.

This was sufficient to move the deceased to procure for him
the greatest of all benefits, that of conversion and vocation
to a religious life. About thirty days after his death he
appeared to the lawyer, and implored his assistance,
because he was in Purgatory. "Are your sufferings intense?"
he asked of his friend. "Alas!" replied the latter, "if the whole
earth with its forests and mountains were on fire, it would
not form a furnace such as the one into which I am plunged."
Seized with fear, his faith revived, and thinking only of his
own soul, he asked, "In what state am I in the eyes of God?"
"In a bad state," replied the deceased, "and in a dangerous
profession." "What have I to do? What advice do you give
me?" "Quit the perverse world in which you are engaged,
and occupy yourself only with the affairs of your soul." The
lawyer, following this counsel, gave all his goods to the poor
and took the habit of Saint Dominic.

Let us see how a holy Religious of the Society of Jesus
showed his gratitude, even after death, to the physician who
attended him during his last illness. Francis Lacci, a Brother
Coadjutor, died in the College of Naples in 1598. He was a
man of God, full of charity, patience, and tender devotion
towards the Blessed Virgin. Some time after his death. Dr.
Verdiano entered the church of the College to assist at Mass
before beginning his visits. It was the day on which were
celebrated the obsequies of King Philip II, who had died four
months previous. When, on leaving the church, he was


about to take holy water, a Religious approached and asked
him why the catafalque had been prepared, and whose was
the service about to be celebrated. "It is that of King Philip
II," he replied.

At the same time Verdiano, astonished that a Religious
should ask such a question of a stranger, and not
distinguishing the features of his interlocutor in the
obscurity of the place where he stood, asked who he was. "I
am," he answered, "Brother Lacci, whom you attended
during my last illness." The doctor looked at him attentively,
and recognized perfectly the features of Lacci. Stupefied
with astonishment, he said, "But you died of that disease!
Are you then suffering in Purgatory, and do you come to ask
our suffrages?" "Blessed be God, I am no longer in pain nor
sorrow. I need not your suffrages. I am in the joys of
Paradise." "And King Philip, is he also already in Paradise?"
"Yes, he is there, but placed as much below me as he was
elevated above me upon earth. As for you. Dr. Verdiano,
where do you propose to make your first visit today?"
Verdiano having replied that he was then going to the
Patrician di Maio, who was dangerously ill, Lacci warned him
to guard against a great danger which menaced him at the
door of the house. In fact, the doctor found there a large
stone so placed, that on being shaken, it would have fallen
and mortally injured him.

This material circumstance seems to have been designed by
Providence to prove to Verdiano that he had not been the
sport of an illusion.


Chapter 50


Advantages - Prayers of the Souls for us - Suarez - Saint
Bridget - Saint Catherine of Bologna - Venerable Vianney

We have just spoken of the gratitude of the holy souls. This
they sometimes manifest, as we have seen, in a clearly
visible manner, but most frequently they exercise it invisibly
by their prayers. The souls pray for us not only when, after
their deliverance, they are with God in Heaven, but even in
their place of exile and in the midst of their sufferings.
Although they cannot pray for themselves, yet, by their
supplications, they obtain great grace for us. Such is the
express doctrine of two eminent theologians, Bellarmine and
Suarez. "These souls are holy," says Suarez, "and dear to
God. Charity urges them to love us, and they know, at least
in a general way, to what dangers we are exposed, and what
need we have of the Divine assistance. Why, then, would
they not pray for their benefactors?"

Why? But it will be answered because they know them not.

In that dismal abode, in the midst of their torments, how can
they know who are those that assist them by their suffrages?

To this objection it may be replied, the souls feel at least the
alleviation which they receive and the assistance which is
given them; this suffices, even should they be ignorant of
the source whence it came, to call down the benedictions of
Heaven upon their benefactors, whosoever they may be, and
who are known to God.

But in reality do they not know from whom they receive
assistance in their sufferings? Their ignorance of this is
nowise proved, and we have strong reason to believe that no
such ignorance exists. Would their angel guardian, who


dwells there with them to give them all the consolation in
his power, deprive them of this consoling knowledge? Is this
knowledge not conformable to the doctrine of the
Communion of Saints? Would the intercourse which exists
between us and the Church Suffering not be the more
perfect for its being reciprocal, and that the souls know their
benefactors better?

This doctrine is confirmed by a great number of particular
revelations, and by the practice of several holy persons. We
have already said that Saint Bridget, in one of her ecstasies,
heard several souls cry aloud, "Lord God all- powerful,
reward a hundredfold those who assist us by their prayers,
and who offer to You their good works, in order that we may
enjoy the light of Your Divinity."

We read in the Life of Saint Catherine of Bologna that she
had a most tender devotion towards the holy souls in
Purgatory; that she prayed for them very frequently, and
with the greatest fervor; that she recommended herself to
them with the greatest confidence in her spiritual
necessities, and advised others to do the same, saying,
"When I wish to obtain any favor from our Lather in Heaven,

I have recourse to the souls that are detained in Purgatory; I
entreat them to present my request to the Divine Majesty in
their own name, and I feel that I am heard through their
intercession." A holy priest of our own day, the cause of
whose beatification has been commenced in Rome,
Venerable Vianney, Cure of Ars, said to an ecclesiastic who
consulted him, "Oh! if it were but known how great is the
power of the good souls in Purgatory with the Heart of God,
and if we knew all the graces we can obtain through their
intercession, they would not be so much forgotten. We must,
therefore, pray much for them, that they may pray much for
us."


These last words of Venerable Vianney indicate the true
manner of having recourse to the souls in Purgatory; we
must assist them, to obtain their prayers and the effects of
their gratitude in return - We must pray much for them that
they may pray much for us.

There is no question here of invoking them as we invoke the
saints in Heaven. Such is not the spirit of the Church, which,
before all else, prays for the departed, and assists them by
her suffrages. But it is nowise contrary to the spirit of the
Church nor to Christian piety to procure relief for the souls,
with the intention of obtaining in return, through the
assistance of their prayers, the favors which we desire. Thus
it is a laudable and pious act to offer a Mass for the departed
when we are in need of any particular grace. If, when the
holy souls are still in their sufferings, their prayers are so
powerful, we may easily conceive that they will be much
more efficacious when, being entirely purified, these souls
stand before the throne of God.


Chapter 51


Advantages - Gratitude of the Divine Spouse ofSouis -
Venerabie Archangeia Panigaroia and her Father, Gothard

If the souls are so grateful towards their benefactors, our
Lord Jesus Christ, who loves those souls, who receives as
done to Himself all the good which we procure for them, will
bestow an abundant recompense, very often even in this
life, and always in the next. He regards those who show
mercy, and punishes those who forget to show it, towards
the sufFering souls.

Let us first see an example of chastisement. Venerable
Archangeia Panigaroia, a Dominican Religious and Prioress of
the Monastery of Saint Martha in Milan, had extraordinary
zeal for the relief of the souls in Purgatory. She prayed, and
obtained prayers for all her deceased friends, and even for
those unknown to her, but of whose death she had been
notified. Her father, Gothard, whom she tenderly loved, was
one of those Christians of the world who seldom thought of
praying for the dead. He himself died, and, quite
disconsolate, Archangeia understood that her dear father
stood more in need of her prayers than of her tears. She
therefore took the resolution of recommending him to God
by special suffrages. But, strange to say, this resolution was
scarcely ever carried into effect; this girl, so pious and
devoted to her father, did very little for his soul. God
permitted that, notwithstanding her holy resolutions, she
continually forgot him, and interested herself in behalf of
others. Finally, an unexpected event explained this
unwonted forgetfulness, and aroused her devotion in behalf
of her father. On the Feast of All Souls she remained
secluded in her cell, exclusively occupied in exercises of


piety and penance for the relief of the poor souls. Suddenly
her angel appeared to her, took her by the hand, and
conducted her in spirit into Purgatory. Among the first souls
which she saw, she recognized that of her father, plunged in
a pond of icy water. Scarcely had Gothard seen his daughter
than, coming towards her, he reproached her sorrowfully for
having abandoned him in his sufferings, whilst she showed
so much Charity towards others, whom she constantly
relieved, and frequently delivered those who were strangers
to her.

Archangela stood for some time confused by these
reproaches, which she knew she had merited; soon,
however, shedding a torrent of tears, she replied, "I will do,
my dear father, all that you ask of me. May it please God to
give ear to my supplications and speedily deliver you."
Meanwhile she could not recover from her astonishment, nor
understand how she could thus have forgotten her beloved
father. Having taken her back, her angel told her that this
forgetfulness had happened by a disposition of Divine
Justice. "God," he said, "has permitted it in punishment for
the little zeal which, during life, your father manifested for
God, his own soul, and that of his neighbor. You saw how he
was tormented and benumbed in a lake of ice; this was the
chastisement of his tepidity in the service of God, and his
indifference with regard to the salvation of souls. Your father
was not an immoral man, it is true, but he showed little
inclination for the acquirement of virtue and for the practice
of those works of piety and charity to which the Church
exhorts the faithful. . . . This is the reason why God
permitted that he should be forgotten, even by you, who
would have given him too much relief. This is the
chastisement ordinarily inflicted by Divine Justice upon
those who are lacking in fervor and charity. He permits that
others should conduct themselves in their regard as they
have acted towards God and towards their brethren."


Moreover, this is the rule of Justice which our Saviour has
established in the Gospel: With what measure you mete, it
shall be measured to you again. (Matt. 7:2).


Chapter 52


Advantages - Charity towards the Holy Souls recompensed
by Jesus Christ - Saint Catherine of Siena and Palmerine -
Saint Magdalen de Pazzi and her Mother

God is more inclined to reward than to punish, and if He
inflict a chastisement upon those who forget the souls so
dear to His Heart, He shows Himself truly grateful towards
those who assist Him in the person of His suffering spouses.
In recompense He will one day say to them. Come ye blessed
of My Father, possess the kingdom which is prepared for you.
You have exercised mercy towards your necessitous and
suffering brethren; Amen, I say to you, as long as you did it
to one of these My least brethren, you did it to Me. (Matthew
25:40). Very often in this life Jesus rewards compassionate
and charitable souls by the bestowal of many favors. Saint
Catherine of Siena by her charity had converted a sinner
named Palmerine, who died and went to Purgatory. The saint
gave herself no rest until she had delivered this soul. In
recompense. Our Lord permitted her to appear to the saint,
or rather our Saviour Himself showed her to His servant, as a
glorious conquest of her Charity. Blessed Raymond thus
gives the details: In the middle of the fourteenth century,
when Saint Catherine edified her native city by all sorts of
works of mercy, a woman named Palmerine, after having
been the object of her tenderest charity, conceived a secret
aversion towards her benefactors, which even degenerated
into implacable hatred. No longer able to see or listen to the
saint, the ungrateful Palmerine, embittered against the
servant of God, ceased not to blacken her reputation by the
most atrocious calumnies. Catherine did all in her power to
conciliate her, but in vain. Then, seeing that her kindness,
her humility, her benefits served but to excite the fury of


this unfortunate woman, she earnestly implored God to
vouchsafe Himself to move her obdurate heart.

God heard her prayer by striking Palmerine with a mortal
malady; but this chastisement did not suffice to make her
enter into herself. In return for all the tender care which the
saint lavished upon her, the wretched woman loaded her
with insults and drove her from her presence. Meanwhile,
her end approached, and a priest was called to administer
the last Sacraments. The sick person was unfi t to receive
them, on account of the hatred which she nourished, and
which she refused to give up. On hearing this, and seeing
that the unfortunate creature had already one foot in Hell,
Catherine shed a torrent of tears and was inconsolable. For
three days and three nights she ceased not to supplicate
God on her behalf, adding fasting to prayer. "What! Lord,"
she said, "will You allow this soul to be lost on my account? I
conjure You, grant me at any price her conversion and her
salvation. Punish me for her sin, of which I am the occasion:
it is not her, but me, the chastisement should strike. Lord,
refuse me not the grace which I ask of You: I shall not leave
You until I shall have obtained it. In the name of Your
Goodness, of Your Mercy, I conjure You, most merciful
Saviour, not to permit the soul of my sister to leave her body
until it has been restored to Your grace."

Her prayer, adds her biographer, was so powerful that she
prevented the sick woman from dying. Her agony lasted for
three days and three nights, to the great astonishment of
her nurses. Catherine during this time continued to
intercede, and ended by gaining the victory. God could no
longer resist, and worked a miracle of mercy. A ray of
heavenly light penetrated the heart of the dying woman,
showed her her fault, and nerved her to repentance. The
saint, to whom God revealed this, hastened to her side. As
soon as the sick person saw her, she gave her every possible


mark of friendship and respect, accused herself aloud of her
fault, received with piety the last Sacraments, and died in
the grace of God.

Notwithstanding the sincerity of her conversion, it was to be
feared that a sinner who had barely escaped Hell would
have to undergo a severe Purgatory. The charitable
Catherine continued to do all in her power to hasten the
moment when Palmerine would be admitted to the glory of
Paradise.

So much Charity could not fail to meet its reward. "Our
Lord," writes Blessed Raymond, "showed to His spouse that
soul saved by her prayers. It was so brilliant that she told me
she could find no words capable of expressing its beauty. It
was not yet admitted to the glory of the beatific vision, but
had that brightness which creation and the grace of Baptism
imparts. Our Lord said to her, 'Behold, My daughter, this lost
soul which you have found!' And He added, 'Does she not
appear to you most beautiful and precious? Who would not
endure all sorts of suffering to save a creature so perfect and
introduce it into eternal life? If I, who am the Supreme
Beauty, from whom all beauty emanates, have been so far
captivated by the beauty of souls as to descend upon earth
and shed My Blood to redeem them; with how much greater
reason should you not labor one for another, that such
admirable creatures be not lost. If I have showed you this
soul, it was that you should be all the more zealous in all
that concerns the salvation of souls.

Saint Magdalen of Pazzi, so full of devotion for the dead,
exhausted all the resources of Christian Charity on behalf of
her mother, after the latter had departed this life. A fortnight
after her death, Jesus, wishing to console His spouse, showed
her the soul of her beloved parent. Magdalen saw her in
Paradise, arrayed in dazzling splendor, and surrounded by


saints, who appeared to take great interest in her. She heard
the blessed soul give her three commands, which ever
remained impressed upon her memory: "Take care, my
daughter," she said, "to descend as low as possible in
humility, to observe religious obedience, and to carry out
with prudence all that it prescribes." Saying this, Magdalen
saw her blessed mother vanish from sight, and she remained
inundated with the sweetest consolation.


Chapter 53


Advantages - Charity towards the Dead Rewarded - Saint
Thomas ofAquin, his Sister, and Brother Romano - The
Archpriest Ponzoni and Don Aiphonso Sanchez - Biessed
Margaret Mary and Mother Greffier

The Angelic Doctor, Saint Thomas of Aquin, was likewise
very devout towards the suffering souls, who appeared to
him several times, and we know of them by the testimony of
the illustrious Doctor himself.

He offered his prayers and sacrifices to God, particularly for
the departed souls whom he had known or who were related
to him. When he was Professor of Theology at the University
of Paris he lost a sister, who died in Capua, at the convent of
Saint Mary, of which she was Abbess. As soon as he heard of
her decease, he recommended her soul to God with great
fervor. Some days later she appeared to him, conjuring him
to have pity on her, and to redouble his suffrages, because
she suffered cruelly in the flames of the other life. Thomas
hastened to offer for her all the satisfaction in his power, and
solicited also the suffrages of several of his friends. He thus
obtained the deliverance of his sister, who came herself to
announce the glad tidings.

Some time after this, having been sent to Rome by his
superiors, the soul of this sister appeared to him in all the
glory of triumphant joy. She told him that his prayers had
been heard, that she was freed from suffering, and was
going to enjoy eternal repose in the bosom of God.
Familiarized with these supernatural communications, the
saint feared not to interrogate the apparition, and asked
what had become of his two brothers, Arnold and Landolph,
who had died some time previous. "Arnold is in Heaven,"


replied the soul, "and there enjoys a high degree of glory for
having defended the Church and the Sovereign Pontiff
against the aggressions of the Emperor Frederic. As to
Landolph, he is still in Purgatory, where he suffers much,
and is greatly in need of assistance. As regards yourself, my
dear brother," she added, "a magnificent place awaits you in
Paradise, in recompense for all you have done for the
Church. Hasten to put the last stroke to the different works
which you have undertaken, for you will soon join us."

History tells us that, in fact, he lived but a short time after
this event. On another occasion, the same saint, being in
prayer at the Church of Saint Dominic at Naples, saw
approaching him Brother Romano, who had succeeded him
at Paris in the chair of theology. The saint thought at first
that he had just arrived from Paris, for he was ignorant of his
death. He, therefore, arose, went to meet him, saluted him
and inquired of him concerning his health and the motive of
his journey. "I am no longer of this world," said the Religious
with a smile, "and by the mercy of God I am already in the
enjoyment of eternal beatitude. I come by the command of
God to encourage you in your labors." "Am I in the state of
grace?" asked Thomas immediately. "Yes, dear brother, and
your works are very agreeable to God." "And you, had you to
suffer Purgatory?" "Yes, for fourteen days, on account of little
infidelities which I had not sufficiently expiated on earth."

Then Thomas, whose mind was constantly occupied with
questions of theology, profited by the opportunity to
penetrate the mystery of the beatific vision; but he was
answered with this verse of Psalm 47: Sicut audivimus, sic
vidimus in civitate Dei nostri - "As we have learned by faith,
we have seen with our eyes in the city of our God." Saying
these words, the apparition vanished, leaving the Angelic
Doctor inflamed with the desire of the Eternal Good.


More recently, in the sixteenth century, a favor of the same
nature, but perhaps more wonderful, was granted to a
zelator of the souls in Purgatory, an intimate friend of Saint
Charles Borromeo. Venerable Gratian Ponzoni, Archpriest of
Arona, interested himself in the cause of the poor suffer ing
souls throughout his whole lifetime. During the pest which
carried off so many victims in the diocese of Milan, Ponzoni,
not content with administering the Sacraments to the
plaguestricken, hesitated not to become sexton, and to bury
the dead bodies; for fear had paralyzed the courage of all,
and no one would take upon themselves that terrible task.
With a zeal and charity truly apostolic, he had assisted a
large number of the unfortunate victims in Arona in their
last moments, and had interred them in the cemetery near
his church of Saint Mary. One day, after the office of Vespers,
as he was passing by the cemetery in company with Don
Alphonso Sanchez, then governor of Arona, he stopped
suddenly, struck with an extraordinary vision. Fearing some
delusion, he turned towards Sanchez and said, "Sir, do you
see the same spectacle which presents itself to my view?"
"Yes," replied the governor, who had the same vision, "I see a
procession of the dead, advancing from their graves towards
the church; and I avow that until you spoke I could not
believe my eyes." Assured of the reality of the apparition,
the Archpriest added, "They are probably the recent victims
of the pest, who wish to make known that they are in need
of our prayers." He immediately caused the bells to be rung,
and invited the parishioners to assemble on the following
morning for a solemn service for the dead.

We see here two persons whose sound judgment guarded
them against all clanger of illusion, and who, both struck at
the same time, seeing the same apparition, hesitate to give
credence to it until they were convinced that their eyes saw
the same phenomenon. There is not the least room for
hallucination, and every sensible man must admit the reality


of a supernatural occurrence, attested by such witnesses.

Nor can we call in question those apparitions based upon
the testimony of a Saint Thomas of Aquin, as related above.
We must also guard against too easily rejecting other facts
of the same nature, from the moment they are attested by
persons of recognized sanctity and truly worthy of belief. We
must be prudent, no doubt, but ours must be a Christian
prudence, equally removed from credulity and from that
proud, conceited spirit with which, as we have remarked
elsewhere, Jesus reproached His Apostles, "Noli esse
incredulus, sed fidelis " Be not faithless, but believing. (John
20:27).

Monseigneur Languet, Bishop of Soissons, makes the same
remark with reference to a circumstance which he relates in
the Life of Blessed Margaret Alacoque. Madame Billet, wife of
the doctor of the house - that is to say, of the convent of
Paray - where the blessed sister resided, had Just died. The
soul of the deceased appeared to the servant of God, asking
her prayers, and charging her to warn her husband of two
secret affairs that concerned his salvation. The holy sister
gave an account of what had taken place to her Superior,
Mother Greffier. The Superior ridiculed the vision, and the
one who related it to her; she imposed silence upon
Margaret, forbidding her to say or do anything regarding
what had been asked of her. "The humble Religious obeyed
with simplicity; and with the same simplicity she related to
Mother Greffier the second solicitation which she received
from the deceased some days later; but the Superior treated
this with the same contempt. However, the following night
she herself was aroused by such a horrible noise in her room
that she thought she would die from fright. She called the
sisters, and when assistance came, she was on the point of
swooning away. When she somewhat recovered, she
reproached herself with incredulity, and no longer delayed


to acquaint the doctor with what had been revealed to Sister
Margaret.


"The doctor recognized the warning as coming from God,
and profited by it. As for Mother Greffier, she learned by
experience that if distrust is ordinarily the wisest policy, it is
sometimes wrong to carry it too far, especially when the
glory of God and the good of our neighbor is concerned."


Chapter 54


Advantages - Salutary Thoughts - Make Satisfaction in this
Life rather than in the Next - Saint Augustine and Saint Louis
Bertrand - Brother Lourenco - Father Michei de ia Fontaine

Besides the advantages which we have already considered.
Charity towards the departed is very salutary to those who
practice it, because it stimulates them to fervor in the
service of God, and inspires the holiest thoughts. To think of
the souls in Purgatory is to think of the sufferings of the
other life; it is to call to mind that all sin demands expiation,
either in this life or the next.

Now, who does not understand that it is better to make
satisfaction here, since future chastise ments are so terrible?
A voice seems to come forth from Purgatory, repeating these
words of the Imitation, "Better is it to purge away our sins
and to cut off our vices now, than to keep them for purgation
hereafter."

We call to mind, also, this other sentence, of which we read
in the same chapter: "There, one hour of punishment will be
more grievous than a hundred years of the most bitter
penance here." Then, penetrated with salutary fear, we
willingly endure the sufferings of the present life, and we
say to God with Saint Augustine and Saint Louis Bertrand,
Domine, hie ure, hie seca, hie non parcas, ut in aeternum
parcas - "Lord, apply here iron and fire; spare me not in this
life, in order that You may spare me in the next."

Penetrated with these thoughts, the Christian regards the
tribulations of the present life, and especially the sufferings
of a painful malady, as a Purgatory upon earth which will
dispense him from Purgatory after death.


On 6 January 1676 there died in Lisbon, at the age of sixty-
nine years, the servant of God, Caspar Lourenco, Brother
Coadjutor of the Society of Jesus, and porter of the professed
house of that Institute. He was full of charity towards the
poor and towards the souls in Purgatory. He knew not how to
spare himself in the service of the unfortunate, and was
marvellously ingenious in teaching them to bless God for
their misery, which was to purchase Heaven for them. He
himself was so penetrated with the happiness of suffering
for Our Lord, that he crucified his flesh almost without
measure, and added other austerities on the vigils of
Communion days. At the age of seventy- eight, he would
accept of no dispensation from the fasts and abstinences of
the Church, and allowed no day to pass without taking the
discipline at least twice. Even in his last illness, the Brother
Infirmarian said that the approach of death did not make
him divest himself of his hair shirt, so great was his desire to
die upon the cross. The sufferings of his agony, which were
most cruel, might have taken the place of the most rigorous
penances. When asked if he suffered much, I am undergoing
my Purgatory before departing for Heaven," he replied with
a joyous air. Brother Lourenco was born on the day of
Epiphany; and Our Lord had revealed to him that this
beautiful day was to be also that of his death. He designated
the hour on the previous night; and when the Infirmarian
visited him at daybreak, he said to him with a smile
expressive of doubt, "Is it not today, brother, that you expect
to go and enjoy the vision of God?" "Yes," he replied, "as
soon as I shall have received the Body of my Saviour for the
last time." In fact, he received Holy Communion and expired
without struggle and without agony.

There is, then, every reason to believe that he spoke with a
supernatural knowledge of the truth when he said, "I am
undergoing my Purgatory before departing for Heaven."


Another servant of God received from the Blessed Virgin
herself the same assurance that his earthly suffering would
take the place of Purgatory. I speak of Lather Michel de la
Lontaine, who slept sweetly in the Lord on 11 February
1606, at Valencia, in Spain. He was one of the first
missionaries who labored for the salvation of the people of
Peru. His greatest care when instructing the new converts
was to inspire them with a sovereign horror of sin, and to
lead them to great devotion towards the Mother of God, by
speaking of the virtues of that admirable Virgin, and
teaching them to recite the beads in her honor.

Mary, on her part, did not refuse the favors asked of her. One
day when, exhausted with fatigue, he lay prostrate in the
dust, not having strength to rise, he was visited by her
whom the Church styles with reason Comforter of the
Afflicted. She reanimated his courage, saying to him,
"Confidence , my son; your fatigues will take the place of
Purgatory for you; bear your sufferings patiently, and on
leaving this life your soul will be received into the abode of
the blessed."

This vision was for Father de la Fontaine during life, but
especially at the hour of his death, a source of abundant
consolation. In gratitude for this favor, he each week
practiced some particular penance. At the moment when he
expired, a Religious of eminent virtue saw his soul take its
flight to Heaven in company of the Blessed Virgin, the Prince
of the Apostles, Saint John the Evangelist, and of Saint
Ignatius, the founder of the Company of Jesus.


Chapter 55


Advantages - Salutary Instruction - Blessed Mary of the
Angels - Saint Peter Claver and the Sick Negro - The Negro
and the Rosary

Besides the holy thoughts which devotion to the holy souls
suggests, the latter sometimes contribute directly to the
spiritual welfare of their benefactors. In the Life of Blessed
Mary of the Angels, of the Order of Mount Carmel, it is said
that it is almost beyond belief how frequent were the
apparitions of the souls of Purgatory who came to implore
her assistance, and afterwards to thank her for their
deliverance. Very often they conversed with the blessed
sister, giving her useful advice for herself or for her sisters,
and revealing things related to the other world. "On the
Wednesday within the Octave of the Assumption," she
writes, "whilst saying the evening prayers, one of our good
sisters appeared to me. She was clad in white, surrounded
with glory and splendor, and so beautiful that I know of
nothing here below to which I could compare her. Fearing
some illusion of the devil, I armed myself with the Sign of
the Cross; but she smiled, and disappeared shortly after. I
begged Our Lord not to permit me to be deceived by the
demon. The following night the sister again appeared, and
calling me by my name, said, 'I come on the part of God to
let you know that I am in the enjoyment of eternal bliss. Tell
our Mother Prioress that it is not the design of God to reveal
to her the destiny that awaits her; tell her to place her
confidence in Saint Joseph and in the souls in Purgatory.'
Having said this, she disappeared."

Saint Peter Claver, Apostle of the Negroes of Carthagena,
was aided by the souls in Purgatory in his work of the


apostolate. He did not abandon the souls of his dear Negroes
after their death; penances, prayers, Masses, indulgences, as
far as depended upon himself, he applied to them, says
Father Fleurian, his biographer. Thus it often happened that
those poor afflicted souls, sure of his power with God, came
to ask the assistance of his prayers.

The fastidiousness and incredulity of our century, says the
same author, does not prevent us from relating some few
additional facts. They may perhaps appear worthy of the
raillery of freethinkers, but does it not suffice to know that
God is the Master of these occurrences, and that they are,
moreover, so well authenticated as to deserve a place in a
history written for Christian readers?

A sick Negro, whom he had taken into his room and laid
upon his own bed, having heard a noise as of loud moaning
during the night, fear made him run to Father Claver, who
was kneeling in prayer. "Oh, Father!" he cried, "what is that
dreadful noise, which terrifies me and prevents me from
sleeping?" "Return, my son," replied the holy man, "and go
to sleep without fear." Then, having assisted him to get into
bed, he opened the door of the chamber, said a few words,
and immediately the moaning ceased.

Several other Negroes, being occupied in repairing a house
at some distance from the city, one of them went out to cut
wood upon a neighboring mountain. As he approached the
forest he heard himself called by his name from the top of a
tree. He raised his eyes in the direction whence the voice
came, and not seeing anyone, was about to take to flight
and join his companions, but he was stopped in a narrow
path by a frightful specter, who discharged a shower of
blows upon him with a whip furnished with pieces of red-hot
iron, and saying, "Why have you not got your rosary? Carry
it about you in future, and say it for the souls in Purgatory."


The phantom then ordered him to ask of the mistress of the
house for three gold pieces which were due to him, and
which he was to take to Father Claver, that Masses might be
offered for his intention, after which he disappeared.

In the meantime the noise of the blows and the cries of the
Negro had brought his companions to the spot, where they
found him more dead than alive, covered with the wounds
he had received, and unable to utter a word. They carried
him to the house, where the mistress acknowledged that in
reality she owed the sum of money in question to a Negro
who had died some time previous. Father Claver, on being
informed of what had occurred, said the Masses which were
asked of him, and gave a rosary to the Negro, who ever
afterwards wore it, and never omitted to say it daily.


Chapter 56


Advantages - Salutary Instructions - Saint Magdalen de Pazzi
and Sister Benedicta - Father Paul Hoffee - Venerable Father
de la Colonnbiere - Father Louis Corbinelli

Saint Magadlen de Pazzi, in an apparition of a departed soul,
received the most wholesome instruction on religious
virtues. There was in her convent a sister named Mary
Benedicta, who was distinguished for her piety, her
obedience, and all other virtues which are the ornament of
holy souls. She was so humble, says Father Cepari, and had
such contempt for herself, that, without the guidance of her
Superiors, she would have gone to extremes, with the sole
view of acquiring the reputation of being a person without
prudence and without judgment. She therefore said that she
could not help feeling jealous of Saint Alexis, who found a
means of living a hidden life, contemptible in the eyes of the
world. She was so docile and prompt in obedience, that she
ran like a little child at the least sign of the will of her
Superiors, and the latter were obliged to use great
circumspection in the orders which they gave her, lest she
should go beyond their desires. In fact, she had gained such
control over her passions and appetites, that it would be
difficult to imagine a more perfect mortification.

This good sister died suddenly, having had but a few hours
of sickness. The following morning, which was Saturday,
when, during the Mass which was celebrated, the Religious
were singing the Sanctus, Magdalen was rapt in ecstasy.
During the rapture, God showed her this soul under the
corporal form in the glory of Heaven. She was adorned with
a gold star, which she had received in recompense for her
ardent charity. All her fingers were covered with costly rings.


on account of her fidelity to all the rules, and the care she
had taken to sanctify her most ordinary actions. Upon her
head she wore a very rich crown, because she had always
loved obedience and suffering for Jesus Christ. In fact, she
surpassed in glory a great multitude of virgins, and she
contemplated her Spouse Jesus with singular familiarity,
because she had so loved humiliation, according to these
words of our Saviour, He that humbleth himself shall be
exalted. Such was the sublime lesson which the saint
received in reward for her charity towards the departed.

The thought of Purgatory incites us to labor zealously, and
to fly the least faults, in order to avoid the terrible expiations
of the other life. Father Paul Hoffee, who died a holy death at
Ingolstadt in the year 1608, made use of this thought for his
own benefit and that of others. He never lost sight of
Purgatory, nor ceased to relieve the poor souls who
frequently appeared to him to solicit his suffrages. As he was
Superior of his brethren in religion, he often exhorted them,
first to sanctify themselves, the better to be able afterwards
to sanctify others, and never to neglect the smallest
prescription of their rules; then he would add with great
simplicity, "Otherwise I fear you will come, like several
others have done, to ask my prayers that you may be
delivered from Purgatory." In his last moments he was wholly
occupied in loving colloquies with Our Lord, His Blessed
Mother, and the Saints. He was sensibly consoled by a visit
of a very holy soul, who had preceded him to Heaven but
two or three days previous, and who now invited him to go
and enjoy the eternal love of God. (Menology of the Society
of Jesus, 17 December).

When we say that the thought of Purgatory makes us use all
means to avoid it, it is evident that we have reason to fear
that we shall go there. Now on what is this fear based? If we
but reflect a little upon the sanctity required to enter


Heaven, and the frailty of human nature, which is the source
of so many faults, we easily understand that this fear is but
too well founded. Moreover, do not the examples we have
read above show us clearly that very often even the holiest
souls have sometimes to undergo expiation in the other life?

Venerable Father Claude de la Colombiere died in the odor of
sanctity at Paray, 15 February 1682, as Blessed Margaret
Mary had predicted to him As soon as he had expired, a
pious girl came to announce his death to Sister Margaret.

The holy Religious, without showing any disturbance or
breaking forth into vain regrets, said simply to that person,
"Go and pray to God for him, and cause prayers to be
everywhere offered for the repose of his soul." The Father
had died at five o'clock in the morning. That same evening
she wrote a note to the same person in these terms:

"Cease to be afflicted; invoke him. Fear nothing. He is more
powerful to aid us than ever." These words give us to
understand that she had been supernaturally enlightened
regarding the death of this holy man, and of the state of his
soul in the other life.

Sister Margaret's peace and tranquility at the death of a
director who had been useful to her was another sort of
miracle. The blessed sister loved nothing except in God and
for God; God held the place of all else in her heart, and
consumed by the fire of His love all other attachment. The
Superior was surprised at her perfect tranquility on the
death of the holy missionary, and still more so that Margaret
did not ask to do any extraordinary penance for the repose
of his soul, as was her custom on the death of any one of her
acquaintances in whom she was particularly interested. The
Mother Superior asked the servant of God the reason of this,
and she replied quite simply, "He is in no need of it; he is in
a condition to pray for us, since he is exalted in Heaven by


the Sacred Heart of our Divine Lord. Only to expiate some
slight negligence in the practice of Divine Love," she added,
"his soul was deprived of the vision of God from the time it
left his body until the moment when his remains were
consigned to the tomb."

Let us add one example more, that of Father Corbinelli. This
holy person was not exempted from Purgatory. It is true he
was not detained there, but he had to pass through the
flames before being admitted into the presence of God.

Louis Corbinelli, of the Company of Jesus, died in the odor of
sanctity at the professed house in Rome, in the year 1591,
almost at the same time with Saint Aloysius Gonzaga. The
tragic death of Henry II, King of France, gave him a disgust
for the world and he decided to consecrate himself entirely
to the service of God. In the year 1559 the marriage of the
Princess Elizabeth was celebrated with great pomp in the
city of Paris. Among other amusements, a tournament was
organized, in which figured the flower of the French nobility
and chivalry. The King himself appeared in the midst of his
brilliant court. Among the spectators, gathered even from
foreign lands, was young Louis Corbinelli, who had come
from his native city, Florence, to assist at the festival.
Corbinelli contemplated with admiration the glory of the
French monarch, now at the zenith of his grandeur and
prosperity, when suddenly he saw him fall, struck by a fatal
blow aimed by an imprudent filter. The lance badly directed
by Montgomery transpierced the King, who expired bathed
in his blood.

In the twinkling of an eye all his glory vanished and the
royal magnificence was covered with a shroud. This event
made a salutary impression upon Corbinelli; seeing the
vanity of human greatness thus exposed, he renounced the
world and embraced a religious life in the Society of Jesus.
His life was that of a saint, and his death filled with joy all


those who were witnesses of it. It took place a few days
before that of Saint Aloysius, who was then sick in the
Roman College. The young saint announced to Cardinal
Bellarmine that the soul of Father Corbinelli had entered into
glory; and when the Cardinal asked him if it had not passed
through Purgatory, "It passed through," he replied, "but it
did not stay."


Chapter 57


Advantages - Stimulant to Fervor - Cautions to us -
Probability of going to Purgatory - Means of Escaping it -
Employment of those Means - Saint Catherine of Genoa

If holy Religious pass through Purgatory, although not
detained there, have we not to fear that we shall not only
pass through it, but also remain for a longer or shorter time?
Can we live in a security that would be, to say the least, very
imprudent? Our faith and our conscience tell us that our fear
of Purgatory is well grounded. I go still further, dear reader,
and say that with a little reflection you yourself must
acknowledge that it is very probable, and almost certain,
that you will go to Purgatory. Is it not true that on leaving
this earth your soul will enter into one of those three abodes
pointed out to us by faith: Hell, Heaven or Purgatory? Will
you go to Hell? It is not probable, because you have a horror
of mortal sin, and for nothing in the world would you commit
one, or keep it upon your conscience after having committed
it. Will you go to Heaven? You answer immediately that you
think yourself unworthy of such a favor. There remains, then,
but Purgatory; and you must own that it is very probable,
almost certain, that you will go into that place of expiation.

By setting this grave truth before your eyes, do not think,
dear reader, that we wish to frighten you, or take from you
all hope of entering Heaven without Purgatory. On the
contrary, this hope must ever remain deeply impressed upon
our hearts, for it is the spirit of Jesus Christ, who nowise
desires that His disciples should stand in need of future
expiation. He even instituted Sacraments and established all
sorts of means to assist us to make full satisfaction in this
world. But these means are too often neglected; and it is


especially by a salutary fear that we are stimulated to make
use of them.


Now, what are those means which we have to employ in
order to avoid, or at least shorten, our Purgatory and
mitigate its rigor? They are evidently those exercises and
good works which most assist us to satisfy for our faults in
this world and to find mercy before God, namely, the
following: devotion to the Blessed Virgin Mary, and fidelity
in wearing her scapular; charity towards the living and the
dead; mortification and obedience; a pious reception of the
Sacraments, especially on the approach of death;
confidence in the Divine Mercy; and, finally, the holy
acceptation of death in union with the death of Jesus upon
the cross.

These means are sufficiently powerful to preserve us from
Purgatory, but we must make use of them. Now, to employ
them seriously and with perseverance, one condition is
necessary: it is to form a firm resolution of satisfying in this
world rather than in the next. This resolution must be based
upon faith, which teaches us how easy is satisfaction in this
life, how terrible is Purgatory. Be at agreement with thy
adversary betimes, says Jesus Christ, whilst thou art in the
way with him; lest, perhaps, thy adversary deliver thee to
the judge, and the judge deliver thee to the officer, and thou
be cast into prison. Amen, I say to thee, thou shalt not go
out from thence till thou repay the last farthing. (Matthew
5:25)

To be reconciled with our adversary in the way, signifies, in
the mouth of Our Lord, to appease Divine Justice, and to
make satisfaction on our way through life, before reaching
that unchangeable end, that eternity where all penance is
impossible, and where we shall have to submit to all the


rigors of Justice. Is not this counsel of our Divine Saviour
most wise?

Can we appear before the tribunal of God burdened with an
enormous debt, which we might so easily have discharged
by some works of penance, and which we shall then have to
pay by years of torment? "He who purifies himself from his
faults in the present life," says Saint Catherine of Genoa,
"satisfies with a penny a debt of a thousand ducats; and he
who waits until the other life to discharge his debts,
consents to pay a thousand ducats for that which he might
before have paid with a penny." We must, therefore, begin
with the firm and efficacious resolution of making
satisfaction in this world; that is the foundation stone. This
foundation once laid, we must employ the means
enumerated above.


Chapter 58


Means to Avoid Purgatory - Great Devotion to the Biessed
Virgin - Father Jerome Carvaiho - Saint Bridget - The
Scapuiar of Mount Carmei

A Servant of God sums up these means, and reduces them
to two, saying, "Let us cleanse our souls by water and by
fire"; that is to say, by the water of tears, and by the fire of
charity and good works. In fact, we may classify them all
under these two exercises, and this is conformable to Holy
Scripture, where we see that souls are cleansed from their
stains, and purified like gold in the crucible. But since we
must seek above everything to be practical, let us follow the
method we have indicated, and which has been practiced,
with so much success, by the saints and by all fervent
Christians.

In the first place, in order to obtain great purity of soul, and
in consequence to have little reason to fear Purgatory, we
must cherish a great devotion towards the Blessed Virgin
Mary. This good Mother will so assist her dear children in
cleansing their souls and in shortening their Purgatory, that
they may live in the greatest confidence. She even desires
that they should not trouble themselves on this subject, and
that they should not allow themselves to be discouraged by
excessive fear, as she herself deigned to declare to her
servant, Jerome Carvalho, of whom we have already spoken.
"Have confidence, my son," she said to him. "I am the
Mother of Mercy for my dear children in Purgatory, as well as
for those still living upon earth." In the Revelations of Saint
Bridget we read something similar: "I am," said the Blessed
Virgin to her, "the Mother of all those who are in the place of


expiation; my prayers mitigate the chastisements inflicted
upon them for their faults." (Book 4, chap. 1).

Those who wear the holy scapular have a special right to the
protection of Mary. The devotion of the holy scapular, unlike
that of the Rosary, does not consist in prayer, but in the
pious practice of wearing a sort of habit, which is as the
livery of the Queen of Heaven. The scapular of Our Lady of
Mount Carmel, of which we here speak, traces its origin back
to the thirteenth century, and was first preached by Blessed
Simon Stock, fifth General of the Order of Mount Carmel.

This celebrated servant of Mary, born in Kent, England, in
the year 1165, whilst yet young, retired into a solitary forest
to apply himself to prayer and penance. He chose as his
dwelling the hollow of a tree, to which he attached a crucifix
and a picture of the Blessed Virgin, whom he honored as his
Mother, and ceased not to invoke with the tenderest
affection. For twelve years he entreated her to make known
to him what he could do that would be most agreeable to
her Divine Son, when the Queen of Heaven told him to enter
the Order of Mount Carmel, which was particularly devoted
to her service. Simon obeyed; and, under the protection of
Mary, became an exemplary Religious and the ornament of
the Order of Mount Carmel, of which he was elected Superior
General in 1245.

One day - it was the 16th of July, 1251 - the Blessed Virgin
appeared to him surrounded by a multitude of heavenly
spirits, and, with a countenance radiant with joy, she
presented to him a scapular of a brown color, saying,
"Receive, my dear son, this scapular of thy Order; it is the
badge of my Confraternity and the pledge of a privilege
which I have obtained for thee and for thy brethren of Mount
Carmel. Those who die devoutly clothed in this habit shall be
preserved from eternal fire. It is the sign of salvation, a
safeguard in peril, a pledge of peace and special protection.


until the end of time." The happy old man everywhere
published the favor he had received, showing the scapular,
healing the sick, and working other miracles in proof of his
marvelous mission. Immediately, Edward I, king of England,
Louis IX, king of France, and after their example almost all of
the sovereigns of Europe, as also a great number of their
subjects, received the same habit. From that time
commences the celebrated Confraternity of the Scapular,
which was soon afterwards canonically erected by the Holy
See.

Not content with granting this first privilege, Mary made
another promise in favor of the members of the
Confraternity of the Scapular, by assuring them of a speedy
deliverance from the sufferings of Purgatory. About fifty
years after the death of Blessed Simon, the illustrious
Pontiff, John XXII, whilst at prayer in the early morning, saw
the Mother of God appear surrounded with light, and
bearing the habit of Mount Carmel. Among other things she
said to him, "If among the Religious or members of the
Confraternity of Mount Carmel there are any who, on
account of their faults, are condemned to Purgatory, I will
descend into the midst of them like a tender Mother on the
Saturday after their death; I will deliver them and conduct
them to the holy mount of eternal life." These are the words
which the Pontiff places in the lips of Mary in his celebrated
Bull of 3rd March 1322, commonly called the Sabbatine Bull.
He concludes in these words: "I therefore accept this holy
indulgence; I ratify and confirm it upon earth, as Jesus Christ
has graciously granted it in Heaven through the merits of
the most Blessed Virgin." This privilege was afterwards
confirmed by a great many Bulls and Decrees of the
Sovereign Pontiffs.

Such is the devotion of the holy scapular. It is sanctioned by
the practice of pious souls throughout the Christian world.


by the testimony of twenty-two Popes, by the writings of an
incalculable number of pious authors, and by multiplied
miracles during the past 600 years; so that, says the
illustrious Benedict XIV, "he who dares call in question the
validity of the devotion of the scapular or deny its privileges,
would be a proud despiser of religion."


Chapter 59


Means to Avoid Purgatory - Privileges of the Holy Scapular -
Venerable Father de la Colonnbiere - The Hospital at Toulon -
The Sabbatine - Saint Teresa - A Lady at Otranto

According to what we have said, the Blessed Virgin has
attached two great privileges to the holy scapular; on their
part, the Sovereign Pontiffs have added to them the richest
indulgences. We shall not speak here of the two
indulgences; but we consider it useful to make these two
precious privileges thoroughly known, the one under the
name of Preservation, the other under that of Deliverance.

The first is the exemption from the torments of Hell: In hoc
moriens aeternum non patietur incendium - "He who dies
wearing this habit shall not suffer the fire of Hell." It is
evident that he who dies in mortal sin, even whilst wearing
the scapular, will not be exempt from damnation; and such
is not the meaning of Mary's promise. This good Mother has
promised mercifully so to dispose all things that he who dies
wearing that holy habit will receive an efficacious grace
worthily to confess and bewail his faults; or, if he is surprised
by sudden death, he will have the time and will to make an
act of perfect contrition. We might fill a volume with the
miraculous events which prove the fulfillment of this
promise. Let it suffice to relate a few of them.

Venerable Father de la Colombiere tells us that a young
person, who was at first pious and wore the holy scapular,
had the misfortune to stray from the path of virtue. In
consequence of bad literature and dangerous company, she
fell into the greatest disorders, and was about to lose her
honor. Instead of turning to God and having recourse to the
Blessed Virgin, who is the refuge of sinners, she abandoned


herself to despair. The demon soon suggested a remedy to
her evils - the frightful remedy of suicide, which would put
an end to her temporal miseries to plunge her into eternal
torments. She ran to the river, and, still wearing the
scapular, threw herself into the water. But, oh, wonder! she
floated instead of sinking, and could not find the death she
sought. A fisherman, who saw her, hastened to give her
assistance, but the wretched creature prevented him:
tearing off her scapular, she cast it far from her and sank
immediately. The fisherman was unable to save her, but he
found the scapular, and recognized that this sacred livery
while she wore it had prevented the sinner from committing
suicide.

In the hospital at Toulon there was an officer, a most impious
man, who refused to see a priest. Death approached, and he
fell into a sort of lethargy. The attendants profited by this to
place a scapular about his neck, without his knowledge. On
recovering soon after, he cried out in a fury, "Why have you
put fire upon me, a fire which burns me? Take it away, take it
away!" Then they invoked the Blessed Virgin, and tried
again to put on the scapular. He perceived this, tore it off in
a rage, threw it far away from him, and with a horrible
blasphemy upon his lips he expired.

The second privilege, that of the Sabbatine or Deliverance,
consists in being released from Purgatory by the Blessed
Virgin on the first Saturday after death. To enjoy this
privilege, certain conditions are to be fulfilled: First, to
observe the chastity of our state. Second, to recite the Little
Office of the Blessed Virgin. Those who recite the Canonical
Office satisfy this condition. Those who are unable to read
must, instead of saying the Office, observe the fasts
prescribed by the Church, and abstain from flesh meat on all
Wednesdays, Fridays, and Saturdays. Third, in case of
necessity, the obligation of reciting the Office, the


abstinence and fasting, may be commuted into other pious
works, by those who have the power to grant such
dispensations. Such is the privilege of the Sabbatine or
Deliverance, with the conditions necessary to enjoy it. If we
remember what has been said of the rigors of Purgatory and
its duration, we shall find that this privilege is most precious,
and its conditions very easy.

We know that doubts have been raised concerning the
authenticity of the Sabbatine Bull, but besides constant
tradition and the pious practice of the faithful, the great
Pope, Benedict XIV whose eminent learning and moderation
of opinions are well known, has pronounced in its favor.

At Otranto, a city in the kingdom of Naples, a lady of high
rank experienced great pleasure in assisting at the sermons
of a Carmelite Father who was a great promoter of the
devotion to Mary. He assured his auditors that all Christians
who piously wore the scapular, and fulfilled the pre scribed
conditions, would see the Divine Mother at their departure
from this world, and that this great consoler of the afflicted
would come on the Saturday after their death to deliver
them from Purgatory, and take them into the abode of the
Blessed. Struck with these precious advantages, this lady
immediately put on the livery of the Blessed Virgin, firmly
resolved to observe faith fully the rules of the Confraternity.
Her piety made rapid progress. She prayed to Mary day and
night, placed all her confidence in her, and rendered her all
possible homage. Among other favors which she asked, she
implored that of dying on a Saturday, in order that she
might be the sooner delivered from Purgatory. Her prayers
were heard. Some years later, having fallen ill,
notwithstanding the contrary opinion of her physician, she
declared that her malady would carry her to the grave. "I
bless God," she added, "in the hope of being soon united
with Him in Heaven." Her sickness made such rapid progress


that the doctors unanimously declared that she was at the
point of death, and that she could not live through the day,
which was Wednesday. "You are again mistaken," said the
sick lady; "I shall live three days more, and shall not die until
Saturday." The event justified her words. Regarding the days
of suffering which remained to her as an inestimable
treasure, she profited of them to purify her soul and to
increase her merits. When Saturday came, she rendered her
soul into the hands of her Creator.

Her daughter, who was also very pious, was inconsolable in
her bereavement. Whilst praying in her oratory for the soul
of her dear mother, and shedding abundant tears, a great
servant of God, who was habitually favored with
supernatural communications, went to her and said, "Cease
to weep, my child, or rather let your grief be turned into joy.

I come to assure you, on the part of God, that today,
Saturday, thanks to the privileges granted to the members
of the Confraternity of the Scapular, your mother has gone
to Heaven, and is numbered among the elect. Be consoled
and bless the most August Virgin, the Mother of Mercy."


Chapter 60


Means to Avoid Purgatory - Charity and Mercy - The Prophet
Daniei and the King of Babyion - Saint Peter Damian and
John Patrizzi

We have just seen the first means of avoiding Purgatory, a
tender devotion towards Mary; the second consists in
Charity and works of Mercy of every kind. Many sins are
forgiven her, said Our Lord, speaking of Magdalen, because
she hath loved much. (Luke 7:47). Blessed are the merciful:
for they shall obtain mercy. (Matthew 5:1) Judge not, and
you shall not be judged. Condemn not, and you shall not be
condemned. Forgive, and you shall be forgiven. (Luke 6:37)

If you forgive men their offences, your Heavenly Father will
forgive you also your offences. (Matthew 6:14). Give to
every one that asketh of thee: give, and it shall be given to
you: for with the same measure that you shall mete withal, it
shall be measured to you again. (Luke 6:30,38) Make unto
you friends of the mammon of iniquity, that when you shall
fail [when you leave this world] they may receive you into
everlasting dwellings. (Luke 16:9) And the Holy Ghost says
by the mouth of the Royal Prophet, Blessed is he that
understandeth concerning the needy and the poor: the Lord
will deliver him in the evil day. (Psalm 40)

All these words indicate clearly that [for our] Charity, Mercy,
and Benevolence, whether towards the poor or towards
sinners, towards our enemies and those who injure us, or
towards the departed who are in great need of our
assistance, we shall find mercy at the tribunal of the
Sovereign Judge.

The rich of this world have much to fear. Woe to you that are
rich, says the Son of God, for you have had your consolation.


Woe to you that are filled: for you shall hunger. Woe to you
that laugh now: for you shall mourn and weep. (Luke 6:24).
Certainly, these words of God should cause the wealthy
votaries of this world to tremble; but if they wished, their
wealth itself could become for them a great means of
salvation; they might redeem their sins and pay their
terrible debts by abundant alms. Let my counsel, O king, be
acceptable to thee, said Daniel to the proud
Nabuchodonosor, and redeem thy sins with alms, and thy
iniquities with works of mercy to the poor. (Daniel 4:24). For
alms deliver from all sin and from death, and will not suffer
the soul to go into darkness. Alms shall be a great
confidence before the Most High God to all them that give it,
said Tobias to his son. (Tobit 4:11-12). Our Saviour confirms
all this, and goes even further when He says to the
Pharisees, But yet that which remains, give alms; and
behold all things are clean unto you. How great, then, is the
folly of the rich, who have in hand so easy a means of
ensuring their future spiritual welfare, and yet neglect to
employ it! What folly not to make a good use of that fortune
of which they shall have to render an account to God! What
folly to go and burn in Hell or Purgatory, and leave a fortune
to avaricious and ungrateful heirs, who will not bestow upon
the departed so much as a prayer, a tear, or even a passing
thought! But, on the contrary, how happy are those
Christians who understand that they are but the dispensers,
before God, of the goods which they have received from
Him, who think only of disposing of them according to the
designs of Jesus Christ, to whom they must render an
account, and, in fine, who make use of them only to procure
friends, defenders, and protectors in eternity!

Saint Peter Damian, in one of his treatises, relates the
following. A Roman lord, named John Patrizzi, died. His life,
although Christian, had been like that of the generality of
the rich, far different from that of his Divine Master, poor.


suffering, crowned with thorns. Fortunately, however, he had
been very charitable towards the poor, even so far as to give
away his garments to clothe them. A few days after his
death, a holy priest, being in prayer, was rapt in ecstasy,
and transported to the Basilica of Saint Cecilia, one of the
most celebrated in Rome. He there saw a number of
heavenly virgins. Saint Cecilia, Saint Agnes, Saint Agatha,
and others, grouped around a magnificent throne, upon
which sat the Queen of Heaven, surrounded by angels and
blessed spirits.

At this moment appeared a poor woman, dressed in a
miserable garment, but having a cape of costly fur upon her
shoulders. She knelt humbly at the feet of the Heavenly
Queen, and joining her hands, her eyes filled with tears, she
said with a smile, "Mother of Mercy, in the name of thy
ineffable goodness, I beg thee to have pity on the
unfortunate John Patrizzi, who has just died, and who suffers
most cruelly in Purgatory." Three times she repeated the
same prayer, each time with more fervor, but without
receiving any answer. "You know well, O most merciful
Queen, that I am that beggar who, at the entrance to your
great Basilica, asked alms in the depth of winter with
nothing to cover me but my rags. Oh, how I trembled with
cold! Then John, whom I petitioned in the name of Our Lady,
took from his shoulder this costly fur and gave it to me,
depriving himself of it in order to give it to me. Does so great
an act of charity, performed in thy name, O Mary, not merit
some indulgence?"

At this touching appeal the Queen of Heaven cast a glance
of love upon the supplicant. "The man for whom you pray,"
she replied, "is condemned for a long time to the most
terrible suffering, on account of his numerous sins. But since
he had two special virtues, mercy towards the poor and
devotion for my altars, I will condescend to give him my


assistance." At these words the holy assembly testified its
joy and gratitude towards the Mother of Mercy. Patrizzi was
brought in; he was pale, disfigured, and loaded with chains,
which had made deep wounds. The Holy Virgin looked upon
him for a moment with tender compassion, then ordered
that his chains should be taken off, and garments of glory be
put upon him, in order that he might join the saints and
blessed spirits who surrounded her throne. This order was
immediately executed, and all disappeared.

The holy priest who had enjoyed this vision ceased not from
that moment to preach the clemency of Our Lady towards
the poor suffering souls, especially towards those who had
been devoted to her service, and who had had great charity
towards the poor.


Chapter 61


Means to Avoid Purgatory - Blessed Margaret Mary and the
Suffering Souls - The Novice and her Father - A Soul that had
Suffered without Connplaint

Among the revelations of Our Lord to Margaret Mary on the
subject of Purgatory there is one which shows how
particularly severe are the punishments inflicted for faults
against Charity. "One day," relates Monseigneur Languet,
"Our Lord showed His servant a number of souls deprived of
the assistance of the Blessed Virgin and the saints, and even
of the visits of their angel guardians; this was," said her
Divine Master, "in punishment for their want of union with
their superiors, and certain misunderstandings. Many of
those souls were destined to remain for a great length of
time in horrible flames. The blessed sister recognized also
many souls who had lived in religion, and who, on account of
their lack of union and charity with their brethren, were
deprived of their suffrages and received no alleviations."

If it is true that God punishes thus severely those that have
failed in Charity, He will be infinitely merciful towards those
who have practiced this virtue so dear to His Heart. But
before all things. He says to us by the mouth of His Apostle,
Saint Peter, have a constant mutual charity among
yourselves, for charity covers a multitude of sins. (1 Peter
4:8).

Let us hear Monseigneur Languet again in the Life of
Margaret Mary. It is Mother Grefiber, he says, who, in the
memoir she wrote after the death of the blessed sister,
attests the following fact. "I cannot omit the cause of certain
particular circumstances which manifest the truth of a
revelation made on this occasion to the servant of God. The


father of one of the novices was the cause of it. This
gentleman had died some time previous, and had been
recommended to the prayers of the community. The charity
of Sister Margaret, then Mistress of Novices, urged her to
pray more especially for him.

"Some days later the novice went to recommend him to her
prayers. 'My daughter,' said her holy mistress, 'be perfectly
tranquil; your father is rather in a condition to pray for us.
Ask your mother what was the most generous action your
father performed before his death; this action has obtained
for him from God a favorable judgment.'

"The action to which she alluded was unknown to the
novice; no one in Paray knew the circumstance of a death
which had happened so far away from that town. The novice
did not see her mother until long afterwards, on the day of
her profession. She then asked what was that generous
Christian action which her father had performed before
dying. 'When the Holy Viaticum was brought to him,' replied
her mother, 'the butcher joined those who accompanied the
Blessed Sacrament, and placed himself in a corner of the
room. The sick, on perceiving him, called him by his name,
told him to approach, and, pressing his hand with a humility
uncommon in persons of his rank, asked pardon for some
hard words which he had addressed to him from time to
time, and desired that all present should be witness of the
reparation which he made.' Sister Margaret had learned from
God alone what had taken place, and the novice knew by
that the consoling truth of what she had told her concerning
her father's happy state in the other life."

Let us add that God, by this revelation, has shown us once
more how Charity covereth a multitude of sins, and will
cause us to find Mercy in the day of Justice.


Blessed Margaret Mary received from our Divine Lord
another communication relative to Charity. He showed her
the soul of a deceased person who had to undergo but a
light chastisement, and He told her that among all the good
works which this person had performed in the world, He had
taken into special consideration certain humiliations to
which she had submitted in the world, because she had
suffered them in the spirit of charity, not only without
murmuring, but even without speaking of them. Our Lord
added, that, in recompense. He had given her a mild and
favorable judgment.


Chapter 62


Means to Avoid Purgatory - Christian Mortification - Saint
John Berchmans - Biassed Emiiy de Verceii and the Reiigious
who was weary of Choir

The third means of satisfying in this world is the practice of
Christian mortification and religious obedience. We bear
about in our body the mortification of Jesus, says the
Apostle, that the life also of Jesus may be made manifest in
our bodies. (2 Cor. 4:10). This mortification of Jesus, which
the Christian must bear about in him, is in its broadest
sense, the part that he must take in the sufferings of his
Divine Master, by bearing in union with Him the trials he
may have to encounter in this life, or the suffering which he
voluntarily inflicts upon himself. The first and best
mortification is that which is attached to our daily duties,
the pains we have to take, the effort we must make to acquit
ourselves properly of the duties of our state, and to bear the
contradictions of each day. When Saint John Berchmans said
that his chief mortification was the common life, he said
nothing else than this, because for him the common life
embraced all the duties of his state.

Moreover, he who sanctifies the duties and sufferings of
each day, and who thus practices fundamental mortification,
will soon advance, and impose voluntary privations and
sufferings upon himself in order to escape the pains of the
other life.

The slightest mortifications, the most trifling sacrifice,
especially when done through obedience, are of great value
in the sight of God.


Blessed Emily, a Dominican, and Prioress of the Monastery of
Saint Mary at Vercelli, inspired her Religious with a spirit of
perfect obedience in view of Purgatory. One of the points of
the Rule prohibited the Religious to drink between meals
without express permission of the Superior. Now, the latter,
knowing, as we have seen, the value of the sacrifice of a
glass of water in the eyes of God, was generally accustomed
to refuse this permission, that she might afford her sisters an
opportunity to practice an easy mortification, but she
sweetened her refusal by telling them to offer their thirst to
Jesus, tormented by a cruel thirst upon the Cross. She then
advised them to suffer this slight privation with a view of
diminishing their torments in the expiatory flames of
Purgatory.

There was in her community a sister named Mary Isabella,
who was too prone to levity, being fond of conversation and
other exterior distractions. The consequence was that she
had little relish for prayer, was negligent in reciting the
Office, and only acquitted herself of this her chief duty with
the greatest repugnance. Thus she was never in any haste to
go to choir, and as soon as the office was ended she was the
first to go out. One day whilst she was hurrying to leave the
choir, she passed by the stall of the Prioress, who stopped
her. "Where are you going in such haste, my good sister?"
she said to her, "and why are you so anxious to get out
before the other sisters?" The sister, taken by surprise, at
first observed a respectful silence, then she acknowledged
with humility that the Office was wearisome to her and
seemed too long. "That is all very well," replied the Prioress,
"but if it costs you so much to chant the praises of God
seated comfortably in the midst of your sisters, what will you
do in Purgatory, where you will be obliged to remain in the
midst of flames? To spare you that terrible trial, my
daughter, I order you to leave your place the last of all." The
sister submitted with simplicity, like a truly obedient child;


she was recompensed. The disgust which she had
experienced thus far for the things of God was changed into
devotion and spiritual joy. Moreover, as God revealed to
Blessed Emily, having died some time afterwards, she
obtained a great diminution of the suffering which awaited
her in the other life. God counted as so many hours in
Purgatory the hours which she passed in prayer through a
spirit of obedience.


Chapter 63


Means to Avoid Purgatory - The Sacraments - Receiving
them Promptiy - Medicinai Effect of Extreme Unction - Saint
Aiphonus Liguori

We have indicated, as a fourth means of satisfying in this
world, the use of the Sacraments, and especially a holy and
Christian reception of the last Sacraments on the approach
of death.

The Divine Master admonishes us in the Gospel to prepare
ourselves well for death, in order that it may be precious in
His eyes and the worthy crowning of a Christian life. His love
for us makes Him desire ardently that we should leave this
world entirely purified, divested of all debt towards Divine
Justice; and that on appearing before God, we should be
found worthy to be admitted among the elect, without need
of passing through Purgatory. It is for this end that He
ordinarily sends us the pains of sickness before death, and
that He has instituted the Sacraments, to aid us in
sanctifying our sufferings, and the more perfectly to dispose
us to appear before His face.

The Sacraments which we receive in time of sickness are
three: Confession, which we may receive as soon as we wish;
Holy Viaticum and Extreme Unction, which we may receive
as soon as there is danger of death. This circumstance of the
danger of death must be taken in the broad sense of the
word.

It is not necessary that there should be an imminent danger
of dying, and that all hope of recovery be lost; it is not even
necessary that the danger of death be certain; it suffices


that it be probable, and prudently presumed, even when
there is no other infirmity than old age.

The effects of the Sacraments, well received, correspond to
all the needs, all the lawful desires of the sick. These divine
remedies purify the soul from her sins, and increase her
treasure of sanctifying grace; they fortify the sick person,
and enable him to bear his sufferings with patience, to
triumph over the assaults of the demon at the last moment,
and to make a generous sacrifice of his life to God. Moreover,
besides the effects which they produce upon the soul, the
Sacraments exert a salutary influence upon the body.
Extreme Unction especially comforts the sick person and
alleviates his sufferings; it even restores him to health, if
God judges it expedient for his salvation.

The Sacraments are, then, for the faithful, an immense
assistance, an inestimable benefit. It is not, therefore,
surprising that the enemy of souls makes it his first object to
deprive them of so great a good. Not being able to rob the
Church of her Sacraments, he endeavors to keep them from
the sick, either by making them entirely neglect to receive
them, or that they receive them so late as to lose all their
benefit. Alas! how many souls allow themselves to be taken
in this snare! How many souls for not promptly receiving the
Sacraments fall into Hell, or into the deepest abyss of
Purgatory!

To avoid this misfortune, the first care of a Christian, in case
of sickness, must be to think of the Sacraments, and to
receive them as promptly as possible. We say, that he
should receive them promptly, whilst he is still in possession
of the use of his faculties, and we dwell upon this
circumstance for the following reasons.


1) In receiving the Sacraments promptly, the patient, having
yet sufficient strength to prepare himself properly, derives
all the fruit of them.

2) He needs to be provided as soon as possible with the
Divine assistance, in order to support his sufferings, to
overcome temptation, and to sanctify the precious time of
sickness.

3) It is only by receiving the holy oils in time, that we can
experience the effects of a bodily cure.

For we must here remark an important point: the
sacramental remedy of the holy unction produces its effect
upon the sick person in the same manner as medical
remedies. It resembles an exquisite medicine that assists
nature, in which there is still supposed to be a certain vigor;
so that Extreme Unction cannot exercise a medicinal virtue
when nature has become too feeble, and life is almost
extinguished. Thus a great number of sick persons die
because they put off receiving the Sacraments until they are
at the last extremity; whilst it is not unusual to see those
entirely recover who hasten to receive them.

Saint Alphonsus speaks of a sick man who delayed to
receive Extreme Unction until it was almost too late, for he
died shortly afterwards. Now, God made known by way of
revelation, says the holy doctor, that if he had received that
Sacrament earlier, he would have been restored to health.
However, the most precious effect of the last Sacraments is
that which they produce upon the soul; they purify it from
the remains of sin, and take away, or at least diminish, its
debt of temporal punishment; they strengthen it to bear
suffering in a holy manner; they fill it with confidence in
God, and assist it to accept death from His hands in union
with that of Jesus Christ.


Chapter 64


Means to Avoid Purgatory - Confidence in God - Saint Francis
de Saies - Saint Phiiip Neri and Sister Schoiastica

The fifth means for obtaining favor before the tribunal of
God is to have great confidence in His Mercy. In Thee, O
Lord, have I hoped; let me never be confounded, says the
Prophet. (Psalm 30) Surely He who said to the good thief,
"This day thou shalt be with Me in Paradise," well merits that
we should have an unbounded confidence in Him. Saint
Francis de Sales avowed that if he considered his misery
only, he deserved Hell; but full of humble confidence in the
mercy of God and in the merits of Jesus Christ, he firmly
hoped to share the happiness of the elect. "And what would
Our Lord do with His eternal life," said he, "if not give it to
us, poor, little, insignificant creatures as we are, who have
no hope but in His goodness? Blessed be God! I have this
firm confidence in the depth of my heart, that we shall live
eternally with God. We shall one day be all united in
Heaven. Take courage; we shall soon be there above."

"We must," he said again, "die between two pillows; the one,
of the humble confession that we merit nothing but Hell; the
other, of an entire confidence that God, in His mercy, will
give us Paradise." Having one day met a gentleman who was
filled with excessive fear of the judgments of God, he said to
him, "He who has a true desire to serve God and to avoid sin,
must in nowise allow himself to be tormented by the thought
of death and judgment. If they are to be feared, it is not with
that fear which dejects and depresses the vigor of the soul;
but a fear tempered with confidence, and therefore salutary.
Hope in God: who hopes in Him shall never be confounded."


We read in the Life of Saint Philip Neri, that having gone one
day to the Convent of Saint Martha in Rome, one of the
Religious, named Scholastica, desired to speak to him in
private. This lady had been tormented for a long time with a
thought of despair, which she had not dared to make known
to anyone; but, full of confidence in the saint, she resolved
to open her heart to him. When she went to him, before she
had time to say a word, the man of God said to her with a
smile, "You are very wrong, my daughter, to believe that you
are destined for eternal flames: Paradise belongs to you!" "I
cannot believe it. Father," she replied with a deep sigh. "You
do not believe it? That is folly on your part, you will see. Tell
me, Scholastica, for whom did Jesus die?" "He died for
sinners." "And now tell me are you a saint?" "Alas!" replied
she weeping, "I am a great sinner." "Therefore Jesus died for
you, and most assuredly it was to open Heaven for you. It is
thus clear that Heaven is yours. For as to your sins, you
detest them, I have no doubt." The good Religious was
touched by these words. Light entered her soul, the
temptation vanished, and from that moment those sweet
words. Paradise is yours, filled her with confidence and joy.


Chapter 65


Means to Avoid Purgatory - Holy Acceptation of Death -
Father Aquitanus - Saint Alphonsus Liguori - Venerable
Frances of Pampeluna and the Person who was not Resigned
to Die - Father Vincent Caraffa and the Condemned Man -
Sister Mary of Saint Joseph and Mother Isabella - Saint John
of the Cross - Sweetness of the Death of the Saints

The sixth means to avoid Purgatory is the humble and
submissive acceptation of death in expiation of our sins: it is
a generous act, by which we make a sacrifice of our life to
God, in union with the sacrifice of Jesus Christ upon the
Cross.

Do you desire an example of this holy resignation of life into
the hands of the Creator? On 2 December 1638 there died at
Brisach, on the right bank of the Rhine, Father George
Aquitanus, of the Society of Jesus. Twice he had devoted his
life to the service of the plague-stricken. It happened that on
two different occasions the pest raged with such fury that it
was almost impossible to approach the sick without being
attacked by the contagion. Everyone fled and abandoned
the dying to their unhappy fate. But Father Aquitanus,
placing his life in the hands of God, made himself the
servant and the apostle of the sick; he employed himself
exclusively in relieving their sufferings and in administering
to them the Sacraments.

God preserved him during the first visitation of the pest; but
when it again broke out with renewed violence, and the man
of God was called upon for the second time to devote
himself to the care of the sick, God this time accepted his
sacrifice.


When, a victim of his Charity, he lay extended upon his bed
of death, he was asked if he willingly made the sacrifice of
his life to God. "Oh!" he replied full of joy, "if I had a million
lives to offer to Him, He knows how readily I would give them
to Him." Such an act, it is easy to understand, is very
meritorious in the sight of God. Does it not resemble that
supreme act of charity accomplished by the martyrs who
died for Jesus Christ, and which, like Baptism, effaces all sin
and cancels all debts? Greater love than this, says Our Lord,
no man hath, that a man lay down his life for his friend.

(John 15:13).

To make this act in time of sickness, it is useful, not to say
necessary, that the patient should understand his condition,
and know that his end is approaching. It is therefore to do
him great injury to withhold this knowledge from him
through a false delicacy. "We must," says Saint Alphonsus,
"prudently impart to the sick person the knowledge of his
danger."

If the patient endeavors to deceive himself with illusions, if,
instead of resigning himself into the hands of God, he thinks
only of his cure, even when he receives all the Sacraments,
he does himself a deplorable wrong.

We read in the Life of Venerable Mother Frances of the
Blessed Sacrament, a Religious of Pampeluna, that a soul
was condemned to a long Purgatory for not having had a
true submission to the Divine Will upon her deathbed. She
was otherwise a very pious young person, but when the icy
hand of death came to touch her in the flower of her youth,
nature recoiled, and she had not the courage to resign
herself into the ever-loving hands of her Heavenly Father -
she would not die yet. She expired, nevertheless, and the
Venerable Mother Frances, who received frequent visits from
the souls of the departed, learned that this soul had to


expiate by long sufferings her want of submission to the
decrees of her Creator.

The Life of Venerable Father Caraffa furnishes us with a more
consoling example.

Father Vincent Caraffa, General of the Society of Jesus, was
called to prepare for death a young nobleman who was
condemned to be executed, and who thought himself
condemned to death unjustly. To die in the flower of one's
age, when one is rich, happy, and when the future smiles
upon us, is hard, we must own; yet a criminal who is a prey
to remorse of conscience may resign himself to it, and
accept it as a chastisement in expiation for his crime. But
what shall we say of a person who is innocent?

The Father had, therefore, a difficult task to accomplish.
Nevertheless, assisted by grace, he knew so well how to
manage this unhappy man, he spoke with such unction of
the faults of his past life and of the necessity of making
satisfaction to Divine Justice, he made him understand so
thoroughly how God permitted this temporal chastisement
for his good, that he crushed rebellious nature and
completely changed the sentiments of his heart. The young
man looked upon his sentence as an expiation which would
obtain for him the pardon of God, mounted the scaffold not
only with resignation, but also with a truly Christian joy. Up
to the last moment, even under the axe of the executioner,
he blessed God and implored His Mercy, to the great
edification of all those who assisted at his execution.

At the moment when his head fell. Father Caraffa saw his
soul rise triumphantly to Heaven. He immediately went to
the mother of the young man to console her by relating what
he had seen. He was so transported with joy, that on


returning to his cell he ceased not to cry aloud, "O happy
man! O happy man!"


The family wished to have a great number of Masses
celebrated for the repose of his soul. "It is superfluous,"
replied the Father; "we must rather thank God and rejoice,
for I declare to you that his soul has not even passed
through Purgatory." Another day, whilst engaged in some
work, he suddenly stopped, his countenance changed, and
he looked towards Heaven; then he was heard to cry out, "O
happy lot! O happy lot!" And when his companion asked him
for an explanation of these words, "Ah! my dear Father," he
replied, "it was the soul of that condemned man which
appeared to me in glory. Oh, how profitable to him has been
his resignation!"

Sister Mary of Saint Joseph, one of the four first Carmelites
who embraced the reform of Saint Teresa, was a Religious of
great virtue. The end of her career approached, and Our
Lord, wishing that His spouse should be received into
Heaven in triumph on breathing her last sigh, purified and
adorned her soul by the sufferings which marked the end of
her life.

During the four last days which she passed upon earth, she
lost her speech and the use of her senses; she was a prey to
frightful agony, and the Religious were heartbroken to see
her in that state. Mother Isabella of Saint Dominic, Prioress
of the convent, approached the sick Religious, and
suggested to her to make many acts of resignation, and total
abandonment of herself into the hands of God. Sister Mary
of Saint Joseph heard her, and made these acts interiorly,
but without being able to give any exterior sign thereof.

She died in these holy dispositions, and, on the very day of
her death, whilst Mother Isabella was hearing Mass and


praying for the repose of her soul, Our Lord showed her the
soul of His faithful spouse crowned in glory, and said, "She is
of the number of those who follow the Lamb." Sister Mary of
Saint Joseph, on her part, thanked Mother Isabella for all the
good she had procured for her at the hour of death. She
added that the acts of resignation which she had suggested
to her had merited for her great glory in Paradise and had
exempted her from the pains of Purgatory. What happiness
to quit this miserable life, to enter the only true and blessed
one! We all may enjoy this happiness, if we employ the
means which Jesus Christ has given us for making
satisfaction in this world, and for preparing our souls
perfectly to appear in His presence. The soul thus prepared
is filled in her last hour with the sweetest confidence; she
has, as it were, a foretaste of Heaven; the experiences which
Saint John of the Cross has written on the death of a saint in
his Living Flame of Love.

"Perfect love of God," he says, "renders death agreeable,
making the soul taste the greatest sweetness therein. The
soul that loves is inundated with a torrent of delights at the
approach of that moment when she is about to enjoy the full
possession of her Beloved. On the point of being delivered
from this prison of the body, she seems already to
contemplate the glories of Paradise, and all within her is
transformed into love."


About This Ebook


The text of this ebook is taken from the book Purgatory
Explained by the Lives of the Catholic Saints, by Father
Frangois Xavier Schouppe, SJ. It was translated from the
French by a translator who identifies himself as

It has the Imprimatur of Cardinal Herbert Alfred Henry
Vaughan, Archdiocese of Westminster, England, 11 October
1893.

The cover image is a detail of an illustration of Purgatory
from the Book of Hours of Queen Bona, c.1527, by Stanislaw
Samostrzelnik. The image was swiped from Wikimedia
Commons.

For more free ebooks, other material thousands of saints,
beati, venerables, servants of God, devotions, or history of
the Church, come see us at -

CatholicSaints.Info

* or*

CatholicSaints.Mobi
