TIME RECONSTRUCTION AT THE BOOK DEPOSITORY - SOURCE OF SHOTS
Statements of Witnesses - Marrion L. BAKER, March 25, 1964, 3 H 24l-70
Although it was far from the Commission's intentions, motoreycle
competence I have no doubt), gave unsolicited information that could
have a considerable bearing upon the source of some of the shots, and
gave leads that were. not followed.
Baker is the officer tho dashed into the building, by his. own
testimony and that of Roy Truly, pushing people out of the way in his
room. The Commission cailed him to elicit this testimony and because
it had used him in a reconstruction of what he did and how long it took.
Baker and the staff,Baker would have gotten to the lunchroom before
Oswald. The Cormission makes efforts to camouflage this -in fact, lies
about it -·in the Report. But the facts as presented by Baker are
uncontroverted。
On the question of the integrity of the staff, the reconstruction
of Baker's movements and the calculation of bis time knowingiy and de-
liberately were commenced with the first shot.The.reconstruction could
not possibly begin until sometime after hhe final shot. The Commission's
own minimuu time lapsebetween the first and the third shots was about
5 seconds. By the reconstruction, therefore, Baker got there a minimum
of 4 seconds before Oswald..
Also bearing on the integrity of the Commissim 's staff is the
cer in the motorcade, Chaney. This will be summarized breefly below.
The Commission did not call Chaney as a witness. There is only one
possible reasonable explanation for this failurs: The Commission was

--- PAGE BREAK ---aney. This will be summarized breefly below.
The Commission did not call Chaney as a witness. There is only one
possible reasonable explanation for this failurs: The Commission was

--- PAGE BREAK ---

2-Baker
shot and there was a witness to it. It was uawilling to allow Gov.
Connally's isubstantial testimony, hhe most believable I have read, to
be substantiated in any way. In the light of hhe analysis I have al-
ready made of the autopsy report, the suppression of the photographs
of the President taken at Bethesda Hospital, and the participation of
the staff in the deceit involving the false "artistic" representation
of the President's wounds, makes its failure to call Officer Chaney
even more suspicious, and allows Bakeris hearsay testimony to stand
uncontroverted and we are entitled to accept it. as unquestioned.
Baker is a veteran Dallas policeman with 7 or 8 years of experience
        1    
of the flankers of the Presidential car,but was several cars toward
from Main into Houston when he was'struck by a strong wind from the
north that almost unseated him.He also tegtified that at the timebe
Houston into Elm. (Note that .the Commission ignores this and other tes-
timony. about a strong north wind in its Msy reconstruction where it
assued the trees, and especially the tree directly outside the Book
Depository, were not moving in the breeze at all.)
Inadvertently, perhaps, Dulles revealed Conmision knowledge at
variance to the position it has taken about an important factor involv-
ing distance. The Commissian and the Secret Service have referred to
& gap of 20 to 25 feet between the Presidential and. the followup cars
at the time it turned' the corner. This is not supported by the Aitgens
photograph, which, despite the fact that it was taken by a teaephoto

--- PAGE BREAK ---the Presidential and. the followup cars
at the time it turned' the corner. This is not supported by the Aitgens
photograph, which, despite the fact that it was taken by a teaephoto

--- PAGE BREAK ---

3-Baker
lens, shows a relatively short space between these 2 vehicles, and
this is important in a number of respects, especially because eyewite
nesses have placed the timing of the shot with respect to where they
saw the followup car.
Duiles places this distance at .6 to 7 feet.  This is supported
by the Altgens photograph and it is supported by the testimony of the
motoreycle policemen in the motorcade. (p.245) +Rumh
In the reconstruction, Baker stopped his motorcyale at the point
along Houston St. he recalled being at the time he heard the first shot.
to l0 percent of the distance from Houston to Elm St. There was no
doubt in Baker's mind that the first.shot was a rifleshot.He is 8
hunter and had just returned from hunting.(and the other traffic police-
men say the same thing), and his testimony is explicit and unchallenged.
I make this point because the Secret Service people fairly uniformly
describe the sound as that of a backfire. This might be acceptable com-
ing from oridinary civilians, but it is not .acceptable coming from men
supposed trained in and experienced with firearms. Almost without ex-
ception, the police and the sheriffs immediately recognized the first
and succeeding shots as rifleshots. The traffic policemen in·the motor-
cade are expressly explicit,, and one of them points out the clear dif-
ference betwean the "pop" of a backfire. and the sound of a rifle. (p.2l6)
Baker's description of what he did after the shots was that he
pue wta Jo touroo au4 4e pofred, dn olofoxo4ou 4eu4 pe4aat fro4atpaumrTn
Fouston, the .distance having been paced the Friday previous to his tes-
timony at from 180 to 200 feet, and rushed to the Book Depository Build-
ing.(p.247)
Baker comments on something that looks like it should be a good

--- PAGE BREAK ---the Friday previous to his tes-
timony at from 180 to 200 feet, and rushed to the Book Depository Build-
ing.(p.247)
Baker comments on something that looks like it should be a good

--- PAGE BREAK ---

4-Baker
lead,but at the moment I don't know what to do with.it.His testi-
mony is paralleled by that of other poiicemen in the motorcade. He
Ueu 3 sem eteu4 2nq 'sem 9u oum Moux 4,uptp I ‘auo pootaou I"":: "pt3s
anything.else?! and the incident is at that point dropped completely.
(p.248)
Baker then describes going into the building with Truly, saying
u"'4 'qou4 ppoa e "mouy nor “qnq 4seJ Teau 4ou 'uaa TIe Jo putx 9m"".
(p.2l9) Truly rushed ahead of him up the stairs,--and Baker said that
walking away from this - I happened to see him thvough this window in
this door. I donit kmow ·how come I saw him, but I had a glimpse of
him coming down there." Note the use of the word "walk" to describe
the man's pacd. Later, Baker changes this to "run"
Now o this door closes by an automatic closing mechanism. Truly
was ahead of Baker and saw nothing unusual, either about a man or the
door. At the time.Baker reached this door, the outer door of the lunch-
room, which is, as previously pointed out, at an angle, ."... I couid
: see him, he was walking awsy from me about 20 feet away fron me in the
lunchroom."
I am by no means suggesting that Baker didn't see·bither part
ofa man or something else that be might nothave explicitly recalled
that attracted his attention. .But I am suggesting his recollection
is not accurate. Baker describes a man as walking into a blank wall.
This is something that completely defies explanation. If the man was
in the outer door (Baker gives it at 2 x 2) and the angles involved in
seeing simulataneously thnough both doors, even without regard to the

--- PAGE BREAK ---tely defies explanation. If the man was
in the outer door (Baker gives it at 2 x 2) and the angles involved in
seeing simulataneously thnough both doors, even without regard to the

--- PAGE BREAK ---

5-Baker
increased difficulty of.accomplishing this if the outer door had been
open, had placed the man in close proximity to the south wall. of the
     o     ag  
not suggested in anybody's testimony.
Again Baker describes the man as "walking". (p.250)
Baker is shown Exhibit l97 (17 H 212) and here and in sueceeding
 1 a        
place. where he was, as the place where he. wss face to face with the
a   s     g   o 
steps to the doorway, showing that he had not made any kind of a wide.
circle·in the course of coming up the steps.
But on p.252, foilowing a suggestion in the form of a question
by Dulles that the man was hurgying, Baker says, "Evidently he was
hurrying" and makes the po@nt I made previously, that at the time Baker
u'u uotJ feme 4eag 07 9uos: s8m ueu au4 xoop 994. 04 203
aou prp ueu sut pres rayeg 's9sog :doy fa peuotasanb ueqy 4ng
uua sagog "'mouy nof reurou pareadde n, 'uanara Jo ano oa o4 xeadde
Wants to know, "Was he calm and collected?" 'and Baker describes the
man in the following fashion, "yes, sir. He never did say & word or
nothing. In fact, he didnit change his expression one bit." This also
his face". When Dulles corrects Belin on the position of the gun, Baker
"'s194 9XTT wTy 04 8u171a4 18 Am p89 Ia 'p78s
There is nothing in the
pointed at Oswald's midsection and approximately touching it. Baker
says it was about 3 feet away.'
What kind of an assassin do we have who shows no emotion at all
upon,what seems lire apprehension? He shows neither anger nor fear,

--- PAGE BREAK ---uching it. Baker
says it was about 3 feet away.'
What kind of an assassin do we have who shows no emotion at all
upon,what seems lire apprehension? He shows neither anger nor fear,

--- PAGE BREAK ---

6-Baker
neither.anxiety nor hate, he has nothing to say, he makes no effort to
do anything, and he shows no apprehensiion of any kind whatsoever?
This is an assassin? Even the kind the Cormission describes? .As one
who wants to get caught?
They then get into the time reconstruction which Baker says was
done with a stopwatch from the time of the first shot.Actually, Baker
and wanted to help because this is what actually happened:
"Mr. Dulles.
Will you say from what. time to what time, from the
last shot?
Mr. Baker. From the lasb' shot.
Mr. Belin.
The first shot.
Mr. Dulles.
The first shot?
Mr. Baker.
The first: shot." (p.252)
Saying he wanted to get it clear in his own mind, Dulles asks
if this was in fact the first shot and if the timing terminated at the
reconstructed time he saw Oswald. Baker affirms it. There.were two
such timings.. The first was 1 minute 30 seconds, the second 1 minute
15 seconds. Belin asked:
"Mr. Belin.
Were we walking or running when we did this?
Mr. Baker.
The first time.we did it a little bit slower,and.the
second time we hurried it up a little bit. (p:252)
Mr. Belin. Were we running or walking, when we moved, 'aid we
run or walk?
Mr. Baker. From.the time I got off the motorcyele we walked the
on into the building.
.Mr. Belin. All right. When we got inside the building did we

--- PAGE BREAK ---n we moved, 'aid we
run or walk?
Mr. Baker. From.the time I got off the motorcyele we walked the
on into the building.
.Mr. Belin. All right. When we got inside the building did we

--- PAGE BREAK ---

7- Baker
run or trot or walk?
Mr. Baker. Well, we did it at kind of a trot, I would say, it
wasn't a real fast run, an open run. @t was more of a trot, kind of.!
(p.253)
This is nothing but faaud. There was no possible justification
for any kind of a walking reenactment. Sll the testimonp, including
that of Baker.himself, is that he ran.  Truly gives a description of
Baker tearing madly through the people, scatter ng them in all direc-
opened & swinging door.
farther
So in addition to starting at a distance considerabiy Rakkax
from the building thah Baker was at the time of the last shot - and
the assassin could not have discarded the rifle until after the last
shot-the Commission here postulates a kmown impossibility and a
known falsity. A walking reenactment has no relevance and is a decep-
tion.. It is, however,. used in the Commission's report.
Even the description.of the pace inside the building as a trot
is undoubtedly a considerable underestimation. Baker was in a real
hurry. All of his testimony indicates that he was wasting not a frac-
and
tion of a second. He had a specific thing in mind kkak he was pursuing
it rapidly. As it turns out from the reconstruetion, this is not too
important, but it nonetheless is undoubtedly a slower'pace than that
at which they were traveling.
Notice also that with respect to the shorter time, the l minute
running as, by his own testimony and that of Truly, he was. He said
merely that instead of walking "we hurried up a little bit." This again

--- PAGE BREAK ---espect to the shorter time, the l minute
running as, by his own testimony and that of Truly, he was. He said
merely that instead of walking "we hurried up a little bit." This again

--- PAGE BREAK ---

8 - Baker
resulted in a longer time lapse than could be justified, knowing what
happened and what was seen and what was done .on the 22nd of November.
Then they get into the reconstruction of Oswaldis projected time
from thewindowto the·second floor:
"Mr. Belin. pl Did we make any or do lany stopwatch tests about
any route from thesoutheastcorner ofthesixth floor dowm tothe lunch-.
room?
Mr.Baker.
Yes, sir; we made two test runs
Mr.Belin.
All right. Do you remember what.the route was?
Mr. Baker. Yes, sir; We started on the sixth floor on the east
side of the building.
Mr. Belin. All right.
Mr. Baker.
We walked down the east wail:
Mr. Belin.
We'started at that particular corner?
Mr. Baker.
Yes, sir; we started in the southeast corner:
Belin.
All right.. .we walked down the east wall, you say?
Mr.
Baker.
That is right.
Mr.1
Belin.
All right, then.where did we go?
Mr. Baker.
To the north wall and then we walked down the north
wall to the west
t side of where the stairs was.
walked
Mr. Belin.. All right, we wakwd from the southeast corner to the
northeast corner?
Mr. Baker.
That is right.
Mr. Belin.
tkxxxgkky Then along the northeast coraer, around
the elevators, do you remember who was with us when we did this?
Mr. Baker.
Yes, sir。
There was, it seems to me like his name
was John - snyway, he was a Secret Service man.
Mr. Belin. JohnHowlett.

--- PAGE BREAK ---you remember who was with us when we did this?
Mr. Baker.
Yes, sir。
There was, it seems to me like his name
was John - snyway, he was a Secret Service man.
Mr. Belin. JohnHowlett.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

9-Baker
Mr.
Mr. Baker.
John Howlett. That is right, sir.
Mr. Belin。1
Did Mr. Howlett simulate anyone putting a gun in any
particular place?
Mr. Baker.. Yes, sir; he did.
Mr. Belin. -And then what did we do when we got to the - where did he
do that, do you remember?
Mr. Baker. That. would be as we approached the stairway, there
were some cases of books on the left-hand side there.
Mr. Belin.  Ail right. .And Secret Service Agent Howlett went over
to these books and leaned over as if he were putting a rifle there?
Mr. Baker. That is right, sir.
Mr. Belin.
When what did he do?
Mr. Baker.
Then we continued on down the stairs. (p.253)
Mr.
Belin.
To the lun_chroom?
Mr:
: Baker.
That is right, sir.
Mr.
Belin.
Do you remember' how long that took?
Mr.Baker。
The first run with normal walking took us a minute
and 18 seconds.
Mr. Belin。
Whataboutthesecond time?
Mr. Baker. And the second time we did it at a fast walk which.
4
took us a minute and' lh seconds." (p.253)
Ignoring the variables permitted oby Howlett's part in this re-
construction, described as
"putting" a gun in a piace, and as "leaned
over as if he were putting a rifle there", this took a minute and 18
4seJ 8 94tm sso spuoses t 6tuo pue 9oed 9utxtem Teutou 8 48 spuooos
walk, which seems like an optimism again worked out on behalf of the
Commission's thesis.
But even accepting the figure of a minute and l8 seconds and allow-

--- PAGE BREAK ---em Teutou 8 48 spuooos
walk, which seems like an optimism again worked out on behalf of the
Commission's thesis.
But even accepting the figure of a minute and l8 seconds and allow-

--- PAGE BREAK ---

.10-Baker
ing only 5 seconds for the interval between the shots, Baker still got
to the lunchroom before Oswaid. If we accept the more realistic figure,
which is probabiy eloser to the time Oswald would have taken had he,
in fact, made this trip, we .have then a difference of a minimum of 6f
even this doesnit allow for the time it would have taken Oswald to
 a  1       a  
room and have it at least, by Baker's testimony, almost entirely closed
by an automatic closing device, the time cycle of hich the Conmission
does not at any point investigate。
 So accepting the .Commission's figures, and accepting their thesis,:
. There are 'other major flaws in this reconstruetion. Despite the
implications of the Commission to the contrary, if that rifle was on
that occasion used, whoever used it stopped long enough to wipe it
clear of fingerprints. This, obviously, took time. The Commission
takeand
in its report does not say the rifle did not and could not/hold finger-
prints. It merely implies this. But the Report @and the other testi-
gony bearing on this indicate that, without question, the rifle could
take, aid take, and did hold an·identifiable palnprint which was found
the barrel between the barrel and the wooden stock, a print that could
have been placed upon there only prior to the reassembiy of the rifle.
and
a parallel of the actual testimony having to do wit h the location pf
the discovery of this rifle. Searchers went by it 9 or lo times without

--- PAGE BREAK ---or to the reassembiy of the rifle.
and
a parallel of the actual testimony having to do wit h the location pf
the discovery of this rifle. Searchers went by it 9 or lo times without

--- PAGE BREAK ---

11-Baker
seeing it, it was so well hidden. It was described by various police
witnesses as even partly hidden when they found it surroundedjby walis
of boxes. So even if we assume that the alleged assassin was totally
be so unconcerned,:especially after he had wiped the fingerprints off
the rifle), he still had to get over and through the wall of boxes,
and he put the rifle down neatly and carefully on its bottom edge,
propped against a wall of boxes and partly obscured. This was no
·Suraand Jo uor4sonb atdmts 8 4snf 4ou s8M 41 ·uo14etedo SutueeT 9Tdu1s
This and the wiping off of the fingerprints I.believe did take an appre-
ciable amount of time not allowed for 4by the Commission.
Had the Commission allowed for it, this also would have compbetely.
have been higher in the building than the second floor at the time he
was encounteredby Baker.
So all of this phony reconstruction, all of this invalid duplica-
tion, serves only wwz one purpose: To pin it all on Oswald, and in
defiance of all the information the Commission had.
We have not only what I have cited above about the wiping off of
the fingerprints and the time consumed in hiding the weapon inside a
barricade of boxes. We have also the uncontested testimony of the 3
or running or moving in any way on the sixth floor above them, even
though. they thought the shats came from there. These Negroes stayed
on the fifth floor for some time and described even how they went to
in motion. And the witness, Jack Dougherty, who was on the fifth floor
near the-elevators, saw noboay and heard nobody.

--- PAGE BREAK ---ifth floor for some time and described even how they went to
in motion. And the witness, Jack Dougherty, who was on the fifth floor
near the-elevators, saw noboay and heard nobody.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

12 - Bsker
This reconstruction and the Cormissionis entire position,in
unadorned language, is nothing but a frameup.
The testimony of Baker at this point and that earlier of Truly
proves clearly that anyone coming from the sixth floor to the second
floorhad two elevators availableto him on the fifth floor and did
not, in fact, use either one. Baker testified that he did not hear
any elevator moving. He also testified he never say any of the cables
W
moving.(p.254)
gone through this door. By Baker's testimony, Ozwald could have been
in the lunchroom all of the time. He is specificaily asked about this
by Dulles and replied, "I can't say whether he had gone on through
that door or not. All I did was catch & glance at him."
In the light of the above analysis of the Commissio n's "recon-
struction", especially since Roy Truly saw no one entering this door
and did not see the door itself in motion, the probability is that
Oswald was in that lunchroom and had not come down from the floor above.
Note the Commission avoids the fact that Truly could have heard and/or
seen anyone coming down the stairs.
This is completely consistent with
what the police say Oswala told them, that he had gone up from the
first floor to get.a beverage. .(p.255)
Dulles continues his interest in this matter after Belin gets
497. Baker has reiterated "I was just stepping out. onto the second
floor when I caught this glimpse of this man through this doorway."
Now, leading into the vestibule are two other areas, the one in
the center of the building marked "office spacd,"
a
andhehaliway

--- PAGE BREAK ---ght this glimpse of this man through this doorway."
Now, leading into the vestibule are two other areas, the one in
the center of the building marked "office spacd,"
a
andhehaliway

--- PAGE BREAK ---

13 -Baker
of stairs leading to the first floor.According to Exhibit l97, these
So, if Oswald had not already been in the lunchroom, and nobddy saw
him entering it,he could have entered the vestibule from 2points other
than the hallway leading to the stairs upward.
Dulles got to this pon t and asked what he himself described as
a leadingquestion:
: "Could I ask one oquestion before you ask this
question, and this is a bit of a leading question,: and think carefully.
If Oswald had been coming down the stairs and going into the lunchroom
would he' have been following the course insofar as you saw a course,
that : that you saw him'follow?" Baker's response of "yes, sir"'is
completely false. He has already testified on more'than one occasion
that the man he saw was inside the'lunchroom and he saw him thro ugh the
outer door.·Baker tries to explain this in terms of a hallway to the
right, but is interrupted by Belin before he finishes it, and Baker
uTreg u'9rou 4uatu famtreu 8 sT stuiy. *fas 04 uTiog s4dnmrequt ueua
agrees. Now, actually, the hallway does not have the number 27 on it.
There is approximately 90 feet of hallway illustrated on Exhibit 497.
The point at whieh the Comnission decided to mark a number on this
exhibit. representing the hallway just by pure coincidence happened to
be exactly the point at which the doorway was.. So, unless αgx examine
you
Exhibit l97 with extreme care, you will find this doorway almost entirely
obligerated by arrow symbol employed by theCormission with a circle in
which the number 27 is enelosed. Doesn't it seem odd that with all
those feet of hallway in which to put a symbol, the Cormmission elected
to use only that spot which could result in a deception?
Baker then says that he understood there ae offices along thewith all
those feet of hallway in which to put a symbol, the Cormmission elected
to use only that spot which could result in a deception?
Baker then says that he understood there ae offices along the

--- PAGE BREAK ---

1l-Baker
hallway and. Dulles agreed. Baker then switches roles from witness to
room would be the only place that he would be going, and there is a
Now this was none of Baker's business as ·a witness. Entirely
aside from. whether or not it was his busi ness, he was compdetely wrong.
If in no other respect, it is one of hhe means of getting to a lunch-
room from the first floor, and this is precisely what 0swald, according
to the police, had told the police he had done. In any event, mzxax
Baker's
corment does not constitute testimony;-it should not have been permitted
by the Cormmission. Once it was out, it should not have been permitted
. to stay uncontested in 'the record or in the record in any fashion. It
is thorughly and completely incompetent.
However, it suited the purposes of the staff of the Cormmission
for it to remain, and it does remain. There' is no corment, criticism
or question of Baker.about it. (p.256) .
Baker is asked to describe Oswald as he was dressed and while
admitting he was uncertain he said, "he had a light brown jacket on and
maybe some kind of white-looking shirt." (p.257)
The next several pages are occupied in rehashing and retracing
Baker's movements and observations after he left the lunchroom. He and
Truly took the elevator to the sixth floor and walked up to the seventh
floor. In the.course of othis, Baker points out that in his opinion
the shots could have' come from either the Depository Building or the
one across the street. This is a very. likely possibility that.the Com-
mission has entirely ignored. Ig also has ignored the revelation in
the police radio log that a suspect who had no business in the second
building was, in fact, apprehended there. I have as yet seen nothing

--- PAGE BREAK ---ed. Ig also has ignored the revelation in
the police radio log that a suspect who had no business in the second
building was, in fact, apprehended there. I have as yet seen nothing

--- PAGE BREAK ---

15.-Baker
indicating what happened to this man after he was picked up pby the
police.(p.259)
Baker made a rapid inspection of the 7th floor and the roof, be-"
cause he had been certain the top of the builidng was one of the points
from which the shots could have come.
this inspection, it never seems to have occurred to him to have in
spected the 6th floor, which was not only at the top of the building.
but also because there was an open window there and he himself elsewhere
testifies to having made a rapid examination of this side of the build-
ing and noticed people in the windows and windows open. But instead of
his looking on the 6th'floor, he went down in the elevaeor (p.260) and
on either the 3rd or the 4th floor saw Inspector Sawyer, believes he
reported what he had done to Insp.Sawyer,and refers to no instruetions
of any kind that he got. As a completely free agent, he left the in-
4s4tg 08,o4 peptoep pet114sa4 41auanbasqns 9u se pue) (19z*d) 1o4oads
to the Trade Mart and then to Parkland Hospital - p.265).
Here we have & picture of an organized; responsible, disciplined
trained police force. And Baker didn't waste any time getting out of
the building. His words were/ that, when he got off the elevator, he
Dulles asks Texas Attorney General Carr if he has any questions
to &sk,and Carr does:
"Mr. Garr. Yes, sir; at the time he has been testifying about.
Did you have occasion during the rest of the day either in passing
visits or idle conversation or anything of that type with any of the
people that were there at the time who might have seen something or
told you some theory they had about what might have happened?
Mr. Baker. Not until last Friday morning.. Chief Lunday, which

--- PAGE BREAK ---were there at the time who might have seen something or
told you some theory they had about what might have happened?
Mr. Baker. Not until last Friday morning.. Chief Lunday, which

--- PAGE BREAK ---

16Baker.
  a        o   o  
Depository Building, and I had - I have worked traffic outside several
times but I never did go inside or talk to any of the employees.
Mr. Carr. I am referring to the people who were out there at
the time of the shooting...." (p.264)
Friday morning, but there can be no question, the Commission should have
Friday
Book Depository the/previous to his testimony, is totally unrecorded.
Then Baker said the only people he tal ked to at the time of the
assassination were his conmpanion motorcycle policemen (p.26l) They
were talking bbout where each of the flankers was with relationship to
the car in which the President was riding, and all agreed that &t the
second shotothey still didn't kmow,and then the third.shot some of
them over to the left-hand side, the blood and everything hit their
helmets and their windshields and they they knew it had to come from
behind." . Baker quotes Officer B. J. Martin, who he describes as having
been on "the left front" of the Bresidentis car. This is inacuurate.

by apparently the President!s own instruction, judging from the testi-
mony of the other motorcycle policemen. Hence,-there is significance
having to do with the source of the shot coming from the parts of othe
policemen splattered with blood and other human materials, and if their
being splattered while in front of the President proved that the bullet
had come from behind, is not the converse true; since they were behind
the president,.does it not mean that the bullet came from the front?
(See depositions of Maftin and Hartgis.)
Baker continues with his second description of the splattering of

--- PAGE BREAK ---hind
the president,.does it not mean that the bullet came from the front?
(See depositions of Maftin and Hartgis.)
Baker continues with his second description of the splattering of

--- PAGE BREAK ---

17-Baker
the policemen and their motorcycles and again, when asked by Dulles,
is entirely uncorrected by the staff, who obviously knew better, when
he said of these policemen, "They were irmmediately in front of the car.
The silence of the staff, especially.with the member of the Com.
mission involved, cannot be regarded as a simple oversight. (p.265)
Baker then runs two important observations together.  T
The first
is the hearsay he got from Officer Jim Chaney who, as I pointed out
above, was never called by the Commission. .Note that Chaney said each
qou p1p pue tout9aog 9u4 4tu auo 48u4 pue 6194eaadas 4Tu sqous 0 au4 1o
hit.the President. The only question asked by Belin establishes the
because he was; other -than the occupants of the car, closest to itland
presumably looking at its occupants.
The other point, that the car almost came to & stop, is frequently.
referred to by a number of witnesses and always avoided by the Conmmis-
sion. Bakerlg reference to Truly is precise and.accurate and in my
analysis of Truly's testimony I pointed out how, among other things,
this' maneuver by the Presidential car so close to the curb opposite
the door to the Depository itself, invalidated all of the alleged re-
construction coming from the window because the Presidential car was
not where the Commission presumed it was in its reconstructione
Baker also quotes Chaney as.having said of the shot merely htat
 it came from behind and as specifically not knowing where behind. He
also quotes Chaney again as seeing the shots strike home. (p.266)
I ran in I.was pushing them aside and running yhrough them ...
ThiS
addresses itself to my analysis in which I pointed out that Truly had
described Baker as dashing madly through the crowd, scattering.people
as he went. This is anything but a waik, anything but a trot. He de.s itself to my analysis in which I pointed out that Truly had
described Baker as dashing madly through the crowd, scattering.people
as he went. This is anything but a waik, anything but a trot. He de.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

18-Baker
scribes himself as making the best time he. could. Also in this sequence
of testimony, he reveals that he had seen the front of.hbe building, and
Sugxoot sem suofue g rouzoum eotaou nof prpu "redooo *uas fq paxse uoum
out of the windows ...?" he replied affirmatively, saying a number were
open and " ... to the best of my recollection, I scanned those windows,
but I can't recall anybody looking out of them, you know."
·It can be understood. that after, as he testified, looking at
buiidings throughout the entire motoreade, Baker might have no indepen-
dent recollection of 3 people looking out of the windows of the Book
Depository Building. But it is asking too mgch to expect, that, aRx强r
having,heard a shot, having identified it as a khot, if. he had seen a
barrel protruding from a builaing when he .was looking at the buiiding,
.. he would not have noticed it or not have remembered it. This addresses
itself to the testimony of Brennan who may, in fact, have seen a weapon
in the building, but who, as I indicated in the analysis of his testi-
mony, could not very well have seen as much of the weapon as he said
Ahe did. Brennan was closer to the building and he was farther to the
west. But by Beennan's description, Baker could not have avoided seeing
a major part of the rifle. Needless to say, this is of no interest to
the Commission.(p.267)
Again one of those cases where Baker. wanted to say something and
railroad yards"; to which he replied affirmatively and was.then asked,
" - ueu4 xauao uotaua4ae cmof paaoera2g yotam ateua Suruzfue 9os nof prpu
If Baker had anything in mind that attracted his attention other than
the crowd, we probably wiil never know it.

--- PAGE BREAK ---u4 xauao uotaua4ae cmof paaoera2g yotam ateua Suruzfue 9os nof prpu
If Baker had anything in mind that attracted his attention other than
the crowd, we probably wiil never know it.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

19 - Baker
He again describes the mysteriaus man
I saw this man run
that
This happened, he said, as he' parked hismotorcycle and
saw the Presidential car "had swerved to the left.! Baker thought this
man came from one of the cars "right there by the President's caw. He
was, he came from the motorcade, inside the motorcade out to the side-
walk and then back." (p.268)  -
Questioned about his immediate recognition of the first as a
rifle shot,(because Belin knew that all.of the Secret Service people
meitwasirmediatelyarifle shot...
.." He saia that a lot of the solo
know, it just hit me as a rifle shot.
.He gives an interesting picture of his mates in the police depart-
ment saying that, while he himself is unfamiliar with foreign guns,
with foreign type guns, rifles, you know of this kind, and a lot of them
sel1 them,.and a lot of them rework them, you know, make them .into deer
rifles."
Nobody on the Commissim and none of its staff is interested in
this/commentary on the Dallas police.
Then Baker, describing the backfire from'& motoreycle as a "pop"
says there is a difference between .that sound and the sourid of a rifle.
(p.2kt@ 269)