DOgS
Chteha
Lady,Zhe dog who wasnt Clyde's was one of tbe delights of my life,although
Iwasn't suffieiently pereeptive at the.beginning
to realize it,and.she supplied
us with the most wonderful animal who ever shared our
Iives,Chicha.
Clyde had kept Lady ehai ned,e not uncommon praetise
with hunting dogs,but one that usuel ly tends to make the warm am nornelly
raised the pullets mho, when they grew up, would lay the eges we sold, on pasture.
At night they were confined in small portable buildings.I feared that if Lady
by neeessity
were not a killer she ould be driven to eating our chickens.Neither the dog's
dog ctacher alsohad no interest.There was nothing
for us todobutfeed her.
Nightly she came to the baek of our house and accepted the surplus we put out for
the eats. She just adopted us,and she seemed to ignore the chickens.
She was a wonderful hunter,with an unbelieuable nose. Sje spent most
of her time running rabbits,and the overgrown hillside to the north of our
home resounded to her heppy baying as she trailed the rabbits no hunter was willing
to breve the ensnarled honeysuckle,briars and young trees to hunt. Little by

--- PAGE BREAK ---

Dh1eb8-2
in she neveradoptedus
Sax o'cloek one Seturday morning that summer I had completed the morning
chores and was grading eggs when I hear her berking from the direetion of the
pasture on whieh he had about six hundred pullets nearing laying age. There wes
imperative tone I rushed out to see little Lady chasing a Dalmetian and a Agerman
shepherd, each of whom had a pullet in its mouth. These two dogs were well kmown
when they menaced people who had to walk past his home.
wheImed
cqnspicuous courage.I was,too.
With genuine warmth and feeling I call her by name. She came,half slinking
by which she expressed pleasure.Like all dogs,she under stood the tone of my
voiee. I suppose she was happy to know she had been accepted. Wegging her tial

--- PAGE BREAK ---. She came,half slinking
by which she expressed pleasure.Like all dogs,she under stood the tone of my
voiee. I suppose she was happy to know she had been accepted. Wegging her tial

--- PAGE BREAK ---

Chieha-3
her tongue hanging over her lower jaw, and greedily lapped up my sineere praise
Every time I said "Goos Ledy" or good dog" the paee of her wagging
inereased.When I stroked her beed her tail just froze in pleasure,and when
carressed her floppy ears she elosed her eyes in extasy, almost seeming to swoon.
Ihmediately I concluded thst her great virtues as a hunting dog had been bruited
toother men,but that she hgd never been treated with affeetion.She was
starved for love,and for the rest of her life,whieh she spent with us, she
both respected and loved her, she never hed enough.
She had a remarkable sensitivity to intonations in the humen voiee. As
she was enraptured with approbation, so also was she subdued by the sightest
inference of-aisapproval
My wife and I were so impressed by her genuine devotion and her
ineredible bravery on our behalf that we decided to reciprocate not alone with
ere entitled.Over end above this minimum we decided she should be as free as
she wanted. The only restraints of man's society we place upon her were vaccinations
and other regular trips to the vet. She was one dog who required no other restraints

--- PAGE BREAK ---as free as
she wanted. The only restraints of man's society we place upon her were vaccinations
and other regular trips to the vet. She was one dog who required no other restraints

--- PAGE BREAK ---

She never threatened any visitor, not ever strange ehildren, even when they
she revelled in cmy attentions she received from them. Any humen could disft
almost any abuse upon her without being bitten. She me e merely moved away
and barked her complaint. Without so intending, small children often hurt her
Lady never even snapped at them. She would other remain perfeetly still,hoping
the abuse would stop, of she'd run away as fast as her stubby bowed legs would
carry her.I dont know how she was before, but from the time I first stroked
her head, she was never aggressive toward any human being, regerdless of the
degree of prevocation.
Beeause she was completely unfettered her periodic lovelife was e riot.
The size, shapes, colors breeds and mixtures-of her sitors wes equalled by
reports
concoctions she produced 1s an eloquent testimony to random breeding. All
her pups were good dogs.
thgn
Thw winter I eomnleted
pole barn she awarded us with seven healthy puppies who had nothing in eommon

--- PAGE BREAK ---1s an eloquent testimony to random breeding. All
her pups were good dogs.
thgn
Thw winter I eomnleted
pole barn she awarded us with seven healthy puppies who had nothing in eommon

--- PAGE BREAK ---

ehieha5
even the noses were alike,,save for their common composition of bone,
fesh
skin and hair. Some had long legs, others short ones; some were slim, others
more rounded. None were very large, but some were small; Virtually all co lors
It apparently was Lady's desire that her offspring be hardy and of the
outdoor type. She delivered herself of them in the least proteeted part of the
building, atop three layers of beled hay. The sole shelter her brood had from
the elements, save for her body when she was with them,
camefrom theroof
Neither the front nor the the back walls had yetbeen completed. When It snaowed
and the wind blew,the pups got snowed upon. This disturbed neither Ledy nor
her pups. Religiously I'd go dow to the barm when it snowed to move the pups
onto
to an srea of the haystack ww which the snow.wasn't blowing. By the time I had moved
the seventh to a dry spot, the first couple were crawling back to the speeifie
loeation of their nativity.That,the most point in the chreehe was their instinctive
preference,as it was their mother's. Despite my fear,they never eaught cold or
One Sunday before the pups were weaned a Customer,Sam Elkins,eame to
visit us. Hearing of the puppies he had to see them,and having seen them,
ne

--- PAGE BREAK ---my fear,they never eaught cold or
One Sunday before the pups were weaned a Customer,Sam Elkins,eame to
visit us. Hearing of the puppies he had to see them,and having seen them,
ne

--- PAGE BREAK ---

ust absolutely hed to heve one for hds only grandson. Like cobt eity
most
for.theycompanion
shipof men s best friend.When merrage kept him in an apartment
end-blessedhtm
a daughter wmo did not regard the canine as
womansbestfriend
Sam
trensfered his longingnto his grandson,who lived in a house in the suburbs.
Ao
Vith the canny eye of the shrewd and successful merchent he was
experience with dogs to go on, equipped with only his unfulfilled boyhood dreams,
and his. She was a two-tdned brown and white,chubby,end with the Iargeat ears
1nelitterof
cute and friendly shinals, she was pre-eminent in both charaeteristies.
Sam wasn'table to return at the appointed time, but I kept hls ehoiee
and one other,so uglyam misbegotten that none of the other familiesho came
for their free pets would have it - even for free.It resembled nothing else in
dogdoms,in either the shapeand relationship toeaeh other ofits feetures or
Sam did come, his grandson was with him.

--- PAGE BREAK ---pets would have it - even for free.It resembled nothing else in
dogdoms,in either the shapeand relationship toeaeh other ofits feetures or
Sam did come, his grandson was with him.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

Chieh8
"oh,granddady" the boy cried in excrutiating pleasure,nPhis is the
had re jected.
"Dont you think maybe you'd dike the 1ittle brownie ome better?n Sam
inquired, his diplomaey overcoming his sorrow. But none of the subtlty, noneof
the salesmanship that had made him virtually the King of Seventh Street,1nflueneed
So,"the little brownie one" remained,and she continued to remain,for
end learn the skills of rebbit traeking,to run and romp and sleep in the sun
and praetise the dogs cal scales for the canine La Seala,to tease the cats and
the waterfowl,ehase her tail 8nd the kittens,splesh in the ereek,frisk with
ehildren passing ny and all the other things that make a growing puppy's like a
exf.r one small farm just the right proportion, and we were both devoted and
eltlhpul
obligated to Lady.But the little one grew on us as she
moreadmoretime

--- PAGE BREAK ---a growing puppy's like a
exf.r one small farm just the right proportion, and we were both devoted and
eltlhpul
obligated to Lady.But the little one grew on us as she
moreadmoretime

--- PAGE BREAK ---

with ua.She was utterly cherming,with the insouisance of Prospero's daughter
the inclinations of Puek, the swageer of Mercutio and Romeo's pession for my wife.
Hers was the happiest life a dog even had. She enjoyed the run of our aeer
the love of a completely captured mistress and tle compenionship of a me ster who
enjoyed her  dogging his every step. The eata put up with her pleyfulness and
sBezmx scampery, the geese only pretended to bite her when she stole their goodies
the chickens never onee peeked her and I alone spanked her. By the time she as
six months old, when we decided to b ve her apayed,she knew the raod was her
only prohibited outside territory. She kmew all about chiekens, espeeially beby
chicks, end aecompanied me on all but the earliest round I made in tending the
sawdust.If there was an egg on the floor,she stood over it like a pointer.Not
onee did she try and steal one. When baby chieks arrived and she went into the
warm brooder s houses with me,her eye counted the little balls of fluff as I
examined each and placed it within a restraining ring intended to keep it neer
the souree of hest until they learned how to get wam under the brooder. Some
times the more adverturesome chieks learned how to scale thr ring by first

--- PAGE BREAK ---ing intended to keep it neer
the souree of hest until they learned how to get wam under the brooder. Some
times the more adverturesome chieks learned how to scale thr ring by first

--- PAGE BREAK ---

Chieh8-9
flaps, flying over the ring. when we entered the brooder house, &h she kmew
the instant the door was opened if one was out and where it was. Gently, with her
sisters. Despite their reputation for cowardliness as adults,baby chicks are
spunky. More than once the dog got her none pecked, but she never bit baek. She
nudge the misereant home.
The dog had to heve a name. In a way I do not recal,if I ever knew
it became Chieha.
Day by day Chicha learned how far she could go wtth every ereeture on
hermother,
the place, the cattle,the fowl, the cats snd the people; and dey by day,
gently but persistently,she extended the frontiers of her liberties.She
came from Chieha,who grew into a female return of a mixture between Penrod
and Tom Sawyer.
When she was 16 months old we almost lost both Lady and Chicha,and
hearts or thiekened our tongues.

--- PAGE BREAK ---Chieha,who grew into a female return of a mixture between Penrod
and Tom Sawyer.
When she was 16 months old we almost lost both Lady and Chicha,and
hearts or thiekened our tongues.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

Cbiehalo
It was the dey of the ennual strawberry festival of the Women s Auxiliar
of our fire depa rtment. My wife amd Byu I had rushed through our respeetive
chorse Chores to be free when friends from town eame to shre share the fresh
loeal strawberryes and otmer local delicacies with us. We washed, chsnged and
fexxkhexratsxawkxng- placed the feed for the cats and dogs outside about two
sadism for it meent we had to persevere the oompshs, toots am whistles of the
Browingsville Band, generated in the highest deeibel levels,that much longer
friends children, who derived added pleasure from their virtually unhibited
right on that day os days to clamber over all the fire equipment, wear the
Some time after dark we took our aehing ears home.We then observed
afierce pleasure somewhere in the woods and, knowing of our absenee, had decided
to parsue it. More concerned with our added responsibilities the coming day, a
Sunday, which required an earlier arrising than our normal early farmer's hours
we retired almost immediately.My wife was to baby sit our nephew Clark and

--- PAGE BREAK ---ilities the coming day, a
Sunday, which required an earlier arrising than our normal early farmer's hours
we retired almost immediately.My wife was to baby sit our nephew Clark and

--- PAGE BREAK ---

Chich811
themforme.
When we had completed ourrespeetive chores and finished breakfast.
at about 6 a.m snd the dogs had not returned we both grew elarmed. I set off
search of them calling then all the while.There was no response an@ ne sign
which I conld lock tools and feed, when I thought I heard a low.moan.
Opening the door, and with only the light that came through the door to
my back, for there were no windows in that section,I was confronted with the
bloodiest sight I he w ever seen outside of a slaughterhouse
Chieha was lying in a thin layer of blood, shivering and whimpering almost
inaudibly.Of all the white sreas in her coat,not one was still white.Costed ith
blood, she seemed a solid brown in the semidarkness. Lady was lying silently, as
though dead,fath farthur into one of the corners.She was still warm,and her
heart was still beating,but the sickening glance made me wonder why.It seemed
as though her entire baek hed been skinned, for the skin and fur had peeled baek
from her right shoulder to her left hip,exposingher bleeding flesh and some
of her bones. Restraining the upsurge or nausea I dashed to the house and told

--- PAGE BREAK ---n and fur had peeled baek
from her right shoulder to her left hip,exposingher bleeding flesh and some
of her bones. Restraining the upsurge or nausea I dashed to the house and told

--- PAGE BREAK ---

my wife of the monstrous thing that had been done these two innocents and sent
her for Carve Priee,o ne ighbor am sometimes helper. By the tme her arrived
I hed placed Chieha in a box and pts carried her to our truek.Beturning
tothe
could tend our chickens while I was taking the dogs to the vet and the eggs to
the Haights. He assented. As we neared the barn,I told him I wanted only that
he hold the box as I lifted Lady into it,that her injury was so vast and grue
some I wanted to be certain to spare her tortured body even an unnecessary contact
With thekwxside of thebox.
eountless tm serious injuries to hundreds of ctttle,horses, swine and sheep.
But he had only a glance st Lady's exposed museulature when he puked and
declinedfurther view of the suffering animel
protested. "who is capable of such a thing?" I didn't answer, but I hed a
pretty good suspicion.
Every bump we couldn't avoid on the 20 mile trip to the vets in
Roekville madeus sufferas We imagined the.dogs did.That was a miserable
Sunday until about 3 o'clock when Harold Holbrook, the vet, phoned to say he

--- PAGE BREAK ---the 20 mile trip to the vets in
Roekville madeus sufferas We imagined the.dogs did.That was a miserable
Sunday until about 3 o'clock when Harold Holbrook, the vet, phoned to say he

--- PAGE BREAK ---

was confident they.d both live.He refused us permission to come and  see them
promiang instead that one would be ready tocome home dithin the week.
He kept his word. We got Chieha and explanetions that Satursday.
Both dogs had been shot, Lady apperently with a slightly deformed or
soft nose bullet. Hers wes the severe wound,Chicha s was merely unusual.As
Harold reconstrueted it, Chieha was running at right angles to the angle of
fire,He vast ears usually flapped up ard dow as she ren. The seme bullet
P1Bstic
everytime we saw the semicirculer cut flat aecross the bck of her head,the path
of the bullet that was dom to the skin but di dn't penetrate.tbe Onee home, she
was as she had always been, except that she was permanently gunshy.
How Lady didnt bleed to death overnight is truly e wonder.It is also
wonder thatHarold wasable to pateh her.It took B2 days and three sttempts
catgut,lace her with steel wires end swath her so in bandages that she was

--- PAGE BREAK ---ht is truly e wonder.It is also
wonder thatHarold wasable to pateh her.It took B2 days and three sttempts
catgut,lace her with steel wires end swath her so in bandages that she was

--- PAGE BREAK ---

146h1ch8
otherwise
Le os io Aep e rof punoie pedou queii d qetnb pue etqthoeil e sem oum ApeT
seeing us.It was better for us, too,for the sight of that poor suffering dog
who had left no legitimate grievence enywhere, was a sharp pain te us end mede.
us wonder whether people ean properlybecal led humens
that word has.
What a reunion that 32nd. day was! Lady first drogled all ove r us
pewing and elimbing as though she sought to get inside our bodies. Then she
praneing ezcitement,each almost stiff-legged at the unrestrained exeitement.
Then she communed with all her favorite spots,sniffing here, prying with her
nose and snorting there, te sting w th her feet and gene rally, in her every
motion end facial expression,mking clear herjoy at being home and her
satisfaction with the way she found things.
Most remerkable of al,she had lost no trace of her loveable disposition
and none of her powers,including a senee of smell that was exceptionel for
even hunting dogs.The first year she lived wth us,I had seen her track a rabbit

--- PAGE BREAK ---her loveable disposition
and none of her powers,including a senee of smell that was exceptionel for
even hunting dogs.The first year she lived wth us,I had seen her track a rabbit

--- PAGE BREAK ---

3zoxgs212czxBaB2geszxhe2kerx8c2xsxes7
Her uncemy ability to trade the hops of that rabbit through all those overpowering
and conflieting scents is as rare as the deteetion of the fragrence of a delicate
threugh the woods af ter countless rabbits with which she never caught up. Once
I saw her a quarter of an hour behind a foxe whose passage I had noted from the
hen house.She almost place her paws where bis had been as she followed him,
step by step,wi th her sniffing nose sliding through the grass.
If enything,Chieha beeame even more attaehed to my wife.She took to sleep-
Ing behind the house and when I arrose, any time beginning three a.m.,she was
on the bed and was snuggled et my wifes feet feigning sleep by the time I reached
her. First she'd ignore my whispered orders to get ofr the bed,then she open
just one eye and loak at me,as though to pretend,"WHat's the idea of waking
me from a sound sleep?" She was all innocenee,but finally shed leave the bed,
offhercoat:

--- PAGE BREAK ---,then she open
just one eye and loak at me,as though to pretend,"WHat's the idea of waking
me from a sound sleep?" She was all innocenee,but finally shed leave the bed,
offhercoat:

--- PAGE BREAK ---

Chich816
beginning the chores. Onee she lesrned I intended for her not to getbonto the
bed, Miss innoeence curled up at my feet, clearly trying to persusde me such
sometimes,when I finiehed the eoffee and went to work she was aetually asleep
but the marks on the blenket lawys reported her sohurn at Lil s feet.
She was a smart one. How smart  learned only by aecident.One morning
was a little late and started working without the coffee. Immediately  had to
return to the house, having forgotten my key. It seemed to me that I heere some
sounds as I opened the door, but I was not certain. It also seemed that Ghicha
her focebaw prints on the sofa near the window, and then it alI beeame clear
rushed to the sofa, from which she eould see if I was, aetually, going dow to
the chickens. Determining that I was returning,she resumed her former position
as.closelyassheeould.
The next morning I was, I told myself, going to cateh her in the aet. I did
to my regret: I only pretended to leave the house. When I elosed the door I was

--- PAGE BREAK ---on
as.closelyassheeould.
The next morning I was, I told myself, going to cateh her in the aet. I did
to my regret: I only pretended to leave the house. When I elosed the door I was

--- PAGE BREAK ---

0n1ch817
still inside and in my stdekinged feet,I tiptoes back as she sprung onto the
sofa.and called "Chicha!"
Caught in the aet, her guilt was as transparent as a childs with the
smeared on his faee. when she saw she wasn't going toiget away with claiming
she he dn't been in the jam am I continued telling her all the different kinds
ofa bad girl she was, Chieha just shivered dn the spot amd finally piddled
What could I do? Whenever she got nervous sfter she was spayed she couldn't
control her bladder.Faced with 8 choise between piddle on the sofa and
dirty dew on the blanket, Chicha won. She never ceased the pretense, however,
that she didnt mount the bed.Especially in the winter time,my wife,faced
the blankets, preferred the comfort of the dog's warming presenee.
Even in her pretending she was asleep and opening one eye,Chieha strongly
suggested an errant child. She couldn't just open the one eye. Childiike, she
alsohad to elose the other eye harder.
Exeept for the bed she was ather well behaved.Whenever she did what she
wasn't supposed to, she kmew she had done wrong and invariably shpwed it by her
carriage and aprearance. We didnt always kmow what she had done wrong,but always

--- PAGE BREAK ---er she did what she
wasn't supposed to, she kmew she had done wrong and invariably shpwed it by her
carriage and aprearance. We didnt always kmow what she had done wrong,but always

--- PAGE BREAK ---

Chieha19
When we le ft the hen house she'd spring
ramp
where she!d stend Like a statueuntfl she Baw men as T reaehed the corner
builfing,Then,following.a fewjotous fla sheswi
shey
passeditoAgain
happy tail actand eginshe was off,runningwcttex
in an almost stifr-legged
junction of the lane to our home and the road,Chiehe hed bounded up a fight of
stairs
and was waiting at a usually discrete distance
fgon the road,her every
"Good Chicha! Idt tell her
"yery good girl,and,elated,she'd bounee
my wife all about it, in a shrill falsetto she enployed only in talking to us.
If we were away for most of a dey, on our return, she'd talk-howI in that
odd falsetto and my wife swore she could understand all Chieha's compleints about
all the things that had gone wrong or happened to her in our ebsence.
When she did something she knew was wrong snd didn't see either of us until
she was in the house,she'd slink over on one side, gingerly raise her two upper

--- PAGE BREAK ---d to her in our ebsence.
When she did something she knew was wrong snd didn't see either of us until
she was in the house,she'd slink over on one side, gingerly raise her two upper

--- PAGE BREAK ---

legs,flatten her teil against her belly and hang her chin against her breast
averting a direct look with her cowed eyes.No animal we ever knew hed a more
developed senseofguilt.
She also had all th customary trick of smart,happy dogs,like how to
get. her head scratched when we didn't want to do it, how to beg for food ahead of
time and get it,how to throw and catch a ball or any aveileble substitute,like
8rock or a stick. With unerring accuraey she read our moods and feelings.If
we were ne aring the short end of the termper, she'd be deicretely in the background
whether or not we seid anything. If we felt' ill, she be close by, eommiserating.
She read our faces as people read books. She was both sensitive andnintelligent.
happinesswithus.
Early on fel Lady didn't come home all day. By the next day we were
Several weeks later Chicha didnt appear in the morning.The day wore on and
our anxiety increased.We both called and searched for her,without response
That afternoon I tcok my wife on a walk,aroum the place, trying to get
mina.offofChicha.I'm.sorry.Idid,

--- PAGE BREAK ---d
our anxiety increased.We both called and searched for her,without response
That afternoon I tcok my wife on a walk,aroum the place, trying to get
mina.offofChicha.I'm.sorry.Idid,

--- PAGE BREAK ---

Chieha2l
She was dead. No, daad is not the word - she was horribly mm gled
and then had been dragged into the spring at the bottom of
the hill behind our home am left to drown in the water. I buried
her on the hill,the final resting plaee of all our dogs and eats
It wasn't difficult for us to see what had happened. A
previous night by the snarling and barking of a large dog fight.
City people have peta they want to get rid of.M
Maybe they're going to california,of the wife gets alergic
to her husband and the doctor says she'd allergic to hair,or
Cat's tail until the ereature takes a fit every time he sees the
kid. For any various reasons, both good and bad, they decide to
get rid of the dog or cat.Instead of doing it properly, throu
the existing ageneieg set up for tyis purpose,either because
they have a guilt complex of theyre tdz stingy and fear it may
abandonthe former pets. They just put them out of the car and
drive on,telling themselves and each other how kim and thought-
hecatthatisaneha

--- PAGE BREAK ---

goodmouser
atleastin.theirimeginations,
anahisfamily
andtaedog
Mr.and Mrs. city Dweller drive home,holier than God,and teLi ing each othe
the boon theyhe e brought to the count ryside.
It ne ver happens that way
One of these godsends,a kittan we named Lord Nelson I He had onei ey
was abandoned near us.We tosk him home,feeling sorry.with lim we got ce
ofmost of the kmon end several as yet unitentified feline viruses.
Mey
enteritis and pneumonitis. If we een get the kittens to Harold et ther
maieh is just as they are mestly weaned and getting less of the motherl s
but before they reeeived none, end ean then return them to his hospital
the right interval,Harold has learned how to save most of them.As len

--- PAGE BREAK ---aned and getting less of the motherl s
but before they reeeived none, end ean then return them to his hospital
the right interval,Harold has learned how to save most of them.As len

--- PAGE BREAK ---

Chicha
heve cots,whieh probably means as long as we live,well remember
LordvNeLson
remenber the suffering this has caused the eats and us,the least of
the great weste of our time and the considerable expenditure in mone
Itis even worse with dogs. They get hungry fast and look
forfooor
order to snrvive they revert to killers. Soon they are running and breeding
packs. They have both the ebility and disposition to kill large animals, eueh as
cows weighing a half ton and more. For yeers I never left the heuse
eEzlgzlth2uzz2zelz2lbefore dayllght or after dark withoute pistol These
Wild dogs ere dangerous. If they dont kill they in turn die. Within a short time
they turm vicious,whieh is exaetly what their ever so holy former owners also ar
The traeks around the edges of the stream told the en tire story. Chicha had
successfully attempted to divert the peck from our geese. We lost no geese. We lost
only Chiehe, which is km another way of saying we lost part of our lifes.Then we
both recalled that sometime after midnight we hed been awakened by the dogs. At
that time they were not visible am I hsd returned to bed,encouraged to do so
by the cold that quickly penetrated the robe I had hastily donner. I felt as though
at least in pert I was responsible.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

Undoubtedly Ladysuf ered a similar fate,either on our fazm or on her
On
beloved,overgrownhillside.xwbxwhich we are certain he expired from her wounde.
She was either killed there or wi th the la st flicker of animal
feellng
death
approaching,had crawled there.
when Clyde Left,he had medea mess of the place.His threats had upset
my wife greatly.His thefts annoyed me.His museovy drake was
mDaperfeetly
titled in our favor. Those dogs were a wonderfal experience.