Letter on Payoff
Forged , U.S. Says

^ ^ ^ By Michael Getler

Washington Post Foreign Service


BONN, West Germany, Sept. 22 —The \U S. em-
bassy here said today that the United States consid-
ers “to be a forgery”, , a letter allegedly written by
former CIA chief Allen Dulles in November 1958 to
former West German Defense Minister Franz-Josef
Strauss that alludes to “subsidies” apparently ear-
marked for Strauss.


Strauss, then and now head of West German’s
Christian Social Union Party, has been the target of
as-yet-unproven allegations by a former Lockheed
employee that , some 12 million in pay-offs were
made to that party in connection with West Ger-
many’s purchase of some 900 F-104Starfighter jets
beginning in 1958. Strauss has ( vehemently denied
the accusations.


An embassy statement said no evidence had been
found that such a letter was ever written or that
Dulles had ever served as an intermidiary between
Lockheed and other governments.

Moreover, the statement adds, it is considered
“highly unlikely that he (Dulles) would have acted
in such a capacity. On the basis of the available evi-
dence, therefore, the U.S~ government considers
the letter to be a forgery.”

The embassy statement is the fourth allegation
this month of forgeries' in the global Lockheed brib-
ery scandal.


Last week, the West German Defense Ministry
said that handwriting experts had established as for-
geries some of the incriminating letters produced i
by Ernest Hauser, the former Lockheed agent who
has alleged that bribes were paid to Strauss’ party
in the Lockheed purchases. •

Two weeks ago, a Netherlands’ commission re-
ported that a memorandum alleging $878,000 pav-off
was “a forgery put in circulation by Mr. Hauser.”
Earlier this month, a Lockheed spokesman also
said documents published in the Italian magazine
L’Expresso that linked Premier Giulio to Lockheed
bribery charges, “appear to be forgeries.”

The alleged Dulles letter, Which was published by
a German newspaper last week, was addressed to
Franz J. Strauss, and said, in part: “I can confirm
I that the subject of subsidies, to which you alluded, l
( will present no difficulties now that your contract
with the firm .has been successfully concluded.”
