A.G. Dugin
NOOMACHIA
WARS OF THE
MIND
POLITICA AETERNA
POLITICAL PLATONISM AND
BLACK ENLIGHTENMENT

--- PAGE BREAK ---A.G. Dugin
NOOMACHIA
WARS OF THE
MIND
POLITICA AETERNA
POLITICAL PLATONISM AND
BLACK ENLIGHTENMENT

--- PAGE BREAK ---

The main idea of the course on political philosophy is to show the synchronic structures of
political Logos in their connection with philosophy, metaphysics, and ontology, and then to outline
the diachronic unfolding of these structures in political history. It was precisely the synchronism
of the structural description that became the decisive argument in choosing the title — Politica
Aeterna or Eternal Politics. The author approaches the consideration of the political first as a
timeless structure and only then as processes of historical transformation.
The two poles of the temporary deployment of Politica Aeterna are traditional society and
modern society. Thus, Politica Aeterna, static in some of its structures, becomes clear in other
structures only in the course of historical processes that actualise what previously remained
potential. At the same time, the foundations of politics that dominated traditional society become
potential, virtual, and gradually as marginal and "heretical" as the previously materialistic versions
— democracy, individualism, economics, etc. This tension in the polar interpretation of the political
throughout history is organised in such a way that at first one pole, well aware of itself, describes the
opposite pole approximately or even incorrectly, and then the same happens with the opposite pole.
The political philosophy of Plato and Aristotle conveys the truth about the vertical Logos of Tradition,
but political materialism presents it in a distorted and very approximate way. Modern political
philosophy moves towards the realisation of its nihilistic essence gradually, reaching it only when
Modernity finally triumphs and the transition to Postmodernity and speculative realism begins. Here,
the truth of political nothingness is revealed, but at the same time, the understanding of the Logos of
Tradition is completely lost. Thus, in both cases, we are dealing with a partial truth about the
structure of the political Logos, which is an inevitable and, probably, constitutive aberration of time
for the very nature of history. It is time — political time — that prevents us from correctly assessing
the metaphysical foundations of the Political in all its entirety, since we are forced to take a position
in time, that is, in a specific phase of political history, which predetermines our view and, at the same
time, the object on which it falls and which it seeks to distinguish.ced to take a position
in time, that is, in a specific phase of political history, which predetermines our view and, at the same
time, the object on which it falls and which it seeks to distinguish.

--- PAGE BREAK ---on
in time, that is, in a specific phase of political history, which predetermines our view and, at the same
time, the object on which it falls and which it seeks to distinguish.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

Preface. Politica Aeterna — topology,
theory, method
The Political Dimension of Eternity
The book Politica Aeterna is based on edited lectures from a course on
political philosophy taught at the Faculty of Sociology of Moscow State
University in 2014. However, some of the topics covered there are
developed in much greater detail, and some sections have been rewritten.
Thus, the book combines the simplicity of the lecture language with more
rigorous philosophical generalisations. At the same time, the main idea of
the course has been preserved unchanged. It was to show the synchronic
structures of the political Logos in their connection with philosophy,
metaphysics and ontology, and only then to outline the diachronic
unfolding of these structures in political history. It was precisely the
synchronism of the structural description that became the decisive
argument in choosing the title — Politica Aeterna or Eternal Politics, but it
can also be understood as the political dimension of eternity or the politics of
eternity. Politica Aeterna approaches the Political first as a timeless structure,
and only then as processes of historical transformation. The eternal
explains time, which adds nothing to the structure of the philosophical City
(polis), but may well detract from its completeness. However, this
completeness, glimpses of which we encounter in the philosophical
systems of the greatest geniuses — Plato, Aristotle and... Democritus, being
generally represented in the classical teachings of Antiquity, many of which
have direct analogues beyond the Mediterranean civilisation — in India, Iran,
China, etc., nevertheless has, in turn, some less contrastingly described
and interpreted aspects. This applies above all to the materialistic
interpretation of politics, which was generally deeply alien to the very spirit
of Greco-Latin culture and, moreover, to traditional civilisation as a whole.
Yes, the ancient materialists Leucippus, Democritus, Epicurus, Lucretius and
the schools and movements close to them had already outlined the main
vectors of their interpretation.ation as a whole.
Yes, the ancient materialists Leucippus, Democritus, Epicurus, Lucretius and
the schools and movements close to them had already outlined the main
vectors of their interpretation.

--- PAGE BREAK ---es, the ancient materialists Leucippus, Democritus, Epicurus, Lucretius and
the schools and movements close to them had already outlined the main
vectors of their interpretation.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

4
Preface. Politica Aeterna — topology, theory, method
the political Logos, but for them to become fully clear, it was probably
necessary to have the political philosophy of Modernity, where political
materialism and nihilism itself could reveal themselves much more fully
than in traditional society, where they were marginal and "heretical" (from
a philosophical point of view) phenomena. Thus, Politica Aeterna, static
in some of its structures, becomes clear in other structures only in the
course of historical processes that actualise what previously remained in
potential. At the same time, the foundations of politics that dominated
traditional society become potential, virtual, and gradually as marginal and
"heretical" as the previously materialistic versions — democracy,
individualism, economics, etc.
Politica Aeterna is therefore supplemented by an analysis of political
Modernity, which, without adding anything to the eternal structure,
nevertheless clarifies some of the borderline territories of political Logos,
revealing its darkest, shadiest aspects, associated with the structures of
nothingness, matter and the figures of the Great Mother. At the same time,
turning to the political Logos of traditional society as the main content of
Politica Aeterna, we recall that its relationship with the "past" has a
symbolic and conventional meaning that should not obscure the eternal
relevance of patriarchal — Platonic and Aristotelian — models of vertical
and hierarchical organisation of society. Therefore, what was obvious and
clear — real — in traditional society in the Modern Age has become
potential, blurred and considered "something that has been overcome,"
"removed," and therefore irrelevant and, ultimately, "incomprehensible."
Conversely, the marginal and peripheral conception of the political in
traditional society, which was in turn "incomprehensible,"
"eccentric" and "extravagant" became self-evident in the era of European
Modernism. This tension in the polar interpretation of the Political
throughout history is organised in such a way that at first one pole, well
aware of itself, describes the opposite pole approximately or even
incorrectly, and then the same happens with the opposite pole. The political
philosophy of Plato and Aristotle conveys the truth about the vertical
Logos of Tradition, but political materialism presents it in a distorted and
very approximate way. Modern political philosophy moves towards the
realisation of its nihilistic essence gradually, reaching it only when Modernity
finally triumphs and the transition to Postmodernity and speculative re-odern political philosophy moves towards the
realisation of its nihilistic essence gradually, reaching it only when Modernity
finally triumphs and the transition to Postmodernity and speculative re-

--- PAGE BREAK ---osophy moves towards the
realisation of its nihilistic essence gradually, reaching it only when Modernity
finally triumphs and the transition to Postmodernity and speculative re-

--- PAGE BREAK ---

5
Preface. Politica Aeterna — topology, theory, method
realism. Here, the truth of the political is revealed, but at the same time, the
understanding of the Logos of Tradition is completely lost. Thus, in both
cases, we are dealing with a partial truth of the structure of the political
Logos, which is an inevitable and, probably, constitutive aberration of
time for the very nature of history. It is time — political time — that
prevents us from correctly assessing the metaphysical foundations of the
Political in all its entirety, since we are forced to take a position in time, that
is, in a specific phase of political history, which predetermines our view and,
at the same time, the object on which it falls and which it seeks to distinguish.
In Modernity, and especially in Postmodernity, we are close to political
nothingness, to the lower limit of the Political, to the very substance of
politics, and therefore we are able to discern its details at the quantum level.
But the price for such detail is the loss of the idea of the whole, the
complete, the perfect. The discovery of the truth about nothingness comes
at the cost of the loss of being.
In traditional society, and especially in its most complete and perfect
forms, existence reigns supreme, but at the expense of ignoring non-
existence, pushing nothingness beyond the limits of attention, and at the
expense of a lack of detail. And although in traditional forms of politics —
empire, theocracy, monarchy, aristocracy, etc. — the deficit is negligible (the
only thing missing here is knowledge of what nothingness is), and in political
modernity, on the contrary, knowledge of nothingness is achieved through
complete oblivion of being, Nevertheless, for the completeness of the
political Logos, it is important to combine the diachronic picture into a
synchronic model, where not only completeness and perfection (lost in
Modernity and even more so in Postmodernity) are taken into account, but
also matter, distortions, decay, poverty, insignificance, and nothingness itself.
This is precisely what constitutes the content of Politica Aeterna,
complementing the traditional view of the Political with nihilism and the
motifs of the "Black Enlightenment," but at the same time reminding the
nihilistic period of political history in which we live that what once was is not
simply a thing of the past, but is eternal, and therefore may be in the future,
beyond Modernity and attempts to overcome it, plunging ever deeper into its
own essence (i.e., into Postmodernity). The political vertical of Platonism and
Aristotle's normal state (i.e., monarchy) are always and always possible. But
there is also always and forever the possibility of political Modernity and
Postmodernity, realised today, but fully understood and lived out by
Democritus.
Taken together, this constitutes the general topology of Politica
Aeterna, as a system of political philosophy that does noternity, realised today, but fully understood and lived out by
Democritus.
Taken together, this constitutes the general topology of Politica
Aeterna, as a system of political philosophy that does not

--- PAGE BREAK ---ay, but fully understood and lived out by
Democritus.
Taken together, this constitutes the general topology of Politica
Aeterna, as a system of political philosophy that does not

--- PAGE BREAK ---

6
Preface. Politica Aeterna — topology, theory, method
knows political decrees as something irreversible and fatal, and opens up the
realm of political thought to absolute verticality. The ancient Greeks or
Hindus could have chosen materialism, scepticism, nihilism, and democracy.
And sometimes they actually did. But then such choices were reversed, and
the decision shifted to the realm of monarchy, aristocracy, or theocracy. The
fact that vertical politics prevailed and constitutes the basic definition of
traditional society: in it, verticality and sacredness prevail, and the always
possible outbreaks of materialism are exceptions. In the modern era, on the
contrary,
materialism,
egalitarianism,
democracy,
and
atomism
(individualism) are the most common, and attempts to return to sacred
politics are exceptions. Politica Aeterna draws a fundamental conclusion
from this observation: political time, with its own logic, is not an irreversible
fate. It may seem so, but this is an illusion. Any political system, whether
traditional or modern, is based on a Decision. Turning to "political eternity,"
we can choose any of its areas. Some of them seem more distant and difficult
to access, while others, on the contrary, seem close and almost obvious. This
is precisely what political history determines. But Politica Aeterna asserts a
perpendicular to this history. It must be taken into account and reckoned
with, but the choice always exists. This is precisely the revolutionary content
of Politica Aeterna: it makes the Decision free, restoring the dignity of human
(and non-human) thought. When choosing in the context of Politica Aeterna,
we are dealing with the present, that is, with what is and what is here and
now. Another question is the degree of intensity of this presence. It varies.
But this is not fatal: for however shaky the truth may seem, in the end it will
prove to be harder than any metal.
Philosophy and politics: the nature of an inseparable
connection
From the description of the essence of Politica Aeterna, one can move in
different directions. First, one can delve deeper into the thesis of the profound
identity of philosophy and politics, or the philosophical and the political. This
is almost obvious in theory, but we often forget about it when we immerse
ourselves in political analysis, especially in applied political science.
Meanwhile, no other field lies so close to philosophy and depends on it as
much as politics depends on philosophy. It is philosophy that establishes the
Political and all its proportions and structures, whichno other field lies so close to philosophy and depends on it as
much as politics depends on philosophy. It is philosophy that establishes the
Political and all its proportions and structures, which

--- PAGE BREAK ---so close to philosophy and depends on it as
much as politics depends on philosophy. It is philosophy that establishes the
Political and all its proportions and structures, which

--- PAGE BREAK ---

7
Preface. Politica Aeterna — topology, theory, method
in turn affect science, society, education, the economy, and everyday life.
This totality of the political is recognised by everyone from Plato to Deleuze,
but politicians themselves and those who try to think about politics more
systematically (political scientists) often overlook this, reducing politics to a
set of technologies or solutions to practical issues related to power, its
acquisition, retention, and application, and all the purely instrumental
practices associated with it. For individuals or entire groups within society,
the question of power is indeed central and paramount. But the context in
which this power is acquired and exercised is much more important than is
usually recognised. Everything fundamental in society depends on the
political Logos, and individual rulers, parties, groups, dynasties, etc. can
influence it only to a very limited extent. A tyrant, dictator or, conversely, a
benevolent humanist in power can do practically nothing to change its
structures. At the root of the most serious political transformations are
prophets and philosophers, often having no direct connection to a particular
authority, but deeply understanding the very nature of the political Logos. It
is the Logos that rules, and those who realise this are closer to the element of
power than those who occupy central positions in it. Power is a philosophical
category and is associated with the depths of the metaphysical Decision.
Those who do not know this element of Decision do not rule, but only play a
role, representing the true power, which in this case lies elsewhere.
In traditional societies, this circumstance was openly acknowledged: the
ruler was a priest, a philosopher, and the central figure of the social and
cosmic cult. Power is sacred, and therefore those who wield it must be as
close as possible to the sacred realm. In the modern era, democratisation
processes were directed towards the desacralisation of power. However, this
did not completely abolish the sacred (as that would have abolished power
altogether), but rather concealed it. In this sense, the German political
philosopher Carl Schmitt spoke of two types of power: Potestas Directa
(direct power) and Potestas Indirecta (indirect power). True power is sacred,
metaphysical and based on decisions made in the context of the general
synchronous structure of Politica Aeterna. In traditional society, Potestas
Directa (direct power) was openly sacred and therefore unique. Sometimes
only two of its sides were represented by the pair of the king and the priest
(as King Arthur and Merlin the wizard in medieval legends) or the Emperor
and the Patriarch (as in the Byzantine symphony of powers). Both the king
and the priest were Potestas Directad the priest
(as King Arthur and Merlin the wizard in medieval legends) or the Emperor
and the Patriarch (as in the Byzantine symphony of powers). Both the king
and the priest were Potestas Directa

--- PAGE BREAK ---ng Arthur and Merlin the wizard in medieval legends) or the Emperor
and the Patriarch (as in the Byzantine symphony of powers). Both the king
and the priest were Potestas Directa

--- PAGE BREAK ---

8
Preface. Politica Aeterna — topology, theory, method
(direct power). In the modern era, Potestas Directa (direct power) is stripped
of its sacred content, hence the principle of separation of powers,
transparency, etc. But such power, deprived of its connection with the
political Logos, would be unstable and would quickly collapse. This is how
"Shadow power" — Potestas Indirecta. This power also maintains links
with the sacred, but only covertly, not directly, through parallel
hierarchies and closed structures — lodges, clubs, etc. In this case, Potestas
Directa (direct power) can indeed remain profane and ignorant in the sphere
of political philosophy, since Potestas Indirecta (indirect power) takes care
of the political Logos. In this case, the philosophical incompetence of the
ruler does not pose a problem: he thinks he rules, when in fact others rule
for him. And if Potestas Indirecta (indirect power) pursues everyday
technical goals, this means only one thing: it is not real Potestas Indirecta
(indirect power), but its simulacrum. Political ontology itself is such that
it is inextricably linked to philosophy and depends directly on it.
But in any case, Politica Aeterna draws attention to the fundamental and
decisive significance of philosophy in relation to politics, which is sometimes
overlooked.
Politica Aeterna and the Fourth Political Theory
Politica Aeterna is fundamental in another context as well: in the search
for an alternative to the political philosophy of Modernity and Postmodernity.
We refer to the move beyond the political paradigm of the Modern era as the
"Fourth Way" or "Fourth Political Theory."This direction aims to overcome
the three dominant political philosophies of modernity — liberalism,
communism and nationalism — and to construct an alternative political
theory beyond the political paradigm that prevails today on a global scale.
Interest in this is gradually growing, and accordingly, more and more detailed
arguments are needed both in the critique of political modernity, and
especially its currently dominant version — liberalism — and in the
justification of an alternative political Logos — its content, its structures, its
proportions and forms.
The fourth political theory includes, first and foremost, everything that
was rejected by modernity: political Platonism
1  Dugin, A. G. The Fourth Way. Introduction to the Fourth Political Theory. Moscow: Academic
Project, 2014.ludes, first and foremost, everything that
was rejected by modernity: political Platonism
1  Dugin, A. G. The Fourth Way. Introduction to the Fourth Political Theory. Moscow: Academic
Project, 2014.

--- PAGE BREAK ---emost, everything that
was rejected by modernity: political Platonism
1  Dugin, A. G. The Fourth Way. Introduction to the Fourth Political Theory. Moscow: Academic
Project, 2014.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

9
Preface. Politica Aeterna — topology, theory, method
and Aristotelianism. Platonism is included through its most radical and
revolutionary version in the form of 20th-century traditionalism, which
declared ontological and epistemological war on Modernity. In this capacity,
the Fourth Political Theory can be seen as a logical continuation of
traditionalism. But the appeal to Politica Aeterna significantly broadens the
understanding of political Platonism, placing it in a broader context and
clarifying its relationship with other political paradigms — above all with
political Aristotelianism.
However, since the Fourth Political Theory addresses not only elites but
also peoples as human beings as such, its focus is on the human being, taken,
however, in isolation from secondary historical and social superstructures.
Therefore, Da-sein, the central concept of Martin Heidegger's philosophy, is
proposed as the subject of the Fourth Political Theory. This opens the way to
phenomenology as a whole, making the Fourth Political Theory not just a call
for sacred restoration, but also a path to the construction of a special
existential ontology. This is part of the avant-garde nature of the Fourth
Political Theory, which cannot be reduced exclusively to traditionalism. I n
the context of Politica Aeterna, the zone of phenomenology corresponds
precisely to Aristotle's teaching, the appeal to which became the most
important moment in the development of phenomenology — in Brentano,
Husserl, and Heidegger himself. Moreover, Heidegger's reading of Aristotle
made it possible to establish a metaphysical kinship between Aristotle's
philosophy and phenomenology in contrast to Platonism.
The combination of the political interpretation of Plato and Aristotle, or
in modern terms, traditionalism and phenomenology (existentialism),
forms the metaphysical basis of the Fourth Political Theory. Its alignment
with the context of Politica Aeterna further clarifies its structure and
essence.
At the same time, Politica Aeterna allows us to correctly interpret
speculative realism and object-oriented ontology as expressions of the
terminal stage of all political modernity and the final chord of postmodernity.
Speculative realists close the page on rhetorical humanism, under which
Modernity concealed its essential nihilism, detectable only by its critics (such
as Nietzsche and Heidegger), and acknowledge this as its essence. This is the
source of Nick Land's thesis of "Black Procession," accelerationism, and
"transcendental nihilism" ( R. Brasier). This truth about political materialism,
which finds its justification and topological predestination only in Politica
Aeterna, is also the most important argument of the Fourth Political Theory.r). This truth about political materialism,
which finds its justification and topological predestination only in Politica
Aeterna, is also the most important argument of the Fourth Political Theory.

--- PAGE BREAK ---political materialism,
which finds its justification and topological predestination only in Politica
Aeterna, is also the most important argument of the Fourth Political Theory.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

10
Preface. Politica Aeterna — topology, theory, method
, is also the most important argument of the Fourth Political Theory. Political
Platonism and political Aristotelianism did not know the truth of matter,
denying the very possibility of the existence of Logos in it. Modernity created
a political reality that was impossible and unacceptable within the structure of
the ontological hypotheses of sacred vertical politics. In doing so, it insisted
on its own Logos, fully manifested precisely in speculative realism, which
pushed the boldest intuitions of postmodernism to their limits. The fourth
political theory, thus, in opposition to liberalism, communism and
nationalism, metaphysically rejects the entire political Modernity. But the
essence of this political Modernity — political materialism and nihilism — in
the field of philosophy is precisely the "Black Enlightenment." The Black
Enlightenment no longer hides the essence of modernity and openly declares
war on man and even on life in favour of the Radical Object. This is precisely
what the Fourth Political Theory opposes, not simply rejecting the Logos of
matter, but now — and precisely thanks to modernity — knowing its truth.
The Fourth Political Theory does not simply reject nihilism, unwilling to
know anything about it (like Plato and Aristotle), but overcomes it by first
knowing it. And this overcoming, based on prior knowledge, is another
distinctive feature of the Fourth Political Theory. It does not simply combine
traditionalism with phenomenology (Dasein), but also accepts the challenge
of the "Black Enlightenment," offering an answer to the challenge of the
Radical Object of speculative realists. This answer is the Radical Subject(1)
,but this topic goes beyond the scope of Politica Aeterna, although it remains
deeply connected to it.
1
 A. G. The Radical Subject and Its Double. Moscow: Eurasian Movement. 2009.l Subject(1)
,but this topic goes beyond the scope of Politica Aeterna, although it remains
deeply connected to it.
1
 A. G. The Radical Subject and Its Double. Moscow: Eurasian Movement. 2009.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

PART 1. POLITICAL PLATONISM

--- PAGE BREAK ---na, although it remains
deeply connected to it.
1
 A. G. The Radical Subject and Its Double. Moscow: Eurasian Movement. 2009.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

PART 1. POLITICAL PLATONISM

--- PAGE BREAK ---

Chapter 1. The Essence of Politics. Plato and
His Cave
Subject of Study
First of all, let us consider the nature of the discipline known as political
philosophy. If we turn to the history of philosophy and the history of political
systems, we find the following pattern: from the very beginning, philosophy
and politics have developed not simply in parallel, but inextricably linked.
Among the first Seven Sages, who are considered the founders of the pre-
Socratic philosophical tradition, are many who are known for writing political
laws and regulations (in particular, Solon). In essence, they were political
figures representing their cities and political entities. Therefore, from the very
beginning of the history of philosophy, we see an inseparable link between
philosophy and politics.
Thus, politics as a separate phenomenon, detached from philosophy,
represents a completely different approach. The philosophy of politics is a
much deeper discipline. It considers both philosophers who were involved in
politics and wrote about politics, and politicians who justified their laws and
the structure of their political system with philosophical principles. In fact, at
the dawn of philosophy and politics, these things were not separated at all.
Thus, the subject of political philosophy is the original sphere that united
philosophy and politics into a certain
there is a common and unified direction.
I mean that there are no such separate phenomena as
"philosophy" and "politics" that we artificially combine and use philosophy
to study politics. We are not just talking about the political philosophy of a
particular direction, period, culture or civilisation. When we talk about the
philosophy of politics, we are talking, on the one hand, about the essence of
politics, about what makes politics politics, and on the other hand, about the
political essence of philosophy, which makes philosophy philosophy. But
note that there is a difference: philosophy dominates here because politics
without philosophy is impossible.hand, about the
political essence of philosophy, which makes philosophy philosophy. But
note that there is a difference: philosophy dominates here because politics
without philosophy is impossible.

--- PAGE BREAK ---itical essence of philosophy, which makes philosophy philosophy. But
note that there is a difference: philosophy dominates here because politics
without philosophy is impossible.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

14
Part 1. Political Platonism
Politics is a form of applied philosophy, the application of philosophy
to a specific sphere of human life. And philosophy without politics is
possible. That is, there is philosophy that does not deal with politics. But
there is no politics that is not based on philosophy.
The union of philosophy and politics
The philosophy of politics studies not only the philosophical
foundations of politics, but also the political aspects of philosophy itself,
because politics is not a private and accidental application of philosophy, but
the most fundamental, albeit still applied, element of philosophy. As soon
as philosophy appears, it necessarily turns first to politics; and all politics
flows from philosophy. There is no equilibrium between them, but a deep
organic connection. Where this original union of the philosophical and the
political takes place, there arises the birth of all possible political systems
and, at the same time, the crystallisation of philosophical knowledge.
In theory, there is a philosophy that is free from politics and deals
with non-political issues. But in reality, even such a free, non-political
philosophy is in one way or another connected with politics (since
philosophy and politics have common roots). If philosophy considers
aesthetic, historical, and cultural issues and yet says nothing about
politics, this does not mean that such philosophy is a completely separate
— non-political — phenomenon.
All philosophy has a political dimension: in some cases explicit (Solon,
the pre-Socratics, Plato, Aristotle), in others implicit (when philosophy says
nothing about politics, but the very fact of the existence of a philosophical
paradigm implicitly contains the possibility of a political dimension).
Therefore, there is a very deep connection between philosophy and politics —
a connection at the level of their origins. And studying philosophy in
isolation from politics significantly impoverishes or weakens the very
meaning of philosophy.
On the other hand, the study of politics without philosophy is
generally unreliable. A person who does not know philosophy cannot
engage in politics. Any philosophical system has a political dimension.
But not every philosophical system explicitly develops this model.ly unreliable. A person who does not know philosophy cannot
engage in politics. Any philosophical system has a political dimension.
But not every philosophical system explicitly develops this model.

--- PAGE BREAK ---son who does not know philosophy cannot
engage in politics. Any philosophical system has a political dimension.
But not every philosophical system explicitly develops this model.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

15
Chapter 1. The Nature of Politics. Plato and His Cave
Homologies: the history of kingdoms and the history of ideas
are not different from each other.
Strictly speaking, the history of philosophy and the history of politics
follow the same pattern. There is absolute homology between them. When
philosophy moves in one direction, politics moves with philosophy in the
same direction and cannot move in another. If something changes in
philosophy, something will inevitably change in politics. But if something
changes in politics, it means that something (either before or simultaneously)
has changed in philosophy, which predetermined this change.
In fact, there is no autonomy of politics from philosophy. From the point
of view of political philosophy, political history is a cross-section of the
history of philosophy, depending on this history in an absolute way. No
politician is free from philosophy, and no philosopher can be considered in
isolation from his implicit political dimension. In other words, the historical
picture, history itself as such: the rise of kingdoms, the fall of kingdoms, the
construction of a particular civilisation, the demise of civilisation, the conflict
between civilisations, states or peoples, dynastic changes, political
revolutions, changes in the balance between the urban and rural populations,
etc. — all this has a philosophical dimension (not always obvious, not
always clearly understood). But the task of those who study the philosophy of
politics is to construct the completeness of this total homology. What does
homology mean (from the ancient Greek GHoIGJ — similar, alike; KLMGJ
— word, law)? It means equivalent in meaning; the meanings are common.
The meaning of history — political-philosophical or philosophical-
political — is the same. History has two sides: on the one hand, it is the
history of kingdoms, states, peoples; on the other hand, it is the history of
ideas. The history of kingdoms and the history of ideas are not different.
They are interconnected. It is the same story.
Therefore, if we observe changes in the sphere of philosophy, for
example, the transition from subjective idealism to objective idealism, this
is necessarily accompanied by similar political changes. In the transition
from subjective idealism to objective idealism, we move from one
political model to another. The transition from idealism to materialism
entails other changes. Changes in the configuration of religions radically
alter the content of political processes in societies where this philosophy is
widespread. This homology between the philosophical and the political can
be approached from all sides, but it is explained by the unity of a common
semantic core.ocieties where this philosophy is
widespread. This homology between the philosophical and the political can
be approached from all sides, but it is explained by the unity of a common
semantic core.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

16
Part 1. Political Platonism
Fathe
r
philosophy
political philosophy
Fam
ily
Son
Politician
In the image and likeness
This homology can be likened to the common ancestral root between the
figures of the Father and the Son. The philosophical realm—the realm of
ideas—is the domain of the Father. It is always above. This gives rise to a
certain autonomy of philosophy in relation to politics—that is, the fact that
philosophy can contain politics both explicitly and implicitly. Politics, on the
other hand, is always and in all cases a projection of the philosophical.
However, the relationship between the Father and the Son, or between the
Idea and the Kingdom, cannot be represented in strictly linear terms. The
Father, who creates the Son, reproduces in him that which is common to both
and which is commonly called the genus. There is no more nature in the
Father than in the Son, despite a certain hierarchy and logical and
chronological sequence. In some cases, the Son may embody nature more
fully than the Father, and in this case he is more Father than the Father
himself.
This can be illustrated in a diagram.
Scheme of the relationship between the Philosophical and the Political

--- PAGE BREAK ---he Father, and in this case he is more Father than the Father
himself.
This can be illustrated in a diagram.
Scheme of the relationship between the Philosophical and the Political

--- PAGE BREAK ---

17
Chapter 1. The Nature of Politics. Plato and His Cave
Thus, the homology between the philosophical and the political must be
conceived on the basis of generic unity, rather than as a mechanical
application of philosophy to politics. After all, the genus is equally primary in
relation to the Father and in relation to the Son, but not chronologically,
rather ontologically, metaphysically.
Politics and the Political (Das Politische)
In order to study the philosophy of politics, we start with a certain axiom
— the absolute homology between the Political and the Philosophical. Here,
of course, one can find a certain difference between politics and the Political.
One of the greatest political philosophers, Carl Schmitt (1888–1985),
distinguishes between politics and the Political (das Politische)(1) .The latter
should be understood not as an adjective but as a noun. By "politics," Schmitt
means the application of the Political to a specific social and historical
situation. In other words, politics is the concretisation of the Political.
What, in turn, is the Political? Das Politische is the point where the
Son/politics connects with the Father/philosophy. This is the realm of the
genus. The political is the sphere of political philosophy, the point of
homology where we are no longer talking about politics, but not yet about
philosophy. Thus, the sphere of the political is the sphere of the existence of
preconceptions. And by studying preconceptions, we study the homology
mentioned earlier.
The point is that there is a field where the set of philosophy intersects
with the set of politics, and between them there is something common that
belongs to both the first and second circles — a certain segment that is the
Political, the main subject of political philosophy.
The philosopher-king. Plato as a synonym for all
philosophy
It is believed that Plato (c. 427–347 BC) was the creator of the first
complete philosophical system in history. He most fully formulated the
philosophical agenda that determined the entire ancient history of
philosophy, the entire Middle Ages, and, to a large extent, the philosophy
of the Renaissance, anticipating the philosophy of the modern era. Today, in
the 21st century, there is no thinker who...
1  Schmitt, K. The Concept of the Political. St. Petersburg: St. Petersburg Publishing House
"Nauka" RAS, 2016.e philosophy of the modern era. Today, in
the 21st century, there is no thinker who...
1  Schmitt, K. The Concept of the Political. St. Petersburg: St. Petersburg Publishing House
"Nauka" RAS, 2016.

--- PAGE BREAK ---modern era. Today, in
the 21st century, there is no thinker who...
1  Schmitt, K. The Concept of the Political. St. Petersburg: St. Petersburg Publishing House
"Nauka" RAS, 2016.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

18
Part 1. Political Platonism
more famous and relevant, but at the same time less comprehended and less
understood than Plato.
Plato is philosophy itself. All the most brilliant thinkers of the 14th–20th
centuries turned to Plato. We still haven't outgrown his agenda. Every word
Plato wrote is still hotly debated today. Some geniuses rise up to tear down
Platonism,while others restore it. All Christian dogma is based on Plato, and there
is not a single thesis in Christian theology that does not have a Platonic
dimension. Islamic theology is also built exclusively on Platonism. That is
why Plato is considered a philosopher-king whose kingdom — within the
realm of philosophy — no one has yet been able to attack effectively.
Thousands of times it has been declared that Plato's empire has fallen, but
such statements have been reduced to "marginal hallucinations." It still
stands.
Plato is the king of philosophy. We either dispute this (and then raise a
slave revolt) or accept it unconditionally. The idea that the history of
philosophy has added anything to Plato is completely unfounded. Even
those who are considered the embodiment of, for example, modern
philosophy—Henri Bergson (1859–1941), Karl Popper (1902–1994),
Bertrand Russell (1872–1970)—turned to Platonism. Sometimes even such
positivist philosophers as Whitehead (1861–1947) were inspired by Plato.
Plato is everything. When a person reads Plato, they come into contact
not with a single philosopher, not with a single author, not with a single
school — they come into contact with philosophy as such, because all
philosophy is nothing more than a movement between Plato's theses, their
development, their comparison or contrast, their rejection and new
acceptance. Plato created all of philosophy at once. One could say that the
study of philosophy is the study of Plato's philosophy. Everything else, in
essence, as Whitehead himself said, is "mere notes in the margins of
Plato."
Accordingly, we must pay attention to the fact that philosophy is only
Plato, and if we do not understand Plato, we do not understand the
"programming language" of philosophy. The study of philosophy begins
with the study of Plato's works, continues through the study of Plato's
works, and ends with the study of Plato's works. There is not a single
philosopher who does not know Plato.
1Among these geniuses were Friedrich Nietzsche (1844–1900), whose philosophy, in his own
words, was "inverted Platonism," and Martin Heidegger (1889–1976).ingle
philosopher who does not know Plato.
1Among these geniuses were Friedrich Nietzsche (1844–1900), whose philosophy, in his own
words, was "inverted Platonism," and Martin Heidegger (1889–1976).

--- PAGE BREAK ---ho does not know Plato.
1Among these geniuses were Friedrich Nietzsche (1844–1900), whose philosophy, in his own
words, was "inverted Platonism," and Martin Heidegger (1889–1976).

--- PAGE BREAK ---

19
Chapter 1. The Nature of Politics. Plato and His Cave
Thus, if we want to become acquainted with the matrix on which the
Political, das Politische, is built, i.e., the sphere of the homology we are
talking about, if we want to understand where politics comes from, what its
structure is, and how it manifests itself through the Political, we need to
study Plato. Consequently, Plato is the basic author for the course
"Philosophy of Politics" (1).
Politics and the doctrine of ideas
Let us turn our attention to where Plato formulates his doctrine of ideas in
the clearest form. Key to understanding Plato in this sense is the dialogue The
Republic (2)(Politeia, Greek: PGKIQRST, Latin: Respublica). Plato's state is not
simply a "state" in our understanding of "State" or "power." One could say
that Politeia is the Political itself. Politeia is translated as both "state" and
"republic," but the Greek word has a deeper meaning. It means any political
entity. In essence, Politeia is what Carl Schmitt calls das Politische. It is the
Political, which is most often embodied in the state; the state itself finds its
meaning through the Political. Politeia is primary in relation to the state.
The question arises: is it a coincidence that Plato formulates his
philosophy in its most systematic form in a work called "Politeia," The
Political? The answer is no. Therefore, it is Plato's dialogue "The Republic,"
the main work of the main philosopher, that serves as our starting point for
understanding the philosophy of politics.
Every philosopher has an inner coherence and an inner obligation to the
truth. A philosopher is not free from the truth. What he writes, how he
calls, how he formulates a phrase, is a fundamental statement in the face of
the most monstrous authority, no less terrifying and irreversible than death.
As Heidegger notes, philosophers think in the face of death. Those who
do not think in the face of death do not think at all. Every word of a
philosopher is his last word.
Check out the dialogue "Phaedo" 3, which describes Socrates' last days
and last words. The words Socrates spoke before drinking the cup of hemlock
are
1   Plato. Collected Works: In 4 vols. Moscow: MyUl, 1990–1994.
2   Plato. The Republic / Plato. Collected Works: In 4 vols. Vol. 3. Moscow: MyUl, 1994.
3   Plato. Phaedo / Plato. Collected Works: In 4 vols. Vol. 2. Moscow: MyUl, 1993.ls. Moscow: MyUl, 1990–1994.
2   Plato. The Republic / Plato. Collected Works: In 4 vols. Vol. 3. Moscow: MyUl, 1994.
3   Plato. Phaedo / Plato. Collected Works: In 4 vols. Vol. 2. Moscow: MyUl, 1993.

--- PAGE BREAK ---90–1994.
2   Plato. The Republic / Plato. Collected Works: In 4 vols. Vol. 3. Moscow: MyUl, 1994.
3   Plato. Phaedo / Plato. Collected Works: In 4 vols. Vol. 2. Moscow: MyUl, 1993.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

20
Part 1. Political Platonism
philosophy. What does Socrates say in this dialogue? He says: what have
I been doing all my life, my friends? I have spent my whole life
philosophising on the brink of death. Will I attain a new state after I drink
the poison? I have spent my whole life in it — facing death. This cup of
hemlock has accompanied me from the moment I felt my calling to
philosophy.
Alcibiades in "The Symposium" (1)tells how Socrates bravely retreated
during the war. He took part in military operations in which the Athenian
army was defeated and all its participants fled. Those who fled cowardly
were the first to be pursued by the enemies. Alcibiades says how well
Socrates retreated. He retreated thoughtfully, calmly, and the enemies, seeing
his unhurried gait, did not dare to throw a spear at him or strike him with a
sword. According to Alcibiades, Socrates retreated with dignity. Alcibiades
says:
It was especially worth seeing Socrates, my friends, when our army,
turning to flight, was retreating from Delia. I was then in the cavalry, and he
was in the heavy infantry. He was leaving with Lachetus when our men had
already scattered. And so I met them both and, as soon as I saw them, I urged
them not to lose heart and told them that I would not abandon them. It was
then that Socrates showed himself to me in an even better light than at
Potidaea, for I myself was in less danger because I was on horseback. First of
all, he had more self-control than Lachetus. Besides, it seemed to me that
there, as here, he walked, in your words, Aristophanes, "looking properly to
the left and to the right," that is, calmly looking at his friends and enemies, so
that even from a distance it was clear to everyone that this man, if provoked,
would be able to defend himself, and therefore both of them completed their
retreat safely. For those who behave in this way are usually left alone in war;
it is those who flee without looking back who are pursued.
The title "The State" in Plato cannot be accidental. His teaching about
ideas, therefore, has a direct bearing on politics. "The Republic" is a basic
document of political philosophy or the philosophy of politics. There we are
dealing with the transition between philosophy (for Plato, this is the
doctrine of ideas) and politics as the organisation of the polis in its pure
form. Between philosophy and politics lies "The Republic".
1   Plato. The Symposium / Plato. Collected Works: In 4 vols. Vol. 2.
2Plato. The Symposium. pp. 131–132.anisation of the polis in its pure
form. Between philosophy and politics lies "The Republic".
1   Plato. The Symposium / Plato. Collected Works: In 4 vols. Vol. 2.
2Plato. The Symposium. pp. 131–132.

--- PAGE BREAK ---is in its pure
form. Between philosophy and politics lies "The Republic".
1   Plato. The Symposium / Plato. Collected Works: In 4 vols. Vol. 2.
2Plato. The Symposium. pp. 131–132.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

21
Chapter 1. The Nature of Politics. Plato and His Cave
It should be noted that in Plato's Republic, the philosopher reigns
supreme. The ruling philosopher is a figure of the Political.
Plato did not succeed in establishing the political system described in The
Republic during his lifetime, and it is quite possible that it cannot be
established at all, but he managed to justify the Political, the "state of
philosophers," the ideal state or Kallipolis (WTKKSXGKIJ — from the Greek
Kallos, "beautiful" and polis, "city"). If we understand what Plato was leading
to (and he was leading to the philosophy of politics, not to politics), if we
realise that all his statements are not concepts, but pre-concepts (in other
words, the things from which specific political concepts are derived), then we
will understand that the ideal state (Kallipolis) and the Political, which Plato
described in his "Republic," are the meaning of practically all subsequent
history — both the history of thought and the history of actions.
In reality, in his ideal state, he did not simply give some kind of
covenant, plan or project that could either be implemented or not — he raised
and showed the foundation on which all politics in its concrete manifestations
rests.
Plato wanted to bring a whole range of specific forms of politics into a
single matrix, and he succeeded in doing so. That is why Plato's "State" is the
most realistic thing in the entire history of politics.
We live in Plato's state, we have always lived in Plato's state, and we are
moving towards the construction of Plato's state — from Plato's state to
Plato's state, but only by sorting through the technical possibilities and
historical-political concepts of this "State," which all converge on the
preconceptions of Kallipolis1.
Three functions
Plato says that the structure of the Political is divided into three castes:
philosophers (guardians), warriors (assistants) and everyone else (mainly
peasants, as well as craftsmen and artists) engaged in the production of
material goods. If we look at the history of Indo-European civilisation, as
reconstructed by Georges Dumézil (1898–1986), we see that it was
precisely these three functions that determined the structure of Indo-
European societies for thousands of years: from the ancient Scythians and
nomads who lived in Eurasia since time immemorial to Rome, Greece,
1  In modern sociology, this corresponds to the concept of the "ideal type" (German:
Idealtypus) put forward by Max Weber (1864–1920).mads who lived in Eurasia since time immemorial to Rome, Greece,
1  In modern sociology, this corresponds to the concept of the "ideal type" (German:
Idealtypus) put forward by Max Weber (1864–1920).

--- PAGE BREAK ---rasia since time immemorial to Rome, Greece,
1  In modern sociology, this corresponds to the concept of the "ideal type" (German:
Idealtypus) put forward by Max Weber (1864–1920).

--- PAGE BREAK ---

22
Part 1. Political Platonism
Iran, India, and throughout the Mediterranean. Everywhere we encounter
these three types: divine kings (or priests), warriors, and peasants1.
Plato described to us the fundamental matrix of what was and is. The
entire Middle Ages and the entire Roman Empire were built strictly
according to this principle: at the top were the sacred monarchs
(philosopher kings, or a division between king and philosopher, emperor
and high priest); then the noblesse/noble warriors (the Russian aristocracy
was also part of this second class), who, according to Plato, were the
guardians' assistants; at the bottom was the main population — peasants
(and artisans). We see exactly these models in Greece, Rome, Iran, India,
etc.
There is an opinion that Plato's state was never realised, and that the
philosopher himself was a "failure" who invented an unworkable system, and
that all his attempts to involve the tyrant Dionysius in this system were
fruitless, after which Plato was sold into slavery, later ransomed, and later
no longer engaged in politics. This is a banal — and completely false —
story about Plato's failures to build an ideal state.
The true story of the fate of Platonopolis is as follows: Plato built that
great state which was, is, and will be, because he established an ontological
and metaphysical system of preconceptions for political organisation. The
three-function model discovered in the 20th century by Georges Dumézil
(1898–1986) in the course of sociological research on the structure of
Indo-European societies is nothing more than another retelling of Plato's
"The Republic." The entire Middle Ages, with its three estates, is the
realisation of Plato's ideal state (Kallipolis).
We see these estates in most societies. That is why Plato is one of the
most successful political philosophers in the world, since the model he
established truly dominates in various historical types (with some variations).
It should be understood that Plato was engaged in political philosophy, not
politics:
•his project was created at the level of a preconception,
•the construction of certain matrices within which different names and
relationships can be fixed and arranged in different ways.
•he simply outlined the most general structure of what is Political, and
all
political
forms
are
concretisations,
transitions
from
preconception to concept.
1   Dumezile G. The Supreme Gods of the Indo-Europeans. Moscow: Nauka, 1986; Dumezile G.
The Tripartite Ideology of the Indo-Europeans. Paris: Latomus, 1958.ansitions
from
preconception to concept.
1   Dumezile G. The Supreme Gods of the Indo-Europeans. Moscow: Nauka, 1986; Dumezile G.
The Tripartite Ideology of the Indo-Europeans. Paris: Latomus, 1958.

--- PAGE BREAK ---conception to concept.
1   Dumezile G. The Supreme Gods of the Indo-Europeans. Moscow: Nauka, 1986; Dumezile G.
The Tripartite Ideology of the Indo-Europeans. Paris: Latomus, 1958.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

23
Chapter 1. The Nature of Politics. Plato and His Cave
There is nothing accidental, nothing banal, and nothing secondary in
Plato.
The Cave. Anodos and Katodos
Let us turn to Plato's fundamental image in his dialogue
The Republic. It is the image of a cave. The story told by Plato is as follows:
deep inside a cave, there are people (believed to be slaves or captives) sitting
and looking at a wall on which shadows are moving; the attention of the
entire group is completely fixed on the shadows, and the people believe that
this is life.
What does the philosopher do at this moment? He realises that something
is wrong here and begins to look for another explanation for what is
happening. The philosopher turns his head in the other direction, he turns
back. In doing so, he separates himself from the other people who continue to
contemplate the shadows (looking straight ahead). He takes a risky action,
going against the flow.
And what does the philosopher see when he turns around? He sees that
on a platform, some people (a procession) are carrying statues. Of course, this
is the Dionysian procession. The priests of Dionysus are walking there.
Everyone is looking only at their shadows.
Then the philosopher makes a second gesture — he rises from his seat
and heads towards the procession. This is followed by a third gesture — the
philosopher does not remain with the Bacchantes and the Phaenicians, but
searches for the source of light that casts its rays upon them, so that they, in
turn, cast away the shadows. Thus, the philosopher reaches the entrance to
the cave and beholds the real world for the first time. Socrates says that the
philosopher must do this at night because his eyes must first get used to the
dim light of the stars, for if he immediately rushes outside, the sight of the
sun will blind him. At first, the philosopher must look at the multitude of
stars, at the world of ideas, and only then at the sun, which is the source of
these ideas. Plato calls the ascent to the exit of the cave "anodos" (Greek:
avo[oJ — the way up).
Thus, the philosopher makes three gestures: he turns his head, joins the
Bacchantes 1and goes to the entrance of the cave to see the real world, where
he first contemplates a multitude of ideas
1In "Phaedo," Socrates calls true philosophers Bacchantes, counting himself among them:
"Yes, for, as those who are knowledgeable in the mysteries say, 'there are many thyrso-bearers,
but few Bacchants,' and 'Bacchants' here, in my opinion, are no one else but true philosophers. I
have tried to become one of them — all my life, with all my strength, without missing anything.
Whether I tried correctly and achieved anything, I will know for sure, if it pleases God, when I
come to Hades." Plato. Phaedo. P. 29.— all my life, with all my strength, without missing anything.
Whether I tried correctly and achieved anything, I will know for sure, if it pleases God, when I
come to Hades." Plato. Phaedo. P. 29.

--- PAGE BREAK ---all my strength, without missing anything.
Whether I tried correctly and achieved anything, I will know for sure, if it pleases God, when I
come to Hades." Plato. Phaedo. P. 29.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

24
Part 1. Political Platonism
(in the form of stars), and then the main idea — the idea of Good
(represented, according to some interpretations, by black 1— the sun).
A philosopher is someone who has performed these three gestures and, in
the end, has left the cave and sees the prototypes of those things whose
shadows satisfy ordinary people. In other words, a philosopher twice
overcomes man:
1) he moves from shadows to reality,
2) he passes from reality to archetypes.
Thus he accomplishes a fundamental ascent, anodós.
But then comes katodos (ancient Greek ]^_o[oJ — the way down).
Realising how everything is arranged in the world of ideas, the
philosopher descends. In this descent, he returns to those who contemplate
the shadows and becomes their king. The philosopher becomes a
philosopher
through
anodos/ascension,
and
a
politician
through
katodos/descent.
Philosophy is ascension, politics is descent. This brings us to the main
connection between philosophy and politics, to the structure of the
homology we mentioned earlier. This is how pre-concepts are formed.
The philosopher comes with knowledge that is inaccessible to everyone
else and begins to open the eyes of the prisoners. He says that freedom is
better than slavery, that reason is better than stupidity, that will and
control are better than blind obedience, that truth is much more interesting
and sweeter than delusion, that light is much more meaningful and
exciting than this play of shadows in eternal twilight, that breathing the
real air of existence is incomparably more pleasant than suffocating in the
nightmarish stench of the cave floor.
Then (often) he is killed. He is killed because everything he says is
completely at odds with the usual ideas, and the philosopher simply prevents
people from watching the spectacle cast by the shadows of the Corybants on
the wall. But in some cases (as an exception), he is not killed, and then he
convinces the prisoners that even if not all of them are ready for the three
philosophical gestures, at least they are capable of facing the truth — of
looking back, of looking in another direction. Others can rise up to the
Bacchantes and take part in the festival of Dionysus. If anyone wants to
follow further, the philosopher takes him by the hand and leads him to the
exit of the cave.
1Neoplatonists emphasised the apophatic nature of the Good, identifying it with the
super-being One from Plato's dialogue Parmenides. Plato. Parmenides/Plato. Collected Works:
In 4 vols. Vol. 2. On the black sun, see Marlan S. The Black Sun: The Alchemy and Art of
Darkness. College Station: Texas A&M University Press, 2005.nides. Plato. Parmenides/Plato. Collected Works:
In 4 vols. Vol. 2. On the black sun, see Marlan S. The Black Sun: The Alchemy and Art of
Darkness. College Station: Texas A&M University Press, 2005.

--- PAGE BREAK ---ides/Plato. Collected Works:
In 4 vols. Vol. 2. On the black sun, see Marlan S. The Black Sun: The Alchemy and Art of
Darkness. College Station: Texas A&M University Press, 2005.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

25
Chapter 1. The Nature of Politics. Plato and His Cave
Those who determine the philosophical paradigms of
governance rule
Before us lies the entire political programme: rise up, descend so as not
to leave people behind, and lift up all the rest — those who can still be
awakened. Politics must be placed under the Political, i.e., under the
philosophy of politics. Then the philosopher is the King, and only the
philosopher has the right to power. All others are usurpers. Only those who
can perform two actions — anodos and katodos — can be adequate
philosophers and adequate rulers.
Of course, the question arises: why descend? Socrates replies that it is a
sacrifice. A true philosopher must ascend, but if he does not descend, he will
show his dependence on the filth he left behind. He will be too squeamish a
philosopher. It is truly necessary to descend into the cave, reach its bottom,
and clean up all the rubbish that is there, to awaken people from their sleep.
Therefore, true politics is the politics of philosophical awakening.
Only a political system that guides all its citizens towards awakening and
spiritual self-awareness is adequate. If politics does not pursue this goal, it is
false politics, the politics of evil, the politics of usurpation.
All power has a philosophical dimension, and it is always philosophers
who rule. Those who rule are those who determine the philosophical paradigms
of governance, those who engage in political philosophy, not politics. And
political philosophy, as we have said, involves two actions: the ascent to
philosophical contemplation (anodos) and the sacrificial descent in order to
awaken the people (katodos).
Therefore, in this parable, in Plato's cave, where the doctrine of ideas
is first introduced, the most complete representation of political philosophy
appears for the first time. The metaphor of the cave is the essence of
political philosophy. For Plato, philosophy becomes complete when those
who have attained the highest descend to the lowest, when those who have
seen the truth bring it to those who are deluded and sitting below (but this is
only possible by political means). A philosopher truly becomes a
philosopher when he becomes a king.
Layers of polity
In The Republic, Plato describes the ideal city. Its fundamental feature is
a vertical organisationlitical means). A philosopher truly becomes a
philosopher when he becomes a king.
Layers of polity
In The Republic, Plato describes the ideal city. Its fundamental feature is
a vertical organisation

--- PAGE BREAK ---ilosopher truly becomes a
philosopher when he becomes a king.
Layers of polity
In The Republic, Plato describes the ideal city. Its fundamental feature is
a vertical organisation

--- PAGE BREAK ---

26
Part 1. Political Platonism
, a hierarchy corresponding to the vertical structure of Platonic ontology, that
is, of all existence as a whole.
The philosopher-king stands at the top of the social hierarchy of the
polity. He is completely immaterial, ascetic, devoted only to the
contemplation of the Good, and performs all other functions only under
the influence of the idea he contemplates. The Neoplatonist Plotinus
(204/205–270) described this as the philosopher being "overflowing" with
the rays of the One (Ev), which requires the further outpouring of these
contemplated rays onto the rest of society. The philosopher thus performs a
salvific function, and power acts as a soteriological instrument that
dispenses genadic (from the Greek avTJ, "genada," "participation in the
One") belonging to the transcendent principle.
The main function of the philosopher is knowledge, therefore, in the
human soul, royal power and aristocracy correspond to the ability to engage
in higher forms of thinking — theory (_RbpST — contemplation).
At the opposite end, at the bottom of society, are peasants, cattle
breeders, artisans, traders, merchants, artists, painters, metics, and slaves.
They are divided vertically ( slaves are at the bottom) and horizontally (Plato
recognises the division of labour and sees in it the inability of people engaged
in specific professions to rule the whole society). This is the main
composition of the polity, engaged as necessary in interaction with the realm
of materiality and corporeality. The attraction to the material is
predetermined by the quality of the soul of the common people: they are
dominated by lust, a craving for material pleasure, food, physical comfort,
and lower down — by lust, debauchery, baseness, meanness, etc. Here,
money becomes the key instrument as the antithesis of philosophical thought.
Everything noble, sublime, refined, insightful, and upward-looking gravitates
toward philosophy. Everything defective, ignorant, base, coarse, banal, and
scattered in a multitude of carnal sensations strives for money. The soul of
the lower classes is structured in such a way that it is dominated by a focus
on production (poiesis).
Above the main mass of material citizens, focused on production, are the
"guardians" (cdKT3) and their assistants. In some cases, the "guardians" are
identified with the philosophers themselves, and the assistants of the
guardians with warriors. The type of warrior is driven by "fury," _uHLJ.
Warriors are called upon to defend the citizens of the City from external
threats. In the structure of Plato's polity, guardians and warriors play a key
role. They are seen as bearers of a special nature, in which gold and silver
predominate,ns of the City from external
threats. In the structure of Plato's polity, guardians and warriors play a key
role. They are seen as bearers of a special nature, in which gold and silver
predominate,

--- PAGE BREAK ---external
threats. In the structure of Plato's polity, guardians and warriors play a key
role. They are seen as bearers of a special nature, in which gold and silver
predominate,

--- PAGE BREAK ---

27
Chapter 1. The Nature of Politics. Plato and His Cave
while the lower classes are associated with copper and iron. It is the guards
who represent the elite of the City and are the primary focus of Plato's
attention. This is the "political class," and the quality of its condition and
education directly determines the entire polity as a whole.
Possessing "fury" clearly distinguishes warriors from other types. Plato
interprets fury as something that restrains natural animal needs: first and
foremost, the need for production. A fierce person seeks honour and glory,
i.e., builds their existential strategy on overcoming and excelling. Here,
according to Neoplatonic theories, politics and "political virtues" begin.
Political virtue differs from other virtues (e.g., ethical virtues) in that
it strictly regards the body as an instrument of the soul. The soul is fierce,
and it is the soul that is most of all the soul, not the body, i.e., a self-
propelling and matter-free autonomous entity, the source of movement and
the centre of life. It is fierce where it is full, where it is "overflowing" with
life, bursting at the seams. Fury freely manifests itself in war, in the
defence of the homeland and the people from external threats. And there,
warriors realise the fullness of their nature.
The metaphor of the dog
In one place, Plato addresses a very important issue: if ferocity is the
main virtue of warriors (assistants to the guards), will they not spread it to
each other, leading to chaos and discord within the polity itself?
Here, Plato's attention falls on the dog (incidentally, many have
wondered why Socrates repeatedly swears by dogs in his dialogues). It is
precisely the dog that Plato calls a philosophical animal, a beast
possessing the primary skills of philosophy. What are these skills?
Plato explains it in the second book of The Republic:
— (...) You know about purebred dogs, that their nature is to be as gentle
as possible with those they are accustomed to and know, but with strangers,
just the opposite.
— I know, of course.
— So, it is possible, and seeking such qualities in guards is not
contrary to nature.
— Apparently not.e they are accustomed to and know, but with strangers,
just the opposite.
— I know, of course.
— So, it is possible, and seeking such qualities in guards is not
contrary to nature.
— Apparently not.

--- PAGE BREAK ---d to and know, but with strangers,
just the opposite.
— I know, of course.
— So, it is possible, and seeking such qualities in guards is not
contrary to nature.
— Apparently not.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

28
Part 1. Political Platonism
— Don't you think that a future guard needs something else: not only
must he be fierce, but he must also, by nature, strive for wisdom.
— How so? I don't understand.
— And you will also notice this trait in dogs, which is very surprising in
an animal.
— What exactly?
— When a dog sees a stranger, it becomes angry, even though the
stranger has done nothing to it, but when it sees a familiar person, it fawns on
them, even though they have never done anything good for it. Hasn't that
struck you?
— I hadn't really noticed it before, but it's clear that the dog behaves
in this way.
— This trait of its nature seems remarkable and even truly
philosophical.
— How so?
— Well, a dog determines whether a person it sees is friendly or hostile
based on whether it knows them or not. Isn't this a desire to learn, when the
determination of whether someone is close or, conversely, a stranger is made
on the basis of understanding or, conversely, misunderstanding?
— This cannot be denied.
— And the desire to know and the desire for wisdom are one and the
same1.
The ability to control anger as the main trait of a guard dog is rooted
only in wisdom, i.e. in theory, in philosophy. Therefore, a dog capable of
abstract concepts such as "friend," "one's own" (even if it has done nothing
good for it) and "enemy" ("stranger," even if it has done nothing wrong to
it) represents an initial form of abstract philosophising, the identification
of the eidos of "one's own" and "the other" as predetermining rigid
behavioural patterns (playful games/threatening barking). Thus, the dog
becomes a symbol not only of loyalty to its master (like a guard loyal to
the polis), but also a symbol of wisdom, since it is capable of activating
the higher aspects of its soul — precisely those where wisdom is rooted
and where the ability to contemplate ideas is located. From this, we can
draw an important conclusion: the symbolism of the dog may be related to
the caste of warrior-philosophers or warrior-priests, which refers us to the
Ghibelline Emperor, symbolised by a greyhound (veltro), to the Catholic
order of the Dominicans (dogs of the Lord).
1   Plato. The Republic. pp. 138–139.s or warrior-priests, which refers us to the
Ghibelline Emperor, symbolised by a greyhound (veltro), to the Catholic
order of the Dominicans (dogs of the Lord).
1   Plato. The Republic. pp. 138–139.

--- PAGE BREAK ---, which refers us to the
Ghibelline Emperor, symbolised by a greyhound (veltro), to the Catholic
order of the Dominicans (dogs of the Lord).
1   Plato. The Republic. pp. 138–139.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

29
Chapter 1. The Nature of Politics. Plato and His Cave
them), as well as to the use of dog heads in the symbolism of the Russian
oprichnina under Ivan the Terrible (1530–1584) — a figure in Russian
history who was closer than any other to the figure of the philosopher-tsar.
Guards and philosophy
The ability of guardsmen to control their anger gives them access to
philosophy. The nobility of their souls is such that the best among them can
become philosophers, and in their case, a philosophical education should
complement their gymnastic and musical training. Physical strength and
sensitivity must be crowned with theoretical knowledge. Therefore, the
guards become the environment that binds the entire polity together: from
this environment, the most worthy and wise become philosophers and,
perhaps, kings, while others maintain the philosophical level from generation
to generation through education, upbringing, and a kind of caste hygiene
(encouraging selection — heroes and wise men should have as many children
as possible, while the weak and inferior should have as few as possible).
Another part of the guardians, whose abilities for philosophy are limited,
remain in the rank of "assistants." Assistants interact with the general
population, monitor order and compliance with norms and laws, and
participate in military operations. All guardians are prohibited from owning
private property, money, or starting families. Equality and simplicity of
morals, contempt for materialism and physicality flourish among them. Their
entire human nature is artificially constructed: the body is formed through
physical exercise; the soul and sense of beauty are formed through the
mastery of the arts and music (in "The Laws" (1)Plato insists that the
inhabitants constantly perform sacred dances in honour of the rulers and
gods, sing and dance, and that this should be made a duty for citizens);
wisdom i s achieved through contemplation and dialectics, the highest of the
sciences. It is very important to emphasise here the direct identification of
power with asceticism and material minimalism, and of submission with
material well-being, wealth, and the possession of financial resources. Noble
modesty rules over voluptuous wealth.
Stratification of polytheia
In The Republic, two forms of vertical division of society can be found:
dyadic and triadic. In one case, there is a pro-
1   Plato. Laws / Plato. Collected Works: In 4 vols. Vol. 4. Moscow: MyUl, 1994.The Republic, two forms of vertical division of society can be found:
dyadic and triadic. In one case, there is a pro-
1   Plato. Laws / Plato. Collected Works: In 4 vols. Vol. 4. Moscow: MyUl, 1994.

--- PAGE BREAK ---rms of vertical division of society can be found:
dyadic and triadic. In one case, there is a pro-
1   Plato. Laws / Plato. Collected Works: In 4 vols. Vol. 4. Moscow: MyUl, 1994.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

30
Part 1. Political Platonism
hundred men and guards. And from the most gifted of the guard dogs,
philosophers-rulers are educated. In the other case, there are commoners,
guards (as assistants) and philosophers-aristocrats. Both of these models can
be accepted simultaneously, since the triadic structure corresponds exactly to
the tripartite structure of the main properties of the soul: desire, anger and
reason (which gives us commoners, guards and philosophers), while the
dyadic structure draws a line between the noble elite (guards, including
philosophers) and the masses (everyone else). At the same time, all castes are
conceived as a single organism in which the soul and mind are related to the
higher, and the body and organs to the lower.
The education of the guardians is the main task of the polity. To achieve
this goal, Plato proposes censoring mythology and poetry, retaining only
those stories that describe gods and heroes in a respectable manner.
Chthonogenesis
Plato expresses an important idea regarding the chthongensis of the
citizens of the ideal state. Plato mentions the origin of humans from the earth
in the dialogue "Politicus":
Stranger. It is clear, Socrates, that in the nature of that time there was no
birth of living beings from living beings; the lot of the generation of that time
was to be reborn from the earth, as in the past, people were earth-born 1.
Plato suggests instilling in the citizens of the polity the belief that they
were created by the earth, not by other people (thus proposing a return to the
original time, the "golden age"). To this end, on the one hand, families are
abolished so that children do not know their parents and attribute their birth
to the state and its land, and on the other hand, a chthonic genealogy is taught
from childhood. Plato writes:
— I will try to convince first the rulers and soldiers, and then the rest of
the citizens, that everything in which we have raised and nurtured them
appeared to them in a dream as something they had experienced, when in fact
they were underground, being moulded and nurtured in its depths — both
themselves and their weapons and various
1   Plato. Politician / Plato. Collected works: In 4 volumes. Vol. 4. P. 20.n in fact
they were underground, being moulded and nurtured in its depths — both
themselves and their weapons and various
1   Plato. Politician / Plato. Collected works: In 4 volumes. Vol. 4. P. 20.

--- PAGE BREAK ---underground, being moulded and nurtured in its depths — both
themselves and their weapons and various
1   Plato. Politician / Plato. Collected works: In 4 volumes. Vol. 4. P. 20.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

31
Chapter 1. The Nature of Politics. Plato and His Cave
equipment prepared for them. When they were completely ready, the earth,
being their mother, brought them forth. Therefore, they must still care for the
country in which they live as for their mother and nurse, and defend it if
anyone attacks it, and treat other citizens as brothers, also begotten by the
earth(1) .
And he continues:
Although all members of the state are brothers (so we will say,
continuing this myth), the god who created you mixed gold into those of
you who are capable of ruling, and therefore they are the most valuable,
and silver into their assistants, and iron and copper into farmers and
various craftsmen. You are all related, for the most part you give birth to
your own kind, although it does happen that silver offspring are born from
gold, and gold from silver; the same is true in other cases. God demands
first and foremost of rulers that they be valiant guardians and protect nothing
so zealously as their offspring, observing what admixture there is in the
souls of their children, and if a child is born with an admixture of copper or
iron, they should not show any pity towards him, but should treat him
according to his natural abilities, i.e. include him among the craftsmen or
farmers; if anyone is born with an admixture of gold or silver, he should
be valued and honourably transferred to the guards or assistants. For there
is a prophecy that the state will be destroyed when it is guarded by iron or
copper guards (2).
Plato clarifies here that if the actual characteristics of a member of a
particular caste of the polity do not correspond to the norms, the caste can
be changed — if a peasant's child shows an aptitude for war and
philosophy, it means that there is gold and silver in his soul; and if an
aristocrat is cowardly, mean, lazy, greedy, deceitful, or loves money, then
copper or iron prevails in him, and he must be expelled from his caste.
In this way, patriotism is also cultivated: all citizens grew out of the
Hellenic soil (as if Plato were continuing the mystical idea of the primacy
of the soil of Xenophanes of Callippus), and therefore its defence is their
direct natural duty.
1   Plato. The Republic. P. 184.
2  Ibid. pp. 184–185.re continuing the mystical idea of the primacy
of the soil of Xenophanes of Callippus), and therefore its defence is their
direct natural duty.
1   Plato. The Republic. P. 184.
2  Ibid. pp. 184–185.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

32
Part 1. Political Platonism
It is important to emphasise here that the structure of the citizens of
the City, who arise directly from the Earth under the influence of the
heavenly Logos without the mediation of humans, corresponds to the
phase when the cosmos is governed directly by God. Birth from humans
and, accordingly, the institution of the family belong to that historical stage
when the cosmos becomes autonomous and begins to (falsely) think of itself
as self-created, autogenous. Within the cosmos, individual parts also begin to
consider themselves autonomous and autogenous. Therefore, the artificial
myth of the origin of humans from the earth, which Plato proposes to
introduce as an element of the education of the guardians, is actually closer to
the truth than the birth of humans from humans. It is the Logos, acting on
matter, that makes humans human.

--- PAGE BREAK ---as an element of the education of the guardians, is actually closer to
the truth than the birth of humans from humans. It is the Logos, acting on
matter, that makes humans human.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

Chapter 2. Ontology of the ideal state
(Kallipolis)
Political: implicit and explicit
Let us consider the classical view of political philosophy as presented by
Plato. Three of his dialogues are specifically devoted to the problems of
political philosophy: The Republic, The Statesman 1 ,
The Laws 2  (and its supplement, The After-Laws 3 ). However, we will not
focus on them. Although it is in these dialogues that Plato's conception of
political philosophy is most fully developed, this conception is inextricably
linked to Plato's philosophy as such. Therefore, based on the homology
between the Political and the Philosophical, we can consider and seek the
political dimension not only in those dialogues devoted to the philosophy of
politics, but also in dialogues devoted simply to philosophy. This is a very
important element. Plato's philosophy is something whole: in part he speaks
about politics, and in part he does not. But even where he does not speak
about politics, one can find political change. In any, even the most abstract
and abstract philosophical statement of Plato, we can find a kind of
equivalent of the political — in that intermediate set where homology is
constructed between philosophy and politics, i.e., in the sphere of
the Political.
This does not mean that all philosophy boils down to politics; it only
means that all philosophy has the potential for political interpretation.
Philosophy, as we have said, is more than politics. Philosophy contains all
politics within itself. Therefore, from the completeness of philosophy, we can
extract the completeness of politics. The dialogues of Plato listed at the
beginning of this lecture serve as an example of this. They make explicit the
basic philosophical principles of politics.
1   Plato. The Statesman.
2   Plato. Laws.
3   Plato. After the Laws /Plato. Collected Works: In 4 vols. Vol. 4.an example of this. They make explicit the
basic philosophical principles of politics.
1   Plato. The Statesman.
2   Plato. Laws.
3   Plato. After the Laws /Plato. Collected Works: In 4 vols. Vol. 4.

--- PAGE BREAK ---They make explicit the
basic philosophical principles of politics.
1   Plato. The Statesman.
2   Plato. Laws.
3   Plato. After the Laws /Plato. Collected Works: In 4 vols. Vol. 4.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

34
Part 1. Political Platonism
Every philosophical idea of Plato has a political dimension
In his dialogues devoted directly to politics, Plato says: we take
philosophy, apply it to politics, and obtain the realm of politics. In other
cases, he himself does not carry out this operation of translating the
philosophical into the political.
But does this mean that Plato's other dialogues should be considered
exclusively in the realm of philosophy? Certainly, they can be considered in
the realm of philosophy in isolation from politics (this is a perfectly
legitimate operation), but in fact, this is neither exclusive nor necessary; in
other words, every philosophical idea of Plato has a political dimension.
In one case, this measurement is explicit, i.e., frank, open, and clear, while
in another, it is implicit (this means that Plato himself did not apply a particular
philosophical idea in the sphere of politics, but it does not mean that those
who follow him cannot do so). Does this mean that the very application of a
philosophical idea in a given sphere is called into question? No, it does not. If
Plato himself did not draw political conclusions from his philosophical ideas,
this does not mean that this should not be done or that it is impossible to do
so. Consequently, in order to understand the completeness of Plato's Politics,
we can draw on both dialogues explicitly devoted to political philosophy and
those in which nothing is said on the subject.
Accordingly, Plato's entire philosophy can be viewed as either
explicitly or implicitly containing political philosophy.
The ontology of Timaeus and the three states: ideal,
phenomenal, material
In this regard, attention should be paid to the following dialogue, which
is strictly necessary for understanding the completeness of Plato's thought as
a whole. This is the dialogue "Timaeus" 1. There, Plato talks about the
structure of the cosmos, ontology and metaphysics, and says nothing about
politics. Nevertheless, based on what has been said earlier, we ourselves can
perform the operation that Plato did not perform. That is, we can apply his
philosophical, cosmological, ontological, and metaphysical views to the
political sphere. He himself does something similar in the dialogue "The
Republic."
1   Plato. Timaeus / Plato. Collected Works: In 4 vols. Vol. 3.ogical, ontological, and metaphysical views to the
political sphere. He himself does something similar in the dialogue "The
Republic."
1   Plato. Timaeus / Plato. Collected Works: In 4 vols. Vol. 3.

--- PAGE BREAK ---and metaphysical views to the
political sphere. He himself does something similar in the dialogue "The
Republic."
1   Plato. Timaeus / Plato. Collected Works: In 4 vols. Vol. 3.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

35
Chapter 2. Ontology of the ideal state (Kallipolis)
Timaeus is a long, detailed dialogue, most likely representing a Platonic
exposition of Pythagorean cosmology. The following is important for us:
what is set out in Timaeus is fully consistent with the entire structure of
Plato's thought and, in particular, with the picture we discussed when talking
about the cave metaphor — first of all, where it is about shadows, then about
objects, and then about the search for the source of light. This ascent
(avo[oJ) of the philosopher to the source of light and his descent/return
(]^_o[oJ) on the one hand, describes a kind of vertical path of philosophy,
and on the other, the vertical structure of politics, because at the centre of the
Political, according to Plato, stands the philosopher-king who has returned
from his metaphysical journey to the origins. If he has not made this journey,
his power is metaphysically illegitimate.
Legitimacy, validity, normality, and idealism in the structure of power
are like a philosopher returning from a transcendental journey. That is
what a king is. He returns with memories of contemplating the highest
principle. Thus, the vertical ascent and descent that underlie the basic
scenario of normative political philosophy are clarified in the topic of the
dialogue
"Timaeus."
The metaphor of the Father: The world of paradigms
What does the dialogue "Timaeus" say in its most fundamental
dimension? It says that there are three principles, three main types of all that
exists. All that exists can be divided into three ontological categories.
The first category, which Plato summarises as the Father, represents the
world of paradigms (Greek: XTp^[RIMHT — model). This corresponds exactly
to the idea (Greek: í[gT — prototype, type). An idea is almost the same thing
as a paradigm. The first world of paradigms is the world of the spirit, the
world of the Mind, NohJ. It is the world in which the original seeds of things,
ideas or eidos, reside.
Accordingly, this world is truly real. It exists in the full sense of the
word. It is not a representation or projection of human consciousness. On
the contrary, human consciousness is a projection of these ideas.
It is important to note that, according to Plato, the contemplative (voiQJ)
comes first, followed by the contemplative (voRpJ). In the beginning, there is an
ideal world, which is a zone of models according to which everything else is
arranged. This world is active and is the centre of existence.the contemplative (voRpJ). In the beginning, there is an
ideal world, which is a zone of models according to which everything else is
arranged. This world is active and is the centre of existence.

--- PAGE BREAK ---voRpJ). In the beginning, there is an
ideal world, which is a zone of models according to which everything else is
arranged. This world is active and is the centre of existence.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

36
Part 1. Political Platonism
From Plato's point of view, an idea is not something that is in our heads,
not something we invent; an idea is something that really exists. An idea is the
contemplative (voiQJ). It is also XTp^[RIMHT. í[gT is the visible, XTp^[RIMHT
is the model.
These two concepts are very important because their meaning and
identification show us how Plato's philosophy (Platonism) and practically
all idealistic philosophy is constructed. When we talk about í[gT, about
XTp^[RIMHT, we describe philosophy as such, in its original, unchanging,
eternal structure, characteristic of philosophy today.
Contemporary philosophy represents a vicious attack on Plato, that is, an
attack of time on eternity, of stupidity on intelligence, of delusion on truth.
However, in reality, all that exists is Plato and his enemies (and, of course,
the notes in the margins of his works).
Everything is Plato. That is why it is so important to understand what
Plato is. And if we are talking about political philosophy, we must constantly
refer to Plato. Plato was, is, and will be. This is the only thing that people
who study political philosophy begin with and, more often than not, end with.
Everything else is, at best, good commentary. Reading the dialogues: "The
Republic," "The Laws,"
"The Statesman," but also "Timaeus" will give us some idea, albeit a very
distant one, of Plato. Without this, it is impossible to study political
philosophy. If Plato is not open to us and these works are not read, our
knowledge of political philosophy will be notoriously incomplete.
The ideal state is a state that eternally exists
Thus, ídéa is XTp^[RIMHT, the visible is the exemplary. This means that
the idea/paradigm/world of the Father is what is. How does an idea exist?
It exists eternally. Therefore, the idea was, is, and will be. The idea is
primary in relation to time. The idea contains within itself all its possible
embodiments. The world of ideas constitutes the world of paradigms
(models). This is the world of the Father.
Please note: when we say "the ideal state," we are not talking about the
state we should strive for, nor are we talking about the state we have
imagined. We are talking about the state that exists. And to the extent that the
existing state resembles the ideal state, to that extent it is the ideal state.re we talking about the state we have
imagined. We are talking about the state that exists. And to the extent that the
existing state resembles the ideal state, to that extent it is the ideal state.

--- PAGE BREAK ---the state we have
imagined. We are talking about the state that exists. And to the extent that the
existing state resembles the ideal state, to that extent it is the ideal state.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

37
Chapter 2. Ontology of the ideal state (Kallipolis)
An ideal state is a state that exists eternally and serves as a model for
all historically existing states. All historically existing states are nothing
more than temporary and random reflections of this ideal state. Accordingly,
we speak of the ideal state not as something that could be, should be, or was
conceived by someone, but as a state that truly exists.
The following can be said about the state in which we live: to the extent
that it resembles the ideal state, it also exists. Similarly, to the extent that it
does not resemble an ideal state, it is non-ontological, non-existent,
fictitious, transient, unstable, false and non-existent. That is, it does not
really exist, but rather a distorted parody of it, a pseudo-state.
The true and the visible
Greek philosophy, starting with Parmenides (c. 540 – c. 470 BC),
distinguishes between the true (, Greek for "unhidden," "true") and the visible
([L3T, Greek for "opinion," "imaginary"). The world we see is the imaginary
world. The real world is hidden behind the imaginary world, just as truth
(TKj_RIT) is hidden behind opinion ([L3T). What we see is imaginary,
containing truth within itself, simultaneously hiding and revealing it. But not
everything we see, perceive and know is true; much of it is only imaginary,
apparent. Thus, the imaginary deceives us, appearing to be, but not being.
The ideal state is a state that fully corresponds to the idea of the state; a
state that exists eternally in the structure of the paradigm. That is, we can say
that it is a paradigmatic state, or a state of ideas/a state of paradigms.
Accordingly, the idea of the ideal state as a Fatherland, founded on the logic
described by Plato, exists eternally; it is true, it is. Everything else combines
"is" and "is not." Everything that is different from the ideal state is an
imaginary state.
The metaphor of the Son: icons, symbols
In order to understand the ontology of everything else besides the world
of the Father and move on to the second principle of the Timaeus, we turn to
the metaphor of the Son. This is the second world.order to understand the ontology of everything else besides the world
of the Father and move on to the second principle of the Timaeus, we turn to
the metaphor of the Son. This is the second world.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

38
Part 1. Political Platonism
existence
Nurse
space
Mother
matter choir
elements (elements)
Recipient
place
is
demiurge (creator)
cosmos
Son
phenomen
a icons
symbols
time
and is, and is not
is as if not
The structure of "Timea"
Who is the Son? The Son is both the Father, since he was created by the
Father, and Other than the Father. And since the Son is in the Father, and not
the Father in the Son, he is in some ways similar to the Father, and in some
ways different from him. The Son is in some way inferior to the Father. He
cannot be better than the Father, otherwise, from the point of view of
Good
Father
paradigms
ideas
eternity

--- PAGE BREAK ---s different from him. The Son is in some way inferior to the Father. He
cannot be better than the Father, otherwise, from the point of view of
Good
Father
paradigms
ideas
eternity

--- PAGE BREAK ---

39
Chapter 2. Ontology of the ideal state (Kallipolis)
the idea, he would be the Father himself1. The Father-Son relationship in the
patriarchal Greek model is a symbolic relationship, a relationship of
wholeness and part (inheriting something from the whole). So, the metaphor
of the Son is the first thing.
The second is the icon (from the Greek Rí]Gk, from the ancient Greek Rí]v,
"image," "depiction"). The world of the Son consists of icons or images.
Images are not models; images are copies. The second world is the iconic or
symbolic world, the world of symbols (ldHmoKov).
What do symbols symbolise? They symbolise ideas. Ideas are what exist,
but symbols... do they exist or not? Symbols partly exist and partly do not.
Ideas are identical to themselves. They are themselves, they are what they
are. Symbols point to these ideas. That is, symbols partly exist to the extent
that they point to an idea, but partly they do not exist — just as they do
not exist in isolation from the ontological act of pointing. If the formula
A=A (an idea is an idea) is true for an idea, then a symbol has a much more
complex relationship to being; it exists because it is not itself (AoA); a
symbol does not symbolise itself, but someone else, and without the other, it
loses its meaning in being.
disappears. It exists as long as it points to something other than itself.
But a symbol in itself is not what it points to. It is not an idea or a model.
A symbol is not a paradigm, but an icon, a copy. Accordingly, like A=A, it
does not exist.
The existence of a symbol is not the same as the existence of an idea. The
existence of a symbol is both real and unreal. It is a combination of
existence and non-existence in one. As an indicator of an idea (which
definitely exists), a symbol exists. As a thing in itself, it does not exist.
What is a mirror? In reality, a mirror is meaningless in itself. It acquires
content when it reflects something. But what does a mirror reflect when it
reflects nothing? Nothing. That is, there is no existence in this mirror. If
we imagine a symbol as a mirror reflecting some kind of existence, we
will say that we really see some kind of existence in it, and therefore this
mirror exists.
In the work of Stéphane Mallarmé (1842–1898), the image of a mirror
lying on the floor of a dark room at night recurs, and the poet asks, in what
sense does this mirror exist? This mirror reflects nothing. The meaning of
a mirror is to reflect. But if a mirror reflects nothing, does it exist?
From the idea of a mirror left in an empty room at night, the idea of pure
possibility arises, which Plato describes in Timaeus as the third genus or
order of being.
1  This is possible, however, if we consider the primordial nature of the concept of gender in
relation to both the Father and the Son.ato describes in Timaeus as the third genus or
order of being.
1  This is possible, however, if we consider the primordial nature of the concept of gender in
relation to both the Father and the Son.

--- PAGE BREAK ---aeus as the third genus or
order of being.
1  This is possible, however, if we consider the primordial nature of the concept of gender in
relation to both the Father and the Son.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

40
Part 1. Political Platonism
The phenomenon as an icon
But before we move on to explaining the ontology of matter, I would like
to draw attention to another second-order name, the world of copies or the
iconic world. Plato calls it phenomenon (from the Greek cTIvLHRvov —
"appearing," "phenomenon").
It is important to note that a symbol, an icon, a copy is a manifestation
of an idea. Through the Son, the Father is manifested; through the copy,
the paradigm is manifested; through the phenomenon, the idea is
manifested. The meaning of a phenomenon lies in its dual existence. On
the one hand, it is cTIvLHRvov, a phenomenon — it is (since something is
manifested in the phenomenon), and on the other hand, it does not exist in
itself. This is a very important philosophical point. Hence the term
"phenomenal" or the branch of philosophy called "phenomenology." A
phenomenon is that which is revealed, but revealed not as identical to
itself. A phenomenon always has its essence, that is, something that is
through this phenomenon.
The world of phenomena, the world that is given to us in direct
perception, is the world of the manifestation of ideas — to us. That is,
they exist through the world of ideas, and therefore this world is not
identical to itself. The world we perceive is an imaginary world, a world of
opinions. Nothing here points to itself, nothing here is self-referential.
Every object and every phenomenon of nature, from the point of view of
Platonism, is a symbol, i.e. a pointer to something else. It is not the truth
itself, but its manifestation.
Time, according to Plato, is a copy of eternity.
But there is something in this phenomenon that resembles an idea
(which is why the world is fundamentally beautiful), and there is also
something that does not resemble an idea (which is why the world is
essentially transient and mortal). The law of the second world, the world of
the Son, is MgvRlIJ (origin) and c_LpoJ (destruction); moreover, it is time.
If eternal ideas exist in the world of models/paradigms, then time exists
in the world of copies. What is time, according to Plato? It is a copy of
eternity. What is simultaneous in eternity is sequential in time.
In eternity, we are unborn, small, adult, old and dead at the same time 1.
The idea of us is eternal and unchanging.
1In this sense,Empedocles (c. 490 – c. 430 BC), who taught about the four elements (roots) of
reality, claimed that he was simultaneously a child, a bush, a fish, and a bird. By this he wanted to
show that his inner self, his subject or his daimon, was essentially unchanged, no matter what
elements it took on. It is interestingeously a child, a bush, a fish, and a bird. By this he wanted to
show that his inner self, his subject or his daimon, was essentially unchanged, no matter what
elements it took on. It is interesting

--- PAGE BREAK ---sh, a fish, and a bird. By this he wanted to
show that his inner self, his subject or his daimon, was essentially unchanged, no matter what
elements it took on. It is interesting

--- PAGE BREAK ---

41
Chapter 2. Ontology of the ideal state (Kallipolis)
, but in the world it is given to us sequentially: we appear from nowhere,
come into the world of phenomena and disappear into nowhere.
But according to Plato, this "nowhere" — the world of death and the
world that precedes birth — is what we ourselves are. Our death is
fundamentally ontological. This is our idea. We emerge from the idea of
ourselves and return to the idea of ourselves. Moreover, this idea of ourselves
is, to a greater extent, itself not when we are, but when we are not.
Plato describes this through the concept of the eternity of the soul
(puqj). The soul is the idea of us. We ourselves are phenomena, which is
why we live in time. In time, the idea of us turns into a phenomenon, the
ideal "us" turns into the phenomenal, we are ourselves through ourselves.
We are copies of ourselves. Note that here the concept of the dialectic of
the world of the Father and the world of the Son, the world of originals
and the world of copies, is introduced.
The ideal and phenomenal state
We can apply the second principle to the state: there is an ideal state and
a phenomenal state (the state as a phenomenon, the symbolic state, the iconic
state, the state of copies).
What is the phenomenal state a copy of? The ideal. If the ideal state
exists, what is the ontological status of the phenomenal state?
On the one hand, the phenomenal state exists (since it reflects and
represents the ideal state), and on the other hand, it does not exist (since it has
a diminished ontology, which is ultimately non-existent). We can say that the
ideal state (Kallipolis) is a state of the soul, where its citizens are eternal
ideas, and the phenomenal state is a genetic state (it arises and then
inevitably perishes). Its citizens are people.
The ontological status of the ideal state and the phenomenal state
through "Timaeus" helps us understand the metaphor of the cave. The
philosopher's upward movement (avo[oJ) and downward movement
(]^_o[oJ), his exit from politics through the Political into the
Philosophical, and further, the establishment of ideal politics through the
Political in his return, are in fact precisely this dialectic
that the human image in Empedocles (the child) corresponds to the element of fire or the sun.
Wright M. R. Empedocles. The extant fragments. NY; L: Yale University Press, 1981. A similar
idea of the eternally unchanging Soul was held by the Neoplatonist Plotinus (204/205–270).re or the sun.
Wright M. R. Empedocles. The extant fragments. NY; L: Yale University Press, 1981. A similar
idea of the eternally unchanging Soul was held by the Neoplatonist Plotinus (204/205–270).

--- PAGE BREAK ---ht M. R. Empedocles. The extant fragments. NY; L: Yale University Press, 1981. A similar
idea of the eternally unchanging Soul was held by the Neoplatonist Plotinus (204/205–270).

--- PAGE BREAK ---

42
Part 1. Political Platonism
the transition from Father to Son. When the Political emerges, the
philosopher (the Son, the phenomenal man) returns to his own soul (the Son
returns to the Father) and descends again to himself, but now as someone
else. It is one thing for the Son to be simply born, and quite another for the
Son to know the Father. At first, the Son realises that he is only the Son, that
this phenomenal world, the world of opinion ([L3T), is only a copy, just like
himself. Realising what he is a copy of, i.e. comprehending the Father
through contemplation of himself, he becomes a different Son; a Son who
emphasises his similarity to the Father, not his difference, his unity with the
Father, not his opposition. The Son understands that he is not himself, but a
symbol. He is no longer a victim of the delusion that the world we are given
is everything. The Son understands that this world is not true. What is true in
this imaginary world? That it symbolises the true world. Therefore, by the
method of cataphysics (from the Greek ]TQTcTQI]LJ, 'affirming'), by the
method of similarity, we can arrive at what is in the phenomenon. What is in
the phenomenon is not the phenomenon itself. Pay attention to how the
phenomenal state relates to the ideal state: the phenomenal state is a state-
phenomenon, a copy, and to the extent that this copy reflects the ideal state
(Kallipolis), this state exists. Similarly, to the extent that it does not reflect it,
this state does not exist.
The philosophy of politics asserts that politics cannot be studied using
political methods. The content of politics is not politics itself. The content of
politics is philosophy. Politics is the realm of phenomena, while philosophy
is the realm of ideas. Every element of politics is nothing more than a
political phenomenon, a phenomenon. What this phenomenon is is a question
that needs to be studied.
And one last remark: we need to pay attention to what a "norm" (Latin:
norma) is. A norm means almost the same thing as the word "idea" or "ideal."
"To be normal" and "to be ideal"
are approximately the same thing. A norm is never a given; a norm is an
ontological content or paradigm/model against which we measure the
phenomenal. Therefore, Plato's ideal state is a normal state. Moreover, any
phenomenal state is normal only to the extent that it is ideal or similar to the
ideal. What, then, is the state we are dealing with in history? It is by
definition an abnormal state, differing only in the scale and variety of its
abnormality.that it is ideal or similar to the
ideal. What, then, is the state we are dealing with in history? It is by
definition an abnormal state, differing only in the scale and variety of its
abnormality.

--- PAGE BREAK ---similar to the
ideal. What, then, is the state we are dealing with in history? It is by
definition an abnormal state, differing only in the scale and variety of its
abnormality.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

43
Chapter 2. Ontology of the ideal state (Kallipolis)
Woman and the bastard Logos
The third genus in Timaeus is "chora" (qpT). This term originally means
"space" or "place." Plato calls qpT
"Mother," "Recipient," or "Nurser" and identifies space and the feminine
principle with each other, simultaneously describing it as a sphere where the
primary elements (lQGIqRrG) are located.
This third feminine principle, from Plato's point of view, cannot be
understood by the mind, because in the pure feminine principle everything
is meaningless. Woman is understood through a special Logos — a
bastard ("illegitimate") Logos. Everything in a woman that is purely
feminine is understood not by the mind, but by the pseudo-mind.
On the contrary, the Father and the Son are understood by the normal
Logos. Therefore, Plato does not pay much attention to the bastard Logos. In
Greek, "illegitimate," "illegitimate" is KLMoJ vL_oJ.
Plato writes about it as follows
There is another genus, namely space (qpT): it is eternal, impervious to
destruction, provides a home for everything that is born, but is itself
perceived outside of sensation, by means of a kind of unlawful reasoning
(KLMoJ vL_oJ — literally "bastard logos"), and it is almost impossible to
believe in it. We see it as if in dreams and assert that all existence must
necessarily be somewhere, in some place, and occupy some space, and that
anything that is not on earth or in heaven does not exist. In our sleepy
oblivion, we transfer these and related concepts to the nature of true being,
which is unrelated to sleep, and when we wake up, we find ourselves unable
to distinguish between them and speak the truth, namely that, since an image
does not bear the cause of its own birth within itself, but invariably
represents the phantom of something else, it must be born within something
else, as if attached to its essence, or not be anything at all (1).
It should be noted that at this point in Timaeus, Plato's previously
crystal-clear speech loses its transparency, and he begins to speak using
vague images, losing the metaphysical certainty that is unshakeable when
he describes the first and second kinds of being. This can be likened to...
1   Plato. Timaeus. P. 455.begins to speak using
vague images, losing the metaphysical certainty that is unshakeable when
he describes the first and second kinds of being. This can be likened to...
1   Plato. Timaeus. P. 455.

--- PAGE BREAK ---g
vague images, losing the metaphysical certainty that is unshakeable when
he describes the first and second kinds of being. This can be likened to...
1   Plato. Timaeus. P. 455.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

44
Part 1. Political Platonism
to the fact that the gaze of the heavenly god reaches the surface of the Earth,
the lower boundary of the world of copies, and here, encountering its limits,
sees something that cannot be clearly distinguished. On the border of day, the
realm of night dreams flickers. Therefore, Plato limits himself to a few
indications and postulates "chorus," qpT (space) as a flat boundary beyond
which there is nothing, which cannot be understood, since there is nothing to
understand in it.
The Logos born of the law is the Logos of the Father and the Son.
Between them unfolds the entire philosophy of politics in the ideal state
(Callipolis). Woman (qpT) is only a nurse; she feeds the Son without giving
him anything of substance. Woman (qpT) merely gives him a certain
phenomenal existence. In essence, woman (qpT) brings only illusion into the
world. She is the mother of pure "doxa," that is, the direct opposite of truth.
When does the phenomenal approach the ideal? When the second (Son)
approaches the first (Father), breaking away from the third (Mother, Nurse).
What does a woman give to the soul, according to Plato? The body. But the
body is a kind of meaningless burden that transforms the eternal into the
temporal, the transparent into the semi-transparent, and so on.
The chariot of the soul
Plato asserts the same fundamental triad in the very structure of the
human being. In Phaedrus,he compares the human soul to a chariot drawn by
two horses. This chariot participates in the races of the gods across the
heavens. And only when the chariot strays from its path and breaks away
from the group of deities does it enter the body, from where it strives to free
itself and return to its divine companions and leaders.
In the structure of the soul (chariot — Greek sqiHT) there is
1) a charioteer (Greek: ]GdmRc_RSJ, i.e. KLMGJ, vohJ — "mind"),
2) a white horse with a black eye (anger, Greek _dHoJ)
3) and a black horse with a white eye (lust, Greek XI_uHST). The chariot
of the soul, driven by the charioteer, has three principles: nothingness
nothing and two horses.
The charioteer himself is a philosopher, the noblest part of the soul. He
who cultivates the mind develops the highest principle within himself. He
does not simply live by the power of the soul, but subjugates life to thought,
contemplation...
1   Plato. Phaedo / Plato. Collected Works: In 4 vols. Vol. 2.he highest principle within himself. He
does not simply live by the power of the soul, but subjugates life to thought,
contemplation...
1   Plato. Phaedo / Plato. Collected Works: In 4 vols. Vol. 2.

--- PAGE BREAK ---within himself. He
does not simply live by the power of the soul, but subjugates life to thought,
contemplation...
1   Plato. Phaedo / Plato. Collected Works: In 4 vols. Vol. 2.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

45
Chapter 2. Ontology of the ideal state (Kallipolis)
contemplation, that is, he strives to give life meaning and purpose. The
charioteer represents the most divine side of the soul
The white horse with a black eye is rage (_dHoJ), the desire to kill, to
commit violence, but also to be courageous, to defend one's homeland.
Rage is a masculine trait, the soul's desire for expansion. It is the turbulent
principle of the soul, associated with pride, vanity, the will to power, the
desire to dominate others, to conquer. But at the same time, this desire draws
the soul away from the physical world — into more subtle worlds.
The black horse with a white eye is lust (XI_uHST), which binds a person
to material things, thereby constituting them, because it is precisely the
orientation of expansion towards matter that gives rise to the materiality and
corporeality of things. According to Plato, this horse must first be subjugated,
the other tamed, and the charioteer nurtured, as this is our "higher self."
Thus, Plato distinguishes three fundamental levels in the structure of
man.
The dialectic of Parmenides
To understand Plato's thought as a whole, it is also important to consider the
dialogue
"Parmenides" 1 . It establishes a hierarchy of dialectical statements reflecting
the relationship between the One and the Many. Later, non-Platonists —
primarily Plotinus 2 , Iamblichus 3  (245/280–325/330), and especially
Proclus4  (412–485) and Damascius 5 (458/462 – after 538) built on the
analysis of this dialogue a detailed and extensive system combining theology,
cosmology, ethics and physics 6. Proclus and Damascius identify nine
hypotheses in the dialogue Parmenides. The first five hypotheses are based
on the recognition that the One (Ev) exists. For the Platonists, this
recognition is fundamental: if the One (Ev) exists, then everything else exists,
that is, the Many. However, immediately in the first hypothesis, the very
existence of the One (Ev) is significantly clarified: the One (Ev) does not
simply exist like everything else, it exists in a radically different way. In a
sense, if we take "is" to mean how everything is,
1   Plato. Parmenides.
2Plotinus. Enneads: In 7 vols. St. Petersburg: Oleg Abyško Publishing House; University
Book, 2010.
3  Iamblichus of Chalcis. Commentaries on Plato's Dialogues. St. Petersburg: Aleteya. 2000;
Ibid. On the Egyptian Mysteries. Moscow: Aleteya, 2004.
4   Proclus Diadochus. Commentary on Plato's Parmenides. St. Petersburg: Publishing House
Mir, 2006.
5   Damascius. Commentary on Plato's Parmenides. St. Petersburg: Mir. 2008.
6   Dugin, A. G. In Search of the Dark Logos. Moscow: Academic Project, 2014.s. St. Petersburg: Publishing House
Mir, 2006.
5   Damascius. Commentary on Plato's Parmenides. St. Petersburg: Mir. 2008.
6   Dugin, A. G. In Search of the Dark Logos. Moscow: Academic Project, 2014.

--- PAGE BREAK ---ublishing House
Mir, 2006.
5   Damascius. Commentary on Plato's Parmenides. St. Petersburg: Mir. 2008.
6   Dugin, A. G. In Search of the Dark Logos. Moscow: Academic Project, 2014.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

46
Part 1. Political Platonism
What is, is the One (Ev), which is qualitatively superior to everything else.
This is stated in the first hypothesis: the One (Ev) radically transcends being.
And only when recognised as such does being itself begin to exist. Being has
a pre-existent (super-existent) cause. In the theological system of
Christianity, this was called
the "apophatic interpretation of God." We find similar ideas in Islamic
Sufism, Jewish Kabbalah, Hinduism, and Buddhism.
So, the first five hypotheses are as follows:
1) v (the one);
2) v XoKK^ (the one and the many);
3) v ]TI XoKK^ (the one and the many);
4) XoKK^ ]TI v (many and one);
5) XoKK^ (many).
All five of Parmenides' first hypotheses originate from the One (Ev),
therefore all the worlds they describe exist. The second, third, fourth and
even fifth hypotheses become valid only because the first was already
established.
The remaining four hypotheses, from the sixth to the ninth, discussed in
the same dialogue, originate from the non-One. These are purely speculative
logical constructions, which for the Platonists have no ontological basis.
The sixth hypothesis asserts that there is no unity, but there is much, and
therefore, under certain circumstances, much can be combined into a
"unity." This "one" will be composite, collective, artificial, i.e., it will not
possess the primacy of the genuine one (the denial of which gives rise to
the second series of hypotheses). Some Neoplatonists say that such an
assumption is simply a game of the mind. Others (such as Damascius) say
that unity can be conceived in this way from the point of view of the body. In
other words, such a unity is the possibility of combining a multitude of
atomic (individual) parts into a secondary whole.
The seventh hypothesis states: There is no unity, but there is multiplicity,
which is left to itself, that is, it cannot be combined into a "unity." The eighth
hypothesis: There is no unity, but there is multiplicity for multiplicity. That is,
individual atoms exist through interaction between co-
.
Finally, the ninth hypothesis: There is no unity, but there is also no
multiplicity for the many.
This dialectic of the One/Many gives rise to another type of hierarchy,
quite homologous to the general structure of Platonic ontology, and clarifies
some of its most important points.for the many.
This dialectic of the One/Many gives rise to another type of hierarchy,
quite homologous to the general structure of Platonic ontology, and clarifies
some of its most important points.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

1-The
hypothesis
2-Hypothesis
The
One
Good
The One Many
Go
d
U
super-is
3-a hypothesis
Unity and
Many
is
4-a hypothesis
Many and
One
5 -th
hypothesis
Many
matter
is
how not to eat

the boundary between existence and non-
existence
6 -a hypothesis
from many, "one"
(according to Damascius)
7-the
hypothesis
8-The
hypothesis
from many, not "one"
from many, many
falseho
od is
not
(according to Damascius)
9-the hypothesis
from many, not many
Metaphysical and ontological hierarchy of the One/Many in Plato's
Parmenides
m
worl
d
Not the
One
submaterial (subcorporeal) worlds
Unity
Son
Fathe
r
Moth
er

--- PAGE BREAK ---from many, not many
Metaphysical and ontological hierarchy of the One/Many in Plato's
Parmenides
m
worl
d
Not the
One
submaterial (subcorporeal) worlds
Unity
Son
Fathe
r
Moth
er

--- PAGE BREAK ---

48
Part 1. Political Platonism
Three types of political ontology in "Timaeus"
Thus, we have arrived at three types of political ontology. Accordingly,
there exists:
•the ideal, paradigmatic, Father; it is.
•the phenomenal, iconic, filial; it is and is not; it is as a symbol. Thus,
there are two states: the ideal and the phenomenal.
•XpT is the place where the state resides; where the physicality of the
state, the primary matter of the state, exists. XpT, to the extent that she
is only a woman, only herself, does not exist; however, to the extent
that she exists, she participates in the Son; the Mother exists through
the Son.
According to Plato, a woman represents nothing except nursing and
bearing another than herself. And the material structure of statehood acquires
being (including political being) only when it begins to act as the primary
matter for the state phenomenon.
Thus, we can imagine three ontologies of political philosophy:
•The State of the Father: eternal, ideal, paradigmatic state, which
eternally exists;
•The State of the Son: a phenomenal state — a projection of the first
true state into the sphere of phenomena, which is partly there and
partly not there; it combines being and non-being, arises and
disappears, and can be likened to us ourselves, living beings.
•The material aspect of the state. In its pure form, it does not exist. It
is a kind of burden on the state. A non-existent, false state.
We obtain a triangular figure in which three sectors can be identified (see
next page).
The economy appears here as non-politics, or the politics
"animalistic humanity" (according to Plato); this is the lower aspect.
Many positions and many schools will fit into this triangle, into this
Platonic picture of political philosophy. Whatever philosophy of politics,
whatever state and whatever political system we take, we must find a place
for it in this Platonic picture. Beyond the limits of this scheme, there can be
no politics or thought about politics.cs,
whatever state and whatever political system we take, we must find a place
for it in this Platonic picture. Beyond the limits of this scheme, there can be
no politics or thought about politics.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

The
Three ontological layers of politics
state of the
Father
of the
paradigm
models
eternity
ideas
the ideal
state
state of the Son
phenomenal state
phenome
na
symbols
images
icons
material aspects of
the state
Choir
existence
place
economy

--- PAGE BREAK ---the
paradigm
models
eternity
ideas
the ideal
state
state of the Son
phenomenal state
phenome
na
symbols
images
icons
material aspects of
the state
Choir
existence
place
economy

--- PAGE BREAK ---

50
Part 1. Political Platonism
Plato's ideal state: the philosopher-king
Now we can correlate these three parts of the general ontology of
Timaeus, the three types of state (ideal, phenomenal and material) and the
three classical castes of Plato's ideal state.
What does the ideal state correspond to? A philosopher-king. Plato
also adds: aristocracy. At the head of Plato's ideal state (Callipolis) are
representatives of the first caste (philosophers, kings, aristocrats, guards).
This is monarchical rule, philosophical rule, and aristocratic rule. For Plato,
only philosophers are the best (^pSlQoJ). In any state, those who know what
the ideal state is should rule. And even if this state is phenomenal, the best
should rule.
Who is a monarch? A monarch is someone who has, to a greater extent,
found his way to his soul. For him, the entire state is himself, not a collection
of others. A monarch experiences everything personally, and accordingly, the
political in him reaches its peak of intensity at the moment of power. He
represents the point of the most concentrated expression of the paternal
principle.
And the fourth concept (along with the three already mentioned:
philosopher, king, aristocrat) is guardian (cdKT3). A guardian does not
simply guard, he stays awake when everyone else is asleep.
Remember how the philosopher began to behave in the cave metaphor?
Everyone was satisfied with the state of illusion, but he wanted the truth.
Everyone was asleep, but he woke up. Everyone was looking in one
direction, but he looked in the other. Night falls, and everyone falls asleep.
Everyone except the guardian. He alone walks through the city with his club
while everyone else sleeps. Surrounded by owls and gods, who are also
awake, the guardian patrols the Greek polis. He separates his destiny from
that of others. He lives at night. He guards not only these sleeping people, but
to a greater extent he guards the gods (sometimes even from these people
themselves). The guard guards the sacred, existence, the ideal state. He is on
guard for the Other. For that which truly is.
The phenomenal state — the state of the warrior
The second level is the phenomenal state. In Plato's hierarchy, it
corresponds to the guardians' assistants. They are also warriors whose virtue
is masculinity.
What is most important in the world of phenomena? Plato says that
another virtue dominates here — not the contemplation of ideasians' assistants. They are also warriors whose virtue
is masculinity.
What is most important in the world of phenomena? Plato says that
another virtue dominates here — not the contemplation of ideas

--- PAGE BREAK ---ey are also warriors whose virtue
is masculinity.
What is most important in the world of phenomena? Plato says that
another virtue dominates here — not the contemplation of ideas

--- PAGE BREAK ---

Chapter 2. Ontology of the ideal state (Kallipolis)
51
directly, not the protection of being, not a view of the paradigm, but courage.
If a philosopher enters the world of death, reaching its depths, then a warrior
or a philosopher's assistant constantly interacts with this death from outside.
A warrior causes death to others, i.e., he necessarily kills, and he is ready to
sacrifice himself for his state and for the Political itself.
Accordingly, this is the second caste of warriors, which represents the
assistants and defenders of philosophers who strive for glory and courage;
in addition, they are disciples of philosophers. They have a completely
different structure — they are people of the phenomenal world; they are
born, kill and die, they are not in eternity, but in time. If the first caste is
philosophical, the ontological caste of philosopher-kings, then the second
caste is phenomenal.
The phenomenal is not the concern of the philosopher. Unlike him,
members of the second caste are concerned with phenomena. In this
sphere, rage (_dHoJ) reigns supreme. According to Plato, this is a positive
passion. Of course, rage prevents philosophising, but it is nevertheless very
useful in other cases, as it is the maximum expression of life force.
Thus, we come to an understanding of the phenomenal state, or the state
of warriors (the Kshatriya state), in which valour (TvRQj) and rage (_dHGJ)
dominate.
Pacifist warriors are a pathology
The dialogue "Politician" talks about how to tame warriors who live by
rage. Since a warrior is incapable of pure contemplation, when left to his own
devices, he may discover a tendency towards ampIJ (Greek "arrogance,"
"pride"), and boundless belligerence (under its influence, a person not only
kills an enemy but, for example, mocks his corpse). Enough examples can be
found in the Iliad and the Odyssey. Under the influence of ampIJ, the warrior's
fury goes beyond its legitimate limits.
Fury is necessary, Plato believes, but a balance must be found. It is
philosophers who pacify warriors. In order to pacify them, warriors must be
eager for battle. Pacifist warriors are undoubtedly pathological. Warriors
must be fierce, they must love to kill, like hunting dogs, they must smell
blood and be excited by it; however, moderation is necessary here. Thus,
the problem of the phenomenal state is rage and the measure of rage. In
other words, the phenomenal state is created by warriors; they constitute the
warrior caste.eration is necessary here. Thus,
the problem of the phenomenal state is rage and the measure of rage. In
other words, the phenomenal state is created by warriors; they constitute the
warrior caste.

--- PAGE BREAK ---here. Thus,
the problem of the phenomenal state is rage and the measure of rage. In
other words, the phenomenal state is created by warriors; they constitute the
warrior caste.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

52
Part 1. Political Platonism
Providing for thinkers and warriors
The third principle is associated with qrT, the Provider. Just as the
nurturer feeds the child, so the peasantry and craftsmen feed the warriors and
philosophers. The task of the peasant is to ensure that the warrior is well fed
when he rides out to cut off someone's head. Accordingly, the resource-
based economic state is subordinate to the warriors.
Mothers and wet nurses (qpT) correspond to the third caste — the caste
of producers and peasants. They are located in the sphere of space, in
qpT; they work in the countryside: they plant and harvest crops. Their role is
to provide a visible material foundation for the state, to be the place where
the state manifests itself.
In the dialogue "The Laws," Plato talks a lot about what ordinary citizens
of the state should do. They should dance in circles (introduced by the state
as a duty). Plato dwells in detail on how these circles should be arranged,
proposing to divide them into three circles according to age categories.
Circular movements reproduce the rotation of the heavenly bodies and
planets. Therefore, through the cyclical nature of labour and festive dances,
the main population of the ideal state also participates in eternity — in the
world of ideas.
Philosophers think, warriors fight, and the rest work and dance in circles.
This is the ideal model of political philosophy.
Stages of state degradation according to Plato: timocracy,
oligarchy, democracy, tyranny
In the dialogue "The Republic," Plato talks about perverted types of
states. So, there is an ideal state (Kallipolis), which we have described, and
there are perversions or deviations from this paradigmatic model. Plato
names four types of state that should not exist but, unfortunately, do:
timocracy, oligarchy, democracy and tyranny.
1. Timocracy (QIHo]vTQST) or timarchy (QIHTvqST). Plato associates it
with the Spartan model, in which the military principle (rather than the
philosophical one) prevails. That is, there is a certain weakening of the
philosophical principle and a strengthening of the military one. The centre
of gravity shifts from the guards to the assistants of the guards. Under
timocracy, there are still philosophers, but they are not as powerful as they
should be. Fury, as a trait of warriors and a virtue of the second level, begins
to dominate wisdom, a virtue of the first level. This is not yet a complete
seizure of power by philosophers, but only auld be. Fury, as a trait of warriors and a virtue of the second level, begins
to dominate wisdom, a virtue of the first level. This is not yet a complete
seizure of power by philosophers, but only a

--- PAGE BREAK ---

philosopher-king
first caste
aristocracy
wisdom
guards
second caste
fury
guard assistants
warriors
dances
peasants
artisan body
third caste
economy
The three castes of Callipolis

--- PAGE BREAK ---philosopher-king
first caste
aristocracy
wisdom
guards
second caste
fury
guard assistants
warriors
dances
peasants
artisan body
third caste
economy
The three castes of Callipolis

--- PAGE BREAK ---

54
Part 1. Political Platonism
Initial state, first signs. Here, wise men are listened to less, and valour is
elevated to an absolute, rather than relative, value. Spartan gerousia,
military style, and militarism become dominant values.
Plato does not think badly of timocracy, saying that it is not the worst
form of government. Nevertheless, timocracy is a perversion. It is very
important to note that as soon as a warrior is distracted from philosophy, that
is, ceases to be a spiritual warrior, an assistant to the guardians of being, he
becomes attracted to material things. He begins to use his will not only to
fight, but also to grab as many trophies as possible. As the realm of
phenomena becomes more self-centred, it becomes more material and less
and less what it is. When the warrior class becomes interested in material
aspects, it approaches its degeneration.
2. Oligarchy (LKIMTvqST)1 . This type of government arises when several
degenerate, influential military rulers or corresponding groups who have lost
their status, together with wealthy townspeople, form a society of a few rich
people, oligarchs. This is a group of major material and political figures who,
by fair means or foul, by force or cunning, have gained power and rule the
city (state). Plato considered this to be a very bad order. It is a transition to an
even lower stage — between the phenomenal state and pure economics.
Oligarchy is a decisive step away from the order of the Son to the order of the
Mother.
3. Democracy ([iHo]vRIT)2 . Plato believed that this political system
represented a complete perversion and decline, and essentially meant the
transition of the phenomenal state into a material sub-state. Here,
oligarchic power is distributed among a large number of citizens, each of
whom thinks selfishly only of their own material well-being.
For Plato, Socrates' death was the death of a philosopher-king at the
hands of a maddened democratic mob. This is the essence of Plato's
revolution in relation to the society in which he lived. He said that we are in
the third, practically the worst form of perversion, and in order to return to
a normal state, we must turn away from the democratic mob and take a step
towards the ideal model. Thus, Plato, being a representative of the aristocracy,
believed that the state should be ruled by the wise, and not by the masses.
1  Greek: LKIMTpqST (oligarchia) — "rule by the few", from ancient Greek: LKSMoJ (oligos) —
"few" and other Greek words derived from wrché (arche) — "power".
2
  Ancient Greek [iHo]vQST — "power of the people," from [jHGJ — "people" and ]v^QGJ — "power."om ancient Greek: LKSMoJ (oligos) —
"few" and other Greek words derived from wrché (arche) — "power".
2
  Ancient Greek [iHo]vQST — "power of the people," from [jHGJ — "people" and ]v^QGJ — "power."

--- PAGE BREAK ---SMoJ (oligos) —
"few" and other Greek words derived from wrché (arche) — "power".
2
  Ancient Greek [iHo]vQST — "power of the people," from [jHGJ — "people" and ]v^QGJ — "power."

--- PAGE BREAK ---

Chapter 2. Ontology of the ideal state (Kallipolis)
55
The leader of an aristocratic Athenian family (one might say an oligarchic
family) challenges it and says that this form of government must be corrected
and that it is necessary to return from the material sub-state qr to the ideal
model.
4. Tyranny (QurTvvST)1. According to Plato, this is the worst and final form
of statehood. It is an inverted parody of the rule of the philosopher-king. The
philosopher-king is the best of men who rules, while the tyrant is the worst.
Any democracy ends in dictatorship, i.e., tyranny, the seizure of power. It is
clear that sooner or later, a dull democratic society will choose (or have
imposed upon it) the worst of its representatives. Or, out of fear of disorder
and chaos, it will surrender power to a usurper.
Anti-king
This is how Plato describes the four stages of the degradation of the ideal
state (Kallipolis). At first, we have a departure from the norm, then an
increasing deviation, and finally a complete parody, because the tyrant
parodies the philosopher-king. The tyrant is the anti-king, the anti-
philosopher. He is the most foolish and vile of men, claiming to rule over
others. He is the most cowardly, claiming to lead the army. He is a thief and a
corruptor, saying that he can improve life. Tyranny embodies anti-politics.
Starting with democracy, we enter the realm of the sub-state.
The whole picture we have described will only be clear if we understand
what an ideal state (Kallipolis) is. An ideal state always exists; it remains
unchanged, which cannot be said about its projections, phenomena. The ideal
state (Callipolis) may be slightly distorted in a timocracy, more distorted in
an oligarchy, even more distorted in a democracy, and as a parody, as its own
opposite, in a tyranny. Accordingly, a tyrant parodies a monarch, a dictator
parodies a philosopher, and so on. According to Plato, tyranny brings
together all the worst that can be found in other types of statehood. From the
point of view of ontology, a tyrant is someone who is even lower than matter.
Therefore, the existence of tyranny is minimal. There is nothing more
ephemeral than tyranny. What claims to be eternal in tyranny usually turns
out to be temporary, transitory, and illusory.
1  Greek: QupTvvSJ — arbitrariness.yranny is minimal. There is nothing more
ephemeral than tyranny. What claims to be eternal in tyranny usually turns
out to be temporary, transitory, and illusory.
1  Greek: QupTvvSJ — arbitrariness.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

56
Part 1. Political Platonism
However, the cycle of degradation does not affect the nature and
existence of the ideal state. All distortions are distortions of the original,
which remains unchanged in itself. Therefore, according to Plato, after
tyranny, the time of the philosopher-king returns. Callipolis, in its ideal
immutability, establishes the boundaries of its phenomenological
manifestation. When the copy state reaches the limit of dissimilarity with the
model state, that is, when tyranny is established, everything returns to
Callipolis, restoring the normative proportions. Therefore, the Greeks
considered one of the wonders of the "old tyrant"; tyrants usually did not
live to old age.

--- PAGE BREAK ---ing returns to
Callipolis, restoring the normative proportions. Therefore, the Greeks
considered one of the wonders of the "old tyrant"; tyrants usually did not
live to old age.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

Chapter 3. The State of the Son. Aristotle
Politics according to Aristotle
Plato's philosophy provides the most complete picture of the essence of
metaphysical, ontological, cosmological, political, and anthropological
issues. As we have already said, Plato represents the completeness of all
possible variants and includes all possible types of worldviews. When we
spoke about "Timaeus," we pointed out that there are three kinds of beings —
1) paradigmatic,
2) phenomenological, and
3) material
These correspond to three principles:
1) the Father,
2) Son, and
3) Mother (Nursing Mother, Recipient).
Theoretically, we can identify three philosophies in this cosmology of
Timaeus:
1) a philosophy that emphasises paradigms,
2) a philosophy that emphasises phenomena,
3) a philosophy that emphasises matter.
These three levels of the cosmos, being, ontology, and metaphysics,
correspond to three philosophical traditions. We encounter them both in
Ancient Greece and in the modern world. In fact, Plato and everything that is
called Platonic philosophy is inextricably linked to the first philosophy — to
the supremacy of the world of paradigms. In the first philosophy (in
Platonism in the broadest sense), ideas are endowed with being, which are
considered to be the only fully and purely existing things, while phenomena
in this case become half-existing, half-non-existent, with virtually no
attention paid to the material side of being (hence the idea of matter as
privation, deficiency).
1  Dugin, A. G. Noomakhia. Three Logos. Moscow: Academic Project, 2014. This line of thought is
consistently traced throughout all volumes of the Noomakhia project.

--- PAGE BREAK ---, deficiency).
1  Dugin, A. G. Noomakhia. Three Logos. Moscow: Academic Project, 2014. This line of thought is
consistently traced throughout all volumes of the Noomakhia project.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

58
Part 1. Political Platonism
Matter is the physicality of a phenomenon. Everything we see in the
material world exists because it has a certain eidos (Ri[oJ), a type, i.e. the
existence of a material object does not in any way flow from matter itself,
which is merely a "receptor" of eidos, which has an immaterial
(supermaterial, supra-material) nature.
Here a very clear picture emerges: the world of paradigms is absolute,
the world of matter/corporeality in its pure form is not absolute in itself, but
the phenomenal world mixed between them both is and is not.
Platonic philosophy and, accordingly, Platonic political philosophy
are constructed in exactly this way. In this case, there are
1) an ideal state (which is),
2) the phenomenal state (which partly is and partly is not) and
3) the lowest material "state," concerned with purely material issues —
caring for the population, striving for comfort, i.e., the economy1  (such
a state is not, or at least is not a state, not a polity (XGKIQRST), but something
else — for example, a "civil society" or a "market").
From Plato's point of view, a political system that pays attention to the
third caste of producers and traders (oligarchy and democracy) is anti-
political, destroying political idealism.
Three philosophies of politics
Theoretically, it is possible to consider other types of philosophy.
Plato describes all of them at once, but we can also outline a consideration
of phenomenological philosophy (in the 20th century, this philosophy was
partially constructed by Husserl (1859–1938) and, to a large extent,
Heidegger) and materialist philosophy (materialism appeared as early as
Ancient Greece — Democritus
1  The term "economy" here refers to its modern meaning, whereas in Ancient Greece it was
called "chrematistics" qpiHTQIlQI]j, "enrichment," from qpjHTQT, "money." It is important to note that
etymologically, the word qvxTQT, "money," comes from the verb qvb, "to need something," "to
experience need." This corresponds precisely to the Platonic understanding of matter as lack,
deficiency, need. "Economy" (from oikos, "house," 'household' and vLHo, 'law', 'organisation of
territory') was a more complex concept of the ordering of life and living space, i.e. 'house building'
or 'housekeeping', which was by no means reduced to increasing comfort, let alone the pursuit of
money and profit.,re complex concept of the ordering of life and living space, i.e. 'house building'
or 'housekeeping', which was by no means reduced to increasing comfort, let alone the pursuit of
money and profit.,

--- PAGE BREAK ---f the ordering of life and living space, i.e. 'house building'
or 'housekeeping', which was by no means reduced to increasing comfort, let alone the pursuit of
money and profit.,

--- PAGE BREAK ---

59
Chapter 3. The State of the Son. Aristotle
Crete, Epicurus). Thus, within the Platonic complex (Timaeus), three philosophies
of politics can be distinguished:
•Platonic;
•phenomenological;
•materialistic (reduces politics to economics). Examples of
contemporary materialism, which has developed in
The political components are well known: liberalism, Marxism and (to
some extent) nationalism. The materialists of the ancient world were unable
to build a definitive political system. Plato built one (and we can see how
complete and comprehensive his political philosophy is). It should be noted
that the materialist Democritus was the first to engage in speculation (pure
chrematistics) in his city of Abdera, buying up grain reserves and then
reselling them when their price rose. Nevertheless, the Greeks never
created a materialistic philosophy of politics that would be directly and
comprehensively linked to the third genus of being — to Mother and
"chora."
The polity of the Father and the polity of the Son
Now we move on to the philosophy that was developed in Greece and
which differed significantly from Plato's philosophy. This is the political
philosophy of Aristotle (384–322 BC).
Let us begin with the fact that Aristotle was a student of Plato and
listened to the entire course of Platonic teaching. Therefore, whether he
wanted to or not, he was fundamentally "programmed" by the basic maxims
of Platonism.
If you like, Aristotle's consciousness was shaped by Platonism. This
thinker is within the Platonic tradition. When people say "Plato and
Aristotle," they essentially mean
"Aristotle is the 'Son' of Plato." What Aristotle has that is most essential and
reasonable, he took from his "Father."
But Aristotle decided to construct the philosophy of the Son, that is, a
kind of prototype of what in the 19th and 20th centuries would be called
"phenomenology." Earlier, we spoke of three worlds or kinds: the world of
ideas, the world of phenomena/appearances, and the world of matter. Plato's
philosophy is based on the first kind, while Aristotle's philosophy is based on
the second kind. This is phenomenological philosophy of politics(1) .
1This can be compared to the sociological theory of the "normal type" (German:
Normaltypus) put forward by Ferdinand Tönnies (1855–1936). In this interpretation, Max Weber's
"ideal type" corresponds to Tönnies' "normal type."e sociological theory of the "normal type" (German:
Normaltypus) put forward by Ferdinand Tönnies (1855–1936). In this interpretation, Max Weber's
"ideal type" corresponds to Tönnies' "normal type."

--- PAGE BREAK ---y of the "normal type" (German:
Normaltypus) put forward by Ferdinand Tönnies (1855–1936). In this interpretation, Max Weber's
"ideal type" corresponds to Tönnies' "normal type."

--- PAGE BREAK ---

60
Part 1. Political Platonism
Aristotle constructs the philosophy of the Son partly similar to the
philosophy of the Father, and partly not. As we have said, the Son has
something from the Father and something not from the Father. Or, from
Plato's point of view, he has something from being and something from non-
being. Aristotle is the same: he has something from Plato and something not
from Plato. What he has from Plato determines his similarity to Platonism.
But Aristotle also has something else — criticism of Plato.
Aristotle, being a Platonist, sets himself the task of criticising Plato. This
is the criticism of the Father by the Son. To the extent that the Son follows
the Father, he is the same as the Father. To the extent that he opposes the
Father, he falls, from the point of view of Platonism, into "sin."
Two male philosophies
Aristotle's philosophy is partly the same as that of the Father, and partly
directed against him. To the extent that it is directed against the Father, it
does not exist. To the extent that it continues the Father, it exists. Therefore,
Aristotle himself is the spiritual "Son" of Plato, and together Platonism and
Aristotelianism cover all the possibilities of male philosophy (the philosophy
of the first two genera). That is, a man thinks either as the Father (and then he
is a Platonist) or as the Son (and then he is an Aristotelian). Where
materialism prevails, the third genus (in particular, economics), the masculine
principle disappears, is eliminated, and what can be called the philosophy of
the Mother or the philosophy of the "chora" begins.There, statehood (as polity,
XoKIQRST) ends, the idea of the classical Greek Indo-European order
disappears, and the domination of two castes (the caste of philosophers and
the caste of warriors), which correspond to two philosophies, the philosophy
of the Father and the philosophy of the Son, is eliminated.
There are two male philosophies: Platonism as a fully male philosophy
(Plato did not allow women to listen to his lectures, but some still managed to
sneak in by dressing in men's clothes; among them were several female
disciples who were so devoted that after his death they created the Oracle of
Plato, propagated his teachings and designated their philosophical priestly
dignity) and Aristotelianism as a revision of Platonism from the point of view
of the Son. Plato
is analogous to the relationship between Plato's ideal state and Aristotle's actual (normal, phenomenal)
state.
1   Dugin, A. G. Noomachia. Three Logos.nism from the point of view
of the Son. Plato
is analogous to the relationship between Plato's ideal state and Aristotle's actual (normal, phenomenal)
state.
1   Dugin, A. G. Noomachia. Three Logos.

--- PAGE BREAK ---of view
of the Son. Plato
is analogous to the relationship between Plato's ideal state and Aristotle's actual (normal, phenomenal)
state.
1   Dugin, A. G. Noomachia. Three Logos.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

61
Chapter 3. The State of the Son. Aristotle
and Aristotle remain within the same philosophical space: one looks at
ideas and positions himself as the Father (the philosophy of Zeus, Apollo),
the other looks away from ideas and positions himself as the Son (the
philosophy of Dionysus)1.
Logos apophantikos and the declarative state
So, if Plato develops the theme of the ideal state (Callipolis), i.e., one that
exists from the point of view of the world of ideas, and considers that the
phenomenological state, i.e., the state that is, is nothing more than a relative
manifestation of the eternal in the temporal, the absolute in the transitory,
then Aristotle justifies another state — the phenomenal (phenomenological)
state itself. This is a state that exists here and now and must be understood as
a given, as a phenomenon. In the spirit of Aristotle's teaching, it can be called
an apophantic state (from the Greek wXLcTvlIJ, "statement," "affirmation"),
parallel to the way Aristotle uses the concept of apophantic or apophantic
statement (> ? @ o A BCoDBvEFG?A).
"affirmation"), parallel to Aristotle's use of the concept of disclosure or
declarative utterance (KLMoJ TXocTvQI]LJ). The declarative (apophantic)
state is what the state is in isolation from what it should be and what it is in
the transcendent world of ideas. Here we see a transition from the political
philosophy of the Father (paradigm) to the political philosophy of the Son
(phenomena).
Now, if we recall "Timaios," it immediately becomes clear that as soon as
we place ourselves in the position of the Son, we say
"The Son is everything. And what is Fatherly in him is the Son, and what
is not Fatherly in him is also the Son."
But if Plato says that the part of the Son that is not Father is accidental
and illusory, then the Son, who constructs an autonomous philosophy,
asserts something else and says:
"The Son is what is, and the Father and the Nourisher are not, but are only the
boundaries of the Son."
In other words, the Son places himself at the centre and builds politics,
the state, philosophy, cosmology, and theology from this central position.
Therefore, if Plato's philosophy is divine, then Aristotle's philosophy is
divinely godless. To the extent that the Son resembles the Father, it is
divine. To the extent that there is criticism of the world of ideas, it is
godless philosophy.
1   Dugin, A. G. Noomachia. Three Logosgodless. To the extent that the Son resembles the Father, it is
divine. To the extent that there is criticism of the world of ideas, it is
godless philosophy.
1   Dugin, A. G. Noomachia. Three Logos

--- PAGE BREAK ---nt that the Son resembles the Father, it is
divine. To the extent that there is criticism of the world of ideas, it is
godless philosophy.
1   Dugin, A. G. Noomachia. Three Logos

--- PAGE BREAK ---

62
Part 1. Political Platonism
But this is only from Plato's point of view. From Aristotle's point of view,
this is certainly not the case. On the contrary, Aristotle says that his
philosophy is true and correct in both directions. There is neither the material
nor the paradigmatic here, but there is the phenomenal. That is, that which is,
KLMoJ TXocTvQI]LJ.
It is fundamentally important that for Aristotle, it is the phenomenon
itself that exists (just as for Plato, it is the idea that exists first and foremost),
which is why he attacks Plato's doctrine of ideas. At the same time, Aristotle
does not assert things (in their physicality) instead of ideas; he asserts
something else — instead of ideas, for him there is eidos (Ri[oJ), form. For
Plato, eidos (Ri[oJ) and idea (í[gT) are almost the same thing. Aristotle
asserts that ideas do not exist separately from phenomena, but that
phenomena have an eidetic character, since every phenomenon has within
itself Horcj (form), which is eidos (Ri[oJ), and aKi (matter, wood). If Plato
spoke of qra (space), Aristotle spoke of aKi. Incidentally, the word
"matter" (m{teria) is not derived from the word "mother," as many believe,
but from a word that referred to shipbuilding timber, from which masts, in
particular, were made. We are dealing with a practical calque of the Greek
word aKi, meaning "tree," "wood" (1).
Aristotle's philosophy denies not only Plato's upper
world of ideas, but also the world of Matter
So, according to Aristotle, there are no ideas, but there are eidos (Ri[oJ).
Phenomena are always constructed in this way: they have a primary element
(eidos, Ri[oJ) and a secondary element (matter, aKi); there is content
(content, form) and subject (substance), i.e., that in which this content
manifests itself (the material). Unlike Plato, Aristotle believed that matter
does not exist on its own. In Plato, matter, qrT, is called the third genus of
being. It is a genus of being that is non-existent, but this genus exists in itself,
in its non-being. Aristotle says: matter does not exist, just as ideas do not
exist, but there is a material and ideal eidetic horizon of phenomena.
Aristotle's philosophy denies not only Plato's upper world of ideas, but
also the world of Matter. It asserts that there is only and exclusively the
world of the Son. Who is the Father? This is the Son's hypothesis about his
origin. Who is the Mother? This is the material cause.
1  Some Latin authors translated Aristotle's term aKi not as materia, meaning 'mast wood' or
'ship timber', but as selva, simply 'forest' or
"wood."in. Who is the Mother? This is the material cause.
1  Some Latin authors translated Aristotle's term aKi not as materia, meaning 'mast wood' or
'ship timber', but as selva, simply 'forest' or
"wood."

--- PAGE BREAK ---r? This is the material cause.
1  Some Latin authors translated Aristotle's term aKi not as materia, meaning 'mast wood' or
'ship timber', but as selva, simply 'forest' or
"wood."

--- PAGE BREAK ---

63
Chapter 3. The State of the Son. Aristotle
on the Son, who thinks about his origin. In other words, for Aristotle,
everything boils down to the Son, to the intermediate level, to the world of
phenomena, where there are two horizons — the ideal and the material. But
what is a horizon (Greek òpS3bv — literally, a limit, a restriction from the
root òpS3b, "to divide")? It is the most extreme side of the same thing. And
for Aristotle, this implies that beyond the horizon of the Son, on the other
side of it, there is nothing. The philosophy of the Son is absolutised, which
clarifies the fundamental difference between Plato's use of the concept of
"idea" (í[gT) and Aristotle's use of "eidos" (Ri[oJ). Aristotle thinks of eidos
(Ri[oJ) as the upper horizon and aKi (matter) as the lower horizon. These are
the boundaries of the Son from within himself. Nothing exists beyond
these boundaries. Therefore, Aristotle has no concept of the "transcendent"
or "beyond the limits." In this respect, Aristotle's philosophy is certainly not
Platonism and is based on complete immanence.
Two philosophies
Thus, two philosophies emerge: Plato's transcendental philosophy and
Aristotle's immanentist philosophy. If Plato's theology, later developed by
the Neoplatonists — in particular, Proclus1  (412–485), is associated with
a transcendent God, a god beyond the limits of the world, Aristotle's god
is completely different — he is an immanent God ("unmoved mover" — Greek
 od ]IvodHRvov ]IvRr). Plato's God is God the Father, while Aristotle's God
is God the Son. In essence, these are two views of the divine.
According to Aristotle, the entire universe revolves around an
"immovable mover," and all things strive toward it, but the matter mixed
with these things prevents them from merging with God. They remain at a
certain distance. The rotation of the heavenly spheres, the daily rhythms, the
cycle of the year and the elements show us how this happens. Everything
revolves around the point of the "immobile mover," around the pure Son, and
only an Aristotelian philosopher can come so close to God that he essentially
becomes that god. Aristotle considered himself a god, and his disciple
Alexander the Great (356–323 BC) also considered himself a god. They (one
from the point of view of philosophy, the other from the point of view of
politics) were closest to the "immobile mover." In this sense, Aristotle is
divine, but divine in an immanent sense.
1   Proclus. Platonic Theology. St. Petersburg: RHGI, Summer Garden, 2001.iew of
politics) were closest to the "immobile mover." In this sense, Aristotle is
divine, but divine in an immanent sense.
1   Proclus. Platonic Theology. St. Petersburg: RHGI, Summer Garden, 2001.

--- PAGE BREAK ---re closest to the "immobile mover." In this sense, Aristotle is
divine, but divine in an immanent sense.
1   Proclus. Platonic Theology. St. Petersburg: RHGI, Summer Garden, 2001.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

64
Part 1. Political Platonism
Aristotle as an apologist for slavery
Aristotle
constructed
a
complete,
comprehensive,
developed,
phenomenological, immanentist ontology, philosophy, cosmology, physics,
and political science. These things are necessary to know in order to
understand the meaning of Aristotle's treatise Politics 1.
Like Plato, Aristotle discusses politics by applying his philosophy to
the political sphere. And, like Plato, Aristotle asserts that engaging in
politics and engaging in philosophy are two types of activities that are
noble and superior. Anyone who does not engage in philosophy and politics,
from Aristotle's point of view, is a slave. However, Aristotle treats this slave
very well, since a slave must work, master technical professions, and be
able to get along well with others. Accordingly, people who are engaged
in technical matters (production, management, etc.) are, for Aristotle,
inferior people. He even said that people who produce something with their
own hands should not be given freedom. People who are connected with
material things, with physicality, should be slaves; otherwise, they will try
to bring their completely unnecessary economic considerations into
politics, which is the business of warriors, and into philosophy, which is
the business of wise men. Aristotle was an apologist for slavery.
On the one hand, Aristotle rebelled against Plato, stating that one
should not submit to a higher transcendent principle. At the same time,
however, he retained many of Plato's ideas, believing that it was necessary to
introduce a strict hierarchy within the phenomenal (note: declarative)
state. At the head of the expressive state (the Son), we again encounter three
Platonic types: philosophers, assistants, and producers. Aristotle taught that
philosophers (but not Platonists, rather Aristotelians, priests of the
"unmoved mover," priests of the immanent deity), alongside them should be
warriors (well-armed, strong, courageous, and willing to sacrifice their
lives), and below them should be everyone else.
Aristotle set himself a practical task, asking the question: how can
philosophers rule over warriors? This was solved with the help of an ethical
system that prioritised nobility and refinement. People who think are, of
course, more noble and refined than those who fight. In turn, those who fight
are more noble and refined than those who
1   Aristotle. Politics / Aristotle. Collected Works: In 4 vols. Vol. 4. Moscow: MyUl, 1983.noble and refined than those who fight. In turn, those who fight
are more noble and refined than those who
1   Aristotle. Politics / Aristotle. Collected Works: In 4 vols. Vol. 4. Moscow: MyUl, 1983.

--- PAGE BREAK ---an those who fight. In turn, those who fight
are more noble and refined than those who
1   Aristotle. Politics / Aristotle. Collected Works: In 4 vols. Vol. 4. Moscow: MyUl, 1983.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

65
Chapter 3. The State of the Son. Aristotle
They labour, dealing with physicality, matter and its inherent heaviness and
coarseness.
Despite all his differences from Plato, Aristotle retains his three-part
structure of vertical social organisation. Thus, in Nicomachean Ethics 1he
speaks of three types of life and the hierarchy that exists between them.
These types are as follows:
1) mSoJ _Rbv}tI]LJ (contemplative life, whose goal is to understand the
essence of the human being as such in itself and the truth);
2) mSoJ XoKIQ]LJ (political life, whose goal is the acquisition of glory,
"time2 " — QIHj);
3) mSoJ ^XoKTulQI]LJ (a life of pleasure, i.e. hedonism). These three
forms of life correspond to three abilities of the eternal soul:
human soul:
1) mind (vohJ),
2) striving, desire, attraction (spR3IJ3 ) and
3) feeling (Til_il~J).
Here we see the same triadic scheme that Plato elaborates in the
Phaedrus. Accordingly, the types of life are forms of priority development
of one or another part of the soul. And again, like Plato, Aristotle reduces
this triad to three human types.
1) the perfect man
2) hero
3) the common man.
According to Aristotle, the person who has the most developed mind and
who strives for a contemplative life is the perfect man (QgKRIov). Through the
study of philosophy, such a person achieves complete self-control and
complete self-sufficiency (TuQ^v]i). Thus, it is thought that makes a person
truly free and independent of any external conditions and circumstances.
Self-sufficiency stems from the fact that only through
1  Aristotle. Nicomachean Ethics/ Aristotle. Collected Works: In 4 vols. Vol. 4. Moscow:
MyUl, 1983.
(2)   The predominance of this type of life in Plato lies at the heart of "Timocracy."
3The term spR3IJ goes back to the verb LpgMb, "to stretch out," which means horizontal
expansion. Its etymology is related to the Indo-European root *h3re-, from which fundamentally
important Indo-European terms related specifically to the second caste (the warrior caste) in
Sanskrit (the element of fire associated with the middle — warrior — part of the soul — "rajas",
from which "raja" — king, ruler), the Iranian tradition — "kharj", also king, ruler, and Latin —
rex, king, and rego, "I rule". From the same root (rehtaz) in Germanic languages, concepts
meaning "law," "straight direction," and "order" are formed.ition — "kharj", also king, ruler, and Latin —
rex, king, and rego, "I rule". From the same root (rehtaz) in Germanic languages, concepts
meaning "law," "straight direction," and "order" are formed.

--- PAGE BREAK ---o king, ruler, and Latin —
rex, king, and rego, "I rule". From the same root (rehtaz) in Germanic languages, concepts
meaning "law," "straight direction," and "order" are formed.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

66
Part 1. Political Platonism
Contemplation is understood as the highest goal of existence. And it is
precisely in the course of a contemplative life that goodness becomes the
inner content of the thinker (hence self-sufficiency).
According to Aristotle, heroes also strive to make virtue internal and
inseparable ([ulTcTSvRQov) through glory, but they still depend on certain
external conditions — not on nature, but on society.
The third category of people live by their feelings and strive for physical
and emotional pleasures. They constitute the common people.
The common people are mainly engaged in "household management"
(economics, oS]Riov) and are completely dependent on the external world, on
society and nature.
In a normal society, a philosopher-king, a perfect contemplator, rules. He
is the bearer and guardian of the Logos, and therefore of the polis. According
to Aristotle, man is by nature defined as a "thinking animal" 1(3bov KLMov
aqov) and at the same time as a "political animal" (2)   (3ov XoKIQI]Lv).
Thought and politics constitute the essential aspects of human existence,
separating it from other forms of life. Therefore, the most intelligent
(philosopher, contemplator) is at the same time the most political, and the
contemplative life is not opposed to politics, but is its source and its centre.
States are a form of thought. And therefore, the central place in a good state
must be given to wise men.
The state is defended and protected by warriors who love glory. If the
philosopher is focused on truth (TKj_RIT), then the warrior is focused on
appearance, that is, on approaching truth, which the Greeks defined as [L3T.
The meaning of the term [L3T is multifaceted and goes back to the verb
[o]gb, "to indicate," "to seem," "to suppose," "to imagine." In some cases,
[L3T is translated into Slavic as "glory," hence Lp_o[o3ST,
"Orthodoxy," which means "right opinion." Thus, warriors, driven by a desire
for glory, seek the truth on the one hand, and on the other hand, embody what
they have been able to comprehend in life, thereby bringing order to it and
introducing an orthodox vector. This vector is the existential axis (spR3IJ)
of heroism.
All other citizens of Aristotle's phenomenal state live a quiet and
measured life devoted to pleasure and bodily comforts. They belong to the
lower spectrum of existence and have only an indirect relationship to truth
and even orthodoxy —
1   KLMov [ HLvov av_vbXoJ aqRI Qbv 3bv. Aristotle. Nicomachean Ethics; Ibid.
Politics. P. 379.
2 ò av_vbXoJ cdlRI XoKIQI]òv 3¼ov. Aristotle. Politics. P. 378.ionship to truth
and even orthodoxy —
1   KLMov [ HLvov av_vbXoJ aqRI Qbv 3bv. Aristotle. Nicomachean Ethics; Ibid.
Politics. P. 379.
2 ò av_vbXoJ cdlRI XoKIQI]òv 3¼ov. Aristotle. Politics. P. 378.

--- PAGE BREAK ---d even orthodoxy —
1   KLMov [ HLvov av_vbXoJ aqRI Qbv 3bv. Aristotle. Nicomachean Ethics; Ibid.
Politics. P. 379.
2 ò av_vbXoJ cdlRI XoKIQI]òv 3¼ov. Aristotle. Politics. P. 378.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

67
Chapter 3. The State of the Son. Aristotle
through the ordering of the world of things and feelings. They also participate
in politics, but in its most pragmatic and practical matters related to the
organisation of the physical world.
Since ordinary citizens develop the lower, sensual side of the soul, they
should play a subordinate role in politics.
First a warrior, then a philosopher
With regard to the structure of the soul, Aristotle generally accepts
Plato's division into three parts — rational, passionate, and lustful — and,
accordingly, the metaphor of the chariot of the soul, consisting of a
charioteer (reason), a white horse (passion), and a black horse (lust).
Depending on which principle prevails in a person, we get a philosopher-
sage, a warrior or a lustful labourer. How can we establish a hierarchy
between them? Aristotle believed that the intelligent and strong would
inevitably establish dominance over the "materially oriented part of the
population." Aristotle asks himself: how are the specific societies of most
Greek polis organised — in Lacedaemon (Sparta), Attica, Epirus, Magna
Graecia, Ionia, as well as in other countries — for example, in Phoenicia
or Thrace? They are organised exactly like this. And it has never been
otherwise. The stupid, weak, and materially preoccupied are always under
the boot of the clever and bold.
The question is how to make a strong warrior with a sword obey a
philosopher without a sword, who thinks about the high, the right, and the
true, but whose fury is tamed? That is, how to make a strong horse submit to
a groom?
According to Aristotle, the problem of the philosophical and military
principles can only be solved if we consider the following situation: when
there is something that is different and at the same time the same (i.e., it
simply violates the first law of its own logic). In order for us to be able to
subordinate warriors to philosophers, it is necessary that they be the same
people. The same, but different. To do this, we need to divide the life of a
noble person into two parts — young and older, up to 50 and after 50. Up to
50, he is a warrior, after 50 — a philosopher. That is, in the first part of his
life, a person fights for the state, and in the second, he lives as a
philosopher. Thus, a person (warrior) is not subordinate to another, but to
himself (philosopher), but to his older self. According to Aristotle, a noble
person is a warrior-philosopher (who is first a warrior and then a
philosopher).
Both types — philosopher and warrior — are considered aristocracy by
Aristotle and Plato. Aristotle said that in some societies, people are born
aristocrats, in others they become aristocrats, and in others they are both born
and become aristocrats. The philosopher believed that if a person is born
noble, he will remain noble, but if he is born a slave, he will remain a slave.ristocrats, and in others they are both born
and become aristocrats. The philosopher believed that if a person is born
noble, he will remain noble, but if he is born a slave, he will remain a slave.

--- PAGE BREAK ---thers they are both born
and become aristocrats. The philosopher believed that if a person is born
noble, he will remain noble, but if he is born a slave, he will remain a slave.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

68
Part 1. Political Platonism
some societies, while in others they become aristocrats, and in others they
are both born and become aristocrats. The philosopher believed that if a
person came from a noble family and if his ancestors had fought for
Greece, then he was most likely a good person and would have good
offspring. According to Aristotle, people born with inferior qualities should
be killed, since only those who improve society, not those who worsen it,
should live.
Aristotle himself was not a citizen of Athens, that is, a metic (Greek:
HgQoI]oJ), and he even had restrictions on owning his own school, the
Lyceum (Greek: d]RIov). He was born in Stagira. He did not protest against
this. The man who raised the great emperor nevertheless had certain
restrictions on his citizenship by virtue of the law. Therefore, aristocracy does
not always coincide with the highest administrative positions in the polis. As
with Plato, Aristotle is primarily concerned with aristocracy of the soul.
The paradigm of three types of government
What types of government does Aristotle identify in his Politics? He
differs somewhat from Plato in his list of types, but he does agree with
him in part. Aristotle says that there are three fundamental types of
government, which can be viewed positively or negatively, or as genuine
or false. There is the rule of one — the rule of a king. There is the rule of
a few — the rule of a certain elite. There is the rule of the majority, i.e. of
many. Aristotle sees these three forms in all political systems. In Sparta, he
identified all three types and therefore (like Plato) sympathised with this part
of Greece and its political system, while being sceptical of Athenian
democracy.
The three models outlined above form a kind of matrix, a topology of
political systems that has remained unchanged to this day. Accordingly,
just as Plato set the global framework for political philosophy, Aristotle's
political theory also creates fundamental types of politics. Unlike Plato,
these types are not based on the eternal-temporal, ideal-perverted model.
Aristotle looks at the situation phenomenologically. In fact, there is either
the rule of one, the rule of several, or the rule of many — and in various
combinations. One can draw a triangle of Aristotelian politics, with the
rule of one at the top, the rule of several in the middle, and the rule of
many at the bottom.rule of many — and in various
combinations. One can draw a triangle of Aristotelian politics, with the
rule of one at the top, the rule of several in the middle, and the rule of
many at the bottom.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

69
Chapter 3. The State of the Son. Aristotle
rule by
several
rule by many
rule by one autocracy
General scheme of Aristotle's types of government
This triangle can be used to analyse any political system, both ancient
and modern. It is a general law of political science or political philosophy.
A good state
Aristotle goes on to say that there is good government by one, good
government by several, and good government by many, and there is bad,
perverted government by one, government by several, and government by
many. In other words, a duplicate of this scheme is created. Not one triangle,
but two triangles.
The correct triangle would be:

--- PAGE BREAK ---

70
Part 1. Political Platonism
Aristocracy
rule by
several
Polity
rule by many
Monarchy
rule by one autocracy
Positive types of political systems according to Aristotle
Aristotle considers these three systems of government to be correct:
1) monarchy (HovTpqST),
2) aristocracy (wpIlQo]v{tIT) and
3) polity 1  (XGKIQRST).
1Aristotle uses the term "XGKIQRST" in a slightly different sense than Plato. For Plato, it means any
politically organised community, regardless of its form of government, while for Aristotle, it refers to a
specific type of government in which power is distributed among all free citizens of a city or
settlement. Therefore, we use two English transcriptions for the same Greek word XoKIQRST:
"politeia" in the case of Plato and his interpretation, and "politia" in the case of Aristotle to denote
the positive version of what is generally understood by "democracy" or "organic democracy."

--- PAGE BREAK ---case of Plato and his interpretation, and "politia" in the case of Aristotle to denote
the positive version of what is generally understood by "democracy" or "organic democracy."

--- PAGE BREAK ---

71
Chapter 3. The State of the Son. Aristotle
Various combinations and combinations are possible between them,
which are also theoretically positive.
Monarchy: the monarch is a noble philosopher, a wise man, a person who
is truly guided by the common good. The monarch is the embodiment of
political good. His power must be as reasonable, selfless and exalted as
possible. This is exactly how Aristotle tried to raise his son Philip of
Macedon (382–336 BC), Alexander, who indeed became the greatest of the
Greek rulers.
Aristocracy: the embodiment of political dignity, i.e., certain virtues
associated with courage, bravery, heroism, and self-sacrifice. Aristocrats are,
first and foremost, noble warriors. At the top of their value system are
bravery, honour, dignity, and fearlessness in the face of death.
Polity: a community of mentally sound, responsible, benevolent people
of good will. The majority are qualified to make laws and govern themselves.
Aristotle usually refers to a village where everyone knows each other. Polity
is the least good form of government; it is much worse than the rule of
warriors, aristocrats, and, even more so, monarchy. But it is not bad either.
At the same time, Aristotle introduces a spatial principle for
classifying types of political systems. Monarchy is most suited to large
territorial states. Aristocracy is suited to medium-sized states, while polity
is most effective on a small scale — in villages, settlements, and small towns,
where people know each other and can assess the qualities of those elected
more or less responsibly.
If we mix all these levels — monarchy, aristocracy, and polity — we get
a positive image of a state that is not ideal, but good. Aristotle does not say
that such a state exists. He says that it can be and should be. This is the
"immovable mover" to which we aspire. It is the natural place of politics,
towards which all processes are directed. In any state, there must be an
intelligent king who cares about the common good, there must be the best
warrior-aristocrats who have proven with their lives, courage and skill that they
have a right to power, and there must be a responsible, kind, pious people who
obey all the rules.
According to Plato, there is no doubt that the ideal state exists. According
to Aristotle, such doubts exist because a good state may or may not come into
being.
Look at how this political doctrine transformed the consciousness of
Alexander the Great. The Macedonians came from the north,such doubts exist because a good state may or may not come into
being.
Look at how this political doctrine transformed the consciousness of
Alexander the Great. The Macedonians came from the north,

--- PAGE BREAK ---ecause a good state may or may not come into
being.
Look at how this political doctrine transformed the consciousness of
Alexander the Great. The Macedonians came from the north,

--- PAGE BREAK ---

72
Part 1. Political Platonism
Athens was captured, and Aristotle told his student Alexander that it was
necessary to create a unified whole, with a single "immovable mover" at its
centre. They should strive to create a state headed by a king who cares for
the common good, surrounded by an aristocracy and a responsible
population. Alexander thinks — Alexander acts. He listened to his
teacher, and a few years later, the vast Greek world, which had never been
united by anyone in all of history, plus territories many times larger than it,
stretching as far as Northern India, the entire Middle East, and all of Iran,
found itself under the rule of a single monarch. That is what a good
philosopher is, and that is what a good student is. Alexander realised that he
was that "good king," dealt with his rivals, selected the best, formed a
guard based on them, and conquered the whole world. Aristotle's ontology
of politics takes on the character of action, of an active phenomenon. For
something to appear, it must be revealed. The state comes into being when
we create it. This is Aristotle's philosophical praxis.
stotel.
Note how political philosophy is transformed in the transition from
Plato to Aristotle, from a philosophy where contemplation completely
dominates action — Aristotle introduces "contemplative action." When
we take this teaching seriously, we get an empire in which there really is
the best king, the best aristocrats and responsible citizens. It is this
combination of monarchy, aristocracy and polity that became the possible,
achievable ideal of classical Mediterranean civilisation.
It was this idea that later formed the basis of the Roman Empire. It
was built according to the "pattern" of Alexander the Great. It is a
completely Aristotelian empire, dominated by three principles: Caesar (the
sacred emperor), the senate (the aristocracy) and the Roman people (the
polity). Aristotle's eidetic goal, the natural place of Aristotelian politics, is
possible, achievable, desirable, and the best are moving towards it.
A bad state
Just as there can be a good state, there can also be a bad one. But even a
bad state, in all its forms, can be reduced to the original typology of the
Political. This gives us a version of the same triangle, but with all forms of
government being non-negative.But even a
bad state, in all its forms, can be reduced to the original typology of the
Political. This gives us a version of the same triangle, but with all forms of
government being non-negative.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

73
Chapter 3. The State of the Son. Aristotle
Oligarchy
rule by
several
Democracy
rule by many
Tyranny
rule by one autocracy
Negative types of political systems according to Aristotle
According to Aristotle, as well as Plato, the worst form of government is
tyranny, the rule of an idiot; Carl Schmitt calls this "sovereign dictatorship"
1(when the dictator acts only in his own name as an individual). The rule of
one in a positive case is the best, and the same rule of one in a negative
triangle is the worst. Accordingly, if a sole ruler is guided not by the common
good but by his own individual interests, he is a representative of the worst
political system.
1  Schmitt, C. Dictatorship: From the Origins of the Modern Idea of Sovereignty to the Proletarian
Class Struggle. St. Petersburg: Nauka, 2006.

--- PAGE BREAK ---ive of the worst
political system.
1  Schmitt, C. Dictatorship: From the Origins of the Modern Idea of Sovereignty to the Proletarian
Class Struggle. St. Petersburg: Nauka, 2006.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

74
Part 1. Political Platonism
A little better than tyranny, but still a bad form of government, is
oligarchy, the rule of a few. Oligarchy is the opposite of aristocracy. A few of
the best rule in an aristocratic system, and a few of the worst rule in an
oligarchic system.
The next level, the worst form of government, is democracy. Democracy
is a parody of polity. While in polity, responsible citizens make responsible
decisions, in democracy, irresponsible citizens make irresponsible
decisions, moving in sporadic bursts of sleepy consciousness. In other
words, democracy is a parodic organisation of the majority, where the mob
(sqKoJ) acts under the guise of the majority. At the same time, Aristotle
excluded not only slaves but also many labourers from even such a
democracy.
The philosopher considered democracy to be the terrible rule of the
intellectually inferior masses. At the same time, he says that if tyranny is
radically different from monarchy (like top and bottom) and oligarchy is
also very different from aristocracy, then polity is less different from
democracy. Nevertheless, worse than democracy is oligarchy, and worse
than oligarchy is tyranny. On a par with the kingdom of Alexander the Great,
one can imagine an anti-Empire ruled by a tyrant, supported by oligarchs and
under the cover of an unthinking majority.
Aristotle's analysis, with all his models, is absolutely applicable to any
political system of any time.

--- PAGE BREAK ---nt, supported by oligarchs and
under the cover of an unthinking majority.
Aristotle's analysis, with all his models, is absolutely applicable to any
political system of any time.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

Chapter 4. Sacred politics and
religion
Religion and three types of societies
All types of society can be reduced to three general groups 1:
1) traditional society (also known as pre-modern society);
2) modern society (modern society);
3) postmodern society (postmodern society). Religion is a distinctive
(and main) feature of traditional society.
Therefore, in order to study all aspects of any traditional society, and above
all its political structure, it is necessary to thoroughly study the religious
premises on which it is based.
Any religion and, more broadly, any traditional teaching 2places at the
head of its value system an otherworldly, spiritual principle, that is, something
sacred, divine, sometimes formulated into a strict theological system,
sometimes represented in the form of myths, rites and rituals, sometimes
existing as completely archaic beliefs (which is characteristic of the simplest
types of societies).
This is the most general concept of religion, encompassing all types of
traditional
societies,
including
archaic
ones.
Religion
can
be
institutionalised in the form of a church, a body of dogmas, texts, or laws.
It can also have more vague contours, taking the form of mythology, rituals,
or a system of beliefs in spirits, gods, heroes, the souls of the dead, etc.
It is characteristic that modern society is built on the denial of the
dominant position of religion. Therefore, modernisation includes secularism,
i.e. the relegation of religion to the periphery of the socio-political system;
the strict separation of religion from power, politics, education, etc. Modern
society is also defined by its attitude towards religion, but in this case, the
attitude is negative; if religion is allowed, it is only in the form of
1   Dugin, A. G. Post-Philosophy. Moscow: Eurasian Movement. 2009.
2There are many different definitions of religion. The difference between religion and sacred
tradition will be discussed later.of
1   Dugin, A. G. Post-Philosophy. Moscow: Eurasian Movement. 2009.
2There are many different definitions of religion. The difference between religion and sacred
tradition will be discussed later.

--- PAGE BREAK ---Post-Philosophy. Moscow: Eurasian Movement. 2009.
2There are many different definitions of religion. The difference between religion and sacred
tradition will be discussed later.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

76
Part 1. Political Platonism
marginal authority, and the choice of religion becomes a matter for each
individual to decide by law. This is the fundamental difference between
traditional society (pre-modern) and modern society (modern). The former is
necessarily religious, and religion plays a dominant role (including
politically). The latter rejects religion in this role and either relegates it to the
periphery or abolishes it altogether.
Postmodern society has a more complex relationship with religion. It
does not so much deny it outright as parody it, mock it and give it grotesque
features. Postmodernism seeks to carry the line of modernism to its
conclusion, but believes that the means of modernism itself cannot achieve
this. Therefore, atheism and secularism, which predominate in modernism, are
seen by postmodernists as insufficient, and they resort to irony, parody and
simulacra to destroy religion.
The sacred: dark and light sides
Traditional society includes all types of societies in which God, the
divine, and the spiritual are at the forefront. This type of society can be called
a sacred society.
The sacred 1is a very complex category. Usually, the sacred is separated
from the concept of "holy," although it is formally very difficult to find an
exact equivalent for the concept of "sacred" in Russian. It is both holy and
sacred at the same time. At the same time, it includes something "cursed" and
"demonic." In any case, the sacred inspires awe and reverence and establishes
a distance between people and powers that far exceed human capabilities and
understanding.
The concept of "sacred" is an essential sociological category and
represents a kind of higher principle that cannot be rationally understood
and precedes all types of
1From Latin sacer – "sacred." The sacred is ambivalent and includes not only the "holy" and
"pure," but also the "demonic." Mircea Eliade (1907–1986) also points this out: "Commenting on
Virgil's words 'auri sacrafames' ('rumour sacred to the ear'), Servius rightly remarks that 'sacer' can
mean both 'cursed' and 'holy'. Eustathius points to the same duality of meaning in the Greek TMIoJ,
which can mean both "purity" and "impurity." And we find the same ambivalence of the sacred
among the ancient Semites and Egyptians." Eliade, M. Essays in Comparative Religion. M.:
Ladomir, 1999. P. 30. See also Durkheim, E. The Elementary Forms of Religious Life. M.:
Publishing House DELO, 2018 and Eliade, M. The Sacred and the Profane. M.: Moscow State
University Press, 1994.
2Otto, R. The Idea of the Holy: An Essay on the Meaning of the Rational in a World Filled
with Myths, Theologies, and Religious Theories. New York: The Free Press, 1959.tate
University Press, 1994.
2Otto, R. The Idea of the Holy: An Essay on the Meaning of the Rational in a World Filled
with Myths, Theologies, and Religious Theories. New York: The Free Press, 1959.

--- PAGE BREAK ---ss, 1994.
2Otto, R. The Idea of the Holy: An Essay on the Meaning of the Rational in a World Filled
with Myths, Theologies, and Religious Theories. New York: The Free Press, 1959.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

77
Chapter 4. Sacred Politics and Religion
myths, theologies, and religious theories. This concept is experienced in
concrete experience—in the experience that C. G. Jung (1875–1961)
called the numinous experience1.
We are talking about a collision between a person and something
fundamentally higher than themselves. So high that this collision gives rise
to a double feeling: a feeling of delight and a feeling of horror. It is very
important that the sacred is not just an experience of goodness; it is an
experience that has not yet been divided into awe and horror, into a sense of
one's own absolute insignificance and the greatness of what is revealed.
There is a dark side to the sacred, and there is a light side
. The dark side is what terrifies a person and therefore removes their
personality (in this respect, the sacred often takes the form of death). In other
words, the individual ceases to exist when experiencing the sacred.
The other, light side of the sacred is that which fills a person with delight,
endless joy, and bliss; here again, the individual is stripped away, but in a
positive sense, and the place of the vanished person is taken by the all-
consuming joy of contemplating the light.
The sacred is distinguished by the fact that the terrifying and the awe-
inspiring remain inseparable. This is the common root of the two most
powerful forms of experience. Thus, a society that places this instance at the
forefront is a sacred society. It may be called "God," "spirit," "Heaven,"
"supernatural," but in each case we are dealing with something sacred. In
some societies, leaders became sacred figures (sacralisation of power),
inspiring both fear and love in the people.
The sacred ruler is the central figure of a religious society.
1The concepts of "numinous," "numinous," and "numinosum" (from the Latin numen,
meaning "divinity" or "will of the gods") were introduced by the German theologian Rudolf Otto
(1869–1937) in his work The Sacred (Das Heilige). According to Otto, the numinous includes
four main components: 1) a sense of creaturehood (Kreaturgefuhl), 2) a terrifying mystery
(Mysterium tremendum), 3) awe (Fancinans), and 4) a sense of the numinous value of the sacred
(Sanctum als numinoser Wert). According to Otto, the basis of all religions is one and the same
and is rooted in the experience of the numinous. See Otto, R. The Sacred: An Essay on the
Irrational in the Idea of the Divine and Its Relation to the Rational. Following him, C. G. Jung
believed that "the idea of God originated from the experience of the numinous. It was a physical
experience, moments of being overwhelmed, intoxicated by it. Rudolf Otto, in his psychology of
religion, defined this moment as numinosity, tracing the word back to the Latin numen, meaning
hint or sign." Jarrett James L. (ed.). Jung's seminar on Nietzsche's Zarathustra (1934–1939).
Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press, 1988. P. 1038.cing the word back to the Latin numen, meaning
hint or sign." Jarrett James L. (ed.). Jung's seminar on Nietzsche's Zarathustra (1934–1939).
Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press, 1988. P. 1038.

--- PAGE BREAK ---o the Latin numen, meaning
hint or sign." Jarrett James L. (ed.). Jung's seminar on Nietzsche's Zarathustra (1934–1939).
Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press, 1988. P. 1038.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

78
Part 1. Political Platonism
The main element of the political philosophy of a religious society (if we
understand religion in a broad sense) is the sacred, and we are dealing either
with a sacred society (in which case it is religious) or with a profane society,
i.e. one that does not place the sacred at the forefront, but something else.
Traditional society is sacred. Modern society is profane, i.e. non-sacred.
Continuing to apply this criterion, we can say that postmodern society is anti-
sacred, parodically sacred, or sacred in reverse. The term sacred has been
widely used in sociology and politics since Durkheim. Sacred sociology was
founded in the late 1930s
by Roger Caillois (1913–1978) and Georges Bataille (1897–1962)1.
Religion according to Guénon
There is a narrower understanding of the term "religion," particularly that
used by Protestant theologians 2and by the French traditionalist René Guénon
(1886–1951). Guénon views religion not as the entirety of sacred society, nor
as all types of sacred phenomena, but only as a part thereof. According to his
terminology, only those sacred institutions that consider the sacred principle
to be strictly transcendent can be called "religion" in the full sense of the
word. René Guénon insists that the term "religion" should only be used within the
group of monotheistic religious traditions formed by Judaism, Christianity, and
Islam. Guénon also points out the difference between purely metaphysical
thinking, corresponding to the sacred in the most general sense, and
theological, i.e., religious,thinking.
According to Guénon, religion differs from other sacred systems in that
its highest sacred principle is called a transcendent God. This God is the
Creator (hence the concept of "creationism"); he creates the world out of
nothing, not out of himself (in creationism, there is an ontological gap
between God and the world He created). God is always and absolutely, while
the world is created out of nothing (the idea of creation ex nihilo). It is
precisely the concept of creation, creation out of nothing, that defines what is
called religion in the narrow sense. From this view arises strict monotheism,
that is, the dogmatic assertion that God is not only one, but also unique, and
that between Him and the rest of the world (including humans) lies an
insurmountable ontological abyss(4) .
1   Denis O. College of Sociology. St. Petersburg: Nauka, 2004.
2   Bartsch H.-W. (ed.) Kerygma und Mythos. Vol. 1–5. Hamburg: Resih, 1948–1955.
3   Guénon, R. Essays on Tradition and Metaphysics. St. Petersburg: Azbuka-Klassika, 2010.
4  Dugin, A. G. Post-Philosophy.Bartsch H.-W. (ed.) Kerygma und Mythos. Vol. 1–5. Hamburg: Resih, 1948–1955.
3   Guénon, R. Essays on Tradition and Metaphysics. St. Petersburg: Azbuka-Klassika, 2010.
4  Dugin, A. G. Post-Philosophy.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

79
Chapter 4. Sacred Politics and Religion
Creation and Manifestation.
Every term in philosophy, politics, and science in general must be
explained in a certain way through a negative pair. When we talk about the
sacred, we emphasise: the sacred, not the profane. When we talk about the
ideal, we contrast it with the "normal" and the "material." When talking about
sole rule, we contrast it with the rule of several or the rule of many (i.e., not
one). The most important aspect of philosophy is the precise selection of a
specific and positive meaning that takes the place of the initial thesis, term, or
statement in the process of negation (1).
A
A
Sacred
Profane
not B
not A
not Profane
Not sacred
general view of Greimas'
semantic square
opposition Sacred/Profane
Autocracy
power of many or
power of a few
Monarchy
Aristocracy or polity or tyranny
or oligarchy or democracy
power of not a few
nor of many
not autocracy
not aristocracy and not polity
nor tyranny nor oligarchy
nor democracy
not monarchy
semantics of autocracy
semantics of monarchy
Examples of Greimas' semantic square as applied to basic terms in
political philosophy
1  This is systematically studied by hermeneutics and, in particular, by A. Greimas (1917–
1992), who developed a special semantic square. See: Greimas, A.-J. Structural Semantics.
Moscow: Academic Project, 2008.

--- PAGE BREAK ---by hermeneutics and, in particular, by A. Greimas (1917–
1992), who developed a special semantic square. See: Greimas, A.-J. Structural Semantics.
Moscow: Academic Project, 2008.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

80
Part 1. Political Platonism
Sacred
What semantic pair, what antonymic doublet is there for the concept
of 'creation'? Is it the term 'manifestation',
"Manifestation." Herein lies the difference between the broad
understanding of religion (which includes both theories based on
manifestation and theories based on creation) and the narrow understanding
(which includes only those theories of the origin of the world that are based
on the principle of creation).
Sacred
religious
non-religious
monotheism
non-monotheism
exotericism
esotericism
mysticism
polytheism
other forms
dualism
Zoroastrianism
Buddhism
Jainism
archaic worldview
creation
manifestationism
creation from nothing
creation from God
creatio ex nihilo
creation from
God
religion
monotheism
creationism
politism
or esotericism or
mysticism or other
forms of the sacred
non-manifestationism
not creation
not religion
Semantics of the definition of religion and monotheism

--- PAGE BREAK ---eationism
politism
or esotericism or
mysticism or other
forms of the sacred
non-manifestationism
not creation
not religion
Semantics of the definition of religion and monotheism

--- PAGE BREAK ---

81
Chapter 4. Sacred Politics and Religion
Creation means God's creation from nothing (ex nihilo), not from
Himself (ex Deo). And therefore, another pair of terms to the pair "creation
— manifestation" is "creatio ex nihilo — creatio Ex Deo" ("creation from
nothing — creation from God"). Creatio Ex Deo= manifestation. If God
creates from Himself, then He manifests Himself in the world. There is no
rigid, insurmountable ontological barrier between Him and the world, no
strict transcendence.
God the Creator as a Person
God the Creator is a personal God. He is, if you will, an individual who is
in a "contractual" relationship with other individuals. This gives rise to the
idea of the Covenant as an agreement, a contract, a legal transaction between
one individual (transcendent, omnipotent, absolute, eternal, immortal and
creative) and other individuals who are his antithesis; that is, people who are
mortal, limited, temporary, and ambiguous.
This idea of the individualisation of the sacred is the second feature that
defines a narrow understanding of religion. God in religion, in the narrow
sense, is always a personal, creative, transcendent God.
Religious and secular societies
Thus, we have divided the concept of religion into a broad understanding
and a narrow understanding. It is precisely the second, narrow understanding
of religion that is characterised by such a phenomenon as theology.
The term "theology" itself was introduced by monotheism to describe the
construction of the philosophy of religion within this basic model: when God
is the Creator and when God is a personality. The narrow understanding of
religious societies includes three monotheistic religions:
1) Judaism,
2) Christianity, and
3) Islam.
If we take a broader concept of religion, then, of course, all other
types of societies are included, except for the profane society — that is,
modern Western society or societies modelled on it.
Secular societies began to emerge in Europe in the modern era,
starting in the 16th century. All other societies — non-European societies,
as well asern Western society or societies modelled on it.
Secular societies began to emerge in Europe in the modern era,
starting in the 16th century. All other societies — non-European societies,
as well as

--- PAGE BREAK ---or societies modelled on it.
Secular societies began to emerge in Europe in the modern era,
starting in the 16th century. All other societies — non-European societies,
as well as

--- PAGE BREAK ---

82
Part 1. Political Platonism
European societies before the 16th century — were and remain, in a broad
sense of the word.
Some societies existing today are also religious. Such are some
Islamic states, such as Saudi Arabia, the United Arab Emirates, Qatar, Iran,
etc. Hindu civilisation is, of course, sacred and religious in the broad sense
(but not in the narrow sense!); apart from a few branches of Vishnuism,
the main body of Hindu religious beliefs corresponds to manifestationism
(1).In
Hinduism, God is impersonal; He creates the world from Himself (creatio ex
Deo).
The Chinese civilisation (perhaps until the Soviet period) is a sacred
civilisation, and the peoples of Korea, Vietnam, Japan and, to some extent,
Indochina were under its decisive influence. Throughout its history,
Chinese civilisation has been religious in a broad sense, but not monotheistic
or creationist, because the Chinese tradition is even further removed than
all other traditions from the idea of an individual deity.While in Hinduism,
in some forms of Krishnaism and Vishnuism, there are instances of an
individual God perceived as a personality, nothing of the sort can be found in
the Chinese tradition. This tradition does not even have a remote concept of a
creative transcendent personality. It has the Tao, the will of Heaven, the
sacred Emperor. It is a sacred civilisation in the full sense of the word, but
in the narrow sense of "religion" it is very poorly grafted onto it.
If we look at the world as a whole, we see that most political systems and
most societies — both in ancient times and today — live in sacred societies.
This may surprise many, because we are accustomed to thinking that we live
in a new era (Russians live in it only halfway), but this is only a small spot
of profanity compared to the vast sea of sacredness. However, modern society
is extremely intrusive and intolerant, claiming universality and universality,
although in reality, even today, despite Westernisation, modernisation and
globalisation, it is only a pretentious, aggressive, colonial, imperialist island
of profanity in a sea of sacredness. This sea has not dried up.
Romanian intellectual Calin Georgescu, who was the UN Special
Representative for the Pacific, said that until the 1950s, the Marshall Islands
were an absolute
1  Dugin, A. G. Noomakhia. Great India. The Civilisation of the Absolute. Moscow:
Academic Project, 2017.
2  Dugin, A. G. Noomakhia. The Yellow Dragon. Civilisations of the Far East. China. Korea.
Japan. Indochina. Moscow: Academic Project, 2017.lisation of the Absolute. Moscow:
Academic Project, 2017.
2  Dugin, A. G. Noomakhia. The Yellow Dragon. Civilisations of the Far East. China. Korea.
Japan. Indochina. Moscow: Academic Project, 2017.

--- PAGE BREAK ---lute. Moscow:
Academic Project, 2017.
2  Dugin, A. G. Noomakhia. The Yellow Dragon. Civilisations of the Far East. China. Korea.
Japan. Indochina. Moscow: Academic Project, 2017.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

83
Chapter 4. Sacred Politics and Religion
a paradise where everything was sacred. Then the Americans came, and in
just a few decades, the paradise islands turned into a real hell. The
Americans set up a naval base there, spread tents with Coca-Cola and
Pepsi, and gradually the people began to degenerate.
The natural relations between the tribes began to turn into competition,
and life expectancy decreased significantly. Nature was destroyed by
underwater nuclear explosions, everything was contaminated with radiation,
and a huge, feral, impoverished population, grouped in new pseudo-Western
cities, was forced to feed on scraps.
Thus, the stain of profanity reached the sacred Marshall Islands. The
history of Western European civilisation can be viewed in much the same
light, which first dismantled sacredness on its own territory and then
spread throughout the world like a poisonous stain, reaching territories
further and further away from Europe.
Therefore, when we want to gain a clearer understanding of what a
sacred society is and what a profane society is, and, accordingly, what
sacred (religious) politics and profane politics are, we must take into
account that, although today our education is based on the absolutisation
of the profane, the majority of humanity still lives in a sacred world. When
we talk about sacred political philosophy, we are not talking exclusively
about something that once was — today it is almost the entire Islamic world
(!), and if we look at other regions, then, apart from Europe and North
America, sacred principles clearly prevail there. It is believed that modern
humanity has been living in a modern society for several centuries. This is
true only for Western Europe and North America. Outside these regions,
elements of traditional society remain extremely stable and sometimes
even openly dominant.
This is a paradoxical moment: modern humanity is more sacred than
profane, although the official (quite totalitarian) ideology of self-
understanding of all our cultures and civilisations is precisely profanity.
This topic immediately brings to mind the idea that somewhere there
is a pole of "pure profanity"; this is modern Europe and the United States.
For 500 years, the West has been living under profane philosophy and
profane politics. Over the course of these 500 years, religion has gradually
been replaced by
1   Dugin, A. G. Theory of a Multipolar World. Moscow: Academic Project, 2015.er profane philosophy and
profane politics. Over the course of these 500 years, religion has gradually
been replaced by
1   Dugin, A. G. Theory of a Multipolar World. Moscow: Academic Project, 2015.

--- PAGE BREAK ---y and
profane politics. Over the course of these 500 years, religion has gradually
been replaced by
1   Dugin, A. G. Theory of a Multipolar World. Moscow: Academic Project, 2015.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

84
Part 1. Political Platonism
further and further away — from the centre of society to the periphery,
transforming from a public (and political) institution into a private one.
The experience of the death of the individual
The collective dimension of religion is decisive for a sacred society,
which places emphasis not on the individual but on that which transcends the
individual. When we experience the sacred, we experience the death of the
individual. When we experience the sacred, we experience something greater
than ourselves. So much greater, brighter, more global that we dissolve
before it and rejoice in this dissolution. Or we are terrified. Or we experience
both at the same time.
Therefore, we can say that at the heart of the sacred philosophy of
politics lies the experience of death, the experience of the "terrible"
beginning, which is at the same time the beginning of "good." And if we try
to separate the good beginning from the terrible, for example, the delight
from the horror, we will simply destroy the sacred, since its property is to
have both sides at the same time.
The sacred cannot be only holy. The sacred is necessarily also
monstrous, that is, it frightens, destroys, suppresses, and causes trembling.
And if the sacred does not make us tremble, then it is not sacred, but
merely a substitute, a simulacrum. The genuine sacred is distinguished by
the fact that it precedes the division into the good and the terrifying.
Secularism
Profane civilisation banishes the concept of the sacred and constructs a
completely different profane politics. In this case, religion moves from being
a central institution of society to a peripheral one, from a universally binding
model to a matter of private choice.
Accordingly, religion ceases to be religion, and even if it survives, it
survives in these profane societies in a new guise. Is there religion in the
modern West? Of course there is. But it is a profane society because religion
is neither at the centre of social life, nor does it have a public dimension, nor
is it a political institution. It exists, but from a socio-political point of view, it
does not exist. It does not exist as the axis and core of the political. And
before the beginning of the modern era, it was precisely that — a kind of
"measure of things."olitical point of view, it
does not exist. It does not exist as the axis and core of the political. And
before the beginning of the modern era, it was precisely that — a kind of
"measure of things."

--- PAGE BREAK ---ew, it
does not exist. It does not exist as the axis and core of the political. And
before the beginning of the modern era, it was precisely that — a kind of
"measure of things."

--- PAGE BREAK ---

85
Chapter 4. Sacred Politics and Religion
This is the idea behind secularism and secularisation: the separation of
church and state, the separation of religion and society. In a sacred
(religious) society, this is impossible. Politics is subject to religious principles
and has its roots in religion. In a profane society, politics is seen as
something independent, also stemming from philosophy, but from profane
philosophy. Thus, we can say that there is a religious philosophy of
politics, characteristic of sacred societies, and a profane philosophy of
politics, characteristic of profane societies, i.e. those that have proclaimed the
principle of secularism and made religion not political or social, but personal
and private.
When religion becomes a private matter for individuals, it ceases to be a religion
When religion becomes a private matter for individuals, it
ceases to be religion
The fact is that if religion becomes a private matter for individuals, it
ceases to be religion. When the Church or another institution moves from the
sacred world to the profane world, the nature of religion changes. Religion
presupposes a comprehensive understanding of the world. The religious
world cannot be the product of the "self-development of matter" or the
"evolution of monkeys." The world with which the religious worldview deals
is either an expression of the deity or a product of God's creation. In both
cases, this world unconditionally possesses the principle of holism, of
wholeness. The whole precedes the parts; it is not composed of parts, nor is it
the result of their "evolution." God, thought, spirit, and subject are
primordial.
Holism is opposed to the concept of individualism 1. Thus, we have two
approaches to understanding (any) thing. Aristotle gave us a holistic
understanding of things: the whole is greater than the sum of its parts. An
individualistic understanding implies that the whole is an arbitrary
combination of parts (i.e., the whole is equal to the sum of its parts, and if we
regroup these parts, we create a different whole). From the point of view of
holism, the whole possesses a quality that surpasses the qualities of all its
constituent parts, determines them and precedes them. From the point of view
of individualism, the whole is completely equal to its parts. The founder of
sociology, Émile Durkheim,understood society in an Aristotelian way,
believing that
1Dumont, L. Homo Hierarchicus: An Attempt at a Description of the Caste System. St.
Petersburg: Eurasia, 2001; Ibid. Essay on Individualism. Dubna: Phoenix, 1997.
2   Durkheim, E. Sociology: Its Subject, Method, and Purpose. Moscow: Canon, 1995.Description of the Caste System. St.
Petersburg: Eurasia, 2001; Ibid. Essay on Individualism. Dubna: Phoenix, 1997.
2   Durkheim, E. Sociology: Its Subject, Method, and Purpose. Moscow: Canon, 1995.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

86
Part 1. Political Platonism
that society is primary in relation to the individual. This is a holistic
approach.
As for the religious philosophy of politics, in a broad sense we can
consider it as a combination of political Platonism and political
Aristotelianism. All types of religious philosophy fit completely into
Platonism and Aristotelianism. In fact, Islamic political philosophy,
Christian political philosophy, Jewish political philosophy, and the
political philosophy of India and China can all be explained in one way or
another using Plato's understanding of the world and the state (polis), and
— provided that something does not fit into the framework of this
political Platonism — the principle of political Aristotelianism can be
applied.
Both Plato's political philosophy and Aristotle's political philosophy
are religious. These types of political philosophy are sacred and
correspond to traditional society (one with a highly differentiated
structure).
One more general remark should be made. Many archaic societies are
generally not as symmetrical and vertical as the pictures painted by Plato
and Aristotle. We have already mentioned that both Plato and Aristotle
distinguish three castes, three classes:
•priests/philosophers
•warriors
•producers
This scheme corresponds to developed traditional societies, where we
see a high degree of social differentiation. In hunter-gatherer societies or in
the simplest agrarian collectives, we do not find such a strict triadic model.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

PART 2.
MONOTHEISTIC RELIGIONS AND
TYPES
OF POLITICAL THEOLOGIES

--- PAGE BREAK ---cieties or in
the simplest agrarian collectives, we do not find such a strict triadic model.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

PART 2.
MONOTHEISTIC RELIGIONS AND
TYPES
OF POLITICAL THEOLOGIES

--- PAGE BREAK ---

Chapter 1. The Political Philosophy of Judaism
Judaism and politics. Israel as an idea
The political philosophy of Judaism is based on the religious principle of
a covenant between a single personal God (the Creator) and the "chosen
people" (the Jews). This is called the Old Covenant1. The Jews made a pact
with God the Creator to serve Him and no other gods.
From the whole collection of sacred symbols, the Jews chose one
figure. Here, religion coincides with the people, and belonging to the
people is determined by the fact of religion. Anyone who believes in the
one God of the Old Testament, anyone who inherits the covenant with
him, is a Jew.
Since the Jewish people lived for a long time in opposition to other
peoples, they developed a distrustful attitude towards peoples who also
claimed to believe in gods and in the sacredness of their political system, but
did so differently from the Jews. Thus, a gradual convergence between the
ethnic and the religious took place.
It is interesting that, from the point of view of Jewish political
philosophy, the optimal political system is a state of paradise (before the
Fall). In this "political" system, there are no rulers, no labour, only Adam,
faithful to God. This paradise on earth is the starting point of history and a
spiritual model. Paradise in Judaism fulfils the same role as the ideal state
(Kallipolis) in Plato's philosophy.
It is important to note that the word "paradise" (Hebrew:
 , pardes)
comes from the ancient Iranian root par{daiah-, from which the Avestan
pairi-daêza- was derived, meaning "park surrounded by walls" 2. At the same
time, the most ancient meaning of this term was associated precisely with
walls (Old Persian daêza), but it was precisely the presence of walls that was
the main feature in ancient times.
1  Dugin, A. G. Noomakhia. Semites. Monotheism of the Moon and the Gestalt of Va'al. Moscow:
Academic Project, 2017.
2  Dugin, A. G. Noomachia. Iranian Logos. The World War and the Culture of Expectation.
Moscow: Academic Project, 2016.notheism of the Moon and the Gestalt of Va'al. Moscow:
Academic Project, 2017.
2  Dugin, A. G. Noomachia. Iranian Logos. The World War and the Culture of Expectation.
Moscow: Academic Project, 2016.

--- PAGE BREAK ---and the Gestalt of Va'al. Moscow:
Academic Project, 2017.
2  Dugin, A. G. Noomachia. Iranian Logos. The World War and the Culture of Expectation.
Moscow: Academic Project, 2016.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

90
Part 2. Monotheistic religions and types of political theologies
sign of the city, XLKIJ1 . Paradise (paradise) is a paradigm of the structure of
life in the Jewish tradition.
The entire history is conceived as the expulsion of the forefathers
from paradise, that is, the departure from the ideal city, wanderings and
trials, and the restoration of paradise in the last days. Thus, in a political
and philosophical sense, history itself is interpreted by Jews as a path from
paradise (which lay at the beginning of history) to the final messianic times,
when the Messiah will come,that is, back to paradise.
At the heart of Judaism is a covenant with the Creator
Accordingly, the various historical stages between the Fall/expulsion
of the first parents from paradise and the restoration of the original fullness
of the paradise world constitute the cycle of sacred history.
The Jewish people and the Jewish religion are directly linked to this
sacred history. A Jew is someone who lives in this history and is part of it.
A Jew is a subject of history. All other peoples are demons, manifestations of
the powers of "the other side" (Hebrew: "
 " —
"sitra achra"). This gives rise to the idea that since the Jewish people are the
subject of history, then in fact, from beginning to end, all of history is
conceived and measured in terms of the stages of the Jewish people's
existence. This gives rise to radical religious ethnocentrism.
Thus, at the heart of Jewish political philosophy lies the covenant
between the Jews and the Creator of the world, the God of Abraham,
Isaac, and Jacob. In essence, the entire history of Judaism is a problem of
loyalty and betrayal towards one's God.
1The fact that such a fundamental term in Judaism as "paradise" is an Iranian borrowing is
highly significant. After their return from Babylonian captivity, the Jews incorporated many
elements of Iranian religion into their religious, political and cultural traditions. See Dugin, A. G.
Noomakhia. Semites. Moon Monotheism and the Gestalt of Baal.
2 Mashiach, or Messiah, comes from the Hebrew word "
 ," meaning "anointed one." See:
Dugin, A. G. Noomakhia. Semites. Moon Monotheism and the Gestalt of Baal.
3This religious-political philosophy of history is associated with the coming of the King-
Savior at the end of time, and the term "anointed" refers specifically to the King.
"anointed to the kingdom" also almost certainly has Iranian origins, since the Iranian tradition was
originally built on a close connection between the structure of history, the fate of the kingdom,
and the expectation of the coming King-Restorer (Saoshyant in the Mazdean tradition). At the
same time, all these themes are absent in early Judaism and appear only in the later, post-
Babylonian edition. See Dugin, A. G. Noomakhia. Iranian Logos. The World War and the Culture
of Expectation.ame time, all these themes are absent in early Judaism and appear only in the later, post-
Babylonian edition. See Dugin, A. G. Noomakhia. Iranian Logos. The World War and the Culture
of Expectation.

--- PAGE BREAK ---themes are absent in early Judaism and appear only in the later, post-
Babylonian edition. See Dugin, A. G. Noomakhia. Iranian Logos. The World War and the Culture
of Expectation.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

91
Chapter 1. Political Philosophy of Judaism
At different stages, the political organisation of the Jews relates
differently to this vertical structure. Having received the Old Testament, the
Jews begin to carry it. The most important idea became the organisation of
society around the vertical axis of the Covenant: around religious leaders,
judges, prophets, around the sacred Ark of the Covenant, where the tablets
of the Covenant that Moses received on Mount Sinai are kept. Accordingly,
Jewish society, politics and history are built around this sacred model,
which is why Jews often refer to themselves as a "priestly nation."
Judaism and Platonism
If we now return to Plato's model of the cave and ask who is the
legitimate ruler in the Jewish understanding, we will answer that it is the
same Platonic philosopher who rises from the cave (anodos) and descends
again (katodos). The entire Jewish people as a whole think of themselves as
priests among other nations. Other nations are either warriors or craftsmen,
while the priestly nation is the nation of the book, the nation of thought,
the nation that makes service to the supreme deity its fundamental task
(hence the large number of synagogues and people studying the Torah).
This approach shapes the perception of the place of Jews among other
peoples. This is the royal-philosophical place that was occupied by the Jews
during the period when the Promised Land was destined for the future
kingdom, followed by the Egyptian captivity, and then, with Moses, the
Jews were able to return to the Promised Land to once again become
rulers, restoring their royal dignity.
The Promised Land was given by God to the 12 tribes of Israel, and
they returned to their land to become kings of the Canaanite peoples living
around them. A Canaanite centre emerged, where the Jews controlled what was
then a vast territory of Israel. At first, the organisation of the Jewish
people, linked to the division of the territory into 12 tribes, was uncertain:
after the messianic leaders Moses, who led the Jews out of Egypt, and
Joshua, who reconquered the territory of Israel after the end of the
wanderings in the Arabian desert, a period of judges began. All Jewish
leaders were priests and sages who determined how to fairly organise the
political and social model of ancient Israel based on the Covenant.
1   Dugin, A. G. Noomakhia. Semites. Monotheism of the Moon and the Gestalt of Baal.ages who determined how to fairly organise the
political and social model of ancient Israel based on the Covenant.
1   Dugin, A. G. Noomakhia. Semites. Monotheism of the Moon and the Gestalt of Baal.

--- PAGE BREAK ---how to fairly organise the
political and social model of ancient Israel based on the Covenant.
1   Dugin, A. G. Noomakhia. Semites. Monotheism of the Moon and the Gestalt of Baal.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

92
Part 2. Monotheistic religions and types of political theologies
However, during the conquest of Canaan, it was military leaders such
as Joshua, who achieved a religious goal by military means, who
distinguished themselves. The Israelites often fought with neighbouring
peoples, but in their eyes, this war was sacred. Establishing Jewish rule
over the "promised land" was a religious mission, a kind of restoration of
the conditions of a lost paradise. From this, it is easy to understand the place
of the territory of Palestine in the political philosophy of Judaism (both in
ancient times and today).
Property, livestock, slaves, and everything else that the Jews seized from
the defeated peoples as a result of war was called by a special term,
"cherem" (Hebrew:
 ). This is a very interesting term, which is worth
considering in the sociology of religion by Émile Durkheim.
Why is the spoil captured by the Jews from other nations called
"cherem"? On the one hand, "cherem" can be offered as a sacrifice to God,
and on the other hand, it is something that the Jews themselves, being pure,
cannot eat or take for themselves. Herem must either be sacrificed to God or
destroyed, because other peoples are "tainted by demons" and polytheism,
and what is taken from them is "herem." The term "herem" corresponds
exactly to the concept of "sacred." It is both too high (i.e., belonging to God)
and too terrifying, capable of causing irreparable harm to people. Here we see
the duality of the very principle of the sacred, the meaning of which is that
the sacred transcends the human level — both upward, toward God, and
downward, toward the "demonic."
We see that in the Jewish religion and the sacred history of the Bible,
there is a clear and coherent political philosophy that fits perfectly into the
concept of political Platonism, but instead of a philosopher-king, there is a
chosen people, the "king of all nations." God says to the Jews: "You shall
rule over all nations" 1.And not because they are kings, and not even
because they want to be. They will rule over other nations because they
have ascended (avo[oJ) to God, and God sends them to rule, sends them as a
sacrifice (]^_o[oJ) so that they may save their people and, through them, the
whole world. From the point of view of Platonic topics, one can understand
both the religious structure of Judaism and its political philosophy. The
anodos of the Jews is the Revelation received by Noah, Avraham, Jacob,
Moses, and other leaders of the Jews, which became the axis of the
Covenant or the Law.
1 "And thou shalt rule over many nations, and they shall not rule over thee." Deuteronomy
28:12.aham, Jacob,
Moses, and other leaders of the Jews, which became the axis of the
Covenant or the Law.
1 "And thou shalt rule over many nations, and they shall not rule over thee." Deuteronomy
28:12.

--- PAGE BREAK ---and other leaders of the Jews, which became the axis of the
Covenant or the Law.
1 "And thou shalt rule over many nations, and they shall not rule over thee." Deuteronomy
28:12.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

93
Chapter 1. Political Philosophy of Judaism
It is telling that the Bible refers to the Torah (Hebrew:
 ), which
literally means "law," as the socio-political and legal code governing the
life of society. Once again, we clearly see the profound unity and common
roots of religion, philosophy, and politics.
The philosopher Samuel and King Saul
During the reign of Saul, the idea of a Jewish kingdom emerged. It is
very interesting how the Bible describes its formation: the Jewish people
felt that they could not cope with an organisation based on the authority of
the institution of judges that had developed after Joshua, and asked the
prophet Samuel to appoint a king over them.
The prophet Samuel is very upset by this request, because God is the king
of Israel, and if the people ask for a king to rule over them, as other nations
have, it means that they want less and worse for themselves. The prophet
Samuel tests the Jewish people, pointing out that if he appoints a king over
them, they will have to obey God indirectly rather than directly. Samuel
promises to anoint Saul as king, while warning the Jews that they will lose
the best king (God) — by losing a sacred king, they will get a king who is
only partly sacred.
By decision of the Jewish people, the prophet Samuel nevertheless
anoints Saul as king. Thus, a new political system is established — a
kingdom that receives blessing and ritual anointing from a priestly
authority (the prophet). The king of Israel becomes the "firstborn of
Israel." Here we see again the figure of the philosopher-king, but now it is
divided: there is
"philosopher" Samuel and "king" Saul. And Saul, king of Israel, is not just a
warrior, not just the best and strongest. He becomes a sacred figure who
belongs to the first caste, not the second. Below him is the Israeli nobility,
and below the nobility (as in any system) are the labourers.
The Babylonian Captivity
During the era of the Kingdoms, the structure of the chosen people's
relationship with God changes, but the general model of politics remains the
same:
1  "And the Lord said to Samuel, 'Listen to the voice of the people in all that they say to you,
for it is not you they have rejected, but Me, that I should not reign over them.'" 1 Book of Kings.
Chapter 8: 7.Lord said to Samuel, 'Listen to the voice of the people in all that they say to you,
for it is not you they have rejected, but Me, that I should not reign over them.'" 1 Book of Kings.
Chapter 8: 7.

--- PAGE BREAK ---'Listen to the voice of the people in all that they say to you,
for it is not you they have rejected, but Me, that I should not reign over them.'" 1 Book of Kings.
Chapter 8: 7.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

94
Part 2. Monotheistic religions and types of political theologies
We are dealing with classical political philosophy of a sacred nature, but
instead of the general figure of the philosopher-king (as in Plato), here
patriarchs (Abraham, Isaac, Jacob), messianic leaders (such as Moses and
Joshua), then judges, and then kings (Saul, David, Solomon, etc.).
The Age of Kingdoms is also based on sacred philosophy: the king is
a sacred figure. However, the warning of the prophet Samuel gradually
begins to come true, and kings in the specific circumstances of their reign
begin to deviate from high ideals.
This deviation began with Saul, and even the prophet David had serious
transgressions (taking Bathsheba as his wife and effectively murdering her
husband, Uriah the Hittite). Under King Solomon, through his numerous
wives taken from other nations, foreign motives, cults, and practices
penetrated the religion itself.
The kingdom begins to decline in a certain way until its complete
destruction, collapse, division into Israel (north) and Judah (south), under
the rule of separate dynasties, and finally the invasion of the Babylonians,
the capture of Jerusalem, the destruction of the Temple, and the Babylonian
captivity. In the future, the Kingdom of Israel no longer reaches its own
highest horizon. It is punished by God for deviating from his ideal model, for
the Jews' departure from their destiny. Real politics deviated critically
from normative political philosophy, from Heavenly Israel, from the idea
of Israel, from Israel as an idea, from the eternal paradigm of "pardes."
Israel and Aristotle
The meaning of Israel, when it acts in history, can be reduced to
Aristotelian politics. Recall what Aristotle's "unmoved mover" or his
immanent God is.
The function of the "immovable engine" in Jewish political philosophy
during the era of the Kingdoms is performed by the axis of the world —
Jerusalem or the Temple built by the third king, Solomon1. Everything related
to Jewish history thereafter is a desire to preserve and protect the Temple, and
after its destruction, to restore it
1  But Jerusalem is already the fourth historical manifestation of the "immovable engine."
The original, first and eternal is "paradise," the "garden enclosed by camps," the Callipolis of
Judaism. Then its role is transferred to the Promised Land, located in the centre of Canaan. And
finally, under David, the ancient city of Jebus (named after the Jebusites), also known as
Jerusalem, becomes the final historical-mystical form.Promised Land, located in the centre of Canaan. And
finally, under David, the ancient city of Jebus (named after the Jebusites), also known as
Jerusalem, becomes the final historical-mystical form.

--- PAGE BREAK ---ted in the centre of Canaan. And
finally, under David, the ancient city of Jebus (named after the Jebusites), also known as
Jerusalem, becomes the final historical-mystical form.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

95
Chapter 1. Political Philosophy of Judaism
The Temple (which was built during the construction of the Second
Temple by Zerubbabel) and finally, in our time (considered in Judaism to
be the Messianic, "Last" era), to build the Third Temple1.
If the Platonic model represents an ideal and eternal Israel that is
always close to God, then the Aristotelian model represents a phenomenal
Israel. Such a phenomenal Israel may in some situations stray from God,
but it can (and must) return to Him through its own efforts. This is the
Aristotelian effort. It is not simply the contemplation of a pure image of
political philosophy, but a volitional, active, practical striving connected
with the political metaphysics of the Temple. Hence the idea of returning
to Jerusalem and rebuilding the Temple. Thus, within the spectrum of
political Aristotelianism, Jewish political philosophy is linked to the
restoration of the Temple, the defence of Jerusalem and the re-
establishment of the state of Israel.
In a political sense, the dispersion that began with the reign of Titus
Flavius Vespasian (9–79), from 70 CE, was God's final punishment of the
Jews for their unfaithfulness to Him and their departure from His divine
commandments. And the Jews were sent into galut (Hebrew:
 —
"exile") in order to purify themselves. During this period, their politics are
directed towards the past and the future; they have no political philosophy
in the present. For 2,000 years, the Jews have lived under the influence of
other (gentile) political systems, which are a punishment for them.
Therefore, the political philosophies, states and societies in which Jews have
been present for 2,000 years are, in essence, anti-Jewish and were given to
the Jews so that they would feel how bad it is to abandon God. This is a kind
of historical propaedeutics.
The peak of suffering was the mass extermination of Jews — the
Holocaust (Greek: òKo]TdlQoJ — "burnt offering," "sacrifice by fire") or
Shoah (Hebrew:
 "disaster," "catastrophe"). This purifying suffering
prepares the next — and final — stage in Jewish history: the return to the
Promised Land, the proclamation of Jerusalem as the capital of Israel, the
construction of the Third Temple on the Temple Mount, and finally, the
coming of the King of the Jews, the Messiah. This will be the restoration of
the "immovable mover" as the axis of the world and the foundation of the
"good kingdom," which in turn will restore the direct connection with the
transcendent and will be a return to paradise (the ideal state).
1   Dugin, A. G. Noomachia. Semites. The Monotheism of the Moon and the Gestalt of Baal.n will restore the direct connection with the
transcendent and will be a return to paradise (the ideal state).
1   Dugin, A. G. Noomachia. Semites. The Monotheism of the Moon and the Gestalt of Baal.

--- PAGE BREAK ---irect connection with the
transcendent and will be a return to paradise (the ideal state).
1   Dugin, A. G. Noomachia. Semites. The Monotheism of the Moon and the Gestalt of Baal.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

96
Part 2. Monotheistic religions and types of political theologies
Israel as Political Praxis. Zionism. King Messiah
How does Jewish political philosophy dictate that Israel should act in
the era of galuta? The main thing is to strive to return to the Promised
Land, that is, to restore the past (but in essence, the eternal) in the future.
Hence the messianic-political idea of returning to Palestine by any means
necessary, rebuilding the state of Israel, recreating it in the same place where
it once stood. This is a genuine desire to return to what Aristotle calls the
"natural place." And the "natural place" of the Jews, from a religious point
of view, is the Temple of Jerusalem. This aspiration formed the basis of the
politics of the galuta during that period.
However, how and when the Jews should return to Palestine from the
Diaspora was a matter of fierce debate within the Jewish diaspora. At the
same time, the Talmud strictly forbade this return from taking place before the
time was right — that is, before the coming of the Messiah.
The first wave of Zionism, i.e. the return to Zion, where Jerusalem is
located, to its "natural place," occurred in Jewish history with the
appearance in the 17th century of the "pseudo-Messiah" Sabbatai Zevi1
(1626–1676). Sabbatai Zevi announced to his followers that the end of
time had come, that he himself was the Messiah, and that they should
follow him to the Promised Land. This marked the beginning of the first
active emigration of Jews to Palestine. From the point of view of Jewish
historical philosophy, the end of the world will come with the arrival of the
Messiah. Note: for Jews,the Messiah is a king,a good and righteous king who
will restore the completeness of Jewish political philosophy in both its
Platonic and Aristotelian forms.
In a platonic sense, this eschatological Israel becomes the ideal Israel,
and from the point of view of volitional intention, it is embodied in the
Messiah King (it is very important that for Jews, the Messiah is not God, but
a king, a messenger of God, and this is their fundamental difference from
Christians). This king, by his will — in the Aristotelian sense — returns his
people to the Promised Land; and here the action of the phenomenal world,
subject to time, resonates with the structures of the unchanging eternal world;
the immanent pole, which is Jerusalem, is closed
1   Dugin, A. G. Noomakhia. Semites. The Monotheism of the Moon and the Gestalt of Baal
2  On the Iranian roots of this idea, see: Dugin, A. G. Noomachia. Iranian Logos. The World
War and the Culture of Expectation; Ibid. Noomachia. Semites. The Monotheism of the Moon and
the Gestalt of Baal.he Iranian roots of this idea, see: Dugin, A. G. Noomachia. Iranian Logos. The World
War and the Culture of Expectation; Ibid. Noomachia. Semites. The Monotheism of the Moon and
the Gestalt of Baal.

--- PAGE BREAK ---this idea, see: Dugin, A. G. Noomachia. Iranian Logos. The World
War and the Culture of Expectation; Ibid. Noomachia. Semites. The Monotheism of the Moon and
the Gestalt of Baal.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

97
Chapter 1. Political Philosophy of Judaism
Temple, and the transcendent principle. This is the end of history, and this is
the political project of modern Jewry.
The dispute over time and methods
The process of the Jews implementing their historical political
programme, which spans thousands of years, is not taking place in a vacuum.
It is unfolding against the backdrop of the collapse of traditional Western
civilisations, de-Christianisation and the establishment of the secular
political paradigm of the modern era, where religious factors are not taken
into account at all. Modernisation also affects Zionism, which in the 19th
century takes on the form of nationalism copied from the European
bourgeois type (but within the Zionist movement, of course, it is
enlivened by religious political philosophy).
Israel, as it exists today and was created in 1947, is a sign of the
beginning of the messianic era. Jews are already living in the messianic era.
Jews are returning to Israel, the Promised Land, from their galuta only in the
messianic era (and not on the eve of it).
Thus, this horizontal phenomenal philosophy of politics is closing in
on the vertical philosophy of politics. And this is happening now. This
explains the intensity of the confrontation with Muslims in Jerusalem.
Muslims are contesting the territory where the Temple stood, and the
Temple, as we have already said, is the "immovable engine" of Jewish
politics, its historical, political and religious goal.
Most Jews, both those who have returned to Israel and those who
remain outside it, accept the general model of Zionism in one form or
another, whether in its religious, secular, or mixed form. Only a small
number of religious Jews, particularly those from the Neturei Karta
movement, reject Zionism as contrary to the traditions of the Talmud and
the entire logic of the Jewish religion. For them, the creation of Israel before
the coming of the Messiah, based on force, nationalism and political
intrigue, is a parody and sacrilege, something similar to the actions of the
pseudo-Messiah Sabbatai Zevi. Although the "Neturei Karta" proceed from a
strictly identical political philosophy to that of the Zionists, they radically
disagree with them on the methods and timing of the return to Palestine.
Returning from the Diaspora before the arrival of the Messiah is equivalent
in their eyes to "political and religious Satanism," since in this case people
attribute to themselves the attributes of God and God's messenger.
The political philosophy of Judaism, embedded in sacred history, in
the Old Testament religion, in Judaism as a wholes case people
attribute to themselves the attributes of God and God's messenger.
The political philosophy of Judaism, embedded in sacred history, in
the Old Testament religion, in Judaism as a whole

--- PAGE BREAK ---

Division into Israel and Judah
Destruction of the First
Temple
Sabbatai Zevi
the Jewish people as the subject of history
Pardes
Paradise
the Promised
Land
Egyptian
captivity
Kingdom
Babylonian
captivity
Galut
Zionism
Dispersion
The Kingdom of
Israel The arrival
Messiah
Adam Noah Abraham
patriarchs
judges
Prophets
Third
Temple
Babylonian
Empire
Persian
Empire
Greek
Empire
Roman Empire
Modern
The structure of the historical process in the context of Judaism
Moses
Joshua
Saul
David
Solomon
Nebuchadnezzar
Construction of
the Second
Temple
Zorobabel
Ezra
destruction of the
Second Temple
Vespasian
Shoah
creation of the State of Israel

--- PAGE BREAK ---

99
Chapter 1. Political Philosophy of Judaism
religious and legal concepts is not merely a shadow of some distant past. The
texts of the Torah are still read today, prayers are continuously offered,
commentaries and the Talmud are diligently studied — and this is one
continuous process of Jewish political philosophy, which at the present stage,
the final one for the Jews, puts the final seal on the Covenant made by the
Jews with their God in ancient times.
The philosophy of politics as applied to religion is extremely relevant.
And this is not a thing of the past — it is happening today and allows us
to adequately interpret news stories concerning, for example, the Israeli-
Palestinian conflict or American-Israeli relations. Thus, the political
philosophy of religion is an active factor in contemporary politics,
explaining the past and determining the future.

--- PAGE BREAK ---n conflict or American-Israeli relations. Thus, the political
philosophy of religion is an active factor in contemporary politics,
explaining the past and determining the future.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

100
Part 2. Monotheistic religions and types of political theologies
Chapter 2. The Political Philosophy of
Christianity
Christianity and Rome. The restraining force (katechon)
Christian political philosophy is made up of several factors. First,
there's the special theological model of Christianity. Christianity is a
specific religion that partly comes from Judaism and therefore accepts its
basic ideas about monotheism and creationism. At the same time, the idea
of the incarnation of God, unimaginable for Judaism and contrary to all
logic of Jewish religious theology, is at the centre of the Christian
religion. Christianity is thus both a continuation of Judaism and, at the
same time, its theological overcoming or refutation. In this sense,
Christianity finds itself in a complex position in relation to Judaism. The
fact that Christian theology is completely unique in the context of other
versions of monotheism (Judaism and Islam) also affects Christian
political philosophy.
In addition to a special theology based on the New Testament and the
basic Christian idea of the incarnation of God in man, there is another very
important circumstance — the continuity of Christianity in the Roman
Empire1.
The philosophy of the Roman Empire tends to combine all three types
of positive models of Aristotelianism. The Roman Empire is more similar to
Aristotle's philosophy of politics than to Plato's; and to a large extent, the
Roman Empire saw itself as a repetition (in Latium, in Italy) of the state-
building feat of Alexander the Great, who was a student of Aristotle. This
empire strives to embody the three best aspects of Aristotle's understanding
of politics and proposes to establish a positive monarchy (hence: the
emperor as a sacred figure, in fact a living deity). The empire
1  Dugin, A. G. Noomakhia. Latin Logos. Sun and Cross. Moscow: Academic Project, 2016.ses to establish a positive monarchy (hence: the
emperor as a sacred figure, in fact a living deity). The empire
1  Dugin, A. G. Noomakhia. Latin Logos. Sun and Cross. Moscow: Academic Project, 2016.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

101
Chapter 2. Political Philosophy of Christianity
The ruler was also called "pontifex" (Latin for "bridge builder") — a bridge
between the world of humans and the world of gods, between Earth and
Heaven, between life and death. Therefore, the sacred king, the emperor, is at
the centre of this sacred monarchy of the Roman Empire.
The Political Structure of the Roman Empire and
Aristotle's "Good State"
The next level of power is the aristocracy: the Roman Senate, the Roman
patricians, the high-ranking noble citizens of Rome, who represent the second
layer of Aristotle's model.
And finally, the Roman polity, that is, the people of Rome, who also
act as a political institution in significant cases.

--- PAGE BREAK ---me, who represent the second
layer of Aristotle's model.
And finally, the Roman polity, that is, the people of Rome, who also
act as a political institution in significant cases.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

102
Part 2. Monotheistic religions and types of political theologies
The Roman people support or overthrow the emperor; they side with the
aristocratic patrician families or, conversely, enter into conflict with them,
and in the Roman Empire they sometimes even organise systems of self-
government based on a qualified majority (as opposed to democracy).
Thus, in the Roman Empire, we see a combination of all three types of
Aristotle's political model:
1) the sacred Emperor (Pontifex), who corresponds to the monarch;
2) aristocracy in the form of the Senate;
3) Roman citizens, Populus Romanus Quiritium — members and
foundation of Roman politics.
Note how Aristotle distributed these forms of government among
themselves:
1) A large territory tends towards monarchy,
2) the middle part to aristocracy,
3) and the small one to polity.
Accordingly, since the Roman Empire was huge, it was headed by
monarchs or emperors. At a more limited level of the Roman Empire, power
belonged to the aristocracy, and finally, in small settlements, towns or
villages, polity prevailed.
When Christianity became established in the Roman Empire, a very
important theoretical identification of the figure of the emperor with the
image from the Second Epistle of St. Paul to the Thessalonians occurred.
This passage defines the essence of Christian political philosophy.
In the prophecy of the Apostle Paul, it is said that the son of perdition,
that is, the Antichrist, will not come into the world "until he who restrains
now is taken out of the midst" 2. This mysterious phrase has been
interpreted in different ways. The classical Orthodox (and to a large extent
1  The Apostle Paul, who lived in the era of the first apostles, initially acted as a persecutor of
Christ, but was later converted and became the most prominent preacher of Christianity.
2  "Let no one deceive you in any way, for that day will not come until the apostasy
comes first, and the man of lawlessness is revealed, the son of destruction, who opposes and
exalts himself above every so-called god and every object of worship, so that he sits in the
temple of God, proclaiming himself to be God. Do you not remember that when I was still
with you, I told you this? And now you know what he is doing, that the time for him to be
revealed has not yet come. For the mystery is already at work; only he who now restrains it
will do so until he is taken out of the way." Second Epistle of Saint Paul to the Thessalonians.
Chapter 2:3–7.led has not yet come. For the mystery is already at work; only he who now restrains it
will do so until he is taken out of the way." Second Epistle of Saint Paul to the Thessalonians.
Chapter 2:3–7.

--- PAGE BREAK ---. For the mystery is already at work; only he who now restrains it
will do so until he is taken out of the way." Second Epistle of Saint Paul to the Thessalonians.
Chapter 2:3–7.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

103
Chapter 2. Political Philosophy of Christianity
The medieval interpretation (both Catholic and Orthodox) identified the
image of the "restrainer" with the Emperor1.
In the Apostle Paul's prophecy about the "last days," it is said that the
"son of perdition," that is, the Antichrist, will not come into the world "until
he who restrains him is taken out of the way," which in Greek is "katechon"
(ò katechv — "he who restrains"). The word "katechon," usually translated
into Russian as "holding back," literally means "the one who has under
himself" (Greek: kat — "under" and acho — "to have"), that is, "the one who
rules," "the one who possesses."
In the Greek text of the Gospel, the passage from the Epistle of St. Paul
— "and now you know that it is not permitted for him to be revealed at his
time" — includes an important concept that is omitted in the Synodal
translation: "And now the holding back, that it may be revealed at his own
time" 2— "that which restrains," in the neuter gender — in Greek Qò ]TQgqb.
This "restraining" is that which restrains "the restrained." It is precisely this
"holding" that St. John Chrysostom (c. 347–407), the undisputed bearer of
Christian orthodoxy, identifies as "the Roman state." Let us quote this
passage in its entirety because of its fundamental importance for the very
foundations of Christian political philosophy:
It is fair for anyone to ask, first, what is this restraining force (Qó
]aQgqov), and then to want to know why Paul speaks so unclearly about it.
What is this "restraining force" that appears to him, that is, "the hindrance"?
Some say that it is the grace of the Holy Spirit, while others say that it is the
Roman state; I agree more with the latter. Why? Because if the apostle had
wanted to speak about the Spirit, he would not have expressed himself
unclearly, but would have said clearly that what was now preventing him
from appearing was the grace of the Holy Spirit, i.e., extraordinary gifts.
Besides, it would have been appropriate for him to come already, if he was to
come when the (extraordinary) gifts were depleted, because they had long
since been depleted. But since (the apostle) says this about the Roman state, it
is understandable why he only hints at it and speaks covertly for the time
being. He did not want to incur excessive enmity and useless danger. Indeed,
if he had said that the Roman state would soon be destroyed, then
immediately he would have been
1  Dugin, A. G. Noomakhia. Byzantine Logos. Hellenism and Empire. Moscow: Academic Project,
2016.
2  In the original Greek: kàì vu˜v tò kàtechov oidate eis tò apokaluthèvtai autòv thv tò dautou kaipò.Dugin, A. G. Noomakhia. Byzantine Logos. Hellenism and Empire. Moscow: Academic Project,
2016.
2  In the original Greek: kàì vu˜v tò kàtechov oidate eis tò apokaluthèvtai autòv thv tò dautou kaipò.

--- PAGE BREAK ---khia. Byzantine Logos. Hellenism and Empire. Moscow: Academic Project,
2016.
2  In the original Greek: kàì vu˜v tò kàtechov oidate eis tò apokaluthèvtai autòv thv tò dautou kaipò.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

104
Part 2. Monotheistic religions and types of political theologies
as a rebel, would wipe them off the face of the earth, and (along with them)
all believers, both living and striving for this.
That is why he did not use such an expression; nor did he say that it
would soon follow, although (implicitly) he always says so. (...) He says the
same thing here: "hold fast (ò katech) now until the middle of time." That is,
when the Roman state ceases to exist, then he (the Antichrist) will come. And
rightly so, because as long as people fear this state, no one will quickly
submit (to the Antichrist); but after it is destroyed, lawlessness will reign, and
he will seek to seize all power, both human and divine. Just as the kingdoms
were destroyed before, namely: the Median by the Babylonians, the
Babylonian by the Persians, the Persian by the Macedonians, and the
Macedonian by the Romans, so this last one will be destroyed by the
Antichrist, and he himself will be defeated by Christ and will no longer reign.
All this is conveyed to us with great clarity by Daniel. "And then," he says,
"the lawless one will appear." What then? Immediately after this comes
consolation: (the apostle) adds: "whom the Lord Jesus shall slay with the
spirit of His mouth, and bring into nothing the appearance of His coming:
whose coming is to the working of Satan." Just as fire, when it approaches,
even before its arrival, paralyses and destroys small animals that are even far
away, so Christ, with a single command and His coming, will kill the
Antichrist. It is enough for Him to appear, and all will perish. As soon as He
appears (the Lord), He will put an end to deception (3)...
Christianity emerged on the eve of the anticipated arrival of the
Antichrist, and this determined Christian philosophy and history. The
Christian religion asserts that Christ will come at the "end of time" to save
the world, followed by an era of "apostasy" (apostasy — Greek wXolQTlST)
and, finally, the Antichrist will appear. Unlike Judaism, Christ is not the King
of Israel, but the King of all existence, and "his kingdom is not of this world."
Consequently, the understanding of political history is also different from
Judaism: it is not limited to the Jewish people (as the subject of history), but
extends to all of humanity. However, it is the Church of Christ that becomes
the true subject. It was founded by Christ and the Third Person of the Holy
Trinity, the Holy Spirit, after the Resurrection and Ascension of Christ.
3  St. John Chrysostom. Works of Our Holy Father John Chrysostom, Archbishop of
Constantinople. Vol. 11. Book 1. St. Petersburg: Publication of the St. Petersburg Theological
Academy, 1905. pp. 597–598.t. John Chrysostom. Works of Our Holy Father John Chrysostom, Archbishop of
Constantinople. Vol. 11. Book 1. St. Petersburg: Publication of the St. Petersburg Theological
Academy, 1905. pp. 597–598.

--- PAGE BREAK ---Works of Our Holy Father John Chrysostom, Archbishop of
Constantinople. Vol. 11. Book 1. St. Petersburg: Publication of the St. Petersburg Theological
Academy, 1905. pp. 597–598.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

105
Chapter 2. Political Philosophy of Christianity
And since Christ is God for Christians, the Old Testament history ends and a
new history begins — the New Testament. This is the history of the Church.
In this history, in turn, semantic poles arise — the exemplary time
becomes not so much
"Paradise" refers to the time Jesus Christ spent on earth among people, and
the opposite pole is the coming of the Antichrist. Therefore, Christianity
thinks politically differently, introducing a "transcendent" dimension—the
Kingdom of Heaven, which is expressed in the Church.
Christian teaching is eschatology, the doctrine of the "end of the world"
(from the Greek lqTQov — "end," "limit"). Christ comes in the last days
before the coming of the Antichrist, and the Christian worldview can be
called the worldview of people awaiting the end of the world. This end of the
world has the following scenario: first comes the Antichrist (AvQSqpIlQoJ),
which can mean both the one who is against Christ and the one who comes
before Him. Then the Second Coming of Christ takes place and the Antichrist
is defeated by the heavenly army.
The First Coming is Christ suffering and crucified. The Second Coming
is "Christ in power" (1).The second time, Christ comes not as a man, but as
God, and puts an end to the reign of the Antichrist. The reign of the
Antichrist thus takes place between the First Coming and the Second.
The philosophy of Christian history asserts: Christ came, saved the
world, was crucified, and on his blood and flesh the Church was formed
as a new subject of history (this New Testament Church moves through
history, carrying out its mission of universal salvation), in the further
future — the coming of the Antichrist, apostasy, and, finally, the Second
Coming, which will end the era of apostasy. It is in this eschatological
context that Christian political philosophy is situated. Accordingly, when we
say that
"until the one who restrains him is taken out of the way," the son of perdition
(the Antichrist) will not appear, the holy apostle Paul indicates that after the
worldwide spread of Christianity and its victory, there will be a certain
historical period during which the coming of the Antichrist will not yet
take place. That is, there is the following Christian structure of historical
logic.
1
  The central icon in the traditional Russian iconostasis is also called this. "Christ in
Power" is an image that expresses the appearance of Christ the Saviour at the end of time in glory
and power. Christ will descend to earth in the name of fulfilling God's Providence, uniting heaven
and earth under Christ's head.ses the appearance of Christ the Saviour at the end of time in glory
and power. Christ will descend to earth in the name of fulfilling God's Providence, uniting heaven
and earth under Christ's head.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

God the Father
God the Trinity
Father
Son
Holy Spirit
Kingdom of Heaven
Jewish people
Adam
John
The coming of
Christ
For some time,
The
Coming
Second
Coming of
Christ
Para
dise
The Baptist
until the Antichrist comes
Antichrist
Old Testament
era of the law
New Covenant
era of grace
The structure of the Christian understanding of history
Christian Church
Christian Empire
apostasy
Kingdom

--- PAGE BREAK ---comes
Antichrist
Old Testament
era of the law
New Covenant
era of grace
The structure of the Christian understanding of history
Christian Church
Christian Empire
apostasy
Kingdom

--- PAGE BREAK ---

107
Chapter 2. Political Philosophy of Christianity
After the era of Christ, there will be a unique period when the Antichrist
will not yet exist — in the Apocalypse, this is described as a time when the
dragon, the ancient serpent, will be bound for a thousand years.
And I saw an angel coming down from heaven, having the key to the
bottomless pit and a great chain in his hand.
He seized the dragon, that ancient serpent, who is the devil and Satan,
and bound him for a thousand years.
and cast him into the abyss, and shut him up, and set a seal upon him,
so that he should deceive the nations no more, until the thousand years were
finished; after that he must be released for a little while.
And further
When the thousand years are over, Satan will be released from his prison
and will go out to deceive the nations in the four corners of the earth, Gog
and Magog, and gather them together for battle. Their number is like the sand
of the sea.
The serpent (Satan) is released from his prison at the very moment
when "the restrainer is taken out of the midst." Such is the Christian view
of history.
Christianity already contains a political component
even when it does not yet speak of it
does not speak of it
The first community was built in the time of Christ on the basis of
communal living; it was not yet a political system, but an organisation of
society completely immersed in the fact of the divine incarnation and in
the understanding of the "Good News."
But already in the first generation, particularly in the writings of St.
Paul the Apostle, there is a certain view of how Christianity will exist
until the next period, when it is destined to spread throughout the earth. The
prophecy about the catechon is the key to the entire formula of Christian
history and political philosophy. The restrainer mentioned in the epistle of St.
Paul was interpreted by Orthodox teachers, including St. John Chrysostom,
as the Roman Emperor.
1   Revelation of St. John the Theologian. Ch. 20: 1–3.
2   Revelation of Saint John the Theologian. Chapter 20: 7.erpreted by Orthodox teachers, including St. John Chrysostom,
as the Roman Emperor.
1   Revelation of St. John the Theologian. Ch. 20: 1–3.
2   Revelation of Saint John the Theologian. Chapter 20: 7.

--- PAGE BREAK ---teachers, including St. John Chrysostom,
as the Roman Emperor.
1   Revelation of St. John the Theologian. Ch. 20: 1–3.
2   Revelation of Saint John the Theologian. Chapter 20: 7.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

108
Part 2. Monotheistic religions and types of political theologies
Thus, long before Christianity became the official religion of the Roman
Empire, there was already a prophetic understanding of the coming
ecclesiasticalisation of the Empire and the religious mission of its ruler, the
Emperor. Already in the first apostolic period, which was an era of
persecution and oppression (including from the Empire), early Christians
believed that after some time Christianity ( as a community with no political
dimension) would change its catacomb nature and become a creed with a
political dimension.
Thus, we see that Christianity already contained a political component
from the very beginning, even when it did not explicitly state this and
appeared to be completely separate from politics. In the concept of "holding
back," we are dealing with an image that is rare in the early Christian context
and has a political dimension; it is from this point that the entire political
philosophy of Christianity is born.
The Roman Empire (Aristotle's political model) is further seen as a
providential vessel (the kingdom prepared by God's Providence) for receiving
Christianity. Thus, the early Christians, in a remarkable way, believed that
the Roman Empire was created for them and that the fact that Christ was born
in this very empire was endowed with enormous prophetic significance.
Thus, according to the early Christians, this empire was to fulfil a very
important religious function connected with the coming of the Antichrist. As
long as the Empire exists, as long as there is an Emperor (the one who holds
it together), the Antichrist cannot come. Note the fundamental religious
significance that the Roman state acquires in Christian political philosophy.
The doctrine of the four kingdoms and the "political
Antichrist"
In Christianity, there was a doctrine of the Four Kingdoms. The first
kingdom was considered to be Babylon, the second — Persia, the third —
Greece (the kingdom of Alexander the Great), and the fourth — the Roman
Empire. Each of these kingdoms corresponded to a specific metal: gold to
Babylon, silver to Persia, copper or bronze to the Empire of Alexander the
Great, and iron to the Roman Empire. This symbolism was based on the story
of Nebuchadnezzar's dream, in which he saw a colossus made of four metals
standing on clay feet, and on the interpretation of this dream by the prophet
Daniel.This symbolism was based on the story
of Nebuchadnezzar's dream, in which he saw a colossus made of four metals
standing on clay feet, and on the interpretation of this dream by the prophet
Daniel.

--- PAGE BREAK ---ased on the story
of Nebuchadnezzar's dream, in which he saw a colossus made of four metals
standing on clay feet, and on the interpretation of this dream by the prophet
Daniel.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

109
Chapter 2. Political Philosophy of Christianity
It is very important that the Empire in this understanding is not just an
ordinary state. It is conceived as a world kingdom, a kind of absolute state, a
meta-state, a superstate, which included many states and smaller polities
(XGKIQRST). The emperor was not just a king, but a "king of kings" — a
sacred, divine figure.
It is precisely because of its sacred nature that the Empire is able to unite
such diverse individual states, peoples, principalities, and other political
forms. From a Christian point of view, the only legitimate entity is the
Christian Roman Empire. It is the political homeland of Christians. This
Empire is the direct heir to the previous three kingdoms, and after it, there
can be no legitimate organisation of the political space on a global scale.
When Rome falls, the Antichrist will come. This will happen when the
Roman Emperor, the "katechon," the "restrainer," is "taken out of the midst."
The fall of the Empire will mean the onset of the "last days" and the coming
of the Antichrist.
Here, a very interesting point arises—the possibility of giving the
Antichrist a political or historical-political dimension. In a sense, one can
speak of the "political philosophy of the Antichrist." That which destroys the
normative (good) kingdom, that which replaces the only correct and
acceptable political form of the Christian state, is the political Antichrist. The
political Antichrist is, in general terms, everything that is opposed to the
Empire. The doctrine of the political philosophy of the Antichrist is the
doctrine of any political organisation that denies the fundamental
soteriological (from the Greek lbQjv, "savior") eschatological function of the
Christian Roman Empire. Thus, a conscious enemy of the Empire, an
opponent of the "katechon," appears in the context of Christian political
philosophy as the bearer of the political philosophy of the Antichrist.
The political system of the devil
The end of the Roman Empire, the fall of Rome, and the removal of "the
thing that now restrains" bring Christians into a world of illegitimate
political systems. Any non-imperial, non-Christian political system is
illegitimate for Christians, and one that is not simply excluded from the
Empire but comes after its end or instead of it, contributing to its
destruction, is an activehristian political system is
illegitimate for Christians, and one that is not simply excluded from the
Empire but comes after its end or instead of it, contributing to its
destruction, is an active

--- PAGE BREAK ---ystem is
illegitimate for Christians, and one that is not simply excluded from the
Empire but comes after its end or instead of it, contributing to its
destruction, is an active

--- PAGE BREAK ---

110
Part 2. Monotheistic religions and types of political theologies
the political form of the Antichrist. It follows that Christians must oppose
the Antichrist not only on a religious level, but also on a political level. A
political system built around a secular non-Christian (anti-Christian) ruler
and any non-catechumenal (and especially anti-catechumenal) political
ideology is a political system of the devil or a political system of the
Antichrist.
After the pagan Roman Emperor Constantine (288–337) issued the
Edict of Milan prohibiting the persecution of Christians, and after some
time moved his capital to the newly rebuilt Byzantium and proclaimed
Christianity the state religion of the Roman Empire, the prophecy of St.
Paul the Apostle from the Second Epistle to the Thessalonians came true, and
the katechon (the restrainer) becomes a concrete political and historical
reality.
Thus, the Christian Roman Empire was established in practice, whose
purpose was to keep the devil, the ancient serpent, in chains for a thousand
years and prevent the coming of the Antichrist. Constantinople was given
the name New Rome, but now the Orthodox Empire is conceived as a
continuation of the same fourth universal kingdom.
Byzantium. Symphony of Powers
At first, the Roman Empire united the East and the West, but gradually
they began to separate because the western Roman provinces slipped out of
the control of New Rome.
Thus, a difference arises in the political destinies of the two halves of the
Christian world. The classic moment we talked about — the doctrine of the
Orthodox Empire, of the katechon, of Rome, of the Emperor preventing the
coming of the Antichrist — is fully affirmed in the eastern part of the Roman
Empire (much later it will be called "Byzantine").
Here, too, a political doctrine of normative
"symphony of powers" developed, in which the Orthodox Emperor, a
sacred figure endowed with the function of preventing the coming of the
Antichrist, stands at the head of the sacred state, and with him is the
patriarch (or several patriarchs), the head of the Church. The Emperor bases
his rule on a union with the head of the Church. Religious and imperial
power, represented by the patriarch and the emperor, act in complete
harmony, because the Church is not simply an addition to the Empire, but
the force that changese Church. Religious and imperial
power, represented by the patriarch and the emperor, act in complete
harmony, because the Church is not simply an addition to the Empire, but
the force that changes

--- PAGE BREAK ---and imperial
power, represented by the patriarch and the emperor, act in complete
harmony, because the Church is not simply an addition to the Empire, but
the force that changes

--- PAGE BREAK ---

111
Chapter 2. Political Philosophy of Christianity
the very essence of the Empire. Thus, we once again encounter the
Platonic figure of the philosopher-king, the sacred ruler, only in this case his
figure is divided into two "inseparable and unmerged" (like the two natures
in Christ) poles, which constitute the content of the "symphony of powers."
In turn, the Empire is not merely an instrument of the Church, it is
something transformed by the rays of Christ's faith; a space where "sacred"
("sacral") politics is established. From a Christian point of view, imperial
politics is sacred; in its context, every person who carries out the political
instructions of their leader fulfils, in a sense, not just a civic duty, but a
religious one.
When the Church becomes inseparable from the state, the state itself
becomes part of the Church. Therefore, political decisions and political
institutions are not simply rational mechanisms — they become moral
soteriological instruments. A person who rules well and a person who rules
badly are not simply passing a technical exam in their competence, and even
less are they realising their personal will to power — they are either sinning
or practising virtue. At the same time, the scale of the Emperor's sins and
virtues far exceeds that of ordinary citizens — the Emperor is given much,
but much is also demanded of him. Therefore, the very rule of the Empire
acquires a comic and, moreover, a spiritual dimension. The Christian
Emperor acts in the earthly world on behalf of Christ's "heavenly kingdom"
and carries out the will of Heaven on earth.
In the eastern part of the Roman Empire, the idea of sacred politics
(hieropolity) remained in its original form. In the west, starting from the first
centuries of the Byzantine Empire, a gradual departure from this norm
began. This happened against the backdrop of the increasing political
autonomy of the western lands, their distancing from the capital of the
Empire, and the gradual conquest of these territories by pagan peoples.
The Western Roman Empire began to tremble and decay under the blows
of the barbarians.
The barbarians establish a completely different political system there. Its
main difference is that the barbarians do not build an empire, but ordinary
states, completely detached from soteriology, eschatology, the catechon
mission, and the doctrine of the universal kingdom. In each part of the
fragmented Western Roman Empire, their own kings appear, whose polities
(XGKIQRST) are organised in accordance with the traditions of warlike tribes
and tribal unions, primarily Germanic ones. Here, there is no figure of the
emperor himself.ings appear, whose polities
(XGKIQRST) are organised in accordance with the traditions of warlike tribes
and tribal unions, primarily Germanic ones. Here, there is no figure of the
emperor himself.

--- PAGE BREAK ---olities
(XGKIQRST) are organised in accordance with the traditions of warlike tribes
and tribal unions, primarily Germanic ones. Here, there is no figure of the
emperor himself.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

112
Part 2. Monotheistic religions and types of political theologies
These peoples still nominally recognise the Byzantine Emperor as their
supreme ruler, but they have already built a completely different political
system. It is qualitatively different from the catechon Byzantine system. In
the new political system, the unity of the Western Roman Empire is no
longer ensured by the emperor (as in the Eastern Roman Empire), but by
the Pope of Rome.
In the new political system, the unity of the Western Roman Empire is no
longer ensured by the emperor (as in the Eastern Roman Empire), but by the
Pope.
The model of "unholy politics"
A completely new model of "unholy politics" is emerging, the
preconditions for which can be seen in the theory of the "two cities" 1of St.
Augustine (354–430). Instead of Aristotle's idea of a phenomenal Empire, St.
Augustine offers a theory more reminiscent of Plato. He formulates a
doctrine of "two cities," the Heavenly City and the Earthly City, between
which there is a war. The Earthly City lies in evil, while the Heavenly City is
the city of saints, waging war against the city of the damned.
Here we can see the origins of a completely different political
philosophy, distinct from the Byzantine sacred (symphonic and catechon)
politics. Here, a holy ideal city and an unholy dark earthly city are affirmed,
between which there is not harmony, symphony, that is, "consonance" (as
in Byzantium), but opposition. It is precisely this teaching of Blessed
Augustine that forms the basis of the political system known to us as
Catholic political philosophy.
Initially, the Christian political philosophy we discussed earlier
prevailed in the western part of the Roman Empire. but gradually, as the
fates of the western and eastern parts of the Roman Empire diverged, it
survived only in Byzantium, where it existed until its end, while in the
western part a new political philosophy emerged, based on the opposition
between the Church and the state. In Byzantine political philosophy, their
synthesis was established, while in Catholic political philosophy, on the
contrary, their separation was established.
1   Blessed Augustine. The City of God. Moscow; Minsk: AST; Harvest, 2000.their
synthesis was established, while in Catholic political philosophy, on the
contrary, their separation was established.
1   Blessed Augustine. The City of God. Moscow; Minsk: AST; Harvest, 2000.

--- PAGE BREAK ---established, while in Catholic political philosophy, on the
contrary, their separation was established.
1   Blessed Augustine. The City of God. Moscow; Minsk: AST; Harvest, 2000.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

113
Chapter 2. Political Philosophy of Christianity
In such a situation, the Pope, who was the only authority ensuring the
ideological and cultural unity of the Western Roman Empire, began to be
identified with the representative on earth of the "city of saints," the
Heavenly City, while secular kings, princes and other rulers, as well as the
polities (XGKIQRST) they created on the ruins of the Western Roman Empire,
found themselves in the position of the "city of the damned." Thus arose the
idea of a spiritual war between Catholicism (the Roman See) and the political
systems of the barbarian rulers.
Thus, in the dualism of the "two cities," something emerges that goes
beyond the classical Roman tradition—a political phenomenon that is in
itself devoid of sacredness, that is, "unholy." And in order to give this
phenomenon legitimacy, it must be subordinated to the will of the Pope and
the Catholic Church as an institution that ensures the connection with the
"Heavenly City." In the Eastern Empire, "sacredness" is inherent in imperial
politics as such. In the Western part, this sacredness disappears, and only a
non-political institution — the Catholic Church — can restore it, at least in
part.
The Papacy. The usurpation of the empire by Charlemagne
Thus, two political philosophies gradually emerged in the once united
Christian world (the Christian oikoumene):
1) the main "catechon" philosophy, which continued to exist in
Byzantium, in the eastern part of the Roman Empire;
2) a new dualistic philosophy of "two cities," systematically taking
root in the gradually disintegrating Western Roman Empire.
If we look at these models from the point of view of the philosophical
and political paradigms we discussed earlier, we can say the following:
initially, the Aristotelian idea of the Roman Empire prevailed in Christianity,
while in the Western Roman Empire, a dualistic form of political Platonism
gradually took hold, in which models were contrasted with their copies (the
earthly city — the heavenly city).
In history, this phenomenon has been called "Caesaropapism" 1  and
"Papocaesarism" 2 . Caesaropapism is an Eastern, Byzantine model in which
the emperor is not merely a political secular ruler, but also a spiritual
authority who prevents the coming of the Antichrist. Pa-
1   Caesaropapism also comes from the Latin caesar, meaning "Caesar," and papa, meaning
"pope."
2  Formed from the same words, only in reverse order.ty who prevents the coming of the Antichrist. Pa-
1   Caesaropapism also comes from the Latin caesar, meaning "Caesar," and papa, meaning
"pope."
2  Formed from the same words, only in reverse order.

--- PAGE BREAK ---coming of the Antichrist. Pa-
1   Caesaropapism also comes from the Latin caesar, meaning "Caesar," and papa, meaning
"pope."
2  Formed from the same words, only in reverse order.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

114
Part 2. Monotheistic religions and types of political theologies
Caesarism is a Catholic model in which, on the contrary, any political
figure is seen as strictly secular, non-sacred and even deliberately "sinful"
ruler, above whom stands the sinless and sacred Pope of Rome.
Thus, Aristotelianism and Platonism within Christian political philosophy
take on somewhat antagonistic expressions. This continues from the 4th to
the beginning of the 9th century.
However, since until the 9th century there was only one emperor in the
Christian oikoumene (nominally recognised even by the West), it can be said
that during this period the entire Roman Empire still nominally existed as a
single political and religious entity with a common political philosophy. At a
certain point in Byzantium, Irene (c. 752–803) became Empress, and in
parallel with this, important changes took place in the West: the powerful
king from the Carolingian dynasty, Charlemagne (748–814) united numerous
Germanic tribes under his rule and became the almost sole ruler of the
previously fragmented lands of the Western Roman Empire.
So, in the East, dynastic power ended up in the hands of a woman
(which was unusual for the patriarchal Roman society), while the western,
previously fragmented half of the Roman Empire was united under the
leadership of a strong and masculine king of the Franks. In this situation,
Charlemagne decided to become emperor. According to some sources, he
initially wanted to achieve this through a dynastic marriage with the
Byzantine Empress Irene. The plan was as follows: if he married Irene, he
would become the sole emperor of both the East and the West, and the
Roman Empire would be restored in its ecumenical unity. Charlemagne sent
matchmakers to Irene, but the empress refused. After her fatal decision,
Charlemagne declared that he denied her imperial title and was ready to
proclaim himself Emperor. The Pope anointed Charlemagne as king
according to the ancient rite of the "Emperors," just as the Patriarchs of
Constantinople anointed the Byzantine Emperors. The coronation of
Charlemagne took place.
Thus, in the space of the nominally unified Christian Empire, two
catechons, two emperors, emerge simultaneously: Charlemagne in the
Western Roman Empire and Empress Irene in the Eastern Roman Empire.
Constantinople does not recognise Charlemagne's coronation.
It is important that, in parallel with his claims to imperial status,
Charlemagne moves towards recognition of the Filioque (a dogmatic additionantinople does not recognise Charlemagne's coronation.
It is important that, in parallel with his claims to imperial status,
Charlemagne moves towards recognition of the Filioque (a dogmatic addition

--- PAGE BREAK ---ecognise Charlemagne's coronation.
It is important that, in parallel with his claims to imperial status,
Charlemagne moves towards recognition of the Filioque (a dogmatic addition

--- PAGE BREAK ---

115
Chapter 2. Political Philosophy of Christianity
to the Nicene-Constantinopolitan Creed, concerning the Third Person of the
Trinity — the Holy Spirit — as
"proceeding from the Father and the Son" 1. By introducing the Filioque and
crowning Charlemagne as Emperor, Western Christianity separated itself
from Constantinople. Thus, a second
"katechon" appeared in the Christian oikoumene.
Byzantium rejected both, declaring the Filioque a heresy and refusing
to recognise the imperial status of the Carolingian kings. From the point of
view of Byzantine political philosophy, this was usurpation. Here, the
contradictions between the Christian East and the Christian West, which
had been building up for some time, reached their peak, gradually leading
to the final schism in 1054.
It should be noted that in the case of Charlemagne, the Christian West
acted on the basis of the original and common Christian conception of
political philosophy. The Carolingian ruler understood perfectly well that the
only legitimate political form for Christians (and the Franks were among the
first to adopt Orthodox Christianity)was the Holy Roman Empire. One could
only be the political ruler of all Christians as an emperor, no matter how vast
the power of a particular ruler might be. The Franks were able to retain their
imperial status later on, which Constantinople — and Orthodox Christianity
as a whole — never recognised. Later, Charlemagne's state was named the
Holy Roman Empire of the German Nation.
Two political philosophies: Orthodox and Catholic
In 1054, the final schism of the Churches took place, followed by
excommunication:
Catholics
called
Orthodox
Christians
"Eastern
schismatics" (heretics), while Orthodox Christians declared Catholics to
be representatives of the "Latin heresy" or
"papist heresy."
From this moment on, two political forms emerged — two political
philosophies that prevailed in two parts of what was once a united Christian
world. On the one hand, there was Orthodoxy
1In the Orthodox version, the Holy Spirit proceeds only from the Father. The addition of the
phrase "and from the Son" (Latin: Filioque) to the Creed gave Orthodox theologians the
impression that the West had adopted a model of subordination, i.e., hierarchical subordination of
the Persons of the Holy Trinity, which was rejected as heresy.
2Many other Germanic tribes — primarily the Goths — were inclined towards Arianism, a
heresy that had already been rejected at the First Ecumenical Council of Nicaea.y, which was rejected as heresy.
2Many other Germanic tribes — primarily the Goths — were inclined towards Arianism, a
heresy that had already been rejected at the First Ecumenical Council of Nicaea.

--- PAGE BREAK ---d as heresy.
2Many other Germanic tribes — primarily the Goths — were inclined towards Arianism, a
heresy that had already been rejected at the First Ecumenical Council of Nicaea.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

116
Part 2. Monotheistic religions and types of political theologies
the glorious philosophy of politics, and Catholicism. These two models
continued to dominate for many centuries and have retained some of their
influence in Western and Eastern Christianity to this day. It can be said that
political Platonism in its dualistic, rigidly antagonistic version, contrasting
the Heavenly City (the Church) with the Earthly City (the state and its ruler),
came to dominate in Western Europe. This was finally consolidated with the
victory of the Guelphs (the papal version) over the Ghibellines, supporters of
imperial power (the heirs of Charlemagne and, above all, the Hohenstaufen
dynasty) in the Western manner. Thus, the West became the territory of papal
supremacy. In the East, the Caesaropapist, catechistic imperial principle,
which was original to Christianity, remained unchanged and continued to
prevail until the end of the Byzantine Empire. From there, it spread to other
Orthodox peoples — the Bulgarians, Serbs and, finally, the Russians, who at
various stages proclaimed themselves the successors of the Byzantine Empire
(hence the ideology of Moscow as the Third Rome).
Thus, within the framework of a single Christian religion, two
political philosophies were formed: Orthodox and Catholic. The first
predetermined the normative structure of the Eastern Church's politics, the
second that of the Western Church's politics.
The wandering Rome reaches Moscow
In 1452, the history of Byzantium came to an end. Byzantium fell under
the blows of the Ottoman Turks, after which the Ottoman Empire arose in
place of the Eastern Roman Empire, where Islam and its corresponding
political philosophy became the dominant religion. At various stages of
history, a number of Orthodox peoples had already expressed their intention
to become the successors of Byzantium. This was the case during the heyday
of the First and Second Bulgarian Empires (1).In the 14th century, the Serbian
rulers grew in power, building a strong state that successfully rivaled the
weakening Byzantium. Thus, the Serbs also dreamed of becoming the Third
Rome. These claims of the Slavic Orthodox rulers, who at certain moments
achieved power and prosperity, were based on the concept of the "wandering
Rome."
1  Dugin, A. G. Noomakhia. Eastern Europe. Slavic Logos: Balkan Nav and Sarmatian Style.
Moscow: Academic Project, 2018.eved power and prosperity, were based on the concept of the "wandering
Rome."
1  Dugin, A. G. Noomakhia. Eastern Europe. Slavic Logos: Balkan Nav and Sarmatian Style.
Moscow: Academic Project, 2018.

--- PAGE BREAK ---erity, were based on the concept of the "wandering
Rome."
1  Dugin, A. G. Noomakhia. Eastern Europe. Slavic Logos: Balkan Nav and Sarmatian Style.
Moscow: Academic Project, 2018.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

117
Chapter 2. Political Philosophy of Christianity
The idea was as follows: in the historical and geographical context of
the same Fourth World Kingdom (the Iron Roman Empire), the centre of
the Empire (i.e. Rome) could shift. It is important to note that the First
Rome is not the Catholic Rome of the Popes, but Rome as the capital of the
pre-Christian Roman Empire, the seat of the Emperor. With the adoption
of Christianity, this Rome moved to the Second Rome, or New Rome,
which became Byzantium. Therefore, as Byzantium weakened, the status of
"Rome" could shift again — to those Orthodox peoples who proved
themselves worthy of it.
This idea of a "wandering Rome" became particularly relevant when
Byzantium finally fell to the Ottoman Turks. Accordingly, it seemed natural
to imagine that this time Rome
"migrated" to those Orthodox peoples and states that remained independent.
Among all the Orthodox kingdoms at that time, only one managed to
preserve its imperial scale, independence and Orthodox faith — the
Russian state, Muscovy
1. It was then that the Russians declared
themselves the Third Rome, while the Bulgarians, Serbs and even
Romanians, who had previously claimed this status, found themselves
under the rule of the Ottoman Empire. Moscow, as the Third Rome, took on
the mission of the catechon. The doctrine of a normative political system
was transferred to Muscovy. Perhaps this is why Aristotle, the most
brilliant thinker of the "real Empire," is depicted in some ancient frescoes
in Russian churches. Sacred politics moved to the Third Rome, and
Russian rulers, beginning with Ivan the Terrible (1530–1584), became not
just grand princes, but Vasilevs (Greek: BTlSKRIoJ), emperors. The
realisation of the new significance of Muscovy began under Ivan III
(1440–1505), when the doctrine of "Moscow is the Third Rome"was finally
formulated,and during the reign of Ivan IV, the historical ritual of anointing
the Russian tsar according to Byzantine canons took place. Since then,
Russian tsars became the catechon, the Russian kingdom became "Rome,"
and the Russian people became part of sacred politics, where — at least
according to religious-political philosophy — every action of every
person took on a soteriological character. This found expression in the
theory
"draught state."
1  Dugin, A. G. Noomakhia. Russian History. The People and the State in Search of a Subject.
Moscow: Academic Project, 2019.
2  Its authorship belongs to the monk Philotheus (c. 1465–1542) of the Pskov-Pechersk
Monastery.ia. Russian History. The People and the State in Search of a Subject.
Moscow: Academic Project, 2019.
2  Its authorship belongs to the monk Philotheus (c. 1465–1542) of the Pskov-Pechersk
Monastery.

--- PAGE BREAK ---The People and the State in Search of a Subject.
Moscow: Academic Project, 2019.
2  Its authorship belongs to the monk Philotheus (c. 1465–1542) of the Pskov-Pechersk
Monastery.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

118
Part 2. Monotheistic religions and types of political theologies
Reflections of the Catechon
The end of the Muscovite period is associated with processes of
desacralisation that led to a schism in the church. The official Church and
state followed the countries of the West, which had already entered the New
Age, into the paradigm of Modernity. The most consistent proponents of the
ideology of Moscow as the Third Rome were the Old Believers (1),who,
however, were defeated and found themselves in the position of a persecuted
minority. The Old Believers adhered to the norms of Ancient Rus, which
predetermined their complete rejection of religious reforms, which were
followed by political innovations.
This was most evident during the reign of Peter the Great (1672–1725),
who began to restructure the political and ecclesiastical system along the
lines of Western European monarchies, primarily Protestant ones.
Despite the departure from the fundamentals of Orthodox political
philosophy embodied in the principle of the symphony of powers (Peter
abolished the patriarchate altogether, transferring power over the Church
to a secular official, the Oberprokuror of the Synod), distant echoes of
strictly Christian politics persisted in later eras. This was particularly
noticeable in the 19th century, when Russian tsars and the intellectual
elite (especially the Slavophiles) once again focused on the mission of
defending Christian truth and rethought the role played in Russian history by
the theory of Moscow as the Third Rome. An attempt to give politics a
sacred — Christian — dimension was proclaimed by Alexander I (1777–
182) in the "Holy Alliance," which was intended to unite Christian
peoples in the face of advancing secularism, atheism, and political
modernity in general.
Until the Soviet period of Russian history, there was a shadow of
sacred politics, the idea of the Empire as a mission, the religious function
of the Russian state, and the Russian tsar as the one who holds things
together, the one who stops the "son of perdition" from coming.
It can be noted that for an Orthodox Christian, the only legitimate form of
political existence is the sacred Christian Empire. Catholics have a slightly
different view: for them, in accordance with the political philosophy of
Catholicism, the most important thing is submission to the Pope.
1  Dugin, A. G. Noomakhia. Russian History. The People and the State in Search of a
Subject.ordance with the political philosophy of
Catholicism, the most important thing is submission to the Pope.
1  Dugin, A. G. Noomakhia. Russian History. The People and the State in Search of a
Subject.

--- PAGE BREAK ---itical philosophy of
Catholicism, the most important thing is submission to the Pope.
1  Dugin, A. G. Noomakhia. Russian History. The People and the State in Search of a
Subject.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

119
Chapter 2. Political Philosophy of Christianity
From the point of view of a fully-fledged Christian politics (both
Orthodox and Catholic), the idea of the separation of Church and state is
inherently anti-Christian and even anti-Christ. Political Modernity, which
attempts to build its political philosophy on the denial of the sacred
character of the Empire and of politics as a whole, cannot be anything other
than an "anomaly," an unnatural, perverted form of government, a "bad
state" in the eyes of a Christian. According to Aristotle, the worst versions
of this are democracy and tyranny.
Protestantism and democracy
In Western Christianity, the Reformation began in the 16th century,
leading to another form of Christian political philosophy — the phenomenon
of Protestantism1. Protestantism, which is opposed to Catholicism, is
nevertheless an entirely Western phenomenon and inherits all the
characteristics that historically divided Catholicism and Orthodoxy.
Protestantism stands even further from Orthodoxy than Catholicism, although
in the early stages of the Reformation some Protestant leaders sought an
alliance with Orthodox rulers, but these attempts did not develop further.
What does Protestant political philosophy oppose to Catholicism? For
Catholics, as we have already noted, the highest authority is the Pope as the
spiritual head of the Western Christian world. Protestants, on the other hand,
reject this authority, abolish the doctrine of the two kingdoms, attack St.
Augustine and political Platonism, and, for the first time in history, introduce
a completely new model of political system based on the individual, which
had previously been absent in the Christian world.
Protestantism within the Western Christian Church justifies the doctrine
of democracy — that is, the worst and lowest type of government (according
to Aristotle). In church democracy, Protestants reject the clergy, celibacy, the
power of priests, and the transmission of apostolic blessing, that is, all
those sacred components that have survived in the West to this day in
Catholicism.
1  Dugin, A. G. Noomakhia. Germanic Logos. The Apophatic Man. Moscow: Academic
Project, 2015; Ibid. Noomakhia. England or Britain? The Maritime Mission and the Positive
Subject. Moscow: Academic Project, 2015.
2Dumont, L. Essay on Individualism. See also: Sombart, W. Collected Works: In 3 vols. St.
Petersburg: Vladimir Dal, 2005.e Maritime Mission and the Positive
Subject. Moscow: Academic Project, 2015.
2Dumont, L. Essay on Individualism. See also: Sombart, W. Collected Works: In 3 vols. St.
Petersburg: Vladimir Dal, 2005.

--- PAGE BREAK ---nd the Positive
Subject. Moscow: Academic Project, 2015.
2Dumont, L. Essay on Individualism. See also: Sombart, W. Collected Works: In 3 vols. St.
Petersburg: Vladimir Dal, 2005.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

120
Part 2. Monotheistic religions and types of political theologies
Believers themselves are capable of creating any denomination based on the
contractual acceptance of certain interpretations, which completely abolishes
the very idea of the Church as created from above — from God to people,
from Heaven to Earth.
From the vertical model emerges a kind of horizontal religiosity,
where there is a transcendent God and an individual who builds his own
individual model of relations with this God, ignoring all mediating
instances. In essence, such a view of religion brings to the fore human
reason, the human individual who exists on his own — outside the Church
(unlike Catholics) and outside the Empire, outside sacred politics (unlike
Orthodox Christians) — and takes it upon himself to judge what is right and
wrong, that is, to "establish" the Church and, accordingly, create a political
regime that meets its needs and interests. This is an act of radical
desacralisation of the entire Christian teaching as a whole, including its
political dimension.
Protestantism — a revolution against vertical thinking
Protestantism represents an unprecedented step in Christian history,
sharply different from Platonism, Aristotelianism, Catholicism, and
Orthodoxy. In fact, it is a break with the entire tradition of Christian
politics, which, as we have seen, continued the Greco-Roman model. Here
there is neither directly sacred politics (Caesaropapism) nor religious
Platonic politics (Papocaesarism).
Protestantism represents a religious revolution directed against the
authority of the Church. In fact, it rejects the thesis of the Church as a
community of the elect, whose pastors have direct apostolic succession.
Aimed primarily against the Pope and Catholicism, Protestantism
carries with it a fundamentally new political philosophy. This political
philosophy is linked to the self-organisation of individual groups.
Protestantism began its struggle simultaneously with the Empire
(Western) and with the Catholic Church. In essence, it is a rejection of
both political Platonism and political Aristotelianism. It is a rebellion of
matter, of the plebs, a rebellion of the masses against the educated
majority, against the clergy, against the priesthood, and also against the
nobility and aristocracy.anism. It is a rebellion of
matter, of the plebs, a rebellion of the masses against the educated
majority, against the clergy, against the priesthood, and also against the
nobility and aristocracy.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

Orthodoxy
Moscow, the
Third Rome
World Kingdom Sacred
Politics
Christian history and contexts of Christian political philosophy
Protestantism Bourgeoisie Democracy
Catholicism
Christianisation
Apostolic
Empires
era
Catechon
VII BC VI BC
Babylon
Persia
IV BC
Greece
0
IV
IX
1453   XVI
1917
Rom
e
Modern
1054
The Coming of Christ
2nd Epistle to the Thessalonians
Constantine the Great
Charlemagne
Schism of the
Churches
Fall of Constantinople
Reformation
schism
End of the
Habsburg dynasty
October Revolution
Antichrist
Usurpation of the
Catechon

--- PAGE BREAK ---ntine the Great
Charlemagne
Schism of the
Churches
Fall of Constantinople
Reformation
schism
End of the
Habsburg dynasty
October Revolution
Antichrist
Usurpation of the
Catechon

--- PAGE BREAK ---

122
Part 2. Monotheistic religions and types of political theologies
This is the bourgeois revolution, or Protestant ethics1. In fact, this is
how a completely new bourgeois political philosophy emerges, which is a
direct product of the Protestant religious Reformation. Capitalism and the
bourgeois system grew out of Protestant Europe as a direct consequence.
Protestantism as a religious phenomenon carries within it the political idea of
anti-sacral, anti-imperial and anti-ecclesiastical democracy, where all
decisions are made on the basis of the individual reflection of a single
member of society.
Thus, a new subject emerges — not the chosen people (as in Judaism),
not the Church, and not the Christian Empire (as in Catholicism and
Orthodoxy), but the individual, who henceforth becomes the source and
measure of legitimacy in religious and political matters.
Three political philosophies of Christianity and the
assumption of a fourth model
So, we have briefly examined three types of political philosophy in
Christianity:
1) the political philosophy of Orthodoxy (Caesaropapism, symphony
of powers, the katechon, the sacred Empire);
2) the political philosophy of Catholicism (papal supremacy, two cities,
the primacy of the Holy See over "sinful" politics);
3) the
political
philosophy
of
Protestantism
(which
rejects
superhuman authority and makes the individual, capable of
independently determining his relationship with God and other
people, the main criterion).
It is worth noting here that, in theory, Christian thought allows for a
fourth type of political philosophy, which is in direct opposition to
Christianity in general. It can be conditionally called the "political
philosophy of the Antichrist." Such a philosophy can be found in a state or
other form of political organisation where the truth of Christianity is denied
and the separation of Church and politics is normatively justified. In the eyes
of a Christian, such a political system represents an anomalous
eschatological phenomenon, suggesting that the coming of the "son of
perdition," which was prevented by the traditional political model, has
been accomplished.
1   See: Weber, M. The Protestant Ethic and the Spirit of Capitalism. Moscow: Ist-Viu, 2002.of the "son of
perdition," which was prevented by the traditional political model, has
been accomplished.
1   See: Weber, M. The Protestant Ethic and the Spirit of Capitalism. Moscow: Ist-Viu, 2002.

--- PAGE BREAK ---ition," which was prevented by the traditional political model, has
been accomplished.
1   See: Weber, M. The Protestant Ethic and the Spirit of Capitalism. Moscow: Ist-Viu, 2002.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

Chapter 3. Political Philosophy of Islam
Radical Creationism
The Islamic religion is based on the principle of radical creationism,
embodied in the idea that there is no intermediary between God and the world
(man). This is the essence of Islam. In Islam, the formula "do not associate
partners with God" 1is of central importance. Attributing partners to God, i.e.,
denying pure monotheism, is called shirk (Arabic
 , "paganism,"
"polytheism") in Islam, which is considered the most serious crime, not only
religious but also political ( within the Islamic system).
The meaning of strict creationism in Islam lies in the absence of an
intermediate authority and, accordingly, in the emergence of a relationship of
absolute domination between God and humans: God appears as the
unconditional, sole Lord of the world and of humans, a Lord who has nothing
in common with his slaves. The term "Islam" (Arabic:
 ) means
"submission" (to God), complete humility before the Lord (Arabic: ´) and
recognition of one's own insignificance before Him(2) .Thus, God and the
world (man) are radically different metaphysical entities. God is Everything,
and man is nothing. God acts as an absolute scythe of death in relation to the
world — God kills the world because the world is insignificant in relation to
God (3).Between these two poles — insignificant man and absolute God —
there is no mediator. This is the fundamental meaning of the Islamic religion:
it is impossible to place anyone or anything between absolutely insignificant
man and absolutely complete God.
human being and the absolutely complete God.
Here we see a special version of the transcendental relationship between
God and man, or more broadly, between the Creator and creation4. This
relationship is extremely tense and represents an opposition: God is opposed
to
1   Quran. Sura 17, verse 22.
2   Dugin, A. G. Noomakhia. Semites. Monotheism of the Moon and the Gestalt of Wa'al.
3  Dzhemal G. The Revolution of the Prophets. Moscow: Ultra.Culture, 2003.
4  Dugin, A. G. Post-Philosophy.se 22.
2   Dugin, A. G. Noomakhia. Semites. Monotheism of the Moon and the Gestalt of Wa'al.
3  Dzhemal G. The Revolution of the Prophets. Moscow: Ultra.Culture, 2003.
4  Dugin, A. G. Post-Philosophy.

--- PAGE BREAK ---G. Noomakhia. Semites. Monotheism of the Moon and the Gestalt of Wa'al.
3  Dzhemal G. The Revolution of the Prophets. Moscow: Ultra.Culture, 2003.
4  Dugin, A. G. Post-Philosophy.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

124
Part 2. Monotheistic religions and types of political theologies
It is presented to humanity and the world as a radical alternative, and all
creatures are forced to make a fundamental choice between submission to the
Other or solidarity with what is given—with the fact of existence. Thus, the
Platonic dualism of the "ideal state" takes on a conflictual character here, and
the two poles — the paradigmatic and phenomenological ontology of
Timaeus — find themselves in profound opposition. This is the basis for
Islam's criticism of what is called
"jahiliyya" (Arabic
 ) or "polytheism."
Shirk
Polytheism implies "assigning partners to God," affirming certain
intermediate instances between God and the world (man), and therefore, for
Islam, polytheism represents a metaphysically completely false model of
philosophy and ontology.
The main thrust of Islamic philosophy is directed against polytheism.
Those who recognise the oneness of God are righteous, true, and submissive
to the transcendent God (Muslims). Those who oppose the oneness of God,
this absolute Person who removes any possibility of autonomous ontology,
are bearers of evil, rebelling against God.
What kind of evil, and to what extent is this evil? Islam clearly states: to
the extent of the absolute necessity of the physical destruction of polytheists.
The Quran contains a direct call to this effect:
Kill (the infidels) wherever you find them, drive them out of the places
where they drove you out, for their disbelief (fitna) is worse than death at
your hands1.
Elsewhere, this call is literally repeated:
They want you to become unbelievers like them, so that you may be
equal. Therefore, do not take them as helpers or friends until they emigrate
in the way of Allah. But if they turn away, seize them and kill them
wherever you find them.
A person who does not recognise the oneness of God must be put to
death. This is the norm in Islamic tradition. At least, this is how it should be
in a normative (Islamic) society.
1   Quran. Sura 2, verse 191.
2   Quran. Sura 4, verse 89.ss of God must be put to
death. This is the norm in Islamic tradition. At least, this is how it should be
in a normative (Islamic) society.
1   Quran. Sura 2, verse 191.
2   Quran. Sura 4, verse 89.

--- PAGE BREAK ---t to
death. This is the norm in Islamic tradition. At least, this is how it should be
in a normative (Islamic) society.
1   Quran. Sura 2, verse 191.
2   Quran. Sura 4, verse 89.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

125
Chapter 3. Political Philosophy of Islam
Political and Religious Anthropology of Islam. People of the
Book and Their Status
Islamic theology is based on the idea of genocide on religious
grounds: all people who do not recognise the oneness of God (Allah) must
be destroyed. The only exception is for those referred to as "people of the
Book" (Arabic:
 — "ahl al-Kitab") — Jews and Christians. From the
Muslim point of view, Jews and Christians worship the same God as
Muslims. This is the one God, a transcendent, creationist God. Jews and
Christians are not considered polytheists, and therefore guilty of shirk, i.e.
"associating partners with God"; accordingly, the People of the Book have
the right to live.
Nevertheless, the Quran contains significant criticism of Jews and
Christians, based on the most important principle of the Islamic religion —
"not associating partners with God." Those who are pure pagans openly
"associate partners with God." In turn, the "people of the Book" (the
Abrahamic traditions — Judaism, Christianity, and Islam) recognise the
uniqueness of the transcendent God.
The Prophet Muhammad (571–632) is considered by Muslims to be the
last prophet and the "seal of the prophets" 1(
 ), completing the cycle
of prophets. Why, from a Muslim point of view, is the last revelation of the
monotheistic cycle necessary? Muhammad restores the completeness of the
original Revelation, so it can be said that Islam in its archetype (as pure
paradigmatic monotheism) has always existed: in the original form of the
ancient Revelation, then in the form of Judaism, then in the form of
Christianity, and then the Revelation was restored to its fullness through the
prophet Muhammad(2) .
Jihad: either Islam or paganism
Continuing this line of radical purification of the transcendent God from
all intermediaries, insisting that the transcendent God and the immanent
world (and man) have nothing in common and nothing in between, the norm
of religious genocide of polytheists (which is the leitmotif of Islamic history)
is essentially justified. the norm of religious genocide of polytheists (which is
the leitmotif of Islamic history). We are talking about a holy war, "jihad"
(from the Arabic
 — "effort") against pagans, i.e., those who "associate
partners with God." The entire history of Islam has been and continues to be
marked by this.
1   Quran. Sura 33, verse 40.
2   Dugin, A. G. Noomakhia. Semites. Monotheism of the Moon and the Gestalt of Wa'al.with God." The entire history of Islam has been and continues to be
marked by this.
1   Quran. Sura 33, verse 40.
2   Dugin, A. G. Noomakhia. Semites. Monotheism of the Moon and the Gestalt of Wa'al.

--- PAGE BREAK ---e history of Islam has been and continues to be
marked by this.
1   Quran. Sura 33, verse 40.
2   Dugin, A. G. Noomakhia. Semites. Monotheism of the Moon and the Gestalt of Wa'al.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

126
Part 2. Monotheistic religions and types of political theologies
Thus, religious philosophy in Islam is directly expressed in politics,
since jihad appears as an expression of a profound metaphysical truth.
"Why is it necessary to fight the pagans?" "Because they deny the
philosophical religious truth of the oneness of God."
From the Muslim perspective, they are theologically mistaken, which
means that they must either submit to Muslims and acknowledge their
righteousness or be destroyed. This radical approach to religious
philosophy has predetermined the political practice of Islam throughout its
history.
The uniqueness of God (Allah) is directly linked to the theme of power.
Recognising a single God means recognising his authoritative status. To be a
"Muslim" (literally, "one who has submitted to Allah") means not only to
recognise God as the Creator of the world, but also as the supreme ruler.
Thus, the Islamic religion, at its very core, already includes a political
dimension, since power is primarily a political concept.
Where there is polytheism or any other form of society that refuses to
recognise God (Allah) as the bearer of absolute power, a socio-political and
cultural environment develops that is radically incompatible with Islam. It
is either Islam or paganism (shirk, jahiliyya). If Islam comes into contact with
paganism, then someone must die (from the Muslim point of view, but not
from the point of view of the pagan, who does not take away the Muslim's
right to believe in one God, while reserving the right to believe
otherwise).
However, in such a situation, how do Muslims view a figure such as
Christ, i.e., the God-man (mediator between the purely transcendent God and
the world)? What is their attitude towards the community of Israel, the
Jewish people, who also consider themselves mediators? These two points —
the Incarnation in Christian theology and the special sacred function of the
chosen people in Judaism — are what the Qur'an holds against Christians and
Jews, fundamentally distinguishing them from Muslims. They do not recognise
any gods other than the one God, and therefore they are recognised as human
beings, but from the Muslim point of view, it is precisely these theological
postulates that violate the purity of radical transcendentalism, and thus they
find themselves between heretics/polytheists and pure Islam. Jesus Christ is
regarded by Muslims as one of a chain of prophets who preceded
Muhammad, and Jews are considered one of the peoples who received
revelation on an equal footing with others, but who are not "chosen" and
do not differ fundamentally from all others.who preceded
Muhammad, and Jews are considered one of the peoples who received
revelation on an equal footing with others, but who are not "chosen" and
do not differ fundamentally from all others.

--- PAGE BREAK ---mad, and Jews are considered one of the peoples who received
revelation on an equal footing with others, but who are not "chosen" and
do not differ fundamentally from all others.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

127
Chapter 3. Political Philosophy of Islam
Attitude towards Jews and Christians
Islam rejects the dogma of the Holy Trinity and the incarnation of God in
Christ, whom Muslims see as merely a man, a prophet, and the belief of Jews
that they are the chosen people (there is no such concept as "people" in Islam).
Jews and Christians are, from the point of view of Islam, "non-Muslims" and,
accordingly, "non-citizens," so in the political system they, as "people of the
Book," are subject to additional taxes ("jizya" —
 ), significant restrictions on
holding certain positions in the state, and various prohibitions on the practice
of religion (for example, in some Islamic countries it is forbidden to have
crosses on Christian churches, and in almost all Islamic countries the use of
bells is prohibited). In the political system
In Islam, "people of the Book" have the status of "
 " (Arabic: ), meaning
literally "under protection" or "under guardianship." Similar formulas are
used in political philosophy to refer to a category of people whose rights are
limited but not completely denied.
Note the significance of theology here: the gradation of three types of
people in Islam (Muslims, "non-Muslims," pagans) associated with the
structure of the religious worldview takes on a purely political expression and
predetermines social and political status.
The pure transcendence of God constitutes the Muslim, which in Islamic
politics guarantees full political status and citizenship. Recognition of the
transcendence of God with some elements of mediation in the person of the
Incarnation of Christ (for Christians) or the divine election of the Jewish
people (for Jews) — place
"Zimmis" were relegated to a lower status (people under the "protection" of
others, i.e., full citizens). Polytheists fell outside the political system
altogether, finding themselves in the position of outcasts — they were
offered the choice of converting to Islam or being destroyed. In practice,
Muslims did not always treat polytheists so harshly, sometimes being forced
to compromise and granting them the "right to live" in marginalised areas of
society. This was the case with Hindus and Buddhists in India, Zoroastrians in
Persia, some archaic tribes in Africa that came under Muslim rule, etc. From
the point of view of a complete political philosophy of Islam, however, such
"softness" is already a deviation from the strict norm of exclusive
monotheism. Thus, the legal and judicial system of Islam reflects
There are three metaphysical attitudes between the world and God.
—
osufosufosualready a deviation from the strict norm of exclusive
monotheism. Thus, the legal and judicial system of Islam reflects
There are three metaphysical attitudes between the world and God.
—
osufosufosu

--- PAGE BREAK ---from the strict norm of exclusive
monotheism. Thus, the legal and judicial system of Islam reflects
There are three metaphysical attitudes between the world and God.
—
osufosufosu

--- PAGE BREAK ---

128
Part 2. Monotheistic religions and types of political theologies
The global Islamic political empire
Islamic theology predetermines not only the internal politics of
Islamic society, but also its foreign policy. This was the driving force
behind Islamic expansion when a small religious community of nomadic
Arabs from the Arabian Peninsula spread its influence worldwide, creating a
huge centralised state — the Caliphate — built on the principles of
Islamic religious philosophy.
Why should Muslims rule the world? Because the world is already
ruled by the one transcendent God (Allah). Muslims' belief in this purely
transcendent God, and moreover, their recognition of Him as the only true
and legitimate Lord and ruler, gives them the right to global planetary rule;
moreover, it makes this a duty.
Christians and Jews are under the protection of Muslim rule until they
themselves become Muslims.
Who is financing the construction of this global Islamic political
empire? At the expense of pagans (as well as materialists, atheists, and
agnostics), who must either be destroyed or converted to Islam. That is why
Islamic religious philosophy inherently carries political universalism and
justification for political expansion.
Of course, when they find themselves in the context of other, non-
Islamic societies built on principles different from Islamic philosophy,
Muslims adapt to the existing conditions. But from the point of view of
the completeness of the Islamic worldview, this state of affairs is
"temporary," a kind of political (and even partly religious) compromise
with easily discernible limits.
Islam and Christianity in architecture
Let us consider other aspects of Islamic tradition. For example,
architecture. In his book Understanding Islam, Frithjof Schuon (1907–1998),
a Swiss traditionalist philosopher who converted to Islam in its mystical form
(Sufism), describes the specific features of Islamic architecture. The idea that
one should not "give God partners" is embodied in the absence of roofs on
Islamic buildings. The idea of flatness, horizontality, which has no common
1   Schuon F. Understanding Islam. Bloomington, Indiana: World Wisdom, 1998.rtners" is embodied in the absence of roofs on
Islamic buildings. The idea of flatness, horizontality, which has no common
1   Schuon F. Understanding Islam. Bloomington, Indiana: World Wisdom, 1998.

--- PAGE BREAK ---in the absence of roofs on
Islamic buildings. The idea of flatness, horizontality, which has no common
1   Schuon F. Understanding Islam. Bloomington, Indiana: World Wisdom, 1998.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

129
Chapter 3. Political Philosophy of Islam
Measures with verticality are expressed in the very structure of the Islamic
city. If we look at a traditional Islamic city, we see flat roofs, low buildings,
periodically interrupted by tall, slender minarets (towers dedicated
exclusively to God). This model of the Islamic polis reflects the essence of
both the Islamic religion and Islamic political philosophy.
With God, everything is vertical, with man, everything is horizontal.
There is no unity between the temple and the home. In the Christian
tradition, on the contrary, the structure of the temple and the structure of
the home are always connected with roofs (there is a gradual and slow
ascent from the horizontal to the vertical). The triangular roof of an
ordinary dwelling (both rural and urban) symbolises the ascent of many
things to the One. The phenomenon of the roof itself (primarily its shape,
ridge, carved patterns, etc.) represents the deepest metaphysical element
of the Christian world. In essence, every house is a small temple, a small
church. A church is a large house, and a house is a small church. And both
are directed towards the sky.
A completely different picture emerges when we consider the flat roofs
of ordinary people's dwellings and the minarets reaching towards the sky.
Two different metaphysics, two different architectures, two different
societies.
The absence of priests in Islam
In Islamic teaching, all people are fundamentally equal. This equality
leads to a sharp rejection by Islamic tradition of the very status of
priests/clergy 2. In Islam, there are no priests, no ordination, and the
mullah, whom we sometimes mistakenly perceive as a priest, is nothing
more than a learned Muslim who has received special education. This is a
striking difference from the Christian priesthood, where the priest is a
minister of God Almighty and receives special
1  A contemporary American philosopher (of Iranian origin) and proponent of "speculative
realism" Reza Negarestani gives a similar theological and political interpretation of the hostility of
modern radical Salafi Muslims, who preach a return to original Islam and reject all vertical
structures and objects in general. In the spirit of Negarestani's own philosophy, he interprets this
as a desire for underground realms, inside the earth, towards the centre of maximum poverty and
insignificance, as the main property of creation in Islam — the most radical of all versions of
monotheism. Negarestani R. Cyclonopedia: Complicity with Anonymous Materials. Melbourne:
Re.Press, 2008.
2  Jemal G. The Revolution of the Prophets.on in Islam — the most radical of all versions of
monotheism. Negarestani R. Cyclonopedia: Complicity with Anonymous Materials. Melbourne:
Re.Press, 2008.
2  Jemal G. The Revolution of the Prophets.

--- PAGE BREAK ---st radical of all versions of
monotheism. Negarestani R. Cyclonopedia: Complicity with Anonymous Materials. Melbourne:
Re.Press, 2008.
2  Jemal G. The Revolution of the Prophets.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

130
Part 2. Monotheistic religions and types of political theologies
The laying on of hands by the Holy Spirit, which comes from the apostles,
and is actually considered a person endowed with a special status.
For a Muslim, there is no difference between a simple believer, a political
leader of Islam, and a mullah. They are all ordinary people. And if someone
says that he has more reason to believe that he is closer to God than others, he
will find himself in the position of one who
"gives God a partner" (i.e., himself), and thus becomes a bearer of shirk and
thereby condemns himself to death. There is fundamental equality among
Muslims; Islam rejects any kind of caste-based anthropological
differentiation. It is important to note that for Muslims, even Muhammad,
whom they revere, and other prophets are simply human beings.
Muhammad is not God, not an angel, but only a human being, albeit one
chosen from among other people to receive
revelation about the absolute transcendence of God.
Therefore, the landscape of Islam consists only of flat roofs, only ashes,
only decay, only death. The Islamic world is a world of fundamental
death. Everything that happens in Islamic society is movement within the
territory of death, because only God is alive and only God is a person
(while all others are not persons, they are not alive, they do not exist, and the
most they are capable of is being submissive). Who is a Muslim? He is
submissive, bowed down, prostrate. He does not see himself as God or the
son of God. He is only a created human being, but unlike other creatures, he
has knowledge of the existence of the absolute God, the creator of Heaven
and Earth, and humbly accepts His absolute power.
This model represents a departure from the traditional state structure
based on a pyramid, as described by Plato and Aristotle. The radicalisation of
relations between the Creator and creation gives rise to a different model of
politics — the Islamic state as a state based on anthropological equality
(contrary to Plato's ideal state with the domination of a philosopher-king or
Aristotle's phenomenal Empire, where various forms of power or a
combination of several types are allowed).
Islam and politics: dispute is war
In Islam, the absence of a distinction between religion and politics can
be seen most clearly. Islam does not conceive of itself as a purely religious
or purely political phenomenon. Islam does not accept
1  Jemal G. Daoud vs Jalut (David vs Goliath). Moscow: Social and Political Thought, 2011.slam does not conceive of itself as a purely religious
or purely political phenomenon. Islam does not accept
1  Jemal G. Daoud vs Jalut (David vs Goliath). Moscow: Social and Political Thought, 2011.

--- PAGE BREAK ---ve of itself as a purely religious
or purely political phenomenon. Islam does not accept
1  Jemal G. Daoud vs Jalut (David vs Goliath). Moscow: Social and Political Thought, 2011.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

131
Chapter 3. Political Philosophy of Islam
knows no difference between religion and politics. If power belongs to
God, then accordingly, those who properly worship that God should rule.
The struggle for faith in a theological dispute and the struggle of Muslims
against non-Muslims in a military sense are strictly the same thing.
There is no separate theological dispute and separate war. Dispute is
war, war is dispute. Muslims see the affirmation of their metaphysics in
concrete political actions. Theology and politics are one and the same. In
the Quran, we can find ideas about the structure of heaven and hell, the
creation of the world and man, sacred history, religious norms, as well as
advice on how to organise human society in an orderly manner, how to
build relationships within the community (Arabic: Umma,
 ), how to
treat livestock, what hygiene rules to follow, etc.
This is where the Quran is totally different from the Bible. The Bible
doesn't say anything about how to organise politics and society (Christians
got their social and political model from the Roman Empire). The Quran
presents a completely different situation — it is filled with political, social,
economic, moral, and even everyday guidelines that determine the political
system, government, norms of social organisation, and forms of warfare.
Here we see the complete unity of religion and politics.
Therefore, for a true Muslim, it is absolutely unacceptable to consider
Islam as merely a religion. This is the meaning of the concept of "sharia"
(Arabic:
 f), which originally means
"mode of action," but in Islam it acquired the meaning of the legal basis of
society. "Sharia" is the legitimate model of politics, which organically
combines theological norms, structures of universally binding religious
practice, the foundations of the political system, principles of economics,
morality, culture, and everyday behaviour that are considered necessary
for compliance. In Sharia, religion and the socio-political system are
regulated with equal rigour and clarity. For Muslims, Sharia is the only
acceptable and justified form of social organisation, which, in addition to
religious worship, necessarily includes everything else.
Caliphate
In its pure form, Islam does not recognise any society other than an
Islamic one, and the entire history reflected in the Quran, and even more so,hip, necessarily includes everything else.
Caliphate
In its pure form, Islam does not recognise any society other than an
Islamic one, and the entire history reflected in the Quran, and even more so,

--- PAGE BREAK ---ludes everything else.
Caliphate
In its pure form, Islam does not recognise any society other than an
Islamic one, and the entire history reflected in the Quran, and even more so,

--- PAGE BREAK ---

132
Part 2. Monotheistic religions and types of political theologies
The entire history of Islamic conquests is connected with this. In the
beginning, there was a struggle between Muhammad's community and his
followers against the Arab pagans. Later,this grew into the imposition of
Islam on the surrounding peoples. The impulse to strictly combine religion
with politics, the unconditional assertion of the necessity for Muslims to rule
over all non-Muslims, and the call for the destruction of polytheists all had a
tremendous explosive effect in the era of Muhammad, in the late 7th and
early 8th centuries. And already during the eighth century, in just a few
decades, a gigantic Islamic empire was created. In this empire, everyone
either converted to Islam, found themselves in the position of "dhimmi"
("People of the Book"), or were destroyed. We see the construction of the
first Arab Caliphate as a complete and brutal affirmation of the foundations
of Islamic theology, reflected in the Quran and stemming from the main tenet
of the Islamic religion (the absolute transcendence and uniqueness of the
Creator).
The first Arab Caliphate, founded during Muhammad's lifetime, was a
model of the practical application of Islamic teachings and their
embodiment in life. For centuries thereafter, this was considered the norm
for Muslims. History, of course, placed Muslims in new historical
circumstances. They were not always able to behave as strictly and
consistently (aggressively) everywhere. They did not always succeed in
following the original line flawlessly in everything. But where such an
opportunity arose, it was precisely this approach that prevailed: the
combination of religion and politics, the direct implementation of the
metaphysics of creationism, embodied in the political power of Muslims,
without any intermediate instances.
Thus, Islamic history in its internal — paradigmatic — dimension
represents an eternal struggle against "jahiliyya" ("polytheism," "shirk"), the
eternal conquest of Medina and Mecca by Muhammad's followers, which
symbolically means the struggle against pagans, against all non-Muslims, and
the establishment of Islamic rule over all historically accessible territory. This
is a model, a kind of "ideal type" of society (according to M. Weber), which,
under favourable historical circumstances, also becomes "normal" (according
to F. Tönnies). The conception of the Islamic religion, embodied in the
Islamic political system and historically fixed in the Arab Caliphate, is for
Muslims a kind of absolute horizon of the Political.
1   Dugin, A. G. Noomakhia. Semites. Monotheism of the Moon and the Gestalt of Wa'al.system and historically fixed in the Arab Caliphate, is for
Muslims a kind of absolute horizon of the Political.
1   Dugin, A. G. Noomakhia. Semites. Monotheism of the Moon and the Gestalt of Wa'al.

--- PAGE BREAK ---ally fixed in the Arab Caliphate, is for
Muslims a kind of absolute horizon of the Political.
1   Dugin, A. G. Noomakhia. Semites. Monotheism of the Moon and the Gestalt of Wa'al.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

133
Chapter 3. Political Philosophy of Islam
The House of Islam and the House of War
Contemporary Islamic theorists (mainly theorists of pure Islam1) have
proposed the theory of the "three houses." Where the rules we have discussed
are observed, that is, where Sharia law is established, there is the "house of
Islam" (Arabic: "dar al-Islam,"
). The territory where there is no "dar al-Islam" is called
"dar al-kufr 2" (
 ), "house of falsehood" or "house of Satan" (
 ) —
because any non-Islamic society is a "Satanic society." A Muslim who lives in
the "house of Islam" must be peaceful, law-abiding and humble. He is on his
own territory, and any deviation from Sharia law is both a moral sin and a
social crime, which must inevitably result in appropriate punishment.
Meanwhile, a Muslim living in the "house of falsehood" must turn that
house into a "house of war" ("dar al-harb" —
 ). Thus, if a Muslim
lives in an Islamic society, he is a respectable and law-abiding citizen.
However, if this same Muslim is transferred to a non-Islamic society, he
becomes a centre of terrorist activity and turns the "house of Satan" into a
"house of war" — in order to sooner or later destroy the polytheists
("jahiliya") or subjugate the "people of the Book" (because Christians and
Jews — in normal circumstances — should also be subordinate to Muslims,
i.e. have the status of "dhimmis" under "protection").
Of course, most Muslims today do not believe this and do not adhere to
it, but throughout world history there have been Islamic tendencies that have
repeatedly returned to original Islam and sought to build the same caliphate,
to reproduce the same logic. Today, this is a minority of Muslims, but
nevertheless, this principle is at the heart of the Islamic religion itself, at the
heart of the religious philosophy and theology of Islam, and at the heart of the
political system of Islam. Therefore, there is always the possibility that a
certain group of Muslims will decide to return to the original model and
transform
1According to Iraqi scholar Majid Khadduri (1909–2007), this theory basically took
shape around 732 after the Umayyad Caliphate got beat at the Battle of Poitiers, which
stopped the spread of Islam in Europe. See: Khadduri M. War and Peace in the Law of Islam.
Baltimore: The Johns Hopkins Press, 1955.
2  The term "kufr" (
 ) means "unbelief," "concealment (of the truth)," etc. Hence
"kafir" means "unbeliever" or "non-believer."d Peace in the Law of Islam.
Baltimore: The Johns Hopkins Press, 1955.
2  The term "kufr" (
 ) means "unbelief," "concealment (of the truth)," etc. Hence
"kafir" means "unbeliever" or "non-believer."

--- PAGE BREAK ---f Islam.
Baltimore: The Johns Hopkins Press, 1955.
2  The term "kufr" (
 ) means "unbelief," "concealment (of the truth)," etc. Hence
"kafir" means "unbeliever" or "non-believer."

--- PAGE BREAK ---

134
Part 2. Monotheistic religions and types of political theologies
the "house of falsehood" (dar al-kufr) becomes the "house of war" (dar al-
harb). This gives rise to a corresponding system of actions directed against
societies that do not conform to Islamic norms.
In the full sense of the word, such a coherent ideology did not dominate
for long. Muslims lived according to this law for several decades — during
the era of the first Arab Caliphate1. At that time, there were no hereditary
rulers of the ummah — the most courageous and gifted were chosen from
among Muhammad's companions; there were no nation states or priesthood.
It was a society of radical, militant and religious egalitarianism, jamaat
(Arabic
— a society, collective, community), male brotherhoods, which were
essentially engaged in warfare against atheists, polytheists, and Christians (at
that time, Jews did not constitute an independent political force). Although
this idea was given theoretical form at the next stage — during the Umayyad
Caliphate (2) —when some deviations from the original model of Muhammad's
military-religious community had already occurred.
In general, the theory of the "three houses" has become widespread
among theorists and practitioners of Salafism and Wahhabism, radical
fundamentalists and other structures. It forms the basis of the political
projects of extremist organisations such as Al-Qaeda (
 ), Hizb ut-Tahrir (
), Islamic State (also
known as Daesh —   3  etc.
Shiism and its philosophy
During the reign of the third caliph, Uthman ibn Affan (574–656), the
Fitna (Arabic:
 f, meaning "turmoil") began, a civil war within Islam. At
this point, Islam split into two deeply different tendencies: Sunni and
Shia. During this civil war, an alternative pole emerged in the form of the
Prophet Muhammad's cousin, Ali (599–661), who was married to his
daughter Fatima (605–633). A separate party, the Shia (Arabic:
 —
literally "party," "group of followers"). Since politics in Islam is
inextricably linked to religion, the struggle for power in the Arab
Caliphate was inextricably and organically intertwined with theological
issues and the problem of interpreting the Quran and Islamic tradition as a
whole.
1   Dugin, A. G. Noomakhia. Semites. Monotheism of the Moon and the Gestalt of Wa'al.
2   Khadduri M. War and Peace in the Law of Islam.
3These organisations are officially banned in the Russian Federation and most countries as
terrorist organisations.e Moon and the Gestalt of Wa'al.
2   Khadduri M. War and Peace in the Law of Islam.
3These organisations are officially banned in the Russian Federation and most countries as
terrorist organisations.

--- PAGE BREAK ---lt of Wa'al.
2   Khadduri M. War and Peace in the Law of Islam.
3These organisations are officially banned in the Russian Federation and most countries as
terrorist organisations.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

135
Chapter 3. Political Philosophy of Islam
This is how Shiism emerged as a distinct branch of Islam. Shiism asserts
that all fundamental Islamic tenets accepted by the Muslim ummah
(community) at that time are completely valid. Except for one, but
fundamental, concerning the legitimate political authority in Islamic society
and, at the same time (inseparable from this), the question of the highest
authority in interpreting Muhammad's legacy. The Shiites, supporters of Ali,
proclaimed that, apart from the figure of the prophet, nabi (Arabic:
 ),
Muhammad, there is another fundamental figure — the interpreter, the wali
(Arabic:
 — "interpreter," "support," "saint"), who possesses the highest
divine knowledge of the Quran and the basic religious tenets. This interpreter
is Ali, the prophet's cousin. Accordingly, the fundamental principle of equality
on which Islamic philosophy is based is violated or, more precisely,
significantly modified.
This gives rise to a completely different model of theology, a different
religious philosophy, where another instance appears between God and the
world. Islam eliminates all instances between God and the world, while
Shiism, recognising the adequacy of this elimination in relation to polytheists,
and partly to Christians and Jews, re-establishes a certain instance that turns
out to be more important than the ordinary person. This is further developed in
the theory of "imamate" (Arabic:
 ), which is an institution of rulers-
interpreters and their loyal followers (Shiites), founded by
the "first imam" Ali, and then his descendants, the "holy imams" 1.
Thus, Shiism establishes anthropological, ontological, soteriological,
gnoseological, and political inequality. All people are equal, Shiites assert,
except for the "holy imams." All people are the same, except for the house of
the Prophet Muhammad through his cousin and his daughter Fatima. The
holy imams are intermediaries between God and people, and only they know
how to interpret the Quran and Islam correctly. That is, only they possess the
keys to true interpretation, and only their interpretation is reliable. In a
religious sense, a new authority emerges. When asked how to understand the
suras of the Quran and the hadiths, Shiites respond: as the holy imams tell us.
Accordingly, it is they who should hold power in a fully-fledged Islamic
society. This community was founded by the prophet, the nabi, who is
considered the last in Islam. Therefore, he may have successors among the
prophets, whose chain ends with Muhammad. They are replaced by a chain
of interpreters, the vali, that is, the imamate.
1   Dugin, A. G. Noomakhia. Semites. Monotheism of the Moon and the Gestalt of Va'al.ts, whose chain ends with Muhammad. They are replaced by a chain
of interpreters, the vali, that is, the imamate.
1   Dugin, A. G. Noomakhia. Semites. Monotheism of the Moon and the Gestalt of Va'al.

--- PAGE BREAK ---with Muhammad. They are replaced by a chain
of interpreters, the vali, that is, the imamate.
1   Dugin, A. G. Noomakhia. Semites. Monotheism of the Moon and the Gestalt of Va'al.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

136
Part 2. Monotheistic religions and types of political theologies
Ali's opponents, the followers of Uthman, rejected the claims of the
Shiites in both theology and politics. And military force was on their side.
This led to a division between the Shiites, supporters of Ali and the imamate,
and the Sunnis, who relied on the interpretation of the Quran and the Sunnah
(
 — sacred Islamic tradition). The Umayyad Caliphate was Sunni, and
Ali's supporters found themselves in the role of a persecuted minority (1).
The Mahdi and the culture of expectation
Shiism is a deeply elitist ideology that permeates Islam and changes
many of its aspects. "Elitist" in this case means that all people are equal, but
there are those who are higher than all these equals — the "holy imams." This
gives rise to the idea of the political power of the imams — only the Alids
(Arabic:
 ) can rule, and if there are none, representatives of the holy
imams must rule, who act as intermediaries not only with God, but with the
imams. It is believed that the Last Imam (the Seventh for the Ismailis and the
Twelfth for the Twelver Shiites) did not die but went into hiding and will
return at the end of time.
This gives rise to a political "culture of waiting." The Shiites await the
arrival of the Imam, and until he comes, they remain in the minority and
are persecuted. They base their political system on the return of the holy
Imam Mahdi. A new fundamental hierarchy emerges, rejected by Sunni
Islam, giving rise to the dynastic succession of the Alids and the idea that
religious interpretation should be based on the authority of the holy
Imams.
Between the status quo, in which Sunnis enjoy political and theological
superiority, and the ideal Shiite state, there is opposition. It will be resolved
through the arrival of the last Imam and his representatives. However, the
expectation of the Mahdi should not be passive: his arrival must be hastened
by the struggle for Shiite truth, which is both religious and political. This
principle was the basis for the Fatimid Caliphate (909–1171), which
temporarily united the countries of the Maghreb and the Middle East under
Shiite rule, the Karmathian state, and later Safavid Iran, created in 1501 by
the Shiites, and the modern Islamic Republic of Iran.
1   Dugin, A. G. Noomakhia. Semites. Monotheism of the Moon and the Gestalt of Wa'al.
2   Korben, A. History of Islamic Philosophy. Moscow: Sadra, 2018.
3   Dugin, A. G. Noomakhia. Iranian Logos. The World War and the Culture of Expectation.theism of the Moon and the Gestalt of Wa'al.
2   Korben, A. History of Islamic Philosophy. Moscow: Sadra, 2018.
3   Dugin, A. G. Noomakhia. Iranian Logos. The World War and the Culture of Expectation.

--- PAGE BREAK ---nd the Gestalt of Wa'al.
2   Korben, A. History of Islamic Philosophy. Moscow: Sadra, 2018.
3   Dugin, A. G. Noomakhia. Iranian Logos. The World War and the Culture of Expectation.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

137
Chapter 3. Political Philosophy of Islam
Shiism and Iranian influences
So, two parties emerged in the Islamic world: Sunni and Shia. One
(Sunnis) stands for the original version of Islam, although since the
Umayyad era it has undergone certain changes that became even more
apparent in the Abbasid Caliphate (with its capital in Baghdad), while the
other stands for the Shiite version (1).Thus, a certain pole of alternative
metaphysics emerged in Islam, which was immediately projected into
alternative politics. Moreover, since we have seen that theology and politics
are not separate in Islam, a slight change in theological orientation (as in
Shiism) also changes the political structure.
These principles are valid for understanding the history of Islamic states
in the period of traditional societies (pre-modern), but they also have a
significant influence on the current political situation in Islamic societies.
Thus, modern Iran is a Shiite state in the full sense of the word, and the
current leadership of Syria is also Shiite (Alawites are one of the branches of
Shiism).
There are two other fundamental elements that changed Islamic
metaphysics and politics. The second element, alongside Shiism, was a
movement known as spiritual Islam or intellectual Islam. This movement
began to develop during the Abbasid Caliphate and was dominated almost
exclusively by Iranians (2).
Arab Muslims, who were the first to adopt this ideology (extremely
Sunni), took over the Persian Empire of the Sassanids, killed a bunch of
Zoroastrians, and made everyone else convert to Islam. Thus, huge masses
of a completely different Iranian culture, which had nothing in common
with the Arabs and represented a different metaphysics based on the
principle of the opposition of Light and Darkness3, found themselves under
Islamic influence (having accepted Islam, they immediately began to
reinterpret it based on their own deep philosophical models). An Iranian
stratum immediately formed around the first Shiites, supporters of Ali. The
Iranians enthusiastically supported the Shiite version because they saw in it
much more similarity to their own pre-Islamic tradition. Gradually, Shiism
became, to a large extent, an almost purely Iranian phenomenon.
1   Dugin, A. G. Noomakhia. Iranian Logos. The World War and the Culture of Expectation.
2   Korben, A. History of Islamic Philosophy.
3   Dugin, A. G. Noomakhia. Iranian Logos. World War and the Culture of Waiting.. Noomakhia. Iranian Logos. The World War and the Culture of Expectation.
2   Korben, A. History of Islamic Philosophy.
3   Dugin, A. G. Noomakhia. Iranian Logos. World War and the Culture of Waiting.

--- PAGE BREAK ---Logos. The World War and the Culture of Expectation.
2   Korben, A. History of Islamic Philosophy.
3   Dugin, A. G. Noomakhia. Iranian Logos. World War and the Culture of Waiting.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

138
Part 2. Monotheistic religions and types of political theologies
Sufism — the secret "religion of love"
In Sunni Islam, another movement developed in parallel — Sufism,
which radically reinterpreted the Islamic tradition in the spirit of Platonism
and dualistic Iranian light gnosis1. This was a completely different Islamic
philosophy. In essence, Islamic philosophy itself was created
by the
Iranians.For example, the two greatest representatives of Islamic philosophy,
Al-Farabi ( 870–950) and Avicenna (980–1037), were Iranians.
Iranian philosophy and Sufism represented a metaphysics based on the
metaphysics of mediation. We have already established that Islam
categorically rejects mediation. Sufism and spiritual Islam, on the other hand,
affirm mediation. For example, it is claimed that before Muhammad there
was the eternal Light of Muhammad (Arabic:
), which existed between God and people and manifested itself in the
historical Muhammad. Accordingly, this Light connected God and the world,
and those who are part of this Light are special beings, "friends of God."
Once again, an anthropological differentiation arises, dividing people into
two types on grounds very close to Platonism. The "friends of God" are
those who contemplate His Light, rising above the prejudices of the blind
majority, who are satisfied with merely contemplating the play of shadows
on the wall of Plato's cave.
Sufism is less politically pronounced than Shiism. Sufis do not have a
single doctrine about who should hold power. They have not created their
own political doctrine, but they do believe that Sufi sages, or sheikhs, should
guide political power. This applies equally to Sunnis and Shiites. The
consideration of the inner dimension of existence, which Sufis insist on, is
extremely useful for ensuring that power is just, harmonious, and spiritual.
Also, Sufis do not have a big problem with the existence of Muslims outside
Islamic society. Following their own — inner — tol-
1 Korben, A. The Man of Light in Iranian Sufism. Moscow: Foundation for the Study of
Islamic Culture; Magic Mountain; Design. Information Cartography, 2009
2   Dugin, A. G. Noomakhia. Iranian Logos. The Light War and the Culture of Expectation.
3 Al-Farabi is the author of a series of treatises on the "ideal state," which generally follow
Plato's main line of thought. In Islamic philosophy, he was the one who most fully described the
model of "Kallipolis." Al-Farabi. On the Perfect State. Oxford: Clarendon Press, 1985. At the
same time, he proposed building Islamic societies on this basis in specific political and historical
circumstances, that is, harmoniously combining Plato's "ideal type" with Aristotle's "normal type."
Al-Farabi. The Political Writings. Selected Aphorisms and Other Texts. Ithaca: Cornell
University Press, 2001.s, that is, harmoniously combining Plato's "ideal type" with Aristotle's "normal type."
Al-Farabi. The Political Writings. Selected Aphorisms and Other Texts. Ithaca: Cornell
University Press, 2001.

--- PAGE BREAK ---usly combining Plato's "ideal type" with Aristotle's "normal type."
Al-Farabi. The Political Writings. Selected Aphorisms and Other Texts. Ithaca: Cornell
University Press, 2001.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

139
Chapter 3. Political Philosophy of Islam
the Islamic religion, they can adapt to any society, finding reflections of the
one Truth everywhere. Thus, the greatest philosopher of Sufism, Ibn Arabi
(1165–1240), wrote about a special "religion of love," understanding it as the
teaching of the Sufis:
My heart has become capable of taking any form: it is a pasture for
gazelles, a monastery for Christian monks, a temple for idols, the Kaaba
for pilgrims walking around it, the tablets of the Torah, and the scroll of
the Quran. I follow the religion of love, and whatever path the camels of
love choose, that is my religion, my faith.
Mazhabs and states
Already in the Umayyad Caliphate and the Abbasid Caliphate that
followed, the idea of dynastic succession of caliphs gradually took root,
which was a departure from the original egalitarianism of the umma. Various
ideas and attitudes of the peoples who found themselves under Arab rule
also began to gradually penetrate Islamic culture, gradually strengthening
their influence on the Arab elite. Thus, in the Abbasid Caliphate, the active
formation of legal schools, or madhhabs (Arabic:
 ), began.
The most widespread was the Hanafi madhhab (Arabic:
 f — Hanafi),
which included local ethnic beliefs as one of the sources of law, something
that was completely unthinkable in early Islam. Other madhhabs —
primarily the Hanbali (Arabic:
 ) — reflected attitudes more
appropriate to Arab nomadic societies. The Shiites created their own
madhhab, the Ja'fari (Arabic:
 ), which included the political and
religious ideas of the imamate (3).
At the same time, the unified Islamic space became pluralised: various
separate states began to emerge, where Islam and Sharia law formally
dominated, but local customs — including those relating to the political and
social structure — continued to retain their significance to a large extent. The
initial extreme metaphysical radicalism of the early Caliphate increasingly
gave way to various local lo-
1   Dugin, A. G. Noomakhia. Semites. Monotheism of the Moon and the Gestalt of Wa'al.
2  Ibn al-Arabi. Turjum{n al-Ashw{q. Beirut: D{r ?{dir, 1966. English translation in
Nicholson R. The Tarjumán al-Ashwáq: A Collection of Mystical Odes by Muhyiddn Ibn al-
’Arab. London: Royal Asiatic Society, Oriental. 1911.
3   Dugin A. G. Noomakhia. Semites. The monotheism of the moon and the gestalt of Wa'al.hwáq: A Collection of Mystical Odes by Muhyiddn Ibn al-
’Arab. London: Royal Asiatic Society, Oriental. 1911.
3   Dugin A. G. Noomakhia. Semites. The monotheism of the moon and the gestalt of Wa'al.

--- PAGE BREAK ---f Mystical Odes by Muhyiddn Ibn al-
’Arab. London: Royal Asiatic Society, Oriental. 1911.
3   Dugin A. G. Noomakhia. Semites. The monotheism of the moon and the gestalt of Wa'al.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

140
Part 2. Monotheistic religions and types of political theologies
cal tendencies. In the Abbasid Caliphate, which replaced the Umayyad
Caliphate1, these tendencies became somewhat entrenched. Although the state
was conceived as a religious umma, it largely acquired an independent
character.
The political landscape
The political history of Muslim societies is closely linked to theology.
Theology and politics are inseparable components of a unified Islamic
worldview. This fully confirms the basic thesis that politics is only one
dimension of philosophy, if we understand philosophy broadly, including
religion and its inherent metaphysical picture of the world, i.e., theology. The
political philosophy of Islam is shaped by how the Islamic religious
worldview emphasises, understands or interprets the relationship between the
world (human beings) to God, how radically or non-radically it pursues the
idea of the absence of a mediator, or, conversely, how it expresses and
describes an intermediate instance between God and the world. The entire
political history of Islamic societies is inextricably linked to theological
attitudes within Islam. The same principle applies here as the features of
Islamic architecture noted by Shuon: the pattern of the political history of
Islamic peoples and states is built depending on the structures of the
metaphysical interpretation of the most profound and fundamental
theological and metaphysical questions. The nature of the relationship with
God, the interpretation of sacred texts, and one or another version of the
sacred determine how events, wars, conflicts, dynastic collisions, popular
uprisings, and social protests unfold. It should be noted that when dealing
with Islamic society, we find ourselves in the paradigm of Tradition
(Premodern), and therefore the transcendent dimension underlying Islamic
religion and dogma must be taken into account as a crucial and effective
factor.
In order to understand what is happening in the Islamic world and how
we should build relations with Muslims today, it is necessary to operate on
the basis of theological principles.
Salafism and Wahhabism
Today, there are several versions of political Islam.
1Remnants of the Umayyad state survived, however, in North-West Africa and on the Iberian
Peninsula, where they persisted for several more centuries.y, there are several versions of political Islam.
1Remnants of the Umayyad state survived, however, in North-West Africa and on the Iberian
Peninsula, where they persisted for several more centuries.

--- PAGE BREAK ---versions of political Islam.
1Remnants of the Umayyad state survived, however, in North-West Africa and on the Iberian
Peninsula, where they persisted for several more centuries.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

141
Chapter 3. Political Philosophy of Islam
•radical Islam, Salafism (and its extreme form, modern Wahhabism),
•political Shiism,
•and a wide range of versions of traditional Islam. Salafi Islam (from
the Arabic
 , meaning "the followers of the first generation") calls
for
It seeks to return to the ideals and norms of the first Arab Caliphate, the era
of Muhammad himself and his companions. Here, the political programme
consists of a literal repetition of early Islamic history, including an
uncompromising attitude towards "infidels," a tightening of the application
of Sharia law, a rejection of flexible forms of legal interpretation, and an
irreconcilable struggle against internal Islam (Sufism) and Shiism. Salafis
differ from representatives of traditional Islam precisely in that they view
virtually all periods of Islamic history with suspicion, with the exception of
the earliest era. They see a departure from the "ideal" ("norm") already under
the Abbasids, not to mention later periods.
In the 18th century, an even more radical version of Salafism emerged in
Saudi Arabia, rejecting all madhhabs (although most Salafis still recognise
the legitimacy of established Islamic legal forms, except for Shiite ones) —
Wahhabism. Its founder was the preacher Muhammad ibn Abd al-Wahhab
(1703–1792), who called on his followers to reject any interpretation of the
Quran and Sunnah, taking everything strictly literally and returning to the
6th–7th centuries, right down to clothing, everyday life and the smallest
details.Among the Wahhabis, Salafi tendencies towards the "purification of
Islam" reached their logical conclusion, and the entire history of traditional
Islam was subjected to radical criticism, being recognised as a deviation and
hidden "idolatry" (i.e. shirk). The alliance of Wahhabi reformers with the
political leaders of the Saud dynasty, the traditional rulers of the Arabian city
of Ed-Diriyah, laid the foundation for the future state of Saudi Arabia, which
emerged with British support on the ruins of the Ottoman Empire.
Saudi Arabia and a number of Arab states close to it remain to this day a
stronghold of radical Salafism and its corresponding political philosophy.
Ideologically close to this movement is the Muslim Brotherhood, which
emerged in Egypt. In its extreme forms, this version of Islam is used to
justify terrorism and various forms of political and religious extremism,
which stems from the literal application of
1   Dugin, A. G. Noomakhia. Semites. Monotheism of the Moon and the Gestalt of Wa'al.ify terrorism and various forms of political and religious extremism,
which stems from the literal application of
1   Dugin, A. G. Noomakhia. Semites. Monotheism of the Moon and the Gestalt of Wa'al.

--- PAGE BREAK ---rious forms of political and religious extremism,
which stems from the literal application of
1   Dugin, A. G. Noomakhia. Semites. Monotheism of the Moon and the Gestalt of Wa'al.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

142
Part 2. Monotheistic religions and types of political theologies
the principle of the "three houses." The Islamic State is one of the most striking
examples of such a political-religious model.
Contemporary Shiism
Modern Shiism prevails in the Islamic Republic of Iran, where, after the
overthrow of the Shah's regime, a special form of Shiite rule was established,
called the "state of the enlightened" (1)   (Arabic:
 — "wilayat al-faqih").
It assumes that while the Last Imam is still in hiding, Shiite scholars, who
form a hierarchy based on the depth of their religious experience and breadth
of Islamic knowledge, should rule on his behalf. The highest rulers are the
Ayatollahs (
 , the highest rank among interpreters of religion and law),
among whom the Alids, descendants of various branches of the family of Ali,
are particularly distinguished. Together, the Alids constitute the "ahl al-Bayt"
(
 ), meaning "people of the House," referring to the descendants of
Muhammad and Ali.
The "wilayat al-faqih" system is oriented towards the coming of the
"end times," when the Last Imam must return to the world and engage in
the final battle with the armies of Darkness (which the Shiites consider to
be primarily modern Western civilisation — materialistic, atheistic,
colonial and hegemonic). This should be accompanied by the spread of
Shiism and a series of political victories.
The model of "wilayat al-faqih" and the theories of the Islamic (Shiite)
revolution were developed in the 20th century by Shiite intellectuals,
primarily Imam Khomeini (1900–1989), who became the leader of the
Iranian Revolution of 1979. However, similar ideas were supported by the
Shiites of Iraq (who make up about 70 per cent of the Iraqi population) and
the Lebanese Shiite movement Hezbollah. There are also Shiite
populations in other countries, such as Syria, Yemen (where Shiite
Houthis are currently fighting other political groups), Bahrain, Turkey
(Alevis), and some countries in the Middle East, the Maghreb, and Central
Asia. Shiism is also somewhat widespread in Africa and the United States
(mainly among African Americans). There are Shiites in Saudi Arabia and
Pakistan.
The Shiites, who have always been persecuted, have a principle called
takiyya (Arabic:
 — "prudence," "caution," "discretion").
1   Dugin, A. G. Noomakhia. Iranian Logos. The World War and the Culture of Expectation.
(2)  The Shiite revolution in Iran took place in January 1978 - February 1979 (1357 according to
the Iranian calendar)., A. G. Noomakhia. Iranian Logos. The World War and the Culture of Expectation.
(2)  The Shiite revolution in Iran took place in January 1978 - February 1979 (1357 according to
the Iranian calendar).

--- PAGE BREAK ---ranian Logos. The World War and the Culture of Expectation.
(2)  The Shiite revolution in Iran took place in January 1978 - February 1979 (1357 according to
the Iranian calendar).

--- PAGE BREAK ---

143
Chapter 3. Political Philosophy of Islam
"caution"), i.e. the principle of concealing one's own affiliation in difficult
circumstances. Thus, Shiites do not always say that they are Shiites. And in
cases where they encounter aggressive opponents of Shiism, they may refer
to themselves as "Sunnis". Shiism is a tradition that is, in a sense, parallel to
Islam. Shiism has almost always lost historical battles, and all the first imams
were killed.Therefore, it is very difficult to determine the exact number of
Shiites in the world.
Shiism is a tradition of suffering and pain, a tradition of waiting. But
this waiting must be active and energetic. At present, Shiite authorities
clearly distinguish between the signs of the "last days" and the approaching
arrival of the Mahdi, the Last Imam. This has a significant impact on the
contemporary political map of the Middle East and, to some extent,
Central Asia. The confrontation between modern Iran and Israel is
interpreted by both sides in religious and eschatological terms. For
Shiites, the state of Israel, which arose on territories previously inhabited
by Muslims and is preparing to destroy the Al-Aqsa Mosque, the second
holiest site in Islam after the Kaaba, in order to begin construction of the
Third Temple on that site, embodies the power of pure evil — the principle of
Dajjal (Arabic:
 ), the "Deceiver" — the analogue of the Antichrist in
Christian political philosophy, is an eschatological enemy. The support of
Israel by the West, and especially the United States, further convinces
Shiites of the correctness of this analysis (the West is= Dadjal, or "Great
Shaitan," in the words of Khomeini). In response, Israelis identify Iran as the
force that is preventing the coming of the Messiah and seeking to prevent the
fulfilment of the prophecies about the restoration of the Third Temple.
Traditional Islam
It remains to briefly consider traditional Islam. As a rule, this refers to
the Abbasid-Ottoman versions of Islam adapted to local conditions. That
is, "traditional Islam" refers to Sunni Islam, but not fundamentalist, Salafi, or
Wahhabi Islam. At the theological level, this form of Islam tends to soften the
relationship between the world and God. Theological and
1  It is reported that Abu Hasan Rida said: "All eleven imams after the Prophet (s) were
killed. Some died by the sword, like the Commander of the Faithful and Husayn (a), and others
were poisoned." Al-Ka'im Mahdi Muntazir. Jesus in the Qur'an and Hadith. St. Petersburg:
Petersburg Oriental Studies, 2012. P. 63.
2   Dugin, A. G. Noomakhia. Iranian Logos. World War and the Culture of Expectation.Al-Ka'im Mahdi Muntazir. Jesus in the Qur'an and Hadith. St. Petersburg:
Petersburg Oriental Studies, 2012. P. 63.
2   Dugin, A. G. Noomakhia. Iranian Logos. World War and the Culture of Expectation.

--- PAGE BREAK ---zir. Jesus in the Qur'an and Hadith. St. Petersburg:
Petersburg Oriental Studies, 2012. P. 63.
2   Dugin, A. G. Noomakhia. Iranian Logos. World War and the Culture of Expectation.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

144
Part 2. Monotheistic religions and types of political theologies
The metaphysical meaning of traditional Islam lies in softening the
opposition between the immanent existence given to us and the transcendent
Beginning (Allah). As soon as this opposition is softened, we are dealing
with traditional Islam.
And where this traditional Islam reaches its highest intellectual level of
understanding, we encounter Sufi tariqas (Arabic:
— road, path), orders,
and representatives of tasawwuf (Arabic    ).
Sufism, continuing the line of Ibn Arabi, reinterprets the exclusive
oneness of God into an inclusive unity, which allows Muslims to find a place
outside the Sharia context, and in Islamic societies to be sufficiently open to
various religious forms — primarily monotheistic, but not exclusively so
(as Asian Sufism demonstrates in relation to the polytheistic traditions of
Hinduism and Buddhism). Politically, this is reflected in the fact that
traditional Islam even formally rejects Salafism, recognises the legitimacy
of various periods of Islamic and world history, and seeks to find the key
to their dialectical interpretation. Therefore, for traditional Islam, the
interpretation of the Quran is always relevant and should not be closed at any
stage or rejected altogether (as in Wahhabism).
At the same time, supporters of traditional Islam, which includes the vast
majority of Muslims in all countries, do not have a single political ideology.
Such Islam naturally gravitates towards maintaining Sharia norms, insisting
on the fulfilment of religious obligations and the norms of Islamic law.
Where possible, priority is given to the creation of an Islamic social order
based on the principles of the Quran and Sunnah. However, the most
stringent precepts of Islam are interpreted allegorically. Thus, among the two
versions of "jihad" (1)  ,"holy war," priority is given to the "great jihad," which
believers must wage against their own vices and weaknesses, while the
"lesser jihad," i.e., the actual "war against infidels," is interpreted as
opposition to the enemies of the fatherland, that is, in the spirit of generalised
patriotism. Therefore, traditional Islam and its most intellectual core (Sufism)
contrast with the more clearly expressed models of the Salafis and Shiites
(both in theology and politics), but at the same time it does not represent
something whole and allows for
many versions.
1 This interpretation goes back to the Arab jurist and theologian of the Abbasid period, al-
Khatib al-Baghdadi (1002–1071), whose authority is generally rejected by Salafis.allows for
many versions.
1 This interpretation goes back to the Arab jurist and theologian of the Abbasid period, al-
Khatib al-Baghdadi (1002–1071), whose authority is generally rejected by Salafis.

--- PAGE BREAK ---ions.
1 This interpretation goes back to the Arab jurist and theologian of the Abbasid period, al-
Khatib al-Baghdadi (1002–1071), whose authority is generally rejected by Salafis.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

145
Chapter 3. Political Philosophy of Islam
The Sufi Empire of the late
The political ideas set forth by Ibn Arabi in his major work
The Meccan Prophecies
1bear a striking resemblance to Shiite
eschatology. Ibn Arabi describes the regime that the Mahdi and his loyal
viziers will establish at the end of time as a model state. The Mahdi here
represents an eschatological version of the "perfect man" (al-ins{n al-k{mil
—
 ), who is generally described by Ibn Arabi as a mediator
between God and the world and a divine vice-regent. At the beginning of
time, the "perfect man" is represented by Adam, and at the end by the
Mahdi. The Mahdi, like the Jewish Messiah, is presented as the "ideal
ruler." During the reign of the Mahdi, the restrictive aspects of external
Islam and a number of legal interpretations will be abolished, as the Mahdi
will know spiritual truth directly. The Mahdi's viziers are described as
spiritual beings capable of penetrating divine mysteries and, together with
the Mahdi, bringing the external material world into conformity with the
Divine plan and light archetypes. Ibn Arabi clarifies that none of the Mahdi's
assistants will be ethnic Arabs, although they will all speak only Arabic.
Some passages by Ibn Arabi suggest that the Mahdi's "vizirs," endowed
with superhuman qualities, will not be mere servants, but his mentors,
direct conduits of divine will, a kind of incarnate angels, while he himself
will be only a sword, that is, an instrument of will. This again takes us back
to the rule of the philosopher-guardians of Plato's Kallipolis. Mahdi (al-
Mahdi —
 ) literally means
"guided" (meaning "guided by God"), but his viziers are
called "the guided" (al-hudat —
 ). According to Ibn Arabi, there should
be nine such "guided" ones.
It is important that the Sufi vision of the End Times Empire includes a
forceful component. The Mahdi himself is repeatedly referred to as a
"sword," and various fragments of the "Mecca Prophecies" emphasise that he
will defeat his enemies by force.
At the same time, one of the most important features of the Mahdi's rule
should be the fair distribution of wealth and honours. If injustice reigns in the
present world, the Mahdi's empire will overturn the existing proportions and
restore the divine order that has been lost over time. This is the social
character of political Sufism, which is, however, exclusively
1   Morris J W., Chittick W. (ed.) Ibn ‘Arabi:¯ The Meccan Revelations. NY: Pir Press, 2002.
—
—
—een lost over time. This is the social
character of political Sufism, which is, however, exclusively
1   Morris J W., Chittick W. (ed.) Ibn ‘Arabi:¯ The Meccan Revelations. NY: Pir Press, 2002.
—
—
—

--- PAGE BREAK ---This is the social
character of political Sufism, which is, however, exclusively
1   Morris J W., Chittick W. (ed.) Ibn ‘Arabi:¯ The Meccan Revelations. NY: Pir Press, 2002.
—
—
—

--- PAGE BREAK ---

146
Part 2. Monotheistic religions and types of political theologies
In view of the prospect of the "end of the world," Sufis suggest focusing
on the inner spiritual path and calmly accepting the injustices and
lawlessness that prevail in the world. In this, the Sufi attitude towards
society differs significantly from Salafi projects, which insist that
compliance with Sharia law is already a sufficient condition for justice and
that this must be enforced immediately, without waiting for some special
era.
Sufi sheikhs, including the highest among them, who have the status
of "pole" (al-qutb —
 ), generally avoid direct involvement in politics,
limiting themselves to providing spiritual guidance to those leaders who
turn to them for help. However, in the end times, Sufi teachings (and
therefore the inner core of traditional Islam) take on pronounced political
features, and the scenario of the Mahdi's struggle with his opponents, and
even his title "Great Imam" (al-Iman al-Akbar —
 ) completely
coincides with Shiite eschatology. The only difference is that the Sufi
scenario of the restoration of the "ideal state" under the leadership of the
"perfect man" is not directly linked to the descendants of Ali, and
accordingly, the Sufi Mahdi is seen as having no (at least explicit)
connection with the "hidden Imam."
Islam of the Medina Constitution
However, there is another version of traditional Islam that differs from
Sufism. In this interpretation, the emphasis is not so much on metaphysics as
on determining what constitutes the normative structure of society. In this
case, the focus is on the position of the Islamic ummah that prevailed during
the lifetime of Muhammad himself. At that time, his followers formed a
traditional tribal community of Arab nomads, where the laws of military
democracy prevailed, but in the case of Muslims, the head of this community
was the prophet. Probably, the Jews in the era of Abraham, but also Moses
and up to the era of the Judges, were a similar society, which was replaced by
the establishment of the kingdom under Samuel and Saul. In the corpus of
Islamic hadiths, evidence of how this early community was organised is
contained in the so-called Medina Constitution.
Supporters of this interpretation of traditional Islam reject Salafism,
which considers the structure of Islamic society that developed after
Muhammad under the first caliphs (i.e., the "salafa," or "followers") to be an
unconditional dogma. "followers"), when the foundations of the state, as
understood by Sunnis, were laid. In the Umayyad,
—
—ad under the first caliphs (i.e., the "salafa," or "followers") to be an
unconditional dogma. "followers"), when the foundations of the state, as
understood by Sunnis, were laid. In the Umayyad,
—
—

--- PAGE BREAK ---aliphs (i.e., the "salafa," or "followers") to be an
unconditional dogma. "followers"), when the foundations of the state, as
understood by Sunnis, were laid. In the Umayyad,
—
—

--- PAGE BREAK ---

147
Chapter 3. Political Philosophy of Islam
Abbasid and, ultimately, Ottoman caliphates, many extraneous elements were
added to this. The Shiites and Sufis further enriched Islamic culture with
various mystical motifs, moving even further away from Muhammad's Arab
nomadic community than the first caliphs and Salafis. If traditional Islam is
understood in this way, it can serve as a religious justification for the tribal
system in combination with Islamic tradition and as a paradigm for the
preservation or even artificial revival of tribal communities. For some Islamic
peoples who have preserved their tribal institutions (such as the Chechens
and their teips), this interpretation of traditional Islam may be relevant. This
explains why one of the leading theorists of such traditional Islam is the
Chechen public figure Khoja Ahmed Nukhaev.
The same is true for some ethnic groups in Afghanistan, Pakistan and
Malaysia, and probably for the Bedouins who have preserved their nomadic
way of life, some Berber tribes and peoples of Africa who have converted
to Islam.
Islam in Russia
In modern history, and in particular in Russian society, as in Europe,
America and the rest of the world, these theological and, accordingly,
political models are still in force and determine a great deal.
Sunni Islam traditionally dominates among Russian Muslims (only
Azerbaijanis are Shiites).
In Sunni Russian Islam, in turn, there are two poles, two political
philosophies:
1) traditional Islam, oriented mainly towards Sufi tariqas, and
2) radical Islam, Salafi and Wahhabi, imported relatively recently and
mainly from Saudi Arabia).
Radical Islam, as we have seen, is guided by a metaphysical vision of a
harsh confrontation between man and God. In essence, it is a terrorist
ideology that turns any Muslim (if he lives in a non-Islamic society) into a
bearer of "dar al-harb," the "house of war." I f he is in an Islamic b u t non-
Salafi society ( for example, in a Shiite
1   Nukhaev, H.-A. T. Vedeno or Washington? Moscow: Arktogey-Centre, 2001.a
bearer of "dar al-harb," the "house of war." I f he is in an Islamic b u t non-
Salafi society ( for example, in a Shiite
1   Nukhaev, H.-A. T. Vedeno or Washington? Moscow: Arktogey-Centre, 2001.

--- PAGE BREAK ---l-harb," the "house of war." I f he is in an Islamic b u t non-
Salafi society ( for example, in a Shiite
1   Nukhaev, H.-A. T. Vedeno or Washington? Moscow: Arktogey-Centre, 2001.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

148
Part 2. Monotheistic religions and types of political theologies
or in a traditional Islamic environment), he must once again rise up against
"incorrect" (i.e., non-Wahhabi) Islam. Supporters of this radical version
unite in jamaats, militarised political-religious structures that often resort to
terrorist activities. Representatives of traditional Islam, and above all
authoritative Sufi sheikhs, often become the targets of assassinations and
terrorist acts. For Salafis, it is important first and foremost to get rid of
ideological opponents within the Islamic umma itself.
Representatives of traditional Islam in Russia (including Sufi circles) are
not unconditional supporters of the Russian political system. Historically,
some Sufi tariqas became the core of resistance among the mountain Islamic
peoples of the Russian Empire, as was the case, in particular, in the Shamil
uprising (1797–1871). Although these versions of Caucasian Sufism already
had some features of Salafi ideology, directed primarily against local
Caucasian ethnic customs that were calmly accepted by traditional Islam.
Also, traditional Islam, for all its inclusiveness, cannot accept the legitimacy
of atheistic, materialistic, and hedonistic attitudes, as well as social models
that go directly against the norms of Islamic tradition. This applies to certain
aspects of political modernity and, even more so, to postmodernity.
Supporters of traditional Islam are generally bearers of traditional values such
as religion, ethics, justice, morality, family, etc. It was precisely by turning to
traditional Islam for support in the fight against radical (Salafi) Islam that
Russia owed its success in the Second Chechen War, when the main ally of
Moscow in Chechnya became the sheikh of the Sufi tariqa (virda) Akhmad
Kadyrov (1951–2004).
There is irreconcilable enmity between the two designated poles of Islam
— traditional and Salafi. Although Muslims belong to both poles, their
metaphysics, political views, social attitudes, ideas about a normative society,
and attitudes towards other nations and religions are diametrically opposed.ough Muslims belong to both poles, their
metaphysics, political views, social attitudes, ideas about a normative society,
and attitudes towards other nations and religions are diametrically opposed.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

PART 3. THE POLITICAL
PARADIGM OF MODERNITY.
THE WAR OF CONCEPTS

--- PAGE BREAK ---mative society,
and attitudes towards other nations and religions are diametrically opposed.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

PART 3. THE POLITICAL
PARADIGM OF MODERNITY.
THE WAR OF CONCEPTS

--- PAGE BREAK ---

Chapter 1. The Political Philosophy of
Atomism
Generalised paradigm of politics in the pre-
modern era
We now move from the political philosophy of traditional society (pre-
modern) to the political philosophy of modern societies. In order to
understand the political and philosophical essence of this transition, we must
again refer to the map of types of the political, based on Plato's dialogue
"Timaeus." The meaning of modernity and the entire spectrum of political
teachings inherent in it will remain completely incomprehensible if we do not
constantly keep in mind the context in which it originated and what the
fundamental system of axioms, principles, and basic postulates it negated.
Modernity is the negation of Tradition. But as it spread and deepened, what it
originally and programmatically denied disappeared behind the horizon or
was distorted beyond recognition in the biased and obsessive interpretations
of Modernity itself. Therefore, in order to understand how the Political came
to be understood and constructed in the New Age, and on what foundation its
hermeneutics was based, one must always refer to the very scheme that
Modernity itself sought to demolish, refute and abolish.
So, politics in traditional society can generally be reduced to a
common pattern described by Plato and Aristotle, which has remained
fundamentally unchanged throughout this period (right up to modern
times).
All types of political philosophy in traditional society are based on the
first two principles. In turn, they can be divided into Platonic political
philosophy, where the focus is on the figure of the Father and the model of
imitation of the earthly world by the heavenly world, and Aristotelian
political philosophy (the political philosophy of the Son), which focuses on
the world of phenomena, divided into the upper horizon (eidos, Ri[oJ) and the
lower horizon (matter, aKi).Aristotelian
political philosophy (the political philosophy of the Son), which focuses on
the world of phenomena, divided into the upper horizon (eidos, Ri[oJ) and the
lower horizon (matter, aKi).

--- PAGE BREAK ---

152
Part 3. The Political Paradigm of Modernity. The War of Concepts
the ideal state
Empire of the Spirit
Demiurge (creator)
Horizon
Eidos
Son
phenomena
icons
cosmos   symbols
normal state
World kingdom
time
to eat or not to eat
horizon
matter
Artificial
Intelligence
Antichrist
center of
hell
self for is
kingdom of quantity
nihilism
infra-corporeal zone
not there, but reveals
itself
place
materialism
elements (elements)
Mother
matter
space
chora
Receptacle
Nurse
existence
The structure of "Timaeus" and types of political philosophy
Political philosophy in the pre-modern era is characterised by the
reduction of all positive ("good") political systems to two fundamental
paradigms: the political philosophy of the Father and the political
philosophy of the Son. Applying this to the political philosophy of
monotheistic religions, we determine in each specific case where the Father
paradigm is stronger and where the Son paradigm is stronger, how they
combine and how their balance changes in the course of historical
transformations, reforms and conflicts(1) .
1Only in Protestantism did we encounter for the first time elements of a different political
system that goes beyond these two fundamental paradigms of political philosophy.
Good
Father
paradigms models
ideas
is
eternity
Postmodern
Modern
political philosophy of the
Modern era
The tradition
political philosophy of the pre-modern era
flesh
body

--- PAGE BREAK ---osophy.
Good
Father
paradigms models
ideas
is
eternity
Postmodern
Modern
political philosophy of the
Modern era
The tradition
political philosophy of the pre-modern era
flesh
body

--- PAGE BREAK ---

153
Chapter 1. The Political Philosophy of Atomism
Let us also recall the division into three socio-political strata (types of
milia castes) that we find in the most general models of traditional societies
(also in Plato and Aristotle).
Plato
Aristotle
philosopher-
king
guardians
assistants to the
guardian
warriors
rule of one autocracy
contemplative life
rule by several
volitional life
heroism desire for
glory
monarch
aristocracy warriors
craftsmen
peasants
rule by many
sensual life
polity
(democracy)
physical pleasure
fear
economy
The hierarchy of political strata in Plato and Aristotle
These two types dominate political philosophy in the Tradition. In
other words, it is either a monarchical or an aristocratic society. A special
case is "theocracy," _RG]vTQST, in which the emphasis is on the rule of
priests, which does not change the general scheme (domination of
contemplative life) but gives the highest caste a special characteristic (1).
Some elements of democracy are also found in the Salafi interpretation of Islam.
1  The two founding theorists of traditionalism, René Guénon and Julius Evola (1898–1974),
disagreed on the primacy of priests or sacred kings in traditional society. Guénon insisted on the
primacy of priests (Indian

--- PAGE BREAK ---tionalism, René Guénon and Julius Evola (1898–1974),
disagreed on the primacy of priests or sacred kings in traditional society. Guénon insisted on the
primacy of priests (Indian

--- PAGE BREAK ---

154
Part 3. The Political Paradigm of Modernity. The War of Concepts
The centrality of hierarchy in Tradition
In traditional society, a vertical hierarchy is necessary: radically vertical
when it comes to the Father, or relatively vertical when it comes to the Son.
The Greek word ìRvXTvqST is formed from two roots, ìRv, "sacred," and
wvqj, "rule," i.e., "sacred rule." One may ask: why "sacred authority," why
does the term ìRvLJ appear in this system of power? The point is that the
political system reflects the system of theology (if we are talking about
monotheistic religions) or ontology (in the case of pre-monotheistic
religions). In other words, the political structure of traditional society is
sacred; it is based on the principle of sacredness. This is the most important
distinguishing feature of traditional society.
Vertical organisation is inextricably linked to sacredness, since it
places at the root of the hierarchy not simply quantitative criteria such as
power, wealth, or the ability to subjugate others by any means. Such a
vertical structure would not be 'sacred', that is, it would not be a 'hierarchy'.
Power has an otherworldly source. It originates in heaven, in the realm of
the eternal and divine. And it is precisely this relationship with the Divine
(however it may be interpreted) that determines the legitimacy of power.
The third type in "Timaeus"
In Plato's Timaeus and Republic, as well as in Aristotle, there is another,
third principle. In Timaeus, it is called "chora" (qpT),
"Mother," "Nurse," "Recipient." In Parmenides, this corresponds to the
ontological concept of "many" (XoKK^). In Plato's ideal state (Callipolis), this
third principle corresponds to peasants or artisans.
In Aristotle's description of the physics of the world, we encounter the
principle
"matter (aKi — "wood"). In politics, it corresponds to democracy, as the
power of representatives of the lowest — third — class. Accordingly, the
political philosophy of traditional society is built on the following model:
the political philosophies of Father and Son can argue with each other, the
Brahmin castes can argue with each other
the Brahmin caste). See: Guénon, R. Spiritual Dominion and Worldly Power. Moscow:
Belovodye, 2012. Evola (in the spirit of the Ghibelline ideology) defended the principle of the
superiority of sacred kings. Evola, Y. Revolt Against the Modern World. Moscow: Prometheus,
2016; Ibid. The Mysteries of the Grail. Moscow-Voronezh: TERRA FOLIATA, 2013.efended the principle of the
superiority of sacred kings. Evola, Y. Revolt Against the Modern World. Moscow: Prometheus,
2016; Ibid. The Mysteries of the Grail. Moscow-Voronezh: TERRA FOLIATA, 2013.

--- PAGE BREAK ---e of the
superiority of sacred kings. Evola, Y. Revolt Against the Modern World. Moscow: Prometheus,
2016; Ibid. The Mysteries of the Grail. Moscow-Voronezh: TERRA FOLIATA, 2013.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

155
Chapter 1. The Political Philosophy of Atomism
Priests and warriors, just as the aristocracy and the monarchy can argue
among themselves — and this is within the bounds of what is permissible.
The third principle in traditional society almost never acquires full
power. This principle is material, maternal, peasant-craft. But purely
theoretically, just as there is a political philosophy of the Father and the
Son, there is also a potential political philosophy of the Mother, which is
unrealizable within the framework of traditional society. This form of
government exists only as a hypothesis; from Plato's point of view, it is the
ultimate degradation of the ideal state (democracy and tyranny), and from
Aristotle's point of view, it is the worst system of government. We are
talking about the power of the third principle.
In philosophy, this hypothesis corresponds to the zone of the Mother,
matter or space. The sacred politics of traditional society is built on higher
levels, but the overall picture of ontological levels and types of political
systems reserves a special place for such political philosophy. This place
lies beyond the paradigm of Tradition (Premodern) and for many millennia
remains a purely potential possibility, coming to life only when normative
forms of politics fall into decline and reach a critical point of degeneration.
From Democritus to democracy
However, even in ancient times, we encounter some thinkers who
attempted to explain the world not in the traditional Greek manner, where
everything originates from the Father or is contained in the living
synthesis of the Son, but from the bottom up, starting from matter, bodies,
and the direct fact of existence. Plato, in his dialogue Sophist,speaks of a
"giantomachy in relation to essence," that is, a dispute between those who
recognise the world of ideas and consider it to be original and autonomous
(like Plato himself), and those who, on the contrary, accept only bodily
things as existing. Plato likens this to a battle between gods and giants — the
position of the gods corresponds to the bearers of the classical tradition,
while the Titans are the first representatives of ancient materialism. The
main character of the dialogue "The Stranger" says the following about them
to his listener Theaetetus:
— Some pull everything down from the sky and from the invisible realm
onto the earth, as if embracing oak trees and rocks with their arms. Clinging
to everything
1   Plato. Sophist / Plato. Collected Works: In 4 vols. Vol. 2.from the sky and from the invisible realm
onto the earth, as if embracing oak trees and rocks with their arms. Clinging
to everything
1   Plato. Sophist / Plato. Collected Works: In 4 vols. Vol. 2.

--- PAGE BREAK ---om the invisible realm
onto the earth, as if embracing oak trees and rocks with their arms. Clinging
to everything
1   Plato. Sophist / Plato. Collected Works: In 4 vols. Vol. 2.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

156
Part 3. The Political Paradigm of Modernity. The War of Concepts
they claim that only what can be touched and felt exists, and they consider
bodies and existence to be one and the same thing, while they pour
contempt on all those who say that something immaterial exists, not
wanting to hear anything more1.
To which Theaetetus reasonably
remarks:
— You have named terrible people 2.
Here Plato refers to the teachings of the atomists, primarily Democritus (c.
460 – c. 370 BC). Democritus was one of the first to attempt to construct a
philosophical model based on the principle of
"bottom-up" principle. Early thinkers such as Leucippus, who is considered
to be Democritus'teacher, can also be included here. Later, similar ideas were
developed by Epicurus (342/341–271/270 BC) and his follower, the
Roman philosopher Titus Lucretius Carus (c. 99–55 BC).
Leucippus and Democritus put forward the thesis of "isonomy"
(ílovoHST), anticipating later ideas of the Modern Age about the isotropy of
space and the existence of everything (the principle of contingency4). This
thesis, often attributed to Leucippus, reads as follows: "no more than otherwise"
(Greek: Hi[v HãKKov QoIohQov j QoIohQov RSvTI)(5) .It stems from the idea of the
infinity of the phenomenal world (which is strictly opposed to both Plato and
Aristotle, since the world in their systems is limited and finite, although for
different reasons — in Plato, due to its secondary nature compared to the
paradigm, and in Aristotle, because of its harmonious structure around a fixed
centre(6)  ). Thus, everything becomes
1   Plato. Sophist. P. 314.
2   Ibid.
3  Many authors in Ancient Greece (e.g., Epicurus) questioned the existence of Leucippus,
believing that Democritus himself was the creator of atomism.
4   Copernicus' astronomy, Galileo's and Newton's physics were based on this principle, and
in postmodernism, contingency was elevated to the highest principle in object-oriented ontology.
See: Meillassoux, Quentin. After Finitude: Essays on the Necessity of Contingency. Ekaterinburg;
Moscow: Kabinetny Ucheny, 2016.
5   Lurie, S. Ya. Democritus. Texts. Translation. Research. L.: Nauka, 1970. P. 207.
6  The Roman philosopher Cicero (106–43 BC) conveyed Democritus' teaching about
isotropic space as follows: "Democritus believes that the bodies he calls atoms, i.e.
indivisible, due to their hardness, float in an infinite void, in which there is no highest, lowest,
middle, furthest or outermost point, and that they float in such a way that when they collide, they
stick together, resulting in all the things that exist and that we see; this movement of atoms must
be thought of as having no beginning (that they float in such a way that when they collide, they
stick together, resulting in all the things that exist and that we see; this movement of atoms must
be thought of as having no beginning (

--- PAGE BREAK ---such a way that when they collide, they
stick together, resulting in all the things that exist and that we see; this movement of atoms must
be thought of as having no beginning (

--- PAGE BREAK ---

157
Chapter 1. The Political Philosophy of Atomism
relative, and any order turns out to be just a special case of chaos, and
moreover, something random and fleeting. This totally destroys the semantic
verticality of the world, which turns out to be a purely material phenomenon,
since "infinity" in Greek thought was synonymous with matter.
The principle of "isonomy" established a kind of equality not only between
one and another, but also between the existing and the non-existing, equating
being with non-being, that is, "something is no more than what it is not" (Greek
od[v HãKKov Qò sv j Qò Hj sv RSvTI).
Democritus, following Leucippus, put forward the idea that atoms exist.
An atom ( aQoHoJ) literally means "something indivisible," "something that
cannot be cut." Atomists used another term for indivisible particles —
à[ITSpRQT (2) .The corresponding term "amera" (Greek wHRpj), literally "that
which has no parts," was proposed in the 4th century BC by the sophist and
dialectician Diodorus Cronus of Megara. Democritus considered "atoms" to
be "dense" ( "full,"
"perfect" — Greek XKjviJ, vTlQLJ). Thus, Democritus completely overturns
the Platonic conception of being, placing existence not above, in the realm of
ideas and the divine One, but below. However, only Democritus'
commentators identified atoms with existence. He himself apparently did not
use such a category as being to describe them. Atoms were contrasted with
emptiness (3)(Qo ]gvLv), infinity (wXRIpST) or "nothingness" (od[gv), but
precisely as a mirror opposition. Their non-emptiness, non-infinity and non-
nothingness do not yet mean that they exist, that they represent being. This is
only a concept, and it is no coincidence that Democritus avoids ontological
definitions in his philosophy. The difference between emptiness and atoms is
speculative, purely conceptual, like emptiness and atoms themselves. The
"existence" of atoms is only evidenced by human thought, but according to
Democritus, this thought is secondary, being a derivative of the momentary
random play of atoms. Thinking is an accident of cosmic chaos. Therefore, its
conclusions are, on the whole, random. There is no reliability that Plato
attributes to the conclusions of thinking.
but already happening for an infinite amount of time." Lurie. S. Ya. Democritus. Texts.
Translation. Research. P. 251.
1The Stoic Posidonius (139/135–51/50 BC) reports that the first to formulate the theory of
atoms were the Phoenicians, in particular a certain Mohos of Sidon, who lived before the Trojan
War. Isaac Newton (1642–1727) was also convinced of this, identifying Mohos with Moses.
See: Dugin, A. G. Noomachia. Semites. Monotheism of the Moon and the Gestalt of Va'al.
2   This term is attributed to Democritus' disciple Mitrodorus of Chios.
3  A synonym for "emptiness" is also the important philosophical term "absence" (Greek
lQgvpi, Latin privatio).talt of Va'al.
2   This term is attributed to Democritus' disciple Mitrodorus of Chios.
3  A synonym for "emptiness" is also the important philosophical term "absence" (Greek
lQgvpi, Latin privatio).

--- PAGE BREAK ---his term is attributed to Democritus' disciple Mitrodorus of Chios.
3  A synonym for "emptiness" is also the important philosophical term "absence" (Greek
lQgvpi, Latin privatio).

--- PAGE BREAK ---

158
Part 3. The Political Paradigm of Modernity. The War of Concepts
and Aristotle, Democritus is nowhere near. These conclusions are truer than
the hallucinations of sensory forms, but still only relatively so. Therefore, the
existence of atoms is also relative. They are not so much the ontological
foundations of everything as the concept of such foundations. Consequently,
it can be said that atoms are not emptiness, but it can hardly be said with
certainty that they exist.
Democritus was seriously concerned with epistemology and ontology,
that is, reflection on the basis on which he himself asserted the existence of
atoms and emptiness and how these assertions relate to sensory
experience. It is likely that his emphasis on this distinction led to
Democritus sometimes being regarded as a follower of the Eleatics, who,
following Parmenides, based their philosophy on the distinction between
opinion ([L3T) and truth (wKj_RIT), where sensory experience affected only
opinion, while truth was hidden deep within and accessible only to the
intellect. This epistemological position was most fully developed by Plato.
But the entire system of Democritus' worldview is opposed to the unity of
Plato and Parmenides, proceeding, on the contrary, from multiplicity and
emptiness. At the same time, however, Democritus bases his metaphysical
judgements on sensory experience, considering it secondary, distorted and
unreliable. The Great Void and atoms are postulated by thought, but by a
thought that is fundamentally different from the classical Greek
interpretation. This is not Logos, not Nous (NohJ), not Sophia, which are
divine, universal and belong to the transcendent philosophy of the Father.
This thought, voRvLJ, is a product of the mental activity of an individual
being. In modern philosophy, this is usually called a "concept" (Latin
conceptum, from the verb capere, which literally means "to grasp").
"to grasp"). The instance that grasps the concept is not divine reason, but
human reason
1. But this "quick-witted reason" is different from the
information conveyed by the senses. In essence, Democritus was the first in
his era to assert a completely original conception of thinking, a special
epistemology that surprisingly anticipates the Modern Age, where basic
judgements are made on the basis of the same instance — human (primarily
individual) reason — bon sense of the French rationalist Descartes (1596–
1650) or the common sense of the Scottish realists — T. Reid (1710–1796),
A. Ferguson (1723–1816), etc. But it was in the Modern Age that this
understanding of thought as a product of rational thinking was most fully
proposed by
1  Democritus said about this: "We know nothing of what is clear in reality, but the opinion of
each of us represents the form (of things) in a modified form." Lurie S.Y. Democritus. Texts.
Translation. Research. P. 219.ut this: "We know nothing of what is clear in reality, but the opinion of
each of us represents the form (of things) in a modified form." Lurie S.Y. Democritus. Texts.
Translation. Research. P. 219.

--- PAGE BREAK ---thing of what is clear in reality, but the opinion of
each of us represents the form (of things) in a modified form." Lurie S.Y. Democritus. Texts.
Translation. Research. P. 219.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

159
Chapter 1. The Political Philosophy of Atomism
John Locke (1632–1704), who will be discussed further, was a follower of
Democritus. Therefore, Democritus' epistemology, as well as his void-atomist
ontology, were completely unprecedented in classical Greece. He
considered truth to be the result of the activity of the individual mind, i.e. a
concept, while existence (or non-existence, nothingness, emptiness, etc.)
appeared as the fruit of rational conclusion. At the same time, he
considered truth itself to be inaccessible, hence his famous expression
"truth is in the abyss" (Greek: v mu_bI Màp  wKj_RIT(1) ).
According to Democritus, atoms are like tiny particles of dust that can be
seen in the sun's rays but remain invisible when scattered in the air. However,
this does not mean that humans are capable of seeing atoms, but is merely a
metaphorical indication that something invisible under certain circumstances
can become visible under others. The Christian author Bishop Jerome of
Stridon (342–419 or 420) in his commentary on the Book of Isaiah (40:12)
specifically focused on the following passage:
Who has measured the waters in the hollow of
his hand, and marked off the heavens with a
span,
and counted the dust of the earth?
In the expressions "earthly dust" and "ashes," he saw a reference to
another Hebrew word, daq (
 ), which he in turn compared to Democritus'
"atoms." From this observation, a number of important parallels can be drawn
between grains of sand, the smallest particles of matter, and atomist theory. A
similar view was shared by the Islamic Ash'ari school, which also identified
the smallest particle of matter, the "atom" (Arabic:
 — dhara(2) ), with the
fundamental basis of existence. For the Ash'arites, every "atom" of matter, as
well as every point in space and every moment in time, was created by God.
In the materialistic picture of Democritus, Leucippus, and other atomists,
these particles of dust were not created by anyone, arose by themselves, and
are not subject to any law except chance. Therefore, worlds are created and
destroyed by the arbitrary play of atoms that stick together and separate (3).
1   Lurie, S.Y. Democritus. Texts. Translation. Research. P. 38.
2
 — dhara literally means "grain," which refers to a completely different symbolic chain
associated with agrarian societies and their beliefs.
3This topic has been developed by contemporary philosophers — speculative realists,
supporters of objectively oriented ontology, who, at a new stage, seek to justify the existence of
matter and sub-material dimensions.developed by contemporary philosophers — speculative realists,
supporters of objectively oriented ontology, who, at a new stage, seek to justify the existence of
matter and sub-material dimensions.

--- PAGE BREAK ---160
Part 3.

The Political Paradigm of Modernity.

The War of Concepts
The cosmos is composed of atoms, material particles.

It arises from the
fact that atoms collide chaotically with each other, clump together and
disintegrate, forming a vortex ([rvoJ).

Democritus clearly did not want to explain which came first, atoms or
emptiness, but his description of the emergence of a vortex as a stream of
atoms cannot avoid this problem.

The birth of a vortex is described as
follows:
A whirlwind of all shapes separated from the universe 1.

These words are attributed to Democritus by the Neoplatonist Simplikios (c.

490–560).

Epicurus puts it this way:
The world is a part of space that has separated from infinity 2.

In the first case, the verb wXo]vSvb is used in the sense of "to separate,"
while in the second, Epicurus uses the verb wXoQgHvb, which has the same
root as the word "atom," indicating "cutting" or "dividing." A whirlwind,
consisting of indivisible particles, is initially separated from emptiness
(infinity), which becomes the beginning of the movement of atoms in
emptiness.

But here it should be noted that in order to separate from
emptiness, it is necessary first to be merged with it, unified, inseparable.

And
although Democritus and Epicurus strive to give both atoms and emptiness,
in the very sense in which they are described, the property of eternity, and
thus eternal separateness from each other, the very description of the
appearance of a whirlwind of atoms indicates some state preceding this
separateness, since the appearance of a whirlwind
The themes of “sand” and “particle memory” are also of great importance to contemporary
philosopher Reza Negarestani, who links sand and dust, as the root of matter, to the
distinctive style of Middle Eastern cultures and even directly to Islamic civilisation.

See:
Negarestani R.

Cyclonopedia: Complicity with Anonymous Materials.

Melbourne: Re.Press,
2008.--- PAGE BREAK ---

Cyclonopedia: Complicity with Anonymous Materials. Melbourne: Re.Press,
2008. The "memory of atoms" was also a central theme for Russian cosmists N.F. Fedorov and
K.E. Tsiolkovsky. According to Fedorov, matter contains the atoms of deceased ancestors,
which must be resurrected by scientific methods. Fedorov N. F. Collected Works: In 4 vols. Moscow: Progress-Tradition; Evidentis, 1995–2004. Tsiolkovsky believed that every atom of
matter was once part of a living organism (according to Tsiolkovsky, life cannot be a random
phenomenon of a single planet and is a universal phenomenon, hence his conviction in the
existence of life in other worlds, galaxies and planets). Therefore, the atom contains an euphoric
quantum of being (the memory that a particle of matter was a component of a living organism
inspires it with happiness. Tsiolkovsky, K. E. Cosmic Philosophy. Moscow: IDLi; Sfera, 2004. See also: Dugin, A. G. Noomakhia. Images of Russian Thought. The Sun King, the Reflection of
Sophia, and Underground Russia. Moscow: Academic Project, 2019. 1   Lurie, S. Ya. Democritus. Texts. Translation. Research. P. 274. 2   Ibid. P. 275.

--- PAGE BREAK ---e Sun King, the Reflection of
Sophia, and Underground Russia. Moscow: Academic Project, 2019. 1   Lurie, S. Ya. Democritus. Texts. Translation. Research. P. 274. 2   Ibid. P. 275.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

161
Chapter 1. The Political Philosophy of Atomism
is described as an event whose meaning consists in separation. And it is
obvious that the primordial state preceding the appearance of a vortex
consisting of atoms must be the non-existence of atoms as such and their
fusion with emptiness. This allows us to assume a shadow side of atomistic
ontology (more precisely, nihilistic ontology), which Democritus himself
probably calls "the abyss in which truth resides."
If we put aside this highly problematic cosmogony (ontogony), the
cosmological description of the already existing cosmos, in which vortices
swirl, looks as follows. There are voids between atoms, and motion
(including the cycle of births and deaths) is explained by the random coupling
( X^KKT3IJ) and uncoupling of atoms. According to Democritus, the world
itself is essentially the Great Void (Qo ]gvLv(1) ), infinity (wXRIpST)(2)  or
"nothingness" (od[gv(3) ). Atoms move chaotically in this void, creating worlds
that arise and are destroyed.
Atoms rush about in the void in a haphazard manner; colliding with each
other spontaneously as a result of their disorderly movement and intertwining
due to their diversity of forms, they do not cling to each other and thus create
the world and everything in it, or rather, infinite worlds 4.
These worlds consist of forms (RS[bKT5). Democritus denies the existence
of ideas (unlike Plato) and that each thing has its own purpose (unlike
Aristotle). Therefore, the only way to explain things is to identify the cause.
Existence, having no purpose and no higher eternal meaning, becomes, on the
one hand, accidental and, on the other hand, mechanically predetermined by a
law of cause and effect, that is, material necessity.
1   Lat. inanitas.
2   Lat. infinitas.
3   Lat. nihil.
4   Lurie. S. Ya. Democritus. Texts. Translation. Research. P. 276.
5The choice of the term Ri[bKov to denote form as opposed to Plato's í[gT, RS[oJ or
Aristotle's Hopcj is significant. The Greeks used this word to denote something that appears to be
— a ghost, a phantom. The concept of "idol" derives from this. This is not a vision of the essence
of a thing, but, on the contrary, its false appearance. In the eidolon, the "idol," the ghost, nothing
essential is hidden; it is a shadow, deprived of the body that casts it. Such is the atomistic universe
— it is a ghost. In postmodernism, this theme was developed in the direction of "ontology," the
"science of ghosts." Derrida, J. Specters of Marx. M.: Logos altera, Ecce homo, 2006; Buse P.,
Scott, A. (eds). Ghosts: Deconstruction, Psychoanalysis, History. London: Macmillan, 1999.tology," the
"science of ghosts." Derrida, J. Specters of Marx. M.: Logos altera, Ecce homo, 2006; Buse P.,
Scott, A. (eds). Ghosts: Deconstruction, Psychoanalysis, History. London: Macmillan, 1999.

--- PAGE BREAK ---ce of ghosts." Derrida, J. Specters of Marx. M.: Logos altera, Ecce homo, 2006; Buse P.,
Scott, A. (eds). Ghosts: Deconstruction, Psychoanalysis, History. London: Macmillan, 1999.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

162
Part 3. The Political Paradigm of Modernity. The War of Concepts
The lying logos
We have seen that Plato, in Timaeus, claimed that matter is grasped by a
special "bastard logos." This "bastard logos" is the form of conceptual
thinking with which Democritus grasps the existence of emptiness (Qo ]gvLv)
or "nothingness" (od[gv). The Neoplatonist Plotinus, reflecting on the nature
of the "bastard logos" (KLMoJ vL_oJ), comes to the conclusion that Plato's third
type of being, the incomprehensible "chora" (qpT), "is comprehended by
thought that does not proceed from the mind, but is empty" (1).
The mysterious, empty, bastard, illegitimate Logos is not emptiness
itself, since it is still a definite property, but an emptied thought. This is the
conceptual thinking of the individual, which later became the normative form
of consciousness in the Modern era.
According to Plotinus, matter is "fantasy," that is, a purely pseudo-logical
category. Plotinus writes:
(…) some find matter empty (identifying it with emptiness). I say that it
is a phantom (fantasy) of mass (weight), cávQTlHT sM]ou, since the soul,
which has come (extremely) close to matter, cannot distinguish anything
(clearly) (distinguish, òpílTI, define, place within limits, within boundaries),
begins to tremble (rage, agitate) in uncertainty, and has no power to grasp
something with its gaze (give form, outline, recognise eidos, eidetic
features, define) or come to (reveal) a sign (meaning), because that would be
the same as distinguishing (and that is precisely what it cannot do)(2) .
This phrase develops the idea that heaviness is more a state of the soul
than a property of matter, that heaviness is born of the frenzy, the obsession
of the soul, which falls and desperately tries to stop its fall — but not through
flight, but through dark and ignoble operations that ultimately lead to the
constitution of materiality — as a mark of the deepest degeneration of the
mind.
Matter itself does not exist, but there is a "logos" that perceives it.
This is the "lying logos."
1
  wllà KoMIlH¼ od] ] voh, wKKà ]RvbJ. Plotinus. Second Ennead // Plotinus. Enneads: In 7 vols.
Vol. 2. St. Petersburg: Oleg Abyshko Publishing House; University Book, 2010. P. 203.
2   Ibid.os."
1
  wllà KoMIlH¼ od] ] voh, wKKà ]RvbJ. Plotinus. Second Ennead // Plotinus. Enneads: In 7 vols.
Vol. 2. St. Petersburg: Oleg Abyshko Publishing House; University Book, 2010. P. 203.
2   Ibid.

--- PAGE BREAK ---H¼ od] ] voh, wKKà ]RvbJ. Plotinus. Second Ennead // Plotinus. Enneads: In 7 vols.
Vol. 2. St. Petersburg: Oleg Abyshko Publishing House; University Book, 2010. P. 203.
2   Ibid.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

163
Chapter 1. The Political Philosophy of Atomism
According to Plotinus, the atom is the limit of the descent of the Mind,
which cuts and divides any object of thought into two halves.
The Mind seeks duality, for it divides until it reaches the simple, which
can no longer be divided. As long as it can, it will continue to descend into its
abyss. The abyss of each is matter; therefore, it is completely dark, for light is
the Logos1
Accordingly, the cessation of division, i.e., the attainment of the atom, is
the moment of complete extinction of the Mind. But if the Mind is extinct, then
it does not exist. It can exist after its end only as a phantasm, as an extremely
weakened parody of itself, incapable of performing what is the main
characteristic of the Mind — to distinguish. An undifferentiating mind is a
paradox, but it is precisely this epistemological instance that operates with
the concept of the atom.
Plotinus' remark is extremely important for Politica Aeterna, as it
allows us to better understand the metaphysical foundations of
Modernism. Modernity is based on pseudo-logic; it is a generalisation of
the "lying logos." And the first to formulate the "lying logos" as the main and
only one was Democritus, the most modern of the modern thinkers.
The mortality of the gods, the pull of hell, and democracy
Democritus taught that nothing is eternal, and even the gods are only
more durable (more stable) than humans, but sooner or later they perish. It is
significant that various sources indicate that Democritus wrote a work
entitled "On the Kingdom of Hades," which claimed that the dead can feel
something. On this basis, he proposed preserving corpses (in honey) so that
they could be resurrected under certain circumstances.All this testifies to
Democritus' heightened interest in precisely that underground realm which, in
traditional ontologies of classical Greece,was placed at the lowest level of
existence.
1   Plotinus. Second Ennead. P. 189.
2This theme anticipates not only Modernism, but also, in part, the Postmodern paradigm,
where, in the context of post-humanist theory and technological development, the question of
achieving physical immortality becomes one of the main ones. This aspect of Democritus'
teaching can be correlated with the philosophy of the "Russian Cosmists." See Fedorov, N. F.
Collected Works: In 4 vols. Moscow: Progress-Tradition; Evidentis, 1995–2004.
3  Dugin, A. G. Noomachia. Hellenic Logos. Valley of Truth. Moscow: Academic Project,
2016.osmists." See Fedorov, N. F.
Collected Works: In 4 vols. Moscow: Progress-Tradition; Evidentis, 1995–2004.
3  Dugin, A. G. Noomachia. Hellenic Logos. Valley of Truth. Moscow: Academic Project,
2016.

--- PAGE BREAK ---v, N. F.
Collected Works: In 4 vols. Moscow: Progress-Tradition; Evidentis, 1995–2004.
3  Dugin, A. G. Noomachia. Hellenic Logos. Valley of Truth. Moscow: Academic Project,
2016.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

164
Part 3. The Political Paradigm of Modernity. The War of Concepts
Democritus did not construct an original political philosophy and
mainly taught about the structure of the world, but as we have repeatedly
noted, any philosophy necessarily has a political dimension. Therefore, if
we apply Democritus' principle to society, we obtain the seeds of a theory
of democratic society. The philosophy of atomism, when projected into the
sphere of politics, gives us the basic idea of democracy. As confirmation
of this, we find a brief fragment from Democritus himself:
Poverty in a democratic state is preferable to what is called a happy life
in a monarchy1.
When we project the concept of an atom onto a political system, we
arrive at the concept of a "social atom." In Greek, atom, aQoHoJ
("indivisible," "that which cannot be cut"). In Latin, there is a direct
translation of the term — individuum, "indivisible." From this, it is easy to
logically deduce that the aggregate of individuals (political atoms) creates
and establishes a political state. Thus, in the most general terms, the
philosophy of democracy is born, filling the hypothetical — third — place
assigned to it in the complete three-part model of the Platonic and
Aristotelian conception of the nature of the Political.
The formula "one from many"
Democritus was an atomist philosopher, and his philosophy, which
describes a world built from material atoms (he even considered gods to be
material), is a doctrine of democracy. This doctrine can be described by the
following formula: from many, "one" can arise. This is the sixth hypothesis
from Plato's dialogue "Parmenides." It is significant that the Latin version of
this expression, "e pluribus unum" (Latin for "out of many, one"), is the
motto on the coat of arms of the United States.
This is the philosophy of the third principle, which is essentially absent
in the ancient traditional world, in the world of sacred politics. Plato called
for the burning of Democritus' books because, from the point of view of the
Greeks, who were oriented towards the Father and the Son, the maternal
"philosophy from below" that the masses would determine what is true
could inspire only
1   Lurie, S. Ya. Democritus. Texts. Translation. Research. P. 361.wards the Father and the Son, the maternal
"philosophy from below" that the masses would determine what is true
could inspire only
1   Lurie, S. Ya. Democritus. Texts. Translation. Research. P. 361.

--- PAGE BREAK ---the Son, the maternal
"philosophy from below" that the masses would determine what is true
could inspire only
1   Lurie, S. Ya. Democritus. Texts. Translation. Research. P. 361.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

165
Chapter 1. The Political Philosophy of Atomism
For those thinkers who stood on the side of the gods in the "gigantomachy
of essences," the phenomenon of democracy or the philosophy of
Democritus (atomism) was the ultimate form of degradation.
As long as we are dealing with a religious society, we always remain
within the paradigm of the political philosophy of the Father or the Son, and
any attempt to construct a political system based on a multitude (individuals,
political atoms) is impossible in a traditional society. Although democracy
was a phenomenon partially known in Ancient Greece, it was hardly possible
to elevate it to an independent political doctrine, to political philosophy.
Rather, democracy was conceived as a product of the corruption of more
perfect forms of political organisation. But the example of Democritus (as
well as Epicurus and Lucretius) shows that the possibility of constructing a
philosophical teaching based on the third — material, matriarchal —
principle was nevertheless partially realised. It did not develop significantly,
since in the culture of Greece, Rome, and then in the European Middle Ages
(as well as in the Islamic world and other civilisations) until the Modern era,
the traditional model of sacred hierarchy prevailed.
The situation began to change only with the advent of the Modern era.
And only then, in the Modern era, did this political philosophy, the
philosophy of the third level, gradually come to the fore until it became
dominant.
Epicurus: ancient liberalism of the "Garden"
Another Greek materialist philosopher, Epicurus, lived after Democritus,
from whom he completely borrowed the idea of atoms and emptiness.
While accepting Democritus' cosmology and his atomistic metaphysics, he
nevertheless placed much greater trust in sensory perception, which he
considered to be the main criterion of truth. Considering the data of the
senses to be the basis of real existence, Epicurus developed a sensualist
ontology, which, however, rested on a more fundamental basis — the
conceptual philosophy of Democritus, to which Epicurus turns whenever
it is necessary to make a more profound conclusion than sensory
experience allows. Thus, Epicurus explains the existence (and at the same
time the mortality) of the soul and even of the gods by the bonding of
atoms. Epicurus' gods live in the voids between worlds (Greek:
HRQT]olHST), which are again a scaling of Democritus' interatomic void.e mortality) of the soul and even of the gods by the bonding of
atoms. Epicurus' gods live in the voids between worlds (Greek:
HRQT]olHST), which are again a scaling of Democritus' interatomic void.

--- PAGE BREAK ---soul and even of the gods by the bonding of
atoms. Epicurus' gods live in the voids between worlds (Greek:
HRQT]olHST), which are again a scaling of Democritus' interatomic void.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

166
Part 3. The Political Paradigm of Modernity. The War of Concepts
If Epicurus does not introduce anything fundamentally significant into
the ontology of the third kind — Matter, "chora," "multiplicity" —1 , and his
sensualism is in a sense a step backward compared to Democritus' conceptual
materialism, he justifies several social and ethical theories which — like
everything materialistic and individualistic — will be adopted in the Modern
era. Thus, Epicurus considers the human desire for pleasure (Greek [ovj —
hence "hedonism") to be the basis of ethics. Here we can easily recognise the
third principle of the soul in the metaphor of the chariot in Plato's Phaedo. In
Plato, the lowest — the third (a direct analogy with the third gender —
Mother-Receiver) — force of the soul is called "desire" or "lust," "wanting"
(Greek XI_uHST), and Epicurus reduces the structure of man to this very
quality. Man is governed solely by desires, which constitute the highest goal
of his existence. In turn, all desires can be classified, but what desire as such
gravitates towards is precisely pleasure. Such directness in glorifying the
lowest — the least noble — property of the soul was rare in Hellenic culture,
but in turn anticipated the ethics of the Modern Age — above all the
"utilitarianism" of Jeremy Bentham (1748–1832).
Even more insightful — in the same vein as Modern's anticipation — was
Epicurus' theory of the origin of society. From his point of view, society and
the state arise from the bottom up, as the result of a "social contract." Unlike
Plato and Aristotle, for whom the whole preceded the parts, Epicurus derives
the whole from the parts. He considers the subject of the "social contract" to
be the maximisation of pleasure and the minimisation of violence, which is
the antithesis of pleasure. People unite in society not because it has some
special ontology, mission or goal, but only to protect themselves from
causing each other unpleasantness. In general, Epicurus considered a more or
less secluded life devoted to the pursuit of pleasures, which included sensory
experiences of various kinds — from eating and drinking to conversations
with friends — to be optimal. This right to pleasure was something natural
for Epicurus, from which he derived the theory of "natural law" (cdlRbJ
[S]TILv) as the original and normative existence of the individual.
1  The exception is the assumption of deviation (XTpM]KIlIJ) of an atom from a straight line
of motion, which was later noted by Karl Marx. The theme of deviation became particularly
relevant in postmodern philosophy.the assumption of deviation (XTpM]KIlIJ) of an atom from a straight line
of motion, which was later noted by Karl Marx. The theme of deviation became particularly
relevant in postmodern philosophy.

--- PAGE BREAK ---viation (XTpM]KIlIJ) of an atom from a straight line
of motion, which was later noted by Karl Marx. The theme of deviation became particularly
relevant in postmodern philosophy.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

167
Chapter 1. The Political Philosophy of Atomism
Therefore, the wise man Epicurus advised to "live hidden" (K^_R mIlTJ),
at a sufficient distance from society, without getting too involved in its
element. He called the school where he lived and taught others his philosophy
"The Garden."
Epicurus' attitude towards death is revealing. He considered fear of death
unnecessary, as he did not believe that the soul could survive the body and,
therefore, that there was no continuity or common measure between life and
death (just as between an atom and emptiness). When a person lives, he only
comes to life, that is, he exists. And this existence of sensory being is, in a
sense, total. It is not limited by anything, since the onset of death does not
affect the same being that enjoys life. Death is not experienced, not realised,
and does not pose a threat to life, since it does not exist during life, and after
death it also does not exist, since there is no subject that could testify to its
demise and compare posthumous existence with life. In this, Epicurus
disagrees with Democritus, who taught that a corpse has residual sensuality
and that the soul disintegrates more slowly than the body. Democritus based
his ontology of Hades on this. For Epicurus, who based everything on
sensory experience, such a difference between the speed of disintegration into
atoms of the body and the soul is meaningless, since it cannot be reliably
determined from experience. Once again, this view of death and the absence
of the soul corresponds precisely to the most existential culture of the
Modern era.
In fact, Epicurus' ideology represents almost complete liberalism,
anticipating European philosophical thought by a millennium and a half.
Epicurus' teachings were first adopted during the Renaissance, when
Pierre Gassendi (1592–1655) took a keen interest in his atomism and
sensualism.
Ockham's nominalism
The first approximation to the atomism of the Modern Age, in which
some features of Democritus' teachings can already be recognised, can be
considered the position of the nominalists in the medieval dispute about
universals. This dispute was in fact a new edition of the "gigantomachy
regarding essence," resumed more than a millennium after the era of
Plato. The most consistent Platonism, that is, the philosophy of the Father,
was the position of "idealism."
1   Gassendi, P. Works: In 2 vols. Moscow: MyUl, 1966–1968.a millennium after the era of
Plato. The most consistent Platonism, that is, the philosophy of the Father,
was the position of "idealism."
1   Gassendi, P. Works: In 2 vols. Moscow: MyUl, 1966–1968.

--- PAGE BREAK ---he era of
Plato. The most consistent Platonism, that is, the philosophy of the Father,
was the position of "idealism."
1   Gassendi, P. Works: In 2 vols. Moscow: MyUl, 1966–1968.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

168
Part 3. The Political Paradigm of Modernity. The War of Concepts
The most prominent representative of this school was the Irish mystic
John Scotus Eriugena (c. 810–877). Idealists completely shared the
position of Plato and the Platonists that ideas precede things and exist
independently of things and before them. The idealists interpreted
universals, i.e. generalising concepts, precisely as Platonic ideas and
insisted on their autonomy and complete ontological superiority. This
position was defined as (universalia ante rem). However, this position was
rejected by Catholic dogma, although this did not prevent Platonism from
surviving in the Catholic Church, albeit mainly in Catholic mysticism.
The idealists-Platonists were opposed by realists who, relying on
Aristotle, insisted that "eidos" (but not the idea!) exists and has being only
when it exists through a thing, within a thing, through a thing (universalia
in re). This interpretation was called "realism" (from the Latin res, "thing,"
since only existing things were endowed with unconditional being). Here,
universals were equated precisely with eidos or form, that is, the philosophy
of the Son and Aristotelian immanentism (but without materialism)
prevailed. This position was held by the majority of scholastics, and it was
accepted by Catholicism as an unconditional dogma.
But already in the 11th century, representatives of a third position
appeared, who in fact laid the foundation for future materialism and
individualism. They argued that a general concept is only a linguistic
convention and is not endowed with any existence, representing an "empty
sound" (flatus voci). Their position was defined by the formula universalia
post rem. The term "nominalism" comes from the Latin nomen, "name,"
"designation," "designation." This meant that nominalists believed that only
concrete things exist, and that their reduction to a generalised form, to a
universal, is nothing more than a name attributed from outside for the
convenience of classification. The first representative of nominalism was the
French scholastic, the founder of nominalism, John Roscelin of Compiègne
(c. 1050 - c. 1122). Roscelin's ideas and nominalism in general were
condemned because they contradicted realism, which was accepted as a
philosophical dogma.
In fact, nominalists propose a model of the universe that corresponds to
the third type of Plato's Timaeus — that is, Matter, "chore." Here, a thing is
conceived as a primary given, the fundamental
1  Erigène Jean Scot. De la division de la nature. Periphyseon. P.: Presses Universitaires de
France; Épiméthée, 1995–2009.r, "chore." Here, a thing is
conceived as a primary given, the fundamental
1  Erigène Jean Scot. De la division de la nature. Periphyseon. P.: Presses Universitaires de
France; Épiméthée, 1995–2009.

--- PAGE BREAK ---thing is
conceived as a primary given, the fundamental
1  Erigène Jean Scot. De la division de la nature. Periphyseon. P.: Presses Universitaires de
France; Épiméthée, 1995–2009.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

169
Chapter 1. The Political Philosophy of Atomism
which are materiality and individuality. Only the unique, separate and
concrete exist in the full sense of the word, according to nominalists. An
attempt to give the same name to different — albeit similar — individual
things does not change the existence of each of them or all of them together.
They continue to exist both together and separately precisely as individual
objects, and the commonality of names is attributed to them by human
consciousness, which simplifies its perception of the world through artificial
operations that do not affect the individuality — in essence, the atomicity —
of each concrete thing. This means that for nominalists there is neither idea
nor eidos, that is, neither a model (paradigm) nor a bipolar and indivisible
structure in which essence and matter necessarily exist and are both endowed
with full and independent existence. By opposing realists, nominalists
undermined the very foundation of the worldview on which the medieval
model of the world was built, where Aristotle's ontology dominated.
In the spirit of nominalism, a model was constructed by one of the most
prominent representatives of late scholasticism, Duns Scotus(1)  (1265–1308),
who insisted that the most general element of existing things is matter,
which constitutes being (an extremely anti-Platonic and anti-Aristotelian
idea). At the same time, matter itself in its universality can only be known
by God, and everything else that exists is an individual unit. For Duns
Scotus, a thing is not a combination of form and matter, as in Aristotle and
the realists, but an individuality that is the highest and ultimate reality,
ultima realitas entis. Duns Scotus' followers introduced a special term to
denote this highest individual reality — haecceitas, "thisness." According to
Duns Scotus, the sign of being does not coincide with what a thing is
(quidditas, "whatness"), but with the fact of the existence of the named
"this" thing. From this follows the recognition of being behind matter (but
this truth is open only to God) and behind individuals, and this represents the
ultimate truth and the limit of human knowledge. Thus, we see here both
materialism (equating being with matter, not with eidos or idea) and
individualism, i.e., the refusal to recognise independent existence behind
universals.
The nominalist philosophical paradigm was finally formulated by another
English thinker, the Franciscan William
1  Blessed John Duns Scotus. Selected Works: Franciscan Publishing House, Moscow, 2001.The nominalist philosophical paradigm was finally formulated by another
English thinker, the Franciscan William
1  Blessed John Duns Scotus. Selected Works: Franciscan Publishing House, Moscow, 2001.

--- PAGE BREAK ---sophical paradigm was finally formulated by another
English thinker, the Franciscan William
1  Blessed John Duns Scotus. Selected Works: Franciscan Publishing House, Moscow, 2001.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

170
Part 3. The Political Paradigm of Modernity. The War of Concepts
Occam 1(1285–1349). Occam accepts most of Duns Scotus' ideas, but goes
even further. According to Occam, God does not create matter (as in Duns
Scotus) by his will, which then becomes individual objects through a
volitional impulse, but individual things, individuals, directly. According to
Occam, individuals exist entirely outside the mind, both divine and human.
But in God they have their origin as God's will, and in humans, who are in
turn pure individuals, the will is limited by certain boundaries. Therefore, in
any case, cognition is only cognition by individuals and of individuals. God
knows things through the process of their individual creation. Man knows
things through individual experience of contact with individual things.
The experience of individual things, which alone possess existence,
corresponds in consciousness to two types of intentions that form two
classes of natural signs. The first intention is a natural sign of the mind, a
concept (conceptum) corresponding to an individual thing, a kind of
"natural sign." The second intention is even more conventional and, in turn,
serves to designate "natural signs." These two intentions characterise the
logical activity of the knowing mind. Finally, there are also conventional
signs (flatus voci), which, by agreement, serve to exchange information
about natural signs between people. Languages belong to this category. At
the same time, according to Ockham, there are no "universals" at all, and
everything that serves to designate individual things is nothing more than
signs of one kind or another. Thus, Ockham's nominalism prepares the
philosophical platform for the science and logic of the modern era. Only
individual material physical things are endowed with existence, while
their conceptual analogues (first intention and second intention) are placed
in the realm of human consciousness and regarded as conventions. Occam's
political ideas are highly symptomatic (2).
He was one of the first European authors to advocate the separation of
church and state, formulating his ideal in terms of
"enlightened absolutism." Based on his conception of the individual ontology
of man and things, he provided a metaphysical justification for absolute
private property as a direct legal relationship between two individual entities
—
1  A compendium of Ockham's teachings: a translation of the Tractatus de principiis theologiae.
St. Bonaventure, NY: Franciscan Institute, St. Bonaventure University, 1998.
2  Guilelmi de Ockham. Opera Politica. 4 vols. Manchester; Oxford: Manchester University
Press; Oxford University Press, 1940–1997.enture, NY: Franciscan Institute, St. Bonaventure University, 1998.
2  Guilelmi de Ockham. Opera Politica. 4 vols. Manchester; Oxford: Manchester University
Press; Oxford University Press, 1940–1997.

--- PAGE BREAK ---an Institute, St. Bonaventure University, 1998.
2  Guilelmi de Ockham. Opera Politica. 4 vols. Manchester; Oxford: Manchester University
Press; Oxford University Press, 1940–1997.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

171
Chapter 1. The Political Philosophy of Atomism
man and thing, which later became the basis of the economic philosophy
of liberalism.
Overall, Occam is rightly considered a precursor of the later bourgeois
liberal-democratic ideology based on philosophy, metaphysics, and ethics,
which is extremely close to Occam's views. Both the main currents of
empirical science and representatives of contemporary analytical
philosophy usually trace their origins back to him.
Nominalism prepared the ideological ground for Protestant philosophy
and for some trends of the Renaissance. In it, we see two fundamental aspects
of the political Logos of the New Age: materialism and individualism, which
would later develop fully in a different context — completely outside the
paradigm of Tradition. In principle, nominalism contains all the basic
prerequisites for a political philosophy that is built strictly from the bottom
up, contrary to the vertical models that dominated the Church and the state in
the Catholic Middle Ages.
The Modern Era. The Modern Paradigm
Here we come to what is the paradigm of the Modern Age.
The Modern Age is an era that began in the 16th century in Western
Europe and lasted until the end of the 20th century, representing a completely
unique historical period. During the same period, traditional societies based
on the political philosophy of the Father and the political philosophy of the
Son still existed in non-Western Europe. Therefore, the Modern Era is a
phenomenon that can be localised not only historically but also
geographically.
It can be said that the Modern Era is a specific type of philosophy,
politics, culture, science, and thinking characteristic of Western European
countries from the 16th to the 20th centuries. Initially, under its influence
1It should be noted that in Orthodox culture there has never been anything even remotely
resembling nominalism, and the basic topology of thought remains within the context of the
philosophy of the Father and the philosophy of the Son, never coming even close to equating
being with matter or individuality. In Orthodoxy, Aristotle's philosophy has retained its
significance to this day, the most important points of which in the context of Orthodox theology
are set out by John of Damascus (c. 675 – c. 753). See The Works of St. John of Damascus,
Source of Knowledge. Moscow: Indrik, 2002.
2  Dugin, A. G. Post-Philosophy.the context of Orthodox theology
are set out by John of Damascus (c. 675 – c. 753). See The Works of St. John of Damascus,
Source of Knowledge. Moscow: Indrik, 2002.
2  Dugin, A. G. Post-Philosophy.

--- PAGE BREAK ---dox theology
are set out by John of Damascus (c. 675 – c. 753). See The Works of St. John of Damascus,
Source of Knowledge. Moscow: Indrik, 2002.
2  Dugin, A. G. Post-Philosophy.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

172
Part 3. The Political Paradigm of Modernity. The War of Concepts
These were partly Italy 1, where certain scientific materialistic teachings
developed, as well as England 2and France 3, which became the two main
centres for the spread of Modernism both in Europe and beyond. Modernism
then began to expand in "circles," spiraling—mainly through colonial
conquests—across the entire world. In fact, the age of Columbus
coincides with the beginning of the modern era. In some societies, the
modern worldview penetrated as deeply as in Europe itself, where it
reached the mineral roots of human culture, making modernity a natural,
self-evident mental environment.
While in Europe this movement was directed inward (it could be called
"intensive Modernism"), in colonial societies or societies that were partially
Westernised and Europeanised from outside, these systems of thought were
superficially superimposed on deeper archaic and traditional models, and in
this case, the extensive spread of the Modern paradigm affected mainly only
the superficial aspects of society. This superimposition of two paradigms —
the Modern paradigm on the not yet completely obsolete paradigm of
Tradition — gave rise to a special sociological phenomenon — the archaeo-
modern (4).In any case, since the 16th century, this paradigm of the New Age
has gradually expanded, and today it is dominant in one form or another on a
global scale.
What is the meaning of the New Age from a philosophical point of
view? Starting with Galileo Galilei (1564–1642) and Pierre Gassendi, the
first theorists who laid the foundations forthe scientific picture of the
Modern Age,this philosophy directly refers to Leucippus, Democritus,
Epicurus, and Lucretius. This marks a departure from the vertical
worldview of Plato and Aristotle and establishes a new view of the world —
from the bottom up, from the perspective of matter, corporeality, and direct
earthly existence. This is accompanied by radical attacks on Aristotle, who
was considered in the Middle Ages to be the standard and infallible thinker in
all matters of science and cosmology. The legacy of the atomists, which
existed on the periphery of culture, is extracted
1   Dugin, A. G. Noomakhia. Latin Logos. Sun and Cross.
2  Dugin, A. G. Noomakhia. England or Britain? The Maritime Mission and the Positive Subject.
Moscow: Academic Project, 2015.
3  Dugin, A. G. Noomakhia. French Logos. Orpheus and Melusina. Moscow: Academic
Project, 2015.
4   Dugin, A. G. Archeomodern. Moscow: Eurasian Movement, 2011.
5   Dugin, A. G. Evolution of the Paradigmatic Foundations of Science. Moscow: Arktogeya-
Centre,
2002Moscow: Academic
Project, 2015.
4   Dugin, A. G. Archeomodern. Moscow: Eurasian Movement, 2011.
5   Dugin, A. G. Evolution of the Paradigmatic Foundations of Science. Moscow: Arktogeya-
Centre,
2002

--- PAGE BREAK ---roject, 2015.
4   Dugin, A. G. Archeomodern. Moscow: Eurasian Movement, 2011.
5   Dugin, A. G. Evolution of the Paradigmatic Foundations of Science. Moscow: Arktogeya-
Centre,
2002

--- PAGE BREAK ---

173
Chapter 1. The Political Philosophy of Atomism
from nothingness and gradually becomes a new scientific and philosophical
dogma.
The direct predecessors of the atomists were the medieval nominalists,
who had the greatest influence in England. Later, it was England that became
the cultural environment where, earlier than other European countries and in
a sense more fully and vividly, the main provisions of this new paradigm
were developed.
From the perspective of Plato's three levels of existence in the Modern
Age, we are dealing with the philosophy of Mother, Metria, and qpT. The
entire scientific picture of the world in the Modern Age — in Galileo,
Copernicus, and especially in Descartes and Newton (1642–1727) — is
based on the idea of Democritus' atomism. Thus, the philosophy of the New
Age is new because it rejects both the principle of the Father and the
principle of the Son, and at the same time, the Christian Middle Ages is
overthrown. But at the same time, it rediscovers the basic tenets of a
philosophical movement that was considered marginal and extravagant in
classical Greece.
The new era saw itself as a paradigm alternative to the Middle Ages
and set itself the task of overthrowing the verticality that constituted the
essence of previous worldviews, which had prevailed in Europe in both
the Christian and pre-Christian eras. From then on, scientists who
considered only knowledge obtained through rational judgement or
physical experience to be valid still acknowledged God, but only as a
philosophical convention, an abstract cause necessary to explain the
existence of material being. This trend was called "deism," that is, belief
in God apart from religion, worship, full-fledged theology, and a complete
dogmatic worldview. Such a belief was conceived not as a revelation
received from Heaven, but as a rational conclusion reached by a group of
separate, atomic individuals on the basis of consistent reasoning.
Protestantism is based on the "religious atom."
The Protestant Reformation was the most important moment in the
transition from the paradigm of Tradition to the paradigm of Modernity in
Europe.
We have briefly described the model on which the Orthodox and
Catholic interpretations of politics are based, mentioning Protestantism as
well. Here we should dwell on this in a little more detail, since it is
precisely Protestantism that is associated with the phase transition of
European civilisation to the Modern Age.estantism as
well. Here we should dwell on this in a little more detail, since it is
precisely Protestantism that is associated with the phase transition of
European civilisation to the Modern Age.

--- PAGE BREAK ---Here we should dwell on this in a little more detail, since it is
precisely Protestantism that is associated with the phase transition of
European civilisation to the Modern Age.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

174
Part 3. The Political Paradigm of Modernity. The War of Concepts
In the 16th century, a new religious movement called Protestantism
emerged in Europe. It rejected Orthodoxy and Catholicism, asserting a new
religious model based on
the "religious atom," not on God, but on man, capable of independently
forming his own judgement about God.
The Protestant Reformation, while remaining formally within the
Christian context, marked a transition from the political theology of the
Father and the Son to a political theology of the Earth, at the centre of
which was no longer God, but man, the individual personality. Protestants
unite in congregations, communities where they discuss God based on
their own conscience and make decisions about Him. In doing so, they
consider themselves entitled to abolish certain aspects of tradition or add
something new. Religious dogma loses its meaning. The doctrine of the
Church, based on the supernatural presence of Christ and the Holy Spirit, is
replaced by a social constructivist interpretation. Thus, at the level of
religion, the vertical hierarchy is completely lost, and consequently the
entire picture of the sacred world collapses. Protestants rethink
Christianity from an individual perspective. This was the main reform of
Martin Luther (1483–1546) and his followers, which dealt a powerful blow
to the medieval worldview and theocracy.
A new theology, a new philosophy of nature, and, most importantly
for us, a new philosophy of politics are emerging in the Protestant
environment. Almost all the classics of modern political philosophy came,
in one way or another, from Protestant circles, since we are dealing with a
general phenomenon — a paradigm shift, a transition from Aristotelianism
and Platonism to a completely new picture of the world. This time, it is
horizontal and even chthonic, and at its centre stands not God, as before,
but man. Ideas about the world, God, and the relationship between the
Creator and creation are constructed not from the top down, but from the
bottom up. The political system is now also organised from the bottom up;
it is now conceived as a product
"collective agreement" or "social contract." In principle, Democritus
understood the essence of politics in a similar way, arguing that laws and
states were invented by people and therefore there is nothing sacred about
them; they can be restructured or abolished at any time.
Although Protestantism is still a religion, it fundamentally paves the
way for the emergence of pure atheism. Here one can
1   Dugin, A. G. Noomakhia. Germanic Logos. The Apophatic Man.at any time.
Although Protestantism is still a religion, it fundamentally paves the
way for the emergence of pure atheism. Here one can
1   Dugin, A. G. Noomakhia. Germanic Logos. The Apophatic Man.

--- PAGE BREAK ---gh Protestantism is still a religion, it fundamentally paves the
way for the emergence of pure atheism. Here one can
1   Dugin, A. G. Noomakhia. Germanic Logos. The Apophatic Man.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

175
Chapter 1. The Political Philosophy of Atomism
recall the words of the philosopher Friedrich Nietzsche (1844–1900): "God is
dead. We killed him — you and I!"(1)   Withregard to political philosophy, this
tragic statement means that the essence of the New Age is the dismantling of
the Platonic-Aristotelian conception of God and the transfer of everything to
earth, to materiality, to the economy, to the individual, to material and
technical progress, to capitalism. Thus, the political philosophy of the New
Age is nothing more than a political cross-section of a new philosophical
paradigm.
The revolt of the third estate
In Plato, the philosopher rises from the cave and descends back into it;
he separates himself from ordinary people, who see only shadows; then he
comprehends the truth and returns with new knowledge. In Aristotle, we
saw the "unmoved mover," which is the immanent God around whom all
beings revolve, striving to come closer to him. In Platonism, the subject is a
transcendent God, and all of Platonism's politics is built around God as an
actor. In Aristotelianism, God is no longer thought of as transcendent, but
as inherent in the world; this is the idea of an "unmoved mover" who
stands at the centre of things, not above them.
At the third level, in the philosophy of the Modern Age, a new subject
emerges (the bourgeoisie, the third estate), which democratically
organises its political system, acts as a socio-political atom and
emphasises material things. This transformation is an act of rebellion by
the third estate of European society against the two higher castes (priests and
warriors). Such an act of rebellion constitutes the profound meaning of
modern philosophy.
The political philosophy of the Modern Age presents society and
politics as the creation of human hands. The state appears as a property of
human individuals, and the idea of a social contract (a state based on a
social contract) emerges.
Note the metaphysical and philosophical roots of this completely new
idea. The state becomes a product of a social contract only if the subject
of politics is the human being, and the object of politics is the human
being.
1  Nietzsche, F. The Gay Science (la gaya scienza) / Nietzsche, F. Complete Works: In 13
Volumes. Vol. 3: Dawn. Messinian Idyls. The Gay Science. Moscow: Cultural Revolution, 2014.
P. 440.n
being.
1  Nietzsche, F. The Gay Science (la gaya scienza) / Nietzsche, F. Complete Works: In 13
Volumes. Vol. 3: Dawn. Messinian Idyls. The Gay Science. Moscow: Cultural Revolution, 2014.
P. 440.

--- PAGE BREAK ---he, F. The Gay Science (la gaya scienza) / Nietzsche, F. Complete Works: In 13
Volumes. Vol. 3: Dawn. Messinian Idyls. The Gay Science. Moscow: Cultural Revolution, 2014.
P. 440.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

176
Part 3. The Political Paradigm of Modernity. The War of Concepts
The individual (i.e., the atom) is the basis of politics. Self-sufficient atoms
unite into a group and launch the state, creating it.
Plato's conception of the state is completely different: the state is not
created by anyone, its structure is not created by people, the state as
Kallipolis always exists, and in the world of phenomena it is an
expression of being, of sacred being, built on the principle of a sacred
hierarchy.
Aristotle said that "man is a political animal." What does "political
animal" mean? It means that everything non-political in man is animal,
and if we remove politics from man, we are left with a beast. Elsewhere,
Aristotle says that man is "an animal with the power of thought." Here, man
is defined through the state and through thought, rather than thought and
the state being defined through man. In the classical version of a vertical
society, only a being ("animal") that has awakened to philosophy and
politics is truly human. If a person is not involved in politics, according to
Aristotle and Plato, if he does not think or philosophise, then he does not
exist. Thus, man is a derivative of Logos, of the idea.
The philosophy of the New Age completely overturns this definition.
For it, man himself produces both thought and the state. The idea of eternal,
shining heavenly truth is transformed into the result of the reasoning of an
individual,
whose
norm
becomes
the
bourgeois,
the
philistine.
Accordingly, the state loses its sacred dimension, turning into a kind of
artel, trust or commercial enterprise. The third estate brings with it its own
philosophy — the philosophy of the body, feelings, matter, comfort, carnal
pleasures, well-being and security. Politics is now built according to the
philosophy not of priests, thinkers and heroes, but of merchants.
Man as a producing and trading being
The political philosophy of the Modern Age considers thought and
political philosophy to be an artificial construct of the individual. For
Platonists and Aristotelians, for people of traditional society, politics is
given just as the world is given. For representatives of modern philosophy
(as for Democritus), politics is a man-made phenomenon. Politics is as
random as the collision of atoms. The state arose artificially,
1  Sombart, W. Merchants and Heroes. Jews and the Economy/Sombart, W. Collected
Works: In 3 vols. Vol. 2. St. Petersburg: Vladimir Dal, 2005.as the collision of atoms. The state arose artificially,
1  Sombart, W. Merchants and Heroes. Jews and the Economy/Sombart, W. Collected
Works: In 3 vols. Vol. 2. St. Petersburg: Vladimir Dal, 2005.

--- PAGE BREAK ---atoms. The state arose artificially,
1  Sombart, W. Merchants and Heroes. Jews and the Economy/Sombart, W. Collected
Works: In 3 vols. Vol. 2. St. Petersburg: Vladimir Dal, 2005.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

177
Chapter 1. The Political Philosophy of Atomism
based on contracts and agreements between people, and therefore politics
may not exist.
What, then, is man in this philosophy of the New Age? Man here is a
producing (homo faber) and trading (homo mercatus) being.
In the classical model, politics is an integral part of the very nature of
the philosopher and warrior, but for representatives of the third estate, politics
is fundamentally optional. Hence the idea that the philosophy of politics in
the modern era regards the political dimension as artificial and contractual,
i.e., not inherent in the nature of the world or even in human nature.
Politics is understood here as an artificial construct built by humans, but it
does not reflect human essence. Politics becomes optional.
What, then, reflects human nature? Food, trade, comfort, security,
pleasure, material activity, bodily reproduction. This is the fate of merchants
and craftsmen. Politics and the state, unlike economic activity, are completely
optional parts of existence in modern philosophy. This gives rise to the idea
of civil society as a society of autonomous individuals who, in essence, do
not need politics and are content with non-political forms of life.
Thus, economics or political economy gradually comes to the fore. For
economic people (homo economicus), who are gradually replacing political
people (homo politicus), economics truly becomes destiny.
Godlessness and democracy
Gradually, in modern times, political (i.e., vertically organised,
hierarchical) society was replaced by civil society. "Citizens" refers to
ordinary city dwellers, townspeople, which means that they do not belong to
the higher classes. The term "bourgeois" (French bourgeois), derived from
the German Burg, meaning "city," has the same meaning. Civil society is the
same as bourgeois society, i.e., a model where the representative of the third
estate is the norm.
Civil society is, at its core, a radical, revolutionary, democratic and, in the
extreme, "godless" concept. It reflects the act of "killing God" in the sphere
of political philosophy. It is a rejection of the recognition of the sacred
dimension of politics,ocratic and, in the
extreme, "godless" concept. It reflects the act of "killing God" in the sphere
of political philosophy. It is a rejection of the recognition of the sacred
dimension of politics,

--- PAGE BREAK ---extreme, "godless" concept. It reflects the act of "killing God" in the sphere
of political philosophy. It is a rejection of the recognition of the sacred
dimension of politics,

--- PAGE BREAK ---

178
Part 3. The Political Paradigm of Modernity. The War of Concepts
of hierarchy, of the state as an ontological reality. It is the reduction of the
political to the economic, commercial, and mercantile.
According to Plato, this is the ultimate degradation of Kallipolis to the
level of oligarchy and democracy (ultimately to tyranny). According to
Aristotle,
"democracy" is the worst form of government of the many.
However, from the perspective of the modern paradigm, civil society is
conceived as the "natural state of man." This gives rise to the idea that the
state is not necessary. According to classical modern theories, the state can
— and sooner or later must — be abolished. This is described with some
differences in various political ideologies of the modern era. For example,
liberals believe that a global market should replace the state. Communists
believe that when the communist state has fulfilled its historical function, it
will be abolished, and everyone will live in a "single human community."Why
do liberalism and communism, as two typical philosophies of modernity,
reject the state? Because, from the point of view of the primordial concept of
civil society as consisting of atoms, the state is conceived as an artificial
construct created by people. Consequently, politics, although possible, does
not constitute an essential dimension of human existence. As modernisation
and "progress" advance, the state and politics must be completely replaced by
the economy (hence the thesis: "the economy as destiny"). If people created
the state themselves and it has nothing sacred in itself, then they can also
abolish it. Sooner or later, under certain circumstances, they will do so.
Accordingly,
politics
is
something
temporary,
conditional,
intermediate, artificial and completely man-made, non-ontological, non-
sacred, non-religious, unnatural and inorganic. Thus, in the transition to the
modern paradigm, politics fundamentally changes its status, its very
existence. Now it is no longer a universal trait inherent in every human
being, but something optional. From now on, it is not man for politics (as a
"political animal"), but politics for man.
Moving on to the political philosophy of the Modern Age, we are
dealing with a radically new philosophical picture of the world, with
different
1Vladimir Mayakovsky (1893–1930) wrote in his poem "To Comrade Nette, the
Steamboat, and Man": We live bound by an iron oath. For it, we will be crucified and shot: this
is so that in a world without Russia and Latvia, we may live as one human community.omrade Nette, the
Steamboat, and Man": We live bound by an iron oath. For it, we will be crucified and shot: this
is so that in a world without Russia and Latvia, we may live as one human community.

--- PAGE BREAK ---teamboat, and Man": We live bound by an iron oath. For it, we will be crucified and shot: this
is so that in a world without Russia and Latvia, we may live as one human community.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

179
Chapter 1. The Political Philosophy of Atomism
philosophical foundations of thought, science, culture, and social
organisation.
This is how the unity between the divine paradigm (the Idea), man,
and the world is lost. Now everything is divided into the subjective and
the objective (as in Descartes): in such a situation, the state is conceived
as something subjective, constructed by people, while nature, and
especially matter, is conceived as something objective that must be known
and subjugated.
Secularisation: a secular society that kills God
In traditional society, it was impossible to conceive of political
philosophy based on material premises. Such a society had to deny God and
the sacred in politics, overthrow the hierarchical vertical, and this was at odds
with the entire structure of the Traditional (Pre-Modern) worldview.
The term that denies the dominance of religion and the sacred in politics
is "secularisation."A secular society is one that has undergone desacralisation.
The very concept of secularity is a fundamental concept of modern
philosophy, implying that society is not created by God, on the basis of
Revelation or Covenant, or by some higher powers, but exclusively by people
— separate, corporeal, atomic individuals.
Secular society is a society that kills God, a society that is godless and
anti-Christian. A person who calls himself a supporter of the secular model
is a supporter of the Antichrist. This is the meaning of Friedrich Nietzsche's
philosophy. Hieromonk Seraphim (Rose) (1934–1982) said that the true
enemy of Christ is not the one who is a great denier, but the one who is a
small affirmer, who has Christ only on his lips and not in his heart.He was
referring precisely to Nietzsche. Nietzsche, who wrote about the death of
God, does not kill God; he merely states that the modern secular paradigm
and philosophy of Modernism, secularism, is the Antichrist. Nietzsche does
not call for the Antichrist; he sees the Antichrist in the modern Western
secular modernist scientific picture of the world. Nietzsche says that it was
not he personally who killed God, but Western European civilisation,
which condemned
1We have seen that one of the first advocates of secularisation was the great nominalist William of
Ockham.
2Seraphim (Rose). Nihilism: The Source of the Revolution of the Modern Age. Forestville,
California: Fr. Seraphim Rose Foundation, 1994.of secularisation was the great nominalist William of
Ockham.
2Seraphim (Rose). Nihilism: The Source of the Revolution of the Modern Age. Forestville,
California: Fr. Seraphim Rose Foundation, 1994.

--- PAGE BREAK ---s the great nominalist William of
Ockham.
2Seraphim (Rose). Nihilism: The Source of the Revolution of the Modern Age. Forestville,
California: Fr. Seraphim Rose Foundation, 1994.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

180
Part 3. The Political Paradigm of Modernity. The War of Concepts
carried out the rebellion of the Earth against God the Father and God the
Son. Nietzsche exposes the negation, the nihilism that lies at the heart of
the third version of political philosophy. Nietzsche is a great negator, but,
from Seraphim Rose's point of view, those who expose the monstrous
essence of the modern world are not as dangerous as those who do not
notice it and remain indifferent to everything that is happening. The truth
about evil is not evil in itself.
Svinopolis of the New Age
All paradigms of modern political philosophy are built within the
framework of the fundamental model of political philosophy of the
Mother (Titanism, materialism1). As Modernity strengthened, the
initiative in the battle between gods and giants shifted to the giants.
The modern era radically changed human thinking. In both Antiquity and
the Middle Ages, Europe lived by inertia within the framework of the
political philosophy of the Father and the political philosophy of the Son (this
was the traditional sacred society). The new era decisively rejects these
models: there is no Father and no Son, there is only the atomic individual left
to himself, bound to his biological existence. Everything else is his
constructs, his projections, his creation. This is homo faber, the "man who
creates," who has replaced Deus Faber, God the Creator.
If Aristotle had seen the political history of Europe from the 16th to the
20th century, he would probably have said: "Look, these are not people!
Their politics are secondary, their thinking is vague. Divine thought and
contemplative life are no longer their highest values. It is not wisdom but
animal instinct that prevails in their souls." Socrates spoke of something
similar in "The Republic," painting a picture of a "city of pigs," a
"pigopolis," where people are interested only in food, individual comfort,
travelling on holiday, etc. The following picture emerges in the dialogue:
— If, Socrates, Glaucon replied, the state you are proposing consisted of
pigs, what else would you feed them but this?
— But what else is required, Glaucon?
— What is customary: to lie on couches, dine at tables, eat the food and
delicacies that people currently enjoy — that, in my opinion, is what is
needed in order not to suffer deprivation.
1   Dugin, A. G. Noomakhia. Three Logos
2   Plato. The Republic. P. 134.food and
delicacies that people currently enjoy — that, in my opinion, is what is
needed in order not to suffer deprivation.
1   Dugin, A. G. Noomakhia. Three Logos
2   Plato. The Republic. P. 134.

--- PAGE BREAK ---s that people currently enjoy — that, in my opinion, is what is
needed in order not to suffer deprivation.
1   Dugin, A. G. Noomakhia. Three Logos
2   Plato. The Republic. P. 134.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

181
Chapter 1. The Political Philosophy of Atomism
"Lying on couches, dining at tables, eating delicacies and luxuries," "not
suffering deprivation" — this is the ethical ideal of pig-like humanity.
The philosophy of the New Age in all its dimensions falls under Socrates'
idea of the "city of pigs" or Nietzsche's idea of the "last men" ("Happiness
has been found by us," say the last men, and they wink 1).
Since the 16th century, Western European society and all societies under
its influence have been living according to this paradigm for several
centuries, so it seems self-evident to us. In essence, our entire education
system, our entire society, our entire culture, and our entire politics are built
on the foundation that the figure of the citizen and human rights are the main
principles, that the individual is the measure of all things, that democracy is
the natural, acceptable, and legitimate form of political organisation, that
the state is a construct created by individuals and is unquestionably
secular, and that the welfare and prosperity of citizens, freedom of trade and
freedom of movement are the basic principles of the political system. For us,
modern political philosophy is a fundamental code that we are
fundamentally incapable of questioning. But this means that other types of
political philosophy remain completely inaccessible to us, and we have a
very distorted view of them.
Taking "pig-polis" for granted, we can hardly imagine what politics was
like in other eras, what it is like for other cultures that have preserved their
connection with religion and tradition, and what it could theoretically
become again if we choose a different paradigm — that of the Father or the
Son.
Regicide — a fundamental gesture of Modernity
In order to gain an understanding of what political philosophy is in its
fullest form, of what Plitica Aeterna is, one must realise how
fundamental the shift was in the transition from the paradigm of Tradition
to the paradigm of Modernity. The contemporary worldview — both in
relation to nature and society — is entirely based on the Democritean
materialist principle. In modern political philosophy, there can be no
Platonic philosopher, no king, no aristocrat, no hero. Moreover, within this
model, those who look up
1  Nietzsche, F. Thus Spoke Zarathustra/Nietzsche, F. Collected Works: In 2 vols. Moscow: MyUl,
1996. Vol. 2. P. 12., no king, no aristocrat, no hero. Moreover, within this
model, those who look up
1  Nietzsche, F. Thus Spoke Zarathustra/Nietzsche, F. Collected Works: In 2 vols. Moscow: MyUl,
1996. Vol. 2. P. 12.

--- PAGE BREAK ---crat, no hero. Moreover, within this
model, those who look up
1  Nietzsche, F. Thus Spoke Zarathustra/Nietzsche, F. Collected Works: In 2 vols. Moscow: MyUl,
1996. Vol. 2. P. 12.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

182
Part 3. The Political Paradigm of Modernity. The War of Concepts
Those who seek to go beyond the cave and its spectacle must be sacrificed
— torn apart, killed by the rebellious, aggressive masses who gaze at the
shadows and voraciously destroy anyone who tries to show them something
different.
Regicide can be called the fundamental principle of modern political
philosophy. The guardians of Plato's state, priests, aristocracy, are also
subject to demonisation — the bourgeois uprising presupposes the
elimination of the two highest classes — priests and warriors. The new era is
the absolutisation of the bourgeois caste, the third estate. The act of regicide
was the culmination of the three most symbolically significant revolutions in
modern European history —
1) the English Revolution, when Charles I (1600–1649) was executed,
which was the culmination of radical Protestantism;
2) the Great French Revolution, during which the Jacobins beheaded
Louis XVI (1754–1793), establishing a bourgeois republic;
3) the October Revolution, when the Bolsheviks shot the last Russian
tsar, Nicholas II (1868–1918), who held the status of "katechon," and
began building the first socialist state in history, based on radical
materialism and atheism.
These executions symbolised the destruction of the vertical structure,
because at each stage of the revolution, the revolutionaries dealt a
crushing blow to the very vertical organisation of society, to the sacred
axis and hierarchy, to the foundations of the political philosophy of
Tradition. At the same time, the structure of society became — at least
nominally — increasingly horizontal, egalitarian, reduced to its lowest
common denominator.
The present moment of Modernity
Today, we find ourselves at the end of a full cycle of affirmation of
modern political philosophy — at the very bottom of this conceptual field,
where individualisation and the movement towards materiality are reaching
the stage of transition into the sphere of virtual dispersion and the final
elimination of the political principle. In the early 1990s, American political
analyst Francis Fukuyama wrote an important text on the "end of history"
(1).He meant the end of political history, the complete removal of the Political
and the transition exclusively to the
1   Fukuyama, F. The End of History and the Last Man. Moscow: AST Publishing House, 2004.ant the end of political history, the complete removal of the Political
and the transition exclusively to the
1   Fukuyama, F. The End of History and the Last Man. Moscow: AST Publishing House, 2004.

--- PAGE BREAK ---ical history, the complete removal of the Political
and the transition exclusively to the
1   Fukuyama, F. The End of History and the Last Man. Moscow: AST Publishing House, 2004.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

183
Chapter 1. The Political Philosophy of Atomism
In his view of the world, global politics was now to be replaced by global
economics. And since history is always and above all political history, the
transition from politics to pure economics would also mean the end of history
itself.
Although Fukuyama's prediction proved somewhat hasty, his analysis
is generally correct. Political modernity initially consisted of replacing
hierarchical (sacred) politics with democratic and secular politics, and as
democratisation progressed, politics itself was to be gradually abolished.
In effect, Fukuyama declared that "pigopolis" had been built on a
planetary scale, and in a sense, given the successes of civil society,
liberalism, and the market economy by the end of the 20th century, he was
not far from the truth. In any case, there is no doubt that we are currently at
the very end of the Modern era. This Modern era began in the 16th century
and came to an end at the beginning of the 20th century. We are therefore
in a unique situation where we can look back on the entire cycle of the
Modern political paradigm. We know how and when it began, we can trace
its development and we can roughly imagine how it will end, since the end
is obviously near and absolutely inevitable.
Compared to the difference between the political philosophy of the
Father and the political philosophy of the Son, between two male political
philosophies and ontologies, the transition to the maternal model of the third
principle was radically new. The new era was truly new. The shifts here were
much more fundamental than in the transition from Platonism to
Aristotelianism, especially since in the context of traditional society (the pre-
modern paradigm), the political philosophy of the Father and the political
philosophy of the Son coexisted quite harmoniously and often formed a
single structure.
Here, however, with the transition to the political philosophy of the
Mother,   , a global revolution actually took place, a radical change in all
proportions. In all the main philosophical axes, the vectors changed by 180
degrees: in the structure of the world, in the structure of God, in human
existence, in the existence of the Political, in ideas about time and space, etc.
This was a genuine revolution of the New Age, which can only be understood
when fully correlated with other political philosophies characteristic of
traditional society.
If we do not understand how revolutionary, avant-garde, and innovative
the philosophical assertions of the New Age were,ated with other political philosophies characteristic of
traditional society.
If we do not understand how revolutionary, avant-garde, and innovative
the philosophical assertions of the New Age were,

--- PAGE BREAK ---

184
Part 3. The Political Paradigm of Modernity. The War of Concepts
we will not be able to understand the world we live in and the processes that
take place in it. For if we consider only the philosophy of the modern era as
fundamental, unique and optimal, we will not be able to comprehend what
happened in ancient European history, what is happening now in non-
Western European societies, or what is increasingly looming over
contemporary culture in the form of the Postmodern paradigm, which has
already significantly replaced Modernity in many areas.
For a complete understanding of political philosophy, despite the fact that
we live in a world of modern political philosophy, we must bear in mind the
complete reference structure — the political philosophy of Platonism and the
political philosophy of Aristotelianism, even if they do not exist in their pure
form in our society. This structure is necessary in order to more accurately
understand the very nature of Modernity (which is now in its own transition
phase to Postmodernity), to correctly interpret traditional societies remaining
in the non-Western world, and to interpret complex variants of the archaeo-
modern, i.e., political systems in which modernisation has not penetrated
deeply, giving rise to bizarre hybrid forms. This phenomenon is characteristic
of some post-colonial countries (Asia, Africa, Latin America), as well as
Russia and China, which were forced to carry out defensive modernisation
under external pressure from Western civilisation.

--- PAGE BREAK ---al countries (Asia, Africa, Latin America), as well as
Russia and China, which were forced to carry out defensive modernisation
under external pressure from Western civilisation.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

Chapter 2. Protestantism and its
secularisation: a phase transition
in the structure of political theology
Third Christianity
The politics of the New Age are closely linked to the Protestant
religion. Protestantism emerged in the 16th century during the reforms of
Martin Luther and other reformers such as Jean Calvin (1509–1564) and
Philip Melanchthon (1497–1560). The leaders of Protestantism proposed a
completely new model of Christianity. This model broke sharply with the
paradigm of the Christian worldview that had prevailed in Orthodoxy and
Catholicism during the Middle Ages. The Protestant interpretation of
Christianity differed both from the Aristotelianism of the scholastics (with
elements of Platonism, which was particularly evident in the doctrine of the
"two cities") and from the ontology of the Empire that prevailed in the
Orthodox world (Byzantinism)(1) .Protestants based their beliefs on a
completely new approach to the interpretation of God, the world, the
Church, and man. At the heart of their theories was the Christian as an
individual who determines his relationship with God based on his own
reason.
Thus, a new form of Christianity emerges—the third—beyond the
boundaries of Platonic and Aristotelian Christianity: a democratic,
"Democritean,"atomistic Christianity. This is still a religion, that is, a doctrine
that recognises the existence of God and a number of Christian dogmas,
including the authority of the Old and New Testaments, Revelation, the
Trinity, and the divinity and humanity of Christ. But something is already
emerging that fundamentally breaks with the pre-modern era, with the era of
traditional society in Europe itself.
Protestantism, as a religion, theology and ethics, prepares the
paradigm of modern philosophy in politics, culture,
1   Dugin, A. G. Noomakhia. Byzantine Logos. Hellenism and Empire.
2The immediate predecessors of this "third" Christianity were the nominalists (materialists
and individualists), who remained formally within Catholicism but were secretly preparing a
completely different worldview.edecessors of this "third" Christianity were the nominalists (materialists
and individualists), who remained formally within Catholicism but were secretly preparing a
completely different worldview.

--- PAGE BREAK ---third" Christianity were the nominalists (materialists
and individualists), who remained formally within Catholicism but were secretly preparing a
completely different worldview.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

186
Part 3. The Political Paradigm of Modernity. The War of Concepts
in economics and other key areas of public life. It was precisely the Protestant
worldview, Protestant religion, and Protestant ideology that laid the
foundations for the paradigm of the New Age. This is precisely a transitional
moment, because religion still exists, but the Church (as in Catholicism) no
longer exists, nor does the Empire (as in Orthodoxy or under the Habsburgs).
The abolition of Holy Tradition
Luther proclaimed that it was necessary to return to the times of early
Christianity and "purify" religion of historical accretions. Catholicism (as
well as Orthodox Christianity) accepted as sources of indisputable truth
and supreme authority the Holy Scriptures (the Bible) and Holy Tradition,
i.e., tradition, including interpretations, institutions, customs, foundations,
institutions, etc. Luther, Calvin, and other leaders of Protestantism
completely rejected Sacred Tradition, i.e., tradition. At the same time, they
recognised the authority of Holy Scripture, which, however, they
interpreted arbitrarily, relying on rational analysis and personal spiritual
experience.
The Catholic Church is built from the top down. There is Christ, there is
His incarnation. There is a direct transmission of grace from the Holy Spirit,
the third person of the Holy Trinity, descending upon the apostles through an
unbroken chain of priesthood. The Holy Spirit descended from above upon
the apostles at Pentecost. The apostles, thanks to the power of the Holy Spirit,
form the Church. The first of the apostles, Simon Peter, becomes the
foundation (Greek: PgQvGJ — rock) of the Church, the first bishop of Rome,
from whom the line of Roman Popes descends. Everything is formed from
above, from Christ to his apostles, who, like God, consecrate people, and the
Holy Spirit descends upon them at Pentecost. Strictly speaking, the Church is
formed according to a vertical principle, by descent. At the same time, it is
eternal and participates in history.
This dimension of eternity and this vertical symmetry are also fully
inherent in Orthodoxy.
In Protestantism, however, everything changes. Here there is an
authoritative book, the text — the Bible. People read it. They comprehend,
interpret and comment on the texts, relying on their own reasoning. Some
may interpret a passage from the Holy Scriptures in one way, others in
another way, and still others in a third way. Here, everyone has the right
and freedom to interpret, there is no binding tradition, no higher
unquestionable authority. Anyone can, relying entirely on their own reason
and their own reflections, interpret any passage of the Holy Scriptures. And
when these interpretations satisfy others, they unite in a community, a
congregation, a sect.tirely on their own reason
and their own reflections, interpret any passage of the Holy Scriptures. And
when these interpretations satisfy others, they unite in a community, a
congregation, a sect.

--- PAGE BREAK ---reason
and their own reflections, interpret any passage of the Holy Scriptures. And
when these interpretations satisfy others, they unite in a community, a
congregation, a sect.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

187
Chapter 2. Protestantism and its secularisation...
reflections, interpret any passage of the Holy Scriptures. And when these
comments satisfy others, they unite into a community, a congregation, a
kind of sect. At the same time, the term "sect" in Protestantism has a
neutral-positive character. Formally registered Protestant sects are called
"churches" or denominations.
This is not the case in Catholicism and Orthodox Christianity.
Interpretation forms the basis of the Holy Tradition of the Church. The
interpretation of the Gospel and the Old Testament is transmitted in the
Church as an authoritative opinion, confirmed by the Councils and the
decisions of the Pope. Orthodox Christians recognise the supreme authority
of the Seven Ecumenical Councils and the vast body of patristic literature.
Catholics recognise later Councils, but consider the opinion of the Pope to be
the ultimate authority in matters of religion. The Pope has the final say in
determining what constitutes heresy and how a particular passage of
Scripture should be interpreted. In Orthodoxy, this function is performed not
by the Patriarch, but by the entire Orthodox tradition as a whole (the decrees
of the Ecumenical Councils and the patristic traditions). The two branches of
Christianity — Catholicism and Orthodoxy — recognise both Scripture and
Tradition. Tradition is passed down in the Church. In this case, personal
interpretation of religion and the fundamental issues associated with it must
be consistent with this Tradition. Catholics add to this the binding nature of
decisions officially announced by the Pope (in the form of a bull).
Protestants object: no, we will interpret religion ourselves. We will
interpret it as we see fit. Accordingly, a completely new conception of
authority, of the source of authority, arises. The Church or its equivalent is
created here not from the top down, but from the bottom up. Based on
their own interpretations, people make judgements about God, the world,
and themselves.
In other words, a completely different concept of authority emerges. The
Church still exists, as does the Christian community and the Holy
Scriptures, which are endowed with supreme authority. But all
interpretation, all constitution of the Church, the community, and society as
a whole is built "from the bottom up."
The rejection of Sacred Tradition became the core of the Protestant
Reformation, which demanded that only the text of the Bible be followed,
calling into question all other aspects of the living Christian tradition, from
interpretation to rituals.
of the Bible, questioning all other aspects of living Christian tradition —
from interpretation to rituals. Thus, some versions of Protestantism rejected
the Eucharist (Communion), liturgy, and icon worship, reducing worship to
the communal singing of individual psalms and rather arbitrary sermons.
SomeThus, some versions of Protestantism rejected
the Eucharist (Communion), liturgy, and icon worship, reducing worship to
the communal singing of individual psalms and rather arbitrary sermons.
Some

--- PAGE BREAK ---of Protestantism rejected
the Eucharist (Communion), liturgy, and icon worship, reducing worship to
the communal singing of individual psalms and rather arbitrary sermons.
Some

--- PAGE BREAK ---

188
Part 3. The Political Paradigm of Modernity. The War of Concepts
Some sects, such as Calvinism, abolished the institution of the priesthood.
Most Protestant sects reject icons. Some Protestant movements, such as the
HussitesinBohemia, reject the cross as a symbol of Christ's suffering. In other
words, even the cross ceases to be a symbol of Christianity. In churches,
chalices are depicted as a symbol of this movement.
Many have questioned the fundamental foundations of the Christian faith,
to the point that the most extreme Protestants — "Unitarianists" or "Socinians"—
have rejected the dogma of the Trinity.
Against celibacy
Protestant ideology, based on the individual, his reason and his
personal will, destroys the very foundation of the idea of the divine origin
of the Church, as understood by both Catholics and Orthodox Christians.
By "Church," Catholicism understood the clergy, that is, the body of
priests ordained into the priesthood. At the same time, for Catholics, all
priests had to remain unmarried (mandatory celibacy) (3).According to
Roman Catholic teaching, the Catholic clergy — that is, ordained priests
who strictly observe celibacy — constitute the citizens of the "City of
God," that is, the Church.Ordinary Christians have the right to marry through
a special sacrament.
Luther and other reformers struck a blow against priestly celibacy,
declaring that the rules of clerical celibacy were a later "innovation" and
decreed that from now on priests could be married. Luther himself was
originally a monk, and having decided that monks could now marry, he set an
example. Thus, monasticism was completely abolished and monasteries were
dissolved.
1Hussites — the name of a Czech reformist religious movement, named after Jan Hus.
They were called "Chasniki" because they demanded that the chalice be made available to lay
people during communion, since in Catholicism only clergy receive communion under both
species (the body and blood of Jesus Christ), while lay people are given only prosphora (a
wafer). See Dugin, A. G. Noomakhia. Eastern Europe. Slavic Logos: Balkan Nav and Sarmatian
Style. Moscow: Academic Project, 2018.
2  Dugin, A. G. Noomakhia. England or Britain? The Maritime Mission and the Positive
Subject.
3  The Orthodox tradition allows marriage for the white clergy, but the highest episcopal
rank requires celibacy, as in Catholicism.
4From the perspective of Orthodoxy, the Church includes not only priests and bishops
(the clergy), but also all baptised Orthodox Christians, which significantly broadens the
concept of the Church and changes its content to some extent.e Church includes not only priests and bishops
(the clergy), but also all baptised Orthodox Christians, which significantly broadens the
concept of the Church and changes its content to some extent.

--- PAGE BREAK ---t only priests and bishops
(the clergy), but also all baptised Orthodox Christians, which significantly broadens the
concept of the Church and changes its content to some extent.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

189
Chapter 2. Protestantism and its secularisation...
The authority of the Pope, on which the entire Western European
political philosophy had previously been based, was completely rejected.
The entire Catholic clergy — cardinals, bishops and priests — suffered the
same fate. Some Protestant movements (Lutheranism itself) retained their
hierarchy and a number of liturgical practices, while others (Calvinists)
rejected both completely.
Against the Empire
Alongside the rejection of the previous doctrine of the Church, the
Reformation also rejected the very idea of the Empire. At first, the rulers of
the Holy Roman Empire wavered between supporting Rome or the
Reformation, partly continuing the imperial traditions of the Ghibellines.
Under Charles V of Habsburg (1500–1558), the Protestant north and the
Catholic south attempted to divide their powers within a common political
system (the Peace of Augsburg). However, some of the Habsburgs,
primarily Philip II (1527–1598), a radical supporter of Catholicism, chose
Rome, and in the end, the Austrian Habsburgs also leaned towards that
choice. This led to the separation of the Protestant countries — Holland,
Sweden, Norway and Prussia. Together with England and France (which
remained Catholic but was strongly opposed to the Habsburgs), this gave
rise to an anti-imperial coalition of European powers.
In place of the Empire—with its echoes of the doctrine of the Cato—
comes a completely different political normative idea: the nation-state,
created by people (again from the bottom up) for security, protection, and
the optimal realisation of private material interests. Such a nation-state has
no higher purpose or mission. It rejects both the Byzantine concept of the
katechon and the Catholic interpretation of the doctrine of the "two
cities." The Empire had a sacred meaning, and papal power brought a
transcendent (also sacred) dimension to European politics in the Middle
Ages. People obeyed God, the Earth obeyed Heaven, and individual political
entities obeyed the highest unity. That is why the Empire was consistently
called "Holy." The Protestant state is fundamentally not sacred. It has no
mission or higher purpose. It performs technical functions and can always,
in theory, be restructured, changed or even abolished. Protestant
communities were built on this principle, from which anyone could leave
at any time, attracted by a different interpretation.ways,
in theory, be restructured, changed or even abolished. Protestant
communities were built on this principle, from which anyone could leave
at any time, attracted by a different interpretation.

--- PAGE BREAK ---restructured, changed or even abolished. Protestant
communities were built on this principle, from which anyone could leave
at any time, attracted by a different interpretation.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

190
Part 3. The Political Paradigm of Modernity. The War of Concepts
and converting to a different sect. Bourgeois companies, firms, trusts and
trading partnerships were also formed.
Thus, in this Protestant worldview, we arrive at the concept of the social
contract, which is fundamental to the entire philosophy and politics of the
modern era. The Church is no longer a product of the condescension of
the Holy Spirit from above. It is a product of a social contract. And the
state is no longer an empire endowed with a sacred mission, but an artificial
creation of individuals for the purpose of solving certain private secular
tasks.
Thus, the political philosophy of Protestantism rejected the very structure
of the vertical organisation of the world, society, and religion, which was
common not only to Western and Eastern Christianity, not only to
Byzantinism and the doctrine of the "two cities," but also to the entire
European history known to us — from Antiquity to the Renaissance. This
is the special significance of Protestantism: it paved the way for a
completely new model of looking at the world from the bottom up.
Wealth as a virtue
The phenomenon of Protestantism as the basis of the paradigm of the
Modern Age was thoroughly analysed by German sociologist Max Weber,
one of the founders of sociology as such, in his work "The Protestant Ethic" 1.
This work by Max is one of the most famous classical works on sociology.
In it, Weber shows how the Protestant worldview, Protestant theology,
Protestant ideology, and the ethics built on them form the foundations of
bourgeois society and the value system of capitalism, which arose precisely
from this Protestant approach.
M. Weber demonstrates that Protestantism justified the supreme value
of rational practical activity and elevated the merchant, the entrepreneur —
that is, the townspeople, the citizens, the bourgeoisie — to the highest
ideal. Weber shows that the Catholic worldview as a whole is oriented
toward the spiritual world, and wealth is never considered the highest
virtue — hence the cult of poverty in some monastic orders, especially
among the Franciscans. Protestantism, on the other hand, focused its
attention on earthly life, considering material wealth a sign of "electivity."
Calvin, in his theory of Predestination, even stated that man is incapable
of changing either
1   Weber, M. The Protestant Ethic and the Spirit of Capitalism.material wealth a sign of "electivity."
Calvin, in his theory of Predestination, even stated that man is incapable
of changing either
1   Weber, M. The Protestant Ethic and the Spirit of Capitalism.

--- PAGE BREAK ---191
Chapter 2.

Protestantism and its secularisation...

neither their earthly nor their posthumous fate, and wealth and success
should be interpreted as the most visible form of virtue; wealth is good and
a sign of being chosen, while poverty is a vice and a curse.

In Protestantism, the concept of posthumous reward disappears.

It is
believed that a person receives reward not in the future, but in this life.

This gives rise to the thesis that God distributes good and evil, rewards the
righteous and punishes sinners in this life.

Not later, not after death, but
here and now.

Thus, the afterlife, which plays a huge role in Catholicism
and Orthodox Christianity, effectively loses its meaning, and the themes
of Judgment, punishment, and retribution are transferred to earthly life.

This approach turns everything upside down.

In Orthodox Christianity,in
full accordance with Christ's Sermon on the Mount, it is precisely the poor in
spirit, those who mourn, those who suffer, and those who hunger who are
considered blessed.

That is, the Beatitudes describe people who are deprived,
people who suffer, who mourn, who have nothing.

And the second part of
these symmetrical formulas promises future justice, achieved in the kingdom
of heaven — for they shall be comforted, for they shall be filled, for they
shall be called sons of God...

All the unhappy, the unsuccessful, the destitute,
the poor, the suffering, the deprived are the "salt of the earth." This is the
ethical norm in Orthodox Christianity.

For Orthodox Christians, being poor
means, most likely, being good and honest.

Being rich means, probably, not
being so good.

And it is more difficult for the rich to enter the Kingdom of
Heaven than for the poor (2).The poor are promised an easy path to the
Kingdom of Heaven, while the rich have a difficult one.

This does not mean
that it is closed to them, nor does it mean that every poor person is good.

But
in general, the poor are better than the rich.--- PAGE BREAK ---

This does not mean
that it is closed to them, nor does it mean that every poor person is good. But
in general, the poor are better than the rich. Because it is easier for the poor
and suffering — they are deprived of much or even everything in this world,
in the material, physical universe. And this is not just a test, but a driving
force to seek truth and justice beyond its limits — to strive for the kingdom
of heaven and Christ. The rich, on the other hand
1Blessed are the poor in spirit, for theirs is the kingdom of heaven. Blessed are those who
mourn, for they will be comforted. Blessed are the meek, for they will inherit the earth. Blessed
are those who hunger and thirst for righteousness, for they will be filled. Blessed are the merciful,
for they will be shown mercy. Blessed are the pure in heart, for they will see God. Blessed are
the peacemakers, for they will be called children of God. Blessed are those who are
persecuted for righteousness' sake, for theirs is the kingdom of heaven. Blessed are you when
people insult you, persecute you and falsely say all kinds of evil against you because of Me. Rejoice and be glad, for your reward is great in heaven, for so they persecuted the prophets who
were before you. Gospel of Matthew 5:3–11. 2It is easier for a camel to pass through the eye of a needle than for a rich man to enter the
kingdom of God. From Matthew 19:24.

--- PAGE BREAK ---who
were before you. Gospel of Matthew 5:3–11. 2It is easier for a camel to pass through the eye of a needle than for a rich man to enter the
kingdom of God. From Matthew 19:24.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

192
Part 3. The Political Paradigm of Modernity. The War of Concepts
bound to earthly existence. For it is said: where your treasure is, there will
your heart be also1. And, moreover, you cannot serve both God and
mammon2. The rich have riches in their hearts, which are of little use to them
in the next world, and it is difficult for them to enter the Kingdom of Heaven.
Of course, it is possible if they distribute their wealth to the poor, if they
serve their country and the Church. But this is more difficult to do. It is a pity
to part with what one has acquired.
In Catholicism, it is not quite the same as in Orthodoxy, but it is close.
For example, St. Francis of Assisi (1181 or 1182–1226) composed hymns to
poverty, saying that there is nothing more beautiful than the poor
brotherhood, and that the second thing he loves after Christ is poverty. He
gives everything away. He completely sacrifices himself, absolutely
everything. He walks barefoot in winter, wearing only a single robe. His
monasteries flourish, and he lives only with beggars and the poor, content
with very little. Of course, this is far from the whole of Catholicism, but to a
large extent, Franciscan ethics are considered the undisputed pinnacle of
piety in Western Christianity. Because everything important and valuable is
not here. "My kingdom is not of this world" (3).This is how the Orthodox and
Catholic religions understand the world and ethics.
But Protestantism understands the world completely differently. On
the contrary, from a Protestant point of view, rich means good, which
means chosen. The Last Judgment takes place here, and retribution is also
meted out here. Therefore, those who are poor are also bad. And,
accordingly, the idea of enrichment takes on a religious meaning. If a person
works well, earns a lot, and has accumulated a lot of wealth, then he is
almost a saint.
This idea that the rich are holy and the poor are damned is an important
feature of Protestant ethics, a specific worldview. Note how ethical
guidelines change. Formally, we are dealing with Christianity, but all
proportions are reversed, and the entire structure of the worldview is
almost directly opposite.
Protestantism creates a completely new scale of values within
Christianity. First, the Church is built from the bottom up, not from the top
down. And, accordingly, it can be dissolved and re-created. Strictly speaking,
there is nothing sacred in the Church. The Church becomes the work of lay
people, and people gather around the Holy Scriptures in order to interpret
them together, sometimes speaking in tongues ( Pentecostals, modern
charismatics), that is
1   Gospel of Matthew, Chapter 6:21.
2  Gospel of Luke. Chapter 16: 13.
3   Gospel of John. Chapter 18: 36.them together, sometimes speaking in tongues ( Pentecostals, modern
charismatics), that is
1   Gospel of Matthew, Chapter 6:21.
2  Gospel of Luke. Chapter 16: 13.
3   Gospel of John. Chapter 18: 36.

--- PAGE BREAK ---times speaking in tongues ( Pentecostals, modern
charismatics), that is
1   Gospel of Matthew, Chapter 6:21.
2  Gospel of Luke. Chapter 16: 13.
3   Gospel of John. Chapter 18: 36.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

193
Chapter 2. Protestantism and its secularisation...
They shout incomprehensible words, sometimes shake and make
incomprehensible gestures, believing that they are vessels for God's will (like
the Shaker sect).
Protestantism as the foundation of Modernism
It was from the Reformation movement that the political philosophy of
Modernism was born. The modern world is based on Protestant principles:
•religion here is a collective matter, which is determined by consensus
as to whether God exists or not, or how He should be interpreted;
•instead of a sacred Church founded by Christ and the Holy Spirit,
there is a profane "church," that is, a sect;
•Instead of a God-given and mission-driven Empire, a secular nation-
state established on the basis of a social contract;
•instead of focusing on the kingdom of heaven and Christ, complete
involvement in the affairs of the material world;
•instead of posthumous reward and the Last Judgement, fatal
predestination to poverty or wealth as an expression of earthly
justice, measured by material well-being;
•instead of a sacred hierarchy, equality of opportunity;
•instead of priests, monks and warriors — the bourgeoisie;
•instead of verticality, horizontality;
•instead of universality — individualism and the glorification of
absolute private property;
•instead of the heavenly — the earthly;
•instead of goodness and compassion — the ethics of profit and
material prosperity.
This is precisely what Max Weber emphasises: Protestantism, by
shifting attention from the spiritual to the physical and from the heavenly to
the earthly, gave supreme importance to wealth.
Protestantism breaks with traditional society and lays the foundations
for modernity. But it is still a transition. In Protestantism, there is still an
appeal to God; the Church still exists; the authority of Holy Scripture is
still recognised; the existence of the state is still justified. From now on, the
basis of these elements of religion and politics is the individual, but some
objects of interpretation remain from the previous paradigm of the world of
Tradition. The axis of interpretation radically changes its direction —
instead of a view from above, the view is now directed from below, but
some distant connection with the vertical axis still remains.ion. The axis of interpretation radically changes its direction —
instead of a view from above, the view is now directed from below, but
some distant connection with the vertical axis still remains.

--- PAGE BREAK ---erpretation radically changes its direction —
instead of a view from above, the view is now directed from below, but
some distant connection with the vertical axis still remains.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

194
Part 3. The Political Paradigm of Modernity. The War of Concepts
from the bottom up, but some distant connection with the vertical axis still
remains.
If we secularise this Protestant theology, if we remove any mention of
God and the Church, if we reject the authority of the Bible altogether, and if
we completely relativise the state (which was necessary for Protestants at
least as a defence against Catholics), then we arrive at the paradigm of the
modern world, Modernity, in its fullest sense. Here, instead of "churches"
(i.e., sects), individuals unite in political parties, and parties make up the
parliament. Instead of freedom to interpret the Holy Scriptures, it is now
possible to interpret anything, and the authority of materialistic science
completely supplants the authority of religion. Now the individual is free not
only to interpret sacred texts, but also to create his own, which in the context
of a purely profane culture are essentially equal in status to private opinion.
The state breaks away this time even from the task of defending
Protestantism and becomes entirely and completely created by the arbitrarily
established Republic, which has strictly selfish interests. Wealth is seen not
as a sign of a person's election in a predetermined destiny, but simply as the
highest value in isolation from any meaning whatsoever. Capital is now the
measure of all things. Hence capitalism, liberalism, the secular world, civil
society and, ultimately, globalism.
Weber — as well as L. Dumont (1911–1998), W. Sombart (1863–1941)
and others — show that the Protestant Reformation led precisely to this
result, but it was achieved only through the overcoming of Protestantism
itself. The Reformation paved the way for Modernity. But it was not yet
fully Modern, retaining within itself — albeit inverted and distorted —
certain echoes of traditional society.
The secularisation of Calvinism gave rise to liberalism.
Protestant theology and Protestant ethics predetermine the foundations
of political philosophy in the modern era. It should be noted that several
quite different trends can be identified within Protestantism. Each of these
trends can be viewed as a matrix on the basis of which one of the three
main political ideologies of the Modern era developed in the course of
further secularisation.
The most orthodox line emerging from the secularisation of
Protestantism was capitalism. It is most fully reflected in the ideology of
liberalism.developed in the course of
further secularisation.
The most orthodox line emerging from the secularisation of
Protestantism was capitalism. It is most fully reflected in the ideology of
liberalism.

--- PAGE BREAK ---rse of
further secularisation.
The most orthodox line emerging from the secularisation of
Protestantism was capitalism. It is most fully reflected in the ideology of
liberalism.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

195
Chapter 2. Protestantism and its secularisation...
liberal ideology. It is liberalism that puts the individual, who has become
the measure of all things in Protestant anthropology, at the forefront and
considers material wealth to be the highest form of personal evaluation.
Money in capitalism is an absolute value.
Among Protestant theologians, the Swiss reformer John Calvin is closest
to this model. It was he who formulated the basic principles of an
individualistic interpretation of religion, politics, society and culture. He was
also more consistent than others in insisting on wealth as a sign of being
chosen.
Calvinists were the most radical opponents of Catholicism, rejecting
hierarchy and the sacraments. In politics, they adhered to extremely
democratic views. During the English Revolution of 1640–1660, Calvinists
and various movements inspired by them formed the most extreme wing of
the Protestant party, insisting on the abolition of the monarchy (or the
creation of a special Fifth Monarchy1 ) and the complete restructuring of
society on bourgeois-democratic principles.
It is important to note that the founding fathers who arrived by ship in
New York when it was still a Dutch colony were Calvinists. The main core of
immigrants from England and Europe to North America as a whole were
representatives of the most extreme Protestant groups of the Calvinist
persuasion. They laid the foundations of North American civilisation.
Calvin was the originator of the Protestant doctrine of predestination,
which rejects the Christian thesis of free will (liberum arbitrium). This
doctrine radically changed the very concept of the nature of time and the
logic of history. Calvin believed that the eternity of God necessarily contains
all time. For God, time is synchronous, whereas for humanity it is
experienced as a sequence. But in this case, the diachronic unfolding of
events cannot change the content of history, because if it were otherwise, God
would not be perfect. Consequently, Calvin concludes, free will does not
exist; it is merely an optical illusion of a mortal being whose horizon is
fatally limited by time. Taking into account predestination, all history was
predetermined and had a complete structure.
As this view became more secular and the "God hypothesis" was put
aside, Calvinism—in its final modernist, materialistic version—laid the
groundwork for the ideology of progress, which is an interpretation of history
in which all stages are
1  Dugin, A. G. Noomakhia. England or Britain? The Maritime Mission and the Positive Subject.e
groundwork for the ideology of progress, which is an interpretation of history
in which all stages are
1  Dugin, A. G. Noomakhia. England or Britain? The Maritime Mission and the Positive Subject.

--- PAGE BREAK ---e ideology of progress, which is an interpretation of history
in which all stages are
1  Dugin, A. G. Noomakhia. England or Britain? The Maritime Mission and the Positive Subject.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

196
Part 3. The Political Paradigm of Modernity. The War of Concepts
are predetermined. Progress from Calvinism spread to all political ideologies
of the Modern era — liberalism, communism and nationalism — becoming
one of their most important features in the context of the entire Modern era.
But overall, Calvinism had the greatest influence on liberalism. It is quite
possible to argue that liberalism is a product of the secularisation of
Calvinism.
The secularisation of Lutheranism gave rise to bourgeois
nationalism
The ideas of Martin Luther, considered the main figure of the
Reformation, generally placed the individual at the forefront and had much in
common with liberalism. Although Luther relied politically on the support of
German princes who sought to use the Reformation to strengthen their
political positions in opposition to the Papacy and, to some extent, the
Empire, he, like Calvin, was an exponent of the interests of the third estate,
ironically referred to in Plato's "The Republic" as "pig-herding." .
However, Lutheranism was not as strict regarding church traditions. It
retained the idea of the priesthood (only now priests were allowed to marry)
and some church sacraments, such as baptism, communion, and marriage.
Lutherans categorically rejected the status of the Pope, sometimes going so
far as to identify him with the Antichrist. But while strongly opposing the
Vatican, they recognised the legitimacy of national churches subordinate
to secular — most often monarchical or princely — authority. Thus, in
England, after the restoration of the monarchy, it was the Lutheran model
that prevailed in the form of the Anglican Church, whose head is
considered to be the English king.
A similar system developed in Scandinavia and Northern Germany,
where Lutheranism became the philosophical foundation of nation states in
which the vertical structure of monarchical power was combined with the
ever-growing political influence of the bourgeoisie. A striking example of
such a state was Protestant Prussia, which in the 19th century became the
main initiator of the creation of Germany under the Protestant Hohenzollern
dynasty. A comprehensive description of the Lutheran Prussian type of
political system — a kind of "Prussian socialism or national socialism" — is
convincingly presented in the classic work by Oswald Spengler (1880–1936)
Prussianism and Socialism (1).
1   Spengler, O. Prussianism and Socialism. Moscow: Praksis, 2002.r national socialism" — is
convincingly presented in the classic work by Oswald Spengler (1880–1936)
Prussianism and Socialism (1).
1   Spengler, O. Prussianism and Socialism. Moscow: Praksis, 2002.

--- PAGE BREAK ---" — is
convincingly presented in the classic work by Oswald Spengler (1880–1936)
Prussianism and Socialism (1).
1   Spengler, O. Prussianism and Socialism. Moscow: Praksis, 2002.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

197
Chapter 2. Protestantism and its secularisation...
Lutheranism can be seen as the model that gave rise to modern
political nationalism (and, to some extent, National Socialism) during the
process of secularisation and modernisation.
The secularisation of Anabaptism gave rise to communism.
Protestantism also had an extreme version, most vividly represented
by the Anabaptist movement, one of whose leaders was Thomas Müntzer
(c. 1490–1525). The Anabaptists were mainly peasants who shared
apocalyptic views. The Anabaptists shared common features with Christian
Gnostics, who believed that the world was ruled by an "evil god" whose
servants were the representatives of the official Church and the nobility.
The supporters of Anabaptism perceived the Reformation as the onset of
the end times, when the false church and the associated rule of the nobility
would fall and an era of universal equality would dawn. Münzer identified
the Catholic Church with the whore of Babylon, categorically rejected
Luther, and compared the German princes who followed Luther to the
"kings of the Apocalypse." The Anabaptists called on all true awakened
Christians to rise up in a rebellion of the poor, backed by Christ, against the
rich, who were enemies of the faith. Münzer saw his own mission as the
work of John the Baptist, who had come
call humanity to spiritual baptism.
Münzer inspired the Thuringian peasants to revolt, but they were
defeated in May 1525 at the Battle of Frankenhausen. He himself was
captured and executed in Mühlhausen.
Here we see how the rejection of Catholicism during the Reformation
gave rise to an ideology that was in many ways opposed to Calvinism, with
its "deification" of wealth, and to Lutheranism, with its deep alliance with
the princes and the nation state. Marx (1818–1883) himself was clearly
aware of the connection between his ideas and those of the Anabaptists,
whom he considered the harbingers of communism.
Communism can well be considered the result of the secularisation of
Anabaptism.
Three ideologies
Thus, Calvin, Luther, and Münzer can be considered the three figures of
the Reformation who anticipated the three main dominant political ideologies
of the Modern era: liberalism, nationalism, and communism. The roots of the
corresponding versions of Political So-s of
the Reformation who anticipated the three main dominant political ideologies
of the Modern era: liberalism, nationalism, and communism. The roots of the
corresponding versions of Political So-

--- PAGE BREAK ---n who anticipated the three main dominant political ideologies
of the Modern era: liberalism, nationalism, and communism. The roots of the
corresponding versions of Political So-

--- PAGE BREAK ---

198
Part 3. The Political Paradigm of Modernity. The War of Concepts
remain in Protestantism. Consequently, we are entitled to consider
Protestantism as the historical paradigm of political philosophy in the
modern era. In Protestantism itself, these three versions are not yet
completely secular. We are still dealing with Christianity. Even the
Gnostic-peasant rebellion of Müntzer, which is very similar to later
communism, still unfolds in anticipation of the Second Coming of Christ.
Calvin argues that wealth and prosperity are important because they are an
expression of being chosen, of holiness, that is, a consequence of
predestination. Luther insists that it is necessary to affirm and support the
nation state primarily to protect Protestant interests from the Catholic
Austrian Empire and the Roman See. These versions of the Reformation
still retain a reference to the religious dimension. These are religious
movements, and the politics based on them in the 16th–19th centuries still
retain something of Christianity and, accordingly, of traditional society
(the pre-modern paradigm). But having been subjected to secularisation,
completely detached from theology, with the factor of God and Holy
Scripture being bracketed out (in what Nietzsche called "the death of
God"), they give us three political theories that dominate the modern era
(liberalism, communism and nationalism). Geographically, the German
North of Europe becomes predominantly Protestant, while the Latin South
remains Catholic. At the same time, there is a solid segment of Catholicism
among the Germans — Austria, Bavaria, and more broadly, Southern
Germany. In addition, the Celtic Irish remained faithful to Catholicism,
which sharply distinguished them from the Celtic Scots, who became the
most radical
the bearers of Calvinism in the British Isles.ny. In addition, the Celtic Irish remained faithful to Catholicism,
which sharply distinguished them from the Celtic Scots, who became the
most radical
the bearers of Calvinism in the British Isles.

--- PAGE BREAK ---Celtic Irish remained faithful to Catholicism,
which sharply distinguished them from the Celtic Scots, who became the
most radical
the bearers of Calvinism in the British Isles.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

Chapter 3. Founding Fathers of Modern
Political Philosophy: T. Hobbes, N.
Machiavelli, J. Bodin
Niccolò Machiavelli: the autonomy of politics
Protestantism is a historical but still religious expression of a
philosophy that contains the seeds of a specific secular politics that became
the norm in the New Age. Now we can examine how this philosophy of
modern politics acquired its explicit features, formulated programmes, and
created basic founding texts.
The foundations of the already explicit political philosophy of the
Modern Age were laid primarily by three authors who are classics of
modern political thought. These are the Italian Niccolò Machiavelli (1469–
1527), the Frenchman Jean Bodin (1530–1596) and the Englishman
Thomas Hobbes (1588–1679).
Niccolò Machiavelli (1469–1527) is one of three political thinkers who
substantiated the concept of secular politics. There is still heated debate about
the interpretation of his ideas. Some consider Machiavelli an extreme
"reactionary" and "monarchist," a precursor of fascism, while others, on the
contrary, consider him a "progressive republican."
Machiavelli's main idea is that politics is an autonomous world governed
by laws specific to this sphere. This was a complete innovation for the 15th
century. For people of the modern era, it is quite natural to recognise that
different laws apply in politics, morality and religion. But for medieval
Christian Europeans, the idea that there is one truth in politics and another in
morality, religion and ethics was completely unacceptable and blasphemous.
All spheres of knowledge were built on a single set of universal Christian
principles. The only area of medieval thought that partly anticipated this
division into several truths was the philosophy of the Islamic thinker
Averroes (Ibn Rushd, 1126–1198), whose followersan
principles. The only area of medieval thought that partly anticipated this
division into several truths was the philosophy of the Islamic thinker
Averroes (Ibn Rushd, 1126–1198), whose followers

--- PAGE BREAK ---only area of medieval thought that partly anticipated this
division into several truths was the philosophy of the Islamic thinker
Averroes (Ibn Rushd, 1126–1198), whose followers

--- PAGE BREAK ---

200
Part 3. The Political Paradigm of Modernity. The War of Concepts
— especially among Europeans — proposed dividing theological truth, based
on the authority of Scripture, into the sphere of religion, and scientific truth
about the natural world, based on the conclusions of reason.
However, Machiavelli goes much further and proposes to consider the
political sphere as autonomous. He asserts that politics is an absolutely self-
sufficient thing. In his opinion, politics has no goal or higher meaning. Power
is the beginning and end in itself. Therefore, the criteria that should be
applied to politics should not be taken from the realm of religion, morality,
history, and so on. Politics is a completely self-sufficient world with its own
laws, rules, criteria, and evaluations. Machiavelli proceeds from the premise
that the state has no other goal than the exercise of power.
The Prince: the tyrant as a force from below
The personification of the state is the Sovereign, the Prince 1, il
Principe.
A prince is not a person, nor is he a specific ruler. He is a special
authority, a figure who embodies the sum total of politics, taken in isolation
from all other levels of existence. This is how the idea of an autonomous,
self-referential sphere of politics is formed. Politics is elevated to an
independent discipline, an independent sphere. The figure of the prince, who
embodies the essence of politics, becomes the symbol of this politics.
Politics, in this case, is taken in isolation from any higher meaning.
Machiavelli completely and radically rejects the political philosophy of the
"two cities," offering something completely new in its place. He completely
disregards the "heavenly city" and focuses his attention entirely on the
problems of earthly power, its preservation, strengthening and most
effective use. Machiavelli now deals only with the "earthly city," which
becomes the sole and self-sufficient object of political philosophy.
The sovereign in Machiavelli's view is an absolute individual who rises
to the heights of earthly power not in the name of some goal (like Plato's
philosopher-king) and not to fulfil some mission. He is pushed to the top by
the abundance and even excess of earthly forces. It is power that becomes the
ontological foundation in Machiavelli's view.
1   Machiavelli, N. The Prince. Moscow: Khudozhestvennaya Literatura, 1982.the abundance and even excess of earthly forces. It is power that becomes the
ontological foundation in Machiavelli's view.
1   Machiavelli, N. The Prince. Moscow: Khudozhestvennaya Literatura, 1982.

--- PAGE BREAK ---en excess of earthly forces. It is power that becomes the
ontological foundation in Machiavelli's view.
1   Machiavelli, N. The Prince. Moscow: Khudozhestvennaya Literatura, 1982.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

201
Chapter 3. The Founding Fathers of Modern Political Philosophy...
of power; power in its most direct and earthly sense. Everyone wants to rule,
but only the strongest can. Therefore, it does not matter how a person
becomes a ruler: if he has become one, then this in itself means that he has
proved himself strong enough for it. If power is obtained by chance and by
someone who is not very strong, then he will quickly lose it, as a powerful
rival will surely rise up from the depths of life to replace him.
Machiavelli builds his theory on this: the sovereign has no other goal
than to maintain the power he has, strengthen it, and, if possible, increase
its scope and extent. In this theory, we see the absolutisation of the
"earthly city" and, at the same time, the standardisation of the figure of the
tyrant. According to Plato, a ruler who cares only about the realisation of
his will and uses power solely to achieve his selfish goals is a classic
tyrant. Tyrannical traits were certainly inherent in many Italian rulers as
early as the Middle Ages, and in the Renaissance, examples of this type of
government became even more frequent.
Two moralities according to Machiavelli
Developing his analysis of the Prince, Machiavelli comes to an
important conclusion: there is not one morality, but two.
•The morality of the Prince, which consists in the most effective
retention of power, and
•the morality of the general population, ordinary citizens, who must
strictly
follow
prescribed
ethical
obligations
and
bear
full
responsibility for violating the rules.
Machiavelli's idea that the sovereign requires a special morality, different
from that of the masses, is completely new. This morality must put power
itself at the forefront. For the sovereign, there is one good and one virtue:
power, and the stronger and longer it lasts, the better. Everything else flows
from it. What good, argues Machiavelli, is it if the sovereign is good,
merciful, gentle and compassionate, if he is unable to hold on to power,
which means he cannot resist external or internal enemies, protect his citizens
from turmoil, establish an effective social and administrative system, and
defend the state from its enemies? Conversely, what significance can the
personal sins — and even crimes — of a ruler havefrom turmoil, establish an effective social and administrative system, and
defend the state from its enemies? Conversely, what significance can the
personal sins — and even crimes — of a ruler have

--- PAGE BREAK ---lish an effective social and administrative system, and
defend the state from its enemies? Conversely, what significance can the
personal sins — and even crimes — of a ruler have

--- PAGE BREAK ---

202
Part 3. The Political Paradigm of Modernity. The War of Concepts
if he copes with the main thing: ensuring the prosperity and stability of
society, which is impossible without strong power. Even the most
bloodthirsty tyrant, committing individual atrocities, cannot cause great harm
to society as a whole, at least not remotely comparable to uprisings or enemy
invasions.
However, if public morality is violated by the masses, society will fall
into turmoil, become ungovernable, the power of the ruler will be shaken, and
the state will slide into anarchy and collapse. The morality of ordinary people
should be religious, ethical, and consistent with the views of the social
majority. In this respect, Christian morality is quite suitable. People who
follow moral and religious principles set themselves the goal of having a
good reputation, saving their souls, maintaining social order, and not
breaking the rules — these ideas about morality, from Machiavelli's point of
view, are absolutely remarkable, beautiful, and require observance. By
everyone except the Prince. The Prince, on the other hand, must be guided
first and foremost by the pure imperative of power, which for him is the
highest and most binding morality, while the prescriptions for the masses
may be shared to one degree or another, but only as something additional and
voluntary, and even then only if it does not interfere with the exercise of
power.
Machiavelli does not speak out directly against religion, the Church, or
traditions. He only talks about the art of ruling and builds his philosophy in
a way that is as consistent as possible under the given conditions.
The prince is a representative of the ruling authority. However, this is not
necessarily an individual personality. The prince may be collective or
individual. He may be legal and legitimate, or illegal and legitimate. This is
irrelevant. Only one thing is important: those who stand at the head of society
must be guided by a fundamentally different approach to evaluating their
actions and the actions of others than ordinary citizens.
The idea that the people, the majority, and the prince have two
different moralities is an innovation of Niccolò Machiavelli. The morality
of the prince is that he is not responsible for himself personally and does
not pursue his own interests, but for the realisation of large-scale tasks that
involve a large number of people.
1  Schmitt, C. Legality and Legitimacy/Schmitt, C. The State: Law and Politics. Moscow:
Publishing House "Territory of the Future", 2013.of large-scale tasks that
involve a large number of people.
1  Schmitt, C. Legality and Legitimacy/Schmitt, C. The State: Law and Politics. Moscow:
Publishing House "Territory of the Future", 2013.

--- PAGE BREAK ---s that
involve a large number of people.
1  Schmitt, C. Legality and Legitimacy/Schmitt, C. The State: Law and Politics. Moscow:
Publishing House "Territory of the Future", 2013.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

203
Chapter 3. The Founding Fathers of Modern Political Philosophy...
For example, one of the prince's tasks is to preserve the territorial integrity of
the principality, the state in which he is the ruler. To achieve this, the ruler
can do anything: he can lie, threaten, break agreements, dress his troops in
enemy uniforms, stage provocations, send poisoners, invade foreign territory,
take relatives and close friends of his enemies hostage — in short, violate all
norms of morality and ethics. According to Machiavelli, all this is morally
justified for the Prince, although it should be categorically prohibited for
everyone else. Because if the majority starts acting in the same way, the state
will soon collapse.
The opposite is also true: if a prince is a good, pious, devout man who
loves his neighbours, observes all moral precepts and meets the highest
standards of morality and godliness, but at the same time is unable to
effectively resist the armies of a neighbour who is seizing his territory,
plundering his lands, rapes and takes the local inhabitants captive, then
even though he is a good man, he is a very bad prince. He may be a saint
as a man, but a complete nonentity as a prince. But if, by sacrificing all
Christian commandments, through deception, cunning, meanness, force, etc.,
the prince is able to play out a political situation in which his lands
increase several times over, strengthening the power of his principality,
then he is a wonderful prince.
The same applies to domestic policy. Here, the main goal is peace,
prosperity, security, and food security for citizens, as well as maintaining
order. If, to achieve this, the prince eliminates his rivals, incites enmity
among his entourage, promotes to power those who are far from the most
worthy and deserving, weaves intrigues, uses deception, bribery and
repression, as well as any other methods, to achieve his goal, then he is still a
good prince. What is the point, argues Machiavelli, if a good and pious ruler
avoids such measures and chaos, disorder, turmoil, famine and anarchy reign
in the state? He may save his soul, but he will ruin the state entrusted to him.
Thus, two logics are postulated. What is good for the prince and what is
bad for the common man. The goal is to provide a territory that is reliably
protected, well-fed, satisfied citizens, security, peace, and order. What you
personally do in the process, citizen prince, is of no interest to anyone. What
you do there, how you justify it, what is in your heart — that is your business,
your personal business.er. What you
personally do in the process, citizen prince, is of no interest to anyone. What
you do there, how you justify it, what is in your heart — that is your business,
your personal business.

--- PAGE BREAK ---ally do in the process, citizen prince, is of no interest to anyone. What
you do there, how you justify it, what is in your heart — that is your business,
your personal business.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

204
Part 3. The Political Paradigm of Modernity. The War of Concepts
Machiavelli's paradox: the goal of power is power
Machiavelli builds his political philosophy on this basis. There is no
justification for this state of affairs, no criticism, no satire, as Machiavelli's
commentators sometimes believe. It is simply a cold statement of facts that
the political philosopher sees around him and which he undertakes to
describe systematically as they are. If society is openly told about this, it will
rebel, and chaos and unrest will ensue. But for the political science of the
modern era, of which Niccolò Machiavelli can rightly be considered the
founder, this is a fundamental truth. Therefore, Machiavelli himself does not
address the masses. He writes for the Prince, for the political elite. Among
Machiavelli's advice to the Prince is to hide what he does, use secret
intrigues, set everyone against each other, and not allow anyone who could
pose a problem or competition to the Prince to rise to the elite. Do not inform
your opponents of the real state of affairs. Use various political tactics.
Let the people think what they want; all that is required of them is to
obey the established rules and submit. This is how a special realm of politics
emerges, where completely separate criteria apply.
From Machiavelli's point of view, the Prince has one main task: to retain
his power. Outwardly, this seems like a completely selfish and immoral task.
For a person, it is, but for the Prince, it becomes moral — because in order to
retain it, he must meet all the requirements of power.
First, the Prince must have power. That is, he must obtain it, no matter
how. This is the first condition. If someone manages to obtain power, this is
in itself, according to Machiavelli, a fundamental position. Only those who
have power are Princes, not those who are born with it or want to obtain it.
Secondly, he must have a state. There must be a people who do not reject
him, who obey him and thereby acknowledge him. It is completely irrelevant
how they feel about the prince — whether they love or hate him, accept or
simply tolerate him, respect or simply fear him. It does not matter at all. If the
Prince is in power, that is the only decisive factor. And that means that the
citizens are under him. He ceases to be a ruler only if he is overthrown — by
competitors, opponents or subjects. But a new Prince takes his place, and the
cycle begins anew.nd that means that the
citizens are under him. He ceases to be a ruler only if he is overthrown — by
competitors, opponents or subjects. But a new Prince takes his place, and the
cycle begins anew.

--- PAGE BREAK ---he
citizens are under him. He ceases to be a ruler only if he is overthrown — by
competitors, opponents or subjects. But a new Prince takes his place, and the
cycle begins anew.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

205
Chapter 3. The Founding Fathers of Modern Political Philosophy...
Despite the apparent simplicity of this analysis, it contains some very
serious points. After all, in order to gain and maintain power, the Prince
must preserve the territorial integrity and, preferably, even expand the
territory of his polity. He needs a calm, normal, submissive people who
obey discipline, follow rules and regulations, and refrain from rebellions,
uprisings and conspiracies.
This leads to Machiavelli's paradox: a successful prince, without setting
any positive goals, with no desire to please his people, leave a mark on
history, serve the Church, or contribute to the common good, but instead
thinking only of himself, his power, following pure selfishness and driven by
a lust for powerand the will to power, is capable of frequently carrying out
brilliant historical deeds, building states and societies where the people
prosper, temples are full, culture flourishes, territories grow, bread ripens,
thought and science develop, and people are free and happy. But above all
this stands the sinister, selfish, jealous Prince, an aggressive and predatory
"political animal" (1)who does not allow any figure or personality capable of
competing with him to come close to his territory.
Such princely egoism, since it operates on a completely different scale
than that of a private individual, an ordinary citizen, is — but only and
exclusively in the case of the Prince — more important than any altruism.
It is important to note that we live in Machiavelli's world because the
current conception of power and the political elite fits perfectly into this
model of the Prince (at least in those areas of political philosophy where
realism prevails).
Although Machiavelli's views influenced the conception of the nature
of politics in the Modern Age as a whole, the most consistent supporters
of his approach were representatives of the neo-Machiavellian school,
which emerged in Italy at the end of the 19th century. This school
includes political philosophers such as the Italians Vilfredo Pareto (1848–
1923) and Gaetano Mosca (1858–1941) and the German sociologist
Robert Michels ( 1876–1936). Both were greatly influenced by the ideas of
French-
1   In a sense different from Aristotle.
2  Pareto, V. Compendium of General Sociology. Moscow: Publishing House of the Higher
School of Economics, 2008.
3   Mosca G. History of Political Doctrines. Bari: Laterza, 1937.
4   Michels R. Sociology as a Social Science. Berlin: Mauritius, 1926.cow: Publishing House of the Higher
School of Economics, 2008.
3   Mosca G. History of Political Doctrines. Bari: Laterza, 1937.
4   Michels R. Sociology as a Social Science. Berlin: Mauritius, 1926.

--- PAGE BREAK ---e of the Higher
School of Economics, 2008.
3   Mosca G. History of Political Doctrines. Bari: Laterza, 1937.
4   Michels R. Sociology as a Social Science. Berlin: Mauritius, 1926.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

206
Part 3. The Political Paradigm of Modernity. The War of Concepts
economist Léon Walras (1834–1910), who constructed a model of
economic equilibrium. The theory of elites developed by these authors
effectively extends the concept of the Prince to the structure of society as
a whole. From this perspective, all politics boils down to the seizure and
preservation of power.
In other words, the elite is a collective definition of the Prince, and all
political life is a struggle to take his place.
All representatives of the school of neo-Machiavellianism denied the
independent significance of political ideologies, as well as religious views
in their influence on politics, justifying the realm of politics as an
independent and autonomous sphere governed only by its own laws and
rules. This technological and pragmatic approach to politics stemmed
from Walras' principle of equilibrium and the rejection of the idea of
progress, as well as any other linear and unidirectional change in society.
Various strands of realism in the field of international relations are
also based on this principle.
The prince as a tyrant and as the Antichrist
According to Machiavelli, it is pointless to ask why there is a prince or
why there is a political state. It is also impossible to determine whether it is
"holy" or "cursed," "good" or "evil," whether it leads to the salvation or
destruction of the soul — all these questions are irrelevant, completely
unimportant for the organisation of politics and for the study of its nature
and laws.
If in the Middle Ages the prevailing belief was that politics was a
cross-section of philosophy, then with Machiavelli the opposite occurs.
Philosophy becomes an application of politics. Politics acquires the
character of absolute autonomy, which is connected with the very
paradigm of the transition from top-down logic to bottom-up logic.
If we turn to the political philosophy of Plato and Aristotle, it becomes
clear that Machiavelli describes the worst form of government — pure
tyranny. But unlike the classical vertical model of the ideal state or normal
state, where the tyrant is a purely negative figure who turns the entire
hierarchy upside down and asserts
1  Walras L. Éléments d’économie politique pure; ou, Théorie de la richesse sociale. Lausanne: L.
Corbaz, 1874.
2  Dugin, A. G. International Relations (Paradigms, Theories, Sociology). Moscow: Academic
Project, 2014.ts d’économie politique pure; ou, Théorie de la richesse sociale. Lausanne: L.
Corbaz, 1874.
2  Dugin, A. G. International Relations (Paradigms, Theories, Sociology). Moscow: Academic
Project, 2014.

--- PAGE BREAK ---que pure; ou, Théorie de la richesse sociale. Lausanne: L.
Corbaz, 1874.
2  Dugin, A. G. International Relations (Paradigms, Theories, Sociology). Moscow: Academic
Project, 2014.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

207
Chapter 3. The Founding Fathers of Modern Political Philosophy...
The worst replaces the best; in the theoretical field of the New Age, such a
titanic image becomes the new norm.
The ontology of the state itself is also changing. The state of the Prince
belongs to the dimension of the Mother; it is deeply material, as it is
governed by materiality and accepts material criteria as fundamental. The
Prince establishes a tyrannical ontology of the Political, introducing a new
"political theology" (according to C. Schmitt), from which transcendence,
mission, ideal, and normativity are completely expelled. The Prince's state,
his "principality," is completely detached from the higher dimension. It
represents nothing but itself. In this sense, it is the antithesis of the Holy
Empire, since there is nothing sacred in it. Machiavelli gives the first
completely profane description of the Political.
It is important that he chooses the term "prince" to describe the main
character. Not king, not ruler, and certainly not emperor or tsar, but
precisely prince, il Principe. In Latin, as in the Russian translation, the devil
in the Gospel is called "the prince of this world" — Pinceps hujus mundi.
And in this formula, it is especially emphasised that we are talking about
"this" world, as opposed to "that" world, that is, the kingdom of heaven, the
Empire of Christ. Machiavelli's state belongs entirely to "this world"; it has
no higher meaning, no connection with heaven. And that is why
Machiavelli's image of the "Prince" with all his paradoxes has so much in
common with the typical characteristics attributed to the devil in religious
tradition. Satan, who tempted Christ in the desert, also offered him power
over the world. Christ rejected this as a temptation of the "prince of this
world." Machiavelli accepts this as a fact, presenting this devilish version of
The Prince as the norm. And it becomes the norm in the Modern Age.
Thus, there is a complete reversal of the political ontology of Plato and
Aristotle, and the worst form of rule — tyranny — not only gains the right to
exist, but becomes the basic methodology for analysing politics. In the
Christian context, this could not fail to evoke direct associations with the
devil — the "prince of this world."
Hobbes and the idea of absolute original sin
The fundamental author who had a decisive influence on modern political
philosophy was the Englishman Thomas Hobbes. Hobbes was personally
acquainted with such figures fundamental tote original sin
The fundamental author who had a decisive influence on modern political
philosophy was the Englishman Thomas Hobbes. Hobbes was personally
acquainted with such figures fundamental to

--- PAGE BREAK ---fundamental author who had a decisive influence on modern political
philosophy was the Englishman Thomas Hobbes. Hobbes was personally
acquainted with such figures fundamental to

--- PAGE BREAK ---

208
Part 3. The Political Paradigm of Modernity. The War of Concepts
philosophy and science in the Modern era, such as Francis Bacon (1561–
1626) and Galileo Galilei (1564–1642).
Hobbes is the author of the famous book on the nature of the state,
Leviathan 1. Hobbes' radically materialistic and completely immanent
(secular) view of politics was several centuries ahead of political science
and became the subject of study and practical application by subsequent
generations of Englishmen and Frenchmen, as well as Europeans as a
whole. Leviathan is the most fundamental work setting out the basic
principles of modern political philosophy. It provides an understanding of
human nature, the essence of the state, the significance of ethics, the
significance of coercion and violence, and the various states of civilisation
as understood in the modern era. It is a fundamental political philosophy that
provides answers to all fundamental questions.
Hobbes argues that humanity initially exists in a state of nature. At the
same time, Hobbes asserts that human nature is evil and that humans are evil.
Hobbes introduces the axiom "man is wolf to man" (homo homini lupus est).
In the state of nature, Hobbes argues, man strives for only one thing:
domination over others, the seizure of prey, and the satisfaction of his basest
desires and instincts. That is, in his view, man is an aggressive predator, a
wolf who seeks only his own benefit. If left to his own devices, man will
immediately begin to commit violence, subjugate those around him, seize
things and territories, disregard everyone else, and use whatever comes to
hand solely for his own interests. He acts in this way out of absolute
selfishness, because his nature is evil.
This is the idea of original sin, absolutised in a political and
anthropological sense. Yes, Christianity asserts that man is a product of
original sin, but for Calvinist Protestantism, the only way to be saved is to
accumulate wealth and become rich. Christianity and Catholicism have
completely different ideas about this: although man bears the burden of
the fall of his forefathers, who were expelled from paradise, Christ came
into the world and saved humanity, and now it is possible to become a
fundamentally new person, a Christian person, build their society and,
ultimately, a political system based on different Christian values. That is
why Catholics insist
1   Hobbes, T. Leviathan. Moscow: Yurist, 2001.person, a Christian person, build their society and,
ultimately, a political system based on different Christian values. That is
why Catholics insist
1   Hobbes, T. Leviathan. Moscow: Yurist, 2001.

--- PAGE BREAK ---person, build their society and,
ultimately, a political system based on different Christian values. That is
why Catholics insist
1   Hobbes, T. Leviathan. Moscow: Yurist, 2001.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

209
Chapter 3. The Founding Fathers of Modern Political Philosophy...
based on the principle of free will. According to Thomas Aquinas, man is
endowed with sufficient grace to resist sin if he has the will to do so (the
theory of gratia sufficiens). For Protestants — for Luther and especially for
Calvin — this is impossible, since after the Fall, man became too weak,
and this cannot be remedied. In Hobbes, this thesis breaks away from
Christian theology and is asserted as a completely secular view of human
nature. Man is an evil, selfish creature, a kind of social beast, pursuing
exclusively private interests and disregarding others. Thus, from Protestant
pessimism about human nature, we arrive at modern atheistic and
materialistic pessimism, detached from its theological foundations
(Hobbes no longer believes in paradise and the Fall).
So, according to Hobbes, man is a predator. But he is not just a
predator, he is also an intelligent predator. He is a wolf with brains, which
he needs to acquire more, defeat more effectively, capture and destroy his
neighbour or force him to serve himself. Gradually, this selfish wolf begins
to understand that if he acts solely in his own interests, without regard for
the interests of others, then in some situation he himself may find himself in
the position of a victim, weaker and prey to another, stronger and more
powerful predator.
According to Hobbes, while still in its "natural state," an intelligent wolf
at some point begins to understand the relativity of the very principle of
predation. It then begins to think about creating conditions in which it can
dominate others, but others cannot dominate it. Since this cannot be achieved
directly, the intelligent predator concludes that certain compromises must be
made.
And then the cunning wolf proposes to conclude a social contract with
other wolves (people), establishing a set of rules both to legalise and to
somewhat restrict their evil nature. A social contract is an agreement. Its
essence boils down to the acceptance of certain rules that regulate the war of
all against all, establishing laws, boundaries and norms. But in the natural
state, no one will simply follow these laws, since no one will force the
strongest to respect them, as they will not want to limit their appetites of their
own free will (according to Hobbes, free will does not exist, only evil will
exists).
The solution to this dilemma is to leave the "natural state" and enter into
an agreement to create a state. Cunning wolves comeaccording to Hobbes, free will does not exist, only evil will
exists).
The solution to this dilemma is to leave the "natural state" and enter into
an agreement to create a state. Cunning wolves come

--- PAGE BREAK ---free will does not exist, only evil will
exists).
The solution to this dilemma is to leave the "natural state" and enter into
an agreement to create a state. Cunning wolves come

--- PAGE BREAK ---

210
Part 3. The Political Paradigm of Modernity. The War of Concepts
to the conclusion that it is necessary to delegate some of their powers so that
this authority — the State — can control compliance with certain rules in the
satisfaction of individual desires.
But for this authority — the State — to be effective, it must be feared,
inspiring terror even in the strongest and most powerful of human wolves.
Hence the idea of Leviathan, mentioned in the Bible. Leviathan is a sea
monster. It is mentioned in the Book of Job 1when Job protests that he was
righteous, loved God, was closest to God, and suddenly experienced such
misfortune, blows of fate, losing everything, his wealth and loved ones, and
finding himself poor and insignificant, he turns to God with reproaches. God
answers his reproaches: "Have you seen Leviathan, Job? He is so terrible that
the mountains tremble before him. The seas boil. Have you seen the
behemoth, Job? When he walks, the earth shakes. So be afraid and do not
rebel against God, for God is almighty and can both give and punish
according to his own will. God is stronger than all, even Leviathan and
Behemoth, the two primordial monsters, stronger than which there are none.
The reference to Leviathan turns out to be the most convincing argument.
Job humbles himself: well, of course, if You have frightened me so much,
then You are right. This may not be very Christian ethics, but it is quite in
keeping with Protestant pessimism. The more powerful frightened the
weaker, and the weaker submitted and fell silent. They showed Leviathan to
Job, and Job admitted that he was wrong. So, according to Hobbes, it is
enough to present Leviathan to intelligent wolves, and they will retreat in
terror.
But if in the Bible there is a man (Job) on one side, God on the other,
and between them — as an argument — Leviathan, then Hobbes' materialism
does not recognise a separate eternal God. Leviathan is "god," only man-
made, created by human hands as a result of a social contract.
According to Hobbes, the meaning and nature of the state is creation.
"God." But an evil, punishing, artificial, and man-made god. This "evil
god" is the state, which cunning and selfish wolves nevertheless establish
over themselves as an authority to which they can no longer disobey
because it is stronger than each of them. And Leviathan now represents an
instrument of "legitimate violence" ( according to M. Weber(2) ). Levi-
1   , Book of Job, Chapters 40:20–41:26.
2  Weber, M. Politics as a Vocation and Profession / Weber, M. Selected Works. Moscow:
Progress, 1990.egitimate violence" ( according to M. Weber(2) ). Levi-
1   , Book of Job, Chapters 40:20–41:26.
2  Weber, M. Politics as a Vocation and Profession / Weber, M. Selected Works. Moscow:
Progress, 1990.

--- PAGE BREAK ---( according to M. Weber(2) ). Levi-
1   , Book of Job, Chapters 40:20–41:26.
2  Weber, M. Politics as a Vocation and Profession / Weber, M. Selected Works. Moscow:
Progress, 1990.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

211
Chapter 3. The Founding Fathers of Modern Political Philosophy...
A fan is a state. Its main task is to scare and punish those who do not follow
the rules established by consensus. If they were only wolves (i.e., in their
natural state), they would not have created a state. But they are intelligent
wolves, they have the ability to think, and they understand that they can
destroy each other. To prevent this from happening, they create a new
monster. This monster, Leviathan, is the state of the modern era.
The main idea of Leviathan is that the state is created from below, by
evil, disgusting, vicious, selfish people. And it is created solely to keep
selfish villains in relative check. The state is an evil, monstrous, punishing
"god" established by villains to give some order to villainy, which is why the
state does not prevent violence, robbery, seizure, subjugation, and deception;
it organises all of this by establishing rules that everyone must obey.
Such is the world of Thomas Hobbes, his political philosophy. Evil, in
order not to destroy themselves with their own evil, out of cunning and
individual selfishness, create a man-made abominable
"god" called Leviathan, who will frighten and oppress them.
Here, the fundamental idea is the notion of the negativity of human
nature.
Spencer: atomism and the struggle for survival
in a liberal society
Hobbes did not yet have a theory of evolution of species, as Darwin
(1809–1882) later did, but it can already be anticipated in general terms by
replacing wolves with monkeys. According to Hobbes, humans are intelligent
wolves who built Leviathan but retained their wolf-like nature. According to
Darwin, humans are monkeys who, in the struggle for survival, developed the
ability to think and built society.Both theories were combined in social
Darwinism by the greatest theorist of liberal political philosophy, Herbert
Spencer ( 1820–1903).
Spencer draws on Hobbes and, like him, applies the principles of
atomistic physics to society. His goal is to construct a system that would
unite the physical structure of matter and the development of biological
species and the history of humanity under common laws and methods of
investigation. Physicists
1   Danilevsky, N. Darwinism. A Critical Study: In 2 vols. St. Petersburg: M. E. Komarov
Publishing House, 1885–1889.
2  Spencer, G. Scientific, Political, and Philosophical Experiments in 3 Volumes. Minsk:
Sovremenny Literator, 1998.ical Study: In 2 vols. St. Petersburg: M. E. Komarov
Publishing House, 1885–1889.
2  Spencer, G. Scientific, Political, and Philosophical Experiments in 3 Volumes. Minsk:
Sovremenny Literator, 1998.

--- PAGE BREAK ---s. St. Petersburg: M. E. Komarov
Publishing House, 1885–1889.
2  Spencer, G. Scientific, Political, and Philosophical Experiments in 3 Volumes. Minsk:
Sovremenny Literator, 1998.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

212
Part 3. The Political Paradigm of Modernity. The War of Concepts
Spencer's theory is based on the idea that matter, which in its zero state
consists of heterogeneous atoms, particles, possesses an internal inherent
force (life, striving) that causes these homogeneous particles to stick
together, producing heterogeneous agglomerates in a state of motion.
Movement — its accumulation in integrated structures and its dispersion —
is a property inherent in matter itself. Agglomerates of particles, driven by
the motion of matter, begin to adapt to external conditions, and the results of
this adaptation constitute a hereditary code that is transmitted from thing to
thing, from being to being. Thus, an ordered universe is born, which is both
a consequence of evolution and its process. The goal of evolution is to
achieve maximum adaptation to the surrounding conditions, but these
conditions themselves are in turn a process of evolution. This gives rise to
the principle of struggle and "survival of the fittest," which is at the heart of
Spencer's philosophy. The universe and its order embody the limit of
adaptation of the fittest and are the peak of evolution. The first most
successful and "most adapted" agglomerate of particles is an individual
thing, which turns out to be so stable that it transmits its properties to other
things. In the natural world, the pinnacle of individuation is living beings
capable of self-reproduction as species series, perfecting their qualities and
passing them on to their offspring, thereby strengthening their individual
essence. The universe is nothing more than individuation. That is why
humans are thought of as individuals capable of adapting to their
environment better than other species.
and thereby build society.
At the same time, according to Spencer, the individual, in complete
harmony with Hobbes, is selfish and aggressive in his natural state, pursuing
exclusively his own benefit, sometimes in a deadly struggle with other
individuals. Intraspecific and interspecific struggle, according to Spencer,
made man human, forcing him to master new and new techniques of
adaptation, attack and defence, which are passed on by inheritance, thereby
perfecting the human series of individuals. In the course of the struggle
between humans, the "fittest" rise to the top of society. Spencer considers
social inequality to be a positive factor, as it reflects "natural selection" and,
therefore, the progress of humanity. A strong person is more human than a
weak person, Spencer believes, and on this basis he opposes equality —
people should be given the freedom to maximally realise their selfish nature in
order to gradually produce more and more perfect series of people, but this
realisation will be more rational and "evolutionary" if it is based on the
principle of natural selection.fish nature in
order to gradually produce more and more perfect series of people, but this
realisation will be more rational and "evolutionary" if it is based on the
principle of natural selection.

--- PAGE BREAK ---r to gradually produce more and more perfect series of people, but this
realisation will be more rational and "evolutionary" if it is based on the
principle of natural selection.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

213
Chapter 3. The Founding Fathers of Modern Political Philosophy...
to realise their selfish nature in order to gradually produce increasingly
perfect series of people, but this realisation will be more reasonable and
"evolutionary" if the rights and freedoms of others are respected, not as
givens, but as possibilities. Everyone has the right to participate in the
struggle, but the winner gets everything, and the loser is left alone with his
loss; so that next time he will fight better, think faster, act more perfectly and
more effectively, thereby contributing to the process of evolution.
Chaos and struggle of all against all, war of all against all, are
characteristics of natural coexistence, stemming from the evil nature of
man. According to Spencer, this is an order based on pure force. But it is
precisely because of the struggle for survival and natural selection that people
understand that the development of rationality is the most important
advantage for survival and success. And on the basis of this rationality, they
establish politics, agreeing to some restriction of their freedom, but only in
order to realise their will in the best possible way.
Spencer views history as consisting of three evolutionary phases:
•an initial chaotic phase,
•then a phase of creation based on the power and violence of states
and political structures that rigidly enforce hierarchies and hinder
the free process of natural selection,
•and finally, a phase of industrial competition, when the struggle for
survival unfolds through market competition, which is the highest
form of intra-species struggle, as it completely unleashes the full
potential of selfishness inherent in the human individual and
reflects the maximum dynamism of self-propelling matter.
Spencer's political philosophy is an elitist version of liberalism, in
which equality of opportunity (participation in competition) leads to
inequality of results, while competition itself takes place in the area where
the highest technical and scientific achievements of the human species are
concentrated, as an arsenal of methods for waging economic wars. Spencer
was opposed to widespread public education, believing that the ignorance
of the weak and lower classes was an incentive for the strong and superior
to multiply and develop knowledge. Spencer denied women equal rights,
believing that they were the least perfect product of evolution, accumulating
and genetically passing onhe strong and superior
to multiply and develop knowledge. Spencer denied women equal rights,
believing that they were the least perfect product of evolution, accumulating
and genetically passing on

--- PAGE BREAK ---or
to multiply and develop knowledge. Spencer denied women equal rights,
believing that they were the least perfect product of evolution, accumulating
and genetically passing on

--- PAGE BREAK ---

214
Part 3. The Political Paradigm of Modernity. The War of Concepts
that set of adaptive functions that only reinforced their weakness and
uncompetitiveness.
Thus, as modern political philosophy developed, Hobbes' basic thesis
about Leviathan and its genesis continued in a new form, when the aggressive
consciousness of wolf-like people in the conditions of the State was honed to
such an extent that it went beyond its boundaries and chose a new strategy
corresponding to the more developed form of modernity. But it was Hobbes
who laid the foundation for this approach.
The primacy of the social contract and
panegoism
Hobbes' ideas about the nature of the state, developed by his followers,
form the basis of modern political philosophy. The overwhelming majority of
modern theories about the origin of the state, its functions, its nature and its
history are based in one way or another on Hobbes's theses. This applies not
only to those who follow him or seek to develop his intuitions, but also to
those who fundamentally disagree with him.
Hobbes is a philosopher of the modern era, just as Plato and Aristotle
were philosophers of the Tradition. And Hobbes understood with extreme
clarity the very spirit of the new paradigm, built from the bottom up, from
matter to consciousness, from animal to human, from body to mind, from the
chaotic struggle of all against all to the rules artificially established in the
course of the social contract.
For Hobbes, the state is negative because it is nothing more than a
restrictive institution of violence. But it is not evil in relation to people (who
are neutral or good in themselves), but it is evil precisely because the people
who created it are evil. Sociologist Max Weber defines the state as an
"apparatus of legitimate violence."This is a very Hobbesian idea, because the
sole task of Leviathan is to repress, suppress, and punish. But this violence is
legitimate; it is used to repress those who challenge the state system
(Leviathan), to execute criminals, and to destroy those who do not abide by
the rules of the social contract.
The vast majority of modern societies are built on Hobbes' paradigm.
This is the prevailing model of the modern state.
1  Weber, M. Politics as a Vocation
2   Foucault, M. Discipline and Punish: The Birth of the Prison. M.: Ad Marginem, 1999.uilt on Hobbes' paradigm.
This is the prevailing model of the modern state.
1  Weber, M. Politics as a Vocation
2   Foucault, M. Discipline and Punish: The Birth of the Prison. M.: Ad Marginem, 1999.

--- PAGE BREAK ---digm.
This is the prevailing model of the modern state.
1  Weber, M. Politics as a Vocation
2   Foucault, M. Discipline and Punish: The Birth of the Prison. M.: Ad Marginem, 1999.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

215
Chapter 3. The Founding Fathers of Modern Political Philosophy...
Protestant influences (Calvinism) are clearly evident at the origins of
this model, but Leviathan's model itself is completely autonomous. This is
purely "political theology" (K. Schmitt), in which the state is "God," and the
presence or absence of any other level of divinity adds nothing to this
complete picture and takes nothing away from it. Hobbes combines atomism
and materialism with social and political philosophy and obtains a completely
finished and consistent picture. In Plato's Parmenides system of hypotheses,
it corresponds to the sixth hypothesis: atoms artificially create a "unity,"
which Hobbes calls "Leviathan." It is in this type of society that humanity
lives in the modern era.
In Hobbes, we already see the fundamental unit of political philosophy
that remains relevant to this day. If we remove original sin or distract
ourselves from the idea of social Darwinism, we see only one thing: what is
the norm of our modern political philosophy: man is a purely selfish actor, a
rational egoist. As an egoist, he is a predator; as a rational being, he
subordinates his immediate predatory egoistic instincts to certain rational
strategies in order to achieve the optimal result.
There is a humorous definition: "An egoist is someone who loves
himself very much and hates me completely." Every egoist considers
others to be "too selfish." Thus, relationships between people become like
mirrors reflecting each other; this is how panegoism develops — everyone
acts in their own interests without thinking about others.And only when it
comes to safety and when the situation becomes critical do selfish
individuals create a common defence system for their own safety. In such a
picture, selfishness lies at the root of predatory behaviour and at the root
of its restraint. Egoism makes animals think, but only to better satisfy their
appetites and increase their chances of survival in the struggle between
species and individuals. This view of humans as purely selfish actors is at
the heart of our understanding of the world today, but its roots go back to
the philosophy of Thomas Hobbes.
1  The famous "fable of the bees" by Bernard Mandeville, a classic of liberal thought, is
based on this principle.(1670–1733), which describes how a society consisting of complete
egoists comes to universal prosperity, without remotely setting itself such a goal, and, on the
contrary, an altruistic society of kind and compassionate people leads to degeneration, decline and
degradation, since everyone in it thinks only of others and not of their own well-being, which
ends in universal poverty. Mandeville B. The Fable of the Bees; or, Private Vices, Public
Benefits. Clarendon Press, 1714.everyone in it thinks only of others and not of their own well-being, which
ends in universal poverty. Mandeville B. The Fable of the Bees; or, Private Vices, Public
Benefits. Clarendon Press, 1714.

--- PAGE BREAK ---s only of others and not of their own well-being, which
ends in universal poverty. Mandeville B. The Fable of the Bees; or, Private Vices, Public
Benefits. Clarendon Press, 1714.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

216
Part 3. The Political Paradigm of Modernity. The War of Concepts
Later, French philosopher Jean-Jacques Rousseau (1712–1778) offered a
slightly different interpretation ofthe social contract. Rousseau also asserts that
society is based on a "social contract," but he gives it a significantly different
interpretation based on the recognition of the "noble savage," that is, on the
idea that human nature in its original state is not evil, as Hobbes believed, but
rather good. But it is important to note that Hobbes spoke about this much
earlier and provided a philosophical analysis of the mechanism of this social
contract. What do selfish actors agree on? They agree on how to establish
some kind of order above themselves that will reflect this relationship
between their own animal nature and their desire to somehow limit the
animal nature of others. This is in order to justify their own selfishness and at
the same time protect themselves from the selfishness of others. In Rousseau,
this simple but convincing logic of Hobbes is disrupted, and although he also
considers the state to be evil, he interprets it as something external to man
himself. Hobbes, on the other hand, is extremely consistent and seeks to
explain everything by purely immanent factors, without introducing anything
extraneous into his system. The limitation of egoism is a consequence of
egoism, and the violence of the state is a reflection of the violence inherent in
the wolf-man.
Politics is a product of the social contract, and the entire political
ontology is built on it. This thesis describes the essence of modern political
philosophy. In this, we can easily recognise a complete reversal of
Platonism. The state has no existence of its own in the realm of ideas. It
has no model. It is built from below by separate atomic material subjects
driven by private interests and selfish appetites. Everything else follows
from this — the meaning and purpose of politics, its structure, its
improvement, the creation and reform of political institutions, the place and
powers of authority, as well as its nature, the distribution of powers, the
relationship between rulers and the general mass of citizens, etc.
The point of a bottom-up policy is to balance selfish impulses in a
smart way. This balancing act requires a certain level of intelligence.
There's also a certain balance in a wolf pack, but it's not smart. The
strongest wolf is the leader. As soon as the leader weakens, he is killed. In
humans, rational mechanisms are also involved in the distribution of roles
and powers. The strong unite in society
1  Rousseau, J.-J. The Social Contract. Treatises. Moscow: KANON-press; Kuchkovo, 1998.ans, rational mechanisms are also involved in the distribution of roles
and powers. The strong unite in society
1  Rousseau, J.-J. The Social Contract. Treatises. Moscow: KANON-press; Kuchkovo, 1998.

--- PAGE BREAK ---isms are also involved in the distribution of roles
and powers. The strong unite in society
1  Rousseau, J.-J. The Social Contract. Treatises. Moscow: KANON-press; Kuchkovo, 1998.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

217
Chapter 3. The Founding Fathers of Modern Political Philosophy...
and strive to conclude social contracts that would guarantee their dominant
position and further strengthen their position. However, the lower classes
may respond to forms of political revolution, uprisings, and popular unrest
that they consider too unfair. The weaker ones may unite and pose a greater
threat. Therefore, it is necessary to negotiate with the lower classes and take
their opinions into account. This gives rise to a secondary form of social
contract — already within the framework of the Leviathan that has been
created: the upper classes negotiate with the lower classes — this is
already a different form of social contract. It would be easier to simply
suppress the lower classes (as, according to contemporary political
philosophers, was the case in Antiquity and the Middle Ages), but even the
weak possess intelligence and are capable of realising their selfish interests,
which suffer from the domination of the stronger. Thus, they can strike back.
The development of this idea leads to socialism and communism. But
Hobbes serves as the starting point in any case.
The balance of revising various social contracts constitutes the
political history of the modern era. But in any case, in the Modern era, no
one seriously questions that the political body of Leviathan itself, its
evolution and modernisation, is based on the actions of selfish actors who
recombine with each other, creating — always from the bottom up — various
political models. At the same time, the bottom-up principle becomes
increasingly emphasised, erasing even the distant remnants of verticality
inherent in the political systems of early modernity.
Leviathan is a "god-machine," a "god-mechanism," a man-made
"god." It is a true idol. Friedrich Nietzsche expresses this very accurately:
The state is called the coldest of all cold monsters. It lies coldly, and this
lie creeps from its mouth: "I, the state, am the people." (...)
The state lies in all languages about good and evil: and what it says, it
lies — and what it has, it has stolen.
Everything in it is fake: it bites with stolen teeth, toothless.
Even its womb is fake.
The mixing of languages in good and evil: I give you this sign as a sign
of the state. Truly, this sign means the will to die! Truly, it winks at the
preachers of death!
Too many people are being born: the state was invented for the surplus!give you this sign as a sign
of the state. Truly, this sign means the will to die! Truly, it winks at the
preachers of death!
Too many people are being born: the state was invented for the surplus!

--- PAGE BREAK ---as a sign
of the state. Truly, this sign means the will to die! Truly, it winks at the
preachers of death!
Too many people are being born: the state was invented for the surplus!

--- PAGE BREAK ---

218
Part 3. The Political Paradigm of Modernity. The War of Concepts
Look how it draws them to itself, this multitude!
How it suffocates them, chews them up and chews them over!
"There is nothing on earth greater than me: I am the ordering
finger of God," roars the monster 1.
Therefore, Hobbes emphasises that there is nothing sacred or holy in the
state. Monstrous — yes, frightening — yes, awe-inspiring — yes. But it is
just an ordinary man dressed in a police uniform. It is the shell that frightens.
When the wearer of the uniform comes home, changes into his home clothes,
sits down next to his wife and children, he is harmless and dangerous. There
is nothing frightening about him, nothing of the monster. But dressed in his
armour, the guardian of order gives the impression of a storm.
This observation is wittily described in the fairy tale "The Wonderful
Wizard of Oz" 2. The ruler of the Emerald City, "The Great and Terrible,"
turns out to be a harmless and pathetic fool who inspires fear only by virtue
of a "social contract," embodied by the mandatory requirement to wear green
glasses so that all objects in the Emerald City appear emerald. This is exactly
what Nietzsche means when he says about the state:
"everything in it is fake."
The meaning of the state is only to frighten. But unlike the sacred, it
inspires fear, not horror. It does not abolish our self, replacing it with
something new, a new spiritual personality, but simply suppresses it, forces it
to bend, curl up, and tremble lowly.
Jean Bodin and the concept of "sovereignty"
Jean Bodin was another creator of the political philosophy of the
Modern Age. He played a significant role in political thought during the
turbulent 16th century, which was a turning point for France and Europe
as a whole, when there was fierce opposition between Catholicism and
Protestantism. Jean Bodin drew a fundamental political conclusion from
the religious conflict between the Huguenots (Protestants) and Catholics,
which, on the one hand, took Calvinist theories of opposition to Rome and
its supranational authority to their logical conclusion, and on the other,
partly in the spirit of the Catholic party (but entirely in the spirit of
Lutheranism), advocated the absolutisation of royal power. In this way, he
arrived at the form
1   Nietzsche, F. Thus Spoke Zarathustra. P. 35.
2Baum, F. L. The Wonderful Wizard of Oz/Baum, F. L. The Magic Land. St. Petersburg: Andreev
and Sons, 1991.ower. In this way, he
arrived at the form
1   Nietzsche, F. Thus Spoke Zarathustra. P. 35.
2Baum, F. L. The Wonderful Wizard of Oz/Baum, F. L. The Magic Land. St. Petersburg: Andreev
and Sons, 1991.

--- PAGE BREAK ---e
arrived at the form
1   Nietzsche, F. Thus Spoke Zarathustra. P. 35.
2Baum, F. L. The Wonderful Wizard of Oz/Baum, F. L. The Magic Land. St. Petersburg: Andreev
and Sons, 1991.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

219
Chapter 3. The Founding Fathers of Modern Political Philosophy...
models of the nation state, combining monarchism and the interests of the
bourgeoisie, without any specific religious component. Thus, Jean Bodin,
somewhat anticipating Hobbes, became the main theorist of political
modernity, asserting as the norm a completely secular state, detached from
any religious (sacred) content.
Jean Bodin's main idea is the concept of sovereignty. From his point of
view, the state is based on the fact that there is no higher legal or religious
authority above it. The state has no transcendent goals; its tasks are purely
technical. It must protect citizens from external enemies and organise
economic and social life based on maximum efficiency and rationality.
Bodin's state is a purely mechanical construct whose function is limited to
optimal material organisation.
According to Boden, the sovereignty of the state is justified precisely
by the fact that it has no tasks that go beyond the scope of technical
concerns and challenges. If the state does not serve any idea or mission, then
there is no authority capable of evaluating its activities based on higher
criteria. The state can judge only itself; this is the essence of its
sovereignty, the absence of any higher levels.
Like Hobbes in the biblical triad of Job, Leviathan and God, God is
removed and his place is taken by a man-made monster, Leviathan. In
Bodin's view, the sovereign, the bearer of sovereignty, is the highest
authority. And although Boden does not deny God, in the spirit of deism, he
denies Him the ability to effectively intervene in the course of human history.
History is made only by the sovereign. He may or may not take God into
account. But this has no bearing on the structure of the Political itself.
The elimination of the power of the Pope
This idea that the head of state and the state itself are fundamentally
absolute structures is radically new to medieval thinking. God becomes
politically powerless, unable and unwilling to intervene in the course of
human political history. In effect, he is placed outside the brackets. It is
obvious that this is just as radical as
1  Bodin, J. Six Books on the State /Anthology of World Political Thought: In 5 vols. Vol. 2.
Moscow: Mysl, 1999.ct, he is placed outside the brackets. It is
obvious that this is just as radical as
1  Bodin, J. Six Books on the State /Anthology of World Political Thought: In 5 vols. Vol. 2.
Moscow: Mysl, 1999.

--- PAGE BREAK ---side the brackets. It is
obvious that this is just as radical as
1  Bodin, J. Six Books on the State /Anthology of World Political Thought: In 5 vols. Vol. 2.
Moscow: Mysl, 1999.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

220
Part 3. The Political Paradigm of Modernity. The War of Concepts
radically contradicts the Catholic idea of the "two cities" and the ontology of
the Empire, as well as the ideas of Machiavelli and Hobbes.
Today, the concept of sovereignty is the foundation of international law
and a basic constitutional norm. We use it easily. But why was it important
to introduce this concept in the 16th century, when Jean Bodin lived and
wrote his works? Because at that time, there was still a belief that there was
an authority above states that limited their power — primarily the Roman
Catholic Church. The Pope appointed cardinals and bishops, who were, in
essence, conduits of the supranational system. The cardinal was the most
important figure in a European nation-state; he was subordinate not to the
king, but to the Pope. This gave rise to dual power. The universal
supranational power of Catholicism, the Pope, and the national power of the
king. The essence of Bodin's idea is that there cannot be two powers in a
nation state, and all power should be transferred to a secular ruler, i.e., a
prince or king. The king is sovereign because sovereignty is the fundamental
assertion that there is no other higher legal authority above the king.
Therefore, according to Bodin, European society should be viewed as a
collection of sovereign states, sovereign units, rather than a single legal
field of the Catholic Church, united
consecrated by the Pope.
For the era in which Bodin lived, this was a completely new
conception of the very nature of politics. Before him, the idea of the state
had a sacred foundation: the state serves the Church. Hence such concepts
as "Christian monarchy," coalitions of "Christian countries," etc. The
Christian principle, embodied in the Catholic Church, was the authority
that spiritually endowed the national European states with a certain spiritual,
supernatural, and super-rational mission. The guardians of this mission
were the representatives of the Pope, who were the bearers of
supranational control. According to Carl Schmitt, this type corresponded to
the concept of "commissarial dictatorship" (1),i.e., a form of government in
which the entire ruling institution acted in the name of a higher goal. The
Pope himself did not rule on his own behalf, but as
"Commissioner of Christ." And his legates, cardinals, and all other clergy,
obeying the Pope, also participated in this mission through him. The system
of power was open. Boden, however, postulates a completely different
model—from now on, the king's power is a "sovereign dictatorship."
1  Schmitt, K. Dictatorship: From the Origins of the Modern Idea of Sovereignty to the Proletarian
Class Struggle.letely different
model—from now on, the king's power is a "sovereign dictatorship."
1  Schmitt, K. Dictatorship: From the Origins of the Modern Idea of Sovereignty to the Proletarian
Class Struggle.

--- PAGE BREAK ---del—from now on, the king's power is a "sovereign dictatorship."
1  Schmitt, K. Dictatorship: From the Origins of the Modern Idea of Sovereignty to the Proletarian
Class Struggle.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

221
Chapter 3. The Founding Fathers of Modern Political Philosophy...
where the head of the institution of power is the individual as such. And it is
precisely this individual — as a person, not as the bearer of a mission —
who is served by his subordinates and the entire people. The words
attributed to Louis XIV (1643–1715) can serve as a formula for "sovereign
dictatorship":
"I am the state!"
The king's musketeers against the cardinal's guards
Let us recall the famous novels of Alexandre Dumas (1802–1870),
featuring the king's musketeers and the cardinal's guards. Their confrontation
reflected the fundamental dilemma of 17th-century France: the Catholic
authority of the Pope or the national sovereignty of the monarch. The
cardinal's guards were a French segment of a special supranational army —
bearers of a pan-European (and, given the European colonies, global)
network of "commissarial dictatorship." They were not guided by the
personal interests of the powerful Richelieu (1585–1642), but ensured the
unity of the European world in the name of a supranational mission. In this
case, sovereignty — and openly so — was held only by the Pope and his
system of cardinals, who oversaw the nation states as representatives of the
"heavenly city" in the "earthly city." As we have seen, in the model of the
blessed Augustine, this "city of heaven," from a Catholic point of view, was
the city of the righteous (hence celibacy and priests), while the "city of earth"
was the city of sinners. The musketeers, who were on the side of Dumas
himself and, more broadly, the republican-nationalist-oriented French of the
19th century, who had by that time already lived for several centuries in a
world where the ideas of Jean Bodin had completely prevailed.
It is precisely against the "dictatorship of the commissars" of the Pope
and his legates that Bodin's main idea is directed. According to Boden, the
state has no mission whatsoever and therefore no authority should be
above the king. Consequently, cardinals should be stripped of all real power
and be purely ecclesiastical officials. In essence, this is a change in the
conception of the political system of all European politics and all European
philosophy. Here, the "heavenly city" disappears from view altogether.
Politics becomes the exclusive domain of the "earthly city." But since
there is nothing to compare it to, it cannot be called a "city of sinners."
Thus, the vertical dimension is completely removed from politics.es the exclusive domain of the "earthly city." But since
there is nothing to compare it to, it cannot be called a "city of sinners."
Thus, the vertical dimension is completely removed from politics.

--- PAGE BREAK ---ain of the "earthly city." But since
there is nothing to compare it to, it cannot be called a "city of sinners."
Thus, the vertical dimension is completely removed from politics.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

222
Part 3. The Political Paradigm of Modernity. The War of Concepts
Towards the Westphalian world order
Boden's monarchism is completely desacralised. In his understanding,
the king is a strictly immanent and technical figure, but being placed at the
head of the state, he becomes its concentrated expression. The sovereign king
represents the highest authority of the Political.
In practice, this meant that each state had complete and absolute freedom
to build its relations with other states solely and exclusively on the basis of
its national interests. Previously, the European order was qualitatively
different: for example, Rome and the Catholic Church, which had
significant legal powers, actively intervened in disputes and conflicts
between England and France. Of course, secular rulers did not always follow
the instructions of the popes and tried to influence them themselves (due
to political intrigues and unrest in the Catholic Church in the late 14th and
early 15th centuries, there were several popes), but from the point of view of
the European legal system, it was precisely this supranational system that
was legitimate. It was based on the (probably apocryphal) "Donation of
Constantine," a legendary document or order according to which
Constantine the Great (272–337) transferred full power over the Western
Roman Empire to Pope Sylvester (?–335). In such a situation, neither
France, nor England, nor any other European power was sovereign in the
full sense of the word. It was precisely against this that Jean Bodin's ideas
were directed. From now on, the rulers of nation states became the highest
actors. And there was no higher authority above them. Relations between
them were determined solely on the basis of bilateral treaties, alliances and
coalitions, negotiations or war. This was most clearly evident in Protestant
England, but France, although it never broke decisively with Catholicism,
became the second pole of the new political system. Therefore, although
political sovereignty is a product of Protestant thought, it found its
application in the Catholic world, where the avant-garde of the transition
to modernity was
France.
The system based on the principle of sovereignty was finally adopted by
the European powers in the 17th century following the bloody Thirty Years'
War. In it, a coalition of Protestant countries in northern Europe clashed with
southern European powers that sided with the Counter-Reformation and
remained loyal to Rome and the Habsburgs. The Catholic south...coalition of Protestant countries in northern Europe clashed with
southern European powers that sided with the Counter-Reformation and
remained loyal to Rome and the Habsburgs. The Catholic south...

--- PAGE BREAK ---ant countries in northern Europe clashed with
southern European powers that sided with the Counter-Reformation and
remained loyal to Rome and the Habsburgs. The Catholic south...

--- PAGE BREAK ---

223
Chapter 3. The Founding Fathers of Modern Political Philosophy...
made a last-ditch attempt to preserve — even restore — the medieval
order, which assumed the supremacy of the popes and the status of the
Empire. But even during this war, it became clear that a number of
Catholic countries (primarily France) were guided not by a common
Catholic agenda, but by their own national interests (opposition to Austria,
etc.). Since neither side managed to gain a decisive advantage during the
Thirty Years' War, the Peace of Westphalia in 1648 essentially cemented
the victory of the principle of national sovereignty, rejecting any legal
basis for religious authorities, whether Catholic or Protestant. In essence,
this was an ideological victory for Protestantism, which initially (in
Luther and England) advocated the complete autocracy of national kings and
princes. From that moment on, the nation state and its sovereign became
the highest political authority, and religious issues were relegated to the
periphery of politics. This situation was enshrined in the Peace of
Westphalia, which remains the main norm of international law to this day.
Thus, the ideas of Jean Bodin prevailed.
Inside Leviathan
We can draw an analogy between the main concepts of the three
fundamental founding fathers of modern politics:
The Prince (Machiavelli) — Leviathan (Hobbes) — the sovereign
(Bodini)
These are very similar and interrelated concepts. Together and separately,
they constitute a new (compared to Antiquity and the Middle Ages) structure
of the Political. From now on, politics is situated exclusively in the
conditions of the "world of this life"; the ontological vertical collapses, and
the state is conceived as an exclusively immanent phenomenon. Politics
becomes material, materialistic, technical, and exclusively earthly, sharply
detached from any heavenly spiritual dimension. In such politics, there is no
place for a philosopher-king or even a warrior-aristocrat. Everything in it is
subordinated to utilitarian practical tasks. To recognise the legitimacy of
Machiavelli's Prince, Hobbes' Leviathan or Bodin's sovereignty is
tantamount to agreeing with the pig-polity and the legitimacy of its
philosophical foundations.
Today we live in Hobbes' world (Leviathan, social contract, rational
egoism), under the rule of the Prince (the source of namesth the pig-polity and the legitimacy of its
philosophical foundations.
Today we live in Hobbes' world (Leviathan, social contract, rational
egoism), under the rule of the Prince (the source of names

--- PAGE BREAK ---d the legitimacy of its
philosophical foundations.
Today we live in Hobbes' world (Leviathan, social contract, rational
egoism), under the rule of the Prince (the source of names

--- PAGE BREAK ---

224
Part 3. The Political Paradigm of Modernity. The War of Concepts
but sovereign, not commissarial, dictatorship), and from the point of view of
the structure of international law — in Jean Bodin's system (the Peace of
Westphalia). Any supranational organisations — such as the UN, etc. — have
only symbolic significance and possess a recommendatory status1. Any state
may accept or reject the principles of "international law," since the main
provision of this law is precisely sovereignty, which means, among other
things, the completely justified possibility of disregarding any international
norms. If the principle of sovereignty is recognised as the highest foundation,
any supranational union is nothing more than a club. Ostracism or
condemnation may be psychologically and morally unpleasant and even
painful, but there is no authority that can legitimately force a sovereign state
to pursue or refrain from pursuing a particular policy. Only force decides
everything, and the decisive argument for exerting pressure on a sovereign
state is the ability of another state or coalition of states to compel it to act in
one way or another by force.
The politics of the third principle
We live in a world of "Leviathan"; we are dealing with actors of rational
egoism, that is, with rational wolves; this justifies the very existence of the
state, and the legitimacy of violence on the part of the state is justified
precisely by this pessimistic anthropology. Sovereignty is the reality that
continues to be of absolute importance to us today. Bodin wrote in the 16th
century, but even today this is a fundamental factor in the very structure of
the political system, regardless of the specific state in which we live. We are
still in Jean Bodin's world. This world remains Westphalian, which means
that we base our international practice and international law on the principle
of sovereignty.
It is with these three European thinkers—Machiavelli, Hobbes, and
Bodin—that a paradigm shift in political philosophy takes place. We are
leaving behind the state of the Father and the state of the Son, political
Platonism and political Aristotelianism, and moving towards the domination
of the third principle of Timaeus, the realm of the third social type (the
common people, the majority, the demos) and the third principle of the soul
( carnal bodily desires).
1  Dugin, A. G. International Relations (Paradigms, Theories, Sociology). Moscow: Academic
Project, 2014.ople, the majority, the demos) and the third principle of the soul
( carnal bodily desires).
1  Dugin, A. G. International Relations (Paradigms, Theories, Sociology). Moscow: Academic
Project, 2014.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

225
Chapter 3. The Founding Fathers of Modern Political Philosophy...
All these lines are synchronised — the rise of the bourgeoisie, capitalism,
secularisation, the abolition of the transcendent dimension, the transition
from the vertical to the horizontal, the replacement of religion by science, the
shift of the main criterion from unity to multiplicity, etc.
This is how not only the subject but also the object changes. Instead of
Plato's and Aristotle's universe, Democritus' universe becomes the norm.
Atoms of matter have their counterparts in society in the form of
individuals, citizens of a democratic system. The masculine contemplative
and heroic principle gives way to Mother, Nurturer, and Recipient.

--- PAGE BREAK ---ounterparts in society in the form of
individuals, citizens of a democratic system. The masculine contemplative
and heroic principle gives way to Mother, Nurturer, and Recipient.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

Chapter 4. Individualism as the basis of
political philosophy in the modern era
The basis of Protestantism is the social contract
The dominant basis of modern politics is the idea of the individual as
the basic instance of the political. That is, the political is conceived as a
product of the creation of the individual. As we have seen, the origins of
this approach lie in the special theology of Protestantism, which placed the
individual rational being at the centre of the interpretation of Holy Scripture.
Protestants view the Church as a human creation resulting from a social
contract. The social contract forms the Church for Protestantism. At the heart
of this Church is not the clergy (as in Catholicism), nor apostolic grace, nor a
group of people united by the sacrament of baptism (as in Orthodox
Christianity), but a contract between individuals. Protestants believe that
Christians agree among themselves, and the Church is created from this
agreement.
This gives Protestantism a deeply democratic character as a religion. In
some cases, this leads to the rejection of the priesthood altogether — when
there is no pastor at all, or he is elected by all members of the community and
does not receive any additional ordination. In many forms of Protestantism
(especially in Calvinism, its variants and parallel movements), this leads to
the rejection of the Eucharist. In addition, in Protestant sects, we see an
almost complete rejection of icons — statues and images of saints and even
of Christ himself are considered "idolatry."
In fact, the concept of the Church is radically changing. The Protestant
Church is a product of a collective agreement, a social contract.
All we need to do is secularise this Protestant ecclesiology, and we get
the basic model of the political philosophy of the Newtant
Church is a product of a collective agreement, a social contract.
All we need to do is secularise this Protestant ecclesiology, and we get
the basic model of the political philosophy of the New

--- PAGE BREAK ---oduct of a collective agreement, a social contract.
All we need to do is secularise this Protestant ecclesiology, and we get
the basic model of the political philosophy of the New

--- PAGE BREAK ---

Chapter 4. Individualism as the basis of political philosophy in the Modern Age
227
time. In Protestantism, the principle of the individual is still applied to the
interpretation of Scripture, which is still considered sacred and
unquestionable authority. The next step towards Modernism is the rejection
of this, and from now on individuals are free to interpret not only the Bible,
but everything in general. The motive of the sufficiency of the rational
principle for judging how a particular passage of Scripture should be
understood is extended to the limit: from now on, man can make any
judgement based on his own reason.
This is how the normative representation of the subject of the New Age
as an individual is formed. This conception is characteristic of all three
classical ideologies of modernity — liberalism, communism, and
fascism.These three political theories describe practically the entire spectrum
of basic, mainstream versions of political philosophy in the modern era.
These ideologies take different positions in relation to the individual — but
nevertheless, in all three, the idea of the basic source of politics is taken not
from outside the human being (in God, in the sacred, in nature, etc.), but
precisely from within the human being. The individual human being becomes
the main subject of politics. This is the specificity of the modern era.
At the root of all three theories lies the secular model of Protestant
ideology. To put it somewhat simplistically, one could say that if we take
Protestant ideology and remove God, Christ, and the Holy Scriptures, we
are left with the political philosophy of the modern era and the idea of the
social contract that underlies this politics.
The paradoxes of the atom — the nihilistic underpinnings of
modern ontology
There is a direct and immediate connection between atomism in
physics and individualism in political philosophy. This reveals the unity of
philosophy and politics, which constitutes the nature of both.
In fact, the concept of the individual is not as simple and self-evident
as it may seem. The philosophy of the New Age introduces a new element
into the structure of the world that was absent in the Middle Ages, in
Antiquity, in religious society, in the world of Tradition, and in cultures
where the sacred prevailed.
1   Dugin, A. G. The Fourth Way. Introduction to the Fourth Political Theory.Middle Ages, in
Antiquity, in religious society, in the world of Tradition, and in cultures
where the sacred prevailed.
1   Dugin, A. G. The Fourth Way. Introduction to the Fourth Political Theory.

--- PAGE BREAK ---tiquity, in religious society, in the world of Tradition, and in cultures
where the sacred prevailed.
1   Dugin, A. G. The Fourth Way. Introduction to the Fourth Political Theory.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

228
Part 3. The Political Paradigm of Modernity. The War of Concepts
The theories of Democritus, Epicurus, and Lucretius were excluded from
the prevailing systems of cosmology and ontology (predominantly Platonic
or Aristotelian), which directly rejected atomism. However, modern physics,
beginning with Galileo and Gassendi, brought this marginal theory of
atomism back into the spotlight. The idea that there is something indivisible
at the lowest level of the world (the atom in nature and the individual in
society) was an avant-garde, paradigmatic idea of the modern era, since the
concept of matter in the scholastic, Platonic, and Aristotelian sense is
fundamentally anti-atomistic. Why? Because matter is seen as a principle of
insufficiency (i.e., privation, absence). The movement towards matter is a
process of cooling of the Spirit, the fading of the idea of light. But darkness is
only the absence of light. Evil is the diminution of good,as Plotinus wrote,
which was taken up by Christian Platonism. And in this sense, matter as
such does not exist.
Matter is merely a horizon, a limit towards which the falling Spirit
strives. There is no darkness as such, only fading light. Therefore, from a
philosophical point of view, in the era of Antiquity, the Middle Ages and
classical philosophy, matter is a process of materialisation. Matter is only a
limit, only a horizon that is unattainable in itself. The spirit fades, and the
process of its fading is movement towards matter. Matter itself was
thought of as something that does not exist, as something apophatic,
having no existence in itself.
Accordingly, matter is not something given, but a process. There is no
indivisible atom, there is a process of division. Only the conditional, purely
conceptual horizon of this division can be called
"matter." There is a process of dispersion of the original unity into a
multitude, and the limit of division, which is unattainable in the full sense,
is called "matter."
In this case, atomism cannot exist, because any material atom — as
something that is not subject to "tomé" (Greek QoHj) — "division" — is the
limit of division, and this limit is ontologically unattainable. An atom can
exist as the last link in an infinite chain of division, having no existence of its
own.
This is how classical philosophy thinks, and on this it builds its theories
about political structure, about the sacred Empire, about the mission of the
state. Everything proceeds from the One and moves towards multiplicity in
the course of ever greater movement, fragmentation,
1  Literally: "Evil is not some deficiency of good, but rather a complete deficiency." Plotinus.
First Ennead. P. 275.ves towards multiplicity in
the course of ever greater movement, fragmentation,
1  Literally: "Evil is not some deficiency of good, but rather a complete deficiency." Plotinus.
First Ennead. P. 275.

--- PAGE BREAK ---city in
the course of ever greater movement, fragmentation,
1  Literally: "Evil is not some deficiency of good, but rather a complete deficiency." Plotinus.
First Ennead. P. 275.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

Chapter 4. Individualism as the basis of political philosophy in the Modern Age
229
fragmentation, but never fully reaches this multiplicity, since it represents
"nothingness."
It is interesting that Democritus himself builds his atomistic terminology
on a pair of concepts — [gv and od[gv, which are usually interpreted as "atom"
and "emptiness." But only od[gv is a full Greek word, meaning "nothing,"
"absence"1. The second term, [gv, has no meaning in the language and was
artificially created by Democritus to denote the opposite of "nothing," that is,
"not nothing." According to Democritus, [gv means "something," "particle,"
"atom." But the very creation of this artificial concept is highly significant:
Democritus begins with "nothing" (od[gv) and moves from there to designate
its conceptual opposite. However, Democritus does not use an existing Greek
word, but deliberately creates a neologism — [gv. This is necessary to
emphasise the purely speculative (conceptual) nature of the "atom," which is
postulated by the mind but is not an object of sensory perception like
ordinary physical objects. And the fact that this concept is postulated in
opposition to another — the original — concept oGd[gv, indicates the
ontological primacy of negation. We have said that Democritus himself,
unlike his interpreters, does not define the atom as "existing." Not to be "non-
existent"
"emptiness" and "nothingness" do not necessarily mean "being." The
speculative nature of the atom does not give Democritus sufficient grounds to
speak about existence with the same certainty as Plato and Aristotle (for
whom the mind itself is God and obviously represents the maximum of
being). Therefore, in opposition to "nothing" (od[gv), the term [gv appears as
an indication of a special mode of being, derived only from rational reasoning
and not confirmed by sensory experience. It is important that, from a
linguistic point of view, unlike the Russian "ni-chto" or the English "no-
thing", the second part of the Greek term od[gv, i.e. [gv itself, does not carry
the meaning of "thing" (English "thing"). Rather, it corresponds to the Greek
particle [g, which is translated into Russian as "well," "how," "how so," etc.,
while od[gv in this case is something like "here it is," "how so," etc.
"here it is", "how is it", etc., and od[gv in this case is something like
"No." By discarding "no," we do not obtain something affirmative; rather, we
obtain something meaningless in itself and taken separately from other words
— "ze." It is telling that in modern Greek, [gv means precisely "no," "not," as
a shortened form of od[gv, where the negation od has undergone apheresis.
Thus, the truncated word has retained the meaning of the more complete
earlier version. From here
1   Lurie, S. Ya. Democritus. Texts. Translation. Research. P. 250, 253.od has undergone apheresis.
Thus, the truncated word has retained the meaning of the more complete
earlier version. From here
1   Lurie, S. Ya. Democritus. Texts. Translation. Research. P. 250, 253.

--- PAGE BREAK ---eresis.
Thus, the truncated word has retained the meaning of the more complete
earlier version. From here
1   Lurie, S. Ya. Democritus. Texts. Translation. Research. P. 250, 253.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

230
Part 3. The Political Paradigm of Modernity. The War of Concepts
we can draw the most important conclusion: the atom as [gv is not, in the full
sense of the word, an ontological instance, that is, something that exists,
relating to being. gv is not "something" obtained by reading "nothing" or
"no" out of "nothing." gv is "not nothing," about whose existence we cannot
say anything definite. The negation of negation in ontology and philosophy
(unlike in arithmetic) does not necessarily lead to affirmation. And if,
according to Democritus, things that are perceived by the senses are
phantoms (Ri[bKov), then atoms are the sources of phantoms, their genetic
matrices.
Democritus understood emptiness and atoms collectively, which in
classical ancient cosmology were seen as matter,
"many" (XGKK^), since the absence of an eidetic principle (form) did not
allow one to speak of any justified existence and could only be a purely
conceptual abstraction, arbitrarily posited within "nothingness." Therefore,
[gv as the antithesis of od[gv is not yet "something," although it is postulated
"as not nothing." The ontology of the atom is problematic and contrary to the
obvious — both to the obviousness of the classical light mind and to the
elements of sensory perception. The atom is something that is as non-
ostensible and non-evident as an idea or spirit, but it is not located above, in
the realm of the mind, but below, in the inaccessible depths of nothingness.
The same applies to individuals in society. Such a figure does not exist,
since every person is partly individual and partly collective, and the
proportions
between
these
statuses
are
extremely
complex
and
multidimensional. To obtain an individual, it is necessary to destroy
society. Similarly, in order to obtain an atom, one must first destroy the
body by dispersing it below the body's boundaries. Nothing is found only
at the boundary with nothingness.
Hence the nihilism of atomism as a whole. Not only classical vertical
ontologies see matter as nothing, but Democritus, who was groping,
nevertheless, in the densest medium of non-being (materiality) for something
that differs from it, agrees with this in a certain sense.
It is telling that as atomistic physics developed, it became apparent that
an indivisible limit could not be reached, and what was previously considered
an "atom," "indivisible," turned out to be "divisible," consisting of even
smaller particles that could be divided again. Thus, the atom remains
unattainable, which, however, does not refute Democritus, but only
emphasises the original conceptual nihilism of his theory. Similarly, the
individual is unattainable in society, since even if we free man from all ties to
collective identity, we will not reachly
emphasises the original conceptual nihilism of his theory. Similarly, the
individual is unattainable in society, since even if we free man from all ties to
collective identity, we will not reach

--- PAGE BREAK ---riginal conceptual nihilism of his theory. Similarly, the
individual is unattainable in society, since even if we free man from all ties to
collective identity, we will not reach

--- PAGE BREAK ---

Chapter 4. Individualism as the basis of political philosophy in the Modern Age
231
the minimum of humanity — beyond that begins the transition to the
dividuum, the "parliament of organs," the "rhizome," genetic engineering,
and cyborg projects, which form the basis of postmodern anthropology (post-
humanism and transhumanism).
An idiot is a person without qualities.
If we consider the classical ancient or medieval interpretation of the
nature of earthly man, he was necessarily thought of as part of something. He
is part of Adam, part of the Church, part of the people, part of the political
body. In a sense, man is part of his own soul (and not vice versa). The
individual, on the other hand, is a conditional abstract result (non-existent and
impossible in reality) of the dismemberment of some whole. Therefore, in the
full sense of the word, the individual does not and cannot exist from the point
of view of traditional political philosophy. There is individuation, a
movement towards the individual, but the individual itself does not exist —
because its content would be strictly zero. If we really find this individual, it
will be insignificant, nihilistic. It will be as elusive an abstraction as
Democritus' [gv. As we move from the whole to the particular, as the whole
is dismembered, we lose content. Therefore, the individual as such is an
empty abstraction.
In Ancient Greece, the term was used to denote a figure in which all
qualitative forms of collective identity were abolished and which was reduced
to the simple fact of the existence of a human being in complete isolation from
content.
"Idiot," í[IQiJ. The modern Russian word "idiot" (both in the clinical and
derogatory sense) is a calque of an ancient Greek political term that describes a
private individual who does not belong to any social group. An idiot is a
person who has no ancestors in this city, no place in the social system, no
connection to a cult or profession. Such people are neither citizens nor
slaves; they are nobodies. They are idiots. An idiot is a pure individual, devoid
of any specific form of social identity, with the necessity associated with
collective existence and its parameters.
In Greece, where everything was of high quality, an "idiot" was considered
to be a person who, for example, came to a city where no one knew him and
was unable to say anything meaningful or relevant about himself. The person
exists, but there is no substance to him. There were no mythological ancestors,
no connection to religion (at least, recognisable within the framework of
1  Dugin, A. G. Post-Philosophy.The person
exists, but there is no substance to him. There were no mythological ancestors,
no connection to religion (at least, recognisable within the framework of
1  Dugin, A. G. Post-Philosophy.

--- PAGE BREAK ---but there is no substance to him. There were no mythological ancestors,
no connection to religion (at least, recognisable within the framework of
1  Dugin, A. G. Post-Philosophy.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

232
Part 3. The Political Paradigm of Modernity. The War of Concepts
this society). At the same time, he may be rich, strong, handsome, attractive.
But when people in the Greek polis tried to define him, they said, "He's just a
'private individual,' an idiot."
In clinical terms, an "idiot" is a person who is unable to form any
coherent discourse, does not really know who they are, and is incapable of
making the minimal distinctions and actions necessary to communicate with
those around them. No matter how an idiot feels or what he thinks of himself,
he is completely detached from society, desocialised and incapable of
socialisation. Here, the political criterion of the Greek polis is transferred to a
clinical case, which is a pathology and a clear anomaly for any culture. An
idiot is a private individual without qualities. A unit with eyes, ears and
eyebrows, but no content. What to do with an idiot, with a pure individual as
such? In many societies, this was a serious problem. Where to put them? On
the one hand, they are not human beings, since they do not possess any form
of effective socialisation; on the other hand, they exist and resemble human
beings. In some societies, idiots were banished or even killed. In others, such
as Christian societies, they were allowed to live freely and were even
supported. But even in this case, they were not endowed with any qualities
other than the most general ones. Thus, the euphemism for "idiot" was the
word "cretin," derived from the French le chr tien, meaning "Christian,"
which implied that a person lacked any qualities, connections, or
characteristics, Therefore, out of mercy, in Christian society they were simply
called "Christians" or "good Christians."
The idiot as the norm and individuals as objects
The new era, following the logic of atomism, including socio-political
atomism, radically changes the attitude towards the individual. From now
on, a person deprived of qualities acts as a social atom and, consequently,
as a positive phenomenon (rather than the result of the sum of properties).
Thus, something unprovable, non-existent (like an atom in physics) or
frankly degenerative is taken as the starting point, the fundamental model
for understanding the political process. The origins of individualism are
therefore not as obvious as they might seem at first glance.
It seems that there is nothing more empirically obvious than the
individual. Ostensibly pointing to someone next to us or
1   Dumont L. Essay on Individualism.ous as they might seem at first glance.
It seems that there is nothing more empirically obvious than the
individual. Ostensibly pointing to someone next to us or
1   Dumont L. Essay on Individualism.

--- PAGE BREAK ---em at first glance.
It seems that there is nothing more empirically obvious than the
individual. Ostensibly pointing to someone next to us or
1   Dumont L. Essay on Individualism.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

Chapter 4. Individualism as the basis of political philosophy in the Modern Age
233
When we think about ourselves, we automatically consider both aspects of an
individual to be ours. In reality, this is not the case. In order to extract the
individual from a specific person, including ourselves, it is necessary to
subtract from them everything that constitutes their collective identity:
language, way of thinking, gender, parents, origin, education, school,
nationality, age, social roles and statuses, etc.
If we take the sociological completeness that forms the content of
personality (persona
1), and subtract all collective forms, we get an
abstraction. It is this individual — the social [gv — that is considered the
main actor in the political philosophy of the New Age. It is he who enters
into a social contract with another individual for the subsequent formation of
a political body. Similarly, according to Democritus, bodies are formed by
invisible and imperceptible atoms. It is important that the state is created not
by people, not by personalities, not by collective identities, but precisely by
"individuals," that is, philosophical abstractions. These abstractions
henceforth become political and legal norms existing in the ontology of law,
but which cannot be discovered in reality, except in cases of clinical idiocy.
Nevertheless, it is precisely this instance that is considered to conclude the
social contract.
Let us recall Hobbes' Leviathan. What characteristics did he attribute to
this normative idiot? He is not quite an idiot, that is, a person without
qualities. But he is close to it. Hence the stable and extremely important
metaphor of a beast. Moreover, a wild one — in Hobbes' case, a wolf. Plato,
who also wanted to express a minimum of social and political qualities, used
metaphors of pigs — hence the term "pig farmer." Democritus saw the
origins of human society in the imitation of animals. People learned
from spiders to weave and darn, from swallows to build houses, and from
singing birds — swans and nightingales — to sing2.
Thus, according to Hobbes, an idiot is a wolf. It is someone who, based
on their purely selfish desires, wants to obtain the maximum possible amount
of pleasure, possession, food, comfort,
1  The fact that personality, unlike individuality, is a social and even sociological concept is
explained in detail by anthropologist Marcel Mauss (1872–1950). See: Mauss, M. Societies.
Exchange. Personality. Works on Social Anthropology. Moscow: Knizhny Dom "Universitet,"
2011.
2   Lurie, S. Ya. Democritus. Texts. Translation. Research. P. 352.872–1950). See: Mauss, M. Societies.
Exchange. Personality. Works on Social Anthropology. Moscow: Knizhny Dom "Universitet,"
2011.
2   Lurie, S. Ya. Democritus. Texts. Translation. Research. P. 352.

--- PAGE BREAK ---s, M. Societies.
Exchange. Personality. Works on Social Anthropology. Moscow: Knizhny Dom "Universitet,"
2011.
2   Lurie, S. Ya. Democritus. Texts. Translation. Research. P. 352.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

234
Part 3. The Political Paradigm of Modernity. The War of Concepts
security. Accordingly, this is someone who strives to build a situation from
within themselves. At the centre of their system are their desires and
appetites, and on the periphery is everything else. Of course, the beast is by
no means an idiot, and is driven by a fairly rigid programme that
predetermines its very nature. In this sense, it is collective: all wolves or all
hares act almost identically in similar situations. This means that they have
certain qualities and characteristics. But when applied to humans, the
metaphor of the beast is an attempt to find some kind of atomic basis, that is,
to strip humans of everything human. The individual is a beast in the sense
that it arises as a result of subtracting human content from humans, as the
fruit of abstraction, reduction, and liberation from the human eidos. The most
material beginning in a human being is much more material than the body.
The body has form, structure, qualities. The fact of separateness carries
nothing but the act of cutting off, tearing away, dismembering. Therefore,
"wolf," "pig," or "bee" in political narratives applied to humans serve to
illustrate the special essences of "wolf-man," "pig-man," "bee-man," etc.,
designed to describe the chimerical and purely speculative nature of the
individual. These are not animals as such, but a specific metaphor illustrating
the concept of individuality.
It is very important to note that the individual is not a subject. More
precisely, the very concept of subject (Greek hXo]RSHRvov, Latin subjectum)
carries a semantic ambiguity: it literally means "below," "under" (Greek hXo-,
Latin sub-). In Greek, there was a similar term, hypostasis, dXLlQTlIJ (from
hXo- "under" and lQlIJ, lQlRbJ — "standing," "being"). But what is
"under" or "inside" a thing or being can be interpreted in two philosophical
paradigms. On the one hand, it is a hidden essence (Greek odlST, Latin
essentia), which in the Platonic and Aristotelian perspective means the
spiritual, heavenly principle, eidos, paradigm. In this case, the "subject" is
conceived as a rational soul, that is, the highest level of the soul, peculiar
only to humans, while animals, plants and stones have their own souls —
animal, vegetative and mineral (there were different opinions about the souls
of stones in Antiquity). In this case, the prefix hXo- or sub-oz- means "hidden
behind the mask of corporeality," "located on the other side of phenomenal
reality." The concept of "subject" has come to mean precisely this — the
centre of the thinking, volitional soul of a human being. In Christian
theology, this meaning became firmly associated with the concept of
"hypostasis," which coincided with the Latin persona, meaning personality.hinking, volitional soul of a human being. In Christian
theology, this meaning became firmly associated with the concept of
"hypostasis," which coincided with the Latin persona, meaning personality.

--- PAGE BREAK ---soul of a human being. In Christian
theology, this meaning became firmly associated with the concept of
"hypostasis," which coincided with the Latin persona, meaning personality.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

Chapter 4. Individualism as the basis of political philosophy in the Modern Age
235
But it was possible to move in a different direction, following the literal
meaning of the prefix "upo-" or "sub-," extending the movement from spirit
to matter, from Father to Mother-Nurturer, from paradigm to "chore," from
the One to the many, and giving it the meaning of that which lies even lower
than the boundary of corporeality. In Latin, this interpretation became
associated with the concept of sub-stantia, literally "that which is under,"
which gives us a complete calque from the Greek dXLlQTlIJ, but with the
opposite meaning this time. Substantia is the deepest layers of materiality,
located below the body; in a sense, it is not simply matter, but sub-matter, the
material roots of matter. Scholastics directly contrasted the pair of terms
essential and substantia with each other, referring to two opposite poles of
existence — spiritual, divine, heavenly, thinking, and material, created,
insignificant, earthly, and non-thinking. Later, this pair came to be defined as
subject and object (objectum), where ob-jectum (Greek wvQI]RSHRvov) meant that
which lies opposite, in front of the subject. At the origins of these concepts,
one can see an indication of something hidden, which later came to be
interpreted as "hidden" as spirit, as the source of things, as the inner
dimension of being, and "hidden" as matter, as that which lies beneath the
body, as the most external dimension of being. Ultimately, this could mean
both limits of ontology and the One (Ev) and XoKK^ of Plato's Parmenides.
Among the pre-Socratics, this terminology was not clearly defined, and
therefore Democritus' atom should be understood from the context as the
source of substance, that is, the maximum possible objectivity, materiality.
Interestingly, Aristotle discusses the atom in the social dimension, i.e.,
the individual in similar terms, in Politics, saying that the political
dimension, i.e., collective identity, is the natural state of people, from
which there are two possible ways out. Aristotle writes:
Man is by nature a political animal (3¼ov XoKIQI]Lv), and anyone who
lives outside the state by virtue of his nature ([Ià cdlIv) and not by chance is
either an immoral creature (cThKLJ) or a superhuman (]vgllbv); Homer
reviles him, saying, "without family, without tribe, without laws, without a
home" (^cvgQbv ^_gxIlQGJ ^mglQIGJ); such a man, by his very nature, craves only
war; he can be compared to an isolated pawn on a chessboard (a3u3 bv
lXRv v XRQQorJ)(1)  .
1   Aristotle. Politics. pp. 378–379.bv ^_gxIlQGJ ^mglQIGJ); such a man, by his very nature, craves only
war; he can be compared to an isolated pawn on a chessboard (a3u3 bv
lXRv v XRQQorJ)(1)  .
1   Aristotle. Politics. pp. 378–379.

--- PAGE BREAK ---J); such a man, by his very nature, craves only
war; he can be compared to an isolated pawn on a chessboard (a3u3 bv
lXRv v XRQQorJ)(1)  .
1   Aristotle. Politics. pp. 378–379.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

236
Part 3. The Political Paradigm of Modernity. The War of Concepts
Going beyond collective identity (political) gives us either a
"superhuman," someone who is better, stronger, and more capable (kréissv)
than other people, or an underdeveloped degenerate — cThKLJ. It is important that
Aristotle compares him to an unpaired figure (Greek a3u3) in a game. What
is meant by the individual in modern philosophy is precisely the sub-
material section of the human being, the pole of attraction of the soul
towards pure nothingness. The ego in man is the most (and not the least)
material instance, which represents an inverted vertical. This is the "inner
idiot," cThKLJ, an unpaired meaningless object a3u3, or the political analogue
of what Democritus calls "[gv," "not nothing." Indeed, the idiot/individual
is not nothing, but at the same time it is not something. It is a vector
pointing below the lower boundary of the body. And as Democritus said,
atoms can only be seen with the mind, since they are pure concepts. But
not Platonic ideas or Aristotelian essences, but concepts,something artificially
assembled, as understood by modern philosophy. An individual is
precisely an object, the most objective and distant part from its essence
and spirit, from its eidos and its idea (2).
Such empty, "idiotic" individuals, "denes," become normative figures in
the philosophy of the New Age. They are selfish because at the centre of their
individual structure is the point of attraction of their ego, with its desires,
ambitions, will, etc. But all the properties of the ego are no longer individual;
they are shared by many. The ego itself is individual, its most inner
dimension.
The bearer of the ego, the individual, is fundamentally unattainable in
reality; it is as abstract and conceptual as a speculative atom.
In physics, the atom serves only as a reference point in the process of
increasingly subtle division of matter. This division itself constitutes the
essence of "progress" as the main content of time in the conditions of the
New Age. This progress is a movement into the depths of matter, a striving to
find an even smaller particle behind each new achievement. Progress is an
intense transition from the unified
1  Guattari, F., Deleuze, G. What is Philosophy? Moscow: Institute of Experimental
Sociology; St. Petersburg: Aleteya, 1998.
2In contemporary postmodern philosophy — primarily in speculative realism — this becomes
the main goal: to reduce the human subject to an object. But such a reduction does not violate
general individualism; on the contrary, it is the bringing of individualism to its ultimate logical
limit. For the core of the individual is precisely the pure object or the radical object.violate
general individualism; on the contrary, it is the bringing of individualism to its ultimate logical
limit. For the core of the individual is precisely the pure object or the radical object.

--- PAGE BREAK ---dividualism; on the contrary, it is the bringing of individualism to its ultimate logical
limit. For the core of the individual is precisely the pure object or the radical object.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

Chapter 4. Individualism as the basis of political philosophy in the Modern Age
237
to many things. Therefore, knowledge about many things multiplies, and
objects become increasingly fragmented. And although the next contender for
the title of "atom" (i.e., something "indivisible") once again proves to be
subject to division, progress does not stop and does not reconsider its
starting point — belief in the atom.
In political philosophy, something similar happens with the
individual. The postulation of the individual as an ego entity becomes the
driving force of progress, which consists in liberating the individual from
what is collective in him, from what can be separated from him. This
determines the dynamics of political time in the modern era — social
progress. This progress consists in delving deeper into the social fabric in
order to find what is sought — the individual, who constantly eludes
capture at every stage of liberation, repeatedly turning out to be a "dividee"
or a bearer of collective identity. Protestantism liberates the individual from
the Catholic Church with its dogmas and from the Empire with its mission.
But he finds himself once again captive to the religious authority of one
sect or another or under the rule of the Prince. Next comes the liberation of
the individual from the state and politics. This is the ideal of civil society and
the transition to purely economic interactions. The successes of liberalism,
which are increasingly approaching the core of the individual, at some
point emphasise that gender is also a collective identity, which gives rise
to feminism and the call for gender optionality, just as religion, nationality,
class, etc. were previously declared optional. The final step is the transition
to post-humanism, since humans are also a collective identity. But it is
obvious that the desired individual — pure "idiot" — will not be obtained in
this case either, since the result of such liberation will be a machine and/or
Artificial Intelligence, which in turn is something individual that can be
analysed, dissected, and divided. Therefore, individualism in the New Age
should be understood as a process, as a movement towards a limit that
cannot be reached by analytical methods.
Goat-deer and pseudo-science
Given the special nature of atoms and the content of the basic concept of
the individual, we can say that the main idea of the New Age is this: what
does not exist, exists. Nihil (nothingness) exists. Non-being exists.
1   Genon R. The Science of Numbers. St. Petersburg: Vladimir Dal, 2013.can say that the main idea of the New Age is this: what
does not exist, exists. Nihil (nothingness) exists. Non-being exists.
1   Genon R. The Science of Numbers. St. Petersburg: Vladimir Dal, 2013.

--- PAGE BREAK ---in idea of the New Age is this: what
does not exist, exists. Nihil (nothingness) exists. Non-being exists.
1   Genon R. The Science of Numbers. St. Petersburg: Vladimir Dal, 2013.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

238
Part 3. The Political Paradigm of Modernity. The War of Concepts
This is an anti-Parmenidean paradox, although in a certain sense it had
already been conceptualised in Plato's dialogues. From Plato's point of view,
a lie is a non-being that exists, because if a person expresses an opinion,
then the expression itself and the opinion presented in it exist. But being
false, that is, narrating something that does not exist, it is not the whole
truth and not complete being. This is how the ontology of falsehood arises
— a kind of "pseudology" (pRh[GKGMST)(1) .
If we take as the basis of being that which, from the point of view of
Plato and Aristotle, does not exist (such as the worlds described by the 6th,
7th, 8th and 9th hypotheses of Parmenides), then we find ourselves in the
context of a special ontology — pseudo-logical ontology, which is precisely
in the same sense as a false opinion. Plotinus wrote clearly about the "being"
of matter:
Everything that it (matter) presents itself as is a lie; it itself is a lie 2.
Such a pseudo-logical field of existence is pure nihilism. This is the basis
of modern philosophy — nihilism manifested in the ontology of falsehood.
That which cannot be (an atom or an individual) is taken for what is.
Aristotle, in his treatise "On Interpretation," gives an example of a
possible word that denotes a thing whose existence or non-existence is
undefined and cannot be determined. He writes:
Names and verbs are like thoughts without connection or separation,
for example, "man" or "white"; when nothing is added, there is neither
false nor true, although they denote something: for "goat-deer" denotes
something, but it is not yet true or false when the verb "to be" or "not to be"
is not added, either in general or with regard to time(3) .
For Aristotle, a goat-deer (Greek QpTMgKTcoJ) is a phenomenon that has
no ontological status, that is, a pure concept. In the 19th century, the
representative of phenomenological philosophy, Alex-
1   Plato. Sophist.
2 Iò Xãv  v XTMMgKKiQTI pRd[RQT. Plotinus. Third Ennead/ Plotinus. Enneads: In 7 vols. Vol.
3. St. Petersburg: Oleg Abyshko Publishing House; University Book, 2010. P. 301.
3Aristotle. On Interpretation/Aristotle. Collected Works in 4 Volumes. Vol. 2. Moscow:
MyUl, 1978. P. 93.vols. Vol.
3. St. Petersburg: Oleg Abyshko Publishing House; University Book, 2010. P. 301.
3Aristotle. On Interpretation/Aristotle. Collected Works in 4 Volumes. Vol. 2. Moscow:
MyUl, 1978. P. 93.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

Chapter 4. Individualism as the basis of political philosophy in the Modern Age
239
S. Meinong
1(1853–1920) proposed a special term for such objects:
"substantiation." It is impossible to assert that they exist, but it cannot be
proven that they do not exist, since at least the formal aspect of the name
complies with certain structural rules and laws. Therefore, "goat-deer" or
"golden mountains," according to Meinong, substist, they neither are nor
are not. Such objects can be called "virtual" or "pseudo-logical."
The ontological status of an individual belongs to this category — it is a
pseudo-logical unit, analogous to "goat-deer." The same applies to atoms.
The entire philosophy of the Modern Age is based on implicit
nihilism. From the point of view of Antiquity and the Middle Ages, the
philosophy of the Modern Age is a well-developed, fundamental,
scientifically substantiated lie.
1  Meinong, A. On Possibility and Probability: Contributions to the Theory of Objects and the
Theory of Knowledge. Leipzig: J. A. Barthe, 1915.

--- PAGE BREAK ---scientifically substantiated lie.
1  Meinong, A. On Possibility and Probability: Contributions to the Theory of Objects and the
Theory of Knowledge. Leipzig: J. A. Barthe, 1915.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

240
Part 3. The Political Paradigm of Modernity. The War of Concepts
Chapter 5. Liberalism (the first political
theory). John Locke and his legacy
The common metaphysical denominator of the three political
ideologies of the Modern Age
In modern times, the history of European societies, as well as
European colonies on other continents and in other parts of the world,
unfolds exclusively in the context of Plato's third type of "Timaeus." The
modern era was born out of a combination of the Renaissance and the
Reformation,where the tendency towards the immanent and secular
principles of the Renaissance was combined with Protestant individualism.
Southern Europe, where the Renaissance began, did not accept the
Reformation and individualism of northern Europe. The Council of Trent of
the Catholic Church harshly rejected Calvinism and Lutheran theology,
laying the foundation for the Counter-Reformation. In some areas of the
Protestant world, Renaissance secularism was rejected (for example, by
Calvin in Switzerland, where a peculiar Protestant theocracy was
established). But the common denominator of Modern philosophy, in
complete opposition to both Antiquity and the Middle Ages, was precisely
the combination of materialism and secularism on the one hand, and
individualism (social atomism) on the other. This is the formula of
Modernity: materialism+ individualism.
These properties corresponded precisely to the third zone in the structure
of Politica Aeterna, located at the base of the hierarchical triangle of the
Political vertical. In ontology, it was about matter, multiplicity (XGKK^),
"chore" (qpT), nothingness, the lower limit of ontology, the "realm of
quantity" (2),and in Democritus' model, about the great void (Gd[gv) and the
atoms that separated from it ([gv). In the metaphysics of gender, it was about the
figure of the Mother, the Nurturer, the Recipient, called upon to nurture and
envelop the Son with an outer shell, wholly and completely
1  Gilson É. Héloïse et Abélard. P.: J. Vrin, 1938.
2  Guénon, R. The Kingdom of Quantity and the Signs of the Times. Essays on Hinduism.
Esotericism in Dante. Moscow: Belovodye, 2003.and completely
1  Gilson É. Héloïse et Abélard. P.: J. Vrin, 1938.
2  Guénon, R. The Kingdom of Quantity and the Signs of the Times. Essays on Hinduism.
Esotericism in Dante. Moscow: Belovodye, 2003.

--- PAGE BREAK ---lson É. Héloïse et Abélard. P.: J. Vrin, 1938.
2  Guénon, R. The Kingdom of Quantity and the Signs of the Times. Essays on Hinduism.
Esotericism in Dante. Moscow: Belovodye, 2003.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

241
Chapter 5. Liberalism (the first political theory). John Locke and his legacy
the creation of Heaven-Father. In the structure of the soul, this
corresponded to the black horse, personifying carnal desire, bodily
pleasures, comfort, etc. (XI_uHST).
In politics, this was reflected in the urban population, which consisted
mainly of artisans and merchants, and in a broader sense, all social units that
were free and engaged in the production of goods and material objects —
with peasants constituting the overwhelming majority in traditional
society. However, peasants were placed outside the city-state and,
consequently, at some distance from politics. Thus, a situation arose in
which, in the social structure of three estates or classes, the peasants were
replaced by townspeople, whose status did not correspond to either the
warrior caste (aristocracy, nobility), the priestly caste (clergy), or the
dynastic rulers (royal family). Therefore, urban artisans and merchants
became representatives not only of themselves, but also of the peasants,
who constituted the overwhelming majority of the population of any state
until the very last eras. Peasants remained on the periphery of the Modern
era, and townspeople — citizens, bourgeois — spoke on their behalf.
Therefore, the third component of society, associated with the lower limit
of ontology and anthropology, was represented at the origins of
Modernity by the normative merchant, whose role grew as we moved
from the paradigm of Tradition to the paradigm of Modernity. Thus,
gradually, the bourgeoisie, the merchant became synonymous not just with
the townspeople, but specifically with the merchant and entrepreneur, who
was now the primary bearer of the physical, material, quantitative principle
in society, that is, the collective image of the third estate, which originally
included the peasantry, gradually completely pushed to the periphery of
the Political.
The entire structure of the Political New Age belongs to this third
segment on the Politica Aeterna map. Of course, Modernity did not
triumph immediately, even in Europe itself, where its confrontation with
traditional society, its philosophy, its interpretation of religion, its institutions
and its foundations lasted for several centuries. Therefore, even in the
Modern Age, we encounter certain remnants of the old — medieval — order
or combined forms of it until the beginning of the 20th century. But from
the point of view of political philosophy, everything that rightfully belongs
to the modern era and represents contemporary political ideology must
necessarily share the fundamental axioms of modernity, that is, the primacy
and supremacy of the third sector of ontology, an-to the modern era and represents contemporary political ideology must
necessarily share the fundamental axioms of modernity, that is, the primacy
and supremacy of the third sector of ontology, an-

--- PAGE BREAK ---and represents contemporary political ideology must
necessarily share the fundamental axioms of modernity, that is, the primacy
and supremacy of the third sector of ontology, an-

--- PAGE BREAK ---

242
Part 3. The Political Paradigm of Modernity. The War of Concepts
tropology and politics. This means that only political ideology is truly
modern in the full sense of the word, as it is based on materialism, a
scientific worldview, and the recognition of the primacy of democracy and
individual identity, with people uniting into various groups and collectives
only artificially and secondarily. At the same time, it is precisely material
aspirations (XI_uHST) that are considered predominant and central in
humans and society, while everything else is seen as a superstructure over
the "black horse" from Plato's "Phaedrus." It is precisely this volitional (or
lustful, since the word "lust," from the verb "to want," originally meant
simply desire, will, aspiration) side of the human structure that is
considered "real," primary, while everything else, including consciousness,
is seen as important but secondary. Thus, man is equated with an animal,
but one that has developed to such an extent that it has acquired rational
qualities. Thus, Aristotle's definition of man as a "political animal" received a
new — biological, materialistic — interpretation in the Modern era. For
Aristotle, the political dimension is a constitutive quality of man, his eidos,
manifested through his immediate physical presence. For the political
anthropology of the modern era, beginning with Hobbes, politics was
conceived as a new battlefield for survival, gradually formed and mastered
by animals. For Aristotle, philosophy and politics are the natural state of
man. For Hobbes, they are the result of going beyond the natural state, and
for Locke, they are the product of the education (upbringing) of a neutral
human inert mass ready to perceive any external impulse.
Within the entire segment of political philosophy of the New Era, as we
have repeatedly stated, three distinct ideological forms can be identified:
liberalism, communism, and nationalism (fascism). All of them fit
completely within the framework of the Modern paradigm and therefore
share its ideological tenets — primarily materialism and individualism — but
while agreeing with this general tenet, they draw different conclusions, place
different emphases and priorities, and offer their own interpretations and
combinations of various political and philosophical terms and concepts. This
unity of the common denominator and the differences in the theoretical and
institutional constructs built upon it should always be kept in mind when
considering contemporary political ideologies — liberalism, communism
1   Dugin, A. G. The Fourth Way. Introduction to the Fourth Political Theory.ts built upon it should always be kept in mind when
considering contemporary political ideologies — liberalism, communism
1   Dugin, A. G. The Fourth Way. Introduction to the Fourth Political Theory.

--- PAGE BREAK ---uld always be kept in mind when
considering contemporary political ideologies — liberalism, communism
1   Dugin, A. G. The Fourth Way. Introduction to the Fourth Political Theory.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

243
Chapter 5. Liberalism (the first political theory). John Locke and his legacy
and nationalism. Although they are very different and even antagonistic,
grouping themselves into various combinations and alliances in the course
of political history, and especially at the decisive stage of the 20th
century, they share a common paradigmatic metaphysics and belong to the
same segment of Politica Aeterna.
Three types of social contract and the universality of Hobbes
Starting with the Protestants, and especially with Calvin, we are dealing
with individuals as the primary creators of the Church, society, and the state.
Sometimes these three contracts are separated: agreement among people
regarding the interpretation of religion creates a sect or denomination (this is
a religious contract), agreement regarding the model of relations with each
other at the horizontal level creates society (this is a social contract), and
agreement regarding the system of subordination to authorities creates the
state (this is the political contract). Secularisation leads to the first type of
contract receding into the background, while the second and third come to the
fore. At the same time, Hobbes does not distinguish between social and
political contracts, since, in his view, individuals first and foremost agree
with each other precisely on the creation of Leviathan, i.e. on power. Any
other contract is secondary.
This is how a completely specific political anthropology emerges. The
individual is endowed with derivative properties (such as egoism), regarded
as the basis of the political body, and then the entire political philosophy is
built around this figure. This figure forms the basis of the modern paradigm
and is common to all types of political ideologies of the modern era. Liberals,
socialists, and nationalists all build their doctrines on the centrality of
individuals who enter into a contract with each other. In Hobbes, this contract
generalises all possible types that will be derived from this principle in the
future. First of all, individuals agree on power, that is, this contract is
political, and at its centre stands the establishment of the state. Political
nationalism follows precisely this line: the elevation of Leviathan to the
highest value. And although, according to Hobbes, this is only a necessary
measure for people who are wolves, nationalism gives Leviathan an
axiological significance, making it a source of inspiration and positive affect.
The individual wants to identify with Leviathan, to become one with it. The
exaltation of this identification lies at the heart of modern nationalism and
patriotism.nspiration and positive affect.
The individual wants to identify with Leviathan, to become one with it. The
exaltation of this identification lies at the heart of modern nationalism and
patriotism.

--- PAGE BREAK ---ive affect.
The individual wants to identify with Leviathan, to become one with it. The
exaltation of this identification lies at the heart of modern nationalism and
patriotism.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

244
Part 3. The Political Paradigm of Modernity. The War of Concepts
Liberalism and socialism pay more attention to the social contract, that is,
the agreement between individuals regarding the creation of society.
According to Hobbes, this stems from the will to have a state. But later, this
aspect began to stand out as an independent dimension. The social contract
does not form a vertical power structure, but rather a kind of trust, a
company, or a cooperative. Here, too, certain mandatory rules apply, but they
are much less strict and do not imply the establishment of a monopoly on
violence in any one structure. Liberals and socialists partly contrast the social
— horizontal — contract with the political (vertical) contract, believing —
unlike nationalists — that the state is not a value but a necessity (or even an
evil), and that the less state there is, the better. Therefore, in theory, according
to liberal and socialist teachings, individuals can enter into a contract among
themselves to dissolve the state and replace it with social, civil structures.
But there is also a difference between liberals and socialists — this time
in their interpretation of the nature of the social contract itself. Both liberals
and socialists reject social classes, traditional society, hierarchy, the
sacredness of politics, the mission of the state, etc.; they are unanimous in
their egalitarianism and desire for equality. But they understand equality
differently. For liberals, the highest value is the individual, freed from all
forms of collective identity — both classical (ancient, medieval,
ecclesiastical, class, imperial, etc.) and new, artificial (national, state or even
social). Therefore, liberals insist on equality of opportunity and starting
conditions. This is the essence of the liberal contract: everyone agrees that no
one in society should have special privileges, and that every individual is
completely equal to every other. But only at the beginning. Then, individuals,
endowed with equal opportunities, begin to realise them, bring them to life,
and do so with varying degrees of success in the process of free competition.
The optimal form of such competition is the market, since the economy is the
most peaceful form of rivalry — unlike wars, robbery, and battles of all
against all. Those individuals who have achieved success find themselves at
the top of liberal society. Those who have lost are at the bottom. But this does
not violate the principle of equality, liberals believe, and the principle of
individual freedom is fully respected. In liberalism, individualism is most
fully revealed, as it is freed from both Leviathan and the socialist
interpretation of equality.ve, and the principle of
individual freedom is fully respected. In liberalism, individualism is most
fully revealed, as it is freed from both Leviathan and the socialist
interpretation of equality.

--- PAGE BREAK ---e of
individual freedom is fully respected. In liberalism, individualism is most
fully revealed, as it is freed from both Leviathan and the socialist
interpretation of equality.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

245
Chapter 5. Liberalism (the first political theory). John Locke and his legacy
This socialist interpretation insists not only on equality of opportunity,
but also on complete equality of individuals in practically all spheres.
According to socialists, any competition carries an element of dishonesty,
and starting conditions are never equal in reality. Moreover, the property
inequality that develops in a liberal society is unjust and violates the freedom
of some individuals (the unsuccessful, the weak, the losers) in favour of
others (the successful, the strong, the winners). This gives rise to the idea of a
different type of social contract, which can be called socialist. Individuals
enter into it among themselves with regard to the recognition of the
imperative of de facto equality, which can be achieved through the
redistribution of wealth or specific tax policies.
But here the state comes into play again. Some authority must supervise
that individuals comply with the contract, whatever it may be, liberal or
socialist. Therefore, the state (Leviathan) once again becomes necessary as an
instrument for coercing individuals to comply with what they themselves
have decided. Such a state may be liberal or socialist, but it comes back into
play.
Thus, Hobbes and his political philosophy retain their significance in
later stages of the development of modern political philosophy, when his
own views receive a more differentiated and isolated interpretation.
John Locke: anthropological optimism
Before Hobbes' fundamental ideas, in various interpretations, became the
semantic axes of the three main political ideologies of the Modern era,
Hobbes' anthropological pessimism, his view of the evil nature of man (man
as a wolf), his egoism, and the immutability of this state of affairs. At the
same time, as we have said, this pessimism is purely secular and breaks away
from the Christian notion of original sin. Man as an individual is ultimately
just a beast, which determines everything else — right down to the contract
and Leviathan.
The response to Hobbes' challenge came in the 17th century from another
fundamental philosopher of the Modern Age, the founder of political
liberalism
1  Schmitt, K. Leviathan in the Doctrine of the State by Thomas Hobbes. St. Petersburg:
Vladimir Dal, 2006.om another
fundamental philosopher of the Modern Age, the founder of political
liberalism
1  Schmitt, K. Leviathan in the Doctrine of the State by Thomas Hobbes. St. Petersburg:
Vladimir Dal, 2006.

--- PAGE BREAK ---tal philosopher of the Modern Age, the founder of political
liberalism
1  Schmitt, K. Leviathan in the Doctrine of the State by Thomas Hobbes. St. Petersburg:
Vladimir Dal, 2006.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

246
Part 3. The Political Paradigm of Modernity. The War of Concepts
liberalism, John Locke1. Like Hobbes, Locke extended his fundamental
influence over the entire political philosophy of the Modern era, right up to
the 21st century. But while Hobbes encompasses the entire political
Modernity — in all three dominant ideologies (liberalism, socialism,
nationalism) — Locke extends his influence primarily to liberals, who
necessarily follow the basic tenets of his thought. For socialists and
nationalists, he is more of an ideological opponent, which at the same time
includes recognition of the soundness and integrity of his teachings.
Liberalism could have been derived from Hobbes if we focus on the
individual, who already forms the basis of politics in his work. But it is
Locke who adds something to Hobbes's teaching that significantly changes
the parameters of political ontology. Locke's paradigm responds to the
challenge of Hobbes' paradigm at the deepest philosophical level. For
Hobbes, the normative individual is evil — homo homini lupus est. This
"idiot wolf" has no qualities other than greed, selfishness, and the desire to
destroy others, subjugate them, eat them, and take everything they have. This
view of man lies at the heart of Leviathan. Taking into account the analysis of
the ontology of atomism and accepting the fundamental thesis that the
individual is the most objective, material and even sub-material principle,
Hobbes' idea seems quite well-founded metaphysically, although it rejects the
very possibility of an alternative — primarily non-individualistic, holistic,
eidetic, Christian — Platonic and Aristotelian — anthropology. Hobbes is
right in saying that man as an individual is indeed a wolf. But he clearly
exaggerates
when he asserts that no other human beings exist.
But Locke criticises Hobbes and his view of man from a position that is
by no means Platonic or Aristotelian. Locke is just as much an individualist,
nominalist and modernist as Hobbes. He also does not allow for any human
identity other than the individual. But he disagrees with Hobbes's assessment
of the individual — not man as a whole, but the individual himself, the social
idiot, the political atom. Thus, Locke accepts Hobbes's boundaries and does
not seek to go beyond them, but while remaining within them, he radically
changes their interpretation. For him, the individual is still the same profane,
desacralised individual (as in Hobbes), but now he sees him not in a sinister
light, but quite benevolently. This is not a change of anthropological register
or subject of study, but a change of perspective.
1   Locke, J. Works in Three Volumes. Moscow: MyUl, 1985–1988.ister
light, but quite benevolently. This is not a change of anthropological register
or subject of study, but a change of perspective.
1   Locke, J. Works in Three Volumes. Moscow: MyUl, 1985–1988.

--- PAGE BREAK ---ite benevolently. This is not a change of anthropological register
or subject of study, but a change of perspective.
1   Locke, J. Works in Three Volumes. Moscow: MyUl, 1985–1988.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

247
Chapter 5. Liberalism (the first political theory). John Locke and his legacy
rhetoric of its description. What horrified Hobbes, Locke even likes to
some extent. Locke domesticates the individual, transforming the wolf into a
domestic dog through benevolent, pacifying discourse. And Locke says:
indeed, we are dealing only with individuals, but is the individual really so
bad? And from here begins the fundamental debate in political philosophy
about the natural state.
state of nature.
This is the most important debate for determining all forms of political
philosophy in the modern era. Hobbes tells us that the natural state is a war of
all against all, and he justifies this with the evil nature of man. Human nature
is evil. The "idiot wolf" is aggressive, selfish, and just waiting to attack others
and crush the weak. But he is a clever "idiot wolf" and invents the state to
somehow balance this aggression of all against all and turn chaotic slaughter
into a war of the state against criminals and a war of states against each other.
That is, wars are not between everyone against everyone, but between one
Leviathan and another or between Leviathan and its internal enemies. This is
a wonderful way to organise aggression: first, the state's apparatus suppresses
those who violate its laws, and second, wars are waged, interspersed from
time to time with alliances and truces. But all this makes sense when we are
dealing with anthropological pessimism and agree that "man is evil." Hobbes
formulated his ideas on the basis of the English Civil War, which he
witnessed first-hand. When he declares that "man is a wolf to man," he
knows what he is talking about, because around him there are monstrous
clashes between different political parties, the beheading of the king,
violence, torture, denunciations, looting, executions, massacres, all in the
context of rabid religious extremism, when simply belonging to the Catholic
or Protestant faith, or to one sect or another, was sufficient grounds for
immediate murder. And being Irish meant being under attack. It was not easy
for the Scots, who were torn between Catholicism and radical Puritanism. All
this was "natural" to Hobbes. There is no Leviathan, or Leviathan is weak —
and this is what you get as a result. Hobbes also formulates his theory by
observing what is happening outside the window of his carriage. Someone is
dragging someone else to the gallows, someone is burning, raping and
robbing someone else. Informers are scribbling anonymous letters.
Yesterday's favourite is dangling from a lamppost. It is not difficult to
conclude on this basis that man himself is like that.
Then, looking out of the carriage window—but now in a
fundamentally different era, during the Glorious Revolution—Locke
peered out of the carriage window.n this basis that man himself is like that.
Then, looking out of the carriage window—but now in a
fundamentally different era, during the Glorious Revolution—Locke
peered out of the carriage window.

--- PAGE BREAK ---n himself is like that.
Then, looking out of the carriage window—but now in a
fundamentally different era, during the Glorious Revolution—Locke
peered out of the carriage window.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

248
Part 3. The Political Paradigm of Modernity. The War of Concepts
In his youth, already a staunch Puritan, he fought in Cromwell's army and
later participated in the overthrow of James II Stuart (1633–1701). But later,
a different landscape appeared before his eyes. Everything gradually fell
into place. The sun shines on the green meadows of lovely, kind England
and Scotland, which is even more dear to Locke. The bourgeoisie wake up
in the morning and hurry to the market. Peasants harvest bread. With
difficulty, a new social contract between the warring parties is concluded,
albeit at the cost of compromises. And then a thought arises: perhaps the
natural state of man is not so bad? Look at all the good people around you
— they have gathered their goods and are going to the fair. Where do you see
wolves here? Where do you see war of all against all? Man is a commercial
being, peaceful and benevolent, concludes Locke.
And then, based on this observation, he formulates a completely
alternative political ideology: the individual and the social contract exist, but
man takes everything not from his nature, but from society. Man is, in fact,
an individual, but not evil, just empty. This is analogous to Democritus's
concept of inner emptiness, which he distinguished from outer emptiness
(between atoms). Therefore, if an individual is raised in a wolf pack, he
becomes a wolf, but if he grows up among friendly Scottish bourgeois and
receives a decent education and upbringing, he will not fight, trying to
resolve all issues peacefully, relying on his own mind.
From wolf to blank slate
Man is not bad, says Locke. It is not that he is good, but he is a blank
slate (tabula rasa). Man is what society has made him. This is a very
profound observation, anticipating modern sociology. You can write good
things on a person, and you can write bad things.
Of course, Locke did not come to these conclusions simply by looking
around and observing life in post-revolutionary England. He was first and
foremost a philosopher, and in the field of philosophy he followed the
classical English tradition of empiricism. Locke himself was a member of
the British Royal Society, which included his friends Robert Boyle (1627–
1691) and Isaac Newton (1642–1727), and continued the English traditions
of empiricism in the natural sciences and nominalism in philosophy — he
revered Ockham above all others. The connection with nominalism is
fundamental, since the materialism and individualism inherent in
nominalism are precisely what definesminalism in philosophy — he
revered Ockham above all others. The connection with nominalism is
fundamental, since the materialism and individualism inherent in
nominalism are precisely what defines

--- PAGE BREAK ---hy — he
revered Ockham above all others. The connection with nominalism is
fundamental, since the materialism and individualism inherent in
nominalism are precisely what defines

--- PAGE BREAK ---

249
Chapter 5. Liberalism (the first political theory). John Locke and his legacy
the foundations of Protestant theology, the scientific worldview, and the
corresponding bourgeois liberal political philosophy. All these elements are
fully inherent in Locke and constitute the semantic core of liberalism.
In the spirit of radical empiricism, Locke argued that human
consciousness is a "blank slate" (tabula rasa), and its content is formed by
the totality of influences from the external world (in particular, from
society—hence the primary importance Locke attached to the process of
education). At the same time, Locke rejected those aspects of French
rationalism (Descartes, 1596–1650) that recognised the existence of innate
"ideas." For Locke, "ideas" are neither independent entities (as in
Platonism(1)  ), nor eidos, manifesting themselves in things (as in Aristotle
and Thomism), nor even innate concepts (as in Descartes), but always
relative and secondary products of strictly individual thinking(2) .An "idea" has
no independent existence; it is a transient attribute of individual
consciousness. Therefore, all "ideas" are ultimately transient, subject to
change and dependent on upbringing and experience. By themselves, they
mean nothing and can change depending on a particular social situation or
experience. At the same time, Locke sees the genesis of "ideas" in
concrete individual and material things, whose reflections or imprints they
are in consciousness. It was precisely this understanding of ideas that
became generally accepted in European philosophy of the Modern Age. In
fact, we are not talking about the ideas of Plato and the Platonists, but about
concepts artificially constructed by human reason, or about the "eidolons,"
"ghosts," and "mental idols" of Democritus.
But if an individual is a "blank slate," then a series of "ideas" can be
written on it, that is, certain eidolons can be projected onto it, which he will
then manipulate and use to construct his chains of statements, his structures
— his
"ideas." The individual here turns out to be a kind of machine that must first
be pre-programmed and only then allowed to move freely within the context
of the established code.
Therefore, Locke concludes, the natural state of the individual mind does
not necessarily have to be wolfish. It is nothing.
1  He argued with a group of Cambridge Platonists (R. Cadwall, G. More, J. Glenville, R.
Carpenter, R. South, D. Sergent, J. Smith, E. Stillingsfleet, M. Hale).
2  Locke, J. An Essay Concerning Human Understanding // Locke, J. Works in Three
Volumes. Vol. 1. Moscow: Mysl, 1985.ille, R.
Carpenter, R. South, D. Sergent, J. Smith, E. Stillingsfleet, M. Hale).
2  Locke, J. An Essay Concerning Human Understanding // Locke, J. Works in Three
Volumes. Vol. 1. Moscow: Mysl, 1985.

--- PAGE BREAK ---R. South, D. Sergent, J. Smith, E. Stillingsfleet, M. Hale).
2  Locke, J. An Essay Concerning Human Understanding // Locke, J. Works in Three
Volumes. Vol. 1. Moscow: Mysl, 1985.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

250
Part 3. The Political Paradigm of Modernity. The War of Concepts
And if society undertakes education, that is, enters into a social contract to
make itself better, more humane, more reasonable, more friendly, more
organised, etc., then the result will be individuals who produce good thoughts
and perform moral actions. Thus, the transition from Hobbes to Locke
changes the normative conception of the content of the individual: from a
beast to a blank slate, from evil to neutrality, which can be programmed in
any direction. The individual is no longer evil or bad; he is nothing.
The relativisation of Leviathan
Here we come to a crucial point: if people are not so bad in their natural
state and if their sustenance is taken from society (and the social contract
is conceived horizontally, as trust), then Leviathan is necessary only in
certain historical conditions and primarily to combat an evil society, a state
of wolves. It is not necessary to fight against the good. Accordingly,
individuals enter into a contract for a political Leviathan when society is in
a bad, difficult state, when it is necessary to prevent the worst, stop the
slaughter and bring order to chaos. But if the state begins to educate the
population, to civilise its citizens, then everything can change. Leviathan
will lose its relevance. If people are well educated, Locke believes, then
Leviathan can be abolished, allowing society to remain in a natural state,
which can become
good and continue to improve further and further.
Accordingly, based on the change in the attitude towards human nature
and the assertion that this nature is neutral, a new political ideology emerges.
It consists of the following: the main actor remains the individual, but the
individual is subject to re-education. The individual is not bad, and if we
educate him well, he will be law-abiding, moral and well-mannered,
enlightened and rational. And the next generation will be even better, as
positive attitudes will be strengthened, accumulated and developed. For
Hobbes, human society is fundamentally static. For Locke, it changes,
develops, and evolves. This brings us to the idea of social and historical
progress.
From the point of view of liberalism, education and enlightenment are
necessary for social progress to be irreversible. While Hobbes, in his
combination of "rational egoism," emphasises "egoism," Locke emphasises
"rational." This rationality consists in the ability tonecessary for social progress to be irreversible. While Hobbes, in his
combination of "rational egoism," emphasises "egoism," Locke emphasises
"rational." This rationality consists in the ability to

--- PAGE BREAK ---progress to be irreversible. While Hobbes, in his
combination of "rational egoism," emphasises "egoism," Locke emphasises
"rational." This rationality consists in the ability to

--- PAGE BREAK ---

251
Chapter 5. Liberalism (the first political theory). John Locke and his legacy
learning. Therefore, humanity can be brought to a certain irreversible
civilised level of rational egoism.
For Hobbes, there can be no rational egoism. He simply has egoism,
and all his rationality consists in delegating authority to Leviathan until
this egoism destroys its own bearer. That is, Hobbes delegates human
reason to Leviathan, while continuing to pursue his own private interests.
According to Locke, on the contrary, human reason is appropriated by the
individual himself. But this process has several phases: first, reason is
transferred to the state, which, for its part, implements a programme of
higher education and upbringing of citizens; then reason returns to man in
the process of enlightenment, and the individual becomes an individual.
—becomes a rational egoist. Therefore, in a natural state, this cycle will
occur, and people will not kill each other — on the contrary, they will build
their relationships in the most peaceful and optimal way — by trading.
This is the idea of liberalism. If the natural state of man is not evil, then
the concepts of politics, the state, and Leviathan are seen as temporary
phenomena. Not every Leviathan is good — only the one that ends civil war.
And the task of the state is not to interfere in people's lives, but on the
contrary, to give them the opportunity to be themselves, to educate them and
gradually reduce their numbers. And after the programme of education,
upbringing and enlightenment has been completed, the state must disappear.
Then society returns to its natural non-political state, but at a new level —
already enlightened. This enlightened society is the natural state of educated
(cultured) people created by the bourgeois enlightened state. Society
transforms from political to economic — after the state disappears, the
commercial bourgeois civil nature begins to dominate. Thus, the vertical
(political) contract of power is a temporary measure and fits into a broadly
understood social (horizontal) contract.
According to Locke, the state is not God-given; its sacredness was
eradicated long ago, during Hobbes's time. Even Protestant ideology lacks a
political philosophy of revelation; everything is man-made. But now this
man-made nature of Hobbes is transformed into the man-made nature of
Locke's soft, civil, liberal society, which asserts that the state is necessary as
something temporary and must then disappear. The state has no meaning
other than to educate rational egoists. It gradually disappears, and civil
society emerges.erts that the state is necessary as
something temporary and must then disappear. The state has no meaning
other than to educate rational egoists. It gradually disappears, and civil
society emerges.

--- PAGE BREAK ---is necessary as
something temporary and must then disappear. The state has no meaning
other than to educate rational egoists. It gradually disappears, and civil
society emerges.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

252
Part 3. The Political Paradigm of Modernity. The War of Concepts
Sacred private property
Locke's philosophical and political views later became the basis of
liberalism, and he is considered its founding father. This ideology assumes
that society should strive for a "natural state" (as understood by Locke) and
that this is the goal of historical progress and social development. The state
can only be tolerated as long as it is constitutional, based on the separation of
powers (it was Locke who introduced the principle of the separation of
powers into three branches — executive, legislative and federal, and later
judicial) and fulfils its main function — education. If the state does not meet
these requirements, then society has the right to carry out a "democratic
revolution." Locke called a normative society a "civil society" and considered
its possibility of existing outside the state, but with the mandatory
preservation of "sacred private property," which would perform the functions
of the main institution of social order.
The main thing, Locke argues, is to secure what he called "natural rights"
— first and foremost, the right to private property, as well as freedom of
movement, freedom of conscience, freedom of speech, etc. Individualism at
the level of the subject requires its correlate at the level of the object, which
is precisely what "private property" becomes. Locke's world is individualised
in everything — it contains only individual beings and segments of objects
distributed among them, divided into units of private property. But if,
according to Hobbes, rationality and the capacity for calculating thinking are
hypostasised in Leviathan, and private property acts as a competitive field for
selfish desires for pleasure and possession, then for Locke, private property
itself is the hypostasised embodiment of rationality, and by becoming an
institution, i.e. a legal category, it is capable of replacing the state.
The "sacredness"   of private   property   is also   as man-made and
artificial as the sacredness of Leviathan. But if Leviathan is an idol parading
the vertical, then private property is an idol of the horizontal. It preserves the
principle of individuality at a short distance, cutting out a separate fragment
from the world, which includes both the individual himself and his
ontological surroundings, that is, private property.rinciple of individuality at a short distance, cutting out a separate fragment
from the world, which includes both the individual himself and his
ontological surroundings, that is, private property.

--- PAGE BREAK ---ality at a short distance, cutting out a separate fragment
from the world, which includes both the individual himself and his
ontological surroundings, that is, private property.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

253
Chapter 5. Liberalism (the first political theory). John Locke and his legacy
Adam Smith: trade versus war ( )
The next step in structuring the philosophy of the New Age was taken
by Locke's student, the famous economist Adam Smith (1723–1790).
Building on the philosophy of Locke, whom he considered his teacher and
idol, he constructed an economic theory of capitalism.
Adam Smith's main idea was to show that Locke's philosophical
principles are valid in real life and to create an analogue to these principles in
the sphere of economics by interpreting Locke's message in terms of political
economy.
Smith's first and most important idea is that the main source of wealth
is not land, as previously believed by the physiocratsand classical representatives of
economic thought during the transition period of the Modern Age, but
entrepreneurial activity. Smith argues that wealth is not created by real
estate (estates and land), but by production, which is mobile and can be
organised in different places. It is in the industrial and entrepreneurial
sector that the maximum amount of goods and valuable things are
produced, and it is in this area that the means and mechanisms for the
fastest economic growth are concentrated. Smith's thesis reflects the reality
of a society where the industrial and commercial bourgeoisie is beginning
to seriously encroach on the traditional landowners (aristocrats,
landlords), which is a consequence of the transition from a class system to
a capitalist and liberal-democratic one. In fact, this is an expression of
individualism applied to the economy.
This leads to another fundamental principle of modern economic science:
value is created in the process of labour. For Marx, this would be the
starting point for his own system. And again
Adam Smith's second thesis, which is no less important, is the idea that
the main requirement for successful economic development is complete
freedom for individuals to trade.
Trade and entrepreneurship, in Adam Smith's view, are expressions of
the noble nature of man. Adam Smith contrasts trade with war. Trade is
peace, the state
1  Smith, A. An Inquiry into the Nature and Causes of the Wealth of Nations. Moscow: Eksmo,
2007.
2  Quesnay, F., Turgot, A. R. J., Dupont de Nemours, P. S. Physiocrats. Selected Economic
Works. Moscow: Eksmo, 2008.nquiry into the Nature and Causes of the Wealth of Nations. Moscow: Eksmo,
2007.
2  Quesnay, F., Turgot, A. R. J., Dupont de Nemours, P. S. Physiocrats. Selected Economic
Works. Moscow: Eksmo, 2008.

--- PAGE BREAK ---re and Causes of the Wealth of Nations. Moscow: Eksmo,
2007.
2  Quesnay, F., Turgot, A. R. J., Dupont de Nemours, P. S. Physiocrats. Selected Economic
Works. Moscow: Eksmo, 2008.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

254
Part 3. The Political Paradigm of Modernity. The War of Concepts
war and violence. Adam Smith, in the spirit of Locke, is convinced that the
state embodies a spirit of intimidation and repression, directed outward to
fight other states and inward to suppress manifestations dangerous to the
existence of Leviathan, thereby creating an atmosphere of militaristic
societies. If we move from Hobbes' anthropological pessimism to Locke's
anthropological optimism, then for man — in his natural state — it is not to
fight, but to trade. Hence the expression
"la douce commerce" — "gentle trade." This is also the realisation of
private interests, also selfishness, but in this form it no longer entails
human sacrifice, is not based on violence, and does not require its
legitimisation.
Smith's third fundamental thesis: trade must be transnational rather
than national, because in this way, along with trade, the principles of
freedom and civil society are spread on a global scale. This is required by
the universalism of the Enlightenment. Liberal societies built on the
principles of peaceful trade cannot allow aggressive, selfish regimes to
exist outside them, which is why liberalism inherently presupposes
universalism and a global scale. Of course, Smith — as befits an ideologue of
the third estate, who measures everything in material terms, money and profit
— argues for the necessity of free international trade, bypassing state
monopoly, increasing efficiency and accelerating the pace of industrial and
economic development, i.e. the laws of the market. But underlying this is a
fundamental ideological challenge to Leviathan in foreign policy, where
its restrictive, authoritarian and belligerent nature is revealed. Smith's free
trade ("free exchange" in French — libre echange, hence "liberalism") is
conceived as free from the state in both its forms — internal and external.
Liberalism insists on minimising taxes within the state and reducing or
completely abolishing customs tariffs. In this way, liberalism seeks to
minimise the influence of the state in the economy, both within and outside
the state, which necessarily leads to the erasure of its borders and,
ultimately, of the state itself.
In practice, however, there are two components to the implementation
of such a programme: tax cuts and the state's renunciation of its monopoly
on foreign trade. The first only slightly weakens the state's role in the
economy, while the second undermines and, ultimately, abolishes its
sovereignty.d the state's renunciation of its monopoly
on foreign trade. The first only slightly weakens the state's role in the
economy, while the second undermines and, ultimately, abolishes its
sovereignty.

--- PAGE BREAK ---iation of its monopoly
on foreign trade. The first only slightly weakens the state's role in the
economy, while the second undermines and, ultimately, abolishes its
sovereignty.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

255
Chapter 5. Liberalism (the first political theory). John Locke and his legacy
Smith insists on both, opposing mercantilism, which did not object to a
free market within the state but insisted on complete state control over
foreign trade. Such liberalism was half-hearted, and Adam Smith sought to
make it an applied — practical — theory that was as consistent as possible
with Locke's progressive views.
For Smith, free trade and the requirement for direct economic partnership
between citizens of one state and another are opposed to customs policy
precisely because, from the point of view of his teacher Locke, the state
should weaken and gradually die out after fulfilling its functions. The
imperative of free trade in Adam Smith, which he himself justifies with
economic models, must be sought in Locke's philosophical attacks on
Leviathan and on the restriction of national civil society by borders. Locke
categorically opposed this, believing that civil society should be universal.
Accordingly, this pan-European society should gradually abolish
national borders, and in order for them to cease to exist, free trade must be
allowed, i.e., free trade between one actor from one nation-state and
another, bypassing tariff and customs complications.
This gives rise to the concept of liberalism in international relations
1,
which Smith argues for economically: if trade is free, then participation in it
will be beneficial to all societies. Consequently, any attempts by the state to
restrain this process become "evil" and an obstacle to social and economic
development (in his liberal understanding).
Thus, we arrive at a very important conclusion: Adam Smith's capitalism
is directed against nation states. Smith is not opposed to them as a
phenomenon; in a sense, they must exist to ensure free trade and bourgeois
legal norms, but for him, the fate of free trade is more important than the fate
of nation states. Politics as such becomes merely a moment of economics,
and not the other way around, as was believed in traditional society and in the
early stages of modernity. Overall, this is a clear sign of the area that
occupies the lower sector of the synchronous three-part map of the Political,
corresponding to its physical, material side. Smith comes to the conclusion
that
1   Dugin, A. G. International Relations (Paradigms, Theories, Sociology).nchronous three-part map of the Political,
corresponding to its physical, material side. Smith comes to the conclusion
that
1   Dugin, A. G. International Relations (Paradigms, Theories, Sociology).

--- PAGE BREAK ---map of the Political,
corresponding to its physical, material side. Smith comes to the conclusion
that
1   Dugin, A. G. International Relations (Paradigms, Theories, Sociology).

--- PAGE BREAK ---

256
Part 3. The Political Paradigm of Modernity. The War of Concepts
For Pigopolis to be authentic and successful, it must be global.
This is the rationale behind the construction of a global, civic, non-
political, supranational, cosmopolitan society, which is a return to a natural
state in a new form, but now in an "enlightened" — meaningful, universal —
form. In Adam Smith, Locke's entire ideological programme is expressed in
the language of political economy.
Roadmap for global capitalism
For Adam Smith, capitalism, free enterprise, and therefore civil society
(citizen = bourgeois) should develop as independently as possible from
nation states, which in turn should gradually disappear. Thus, Adam Smith's
theory provides a fundamental basis for the idea of enlightened states. Locke
said little about trade, focusing mainly on enlightenment, education, and the
advancement of knowledge. Adam Smith, in turn, says that once the state has
successfully fulfilled its educational mission, the main occupation of the
citizens of this enlightened state should be trade, not war.
Smith conceived of trade and entrepreneurship as a double opposition: on
the one hand, in relation to the peasantry, which was tied to the land, where
the maximum wealth was produced in medieval society, and on the other
hand, in relation to the landlords, who lived off land rent. It is Adam Smith
who makes the bourgeoisie — private entrepreneurs or merchants, but by no
means peasants or landowners — the normative figure in the economic
sphere and, later, in political economy.
Accordingly, it is precisely this economic type that becomes
synonymous with Locke's "enlightened citizen." As we have already said,
if we look closely at the three terms —
"Citizen," "townsman," and "bourgeois" have exactly the same meaning.
Bourgeois (bougeois) is a resident of a "burg," i.e., a town (German Burg —
town). And "townsman" is a resident of a town. "Citizen" is the same as
"townsman". Therefore, the concept of civil society is a concept of bourgeois
and urban society, which includes both the dominant social type (the third
estate, corresponding to Aristotle's demos, the masses, Plato's multitude) and
belonging to an urban environment.ourgeois
and urban society, which includes both the dominant social type (the third
estate, corresponding to Aristotle's demos, the masses, Plato's multitude) and
belonging to an urban environment.

--- PAGE BREAK ---society, which includes both the dominant social type (the third
estate, corresponding to Aristotle's demos, the masses, Plato's multitude) and
belonging to an urban environment.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

257
Chapter 5. Liberalism (the first political theory). John Locke and his legacy
Thus, the urban entrepreneur-bourgeois becomes the basic figure of
the political philosophy of liberalism. After Adam Smith, not only a
political-educational model, as in Locke, but also a concrete political-
economic doctrine of capitalism and the normative forms of the capitalist
economy took shape. Adam Smith, with his ideas about free trade, the
removal of the state from interference in the economy, and allowing
entrepreneurs and traders to conclude deals directly with economic actors
from other countries, bypassing the state (since, according to Adam Smith,
foreign trade is a private matter, not a national one), created a comprehensive
strategy for capitalism, which became the main roadmap for Western
Europe and later for the entire civilisation for several centuries.
 's endless accumulation of wealth
Another important idea that Smith also borrows from Locke is social
progress. Thus, Smith, who applied the theory of social progress to the
political and economic sphere, developed the thesis of the exponential growth
of world wealth. From Adam Smith's point of view, the process of private
enterprise leads to linear growth in profits and an increase in general
prosperity, even though everyone acts in their own private interests, seeking
to enrich themselves personally without thinking about others. But if
everyone gets richer, then everyone gets richer, concludes Adam Smith.
Consequently, the total amount of wealth must grow.
Smith's position that value is created by labour, not land, as was the case
with the physiocrats and earlier political economists, provides a
technological basis for the theory of progress. If land and the crops it
produces have clearly defined boundaries that can only be expanded
slightly, and the fixed income derived from the land can only be
redistributed, then industry can develop — technical progress contributes to
the development of production, and the volume of world wealth grows
steadily. If a society that is less developed than another is involved in free
trade, they begin to develop together, helping each other, and once again the
total wealth of all humanity increases.
This principle of the growth of universal wealth is a fundamental axiom
of the capitalist economy, on which everything else is based: if one state
attempts to defend itself against another state with customs quotas or
protectionist measures in order to develop itsxiom
of the capitalist economy, on which everything else is based: if one state
attempts to defend itself against another state with customs quotas or
protectionist measures in order to develop its

--- PAGE BREAK ---ist economy, on which everything else is based: if one state
attempts to defend itself against another state with customs quotas or
protectionist measures in order to develop its

--- PAGE BREAK ---

258
Part 3. The Political Paradigm of Modernity. The War of Concepts
national economy, free traders and classical liberals always view this
negatively, because it hinders the development of the market, hindering
the growth of general wealth, i.e. progress.
It is not so important, liberals believe, that one country has a less
developed economy or industry than another. If both countries engage in free
trade, the overall growth in wealth will affect both. Moreover, according to
Locke, the state should be abolished as far as possible, and the accumulated
wealth and developed industrial and commercial complexes capable of
increasing wealth will remain, and then it will not matter on whose territory a
particular enterprise, trading platform, bank or stock exchange is located.
From the point of view of free trade (liberalism in international relations),
political
(national)
territories
are
always
somewhat
arbitrary.
Entrepreneurship and industry develop better where fiscal policy is more
favourable, where it is easier to pay taxes, and where natural resources are
closer. Production, finance and trade will go there. But this freedom to move
in accordance with purely economic interests and profit maximisation is often
hampered by political considerations and interests. As a result, nation states
hold back the progress of humanity as a whole. This is a fundamental liberal
idea that underlies globalism and globalisation.
The idea of absolute growth in global wealth is a dogma of liberalism
(albeit as unproven as any dogma). It was opposed by supporters of an
economy based on Hobbesian principles, i.e., primarily mercantilists.
Contrary to Smith, mercantilists argued that the amount of wealth on earth
is limited, so the development of one country's economy always comes at
the expense of another. Once again, there is an acute need for Leviathan,
and war of all against all looms on the horizon, but not at the level of
society, but at the level of states, converging in a brutal struggle for global
resources and the redistribution of wealth in their favour.
Both dogmas — liberal and mercantilist — despite all references to
economic indicators, benefits, tables and calculations, are in fact
expressions of a metaphysical — philosophical — dispute about human
nature. Optimistic liberals follow the logic of progress (Locke), which
gives us the axiom of economic growth (Smith). Here, confidence
prevails: man is good, but even if he is not good enough now, he can always
be improved.follow the logic of progress (Locke), which
gives us the axiom of economic growth (Smith). Here, confidence
prevails: man is good, but even if he is not good enough now, he can always
be improved.

--- PAGE BREAK ---progress (Locke), which
gives us the axiom of economic growth (Smith). Here, confidence
prevails: man is good, but even if he is not good enough now, he can always
be improved.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

259
Chapter 5. Liberalism (the first political theory). John Locke and his legacy
improve. Their opponents argue that progress is relative and even
questionable, that humanity always remains the same, i.e. egotistical, greedy
and aggressive. That is why it needs a guide in the form of Leviathan. At
the same time, the world's wealth is not infinite, but strictly limited.
Therefore, the struggle of one Leviathan against another in the economic
sphere is a zero-sum game. In other words, one state gains wealth while
another loses it, according to mercantilists, who conclude that customs
barriers, state monopolies on foreign trade and protectionism must be
maintained.
But the dispute between liberals (Locke and his followers) and proto-
liberals (Hobbes and his followers) unfolds within the paradigm of modern
political philosophy. According to Hobbes, human nature is immutable and
fundamentally evil. To some extent, this thesis is inherited by representatives
of realism in international relations,the traditional opponents of liberals.
Liberalism asserts that progress exists even if no one sees it or if it
appears partial, sectoral, or even ambiguous and questionable; it still exists
because it is an ideological axiom. There is endless growth of the global
economy and the gradual demise of the state, with all nation states turning
into a single civil trading society.
Here, the ideological axiom of progress, which Adam Smith transformed
into the idea of economic growth, reveals an important moment in the
formation of the ideology of liberalism. Politics is finally replaced by
economics. Economics becomes destiny. Economics, as we have seen in the
generalised scheme of Politica Aeterna,
is the result of the diminution of politics and, ultimately, its elimination. In
liberalism, politics strives for a minimum, and economics for a maximum;
instead of a political society, a civil society emerges. Civil society is a
commercial system, a mercantile society,where all values are determined by
material equivalents and, consequently, everything has a price, that is,
everything is for sale. Civil society is a capitalist commercial and
entrepreneurial society where politics is replaced by economics.
The principle of "less politics, more economics" and, in the long term,
"no politics" means a vector directed towards the end of political history,
where instead of countries and peoples there will be only one world market.
The process of globalisation
1   Dugin, A. G. International Relations (Paradigms, Theories, Sociology).
2   Zombart, W. Merchants and Heroes. Jews and the Economy.here will be only one world market.
The process of globalisation
1   Dugin, A. G. International Relations (Paradigms, Theories, Sociology).
2   Zombart, W. Merchants and Heroes. Jews and the Economy.

--- PAGE BREAK ---e world market.
The process of globalisation
1   Dugin, A. G. International Relations (Paradigms, Theories, Sociology).
2   Zombart, W. Merchants and Heroes. Jews and the Economy.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

260
Part 3. The Political Paradigm of Modernity. The War of Concepts
This is the culmination of this liberal strategy, the fundamental vector of
which was laid down extremely clearly and convincingly by Adam Smith.
And the fact that Smith became the main symbolic figure of liberalism only
confirms the very nature of the transition from politics to economics, which is
the essence of liberal ideology, as well as the entire Modern era as a whole.
The middle class and endless growth
There is one key concept in liberal ideology: the middle class. The
middle class is a key element of liberalism, closely linked to Adam Smith's
specific economic anthropology. From Smith's point of view, all of humanity
represents a potential middle class, potential entrepreneurs. Every person is a
trader and a businessman, an entrepreneur and a banker. The meaning of
history and the task of historical progress is to make this potential
membership of the middle class a reality. This is possible through the endless
growth of global wealth — if it grows, so does the middle class, that is, those
people who gain access to it.
In this case, the task of humanity is to ensure that, against the backdrop
of exponential growth in global wealth, everyone becomes middle class. The
goal of civilisation and its history is for everyone to become traders,
bourgeois (citizens, townspeople), entrepreneurs, and to enjoy a minimum
level of prosperity that meets the criteria of the middle class. Liberals see this
expansion of the middle class as inextricably linked to the abolition of the
state, civil society, globalisation and the elimination of borders. It is
important to note that the concept of the "middle class" is yet another liberal
propaganda concept, like "progress," "endless growth of prosperity,"
"liberalism," laissez-faire, free trade, "civil society," etc. It is in the context of
liberal ideology and its general structure that this concept acquires its
meaning, reflecting deeper levels of Locke's anthropological optimism. The
growth of the middle class is the material expression of the Enlightenment(1) .
material expression of the Enlightenment1.
1   It is obvious that illiberal ideologies of the Modern era (in Marxism and fascism)
The "middle class" is interpreted differently. For communists, the middle class refers only to the
bourgeoisie, and the proletariat will never become the middle class, because along with profits and
technological progress, exploitation, inequality and poverty of the working class grow, and the
surplus value created by the working class is continuously appropriated by the capitalists.
Therefore, its growth is fictitious and is accompanied by structural crises.e working class grow, and the
surplus value created by the working class is continuously appropriated by the capitalists.
Therefore, its growth is fictitious and is accompanied by structural crises.

--- PAGE BREAK ---261
Chapter 5.

Liberalism (the first political theory).

John Locke and his legacy
It is important to note that, from a liberal perspective, the middle class is
essentially the only normative class.

Adam Smith gives an example of the
development of an economic system: in a town, there is a baker (a petty
bourgeois) who bakes bread rolls.

Having accumulated enough funds, he
hires workers — ruined peasants who have come to the city.

For some time,
the peasants bake bread, helping the baker, who takes the main profit for
himself.

Nevertheless, while working for the baker, the former peasant learns
from him how to bake, communicate with customers, advertise, sell goods,
where to buy grain, etc.

Then he takes out a loan from the bank and sets up
his own bakery.

Over time, he will settle down, become a baker, that is, a
petty bourgeois, and hire another ruined peasant who has come to the city to
earn a living and is ready for any job.

If we follow this logic, at some point
all the peasants will move to the city and become townspeople, since the
economic dynamics in the city are significantly higher than in the
countryside.

Thus, all peasants will eventually become townspeople.

As
agriculture becomes less and less influential in the gross income of the state,
the entire economy will move to the city into the sphere of private enterprise,
and peasant farming itself will become a reverse projection of capitalism onto
the countryside, rather than something independent.

Accordingly, landlords
will go bankrupt, land rent will lose its significance, and a kind of
continuous, unified city will emerge.

Adam Smith developed this theory back
in the late 18th century, and now this is exactly what is happening:
urbanisation, the transition from villages to cities on a global scale.

and (albeit relative, but still) growth of the middle class.--- PAGE BREAK ---

Adam Smith developed this theory back
in the late 18th century, and now this is exactly what is happening:
urbanisation, the transition from villages to cities on a global scale. and (albeit relative, but still) growth of the middle class. Thus, Adam Smith gave liberalism the form that best suited the
bourgeoisie, placing at the forefront the values, issues, and priorities that
were close to his heart. And the distant future of humanity was outlined by
Adam Smith. the contradictions of capitalism, which sooner or later will lead to a proletarian revolution directed
precisely against this "middle class." In fascist theory, the middle class of one country is
qualitatively different from the middle class of another, and from a social point of view, the
differences between the rich and the poor, the haves and the have-nots, are secondary to their
common national (racial in national socialism) identity. Consequently, the "middle class" is a
cosmopolitan chimera that obscures the importance of the nation and undermines sovereignty. These examples show how a simple change in rhetoric and a few rather banal arguments can
radically transform the ideological persuasiveness of a particular ideology that insists on its
dogmas and axioms through propaganda, pathos and ideological pressure rather than rational,
refined argumentation, which always merely gives form to the deeper — and always philosophical
and dogmatic — premises of ideology. The same considerations apply fully to the axioms and
dogmas of communism or fascism themselves.

--- PAGE BREAK ---orm to the deeper — and always philosophical
and dogmatic — premises of ideology. The same considerations apply fully to the axioms and
dogmas of communism or fascism themselves.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

262
Part 3. The Political Paradigm of Modernity. The War of Concepts
It is quite clear: everyone is destined to become bourgeois, and the world
will become a single global free market. Thus, humanity will be corrected,
re-educated, abandon its aggression and thirst for violence, and
individualism, tolerance,
"human rights" and the norms of "political correctness" will prevail everywhere.
The replacement of the "third estate": bourgeois us
usurpation
After Adam Smith, in bourgeois economics and, more broadly, in
political philosophy, the third estate came to be definitively and firmly
identified with the urban bourgeoisie, precisely as Adam Smith had
described and conceptualised it. Although this identification later came to
be taken for granted, its origins contain a very important sociological and
even anthropological shift that sheds light on some fundamental features of
the modern paradigm as a whole and of liberal ideology in particular.
The fact is that in the structure of pre-modern European society, the third
estate included all those who had the status of free citizens but were neither
warriors (hereditary aristocrats) nor part of the clergy (Catholic
priesthood). Throughout all periods of traditional society, from ancient
times to the end of the Middle Ages, the basis and absolute majority of this
third estate, in the broad and original sense, was the peasantry or serfs. In
different societies, it had different statuses and was more or less
dependent on landowners, but in Europe it was practically never slaves, i.e.,
the complete property of their masters. Rather, they were considered the
lower echelons of the feudal hierarchy and, in times of war, formed the
basis of the militia of small feudal lords, from which larger armies were
formed. The relationship between the nobility and the serfs was a
continuation of the principle of suzerainty/vassalage, but only at the lowest
level. In other words, there was a kind of social pact between peasants and
landowners, or landlords. Peasants worked the land, fed themselves from it,
and provided sustenance for their lords and their servants. It was the
peasantry that was the foundation of the economy, and the European village
produced the bulk of the wealth at all stages of traditional society. We have
seen that Adam Smith also based his theories on a polemic with the
physiocrats, who, until the beginning of the 18th century, continued to
consider land to be the main and decisive source of national wealth.Adam Smith also based his theories on a polemic with the
physiocrats, who, until the beginning of the 18th century, continued to
consider land to be the main and decisive source of national wealth.

--- PAGE BREAK ---ed his theories on a polemic with the
physiocrats, who, until the beginning of the 18th century, continued to
consider land to be the main and decisive source of national wealth.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

263
Chapter 5. Liberalism (the first political theory). John Locke and his legacy
va." When Adam Smith refutes this, separating wealth from the land and
transferring it to the sphere of the city, labour, production, entrepreneurship,
and trade, he effectively changes the content of a fundamental concept — the
third estate — by excluding the peasantry from it. Of course, something
similar happened before Adam Smith, since in the system of the General
States, which had developed in the Middle Ages (from the 14th century) and
existed until the end of the 18th century, the common people (i.e., the third
estate itself) were represented by wealthy townspeople who were more
involved in politics. The very definition of politics already implies the city
( polis), and the wealthy and influential non-aristocrats and non-priests of the
city were more convenient participants in meetings and discussions than
peasants, whose horizons were usually limited to fairly local issues.
Nevertheless, in the States General, the urban bourgeoisie was considered
to be the representatives of the people, where the majority were peasants, not
the people themselves. This was
the "demos," "dim" (CDEoF), that is, the urban districts and their authorised
representatives, while the peasantry, which remained behind the scenes, was
still considered to be participating to some extent. In the physiocrats'
economic model, the peasantry plays a fundamental role, as it is the most
important element in obtaining wealth from the land, which is the basis of
land rent.
Here, one can put forward a certain hypothesis regarding how the
democratisation of European society might have proceeded if it had not been
for the canonisation of the bourgeoisie (townspeople) by Adam Smith, which
ultimately equated urban entrepreneurs and merchants with the third estate,
from which peasants were simply excluded by default. In this case, the
process of decentralisation of power, towards which modern society
gravitated, moved along the lines of redistributing land holdings from
landlords to peasants. In this case, the sign of the third estate at some point
would have been the possession of a plot of land as the property equivalent of
civil (more precisely, peasant, rural) status, according to the principle of one
plot of land, as the atom of the economic whole, one vote. It is obvious that
the very nature of peasant life, associated with the necessary decentralisation,
would lead to a federal system of political organisation, rather than to a
centralised and unified system, to which cities and their structures gravitated.
In this case, the third estate, in its quantitative majority, would have been
taken as the basis of society, and we would have had a peasant democratic
federation. Something similar, albeit in a slightly different context, was
proposedquantitative majority, would have been
taken as the basis of society, and we would have had a peasant democratic
federation. Something similar, albeit in a slightly different context, was
proposed

--- PAGE BREAK ---ty, would have been
taken as the basis of society, and we would have had a peasant democratic
federation. Something similar, albeit in a slightly different context, was
proposed

--- PAGE BREAK ---

264
Part 3. The Political Paradigm of Modernity. The War of Concepts
by the greatest representative and theorist of European federalism,
Johannes Altusius (1562–1638).
But Smith's theory finally shifted the focus to industry, cities,
entrepreneurship, and trade. Thus, in liberalism, democracy narrowed from
the expansion of the rights and positions of the third estate as a whole to the
interests of the urban bourgeoisie. From then on, the third estate was
represented not by a minority, but by a phenomenon that was completely
alien to the majority.
At the same time, the rise of industrial production led to the fact that
even in the urban environment, the common people, who made up the
"middle class," were pushed to the periphery, initially replaced by
industrial complexes, and then trade became an area of more intensive
capital circulation than production, which led to the third estate being
represented mainly by merchants. As the importance of financial
institutions — banks and interest-bearing capital — grew, financiers
gradually began to predominate, becoming the priority representatives of
the bourgeoisie and acting on its behalf, just as it had previously acted on
behalf of all the common people, among whom peasants predominated.
Thus, liberalism logically became the ideology not of the majority, but of
a special minority that rose to the highest echelons of society as
representation was increasingly reduced. And it is important that this could
only happen because the usurpation of representation lies at the very heart of
liberalism, which has replaced the very meaning of the term "third estate".
The marginalisation of the peasantry and political science
mysteries
Ancient mysteries — primarily the Eleusinian Mysteries 2— were closely
linked to the agricultural cycle and represented a scenario of descent into the
underworld, the realm of death, Hades, and then a return to life, which
testified to the immortality of the spiritual seed of humanity. Agricultural
practices had direct access to this metaphysical narrative, as the seasons of
sowing, growing plants, and harvesting were a visual representation of the
entire symbolic cycle.
1   Althusius J. Politica. Indianapolis: Liberty Fund, 1995.
2   Kerenyi, G. Eleusis: The Archetypal Image of Mother and Daughter. Moscow: Refl-book,
2000.
3  Dugin, A. G. Noomakhia. The Kingdom of the Earth. The Structure of Russian Identity.
Moscow: Academic Project, 2019.Eleusis: The Archetypal Image of Mother and Daughter. Moscow: Refl-book,
2000.
3  Dugin, A. G. Noomakhia. The Kingdom of the Earth. The Structure of Russian Identity.
Moscow: Academic Project, 2019.

--- PAGE BREAK ---pal Image of Mother and Daughter. Moscow: Refl-book,
2000.
3  Dugin, A. G. Noomakhia. The Kingdom of the Earth. The Structure of Russian Identity.
Moscow: Academic Project, 2019.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

265
Chapter 5. Liberalism (the first political theory). John Locke and his legacy
The peasantry corresponded to the third type in the general structure of
Politica Aeterna, which logically associated it with the realm of the earth and
the underworld. Thus, the mysteries and symbolism of agrarian practices are
naturally associated with the realm of the Mother, the "chora" and the border
areas of existence, which are closest to the lowest regions of the cosmos —
the Underworld, the underground world. Therefore, the mysteries were
dominated by images of goddesses or, as in the Eleusinian scenario, even
directly by the goddess of the underworld, Persephone, who, after her
abduction by the god of death and king of the Underworld, Hades, was
sought by her mother, Demeter, goddess of the fields and harvests. Peasantry
was the bearer of Demeter's civilisation, and accordingly, the symbolism of
grain and ears of corn played a central role in the mysteries.
But unlike the rebellion of the earth against Heaven, which we see in
the philosophy of Democritus and which became dominant in the New
Age, the mysteries, although they implied a descent into the underworld,
inevitably led to an ascent and a new light, contemplated at the moment of
their culmination — epopteia (LoLMNíP). Thus, the peasantry maintained its
connection with the earth through its association with the underground
worlds, on the one hand, and on the other, remained part of the sacred
hierarchy of the vertical order, complementing the structure of the Politica
Aeterna with the metaphysical experience of visiting the lowest levels of
the world-building, but with a subsequent return to the face of Heaven.
This is also linked to the peasantry's strong commitment to religious
traditions, which modernists interpreted as their "backwardness," "ignorance,"
"backwardness" and stubborn unwillingness to accept "change" and enter
the New Age.
Consequently, the peasantry was ill-suited to building a purely material
and secular civilisation that was diametrically opposed to the paradigm of
Tradition. At the same time, the urban bourgeoisie, which dealt not with land
and wood, but with stone and conventional — abstract — space as the
dominant element, was not limited by these sacred boundaries.
In this, we can see a profound explanation of what happened to the
concept of the "third estate" in liberal ideology. The urban bourgeoisie was
the most desacralised part of the third estate, deprived of access to
mysteries and even to their symbolic echoes in economic practice itself.
The peasants who grew bread, in their own understanding, were not simply
participating in something material. They were participants in the mystery of
life, bearers of eternity, passing through a sequentially closed circle of
stages — from birth to maturity and death, and then to a new birth. If, from
the outside, peasant labour was expressedof
life, bearers of eternity, passing through a sequentially closed circle of
stages — from birth to maturity and death, and then to a new birth. If, from
the outside, peasant labour was expressed

--- PAGE BREAK ---f eternity, passing through a sequentially closed circle of
stages — from birth to maturity and death, and then to a new birth. If, from
the outside, peasant labour was expressed

--- PAGE BREAK ---

266
Part 3. The Political Paradigm of Modernity. The War of Concepts
In material terms, it was a harvest, but for the peasants themselves it was also
a sacred religious ritual, whose meaning in Christian culture was clearly
manifested in the sacrament of the Eucharist — in the communion of the
blood and flesh of Jesus Christ, into which bread and wine were transformed
in the sacrament of the liturgy. But the preparation of bread and wine was, in
turn, a preparation for the Eucharist, part of a mystery that culminated in
worship.
On the other hand, there was nothing sacred left in the activities of the
bourgeoisie. Only they, and not the peasants, dealt with pure matter, pure
production, pure accumulation, and the pure pursuit of profit. It is the
bourgeois, the normative figure of liberalism, who represents the absolute
profane, while the peasantry retains close and inseparable ties with the
sacred. Moreover, the peasantry, involved in the mystery of grain, had a
certain inoculation against the underworld and its influences. Whereas the
bourgeoisie, denying in the course of increasingly
"progressive" ideas about hell, the devil, and the Antichrist, had no defence
against them. This is one of the most important aspects of the deep
philosophy of liberalism.
Kant: the foundations of constructivism and the prototype of
artificial intelligence
In the 18th century, another major theorist of liberal ideology, Immanuel
Kant (1724–1804), made a fundamental contribution to liberalism. However,
Kant's political philosophy is much more complex, stemming from his ideas
about transcendental (or pure) reason.
The most important thing in Kant's philosophy is that he questions the
Cartesian dualism of subject and object, showing that reliable judgement can
only be made by the mind about itself, and not about what lies beyond its
limits — both external (object) and internal (subject). This became the basis
of the doctrine of "transcendental reason," that is, the autonomy of thought
and its laws from both the thinker and the thought. Transcendental reason
(pure reason), according to Kant, is a complete structure of epistemological
correspondences that predetermines the order of thought, including its
content. Everything that a person perceives, sees, senses, feels, etc., stems
from
1   Kant, I. Collected Works: In 6 vols. Moscow: Nauka, 1963–1966.
2Kant, I. Critique of Pure Reason // Kant, I. Collected Works: In 6 vols. Vol. 3. Moscow:
Nauka, 1964.ses, feels, etc., stems
from
1   Kant, I. Collected Works: In 6 vols. Moscow: Nauka, 1963–1966.
2Kant, I. Critique of Pure Reason // Kant, I. Collected Works: In 6 vols. Vol. 3. Moscow:
Nauka, 1964.

--- PAGE BREAK ---ems
from
1   Kant, I. Collected Works: In 6 vols. Moscow: Nauka, 1963–1966.
2Kant, I. Critique of Pure Reason // Kant, I. Collected Works: In 6 vols. Vol. 3. Moscow:
Nauka, 1964.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

267
Chapter 5. Liberalism (the first political theory). John Locke and his legacy
transcendental reason and is predetermined by it. Such reason already
contains within itself "a priori forms of sensibility," that is, time and space,
with time relating to the more internal (subjective) side of reason, and space
to the more external side, where naive and unreflective self-perception
locates the "external world."
According to Kant, people are bearers of a certain universal form of
rationality, and their individual differences in the face of this structure are
insignificant.
Therefore, according to Kant, one individual is as rational as another
because reason is transcendental. If you like, there is a universal reason,
and different individuals are merely its carriers. Some people perceive
reason more vividly, hence the difference between people; if all people
perceived it equally vividly, they would live in a perfectly happy society,
treating others as they would like to be treated. This is Kant's main
imperative: "treat others as you would like them to treat you."
This rational model is transmitted through education (in this sense,
Kant follows Locke), and when rationality, reason, and consciousness reach a
certain level in society, civil society will emerge in place of the state.
At first glance, this approach seems to have little in common with
materialism and individualism, and instead of atomism, it asserts a certain
primary unity of reason. Indeed, if we draw a straight line from Democritus
and Epicurus to the nominalists (Roscelin, Duns Scotus, Ockham) and
further to the creators of the scientific picture of the world (Galileo,
Newton, Boyle, etc.) and Protestant theology (Luther, Calvin), and finally to
the secular philosophy of the modern era (Hobbes, Locke, etc.), Kant will
find himself outside this axis. This is true; in the context of the modern
era, Kant occupies a special position. He is not so much an atomist and
individualist as the founder of constructivism, a philosophical approach that
asserts that the external world is a mental construct of the mind. In a sense,
this anticipates the postmodern paradigm and the themes of artificial
intelligence (1)and virtuality (2).
However, Kant played a significant role in the formation of liberal
political philosophy. Kant, like Locke, attaches decisive importance to
reason.
1  We also find a prototype of artificial intelligence in the monadology of Leibniz (1646–
1716), who had a great influence on Kant.
2  Land N. Fanged Noumena: Collected Writings 1987–2007. New York; Windsor Quarry
(Falmouth): Sequence; Urbanomic, 2011.in the monadology of Leibniz (1646–
1716), who had a great influence on Kant.
2  Land N. Fanged Noumena: Collected Writings 1987–2007. New York; Windsor Quarry
(Falmouth): Sequence; Urbanomic, 2011.

--- PAGE BREAK ---f Leibniz (1646–
1716), who had a great influence on Kant.
2  Land N. Fanged Noumena: Collected Writings 1987–2007. New York; Windsor Quarry
(Falmouth): Sequence; Urbanomic, 2011.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

268
Part 3. The Political Paradigm of Modernity. The War of Concepts
The importance of education. According to Kant, a person is a bearer of
pure reason, whose self-awareness is realised in the process of education,
which is the formation of the content of pure reason into something
explicit, its unfolding. Pure reason is not contained outside or inside a
person. A person is a person to the extent that they participate in pure
reason. But this reason is not an attribute of God; on the contrary, it is the
main feature of belonging to the human species. Education is not simply an
inscription on a
a "blank slate," but the inscription on it of the main provisions of the works of
Kant himself, who came close to comprehending the structure of pure reason
(as well as practical reason 1, which resolves the antinomies of pure reason
with the help of moral principles — imperatives). Practical reason, according
to Kant, consists of filling in those gaps that pure reason, with the
unambiguity characteristic of its procedures, is unable to fill with moral
propositions that are as universal and universal as the structures of pure
reason. Thus, pure reason describes a constructed ontology, while practical
reason realises it, covering problematic areas with active oughtness. Thus,
pure reason is incapable of formulating a definitive judgement (yes or no)
about God, the external world, or the subject itself. Practical reason, on the
other hand, acts on the basis of moral necessity as if these three poles of
ontology unconditionally existed. Reality, the subject, and even God appear
in this case as anthropological constructs.
Kant's political philosophy and its characteristic pacifism
2,
cosmopolitanism, and thesis on the necessity of building a civil society 3are
based on a moral imperative. Human nature consists in its rationality. It
may be more or less complete, but as it is mastered, everyone comes to a
common position, since rationality is universal and indivisible.
Consequently, as education and the sphere of education expand, all people
will gradually approach this rational element. Realising the constructivist
nature of reality and the homology of reason, everyone will prefer to live
peacefully, borders will become unnecessary, and the place of the
hierarchical state and the vertical power structure will be taken by a
friendly community of people endowed with fundamentally the same form of
1  Kant, I. Critique of Practical Reason // Kant, I. Collected Works: In 6 vols. Vol. 4.
Moscow: Nauka, 1965.
2  Kant, I. Perpetual Peace // Kant, I. Collected Works: In 6 vols. Vol. 6. Moscow: Nauka, 1966.
3  Kant, I. Metaphysics of Morals // Kant, I. Collected Works: In 6 vols. Vol. 4.Moscow: Nauka, 1965.
2  Kant, I. Perpetual Peace // Kant, I. Collected Works: In 6 vols. Vol. 6. Moscow: Nauka, 1966.
3  Kant, I. Metaphysics of Morals // Kant, I. Collected Works: In 6 vols. Vol. 4.

--- PAGE BREAK ---.
2  Kant, I. Perpetual Peace // Kant, I. Collected Works: In 6 vols. Vol. 6. Moscow: Nauka, 1966.
3  Kant, I. Metaphysics of Morals // Kant, I. Collected Works: In 6 vols. Vol. 4.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

269
Chapter 5. Liberalism (the first political theory). John Locke and his legacy
my reason — developed and capable of self-reflection. This is
"civil society," which is already forming in the context of politics, but will
gradually — as the Enlightenment spreads and is assimilated — supplant it,
replacing the state.
Since man and the world are products of construction, according to
Kant, the consistent understanding of oneself by reason must lead to an
increasingly perfect society, since all excesses and negative aspects of life
arise only because pure reason does not operate in people to its fullest
extent.
The conclusions drawn from Kant's philosophy were entirely consistent
with liberalism. Instead of Hobbes' aggressive individualism, we see here a
progressive model close to Locke's, although the significance of the
individual is almost reduced to nothing, and the place of matter is taken by
universal reason.
"Hartland"
There is an interesting concept by the contemporary Dutch political
philosopher Kees Van Der Pijl (1), who proposes a new way of
understanding the scale of Locke's influence and his philosophy through
geography. Kees Van Der Pijl reminds us that Locke originally described the
emerging capitalism he observed in Scotland during a relatively peaceful
period. In fact, Locke conceptualises exactly what he sees (hence our
metaphor of the "carriage window"). Locke draws universal conclusions
about human nature, the meaning of the state, the importance of trade, the
importance of education, and "natural rights" based on a very specific
historical and geographical landscape. This area is limited to Scotland (and
partly to England and Holland). And if Locke had limited his conclusions
to these boundaries, his conceptualisation would have been flawless. It is
precisely this historical and geographical framework, linked to the
biography of John Locke himself, that describes what Kees van der Peil
calls Locke's "heartland" (2). But Locke himself gave his views the
character of a universal theory. In practice, however
1  Pijl Kees Van Der. Vordenker der Weltpolitik: Einfü hrung in die internationale
Politik aus ideengeschichtlicher Perspektive. Opladen: Leske+ Budrich, 1996; Idem. The
Making of an Atlantic Ruling Class. London: Verso, 1984; Idem. Transnational Classes and
International Relations. London: Routledge, 1998.
2Heartland, literally "heartland," is an English geopolitical term denoting the central, core
territory of a strategic or geopolitical structure.nd
International Relations. London: Routledge, 1998.
2Heartland, literally "heartland," is an English geopolitical term denoting the central, core
territory of a strategic or geopolitical structure.

--- PAGE BREAK ---lations. London: Routledge, 1998.
2Heartland, literally "heartland," is an English geopolitical term denoting the central, core
territory of a strategic or geopolitical structure.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

270
Part 3. The Political Paradigm of Modernity. The War of Concepts
At the first stage, they were generally accepted in Scotland and England. This
was a projection of one society onto another, which somewhat simplified the
much more complex picture of England itself. But in any case, Locke's
ideas took root in the educated and "enlightened" English society. Later in
the 18th century, they found expression in the form of the theory of "free
trade" in the works of Adam Smith (1723–1790), a student and follower
of Locke, who applied his ideas to economics and created the most famous
theory of economics, reflecting all the basic principles of liberalism, which
have remained largely unchanged to this day.
Locke's influence gradually spread across the European continent — to
France, Austria, Prussia (later Germany). This represents an even greater
convention, since the social and political traditions of different parts of
Europe differ strikingly from one another. The spread of Locke's
"Hartland" gradually became the trajectory of the expansion of liberalism,
which went far beyond its original territory and specific time period.
The British Empire was the most important instrument in the expansion
of Locke's "Hartland." Thus, liberalism reached the British colonies and took
root in the United States, the most important of them, which became one of
the pillars and later the leader of modern Western civilisation. In the 20th
century, the modernisation and westernisation of the entire world further
strengthened liberalism, and in the form of globalism, based largely on the
same unchanging principles of Locke, it became the leading world ideology,
which until the mid-20th century was one of the three main ideologies (along
with communism and fascism), after 1945 and until 1991 one of two
(alongside communism), and finally remaining the only one after the collapse
of the USSR and the Soviet camp.
It is evident that at each stage, the original model was stretched,
moving further and further away from Hartland. Thus, the concrete picture of
17th-century Scotland, which was accurately described and brilliantly
conceptualised, turned into a global ideology, necessarily abstract, often
contradicting historical and geographical realities, and therefore
increasingly rigid, intrusive, frozen and totalitarian, but at the same time
fragile.
Today, the same set of theses and axioms that constituted the essence of
Locke's Hartland , has become, spiralling upwards, the basis of the
paradigmatic, gnoseological and axiological matrix that is perceived as
something "natural" and "self-evident" by almost the entire population of
planet Earth. Thus, from the history of Scotland, and then of England in the
17th century, which represents "Hartland",as
something "natural" and "self-evident" by almost the entire population of
planet Earth. Thus, from the history of Scotland, and then of England in the
17th century, which represents "Hartland",

--- PAGE BREAK ---ral" and "self-evident" by almost the entire population of
planet Earth. Thus, from the history of Scotland, and then of England in the
17th century, which represents "Hartland",

--- PAGE BREAK ---

271
Chapter 5. Liberalism (the first political theory). John Locke and his legacy
territory of Scotland, and then England in the 17th century, which represents
the "Lockean Heartland" in its original historical and geographical
boundaries, this model gradually spread to all of humanity, predetermining
the main moments of modern political philosophy, in which, by the end of the
20th century, it was precisely   liberalism   that achieved   a fundamental
political and ideological victory. Thus, Locke's liberalism laid the foundation
for: •the global ideology (human rights, civil society),
•politics (liberal democracy),
•economics (capitalism, free trade),
•ethics (individualism, laissez-faire),
•science (materialism, empiricism),
•technology (technical progress).
Thus, starting with Locke, England itself became an increasingly global
phenomenon, until, through the United States and globalisation, it became
something truly universal.
From a philosophical point of view, the British Empire — liberal,
commercial, "progressive," modernist — was Locke's empire.
Today, in the 21st century, we all live in Locke's "Hartland."
We live in an era of liberalism, which is the earliest ideology of the
modern age, but it has proved to be the longest-lived. Attempts to criticise
and overturn it by Marxism (sometimes successful) and fascism (no less
successful) were bright flashes that predetermined the dramatic periods,
clashes and wars of modern history. But liberalism has prevailed.
It should be noted that, on the scale of modernity, this is a rather
archaic ideology, on the one hand, and very peripheral, on the other. It
operates with universal categories, images, figures, processes and
relationships of the European province of the 17th century, where they were
fresh, new and accurate at the time. However, when applied to other
societies, the dogmas of liberalism were a blatant stretch. But with Anglo-
Saxon tenacity in the spirit of their colonial expansion, the British, and
later the Americans, carried liberal theories with them as their ideological
weapon. Although liberals and progressives, their anthropology, sociology
and scientific picture reflect the reality of the Modern era in its earliest
stages, in other parts of the Western world and beyond, this has been
repeatedly challenged, developed, refuted, revised and overcome. But this
provincial ghost of the past has proved to be extremely resilient, despite
everything.tern world and beyond, this has been
repeatedly challenged, developed, refuted, revised and overcome. But this
provincial ghost of the past has proved to be extremely resilient, despite
everything.

--- PAGE BREAK ---d, this has been
repeatedly challenged, developed, refuted, revised and overcome. But this
provincial ghost of the past has proved to be extremely resilient, despite
everything.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

272
Part 3. The Political Paradigm of Modernity. The War of Concepts
subjugating the vital forces of societies, peoples, cultures and civilisations
to their chimerical existence.
Compared to liberalism, other ideologies of the Modern Age —
fascism and communism — appear much more "modern," dialectical,
paradoxical, sophisticated, and dramatic. Of course, they also belong to
Modernity, their roots also go back to Hobbes (and even earlier to
Protestantism), but compared to the gloomy, monotonous, Scottish-style
banality and extreme boredom of liberalism, which has been repeating the
same thing for centuries, regardless of place, time and the relevance of its
discourse, even modernist versions of liberalism look promising and
diverse, capable of varied and lively, sometimes terrifying, risky and
catastrophic experiments.
"Civil society" as an ideological slogan
We have come to the concept of "civil society" as a specifically liberal
model of political philosophy. Civil society is an ideological construct that
operates with the concept of individuals as the basic instance of the bearer of
the Political, taken in the spirit of Locke's optimistic anthropology and at the
same time based on Kant's transcendental rationality.
"Civil society" is as much a slogan of liberalism as "Workers of the
world, unite" is for communists or
"The Aryan race is superior to all others" for the Nazis. When we hear the
expression "Aryan race," we immediately understand that it refers to
political propaganda, racial inequality, and the division of humanity based
on skin colour. This is not simply a scientific statement; it is almost
certainly a political ideology based on very specific principles. In other
words, this expression refers us to National Socialism.
1Of course, the term civil society can also appear in other political theories. This is the case
in Hegel's system, but for him it is only a dialectical moment on the path to the establishment of
absolute monarchy. According to Hegel, the collective mind of civil society does not stop at
recognising itself as the pinnacle of development, but moves further and comes to the conclusion
that it is necessary to transfer power to an enlightened monarch and build a hierarchy based on
knowledge as an expression of the Absolute Spirit. See Hegel, G. W. F. Phenomenology of Spirit.
St. Petersburg: Nauka, 1992.o transfer power to an enlightened monarch and build a hierarchy based on
knowledge as an expression of the Absolute Spirit. See Hegel, G. W. F. Phenomenology of Spirit.
St. Petersburg: Nauka, 1992.

--- PAGE BREAK ---an enlightened monarch and build a hierarchy based on
knowledge as an expression of the Absolute Spirit. See Hegel, G. W. F. Phenomenology of Spirit.
St. Petersburg: Nauka, 1992.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

273
Chapter 5. Liberalism (the first political theory). John Locke and his legacy
When we hear the slogan "Workers of the world, unite!", we understand
without the slightest doubt that this is the communists. The very concept of
the "proletariat" is an essential element of Marxism.
And when we hear the expression "civil society," we are completely
unaware that we are talking about yet another ideology, which, like other
ideologies, has its own dogmas, its own foundations, and its own
arguments—as convincing or unconvincing as those of Nazism and
communism. The fact that we do not regard the thesis of "civil society" as a
rigid political slogan, with all its inherent limitations, propaganda aspects and
consequences (e.g., criticism of the political, individualism and the prototype
of artificial intelligence), shows that we live today under the domination of
liberal ideology. If we are unable to identify this as a propaganda slogan of
liberal ideology, then we are already inside it. This means that we live in
Locke's "Hartland." Accordingly, if the concept of "civil society" does not
cause us the same suspicion as the slogans of communists or fascists, then we
already agree to be supporters of Locke and Kant. When we understand that
political preachers are trying to convince us of their rightness, to recruit us, to
put something into our heads, we usually maintain a certain distance with
sufficient critical awareness, understanding that this is propaganda with all its
inherent limitations and distortions of the truth in favour of achieving specific
results and catching new followers in its net. But when we hear the
expression "civil society," we take it for granted, and all our critical faculties
disappear.
In Soviet times, when the slogan "Workers of the world, unite!" was
heard, ordinary people, ordinary citizens, also nodded: "Of course, unite,
and quickly!" At the same time, it was often difficult for them to understand
who the proletariat were or why they should unite — they did not think
about where it all came from or subject it to critical scrutiny. "Probably
we should unite, it's international." We have the same attitude today
towards concepts such as "civil society" or "human rights." It seems self-
evident, although in reality we are being fed a dogmatic, highly politicised
ideological slogan that is just as poorly substantiated, biased and
manipulative as in the case of the "uniting proletariat" or the "Aryan race."
"Aryan race."ing fed a dogmatic, highly politicised
ideological slogan that is just as poorly substantiated, biased and
manipulative as in the case of the "uniting proletariat" or the "Aryan race."
"Aryan race."

--- PAGE BREAK ---highly politicised
ideological slogan that is just as poorly substantiated, biased and
manipulative as in the case of the "uniting proletariat" or the "Aryan race."
"Aryan race."

--- PAGE BREAK ---

274
Part 3. The Political Paradigm of Modernity. The War of Concepts
Those who study political science and political philosophy differ from
ordinary people in that when they hear phrases such as "civil society," they
first pause to think. The concept of civil society is a consequence of an
optimistic interpretation of anthropology and the idea of the natural state
of society as a movement towards enlightenment and progress. The
concept of civil society is directed against Hobbes' Leviathan, against his
pessimistic anthropology, but also against politics in general (with its
inevitable centrality of the question of power) and against sovereignty.
Those who use the term "civil society" most often assume that the state
should perform only one function: to serve as a temporary source of mass
education. And as soon as the state ceases to perform this function, it must
disappear.
Thus, in the context of Locke's Hartland, the term "civil society"
represents a specific understanding of the very nature of the state, which
has one task: to form this "civil society," to write the ideas of rational
egoism on the "blank slate" of individuals, and then to disappear.
Thus, "civil society" is essentially an anti-state idea. To advocate for
"civil society" means to oppose the country, the state as a value and a self-
sufficient authority. In essence, to be a supporter of
"civil society" is, in a sense, a crime against the state. Because in this
case, the state is seen only as an instrument of enlightenment, nothing
more. All its other functions are fundamentally subject to abolition, and
the state itself is ultimately subject to dismantling and abolition.
The state as liberals imagine it does not interfere in the affairs of citizens,
does not tax them, does not wage war, does not resort to violence except in
extreme cases — to violence, strictly adheres to established rules, and strives
in every way to distribute power among different authorities (at least three —
legislative, executive and judicial, completely independent
from one another). The liberal state is weak and must become weaker and
weaker until it disappears. The stronger the "civil society," the weaker the
state. Ultimately, in the course of human progress, as humanity approaches
equal participation in pure reason, "civil society" will abolish the state
altogether and eternal peace will reign.
Therefore, anyone who says "I am for civil society" means "I am for the
weakening and, ultimately, the elimination of the state."ety" will abolish the state
altogether and eternal peace will reign.
Therefore, anyone who says "I am for civil society" means "I am for the
weakening and, ultimately, the elimination of the state."

--- PAGE BREAK ---e state
altogether and eternal peace will reign.
Therefore, anyone who says "I am for civil society" means "I am for the
weakening and, ultimately, the elimination of the state."

--- PAGE BREAK ---

275
Chapter 5. Liberalism (the first political theory). John Locke and his legacy
Civil society is the antithesis of political society. The movement
towards civil society includes a project of systemic depoliticisation of the
population.
It is important to note that a civil society based on the principle of
individualism and supported by bourgeois norms and capitalism
presupposes the overcoming of bourgeois nation states, which are also
built on the principle of individualism. But this is not simply opposition, it
is overcoming. Civil society becomes relevant when the bourgeois liberal
state has already done the groundwork of educating the population, i.e.,
introducing liberal principles, practices, and axioms into society. From the
point of view of liberals, it is good that nation states are being created with
a national identity at their core and a social contract as their basic
constitutional act, but their value is relative, and they themselves are a
temporary and transitional phenomenon. In the face of traditional society,
supporters of civil society find themselves in the position of defenders and
patriots of the state, at least when it comes to the modern state.
Nevertheless, civil society is a "subversion of Leviathan." In Locke's
case, criticism of the state and politics is absent or implicit. But Locke goes
deeper into anthropology and, by rethinking the quality of the "natural state"
of man — from negative and aggressive (as in Hobbes) to neutral and capable
of improvement — undermines the metaphysical foundations of Leviathan. If
man is not a wolf by nature, then Leviathan is not destiny, and a social
contract can be concluded not necessarily about power (a political
contract), but also about horizontal interactions and rules — above all,
about the rules of trade (a social contract).
From this, an important conclusion can be drawn: liberalism (Locke and
his followers) does not simply reject Hobbes, but continues, develops and
overcomes him, preserving a fundamental continuity with him, consisting in
general materialism and individualism, but at the same time rethinking the
nature of man.
Kant stands somewhat apart in this regard, but the universality
The concept of "pure reason" (as well as "practical reason") allows liberals
to find another compelling argument for justifying civil society as a kind of
post-political condition for the existence of individuals. Kant can, in a sense,
be integrated into socialist systems, since the universality of reason leads to
the conclusion that a society based on collectivist principles can be created.e of individuals. Kant can, in a sense,
be integrated into socialist systems, since the universality of reason leads to
the conclusion that a society based on collectivist principles can be created.

--- PAGE BREAK ---nt can, in a sense,
be integrated into socialist systems, since the universality of reason leads to
the conclusion that a society based on collectivist principles can be created.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

276
Part 3. The Political Paradigm of Modernity. The War of Concepts
collectivist principles. And if we take into account the development (and, in
many ways, the overcoming) of Kant that we find in Hegel (1770–1831),
then this is exactly what happened — in the case of left-wing Hegelianism,
and above all Marxism. But if Hegel himself, in the spirit of his dialectic,
believes that civil society, by virtue of the accumulation of historical self-
awareness, will ultimately lead to the voluntary affirmation of an enlightened
monarch, whose power will be expressed (in a thoroughly messianic
eschatological style) the Absolute Spirit, then for Marx the bourgeois form of
civil society, based on individualism and private property (the paradigm of
liberalism), will pass through a moment of proletarian revolution to
socialism, that is, to an egalitarian socialist (ultimately communist)
collectivist form of civil society based on complete property equality (and not
just equality of opportunity, as in capitalism).
In general, Locke's philosophy of politics in the 17th century
gradually led to the emergence of a specific liberal ideology, which has
remained dominant in bourgeois democratic societies to this day. Locke's
"Hartland" emerged in the 17th century, but stretched out in a spiral
through space and time until the 21st century and on a global scale.
Jeremy Bentham: utilitarianism deontology
A major thinker of the liberal movement was the lawyer Jeremy
Bentham, who laid the foundations of utilitarian philosophy. Jeremy
Bentham embodies the main lines of force of liberal ideology, giving
them a systematic form.
First of all, he (like all liberals) proceeds from consistent individualism,
denying any independent ontology of the "social whole" or "social body."
According to Bentham, only individuals exist, and it is the aggregate of
separate individuals, each possessing complete autonomy and self-
sufficiency, that constitutes society.
In politics and economics, Bentham proposed focusing exclusively on
the individual and his rights, which he considered the main goal; at the
same time, he advocated expanding the categories to which civil rights
should be extended, including groups previously deprived of them, such as
women, the poor, and indigenous peoples.
1   Bentham, J. Selected Works. St. Petersburg: Russian Book Trade, 1867.il rights
should be extended, including groups previously deprived of them, such as
women, the poor, and indigenous peoples.
1   Bentham, J. Selected Works. St. Petersburg: Russian Book Trade, 1867.

--- PAGE BREAK ---extended, including groups previously deprived of them, such as
women, the poor, and indigenous peoples.
1   Bentham, J. Selected Works. St. Petersburg: Russian Book Trade, 1867.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

277
Chapter 5. Liberalism (the first political theory). John Locke and his legacy
colony population. According to Bentham, a person is a n = n individual,
and he was convinced that every individual is endowed with "sound
judgment" to such an extent that they can take full responsibility for all their
actions, deeds, and situations.
On this basis, Bentham builds his main theory, called "utilitarianism."
Utilitarianism is an ethical system based on a schematically understood
radical individualism. Bentham teaches that it is human nature to seek
pleasure and avoid suffering. These two parameters motivate all human
activity. At the same time, the subject of pleasure and suffering is a strictly
separate individual, always concerned only with his own private feelings,
which can be reduced to two opposites.
The combination of the will to enjoy and the desire to avoid pain
gives us Jeremy Bentham's main concept: utility. Useful is that which leads
to maximum pleasure and minimum suffering. The individual seeks only
utility, and it is utility that drives individual activity. At the same time, the
presence of rationality in humans transforms the pursuit of individual
utility into a meaningful and systematic strategy based on calculation. This
calculation is at the heart of all human actions — historical, political, cultural,
religious, etc. The calculation involves assessing the scale of pleasure and
pain, determining the minimum and maximum of both in each specific
situation. This is rational choice, which extends to all spheres — from the
sensual to the spiritual.
On this basis, Bentham builds his doctrine of truth and a special morality
1. He himself called it "deontology" (from the Greek term CXov, meaning
"duty" or "obligation"), i.e., the doctrine of what is right and proper. Truth is
that which brings benefit, Bentham asserts, since it is precisely benefit that
serves as the measure of conformity and connection between the subjective
intentions of the individual and objective realities. The maximum amount of
pleasure for the maximum number of individuals is the criterion and measure
of the truth of a socio-political system.
Utilitarian morality is built on this: good is what gives an individual
pleasure (hence hedonism as the main feature of Bentham's morality); evil is
suffering and the cause of suffering. But since pleasure and pain are inversely
proportional to each other, morality becomes something
1Bentham, J. Introduction to the Principles of Morals and Legislation. Moscow: ROSSPEN, 1998.ffering. But since pleasure and pain are inversely
proportional to each other, morality becomes something
1Bentham, J. Introduction to the Principles of Morals and Legislation. Moscow: ROSSPEN, 1998.

--- PAGE BREAK ---leasure and pain are inversely
proportional to each other, morality becomes something
1Bentham, J. Introduction to the Principles of Morals and Legislation. Moscow: ROSSPEN, 1998.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

278
Part 3. The Political Paradigm of Modernity. The War of Concepts
Relative — when determining good and evil, one must always take into
account the specific proportions between them and also the specific
individual who experiences this pleasure and pain. Therefore, utility is
always a recalculated and subjective calculation and cannot be elevated to a
universal concept applicable to society as a whole. Social utility is based
on the desire for maximum pleasure and minimum suffering for the
aggregate of individuals, who are always different and live in different
conditions.
In the spirit of Locke, Bentham argues that individualistic egoism, which
compels a person to seek maximum pleasure and minimum suffering only for
himself, is overcome not by Leviathan (unlike Hobbes' ideas), but by his
reason, since man can easily understand that consideration for the benefit of
his neighbour can only increase his own benefit. Thus, fundamental
psychological, ontological, and moral individualism, which constitutes the
essence of human nature, is, according to Bentham, the source of society as a
field of exchange, always selfish but always rational. In this case, private
property and the market economy, where everyone acts in their own interests,
become the main social institutions, but this selfish motivation spontaneously
creates the rules of the market game. This is entirely in line with Adam
Smith.
Jeremiah Bentham insists on the equality of all people, since they
consist only of the desire for pleasure and the avoidance of pain. This is a
characteristic of every individual. Pleasure and pain can be purely physical,
psychological, or spiritual. Thus, according to Bentham, religion is also
useful because in certain cases it allows one to obtain pleasure and to dull
or calm pain. True religion should provide spiritual benefit and minimise
suffering. If this is not the case, and this condition is not met, then it is a
"false religion."
Bentham's aesthetics are structured in the same way: what is useful is
beautiful; what is harmful is repulsive.
It is telling that Bentham was the first to come out as a radical
defender of usury. In his 1787 work, written in Russia, where he was
temporarily residing, "In Defence of Usury," he justified the growth of
money and the practice of lending and borrowing as something that
maximises wealth and corresponds to the rational nature of individual
decisions, allowing people to consciously and responsibly lend money at
interest and take out loans. Bentham expressed the same ideas in his letters
to Adam Smith, who in his firstre of individual
decisions, allowing people to consciously and responsibly lend money at
interest and take out loans. Bentham expressed the same ideas in his letters
to Adam Smith, who in his first

--- PAGE BREAK ---cisions, allowing people to consciously and responsibly lend money at
interest and take out loans. Bentham expressed the same ideas in his letters
to Adam Smith, who in his first

--- PAGE BREAK ---

279
Chapter 5. Liberalism (the first political theory). John Locke and his legacy
In various editions of his main work, An Inquiry into the Nature and
Causes of the Wealth of Nations, he expressed disapproval of this practice.
Jeremiah Bentham, with his radical defence of usury, was, according to G. K.
Chesterton (1874–1936), the first author to usher in the "modern world" (1).
John Stuart Mill: the negativity of freedom
The greatest theorist of liberalism was the Scottish philosopher, politician
and economist John Stuart Mill (1806–1873). His father, James Mill (1773–
1836), was an enthusiastic follower of Jeremy Bentham, fully sharing his
ideas of utilitarianism, a love for which he passed on to his son, who also
became one of Bentham's most convinced and active admirers. Together with
David Ricardo (1772–1823), James Mill was the founder of English classical
political economy.In addition, he was the author ofthe three-volume History of
British India,in which he argued for the necessity of harsh exploitation of the
indigenous peoples of the colonies, justifying this by the absence in Indian
culture of even a hint of utilitarian consciousness, which he considered a
universal form of thinking.
John Stuart Mill formulated the concept of "freedom," which is central
to the ideology of liberalism. Mill, like all liberals, starts from the premise
that the individual has absolute existence and a wholly positive content.
Consequently, granting them complete — preferably absolute — freedom is
a positive act and the goal of the entire ideological programme of liberalism.
But when Mill comes to the content of freedom itself, he encounters the
following problem: if we define the content of freedom as something
universal, we will end up prescribing a certain duty to the individual, that is,
telling him how he should use his freedom. Mill calls this the principle of
"freedom for" and designates it with a special term — "freedom."
"Freedom for" is freedom. However, "freedom for" turns out to be something
that comes from outside the individual.
1  "The modern world began with Bentham writing the Defence of Usury." "The modern
world began with Bentham's text 'In Defence of Usury'," wrote Chesterton in his work on Thomas
Aquinas, who, on the contrary, following Aristotle, was an absolute opponent of usury and,
consequently, a defender of Tradition. Chesterton G. K. Saint Thomas Aquinas. NY: Doubleday
Image, 1956
2   Mill J. Elements of Political Economy. London: Baldwin, Craddock and Joy, 1821.
3   Mill J. The History of British India. 3 vols. London: Baldwin, Craddock and Joy, 1818.
4   Mill, J. On Liberty. // Science and Life.— 1993.Y 11. Pp. 10–15;Y 12. Pp. 21–26.Craddock and Joy, 1821.
3   Mill J. The History of British India. 3 vols. London: Baldwin, Craddock and Joy, 1818.
4   Mill, J. On Liberty. // Science and Life.— 1993.Y 11. Pp. 10–15;Y 12. Pp. 21–26.

--- PAGE BREAK ---821.
3   Mill J. The History of British India. 3 vols. London: Baldwin, Craddock and Joy, 1818.
4   Mill, J. On Liberty. // Science and Life.— 1993.Y 11. Pp. 10–15;Y 12. Pp. 21–26.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

280
Part 3. The Political Paradigm of Modernity. The War of Concepts
from itself, and therefore there will be no freedom. For liberal ideology, this
poses a major problem and contradiction: by prescribing to the individual
what he should use his freedom for (e.g., for the good, justice, creativity,
progress, art, etc.), we would thereby make him unfree, since these
prescriptions would have a source other than the individual himself. From
this, J. S. Mill concludes that the goal of liberalism cannot be positive
freedom, "freedom for," but only a different kind of freedom, which he
defines as "freedom from" and calls liberty, a term of Latin origin. Liberty is
negative precisely because, for liberal anthropology, only the individual
subject is entirely positive. It is what it is, and it possesses will and mind.
Bentham's utilitarianism suggests that the will and mind serve the
individual to extract the maximum benefit that he calculates based on his
specific situation. Thus, a utilitarian subject who strives to achieve
maximum pleasure while minimising suffering is always capable of
devising a positive strategy for realising his programme. Moreover, the
less the individual is constrained by external factors, the more effective
this realisation will be. Therefore, Mill concludes, liberty consists in the
complete rejection of any prescriptions imposed on a person by the state,
society, religion, etc. This negative "freedom from" is what should unite
all liberals, regardless of how each intends to realise their freedom and
what they intend to use it for. In other words, liberalism is a universal union
of individual subjects, united not by positive goals, but by a unity of rejection
of all external prescriptions and restrictions. The solidarity of liberals with
each other extends as far as they all experience oppression from external
institutions that are external to each of them. If we assume that these
institutions are eliminated, then nothing connects individuals to each other,
since no integrating platform of "freedom for" not only does not exist, but
cannot exist. Thus, at the limit of the realisation of a liberal strategy on a
global scale, the "end of society" and the transition to special post-social
forms of trans-individual coexistence are postulated. This limit means the
abolition of states and social institutions in favour of a "natural state"
interpreted as a peaceful and reasonable "civil paradise" in the spirit of
Locke, rather than a "war of all against all" in the spirit of Hobbes.d social institutions in favour of a "natural state"
interpreted as a peaceful and reasonable "civil paradise" in the spirit of
Locke, rather than a "war of all against all" in the spirit of Hobbes.

--- PAGE BREAK ---s in favour of a "natural state"
interpreted as a peaceful and reasonable "civil paradise" in the spirit of
Locke, rather than a "war of all against all" in the spirit of Hobbes.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

281
Chapter 5. Liberalism (the first political theory). John Locke and his legacy
The negativity of liberal freedom (liberty) refers us not only to the
chaotic state of atoms in Democritus, but also to the dualistic ontology of CXv,
the atom, defined in relation to emptiness, but not as something that exists,
but as a kind of turn of emptiness itself, "nothing" (oZCXv). This is the
peculiarity of negative freedom: it is not simply the complete liberation of the
individual, freeing them from external barriers (which corresponds to
Democritus' external emptiness), but also the rejection of any ontologisation
of the subject, if the individual is conceived as a subject at all, rather than as a
special otherness of the object. In this case, Mill may indirectly refer us to the
internal emptiness of Democritus' system, which lives inside the bound
bodies, in the interatomic spaces. Thus, the completely liberated individual
approaches the image of a ghost, an "eidolon."
The Austrian School: Mises , founder
Later, in the field of economics, the ideas of liberalism were
developed in the works of two philosophers and economists, Ludwig von
Mises (1881–1973) and Friedrich von Hayek (1889–1992).
Ludwig von Mises defended the principle of the dominance of the
subjective approach in economics (i.e., the priority of individual decision-
making over social norms) and rational choice as the basis of economic
practice. The philosophical basis of von Mises' worldview, on which he
builds his economic theories, is absolute individualism,i.e., the conviction that
at the heart of any social system, including the state, lies the autonomous and
rational individual, who determines the optimal strategies for economic
activity and thereby creates diverse socio-political forms, which he is able to
change at will, in a pragmatic relationship with the position of other
individuals, who also act on the basis of subjective preferences and private
interests. From this followed the familiar liberal prescription to minimise state
intervention in the economy and allow individual actors to act with minimal
restrictions.
Hayek: neoliberalism
This school of economic thought was taken up by von Mises's student
and follower, the leading European economist
1   Mises, L. The Individual, the Market, and the Legal State. St. Petersburg: Pnevma, 1999.chool of economic thought was taken up by von Mises's student
and follower, the leading European economist
1   Mises, L. The Individual, the Market, and the Legal State. St. Petersburg: Pnevma, 1999.

--- PAGE BREAK ---ought was taken up by von Mises's student
and follower, the leading European economist
1   Mises, L. The Individual, the Market, and the Legal State. St. Petersburg: Pnevma, 1999.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

282
Part 3. The Political Paradigm of Modernity. The War of Concepts
He is considered the founder of modern neoliberalism, i.e., the version
that adapts the principles of classical liberalism, which developed in the
18th and 19th centuries, to the historical conditions of the 20th century.
Like Mises, Hayek's economic philosophy is based on the principle of
individual freedom. Hayek sees society as a complex system consisting of
a collection of individuals, each pursuing their own individual goals.
Everyone does this on the basis of rational calculation and is guided by the
principle of efficiency and rationalisation of their activities, striving for
one thing: to achieve maximum effect at minimum cost. However, the
rationality of such behaviour is limited to the sphere of activity closely
related to the individual and to those issues and things that directly
interest him and affect his existence and the success of his economic
activity(1) .All factors that they encounter are divided into relevant and
irrelevant. The former are directly related to the implementation of the
tasks set, while the latter are irrelevant or indirectly related. Even the
number of relevant factors (not to mention irrelevant ones, which are
discarded)
"thinking person," homo calculans, immediately) factors are so numerous
that even among them, people are forced to make careful choices. The
results of distinguishing between the important and the secondary in a
specific situation are learned through experience: positive results lead to
enrichment and success, negative results lead to losses and failures. This
is the rationality of economic behaviour. When it is realised in a space
associated with the individual, the individual strengthens and develops the
logistics of successful and unsuccessful behaviour, testing their actions
against the reality of the results. But as soon as we move on to
generalisations about the economy, society, or the state as a whole, the
number of relevant factors increases exponentially, and rationality
dissipates, giving way to dogmatism or utopia, i.e., a theory that is
obviously not subject to rational verification at the individual level and is
presented as an axiom. Lacking knowledge of critically important relevant
factors, social and economic ideologies — such as nationalism and Marxism
— fill in the gaps with more or less arbitrary extrapolations, subordinating
specific individuals to an irrational project whose postulates cannot be
verified.
1  Mises, L. Bureaucracy. Planned Chaos. Anti-Capitalist Mentality. Moscow: Delo, Catallaxy,
1993., subordinating
specific individuals to an irrational project whose postulates cannot be
verified.
1  Mises, L. Bureaucracy. Planned Chaos. Anti-Capitalist Mentality. Moscow: Delo, Catallaxy,
1993.

--- PAGE BREAK ---cific individuals to an irrational project whose postulates cannot be
verified.
1  Mises, L. Bureaucracy. Planned Chaos. Anti-Capitalist Mentality. Moscow: Delo, Catallaxy,
1993.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

283
Chapter 5. Liberalism (the first political theory). John Locke and his legacy
critical reflection. Thus, Hayek concludes that any generalisations in
economics are futile, as they inevitably lead to violence, totalitarianism,
tyranny and the imposition of irrational goals and values on society, which
only hinder
"natural development" and creating artificial barriers to the strengthening
of minimally rational structures of behaviour accessible to everyone. All this
leads straight to slavery1. According to Hayek, any attempt to organise
society on rational foundations inevitably leads to the triumph of madness
and the reign of violence.
Instead, von Hayek suggests limiting ourselves to a small degree of
rationality, which remains at the individual level. In this sphere, even if an
individual makes a mistake or acts irrationally, this will primarily affect
him alone or those in his immediate vicinity, whereas social experiments
and global projects affect huge masses, directing them towards absurd
goals. At the micro level in economics, the most successful approaches are
building optimal relationships and intuitively searching for the most effective
solutions, which will lead to the gradual progress of society as a whole:
everyone in their place seeks the shortest path to achieving optimal results,
and the whole society thus moves towards prosperity (the old argument of
Adam Smith and classical liberalism). To achieve this, it is necessary to
minimise the interference of society and the state in the economic life of
citizens, creating as equal starting conditions as possible for all.
On the question of social organisation, Hayek is close to G. Spencer and
believes that in society the strongest survive, and any attempt to artificially
help the weak and disadvantaged will be detrimental to the strong, but will
not improve the weak, leading only to stagnation and delay in progress.
Karl Popper: "The Open Society and Its Enemies"
A prominent theorist of neoliberalism was Karl Popper (1902–1994), a
follower of von Hayek who focused primarily on the philosophy of science
but wrote an important ideological work, The Open Society and Its Enemies. In
this book, Popper substantiates the main points of liberal philosophy as
applied to the conditions of the 20th century. Beginning with a critique of
Plato and Aristotle, that is, with the
1   Hayek, F. The Road to Serfdom. Moscow: New Publishing House, 2005.
2  Popper, K. The Open Society and Its Enemies: In 2 vols. Moscow: Phoenix, International
Foundation "Cultural Initiative," 1992.Hayek, F. The Road to Serfdom. Moscow: New Publishing House, 2005.
2  Popper, K. The Open Society and Its Enemies: In 2 vols. Moscow: Phoenix, International
Foundation "Cultural Initiative," 1992.

--- PAGE BREAK ---d to Serfdom. Moscow: New Publishing House, 2005.
2  Popper, K. The Open Society and Its Enemies: In 2 vols. Moscow: Phoenix, International
Foundation "Cultural Initiative," 1992.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

284
Part 3. The Political Paradigm of Modernity. The War of Concepts
political philosophy of Father and Son in the context of Politica Aeterna,
Popper moves on to socialism and nationalism (the second and third political
theories1), which he describes as "enemies of an open society." Popper's main
idea is that both communists and nationalists operate with idealised concepts,
norms and projects that they seek to impose on society by force, leading to
disasters, wars and the establishment of totalitarian regimes. In this, he relies
entirely on Hayek's argument about the scope of relevant factors.
According to Popper, ideologies that are guided by a project and
therefore carry implicit and explicit totalitarianism can only be opposed by
liberalism, not simply based on an open market (this principle underlies
capitalism), but representing an open system capable of constant evolution
without any single predetermined goal. Liberalism, according to Popper,
must replace politics as such, replacing it with trade, and relations between
people must replicate the principles of the market and the multitude of
transactions, insurance operations and futures contracts that make up the
market. This coincides exactly with Smith's ideas.
Popper attacks Marx, Lenin (1870–1924), Stalin (1878–1953) and
Hitler (1889–1945), seeing them as tyrants and dictators who oppose the
very principle of freedom.
Popper attacks any philosophical teachings that speak of an idea or norm
as something that ought to be. This affects both the idealisation of the past
and the existence of any goals for the future or models for the present.
Popper proclaims the need to protect and create an "open society,"
which implies not only progress and the development of liberalism, but
also an uncompromising struggle against various types of "closed
societies," i.e., communism and fascism. Thus, a project designed to
completely overcome dichotomies, Manichean antitheses and any
exclusivism, which, according to Popper, are the main distinguishing
features of communism and fascism (as well as political systems based on
Plato and Aristotle, i.e. the philosophical paradigms of traditional society),
in turn, becomes an aggressive, intolerant version that establishes a
fundamental opposition between supporters of the "open society" and its
enemies, which is reflected in the subtitle of Popper's main political work,
The Open Society and Its Enemies(2) .Thus
1   Dugin, A. G. The Fourth Way. Introduction to the Fourth Political Theory.
2   Popper, K. The Open Society and Its Enemies.Popper's main political work,
The Open Society and Its Enemies(2) .Thus
1   Dugin, A. G. The Fourth Way. Introduction to the Fourth Political Theory.
2   Popper, K. The Open Society and Its Enemies.

--- PAGE BREAK ---ical work,
The Open Society and Its Enemies(2) .Thus
1   Dugin, A. G. The Fourth Way. Introduction to the Fourth Political Theory.
2   Popper, K. The Open Society and Its Enemies.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

285
Chapter 5. Liberalism (the first political theory). John Locke and his legacy
Even in theory, liberalism acquires the characteristics of an intolerant
ideology that demands punishment and repression against those who do not
share its "peaceful" and "tolerant" principles.
George Soros: liberalism is becoming aggressive
Karl Popper's ideas were put into practice by his student George Soros,
who initially achieved enormous success on the stock market through
speculation with national currencies, and then invested a significant
portion of his capital in promoting networks of various non-governmental
organisations and foundations that advocated the ideas of globalisation,
civil society, human rights, and the dismantling of the sovereignty of nation
states (1).George Soros embodies the colourful image of a capitalist who
has no religion other than the religion of money ("financial alchemy" (2)
,as he himself calls it), recognises no states or nations, and with messianic
determination pursues the establishment of a liberal utopia of an open society
on a global scale(3) .In doing so, he relies on a network of informants,
agents, emissaries, envoys, like-minded people and direct employees
recruited with the help of finance and propaganda, as well as special
educational institutions that promote the ideology of liberalism with
fanaticism no less than that of religious sects and terrorist organisations. In
his fight against the "enemies of the open society," Soros actively uses
bribery of political leaders, preparation of colour revolutions and coups d'état,
and mass unrest. In some countries, the activities of his foundations have
been recognised as extremist.
Fogel: The Gradual Nature of Order, Political Religions, and
Totalitarian Heresies
One of the profound theorists of political philosophy in the 20th
century is the Austrian thinker Eric Fogel 4(1901–
1  Soros, George. On Globalisation. Moscow: Eksmo, 2004.
2   Soros, J. The Alchemy of Finance. Moscow: Infra-M, 2001.
3  Soros, J. The Open Society. Reforming Global Capitalism. Moscow: Non-commercial
Foundation for the Support of Culture, Education and New Information Technologies, 2001.
4  Voegelin E. Ordnung und Geschichte. 10 Bde. München: Dietmar Herz & Peter Opitz,
2001–2005.Non-commercial
Foundation for the Support of Culture, Education and New Information Technologies, 2001.
4  Voegelin E. Ordnung und Geschichte. 10 Bde. München: Dietmar Herz & Peter Opitz,
2001–2005.

--- PAGE BREAK ---dation for the Support of Culture, Education and New Information Technologies, 2001.
4  Voegelin E. Ordnung und Geschichte. 10 Bde. München: Dietmar Herz & Peter Opitz,
2001–2005.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

286
Part 3. The Political Paradigm of Modernity. The War of Concepts
1985). In the first half of his life, he was close to Austrian nationalism and
even National Socialism. Many aspects of his philosophy also resonate with
the Conservative Revolution. Hence his holism and his sympathy for the
Middle Ages. But later he emigrated to the United States, largely revised his
original views, and became closer to liberalism, albeit a very atypical form of
it. At the same time, Fogel became a consistent opponent of totalitarianism:
both in relation to communism, which he always criticised, but also in
relation to the third political theory, to which he was close in the early stages.
In his criticism, he sought to provide profound metaphysical justifications for
the ideologies he criticised, which makes his ideas extremely important in the
context of Politica Aeterna. It was Fogel, partly under the influence of Carl
Schmitt, the leading representative of the Conservative Revolution, who
introduced the concept of "political religion" (1)  ,arguing that the totalitarian
ideologies of the modern era (primarily communism and fascism) represent a
revival in a secular context of precisely those religious teachings, including
messianism, eschatology a n d soteriology.
Fogelin justifies liberalism not through individualism (and in this he
differs from most neoliberals, such as Hayek and Popper), but as the most
effective form of social organisation. From Fogelin's point of view, it is not
the individual who is at the centre of the political system, but the ability to
organise Order. This is where his methodological holism comes in, which is
also extremely far from classical liberalism (if not directly opposed to it).
At the heart of Fogelin's political philosophy lies the idea of Order. This
is the central concept of his political philosophy. Although Order for
Fogelin is a product of social contract, and therefore individualism remains
primary, he is interested not so much in this as in the very nature of Order
as such.
The meaning of the concept of "order" lies in "transcendent
authenticity." From Voegelin's point of view, man is dealing with chaos.
Man himself is an element of chaos, and so is the world around him. Man
is a chaotic subject immersed in a chaotic object. In such a picture, we
easily recognise the universe of Democritus and Epicurus,
1   Voegelin E. Die politischen Religionen. Stockholm: Bermann Fischer, 1939.
2  Voegelin E. Die neue Wissenschaft der Politik. München: Wilhelm Fink Verlag, 2004.universe of Democritus and Epicurus,
1   Voegelin E. Die politischen Religionen. Stockholm: Bermann Fischer, 1939.
2  Voegelin E. Die neue Wissenschaft der Politik. München: Wilhelm Fink Verlag, 2004.

--- PAGE BREAK ---us and Epicurus,
1   Voegelin E. Die politischen Religionen. Stockholm: Bermann Fischer, 1939.
2  Voegelin E. Die neue Wissenschaft der Politik. München: Wilhelm Fink Verlag, 2004.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

287
Chapter 5. Liberalism (the first political theory). John Locke and his legacy
the metaphysical foundation of political philosophy prevailing in the
Modern era, particularly evident in liberalism.
The collision of a chaotic subject with a chaotic object generates the pain
of presence. In response to this pain, there arises a desire to see light in the
darkness of chaos. The vision of (rational) light, the perception of space
illuminated in darkness, like a circle lit by a bonfire, gives rise to the feeling
that the pain of chaos is ceasing; it is removed in the moment of exaltation of
light contemplation.
This exalted contemplation of light is the primordial experience of Order,
when the human subject overcomes chaos within themselves and in the
world. Fogelin calls this a "transcendent leap," which lies at the heart of the
political system. Accordingly, he views political history precisely as the
evolution of forms of the "transcendent leap." In such a picture, one can
recognise Kant's pure reason, but Fogelin does not simply state its existence;
he seeks to trace its genesis.
At the same time, the thinker asks himself: why is Order so banal? Why
is political thinking in different cultures, peoples and historical eras
characterised by such a surprising poverty of political recipes? All societies
are organised vertically, from top to bottom, with rulers and subordinates
always present; millennia pass, and we change parliaments, chambers of
communes, democracies, dictators, tyrants, presidents, emperors, kings,
princes, oligarchs in different ways, repeating an extremely limited set of
patterns. That is, in every type of society there is an astonishing poverty of
political forms. This is how Fogelin problematises the "hyperbanality" of
politics. Humanity is extremely diverse in its culture, art and language; it has
countless possibilities, orientations and value systems. The chaos of life, the
chaos of the subject and the object is open and practically infinite, so why,
with such wealth and abundance, do we have such a striking contrast in the
primitiveness of the political order?
All types of political orders are remarkably similar, and in all societies
we always see the same thing: a dominant subject, a subordinate object, and
instruments of subordination in the form of intermediaries who shuttle
between the top and the bottom, conveying the will of the top to the bottom
and the discontent of the bottom to the top, profiting from this differential.
According to Fogel, this is the Order, which is primitive in stark contrast to
the richness of life. Life is rich and multidimensional, while Order is
primitive and dull, as if man suddenly ceases to be humanto Fogel, this is the Order, which is primitive in stark contrast to
the richness of life. Life is rich and multidimensional, while Order is
primitive and dull, as if man suddenly ceases to be human

--- PAGE BREAK ---e Order, which is primitive in stark contrast to
the richness of life. Life is rich and multidimensional, while Order is
primitive and dull, as if man suddenly ceases to be human

--- PAGE BREAK ---

288
Part 3. The Political Paradigm of Modernity. The War of Concepts
and becomes a machine that, like a mechanism, reproduces strictly the same
thing — contrary to real possibilities. There is creativity, diversity of forms
and creative achievements everywhere — everywhere except in the sphere of
politics.
Fogelin concludes that this is the fate of the rationalisation of chaos, and
since Order is nothing more than the antithesis of chaos, its task is to
reduce diversity and reduce all chaotic richness to simplicity through a
transcendent effort. Therefore, order is a process of simplifying chaos. Order
is banal, primitive and insignificant, because that is its nature. The task of
Order is to simplify to the limit the richness of the chaotic subject and the
chaotic object. And in this, according to Fogel, lies the meaning of politics:
politics is a form of reduction of the complex chaos of life to the
transcendent simplicity of some fundamental organisation.
He goes on to say that this can develop in two ways: gradually or abruptly.
To create a stable order, Fogel believes (and this is where his liberalism lies)
that action must be taken gradually. Chaos must be brought together, moving
step by step. An infinitely complex chaotic system must be ordered through a
step-by-step reduction in the number of bifurcation (1)links. According to
Fogelin, the main element in creating a stable (normative) order is precisely
the sequence of reducing the degrees of chaos. Any order is a reduction of the
degrees of chaos to zero — this is its meaning. Order is a method of
transforming wealth into poverty, a large number of possibilities into a small
number. In essence, order is the taming (and ultimately the cessation) of life,
the transition from life to death.
When constructing order, it is best to move gradually, from complete
chaos to partial chaos, to less chaos, to semi-order, to almost order, and so on,
at each stage unfolding around the next "transcendental leap" of the system of
political institutions, interactions, and structures. This gradual transition from
the non-political, the vital, the political to the chaotic constitutes, according
to Fogel, the process of political organisation. Liberalism, in his opinion, is
the best way to transition from chaos to order because it is the most
consistent (here there is
1Bifurcation (from Latin bifurcus, meaning "forked") is a qualitative change in the
behaviour of a dynamic system when its parameters change by an infinitesimal amount. The
bifurcation model is the basis of chaotic systems. There are predictable particle trajectories,
and there are unpredictable ones — bifurcation trajectories: for example, a particle reaches a
certain point and can fly either to the right or to the left with equal probability. Knowing where
it is flying from and where it is flying to, we cannot calculate whether it will reach its
destination.ain point and can fly either to the right or to the left with equal probability. Knowing where
it is flying from and where it is flying to, we cannot calculate whether it will reach its
destination.

--- PAGE BREAK ---y either to the right or to the left with equal probability. Knowing where
it is flying from and where it is flying to, we cannot calculate whether it will reach its
destination.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

289
Chapter 5. Liberalism (the first political theory). John Locke and his legacy
direct democracy of the first level, referendum of the second level,
representation of the third level, etc.) Fogelin understands liberal democracy
as the most consistent system for transforming chaotic nature. In other words,
it is a way of overcoming chaos that seeks to preserve the richness of life as
much as possible, i.e., to incorporate chaos into itself to some extent.
Unlike most liberals, Fogelin does not view progress as something
strictly linear and progressive. For him, it is a more nuanced process. He cites
Greece and the Middle Ages as examples of exemplary forms of democratic
order, where political systems developed that allowed order to be organised
with great elegance and a high degree of persuasiveness. Therefore, from his
point of view, liberal democracy can be found even more readily in the
Middle Ages than in modern society — small communities governed
themselves, larger ones in a more complex and comprehensive, but still
mostly non-linear way. Moreover, the complexity of the system of
governance could include double or even triple subordination that did not
contradict each other (for example, vassal, communal, ecclesiastical, etc.).
The multidimensional system of management levels, which reduces
complexity to simplicity, chaos to order, does not necessarily reach its limit
in liberalism, notes Fogel, but the very idea of gradual transition is important,
as it attempts to preserve some of the diversity of chaotic life in politics. In
this, Fogelin somewhat converges with Hayek, who emphasised the absence
of a project and the adaptability of social structures in a market society.
In general, according to Fogelin, the movement towards transcendence is
nothing more than a process of lowering the status of (chaotic) immanence
while preserving its immanent property, which finds its ultimate
conceptual embodiment in the democratic system.
Such an apologetic view of gradualism, which would ensure the
maximum vitality of Order and include certain elements of chaos that would
preserve at least part of the richness of the world, led Fogel to sharply
criticise totalitarian regimes, in which this transition to Order was abrupt and
coercive, and the simplification of chaos was violent, cruel and conflictual.
Fogelin quite rightly considered totalitarian regimes to be a phenomenon of
political modernity and interpreted them as "political heresies" or, more
generally, forms of "political Gnosticism" (1).Christian
1  Voegelin E. Das Volk Gottes. Sektenbewegungen und der Geist der Moderne. Munich: Fink,
1994.rpreted them as "political heresies" or, more
generally, forms of "political Gnosticism" (1).Christian
1  Voegelin E. Das Volk Gottes. Sektenbewegungen und der Geist der Moderne. Munich: Fink,
1994.

--- PAGE BREAK ---itical heresies" or, more
generally, forms of "political Gnosticism" (1).Christian
1  Voegelin E. Das Volk Gottes. Sektenbewegungen und der Geist der Moderne. Munich: Fink,
1994.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

290
Part 3. The Political Paradigm of Modernity. The War of Concepts
Gnostics, recognised as heretics in the earliest stages of Christianity, were
distinguished by their radical opposition to the true spiritual world of
immanent reality. This gave rise to a deep conflict with their surroundings
and fierce opposition to it. According to Fogel, communism and fascism are
typical representatives of such Gnosticism, based on blindness, obsession
with Order, and a pathological hatred of chaos with all its vital and cultural
richness. People who suffer from chaos, who are overly concerned with its
dispersion and spontaneity, try to impose this Order violently on everything
they touch, sharply and immediately — bypassing all intermediate stages.
The lack of order on the periphery of politics gives rise to an excess of
simplified, reduced order, imposed without taking into account intermediate
models.
In general, these same considerations regarding the nature of
totalitarianism and its critique could also be applied to certain forms of
liberal democracy itself, especially in its later manifestation, when it
remained the sole and completely dominant political ideology after the
defeat of fascism and the collapse of communist regimes in Eastern
Europe and Russia. The liberal order in its globalist version deals no less
harshly with the chaotic diversity of life, cultures and peoples than the second
and third political theories. Therefore, Foghlin's views cannot be fully
attributed to liberal orthodoxy, and in part they can be seen as a direction of
liberalism from which a transition to the Fourth Political Theory is
possible.
Leo Strauss: the need to lie
Another important political philosopher of the liberal 20th century, Leo
Strauss (1899–1973), was partly in tune with Fogelin and Carl Schmitt. Like
Fogelin, Leo Strauss emigrated from Europe to the United States after the
Nazis came to power.
Leo
Strauss
developed
an
original
system
of
political
philosophy2based on the assertion that there is a
fundamental
epistemological dualism between the intellectual elite of society and the
masses. The elite is capable of systematic rational thinking and therefore,
already in Antiquity, created a sophisticated rationalist scientific culture
that was sceptical of myths, religions and rituals. According to L. Strauss, the
intellectual
1   Dugin, A. G. The Fourth Way. Introduction to the Fourth Political Theory.
2   Strauss, L. Introduction to Political Philosophy. Moscow: Izograf, 2000.s. According to L. Strauss, the
intellectual
1   Dugin, A. G. The Fourth Way. Introduction to the Fourth Political Theory.
2   Strauss, L. Introduction to Political Philosophy. Moscow: Izograf, 2000.

--- PAGE BREAK ---trauss, the
intellectual
1   Dugin, A. G. The Fourth Way. Introduction to the Fourth Political Theory.
2   Strauss, L. Introduction to Political Philosophy. Moscow: Izograf, 2000.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

291
Chapter 5. Liberalism (the first political theory). John Locke and his legacy
The intellectual elite is capable of perceiving the world from a scientific
perspective, critically reflecting on themselves and the surrounding reality,
clearly distinguishing between object and subject, and constructing logical
systems. But before the advent of the Modern Age, the elite preferred to pass
on this knowledge and these skills in a closed environment, educating their
own kind, but not spreading their rationalism and, to some extent, scepticism
to the wider society, to the masses. It was only with the Enlightenment that
rationalism, logic and scientific realism went beyond the narrow confines of
the aristocracy and became accessible to the wider population. This was the
essence of European democracy: whereas liberalism had previously been the
preserve of the highly educated upper classes, it was now being passed on to
the whole of society in the context of civil society. But according to L.
Strauss, the mentality of the masses is organised in a fundamentally different
way. It is incapable of perceiving logical constructs and gravitates towards
myth, faith, religion and ritual. According to L. Strauss, the masses live only
in a "world of life" based on unverifiable, illogical and unscientific
(mythological) ideas. In pre-modern societies, the elites understood this
perfectly and therefore clothed their rational and scientific ideas in
mythological and religious forms: this was the only way to share knowledge
with the masses. But the modern era created a paradoxical situation: elite
knowledge ( in particular, the scientific picture of the world) was transmitted
directly to the masses, without a mythological shell. But the masses could not
cope with this and turned science, logic and democracy into yet another myth.
For L. Strauss, the phenomenon of Nazi Germany, from which he had to flee,
was a striking example of this contradiction. — Two centuries after the
Enlightenment, the German people easily fell prey to the most extravagant
myths. This means that rationalism and scientific culture failed to penetrate
the masses and existed as a myth themselves — only a "democratic" and
"liberal" one. Faced with a stronger
myth, the Germans immediately became fascinated by it.
From this observation, L. Strauss drew a pessimistic conclusion:
scientific knowledge, the attainment of full individual freedom, and a
coherent, responsible personality — that is, the basic postulates of liberalism
— are possible only as properties of a minority. Therefore, the enlightened
liberal elite must clothe their ideals in special mythological forms and only
in this form pass them on to the masses, since the masses, as such, cannot
perceive rational theses and immediately distort them. This is how the theory
of the "noble lie" emerged, which is necessary for the advancement of the
ideals of progress and equality in the world.perceive rational theses and immediately distort them. This is how the theory
of the "noble lie" emerged, which is necessary for the advancement of the
ideals of progress and equality in the world.

--- PAGE BREAK ---heses and immediately distort them. This is how the theory
of the "noble lie" emerged, which is necessary for the advancement of the
ideals of progress and equality in the world.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

292
Part 3. The Political Paradigm of Modernity. The War of Concepts
Here we see a combination of anthropological pessimism (characteristic
of Hobbes and realism) with liberalism, which, in the spirit of Spencer,
becomes elitist in Leo Strauss's view, that is, the preserve of elites who are
called upon to rule the masses, either because they are incapable of achieving
liberal democracy or because they are moving in this direction very slowly
and from time to time falling back into simpler mythological and religious
belief systems. Here we again approach Fogel's idea of "political religion."
The philosophical truth accessible to liberal elites is that the world is
material and that there is no Spirit, no God, no sacredness. Only mechanical
laws operate in the world and society, but only the elite know this. In L.
Strauss, the elite is described as the bearer of the Modern paradigm, and he
extends this hypothesis to the elite of traditional society — including Plato,
whom he considers a sceptic, atheist and rationalist forced to hide his true
views under the guise of idealistic teachings.
Since the elite knows that there is no transcendence, only the material
interests of certain groups, and the masses cannot understand this, the elite
rules the masses. If the masses were to discover this
"truth," they would go mad or even die of horror — because they need to
"believe in something sacred." In traditional society, religions existed for this
purpose; in the modern era, the masses believe in ideology and politics. The
elites, who understand that nothing "ideal" exists (all elites, according to L.
Strauss, are deliberately materialists, atomists, and supporters of the
philosophy of Democritus and Epicurus), and that there are only selfish
interests within the limits of global piggery and the struggle for them, they
tell the masses myths that they are happy to believe — about morality,
humanism, equality, democracy, human rights, etc. In fact, Leo Strauss
argues that the elite lies, and, moreover, it has always lied everywhere,
knowing that everything is material and utilitarian, that only money, pleasure
and selfishness rule. But to the masses it said the exact opposite: that there is
faith, hope, dignity, justice, progress, etc.
Here we again encounter a combination of anthropological pessimism in
the spirit of Hobbes and an unconditional commitment to liberal-
individualistic values, concepts and theories. L. Strauss neither justifies nor
condemns this state of affairs; he simply states it as fact, since, in his opinion,
it cannot be otherwise. He considers the only solution to be a policy of
including ever wider circles in the elite,ondemns this state of affairs; he simply states it as fact, since, in his opinion,
it cannot be otherwise. He considers the only solution to be a policy of
including ever wider circles in the elite,

--- PAGE BREAK ---f affairs; he simply states it as fact, since, in his opinion,
it cannot be otherwise. He considers the only solution to be a policy of
including ever wider circles in the elite,

--- PAGE BREAK ---

293
Chapter 5. Liberalism (the first political theory). John Locke and his legacy
who will gradually become accustomed to a sceptical and materialistic
understanding of the nature of the world and society, and thus accept
liberalism in its realistic form — beyond political and religious illusions.
Here, Fogel's gradualism takes on a somewhat different — more pragmatic
— meaning.
The idea of justifying the lies of the elites in the name of liberalism in
practice was borrowed from Leo Strauss by an influential American
neoconservative movement, which combined liberalism with a certain degree
of realism. In contemporary American political practice, many of Leo
Strauss's concepts and theories have been adopted.
F. Fukuyama: the thesis of the "end of history "
After the collapse of the socialist camp and the USSR, a number of
Western political scientists, analysts and experts came to believe that this
event marked the end of the complex dialectic of the stages of globalisation
and that from now on the world would become fully integrated and liberal,
since nothing could prevent the development of the liberal-capitalist
paradigm that had prevailed on a global scale. Globalists viewed these
changes with optimism and believed that the "point of no return" had been
passed and that the world had already become global, unified and planetary,
with residual conflicts and contradictions gradually smoothing themselves
out.
This view was held in the early 1990s by American political scientist
Francis Fukuyama, who wrote the epoch-making text "The End of History"
2. Fukuyama drew on the philosophy of history of Hegel, who believed that
the embodiment of the Idea in the historical process is oriented towards its
culmination in the Absolute Spirit. History, having become meaningful, will
prove to be finite: having achieved a certain goal, it will exhaust its content.
K. Marx applied Hegel's thesis to his version of the dialectical
development of productive forces and production relations, which was
supposed to end in a world revolution and the advent of the "communist
formation" as the "end of history." Hegelian philosopher A. Kojève3  (1902–
1968) suggested that history could end with the complete planetary triumph
of liberal capitalism, the market and bourgeois democracy. Francis
Fukuyama, analysing the collapse of the USSR, believed that Kozhev's
version was coming true before our very eyes
1  Dugin, A. G. Noomakhia. Civilisations of the New World. Pragmatics of Dreams and the
Decomposition of Horizons. Moscow: Academic Project, 2017.
2   Fukuyama, F. The End of History and the Last Man. Moscow: AST, 2004.
3   Kozhev, A. V. Introduction to Reading Hegel. St. Petersburg: Nauka, 2013.tion of Horizons. Moscow: Academic Project, 2017.
2   Fukuyama, F. The End of History and the Last Man. Moscow: AST, 2004.
3   Kozhev, A. V. Introduction to Reading Hegel. St. Petersburg: Nauka, 2013.

--- PAGE BREAK ---scow: Academic Project, 2017.
2   Fukuyama, F. The End of History and the Last Man. Moscow: AST, 2004.
3   Kozhev, A. V. Introduction to Reading Hegel. St. Petersburg: Nauka, 2013.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

294
Part 3. The Political Paradigm of Modernity. The War of Concepts
interpretations of Hegel, and wrote first a programmatic article and then a
book with the corresponding title.
According to Fukuyama, the meaning of "the end of history" boils down
to the end of the major political conflicts that tore humanity apart in previous
stages and thus constituted the content of the historical process. Once upon a
time, in the "barbarian" era, everyone fought everyone else, and the law of
the strongest prevailed. In modern times, nation states were declared the
subjects of history and the bearers of sovereignty, and this principle formed
the basis of the Westphalian system. Nation states fought each other and thus
shaped European history and, through their colonial epics, the history of the
rest of the world. After the Second World War, rivalry between nations
receded into the background in the face of the ideological confrontation
between global capitalism and global socialism, and the meaning of history
became the confrontation between two political and economic systems. The
collapse of the USSR and the victory of the West in the Cold War brought
this period to an end, and thus history no longer has any content or meaning.
During the ideological confrontation with communism, the bourgeois states
became sufficiently close to each other to become the basis of a new socio-
political and economic order, and the disappearance of the ideological enemy
theoretically allows liberal democracy, the market economy and the ideology
of "human rights" to spread throughout the world. In such a situation, nation
states will gradually die out, and politics will be completely replaced by
economics. Economics has no history, as it has no meaning, no dramatic
tension, no substance. The world will become a global market in which
logistics and optimisation will prevail, allowing lagging participants in the
global economy to gradually catch up with developed, advanced societies.
Later, Fukuyama significantly revised his views and acknowledged that
his prediction had been overly optimistic, but his corrections and reservations
are much less interesting than his main thesis about the "end of history." The
point is not that he was hasty and jumped to conclusions, but that he
accurately reproduced the philosophy of contemporary globalism in its most
complete, consistent and coherent form. Fukuyama's ideas seemed quite
realistic in the 1990s, when a "unipolar moment" (Ch. Krauthammer) had
established itself in the world architecture.
1Fukuyama, F. Ideas Matter. A Conversation with A. Dugin // Profile. 2007. No.
23(531).tic in the 1990s, when a "unipolar moment" (Ch. Krauthammer) had
established itself in the world architecture.
1Fukuyama, F. Ideas Matter. A Conversation with A. Dugin // Profile. 2007. No.
23(531).

--- PAGE BREAK ---en a "unipolar moment" (Ch. Krauthammer) had
established itself in the world architecture.
1Fukuyama, F. Ideas Matter. A Conversation with A. Dugin // Profile. 2007. No.
23(531).

--- PAGE BREAK ---

295
Chapter 5. Liberalism (the first political theory). John Locke and his legacy
The First Political Theory: liberalism
We refer to liberalism as the first political theory of the modern era. It
emerged earlier than others, formed on the basis of the Hobbesian
paradigm, but with a qualitative reinterpretation of anthropology — from
the pessimistic version of Hobbes himself to the neutral and optimistic
version (in Locke and later in Kant). Liberalism became the most
consistent ideological expression of capitalism and bourgeois society. It was
liberal ideology that placed the idea of enlightenment, education, progress
and development at the centre of attention.
Politically, liberalism is expressed in liberal democracy, but in certain
cases it allows for oligarchy (as the rule of the wealthiest members of
bourgeois society) and even enlightened monarchy, which is called upon
to create the conditions for subsequent democratic structures through
education and reforms from above. It is obvious that in this case, the
rejected and despised systems of social organisation — democracy, the
selfish bodily pig-polis, the community of "idiots," political atomism —
are, in the eyes of the Platonists (the ideal state, Callipolis) and
Aristotelians (the normal state), as well as supporters of similar theories
developed in a similar topology during the Christian Middle Ages, are taken
as a model, extolled and glorified in every way. But in the end, only the
rhetoric and subjective assessment change: what in the eyes of the
Platonists, Aristotelians (as well as Catholics and Orthodox Christians)
looks like ugliness and degeneration, a kind of political-philosophical
"heresy" (the political philosophy of Mother, the Receptor, the "chorus"),
is regarded by liberals as the highest achievement of freedom (from all
forms of collective identity), progress, the advent of happy times and a
way out of medieval obscurantism. However, from the point of view of
Politica Aeterna, these rhetorical figures are secondary and do not reflect
reality in any way. If we abstract from how we evaluate the structures
themselves, the basic theses and the main semantic axes of the three
political paradigms, we see that it is liberal ideology that bears the greatest
resemblance to the philosophical foundations of what Plato describes as
the third kind of being, as the realm of pure multiplicity (L_``a), as the
figure of the Mother, as Aristotle's "chora" or "matter" (Z`b). In the three-part
structure of the world, political Platonism (in all its versions) represents
Heaven, the Aristotelian model represents the intermediate world, Earth, and
liberalism represents the underground world.structure of the world, political Platonism (in all its versions) represents
Heaven, the Aristotelian model represents the intermediate world, Earth, and
liberalism represents the underground world.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

materialism
atomism
speculative realism post-
individualism object-oriented ontology
Kant
pure
reason
constructivism
Artificial
Intelligence
virtuality
practical reason
Lucretius
Occam
Boden
Luther
Locke
A. Smith
Bentha
m
J.S. Mill
negative
Soros
colour revolutions
Epicurus
Democritus
Duns
Scotus
hicceitas
Machiavelli
Galileo
utilitarianism
laissez-faire
freetrading
freedom
Mises
Popper
open
society
Fukuyama
globalism
$%&
Newton
Calvin
tabula rasa
neutral
growt
h
Hayek
Stross
Levkipp
nihilism
Roscelin
Hobbes
Egoistic
religious
civil society invisible hand of
the market
progress
economic
Spencer
social
Darwinism
struggle
for survival
Fogel
totalitarian
rational individualism
   Middle Ages
Renaissance
Reformation
Modern
Postmodern
The genesis and formation of liberal ideology (the first political theory)
atomism
universalia post rem
nominalism
pacifism
cosmopolitanism
Neoliberalism
divideum

--- PAGE BREAK ---odern
Postmodern
The genesis and formation of liberal ideology (the first political theory)
atomism
universalia post rem
nominalism
pacifism
cosmopolitanism
Neoliberalism
divideum

--- PAGE BREAK ---

297
Chapter 5. Liberalism (the first political theory). John Locke and his legacy
areas of existence, a progressive descent towards the centre of gravity,
towards the material core 1, in the process of gradually liberating materiality
— that is, the atom, the core of the individual, the dimension of radical
objectivity — from all transcendent and strictly subjective forms.
Liberalism emerged earlier than other political ideologies of the
modern era and lasted longer than them. Its victories over illiberal
versions of modernity (fascism and communism) led to its triumph on a
global scale by the end of the 20th century. If we trace the ideological fate of
the 20th century, we see a clash between three ideologies: liberal, communist
and fascist. The first two defeated the third in 1945, and in 1991, the first
defeated the second. Thus, throughout the Modern Age, liberalism
remained the dominant conceptual matrix and can well be considered
synonymous with the political philosophy of the Modern Age. Of course,
the political philosophy of the New Age is paradigmatically broader than
Locke and Kant (just as Hobbes is broader and more fundamental than
Locke), but nevertheless, it is precisely the idea of an optimistic anthropology
characteristic of liberalism (as well as communism, or more precisely,
borrowed from liberals and communists) that is the dominant trend in the
political philosophy of this period.
The idea of the individual as a "blank slate" has deep theoretical
connections with the very semantic core of the Modern Age. This brings us to
the fundamental law of Modern political philosophy: liberalism is the
dominant force here. From Locke to the modern United States, the Anglo-
Saxon world as a whole, the European Union and practically the rest of the
world, first during colonisation, then westernisation and modernisation, and
finally globalisation, it is the liberal paradigm that has become
unquestionably dominant. Thus, liberalism (capitalism, bourgeois society and
its philosophy) won the historical battle, first against traditional society, then
against illiberal alternatives within the modern world, and since the end of the
20th century has become the main — and, in essence, the only — operating
system of ideology, politics and culture on a global scale.
1   Land N. Fanged   Noumena:   Collected   Writings   1987–2007;   Negarestani R.
Cyclonopedia: Complicity with Anonymous Materials.
2   Dugin, A. G. The Fourth Way. Introduction to the Fourth Political Theory.Fanged   Noumena:   Collected   Writings   1987–2007;   Negarestani R.
Cyclonopedia: Complicity with Anonymous Materials.
2   Dugin, A. G. The Fourth Way. Introduction to the Fourth Political Theory.

--- PAGE BREAK ---Collected   Writings   1987–2007;   Negarestani R.
Cyclonopedia: Complicity with Anonymous Materials.
2   Dugin, A. G. The Fourth Way. Introduction to the Fourth Political Theory.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

Chapter 6. Communism (the second
political theory): the dialectic of the vortex
in history
The Second Political Theory
Now we move on to the second political theory, which includes all
types of left-wing, i.e. anti-capitalist, ideologies that are critical of the
bourgeois system. The most vivid and complete systematic expression of the
second political theory is undoubtedly Marxism, which is the most developed
and detailed theory and has achieved impressive, albeit sometimes
monstrous, practical results in history. But all types of leftist thought, both
Marxist and non-Marxist, collectively referred to as socialism or social
democracy (as opposed to bourgeois or liberal democracy, i.e., the first
political theory), have something fundamentally in common at the level of
fundamental philosophical assumptions. The common denominator of the
second political theory is its attitude towards the individual. Materialism,
belief in progress, recognition of the domination of history and time as the
only form of existence, a scientific picture of the world, obsession with
technical development, as well as conviction in the necessity of the final
abolition of states and the creation of a single global cosmopolitan humanity,
all this is common to both the first and second political theories. Up to a
certain point, they are in solidarity with each other and evaluate both the
content and even the moral significance of historical processes — above all,
those of the modern era — in the same way. Thus, both liberals and
communists are in complete solidarity in their opposition to traditional
society, both in its ancient and medieval forms. They unanimously reject
vertical organisation, hierarchy, sacred politics, the ideal state of the Father
and the normal state of the Son with all their corresponding metaphysical,
anthropological, cultural and political forms. Thus, liberals and socialists,
to a certain extent, represent a common front of Modernity against
Tradition, pol-ll their corresponding metaphysical,
anthropological, cultural and political forms. Thus, liberals and socialists,
to a certain extent, represent a common front of Modernity against
Tradition, pol-

--- PAGE BREAK ---ng metaphysical,
anthropological, cultural and political forms. Thus, liberals and socialists,
to a certain extent, represent a common front of Modernity against
Tradition, pol-

--- PAGE BREAK ---

Chapter 6. Communism (the second political theory): the dialectic of the whirlwind in history
299
agreeing with both the assessment of the "old order" and the moral and
historical imperative of transition to democracy, the authorities of the
bourgeoisie. But the differences begin further on. For liberals, bourgeois
democracy is the logical culmination of political and historical progress.
History ends with it. This line was taken to its logical conclusion in the
1990s by the American liberal Francis Fukuyama.Therefore, capitalism and
equality of opportunity are considered the highest limit of liberation. Here,
individualism reaches its apogee. In Plato's model of Parmenides, it is not
simply a question of the triumph of the last four hypotheses, which deny
the One out of the nine, but precisely of a deeper and deeper immersion into
pure multiplicity, that is, the liberation of the individual atom from all
forms of collective identity. This means that from the sixth hypothesis,
which allows for an artificial and secondary "One," liberalism calls for a
move to the seventh hypothesis, which denies the necessity of this "One,"
and further from the eighth hypothesis, within which many (i.e., atoms)
correlate with other many (with other atoms), to the last, ninth, where many
do not correlate with other many, but only with themselves. This is how
extreme individualism is achieved, the most complete expression of which
has already become, in the 21st century, the philosophy of speculative
realism or object-oriented ontology.
Marxism, while not rejecting individualism, interprets it in a completely
different way. It totally rejects the idea that bourgeois reforms liberate the
individual. Marx believes that capital is a mechanical dependence that
prevents
true
individuality
from
unfolding,
and
therefore
liberal
individualism is an anthropological fraud. It is not the individual that prevails
in it, but only a particular aspect of human nature, embodied in hidden
aggression (a reference to Hobbes). Like Locke, Marx is convinced that
people can be re-educated, but such re-education is achieved through a
radical change in the form of society, through the destruction of the bourgeois
order and the establishment of a political order based on complete and perfect
1   Fukuyama, F. The End of History and the Last Man.
2  Bryant L. R., Harman G., Srnicek N. The Speculative Turn: Continental Materialism and
Realism. Melbourne: Re.Press, 2011.
3Louis Dumont rightly notes: "The socialist Marx believed in the individual so strongly that
there was no analogue to this belief in Hobbes, Rousseau, Hegel, or even Locke. It is possible that
such socialism, and such a rise in faith in the individual after the French Revolution, became
possible only after the period of 1840–1850." Dimont L. Essays on Individualism. An
Anthropological Perspective on Modern Ideology. P.: Seuil, 1983. P. 131.idual after the French Revolution, became
possible only after the period of 1840–1850." Dimont L. Essays on Individualism. An
Anthropological Perspective on Modern Ideology. P.: Seuil, 1983. P. 131.

--- PAGE BREAK ---ch Revolution, became
possible only after the period of 1840–1850." Dimont L. Essays on Individualism. An
Anthropological Perspective on Modern Ideology. P.: Seuil, 1983. P. 131.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

300
Part 3. The Political Paradigm of Modernity. The War of Concepts
absolute equality and the absence of any kind of property superiority on the
part of anyone. Only complete equality will allow us to achieve the true
nature of the atom and make the individual truly free. The freedom (liberty)
that liberals pursue and extol is a pseudo-freedom that preserves, along with
inequality, dependence on capital and harsh mechanisms of exploitation.
Capitalism is incompatible with the true freedom of all individuals, since a
significant part of them, the proletariat, the working class, finds itself in a
position of slavery, and therefore their individuality cannot be justified or
fully revealed. Thus, socialists fundamentally disagree with liberals on the
interpretation of individuality, placing the main emphasis on equality,
without which liberation is impossible.
Another fundamental difference between the second political theory and
the first is the attitude towards the artificial "unity" of the sixth and seventh
hypotheses of Plato's Parmenides. Thus, liberalism moves towards the
abolition of this "one" formed by the many (i.e., from the sixth hypothesis
to the ninth), while socialism stops at the sixth, but makes the principle of
equality of the many a condition for this "one." That is, in the eyes of
socialists and communists, the "one" created by the many must be total and
not allow division into two classes (which is what they accuse liberals of)
or into national territories (which is the fundamental difference between
international communism and nationalists, representatives of the third
political theory).
Campanella: the rational city
In the full sense of the word, the second political theory only finally took
shape in the 19th century with Marx, but it had predecessors, the most distant
of whom include the Anabaptists of Müntzer or the creators of such
rationalistic utopias as Tommaso Campanella (1568–1639) or Francis
Bacon (1561–1626).
The Calabrian monk Tommaso Campanella was influenced by the
general ideas of the Renaissance, which combined several diverse trends
— from the Platonism of Marsilio Ficino (1433–1499) and Pico della
Mirandola3  (1463–1494) to the atomism and materialism of Galileo
Galilei (1574–1609) and the scientific revolution.
1  Dumont, L. Homo Equalis. The Genesis and Rise of Economic Ideology. Moscow: Nota Bene,
2000.
2   Ficino M. La religione christiana. Rome: Città Nuova Editrice, 2005.
3Pico della Mirandola Giovanni. De hominis dignitate. Heptaplus. De Ente et Uno. Florence:
Vallecchi, 1942.Nota Bene,
2000.
2   Ficino M. La religione christiana. Rome: Città Nuova Editrice, 2005.
3Pico della Mirandola Giovanni. De hominis dignitate. Heptaplus. De Ente et Uno. Florence:
Vallecchi, 1942.

--- PAGE BREAK ---Ficino M. La religione christiana. Rome: Città Nuova Editrice, 2005.
3Pico della Mirandola Giovanni. De hominis dignitate. Heptaplus. De Ente et Uno. Florence:
Vallecchi, 1942.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

Chapter 6. Communism (the second political theory): the dialectic of the whirlwind in history
301
leia. In the second half of his life, Campanella became close to Galileo,
whose ideas in physics and astronomy he partly accepted.
Campanella, while imprisoned for political reasons, wrote his most
famous work, The City of the Sun 1. In it, he describes a world state built
on the principles of a "new philosophy," which is the philosophy of
Tommaso Campanella himself. The ideal society is created on strictly
rational foundations. It is headed by the Metaphysician, who is obeyed by a
hierarchy of elected authorities structured according to professional
criteria. He embodies the Sun itself, acting as its substitute. His three co-
rulers embody the three main principles of the universe: Power (Pon),
Wisdom (Sin) and Love (Mor). Below them is the Grand Council, and
below that are various professional associations and corporations, each
headed by a "king". All the inhabitants of the City of the Sun work selflessly,
but not to feed themselves, but out of a sense of morality and solidarity. The
rulers distribute wealth based on the principles of justice.
All life in the City of the Sun is extremely rational, everyone is engaged
in their own work, and everyone studies science and the arts. Instead of
historical religions, a "new religion" reigns, in which all three levels of
perception — sensory evidence, rationality, and prophetic mysticism — are
harmoniously combined. The level of knowledge and competence increases
as one rises through the social hierarchy.
"The City of the Sun can be interpreted in different ways, since it does
not yet establish complete equality, but the communists considered the very
principle of rational organisation of society, universal obligation to work,
and the replacement of existing religions with a universal worldview to be
a prototype of their own project for world reorganisation.
Francis Bacon: Atlantis scientists
The author of another utopia that communists considered a model for
their own worldview was the English philosopher and prominent political
figure Francis Bacon, who outlined his views on the optimal structure of a
society based on scientific principles in his book New Atlantis 2. Bacon was
one of the first to formulate a comprehensive programme for scientific
knowledge of nature.
1   Campanella, T. The City of the Sun. Moscow; Leningrad: Publishing House of the Academy of
Sciences of the USSR, 1947.
2   Bacon, F. New Atlantis // Bacon, F. Works: In 2 vols. Vol. 2. Moscow: Mydl, 1978.anella, T. The City of the Sun. Moscow; Leningrad: Publishing House of the Academy of
Sciences of the USSR, 1947.
2   Bacon, F. New Atlantis // Bacon, F. Works: In 2 vols. Vol. 2. Moscow: Mydl, 1978.

--- PAGE BREAK ---of the Sun. Moscow; Leningrad: Publishing House of the Academy of
Sciences of the USSR, 1947.
2   Bacon, F. New Atlantis // Bacon, F. Works: In 2 vols. Vol. 2. Moscow: Mydl, 1978.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

302
Part 3. The Political Paradigm of Modernity. The War of Concepts
based on induction and experiment, becoming the founder of modern
empiricism. Developing medieval nominalism, Bacon argues that true
ideas about things can only be obtained through sensory experience, from
which alone we should derive our knowledge of the surrounding world.
Bacon, in his New Organon, asserts that only pure experience gained
from experiments on matter, free from projections of "ghosts" (eidolons)
onto it, should form the basis of true scientific knowledge and become the
main methodological basis of modern science. Behind this attitude, it is
easy to see the implication of the identity of being and matter and the
secondary nature (reflectivity) of reason, which merely reflects the
structure of materiality (i.e., full-fledged materialism). We can easily find
the premises of this method in Duns Scotus's teaching on the uniqueness
of being and in William of Ockham.
On the other hand, Francis Bacon proposes an active part of the scientific
programme, consisting in the subjugation of nature to man. If earlier, Francis
Bacon argues, people understood nature episodically and subjugated it to
themselves from time to time, from now on the complete and total
subjugation of nature must become a conscious task of humanity. There is
nothing in nature except materiality, which must be studied through
experience and subjugated to man through practice, proclaims F. Bacon.
There is nothing to contemplate in nature except "eidolons," ghosts, and
therefore it must be conquered and made to serve the interests of humanity.
Francis Bacon was one of the first in Europe not only to express but also
to fundamentally substantiate the theory of progress. For him, progress
consists in the accumulation of knowledge, which predetermines the vector
structure of the development of science — from a minimum of knowledge to a
maximum of knowledge. Along this axis, social time is constructed, moving
from minus to plus, and thus representing progress, an irreversible movement
forward. Humanity, following the path of experience and conquest of nature,
continuously strengthens its potential — becoming more and more intelligent
and more and more powerful. Hence Francis Bacon's formula: "Scientia
potentia est" ("Knowledge is power").
All three main points of Francis Bacon's philosophy — the recognition of
the identity of being and matter and the fictitiousness ("ghostliness,"
"nominality") of eidetic forms, on the one hand, and the strict volitional
determination to conquer and subjugate nature as the dominant factor, on the
other hand — are
1   Bacon, F. New Organon. Moscow: Direct Media, 2002.forms, on the one hand, and the strict volitional
determination to conquer and subjugate nature as the dominant factor, on the
other hand — are
1   Bacon, F. New Organon. Moscow: Direct Media, 2002.

--- PAGE BREAK ---nd, and the strict volitional
determination to conquer and subjugate nature as the dominant factor, on the
other hand — are
1   Bacon, F. New Organon. Moscow: Direct Media, 2002.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

Chapter 6. Communism (the second political theory): the dialectic of the whirlwind in history
303
scientific knowledge — on the other hand, and confidence in the
accumulation of scientific knowledge and scientific progress — on the third,
constitute the semantic axis of the Modern paradigm.
F. Bacon describes the ideal society built on the principles of a
scientific worldview in his work "New Atlantis," which paints a picture of
a state headed by pure rationality, the laws of empiricism, and the
constant accumulation of scientific data. The scientific utopia described
by Francis Bacon became the prototype for the organisation of the British
Royal Society.
For communists, as in the case of Campanella's "City of the Sun," we are
dealing with a political project to transform society on scientific and rational
principles. At the same time, in the case of both utopias, we are talking about
the creation of a kind of "unity" from individual particles, which became the
main idea of socialism, that is, the connections (Latin socius — "following
together," "accompanying," "companion") of all with all, and this became the
main idea of socialism.
"unity" from individual particles, which became the main idea of socialism,
i.e., the connections (Latin: socius — "following together," "accompanying,"
"companion") of all with all, and communism (Latin: communis, "common").
Benedict Spinoza: substantialism
The philosophy of Benedict Spinoza (1632–1677) plays an important
role in the genealogy of Marxist materialism and atheism. Spinoza's
philosophy represents the first historical attempt to construct a
metaphysical system based on the principle of pure immanence. All
European philosophy of Antiquity, the Middle Ages, and all Christian
dogma were built on a vertical topography that affirmed the ontological
primacy of God over nature, the world, the elements, and people, that is, on
transcendence.
This transcendence persisted in all versions and all
theological and philosophical systems until Spinoza.
Benedict Spinoza was the first to clearly and openly proclaim the directly
opposite metaphysical thesis: God is not transcendent to the world, but
immanent in it. God is Nature, Spinoza asserts. Deus sive Natura. This in
itself was not simply atheism, but a fundamental change in the entire
metaphysical picture of the world, from which the transcendent dimension
was completely expelled. Before Spinoza, no philosopher, including those
considered materialists, rationalists, and "humanists," dared to assert anything
like this. Usually, materialists recognised God as the cause of the world or,
as in Newton, as a "watchmaker" watching over the planets moving in the
ether so that they do not stray from their orbits.
1   Spinoza, B. Works: In 2 vols. St. Petersburg: Nauka, 1999.he world or,
as in Newton, as a "watchmaker" watching over the planets moving in the
ether so that they do not stray from their orbits.
1   Spinoza, B. Works: In 2 vols. St. Petersburg: Nauka, 1999.

--- PAGE BREAK ---Newton, as a "watchmaker" watching over the planets moving in the
ether so that they do not stray from their orbits.
1   Spinoza, B. Works: In 2 vols. St. Petersburg: Nauka, 1999.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

304
Part 3. The Political Paradigm of Modernity. The War of Concepts
Spinoza's system is entirely derived from the basic principle of pure
immanence. Spinoza asserts that there is a single and absolute beginning,
which he calls substance. It is the cause of itself (causa sui) and proceeds
from itself (sui generis), that is, from its own identity. This principle is
everything; it is the world, it is God, and it is nature. Creation from nothing
is impossible, since there is neither a transcendent God nor nothingness.
Spinoza says as much: "nam ex nihilo nihil fit" ("nothing comes from
nothing").
Substance is ontologically unified, but within itself it is divided into
two derivatives (as in Descartes) into the thinking principle (res cogens) and
extension (res extensa). The unity of substance guarantees the knowability
of the world, since what is known and what is known are two sides of the
same thing. God, who is nature, is not a subject, but means substance itself.
Marxist ontology, like most materialistic systems, is entirely derived from
Spinoza's ideas. Later, Marx simply replaced the concept of "substance"
with the concept of "matter" and discarded the word "God" altogether in
order to obtain the general structure of his strictly immanentist and
materialistic ontology.
From the metaphysics of immanentism, Spinoza derives his ethics, which
constitute an important dimension of his philosophy. This ethics is based on
the juxtaposition of three principles:
•necessity,
•freedom, and
•violence.
Necessity is the internal law of the causal unfolding of substance. It is
irrevocable, since it expresses substance itself. Freedom is the following
of this necessity. The ethics of freedom consists in comprehending
necessity through the knowledge of the laws of nature and science, and in
following it. Violence, on the other hand, is an obstacle to the unfolding of
substantial necessity, which is perceived — understood and experienced
— as lack of freedom. Marx borrowed the thesis of freedom as conscious
necessity entirely from Spinoza. In a sense, this is a continuation of
Calvin's doctrine of predestination, but while Calvin still retains the idea
of a transcendent and eternal deity, which is the transcendent subject, in
Spinoza, predestination is already completely inscribed in the substance
itself as necessity and has no meaning other than corresponding to the logic
of the development of this substance.
The theory of desire is based on the principle of necessity — Spinoza
calls it conatus and understands it as the desire of an individualresponding to the logic
of the development of this substance.
The theory of desire is based on the principle of necessity — Spinoza
calls it conatus and understands it as the desire of an individual

--- PAGE BREAK ---gic
of the development of this substance.
The theory of desire is based on the principle of necessity — Spinoza
calls it conatus and understands it as the desire of an individual

--- PAGE BREAK ---

Chapter 6. Communism (the second political theory): the dialectic of the whirlwind in history
305
of the individual as a mode of universal substance to affirm itself. According
to Spinoza, a person wants something not because they find it good, but finds
good what they want. They always want only one thing — the affirmation of
themselves in the structure of causal chains of an all-encompassing
substance, but they express this in many ways. Thus, fundamental
materialism
(in
Spinoza's
view,
substantialism)
and
fundamental
individualism are inextricably linked.
Jean-Jacques Rousseau: direct democracy ( )
An important element in the preparation of the socialist worldview and
the theory of communism is the doctrine formulated by the French
philosopher Jean-Jacques Rousseau 1(1712–1778). Rousseau proposed a
programme of radical reforms. Therefore, he was approached by the most
extreme representatives of revolutionary circles, who insisted on establishing a
regime of direct democracy in France. In his philosophical works, Rousseau
describes the figure of the "ideal savage" (bon sauvage), who lives in
harmony with nature according to the laws of equality, goodness and justice.
the laws of equality, goodness, and justice.
According to Rousseau, the original organisation of society (the
"natural state") is a harmonious coexistence of man with the surrounding
world and with other people. Rousseau extols the "savage," endowing him
with all kinds of virtues. Evil enters society when selfishness, greed,
technology, and culture begin to spread. Rousseau sees civilisation and
technological progress as negative phenomena that lead to the
transformation of the "good savage" into the "evil civilised man."
Complex social institutions — the church, monarchy, state, etc. — represent
for Rousseau alienating superstructures over the living human element.
Like Hobbes, Rousseau sees the origins of society in a "social contract"
that the powerful gradually forget, usurping authority and securing privileges
for themselves and their families. Therefore, Rousseau puts forward the idea
of "direct democracy," built on the rejection of any vertical hierarchy, indirect
representation, and alienating forms of social organisation. This is a return to
the roots of society, to the "social contract," but only in a form that those in
power can no longer turn into a justification for personal or group power.
1   Rousseau, J.-J. Treatises. Moscow: Nauka, 1969.s of society, to the "social contract," but only in a form that those in
power can no longer turn into a justification for personal or group power.
1   Rousseau, J.-J. Treatises. Moscow: Nauka, 1969.

--- PAGE BREAK ---"social contract," but only in a form that those in
power can no longer turn into a justification for personal or group power.
1   Rousseau, J.-J. Treatises. Moscow: Nauka, 1969.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

306
Part 3. The Political Paradigm of Modernity. The War of Concepts
Rousseau's ideal is the "peasant," "simple labourer," while the higher
classes — priests (clergy) and warriors (aristocracy) — are endowed with all
kinds of vices and accused of violating the original purity and harmony of
life that preceded the advent of differentiated civilisation. It is important
to note that, unlike the liberal tradition that prevailed in England,
Rousseau's model of "direct democracy" is the rural community, not the
"demos" of the city.
At the same time, Rousseau thinks of himself as a representative of
Modernity, progress, and the Enlightenment. Thus, Rousseau considers
Christianity to be a harmful phenomenon incompatible with direct
democracy. He is particularly opposed to the idea of original sin, which he
considers an instrument of suppression of free will, imposed on society by
the political elite during the era of the stratification of civilisation into a
minority that usurped power and an oppressed majority deprived of its
natural rights.
The Great French Revolution set itself the goal of putting Rousseau's
teachings into practice, overthrowing the old "feudal," ecclesiastical-
aristocratic, monarchical order and establishing political democracy in its
most radical form for the first time in Europe, which reached its peak under
the Jacobins.
At the same time, Rousseau's political democracy was fundamentally
different from liberalism. Here, the normative figure was not the
townspeople or merchants, but people living in a state as close to nature as
possible. Later, under the influence of this image of the "noble savage,"
Marx and Engels (1820–1895) developed the idea of "cave communism,"
which was of fundamental importance for their theory of the transition of
economic formations.
Rousseau's ideas anticipate communism in that they offer an optimistic
anthropology (man is inherently good, hence the denial of original sin), they
offer a detailed critique of hierarchical structures, including the urban
bourgeoisie, and insist on direct democracy rather than representative
democracy,
which
the
bourgeoisie
defends,
since
for
Rousseau,
"representation" is the main source of the usurpation of the will of the people.
Political materialism: matter as the e of being
Moving directly to the communist ideology formulated by Marx and
Engels, it should be emphasised that it is constructed within the paradigm of
the New Age. In all itsalism: matter as the e of being
Moving directly to the communist ideology formulated by Marx and
Engels, it should be emphasised that it is constructed within the paradigm of
the New Age. In all its

--- PAGE BREAK ---e of being
Moving directly to the communist ideology formulated by Marx and
Engels, it should be emphasised that it is constructed within the paradigm of
the New Age. In all its

--- PAGE BREAK ---

Chapter 6. Communism (the second political theory): the dialectic of the whirlwind in history
307
In some respects, it belongs to what we have called "political Modernism."
Let me remind you of the basic philosophical principle of political modernity:
it is the idea of constructing politics, ontology, cosmology and, if you like,
theology "from the bottom up". That is, it is the idea that the basic ontological
reality is the bottom, a certain horizon of the lower world, defined by the
concept of
"matter."
This is the meaning of materialism as the basis of Marxist philosophy
and communism. Among other political ideologies of the Modern era,
communism, the second political theory, insists most strongly on explicit
dogmatic materialism. For Marx and Engels, materialism is not some
routine given of the general scientific picture of the world, but the
fundamental basis of all ideology. Everything in communism is built
precisely on materialism and on the conviction, irrefutable for communists
themselves, of the materiality of the world. Liberalism is built on
materialism and implies it, but — as in the case of Kant, for example —
there can be bourgeois-capitalist theories that offer their own, somewhat
different forms of ontology and epistemology. In some cases, materialism
may remain latent, unmanifested, and this does not violate the coherence
of liberal philosophy. For the second political theory, materialism is precisely
an ideological and political dogma. No one insists as harshly and
unambiguously as communists on the materiality of the world and the
primacy of matter. Therefore, it is necessary to reiterate once again the place
that matter occupies in the general structure of Politica Aeterna, especially
since this concept takes on such an important political dimension in the
second political theory.
Earlier, we discussed the political philosophy of the Father, where
ideas exist, and copies of the phenomenal world exist only through their
connection to the idea (political Platonism). We also discussed the political
philosophy of the Son, where being is contained within the phenomenal
world (political Aristotelianism). There is also the political philosophy of
the Mother. If we take the dialogue "Timaeus," this is the Nourisher
("chora"), which is at the bottom of the complete metaphysical map of the
three principles, the genera of being. Consequently, materialism means
that being is placed in its original sense neither at the top (as in Plato) nor
in the middle (as in Aristotle), but at the bottom.
As we have said, from Plato's point of view, and from Aristotle's point of
view, matter as such does not exist. From Plato's point of view, it is a
certain limit of the cooling of the idea. According to Plotinus, evil is the
diminution of the good.om Aristotle's point of
view, matter as such does not exist. From Plato's point of view, it is a
certain limit of the cooling of the idea. According to Plotinus, evil is the
diminution of the good.

--- PAGE BREAK ---of
view, matter as such does not exist. From Plato's point of view, it is a
certain limit of the cooling of the idea. According to Plotinus, evil is the
diminution of the good.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

308
Part 3. The Political Paradigm of Modernity. The War of Concepts
Here, the emphasis is not on evil itself, but on its diminution, on its
deficiency, on the insufficient amount of good. If we imagine the complete
absence of good, then from the Neoplatonist point of view, there would be
nothing, including evil. The absence of good is not evil, it is pure
nothingness. Evil is the diminution of good as a process; it is the process of
dissipation, of cooling of good. If the process is complete, then there is
neither good nor evil. That is why, from the point of view of Platonism,
matter is a conditional limit of the process of diminishing good. Matter as
such does not exist — there is
only the pursuit of material things, materialisation.
From Aristotle's point of view, matter exists, but only together with eidos
— form (EoreD). It is a constituent part of the process of existence, without
which this existence is impossible. But in its pure form, if we remove the
eidetic component (eidos) of a phenomenon, we are left with nothing. In its
pure form, matter, as in Platonism, is unrepresentable; it does not exist. It
exists only through phenomena, through necessary participation in
phenomena, but not in itself. The third political philosophy — the
philosophy of Matter (chora) — represents yet another ontological
hypothesis — that matter (that which is below) actually exists and, in the
ultimate sense, is the only thing that exists. Accordingly, here matter
is endowed with completely new properties.
When we say that we reject Platonism (matter as a diminution of spirit
and a process of cooling of the Idea), reject Aristotelianism (where matter
necessarily exists in combination with eidos), we arrive at a third model in
which matter exists, it is represented by atoms, and these atoms,
indivisible particles of matter, exist in themselves.
In the first case, matter does not exist; in the second case, matter exists
only in combination with eidos; and in the third case, matter exists on its
own. Matter is endowed with new properties and acquires the character of a
special, living matter that carries within itself the content of being.
Everything is turned upside down: previously, the content of being was
contained in Ideas, but in materialism, everything is the opposite — the
content of being is contained in matter.
Living matter of communism
Plato's political philosophy viewed the world and the state from
"above" — the state as God-given, as a revelation, as a manifestation of an
idea (hence the concept of the sacred state, the sacred empire). In
Aristotle's political philosophy, everything is built around an immovable
mover-given, as a revelation, as a manifestation of an
idea (hence the concept of the sacred state, the sacred empire). In
Aristotle's political philosophy, everything is built around an immovable
mover

--- PAGE BREAK ---ion, as a manifestation of an
idea (hence the concept of the sacred state, the sacred empire). In
Aristotle's political philosophy, everything is built around an immovable
mover

--- PAGE BREAK ---

Chapter 6. Communism (the second political theory): the dialectic of the whirlwind in history
309
— there is no descent, no revelation of ideas, but the continuous existence of
an orderly sacred cosmos, an eternal cosmos.
In the third paradigm — the political philosophy of Marx — we get an
idea of growth. This aspect is most clearly represented in communism.
For Marxists, matter is endowed with an internal life that develops
linearly in the direction of consciousness. Therefore, Marxists picked up
on Charles Darwin's (1809–1882) idea of the evolution of species, turning
it into yet another political dogma. Matter develops from primary minerals to
living cells, then to the simplest organisms (amoebas and ciliates), then to
animals, and finally to hominids and humans, reaching the level of
consciousness. But consciousness itself, despite its apparent autonomy, is
material, since it is nothing more than a product of the development of
matter.
Consequently, Marxists develop their ideology, matter is endowed with
internal capacities for growth, and therefore the entire world, including the
capacity for thought, is a derivative of matter. Any phenomenon
(phenomenon), therefore, is not independent (as in the philosophy of the Son)
and is not a derivative of an idea (as in the philosophy of the Son), but is a
derivative of the movement of matter. Thus, matter is endowed with new
content and elevated to a new category, dynamically containing within itself
the possibilities for the development of being and consciousness. In Marxism,
matter is alive and contains within itself the prerequisites for the emergence
of consciousness, which predetermine the emergence of various species from
matter, including human beings and society itself. From the point of view of
such materialism, society is the peak of the development of matter: matter
grows and matures into the state, into the polis.
This is the meaning of the materialist understanding of the essence of
politics. Politics, society, the state, and the polis are the peak of the
development of matter.
Marxism as a post-
Marxist political philosophy is built within the paradigm that
dominates the modern era. At the same time, however, it is strongly
opposed to liberal ideology. Marxism rejects liberalism, but not at all from
the position of the era preceding the modern era. The Communist
Manifesto 1by Karl Marx
1Marx, K., Engels, F. Works. Vol. 4. Moscow: State Publishing House of Political Literature, 1955.at all from
the position of the era preceding the modern era. The Communist
Manifesto 1by Karl Marx
1Marx, K., Engels, F. Works. Vol. 4. Moscow: State Publishing House of Political Literature, 1955.

--- PAGE BREAK ---ition of the era preceding the modern era. The Communist
Manifesto 1by Karl Marx
1Marx, K., Engels, F. Works. Vol. 4. Moscow: State Publishing House of Political Literature, 1955.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

310
Part 3. The Political Paradigm of Modernity. The War of Concepts
The works of Karl Marx and Friedrich Engels devote considerable space
to a very important point — distinguishing themselves from all other forms
of anti-capitalist theory, especially those that oppose capitalism from the
standpoint of traditional society. Marxism sees itself precisely as post-
capitalism, as post-liberalism, and not as pre-liberalism, nor as various
versions of anti-bourgeois ideologies that have survived in modern Europe
by inertia from the era of medieval political institutions. Therefore, Marx
explains in great detail that the enemies of the bourgeoisie can be anyone, but
Marxists are only those who criticise liberalism and capitalism from the
position of the phase following capitalism, and not from the position
preceding it.
During the period when Marx and Engels lived, there were many
different opponents of capitalism in Germany — the Prussian aristocracy,
the military, conservatives, and even monarchists, who vehemently rejected
capitalism, believing that it represented the decay of the traditional medieval
European order and carried with it only nihilism, degeneration, and the
reduction of all values to base and material ones. There were many more
opponents of capitalism at that time than there were Marxists. In order to
show that Marxism belongs to the paradigm of modern political philosophy
and does not oppose it on the level of another political philosophy
(Platonism or Aristotelianism), Marx emphasises in every way that his
critique is a critique of capitalism not from the "right" but from the "left";
that Marxism represents an even more modern, even more immanent, even
more materialistic, even more atheistic, even more anti-Platonic and anti-
Aristotelian political doctrine than capitalism (liberalism). Moreover,
Marxism is in solidarity with capitalism itself in relation to such opponents
of capitalism "from the right." Capitalism is an undeniable progress
compared to the Middle Ages; it is the socio-economic formation that
followed feudalism, the advent of which should in no way be opposed or
counteracted, as it is absolutely necessary as preparation for the next phase.
According to Marx, there is no road from feudalism to socialism; the only
way forward is through capitalism, which must therefore be supported and
defended. Another thing is that capitalism is the end of the road for liberals,
but for Marxists it is only one of its stages, and the end will come after
capitalism, when it in turn will be overcome by the proletarian revolution, the
construction of a socialist society, and finally, the advent of communism.
Therefore, Marxism sees itself as something even more, when it in turn will be overcome by the proletarian revolution, the
construction of a socialist society, and finally, the advent of communism.
Therefore, Marxism sees itself as something even more

--- PAGE BREAK ---ll be overcome by the proletarian revolution, the
construction of a socialist society, and finally, the advent of communism.
Therefore, Marxism sees itself as something even more

--- PAGE BREAK ---

Chapter 6. Communism (the second political theory): the dialectic of the whirlwind in history
311
Contemporary, modernist, more so than Modernism itself, as an ideology of
the future, which has moved much further away from the paradigm of
Tradition, from Platonism and Aristotelianism, than the first political theory.
The declension of the atom: the individual and the " "
Marxism argues with liberalism for the right to define the essence of the
paradigm of political philosophy in the modern era.
Marx is well aware of the genealogy of his teaching, its origins, its
metaphysics, its stages. It is highly symbolic that Karl Marx's doctoral
dissertation is dedicated to Epicurus and Democritus, and that Marx's
favourite philosopher is the substantialist Spinoza. The point is that Marx is
well aware of the origins of his political philosophy in what we have called
the political philosophy of the Mother. This is ancient atomism, this is
Epicureanism, this is Democritus. Marx is extremely clear about the
paradigm of political philosophy with which he is dealing, which he inherits
and on which he builds his own teaching.
Marx
dwells
particularly
on
what
Epicurus
calls
"deviation"
(declination), i.e., the ability of an atom to spontaneously deviate from a
straight trajectory of motion. In this feature of the atom (or individual, since
Marx is well aware of the direct connection between physical atomism and
social individualism), Marx sees a connection between freedom and
necessity, which he understands dialectically. Necessity does not lie in the
atom's strict adherence to a straight line, but, on the contrary, in its ability to
deviate from it, i.e., in the existence of a certain arbitrariness. But this
arbitrariness leads, in turn, not to chaos and disorder, but to "development,"
since the deviation of atoms from a straight line gives rise to their cohesion
and further dynamics, forming vortices and "images," "eidolons," that is,
bodies and worlds. And in the same way, the "arbitrariness" of the play of
atoms gives rise to life, and life gives rise to consciousness and society. This
is the necessity in which a multitude of arbitrary atomic volitional impulses
are linked in a progressive chain of causes and effects. Thus, freedom turns
out to be fatality, and fatality is freedom, not directly, but only when the
observer is able to grasp this from a certain distance. This is precisely what
Marx does later when he constructs his model of interpreting human history
1  Marx, K. The Difference Between the Natural Philosophy of Democritus and that of
Epicurus // Marx, K., Engels, F. Early Works. Moscow: Politizdat, 1956.cts his model of interpreting human history
1  Marx, K. The Difference Between the Natural Philosophy of Democritus and that of
Epicurus // Marx, K., Engels, F. Early Works. Moscow: Politizdat, 1956.

--- PAGE BREAK ---erpreting human history
1  Marx, K. The Difference Between the Natural Philosophy of Democritus and that of
Epicurus // Marx, K., Engels, F. Early Works. Moscow: Politizdat, 1956.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

312
Part 3. The Political Paradigm of Modernity. The War of Concepts
Society. Individuals act freely, and that is precisely why they move through
history along the axis of inexorable mechanical fate.
Epicurus is a particularly important figure for Marx. From his point of
view, Epicureanism enlivens Democritus' somewhat abstract atomism by
adding dialectics to it, and phenomena become not merely "appearances"
(eidola), but expressions of a deeper individual principle.
Gradually, these intuitions of the early Marx led him to the creation of his
own political philosophy, based on a clear awareness of the unity of
thought with the pre-Socratics.
 's titanic rebellion
Marx was well aware of his deep connection not only with Democritus
and Epicurus as pre-Socratic materialists, but also with the mythological
figure of Prometheus. Marx clearly saw himself as a titan and a god-fighter,
challenging the heavenly vertical order of things. Thus, in the preface to his
dissertation, Marx writes:
Philosophy, as long as there is still a single drop of blood beating in
its heart, which conquers the whole world and is absolutely free, will
always declare, together with Epicurus, to its opponents: "It is not the man
who rejects the gods of the crowd who is impious, but the man who joins the
crowd in its opinion of the gods."
The philosophy behind this makes no secret of it.
Prometheus' confession: "In truth, I hate all gods,
is his own confession, his own statement directed against all the gods
of heaven and earth who do not recognise human self-awareness as the
highest deity. There should be no deity beside him.
And in response to the timid souls who rejoice that the position of
philosophy in society has invisibly deteriorated, it repeats what Prometheus
said to Hermes, the servant of the gods:
Know well that I would not exchange my
sorrows for servitude:
I would rather be chained to a rock than be a
faithful servant of Zeus.
Prometheus is the most noble saint and martyr in the philosophical
calendar1.
1  Marx, K. The Difference Between the Natural Philosophy of Democritus and the Natural
Philosophy of Epicurus. pp. 24–25.ometheus is the most noble saint and martyr in the philosophical
calendar1.
1  Marx, K. The Difference Between the Natural Philosophy of Democritus and the Natural
Philosophy of Epicurus. pp. 24–25.

--- PAGE BREAK ---noble saint and martyr in the philosophical
calendar1.
1  Marx, K. The Difference Between the Natural Philosophy of Democritus and the Natural
Philosophy of Epicurus. pp. 24–25.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

Chapter 6. Communism (the second political theory): the dialectic of the whirlwind in history
313
Marx is perfectly aware of the continuity and mythological connection
between his philosophy and active god-fighting, the rebellion of the Titans.
Hatred of God, of the vertical, of the philosophy of the Father and the
philosophy of the Son, is the most important element of Marxism as a
worldview. And although for Marx himself, pre-Socratic and, even more
so, Greek myths seem naive and extremely approximate forms of
thinking, long surpassed by the philosophy and science of the New Age,
from the point of view of Politica Aeterna, his references and metaphors
take on fundamental significance. For the Modern paradigm, everything
related to the Tradition paradigm is ridiculous, naive and, moreover,
incorrect. For Politica Aeterna, cross-evaluations can also be meaningful:
not only how Modern sees Premodern, but also how Premodern sees
Modern. Postmodernism also claims such a distance, but is unable to
achieve it due to its too deep involvement in Modernism, which continues
to affect postmodernism even in the course of its deconstruction strategies.
Therefore, Marx's admissions of his sympathies for atoms, emptiness, as
well as titanism, godlessness, and even Satanism can be treated with all
due attention and trust. Let us assume that for Marx himself, neither titans
nor the devil exist, and that he uses these images as metaphors. But for the
titans themselves or for Satan, Marx exists regardless of whether he
believes in them or not. At least, this is how some of Marx's statements
(especially his early ones) can be interpreted if we truly equate the three
types of beings from Plato's dialogue "Timaeus" and recognise the
legitimacy of political philosophies that prioritise any of them.
However, since Marx did not believe in God, he most likely did not
believe in the devil either. Marx believed in man, but he viewed man himself
in the spirit of Promethean titanism and even godless Satanism. This gives us
a special Satanic-Titanic humanism, which is the metaphysical and
anthropological basis of the second political theory.
Matter, titans, Satan, and those who rebelled against God are vivid
figures that emphasise in every way how Marxist political philosophy
rebels against the political philosophy of the Father (Plato) and the Son
(Aristotle).
1  However, a detailed study of Marx's Satanism was undertaken by Pastor Richard
Wurmbrand (1909–2001). See: Wurmbrand R. Marx and Satan. Westchester, Illinois: Crossway
Books, 1986.n
(Aristotle).
1  However, a detailed study of Marx's Satanism was undertaken by Pastor Richard
Wurmbrand (1909–2001). See: Wurmbrand R. Marx and Satan. Westchester, Illinois: Crossway
Books, 1986.

--- PAGE BREAK ---owever, a detailed study of Marx's Satanism was undertaken by Pastor Richard
Wurmbrand (1909–2001). See: Wurmbrand R. Marx and Satan. Westchester, Illinois: Crossway
Books, 1986.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

314
Part 3. The Political Paradigm of Modernity. The War of Concepts
Marx is Modern
Marxism as a political philosophy begins with the following moment:
there is the first political theory, there is liberalism, there are Hobbes and
Locke, there is individualism, there is the middle class. There is trade and
economics instead of politics. By Marx's time, this thesis had already been
formulated as an ideology. Bourgeois ideology was directed against the
medieval Christian worldview, against Catholicism, against the Holy
Roman Empire, against the sacred state.
Marx wants to say the following: we agree with this ideology, with the
first political theory, with capitalism and liberalism; we have indeed moved
away from class society, replaced politics with economics and trade,
abolished family hierarchies and moved to a class principle based on equal
starting opportunities. In everything that concerns the struggle of the
bourgeoisie against the feudal system (that is, against the preceding socio-
political formation), we are in solidarity with capitalism and the
bourgeoisie. But then the differences begin.
The Marxists support everything related to the bourgeoisie's struggle
against what came before it, and compared to the supporters of the Middle
Ages, Marxism looks like a "pro-capitalist" doctrine. But when capitalism
triumphs, it will not be the end of history, but the beginning of its most
important stage. For, according to Marx, once the bourgeoisie has triumphed
and liberalism has prevailed over traditional society, contradictions within
this political system will become more acute. Instead of the prosperous
existence, growth of the middle class and enrichment of all predicted by
liberals, class contradictions between the bourgeoisie and the proletariat will
begin to take effect. At the same time, they will take place against the
backdrop of growing inter-ethnic contradictions between bourgeois states and
cyclical crises of the capitalist system as a whole. Thus, capitalist society will
begin to degenerate and decay, increasingly splitting into two poles — and
then the time of communism will come. The hour of communism will not
come before capitalism, nor during capitalism, but when capitalism has come
into being and triumphed, supplanting the previous ideological models — then
it will be replaced by the proletarian revolution and Marxism. At the same
time, communists will take full advantage of everything that the liberal order
has created.
The proletariat uses its political supremacy to wrest, step by step, all capital
from the bourgeoisie, to centralise all instruments of production in the hands of the
state, i.e., of the proletariat organised as the ruling class, and to accelerate as far
as possible the concentration of the productive forces in the hands of the state.oduction in the hands of the
state, i.e., of the proletariat organised as the ruling class, and to accelerate as far
as possible the concentration of the productive forces in the hands of the state.

--- PAGE BREAK ---s of the
state, i.e., of the proletariat organised as the ruling class, and to accelerate as far
as possible the concentration of the productive forces in the hands of the state.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

Chapter 6. Communism (the second political theory): the dialectic of the whirlwind in history
315
all the instruments of production into the hands of the state, i.e., the
proletariat organised as the ruling class, and to increase the sum of productive
forces as quickly as possible.
Socialism is thus the logical continuation of capitalism, and the
contradiction between them is the same as that between the present and the
future. Compared to the past, the present and the future are qualitatively
different and even lie on the same side of the time axis. But at the same time,
if we contrast the present with the future, a different symmetry emerges.
Thus, in The Communist Manifesto, Marx and Engels write:
In bourgeois society, the past dominates the present; in communist
society, the present dominates the past.
Thus, communism is a step forward — into the future — compared to the
bourgeois system, which, in turn, is a step forward compared to feudalism,
although, according to Marx, it cannot completely free itself from the past,
but only qualitatively changes, rather than completely overcoming, and even
further exacerbates the inequality inherent in traditional society.
Thus, Marxism fits into the political philosophy of the Modern era and
has nothing against it as long as we are talking about the opposition of
Modern philosophy in its liberal dimension to the medieval model. Here, it
fully agrees with Adam Smith that the source of wealth is not land, but
mobile production (i.e., industry and entrepreneurship). When it comes to the
transition from the rule of landlords, who control surplus product through
control over land and land rent, to the growth of industrial production and the
shift of the centre of the economy to the cities, Marxists support this process.
In the course of the formation of capitalism, a change from estates to classes
takes place, which is fundamental to Marxism. The class hierarchy is
determined by the position of the family in society, and the class hierarchy is
determined by the relationship to the means of production.
But when capitalism prevailed and bourgeois society was established,
Marx continues, that is when the most important thing began: class struggle.
Marx thinks of communism as a second political theory that comes after
liberalism. Marxism is post-liberal
1   Marx, K., Engels, F. The Communist Manifesto. P. 446.
2   Ibid. p. 439.: class struggle.
Marx thinks of communism as a second political theory that comes after
liberalism. Marxism is post-liberal
1   Marx, K., Engels, F. The Communist Manifesto. P. 446.
2   Ibid. p. 439.

--- PAGE BREAK ---rx thinks of communism as a second political theory that comes after
liberalism. Marxism is post-liberal
1   Marx, K., Engels, F. The Communist Manifesto. P. 446.
2   Ibid. p. 439.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

316
Part 3. The Political Paradigm of Modernity. The War of Concepts
He criticises liberalism not from the standpoint that liberalism is inherently
bad, but rather that it is bad in relation to something else. From the
communist perspective, liberalism is bad in relation to Marxism, but not
in relation to the Middle Ages or traditional society as a whole. In relation
to traditional society, it is good. This is very important. Two contemporary
worldviews — liberalism and Marxism — compete with each other over
which of them is more in keeping with the spirit of the Modern, more
avant-garde, more contemporary. This is a dispute over which most fully
corresponds to the philosophy of the third kind — Mother (earth, matter,
multiplicity, "chora"). Both the first and second political theories
represent a titanic rebellion against the Father and the Son, against the
philosophy of Plato and against the philosophy of Aristotle. And within the
framework of this rebellion common to both ideologies, it is determined, in
competitive opposition and desperate struggle, which of the two
tendencies of contemporary political philosophy will prevail, and
therefore which of them belongs to the future — in its progressive,
socialist form.
in the modern, modernist understanding.
Both of these ideologies are rooted in Hobbes, Locke, Spinoza, earlier
in nominalism, and even earlier in Democritus, Epicurus, and Lucretius.
Accordingly, they share a recognition of the existence of matter,
substance, and the lower limit of the cosmos in the generalised scheme of
Politica Aeterna. However, it is precisely among communists that the
thesis of the identity of being and matter has a directly political character,
being an ideological dogma. For Marxists, this is connected with the fact that
communism represents the "future" and clearly, openly and explicitly
proclaims what is implicit, implied and even somewhat obscured in
liberalism.
Thus, in the context of modern political philosophy as a whole, the first
political theory (liberalism) and the second political theory (Marxism) are
completely in solidarity with each other in relation to those political
paradigms that solve the problem of existence in a radically different way
(such as political Platonism and political Aristotelianism), recognising the
unconditional superiority of the third type of "Timaeus" — the political
philosophy of the Mother.
The dialectic of the "world turned "
In his critique of liberalism, as well as in his system as a whole, Marx
draws on Hegel's dialectic. Hegel's system is based on the proposition that
the structure of the world, the structure of thought, and the structure of being
are based on dynamic contradiction.Marx
draws on Hegel's dialectic. Hegel's system is based on the proposition that
the structure of the world, the structure of thought, and the structure of being
are based on dynamic contradiction.

--- PAGE BREAK ---'s dialectic. Hegel's system is based on the proposition that
the structure of the world, the structure of thought, and the structure of being
are based on dynamic contradiction.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

Chapter 6. Communism (the second political theory): the dialectic of the whirlwind in history
317
Hegel asserts that genuine consciousness is unhappy. Unhappy
consciousness does not mean that it needs to be made happy. According to
Hegel, happy consciousness is the state of an idiot. Genuine
consciousness as such is always unhappy because in unhappy
consciousness, contradiction is actively actualised, and this, in turn, forms
the basis of thinking and the main distinguishing feature of the world.
Consciousness becomes unhappy simply because of the fact that the subject
does not coincide with the object, which gives rise to tension and
motivates thought activity.
The spirit is conflict, and since, according to Hegel, history is the
unfolding of the spirit, history is conflict.
Consciousness has an object before it, but this pair is not exhaustive. By
moving onto itself and maintaining its relationship with the object,
consciousness generates representation. In The Phenomenology of Spirit,
Hegel calls this "the inverted world" or "the world turned inside out" (die
verkehrte Welt). He writes:
At first glance, this world is the opposite of the first 1in the sense that
the first world is outside of it and is rejected by it as a kind of reality, that
one world is a phenomenon and the other is in itself, one is the world as it is
for something else, the other, on the contrary, as it is for itself. So (...)
what tastes sweet, properly or internally, is sour in things, or what is the
north pole in the actual magnet of the phenomenon would be the south pole
in internal or essential being; what manifests itself as an anode in
electricity would be a cathode in non-manifest electricity. Or: an act that is
a crime in appearance should be, strictly speaking, a good act in its "inner"
nature (a bad act with good intentions); punishment would be punishment
only in appearance, but in itself or in some other world it would be a
blessing for the criminal. However, such oppositions between internal and
external, appearance and supersensible as two kinds of reality no longer
exist here. The repulsive differences are not distributed again between two
such substances, which would be their carriers and would give each of
them a separate stable existence, thanks to which reason, having left the
"internal," would find itself back where it was before(2) .
1   To the first world, that is, to the object. — Note by A.D.
2   Hegel. Phenomenology of Spirit. P. 87.to which reason, having left the
"internal," would find itself back where it was before(2) .
1   To the first world, that is, to the object. — Note by A.D.
2   Hegel. Phenomenology of Spirit. P. 87.

--- PAGE BREAK ---ving left the
"internal," would find itself back where it was before(2) .
1   To the first world, that is, to the object. — Note by A.D.
2   Hegel. Phenomenology of Spirit. P. 87.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

318
Part 3. The Political Paradigm of Modernity. The War of Concepts
In addition to the world, humans form an image of the world in their
consciousness, and this image does not coincide with either thinking or
the world itself. This exacerbates the problem. The human spirit is a kind
of sickness, indicating that the ends do not meet for the subject.
According to Hegel, this split lies at the heart of spiritual activity. Human
thought is a derivative of a deep-seated illness of thinking, which is thrown
into the process of immanent existence as a trace of the original subjective
Spirit, preceding the emergence of nature (as a moment of alienation of the
subjective spirit from itself).
Thus, the subject, the object, and the "world turned inside out" as a
special representation give rise to a complex structure of the dialectic of
consciousness, its phenomenology, which Hegel examines at different
levels.
Marx takes from this the idea of the conflictual nature of history — and
in this respect he is a consistent Hegelian. Liberalism is non-dialectical. It is
analogous to an atom moving in a straight line. Bourgeois thought sees
history as a process based on equilibrium and choosing the most optimal path
of development. Hence the appeals to the growth of the middle class, the
bourgeois understanding of progress, equality of opportunity, etc. Here, the
axis is the market and its main figure, the merchant. Liberals say: remove the
state, and business will find the best way to organise the social system.
Atoms move in a straight line. An invisible hand seeks the optimal paths of
communication and the most effective means of enrichment. Market society
is structured as follows: first comes the merchant, and everything else falls
into place behind him. And if he is not hindered, he will build an optimal
system, a society that will develop harmoniously and in balance.
Marx objects: nothing of the sort. Development is struggle, conflict,
dialectics. Therefore, the bourgeoisie is not a product and culmination of the
natural evolution of socio-political forces, but only a phase, a moment in this
dialectical confrontation. And the next peak of dialectical opposition must be
communism. That is, for a liberal, liberalism is the peak of history, for a
communist, it is a dialectical moment. So it is ambiguous: it is better than the
previous one, but worse than the next one.
Moreover, capitalism is the "upside-down world" that breaks away from
the object, giving rise to its inverse representation, but gets stuck at the level
of this representation. The bourgeoisie is incapable of breaking through to
matter as the being of the object, and since the being of the object is
primary and matter itself is alive, it is also incapable of breaking through
to the most truencapable of breaking through to
matter as the being of the object, and since the being of the object is
primary and matter itself is alive, it is also incapable of breaking through
to the most true

--- PAGE BREAK ---through to
matter as the being of the object, and since the being of the object is
primary and matter itself is alive, it is also incapable of breaking through
to the most true

--- PAGE BREAK ---

Chapter 6. Communism (the second political theory): the dialectic of the whirlwind in history
319
the nature of the subject, which emerged from matter. The "world turned
inside out" must be turned upside down again (revolution), but not in
order to return to the pre-representational — "naive" — state of the subject
and its uncritical perception of the object ("the first world," according to
Hegel), but by taking the next step forward, which will bring into resonance
with reality a new form of consciousness, enriched by the experience of
representation.
This is why Marx says: I am the future, and therefore Marxism
understands itself dialectically as the ideology of the future. It is important
that this future here is not so much chronological as philosophical in nature:
the communist thinks of himself as a representative of the future already
in the present, attacking capitalism not from the position of today, but
from the position of tomorrow.
 's immanent eschatology of the proletariat
Marxism's appeal to the future is a fundamental feature of this
worldview. This manifests itself in its eschatology and, accordingly, in its
connection with Hegel's thesis of the "end of history" and, even more
profoundly, with Thomas Müntzer and other Anabaptists who, within the
framework of the Protestant Reformation, arrived at an extreme form of
religious proto-communism in anticipation of the Second Coming of Christ.
The Anabaptists abolished private property and created communes based
on complete equality of property, since in the face of the end times they saw
no point in accumulating or possessing wealth. All differences between
people were abolished, since the end of the world was at hand, and people
had to focus their attention on the soul and spirit, not on the body.
In Marx, we see a secular version of this Anabaptist moment. As an
atheist, Marx naturally does not expect the coming of Christ. Existence is
material, and there is no transcendent principle. Nevertheless, the future
represents a qualitative revolution, a reversal of the world, which in its
scale is comparable to the "end of the world" (albeit an inverted one).
History is driven by the internal laws of matter, which unfold
dialectically. The capitalist world does not abolish exploitation, but raises it
to a new level. Thus, for the first time, the working class itself appears,
representing a messianic phenomenon. But unlike the Anabaptists, the
communists do not await the coming of God. The proletarians, like titans,
are called upon to liberate themselves by overthrowing the bourgeoisie,
which, nevertheless, contributed — without setting itself such a goal — to
the formation ofd. The proletarians, like titans,
are called upon to liberate themselves by overthrowing the bourgeoisie,
which, nevertheless, contributed — without setting itself such a goal — to
the formation of

--- PAGE BREAK ---like titans,
are called upon to liberate themselves by overthrowing the bourgeoisie,
which, nevertheless, contributed — without setting itself such a goal — to
the formation of

--- PAGE BREAK ---

320
Part 3. The Political Paradigm of Modernity. The War of Concepts
class dichotomy. Thus, communism turns out to be an immanent form of
eschatology, in which matter, having gone through a complete cycle —
from an inanimate state through life to society, its history and, finally, to an
era of equality and freedom, in which the atoms of matter, having become
conscious atoms of society, achieve completeness and perfection.
Communism is conceived as the construction of paradise on earth.
But at the same time, the imagery of Marxists, with its aggressive
rejection of the religious vertical, which they identify in capitalism, only in
its naked state, when the will to material possession takes on an open,
explicit character, previously hidden under complex idealistic and
theological systems, gravitates more towards categories such as
"paradise" or "the end of the world," but rather to the triumph of the titans
and giants, ancient powers from the depths of the earth, flesh from the flesh
of Mother Matter, who took their revenge on the gods of Olympus and cast
them into oblivion. The messianism of the communists is utterly immanent. It
is not the coming of a Saviour from Heaven, from the world of the Spirit, but,
on the contrary, the realisation by the population of the underground depths,
who have no share in the wealth of the world, that they are their own
saviours, which opens up the possibility for them to reverse the process of
expropriation of the products of their own labour and become masters of the
matter of which they are quite consciously and openly the owners.
Here it is entirely appropriate to speak of the titanic and even
Luciferian nature of the working class, which carries the light of labour
and which is liberated from the windows of bourgeois exploitation. The
proletarians are not messengers from heaven or the gods; they embody the
advent of the titan, Satan or Prometheus. Thus, we are dealing with a special
eschatology, no longer Christian or Protestant (as with the Anabaptists),
but secular, materialistic, atheistic, and even godless.
This is the basis of Marxism's fundamental historical strategy. Marx
says: we must overthrow the capitalists, but only we. And if any proponent
of pre-capitalist ideology, outwardly sympathetic to our own anti-capitalism,
attempts to approach us, we must immediately get rid of them. Not all
anti-capitalism is acceptable to Marxists, only post-capitalist, i.e.
communist, anti-capitalism of the future, not of the past.
If capitalism does not yet exist in a society, then socialism cannot exist
there either. Capitalism must first be established, and only then can
communism follow. This is the peculiarity of communist eschatology: the
Titans can defeat the gods only after they themselves acquire material
characteristics, descend into the material worlds, and then become dependent
on them.eculiarity of communist eschatology: the
Titans can defeat the gods only after they themselves acquire material
characteristics, descend into the material worlds, and then become dependent
on them.

--- PAGE BREAK ---ist eschatology: the
Titans can defeat the gods only after they themselves acquire material
characteristics, descend into the material worlds, and then become dependent
on them.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

Chapter 6. Communism (the second political theory): the dialectic of the whirlwind in history
321
eschatology: the Titans can defeat the gods only after the latter themselves
acquire material characteristics, descend into the material world, and then
become dependent on the Titans and vulnerable to them.
Therefore, communists are forced to defend capitalism where it does not
yet exist or where it has not yet reached maturity. Class society is
necessary as a preliminary and indispensable condition for the emergence
of the proletariat — the messianic class. Without class society, there will be
no proletarian revolution. Without a proletarian revolution, there will be no
socialism, and without socialism, there will be no communism.
Class division and ontological antagonism
Marxist
conflict
theory
and
dialectics,
introduced
into
the
understanding of history, radically alter the general structure of the liberal
interpretation of political history. Marxism becomes a critical theory that
analyses capitalism in a way that capitalism itself cannot. This is precisely
why Marx's magnum opus, Capital,gained such worldwide fame.
Liberalism operates with only one class—the middle class. The division
of society into three classes, accepted in sociology, is a conventional
division that does not have the same meaning as the definition of class in
Marxism. From the point of view of liberals, the middle class is constantly
growing, and in the future, as all societies become more democratic and
liberal, all of humanity will become middle class, and the gap between the
very rich and the very poor will narrow. The large bourgeoisie will become
smaller in comparison with the middle class, and the number of the
destitute and poor will decline.
Accordingly, the middle class will sooner or later become the only class.
This is the utopia of progressive liberalism, which asserts that the general
growth of the well-being of each individual will sooner or later transform all
of humanity into the middle class.
For liberal political philosophy, this is quite logical, since they operate
with a single normative figure — the merchant, who is taken as the
common denominator of economic anthropology2. It can be said that,
from the point of view of liberalism, there is a middle class, a "very
middle" class and a "not middle enough" class
1  Marx, K. Capital // Marx, K., Engels, F. Works. Vol. 23–26. Moscow: State Publishing House
of Political Literature, 1960–1964.
2   . Selected Works. Moscow: Territory of the Future, 2013.h" class
1  Marx, K. Capital // Marx, K., Engels, F. Works. Vol. 23–26. Moscow: State Publishing House
of Political Literature, 1960–1964.
2   . Selected Works. Moscow: Territory of the Future, 2013.

--- PAGE BREAK ---Capital // Marx, K., Engels, F. Works. Vol. 23–26. Moscow: State Publishing House
of Political Literature, 1960–1964.
2   . Selected Works. Moscow: Territory of the Future, 2013.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

322
Part 3. The Political Paradigm of Modernity. The War of Concepts
class. From this follows the ontology and anthropology of the middle class.
To be a member of a market society means to be middle class.
And what do Marxists claim? That the middle class as such does not
exist, and that the middle class has no existence. There are two
antagonistic classes (and not just one): the class of exploiters and the class
of the exploited. Of course, an individual can move from one class to
another: a person can leave the position of the exploited and become an
exploiter, or remain exploited, while an entrepreneur, in turn, can go
bankrupt and be forced into the position of a hired worker. But this does
not affect the foundations of social and economic anthropology. For
communists, class is more fundamental than individuals. It reflects the very
dialectic of history and the movement of matter. And the laws of this
dialectic are based on antagonism: hence the fundamental thesis of class
struggle.
From Marx's point of view (and in this he follows Hegel), although the
quantity of material goods increases, it still represents a fixed quantity at
any given moment, for which two classes struggle — the exploited and the
exploiters. At the same time, wealth (and here Marx follows Adam Smith)
is created by labour, but appropriated by the exploiter. All values that can be
created — exclusively labour and material values — are taken away from
the working class by the exploiters. Moreover, according to Marx, the more
values the working class creates, the more the exploiting class takes away
from it. Thus, there is no equal distribution of wealth among all, but rather
the opposite — the impoverishment of the working class and the
enrichment of the exploiting class. The poor get poorer and the rich get
richer. At the same time, Marx combines both factors — the growth of the
total amount of wealth and the dynamics of its distribution — which makes
his theory quite flexible. What is important is not who owns the critical
amount of wealth at a given moment, but how the process of its
redistribution is organised in society, where the strategy of appropriating
for their own benefit the surplus value arising from increased efficiency and
quality of labour and technical progress, which is rather veiled by the
capitalists themselves, is revealed.
From the liberal point of view, the development of capitalism is
harmonious, and its internal crises are nothing more than corrections to the
main path of endless progress in production and linear accumulation of
material wealth. From the Marxist point of view, the internal crises that
liberalism is undergoing are manifestations of the conflictual, dynamic,
paradoxical, dialecticalnd linear accumulation of
material wealth. From the Marxist point of view, the internal crises that
liberalism is undergoing are manifestations of the conflictual, dynamic,
paradoxical, dialectical

--- PAGE BREAK ---on of
material wealth. From the Marxist point of view, the internal crises that
liberalism is undergoing are manifestations of the conflictual, dynamic,
paradoxical, dialectical

--- PAGE BREAK ---

Chapter 6. Communism (the second political theory): the dialectic of the whirlwind in history
323
nature of history and even of matter itself. Therefore, conflicts and crises
in liberal society are vitally necessary and fateful. They reflect the essence
of history, which consists in struggle. Therefore, two antagonistic classes,
building their struggle around the single theme of possession of material
wealth, reflect the algorithm of the dialectic of existence itself, where,
according to the atomists, a complex game is played between atoms and the
Great Void. The most subtle aspect of this dialectic is determining who
actually represents atoms (CXv) and who represents emptiness (oZCXv).
The definition of class and the battle of concepts
For Marx, the main driving force of history is class struggle. It is
perfectly clear that both the middle class of capitalism and the two classes of
Marxism (the working class and the bourgeoisie) are purely abstract
concepts. We are talking about a certain conceptual ensemble which, being
accepted as a basic methodology, offers one or another version of the
explanation of reality. In this case, we are talking about an analogue of atoms
and emptiness as understood by Democritus: their existence is postulated
strictly rationally, and in concrete phenomenal experience we have no chance
of encountering them, since the sensory world is a distant derivative of these
concepts.
This is the essence of political philosophy: it operates with concepts
postulated in the realm of thought, which are then projected onto society and
ultimately determine its structure and its derivative phenomenology. By
accepting the completely unproven thesis of anthropological pessimism, we
arrive at Hobbes and "man is wolf to man" as the main characteristic of the
"state of nature," and from this follows the essence of the
of the "social contract" that establishes Leviathan. In reality, we know of no
"natural state" of man and base our conclusions on observations and
inferences that someone could dispute. But the acceptance of Hobbes' model
in his explanation of human nature and the nature of the state that follows
from it gives rise to the foundation of political organisation of society in the
Modern Age. And we have been living inside Leviathan — exactly as
Hobbes designed and justified it — for several centuries.
But it is enough to accept a different thesis, for example, Locke's thesis
that the "natural state" can be harmonious oriathan — exactly as
Hobbes designed and justified it — for several centuries.
But it is enough to accept a different thesis, for example, Locke's thesis
that the "natural state" can be harmonious or

--- PAGE BREAK ---Hobbes designed and justified it — for several centuries.
But it is enough to accept a different thesis, for example, Locke's thesis
that the "natural state" can be harmonious or

--- PAGE BREAK ---

324
Part 3. The Political Paradigm of Modernity. The War of Concepts
neutral, which was the basis for Adam Smith, free trade, and liberalism in
general, we get a special ideology that insists on weakening and gradually
getting rid of the state. Once again, this has been put into practice over the
centuries, leading to globalisation and the emergence of post-national
structures such as the European Union. Anthropological optimism, just as
unproven as anthropological pessimism, based on a different form and
structure of conceptualisation, produces a completely different discourse, and
then a different policy and, ultimately, a different reality. At the same time,
the debate between
"realists" and "liberals" is ongoing, usually without convincing either side
of anything.
Rousseau's positive interpretation of human nature, even more optimistic
than Locke's, paves the way for socialism and Marx himself, which in turn
changes the political landscape of reality once again, giving rise to
communist regimes.
This is what politics is all about: it starts with concepts that relate to a
particular sector of Politica Aeterna, and then it's put into practice, becoming
something real. At the same time, historical practice itself doesn't prove
anything, despite what some philosophers say. Political reality is always a
projection, and with the presence of will, power and certain conditions,
various ideological models can be implemented with equal success. This is
the ontology of the political and the essence of ideological struggle: it is not a
matter of mathematical proof, where the more logical, convincing and
consistent wins, but of a clash between fundamental or less fundamental
attitudes, whose victory over opposing or alternative ones does not in any
way mean their
"truth." It is a battle of concepts, a semantic war directed deep into the
concepts themselves, in the course of their defence and implementation,
revealing more and more of their profound philosophical foundations. For
example, the atoms of Democritus and Epicurus, which were first proposed
in ancient times, were only understood and adopted by Gassendi and Galileo,
and became the foundation of science, philosophy and politics even later,
with Hobbes and Locke. It is precisely to Democritus and Epicurus that
the young Marx turns to justify the metaphysical basis of his worldview,
which will fully develop later on. He reflects on concepts, analysing their
original form and tracing their historical — and even political (in
liberalism and capitalism) — expression and development.ich will fully develop later on. He reflects on concepts, analysing their
original form and tracing their historical — and even political (in
liberalism and capitalism) — expression and development.

--- PAGE BREAK ---op later on. He reflects on concepts, analysing their
original form and tracing their historical — and even political (in
liberalism and capitalism) — expression and development.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

Chapter 6. Communism (the second political theory): the dialectic of the whirlwind in history
325
The dispute over a single (albeit potential) middle class (as advocated by
liberals) or two antagonistic classes (as insisted upon by Marx and Engels)
is precisely a struggle between concepts. It is resolved not in scientific
debates, but in the very fabric of political history. Liberals postulate linear
progress, where the growth of the middle class under capitalism will sooner
or later include all of humanity. This is a concept, but it is also a
programme, a strategy and an action. Marx, on the other hand, argues that
the war between Labour and Capital is not a war for life or death.
Consequently, the representatives of Labour, the proletariat, form one army,
and Capital, the bourgeoisie, forms another. At the same time, the middle
class and the two antagonistic classes are a conceptual calibration of
society, the mechanism of which can be described and explained, but
cannot be proven. Postulating class warfare, Marx enters into it, claiming
to be its chief strategist and marshal of the army of Labour. In general,
this was recognised in the 20th century by the overwhelming majority of
left-wing workers' movements.
For Marxism, the proletariat itself is born as capitalist relations
develop. But the birth of the proletariat is not a historical accident, but the
final expression of a historical law, the final form of a much older war
between exploiters and exploited. Pre-capitalist societies also had a class
character (the paradigm of Tradition), but this became fully apparent in
the bourgeois era. According to Marx, classes existed in both Antiquity
and the Middle Ages. They had formed even earlier, with the emergence
of the first property and social inequality in primitive societies, when the
transition from "cave communism" to primary stratification began. But the
whole of history was a movement towards the clarification of the main
contradiction between Labour and Capital, between the proletariat and the
bourgeoisie. The entire history of human society has been a struggle over
the form of distribution of wealth, and from the very beginning, inequality
has prevailed in this area, which has only intensified in the future. Since
Marx is a materialist, he considers the possession of material goods to be
the main content of the historical process, the driving force of time.
Therefore, for example, Marxism regards medieval class society as a veiled
class society — that is, there are classes here too, but they are represented
not directly, but indirectly — through estates. Hence the Marxist thesis
that the task of both the Church as the first estate and the aristocracy as the
second military estate is to justify the appropriation of surplus product.
Platonism, Aristotelianism, religion — all these are, for Marx, nothing more
thanfirst estate and the aristocracy as the
second military estate is to justify the appropriation of surplus product.
Platonism, Aristotelianism, religion — all these are, for Marx, nothing more
than

--- PAGE BREAK ---e aristocracy as the
second military estate is to justify the appropriation of surplus product.
Platonism, Aristotelianism, religion — all these are, for Marx, nothing more
than

--- PAGE BREAK ---

326
Part 3. The Political Paradigm of Modernity. The War of Concepts
concealing the class nature of the exploiting class and its ideological
justification. That is, Marx considers the class estates of pre-bourgeois
society and, accordingly, the main forms of philosophy and political
philosophy to be "crypto-bourgeoisie." For Marx, the clergy and the nobility
are hidden bourgeois. Marx believes that he has exposed them, revealing that
they only exploit the masses with the help of various myths and fairy tales.
Hence Marx's radical anti-religiousness and militant — Promethean
— atheism, his thesis that religion is the opium of the people. It should be
noted that communism is a harsh anti-Christian, anti-church doctrine that
sets itself the task of fundamentally eliminating religious discourse itself,
since, from Marx's point of view, this discourse is nothing more than a
way of distracting attention from the real social process, which consists in
the exploitation of the working class by the ruling classes. In this
understanding, any religion is a form of concealment of an exploitative
society based on inequality. Instead of directly asserting that workers and
peasants must obey the tsar or pay tithes to the Church because they are in a
position of power, they are told that this is their religious duty. Thus, for
Marx, the clergy, priests, warriors, and aristocracy, who in traditional
society constitute a sacred hierarchy, reflecting in their own eyes the
spiritual vertical inherent in society as such, as impressively described in
Platonic philosophy, turn out to be
"hidden bourgeoisie," concerned only with the appropriation of the material
products of labour. Accordingly, the entire conceptual side of traditional
society — the philosophy of the Father and the philosophy of the Son — is
resolutely rejected in favour of a prioritised interpretation of existence based
on materialistic concepts. Once again, we are talking about concept versus
concept.
Marx does not believe in concepts that reject his own conceptuality. In
polemics and propaganda, he mocks them and tries to show their
inconsistency with reality. But reality for him is his own conceptual
construction, or more precisely, its projections.
Accordingly, for Marx, if in a fully class-based (bourgeois) society
social position is directly related to the means of production, then class
society hides this materialistic reality under the mask of religious
ideology. Therefore, capitalism, being the embodiment of inequality,
simultaneously carries the positive meaning that itn class
society hides this materialistic reality under the mask of religious
ideology. Therefore, capitalism, being the embodiment of inequality,
simultaneously carries the positive meaning that it

--- PAGE BREAK ---es this materialistic reality under the mask of religious
ideology. Therefore, capitalism, being the embodiment of inequality,
simultaneously carries the positive meaning that it

--- PAGE BREAK ---

Chapter 6. Communism (the second political theory): the dialectic of the whirlwind in history
327
inequality in its most adequate (i.e., material) form.
 's genesis of the proletariat
It is necessary to describe in more detail how Marx conceives the class
nature of society as a whole and its clarification in the course of the
historical process.
According to Marx and Engels, the earliest state of primitive humanity
was "cave communism." This was the starting point for humanity, which
developed from primates that began to use tools. According to Marx and
Engels, the evolution of human-like apes into humans occurred precisely
when apes began to use tools, establishing an ontological distance between
themselves and the world, embodied in a concrete object. This laid the
foundation for subject-object relations.
At the first stage, "cave people" lived in a state of complete equality,
and this original collectivism was an expression of human nature itself,
but only in its naive, prehistoric form, not yet tempered by dialectics —
negation and negation of negation.
The idea of the original tool that transformed apes into humans, and
further, of "cave communism," is yet another concept, an abstraction
necessary for constructing a theory. Darwin's theories and the observations of
zoologists are used to substantiate it, but they prove nothing and merely
enrich Marxist discourse with vivid details designed to have a suggestive
effect. However, these conceptual images and figures are necessary for the
integrity and coherence of the second political theory and its philosophy.
Furthermore, Marx continues, as tools of labour are improved and
individual subjectivity is strengthened, social stratification begins,
accompanied by a gradual increase in property inequality. Here, Marx and
Engels follow Rousseau with his originally "good" savage, who is corrupted
by social relations based on political and social inequality. What is the
natural state for Hobbes is, for Marx, the beginning and at the same time
the consequence of politics, of the introduction of inequality. Once again,
we are dealing with a war of concepts, the acceptance of which will lead
us to completely different, sometimes antagonistic conclusions about the
very nature of politics.of inequality. Once again,
we are dealing with a war of concepts, the acceptance of which will lead
us to completely different, sometimes antagonistic conclusions about the
very nature of politics.

--- PAGE BREAK ---again,
we are dealing with a war of concepts, the acceptance of which will lead
us to completely different, sometimes antagonistic conclusions about the
very nature of politics.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

328
Part 3. The Political Paradigm of Modernity. The War of Concepts
As soon as political communities form and elders emerge, class
distinctions begin to arise in societies based on inequality. For centuries
and millennia, the material essence of these differences remained
potential, implicit, hidden by numerous ideologies that initially
legitimised the clan system, then patriarchal families, later the slave-
owning system, and finally feudalism. Only under capitalism, Marx believed,
were the masks thrown off, and from that moment on, those who owned the
means of production began to rule society openly. In other words, capitalism
is a form of extreme shamelessness and open exploitation. Before
capitalism, the ruling classes established their dominance through
idealistic constructs. For Marx, these "ontologies" served only to conceal the
basic, fundamental reality: the meaning of political society lies in the
exploitation of man by man. This exploitation by the ruling class
by class was the true content of political history.
This is undoubtedly a radically materialistic and even vulgar
interpretation of man, the world, life and culture. Ideals, beauty, love,
heroism, sacrifice, loyalty to God, suffering and martyrdom mean nothing
to Marxism. Only material goods and the means of their redistribution
matter. This is precisely why Marx does not recognise the Middle Ages or
Antiquity as independent civilisational phenomena — for him, all of this is
hidden capitalism, veiled by artificial ideologies designed to camouflage
the true nature of material inequality and exploitation. According to Marx,
there is only one decisive difference: either material goods are distributed
among the working people fairly, that is, equally, or they are distributed
unfairly, which means that they are appropriated by the ruling exploitative
capitalist elite.
Marx's conception of the class essence of society extends to all types of
society, both modern and non-modern. But modern bourgeois society speaks
openly about this — this is the meaning of the bourgeois revolution according
to Marx. Now everything seems to fall into place: if before it was hidden,
now the problem has been identified. There are those who exploit, owning the
means of production — the bourgeoisie — and there are those who are
exploited — the workers and, to a lesser extent, the peasants.
Thus, Marx does not believe in the Middle Ages, Plato, or Aristotle.
He believes only in Democritus and Epicurus; he is a materialist from a
metaphysical point of view. For him, matter is alive; itThus, Marx does not believe in the Middle Ages, Plato, or Aristotle.
He believes only in Democritus and Epicurus; he is a materialist from a
metaphysical point of view. For him, matter is alive; it

--- PAGE BREAK ---believe in the Middle Ages, Plato, or Aristotle.
He believes only in Democritus and Epicurus; he is a materialist from a
metaphysical point of view. For him, matter is alive; it

--- PAGE BREAK ---

Chapter 6. Communism (the second political theory): the dialectic of the whirlwind in history
329
is the meaning of history, and consciousness is the peak of the development
of matter. Overall, this is a purely satanic-titanic view of the human spirit,
which springs from the earth. Such an interpretation is the most vivid
illustration of the pig city, which, incidentally, is what all types of normative
societies of political modernity are. Without denying the "swine" nature of
man, which Marx, incidentally, tries to describe in a lofty and even romantic
way when it comes to the flowering of individual creative potential in
communist society, he insists only on equality of distribution and the absence
of any hint of a socio-political hierarchy. Thus, in his case, it is equality that
must become the fundamental law of the pig city, whereas the liberal version
considers freedom to be paramount.
When the bourgeoisie emerges as a class of purely material exploiters,
the working people, who are also exploited, change their nature, gradually
forming the urban proletariat, a second class that generalises the pole
antagonistic to the bourgeoisie. Those who were peasants or artisans in the
Middle Ages and in class society form a new phenomenon, purified of
additional and secondary (for Marxists) characteristics and reduced to
direct materiality.
The concept of the proletarian: the minimal human being.
The urban proletariat has no connections, no qualities — it embodies
the element of pure labour. It is precisely the unskilled working class,
who came from the countryside and completely renounced their qualities
(religious, family, traditional), forgot their culture, folklore, all ties to
local traditions, a labour force without qualities or traditions, that is the
central figure — the subject of communism. A person who has broken
away from culture and become a pure machine, producing material values,
is the bearer of the very essence of labour.
Once again, we are dealing with a pure concept. Just like a monkey
wielding a stick that turns into a Cartesian subject; the complete equality of
peaceful cave dwellers; the theologian who deliberately piles up multi-storey
scholastic constructions, cults and rituals solely for the purpose of robbing
simple labourers with impunity; and finally, the bourgeois himself, driven
solely by material passions and selfishness. At the same time, if Marx could
observe the image of the capitalist with his own eyes, all the more so
because representatives of liberal ideology thought in much the same way,
alsond selfishness. At the same time, if Marx could
observe the image of the capitalist with his own eyes, all the more so
because representatives of liberal ideology thought in much the same way,
also

--- PAGE BREAK ---330
Part 3.

The Political Paradigm of Modernity.

The War of Concepts
predominantly materialists and atheists, the degree of conventionality
increases, and the purely speculative nature of the image becomes
increasingly evident as communist thought moves deeper into history,
where in the realm of apes and "cave communism" we are dealing with pure
arbitrariness — quite analogous to Democritus's constructions describing
how atoms separate from the original Great Void and coalesce into
whirlwinds.

The proletariat is a pure concept.

In reality, the urban worker is a
completely different figure.

Almost always (even in Adam Smith's example
of the baker), we are dealing with someone who was a peasant until very
recently.

First he was a peasant, then he became an assistant to a baker, but in
reality he retains his connection with the organic community, endowed with
culture, a special self-awareness, and numerous qualitative properties.

His
economic activity never exhausts his life world, being only one of its aspects.

The proletarian does not even exist etymologically, since the very name
proletarius contains the pejorative meaning of those who are capable of
producing only children and are incapable of anything else.

For Marx, it is
important to emphasise the pure materiality of the worker, his connection
with the most primitive element of matter, and for this he invents a term in
which qualities are reduced to a minimum.

The proletarian is the smallest
quantum of the human element, reduced to the lowest level of ontology.

He is
a fallen titan, driven into Tartarus by the Olympian gods and deprived of his
share in the world that once belonged to him (cave communism).

The
deprivation of all his properties presents him as a spring compressed to the
limit, but this is exactly what Marx wants.--- PAGE BREAK ---

He is
a fallen titan, driven into Tartarus by the Olympian gods and deprived of his
share in the world that once belonged to him (cave communism). The
deprivation of all his properties presents him as a spring compressed to the
limit, but this is exactly what Marx wants. From Marx's point of view, the proletarian is a quantitative quantum of
labour power — a quantum of labour, a labour atom representing the element
of labour itself. It is important that this concept is not neutral and, moreover, is highly
controversial. In principle, those who disagree with the second political
theory do not simply criticise the Marxist interpretation of this figure, but
deny its existence altogether. For liberals, the proletariat does not exist
because this condition is unstable and transitional on the path to the middle
class. Therefore, the proletariat is not a class, but a subclass or, in other
words, the "potential bourgeoisie" (very small — the smallest —
bourgeoisie). There is no proletarian from the point of view of political
Platonism or Aristotelianism, since there is no atom, no void, and no
matter in itself. Consequently, we are dealing here primarily with the
peasant, the craftsman, the householder, the member of a clan, the serf, the
serf, the serf, the serf, the serf, the serf, the serf, the serf, the serf, the serf, the
serf, the serf, the serf, the serf, the serf, the serf, the serf, the serf, the serf,
the serf, the serf, the serf, the serf, the serf, the serf, the ser

--- PAGE BREAK ---the serf, the serf, the
serf, the serf, the serf, the serf, the serf, the serf, the serf, the serf, the serf,
the serf, the serf, the serf, the serf, the serf, the serf, the ser

--- PAGE BREAK ---

Chapter 6. Communism (the second political theory): the dialectic of the whirlwind in history
331
family, village, member of a religious community or even a sect, but all
these are qualitative characteristics. In other words, the fact that the
proletariat and the bourgeoisie are attributed with "existence" means only
a political movement of conceptual projection, seeking to give practical
ontological (phenomenological) status to one or another rational attitude.
In principle, we have the same thing in the case of the middle class in
liberalism, etc. At the same time, the difference in conceptualisation between
liberals and Marxists occurs within the boundaries of a common context
determined by the basic attitudes of modern political philosophy, where
materialism, atomism, etc. prevail. Therefore, the main dispute at the
conceptual level is about which ideology is more modern and,
consequently, more materialistic, atheistic, secular and atomistic, in a word,
more progressive, understanding progress as the development of matter,
technology and the highest form of evolution of life in the form of society.
The political philosophy of traditional society is built on completely
different principles, rejecting not just communism or liberalism, but the very
political ontology of modernity. Here, we cannot speak of concepts in the
same sense as in liberalism and Marxism. For the Platonists, ideas are not
concepts, that is, they are not products of human consciousness. And for
Aristotle, the eidos is also not a concept, but the essence of a thing,
autonomous — but somewhat differently than in Platonism — from the
human subject.
This is the fundamental significance of what we call Politica Aeterna
and what this course is devoted to. Political philosophy should be
interpreted within the coordinate system in which it describes itself, while
striving to separate polemical, biased, rhetorical, and evaluative
projections of other ideologies onto it. Marx himself recognised that ideology
is "false consciousness," that is, a concept that is only an approximation of
the truth, but not the truth itself. For him, truth itself is matter and its
deepest and most autonomous dimensions. This can only be reached through
science. But in order for this science to become such, it must be freed from
the influence of bourgeois ideology. This is the gnoseology, ontology,
epistemology and political science of the second political theory, and it is in
this capacity that it must be interpreted. Here we see a kinship with
liberalism, stemming from the common belonging of the first and second
political theories to the paradigm of Modernity, and this is already a
fundamental difference from the philosophy of traditional political
society, but also a feature of Marxism, which differs from liberalism as an
ideology.aradigm of Modernity, and this is already a
fundamental difference from the philosophy of traditional political
society, but also a feature of Marxism, which differs from liberalism as an
ideology.

--- PAGE BREAK ---, and this is already a
fundamental difference from the philosophy of traditional political
society, but also a feature of Marxism, which differs from liberalism as an
ideology.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

332
Part 3. The Political Paradigm of Modernity. The War of Concepts
on the other hand, whereas in relation to traditional society, terms such as
class, ideology, etc. cannot strictly speaking be applied, since its very
structure does not allow for this.
Value as the basis of the revolutionary narrative
After Marx establishes these two conceptual classes, he launches a
massive war against his main conceptual enemy, which he designates as
"Capital." In the 19th century, we can indeed see some phenomenological
signs of the middle class and its growth. At first glance, it seems that
political and economic history itself confirms the correctness of bourgeois
philosophers — the first political theory. To prove that this is not the case,
and that in fact there is not one inclusive class at work in history, but two
antagonistic ones, Marx delves into the study of the secret mechanisms of
bourgeois society. Thus, Marx's magnum opus, Capital,is born.
In it, Marx demonstrates how the bourgeoisie exploits the working class,
and consequently, which specific procedures reinforce the dominance of
capital in the structure of society, and how bourgeois ideology conceals these
structures.
Another fundamental concept becomes central to Marx's teaching: the
concept of "value." Here again, as in the case of classes, it is primarily a
question of a struggle between concepts. Liberalism knows neither the
concept of the proletariat as Marx understands it nor the Marxist concept of
value. The very expression
"value" appears as early as Adam Smith, who distinguishes between the
"exchange value" of a thing and its "use value," but it does not play a
significant role in his theory.
From the point of view of liberal theory, in a market economy, it is
not value that is important, but price. Price is conceived as a fundamental
around which the entire market structure is built. The pricing process is
linked to the balance between supply and demand. Accordingly, those
who offer goods produced on the market at a certain price take into
account their costs, expenses, development prospects, risks and,
depending on existing demand, adjust the price accordingly. In some
cases, the price may be unprofitable for the producer, and then they go
bankrupt, in particular, they cannot repay their loan, etc. In other cases,
they receive
1   Marx, K. Capital.ingly. In some
cases, the price may be unprofitable for the producer, and then they go
bankrupt, in particular, they cannot repay their loan, etc. In other cases,
they receive
1   Marx, K. Capital.

--- PAGE BREAK ---s, the price may be unprofitable for the producer, and then they go
bankrupt, in particular, they cannot repay their loan, etc. In other cases,
they receive
1   Marx, K. Capital.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

Chapter 6. Communism (the second political theory): the dialectic of the whirlwind in history
333
large profits. The price thus encompasses the entire market, becoming the
point where the entire production process converges into a quantitative
monetary equivalent, while on the other hand, the entire structure of
consumption, including the consumer's financial resources, the scale and
intensity of their needs, and a multitude of social and cultural factors, also
converges at this point. Price is fundamental because it removes the
significance of all the components that led to its determination. At the
same time, there is no such thing as a "fair price" and there cannot be:
there is only the price at which the producer is willing to sell the product and
the consumer is willing to buy it. Everything else disappears behind the
brackets, is discarded.
The concept of the "value" of goods also disappears here. If an
entrepreneur has paid too high a price for the production of certain goods,
thereby increasing their cost price, and the competitive market offers a
lower price, then in the end the producer suffers losses. He is forced either
to sell at a dumping price, to remain with unsold goods, or even to destroy
them. In this case, the value of the goods produced but not sold, the amount
of labour, resources and technical operations expended on their
manufacture are of no significance.
In a real market economy, everything is determined not by value, but
solely and exclusively by price, and value can only serve as a secondary
indicator, suitable for technical justification of prices before a product
enters the market, and even then only in complex market mechanisms, such
as on futures exchanges or in high-risk segments of the economy, prices
tend to deviate almost completely from value. In principle, this autonomy
of prices is the basis for stock market speculation, which more fully reflects
the essence of the capitalist economy.
According to liberalism, it is impossible to say exactly how much
something is worth in itself — it is worth exactly what price it is offered for
and what price it is bought for. If people refuse to buy it at a certain price, its
price falls. It is impossible to answer the question of how much something is
actually worth. Not a penny. In liberal political economy, there is no value; it
is a convention. Therefore, it is impossible to say whether something is worth
something or not. If something is not bought, then it is not worth anything.
Price is the main market fundamental, and this is the meaning of capitalism.
This is the economic expression of "freedom." Everyone is free to produce
whatever they want, and everyone is free to buy whatever they want. No one
has the right to force anyone to produce or consume anything, or to set a
specific price for a good or service.to produce
whatever they want, and everyone is free to buy whatever they want. No one
has the right to force anyone to produce or consume anything, or to set a
specific price for a good or service.

--- PAGE BREAK ---they want, and everyone is free to buy whatever they want. No one
has the right to force anyone to produce or consume anything, or to set a
specific price for a good or service.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

334
Part 3. The Political Paradigm of Modernity. The War of Concepts
Everything is determined by the market, which is the space of freedom.
This leads to an important conclusion: from the point of view of the
bourgeoisie, since there is no value, there is no exploitation. The share of
wage labour in the formation of prices is a secondary factor and is only one
of many indicators that influence the price but do not determine it. The
entrepreneur is forced to pay the workers one way or another, regardless of
whether he makes a profit or loses money in the sale of goods. He is also
responsible for the loan. The risk of the market game deprives the workers'
product and labour itself of any autonomy of value.
So, liberals ask, can we really say that one person is exploiting another
in this case? No, because no one took anything. If the bourgeoisie did well,
they made money, and if not, they lost out. The worker chooses a
guaranteed salary and the absence of nervous breakdowns, and for this
peace of mind he pays by not sharing in the profits, but also by not
bearing the costs in the event of losses. The entrepreneur takes a risk,
chooses a restless life, and it is precisely this risk that gives him the chance to
gain more. But in the eyes of liberals, this is not guaranteed. One makes a
profit, while the other suffers losses. One manages to get rich, while the
other does not and goes bankrupt. Similarly, a bank that risks its loans can
go bust and go bankrupt.
In this view of the economic process, in this economic narrative, there is
no place for value or exploitation. If a worker no longer wants to work for
hire, he can take a risk, save up some money or take out a loan and start his
own business. If everything goes well, he will become an entrepreneur
himself. But then he will be forced to take risks and depend on the vagaries
of the market. For a liberal, everything depends on the free choice of the
individual: if equal opportunities are provided, people will become either rich
or poor, but entirely dependent on themselves. There is no exploitation
because there is no value. There is no autonomous commodity in itself, no
self-significant elements that make it up; there is only price. If a commodity
does not sell, then it is worthless, and no one is exploited.
Liberal materialism is the materialism of money, the materialism of the
dynamic market forces. And the main thing here is market fundamentals. And
since price depends solely and exclusively on the relationship between supply
and demand, there is no value as such — separate from price. But for Marx,
there is.g here is market fundamentals. And
since price depends solely and exclusively on the relationship between supply
and demand, there is no value as such — separate from price. But for Marx,
there is.

--- PAGE BREAK ---damentals. And
since price depends solely and exclusively on the relationship between supply
and demand, there is no value as such — separate from price. But for Marx,
there is.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

Chapter 6. Communism (the second political theory): the dialectic of the whirlwind in history
335
The introduction of value as a self-sufficient category, as a concept,
radically changes the entire structure of market description. We are dealing
with a completely new narrative about capital and capitalism. If value
exists, then the economy is based not on price, but on the reality of the
goods produced. But if the main concept of the economy is not price (as a
market fundamental), but the actual existence of goods, then we are
dealing with a completely different view of the essence of the economy.
Here, the thing itself is placed at the centre of attention, not its
representation in the form of price. This is a kind of economic materialism.
Marx immediately thinks of the economy outside the market. But in this
case, it is a completely different economy and a different society — a
society where production and consumption are linked in a radically
different way than through the market. Production and consumption
converge not on the price of the commodity, but on the commodity itself.
This is what gives rise to the centrality of value as the economic (but not
market) fundamental of the commodity itself.
Marx proceeds from the assumption that it is labour that creates a
thing, i.e. material value, and that value is equal to the labour invested in
it. At the same time, the value that can be imagined outside the market
does not disappear in the market, but is hidden. Marx is called a
"philosopher of suspicion" because he sees dialectical concealment that
must be revealed in the absence of something.
If value, rather than price, is the basis of the economy, then we are
dealing not with one economy, but with two, superimposed on each other.
One is explicit, bourgeois, built around price; the other is implicit, built
around value. The first can only be market-based, while the second can be
either market-based or non-market-based. At the same time, a non-market
economy — that is, a socialist economy — is an economy of value
distributed evenly among all members of society. But before dividing, it is
necessary to determine the equivalent of what is being divided, and this is
value.
But socialism, the liberation of the economy from the market, is a future
prospect. It is also possible only in the context of a conceptual narrative about
value, but this narrative can be applied to the present. This is the main
content of Capital: a description of capitalist society from the standpoint of
value, that is, based on the suspicion that the capitalist narrative itself hides
something and is false. Specifically, its falsity consists in concealing the
concept of value in favour of the concept of price.
If value exists, then the market is built around a specific commodity, a
thing that has value. It is created by labour. This means that, from the point of
view of justice and equality, value muste.
If value exists, then the market is built around a specific commodity, a
thing that has value. It is created by labour. This means that, from the point of
view of justice and equality, value must

--- PAGE BREAK ---then the market is built around a specific commodity, a
thing that has value. It is created by labour. This means that, from the point of
view of justice and equality, value must

--- PAGE BREAK ---

336
Part 3. The Political Paradigm of Modernity. The War of Concepts
be distributed among its creators. There is labour, there is a thing, there is
value.
But in the market, things are not so simple. The capitalist pretends that he
is the main figure in the economy, responsible for the pros and cons of the
market game. He wants to present everything in such a way that labour is of
secondary importance, and it is not the commodity itself, the real thing, the
economic atom, that is important, but the profit or loss that arises in the
course of its placement on the market. For Adam Smith, this was the meaning
of the concept of "exchange value" or "market value," but this is not at all
what Marx meant by "value." Marx says: whether sold or not, marketable or
not, a produced thing exists, labour is invested in it, and therefore it has
value. If a produced thing cannot be sold as a commodity, it can be used in
some other way — for example, given away for free or taken by the person
who produced it. And this non-market existence does not make value
disappear. Consequently, capitalists also deal with value, striving to
appropriate it, and the market serves as a specially designed element for this
purpose.
The appropriation of surplus value by those who own the means of
production is the main mechanism of capitalism, which leads to the growth
of capital, wealth and, at the same time, inequality.
If value is the result of labour, then no matter how much is spent on the
production of a thing, its value will always include the value of the labour
itself. Thus, labour adds value to a thing. Marx calls this surplus value. In
production, an increase in value takes place. It is precisely this surplus value
that capitalists appropriate for themselves, hiding behind risks and market
forces. In this way, they profit from the underestimation of labour,
explaining it away as entrepreneurial and commercial risks.
But if this is the case, then the bourgeoisie becomes the exploiters and
the workers become the exploited. Marx shows that the capitalist economy,
capitalist states, capitalist mass media, capitalist entertainment industry,
fashion and technology are nothing more than a process of veiled
appropriation by the bourgeois class of the surplus value created in the
process of labour by the proletarian class. Therefore, instead of the growth
of the middle class, in fact, from Marx's point of view, the workers only
become poorer, while the bourgeoisie becomes richer precisely because it
appropriates surplus value.
Value justifies the existence of two antagonistic classes and becomes
the basis of class struggle and, in the long run, of the transition from
capitalism to socialism.t
appropriates surplus value.
Value justifies the existence of two antagonistic classes and becomes
the basis of class struggle and, in the long run, of the transition from
capitalism to socialism.

--- PAGE BREAK ---lus value.
Value justifies the existence of two antagonistic classes and becomes
the basis of class struggle and, in the long run, of the transition from
capitalism to socialism.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

Chapter 6. Communism (the second political theory): the dialectic of the whirlwind in history
337
the construction of a socialist society in which there should be no market,
no exploitation, and no capitalist class. The value created in the course of
labour should be redistributed directly among the workers.
This is how the second political theory justifies its conceptual
apparatus.
Ideology as false consciousness
Developing his theory, Marx argues that the proletariat must form
what the bourgeoisie has already formed: ideology. According to Engels,
ideology is "false consciousness" (1).This is the same concept as Hegel's
"inverted world" or "world turned upside down" (die verkehrte Welt),
which we have already discussed.
Ideology is a certain form of representation of conceptual reality, which
is taken as a basic paradigm. Destutt de Tracy,who introduced the very
concept of "ideology," understood it to mean bourgeois ideology, that is, the
bourgeois class's understanding of the world, society, history, and itself, and
the establishment of this ideology as the foundation of society and social
transformation.
For Marx and Engels, capitalism is a form of social order based on a
"world turned upside down," on concepts of "false consciousness"
instilled by the bourgeoisie in itself and, to an even greater extent, in the
exploited classes.
But Marx calls for more than just fighting "false consciousness." He
believes that as contradictions in bourgeois society intensify, an ideology
alternative to the bourgeois one will gradually emerge. This is
communism: the proletariat will begin to read Marx's works, assimilate
his conceptual positions, learn to understand and reproduce, and, if
necessary, complete and develop the communist narrative.
The first step towards this is for the proletariat to realise that it is the
proletariat. After all, we are talking about a concept, and in its Marxist
interpretation, that is, as a class. When a worker understands that he is a
class, he realises that he must not pursue his individual interests, but act
on behalf of and in the interests of the entire class. And this is already a
special collectivist form of consciousness, and not one borrowed from
1   Marx, K., Engels, F. Selected Letters. Moscow: OGIZ, 1947.
2Destutt de Tracy (1754–1836) — French philosopher, politician and economist. See: Destutt
de Tracy A.-L.-K. The Foundations of Ideology. Ideology in the Proper Sense of the Word.
Moscow: Academic Project, 2018.Tracy (1754–1836) — French philosopher, politician and economist. See: Destutt
de Tracy A.-L.-K. The Foundations of Ideology. Ideology in the Proper Sense of the Word.
Moscow: Academic Project, 2018.

--- PAGE BREAK ---French philosopher, politician and economist. See: Destutt
de Tracy A.-L.-K. The Foundations of Ideology. Ideology in the Proper Sense of the Word.
Moscow: Academic Project, 2018.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

338
Part 3. The Political Paradigm of Modernity. The War of Concepts
accepted by the bourgeoisie (such as liberalism, which promises everyone
that sooner or later they will become middle class), but antagonistic towards
it, ready for class struggle, revolution and the final overthrow of the capitalist
system itself. When a person begins to realise themselves as a class, they
begin to act differently — historically, socially, politically.
To realise oneself as a class and be ready to enter into class struggle, it is
necessary to understand that the results of labour are systematically usurped
by the exploiting class; that labour creates real wealth — value, not some
conventionality dependent on the vagaries of market forces; that in creating
value, the working class always creates surplus value, which is appropriated
in its entirety by the exploiting class. And this situation will continue
forever, because the total wealth of society, created by labour and the
accompanying development of the means of production and technical
progress, which constitutes the total surplus value, will always go entirely to
the capitalists, while the workers will continue to live in poverty and
ignorance. It is therefore time for the proletariat to wake up, take up arms
and destroy the bourgeoisie.
This is the essence of Marxism. The first step is for the proletariat to
understand itself as a class, to form political communist parties, and then,
when the capitalist system collapses, a general strike begins, which turns
into a revolution, followed by the establishment of a socialist system and the
dictatorship of the proletariat. At the same time, it is often overlooked that
for Marx himself, communism is also an ideology, that is, a form of "false
consciousness." Here we can see an echo of Democritus, who believed
that
"truth lies in the abyss" (v guhij kàp  l`DhNjP), that is, he saw insurmountable
limitations to rational cognition of reality itself. But Marx has a slightly
different, more optimistic interpretation. If bourgeois ideology is a lie, then
proletarian ideology, although not yet the truth, is closer to it. But the truth
itself — that is, genuine knowledge of matter — can only be attained through
science. However, science is a social phenomenon, and as long as the
bourgeoisie rules, it saturates science itself with its ideology, including the
dominant concepts. Therefore, bourgeois science is inherently ideological
and, to that extent, not entirely scientific. In order to free science from
ideology in general, it must first be freed from bourgeois ideology, which is
completely false, and subordinated to communist ideology, and then move
towards science as such, which will be "proletarian" not only outwardly,
under the influence of communist ideology, but also in its essence.se, and subordinated to communist ideology, and then move
towards science as such, which will be "proletarian" not only outwardly,
under the influence of communist ideology, but also in its essence.

--- PAGE BREAK ---to communist ideology, and then move
towards science as such, which will be "proletarian" not only outwardly,
under the influence of communist ideology, but also in its essence.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

Chapter 6. Communism (the second political theory): the dialectic of the whirlwind in history
339
internally, in its essence, that is, it will reach as far as possible — the truth (in
Marx's case, the truth about matter, material truth).
But the very recognition of the status of communism as an ideology is
quite significant, since with this correction we can more accurately
imagine the entire political paradigm of Modernity. It is precisely ideologies,
that is, "false consciousness," conceptual structures, that clash in it. This is
the meaning of ideological struggle. Nothing is proven or argued in it. In
both cases — liberalism and communism — we are talking about ideology,
not science (however we understand it). And if we strictly accept Marx's
definition of the nature of ideology, then it should be noted that only political
phenomena of modern times can be attributed to it. Traditional societies —
Platonism, Aristotelianism, and religious societies included — did not know
ideology. They did not represent conceptual systems opposed to each other.
They were dominated by ontology, metaphysics, theology, and philosophy in
the most general sense, which served as the basis for the formulation of
ideas about being, man, society, the state, politics, etc.
Therefore, strictly speaking, we can only talk about three political
ideologies: liberalism, communism, and nationalism. All of them emerged in
the Modern Age and are based on the same conceptual foundation, as three
varieties of "false consciousness." We are dealing with "upside-down
worlds," however we interpret them. Therefore, in order to understand
them, it is important first of all to identify the central axial concept or series
of concepts that make up the general narrative. Arguments, examples,
objections, criticism, etc. are purely rhetorical. In a battle of concepts,
proof is no more relevant than in an interfaith discussion.
Antonio Gramsci: t h e autonomy of the superstructure
Marxism had an enormous influence on the intellectual landscape of the
20th century, and a significant number of thinkers were attracted to its critical
theory. Elements of Marxism were added to a wide variety of philosophical
currents and schools, which further strengthened its influence, but at the same
time somewhat blurred its ideological coherence and conceptual clarity.
One of the most consistent and orthodox communists of the 20th century
was the great Italian philosopher Antoniot at the same
time somewhat blurred its ideological coherence and conceptual clarity.
One of the most consistent and orthodox communists of the 20th century
was the great Italian philosopher Antonio

--- PAGE BREAK ---somewhat blurred its ideological coherence and conceptual clarity.
One of the most consistent and orthodox communists of the 20th century
was the great Italian philosopher Antonio

--- PAGE BREAK ---

340
Part 3. The Political Paradigm of Modernity. The War of Concepts
Gramsci
1(1891–1937). He was a staunch supporter of Russian
Bolshevism and an opponent of Italian fascism from its earliest days.
Antonio Gramsci was the left-wing thinker who reinterpreted the
phenomenon of the Russian Revolution and Leninism more profoundly
than anyone else. However, he did not stop at justifying this phenomenon
within the framework of classical Marxism, but with great intellectual
courage proposed to rethink and, in some respects, correct certain aspects
of Marx's teachings.
Classical Marxism viewed politics as a "superstructure" (berbau) above
the economic "base" (Basis). According to Marx, political revolution (i.e., a
qualitative transformation of the superstructure) is possible only when the
necessary preconditions have been met at the level of the base (structure).
The basis is the economy, the superstructure is politics and everything else.
The linear dependence of the superstructure on the base was the basis for
some European Marxists to deny the orthodox nature of the Russian
Revolution and deny Bolshevism the right to be considered classical
Marxism. In early 20th-century Russia, there were clearly insufficient
conditions (the main one being the presence of developed industrial
capitalism), but the fact of the socialist proletarian revolution was there.
Lenin himself, followed by the other Bolsheviks, tried to prove that these
preconditions existed in the base and that industrial capitalism had developed
in Russia by the beginning of the 20th century. But this was an obvious
stretch, significantly weakening the ideological position of the Bolsheviks
among European Marxists. Gramsci, who lived in the Soviet Union in 1922–
1923 and witnessed the social transformations of the USSR at the earliest
stage, offered a different explanation for Bolshevism. In his view, in some
cases, under certain historical circumstances, the superstructure (i.e., the
sphere of politics) can have relative independence from the base and, in turn,
influence it. Thus, between the structure (basis) and the superstructure
(superstructure) there are not linear relations (the former completely
predetermines the latter), but more complex and dialectical ones: although the
superstructure (politics) is an expression of the base (economy), it can
actively influence the base, qualitatively transforming it in turn(3) .According
to Gramsci, this is precisely what Russian Bolshevism demonstrated —
1   Gramsci A. Le opere. Roma: Editori Riuniti, 1997.
2   Gramsci A. Prison Notebooks 3 v. Turin: Einaudi, 1975.
3   Gramsci A. Il rivoluzionario qualificato. Scritti 1916–1925. Rome: Delotti, 1988.—
1   Gramsci A. Le opere. Roma: Editori Riuniti, 1997.
2   Gramsci A. Prison Notebooks 3 v. Turin: Einaudi, 1975.
3   Gramsci A. Il rivoluzionario qualificato. Scritti 1916–1925. Rome: Delotti, 1988.

--- PAGE BREAK ---opere. Roma: Editori Riuniti, 1997.
2   Gramsci A. Prison Notebooks 3 v. Turin: Einaudi, 1975.
3   Gramsci A. Il rivoluzionario qualificato. Scritti 1916–1925. Rome: Delotti, 1988.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

Chapter 6. Communism (the second political theory): the dialectic of the whirlwind in history
341
The Bolsheviks, as a political force (superstructure), seized power in an
agrarian country and rapidly adapted the basis to an industrial model. For
Gramsci, this was proof of the relative autonomy of the superstructure.
The topic of Marxism in Antonio Gramsci's version
But Gramsci does not stop there. Having established the relative
autonomy of the superstructure, he expands its content to include, alongside
politics, the fields of culture, science, and the humanities in general.
Gramsci introduces the concept of the "intellectual" as a third figure
alongside the politician and the worker/capitalist pair. Economic relations
between Labour and Capital distribute roles in the base (the structure of
society). They also determine the expression of these roles in politics: the
bourgeoisie creates its parties, where the common element is dependence on
Capital, and the proletariat creates its revolutionary party, the Communist
Party, which represents the interests of the people of Labour. But having
formed at the superstructure level, parties gain a certain autonomy in
relation to the base. If the communist party is strong and effective, it is
capable not only of fighting the bourgeoisie, but also of changing the
base. This is the lesson Gramsci draws from Leninism.
But the second component of the superstructure is no less important —
the figure of the intellectual1. The intellectual is also free and also dependent
1   Gramsci A. Gli intellettuali e l’organizzazione della cultura. Torino: Einaudi, 1948.
Politics
intellectuals
party
of the proletariat
counter-
hegemony
parties
capital
hegemony
Capital
Labo
ur
Economy
production relations
productive forces
basis
structure
Basis
superstructur
e
superstructure
Überbau
historical pact
historical pactcounter-
hegemony
parties
capital
hegemony
Capital
Labo
ur
Economy
production relations
productive forces
basis
structure
Basis
superstructur
e
superstructure
Überbau
historical pact
historical pact

--- PAGE BREAK ---rties
capital
hegemony
Capital
Labo
ur
Economy
production relations
productive forces
basis
structure
Basis
superstructur
e
superstructure
Überbau
historical pact
historical pact

--- PAGE BREAK ---

342
Part 3. The Political Paradigm of Modernity. The War of Concepts
from the base, just like politicians. But only they can, in turn, be directly
independent of politics while remaining the voice of class interests. An
intellectual may not be a proletarian and may not be a member of the
Communist Party or any other Labour party, but at the same time, through
his creativity — art, philosophy, journalism, etc. — he can stand on the side
of the proletariat.
At the same time, an intellectual, even one of proletarian origin, can
side with Capital without necessarily aligning himself with bourgeois
parties. The intellectual's choice lies in a different plane. Here Gramsci
introduces the concept of "hegemony." He understands it as the spiritual
solidarity of the intellectual with the bourgeois worldview in its deepest and
most paradigmatic foundations. Hegemony consists in capturing the
consciousness of a person who henceforth begins to serve the cause of the
expansion of Capital, the nature of which tends towards maximum
expansion across the entire territory of the planet (Lenin called this
"imperialism"). This is a conceptual gesture, a choice of concept and
groups of concepts.
By siding with Capital, intellectuals who choose to serve hegemony
enter into a "historical pact" with it. Such intellectuals may be paid by the
bourgeoisie and cooperate with bourgeois parties, but they may also choose
not to be paid or cooperate. The historical pact is made at a different level:
the intellectual either recognises the historical rightness of capitalism,
liberal ideology and bourgeois reforms of society, or he does not. And this
is deeper than the mechanics of class affiliation or bribery. It is a spiritual
choice that manifests the maximum of human freedom — every thinking
person (everyone, according to Gramsci, is an intellectual to the extent
that they think systematically) can side with hegemony or reject it. If they
reject hegemony, they automatically side with counter-hegemony. This is
also a historical pact, but this time concluded by the intellectual with Labour.
And again, this pact can be independent of cooperation with the Communist
Party. The choice is realised in the broad field of culture, science,
philosophy and art. This field represents an autonomous segment of the
superstructure. And it is no less important, independent, and influential
than the realm of politics. If the autonomy of politics has been proven by
Leninism, then the theory of the intellectual, hegemony/counter-
hegemony, and the historical pact is entirely the creation of Gramsci
himself.litics. If the autonomy of politics has been proven by
Leninism, then the theory of the intellectual, hegemony/counter-
hegemony, and the historical pact is entirely the creation of Gramsci
himself.

--- PAGE BREAK ---omy of politics has been proven by
Leninism, then the theory of the intellectual, hegemony/counter-
hegemony, and the historical pact is entirely the creation of Gramsci
himself.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

Chapter 6. Communism (the second political theory): the dialectic of the whirlwind in history
343
The end of history in the second political 's theory
The Marxist worldview is distinguished by a clear and explicit vision of
the historical process. The emergence of intelligent life is a consequence of
evolution. Then begins political history, which moves from primitive
communism through patriarchy, slavery and feudalism to capitalism.
According to Marx, this is not a coincidence, but a law. Socio-economic
formations replace one another in a strictly defined sequence. Therefore, the
path that the West has taken must be followed by all other peoples of the
earth. In this, Marx reveals his Eurocentrism and even cultural ethnocentrism
(cultural racism) (1).These stages had already been passed during Marx's
lifetime, and there were several more to go, which Marxists wanted to bring
closer and help bring about.
The logic was as follows. Once the conflict between the proletariat and
the bourgeoisie reaches its peak, i.e. when a bourgeois urban society is fully
established (i.e., when the majority of the population migrates from the
countryside to the cities and megacities are created), when capitalism
becomes the dominant socio-political system and bourgeois ideology
becomes global, at that moment the proletariat, which by then will constitute
the majority of humanity, will begin to realise itself as the subject of
history, the creator of value and world wealth, will acquire class
consciousness, will assimilate Marx, will organise political movements,
uniting in a world proletarian International, and at some point will carry
out the proletarian revolution. Something along these lines happened in
Russia in 1917, although Marx himself and European Marxists were
convinced that this country, due to the absence of a bourgeoisie and
proletariat and its agrarian character, was precisely where this could not
happen, at least in the initial stage. Nevertheless, several generations after
Marx, this part of Marxism's historical conceptualisation became reality.
Marx himself believed that once the proletarian revolution had been
accomplished, the proletariat would have to abolish private property, dispel
the chimera of the middle class, and destroy the bourgeoisie. Thus, the whole
of society would live according to the laws of equality. The surplus value
created by the labour of the workers
1  Hobson J. The Eurocentric Conception of World Politics: Western International Theory,
1760–2010. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 2012.he surplus value
created by the labour of the workers
1  Hobson J. The Eurocentric Conception of World Politics: Western International Theory,
1760–2010. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 2012.

--- PAGE BREAK ---eated by the labour of the workers
1  Hobson J. The Eurocentric Conception of World Politics: Western International Theory,
1760–2010. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 2012.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

344
Part 3. The Political Paradigm of Modernity. The War of Concepts
will be distributed to the whole society. To this end, a socialist proletarian
state must first emerge, which, under the leadership of the Communist Party,
will be responsible for redistributing the products of labour more or less
evenly among all strata of society. At the next stage, under communism, the
state — including the socialist state — will wither away, having fulfilled its
function; people will become conscious, creative, truly individual (as
individual as atoms) and will receive according to their needs, contributing to
the common life as much effort and labour as they can or want (the
consciousness of the new people of communism will correspond to the
highest standards of collectivist altruistic morality).
The construction of communism is the end of history, which goes
through a complete cycle from atoms floating in the Great Void and
forming vortices, to life, consciousness, and history, which were a
dialectical deviation from the original simplicity of matter, and back to a
new return to the fullness of materiality, but not in the form of atoms, but in
the form of the moral and conscious human being of communism, in which
the materiality of the atom, as a thing-in-itself, would be transformed into
free creative individuality as a thing-for-itself, having passed through the
entire path of alienation — existence-for-another. What lay beyond this was
completely unclear to Marx: communist humanity would have to master the
universe in order to fly around it in flying machines — like the atoms and
vortices of the Greek atomists, spreading communism everywhere as an
ideology and a science.
With communism, history ends because, according to Marx, history is a
class struggle. And since the bourgeoisie no longer exists and only the
proletariat remains, which under socialism has eliminated the last vestiges
of bourgeois consciousness, there is no class struggle.
In the USSR and other socialist countries, socialism was built, meaning
that this part of Marxist historical dogma was fulfilled. With regard to
equality in the Soviet Union as a whole, Marx's criteria were satisfied. All
people were more or less equal in material terms, and differences in
income were insignificant. On average, by the end of the USSR, most
people earned 100 roubles, which was more or less sufficient; high salaries
were considered to be 200 roubles and above, and low salaries were 50–70
roubles. There were differences, of course, but compared to today, they
were negligible.
But with the transition to communism, which some Soviet leaders,
such as Nikita Khrushchev (1894–1971), believed would take only a few
decades, changes in the socio-economic formations began that were
completely inexplicable in the spirit of Marxist theory.ers,
such as Nikita Khrushchev (1894–1971), believed would take only a few
decades, changes in the socio-economic formations began that were
completely inexplicable in the spirit of Marxist theory.

--- PAGE BREAK ---Khrushchev (1894–1971), believed would take only a few
decades, changes in the socio-economic formations began that were
completely inexplicable in the spirit of Marxist theory.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

Chapter 6. Communism (the second political theory): the dialectic of the whirlwind in history
345
processes. Labour productivity in socialist countries did not grow at the
expected rate, the world revolution did not happen, and what is more, its
preconditions dissipated, the self-awareness of the Soviet people became
clouded, and morality became increasingly 'petty bourgeois', that is,
selfish and utilitarian.
Thus, the practical implementation of the Marxist version of history
failed, and socialist societies collapsed. Among them, only China (as well
as Vietnam, North Korea and Cuba) survived, but China only managed to do
so by fully embracing a market-liberal economy in the 1980s, while retaining
power in the hands of the Communist Party. But Chinese communism has
strayed even further from Marxist orthodoxy than the Soviet version.
With the end of the USSR and socialism in Eastern Europe, the entire
model of historical time, as understood by communists, collapsed. Marxism
simply did not envisage a return from socialism to capitalism, just as it did
not allow for the construction of socialism in a single country. The
ideological clarity of the second political theory became clouded. From then
on, Marxist views on the logic of history ceased to be perceived as something
obvious and convincing. The conceptual side of Marxism also suffered
significantly, facilitated by both ideological struggle and parallel processes in
scientific circles, which, even in the Modern era, did not always strictly
adhere to ideological tenets, of which there were at least three until the mid-
20th century (liberalism, communism and fascism), and after 1945, two
(liberalism and fascism). communism and fascism), and after 1945 there were
two (liberalism and fascism). This confrontation allowed for the development
of scientific concepts, albeit relatively, on the periphery or on the fault lines
between ideologies. In a capitalist society, where Marxist predictions did not
come true (although they should have done so), and after the fall of the
USSR, the second political theory lost its most important practical support.
Of course, Marxism collapsed, or at least retreated far back, not because
its predictions about the communist end of history did not come true. The
entire content of Marxism, like any ideology of the Modern era, consists of
concepts that cannot be directly correlated with reality (confirmed or refuted),
since reality itself is conceived in the Modern era as a concept. Therefore, the
second political theory's ideas were ideological not only about the future, but
also about the past and even the present (although in the present — that is, in
the era of the rapid rise of capitalism in 20th-century Europe — Marx relied
not simply on "reality," but on the conceptual basis of liberalism and onpresent (although in the present — that is, in
the era of the rapid rise of capitalism in 20th-century Europe — Marx relied
not simply on "reality," but on the conceptual basis of liberalism and on

--- PAGE BREAK ---n the present — that is, in
the era of the rapid rise of capitalism in 20th-century Europe — Marx relied
not simply on "reality," but on the conceptual basis of liberalism and on

--- PAGE BREAK ---

346
Part 3. The Political Paradigm of Modernity. The War of Concepts
Hegel's sophisticated philosophical system (1770–1831), which cannot be
strictly attributed to either Modernism or, even less so, to liberalism. But
political theories and contemporary political ideologies have their own
historical destiny. And instead of the Marxist end of history, we are
witnessing in our time the "end of Marxism," which must be accepted as a
fundamental fact of political philosophy, one that can be explained in
many different ways, but cannot be denied.
The significance of political thought and its price
A brief overview of Marxism in its conceptual foundations shows the
importance of political philosophy for the specific social, political, and
economic environment in which the history of various peoples unfolds. In
Politica Aeter- na, its structures, its symmetries, its metaphysics and its
conceptual systems, at first glance we are dealing with abstract and
speculative subjects — both in the case of traditional society and in relation
to the Modern. Thus, the differences between the first and second political
theories, despite the unity of some common assumptions (materialism,
individualism, progressivism, atomism) stemming from their belonging to the
same type of philosophy — the philosophy of Matter — the antagonism boils
down to the content of some seemingly rather abstract concepts — class,
value, basis, atomic dialectic, matter, etc. But the projection of these
conceptual systems — ideologies (as forms of "false consciousness") — into
reality gives rise to grandiose historical cataclysms — revolutions, bloody
civil wars, battles between peoples and states, repressions that affect
practically all of humanity. Thus, an insignificant gap in the conceptual
apparatus, the interpretation of a particular term, a correct or distorted
understanding of a particular socio-political, economic or historical
phenomenon or process is paid for with rivers and even seas of human
blood, millions of broken lives, an abyss of suffering, and sometimes
grandiose achievements and volcanic eruptions of enthusiasm and
galvanised happiness.
From these concepts (bourgeois class, proletarian class, value, surplus
value, exploitation, ideology as false consciousness) a second political
theory emerges, which, once in power, begins to operate in reality. At the
same time, Gramsci shows that in some cases it is the mood of the
superstructure, i.e. the historical) a second political
theory emerges, which, once in power, begins to operate in reality. At the
same time, Gramsci shows that in some cases it is the mood of the
superstructure, i.e. the historical

--- PAGE BREAK ---theory emerges, which, once in power, begins to operate in reality. At the
same time, Gramsci shows that in some cases it is the mood of the
superstructure, i.e. the historical

--- PAGE BREAK ---

Chapter 6. Communism (the second political theory): the dialectic of the whirlwind in history
347
pact between organic intellectuals, which can far outstrip the state of the
base.
In the 20th century in Russia, Marx's worldview played a fundamental
role. His conceptual apparatus was adopted by the Bolsheviks, who carried
out a revolution, seized power, and built a socialist society, striving to
follow the strategy and dogma of Marxism as closely as possible. The
communists' rise to power meant the dictatorship of the proletariat and the
destruction of the bourgeoisie, along with the rest of the non-proletarian
classes — priests, nobles, landowners, etc.
The civil war, mass executions and repression, the destruction of a
thousand-year-old culture, and the disappearance of the aristocracy and, to
some extent, the peasantry were the direct consequences of the fascination
with Marxism. This is how a totalitarian society was built, in which the
second political theory came to be perceived as an irrefutable dogma. The
"false consciousness" of the abstract proletariat (which, incidentally, did not
exist in Russia to any significant extent) became the natural and universally
accepted worldview and intellectual environment for almost a century.
It is telling that at the beginning of the 20th century, the Marxist
worldview was the preserve of marginal groups (mainly the intelligentsia),
the urban proletariat was insignificant, and industrialisation and the
formation of the bourgeoisie were in their infancy. Everything was
decided by a historical pact with Marxism, concluded by a very small but
passionate and fanatical intelligentsia.
Although the USSR itself was a colossal illustration of a socialist society,
the influence of Marxism spread far beyond its borders. A similar system
was established after World War II in communist China, Vietnam, North
Korea, some countries of the Indochinese Peninsula, Latin America and
Africa, as well as in Eastern Europe. European social democracy, also
based on Marxism, mostly rejected Bolshevism and Maoism, but
communist ideology still had a huge impact on it.
In the 1960s, the successes of the socialist camp on the one hand and the
critical potential of Marxist philosophy on the other were so obvious and
impressive that many European countries also began to move towards
socialism. During this period, not being a communist meant being a
"scoundrel" among European intellectuals — it was believed that in this case,
the intellectual had entered into a historical pact with the bourgeoisie, with
the exploiters, with the forces of evil. This fashion was introduced primarily
by the Frenchlieved that in this case,
the intellectual had entered into a historical pact with the bourgeoisie, with
the exploiters, with the forces of evil. This fashion was introduced primarily
by the French

--- PAGE BREAK ---case,
the intellectual had entered into a historical pact with the bourgeoisie, with
the exploiters, with the forces of evil. This fashion was introduced primarily
by the French

--- PAGE BREAK ---

348
Part 3. The Political Paradigm of Modernity. The War of Concepts
French "new left" philosophers such as Jean-Paul Sartre (1905–1980) and
Albert Camus (1913–1960). Many representatives of the European artistic
avant-garde had been communists since the 1930s, such as the leader of the
surrealist movement André Breton (1896–1966). The appeal of communism
as post-liberalism was reinforced by the fact that it had already triumphed in
many countries, and almost half of the world's population opposed the
capitalist system. Intellectuals believed that it could also prevail in Europe,
where contradictions between the bourgeoisie and the proletariat were also
growing and where, at times, quite revolutionary events took place — such as
in May 1968. At that time, the riots of left-wing youth and students were a
kind of analogue of the Marxist revolution — not carried through to the end,
but significantly influencing the political environment in France. From that
moment on, being a communist became not only prestigious in a cultural
sense, but the sharp rise in the influence of the left brought the socialist
François Mitterrand (1916–1996) to power. Many believed that Europe was
developing in a Marxist direction. Some even felt that Marx had been proven
right, not only partially and "morally," but literally, including with regard to
the replacement of liberalism by communism.
Of course, there was a fundamental difference between Soviet and
European Marxists, which persisted because European Marxists
traditionally disapproved of Bolshevism, considering it Blanquism and
adventurism, and under the influence of the Trotskyists, they felt
particular animosity towards Stalin, believing that he had created a
totalitarian society in the USSR that was not so much communist as
nationalist and bureaucratic in nature. But the fundamental point is that
socialism, as the second political theory, represented for a long time a
significant trend that belonged entirely to the paradigm of the modern era,
just like liberalism (the first political theory), operating with the same
concepts but organising them in a fundamentally different way.
Overall, Gramsci's theses on the historical pact, which essentially
recognise the paramount importance of conceptualisation and ideology,
have been fully confirmed in European history, where the influence of
Marxism, which grew particularly strong in the late 1960s, qualitatively
changed the cultural, educational, social, political and economic
environment.
The political philosophy constructed by Marx played an enormous role in
the development of the dramatic 20th century. Only his example can
convince us of the decisive significance that thought, concepts, ideology and
philosophy play in the history of peoples.s role in
the development of the dramatic 20th century. Only his example can
convince us of the decisive significance that thought, concepts, ideology and
philosophy play in the history of peoples.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

Chapter 6. Communism (the second political theory): the dialectic of the whirlwind in history
349
A concept is formed in the mind of a philosopher or several philosophers, it
connects with others or opposes them, and then millions, billions of people
pay the price for it. That is how important thought is as such — it is what
drives history.

--- PAGE BREAK ---phers, it
connects with others or opposes them, and then millions, billions of people
pay the price for it. That is how important thought is as such — it is what
drives history.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

Chapter 7. Nationalism classical and
revolutionary (third political theory)
The genesis of the third political theory of
Modern nationalism is a political philosophy that represents the third
main line of ideological development of this period. All political theories of
the modern era, beginning in the 19th century, crystallised in one way or
another, reaching their apogee in three fundamental political worldviews:
1) liberalism (the first political theory),
2) communism (the second political theory) and
3) nationalism (the third political theory).
This sequence in the listing of ideologies is related to the order of their
historical emergence: first liberalism appeared, then Marxism as a critique of
liberalism, and much later, at the end of the 19th and beginning of the 20th
centuries, as a response to the challenge of liberalism and Marxism, a full-
fledged ideology of political nationalism emerged in the form of Italian
fascism and German National Socialism (as well as their analogues in other
countries). In addition to fascism and National Socialism, the third political
theory includes typologically similar political systems created by António
Salazar (1889–1970) in Portugal, General Franco ( 1892–1975) in Spain, and
Peronism (from the Spanish justicia, meaning justice) in Argentina. (from the
Spanish justipia — justice) in Argentina(1) .At the same time
1  Contemporary Greek political scientist Dimitris Kitsikis believes that since 1945, when
fascism suffered a crushing defeat in Europe, such ideologies have moved to the Third World.
According to Kitsikis, many Third World regimes, in particular the Arab Baath Party,
combined right-wing and socialist, conservative and Marxist elements, without being strictly
socialist or capitalist parties. They represent a spectrum of variations of Third Political Theory.
According to Kitsikis' classification, the remnants of Ba'athist regimes were Saddam Hussein's
regime in Iraq (1937–2006), Muammar Gaddafi's regime in Libya (1942–2011), and Hafez al-
Assad's regime in Syria (1930–2000). there are also many similar combinations of national
and social ideas in the Palestinian liberation movement.Gaddafi's regime in Libya (1942–2011), and Hafez al-
Assad's regime in Syria (1930–2000). there are also many similar combinations of national
and social ideas in the Palestinian liberation movement.

--- PAGE BREAK ---Libya (1942–2011), and Hafez al-
Assad's regime in Syria (1930–2000). there are also many similar combinations of national
and social ideas in the Palestinian liberation movement.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

Chapter 7. Classical and revolutionary nationalism (the third political theory) 351
Both fascism and National Socialism were largely a reaction to European
socialism, partly incorporating some of its principles and partly offering an
alternative to them. In the case of German National Socialism, for example,
the very name contains a reference to socialism (albeit fundamentally
different from Marxism), while in the case of Italian fascism, in addition to
doctrinal similarities and the early fascists' sympathy for the USSR (which
was mutual at first), it should be noted that Benito Mussolini (1883–1945),
the founder of the fascist party, was a socialist in his youth. Lenin spoke
highly of the early Mussolini and regretted that such a leader had been lost
to the European left.
Fascism and National Socialism in the 20th century are not a Marxist
version of anti-liberalism. This was already anticipated by Marx, who
carefully distinguished between left-wing anti-capitalism and i.e., post-
capitalism itself, which gradually developed into Marxism and the second
political theory, from various forms of anti-capitalism on the right, which
oppose bourgeois society in defence of either the preservation of elements
of traditional society (religion, class, aristocracy, etc.), or do not accept the
proletarian and internationalist dogma of the communists, attempting to
combine socialism either with national elements or with the peasant class.
Later, the most consistent form of combining socialism with the principles
of class society, generalising the tendencies of "conservative socialism"
criticised by Marx in the Manifesto, was proposed in his works by the
Austrian theorist Otto Spann(1)  ( 1878–1950).
Marx engaged in fierce debate, particularly with Ferdinand Lassalle
(1825–1864), who defended national or state socialism. His ideological
opponents were anarchists — especially Joseph Proudhon (3)( 1809–1865),
who advocated a free federation of rural communities and rejected the
messianic role of the proletariat, and Mikhail Bakunin4  (1768–1854), who
recognised the Slavic and, more broadly, the South European peoples as
the true revolutionary force, in opposition to Germany and the North
European nations.
1  Spann, O. The True State: Lectures on the Demolition and Reconstruction of Society,
given in the summer semester of 1920 at the University of Vienna. Vienna: Quelle & Meyer,
1921.
2   Lassal F. Macht und Recht. Offnes Sendschreiben. Zurich: Meyer & Zeller, 1863.
3  Proudhon, J. What is Property? Or An Inquiry into the Principle of Right and Power;
Poverty as an Economic Principle; Pornocracy, or Women in Their Present State. Moscow:
Respublika, 1998.
4  Bakunin, M. A. Collected Works and Letters. 1828–1876 Moscow: Publishing House of the
All-Union Society of Political Prisoners and Exiles, 1934–1935.heir Present State. Moscow:
Respublika, 1998.
4  Bakunin, M. A. Collected Works and Letters. 1828–1876 Moscow: Publishing House of the
All-Union Society of Political Prisoners and Exiles, 1934–1935.

--- PAGE BREAK ---Moscow:
Respublika, 1998.
4  Bakunin, M. A. Collected Works and Letters. 1828–1876 Moscow: Publishing House of the
All-Union Society of Political Prisoners and Exiles, 1934–1935.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

352
Part 3. The Political Paradigm of Modernity. The War of Concepts
which Bakunin considered too "rationalistic." Later, elements of 19th-century
national socialism and certain strands of anarchism (especially in fascist
Italy) were integrated into a third political theory: revolutionary nationalism. It
is important to emphasise that this type of nationalism builds its ideology on
Marxism and anti-capitalist left-wing theories and concepts, and therefore
logically follows the second political theory, which in turn was a critical
reaction to bourgeois ideology (the first political theory, liberalism).
Bourgeois nationalism and revolutionary nationalism
However, although the third political theory, which should be
understood as a complete ideology of revolutionary nationalism that takes
into account the basic tenets of socialism and Marxism and offers
alternative concepts, only emerged in the 20th century, nationalism itself
appeared practically simultaneously with the Modern era and reflects the
main features of Modern political philosophy. If revolutionary nationalism
(of the 20th century) is largely anti-capitalist and staunchly anti-liberal,
then at the origins of European nationalism we see, on the contrary,
bourgeois tendencies. The nation states themselves in Europe developed
under the influence of the Protestant Reformation and were a political
challenge to Catholicism and the Empire. Such bourgeois nationalism
therefore emerged at the very origins of modernity and, in a sense, even
preceded liberalism. In the field of economics, mercantilism, which
insisted on a state monopoly on foreign trade, developed long before
liberalism, and Adam Smith himself formulated his theories in polemics
with the mercantilists. Later, this same logic of bourgeois nationalism
became firmly associated with protectionist policies and, in the 20th
century, became the basis of realism in international relations (1)— without
any connection to the ideology of the Third Way, i.e., revolutionary
nationalism.
Of course, there are certain similarities between bourgeois nationalism,
which emerged at the dawn of the modern era, and revolutionary (anti-
bourgeois) nationalism, which developed into a fully-fledged ideology
only in the 20th century, largely as a reaction to the second political theory.
First and foremost, both declare the supremacy of
1   Dugin, A. G. International Relations (Paradigms, Theories, Sociology).in the 20th century, largely as a reaction to the second political theory.
First and foremost, both declare the supremacy of
1   Dugin, A. G. International Relations (Paradigms, Theories, Sociology).

--- PAGE BREAK ---largely as a reaction to the second political theory.
First and foremost, both declare the supremacy of
1   Dugin, A. G. International Relations (Paradigms, Theories, Sociology).

--- PAGE BREAK ---

Chapter 7. Classical and revolutionary nationalism (the third political theory) 353
the value of national sovereignty, the elevation of national identity to the
status of the supreme subject of foreign policy, etc., but in general these are
different phenomena. The dividing line here runs along the fundamental
principles of capitalism. All types of nationalism, both bourgeois and
revolutionary, are critical of liberalism (the first political theory), but
bourgeois nationalism considers market society and its fundamental
principles (free trade, individualism, progress, etc.) to be completely
legitimate, while revolutionary nationalism rejects capitalism as a whole. It is
easy to recognise the influence of Marxist thought, only read backwards.
Marx, starting from liberal political economy and its postulates, insists on
the international nature of capital, on which he bases his alternative
proletarian internationalism; for him, the international character of
capitalism is a dialectical moment necessary as a preparation for the world
revolution of the proletariat, which must also be an international class. But
revolutionary nationalists (fascists and National Socialists), accepting the
thesis of the international nature of capital (insisted upon by liberals and,
even more so, by Marxists), but draw the opposite conclusion, asserting that
it is precisely because of its international nature that capitalism is
incompatible with national sovereignty and will sooner or later destroy it —
either directly, through international monopolies and financial structures,
or indirectly, through the proletarian revolution. Therefore, the political
theory is precisely revolutionary nationalism, based on a deep philosophical
and historical analysis of the main provisions of Modernity and their
interpretation in the first and second political theories. Bourgeois
nationalism is not so much an ideology as a model for building foreign
policy and, in particular, economic relations with other countries. In
domestic politics, such nationalism does not differ at all from the general
principles of capitalism and, consequently, liberalism.
Given this fundamental difference, we can trace the stages of the
formation of nationalism as such — from its initial and bourgeois form to its
revolutionary form, which had a rather short period of existence in history.
Countries and social classes in the feudal system
Thus, the roots of political nationalism are directly related to the
modern era. This is a phenomenon of modern politicsiod of existence in history.
Countries and social classes in the feudal system
Thus, the roots of political nationalism are directly related to the
modern era. This is a phenomenon of modern politics

--- PAGE BREAK ---history.
Countries and social classes in the feudal system
Thus, the roots of political nationalism are directly related to the
modern era. This is a phenomenon of modern politics

--- PAGE BREAK ---

354
Part 3. The Political Paradigm of Modernity. The War of Concepts
and, therefore, nationalism belongs to the paradigm that we defined in the
terminology of Plato's "Timaeus" as
"the political philosophy of Mother." Thus, nationalism as a whole
represents one of the directions of materialistic philosophy of the Modern
Era.
Political nationalism is directly linked to the concept of nation. A
nation is a bourgeois phenomenon that emerged at the dawn of the
modern era alongside the sovereign state, which in turn represented the
antithesis of the Holy Empire. A nation is the population of a state created
by means of a social contract. Thus, at the heart of a nation, as at the heart
of a state, lies a social contract. The subject from which a nation is formed
is the individual citizen. Where there is a nation, there is individual
citizenship. It is a collection of individuals, social atoms.
A nation is an artificial creation of a group of individuals who are
considered rational and possess a single will. It is a direct product of a
social contract that proclaims the formation of a certain unitary structure.
The unitary structure of the state means that the entire territory within the
borders of the nation consists of a homogeneous legal field where all
citizens of this nation-state recognise a single law, a single language, a
single regime, and a single culture. These citizens are considered the
authority that establishes the nation.
In French, there is an expression — État-Nation (État — state, Nation —
nation) — which shows the historical and political unity of the state and the
nation, their inseparable connection. In English, the corresponding term is
"national state." We could translate this as "national state," but when we do
so, we diminish the meaning of the word "national," and the main emphasis is
placed on "state." However, in the formula État-Nation, there is no adjective;
these are two nouns.
The nation emerges together with the bourgeois revolution. Before the
bourgeois revolution, there is a Holy Empire, a traditional state, a class
society. Class society is regulated not so much by nationally binding
norms and rules as by the relations between different classes, groups and
various associations within that society. In this situation, incidents such as the
following will arise time and again
1   For more details, see: Dugin, A. G. Ethnosociology. Moscow: Academic Project, 2012.associations within that society. In this situation, incidents such as the
following will arise time and again
1   For more details, see: Dugin, A. G. Ethnosociology. Moscow: Academic Project, 2012.

--- PAGE BREAK ---that society. In this situation, incidents such as the
following will arise time and again
1   For more details, see: Dugin, A. G. Ethnosociology. Moscow: Academic Project, 2012.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

Chapter 7. Classical and revolutionary nationalism (the third political theory) 355
When a stable system exists in a certain duchy, vassalage (there is a
suzerain, there are vassals, there is a feudal hierarchy), but the strict
affiliation of this duchy to Normandy, France, England or Germany is
sometimes difficult to determine in European history before the Modern
Era. They could belong to two states at once or to none of them, because the
concept of the state was not yet unified. Social classes were more important
than the state, the feudal system was more important than the national
system, and the relations between vassals and suzerains were more
important than the national affiliation of this territory to one kingdom or
another. At the same time, some territories could be directly subordinate
to the Catholic Church, in which case bishops acted as political rulers.
Sometimes power belonged to an alliance of rural communities. Mixed
forms were also common. A fief is not simply the property of a particular
feudal lord or his family. It was a more complex entity, sometimes
allowing for a fairly wide variety of forms of government. It was within the
feudal estates in the Middle Ages that political and economic exchange took
place — services, labour, food, goods. This exchange was most often in
kind — goods for goods, services for services, etc. The feudal lower classes
— peasants and serfs — had to serve as a militia and supply goods to the
lower nobility, who in turn led their troops into the armies of their
suzerains, to whom they gave part of their produce and goods, and so on
up to the king. The church structure was also part of this feudal structure.
When switching from one suzerain to another, a vassal usually took
with him those who were below him. But in general, the attachment of this
ladder to a single state — and its ruler, the king — was quite loose and was
only felt in cases of serious wars and conflicts. Most of the population may
not have known at all which state they belonged to. Everyone knew that they
were Christians and that their immediate suzerain was a certain baron,
count or duke. Only occasionally did news reach the king, and the very idea
of the state was vague and very approximate.
The political system in Rus' was roughly the same until the beginning
of the Muscovite period, when it became possible to speak of a semblance
of national unity and centralisation of power1. But even in Muscovy itself,
the boyars enjoyed a great deal of freedom, and this is precisely what Ivan
the Terrible fought against — his main reforms were directed against the
free boyars
1  Dugin, A. G. Noomakhia. Russian History. The People and the State in Search of a Subject.precisely what Ivan
the Terrible fought against — his main reforms were directed against the
free boyars
1  Dugin, A. G. Noomakhia. Russian History. The People and the State in Search of a Subject.

--- PAGE BREAK ---the Terrible fought against — his main reforms were directed against the
free boyars
1  Dugin, A. G. Noomakhia. Russian History. The People and the State in Search of a Subject.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

356
Part 3. The Political Paradigm of Modernity. The War of Concepts
(as an analogue of the feudal lords of the European Middle Ages). During
the Time of Troubles, we see how autonomous the Russian boyars remained
even after Ivan the Terrible.
The nation as a bourgeois concept
A nation is created in strict opposition to this state of affairs, to this
class-based feudal system, to this medieval version of political philosophy.
A nation is an anti-class state. It is either classes or a nation. Moreover, a
nation is based on the principle of the dominance of the bourgeois type as
the normative socio-political actor. And the bourgeoisie, as we have seen,
is based precisely on equality of starting opportunities, which in practice
means the rejection of class privileges.
In a class society, individual identity is embedded in class identity.
Where, for example, does the widespread Russian surname "Kuznetsov"
come from, which is etymologically and semantically identical to the English
surname "Smith," the German "Schmidt," etc.? The fact is that in the past, a
person's surname (i.e., family name) reflected what they did for a living. A
blacksmith's son was a blacksmith, and his grandson was a blacksmith, and
so on ad infinitum. Anyone named "Kuznetsov" was a blacksmith. Such a
surname was not possible for an aristocrat or a peasant.
Medieval people defined their individual identity through their social
function, profession, place in society, and membership in a fixed class
group. Accordingly, the surnames "Medvedev" or
"Volkov" are even older, associated with hunters and gatherers, because
during initiation practices, hunters switched roles with their prey, and those
who hunted had to be prepared to become the prey themselves. However,
in some cases, these may have been village nicknames of later origin.
But the surnames "Ivanov" and "Petrov" are very new — they seem to be
traditionally Russian surnames, but this is not the case. They appeared from
patronymics during the census based on Western European models. The
common people were asked, "Whose are you? Ivanov or Petrov?" since these
names were popular among the people, and individuals were recorded by
their patronymic, which only later became a sign of family. But this is
already an element of individualism — the surname "Ivanov" or "Petrov"
tells us nothing about who was the founder of this family from the point of
view of the feudal model. These are modernist surnames.ady an element of individualism — the surname "Ivanov" or "Petrov"
tells us nothing about who was the founder of this family from the point of
view of the feudal model. These are modernist surnames.

--- PAGE BREAK ---dividualism — the surname "Ivanov" or "Petrov"
tells us nothing about who was the founder of this family from the point of
view of the feudal model. These are modernist surnames.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

Chapter 7. Classical and revolutionary nationalism (the third political theory) 357
. It was more traditional to call a person "Krestyankin," meaning "son of a
peasant woman." This is closer to the paradigm of Tradition.
Accordingly, functional surnames are a remnant of class society,
while surnames based on the father's name indicate a certain loss of
traditional collective identity, a certain individualism and possibly the
migration of peasants to the city, registration as a member of the
bourgeoisie as a whole without any characteristic professional traits.
National states are based on individual citizenship. That is, a member of
a nation is thought of as an individual, the very atom that lies at the
foundation of the materialistic worldview and the corresponding scientific
picture of the modern world.
The nation is a product of , nationalism.
The dominant figure of nationalism is the bourgeoisie. Therefore, all
classical nationalism is bourgeois. It is a form of association of people who
have broken their ties with class society and found themselves in the position
of pure individuals. Most often this happened precisely with townspeople,
that is, the inhabitants of Burg, the bourgeoisie. And in order to bring these
individuals together into a manageable and orderly social community, they
are made to believe that they are members of a nation. A nation is an artificial
construct, and it appears as a concept. The entire history of a nation is a
product of the imagination of bourgeois nationalists.
All the main points of modern philosophy, and especially modern
political philosophy, are concepts. The concept is the individual, and it is
precisely this that is the most important and fundamental for modernity as a
whole. In the first political ideology, it is taken as the main one (perhaps this
is related to the stability of liberalism and its political victories over
alternative — illiberal — ideologies of Modernity). The proletariat, property,
and socio-economic formation are also concepts. They are central to
communism. The nation is another concept. It also deals with the individual,
as in socialism, but brings together a group of individuals according to a
different scenario — not according to class, but according to the state. A
nation is the totality of citizens (= townspeople = bourgeoisie) of a given
state. Together they form the État-Nation, the Nation-State.
The mechanism behind the emergence of modern nations and the
intellectual and historical context of this process are convincingly
describedate. Together they form the État-Nation, the Nation-State.
The mechanism behind the emergence of modern nations and the
intellectual and historical context of this process are convincingly
described

--- PAGE BREAK ---orm the État-Nation, the Nation-State.
The mechanism behind the emergence of modern nations and the
intellectual and historical context of this process are convincingly
described

--- PAGE BREAK ---

358
Part 3. The Political Paradigm of Modernity. The War of Concepts
by anthropologist Ernest Gellner (1925–1995) and sociologist Benedict
Anderson (1936–2015). Gellner noted the artificiality of the concept of
nation, which has nothing to do with the historical existence of a people or
medieval class society1.
These authors draw attention to a very important sequence in the
formation of modern nations: in any situation, nationalists come first, and
only then does a nation emerge. Gellner, in particular, insists that
nationalism is not a consequence of the existence of a nation, but that
nations themselves arise as a development of the ideology of nationalism.
He writes:
It is nationalism that creates nations, not the other way around. Of
course, nationalism makes use of pre-existing cultures or cultural diversity,
although it does so very selectively and often radically transforms them.
Dead languages can be revived, traditions invented, anda completely
mythical original purity restored.
Nationalism invents a nation, i.e. a society that never existed, but uses
elements taken from the real historical experience of specific groups
(ethnic groups and the history of a people), which are taken out of context,
thereby losing their meaning, and are transformed into a universally
binding socio-cultural dogma imposed with the full force of the state
apparatus. Gellner emphasises that a nation consists of a mechanical set of
anonymous and alienated atomic citizens, but tries to pass itself off as a
peaceful rural community, cosy and familiar, where everyone knows each
other and shares common habits and synchronised reactions. To achieve
this, the state apparatus is put to work: education, a codified language
(idiom), works of art glorifying the nation's glorious deeds, some of which
are real, and others
Part of it is made up.
A nation is a concept artificially created by a group of intellectuals during
the transition from the paradigm of Tradition to the paradigm of Modernity.
Intellectual nationalists take as their basis some ancient people or the name of
some historical, cultural or political community, real or mythological, and
declare the population of some modern bourgeois state that emerged during
the destruction of the medieval
1   Gellner, E. Nations and Nationalism. Moscow: Progress, 1991.
2   Ibid. p. 127.ical, and
declare the population of some modern bourgeois state that emerged during
the destruction of the medieval
1   Gellner, E. Nations and Nationalism. Moscow: Progress, 1991.
2   Ibid. p. 127.

--- PAGE BREAK ---he population of some modern bourgeois state that emerged during
the destruction of the medieval
1   Gellner, E. Nations and Nationalism. Moscow: Progress, 1991.
2   Ibid. p. 127.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

Chapter 7. Classical and revolutionary nationalism (the third political theory) 359
Catholic and imperial order, or part of this state, as the direct heirs of a long-
vanished ethnic group or tribe. Nationalists then convince the citizens of the
state that they are the direct descendants of those whose name they bear, and
this allows them to artificially bind together an atomised, individualistic
bourgeois society that is beginning to imagine itself as the heir to a myth.
Anderson believes that this identity is strictly imaginary and often created by
romantic poets or artists. In reality, it is a product of the disintegration of
class unity, which has long since replaced the organic community of an
ethnic nature. But nationalism completely ignores this historical, cultural and
political rupture, becoming just as artificial an ideology as liberalism and
communism, and just as individualistic and materialistic as they are.
Such flights of fancy reached their peak in racial theories, which were a
key part of National Socialism. Here, it wasn't just about the idea of a
"nation," but something bigger and even more exotic and artificial — but
just as modern — the idea of "race." Formally, National Socialism
proclaimed the superiority of the "Aryan" race, i.e. the descendants of the
Indo-European peoples. However, the pragmatic conditions of politics and
the extreme utilitarian ideology of the Nazis excluded not only Indo-
European Slavs from the "Aryan" milieu, but also the Celts, while Italians
were classified as representatives of the Mediterranean race. The Gypsies,
who also speak an Indo-European language and are descended from the
entirely "Aryan" India and are no less
"Aryan" Persia, was generally equated with subhumans — on the basis of
culture and phenotype. Nazism, from the point of view of the political use
of racism, is the most exotic and, at the same time, sinister parody. It is
clear that "Aryans" here meant primarily Germans, while those Indo-
European peoples with whom the historical Germans or even the Nazis
themselves had political friction were arbitrarily deprived of this status. The
correlation between racial purity and phenotype had a completely comical
effect, since the leaders of Nazism did not differ in their Nordic
appearance, and those who most closely corresponded to it were tall, blond,
and blue-eyed Scandinavians, distinguished by a very peaceful and docile
character (far from Nordic, if we go by the Nietzschean-heroic rhetoric of
Nazi ideologues) and often had Finno-Ugric (i.e., completely non-Indo-
European) roots.ished by a very peaceful and docile
character (far from Nordic, if we go by the Nietzschean-heroic rhetoric of
Nazi ideologues) and often had Finno-Ugric (i.e., completely non-Indo-
European) roots.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

360
Part 3. The Political Paradigm of Modernity. The War of Concepts
Gellner and Anderson show that all nationalism is a concept that
serves the interests of the bourgeoisie and is based on imaginary structures
used purely pragmatically and utilitarianly. And if nationalist myths are
invented by romantics, sometimes without any concern for practical
application (such as James Macpherson, who published his own poems
under the guise of translations of ancient Celtic ballads by the bard
Ossian1  (1736–1796) or the authors of the apocryphal Dutch book The
Chronicles of Ur-Linda 2 ), in the hands of bourgeois politicians they
became the conceptual basis of political ideology.
In fact, nationalism serves to break up the class society, place the
bourgeoisie at the centre of society, destroy the sacred world, justify the
secular nature of the state, and destroy the ethnic identity of peoples. The
nation state offers one language for all citizens, called the idiom. Usually,
one of the dialects, most often the capital dialect, is taken as a model. The
rest of the dialects and dialects become
"Patuá", i.e. different from the national standard. Thus, the diversity of living
speech and local linguistic traditions is levelled out by the mechanical and
alienating uniformity of the idiom. As a result, all other dialects and accents
are gradually dying out.rsity of living
speech and local linguistic traditions is levelled out by the mechanical and
alienating uniformity of the idiom. As a result, all other dialects and accents
are gradually dying out.

Another contemporary sociologist, Benedict Anderson, developing
Gellner's approach, emphasised that a nation is a product of people's
imagination3.
Like Gellner, Anderson describes the origin of the nation as a
utilitarian construction of collective identity. In order to hold society
together and prevent it from falling apart after the elimination of social
classes, some new form of collective identity was needed. Benedict
Anderson uses an interesting term to describe a nation as an "imagined
community" or "imaginary community." The term "community" means a
group of people organically connected by life, history, culture, origin, and
a set of stable
1   Poems of Ossian. L.: Nauka, 1983.
2   Virt, G. F. Chronicle of Ura Linda. The Earliest History of Europe. Moscow: Veche, 2007.
3Anderson, E. Imagined Communities. Moscow: Canon-Press-Ts; Kuchkovo Pole, 2001.

--- PAGE BREAK ---1983.
2   Virt, G. F. Chronicle of Ura Linda. The Earliest History of Europe. Moscow: Veche, 2007.
3Anderson, E. Imagined Communities. Moscow: Canon-Press-Ts; Kuchkovo Pole, 2001.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

Chapter 7. Classical and revolutionary nationalism (the third political theory) 361
and long-term relationships. It is precisely this organic unity of people who
live side by side — like a large family, a single collective entity, where
everyone not only knows but understands and feels each other. In a
community, everyone is related, in-laws, brothers.
But bourgeois society has nothing to do with such a "community." On
the contrary, in the course of the formation of capitalist relations, organic
communities disintegrate into individuals. Communities are usually located
in a peasant environment, on the land. The natural landscape of the
community is destroyed by urbanisation, industrialisation and the
bourgeois system. In this situation, bourgeois society is a product of the
disintegration of the rural community, its end, its antithesis.
Ferdinand Tönnies devoted his extremely important research in
sociology and political philosophy to the dualism of community
(Gemeinschaft) and society (Gesellschaft). Tönnies contrasts these two
concepts: community (Gemeinschaft) is based on the existence and long-
term preservation of living organic ties, while society (Gesellschaft) is the
product of their rupture and separation as a disintegration of individual
units (which gives us the figure of the "idiot"). Society is a collection of
individuals who have lost their organic ties with the community. When
communities disintegrate, a society emerges. And this artificial society is
bourgeois society, elevated to a political nation. This is why Benedict
Anderson uses the term "imagined" community (comminity). A nation is a
collection of disparate elements that imagine themselves to be a whole.
This is what distinguishes a nation from a society, and nationalism from
socialism. Socialism recognises that it is dealing with a society made up of
individuals and proposes to consciously, rather than imaginatively, unite
them artificially — again, "e pluribus unum", "out of many, one". A
nation, on the other hand, wants to make many individuals believe that they
have something in common and that this commonality is inherent to them,
although in reality it stems from an artificially constructed political
ideology and is simply imposed on everyone for strictly utilitarian
purposes.
Thus, in Anderson's view, the nation is a bourgeois deception.
1  Tönnies, F. Community and Society. Basic Concepts of Pure Sociology. Moscow: University
Fund, St. Petersburg: Vladimir Dal, 2002.es.
Thus, in Anderson's view, the nation is a bourgeois deception.
1  Tönnies, F. Community and Society. Basic Concepts of Pure Sociology. Moscow: University
Fund, St. Petersburg: Vladimir Dal, 2002.

--- PAGE BREAK ---n's view, the nation is a bourgeois deception.
1  Tönnies, F. Community and Society. Basic Concepts of Pure Sociology. Moscow: University
Fund, St. Petersburg: Vladimir Dal, 2002.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

362
Part 3. The Political Paradigm of Modernity. The War of Concepts
A limited group of "idiots" as the ideal of nationalism
A nation is made up of the same individuals who, as we have seen,
were called "idiots" (íCjMbF) in Greece. It is not a union of people with
qualities — families, professions, roots — but an artificial agglomeration of
quantitative units. A nation consists of "idiots." Every nation is idiotic at its
roots, because it is created precisely by separate, unqualified individuals.
And in order for this group of individuals, cut off from their class
affiliation, social status, ethnic environment, and religious-political history
(and a nation is always secular — it arose as a result of the struggle of
Protestant states against the Holy Roman Empire) not to fall apart, the
nation offers them an artificial collective identity. Not historical, not
religious, not ethnic — not real, but — like everything in the philosophy
of modern politics — conceptual.
But if a nation consists of "idiots," then nationalism becomes almost
identical in its anthropological foundations to liberalism. The difference
between them lies only in the scale of agglomeration of individuals they take
as normative and desirable. Liberals are advocates of "maximum idiocy" —
their goal is to spread atomisation to all of humanity. This is why German
philosopher Martin Heidegger (1889–1976) called the ideology of liberalism
"Planet r-Idiotismus," meaning the application of individualistic anthropology
on a planetary scale.Such "planetary idiocy" is globalism, which opens up
enormous prospects for the individual, provided that everywhere and
everywhere he finds only himself, his completely identical copy.
Nationalists set more specific limits for "individual separateness":
"idiots" are of the same type within one nation, while in another nation they
may differ slightly. This is the basis of nationalist rhetoric: one's own idiocy
is contrasted with that of others, while universalist liberals insist that idiocy
must be universal.
1  Idiocy corresponds to planetarism. This word does not refer to a psychiatric concept
describing a state of extreme weakness of the soul and body. From an ontological and historical
point of view, it means a state of solitary separateness, iCjov, in which modern man finds himself
today, living in a mass society. Heidegger M. Überlegungen XII–XV. (Schwarze Hefte 1939–
1941). Frankfurt-am-Main: Vittorio Klostermann, 2014. p. 265.teness, iCjov, in which modern man finds himself
today, living in a mass society. Heidegger M. Überlegungen XII–XV. (Schwarze Hefte 1939–
1941). Frankfurt-am-Main: Vittorio Klostermann, 2014. p. 265.

--- PAGE BREAK ---ich modern man finds himself
today, living in a mass society. Heidegger M. Überlegungen XII–XV. (Schwarze Hefte 1939–
1941). Frankfurt-am-Main: Vittorio Klostermann, 2014. p. 265.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

Chapter 7. Classical and revolutionary nationalism (the third political theory) 363
There is no fundamental difference between the liberal project and
nationalism. In both cases, the focus is usually on the free market, the
separation of powers, elections, parliamentary or presidential forms of
government, etc. The only difference is the configuration of the boundaries
within which individuals enter into a social contract. Nationalism assumes
the borders of a single Leviathan, while liberalism advocates a world state in
which all politics will be internal, and internationalism will equalise all
individuals. In both cases, we are talking about the conceptual reduction of
real people, with their specific historical and cultural identities, to
generalised abstract concepts, but only of different dimensions — in one
case to a "nation," in the other to "humanity."
This creates one of the dividing lines and, accordingly, semantic axes of
the Political in the Modern paradigm: classical nationalism (as opposed to
revolutionary nationalism, which will be discussed later) shares with
liberalism the acceptance of the norms of market society and all the main
points of bourgeois ideology, with the exception of the scale of its application
and the limitation of collective identity to national boundaries (contrary to the
universalism of liberals). This contrasts both nationalists and liberals with
communists, who, in turn, completely reject the legitimacy of a society based
on the market.
Nationalism, Hobbes, and anthropological pessimism
So, the nation is a bourgeois construct of modern times, based on
individual identity and, accordingly, opposed to the Christian religion in
its traditional medieval forms, namely Catholicism and Orthodox
Christianity. The Christian tradition does not recognise nations; it divides
the world on the basis of religion — Christians/non-Christians,
Catholics/Orthodox Christians, orthodox Christians/heretics, etc. Identity
is determined first and foremost by religion, and then by class. The Russian
word "peasants" combines both of these aspects. National identity, being
directed against class identity, carries with it an orientation towards
secularism and, ultimately, atheism and anti-Christianity.
The formation of nations in Europe began among Protestant countries
that opposed the popes and the Holy Roman Empire, and then spread to
some Catholic peoples who, being involved in the process of modernisation,
were forced tourope began among Protestant countries
that opposed the popes and the Holy Roman Empire, and then spread to
some Catholic peoples who, being involved in the process of modernisation,
were forced to

--- PAGE BREAK ---otestant countries
that opposed the popes and the Holy Roman Empire, and then spread to
some Catholic peoples who, being involved in the process of modernisation,
were forced to

--- PAGE BREAK ---

364
Part 3. The Political Paradigm of Modernity. The War of Concepts
adopt this national model and already speak of the formation of Catholic
nations in response to the challenge of the Protestant North.
Of the three main theorists of modern political philosophy, Thomas
Hobbes is the closest to nationalism. In fact, he is the bearer of the classical
view of modern nationalism. Hobbes is the father of modern nationalism; he
has it all: the social contract (the artificial creation of a nation based on a
political pact) and the idea that a nation is a mechanism created by an idol, a
cult figure, a monster that forms a collective through harsh control.
In Hobbes, we find an interesting detail: it is Leviathan, and the fear
he instils in citizens, that is responsible for making people the same.
According to Hobbes, the state makes people the same. It is therefore from
this idea of Hobbes' Leviathan that the fundamental philosophy of
nationalism derives. Nationalism is always, to one degree or another,
Hobbesian.
If we look at the difference between nationalism and liberalism from
Hobbes's perspective, we see that the main distinguishing feature, given the
generally secular, atheistic and anti-Christian nature of both political
ideologies, is once again to be found in anthropology. Nationalists tend to
follow Hobbes in his pessimism. People do not change, remaining
"wolves," and their aggressiveness is most naturally expressed in interethnic
relations, where the natural state is recreated, with all its chaos,
aggressiveness, and selfishness, but only at the level of macro-subjects:
from now on, the bearer of aggressive greed is not an individual, but
Leviathan itself. Therefore, human nature, projected onto Leviathan, gives
rise to realism in international relations, which allows for a kind of
inevitability of war between nations. And here nationalism finds its full
application. The wolfish essence of Hobbes' individual is scaled up to a
nation that behaves towards another nation like a predator, restrained only by
force and natural limitations. At the level of Leviathan, the scenario of
transition to the Political is not repeated among supporters of realism. The
social contract is concluded only in relation to Leviathan — once. And
between Leviathan and another Leviathan (or Behemoth, Leviathan's
eternal enemy, to continue the series of biblical images), there is no longer a
social contract. The individual, thus, accepts
1   Schmitt, K. Leviathan in Thomas Hobbes's Theory of the State.han's
eternal enemy, to continue the series of biblical images), there is no longer a
social contract. The individual, thus, accepts
1   Schmitt, K. Leviathan in Thomas Hobbes's Theory of the State.

--- PAGE BREAK ---, to continue the series of biblical images), there is no longer a
social contract. The individual, thus, accepts
1   Schmitt, K. Leviathan in Thomas Hobbes's Theory of the State.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

Chapter 7. Classical and revolutionary nationalism (the third political theory) 365
the power of a collective monster, but the monster itself remains in a
completely "natural" state.
Opponents of nationalists — liberals and socialists — as we have seen,
proceed from a different anthropology — either neutral (Locke's "blank
slate"), positive (Rousseau's "noble savage"), or accept Kant's model of
universal "pure reason." This affects the interpretation of the state as a
historically transient entity and predetermines the liberal theory of
international relations,which presupposes the conclusion of a social contract
between countries in the name of creating a supranational authority — a
World Government.
Thus, in the context of modern political philosophy, another axis of
opposition becomes clear: nationalism (as anthropological pessimism),
continuing the line of Hobbes, opposes liberalism and socialism, which are
based on anthropological optimism.
Mercantilism as an economic of nationalism
We have already said that mercantilism is the most accurate
expression of classical bourgeois nationalism in the field of economics.
The theory of mercantilism proceeds from the assumption that the state is
the main economic actor in international trade. If everything within a state is
determined by market laws, then in international relations, the state becomes
the main authority. In this case, it is the only monopoly trader, and all internal
market participants can only operate outside the state through its mediation.
The state is guided in its economic policy by national interests, i.e.,
regardless of the interests of a particular national producer or consumer, it
establishes tariffs and duties that would be beneficial to the development of a
particular branch of national industry as a whole. Such a state creates
favourable conditions for its own and complicates competition for foreigners.
In a market economy, there are no "friends" or "enemies," and
therefore the state does not act according to market rules, but according to
other rules, defending not private but public interests. Mercantilism is a
projection of Hobbes' logic onto the economy: the state remains a predator,
considering everything within it to be its own.
1   Dugin, A. G. International Relations (Paradigms, Theories, Sociology).projection of Hobbes' logic onto the economy: the state remains a predator,
considering everything within it to be its own.
1   Dugin, A. G. International Relations (Paradigms, Theories, Sociology).

--- PAGE BREAK ---s' logic onto the economy: the state remains a predator,
considering everything within it to be its own.
1   Dugin, A. G. International Relations (Paradigms, Theories, Sociology).

--- PAGE BREAK ---

366
Part 3. The Political Paradigm of Modernity. The War of Concepts
property, and to what lies outside as a potential threat or victim.
Therefore, a mercantilist state is based on protectionism and the
management of foreign trade processes in order to create a positive or, at
least, zero balance between exports and imports. An individual entrepreneur
seeks only his own private gain, but the state is forced to defend itself at any
cost, including by limiting the profits of its individual units in order to protect
and strengthen itself as a whole.
Within such a state, there is free competition, while outside, the state
itself acts as a collective actor, an entrepreneur acting on behalf of the entire
nation. Hence, there is freedom in domestic trade and restrictions, tariff
policy, and protectionism in international trade.
Thus, nationalist mercantilists argue with liberal internationalists. These
are different concepts: for liberals, there should be less state everywhere and
always, while for nationalists, there should be exactly as much state as is
necessary. At the same time, liberals and mercantilists differ in their
understanding of the necessity of the state: the former reduce its role to
enlightenment, education and the maintenance of a minimum order, while the
latter include representation of the nation in the military sphere, but also in
the economic sphere, in relation to other nations.
Nationalists, in a sense, equate Bodin's sovereignty with the nation-
state as a whole and insist that the nation must also be sovereign. On behalf
of this sovereign nation, decisions are made on matters of peace and war,
politics, trade and the international economy. In other words, within the
state, order is maintained, while outside it, the state acts as a fully-fledged
entity, including in economic terms.
German Romanticism changes the concept of the nation's " "
Before we move on to the 20th century, to revolutionary nationalism, that
is, to the ideology of fascism and National Socialism, which usually serve as
models for the third political theory, we should pay attention to some
attempts to reinterpret bourgeois nationalism in a romantic vein, which we
find in Germany in the 18th and first half of the 19th centuries. This is the
romantic philosophy of Herder ( 1744–1803), Fichte ( 1762–1814), Schelling
(1775–1854) and Hegel. These profound thinkers attempted to give the
concepts of political modernity — such asThis is the
romantic philosophy of Herder ( 1744–1803), Fichte ( 1762–1814), Schelling
(1775–1854) and Hegel. These profound thinkers attempted to give the
concepts of political modernity — such as

--- PAGE BREAK ---c philosophy of Herder ( 1744–1803), Fichte ( 1762–1814), Schelling
(1775–1854) and Hegel. These profound thinkers attempted to give the
concepts of political modernity — such as

--- PAGE BREAK ---

Chapter 7. Classical and revolutionary nationalism (the third political theory) 367
as "nation," "civil society," and even "individual" a more complex and
dialectical character, sometimes going beyond the semantic boundaries of the
Modern era and returning to political Platonism and political Aristotelianism.
Thus, the romantic spirit of German philosophy intervenes in the idea of
pure, classical bourgeois nationalism of the Modern Age. These philosophers
attempt to reinterpret the nation, an artificial and purely political construct, in
a metaphysical key, introducing elements of Plato's idea, Aristotle's eidos and
essence, and certain aspects of ethnic, cultural or historical identity. Thus, in
Herder, we see the concept of "people" (Volk), which he does not strictly
separate from "nation" (Nation) as a continuation of the historical
development of the community. Community and society are not opposed to
each other, and national society is interpreted as a continuation of the
community. This is an attempt to transfer the properties of community to
society, organicity to artificiality, and thereby relativise the bourgeois
character of the nation. While bourgeois ideologues made use of this transfer,
the German Romantics clearly believed in it themselves, without
exacerbating the paradigmatic break between the Middle Ages and the
Modern Era, and even, on the contrary, trying to overcome it dialectically.
This German Romanticism had a significant influence on 20th-century
theories of nationalism, which ceased to be so clearly Hobbesian,
individualistic, and modernist, and took on a more atypical and extravagant
character.
Herder: history as the history of the " " of peoples
Johann Gottfried Herder was a consistent critic of the ideas of the
Enlightenment. But his rejection of the modern paradigm did not mean a
simple return to the ideals of the Middle Ages, which was quite problematic
in 18th-century Europe, where the Enlightenment was rapidly gaining
ground. Moreover, Herder wanted to take a step forward, not backward,
viewing the time in which he lived as part of a broader historical process.
In the spirit of romanticism, Herder put forward an idea that later
influenced all forms of later revolutionary nationalism: from his point of
view, the subject of history is not the individual (in the spirit of bourgeois
atomism), nor is it the estates, the Empire or the Church, as pure
traditionalists believed. Herder put forward the proposition that the subject
of history is the people, or more precisely, peoples in the plural, each of
themtes, the Empire or the Church, as pure
traditionalists believed. Herder put forward the proposition that the subject
of history is the people, or more precisely, peoples in the plural, each of
them

--- PAGE BREAK ---he Church, as pure
traditionalists believed. Herder put forward the proposition that the subject
of history is the people, or more precisely, peoples in the plural, each of
them

--- PAGE BREAK ---

368
Part 3. The Political Paradigm of Modernity. The War of Concepts
It is an organic whole, a cultural unity. History is not the history of a single
humanity, but of many peoples, and therefore it is non-linear and consists of
different overlapping cycles. Herder believed that societies and peoples go
through the same phases in their history as individuals — infancy, youth,
maturity, old age — and then give way to other peoples. Therefore, each
nation builds its own semantic cycle in its history, understandable only to
itself or to an attentive and thoughtful observer, and corresponding to its
internal logic. At the same time, the nation as an organic whole acts as the
bearer of a unique culture that develops and takes shape gradually at each
stage.
To conceptualise this organic whole that is the people, Herder
introduces the concept of the "national spirit," Volkgeist, attributing to it
consciousness, subjectivity, and the capacity for volitional and consistent
self-development. History, thus, is a multidimensional series of revelations of
the "national spirit" in each people. There is no common measure between
them, although certain patterns and parallels between similar phases of
cycles can be identified. However, one should always compare similar
stages with each other: a period of decline with a period of decline, a period
of rise with a period of rise, and so on. In this way, Herder opened up
perspectives for an approach that would become the norm in science two
hundred years after his death and lay the foundation for a "new
anthropology" that continued and developed Herder's intuition.
Herder outlined his main ideas regarding the structure of the historical
process in his seminal work Ideas for a Philosophy of the History of
Mankind
1. There he provides the first generalised and systematic
description of different types of civilisations in the modern era, based on a
balanced approach to each of them, without claiming to construct a
universal system. The "national spirit" is always unique and unrepeatable.
Herder compared it to "the thoughts of God," between which it is absurd
to try to establish a hierarchy — each of them is perfect and valuable in its
own way. Together, they make up the harmony of history. At the same time,
the "national spirit" works equally through geniuses, military leaders, and
great historical figures, as well as through ordinary people who can live a
full life, organically participating in culture through customs, ethics,
language, traditions, and even everyday life.
For Germany, Herder became the founder of the philosophy of identity,
since his ideas implied that Germans have their own
1   Herder, I. G. Ideas for a Philosophy of the History of Mankind. Moscow: Nauka, 1977., Herder became the founder of the philosophy of identity,
since his ideas implied that Germans have their own
1   Herder, I. G. Ideas for a Philosophy of the History of Mankind. Moscow: Nauka, 1977.

--- PAGE BREAK ---founder of the philosophy of identity,
since his ideas implied that Germans have their own
1   Herder, I. G. Ideas for a Philosophy of the History of Mankind. Moscow: Nauka, 1977.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

Chapter 7. Classical and revolutionary nationalism (the third political theory) 369
a cultural ideal, its own "national spirit," which should not be evaluated by
comparison with other European nations in the linear logic of "progress," but
represents a unique sequence of meanings expressed in history and culture;
and the task of the Germans was to give the "national spirit" the fullest and
clearest expression possible — in art, spirituality and, among other things, in
a special form of statehood, which the Germans of the 18th century were
deprived of, being divided into several disparate states, principalities and
electorates. In doing so, Herder laid the theoretical foundation for what later
became known as the "special path" (Sonderweg) and became the main line
of development of German society in the 19th and 20th centuries.
Herder spoke specifically about the people as a special organic category,
quite distant from the political aggregate of individuals united in a single
state. For Herder, the Germans were a people, but not a nation, since there
was no German state and they were scattered across several political
entities of varying sizes. However, in the course of the development of the
idea of Germany by Fichte and Hegel, and especially after its creation by
Bismarck (1815–1898), Herder's national spirit, as the basis of identity,
largely merged with the meaning of "nation," which in German culture
took on a meaning significantly different from the classical use of this
concept in England, France, and most other European countries.
Fichte: "the great I" of the German nation and " " a closed
trading state
Fichte1is considered the founder of German classical philosophy. He was
a student of Kant, but, departing from transcendental reason, he began to
construct his own original philosophy, which is one of the pinnacles of
German idealism.
Fichte, continuing Kant's epistemology, comes to the affirmation of the
higher self, which lies at the basis of everything. If Kant spoke of pure
reason, Fichte moves deeper into it and postulates the figure of the one to
whom this reason belongs — the "great self." Further, the "great I" alienates
itself, constituting an object. And again, Fichte goes further than Kant, not
limiting himself to cautious noumenality in the spirit of constructivism with
regard to things-in-themselves, but justifying the reality of the world by the
reality of the "great I." Further — already within the object —
1   Fichte, I. G. Works in 2 volumes. St. Petersburg: Mifril, 1993.hings-in-themselves, but justifying the reality of the world by the
reality of the "great I." Further — already within the object —
1   Fichte, I. G. Works in 2 volumes. St. Petersburg: Mifril, 1993.

--- PAGE BREAK ---but justifying the reality of the world by the
reality of the "great I." Further — already within the object —
1   Fichte, I. G. Works in 2 volumes. St. Petersburg: Mifril, 1993.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

370
Part 3. The Political Paradigm of Modernity. The War of Concepts
The "great I" constitutes the "little I," the empirical personality, which is the
messenger of the "I" in the "not-I." The task of the "little I" is to restore the
entire structure of the "great I" through complete knowledge of the object
(through science, which Fichte understood as a mystical search for traces of
the "great I" in nature).
Thus, he sharply broke with modern anthropology as a whole, creating a
theory consonant with the Neoplatonist Plotinus or the Hindu doctrine of the
"great identity" of the atman (the human self) with Brahman (the Absolute).
This anthropology partly resonated with Herder's idea of the "national
spirit," and Fichte consciously applied his definition of subjectivity (i.e.,
the "I" as both great and small) to the German people. At the same time,
although Germany did not yet exist, he used the concept of "nation" in a
sense closer to Herder than to the classical bourgeois usage. However,
following the generally accepted definition to some extent, Fichte
proposed to construct this nation by giving the people the characteristics of
a state, which he interpreted in the spirit of his conception of the
philosophical process.
In his "Address to the German Nation" 2Fichte outlined a plan for the
unification of Germany (which at the beginning of the 19th century was
divided into several semi-autonomous principalities and states) as a
prerequisite for an ontological and epistemological leap forward, as a key
stage in the victory over the non-Self, embodied in the natural and historical
obstacles to the unification of the Germans. Fichte considered the Germans to
be a people endowed with special abilities for science and culture, and
therefore believed that the "German nation" was the most important stage in
the return of the aggregate of "little selves" to their unified German "great
self."
In economic practice, Fichte was an advocate of a completely closed
trading state, justifying typical mercantilism not simply by the selfish
interests of Leviathan, but by a critique of the individualistic principle as such
(the "little self" that refuses to strive to become the "great self"). He also
noted that free trade (the English version of economic liberalism) creates
sharp property and social inequality in society, enriching those who
participate in international trade and ruining entrepreneurs engaged only in
domestic trade. Fichte contrasted this with a model of state socialism, where
the priority of economic activity would be
1   Dugin, A. G. Noomakhia. Great India. The Civilisation of the Absolute.
2   Fichte, I. G. Speeches to the German Nation. St. Petersburg: Nauka, 2009.
3   Fichte, I. G. The Closed Commercial State. Moscow: KPASSAND, 2010.hia. Great India. The Civilisation of the Absolute.
2   Fichte, I. G. Speeches to the German Nation. St. Petersburg: Nauka, 2009.
3   Fichte, I. G. The Closed Commercial State. Moscow: KPASSAND, 2010.

--- PAGE BREAK ---e Civilisation of the Absolute.
2   Fichte, I. G. Speeches to the German Nation. St. Petersburg: Nauka, 2009.
3   Fichte, I. G. The Closed Commercial State. Moscow: KPASSAND, 2010.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

Chapter 7. Classical and revolutionary nationalism (the third political theory) 371
not the satisfaction of individual private interests, but a common effort to
overcome obstacles on the path to complete freedom of the "great I", that is,
the domination of the subject over the object resisting it (including scarcity,
deficit, poverty, etc.).
Hegel: philosophical Empire
Another representative of classical German philosophy who had the
greatest influence on the entire philosophy of the 19th and 20th centuries,
both directly and through his interpreters (including Marx's left Hegelianism),
was Georg Wilhelm Friedrich Hegel.
Hegel believed that he was creating a synthesis of all philosophical
thought, and that his system was the most universal of all existing or ever
existing systems, combining all the most essential elements of previous
systems. He linked this not simply to a coincidence of circumstances or
personal genius, but to the deepest logic of world history, which, having
passed through various dialectical stages strictly defined by a
metaphysical structure, finds its resolution in German culture and the
Prussian monarchy as the culmination (end of history), of which Hegel
himself was the theorist, witness and creator. Therefore, in his philosophy,
the universal, the universal and the absolute are dialectically embodied in the
concreteness of 19th-century Germany. According to Hegel, this was
precisely what his system and the philosophy of history itself were: all
these were aspects of a single historical process, a metaphysical process
connected with the stages of the unfolding of the Spirit. Hegel identified
the time and place of the formation of his philosophical system — 19th-
century Germany — with the finale of this historical process, its apogee.
With certain corrections and nuances, this was recognised by all his
followers.
Hegel's influence on philosophy, science, and political processes in the
19th and 20th centuries, both among Germans and far beyond Germany's
borders, was enormous. One of the main political ideologies of the modern
era, Marxism, was built on a special interpretation of his ideas. The chief
theorist of Italian fascism, Giovanni Gentile (1875–1944),also considered
himself an orthodox Hegelian (right-wing, like Hegel himself), applying
Hegel's ideas about Germany to Italy. In the context of liberal ideology,
theorists of this school, such as Alexander
1  Gentile, D. Selected Philosophical Works: In 7 vols. Krasnodar: KSU-KiI, 2008–2012.'s ideas about Germany to Italy. In the context of liberal ideology,
theorists of this school, such as Alexander
1  Gentile, D. Selected Philosophical Works: In 7 vols. Krasnodar: KSU-KiI, 2008–2012.

--- PAGE BREAK ---ny to Italy. In the context of liberal ideology,
theorists of this school, such as Alexander
1  Gentile, D. Selected Philosophical Works: In 7 vols. Krasnodar: KSU-KiI, 2008–2012.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

372
Part 3. The Political Paradigm of Modernity. The War of Concepts
Kozhev1  and Francis Fukuyama2 , who identified Hegel's concept of
"end of history" with liberalism and its global victory (globalisation).
At the same time, Hegel's system can be seen as a synthesis of the
unfolding of the entire German Logos, summarising the process of world
history and that segment of it where Western Europe (since the Middle Ages)
became the field of its most intense and semantically rich development. and
from a certain point onwards, German thought itself, to which Hegel reduces
the history of all humanity and whose ultimate expression became German
classical philosophy, the pinnacle of which Hegel himself considered to be
his system. The transparency and logic of this series of assertions in the very
structure of Hegel's dialectic and his philosophy of history (as well as the
history of philosophy) was so convincing that many philosophers, intellectuals
and historians who felt the fundamental influence of Hegelianism — both
directly, through direct acquaintance with Hegel's works, and indirectly,
through numerous derivatives of his system, and primarily through left-wing
Hegelianists, mainly Marxists. In Russia, Hegel influenced not only Marxists,
for whom he became a dogmatic source, but also Slavophiles, monarchists
and sophists, that is, practically all the currents of the distinctive Russian
philosophical thought that emerged in the 19th century. Hegel also had a
decisive influence on European philosophers of various schools, with the
possible exception of the neo-Kantians.
Hegel was an ardent supporter of the creation of a united Germany (the
Second Reich) and considered his philosophy to be the global metaphysical
framework for this project. "An educated people without metaphysics is like a
temple, richly decorated, but without a sanctuary,"(3) wrote Hegel in the
Preface to The Science of Logic. Since in the 19th century, and especially
during Hegel's lifetime, the question of creating a German state with its centre in
Prussia was very acute, Hegel believed that his metaphysical system should
become this "sanctuary," this "altar" in the German socio-political temple.
The foundations of Hegel's system are set out in two major works: The
Phenomenology of Spirit 4, which carefully examines
1  Kozhev, A. V. Introduction to Reading Hegel.
2   . Fukuyama, F. The End of History and the Last Man.
3Hegel, G.W.F. Science of Logic. Vol. 1. Moscow: Mydl, 1970. P. 76. Literally: "ein
gebildetes Volk ohne Metaphysik zu sehen, — wie einen sonst mannigfaltig ausgeschm ckten
Tempel ohne Allerheiligstes" (to see an educated people without metaphysics is like seeing a
temple richly decorated but without a sanctuary).
4   Hegel, G.W.F. Phenomenology of Spirit. St. Petersburg: Nauka, 1992.erheiligstes" (to see an educated people without metaphysics is like seeing a
temple richly decorated but without a sanctuary).
4   Hegel, G.W.F. Phenomenology of Spirit. St. Petersburg: Nauka, 1992.

--- PAGE BREAK ---e an educated people without metaphysics is like seeing a
temple richly decorated but without a sanctuary).
4   Hegel, G.W.F. Phenomenology of Spirit. St. Petersburg: Nauka, 1992.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

Chapter 7. Classical and revolutionary nationalism (the third political theory) 373
structure of consciousness, and The Science of Logic 1, which provides an
explicit and detailed presentation of metaphysics. The Science of Logic
begins where The Phenomenology of Spirit ends, and the rest of his works
are derived from these two fundamental works for the entire history of
philosophy.
As applied to the unfolding of history, Hegel's scheme can be briefly
described as follows:
•subjective spirit (in itself) — thesis or first law of logic (identity);
•objective spirit (for another) — antithesis, the second law of logic
(negation);
•absolute spirit (for itself) — synthesis, the third law of logic (the
Absolute instead of the excluded third).
The first thesis is the subjective spirit (German: der subjektive Geist) or
"Spirit in itself" coincides with the theological postulate of the existence
of God: the subjective spirit is God-in-itself. This position is extremely
important, as it brings Hegel closer to Platonism and Christian
philosophy, that is, it establishes continuity with the philosophical
paradigm of the Pre-Modern (Tradition) and, consequently, partly takes it
beyond the boundaries of the classical models of the Modern era. Of
course, the "subjective spirit" allowed for various interpretations, including
rationalistic ones (in the spirit of Kant and his pure reason), but it follows
from the general context of Hegel's philosophy that he means by it the
transcendent principle, i.e., the God of Christian theology, although it has
some features in common with Fichte's "great I," i.e., with the mystical
understanding of God as a subject internal to the human soul.
In order to open itself up to the Other, this subjective self projects itself
into the objective spirit (German: der objektive Geist), in which it becomes
nature and even matter. That is, the subject projects itself into the object. This
explains the visibility of nature's self-movement — it is an optical illusion
that attributes to the object what is in fact a property of subjectivity, only
turned into its opposite by the dialectical process of self-alienation. Since
Marx does not believe in a subjective spirit (Marx is an atheist), nature and
matter are the driving forces of development, which endows them with
"magical" and "mystical" properties (the same applies to Spinoza's
substantialism, which forced him to call "nature" "God"). Hegel does not
have this need, but for this reason his philosophy begins
1  Hegel, G.W.F. The Science of Logic: In 3 vols. Moscow: Mydl, 1970–1972.ntialism, which forced him to call "nature" "God"). Hegel does not
have this need, but for this reason his philosophy begins
1  Hegel, G.W.F. The Science of Logic: In 3 vols. Moscow: Mydl, 1970–1972.

--- PAGE BREAK ---ed him to call "nature" "God"). Hegel does not
have this need, but for this reason his philosophy begins
1  Hegel, G.W.F. The Science of Logic: In 3 vols. Moscow: Mydl, 1970–1972.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

374
Part 3. The Political Paradigm of Modernity. The War of Concepts
begins with the open recognition of the Deity — the "subjective spirit."
Thus, the meaningfulness of nature and its knowability are justified in a
vertical topic reminiscent of Platonism and Neoplatonism, only described in a
diachronic dynamic context (this was also a distinctive feature of
Schelling's philosophy of history(1) ).
The third moment of dialectics is the unfolding of the subjective spirit
of its content through nature (as through its otherness). Gradually, through
man and human history, the subjective spirit returns to its essence, but in a
new capacity — as something conscious.
But this is already a new essence — it is not a subjective spirit ("spirit-in-
itself") or "spirit-for-another," but "spirit-in-itself." Thus, the spirit returns to
itself through its own alienation, but this return to itself, according to Hegel,
has greater significance than the departure. The departure creates the
preconditions for the return, and the return, having gone through the entire
cycle, returns to itself the subjective spirit, which becomes the absolute
spirit (German: der absolute Geist). Thus, first we have the subjective
spirit, unknown to anyone, hidden, then the objective spirit, which is
constituted as something else, that is, as not God Himself, by which we
understand creation, and through creation and its crown — human
consciousness — the fullness of perfection is achieved — the conscious
absolute spirit.
According to Hegel, the absolute spirit unfolds through human history
and ascends to the end of history. The meaning of history is the spirit's
awareness of itself through matter. At first, the spirit has itself but is not
aware of it, then it begins to become aware of itself but does not have itself.
Nature itself carries within itself the prerequisites of history, because it is an
element of history. Hence the history of religion, the history of societies, and
as a result of the unfolding of the spirit through history, it reaches its
culmination at the end of history, when it fully realises and possesses itself.
The cycle contains within itself the entire dialectical fullness: thesis,
antithesis, synthesis. From this it follows that history is finite.
This is the basis for Hegel's political philosophy. The evolution of
political systems, models, and regimes is interpreted here as a sequence of
dialectical moments in the formation of the absolute spirit. Politics is the
crystallisation of synthesis. Political history is the movement of the spirit
towards becoming absolute. Politics, therefore, is the history of the
absolutisation of the spirit. This definition allows us to consider
1   Dugin, A. G. In Search of the Dark Logos.of the spirit
towards becoming absolute. Politics, therefore, is the history of the
absolutisation of the spirit. This definition allows us to consider
1   Dugin, A. G. In Search of the Dark Logos.

--- PAGE BREAK ---rds becoming absolute. Politics, therefore, is the history of the
absolutisation of the spirit. This definition allows us to consider
1   Dugin, A. G. In Search of the Dark Logos.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

Chapter 7. Classical and revolutionary nationalism (the third political theory) 375
Hegel's political philosophy as a dynamic version of Politica Aeterna.
Hegel establishes a certain hierarchy between different political forms.
On the one hand, one might get the impression that this is about historical
progress, because each successive political regime is in some sense better
than the previous one. This idea fundamentally contradicts the paradigm of
Tradition, which speaks rather of the degradation of political systems that
gradually lose their similarity to the eternal original (Platonism), or of the
immutability of the norm, from which individual forms of politics can either
deviate or approach (Aristotelian politics). In the recognition of "progress,"
one can see Hegel's connection with the paradigm of Modernity. However,
unlike Marx's theory, this political evolution is not a social continuation of
the development of matter or nature. These are phases of the manifestation of
the spirit that was originally inherent in matter and nature. Accordingly, there
is no materialism here. We are dealing with a complex scheme that combines
the Platonic (in the beginning there was spirit, not matter) and evolutionary
models (when we begin to look at history from the antithesis, from nature —
and this formally resembles the political philosophy of the Mother). Marx
rejected the Platonic part, reinterpreting Hegel in an exclusively materialistic
key. But Hegel himself is more complicated.
The culmination of the third phase — the establishment of the spirit as
absolute, i.e., conscious, spirit-for-itself — is conceived by Hegel as the
end of history and coincides with the fate of Prussia and the creation of a
great state of all Germans — Germany — on its basis. During Hegel's
lifetime, the Germans did not yet have a unified state. But they already
had a great philosophy, the crowning achievement of which Hegel
considered to be his own teaching. Thus, thinkers prepared the end of
history, which for Hegel coincided with the future enlightened German
monarchy. In this way, all of history is a prelude to the formation of
Germany in the 19th century. Hegel said that great nations are those that have
either a great state or a great philosophy. He said that the Russians have a
great state, while the Germans in the 19th century have no state at all.
Accordingly, the Germans must have a great philosophy — then they will
have a great state.
Hegel created the philosophy of the great German state before Germany
even existed. He formulated his teachings in the German world, which
consisted of Prussia, Habsburg Austria, and scattered principalities that
were anything but a powerful and strong state. Hegel united Germany in
his consciousnessachings in the German world, which
consisted of Prussia, Habsburg Austria, and scattered principalities that
were anything but a powerful and strong state. Hegel united Germany in
his consciousness

--- PAGE BREAK ---n world, which
consisted of Prussia, Habsburg Austria, and scattered principalities that
were anything but a powerful and strong state. Hegel united Germany in
his consciousness

--- PAGE BREAK ---

376
Part 3. The Political Paradigm of Modernity. The War of Concepts
, endowed it with an intellectual mission, and, together with Fichte and
Schelling, created an idealistic romantic concept of German statehood as an
expression of the spirit that had become absolute. According to Hegel, the
German state was to become the peak and end of history — an eschatological
monarchy, where the monarch himself was to be supported by a
philosophical elite, Platonic guardians who developed the teachings of Hegel
himself, the founder of the philosophical empire.
Hegel considered himself a prophet of philosophy, humanity, and
Germany. He was a mystical monarchist who viewed the logic of history
as a diverse movement of various political forms towards the Prussian
monarchy.
This is how Hegel interprets the history of religion, philosophy and
politics. The spirit passes into nature, from where it is restored through
society and culture until it reaches the culmination of self-awareness in the
highest political system of philosophical monarchy, the prototype of which,
for Hegel, was 19th-century Prussia and which should be embodied in a
future united Greater Germany. This scenario predetermines the entire
structure of German history and shows Hegel's interpretation of world,
European and German history. Different peoples and civilisations create
different religious and philosophical systems in an attempt to reflect their
attraction to the elusive spirit. History is the history of cycles of
consciousness unfolding on the path to the Logos.
The emergence of Greek philosophy marks the birth of Logos in its
purest form, when the spirit begins to realise itself through the Greek
Daseyn, which is most adequate to itself. The Logos of the Greeks is the
harmonisation (Stimmung) of the spirit. The most important event in world
history takes place in the field of Greco-Roman culture — the incarnation
of Jesus Christ, the Logos itself. This is the culmination of the revelation of
being through time. The Greek Logos and the Incarnate Word then live on
in Christianity, which in turn goes through various stages of self-
understanding that stretch over centuries. Through a chain of dialectical
oppositions and their resolution, history reaches the Age of Enlightenment,
where the Christian Logos is dispersed among the maximum possible number
of individual beings, reaching the mineral bottom of nature —
comprehended by science, transformed by culture, and understood by
citizens enlightened and transformed by the education of societies.
The final gesture of history is the gathering of all enlightened
individuals of the world together, in a synthesis of a vertical philosophical
Empire, where the spirit will complete its movement towards itself
through self-ory is the gathering of all enlightened
individuals of the world together, in a synthesis of a vertical philosophical
Empire, where the spirit will complete its movement towards itself
through self-

--- PAGE BREAK ---of all enlightened
individuals of the world together, in a synthesis of a vertical philosophical
Empire, where the spirit will complete its movement towards itself
through self-

--- PAGE BREAK ---

Chapter 7. Classical and revolutionary nationalism (the third political theory) 377
alienation, and history will reach its culmination, transforming itself into
philosophy, but not abstract philosophy, rather concrete philosophy. This
concrete philosophy will be the direct embodiment of the absolute spirit, in
which the return of the Logos to itself will be fully realised, inclusively
gathering within itself everything that was scattered at the beginning of not
just the historical, but also the cosmological and even ontogenetic process.
According to Hegel, the centre of history as the history of eternity is
Germany, the "promised land" of the absolute spirit, the territory of the "end
of history," the field destined to become the philosophical Empire.
"end of history," a field prepared to become a philosophical empire.
It is obvious that Hegel's grandiose picture, justifying the creation of the
German state, has little in common with Hobbes' Leviathan. At the same
time, Hegel also considers civil society, i.e. the bourgeois order based on
individualism, but considers it one of the dialectical moments in the
unfolding of the spirit. Civil society and the Enlightenment era itself are
important to Hegel as preparation for the establishment of a philosophical
empire, which is conceived not as a nation state in the modern paradigm,
but as a mystical "end of history," as its most important concluding event.
Obviously, such "nationalism" has nothing to do with classical nationalism,
which emerged at the dawn of the Enlightenment, and represents a theory
that goes far beyond Modernity as such. However, alongside the
communist (in Marx, where the "end of history" comes in the form of
communism) and liberal (as in Kojève, where the "end of history"
coincides with globalisation and the final triumph of liberal democracy), it
would also be possible to offer a monarchist or "nationalist" interpretation of
Hegel, as we see among German and Russian conservatives and one of the
main theorists of Italian fascism, Giovanni Gentile.
We find Hegelianism in all three classical ideologies of modernity; but
this does not mean that it can be classified from the point of view of any
one of them. Hegel is broader than all political theories of modernity, and
therefore he clearly does not fit into any of them. Accordingly, there is
something in it that was borrowed by the three political ideologies of
modernity, and something that did not make it there — for example, the idea
of an original subjective spirit that precedes all movement from below,
which is incompatible with the materialism, individualism, and atomism
of the modern era. This element of the original Platonic moment, which then
passes into a picture that in a certain sense can be combined (with some
stretching) with progressiveualism, and atomism
of the modern era. This element of the original Platonic moment, which then
passes into a picture that in a certain sense can be combined (with some
stretching) with progressive

--- PAGE BREAK ---of the modern era. This element of the original Platonic moment, which then
passes into a picture that in a certain sense can be combined (with some
stretching) with progressive

--- PAGE BREAK ---

378
Part 3. The Political Paradigm of Modernity. The War of Concepts
and evolutionary motives, does not allow Hegel to be classified as a
political philosopher of the Modern era.
A particular interpretation of Hegel — neither liberal, Marxist, nor
nationalist — allows us to discover components in his work that are
alternative to modern political philosophy and to integrate him into the
Fourth Political Theory. Thus, with a certain interpretation based on the
principles of Politica Aeterna, we can take Hegel out of the Modern era
and the specific period in which he lived and thought, and place him in a
different, more general and, in a certain sense, trans-contemporary, non-
modernist context. Such a reading of Hegel, such a reconstruction of his
political philosophy contrary to readings in the context of the three
political theories, must begin with a thorough understanding of the first
dialectical moment — the transition of the divine eternal principle into a
multitude of immanent givenness. How we understand this process in the
context of metaphysics determines the interpretation of the ontology of
the world, its eschatological conclusion, and its teleology (purpose), and
the meaning and content of politics, which ultimately (as we see in Hegel
himself) must be determined above all by the relationship of the state with
God, eternity, and the absolute and unchanging source.
Gentile: the state as a 's philosophy
Thus, through Hegel, we come close to revolutionary nationalism, which
should be considered the third political theory in the full sense of the word,
since such nationalism arose after liberalism (the first political theory) and
after communism (the second political theory), while retaining some
similarities — at least terminological and partly conceptual — with the
classical nationalism that emerged at the dawn of the modern era, even
before the emergence of distinct liberal theories, but only developed into a
coherent ideology much later.
One of the main ideologists of Italian fascism, Giovanni Gentile, was a
staunch Hegelian and supporter of objective idealism, strongly opposing
positivism and materialism. Gentile, following Hegel, believed that a great
people needed a great philosophy, and saw a direct and inseparable link
between the construction of Italy as a nation state and the intellectual shaping
of Italian identity in philosophy and culture.eople needed a great philosophy, and saw a direct and inseparable link
between the construction of Italy as a nation state and the intellectual shaping
of Italian identity in philosophy and culture.

--- PAGE BREAK ---philosophy, and saw a direct and inseparable link
between the construction of Italy as a nation state and the intellectual shaping
of Italian identity in philosophy and culture.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

Chapter 7. Classical and revolutionary nationalism (the third political theory) 379
Gentile constructed an original philosophy, which he called
"actualism." He based it on the concept of "thinking thought" (il pensiero
pensante, il pensiero che pensa). Gentile thought of the act as overcoming
the subject-object dualism. For Gentile, as for Hegel, the pure act is the
moment of cognition by the spirit, that is, the source of thought, of itself.
Gentile distinguishes between thinking thought and thought thought; each
has its own logic. Thinking thought is a pure act, while thought thought, on
the contrary, is frozen and alienated, objectified, a product of thinking. In
Gentile's version, Hegel's dialectical triad corresponds to:
•art (direct manifestation of the subject — thesis),
•religion (elevating thought to the status of an object — antithesis),
•philosophy (the subject's understanding of itself as a pure act —
synthesis).
According to Gentile, thought is simply subjective and manifests itself in
art. At the next level — in religion — thought becomes conceptualised. And
only in philosophy does thought become thinking, that is, fully active,
coinciding with pure act as the highest moment of self-consciousness. This is
the basis of Gentile's understanding of history: it is the unfolding of three
moments of the spirit, with religion being the second of these in this system,
that is, a form of the spirit, partly overcome by philosophy. Being a Catholic
and recognising the value of religious education, Gentile believed that the
state should be secular. But secularism, in his understanding, was
synonymous with the third and highest act of self-awareness by the spirit of
itself, that is, the organisation of society on the basis of the domination of the
"pure act."From this directly followed Gentile's political philosophy, which he
identified with political fascism.
Fascism, in Gentile's interpretation, is the theory and practice of a pure
spiritual act, expressed in the elevation of the state to a philosophical
principle. This is the "doctrine of fascism," which represents the logical
conclusion of Hegel's philosophy. The self-awareness of the spirit is
embodied in the state as an instance where the spirit reaches the stage of
synthesis, overcoming both the subjective stage (art) and the stage of
objectification (which for Gentile is equivalent to religion). This justifies the
absolutisation of the state as an immanent version of an idea that has become
flesh.
1  It is believed that Gentile was the author of the programmatic work "The Doctrine of
Fascism," published under Mussolini's name. Mussolini B. La dottrina del fascismo. Florence:
Vallecchi Editore, 1935.s believed that Gentile was the author of the programmatic work "The Doctrine of
Fascism," published under Mussolini's name. Mussolini B. La dottrina del fascismo. Florence:
Vallecchi Editore, 1935.

--- PAGE BREAK ---ile was the author of the programmatic work "The Doctrine of
Fascism," published under Mussolini's name. Mussolini B. La dottrina del fascismo. Florence:
Vallecchi Editore, 1935.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

380
Part 3. The Political Paradigm of Modernity. The War of Concepts
At the same time, Gentile and fascism as a whole were characterised by a
rejection of all forms of internationalism, both bourgeois and Marxist. The
argument for this was the dialectic of the reversal of the spirit, where the
individualism of civil society would be overcome not by a philosophically
enlightened monarchy ( as in Hegel himself), but by a national dictatorship.
At the same time, the very idea of social justice played an important role in
the context of fascist ideology. C o m m u n ism rejected materialism and
internationalism, while concern for the working class and peasantry was an
essential part of the fascist political programme. In one of his speeches,
Mussolini, the leader of Italian fascism, addressed his audience: "Arise,
fascist and proletarian Italy!" 1  Moreover, Mussolini himself came from the
socialist movement, and fascism — especially in its early stages — was an
anti-bourgeois and revolutionary movement in which socialist motives played
an important role. Thus, in Italian fascism, we see a certain convergence
between two versions of Hegelianism — socialist and nationalist.
In Gentile and in fascism in general, we see a combination of Hegelian
dialectics, idealism, and the political philosophy of the Modern, since
Gentile does not return to the traditional Catholic philosophy of the "two
states" or to the imperial idea of the Ghibellines (which was defended
much more consistently by the traditionalist Julius Evola(2) ), but justifies
with his philosophy a secular state, albeit described, following Hegel, in the
spirit of the unfolding of the Idea, but too reminiscent of the theories of
Bodin and Hobbes. Thus, Gentile's fascism is a bizarre combination of
pre-modern and modern elements, but at the same time, appeals to Hegel
with his extremely sophisticated intellectual theory do not allow Gentile's
theory to be classified entirely as belonging to the Modern era. Thus, this
version of revolutionary
 's political philosophy
The formation of revolutionary nationalism and, in particular, the
personal influence of the fascist leader Benito Mussolini
1Such formulas were sharply criticised by Julius Evola, a traditionalist who supported an
aristocratic and, consequently, anti-communist and anti-modern political system. Evola, Julius.
Fascism: A Critique from the Right. Moscow: Revanche, 2005.
2  Evola, Julius. The Mysteries of the Grail. Moscow-Voronezh: TERRA FOLIATA, 2013.munist and anti-modern political system. Evola, Julius.
Fascism: A Critique from the Right. Moscow: Revanche, 2005.
2  Evola, Julius. The Mysteries of the Grail. Moscow-Voronezh: TERRA FOLIATA, 2013.

--- PAGE BREAK ---rn political system. Evola, Julius.
Fascism: A Critique from the Right. Moscow: Revanche, 2005.
2  Evola, Julius. The Mysteries of the Grail. Moscow-Voronezh: TERRA FOLIATA, 2013.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

Chapter 7. Classical and revolutionary nationalism (the third political theory) 381
The philosophy of Friedrich Nietzsche (1844–1900), a completely atypical
thinker, had a profound influence on this. If the English mathematician and
philosopher A. Whitehead (1861–1947) said that all philosophy is a footnote
to Plato, then, paraphrasing him, one could say that all philosophy of the 20th
century is a footnote to Nietzsche. Nietzsche is multidimensional and
multifaceted, and any of his theses are the subject of long and heated debates,
which is why his philosophy cannot be interpreted unambiguously.
Nietzsche's philosophy is extremely multidimensional, although fragmentary
and unsystematic. Representatives of all the major political ideologies of the
20th century — liberalism, communism and nationalism — were influenced
by Nietzsche's thought at various times, interpreting it in each case on the
basis of completely different contexts.
text.
It is impossible to consider Nietzsche a "nationalist" in the usual sense of
the word. He was extremely critical of modernity as such, sharply rejected
the state, and was very sceptical of the Germans. In his drafts, he writes:
Having thus given the Germans their due — for I do love them despite
everything — I see no reason to refrain from reproaching them. They were
once a "nation of thinkers": but do they think at all today? They no longer
have time for it... The German "mind", I fear, is a contradictio in adjecto.
They are becoming boring, and probably already are; big politics is
consuming all interest in truly great things; "Germany, Germany above all"
— this principle comes at an exorbitant price, but it is not a philosophical
principle(1) .
But he remains a German thinker precisely because he provides the last
historical testimony to the state of the German spirit, and if this spirit is sick,
then Nietzsche, without hesitation, makes this illness his own — in order to
go through it to the end, as fate and destiny.
Nietzsche captures the essence of the era in which he lives with a
precise formula: "European nihilism," as he calls the first book of his
project "The Will to Power." In fact, by "nihilism" Nietzsche means
European Modernism, which he rejects but at the same time tries to
understand its meaning and decipher its message.
For Nietzsche, the highest value is life and its power. Accordingly, where
life is subjected to some kind of pressure,
1  Nietzsche, F. Complete Works. Vol. 13. Drafts and Sketches 1887–1889. Moscow: Cultural
Revolution, 2006. pp. 489–490.and its power. Accordingly, where
life is subjected to some kind of pressure,
1  Nietzsche, F. Complete Works. Vol. 13. Drafts and Sketches 1887–1889. Moscow: Cultural
Revolution, 2006. pp. 489–490.

--- PAGE BREAK ---dingly, where
life is subjected to some kind of pressure,
1  Nietzsche, F. Complete Works. Vol. 13. Drafts and Sketches 1887–1889. Moscow: Cultural
Revolution, 2006. pp. 489–490.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

382
Part 3. The Political Paradigm of Modernity. The War of Concepts
restraint, subjugation, limitation; this is where the roots of nihilism should be
sought. In other words, the source of nihilism is Logos itself — at least,
Logos as directed against life. Nietzsche's main task was to establish a new
understanding of thinking, which should not be separate from life, but
within it. This is why Nietzsche's teachings are sometimes called the
"philosophy of life." The main idea is that life is a synthetic phenomenon
that cannot be broken down into immobility and movement, subject and
object, consciousness and the external world, i.e., into the classical topics
of modern philosophy. For Nietzsche, everything is in motion, both subject
and object; they are not fixed, but merged, although simultaneously
separated, in an original unity. Returning to unity beyond the pairs of
opposites (subject-object, top-bottom, good-evil) and overcoming these
pairs is, for Nietzsche, an alternative way of thinking. To think is not to
think life from somewhere
from outside, but from within life.
Philosophers usually think of life and nature as objects, as if they
themselves were dead or not yet born. Nietzsche teaches that new people
must think within life, although this is extremely difficult, since life is a flow.
A stream does not allow us to single out anything unambiguous and strictly
fixed once and for all — today it is one thing, tomorrow another. But
according to Nietzsche, we must not stop the stream; on the contrary, we
must immerse our consciousness and thinking in it. According to Nietzsche,
becoming is what should be taken as the beginning and end of philosophy.
But at the same time, the pure element of becoming eludes thought and being,
representing pure contingency (in the spirit of Democritus' isonomy).
Nietzsche disagrees with this and calls for finding moments of eternity,
crystals of being, in the flow of becoming, for imprinting the stamp of being
on the flow of becoming.
Hence the idea of the "eternal return," since the flow of life has a
certain meaning that can only be revealed in a huge cycle. The huge cycle,
the contemplation of the birth of things at the origins of eternity and their
baptism in the waters of eternity, is the task of philosophy.
Life is opposed by nihilism. At first as alienated rationalism, and then
as the complete degeneration of thought. In his era, Nietzsche identified
nihilism as an open phenomenon, as the essence of history that had become
explicit. This is precisely why he has a dual attitude towards nihilism: it is
not simply a failure or pathology, an accident or a particularity — it is
destiny, the tragic destiny of the spirit (consciousness, thought), waging an
irreconcilable war with life throughout the centuries.
The problem of nihilism as the tragic discovery of the nothingness of
modernity and the horizons for overcoming it is the theme of all of
Nietzsche's work.le war with life throughout the centuries.
The problem of nihilism as the tragic discovery of the nothingness of
modernity and the horizons for overcoming it is the theme of all of
Nietzsche's work.

--- PAGE BREAK ---oughout the centuries.
The problem of nihilism as the tragic discovery of the nothingness of
modernity and the horizons for overcoming it is the theme of all of
Nietzsche's work.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

Chapter 7. Classical and revolutionary nationalism (the third political theory) 383
. It unfolds in stages, since life and becoming, unlike for Hegel, are not taken
as concepts, but retain the fundamental metaphysical significance that Hegel
attributes to becoming (movement) due to the dialectical nature of his
apophatic philosophy. If Hegel is a prophet of history, then Nietzsche is a
prophet of life. Nietzsche sets himself the task of putting the stamp of eternity
on becoming.
To communicate the nature of being to becoming is the highest
will to power1.
He does not simply state the strength and power of nature, as a
materialist, naturalist or pantheist in the spirit of Spinoza would do. He wants
to extract from life its secret essence, its "signs of being," that is, to look into
the ultimate depths of life, precisely where the source of its tragic and inexorable
power lies. Becoming is chaos for Nietzsche. But
"imprinting the character of existence" on it, "stamping" (aufzuprägen) it on
it, should not be done by someone else — not by a spirit, a subject or a mind,
but by the inner power of life itself, reaching its culmination. Hence the
Nietzschean formula from Thus Spoke Zarathustra:
I tell you: one must have chaos within oneself to be able to give birth to a
dancing star2.
Nietzsche noted the failure of humanity, its historical exhaustion, its
futility, which became particularly explicit in humanism, when man showed
what he was capable of when freed from the "yoke" — it turned out that he
was capable only of baseness. From then on, the Superhuman was to take his
place. In the "Prelude" to Thus Spoke Zarathustra, Nietzsche says about this:
"Man is a transition and a descent (destruction)."
What is great about a person is that they are a bridge, not a destination:
what can be loved in a person is that they are a transition and a descent (a
fall, a death)3.
He perishes to make room for those who come after him. Since he is not
an end, but a means, a path, an arrow of longing, thrown
1  Nietzsche, F. The Will to Power // Nietzsche, F. Collected Works: In 5 vols. Vol. 4. St.
Petersburg: Azbuka, 2011. P. 307.
2   Nietzsche, F. Thus Spoke Zarathustra. Moscow: IF RAN, 2004. P. 13.
3   Nietzsche, F. Thus Spoke Zarathustra. P. 11.e, F. Collected Works: In 5 vols. Vol. 4. St.
Petersburg: Azbuka, 2011. P. 307.
2   Nietzsche, F. Thus Spoke Zarathustra. Moscow: IF RAN, 2004. P. 13.
3   Nietzsche, F. Thus Spoke Zarathustra. P. 11.

--- PAGE BREAK ---s: In 5 vols. Vol. 4. St.
Petersburg: Azbuka, 2011. P. 307.
2   Nietzsche, F. Thus Spoke Zarathustra. Moscow: IF RAN, 2004. P. 13.
3   Nietzsche, F. Thus Spoke Zarathustra. P. 11.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

384
Part 3. The Political Paradigm of Modernity. The War of Concepts
to the other side, the moment of becoming, not substance. Man is the
destruction of himself as man and the transition to what follows him in the
logical structure of history — to the Superhuman.
Nietzsche defines the superhuman as "the conqueror of God and
nothingness" ("dieser Besieger Gottes und des Nichts") 1. This is a crucial
definition. God is dead, and with him, order and the world have collapsed.
Nothing remains but chaos and the last men. Nietzsche speaks of "the last
men":
What is love? What is creation? Aspiration? What is a star? — asks the
last man and blinks.
The earth has become small, and the last man jumps about on it,
making everything small. His race is as indestructible as the flea; the last
man lives longer than all others.
"We have found happiness," say the last men, and they blink. They have
left the countries where it was cold to live, for they need
need warmth2 ..
This is the last thing left to people: to narrow their horizons to the space
immediately surrounding their bodies. The "last man" does not know love
because he does not experience acute division, does not feel fragmented. This
means that he shies away from the challenge of difference. It is enough for
him to seem whole to himself — and in doing so, he disintegrates further and
further, becoming a divident rather than an individual, especially when he
believes that his individuality is guaranteed and securely protected. He does
not know creation, since he does not know the Creator who created him, but
he is also incapable of creating himself: his inner emptiness is powerless.
The "last men" are the people of the Modern Age. Nietzsche deeply despises
them. But he believes that in order to overcome the nihilism of the Modern
Age, we must not take a step backward, but a step forward — toward the
Übermensch. Nietzsche lays the foundations for a new anthropology, where
becoming is thus placed in human nature, making man a variable quantity.
As a moment of becoming, man moves along a vertical axis: from what is
always lower to what is always higher. This determines his dialectic, his
openness, his
1  Nietzsche, F. Works in Two Volumes. Vol. 2. Moscow: Mydl, 1990. P. 471. The full quote
reads as follows: This man of the future, who will free us from the old ideal and from what was
supposed to grow out of it — from the greatest repulsion, from the will to nothingness, from
nihilism, this stroke of the midday bell and the great decision that will once again liberate the will,
that will restore to the earth its purpose and to man his hope, this anti-Christian and anti-nihilist,
this conqueror of God and of nothingness — he must come one day...".
2   Nietzsche, F. Thus Spoke Zarathustra. Moscow: IF RAN, 2004. P. 14.and to man his hope, this anti-Christian and anti-nihilist,
this conqueror of God and of nothingness — he must come one day...".
2   Nietzsche, F. Thus Spoke Zarathustra. Moscow: IF RAN, 2004. P. 14.

--- PAGE BREAK ---this anti-Christian and anti-nihilist,
this conqueror of God and of nothingness — he must come one day...".
2   Nietzsche, F. Thus Spoke Zarathustra. Moscow: IF RAN, 2004. P. 14.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

Chapter 7. Classical and revolutionary nationalism (the third political theory) 385
Bottomlessness. Man creates himself anew each time, drawing new and
new essences from his inner abyss in order to overcome them again, to
surpass them, to become the point of destruction and transition, Untergang
und Übergang, for a new moment. This applies to historical man and to each
individual. Moreover, the subject is always both historical and personal,
since human life itself is a time of transition, an impulse, a leap, that is, will
(Wille). The will to power is the axis of dynamic transformational
anthropology. The will to power is the desire to subordinate the past to the
future, the subhuman to the superhuman, the present (and past) self to the
future self. It is the subordination of the frozen moment of an arrow's flight
to the entire flight.
For Nietzsche, the "death of God" is not a catastrophe; the catastrophe is
people's unwillingness to face the abyss head-on, to accept the challenge of
the desert, to recognise chaos as the only power that assails man from all
sides and leaves him alone with himself, without the support or order that
has collapsed. The only answer to the challenge of nothingness that
opened up after the death of God is the Übermensch. Man cannot
withstand the encounter with nothingness: the "last man" is simply naive in
hoping to escape the acuteness of the problem.
Nietzsche's philosophy is deeply revolutionary. He calls for a re-
evaluation of all values. But this re-evaluation can be interpreted in the
context of all three political theories. As a rule, Nietzsche is considered
one of the philosophers who inspired Italian fascism and German National
Socialism.
Indeed, revolutionary nationalists perceived Nietzsche as a critic of
bourgeois values and a champion of the heroic individual, with German
National Socialists interpreting Nietzsche's image of the "blond beast" as a
direct reference to the "Aryan race."
the "Aryan race."
Mussolini, for his part, liked to repeat Nietzsche's idea that one must live
dangerously.
Nietzsche extolled the will, courage, and elemental force of "war." He
was not afraid to directly reject and ridicule progress, equality, and
morality. Some of his statements were openly misogynistic and harshly
patriarchal (for example, his famous remark, "Are you going to the
women? Don't forget your whip!"(1)  ). Nietzsche extolled inequality, believing
that only the brave and intelligent, the strong-willed and courageous have the
right to exist. Scandalous for Christians and even
1   Nietzsche, F. Thus Spoke Zarathustra. P. 64.equality, believing
that only the brave and intelligent, the strong-willed and courageous have the
right to exist. Scandalous for Christians and even
1   Nietzsche, F. Thus Spoke Zarathustra. P. 64.

--- PAGE BREAK ---386
Part 3.

The Political Paradigm of Modernity.

The War of Concepts
secular-humanistic morality were such statements by Nietzsche as "What
falls must be pushed further!"1
A number of Nietzsche's statements could be interpreted in a chauvinistic
manner.

For example, he said that some peoples would be better off never
having been born.

But he used these shocking phrases in a paradoxical sense,
calling on everyone to measure life by its own standards.

In his view, a people
that is alive, that is imbued with the spirit of life, that courageously and
boldly embarks on the path of development, is a worthy people.

Incidentally, Nietzsche was very fond of Russians.

He believed that the
more vicious a people was, the better, as this indicated greater vitality.

He
considered Russians to be particularly vicious.

He even had an aphorism:
"Vicious people have no songs.

Why, then, do Russians have songs?"(2)He
even suggested giving Europe to the Russians so that they could bring their
vitality there, and the pampered European culture would develop peacefully
under the rule of a Russian monarch, as Greece once did under Rome.

The
third political theory, and especially some of its versions — primarily the
racism of the National Socialists — was inspired by Nietzsche's philosophy
of inequality.

Thus, Nietzsche spoke of a "slave race" and a "master race,"
but he did not associate this with biological race.

He spoke of those peoples
who, full of life and the will to power, move through history, the triumphant
historical race of masters.

and those that proved to be permanently conquered.

In his work The Genealogy of Morals,Nietzsche introduced the concept of
ressentiment (French for "resentment") into philosophical language.

The
philosopher and sociologist Max Scheler (1874–1928) has a separate book,
Resentment in the Structure of Morals,which is entirely devoted to the
disclosure of this important concept.--- PAGE BREAK ---

In his work The Genealogy of Morals,Nietzsche introduced the concept of
ressentiment (French for "resentment") into philosophical language. The
philosopher and sociologist Max Scheler (1874–1928) has a separate book,
Resentment in the Structure of Morals,which is entirely devoted to the
disclosure of this important concept. "Resentiment" is the psychological state
of a slave, but not a social slave, rather a typological one. "ontological." It is simultaneously envy, irritation, hatred, recognition of
one's own inferiority complex, and a desire to take revenge on all those who
are above, who feel confident and calm, who are distinguished by that inner
greatness and dignity that are fundamentally inaccessible to the bearer of
"resentment," that is, "slaves by vocation" rather than by position, are
fundamentally inaccessible. There are people who know for certain that they
are finished
1   Nietzsche, F. Thus Spoke Zarathustra. P. 205. 2  Nietzsche, F. Twilight of the Idols, or How Philosophers Philosophise with a Hammer //
Nietzsche, F. Collected Works: In 5 vols. Vol. 5. St. Petersburg: Azbuka, 2011. P. 154. 3   Nietzsche, F. The Genealogy of Morals // Nietzsche, F. Collected Works: In 5 Volumes. Vol. 5. 4   Fr. ressentiment — resentment, vindictiveness, vindictiveness. 5  Scheler, M. Resentiment in the Structure of Morals. St. Petersburg: Nauka: University Book,
1999.

--- PAGE BREAK ---es. Vol. 5. 4   Fr. ressentiment — resentment, vindictiveness, vindictiveness. 5  Scheler, M. Resentiment in the Structure of Morals. St. Petersburg: Nauka: University Book,
1999.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

Chapter 7. Classical and revolutionary nationalism (the third political theory) 387
worthless creatures — bastards, cowards, scoundrels and scum. But, clearly
aware of this, they blame the strong, honest, brave, handsome and manly for
it. And the more acute the feeling of their own inferiority, the greater their
hatred for everything that is complete.
According to Nietzsche, this is a fundamental characteristic that divides
people into two categories: the master race unites those who are free from
sentimentality and who therefore freely extrapolate the excess of life from
themselves, projecting it onto everything around them, and there is the slave
race — people who are completely deprived of this fullness of life, who
always lack something and who therefore always hate everyone else.
Nietzsche unhesitatingly projected these generalisations onto certain peoples
who live in hatred and envy because, for example, they were once conquered
by stronger peoples and have since been unable to free themselves from this
influence. But instead of gathering their strength and rising up (although
Nietzsche said that "rebellion is the virtue of slaves"), they continue to fool
around in their imaginary servility, and sometimes bite, squeal and insult
their masters when they are not listening. Unable to rule themselves or others,
they constantly experience foreign domination as humiliation. These are not
separate peoples — they are a race of slaves, a kind of society, types of
people who are endowed with such qualities. But Nietzsche illustrates this
anthropological observation with various examples from the history of
peoples and religions, which was used by nationalism in a context far
removed from what Nietzsche had in mind.
Although it is generally accepted that Nietzsche was primarily a herald
of the third political theory, there are interpretations of his ideas in the
context of liberalism and communism.
Some liberals view Nietzschean philosophy as an apology for the
individual. In this context, Nietzsche's calls for a re-evaluation of all values
and his teaching on perspectivism are interpreted as the ultimate form of
apologetics for subjectivity. His criticism of the state, his hostility towards
socialism, and his image of the Übermensch are interpreted by liberals as a
model of extreme freedom applied to the market and capitalism. Nietzsche's
glorification of inequality becomes, for liberals, a defence of income and
property inequality (contrary to socialists and communists).. One version of
this liberal interpretation of Nietzsche is offered by Ayn Rand 1  (1905–
1982). Rand takes the principle of liberal individualism and free enterprise to
its logical conclusion, extolling the rich as a "master race" and the poor as
1   Rand, A. The Fountainhead. New York: The Fountainhead, 1951.rinciple of liberal individualism and free enterprise to
its logical conclusion, extolling the rich as a "master race" and the poor as
1   Rand, A. The Fountainhead. New York: The Fountainhead, 1951.

--- PAGE BREAK ---individualism and free enterprise to
its logical conclusion, extolling the rich as a "master race" and the poor as
1   Rand, A. The Fountainhead. New York: The Fountainhead, 1951.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

388
Part 3. The Political Paradigm of Modernity. The War of Concepts
as well as workers as a "slave race." At the same time, Ayn Rand believes
that society and the state exist to restrain and oppress the rich, who must
declare war on them and fight it to the bitter end. This philosophy is called
"objectivism." Many leading figures in the US Federal Reserve System,
including Alan Greenspan, are supporters of liberal Nietzscheanism and
followers of Ayn Rand's objectivism.
There is also a "leftist" — communist — interpretation of Nietzsche.
One of the first communist Nietzscheans was the Russian proletarian
writer and friend of Lenin, Maxim Gorky (1868–1936), who applied
Nietzsche's idea of the Übermensch to a romanticised image of the
proletariat. A more systematic interpretation than Maxim Gorky's was
offered in the 1930s by the French communist philosopher Georges
Bataille (1897–1962). He developed Nietzsche's theme of overcoming
good and evil through radical personal and social revolutionary
experience. Following Nietzsche, Bataille asserts that the elemental force of
life precedes philosophy, rather than following it. Life is primary in relation
to philosophy; it is always paradoxical, never strictly right, good or evil
— it has no concept of fixed dualities. From this, Bataille takes Nietzsche's
invitation to overcome prohibitions as a social programme. The overcoming
of all prohibitions, including sexual ones (which is why some of Bataille's
works are, in fact, pornographic(2) ). The left-wing version of Nietzscheanism
was actively developed by French postmodernists such as Michel Foucault
(1926–1984), Gilles Deleuze (1925–1995), and others.
Thus, we can justify or criticise the "fascist" Hegel and the "fascist"
Nietzsche, the "liberal" Hegel and the "liberal" Nietzsche, as well as the
"Marxist" Hegel and the "leftist" Nietzsche. But all these adaptations of
Hegel and Nietzsche to the political ideologies of Modernity do not
exhaust their political philosophy. And what remains behind the scenes
cannot be uncovered and understood by the tools of Modern political
philosophy.
Pareto: being the elite is the true meaning of politics
Italian fascism was influenced to some extent by the theories of the
great sociologist Vilfredo Pareto (1848–1923), who developed
1   Bataille, G. The Sum of Atheology: Philosophy and Mysticism. Moscow: Ladomir, 2016.
2   Bataille, G. Hatred of Poetry: Pornolatrous Prose. Moscow: Ladomir, 1999.
3  Pareto, V. Compendium of General Sociology. Moscow: Publishing House of the Higher
School of Economics, 2008.r, 2016.
2   Bataille, G. Hatred of Poetry: Pornolatrous Prose. Moscow: Ladomir, 1999.
3  Pareto, V. Compendium of General Sociology. Moscow: Publishing House of the Higher
School of Economics, 2008.

--- PAGE BREAK ---e, G. Hatred of Poetry: Pornolatrous Prose. Moscow: Ladomir, 1999.
3  Pareto, V. Compendium of General Sociology. Moscow: Publishing House of the Higher
School of Economics, 2008.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

Chapter 7. Classical and revolutionary nationalism (the third political theory) 389
partly the philosophy of Niccolò Machiavelli. Pareto did not recognise the
autonomous significance of political ideologies, believing that they were used
by people to cover up more prosaic realities — the fierce struggle for power.
In this, Pareto is close to Hobbes with his anthropological pessimism, and
partly to Nietzsche, who developed the doctrine of the "will to power" as the
main expression of life in the political and social sphere(1) .
Pareto argues that society must be perceived as an unconditional
given; we do not know where it came from or how it is structured, but we
can observe that it has certain iron laws. The main law is the existence of
a political elite.
Pareto notes that in any politically and socially organised society, there is
always a necessity for elites and masses.
The elite is a certain type of people who are able and willing to rule; this
means that they take upon themselves the element of violence, are ready to
exercise it over others and do not allow it to be exercised over themselves.
The elite are people who enjoy the very nature of power, take pleasure in
ruling others and suffer greatly when they are forced to submit themselves.
Pareto believes that this is characteristic of only a small part of society.
The majority of society always represents a mass that cannot and, deep
down, does not want to rule, commit violence against others, command,
order, or control the fate and lives of others. The masses are indecisive,
prefer comfort and security to risky adventures, lead orderly lives and are
ready to submit to authority without thinking about the basis on which
that authority is built.
According to Pareto, this has always been the case and always will be.
Neither the elite nor the masses change. All people belong to one category
or another. Either you are a member of the elite or you are a member of the
masses. The minority elite always wants to rule and never wants to submit.
Pareto does not distinguish between whether people become elite or are
born elite — he simply notes a state of affairs that is easily observed in
various types of societies, whether archaic or modern, traditional or
democratic. Unlike liberal theorists such as Spencer, Pareto does not say
that this is an innate struggle for power. He simply notes the existence of
these types without explaining them.
1   Nietzsche, F. The Will to Power.l theorists such as Spencer, Pareto does not say
that this is an innate struggle for power. He simply notes the existence of
these types without explaining them.
1   Nietzsche, F. The Will to Power.

--- PAGE BREAK ---Spencer, Pareto does not say
that this is an innate struggle for power. He simply notes the existence of
these types without explaining them.
1   Nietzsche, F. The Will to Power.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

390
Part 3. The Political Paradigm of Modernity. The War of Concepts
Pareto was a staunch materialist and supporter of evolutionary theory.
From his point of view, the political system of society is a projection of the
human organism. Lower instincts form "remnants," residui, which affect
the unconscious and everyday behaviour of people. Pareto includes
religion, magic, superstitions, etc. in this sphere. The verticality of the
social and political hierarchy reflects the upright posture of humans, and this
vertical power structure is a functional analogue of the spine. The
rationality of humans as a species is reflected in the rationality of social
systems, and the model of equilibrium is a projection of the activity of the
brain.
The elite and the masses are sociological types; therefore, they are not
simply hostages to their position in society but, on the contrary, their social
typology predetermines this position. The elite strive to rise to the top, while
the masses settle at the bottom. If a member of the masses is placed at the
top of society, they will be unable to hold on to power and will fall back
to their "natural place." The same is true of representatives of the elite:
wherever they are, they will naturally strive to rise to the top. This leads
Pareto to identify another group — the counter-elite, which includes elite
types who, for one reason or another, do not have access to real power.
The counter-elite is a reservoir for replenishing the ruling elite, which,
having been in power for too long, tends to decay and degenerate. Pareto
formulated the law
"elite rotation," according to which
•the first generation of the elite is heroic and active,
•the second is protective,
•and the third, as a rule, loses the characteristics necessary for rule
and gives way to new elites, which are created on the basis of the
counter-elite, from among its members.
Pareto identifies another type — the anti-elite. He includes in this
category those who are fundamentally incapable of power, i.e., who under no
circumstances can become the elite and perform its functions, but who are
nevertheless distinct from the masses because they are endowed with creative
activity and, at the same time, rebelliousness and freedom-loving spirit.
Pareto includes representatives of the bohemian, creative intelligentsia,
sectarians, and criminal circles in the anti-elite. The counter-elite, as long as
it is excluded from power, is often mixed with the anti-elite, and they often
participate together in opposition to the ruling elites. But if the counter-elite
and anti-elite succeed in overthrowing the existing — usually decrepit —
elites, their paths diverge: the counter-elite becomes a full-fledgedposition to the ruling elites. But if the counter-elite
and anti-elite succeed in overthrowing the existing — usually decrepit —
elites, their paths diverge: the counter-elite becomes a full-fledged

--- PAGE BREAK ---ng elites. But if the counter-elite
and anti-elite succeed in overthrowing the existing — usually decrepit —
elites, their paths diverge: the counter-elite becomes a full-fledged

--- PAGE BREAK ---

Chapter 7. Classical and revolutionary nationalism (the third political theory) 391
elite, while the anti-elite returns to the social periphery, being
fundamentally incapable of exercising power.
Thus, the entire typology of society is as follows:
•the elite, who are in power
•the masses, who are always at the bottom and are incapable (unable or
unwilling) to rule, but are always ready to obey and follow the rules
established by those in power.
•the counter-elite, an elitist type that for some reason has been excluded
from power but is stubbornly striving to get there
•the anti-elite, chaotic elements and antisocial types who are
incapable of either ruling or obeying.
According to Pareto, the rotation of elites, i.e., the replacement of
decrepit elites by a counter-elite, can occur in several ways: it can be a
peaceful and gradual process (which is characteristic of democracy) or
violent and bloody (in the case of revolutions, dynastic and palace coups,
etc.). However, the meaning is the same in both cases: democracy is a
method of smooth rotation of elites, and not the distribution of power
among all members of civil society, as liberal theory falsely claims.
Pareto's political ideas are sharply opposed to both liberalism (the first
political theory) and communism (the second political theory), as he denies
the significance of ideology or the reality of democracy, believing that
both are merely a cover for the rotation of elites and a means for counter-
elites to overthrow or gradually replace the old elites. In doing so, Pareto
paved the way for a third political theory, which would triumph in Italy in
the 1920s. It is telling that Benito Mussolini considered himself a follower
of Pareto and offered him a seat in the Senate for the Fascist Party in 1923.
Pareto's theories, while neither socialist nor liberal, nevertheless remain
within the framework of political modernity. He himself was a materialist,
atheist and agnostic, and his understanding of the nature of power and the
state corresponded to the ideas of Bodin and Hobbes, while he openly
acknowledged Machiavelli as his direct predecessor.
Unlike Gentile's Hegelianism or Nietzsche's philosophy of life, Pareto's
version of political philosophy remains entirely within the context of the
political paradigm of the Modern Age, continuing the line of classical
nationalism that emerged at the dawn of the Modern Age.sion of political philosophy remains entirely within the context of the
political paradigm of the Modern Age, continuing the line of classical
nationalism that emerged at the dawn of the Modern Age.

--- PAGE BREAK ---ilosophy remains entirely within the context of the
political paradigm of the Modern Age, continuing the line of classical
nationalism that emerged at the dawn of the Modern Age.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

392
Part 3. The Political Paradigm of Modernity. The War of Concepts
Pareto's ideas were taken up by other representatives of the neo-
Machiavellian school. For example, Gaetano Mosca (1858–1941)1 , built on
Pareto's theory of elites to develop a theory of the "ruling class," identifying the
ability to manage and organise as the main trait that defines a special social
type that always ends up at the top of society and establishes dominance over
the "majority." Another student of Pareto, Robert Michels (1876–1936)2
formulated the same idea, introducing the concept of the "iron law of
oligarchy," i.e., a sociological law according to which the management of
society is always necessarily concentrated in the hands of a minority — a few
dominant figures.
All representatives of the school of neo-Machiavellianism denied the
independent significance of political ideologies, as well as religious views
in their influence on politics, justifying the realm of politics as an
independent and autonomous sphere, governed only by its own laws and
rules.
C. Schmitt: friend/enemy and the structure of the pluriversum
The most prominent theorist of the third political theory was German
philosopher and jurist Carl Schmitt, a classic of modern political science.
Before the National Socialists came to power, Carl Schmitt was a staunch
opponent of liberal democracy, but after 1933 he joined the regime
established by Hitler. At the same time, he belonged to the Conservative
Revolution movement, which was much broader than the ideology of
National Socialism, but had a number of intersections with it. Both Carl
Schmitt and most conservative revolutionaries rejected racism and
advocated not so much for the nation as for the peoples (in Herder's
understanding). Schmitt himself was a theorist of a special concept of
"people's rights" (German: Volksrechte), which he opposed both to the
liberal theory of "human rights" and to the class approach of the
communists, but which at the same time differed significantly from statism,
racism, and classical nationalism, with which, however, Schmitt has some
points in common (this concerns his realism in international relations and
his positive interpretation of Hobbes(3) ).
The most important concept introduced by Schmitt was the concept of the
Political4 , which we have already discussed. The Political (das
1   Mosca G. History of Political Doctrines. Bari: Laterza, 1937.
2   Michels R. Sociology as a Social Science. Berlin: Mauritius, 1926.
3   Schmitt, C. Leviathan in Thomas Hobbes's Theory of the State.
4   Schmitt C. The Concept of the Political. Berlin: Duncker und Humbolt, 1932.ociology as a Social Science. Berlin: Mauritius, 1926.
3   Schmitt, C. Leviathan in Thomas Hobbes's Theory of the State.
4   Schmitt C. The Concept of the Political. Berlin: Duncker und Humbolt, 1932.

--- PAGE BREAK ---Science. Berlin: Mauritius, 1926.
3   Schmitt, C. Leviathan in Thomas Hobbes's Theory of the State.
4   Schmitt C. The Concept of the Political. Berlin: Duncker und Humbolt, 1932.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

Chapter 7. Classical and revolutionary nationalism (the third political theory) 393
Politische) is distinct from politics as the sphere of concrete steps and actions,
and is the ontological and metaphysical foundation of politics. In a sense, the
Political as the essence of politics stands above politics and belongs to the
realm of meta-politics, that is, to the realm of Politica Aeterna. Defining the
Political in his programmatic work The Concept of the Political, Schmitt
writes:
The specifically political division on which political actions and
motivations are based is the division into friend and enemy 1.
The amicus/hostis (friend/enemy) pair is constitutive specifically for the
Political domain, as it is based not on religious views or innate attitudes, but
on a rational assessment of the situation and a volitional decision.
Friend/enemy are determined by the situation, which distinguishes this pair
from other dichotomies — religious (god/devil), moral (good/evil), species
(human/animal), gender (male/female), etc. At the same time, the
specificity of the figures of the enemy and the friend lies in the fact that they
can theoretically change places: the enemy and the friend are defined in
specific circumstances, and this definition itself is a constitutive factor of
the Political. Who is a friend and who is an enemy is never completely
obvious. This is a question of sovereign decision, on which the entire
structure of the Political as such depends. Politics begins only after this
pair has been constructed.
According to Schmitt, the distribution of roles between friend and foe
requires the existence of an authority that can make such judgements. To
do so, it must be constituted in the same way: that is, it must be the bearer
of sovereign will, reason and decision-making capacity. The determination
of who is an enemy and who is a friend is always mutual — it presupposes a
symmetrical gesture on the part of the other. Moreover, this other must be
capable, in turn, of determining friend and foe and acting accordingly. In
other words, politics presupposes in its foundations the existence of the
other as the political Other. Any political entity is only itself in the
presence of a coexisting (strictly speaking, coexisting) political entity.
And enmity and friendship are mutual and situational, that is, their
definition includes the possibility of a change in status under certain
circumstances. In the realm of religion, morality, species or gender, such
1   Schmitt C. Der Begriff des Politisches.. p. 26.definition includes the possibility of a change in status under certain
circumstances. In the realm of religion, morality, species or gender, such
1   Schmitt C. Der Begriff des Politisches.. p. 26.

--- PAGE BREAK ---the possibility of a change in status under certain
circumstances. In the realm of religion, morality, species or gender, such
1   Schmitt C. Der Begriff des Politisches.. p. 26.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

394
Part 3. The Political Paradigm of Modernity. The War of Concepts
action is impossible: good cannot become evil, a person cannot become an
animal or vice versa; here, the dichotomy is presented as an immutable fact,
independent of will and circumstances. Politics, on the other hand, is built on
the principle of being tied to very specific historical and geographical
conditions: friend and foe are always situational, concrete, located in a
strictly defined space and time, as well as to the political form that acts as the
subject of the Political at a given moment and in given circumstances.
Hence the fundamental conclusion of all Schmittian political theory:
politics is pluralistic in nature and presupposes the existence of a pluralistic
universe as a fundamental condition of its existence. Therefore, instead of
universality, the Political is always represented as something regional, local,
as a concrete order and situational form. The only universal rule in politics is
the absence of any universality beyond the limits of a specific political unit or
structure.
Schmitt attached great importance to the principle of sovereignty in
international politics, following Bode in this. For him, sovereignty and the
decision (Entscheidung) taken by the sovereign are transcendent in relation to
all parts of the state and do not allow for assessments on a friend/enemy
scale. The consequence of a decision to choose an enemy or friend in foreign
policy is binding on the entire state, since the transition from domestic to
foreign policy changes the subject of the decision — it shifts from a sub-state
unit to the state itself. In practice, this is sometimes not the case, but in this
case, the policy of forms and structures of the functioning of "direct power"
(potestas directa) is violated. In any case, for the very existence of the
Political, a pluriversum is necessary, in the space of which the other can be
defined as a friend or an enemy.
This interpretation of politics as a pluriverse reflected the main idea of
the entire Conservative Revolution: German sovereignty as the highest
value and the right of Germans to a special path (Sonderweg), to a special
identity both in the European context and more broadly, in the global
context.
At the same time, for Schmitt, the political was an area of direct
manifestation of the spirit: the definition of friend or foe is primarily
influenced by values, and only then by interests. Power, like the principle of
order itself, is a spiritual category, while the material aspects associated with
the state and the process of ordering social processes are always secondary.interests. Power, like the principle of
order itself, is a spiritual category, while the material aspects associated with
the state and the process of ordering social processes are always secondary.

--- PAGE BREAK ---ke the principle of
order itself, is a spiritual category, while the material aspects associated with
the state and the process of ordering social processes are always secondary.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

Chapter 7. Classical and revolutionary nationalism (the third political theory) 395
In defining sovereignty, Schmitt introduces another important term.
Sovereign is the one who decides on a state of emergency 1.
A situation becomes extraordinary (Ernstfall) when the normal
functioning of the legal process cannot continue and some extraordinary step
is required to resolve the problem: either one that is provided for in the legal
corpus as a potential possibility, or one that is taken contrary to the law under
the influence of circumstances. Sovereign is not the one who has the right to
make decisions in extraordinary circumstances, but the one who makes them.
According to Schmitt, this reveals the very essence of politics.
This interpretation of sovereignty led Schmitt directly to the concept of
dictatorship, since the adoption of decisions without reference to any
precedent or legislative basis is most clearly manifested in a dictator. Schmitt
used this to justify Hitler's system of power in Nazi Germany, which the
National Socialists took advantage of.
In his seminal work Political Theology (3),Carl Schmitt shows the parallels
between
changes
in
religious
and
metaphysical
worldviews
and
transformations in political doctrines. Political systems strictly follow the
slightest fluctuations in theological doctrines, which allows us to say that
politics is one of the forms of expression of the human spirit as a whole,
along with religion, philosophy, culture, etc. Hence the very concept of
"political theology." The way theologians understand the status of God and man,
as well as the relationship between them, directly influences which political and
legal systems become prioritised and normative. Just as German sociologist
Max Weber showed the mechanisms of the origin of capitalism from
Protestant ethics, Carl Schmitt more generally demonstrates the process of
the formation of political concepts and systems from theological models.
Thus, in the Middle Ages, scholasticism and a theistic conception of
God dominated. Accordingly, the bearer of supreme sovereignty was the
state.
1   Schmitt, C. Political Theology. Moscow: Canon-Press, Kuchkovo Pole, 2000. P. 15.
2  Schmitt, C. Dictatorship: From the Origins of the Modern Idea of Sovereignty to the Proletarian
Class Struggle.
3   Schmitt, C. Political Theology.Moscow: Canon-Press, Kuchkovo Pole, 2000. P. 15.
2  Schmitt, C. Dictatorship: From the Origins of the Modern Idea of Sovereignty to the Proletarian
Class Struggle.
3   Schmitt, C. Political Theology.

--- PAGE BREAK ---Kuchkovo Pole, 2000. P. 15.
2  Schmitt, C. Dictatorship: From the Origins of the Modern Idea of Sovereignty to the Proletarian
Class Struggle.
3   Schmitt, C. Political Theology.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

396
Part 3. The Political Paradigm of Modernity. The War of Concepts
The papal throne becomes the centre of politics, replacing, in the spirit of St.
Augustine's teaching, the "Heavenly City" in the earthly world. In the
institution of the Popes, the vicars of St. Peter on earth, and through him
Christ himself, the principle of transcendent theological establishment is
manifested: God the Creator is above all hierarchies of creatures, and
therefore supreme power legitimately belongs only to Him; He is the
Almighty, and therefore his vicar on earth, the Roman bishop, is above all
earthly monarchies. This theistic attitude, according to Schmitt,
predetermined the entire structure of politics in the Middle Ages and lay
at the basis of the scholastic understanding of sovereignty: only God is
sovereign, and to some extent his representative on earth, the Pope. Schmitt
himself was a Catholic and therefore generally shared this pre-modern
view of the legitimate nature of power as the most reasonable form of
"political theology."
The next form of "political theology" emerged alongside Protestantism.
Luther introduced the norm of personal experience and rational interpretation
of the foundations of religion. This eliminated the mediating model of the
relationship between the "Earthly City" and the "Heavenly City," which was
embodied in the Catholic understanding of the Pope and in the idea of the
Empire. This gave rise to the concept of the modern state and sovereignty.
The meaning of sovereignty for Hobbes and Bodin, as well as for
Machiavelli, is that there is no higher authority above the sovereign.
In the 18th–19th centuries, as K. Schmitt shows, there was a further
immanentisation of theology — from the deism of the Enlightenment to
the direct atheism and materialism of liberals and socialists, which led to a
new conception of the structure of the state as a product of the "social
contract."
In the last section of Political Theology, Carl Schmitt examines the
counter-revolutionary projects of European conservatives — Joseph de
Maistre (1753–1821), Donoso Cortés (1809–1853) and Louis Bonald
(1754–1840), who, having identified the structure of the processes
prevailing in the "political theology" of the Modern Age, took a counter-
Enlightenment position, rejected the norms of Modernity and, first and
foremost, its most radical and nihilistic (from the point of view of
traditional theology) expression in liberalism, and proposed projects for
the restoration of the political system of the New Middle Ages. Schmitt
himself clearly sympathised with this counter-revolutionary project and
considered possible versions of the legal formalisation of a path in the
opposite direction to the logic of Modernity: from Weimar democracy to a
German nation state based on the principle oft and
considered possible versions of the legal formalisation of a path in the
opposite direction to the logic of Modernity: from Weimar democracy to a
German nation state based on the principle of

--- PAGE BREAK ---ssible versions of the legal formalisation of a path in the
opposite direction to the logic of Modernity: from Weimar democracy to a
German nation state based on the principle of

--- PAGE BREAK ---

Chapter 7. Classical and revolutionary nationalism (the third political theory) 397
absolute sovereignty (with the possibility of dictatorship1 ) and, through it,
to a new European Empire, parallel to the restoration of the power and
authority of the Popes. At the same time, he saw the counter-revolutionary
project as feasible precisely because it was a question of human freedom,
which always has the possibility of making a choice (Entscheidung) in the
sphere of the spirit, i.e. religion and politics, which are the direct
expression of the spirit.
When developing the legal basis for the future European Empire, Carl
Schmitt introduced, as we have said, the concept of "the rights of peoples"
2. This principle in his theory was opposed to European nationalism of the
Modern era, as it denied the individual nature of citizenship and the
bourgeois system of domination of the norms of the Third Estate, which
lay at the foundation of the national state, and especially its contractual
nature, the recognition of which led to liberal democracy, which gradually
abolished states in general in favour of a global "civil society". Schmitt
regarded German nationalism as a transitional stage towards a completely
new (for the modern era) political organisation of Europe, which, in his view,
should be based on:
•the principle of imperial centralisation of strategic management,
•unity of spiritual form (Christianity in its traditional version),
•recognition of the subjects of intra-imperial law not as artificial
nations or citizens, but as organic units — peoples united by a
common historical destiny.
The third point of the new European Empire assumed that the people
(Volk) would become subjects of law, have their own representation and the
opportunity to organise their internal structures on the basis of their cultural
and historical traditions, as well as on the basis of free choice. The only
limitation in this case would be the consideration of the strategic interests
of the Empire as a whole. This project encapsulates the essence of the
Conservative Revolution: the peoples of Europe are given the free choice to
build their future on the basis of democratic consensus (Entscheidung),
which allows for a combination of both traditional and innovative
1   Schmitt devoted an entire work to legal problems and types of dictatorship.
Schmitt, C. Dictatorship. Op. cit.
2  Schmitt C. Völkerrechtliche Großraumordnung mit Interventionsverbot für raum- fremde
Mächte. Ein Beitrag zum Reichsbegriff im Völkerrecht. Berlin: Deutscher Rechts Verlag, 1939.atorship. Op. cit.
2  Schmitt C. Völkerrechtliche Großraumordnung mit Interventionsverbot für raum- fremde
Mächte. Ein Beitrag zum Reichsbegriff im Völkerrecht. Berlin: Deutscher Rechts Verlag, 1939.

--- PAGE BREAK ---Schmitt C. Völkerrechtliche Großraumordnung mit Interventionsverbot für raum- fremde
Mächte. Ein Beitrag zum Reichsbegriff im Völkerrecht. Berlin: Deutscher Rechts Verlag, 1939.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

398
Part 3. The Political Paradigm of Modernity. The War of Concepts
elements, since the Empire does not have the authority to exert prescriptive
influence on this decision, which remains entirely within the competence of
the people as a full-fledged subject of law. The people, drawing on their
history and culture, can choose any combination of the past, present and
future, shaping and transforming themselves as necessary into a self-
correcting project. This combines conservatism and a spiritual turn to
eternity with democracy and even revolution. Thus, we find ourselves in
the context of revolutionary nationalism as a third political theory, distanced
from political modernity as such and in direct opposition to liberalism and
socialism.
On the other hand, according to Schmitt, the principle of "rights of
peoples" must be inscribed within specific territorial boundaries that
characterise the Empire. To this end, he introduces the concept of "large
space" (Grossraum) as an approximate geographical zone within which
empire-building takes place. "Greater space" is the cultural field within which
the historical preconditions for unification processes exist — either on the
basis of precedent (the area of existence of ancient empires), on the basis of
spiritual and religious proximity, or on the basis of objective strategic and
even economic interests. Schmitt himself defines "large space" not as a full-
fledged concept (Begriff), but as a pre-concept, Vorbegriff, that is, as a
preparatory stage for the development of a full-fledged legal model. Schmitt
traces the process of the formation of historical empires and finds everywhere
a special stage where the empire-building centre preliminarily outlines the
horizons of the oikoumene, familiar, close to it or simply known to it. The
empire, thus, before being built in practice, matures in spirit. The same idea
was defended, as we have seen, by Hegel.
This idea of "natural borders" is confirmed or refuted by numerous
military operations, diplomatic treaties, political alliances, i.e., the entire
content of politics. But this plan always exists in one form or another, and
sooner or later — if the empire-building endeavour is successful — it
turns into a concrete historical and political reality, which is subsequently
given full legal status. This is what is meant by "the greater space." The
way it is interpreted by the empire-building elite actively influences the
specifics of political processes until the preconception gives way to a full-
fledged concept, and the "great space" gives way to a full-fledged empire
with its borders, laws, and legal system based, according to Schmitt, on the
principle of "the rights of peoples."o a full-
fledged concept, and the "great space" gives way to a full-fledged empire
with its borders, laws, and legal system based, according to Schmitt, on the
principle of "the rights of peoples."

--- PAGE BREAK ---ncept, and the "great space" gives way to a full-fledged empire
with its borders, laws, and legal system based, according to Schmitt, on the
principle of "the rights of peoples."

--- PAGE BREAK ---

Chapter 7. Classical and revolutionary nationalism (the third political theory) 399
gives way to a full-fledged empire with its borders, laws, and legal system
based, according to Schmitt, on the principle of "the rights of peoples."
Revolutionary nationalism: the boundaries of the ideology of
the " "
The ideology of the Third Way is not limited to historical fascism and
National Socialism — it is a much broader phenomenon. First, there are
characteristics inherent in classical nationalism, which did not develop into a
fully-fledged ideology but had a significant influence on the third political
theory, becoming part of it. We encounter a distinct ideology only in the 20th
century, when nationalism takes on a revolutionary character. In part, this
ideologisation of nationalism is a response to the pronounced ideologism of
Marxism. The conceptual coherence of the second political theory, which,
incidentally, with its systemic criticism, contributed greatly to liberalism
being perceived precisely as a "bourgeois ideology" and not simply a set of
theses and guidelines, forced nationalists to develop symmetrical conceptual
complexes firstly, taking into account liberalism and communism and
providing their own answers to their basic postulates, secondly, integrating
certain aspects of classical nationalism (mercantilism, realism, etc.), and
thirdly, adding completely new and atypical elements, where modernism and
innovation (Nietzscheanism, futurism, existentialism, etc.) coexisted with a
return to pre-modern forms of politics (Hegel's idealism, Schmitt's
justification of empire and the function of the "katechon," the traditionalism
of Y. Evola, etc.). Partly close to revolutionary nationalism, the Conservative
Revolution that took shape in Germany, which was extremely heterogeneous
in itself, represented a parallel phenomenon that can be viewed both as one of
the versions of the third political theory and as something independent and
separate. Therefore, unlike liberalism and Marxism, which are clearly and
unambiguously structured, the third political theory gives the impression of
being eclectic, contradictory and inconsistent. Therefore, in order to better
understand its main semantic nodes, it is necessary to imagine its general
conceptual field.
Strictly speaking, revolutionary nationalism, which manifested itself
most vividly (and at the same time most monstrously) in Italian fascism,
should be recognised as the third political theory.ld.
Strictly speaking, revolutionary nationalism, which manifested itself
most vividly (and at the same time most monstrously) in Italian fascism,
should be recognised as the third political theory.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

German
Romanticis
m
Herder
German
classical
philosophy
philosophy of
life
Nietzsche
Conservative Revolution
Van den Broek E.
Junger
Counter-Enlightenment
Hegel
Fichte
Schelling
Klage
völkisch
German populists
Spengler
reactionary
conservatism
O. Spann
K. Schmitt
Gleichen
Neopaganism
traditionalism Y. Evola
German militarism
conservatism
classical nationalism
revolutionary nationalism
M. Heidegger
towards the Fourth Political
fascism
National Socialism
theory
Leviathan
Sorel
Mussolini
Pareto
Hitler
Theosophy
Hobbe
s
left-wing fascism   right-wing fascism
Rosenberg
Ariosophists
Boden
Machiavelli
corporatism
statism
Gentile
racism
futurism   Marinetti
sovereignty
realism
mercantilism
anarchism Malaparte
Salò
Franco Salazar Perón
colonial racism
Chamberlain
Gobineau
Third political theory
Premodern political theories (Christianity, Platonism, Aristotle) Middle Ages
Feudalism Papacy

--- PAGE BREAK ---lò
Franco Salazar Perón
colonial racism
Chamberlain
Gobineau
Third political theory
Premodern political theories (Christianity, Platonism, Aristotle) Middle Ages
Feudalism Papacy

--- PAGE BREAK ---

Chapter 7. Classical and revolutionary nationalism (the third political theory) 401
Mussolini and Hitler's German National Socialism, and to a lesser extent in
Franco's Spain, Salazar's Portugal, and during the era of General Perón in
Argentina. Other ideological currents, worldview circles, socio-political
and economic trends and orientations created a fertile environment for the
revolutionary nationalism of the 20th century, influencing it, supplying it
with individual elements and conceptual content, but without exhausting
it, identifying with it or claiming the role of dogmatism. In this respect,
the third political theory differs from the first (liberalism) and the second
(Marxism): there is no strictly established theoretical dogma that must be
accepted by all those who speak on behalf of the corresponding ideologies.
The third political theory was not as ideologically totalitarian as liberalism
and Marxism, which do not allow any doubts about their fundamental
foundations. In revolutionary nationalism, everything depended on a
specific leader or dictator. For example, in National Socialist Germany,
racism acquired the status not only of an ideological dogma but also of a
legal system, while in Fascist Italy, racist ideas were of peripheral
importance and became more pronounced only during the existence of the
Republic of Salò under direct German occupation. Similarly, Franco,
Salazar and Perón offered their own original versions, and in these Third
Way regimes, in particular, great importance was attached to Catholicism and
traditional conservatism, whereas in National Socialism neo-pagan motifs
prevailed, and in fascism secular heroism, stylised as the ethical culture of
Ancient Rome.
Nevertheless, all these political forms can be combined into a third
political theory, since the diversity of specific versions and interpretations
is comparable to the numerous trends in liberalism and left-wing ideology,
where there were also many currents, although their ideological boundaries
were more strictly defined and delineated. The third political theory was less
dogmatic, although the individual political regimes based on it were
characterised by a sharply totalitarian style, imposing their attitudes no less
(and sometimes even more harshly and directly) than communism and even
more so than liberalism (which prefers to impose its ideology through
suggestion, soft power, culture and economics rather than direct and brutal
political propaganda(1)  ).
1  However, in recent decades, and especially after the fall of the USSR, liberalism has gradually
begun to acquire openly totalitarian features, gradually tighteningtal
political propaganda(1)  ).
1  However, in recent decades, and especially after the fall of the USSR, liberalism has gradually
begun to acquire openly totalitarian features, gradually tightening

--- PAGE BREAK ---ganda(1)  ).
1  However, in recent decades, and especially after the fall of the USSR, liberalism has gradually
begun to acquire openly totalitarian features, gradually tightening

--- PAGE BREAK ---

402
Part 3. The Political Paradigm of Modernity. The War of Concepts
Italian fascism: futurism and conservatism
The third political theory manifested itself most explicitly in Italian
fascism and German National Socialism, which spread their influence and
direct political power to almost the entire territory of continental Europe.
However, when considering these forms of revolutionary nationalism, one
must constantly bear in mind the entire theoretical field of this ideology,
which goes far beyond the much narrower boundaries of historical
fascism and National Socialism.
Italian fascism appeared earlier than German National Socialism. It was
a reaction of Italian socialism to the internationalist and strictly class-based
dogma of Marxism. At the roots of fascism lies precisely the leftist idea of
the need to fight capitalism, bourgeois exploitation and the power of
economic elites. At the same time, supporters of this movement were
convinced that the bourgeoisie was an international phenomenon guided
by interests that did not take into account the situation of peoples and
states. Therefore, the Italian fascists' struggle against capitalism initially
combined social and national levels. Somewhat similar ideas were
formulated somewhat earlier by the French left-wing philosopher Georges
Sorel (1847–1922), whose authority was recognised by fascists, anarchists
and some socialist movements. In principle, many of the tenets of early
fascism were extremely close to anarchism. Thus, one of the most famous
Italian theorists of anarchism, Curzio Malaparte ( 1898–1957), who took
part in Mussolini's march on Rome, joined fascism at an early stage. Fascist
ideas, and especially their militant style of struggle, also attracted some
communists, including one of the founders of the Italian Communist Party,
Niccolò Bombacci (1879–1945).
It is telling that at the forefront of the fascists were representatives of
such avant-garde art movements as the Futurists, whose inspiration and
leader was Tommaso Marinetti (1876–1944), who became Mussolini's
closest associate. The leading American avant-garde poet Ezra
its ideological nature, which coincided to some extent with the norms of "political correctness,"
which became not only an ethical rule but also the basis for a number of legislative provisions
proclaiming liberalism not simply as the dominant ideology but as a dogma and a legislative
axiom.
1   Malaparte, C. The Technique of the State Coup. Moscow: Agraf, 1988.r of legislative provisions
proclaiming liberalism not simply as the dominant ideology but as a dogma and a legislative
axiom.
1   Malaparte, C. The Technique of the State Coup. Moscow: Agraf, 1988.

--- PAGE BREAK ---visions
proclaiming liberalism not simply as the dominant ideology but as a dogma and a legislative
axiom.
1   Malaparte, C. The Technique of the State Coup. Moscow: Agraf, 1988.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

Chapter 7. Classical and revolutionary nationalism (the third political theory) 403
Pound 1(1885–1972), who moved to Italy and spoke on the radio in
support of Mussolini until the occupation of Italy by American troops.
Ezra Pound, who hated interest-bearing capital, was particularly inspired
by the anti-capitalist aspects of fascist ideology and practice, which he
nevertheless considered insufficient.
In its early stages, fascism, led by the charismatic leader Mussolini,
was a left-wing revolutionary and fiercely anti-bourgeois movement inspired
by the ideas of Nietzsche and the desire to implement radical futuristic
transformations. At the same time, it clearly had a nationalist component,
which continued the earlier trends of the Risorgimento, early Italian
nationalism, which combined republican, bourgeois-liberal and monarchist
elements. However, fascist nationalism was distinguished precisely by its
revolutionary and anti-bourgeois nature, which became the basis of the
third political theory.
Mussolini was not an original thinker, but he possessed sufficient
intellectual ability and culture to comprehend the political ideas of nascent
fascism, as well as the tremendous will to put this heterogeneous complex of
ideas into practice.
The ideology of fascism — as the Italian version of the third political
theory — was a combination of several trends:
•the cold political technology of power in the spirit of Machiavelli,
systematically developed by Pareto and the neo-Machiavellians;
•the right-wing Hegelianism of Gentile, who justified the necessity of a
strong, leader-led nation-state by the very structure of the formation of
Italian history in its connection with ontology and the destiny of the
spirit;
•a romantic heroic spirit in the spirit of d'Annunzio (1863–1938),
based on Nietzsche's orientation towards the Superhuman and the
glorification of war and battle (this also includes Malaparte's
anarchist ideas);
•a futuristic cult of technology (Marinetti);
•a return to Roman ethics and Latin ideals, as well as to fundamentally
conservative values (Latin traditionalists such as Julius Evola, Guido
Di Giorgio (1890–1957), etc.).
1   Pound, E. Cantos. St. Petersburg: Nauka, 2018.and Latin ideals, as well as to fundamentally
conservative values (Latin traditionalists such as Julius Evola, Guido
Di Giorgio (1890–1957), etc.).
1   Pound, E. Cantos. St. Petersburg: Nauka, 2018.

--- PAGE BREAK ---well as to fundamentally
conservative values (Latin traditionalists such as Julius Evola, Guido
Di Giorgio (1890–1957), etc.).
1   Pound, E. Cantos. St. Petersburg: Nauka, 2018.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

404
Part 3. The Political Paradigm of Modernity. The War of Concepts
All this is a direct continuation of the ideas and trends that took shape
during the Risorgimento and thanks to which Italy itself emerged as a
single political entity.
At the same time, fascism absorbed a number of ideas from non-
dogmatic socialism, developed a theory of corporate social organisation
(based on trade unions), and adopted a colonial strategy that had become
the norm in European politics since the early modern period. Distinctive
features of fascism included
•the commissarial dictatorship 1(C. Schmitt) duce,
•the totalitarian nature of one-party rule,
•the relativisation of legal norms and liberal-democratic institutions
in the face of "revolutionary expediency".
If we look for parallels with the history of Ancient Rome, Mussolini's
reforms were — in many ways parodic — analogous to the establishment of
the Empire by Octavian Augustus (63 BC – 14 AD) after the Republican
period. In both cases, dictatorship, conditioned by a specific historical
situation, was elevated to a political principle.
In the second stage, after Mussolini came to power, formally holding
the post of prime minister but wielding dictatorial powers (hence the title
"Duce," Italian for "leader"), the revolutionary fervour of early fascism
gave way to a more classical nationalism. Mussolini, who had previously
held anti-clerical and anti-monarchist views, compromised with King
Victor Emmanuel III (1869–1947) with the Vatican and representatives of
big business, although he retained some socialist social institutions —
above all trade unions and corporations, which became the social base of
the fascist regime.
By 1928, the fascist regime had begun to take on increasingly totalitarian
characteristics—all parties except the fascist party were banned. In 1929,
Mussolini signed agreements with the Vatican. During this period, until 1943,
the policy of fascist Italy was generally quite conservative and shifted
significantly from revolutionary nationalism, which remained at the level of
style, slogans and symbols, to classical nationalism. Nevertheless, Gentile's
right-wing Hegelianism added a special dimension to this. At the same time,
traditionalism as an alternative to Gentile
1  Schmitt, K. Dictatorship: From the Origins of the Modern Idea of Sovereignty to the Proletarian
Class Struggle. Moscow: Nauka, 2005.At the same time,
traditionalism as an alternative to Gentile
1  Schmitt, K. Dictatorship: From the Origins of the Modern Idea of Sovereignty to the Proletarian
Class Struggle. Moscow: Nauka, 2005.

--- PAGE BREAK ---traditionalism as an alternative to Gentile
1  Schmitt, K. Dictatorship: From the Origins of the Modern Idea of Sovereignty to the Proletarian
Class Struggle. Moscow: Nauka, 2005.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

Chapter 7. Classical and revolutionary nationalism (the third political theory) 405
ideology during this period was formulated by the philosopher Julius
Evola, a supporter of a return to the pre-Christian sacred tradition of
Europe 1  and a participant in the Conservative Revolution movement
founded in Germany. The influence of Evola's ideas was marginal and
insignificant, especially since he criticised fascism for its "plebeianism,"
"modernism" and "leftism"2. Evola gained fame after 1945, when he
became a cult figure for most Italians who did not accept the liberal pro-
American regime.
When Hitler came to power in Germany and rapidly transformed the
country into a rapidly developing and powerful empire, Mussolini tried to
pursue an independent foreign policy, but gradually became closer to Hitler,
which forced him to side with Germany in World War II, despite his personal
reluctance to enter into conflict with the USSR, as he felt some sympathy for
the Bolshevik regime. Communists and liberals resisted fascism throughout
its reign in Italy, and during World War II, with support from the West and
the USSR, they began direct partisan actions. This led to a civil war that
divided Italians into two camps: fascists and anti-fascists.
In 1943, American troops landed in southern Italy with the support of
the Mafia, with whom Mussolini had been engaged in a fierce struggle, and
left-wing forces. A number of Mussolini's closest allies and members of
the upper echelons of the bureaucracy overthrew him and placed him under
arrest. Mussolini was rescued from prison by a Nazi special unit, and
Germany occupied northern Italy, where the Italian Social Republic, or
Salò, was established under the leadership of the liberated Mussolini.
There, Mussolini, shocked by the betrayal of the fascist hierarchy,
returned to early fascism in its left-wing and anti-bourgeois form. However,
under pressure from the National Socialists, he was forced to adopt racist
policies that were completely alien to him and to Italian fascism as a
whole.
After the fall of Hitler's Germany, the Americans and partisans destroyed
Salò, Mussolini was hanged, and those who remained loyal to fascism were
subjected to repression and purges. Thus, the two parts of Italian society
switched places.
It should be noted that there is no racism at the heart of the third
political theory in its fascist version. Thus, after Mussolini's death in 1945,
Italian Jews made a statement saying that this regime
1   Evola, J. Pagan Imperialism. Moscow: Arktogeya, 1994.
2   Evola, Y. Fascism: A Critique from the Right.hus, after Mussolini's death in 1945,
Italian Jews made a statement saying that this regime
1   Evola, J. Pagan Imperialism. Moscow: Arktogeya, 1994.
2   Evola, Y. Fascism: A Critique from the Right.

--- PAGE BREAK ---'s death in 1945,
Italian Jews made a statement saying that this regime
1   Evola, J. Pagan Imperialism. Moscow: Arktogeya, 1994.
2   Evola, Y. Fascism: A Critique from the Right.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

406
Part 3. The Political Paradigm of Modernity. The War of Concepts
was not involved, and Jews could hold any position in Italian society.
Mussolini did not organise mass executions or genocide. However, this
did not diminish the totalitarian nature of this ideology, and nationalism and
colonialism (in Libya and Ethiopia) were an official part of the fascist
worldview.
There was no racism (nor anti-Semitism) in other forms of Third Way
ideology — in Franco's Spain, Salazar's Portugal, and even less so in
Perón's Argentina.
Consequently, racism and anti-Semitism are not distinctive features of
the third political theory. Revolutionary or classical nationalism and a
harsh totalitarian character, as well as the dictatorial powers of a
charismatic leader, are features that are inherent to all types of this
ideology to one degree or another. Racism and anti-Semitism are unique
to German National Socialism, the most extensive and sinister, but not the
first and far from the only example of the third political theory being put into
practice.
Scalar fascism Guido de Giorgio
On the periphery of fascist ideology, a special ideological current was
forming that cannot be strictly classified as a third political theory on the
grounds that it rejected the very paradigm of political modernity and its
premises, materialism, atomism, individualism,   philosophy   Matter,
Receptacles,
"choruses." We are talking about the philosophy of traditionalism, the
foundations of which were laid by the French philosopher René Guénon,
who, however, himself remained at a distance from all modern political
theories, seeing in them a direct antithesis to what he considered to be the
ideal or normal understanding of politics, possible only outside the modern
world in the realm of tradition. In Italy, Guénon's followers were the
philosophers Guido de Giorgio and Julius Evola, who, however, chose a
different approach to fascism, seeking to transform it from a political theory
of modernity into something else, something sacred. In this, they were close
to some representatives of the German Conservative Revolution, with whose
leading figures Evola maintained close ties. Traditionalism, like some strands
of the Conservative Revolution, does not so much belong to the third political
theory as anticipate the Fourth Political Theory(1) .
1   Dugin, A. G. The Fourth Way. Introduction to the Fourth Political Theory.ervative Revolution, does not so much belong to the third political
theory as anticipate the Fourth Political Theory(1) .
1   Dugin, A. G. The Fourth Way. Introduction to the Fourth Political Theory.

--- PAGE BREAK ---does not so much belong to the third political
theory as anticipate the Fourth Political Theory(1) .
1   Dugin, A. G. The Fourth Way. Introduction to the Fourth Political Theory.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

Chapter 7. Classical and revolutionary nationalism (the third political theory) 407
In particular, Geno's Italian follower Guido de Giordano saw in
Mussolini's fascism, and in particular in his appeal to Ancient Rome and
his rejection of liberalism and communism as two versions of Modernism,
the possibility of realising the project of restoring Tradition. He
understood that the Third Way also contained elements of Modernism, but
believed that this ideology had the potential to evolve into something else.
This was also the view held for some time by M. Heidegger and J. Evola.
Guido de Giorgio developed sketches of an alternative fascism, which he
himself called "sacred fascism." But such
"Sacred fascism," which rejects nationalism, mechanism, materialism,
various forms of racism, and colonialism, could no longer be considered a
third political theory, representing something that went beyond its scope.
In essence, De Giorgio understands "sacred fascism" not as a political
doctrine or Mussolini's regime, but as the Roman Tradition itself, which he
traces from Antiquity to the present day.
De Giorgio interprets fascism based on the symbol of the lictor's fasces,
which consists of 12 rods and a double axe. For him, "fascism" is what this
sacred object symbolises, that is, what is metaphysically connected with the
fasces.
The only thing that connects the twelve rods of the fasces is the single
bolt of lightning that pierces them, symbolising the power embodied in
the double axe: this is the highest emblem of Tradition, as it represents a
vertical flow: ascent and victory.
Therefore, "fascism" is not the spread of political fascism, but the
turning of the spiritual gaze to the Latin Logos, to the essence of Rome itself,
as a point of eternity within the flow of time. De Giorgio writes:
A return to the Roman Tradition implies the "fascistisation" of Europe
and the world, an integral return to the spirit of truth that is Rome in
name, symbol and reality. Rome is a sacred, invincible, indomitable
summit, standing above all selfishness and human or populist ambitions,
in the true light of the Divine plan to which Rome belongs. This is the
highest goal of the Roman Tradition, exalted
1   The lictor's fasces is an ancient symbol of the Etruscans.
2   Giorgio Guido de. La Tradizione romana. Op. cit. P. 317.hich Rome belongs. This is the
highest goal of the Roman Tradition, exalted
1   The lictor's fasces is an ancient symbol of the Etruscans.
2   Giorgio Guido de. La Tradizione romana. Op. cit. P. 317.

--- PAGE BREAK ---his is the
highest goal of the Roman Tradition, exalted
1   The lictor's fasces is an ancient symbol of the Etruscans.
2   Giorgio Guido de. La Tradizione romana. Op. cit. P. 317.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

408
Part 3. The Political Paradigm of Modernity. The War of Concepts
of Rome's power in the context of Tradition, which alone is capable of giving
the West truth, justice, and greatness.
The restoration we are calling for, taking inspiration and ideals from
Dante, is a return to the spirit of Rome, not simply a repetition of the past,
which, among other things, is impossible, since nothing transitory can be
repeated, but a direct connection to the eternal principles of truth
contained in the Holy Scriptures and ancient symbols. This enormous task of
fascistisation requires superhuman efforts on the part of people of good will
if they want to save the West from catastrophe, not so much from a material
and external catastrophe, which in itself does not particularly affect us, but
from a profound, internal and spiritual one: the catastrophe of the life of the
spirit, the collapse of truth, which is already decaying in this turbulent
disintegration of impulses, aspirations, errors, and egoisms such as have
never before been seen in the history of the world.
Guido de Giorgio considers Dante to be the most vivid expression of "sacred
fascism." He speaks of this in the following terms:
In Dante, East and West balance each other in a single centre, which is
essentially the Primordial Tradition, that is, the unified and sovereignly
realised universality of Tradition. However, since there were close contacts
between East and West in the Middle Ages, and in this great time, as never
before in other eras, elements of different traditions complemented each
other, passing orally from teacher to student and from student to student,
Dante appeared at the end of this era, when the Dominicans and Franciscans,
although significantly degenerate and hostile to each other, still represented
two paths — the cherubic and the seraphic — of realising the Divine, both
anthropocentric but different from each other in nature and method2 : but it
was Dante who managed to unite them, to "fascistise" them without mixing
them. And it must be said that when we use the term "fascistise"
1   Giorgio Guido de. La Tradizione romana. Op. cit. P. 45.
2De Giorgio refers to Canto 11 (lines 37–43) of Dante's Paradise, where Dante speaks of
his vision of St. Dominic and St. Francis of Assisi, founders of the two main monastic orders in
Europe — the Dominicans and the Franciscans. "One burned with the fire of a seraph; / In the
other, wisdom seemed so bright / That he shone with the radiance of a cherub. I will praise only
one, / But honour both, for they speak of one thing, / Because their goal was the same." Dante
Alighieri. The Divine Comedy. Moscow: Pravda, 1982. Dante associates the Franciscans with
the figure of Seraphim, and the Dominicans with the figure of Cherubim. Moreover, Dante
specifies that both paths — Seraphim's and Cherubim's — lead to the same goal. De Giorgio
builds on this a theory that the tworaphim, and the Dominicans with the figure of Cherubim. Moreover, Dante
specifies that both paths — Seraphim's and Cherubim's — lead to the same goal. De Giorgio
builds on this a theory that the two

--- PAGE BREAK ---nicans with the figure of Cherubim. Moreover, Dante
specifies that both paths — Seraphim's and Cherubim's — lead to the same goal. De Giorgio
builds on this a theory that the two

--- PAGE BREAK ---

Chapter 7. Classical and revolutionary nationalism (the third political theory) 409
By "fixing," we do not mean anything similar to syncretism or mixing:
"fixing" in the sense of Tradition means giving each path, each element its
own direction, centre, axis, without allowing fusion. This is the novelty of
the fixity that embodies Tradition.
And further:
In Dante, "fascism" reaches its climax: East and West, ancient and new
Rome, temporary and eternal, earth and sky, world and superworld, man and
God, everything is emphasised, combined, united in the highest vertical,
which is Rome. This is what Sacred Fascism consists of, the true triumph of
justice and truth in man and the world: the fact that there will be
disagreements, battles, and downfalls is of no importance, since all this takes
place within a traditional society, where everything is supported by a higher
equilibrium ensured by the bearers of the keys (Clavigero) and fasces
(Fascigero), the Kingdom (Regnum) and the Empire (Imperium), forever
united in Rome(2) .
Julius Evola: Fascism and Criticism on the right
Another Italian traditionalist who attempted to reinterpret fascism in the
spirit of overcoming Modernity was Julius Evola.
Following Genon, Evola discovered Eastern metaphysics and the
Philosophia Perennis, and also found a fundamental metaphysical basis for
his radical and largely spontaneous rejection of the modern world, which had
already manifested itself in his youth in his sympathies for Dadaism and anti-
bourgeois nihilism. According to Guénon, modernity is not the result of
progress, but of degradation, the decline of sacred civilisation. Therefore, a
person who is faithful to the spiritual Tradition must logically remain in rigid
and irreconcilable opposition to modernity. The modern world, the New Age,
on the one hand, and Tradition, on the other, are two mutually exclusive
phenomena: only war is possible between them. Evol fully accepts this idea
and clearly defines his place in this war — on the side of Tradition against
the modern world. "The revival of monastic orders represents two parallel
paths of spiritual realisation, which must be connected by a 'sacred fascia'."
monastic orders represent two parallel paths of spiritual realisation, which must be linked by a
'sacred bond'.
1   Giorgio Guido de. La Tradizione romana. Op. cit. P. 316–317.
2   Ibid. P. 317.a'."
monastic orders represent two parallel paths of spiritual realisation, which must be linked by a
'sacred bond'.
1   Giorgio Guido de. La Tradizione romana. Op. cit. P. 316–317.
2   Ibid. P. 317.

--- PAGE BREAK ---represent two parallel paths of spiritual realisation, which must be linked by a
'sacred bond'.
1   Giorgio Guido de. La Tradizione romana. Op. cit. P. 316–317.
2   Ibid. P. 317.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

410
Part 3. The Political Paradigm of Modernity. The War of Concepts
"Against the Modern World" 1— this is how Evola refers to his main
programmatic book, in which he systematically sets out his worldview. He
outlines the process of the degradation of sacred civilisation from the
golden age to the iron age, offering an original version of the
reconstruction of the historical process and the change of civilisational
types, up to the extreme degree of degeneration and decline that he
identifies in European civilisation in the modern era.
However, unlike Guénon, Evola does not accept this decline as
inevitable and calls on the last bearers of Tradition in the West to rise up
in rebellion. It is precisely this "active traditionalism" that explains his
relative support for fascism and his occasional contacts with Mussolini.
Later, Evola critically re-evaluated fascism as a phenomenon ("Fascism,
an attempt at a critical analysis from the right" (3)), considering his hopes
for its evolution in a traditionalist direction to have been unfulfilled.
German National Socialism: from left- ism to
right- ism
German nationalism belongs to the same type of revolutionary
nationalism as Italian fascism. At the same time, the term "fascism" usually
refers specifically to "national socialism," without making any distinctions,
which creates a distorted view of the entire third political theory, coloured by
memories of the horrific practices of Hitler's regime and the excesses of
racism, on the basis of which a huge number of people were exterminated on
ethnic grounds. There is no doubt that racism and the practices of mass
extermination based on it were an integral part of the ideology of Nazi
Germany, and therefore historical German National Socialism cannot be
separated from racism, which was an organic and, in a sense, central part of
this ideology. However, this feature is absent in classical nationalism (with
the exception of some theories that justified colonial practices and is often
organically combined with liberalism, especially in the Anglo-Saxon world)
and is not characteristic of Italian fascism or other versions of revolutionary
nationalism. Nationalism and racism are completely different
1   Evola, J. The Revolt Against the Modern World.
2  Evola J. Gli uomini e le rovine. Rome: Edizioni dell’Ascia, 1953.
3   Evola, J. Fascism: A Critique from the Right.acism are completely different
1   Evola, J. The Revolt Against the Modern World.
2  Evola J. Gli uomini e le rovine. Rome: Edizioni dell’Ascia, 1953.
3   Evola, J. Fascism: A Critique from the Right.

--- PAGE BREAK ---different
1   Evola, J. The Revolt Against the Modern World.
2  Evola J. Gli uomini e le rovine. Rome: Edizioni dell’Ascia, 1953.
3   Evola, J. Fascism: A Critique from the Right.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

Chapter 7. Classical and revolutionary nationalism (the third political theory) 411
These are abstract concepts. Nationalism is a political ideology associated
with an emphasis on the value identity of the population of a nation state. In
other words, a nation is an artificial concept denoting all citizens of a
particular state, with the consent of the individual nature of citizenship.
Nationalism thus represents a more radical and aggressive form of patriotism,
or love for one's state, towards other states (and, accordingly, other nations).
It is a political concept based on statehood and individual citizenship. This is
the case with classical nationalism and, in the most general case, with
revolutionary nationalism. The main difference between them lies not in the
sharpness of nationalism, but in their attitude towards capitalism, the
bourgeoisie, market society and the institutions of bourgeois democracy.
Classical nationalism fully recognises capitalism, while revolutionary
nationalism either rejects it altogether or seeks to subordinate it strictly —
politically and ideologically — to national and state interests.
German National Socialism belongs to revolutionary nationalism, but
also includes a racist component.
At the same time, as in the case of Italian fascism, early National
Socialism was much more left-wing, which was preserved in the very name
"National Socialist German Workers' Party," where the reference to workers
had an important ideological significance. Gradually, however, Hitler began
to move closer to conservative circles and a broad spectrum of
representatives of the Conservative Revolution, while increasingly
emphasising the racist component of his ideology. This led to a split with
left-wing Nazis such as Otto Strasser (1897–1974) and National
Bolsheviks such as Ernst Nitschke (1889–1967), who opposed Hitler. Thus,
left-wing National Socialism gradually shifted to the right.At the same time,
racism was inherent in this movement at all stages, from early to late. But
this did not apply to the Conservative Revolution in any way.
Pragmatically, this difference in German national socialism was
linked to the fact that German nationalism itself historically appealed to
Germans living in different states — in Prussia, Austria, Switzerland, Italy,
and in the territories of fairly independent principalities and regions that
had previously been part of the Holy Roman Empire.
1The transition from left-wing to right-wing fascism in literary form was described by the
Japanese writer and playwright Yukio Mishima (1925–1970). Mishima, Yukio. My Friend Hitler/
Mishima, Yukio. The Golden Temple. Novels, short stories, plays. St. Petersburg: Severo-
Zapad, 1993.the
Japanese writer and playwright Yukio Mishima (1925–1970). Mishima, Yukio. My Friend Hitler/
Mishima, Yukio. The Golden Temple. Novels, short stories, plays. St. Petersburg: Severo-
Zapad, 1993.

--- PAGE BREAK ---r and playwright Yukio Mishima (1925–1970). Mishima, Yukio. My Friend Hitler/
Mishima, Yukio. The Golden Temple. Novels, short stories, plays. St. Petersburg: Severo-
Zapad, 1993.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

412
Part 3. The Political Paradigm of Modernity. The War of Concepts
They were incorporated into the Western Roman Empire. Some Germans
were Protestants (Lutherans), while others were Catholics. In addition,
German culture was strongly influenced by the Enlightenment and the
Counter-Enlightenment, Romanticism and radical conservatism. The ideas
of the founders of classical philosophy (Fichte, Hegel, etc.) formed the
basis of the Second Reich,Germany, created in the 19th century by Otto von
Bismarck (1815–1898) around Prussia. But after the end of the First World
War, the Second Reich fell, and there was a need for a new nationalism.
This is where interest in racism emerged, initially spreading only among
Germans living in different states. It could not simply be called
"nationalism" because Germans belonged to different nation states, i.e.
different nations, and in order to unite them all in a common polity, it was
necessary to propose a new concept — just as artificial as the other
political concepts of the modern era — the individuum, class, etc. In Italian
fascism, this concept was the state and the nation itself, where the focus was
also on the artificial community of the inhabitants of the Italian peninsula,
who historically belonged to different political entities — Southern Italy
(originally part of Magna Graecia, then Byzantium, the Lombard kingdoms,
and later Spain), to Central Italy, where Rome and the Vatican played an
important role, and Northern Italy, connected to France in the west,
Switzerland in the centre, and Austria in the east. Italian identity was an
artificial nation. But in order to unite the Germans after the fall of the Second
Reich, a more generalising concept was needed, a function which was
taken on by "racism".
Racist ideas in Germany's National Socialist movement ( )
Racist ideas found their way into National Socialism from England,
France and the mystical sect of theosophists. Racism was completely alien
to German culture, and the idea of the superiority of one race over another,
less complete, did not gain widespread acceptance in Germany due to its
limited colonial experience. As we have seen, the romantic Herder, who
influenced German self-awareness, believed that all peoples were thoughts
of God, which ruled out any hierarchy between them, let alone racial
inequality. One of the first theses on the inequality of human races
1
The first Reich is considered to be the Frankish Empire of Charlemagne (748-814) and,
more narrowly, the Holy Roman Empire of the German Nation (962-1806).t theses on the inequality of human races
1
The first Reich is considered to be the Frankish Empire of Charlemagne (748-814) and,
more narrowly, the Holy Roman Empire of the German Nation (962-1806).

--- PAGE BREAK ---uality of human races
1
The first Reich is considered to be the Frankish Empire of Charlemagne (748-814) and,
more narrowly, the Holy Roman Empire of the German Nation (962-1806).

--- PAGE BREAK ---

Chapter 7. Classical and revolutionary nationalism (the third political theory) 413
This idea was put forward by French sociologist Joseph Arthur de Gobineau
(1816–1882). The idea that "white" people were better than other races
was really popular in the British Empire, which used it to justify its
colonial policy. The British were described not only as conquerors, but also
as bearers of "progress" and "the highest form of culture." Such views were
common among many English liberals, including G. Spencer, J. S. Mill, and
others. The general theory of racism was supplemented by anti-Semitism by
the British author Houston Stewart Chamberlain ( 1855–1927), who had a
significant influence on the worldview of Hitler, the leader of the German
Nazis.
Another source of racial theories was the extravagant teachings of
theosophists3, who, based on various religious sources from Eastern
civilisations, constructed a hypothesis about the succession of four races,
with the white race, in their opinion, coming from the far north, where a
special Arctic continent once existed — Hyperborea. Some German and
Austrian theosophists combined this doctrine with German nationalism,
creating "Ariosophy" (4) ,which formed the basis of the "Aryan theory" and
Nordicism. In this theory, "true Aryans" were usually considered to be
Germans — sometimes more broadly, the Germanic peoples.
Thus, from the combination of the pragmatic concept of uniting the
German ethnic group, European (primarily Anglo-Saxon) colonialism,
anti-Semitism (in which an important role was played by hostility towards
"world Jewry" as a synonym for capitalism and internationalism, i.e. the
rejection of the first and second political theories, among whose prominent
representatives were, in fact, many Jews) and occult "Nordicism," a
National Socialist version of racism emerged, which played a very
important, if not key, role in this ideology.
Later, racist ideas were adapted to the German version of
revolutionary nationalism by the official theorist of National Socialism,
Alfred Rosenberg (1893–1946), whose main work
"The Myth of the Twentieth Century," was considered the main ideological work
1   Gobineau, J. A. de. An Essay on the Inequality of the Human Races. Moscow: Samoteka, 2007.
2  Chamberlain, H. S. Foundations of the Nineteenth Century. In 2 vols. St. Petersburg:
Russkiy Mir, 2012.
3   Genon, R. Theosophy: History of a Pseudo-Religion. Belgorod: Totemburg, 2017.
4Goodrick-Clarke, N. The Occult Roots of Nazism. Secret Aryan Cults and Their Influence
on Nazi Ideology: The Ariosofists of Austria and Germany, 1890–1935. Moscow: EKSMO, 2004.
5  Rosenberg, A. The Myth of the Twentieth Century: An Appraisal of the Spiritual and
Intellectual Struggles of Our Time. Munich: Hoheneichen-Verlag, 1930 (works by this author are
banned in Russia).Rosenberg, A. The Myth of the Twentieth Century: An Appraisal of the Spiritual and
Intellectual Struggles of Our Time. Munich: Hoheneichen-Verlag, 1930 (works by this author are
banned in Russia).

--- PAGE BREAK ---

414
Part 3. The Political Paradigm of Modernity. The War of Concepts
National Socialist Germany, along with Hitler's own book Mein Kampf (My
Struggle) 1.
It was racism that was associated with the most monstrous practices
and crimes committed by the National Socialists, which is why biological
racism discredited itself and, after the fall of Hitler's regime, became the main
argument against the third political theory as a whole. Although racism
was a feature of German nationalism in particular, and penetrated German
society relatively late and from other European cultures, the scale of racial
persecution, genocide, and the adoption of racial laws legalising state
practices directed against members of "inferior races" overshadowed all other
aspects of the ideology of the Third Way, revolutionary nationalism, and to
some extent nationalism as a whole.
So after 1945, when the countries of the bourgeois West (the United
States, England, and their allies) and the communist East (the USSR) jointly
defeated the Axis powers (Germany, Italy, and those who joined them), the
third political theory was condemned at the Nuremberg Tribunal for crimes
against humanity and declared "criminal." Thus, because of racism, which
was not even the main feature of the third political theory, this entire
ideology was deemed unacceptable. And although after 1991, following the
fall of communism in the USSR, representatives of the first political theory
attempted — on similar grounds — to outlaw the second political theory
(referring to the truly large-scale crimes committed by Lenin and Stalin, in
which many millions died), this was not achieved to the same extent as with
revolutionary nationalism.political theory
(referring to the truly large-scale crimes committed by Lenin and Stalin, in
which many millions died), this was not achieved to the same extent as with
revolutionary nationalism.

For a complete picture of the third political theory, even in Germany
itself, it should be noted that National Socialism was only one of its
strands. Thus, Armin Möller (1920–2003) in his book The Conservative
Revolution in Germany 1918–1932 (2)shows that Hitler's National
Socialism, if we take its ideological component, was quite insignificant.
1  Hitler, A. Mein Kampf. Vol. 1–2. Munich: Verlag Franz Eher Nachfahren, 1925–1927 (this
author's works are banned in the Russian Federation).
2  Meller, A. The Conservative Revolution in Germany, 1918–1932. Belgorod: Totemburg, 2017.

--- PAGE BREAK ---Eher Nachfahren, 1925–1927 (this
author's works are banned in the Russian Federation).
2  Meller, A. The Conservative Revolution in Germany, 1918–1932. Belgorod: Totemburg, 2017.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

Chapter 7. Classical and revolutionary nationalism (the third political theory) 415
A. Meller summarises this movement as the "Conservative Revolution."
This ideology of the Conservative Revolution was espoused by such
leading figures in philosophical thought as Oswald Spengler, Carl Schmitt,
Martin Heidegger, Oswald Spengler, Werner Sombart, Ernst Jünger (1895–
1998), Arthur Müller van den Broek (1876–1925), author of the concept of
the "Third Reich" (1)  and many other world-renowned authors. Some of them
had indirect ties to National Socialism, some direct, some were opponents,
some were fellow travellers, and some were internal emigrants. Ernst Jünger,
for example, who was a famous writer by 1933, refused to become a member
of the Reichstag for the National Socialist Party. He spoke contemptuously of
Hitler and his movement.
Theoretically, representatives of the Conservative Revolution could take
the following positions on National Socialism:
•to view National Socialism as a transitional phase towards a more
perfect model (this was the case with K. Schmitt and M. Heidegger, as
well as the early E. Jünger);
•take a radically negative stance towards it (Thomas Mann in 1955);
Ernst Niki, author of the anti-Nazi manifesto Hitler – Germany's Evil
Fate (2)  ,one of the activists of the Red Kapelle, Harro Schulze-Boysen
(1909–1942), etc.);
•view it indifferently as a parody and simulacrum (late E. Junger, F.
Hilscher (1902–1990), E. von Salomon (1902–1972), etc.).
But in all cases, regardless of their specific attitude towards the third
political theory, practically all representatives of the Conservative Revolution
interpreted the main thing differently — the subject. All three political
ideologies of the Modern era were based on the Cartesian understanding of
the subject, whose main properties were considered to be will and reason.
But this subject, common to all of them, was given concrete expression in
each ideology. Liberalism identified the subject with the individual,
considering him to be the normative "measure of things." Hence the very
morality of liberalism, which consists in demanding the liberation of the
individual from all forms of collective identity: religious, ethnic, racial, class
(since the end of the 20th century
1   Müller van den Broek, A. The Myth of the Eternal Empire and the Third Reich. Moscow:
Veche, 2009.
2   Niekisch E. Hitler — ein deutsches Verhängnis. Berlin: Widerstands-Verlag, 1932.20th century
1   Müller van den Broek, A. The Myth of the Eternal Empire and the Third Reich. Moscow:
Veche, 2009.
2   Niekisch E. Hitler — ein deutsches Verhängnis. Berlin: Widerstands-Verlag, 1932.

--- PAGE BREAK ---ler van den Broek, A. The Myth of the Eternal Empire and the Third Reich. Moscow:
Veche, 2009.
2   Niekisch E. Hitler — ein deutsches Verhängnis. Berlin: Widerstands-Verlag, 1932.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

416
Part 3. The Political Paradigm of Modernity. The War of Concepts
and gender, and finally, in postmodern versions — species, i.e. human).
The subject of Marxism is class (two antagonistic classes), which
serves as the main agent of history, expressing its laws and dynamics of
formation.
The subject of nationalism is the nation state (political nation), as in
Italian fascism, or race, as in Hitler's National Socialism.
But for representatives of the Conservative Revolution, this was not the
case at all. For all of them, the subject of political philosophy was something
for which there was simply no conceptual place in the Modern era:
•culture (O. Spengler);
•the people (Volk), the spirit (A. Müller van den Broek);
•order (K. Schmitt);
•Dasein (M. Heidegger),
•the heroic worker (E. Jünger), etc.
Such a subject included both rationality and will, as well as
contemplation and a sense of the sacred (das Heilige), that is, something
irrational, holistic, mystical and mythical, relating to the depths of religious
experience. Therefore, in the Conservative Revolution, we can see a prototype
of what we call the "Fourth Political Theory" (1), i.e., a political philosophy
that consciously and consistently builds its topic outside of Modernity, in
opposition to Modernity, overcoming Modernity and refuting it.
At the same time, representatives of the Conservative Revolution
practically unanimously rejected racism, and if they supported National
Socialism, they saw in it revolutionary nationalism and a third political
theory in a generalised form. Thus, the paths of ideology and political parties
in Germany in the 1930s and 1940s diverged significantly.
Ernst Jünger: the gestalt of the
Ernst Jünger was one of the key figures of the Conservative
Revolution. He was a participant in the First World War and drew
profound existential and philosophical lessons from it. E. Junger describes
modern warfare as a return to the elements and a complete
dehumanisation of existence, seeing in this the most vivid manifestation
of the nihilism of which Nietzsche spoke. The wars of the 20th century
destroyed all the illusions of the Enlightenment, placing man, deprived of his
qualities, pe-
1   Dugin, A. G. The Fourth Way. Introduction to the Fourth Political Theory.e wars of the 20th century
destroyed all the illusions of the Enlightenment, placing man, deprived of his
qualities, pe-
1   Dugin, A. G. The Fourth Way. Introduction to the Fourth Political Theory.

--- PAGE BREAK ---entury
destroyed all the illusions of the Enlightenment, placing man, deprived of his
qualities, pe-
1   Dugin, A. G. The Fourth Way. Introduction to the Fourth Political Theory.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

Chapter 7. Classical and revolutionary nationalism (the third political theory) 417
red face of technology that has completely spiralled out of control. In modern
warfare, man loses his cultural content, leaving only pure will, as a
reflection within the subject of an absolutely cold mechanical and
technical objectivity.
Jünger summarised his ideas and reflections in philosophical form in
his book The Worker 1, which became the most famous programmatic text
of the Conservative Revolution. Here, Jünger develops the concepts of
revolutionary nationalism as the most left-wing version of the
Conservative Revolution. For Jünger, Nietzsche's main lesson was the
discovery of the totality of the nihilism of the New Age, from which he
sees no way out, especially not in a return to the old times and the ancient
way of life (unlike most conservatives). In the face of nihilism, as in war,
man is left with only his will, which, according to Jünger, must be
affirmed in the construction of a technocratic society, a totalitarian state
ruled by an iron dictatorship. Jünger affirms the figure of the Worker as a
creative ideal of a being who has no cultural or emotional content
whatsoever, except for pure will, from which he creates the reality of a new
era. Jünger is convinced that humanity is experiencing the collapse of the
bourgeois world, embodied primarily in the concept of the individual.
According to Junger, the individual was the normative figure of a
civilisation based on rationality and will, but subordinated to the criteria of
security and moderation in the form of morality, prudence and
sentimentality. The individual subjugated and reduced the scope of will and
reason, both in the affirmation of the anarchic personality and in mass
society. But the meaning of modernity lies in the fact that these
boundaries have gradually blurred and collapsed, and will and reason have
gone far beyond the limits of the individual (and the masses), crossing the
line of safety and embodying themselves in the phenomenon of the totality of
technology. In total technology, which goes beyond the dimensions of the
individual, Ernst Jünger saw the awakening of the elements, asserting
themselves in the fury of steel and fire, wild speed and immeasurable power
that transcends all boundaries and limits. All this is embodied in the elements
of modern warfare, where, according to Junger, the individual has no
meaning whatsoever, becoming a purely technical, mechanical and
impersonal moment. What replaces the individual and his doubles, multiplied
and reflected in the masses, Junger calls the term Gestalt. This is an extra-
individual form of the existential organisation of power, coupled with
1   Junger, E. The Worker. Domination and Gestalt. Moscow: Nauka, 2002.masses, Junger calls the term Gestalt. This is an extra-
individual form of the existential organisation of power, coupled with
1   Junger, E. The Worker. Domination and Gestalt. Moscow: Nauka, 2002.

--- PAGE BREAK ---s the term Gestalt. This is an extra-
individual form of the existential organisation of power, coupled with
1   Junger, E. The Worker. Domination and Gestalt. Moscow: Nauka, 2002.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

418
Part 3. The Political Paradigm of Modernity. The War of Concepts
with concepts such as type or style. In our time, the Gestalt is expressed
primarily in the figure of the Worker (Arbeiter) and also in the Worker State
(Arbeitstaat). Jünger does not conceive of the worker as a social or class
figure; he is anti-bourgeois, but at the same time he is not a proletarian. He is
rather a creature completely free from all human boundaries and consciously
committed to the element of technology, to grandiose cycles of ascetic self-
overcoming, planetary construction, intense existential activity motivated not
by results but by the very fact of participation in the life of steel powers. This
is what Junger calls "total mobilisation." By this he means the essence of the
Worker's activity, directed at the surrounding world with the help of
technology. The world consists of elements — merciless and blind. The
Worker does not shy away from them, but goes to meet them, gathering all
the infinity of human will in his fist, responding to challenge with challenge,
blow with blow, power with power. In doing so, the individual completely
loses himself in the gestalt of the Worker; the elements erase him, leaving
behind — as in war — only the torch of an unyielding, impersonal, and
inhuman will.
Jünger calls this position "heroic realism," when cruel traits of a new type
begin to emerge in a person through the degeneration of a lukewarm
bourgeois culture. Jünger observed such transformations on the front lines as
experienced soldiers and officers, under fire and in the complex situations of
total modern warfare, changed their facial features, gestures, and expressions,
acquiring the immobile plasticity of a mask, machines or corpses, and those
in whom this was most noticeable became the most effective, fearless and
heroic soldiers, capable of coping with impossible tasks. According to
Junger, they were thereby elevated to the level of the Gestalt, and the spirit of
the Worker began to operate in them.
It was on this principle of the Worker that Jünger proposed to base a
new anti-bourgeois and anti-proletarian state, at the centre of which should
stand the Gestalt as the highest authority, sorting by its own standards the
three basic new classes — people of passive will, the new aristocracy
(people of active will) and the highest ascetic rulers, the "guardians," who
were as close as possible to the Gestalt in its pure form, that is, personal
incarnations of the Worker.
But at the same time, it was Ernst Jünger who wrote the book The
Worker 1(Dea Arbeiter), which sets out the foundations of National Socialism.
1Junger himself was a participant in the First World War. Junger, E. The Worker. Herrschaft und
Gestalt. Moscow: Nauka, 2002.er 1(Dea Arbeiter), which sets out the foundations of National Socialism.
1Junger himself was a participant in the First World War. Junger, E. The Worker. Herrschaft und
Gestalt. Moscow: Nauka, 2002.

--- PAGE BREAK ---which sets out the foundations of National Socialism.
1Junger himself was a participant in the First World War. Junger, E. The Worker. Herrschaft und
Gestalt. Moscow: Nauka, 2002.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

Chapter 7. Classical and revolutionary nationalism (the third political theory) 419
static worldview. Later, Ernst Jünger and a number of other participants in
the Conservative Revolution were involved in the conspiracy of Claus von
Stauffenberg (1907–1944), which resulted in the failed assassination
attempt on Hitler in 1944.
Arthur Moller van den Broek: The Third Reich
According to Beyond Hitler
The peculiarity of the ideology of the Conservative Revolution can be
traced in the example of Arthur Moller van den Broek, the founder and
inspirer of a number of elite patriotic organisations, in particular the "June
Club," which included many leading thinkers of Germany in the 1920s.
Müller van den Broek was a staunch conservative, romantic, and admirer of
the work of Fyodor Dostoyevsky (1821–1881), whose translations into
German he supervised.
Müller van den Broek was strongly influenced by Nietzsche and set
himself the task of constructing a model for the future that would be both a
new affirmation of the Teutonic spirit and a refined and sophisticated
intellectual breakthrough that took into account all the fundamental scientific,
cultural and ideological challenges of the Modern era.
Arthur Møller van den Broek took up Spengler's idea of "young nations"
and published a manifesto addressed to US President Woodrow Wilson
(1856–1924) with a radical critique of the Versailles agreements entitled
"The Right of Young Nations." The idea that "young nations" should build
their own social system without looking back at the old European
experience took on a clear political dimension for him. In particular, Müller
van den Broek considered liberal ideology to be the main evil, which, in his
view, embodied the purely negative result of European history — the
absolutisation of capitalism, materialism, individualism, atheism, i.e.
nihilism. Therefore, the new German policy, the main points of which
were reflected in the collective collection of conservative revolutionaries
"New Front," published in 1922 in Berlin, had to be based on absolute
anti-liberalism, since liberalism embodies everything that is completely
and radically opposed to the German spirit. Müller van den Broek
reflected this position in his programmatic article "Liberalism Kills Nations."
But the complete formulation of Müller van den Broek's worldview
as expressed in his main work, The Third Kingdom or The Third Empireposition in his programmatic article "Liberalism Kills Nations."
But the complete formulation of Müller van den Broek's worldview
as expressed in his main work, The Third Kingdom or The Third Empire

--- PAGE BREAK ---grammatic article "Liberalism Kills Nations."
But the complete formulation of Müller van den Broek's worldview
as expressed in his main work, The Third Kingdom or The Third Empire

--- PAGE BREAK ---

420
Part 3. The Political Paradigm of Modernity. The War of Concepts
, where he presented the ideas of the Conservative Revolution in their
most systematic form.
The first section of The Third Empire contains an interpretation of
what revolution means to the author and, specifically, what the
Conservative Revolution is. For Moller van den Broke, unlike the old
conservatives, revolution is not a "conspiracy of nihilists" or
"total destruction," but rather the rise of the creative forces of the people.
The people rise up in revolution only when the existing socio-political
conditions run counter to their deep-seated interests and historical intuitions.
Therefore, in a revolution, it is always necessary to distinguish between
destructive and constructive aspects. Moreover, unlike
dogmatic
materialistic Marxism, the constructive aspect should be identified on the
basis of the identity of each particular people. Hence the conclusion: a
revolution must be a popular revolution, that is, a "national" revolution.
Arthur Møller van den Broek writes:
We want to link revolutionary ideas with conservative ones, which keep
popping up again and again. We want to push this Conservative Revolution
until we get the conditions we need to live. We want to win the revolution!
Here we clearly see a direct continuation of Nietzsche's views.
Revolution is nothing; it overthrows God. Now there is only one thing left
to do: defeat nothingness. And this is within the power of the Superhuman. It
is in this vein that Müller van den Broek conceives the movement of the
Young Conservatives. He sees that Nietzsche's words are addressed to
him and to the German intellectuals of the new generation. And he seeks not
to fight the revolution, as reactionaries and old conservatives traditionally
do, but to lead it, to make it German.
The second section of The Third Empire is devoted to socialism. Here,
Müller van den Broek proves the thesis he put forward in the epigraph:
"Every nation has its own socialism." Accordingly, socialism is not taken as
something universal and dogmatic, but as a principle of the united association
of society around a great idea, not for the achievement of base material
goals, but for the realisation of the impossible, the ideal, the spiritual horizon.
Each nation sees this horizon differently. Consequently, it is necessary to
theoretically substantiate and practically organise German socialism, Russian
socialism, Islamic socialism, etc.
1  Möller van den Broek, A. The Myth of the Eternal Empire and the Third Reich.
2   , ibid., p. 132.substantiate and practically organise German socialism, Russian
socialism, Islamic socialism, etc.
1  Möller van den Broek, A. The Myth of the Eternal Empire and the Third Reich.
2   , ibid., p. 132.

--- PAGE BREAK ---ctically organise German socialism, Russian
socialism, Islamic socialism, etc.
1  Möller van den Broek, A. The Myth of the Eternal Empire and the Third Reich.
2   , ibid., p. 132.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

Chapter 7. Classical and revolutionary nationalism (the third political theory) 421
Here, Moller van den Broek provides a detailed critique of Marxism,
rejecting its explanation of history solely through economics. He writes:
The economy is a superstructure, while ideas, power and the state are the
foundation. History cannot be dependent on the economy, but it creates the
economy. Therefore, the economy is dependent on history. The economy is
only a consequence; the cause is historicity1.
This becomes the basis of spiritual, rather than materialistic,
socialism, which, rejecting capitalism just as Marxism does, and even to a
greater extent, conceives of a new society based on a metaphysical
foundation linked to the historical identity and culture of each people. At
the end of the section, Moller van den Broek shows that socialism should
not be the meaning of building a normative state.
German socialism is not the primary task of the Third Reich. It must
be its foundation2.
If Müller van den Broek accepts both revolution and socialism in a
special, neo-conservative interpretation, he rejects liberalism radically and
completely. From his point of view, "liberalism is the freedom to have no
convictions, but to assert that this approach is the main conviction" (3)  .This is
where its nihilistic potential lies: it detaches people from the political
dimension, turning them exclusively towards material things, the
economy, everything petty and insignificant, which makes small people
even smaller and more insignificant. Möller van den Broek writes:
Liberalism leads either to stupidity or to crime4.
"Stupidity" is the reduction of a person to a consumption machine, to a
device in which everything human disappears — the soul, life, nobility,
ideals, spirit. "Crime" is the presentation of this stupidity as the highest
virtue, value, and goal.
1  Möller van den Broek, A. The Myth of the Eternal Empire and the Third Reich. P. 145.
2   , ibid., p. 171.
3   , ibid., p. 172.
4   , ibid., p. 181.tupidity as the highest
virtue, value, and goal.
1  Möller van den Broek, A. The Myth of the Eternal Empire and the Third Reich. P. 145.
2   , ibid., p. 171.
3   , ibid., p. 172.
4   , ibid., p. 181.

--- PAGE BREAK ---est
virtue, value, and goal.
1  Möller van den Broek, A. The Myth of the Eternal Empire and the Third Reich. P. 145.
2   , ibid., p. 171.
3   , ibid., p. 172.
4   , ibid., p. 181.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

422
Part 3. The Political Paradigm of Modernity. The War of Concepts
Liberalism undermined culture. It destroyed religion. It destroyed the
Fatherland. It was the suicide of humanity.
Liberalism is the last word of the West, of Europe, from the moment when
Europeans (first and foremost the French and English, followed by the
Germans) embarked on the path of the Enlightenment. Müller van den Broek
views the Age of Enlightenment, when liberalism emerged and gradually
became its most monstrous and totalitarian expression, in an entirely negative
light. It was an age of degeneration, lies and nihilism. Having studied the
German Logos in depth, Möller van den Broek sees that in its basic
parameters it is completely incompatible with the Enlightenment, and
therefore the problem is posed as follows: either Germany or the
Enlightenment. Hence his sharp and unambiguous call:
The struggle against the Enlightenment that we are beginning will be a
struggle against liberalism, which will be waged on all fronts.
Herein lies the main difference between liberalism and socialism and
revolution: while the latter can be reinterpreted in a German context,
liberalism cannot be reinterpreted in this way. Therefore, it must be destroyed
in the most ruthless manner possible. This is the most important moment in
the entire course of the Conservative Revolution: politically and
ideologically, it hierarchises not only its own values, but also the ideas it
opposes — and the main enemy of the conservative revolutionary is precisely
liberalism and the Enlightenment era that gave rise to it.
In the fourth section of The Third Empire, Møller van den Broek
analyses the concept of democracy and, as in the case of socialism and
revolution, finds positive aspects in it. "Democracy is the participation of
the people in their own destiny."This is how Møller van den Broek defines the
essence
of
democracy,
thereby
affirming
his
organic,
holistic
understanding of it. According to Müller van den Broek, the subject of
democracy can only be the people as a historical whole, not a collection of
individuals (as in liberalism). Therefore, liberal democracy is the antithesis of
democracy, a fake (Müller van den Broek calls it a "liberal chameleon").
Liberalism does not allow the people to participate in their own destiny
simply because it denies the very existence of the people, breaking them
down into individual atoms and then artificially reassembling them, like
stuffed animals
that have been killed beforehand.Therefore, for a
conservative revolutionary,it is fundamentally important
1  Möller van den Broek, A. The Myth of the Eternal Empire and the Third Reich. P. 211.
2  Dugin, A. G. Ethnosociology.ehand.Therefore, for a
conservative revolutionary,it is fundamentally important
1  Möller van den Broek, A. The Myth of the Eternal Empire and the Third Reich. P. 211.
2  Dugin, A. G. Ethnosociology.

--- PAGE BREAK ---a
conservative revolutionary,it is fundamentally important
1  Möller van den Broek, A. The Myth of the Eternal Empire and the Third Reich. P. 211.
2  Dugin, A. G. Ethnosociology.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

Chapter 7. Classical and revolutionary nationalism (the third political theory) 423
defend democracy in its organic sense and at the same time fight against its
liberal interpretation.
Müller van den Broek accepts democracy as a positive value:
"Democracy is an expression of the self-respect of the people,"he writes.
Furthermore, "The will to democracy is the will to political self-awareness of
the people. And to their national self-assertion."The introduction of the
concept of will — the will to democracy — transforms democracy into a
positive value, the defence and affirmation of which is the goal of the
conservative-revolutionary programme.
From the point of view of the structure of politics, Arthur Møller van den
Broek's work conveys the essence of the third political theory more accurately
and completely than the "official" ideology of the Nazi regime.
Werner Sombart: against the spirit of capitalism
Another thinker close to the Conservative Revolution movement and
also strongly influenced by Nietzsche, Werner Sombart3 focused his
attention on sociological and economic issues of German identity.
Distinguishing the bourgeoisie as a separate sociological type
("haggler"), Sombart, in a separate work, "Haggler and Hero" 4, contrasts it
with an alternative sociological type — the "hero." The hero type, in his
view, dominated Europe until the advent of the modern era and was most
clearly manifested in German identity. However, these two types do not
simply replace each other chronologically, but coexist in a state of
irreconcilable war. This is the basis of fundamental dualism. Sombart writes:
The discussion constantly revolved around one alternative: a merchant
mired in his own swamp — he could be called whatever you like:
commercialism, mammonoism, materialism, sportism, comfortism, etc. — or
a hero rising to the heights of idealism. These are the names given to God and
the Devil, Ormuzd and Ahriman, by modern man.
Sombart emphasises that this choice affects modern man in particular,
constituting his main dilemma: capitalism or communism.
1  Möller van den Broek, A. The Myth of the Eternal Empire and the Third Reich. P. 226.
2   , ibid., p. 226.
3   Sombart, W. Collected Works: In 3 vols. St. Petersburg: Vladimir Dal, 2005.
4  Sombart, W. Merchants and Heroes // Sombart, W. Collected Works. Vol. 2.
5  Ibid. P. 82–83.226.
2   , ibid., p. 226.
3   Sombart, W. Collected Works: In 3 vols. St. Petersburg: Vladimir Dal, 2005.
4  Sombart, W. Merchants and Heroes // Sombart, W. Collected Works. Vol. 2.
5  Ibid. P. 82–83.

--- PAGE BREAK ---226.
3   Sombart, W. Collected Works: In 3 vols. St. Petersburg: Vladimir Dal, 2005.
4  Sombart, W. Merchants and Heroes // Sombart, W. Collected Works. Vol. 2.
5  Ibid. P. 82–83.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

424
Part 3. The Political Paradigm of Modernity. The War of Concepts
(i.e., for the haggling merchants) or against capitalism (which means, one
way or another, for the heroes).
According to Zombart, only war is possible between a merchant and a
hero, since the domination of one type over the other means the social and
moral enslavement of the opponent.
He writes about this sharply and decisively:
The only relationship that now connects us to the fundamental peoples of
Europe is the relationship of war, and the only important task for us for some
time now has been victory — complete and decisive1.
Sombart devoted one of his last works, written entirely in the spirit of
the Conservative Revolution, to the theorisation of German socialism 2.
Sombart's appeal to the Germans is a call to give the Anglo-Saxons and
the spirit of capitalism they embody a final battle.
We want to have a strong German people and a strong German state;
we are preserving and growing within our organic limits. And if we need to
expand our territory so that our growing population has the space it needs to
develop, we will take as much land as we deem necessary. Our foot will also set
foot in those lands that appear important to us for strategic reasons, because of
the need to keep our borders inviolable; if this leads to the strengthening of our
power on Earth, we will establish our naval bases in Dover, Malta and Suez.
And that is all. We are not striving for any kind of "expansion." For we have
more important things to do. We need to develop our inner spiritual essence,
we need to keep the German soul pure, we need to ensure that our enemy, the
mercantile spirit, cannot penetrate our feelings in any way — neither from within
nor from without. And this task is very responsible and difficult. For we know
what is at stake: Germany, as the last barrier holding back the flood of filth
pouring out of commercialism, which has either already overwhelmed or will
inevitably overwhelm all other nations in the future, since none of them has been
protected from the advancing threat by the shield of a heroic worldview, from
which, as we have seen, can offer protection and salvation(3)  .
1   Sombart, W. Merchants and Heroes. P. 97.
2   Sombart W. Deutscher Sozialismus. Berlin: Buchholz&amp;Weisswange, 1934.
3   Sombart, W. Torgashi i geroi. Pp. 101–102.protection and salvation(3)  .
1   Sombart, W. Merchants and Heroes. P. 97.
2   Sombart W. Deutscher Sozialismus. Berlin: Buchholz&amp;Weisswange, 1934.
3   Sombart, W. Torgashi i geroi. Pp. 101–102.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

class struggle dialectical progress
proletariat
socialism
Marxism
romanticism
Hegel
Nietzsch
e
Hobbe
s, John.
Machiavelli
Locke
A. Smith
Marx
Gramsci
G. Gentile K.
Schmitt Pareto
anthropological pessimism
anthropological optimism/
neutralism
class anthropology
anthropological pessimism
Superhuman
Catholicism
social classes
empire
feudalism
Nation-state
sovereignty
mercantilism
middle class linear
progress
bourgeois
Conservative Revolution
National Socialism Racism
fascism
statism
corporatism
classical nationalism
liberalism
communism
revolutionary nationalism
first political theory
second political theory
third political theory
individualism
holism
Premodern
political Modern
Diachronic scale
The third political theory in historical context
Protestantism
German classical philosophy
Postmodernis
m
Fourth political theory
Dasein

--- PAGE BREAK ---Premodern
political Modern
Diachronic scale
The third political theory in historical context
Protestantism
German classical philosophy
Postmodernis
m
Fourth political theory
Dasein

--- PAGE BREAK ---

426
Part 3. The Political Paradigm of Modernity. The War of Concepts
The atypical nature of the third political theory
Although the third political theory acquired a more or less systematic
form in the 20th century in such phenomena as fascism and National
Socialism, these movements themselves are quite eclectic. They contain
various elements of classical nationalism, the clear influence of Hobbes,
realism, the glorification of the secular state, economic protectionism and
mercantilism, and sometimes extreme xenophobia. These are some of the
constants of nationalism, which, however, became part of a full-fledged
ideology rather late. These aspects correspond to the paradigm of Modernity
and are fully compatible with bourgeois attitudes. However, the influence
of the Romantics, German classical philosophy with its profound
metaphysics and paradoxical dialectic, as well as the completely
revolutionary and unclassifiable ideas of Nietzsche, who called for the
overcoming of both Tradition and the nihilism that emerged after its end
through a turn to the Superhuman, as well as traditionalism, transformed
revolutionary nationalism into something atypical and extravagant that
cannot be completely reduced to political Modernism.
The third political theory, which flared up briefly and subjugated almost
all of Europe by force or persuasion, disappeared fairly quickly under the
onslaught of the other two ideologies of Modernity, which were much more
orthodox in terms of their conformity to the philosophy of the Mother, the
"chora," the spirit of atomism, individualism and materialism.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

PART 4. POLITICAL
PHILOSOPHY OF POSTMODERNISM

--- PAGE BREAK ---r conformity to the philosophy of the Mother, the
"chora," the spirit of atomism, individualism and materialism.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

PART 4. POLITICAL
PHILOSOPHY OF POSTMODERNISM

--- PAGE BREAK ---

Chapter 1. Political Philosophy Postmodernism
Paradigms of Tradition and Modernity exhaust (almost) all
forms of the Political
Up to this point, we have examined the "model range" of political
philosophies and paradigms related to the paradigm of Tradition and the
paradigm of Modernity, that is, practically all areas of Politica Aeterna
corresponding to the three types of being in Plato's "Timaeus" and many
other types of triadic taxonomies applied to ontology, epistemology,
cosmology, anthropology, and politics. Thus, we can consider that we have a
complete (albeit schematic) picture of the metaphysical and philosophical
foundations of political systems in traditional, sacred, religious societies
and of the philosophical premises of modern political philosophy. We
have also examined the three main ideological versions in which
Modernity manifests itself: liberalism (the first political theory),
communism (the second political theory) and nationalism (the third
political theory), and their semantic structures. Each of the three political
theories of Modernity includes many different versions, combinations and
combinations: for example, liberalism plus socialism are ideologies that
are formally opposed. But in the phenomenon of European social democracy
or left-wing liberalism in general, which in particular forms the basis of many
centre-left parties, such as the contemporary Democratic Party in the
United States, we see precisely this convergence. Similarly, there are
intermediate versions between socialism and classical nationalism (e.g.,
national socialism). There is a significant segment of political ideologies that
lie between nationalism and liberalism (national liberalism), and it is this
ideology that dominates, for example, in the Republican Party in the
United States.
Each of the three theories has nuances, details, and separate currents
within the macro-families of modern political ideologies. A detailed study
of these nuances constitutes the discipline known as political science. For
Politica Aeterna, it is important to showents
within the macro-families of modern political ideologies. A detailed study
of these nuances constitutes the discipline known as political science. For
Politica Aeterna, it is important to show

--- PAGE BREAK ---ro-families of modern political ideologies. A detailed study
of these nuances constitutes the discipline known as political science. For
Politica Aeterna, it is important to show

--- PAGE BREAK ---

430
Part 4. Political Philosophy of Postmodernism
how they relate to the anthropological and ontological basis of modern
political philosophy, to the ideas of political Platonism and Aristotelianism,
and what is the underlying matrix of these political families. All three
political theories (liberalism, communism, and nationalism) belong to the
political philosophy of the Mother; they are based on an atomistic
materialist worldview, anthropological individualism, "progress" and
"development," and accordingly view the state as something built from the
bottom up on the basis of a social contract. This fundamentally distinguishes
them from models such as Aristotle's sacred empire and Plato's ideal state.
Among the political paradigms of traditional society (Premodern), there
is a huge variety of structures and forms that can be traced back to Platonism
and Aristotelianism, but even here we can find many versions, nuances,
and mixed models. We saw this in part when analysing political systems
based on different monotheistic religions. If we take a broader context,
including the sacred civilisations of Antiquity and the East, the diversity
of sacred political forms increases many times over.
At the same time, everything that pertains to Modern politics is strictly
and sharply distinguished from that which pertains to the paradigm of
Tradition, and between the politics of Democritus (the political philosophy of
the Mother), on the one hand, and the politics of Plato (the political
philosophy of the Father) and Aristotle (the political philosophy of the
Son), on the other hand, there is a strictly defined metaphysical boundary
that sharply separates Modernity from Tradition and constitutes the key to
deciphering the complete picture of the Political in the general context of
Politica Aeterna. Thus, the common feature of all three political
ideologies
of
Modernity
is
desacralisation,
secularity,
atomism,
materialism, progressivism, strictly opposed to the sacred, holistic,
spiritual politics of traditional societies based on verticality and hierarchy, on
the transcendence of a higher power (and therefore the source of authority),
which can be expressed either in the idea of the immutability of politics, or
in the recognition of cycles, or in the degradation of political systems that
gradually lose their connection with the model, but in no way in progress,
the very concept of which is incompatible with Tradition.nition of cycles, or in the degradation of political systems that
gradually lose their connection with the model, but in no way in progress,
the very concept of which is incompatible with Tradition.

However, we mentioned that a third paradigm is added to the two basic
paradigms of society — Tradition (Premodern) and Modern — namely,
Postmodern.

--- PAGE BREAK ---incompatible with Tradition.

However, we mentioned that a third paradigm is added to the two basic
paradigms of society — Tradition (Premodern) and Modern — namely,
Postmodern.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

431
Chapter 1. Political Philosophy of Postmodernism
— Postmodernism 1. This may cause confusion. If all types of politics are
exhausted by three macro-families reflecting Plato's three types of being, then
there is no ontological basis left for another paradigm. This is true, but in
order to understand postmodernism, we must turn to the metaphysical origins
of modernism itself, which, from the point of view of dialectical ontology
Plato's Parmenides, already in its foundations, belongs to the realm of
pseudology or non-being, falsely presented as being. This is precisely what
should be understood by the "nihilism" of Modernity: by proclaiming the
atom as the constitutive basis of reality, modern physics, adopting the
conceptual model of Democritus, cannot find anything
"indivisible," while in society, liberal fanaticism in the liberation of the
individual gradually leads to his liberation from all properties (collective
identity — religion, class, then nation, gender, and ultimately humanity
itself), transitioning to the individual. In the early stages of Modernity, its
pseudo-logical nature is not explicitly stated. On the contrary, it seems that
Modernity deals with reality — including human reality (humanism) —
while Tradition dealt with "chimeras." But gradually, scepticism about
traditional society and its axioms began to spread to Modernity itself and the
values it proclaimed — rationalism, materialism, secularism, equality,
democracy, etc. which led in late Modernity to an involuntary agreement with
traditionalists (long since excluded as a reference group for contemporary
society) that Modernity, in the end, has no reliable foundations — neither in
thought nor in its analysis of the surrounding world — and represents a cold
nihilism cloaked in humanistic rhetoric. Thus, in the course of late
Modernism's critical reflection on itself and its premises, a new philosophical
zone gradually emerged, elevated to a new — third — paradigm and given
the name "Postmodernism."
Postmodernism does not denote a new realm beyond the three types of
existence. It merely draws attention to the lower limit of the philosophy of
the Mother, to the deepest level of the "chora," the "matter," pointing to what
lies even lower, in the realm of the sub-material, where the attention of not
only the philosophers of the Tradition but also the bearers of the Modern
paradigm in its classical form did not venture. This realm does not
correspond to some new — fourth — dimension, another type of existence.
From the point of view of Politica
1  Dugin, A. G. Post-Philosophy.in its classical form did not venture. This realm does not
correspond to some new — fourth — dimension, another type of existence.
From the point of view of Politica
1  Dugin, A. G. Post-Philosophy.

--- PAGE BREAK ---m did not venture. This realm does not
correspond to some new — fourth — dimension, another type of existence.
From the point of view of Politica
1  Dugin, A. G. Post-Philosophy.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

432
Part 4. Political Philosophy of Postmodernism
Aeterena is still the same realm of the third—material—principle. But this
principle itself is a pseudo-logical instance which, when taken as
something autonomous and self-sufficient, turns out to be identical to
"nothingness," which refers us back to the insightful Democritus and his
basic pair   , i.e., "nothingness" and its indefinable dialectical invariant
— the atom. Modernity is already nihilism, and therefore the logos it
constitutes is bastardised; according to Plotinus, it is a "lying logos."
Consequently, one can continue the vector of pseudology even deeper into
the realm of nothingness, beyond the limit at which Modernity itself
stops, for fear of losing its rhetorical persuasiveness. According to
Plotinus, matter inspires existential horror. The soul can cope with it only
when its terrifying truth, that is, the total coldness of its nihilism, is
hidden. When the shell of formed matter disintegrates, the bottom ice of
being reveals itself. This is the transition of nihilism from the implicit to
the explicit. This transition is called "postmodernism," which should be
located within matter and, conditionally, at its lower boundary. This
boundary creates a special topology, since, according to Plotinus, the atom
is unattainable for the Mind. It is postulated by the "lying logos" as a concept
(1), and immersion in its comprehension leads to the extinction of the mind.
But the complete extinction of the mind is impossible; it can exist as a
striving towards this unattainable limit — just as it is impossible to
discover a pure atom or a pure individual — that would be the end of
consciousness. Consequently, only a progressive approach to this limit, a
gravitation towards it, is possible, but never its attainment. The lower limit
of matter is insurmountable, but at this very boundary a special pseudo-
logical ontology arises, even more "false" than the materialistic ontology of
Modernity. Immersion in it breaks the familiar proportions and scale (as in
quantum mechanics or astrophysics) and creates bizarre borderline
symmetries in which non-being plays with itself.
From the perspective of the Politica Aeterna model, postmodernism is a
borderline phenomenon of modernism, but from the perspective of social,
cultural, and political cycles, it can be accepted as an independent paradigm.
Postmodernism is both something independent, if we give ontological status
to the lower limits of matter and the extravagant images it generates, and a
paradigmatic addition to Modernism, its logical continuation and pseudo-
logical refinement. In Post-
1   In a sense, any concept is nothing more than a lying logos.vagant images it generates, and a
paradigmatic addition to Modernism, its logical continuation and pseudo-
logical refinement. In Post-
1   In a sense, any concept is nothing more than a lying logos.

--- PAGE BREAK ---erates, and a
paradigmatic addition to Modernism, its logical continuation and pseudo-
logical refinement. In Post-
1   In a sense, any concept is nothing more than a lying logos.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

433
Chapter 1. Political Philosophy of Postmodernism
Modern lies become explicit and grotesquely recognised, while nihilism
transforms from a hidden "truth" into a synonym for "progress," breaking the
rhetoric of early Modernism and tearing off the masks of its own pseudo-
logic. At the same time, postmodernism is not a belated reaction to
tradition, but a bold, self-revealing step by the deepest and most avant-garde
strand within modernism itself. Modernism becomes so strong, powerful
and triumphant that it can afford to turn into Postmodernism without fear of a
reaction from the backward and burdened masses of the world, weighed
down by numerous archaic traits.
The subject and object of materialism: the sole , and its
property
Postmodernism is a special socio-philosophical paradigm that represents
the limit reached by modernism. Modernism operates with materiality, facts,
objects, individuals, and presents epistemological abstractions as basic data.
In Aristotelianism and Platonism, this is not being, not a phenomenon, but
only a speculative limit of the degradation of the spirit, just as an atom is a
certain conventional quantity of the disintegration of wholeness, but not
something whole. In Modernism, matter is taken as an "obvious" given, as a
certain ontological phenomenon. In modern political philosophy, matter and
atomicity are represented as individuals, objects, things, prices, and society.
Modernity believes that everything conceptual that it recognises — the
market mechanism, wealth, class, nation, nature, society, the state, the world
of things and objects — exists, that is, has unconditional being. Consensus on
materiality is the common denominator of all three political theories of
modernity.
This materialistic worldview brings together two fundamental
principles of modern philosophy. René Descartes described these as the
"subject" and the "object." The subject is an individual human being, while
the object is an individual thing. Traditional political philosophy does not
recognise either the subject or the object as introduced by Descartes. This is
because there is a deity acting above the subject, and the world is created
by God. Accordingly, there is always a third instance above the subject and
the object — God — and the subject and the object are not the ultimate
measure of things.
In modern political philosophy, on the contrary, we are dealing with this
fundamental, basic dualism: the subject is the individual, in politics the
citizen, and the object in the external world is (part-ern political philosophy, on the contrary, we are dealing with this
fundamental, basic dualism: the subject is the individual, in politics the
citizen, and the object in the external world is (part-

--- PAGE BREAK ---ophy, on the contrary, we are dealing with this
fundamental, basic dualism: the subject is the individual, in politics the
citizen, and the object in the external world is (part-

--- PAGE BREAK ---

434
Part 4. Political Philosophy of Postmodernism
property (individual in liberalism, collective in socialism, corporate in
fascism). This theme is very well described in the work of the anarchist Max
Stirner (1806–1856) "The Ego and Its Own" (1).What all modern political
philosophy deals with is "the ego and its own," "the individual and private
property." Marxism attempts to overcome this dualism, which is why the
return to the proletarian class leads to the socialisation of property and the
replacement of individual consciousness with class consciousness, but this is
still an antithesis to the thesis of "the unique and his property." It is no
coincidence that Marx and Engels in The German Ideology (2)mocked
Stirner so thoroughly and at such length.
The attitude towards property lies at the heart of modern legal
philosophy, which primarily regulates the relationship between the individual
and his property, i.e. the subject and object in their political dimension. In
capitalist society, this is absolutised, and private property becomes the
measure of the individual subject. Marxism opposes both the individual and
property, but in practice this boils down to the formula
"the unique and not his property," which underlies the doctrine of class
struggle. The struggle against private property constitutes the programme of
Marxism, but the unique (the individual, the subject) is conceived here
dialectically. Capitalists represent a collective subject or false subject, which
is not truly free precisely because of its dead attachment to property, which
becomes its fate. In order to liberate oneself, it is necessary to take as a basis
a subject that is deprived of property, but at the same time deprived of self-
consciousness, since capitalism projects false consciousness onto it,
effectively turning it into a docile machine. The proletariat must awaken as
an oppressed subject, realise its subjectivity, overthrow the pseudo-
subjectivity of the bourgeois class, and distribute property among all
members of the working class, move towards the construction of
communism, where the individual will finally be freed from the chains of the
object, having conquered matter and nature, and this is possible precisely
because man is matter and nature, only the pinnacle of its development. Thus,
in medieval epistemology, man could understand the world only through the
divine mind. For Marxists, however, knowledge of matter is given only to
those who are matter themselves, and those who are most material among the
material, that is, the proletariat.
1   Stirner, M. The Ego and Its Own. Kharkiv: Osnova, 1994.
2Marx, K., Engels, F. German Ideology // Marx, K., Engels, F. Works: In 50 volumes. Vol.
3. Moscow: State Publishing House of Political Literature, 1955.. The Ego and Its Own. Kharkiv: Osnova, 1994.
2Marx, K., Engels, F. German Ideology // Marx, K., Engels, F. Works: In 50 volumes. Vol.
3. Moscow: State Publishing House of Political Literature, 1955.

--- PAGE BREAK ---n. Kharkiv: Osnova, 1994.
2Marx, K., Engels, F. German Ideology // Marx, K., Engels, F. Works: In 50 volumes. Vol.
3. Moscow: State Publishing House of Political Literature, 1955.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

435
Chapter 1. Political Philosophy of Postmodernism
It fully accepts the subject of Modernity and bourgeois nationalism,
merely placing "the unique and his property" in a national context,
contrasting them with "the unique with their property" in the form of another
nation-state; the individual is merely placed within a national framework.
They limit the freedom of action of the unique in relation to his property if it
goes beyond national borders.
Postmodernism is not satisfied with the achievements of
liberalism
Postmodernism is a desire to go even deeper into the essence of matter
than Modernism was able to do. It is a kind of hyper-materialism. If
liberalism, communism and nationalism are naive materialism, then
Postmodernism seeks to develop and purify the philosophy of Matter even
further. Let us recall Plato's metaphor: Mother Earth, Mother Nurturer. If
political modernity brings Heaven down to Earth, gods down to people, the
transcendent to the immanent, then postmodernity seeks to penetrate deep
into the Earth. This is a leap into the underground world, a desire not just to
descend to the surface, but to bury oneself as deeply as possible in
materiality.
On the one hand, postmodernism continues the inertia of modernism,
because
modernism
is
a
movement
towards
desacralisation,
immanentisation, detranscendentalisation and the desire to accept matter
as a basic, fundamental ontological argument.
Postmodernists begin to attack Modernism from the point of view of
"even more Modern," despite the fact that Modernism has already taken a
number of decisive steps against the philosophy of the Father and against
the philosophy of the Son. Modernism killed God, abolished the
transcendent, reduced Plato to nothing, and ridiculed Aristotle. The book by
liberal ideologist Karl Popper, The Open Society and Its Enemies, is a
manifesto devoted mainly to criticising Plato, Aristotle and Hegel. For
Popper, Plato is a fascist, Aristotle is a fascist, and Hegel is a fascist. Or a
communist, which is equally bad for liberals. It is important to note that this
is not simply outrage at the excesses of historical Soviet communism or
historical German Nazism (the Gulag and Auschwitz, mass repression,
genocide, totalitarianism, etc.). Popper attacks Plato,Aristotle, and Hegel
as political philosophers of history belonging to a different species of
being. He criticises
1  "My analysis and criticism will be directed against the totalitarian tendencies of Plato's
political philosophy." Popper, K. The Open Society and Its Enemies. Volume 1. P. 66.being. He criticises
1  "My analysis and criticism will be directed against the totalitarian tendencies of Plato's
political philosophy." Popper, K. The Open Society and Its Enemies. Volume 1. P. 66.

--- PAGE BREAK ---1  "My analysis and criticism will be directed against the totalitarian tendencies of Plato's
political philosophy." Popper, K. The Open Society and Its Enemies. Volume 1. P. 66.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

436
Part 4. Political Philosophy of Postmodernism
It is the roots that need to be addressed, not the consequences, especially
since these are not the right consequences. Another liberal author, Hannah
Arendt (1906–1975), convincingly demonstrated that totalitarianism is not a
consequence of traditional society, but arose specifically in the modern era.
Accordingly, postmodernism asserts the following: after the dismantling
and overthrow of Plato and Aristotle, it is necessary to move forward and
overcome modernity itself. What previously seemed to be the limit of descent
into the worlds of political philosophy of the Mother (liberalism, the subject,
materialism, the One and its property) actually, according to postmodernists,
carries too much of the "masculine principle," "verticality,"
"sacredness" and "ontology."
Postmodernists argue: let's continue to atomise what we atomised in
Modernism. Let's look at what the individual and property are. Are they really
indivisible atoms, individuals? Have we reached real matter? Have we reached
the horizon of complete immanence? We have the triumph of reason over
other forms. This is a vertical topic that reflects the old ideology. Yes, we
have transferred the state to the level of the individual. In modern political
philosophy, the polis itself is reduced to atomistic politics; the polis-state is
also congruent, homologous to man (as in the paradigm of Tradition), but
now in his individual status. Hence the concept of the "state-man" arises —
the individual becomes a state unto himself, and the state is abolished. This is
the limit of the ideology of human rights, or civil society, globalisation,
progress, humanism, and the complete triumph of the market over politics.
But still, postmodernists say, the individual human being is still too
"vertical," too "sacred."
In the course of the political philosophy of Modernity, civil society
replaces political society, the remnants of class and national consciousness
are eliminated, liberalism prevails on a global scale, and we are dealing only
with the individual, without any collective characteristics. This individual is
the polis of the completed Modern era.
Here, postmodernists say: yes, in Modernity we sharply narrowed the
scale, we moved from being to the individual, from politics to the human
being, from the state to the specific citizen. But how do we conceptualise
this citizen? Will we not encounter Platonism and Aristotelianism that
have illegally infiltrated our progressive liberal modern worldview? After
all, in humans
1   Arendt, H. The Origins of Totalitarianism. Moscow: TsentrKom, 1996.r Platonism and Aristotelianism that
have illegally infiltrated our progressive liberal modern worldview? After
all, in humans
1   Arendt, H. The Origins of Totalitarianism. Moscow: TsentrKom, 1996.

--- PAGE BREAK ---totelianism that
have illegally infiltrated our progressive liberal modern worldview? After
all, in humans
1   Arendt, H. The Origins of Totalitarianism. Moscow: TsentrKom, 1996.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

437
Chapter 1. Political Philosophy of Postmodernism
Modernity still has some kind of goal (and this is already violence and
suspiciously reminiscent of Aristotle with his "telos," "natural place" and
"entelechy") and the domination of reason over feelings and desires is
recognised (and this is already suspiciously close to Plato and the
metaphysics of the divine Mind).
In the first stage, the liberating practice of modern political philosophy
called for reducing all political, ontological, and epistemological instances
to the individual. And this was indeed achieved — all the foundations of
traditional society were destroyed, all vertical structures were dismantled,
all forms of transcendence were eliminated, and everything was reduced to
the One and its property.
Although postmodernism sets the liberation of the individual from all
restrictions as its main task, which is also the main goal of liberalism, and
liberalism asserts that it "brings freedom and equality of opportunity to all,"
postmodernists are critical of classical liberalism. From their point of view,
liberalism retains too many masculine patriarchal traits. Despite all the
immanence and materialism of liberalism, postmodernists find it "too
transcendentalist"; it believes too strongly in the unity of the individual; it
pays too much attention to the structure of the vertical subject and is too
attentive to private property. Yes, these are atomistic concepts that are
accepted as reality in the spirit of modern pseudo-science, but nevertheless —
as is always the case with atoms — it is wrong to take a conventional "atom"
for the real thing, and it is impossible to stop the chiselling that moves
towards the lower limit of matter. The mind must become increasingly weak,
evading oppositions and differences; the lying logos must lie more and more
subtly; and all reality — both subject and object — must gradually dissipate
further and further, revealing one subatomic level after another. The mistake
of liberalism, in the eyes of postmodernists, is that it takes as a real individual
someone who is a convention, an approximation, merely an intended vector.
The individual is a goal, a task, and therefore, in the search for atomic
subjectivity, it is necessary to destroy not only large structures such as the
forms of the political in traditional society, but also the structures of
modernity itself, built on the ruins of transcendence. Therefore, it is necessary
to move in two directions: to continue to liberate the individual from all
forms of collective identity (in this case, from gender), and to shift attention
to sub-individual levels, and sometimes even to extra-individual levels (this is
the programme of post-humanism and "deep ecology").tive identity (in this case, from gender), and to shift attention
to sub-individual levels, and sometimes even to extra-individual levels (this is
the programme of post-humanism and "deep ecology").

--- PAGE BREAK ---is case, from gender), and to shift attention
to sub-individual levels, and sometimes even to extra-individual levels (this is
the programme of post-humanism and "deep ecology").

--- PAGE BREAK ---

438
Part 4. Political Philosophy of Postmodernism
The same applies to objects (in particular, social objects of
ownership). Objects are not atoms, but rather "bills of exchange for
atoms." They must also be divided into their constituent parts. Money is a
fundamental step in this direction. It breaks down any thing, acting as
property atoms, which are absolutised in capitalism. But we cannot stop
there. Money itself, like the elements of wealth, must increasingly move
from reality to digitality and virtuality. And with the abolition of the classical
liberal subject, the object must also be dispersed (evaporated).
Postmodernists often refer to Marxism and its dialectics. Capitalism is
modern, but it has objective limits. Marx sought to overcome them, and
although he was defeated at the level of political history, the dialectical
paradoxes of his teaching remain attractive. But in postmodernism, Marxism
is no longer a doctrine of class struggle and the dictatorship of the proletariat.
It becomes "cultural Marxism," that is, it continues Marx's strategy of
solidarity with the bourgeois order, but only in order to overcome it. Thus
"cultural Marxism" welcomes the liberal obsession with liberating the
individual from all forms of collective identity, but only in order to go one
step further and fall through the individual, descending (sliding) to the
subatomic and sub-subjective levels of man and, accordingly, of the world. In
a sense, postmodernism replaces Marxism in post-industrial conditions. Marx
sought to overcome 19th-century capitalism in its industrial phase. But in the
20th and early 21st centuries, capitalism in its post-industrial phase has
surpassed itself (albeit not without the help of Marxism). Thus, the vector of
classical Marx was taken up by postmodernists, while his methods and
specific prescriptions in history proved to be either dead ends (this is how
postmodernists assess the deviation of Soviet regimes, and especially the
USSR, following Trotskyist analysis and European social democracy) or
incorrect ( the proletarian revolution never took place in developed European
bourgeois societies), and therefore had to be revised and discarded.
However, postmodernism cannot be equated with 21st-century Marxism,
as many aspects of liberalism and neoliberalism have been integrated into it.
The starting point here is not class, but rather the bourgeois individual, but
— and this is where it differs from liberalism — he is not glorified as the
crown of progress, but is in turn overcome through new, post-human
concepts — the network, rhizome, cyborg, chimera, artificial intelligence,
etc.ffers from liberalism — he is not glorified as the
crown of progress, but is in turn overcome through new, post-human
concepts — the network, rhizome, cyborg, chimera, artificial intelligence,
etc.

--- PAGE BREAK ---m — he is not glorified as the
crown of progress, but is in turn overcome through new, post-human
concepts — the network, rhizome, cyborg, chimera, artificial intelligence,
etc.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

439
Chapter 1. Political Philosophy of Postmodernism
The dissipation of the individual and the dissolution of
the object : towards the fractal
Postmodern political philosophy recognises that a certain goal of
historical progress has been achieved and, accordingly, the Modern
programme has been realised. The father has been killed, executed (Nietzsche
says, "God is dead. We killed him — you and I!"1). The son has been
eliminated (Aristotle's worldview was ridiculed and dispelled at the dawn
of the modern era by Copernicus, Galileo, Newton, etc.). From now on, we
live in the bosom of the great Mother. This creates a feeling of comfort.
Living in a giant techno-social womb is cosy and safe. In the West, history is
over (and where it is not over, we can always help with
with "humanitarian bombings"). The global tasks of building the political
philosophy of Modernity have been completed in practice.
But it is precisely at this point that Western philosophers note: yes, we
have liberated the individual from all (or almost all) forms of collective
identity, with feminism, gender politics and the promotion of the LGBT
community as the final touches; yes, a market society based on private
property has been built on a global scale. But don't you think, say the
postmodernists, that we have simply transferred the same Platonic-
Aristotelian vertical schemes to the individual and to private property? Don't
you see in this relationship between "the one and his property" a hidden
Platonism once again? Again, hierarchy, again a certain wholeness that is
constructed "from top to bottom," from consciousness to the body, again
hidden and veiled, but still the domination of the subject over the object. Isn't
Modernism itself a kind of repackaged Tradition? Haven't we ended up with
what we were fighting against?
Answering these questions in the affirmative, postmodernists say: the
individual (if we take the individual as a human being as he is) is the same
vertical concept, and private property is also a concept that is vertical,
implying an authoritative pair of the owner and the property. And this is
not sufficiently material, egalitarian, and atomistic. It is necessary to
continue the process of immanentisation, uprooting the remnants of
transcendence that have penetrated the immanence of Modernity.
This has led to a new round of atomisation: since the atom is a
conceptual construct, we must move forward not only in science,
discovering ever smaller particles and ever more extravagant symmetries
and quantum laws, but also in politics, demonstrating...
1   Nietzsche, F. The Gay Science (la gaya scienza). P. 440.science,
discovering ever smaller particles and ever more extravagant symmetries
and quantum laws, but also in politics, demonstrating...
1   Nietzsche, F. The Gay Science (la gaya scienza). P. 440.

--- PAGE BREAK ---g ever smaller particles and ever more extravagant symmetries
and quantum laws, but also in politics, demonstrating...
1   Nietzsche, F. The Gay Science (la gaya scienza). P. 440.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

440
Part 4. Political Philosophy of Postmodernism
by destroying individuals and their private property. The only thing that is
unique to Stirner, his property, as well as the things themselves, turned out to
be not the limit of the destruction of holistic ensembles, but only a stage in
such destruction. This means that these are not yet true concepts, not genuine
atoms and individuals, but an agglomeration of particles that live their own
lives. In physics, this idea is vividly represented by the fractal theories of
Benoit Mandelbrot ( 1924–2010). He begins his fractal theory with the
observation that there are no straight lines in nature. A straight line is
something that exists in our minds, but in nature it is always slightly curved.
Or take volume — it is also three-dimensional only in our minds; in nature, it
is three-dimensional only to a certain extent. Similarly, a point — as a line of
zero length, a circle of zero diameter or an area of zero volume — does not
exist. From this, Mandelbrot concludes that a line in nature is two-
dimensional, a plane is three-dimensional, and volume is four-dimensional.
To describe this ontology, Mandelbrot introduces the concept of fractals —
strange particles that actually fall outside the geometry of our consciousness
but approach the geometry of nature, seen, as it were, "from the point of view
of matter."
The explanation for this can be found in the early stages of the formation
of the scientific worldview of the Modern Age. At that time, materialist
philosophers mixed together what Aristotle had strictly separated: logic,
mathematics and geometry (which reflected the truths of the spirit, the gods
and the world mind) on the one hand, and physics and ontology on the other.
It would be more correct to study physics with the help of rhetoric, which is
not as precise from the point of view of logic, but much closer to nature. This
is precisely what Aristotle himself does when he defines a separate thing (one
being, zv), that is, an ontic unit, not as a logical unit, but as a dual pair of
matter ({`b) and form (EopeD). That is, a thing is a rhetorical figure; it is
conditionally (from a logical point of view) one, but physically it is dual.
Modern physics erased this distinction, insisting on the unity of the physical-
mathematical approach, and thereby undermined the obvious coherence of its
ontology. Mandelbrot, as well as the theory of relativity and quantum
mechanics before him, which questioned some of the postulates of modern
physics, merely encountered the consequences of this philosophical
aberration, but did not dare to overturn the entire monumental edifice of
modernist pseudo-science, which had gained a monopoly in the scientific
world, by attempting to
1  Mandelbrot, B. Fractal Geometry of Nature. Moscow: Institute of Computer Research,
2002.difice of
modernist pseudo-science, which had gained a monopoly in the scientific
world, by attempting to
1  Mandelbrot, B. Fractal Geometry of Nature. Moscow: Institute of Computer Research,
2002.

--- PAGE BREAK ---pseudo-science, which had gained a monopoly in the scientific
world, by attempting to
1  Mandelbrot, B. Fractal Geometry of Nature. Moscow: Institute of Computer Research,
2002.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

441
Chapter 1. Political Philosophy of Postmodernism
somehow correct the situation, gradually exposing the fictitious nature of
all modern science. But this palliative only gave rise to increasingly exotic
theories, unable to renounce the legacy of Modernism, but no longer
satisfied with its epistemological possibilities.
Accordingly, fractal theory and natural physics can serve as a metaphor
for the strategy that representatives of Postmodernism have applied to
humans, society, and philosophy. Neither atoms in nature nor individuals
in society exist as such. They are conceptual. But this does not mean that
we should abandon them; it only means that we should not stop at what has
been achieved, but move forward — deeper into matter, dividing it further
and further — until the unattainable limit is reached. In the course of this
movement of dispersion, dizzying symmetries will arise, phantoms of new
microcosms, possibilities for virtual and genetic engineering, and thus the
acquisition of new degrees of freedom, albeit partly at the expense of
those who could have enjoyed this freedom, since in this process they were
gradually erased or at least transformed — human beings themselves,
turning into social fractals.
 , the cancerous tumour of civilisation
Postmodernism changes not so much the meaning and direction of
modernism as the rhetoric used to describe it. Modernism presented itself as a
triumphant rise, a movement upward toward new goals — essentially, a
titanic assault on the heavens. Postmodernists sharply change the tone and
present the same vector as dissipation, dispersion, fragmentation, in a sense
as decay that loses its pathos but retains the semantics of the basic processes
of civilisation.
Thus, the human individual disintegrates, his subjectivity disperses
into a multitude of momentary or more stable, but still ephemeral, selves.
This is how mental disorders, and above all schizophrenia, where
multiplicity is a characteristic symptom, are valorised. The philosophical
meaning of schizophrenia in postmodernism becomes a programme.
The object also disintegrates. Physics breaks particles down into
smaller and smaller dimensions, revealing completely new laws and rules
at the quantum level that radically change our understanding of the
structures of matter and reality as a whole. Reality disintegrates.nd smaller dimensions, revealing completely new laws and rules
at the quantum level that radically change our understanding of the
structures of matter and reality as a whole. Reality disintegrates.

--- PAGE BREAK ---s, revealing completely new laws and rules
at the quantum level that radically change our understanding of the
structures of matter and reality as a whole. Reality disintegrates.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

442
Part 4. Political Philosophy of Postmodernism
Property, which was previously fixed as rigidly as the atomic framework
of the "single," also begins to dissipate. In the past, people had money in the
form of piles of gold coins, then in the form of banknotes (as a promise of
gold coins). Gold itself as an equivalent was a step towards abstraction,
towards the decomposition of wealth as things. Next comes its dissipation.
But this is not the end of the dusting: digital money is introduced — this is
already a promise to receive paper money, which in itself is a promise to
receive gold.
The structure of payment cards is such that if even a very small
percentage of cardholders simultaneously attempt to withdraw their
savings in the form of banknotes, the entire system will collapse, since
ATMs and bank branches are only supplied with banknotes for a small
fraction of the total amount involved in electronic payments. If you ask for
gold in exchange for banknotes, you will not be given any, because since the
abolition of the Bretton Woods agreements, no currency is officially backed
by gold.
This is how the object dissipates. Both the "unique" itself and its
property are subject to increasing erosion. Each time, an even lower, even
more subatomic level is found, to which the former atom/individual is
offered to descend. Thus, the support of the subject and object becomes
less and less noticeable, more and more unstable and transparent.
The very unity of the human being and the object forms and then
disintegrates again, suspended in virtuality, often without any real guarantee
that promises will be kept.
In such a situation, the global economy faces a growing threat of a
"bubble" — new
"valuable" securities (which are not really that valuable, since they are just
promises to pay someone something at some point in the future). Then
options and hedging transactions are introduced for these "securities,"
followed by options on options (1),and so gradually an economy emerges
where the volume of financial liabilities exceeds the world's gross domestic
product many times over. Financial documents, including debts, debt sales,
debt repayments, debt penalties, penalty repayments, loans and credits,
exceed the value of all goods on earth by a thousandfold. Therefore, if a
microscopic percentage of securities holders want to get rid of them and
get the money itself, the system will completely collapse — the dollar will
collapse, obligations between states will collapse, the economy will
collapse, and production will collapse. That
1   Dugin, A. G. The End of Economics. St. Petersburg: Amphora, 2010.he dollar will
collapse, obligations between states will collapse, the economy will
collapse, and production will collapse. That
1   Dugin, A. G. The End of Economics. St. Petersburg: Amphora, 2010.

--- PAGE BREAK ---apse, obligations between states will collapse, the economy will
collapse, and production will collapse. That
1   Dugin, A. G. The End of Economics. St. Petersburg: Amphora, 2010.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

443
Chapter 1. Political Philosophy of Postmodernism
The enormous financial bubble that the global economy is currently
operating with has nothing to do with the rather limited, insignificant
amount of all the earth's wealth, which has been overvalued, over-mortgaged,
spent and completely withdrawn from the future. Humanity has already
consumed goods for several decades ahead. There is nothing ahead but
serious population growth and a huge "soap bubble." But to sustain this, the
global liberal system continues to extol progress and development,
conjuring up the mass consciousness with myths of "endless growth."
The French philosopher Jean Baudrillard (1929–2007), who was
interested in phenomenology and even postmodern metaphysics, but kept
his distance from it, considered cancer to be a metaphor for postmodern
civilisation. He wrote:
Things are like they have cancer: the uncontrolled growth of non-
structural elements within them, which gives them their self-confidence, is
a kind of tumour.
Cancer consists in the fact that the same cells begin to multiply, losing
their correlation with the rest of the organism as a purposeful structure. Such
is capitalism, according to Baudrillard: it uncontrollably produces huge
quantities of objects that are detached from the structure of society as a whole
organism. But while modernity concealed this under the fanfare of the growth
of the middle class (this growth itself was a kind of planetary cancer),
postmodernists merely note this phenomenon with indifference. In the end,
the most optimistic among them argue that decay and death are part of life,
and perhaps they carry within themselves a reference to some other life.
Baudrillard points to another feature of cancer: cells reproduce
themselves — identically, without change or limitation. Such reproduction is
asexual — no two carriers are involved, the same cell strictly reproduces
itself. In fact, in postmodernism, the economic processes of the
decomposition of goods, objects and the subject itself (the producer or
consumer) lead to the proliferation of a huge amount of waste that reproduces
itself without restriction. Dissipation, dissolution and disintegration of the
object occur.
It is important that we encounter the metaphor of cancer and tumours in
Plotinus precisely where he speaks about the essence of matter 2. He
emphasises
1   Baudrillard, J. The System of Things. Moscow: Rudomino, 1999. P. 137.
2   Plotinus. Second Enneadr and tumours in
Plotinus precisely where he speaks about the essence of matter 2. He
emphasises
1   Baudrillard, J. The System of Things. Moscow: Rudomino, 1999. P. 137.
2   Plotinus. Second Ennead

--- PAGE BREAK ---otinus precisely where he speaks about the essence of matter 2. He
emphasises
1   Baudrillard, J. The System of Things. Moscow: Rudomino, 1999. P. 137.
2   Plotinus. Second Ennead

--- PAGE BREAK ---

444
Part 4. Political Philosophy of Postmodernism
that matter tends to swell, that is, to produce pus-filled blisters, which are a
kind of "inflated nothingness."
In order to take on eidos, matter does not (necessarily) have to be heavy
(in itself); it becomes heavy (mass) and (becoming so) allows something else
(other than itself) to be created1.
Here we are talking about whether matter has the property of "heaviness,"
"mass," "weight," "thickness," zk|oF itself or whether it becomes heavy
by taking on eidos. The term zk|oF is fundamental. It also has the
meaning "to swell," "to puff up." From this developed the concept of
"vanity," k|iEP. Matter is not mass, that is, it cannot be something in
itself, nor can it produce anything. But having received something, it
begins to swell, becoming a material copy of what it has received. But if the
eidos is broken up, then matter will "swell" not from the eidos, but from its
fragments, from its quanta. And the more the eidos is denied, which is
precisely what Modernism does, the smaller its particles will be.
Consequently, the tumour of matter will become increasingly uniform and
lose its connection with the whole (the organism). It is surprising that the
word "oncology," literally the science of tumours, most often understood
as malignant, comes from the same root: it refers to the unstoppable
growth of a tumour as a non-functional proliferation of identical cells.
According to Plotinus, this means that matter itself, its swelling, its
cancerous fragmentation, is a disease, incurable for everything that comes
into contact with it. Therefore, matter is death — everything it touches
dies. All matter is already mortal. And the weaker the eidos, the more deadly
matter is for it, the more malignant it is.
The
search
for
the
authentic
individual:
towards
transhumanism ( )
Just as an object disperses into fractals, into diverging chains of tiny
tumours that dismember matter, so too does the subject in Postmodernism.
The same dispersion, the same dissipation, the same transition to a lower
level of organisation and immersion in the bizarre quantum symmetries
discovered in the course of this immersion — this time at the human level.
1  OZ Moívuv zk|ov CN} N~vPj Mòv CN3ENvov Mò N~CoF, l``´ òEo M¼ kNvXhPj zk|ov |Pì MDv P``bv
LojMbMP CXNhPj. Plotinus. Second Ennead. P. 225.se of this immersion — this time at the human level.
1  OZ Moívuv zk|ov CN} N~vPj Mòv CN3ENvov Mò N~CoF, l``´ òEo M¼ kNvXhPj zk|ov |Pì MDv P``bv
LojMbMP CXNhPj. Plotinus. Second Ennead. P. 225.

--- PAGE BREAK ---— this time at the human level.
1  OZ Moívuv zk|ov CN} N~vPj Mòv CN3ENvov Mò N~CoF, l``´ òEo M¼ kNvXhPj zk|ov |Pì MDv P``bv
LojMbMP CXNhPj. Plotinus. Second Ennead. P. 225.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

445
Chapter 1. Political Philosophy of Postmodernism
The individual turns out to be not a whole, but an agglomeration of its
various components, a product of the interplay of elements and organs. The
social personality is dismantled.
This is easy to see in the example of the network, which reflects many
characteristic features of postmodernism. Everyone can choose their own
a "name" (nickname), as well as gender, photo, history, status, and
geography. There is no fixed individual; a network subject is a combination,
a set of typical properties, not so much something solid as something fluid. This
allows one to create not just another self, but several alter egos. At the
corporate level, entire armies of clones and bots, algorithms and programmes
are created that exist independently on the network, interact with real users,
collide with each other, and make up the chaotic life of the network. These
are fractals of users, divi-duums, which are so intertwined with individuals
that a new form of combined network identity emerges between them. There
is no strict distinction on the network between a real personality, an "avatar,"
a "simulation," a fake personality, or a bot. Everyone can have the same
status of network citizenship.
This divisional structure of the network affects people in their
everyday lives, which are gradually becoming more and more similar to
cyberspace.
The attitude towards human physicality is also changing. Since
ancient times, it's been seen as something whole. Postmodernism
questions this wholeness. Already in the early stages of modernism,
doctors of iatro-mechanics — J. Borelli (1608–1679), J. Balivi (1668–
1707), G. Burgave (1668–1738) — proposed viewing the human body as a
mechanism consisting of mechanical parts. This is essentially the basis of
modern medicine. Technological advances have allowed this approach to
be extended to all aspects of the body, coming close to completely
decoding the genome and creating a model of the brain. The body has
become not a single entity, but a kind of construction kit, with artificial parts
or organs in some cases proving to be more reliable than natural ones.
Similarly, on a physical level, the metaphor of man as a machine —
developed by philosopher J. Lametri (1709–1751) — gradually evolved,
transforming man into an assembled structure that could be substantially
renewed or improved. This led to the development of plastic arts.
1  Castells, M. The Information Age: Economy, Society and Culture. Moscow: Higher School
of Economics, 2000.
2   Bauman, Z. Liquid Modernity. St. Petersburg: Piter, 2008.development of plastic arts.
1  Castells, M. The Information Age: Economy, Society and Culture. Moscow: Higher School
of Economics, 2000.
2   Bauman, Z. Liquid Modernity. St. Petersburg: Piter, 2008.

--- PAGE BREAK ---ic arts.
1  Castells, M. The Information Age: Economy, Society and Culture. Moscow: Higher School
of Economics, 2000.
2   Bauman, Z. Liquid Modernity. St. Petersburg: Piter, 2008.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

446
Part 4. Political Philosophy of Postmodernism
and the desire to modify the body. The body thus moved to the individual
level.
Body construction began with the sick and disabled, but gradually spread
to everyone, changing the very concept of what it means to be human.
Postmodernism perceives humans as artificial constructs — at the intellectual
level, shaped by society, politics and epistemological strategies, and at the
physical level, by medical and anatomical techniques.
Gradually, humans are being constructed into objects that can now be
assembled.
Gradually, humanity is preparing to accept machines (cyborgs, robots)
as equals, granting them full rights. The logic behind such integration is
already clear. At first, cyborgs will be invaluable assistants, performing
humanitarian feats to save people (children, women and the elderly) from
natural disasters and catastrophes. Then they will become indispensable
assistants to humans in their daily activities. And finally, it will be discovered
that they are capable of thinking and feeling. Some people reject equality
with robots (thus giving rise to robot fascism), but they lose out to inclusive
humanists. Then mixed marriages take place, and the line between machine
and human is blurred. It is important to emphasise the new atomicity of the
robot, which consists in its individuality. The human organism, as conceived
by the iatro-mechanics of the New Age, is a mechanism. Now this medical
metaphor ceases to be a metaphor and becomes reality. People become
disassembled, able to store their consciousness on cloud servers and their
memories on flash cards. The concept of death becomes an anachronism.
From a philosophical point of view, we are talking about the further
decomposition of the subject, in the course of which there is a movement
towards the atomic level, which cannot be definitively fixed and which
recedes further and further from the scientific thought that attacks it. Thus,
in postmodernism, the identification of the atom (individual) with a separate
human being, which proved to be conditional and approximate, is overcome.
It turned out to be not an atom, but a whole whirlwind of Democritus, that is,
a world consisting of atoms and therefore in need of further
dismemberment.
The dismemberment of corporeality occurs simultaneously on several
levels. Along with research in the field of genetic engineering,
1  In modern television series such as Humans and Westworld, this theme is explored in depth
and depicted in an extremely realistic manner. Of course, this is an extrapolation of the current
state of society, culture and technology into the future, but it is a very plausible one.d in depth
and depicted in an extremely realistic manner. Of course, this is an extrapolation of the current
state of society, culture and technology into the future, but it is a very plausible one.

--- PAGE BREAK ---cted in an extremely realistic manner. Of course, this is an extrapolation of the current
state of society, culture and technology into the future, but it is a very plausible one.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

447
Chapter 1. Political Philosophy of Postmodernism
With the advent of organ printing, 3D printing, the development of neural
networks, and the study of brain function, gender reassignment and artificial
body transformations, including the implantation of various organic and
inorganic elements, play an important role. This provides preparatory
experience for transferring consciousness from one bodily form to another.
Naturally, the subject's consciousness itself undergoes transformation,
separating itself not only from religious, class, national, and professional
identities, but also from gender identity, which touches the very
foundations of consciousness as such, associated with the gender
dichotomy, which in turn reflects the very nature of the Mind, which,
according to Plotinus, manifests itself in division. Gender is the
embodiment of the metaphysical work of the Mind in relation to the
human species. A change of sex is not a complete transformation of a man
into a woman or a woman into a man. It is rather a propaedeutic step
beyond the boundaries of sex in general, towards a genderless identity that
is much closer to the sought-after individual (atomic subject) than in the
case of an ordinary human being. Therefore, the contemporary
cyberfeminist Donna Haraway, in her "Cyborg Manifesto" (1),rightly notes
that complete equality between men and women is only possible through the
overcoming of gender as such and the total transformation of all people into
genderless cyborgs. From her point of view, it does not matter who is a
man and who is a woman, or whether this identity is natural or artificial; in
any case, the very duality of gender creates a hierarchy, which is the source
of gender inequality, and it is gender inequality that modern liberals,
democrats and feminists must fight against.
The same logic is applied by environmentalists to animals and other
forms of life, which should also be granted equal rights with humans. This
line is consistently pursued by representatives of
"speculative realism" and object-oriented ontology, who advocate a new —
radical — materialism2.
Criticising the subject, postmodernists argue that the human subject is
actually a carbon copy of Plato's ideal state. It has a philosophical
consciousness, warrior feelings and lower-class labourers who are sensations.
All this is structured in such a way that we feel reverence for the mind, treat
feelings (some of which are noble, some not) selectively, and consider
sensations as residual, as an auxiliary area, a means of production.
1  Haraway, D. A Cyborg Manifesto: Science, Technology, and Socialist Feminism in the Late
20th Century. Moscow: Ad Marginem Press, 2017.
2   . Democracy of Objects. Perm: HylePress, 2019.roduction.
1  Haraway, D. A Cyborg Manifesto: Science, Technology, and Socialist Feminism in the Late
20th Century. Moscow: Ad Marginem Press, 2017.
2   . Democracy of Objects. Perm: HylePress, 2019.

--- PAGE BREAK ---y, D. A Cyborg Manifesto: Science, Technology, and Socialist Feminism in the Late
20th Century. Moscow: Ad Marginem Press, 2017.
2   . Democracy of Objects. Perm: HylePress, 2019.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

448
Part 4. Political Philosophy of Postmodernism
providing nourishment for the mind and emotions. In this way, all levels
of the subject, which (according to postmodernists) are in fact an
agglomeration of disparate elements, each of which is an infra-subjective
atom, are hierarchically structured within us, repeating the verticality of
traditional society at the human level. For postmodernists, even fierce
anti-Platonists and enemies of Aristotelianism, liberals, still remain "too
Platonic." They rightly destroy all superstructures above the individual, but
stop at the separate human being, who, from the postmodern point of view, is
not an individual at all.
Therefore, in order for society to be truly open, according to
postmodernists, it is necessary to go beyond the formula of man =
individual. The human individual is something that must be overcome in
the direction of a more authentic individual, who can only be post-human,
transhuman or posthuman. Man as a species remains too "vertical,"
"sacred," "hierarchical," that is, too traditional. Thus, postmodernism is in
solidarity with modernism, but considers it insufficient.
The political philosophy of Postmodernism: three
supporting theories
The vast majority of prominent postmodern philosophers were
French, ranging from the precursors of this movement, the surrealists J.
Bataille 1(1897–1962) and A. Artaud 2(1896–1948), to
J. Lacan 3(1901–1981), M. Foucault 4(1926–1984), R. Barthes 5(1915–
1980), J. F. Lyotard 6   (1924–1998), J. Baudrillard, J. Derrida 7
(1930–2004), B. Latour, and the most brilliant and consistent of
1   Bataille, G. The Accursed Share. Moscow: Ladomir, 2006.
2   Artaud, A. The Theatre and Its Double. The Theatre of Seraphim. Moscow: Martis, 1993.
3  Lacan, J. Seminars. Book 5: The Formations of the Unconscious. Moscow: Gnosis/Logos,
2002.
4Foucault, Michel. The Will to Truth: Beyond Knowledge, Power, and Sexuality. Works
from Different Years. Moscow: Kastal, 1996; Ibid. Madness and Civilisation: A History of
Insanity in the Age of Reason. St. Petersburg: University Book, 1997; Ibid. Discipline and
Punishment: The Birth of the Prison. Moscow: Ad Marginem, 1999.
5   Barth R. Selected Works: Semiotics. Poetics. Moscow: Progress; Univers, 1994
6  Lyotard, J.-F. The Postmodern Condition. Moscow; St. Petersburg: Institute of
Experimental Sociology, Aleteya, 1998.
7   Derrida, J. Writing and Difference. Moscow: Academic Project, 2007.s, 1994
6  Lyotard, J.-F. The Postmodern Condition. Moscow; St. Petersburg: Institute of
Experimental Sociology, Aleteya, 1998.
7   Derrida, J. Writing and Difference. Moscow: Academic Project, 2007.

--- PAGE BREAK ---J.-F. The Postmodern Condition. Moscow; St. Petersburg: Institute of
Experimental Sociology, Aleteya, 1998.
7   Derrida, J. Writing and Difference. Moscow: Academic Project, 2007.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

449
Chapter 1. Political Philosophy of Postmodernism
the entire constellation of philosopher G. Deleuze (1925–1995) and his
co-author F. Guattari (1930–1992). Practically all of these authors were
simultaneously engaged in the development of ontology, epistemology, and
political philosophy from a postmodern perspective. From their point of
view, politics is not just a separate aspect of human life, but its very
foundation. Let us consider only the most striking and fundamental
aspects of postmodern political philosophy related to the very essence of
this phenomenon. As reference points, we will take
•the psychoanalytic structuralist ontology of Jacques Lacan, who
developed the ideas of Sigmund Freud (1856–1939),
•Michel Foucault's study of the role of epistemology in the formation
of political structures and his concept of "biopolitics," and
•the philosophy of Gilles Deleuze and Félix Guattari, which represents
the most complete and perfect — at least by the end of the 20th
century — exposition of political postmodernism.
These foundational authors have shaped the general style of
postmodern political science, which deliberately avoids systematicity and
welcomes paradoxes, contradictions, ambiguities and chaos in presentation,
which is intended to emphasise the transformation of the very nature of the
subject towards dissolution, deconstruction and dispersion, which constitutes
the essence of the entire postmodern paradigm.
Lacan's three orders
Lacan's psychoanalysis, which focused primarily on clinical therapy
for mental disorders and commentary on Freud, despite its extravagance
and fragmentary presentation, is the most important foundation of
postmodern political philosophy. Lacan himself paid little attention to
politics proper, but his philosophical foundations are key to understanding
postmodernism. Just as Plato's general structure of thought can be applied
to the political sphere, and purely philosophical works often contain ideas
and taxonomies that are fundamental to understanding politics, so Lacan,
without specifically thematising politics, allows us to understand
postmodern political philosophy sometimes better than those authors who
were primarily concerned with politics or explicitly included it in the general
context of their views.
Lacan's
ontological-anthropological
(psychoanalytical-gnoseological)
model can be described as follows.
1  Deleuze, G., and Guattari, F. Anti-Oedipus: Capitalism and Schizophrenia. New York: St.
Martin's Press, 1972.-anthropological
(psychoanalytical-gnoseological)
model can be described as follows.
1  Deleuze, G., and Guattari, F. Anti-Oedipus: Capitalism and Schizophrenia. New York: St.
Martin's Press, 1972.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

450
Part 4. Political Philosophy of Postmodernism
Lacan compared the relationship between the unconscious and
consciousness to the figure of Thor, where the ring corresponds to
consciousness and the empty space in the centre corresponds to the
unconscious.
Imaginary
Frozen
Fiction
What we take to be the "real world"
Consciousness
Symbolic
Subconscious
Lie
Dream Escape
Game
Living
Real
Nothin
g Truth
Death
Identity
Source of absolute terror
Lacan's Three Orders
No matter how the point of thought moves across the surface of this
torus, it always remains on the same side, although at different moments it
appears "objectively" on different and even directly opposite sides.
Unconscious

--- PAGE BREAK ---451
Chapter 1.

Political Philosophy of Postmodernism
false.

The only reference point remains the emptiness in the middle, but it
instils terror in the consciousness and therefore acts as a purely negative
reference point, which, being negative, cannot be a reference point at all.

Lacan distinguishes three orders on which his theory is based:
•the order of the real (le Réel),
•the order of the imaginary (l'Imaginaire),
•the order of the symbolic (le Symbolique).

Lacan borrows the term "real" from Bataille, understanding it to mean
that, for a specific individual being, in the most ultimate and purest
experience, there is the experience of oneself as oneself.

For Bataille, the
real is identical with death.

At the same time, Lacan equates the "real"
with Freud's Es (It), seeing in it the root structure of the unconscious,
from which the basic, fundamental desires arise.

Lacan follows Spinoza in recognising three basic affects — desire,
pleasure and displeasure — whereby the unconscious itself, according to
Lacan, is active, that is, capable not only of storing representations, images
and experiences, but also of generating basic impulses.

The real is usually
tightly hidden from human consciousness, with which it has a private
relationship: consciousness is the systematic denial of the real, its false
interpretation, its suppression, its escape from it, its war against it.

In this,
Lacan strictly follows Freud.

By calling the bottom of the unconscious "real,"
Lacan emphasises the epistemological significance of psychoanalysis as a
method directed towards what is in the highest and ultimate sense, giving a
unique interpretation of ontology.

In the real, according to Lacan, Freud's
Eros and Thanatos coincide.

It is important to note that what is real in Lacan is simultaneously
active, effective, and entirely negative.--- PAGE BREAK ---

In the real, according to Lacan, Freud's
Eros and Thanatos coincide. It is important to note that what is real in Lacan is simultaneously
active, effective, and entirely negative. It has no structure of its own except
that which is constituted by two other orders—according to the principle of
the dialectic of differentials and privative oppositions. The real in its pure
form as pure unconsciousness is the power of the negative, which is not a
collection of unconscious archetypes, but only a field of active privation,
spreading its insufficiency in the form of desire, which (as in Spinoza) is
primarily the desire for desire (co-natus), the will to will, and therefore
does not want (something), but only wants to want, which means that, in the
final analysis, it wants nothing or, more precisely, wants nothingness. Desire
becomes the desire for something only at the symbolic stage, where shame
and remorse are formed, and where it takes shape and expresses its negativity
as the desire for the forbidden, expressed in inhibition and complex, that is, in
pathology. Desire itself is the desire for nothing, the insignificance of the will. The second order is the order of the imaginary, where the desire for the
forbidden is expressed in inhibition and complex, that is, in pathology. Desire itself is the desire for nothing, the insignificance of the will. The
second order is the order of the imaginary, where the desire for the
forbidden is expressed in inhibition and complex, that is, in pathology. Desire itself is the desire for nothing, the insignificance of the will. The
second order is the order of the imaginary, where the desire for the
forbidden is

--- PAGE BREAK ---t is, in pathology. Desire itself is the desire for nothing, the insignificance of the will. The
second order is the order of the imaginary, where the desire for the
forbidden is

--- PAGE BREAK ---

452
Part 4. Political Philosophy of Postmodernism
desire for the forbidden, expressed in inhibition and complexes, that is, in
pathology. Desire itself is the desire for nothing, the insignificance of the will.
The second order is the order of the imaginary. This is the realm of
language.
as structures. Language is a rigid system of paradigmatic relationships into
which people are forced to place all their actions, desires, and themselves.
Language represents the matrix of a person before birth and begins to
actively shape a person immediately after birth: an infant hears the speech
of adults, and this field accompanies them until death. Lacan likens
language to a hammock in which a person rests, rocked by the iterations of
his familiar constructions, and is a prisoner, since the strict boundaries of his
differentials, marked by signs, rigidly determine all his manifestations,
including his very content. Language, according to Lacan, is absolutely
social, and society, in turn, he interprets as a rigid binary structure of
kinship. Thus, language is the order in which the unconscious is subjected
to rigid structuring and systematic total repression. At the same time, at the
level of the imaginary, the unconscious does not become conscious — this
is the subtlety of Lacan's psychoanalysis: on the contrary, in language, the
real disappears altogether, being replaced by the imaginary, and not the
imaginary of the individual, but of language itself. The cunning of
thinking lies in the fact that it is not a person who thinks in the process of
thinking, but thinking itself. Similarly, it is not a person who speaks in
language, but language speaks through a person and even beyond them. In
this, one can easily recognise the desire to dismantle the individual, which
constitutes the essence of postmodernism.
The third order is symbolic, in which — as in the field of signs in
structural linguistics — a connection is established between two sets (first
orders): the imaginary and the real. The symbolic is the zone of weak,
problematic connections between the reality of the unconscious
(nothingness) and the imaginary (language structures), which most often
manifest themselves in mental disorders. Freud himself describes them as
phenomena of slips of the tongue or speech dysfunctions that reveal the
mechanism of the "work of the subconscious," which, without ceasing for
a moment, is carried out in the depths of the psyche parallel to rational
activity and most often outwardly unrelated to it. Only when the mind
malfunctions does the subconscious speak more directly about what it
wants, what it fears, what it suffers from, and what torments it directly.
The symbolic is a field of acquisition through the desire to contain,
but not yet fully formed into positive structures onwants, what it fears, what it suffers from, and what torments it directly.
The symbolic is a field of acquisition through the desire to contain,
but not yet fully formed into positive structures on

--- PAGE BREAK ---rs, what it suffers from, and what torments it directly.
The symbolic is a field of acquisition through the desire to contain,
but not yet fully formed into positive structures on

--- PAGE BREAK ---

453
Chapter 1. Political Philosophy of Postmodernism
At the level of language, where the real "I" (the desiring self) is completely
eliminated and replaced by an imaginary "I" that is constituted by what can
be desired and what should be desired, and, accordingly, by those who
"correctly" desire and desire precisely what is required to be desired. The
symbolic is therefore the realm of the structured unconscious, represented
for the first time in "positive" terms (in contrast to the pure negativity of
desire at the level of the real, which is pure horror), but terms that still bear
the imprint of the original darkness. The symbolic order is therefore the order
of disease and pathology. Here, desire is structured as forbidden,
reprehensible, vicious, painful, requiring punishment, condemnation,
repentance and suppression. Having no qualities whatsoever, that is,
nothing (bottomless, super-evil), desire at the level of the real becomes a
bad, vicious, sinful desire at the level of the symbolic, so that at the level of
the imaginary it can be transformed into a carefully censored and acceptable
legitimate desire — to eat, to get married, to wait for a flight, or to win a
competition. The strongest desire is the emptiest desire, that is, a desire so
strong that, due to its sense of total and infinite emptiness, it cannot be
channelled into anything concrete. It weakens at the symbolic level, passing
through the filtering labyrinths of pathology. Finally, it dissipates completely
— along with the complete loss of the subject — in the realm of the
imaginary, where the desired and the desiring become completely
autonomous, automatic moments of a single, totally alienated structure.
 's political ontology
This model of Lacan, originally intended to describe only the structure
of the human psyche and consciousness (based on the subconscious), laid
the foundations for the entire ontology of postmodernism. Postmodernists,
like Democritus, believe that nothingness, non-existence — oZCXv — is
primary. Only it is real, actual and true. This brings us to the realm of
pseudology, because if truth is identical with nothingness, then any
description of something other than nothingness, i.e., things, phenomena,
thoughts, feelings, distinctions, etc., necessarily belongs to the realm of
falsehood. Hence the postmodern irony: postmodernists do not seek truth,
they seek truths about lies, that is, the boundaries of their epistemology
are lies about lies and truths about lies.
Consequently, at the symbolic level, nothing real appears, but only an
escape from truth, that is, the unfolding of pseudo-logical structures that
constitute hallucinatory areas of falsehood. This is how Lacan understands the
symbolic: as falsehood. The essence of this falsehood is that the symbol always
points to something else.uctures that
constitute hallucinatory areas of falsehood. This is how Lacan understands the
symbolic: as falsehood. The essence of this falsehood is that the symbol always
points to something else.

--- PAGE BREAK ---454
Part 4.

Political Philosophy of Postmodernism
logical structures that constitute hallucinatory areas of falsehood.

This is
precisely how Lacan understands the symbolic: as falsehood.

The essence of
this falsehood is that the symbol always points to something else, and that
something else, being a symbol, points again to something else, and so on in
a period.

Everything points to everything else in order to avoid pointing to
nothingness, which is truth and death.

The realm of the symbolic is the realm
of the subconscious.

Here, according to postmodernists, politics is born.

Its
origins are not in the superstructure, but in the base, however, the base is not
interpreted as Marx did — as the relationship between the productive forces
and the relations of production, but as the structure of the symbolic.

The
origins of politics lie in the algorithm of self-enclosed symbolism, each
element of which points to something, but always not to what is, and
accordingly, the basis of the Political consists in the flight from truth, which
is nothing.

Thus, Marx's suspicion is turned around by postmodernists
(sometimes called Freudo-Marxists) into the revelation of Freud's
subconscious, whose work determines the true content of human mental life.

Lacan goes further and reveals nothingness at the core of the subconscious,
turning the subconscious itself into a lie, whereas Freud offered something
similar to explain the relationship between two other orders — the symbolic
and the imaginary (according to Lacan).

According to Freud, lies are the
essence of consciousness, which hides the "truth" of the subconscious.

Lacan
goes further and says: lies are everything that is not truth, and truth is
nothing.

Here we encounter Democritus' atom again, but in a special
interpretation.--- PAGE BREAK ---

Lacan
goes further and says: lies are everything that is not truth, and truth is
nothing. Here we encounter Democritus' atom again, but in a special
interpretation. Recall his extravagant synonym for atom — CXv, formed from
oZCXv, nothing, but containing no explicit reference to "something" or
"being." Xv is the antithesis of oZCXv, nothingness, but an antithesis that is
genuinely existent, that is, ontologically and obviously opposed to
nothingness. This is the materialistic monism outlined by Marx, but which
found its final form in Freudo-Marxism. The alternative to pure non-being
oZCXv is not non-existence, not being, but precisely falsehood, that is, the
symbolic. Nothing is truth, and not something is falsehood. Hence the
secondary nature of the term CXv, derived from oZCXv, but as we have seen,
unlike the Russian - or the English no-thing, the aphorism of the
negative particle "ni", "no", does not give us "what" or "thing". "thing." Xv is something else, and it is not nothingness, nor is it being, nor is
it absence, nor is it presence. It is this that Lacan equates with the basis. In this case, the superstructure is the imaginary. This is the upper floor of
the Political. But its meaning is to give the fluid play of the subconscious a
semblance of reliability, immutability, stability, that is, what is commonly
called "reality."

--- PAGE BREAK ---of
the Political. But its meaning is to give the fluid play of the subconscious a
semblance of reliability, immutability, stability, that is, what is commonly
called "reality."

--- PAGE BREAK ---

455
Chapter 1. Political Philosophy of Postmodernism
From this we can deduce the main theme of postmodern politics. Truth is
nothingness, non-existence, abyss and death. Philosophy that seeks truth must
be prepared for active nihilism, for the complete loss of illusions. True
philosophy can only be nihilism. Unlike Nietzsche, there is no need here to
overcome nihilism (which is impossible anyway). It is proposed to accept it
as the insignificance of everything. This is extreme ontological — and no
longer just anthropological — pessimism. Man is capable of committing only
one true philosophical act — suicide (this is how Gilles Deleuze ended his
life). Everything else belongs to pseudo-philosophy.
Politics is an imaginary construct rooted in the structures of delirium and
dreams. Therefore, politics is the limit of lies and violence, the boundary of
escape from death. But this is not the antithesis of death; in a sense, it is its
mirror image on the other side of the tora. Those who do not know about
Lacan's torus remain in the context of lies, whose degree increases as one
moves from the depths of the torus to its surface. Politics is not just a lie, it is
a frozen lie, dead, rigid. It is the culmination of lies about lies, whereas in the
unconscious we have, rather, the truth about lies. From this follows the
revolutionary imperative of postmodernism: it is necessary to return the
political to its dreamlike, psychoanalytic origins, to plunge it into the
unconscious. Marx's critical theory turns into a critique of the order of the
imaginary, a critique of frozen hallucinations in favour of a return to the
basis, that is, to the order of the symbolic.
But according to Lacan himself, this is impossible to achieve in full.
No matter how successful revolutionaries may be in their attempts to
liberate the symbolic and appropriate the imaginary, since the imaginary
is order and not mere arbitrariness or aberration, it will inevitably be filled
with something. Thus, after the victory of the symbolic (the revolution)
over the frozen structures of the imaginary, they will be recreated — albeit
on different principles. Thor cannot exist without a surface, and no matter
how porous and open he may be without a surface limiting his existence, he
will dissipate into nothingness. Yes, this will be the truth, but there will be
no one and nothing to declare it. Xv will disappear into oZCXv, that is,
falsehood into truth.
This leads to a certain postmodern conservatism in Lacan. Despite the
radical revolutionary nature of his ontology and his nihilism, he tended to
support the existing political system (whatever it may be), striving not so
much to change it as to interpret it correctly.
Lacan argues as follows. If desire at the symbolic level requires its
legitimation in the imaginary (in order to be realised), then), striving not so
much to change it as to interpret it correctly.
Lacan argues as follows. If desire at the symbolic level requires its
legitimation in the imaginary (in order to be realised), then

--- PAGE BREAK ---much to change it as to interpret it correctly.
Lacan argues as follows. If desire at the symbolic level requires its
legitimation in the imaginary (in order to be realised), then

--- PAGE BREAK ---

456
Part 4. Political Philosophy of Postmodernism
make legal what is forbidden), this desire will immediately cease to be a
symbolic desire and a desire for the symbolic (a forbidden desire) and will
cease to be a desire at all, precisely because all its vitality and all its
"desirability" consists in its painfulness (forbidden nature). As soon as
freedom becomes law, it ceases to be freedom and becomes necessity. As
soon as desire ceases to be shameful and forbidden, it loses its connection
with the negative subject (with the order of the real) and turns into
alienation — when the one who has been allowed to want something no
longer wants it, but wants either what he has not yet been allowed to want,
or does not want anything at all. But then the restructured order of the
imaginary begins to weigh on the individual: what you are allowed to do,
you should do. Ultimately, freedom (in the imaginary mode) becomes a
form of coercion to freedom — as in liberalism, especially in its latest
totalitarian globalist stage. Lacan is not opposed to this, since the order of the
imaginary cannot but be totalitarian, and at the same time cannot but be at all.
Whatever content the symbolic throws into it, the imaginary always
transforms its nature: frozen water is ice, and it is foolish to demand fluidity
from it, just as it is difficult to demand fluidity from steam.
However, those who came after him, accepting Lacanian ontology, did
not agree with such ironic conservatism and gave the struggle of the base
(the symbolic order) against the superstructure (the imaginary order) the
status of a moral imperative, liberation and progress. Thus, nihilism
acquired ethical content, becoming the goal of social and political progress,
the highest philosophical truth and moral goal.
Foucault: freedom , madness!
Another important author of postmodernism, Michel Foucault, like
Lacan, operates with structures.
In the spirit of the general left-liberal mood and Freudo-Marxist
generalisations, Foucault, very much in the spirit of Lacan, focuses on the
relationship between normative forms of consciousness (generically called
epistemes) and the processes of the subconscious, which manifest
themselves directly only in the form of mental disorders. Foucault
formulates these ideas in his book Madness and Civilisation: A History of
Insanity in the Age of Reason (1) ,where he approaches a theme that is central
to his entire oeuvre
1   Foucault, M. Madness and Civilisation: A History of Insanity in the Age of Reason. London:
Routledge, 1966.he Age of Reason (1) ,where he approaches a theme that is central
to his entire oeuvre
1   Foucault, M. Madness and Civilisation: A History of Insanity in the Age of Reason. London:
Routledge, 1966.

--- PAGE BREAK ---,where he approaches a theme that is central
to his entire oeuvre
1   Foucault, M. Madness and Civilisation: A History of Insanity in the Age of Reason. London:
Routledge, 1966.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

457
Chapter 1. Political Philosophy of Postmodernism
normative rationality, its criteria, parameters, properties, and methods of
implementation and protection. In light of this, the qualification and
definition of madness, as well as attitudes towards it at different historical
stages, demonstrate, according to Foucault, a change in the very paradigm of
normality
and, accordingly, in the anthropological and ontological
interpretation of what reason is and what a "rational human being" should be.
Here we again see an attack on the individual, whose normality in capitalism
and communism is based on rationality, which always has specific
boundaries and definitions. In fact, the "normal person" is an imaginary
figure (Lacan) and therefore represents a frozen moment of the symbolic (i.e.,
madness).
Madness as a deviation from this norm, its interpretation, forms of
treatment and social evaluation testify to fundamental shifts in the
fundamental structures of society. Thus, Foucault approaches the
description of the structures of European society, which he studies
particularly carefully in the phase of transition to modernity. It is here that
fundamental transformations of clinical practice, its methods and
foundations take place, providing examples that help us better understand the
essence of modern culture. Foucault will return to this theme repeatedly,
particularly in his important work The Birth of the Clinic.The revelation of the
repressive nature of clinical institutions led Foucault to later describe in
detail the process of the emergence of penitentiary institutions in the
modern era in his book Discipline and Punish (2).Physical violence against
marginalised elements, which included the mentally ill, criminals, and even
those suffering from serious illnesses, was, for Foucault, an illustration of
a deeper phenomenon: the repressive practice of reason against the
unconscious, which is effectively tabooed and repressed through dominant
epistemologies — that is, the scientific, philosophical, and ideological
foundations of society. The political is first and foremost an episteme
(3),strictly and always arbitrarily establishing a norm for the "normal
personality," which does not actually exist and is constituted by the
political act itself.
Unlike Lacan, Foucault does not accept this conclusion and calls for an
epistemological revolution aimed at overthrowing the dictatorship of reason
and liberating the symbolic. It is precisely
1   Foucault, M. The Birth of the Clinic. Moscow: Academic Project, 2010.
2   Foucault, M. Discipline and Punish: The Birth of the Prison.
3  Foucault introduces the concept of "episteme" in his book: Foucault, Michel. The Order of
Things. SPb: A-cad, 1994c Project, 2010.
2   Foucault, M. Discipline and Punish: The Birth of the Prison.
3  Foucault introduces the concept of "episteme" in his book: Foucault, Michel. The Order of
Things. SPb: A-cad, 1994

--- PAGE BREAK ---Foucault, M. Discipline and Punish: The Birth of the Prison.
3  Foucault introduces the concept of "episteme" in his book: Foucault, Michel. The Order of
Things. SPb: A-cad, 1994

--- PAGE BREAK ---

458
Part 4. Political Philosophy of Postmodernism
This approach became predominant in Postmodernism, although it was
Lacan — more ironic and "conservative" — who laid the most
revolutionary aspects of Postmodern ontology, against which Foucault's
revolutionary optimism seems somewhat naive.
Foucault's three epistemes
Foucault traces three phases of European history, where one can
clearly see the transition from one episteme to another based on a
fundamental shift in the semiotic and semantic fields:
•Renaissance (16th century)
•Early Modern (17th–18th centuries)
•Late Modernity (19th–20th centuries).
The Middle Ages and earlier periods were based on other epistemes,
which remain largely outside Foucault's field of vision. But this period is
sufficient to convincingly demonstrate the main structuralist thesis: the
content of a person, their normative status, their identity and their ontology
are completely determined by the dominant paradigm of epistemology.
Consequently, we cannot speak of man as a universal phenomenon or as an
individual, but as a sociological form determined by the dominant episteme
and, therefore, derived from it. History cannot be constructed around the axis
of man, taken as something constant at its core and developing in particulars.
History is a change of epistemologies and dominant epistemes, inextricably
linked to the dispositive of power. Therefore, the only reliable axis of history
is the epistemological axis, which, in turn, predetermines history itself as a
functional narrative. In the Modern era (the classical period), a normative
conception of the human (individual) subject as the pole of being, the world,
life, and society was introduced. But this introduction itself is a feature of a
very specific historical era and the episteme that prevailed in it, which did not
exist before and may well not exist in the future. Consequently, Foucault
concludes that in other epistemological contexts, the subject of Modernity did
not exist and will not exist in the future. For the future, this means a call to
dismantle the subject and search for new candidates to represent the
normative individual.
Applied to the political sphere, Foucault's analysis of knowledge as
the main dispositive of power and of the central significance of
authoritative discourse in the general practice of domination became a
classic thesis of European social and political disciplines from the 1960s
onwards.f power and of the central significance of
authoritative discourse in the general practice of domination became a
classic thesis of European social and political disciplines from the 1960s
onwards.

--- PAGE BREAK ---entral significance of
authoritative discourse in the general practice of domination became a
classic thesis of European social and political disciplines from the 1960s
onwards.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

459
Chapter 1. Political Philosophy of Postmodernism
The 20th century. The dispositif is the arsenal with which power ensures its
stability, continuity and permanence. According to Foucault, power is
primarily the establishment of a dominant epistemology, and everything
else flows from this. Consequently, the organisation of mental space
through culture, education, value systems, etc. is the main instrument for
establishing, maintaining and, in some cases, revolutionarily overthrowing
the model of power. It is not a question of which individual, group or even
class dominates society; it is a question of how they justify this particular
system, instilling in society the idea of its immutability, legitimacy and lack
of alternatives. Following the Marxist Gramsci, Foucault and other
postmodernists focus on culture, i.e. the non-political part of the
superstructure, which, in their view, is actually a more solid foundation than
the economy. Thus, the entire Marxist model, already modified by Gramsci,
is finally turned upside down. At the heart of society is not the economy,
but the subconscious, from which the roots of episteme grow.
Biopower and biopolitics
The late modernity according to Foucault, in which we live, is based on
this rethinking of the classical (for modernity) symmetries of the political.
The desire for democratisation, atomisation, further immanentisation and the
ever-increasing degree of materialism have revealed the close connection
between power and the biological roots of life. This led Foucault to the
concept of biopower and biopolitics(1) . Continuing the main line of research
he began in his early works, Foucault concludes that, ultimately, control over
minds is control over bodies, since, from a materialistic point of view,
consciousness is the sublimation of materiality. Control over physicality
through healthcare, demographic regulation, and the economics of pain and
pleasure is the main dispositive of power. It is this control that determines the
configuration of the dominant episteme, which, through the establishment of
"norms" — and the most fundamental norm defining what is to be understood
by "health" and "illness" — controls not only consciousness but also the
physical level of human beings.
From this, Foucault arrives at the concept of the "biopolitics of desire,"
believing that epistemology is built on suppression, surveillance
1   Foucault M. Dits et écrits. P.: Gallimard, 2001.ings.
From this, Foucault arrives at the concept of the "biopolitics of desire,"
believing that epistemology is built on suppression, surveillance
1   Foucault M. Dits et écrits. P.: Gallimard, 2001.

--- PAGE BREAK ---cault arrives at the concept of the "biopolitics of desire,"
believing that epistemology is built on suppression, surveillance
1   Foucault M. Dits et écrits. P.: Gallimard, 2001.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

460
Part 4. Political Philosophy of Postmodernism
and control over the deepest aspects of human biological existence.
Biopower is the real power that asserts its verticality through
manipulation of the bottom layers of the unconscious, directly bordering
the body.
This picture changes the meaning of revolution in late modernity,
transferring it to the psychoanalytic and biological level. This line was later
developed by another postmodernist, the Italian philosopher Giorgio
Agamben.
Gilles Deleuze: the will to nothingness
Postmodern philosophy is most vividly represented in the work of
French
philosopher
Gilles
Deleuze
and
his
regular
co-author,
psychoanalyst Félix Guattari.
Deleuze accepts Nietzsche's thesis of European nihilism, but rejects the
Übermensch as the one who, according to Nietzsche, is called upon to
overcome nothingness. Nothing needs to be overcome, nothing needs to be
desired, Deleuze asserts, basing on this principle the "will to nothingness"
(2).Deleuze's nothingness belongs to the French philosophical tradition of
intense modernism, as understood by Lacan (as a synonym for the real
).
The peculiarity of Deleuze's interpretation of nothingness lies in the fact
that he removes it from the realm of the real (Lacan) and places it in the
zone of indirect but intense attention. "Nothingness" is no longer hidden, but
appears in the form of a given, in the form of a phenomenon.
Following "nothingness," which, according to Deleuze, is the will of
postmodern philosophical thought, matter comes into view, which he
interprets as corporeality. For him — as for all materialists and immanentists
(in particular, those continuing the line of Spinoza's substantialism, whom
Deleuze considered, along with Democritus, the Epicureans and the Stoics, to
be a philosophical beacon) — matter is identical to being, understood,
however, negatively. There is only matter (which does not exist), and
everything else is its folds (4).Corporeality occupies the place of Lacan's real
order here.
1   Agamben, G. Homo sacer. Sovereign Power and Bare Life. Moscow: Evropa, 2011.
(2)  "Man would rather want nothing than want nothing." See: De L'Eau, G. Nietzsche. St.
Petersburg: Axioma, Kolna, 1997. In this formula, it is easy to recognise Lacan's idea of the
identity of Eros and Thanatos in the order of the real, rising in the form of the first impulse into
the symbolic.
3   Deleuze, G. The Logic of Sense. Moscow: Academic Project, 2010.
4   Deleuze, G. The Fold. Leibniz and the Baroque. Moscow: Logos Publishing House, 1997.rm of the first impulse into
the symbolic.
3   Deleuze, G. The Logic of Sense. Moscow: Academic Project, 2010.
4   Deleuze, G. The Fold. Leibniz and the Baroque. Moscow: Logos Publishing House, 1997.

--- PAGE BREAK ---lse into
the symbolic.
3   Deleuze, G. The Logic of Sense. Moscow: Academic Project, 2010.
4   Deleuze, G. The Fold. Leibniz and the Baroque. Moscow: Logos Publishing House, 1997.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

461
Chapter 1. Political Philosophy of Postmodernism
The Body Without Organs: The Political Doctrine of Shaltai-
Boltai
In his study of corporeality, Deleuze enthusiastically descends into the
microcosm, focusing on the weak currents and desires that rise from the
depths of corporeality and move towards what he calls the "surface" or
"screen." This is the outer side of corporeality, the skin. When Deleuze talks
about corporeality, he does not mean an already organised human or any
other body. He is not interested in the body, but in corporeality, that is,
what lies beneath the body. Using Antonin Artaud's visionary metaphor,
Deleuze introduces the concept of the "body without organs" as the basic
matrix of corporeality, preceding interaction with the constructed "external
world," which represents ontic furrows (l'espace strié) and forces the original
"body without organs" to acquire organs, that is, to become a body from
corporeality. According to Deleuze, the "body without organs" is the free
sliding of a ball on an absolutely smooth surface (l'espace lisse) in any
direction. This is the formula of corporeality as such, that is, of being as
matter. Everything else is superimposed on this instance. Deleuze finds an
analogue of Artaud's "body without organs" in the figure of Humpty Dumpty
from Lewis Carroll's (1832–1898) Alice's Adventures in Wonderland.Humpty
Dumpty is represented as an egg, as indicated by the description of his
appearance and the very fact that, having fallen from the wall, he broke into
many small pieces, like an eggshell, and consequently scattered irretrievably.
But the symbolism of the egg in ancient cultures refers to the image of the
Great Mother. Thus, once again, postmodern images refer us to the political
philosophy of the Mother, the third kind of Plato's "Timaeus."
The "body without organs" (the surface of Shaltai-Boltai) as the main
pole of the new conceptuality of postmodernism is the historical culmination
in the formation of the lexicon of the philosophy of the Mother. Deleuze,
continuing the line of materialist philosophy, reaches its final, deepest level:
he constructs a philosophy from the perspective of matter.
The "body without organs" (gynecocratic Shaltai-Boltai) is a pure product
of the Earth without the participation of Heaven.
The splitting of the object: chaosmos
Deleuze, moving towards extreme materiality, towards nothingness,
continues the philosophical dismemberment of the object, coming close to
1   Carroll, L. Alice's Adventures in Wonderland. Moscow: Labyrinth, 2014.g towards extreme materiality, towards nothingness,
continues the philosophical dismemberment of the object, coming close to
1   Carroll, L. Alice's Adventures in Wonderland. Moscow: Labyrinth, 2014.

--- PAGE BREAK ---teriality, towards nothingness,
continues the philosophical dismemberment of the object, coming close to
1   Carroll, L. Alice's Adventures in Wonderland. Moscow: Labyrinth, 2014.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

462
Part 4. Political Philosophy of Postmodernism
to that level of atomistically understood matter where the cosmos ends and
chaos begins. But pure chaos or pure nothingness, which must be strived for
and desired, are unattainable. Therefore, Deleuze fixes his attention on the
boundary where the cosmos ends and chaos begins. Following the writer
James Joyce1  (1882–1941), calls this "chaosmos." The term "chaosmos" is
derived from the Greek words chaos, aoF, and osmos, zEoF. Chaos (aoF) refers
to the state preceding the formation of matter, while "osmosis" (zEoF)
denotes the chemical process of "unidirectional diffusion through a
semipermeable membrane of solvent molecules towards a higher
concentration of the solute." Osmosis gives chaos a direction, always oriented
in the opposite direction to the impulse or disturbance, which generates
Democritus' whirlwinds, vortices, always tending towards dispersion and rest.
Disturbance and rest, agitating the mass of pure corporeality, are juxtaposed
by Deleuze with the Eros and Thanatos of psychoanalysis, which allows us to
unite philosophy, psychology and physics into a common postmodern model,
analogous to the cosmos in earlier philosophical systems. Chaos seeps
through its inherent membrane, generating not order and structures, but
precisely "vortices" consisting not yet of the existing, but of Democritus' CXv.
According to Deleuze, God (as a hypothesis of transcendence and
vertical symmetry) gives meaning to the world. And then reality becomes
a world, an order. But the abolition of God (the death of God according to
Nietzsche) means the loss of meaning (le sens), its dispersion in a purely
immanent topicality of the surface or, more precisely, the replacement of
meaning with the moment of eventful meaninglessness, a quantum of non-
sense (le non-sens), which gives rise to a completely different post-
structure, where the vertical (transcendent) dimension of God falls away
(and if it does not disappear immediately, then, detached from the act of
signification, it is quickly forgotten as Deus Otiosus).
Thus, instead of the world, spontaneous meaningless whirlpools of
chaotic emissions appear.
Accordingly, the external world in postmodern ontology is constituted
as turbulent flows of meaningless quanta, spreading in a bizarre and
arbitrary rhythm in planes and symmetries, nominally two-dimensional, but
at the same time going beyond the parameters of purely geometric laws in the
spirit of Mandelbrot's theory of the geometry of nature and fractals.
1  Joyce, J. Finnegans Wake // Joyce, J. Collected Works: In 3 vols. Vol. 3. Moscow: ZnA.
1994.of purely geometric laws in the
spirit of Mandelbrot's theory of the geometry of nature and fractals.
1  Joyce, J. Finnegans Wake // Joyce, J. Collected Works: In 3 vols. Vol. 3. Moscow: ZnA.
1994.

--- PAGE BREAK ---laws in the
spirit of Mandelbrot's theory of the geometry of nature and fractals.
1  Joyce, J. Finnegans Wake // Joyce, J. Collected Works: In 3 vols. Vol. 3. Moscow: ZnA.
1994.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

463
Chapter 1. Political Philosophy of Postmodernism
The splitting of the subject: rhizome
If chaosmos is a postmodern replacement for the abolished cosmos,
then the classical subject is even more unacceptable to postmodernists.
"The world has lost its centre, the subject can no longer create dichotomies,
but it achieves a higher unity — the unity of ambivalence and
overdetermination — in a dimension that is always additional to the
dimension of its own object,"(1)  according to Deleuze and Guattari. And
instead of the subject, they propose another concept — "rhizome," a
rootstock.
This concept is borrowed from botany and describes a special type of
plant and fungus that spreads horizontally, parallel to the surface of the
earth, sending out roots and stems in separate nodes of a branched
network system. Rhizomes differ from other plants in that, unlike other
plants, pulling out the root and stem does not lead to the death of the
entire organism, which continues to exist as a whole regardless of the loss
of individual elements. By pulling out a plant with its roots, we destroy
only one of its forms, but do not damage the whole, the entire rhizome,
which spreads invisibly horizontally under the ground further and further.
Deleuze introduces the concept of "rhizome" in his seminal work
Capitalism and Schizophrenia: A Thousand Plateaus, written together with F.
Guattari:
(…)— unlike trees and their roots, a rhizome connects any one point to
any other point, and each of its features does not necessarily refer to features
of the same nature; it introduces into play extremely different modes of signs
and even states of non-signs. The rhizome does not allow itself to return to
the One or to the many. It is not One that becomes two, nor even one that
directly becomes three, four, five, etc. It is not many things derived from
One, or to which One is added (n+7). It is not made of units, but of
dimensions, or rather of mobile directions. It has no beginning and no end,
but always a middle from which it grows and spills over the edge. It
constitutes linear sets with n dimensions, without subject or object — sets
that can be laid out on a consistency plane and from which a unit (n–1) is
always subtracted. Such a set changes its dimensions only by changing its
own nature and undergoing metamorphoses.   In   , the opposite of   is
structure,   defined by
1  Deleuze, G. and Guattari, F. Anti-Oedipus: Capitalism and Schizophrenia. A Thousand
Plateaus. P. 11.own nature and undergoing metamorphoses.   In   , the opposite of   is
structure,   defined by
1  Deleuze, G. and Guattari, F. Anti-Oedipus: Capitalism and Schizophrenia. A Thousand
Plateaus. P. 11.

--- PAGE BREAK ---going metamorphoses.   In   , the opposite of   is
structure,   defined by
1  Deleuze, G. and Guattari, F. Anti-Oedipus: Capitalism and Schizophrenia. A Thousand
Plateaus. P. 11.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

464
Part 4. Political Philosophy of Postmodernism
a set of points and positions, binary relations between these points and
one-to-one relations between positions, the rhizome is made only of lines
— lines of segmentarity, stratification as measurements, as well as lines of
slippage or deterritorialisation as its maximum measurement, according to
which and following it, multiplicity undergoes metamorphoses, changing its
nature. We will not confuse such lines, or outlines, with tree-like
descendants, which are only localisable connections between points and
positions. In contrast to the tree, the rhizome is not an object of reproduction:
neither external reproduction as a tree-image, nor internal reproduction as a
tree-structure. The rhizome is anti-genealogy. It is short-term memory or
anti-memory. The rhizome acts through variation, expansion, conquest,
seizure, and puncture. In contrast to graphic images, drawings or
photographs, in contrast to tracings, the rhizome deals with a map that must
be produced, constructed, always dismantled, connected, revisited, modified
— in multiple inputs and outputs with their own lines of escape. It is the
tracings that need to be transferred to maps, not the other way around. In
contrast to
centred
(even
polycentred)
systems
with
hierarchical
communication and pre-established connections, the rhizome is an acentric,
non-hierarchical and non-signifying system — without a General, without
organisational memory or a central automaton, uniquely defined only by the
circulation of states. What is open to discussion in the rhizome is its
relationship with sexuality, as well as with animals, plants, the world,
politics, books, natural and artificial things — a relationship that is
completely different from the tree-like relationship: any kind of "becoming."
The plateau is always in the middle — neither at the beginning nor at the
end. The rhizome consists of plateaus.
 ic topology of consciousness and the machine of desires
The rhizome is the surface of a great corporeality, an instance in which
the fundamental topic of consciousness is formed. In the usual case, the
human structure is organised vertically: trunk (stem),
1  Deleuze, G., Guattari, F. Anti-Oedipus: Capitalism and Schizophrenia. A Thousand
Plateaus. Pp. 37–38.ness is formed. In the usual case, the
human structure is organised vertically: trunk (stem),
1  Deleuze, G., Guattari, F. Anti-Oedipus: Capitalism and Schizophrenia. A Thousand
Plateaus. Pp. 37–38.

--- PAGE BREAK ---he usual case, the
human structure is organised vertically: trunk (stem),
1  Deleuze, G., Guattari, F. Anti-Oedipus: Capitalism and Schizophrenia. A Thousand
Plateaus. Pp. 37–38.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

465
Chapter 1. Political Philosophy of Postmodernism
branches and crown are the upper levels of thinking presence, the roots are
reverse projections into the unconscious. At the same time, consciousness
and the unconscious are constituted simultaneously in one of the moments
of corporeality, forming a concrete body with its eidos, "form" (crown) and
"matter" (roots).
The rhizome is constantly "between" or, as Deleuze and Guattari put it:
"Plato is always in the middle — neither at the beginning nor at the end." The
surface on which and in which the rhizome lives is a screen of desires, onto
which the desire machine projects them. These desires are not articulated or
rational. Deleuze and Guattari oppose the reconstruction of desire in Freud's
psychoanalysis, which they accuse of "patriarchal" and "phallocentric"
interpretations of Eros. Instead, they offer a female view of Eros as desire in
its scattered, unfocused and non-finalised form. The scattered
paneroticism of the Great Mother, which knows no prohibitions, is
contrasted with the patriarchy of classical Freudianism. Thus, delving into
the worlds of corporeality leads Deleuze and Guattari to the thesis that the
taboo on incest must be lifted, since, in their view, this cultural
requirement reflects mechanisms of repression and is the basis of
authoritarianism and dictatorship.
authoritarianism and dictatorship.
The liberation of the "black of depth"
In Logic of Sense, speaking of the Cynics and Stoics, Deleuze describes with
great sympathy the appeal to the "black depth":
There is a clear reorientation of all thought and of what is meant by the
ability to think: there is no longer any depth or height. The mockery
directed at Plato by the Cynics and Stoics is countless. And it is always a
question of overthrowing Ideas, of showing that the incorporeal does not
reside in the heights, but on the surface, and that it is not the supreme
cause, but only a superficial effect, not Essence, but an event. And with
regard to depth, they argued that it is a digestive illusion that complements
the ideal optical illusion. What does such gluttony, the apology of incest
and cannibalism, really mean? The latter theme is present in both
Chrysippus and Diogenes the Cynic. And although Diogenes Laertius
does not explain Chrysippus' views, he gives a very detailed explanation
regarding Diogenes: "There is nothing wrong with eating the meat of any
animal: even eating human flesh is not a crime, as is evident from the
customs of other peoples. In factdetailed explanation
regarding Diogenes: "There is nothing wrong with eating the meat of any
animal: even eating human flesh is not a crime, as is evident from the
customs of other peoples. In fact

--- PAGE BREAK ---regarding Diogenes: "There is nothing wrong with eating the meat of any
animal: even eating human flesh is not a crime, as is evident from the
customs of other peoples. In fact

--- PAGE BREAK ---

466
Part 4. Political Philosophy of Postmodernism
In fact, everything exists in everything and through everything: bread
contains meat, vegetables contain bread, and in general, all bodies seem to
penetrate each other in tiny particles through invisible pores. This is how he
explains it in his "Feast," if only the tragedy was written by him... This
statement, which also applies to incest, asserts that deep down, everything is
a mixture. However, there are no rules according to which one mixture can be
considered worse than another. Contrary to what Plato believed, there is no
external higher measure for such mixtures and combinations of Ideas that
would allow us to determine good and bad mixtures. And likewise, contrary to
the pre-Socratics, there is no immanent measure capable of fixing the order
and sequence of mixing in the depths of Nature: any mixture is no better or
worse than the bodies that permeate each other and the coexisting parts. How,
then, can the world of mixtures not be a world of black depths where
everything is permitted?
The "world of black depth" is a rhizomatic space of negative freedom:
at the human level, freedom from reason; at the political level, freedom
from power. Deleuze and Guattari interpret dictatorship in politics as a
continuation in the social sphere of the repression of rationality (the stem
and crown) against corporeality (the roots and rhizome itself). According to
Deleuze and Guattari, a truly free society is only possible when female
sexuality is completely liberated and legally normalised, contrary to the
repressive models of phallocentric hierarchical socio-political systems.
Based on this idea, Deleuze and Guattari proposed a special reform of
psychoanalysis, calling for the rejection of rigid gender dualism (which, in
their opinion, reflects the vertical topography of crown/roots) but rather
unarticulated rhizomatic sexuality (which, in parallel with Deleuze and
Guattari, was conceptualised by another postmodern philosopher, Michel
Foucault(2) ).
True liberation, according to Deleuze, that is, the limit of the realisation
of the Modern's programme of liberation, boils down to the liberation of the
very "black depths" of corporeality, where "everything is a mixture," and,
accordingly, any epistemologies based on difference, division and,
accordingly, rationality, including prohibitions on cannibalism, incest or
paedophilia, are forms of violence,
1  Deleuze, G. The Logic of Sense. Pp. 176–177.
2  Foucault, Michel. The Will to Truth: Beyond Knowledge, Power and Sexuality. Works from
Different Years. Moscow: Kastal, 1996.are forms of violence,
1  Deleuze, G. The Logic of Sense. Pp. 176–177.
2  Foucault, Michel. The Will to Truth: Beyond Knowledge, Power and Sexuality. Works from
Different Years. Moscow: Kastal, 1996.

--- PAGE BREAK ---e,
1  Deleuze, G. The Logic of Sense. Pp. 176–177.
2  Foucault, Michel. The Will to Truth: Beyond Knowledge, Power and Sexuality. Works from
Different Years. Moscow: Kastal, 1996.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

467
Chapter 1. Political Philosophy of Postmodernism
oppression and dictatorship against what Deleuze considers synonymous with
existence itself — the nihilistic pulsation of the chaosmos.
Schizomass
Deleuze believes that rhizomatic existence is characteristic of people
suffering from schizophrenia, i.e., forms of mental disorders that involve a
splitting of consciousness and a transfer of consciousness from the subject
to external objects or internal poles of consciousness and will that are not
controlled by the mind (hence voices, hallucinations, etc.). According to
Deleuze, masses, taken as a whole, are closer to the model of
schizophrenia than individual personalities structured by patriarchal
culture along the crown/roots axis. Therefore, Deleuze sides with what he
calls "schizomass"
(1),suggesting that schizophrenia should not be
considered abnormal, but rather normalised by expanding the concept of
what is healthy and sick in relation to the human psyche. In patriarchal
culture, Deleuze believes, the metaphor of the tree is taken as the
norm,and therefore everything that deviates from it is considered a
pathology and a disease. But if we put rhizome, surface and chaosmos at
the forefront, that is, if we take a matriarchal-centric view of things,
illness becomes a sign of health, and rationality becomes a special case of
madness. The rehabilitation of madness and the exposure of this pejorative
concept as the result of patriarchal and repressive will to power (3)are the
subject of the works of postmodernist Foucault, who developed, in parallel
with Deleuze, similar matriarchal philosophical trends.
Deleuze had a decisive influence on Postmodern philosophy,
including its political projects, which consisted in radicalising liberation,
but no longer only of the subject, but also of the object, in favour of the
triumph of rhizomatic structures.
Micropolis and micropolitics
The political philosophy of postmodernism is built on these
foundations. It should be noted that, on the one hand, this is a continuation
of modernism, decisive steps in the same direction — towards the
philosophy of the Mother, materialism and the search for the atom
1   Deleuze, G. & Guattari, F. Anti-Oedipus: Capitalism and Schizophrenia. A Thousand Plateaus.
2   Ibid. p. 21.
3  Foucault, Michel. Madness and Civilisation: A History of Insanity in the Age of Reason.
London: Verso, 1969.i, F. Anti-Oedipus: Capitalism and Schizophrenia. A Thousand Plateaus.
2   Ibid. p. 21.
3  Foucault, Michel. Madness and Civilisation: A History of Insanity in the Age of Reason.
London: Verso, 1969.

--- PAGE BREAK ---Capitalism and Schizophrenia. A Thousand Plateaus.
2   Ibid. p. 21.
3  Foucault, Michel. Madness and Civilisation: A History of Insanity in the Age of Reason.
London: Verso, 1969.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

468
Part 4. Political Philosophy of Postmodernism
and individuality through their progressive liberation from restrictive
structures (order, power, hierarchy). On the other hand, postmodernism
overcomes certain boundaries inherent in modernism.
First of all, the idea of the atom as something that has already been
achieved — in physics and politics (the individual) — is called into
question. Refining the content of atomism in science reveals subatomic
dimensions that, at the quantum level, demonstrate new laws and
principles that differ significantly from classical mechanics. Thus, the atom
becomes "indivisible" only conditionally, that is,
a "volume," a conglomerate of other particles, which in turn are not
"Atoms" (i.e., indivisible) are in fact quite divisible. Thus, an object acquires
new content, or more precisely, the old content is gradually drained away.
Postmodernists say that the atom is an ideal goal, not a given reality.
Everything we have, even at the quantum level, is still a combinatorial
agglomerate, a structure, and it must in turn be subjected to
decomposition, anatomy, dismemberment. These structures must be torn
apart, new contenders for the status of "atoms" must be taken not as a
whole, but as a combinatorial ensemble. French philosopher Marcel
Conche(1)  says that the world is no longer a world, but an extravagant
ensemble, offering its own ontology of chance, rejecting any kind of
wholeness.
The same thing happens with the atom of society (politics) — the
individual. A person is no longer an individual, but an agglomeration of
separate combinatorial elements, whose freedom lies in the fact that they can
be assembled in different ways, like mosaics. The totality of individual
content can form any shape at the level of the subject. The individual is a
dividuum and a rhizome. It is possible to change one's past and future, to
invent and create, because everything in human society is invented, created
and constructed. But everything that is constructed can be deconstructed and
reconstructed.
When such views are given normative status, they become the basis of
science, technology, culture, medicine and, ultimately, politics itself.
Everything in human society is subject to fragmentation, right down to
normative identity, which becomes
1  Conche M. L’Aléatoire. P.: Les Belles Lettres, 2012.
2Deconstruction is a key term in postmodern philosophy, introduced by Jacques Derrida
(1930–2004), meaning the placing of any statement — broader than any thing in general — in
the historical context where it first arose in order to Derrida (1930–2004), meaning the
placement of any statement — more broadly, any thing in general — in the historical context in
which it first arose, in order to show how, in the process of quotation or reproduction, it has
lost and distorted its meaning.nt — more broadly, any thing in general — in the historical context in
which it first arose, in order to show how, in the process of quotation or reproduction, it has
lost and distorted its meaning.

--- PAGE BREAK ---ny thing in general — in the historical context in
which it first arose, in order to show how, in the process of quotation or reproduction, it has
lost and distorted its meaning.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

469
Chapter 1. Political Philosophy of Postmodernism
Thus, Deleuze and Guattari's schizo-masses become a political and social
norm, and schizophrenia itself is not a clinical diagnosis, but a legitimate —
and even privileged — form of thinking.
Any wholeness, any structure — from the state to the individual — thus
comes under suspicion of being "totalitarian," "dictatorial," suppressing real
atomism in favour of holistic structures, albeit disguised as "atoms."
Modernity, in its division of society, has reached the individual.
Postmodernity goes further and insists on the splitting of the individual, on
the schizophrenisation of culture, and then of politics.
Thus, for postmodernists, classical democracy or secular socialism are
insufficient precisely because they preserve the classical conception of the
individual. Yes, it is possible to liberate the human individual from various
forms of collective identity — from religion, the state, the nation, even
gender — and this has almost been achieved in late modernity. But
postmodernism goes further and discovers that it is not the right thing that has
been liberated. Instead of a victim of freedom, we have a maniac, a criminal,
a dictator, only of a lower level. Consequently, the political struggle for the
liberation of man turns into a political struggle for liberation from man.
The goal becomes the discovery of a new "atom" — the body-without-
organs (political Jack-in-the-box), rhizomes, schizomass, "parliament of
organs," etc.
Postmodern politics shifts the focus from society to the individual. The
human individual is now seen as a polis. The average person has one centre
of decision-making: consciousness. This is a kind of government. As a rule,
the micro-level political system is a dictatorship of the ego. The ego, the
subject, reason and will are not simply a government, but a tyrant, an
autocrat. It is cruel, rational, intolerant; it tyrannically rules over its subjects,
the "feelings," threatening them, judging them and suppressing them.
In a schizophrenic, who is the norm of liberated postmodernism, the
monarchy breaks down into (at least) two opposing camps. Thus, a person
becomes a place of rebellion, revolution, and even civil war. One part of
the micro-community wants one thing, the other wants another. In some
cases, tyrannical reason prevails, in others its power collapses under the
pressure of multiple "I's" — voices, personalities, motivations, impulses,
intrusions from the unconscious. From the point of view ofannical reason prevails, in others its power collapses under the
pressure of multiple "I's" — voices, personalities, motivations, impulses,
intrusions from the unconscious. From the point of view of

--- PAGE BREAK ---ils, in others its power collapses under the
pressure of multiple "I's" — voices, personalities, motivations, impulses,
intrusions from the unconscious. From the point of view of

--- PAGE BREAK ---

470
Part 4. Political Philosophy of Postmodernism
In classical modern psychiatry, schizophrenia is a disease, but from a
postmodern perspective, the absence of schizophrenia is a disease because it
is violence against the multitude of "selves" that live within us. it is
repression against desires, a dictatorship of consciousness that turns the
multidimensionality of the human rhizome into submissive slaves. Thus,
from now on, it is not a politically and hierarchically organised society, but
the individual human personality that becomes Leviathan, established by a
"social contract" of elements of the sub-subject — individual — level. The
whole problem of realists ( supporters of anthropological pessimism in the
spirit of Hobbes) and liberals (continuing the line of Locke) is transferred to
the micro level. The former defend reason as the Leviathan of the micro-
polis, fearing the destruction that could result from the liberation of sub-
individual schizophrenic personalities and the "seeping" chaos of impulses
and dark desires. The latter, on the contrary, see in this
"progress," "development," and "liberation of creative possibilities," leading
to the enrichment of differences and the deepening of democracy. What was
considered a disease in a totalitarian society, postmodernists assert, is in fact
free creativity. Most artists, performers, and talented individuals are
schizophrenic, and many charismatic politicians, preachers, and orators have
obvious mental disorders. Among brilliant scientists, there are many people
whose consciousness differs significantly from the average norm and who
represent an anomaly. Therefore, we simply need to shift the emphasis. What
was the norm in Modernism must be recognised as a deviation, and vice
versa. According to the logic of Deleuze-Guattari, non-schizophrenics are
subhuman, constrained, repressed, sick creatures suffering under the
tyrannical power of their own
mind, organised along a vertical axis.
According to Deleuze and Guattari, the ordinary person is based on
the metaphor of a tree. Its roots are the past, or a reference to its
physicality, to its material basis; the crown and branches are its future, or
consciousness. And if you take away a person's past and pull out their roots,
the tree will fall; if you cut down the crown, the personality also disappears.
A blow to the roots or the crown leads to the elimination of the individual.
This is the law of classical — "vertical," according to Deleuze —
anthropology. Here we see that while modernists limited themselves to the
overthrow of the political vertical, believing the horizontal (democracy) to
have been achieved, in the micropolitics of postmodernism this vertical is
revealed again at the level of the individual. Society may be democratic,
but the individual, as a unit of that society, remains a totalitarian and
hierarchical system. Thus, me-m this vertical is
revealed again at the level of the individual. Society may be democratic,
but the individual, as a unit of that society, remains a totalitarian and
hierarchical system. Thus, me-

--- PAGE BREAK ---revealed again at the level of the individual. Society may be democratic,
but the individual, as a unit of that society, remains a totalitarian and
hierarchical system. Thus, me-

--- PAGE BREAK ---

471
Chapter 1. Political Philosophy of Postmodernism
the dimension of the Political is negated. Then the topology of Deleuze-
Guattari offers the following solution, noting that between the roots and the
crown there is a line of soil, which represents a kind of screen where the
lower, invisible, root, bodily, material ("the past" as achieved, existing,
reliable) connects with the manifested, conscious and future (fluid,
projective, unguaranteed). This is an intermediate territory where the body
connects with consciousness, and the past with the future, there is an "eternal
present". Its metaphor is the rhizome. By freeing humans from the past and
the future, from the burdensome physicality rooted in nothingness (the order of
the real, according to Lacan), but also from the dictatorship of consciousness,
humans become rhizomes. Until people become rhizomes, they remain
vulnerable, incomplete and tyrannical towards themselves.
These people must be freed by making them "full-fledged people," that
is, schizophrenics, changing first and foremost the very structure of
psychiatric diagnoses and assessments. Instead of the metaphor of a tree, we
need to adopt the metaphor of a rhizome, a mushroom bed, root crops, i.e.
horizontal network propagation — beneath the surface, with cultivation
rather than suppression of multiple — ephemeral, playful, random and
spontaneous — "selves". The ends should not meet in thought, as this would
undermine the tyranny of reason and guarantee creative freedom.
Thus, schizophrenia, the increasing splitting of consciousness, becomes
a process, pushing people towards progressive schizophrenisation, towards
the dispersion of the subject into sub-subjective multitudes.
A rhizomatic "person" is almost invulnerable. We can cut off their
crown, we can uproot them, but the rhizome will remain intact — it will sprout
new shoots. This is how communication works on social media and the
Internet in general. Change your nickname and avatar, close your account,
delete your chat history, and a virtual personality is gone. But you can create a
new virtual personality at any time. This transfers from the network to society,
offline. Here, a similar virtuality grows. People are changing their place of
residence, names, countries, professions, appearance and gender with
increasing ease. They live in an ephemeral present, arbitrarily changing their
roots and crowns, their physicality and consciousness. The rhizome may lose
its memory, consciousness, past and future. But it will retain its meaningless
eternal present, which spreads invisibly underground in all directions.
This is how profound democratisation of the individual occurs at the
micro level, and the rhizome becomes the most important concept in
postmodern politics.invisibly underground in all directions.
This is how profound democratisation of the individual occurs at the
micro level, and the rhizome becomes the most important concept in
postmodern politics.

--- PAGE BREAK ---nd in all directions.
This is how profound democratisation of the individual occurs at the
micro level, and the rhizome becomes the most important concept in
postmodern politics.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

472
Part 4. Political Philosophy of Postmodernism
 ism and liberalism of desires
The transition from policy to micro-policy, and accordingly from politics
to micro-politics, as we can see, repeats the main lines of force of modern
political philosophy, but in a different dimension. This change in dimension
is the main feature of postmodernism. However, as in the case of quantum
mechanics or the theory of relativity, the transition to a new level of
phenomena that are too small or too large somewhat changes the axioms
and physical laws, so postmodernist research into the micropolis — as the
structure of an individual taken as an agglomeration of heterogeneous and
independent particles (=micro-citizens) — is not a complete repetition of the
Political as it appears in Modernity. This correction is important in order
to better understand the peculiarity of micropolitics — much here remains
the same as in macropolitics (Modernity), only on a different scale, but
some things change. Nevertheless, some analogies between Leviathan and
micro-Leviathan are completely unacceptable. For example, we can apply the
scheme of the dispute between liberals and realists (mercantilists) to the
figure of the rhizomatic dividuum.
On the one hand, the postmodern individual is conceived as a
collection of sub-subjective units representing a micro-society. These are
impulses, phantoms, "voices" of organs and, ultimately, the basis of the
unconscious — the "desire machine" 1. It is precisely
The "desire machine" (as a "subconscious factory") generates a multitude
of individual micro-subjects, reducible to a diversity of desires that
construct their own "worlds," including "micro-egos," phenomenology,
and the objects toward which these desires are directed. The liberation of
the workers of this "desire factory" from the censorship of reason and
exploitation by higher levels of consciousness through the extraction of
"surplus value" is the revolutionary goal of postmodern politics or
"schizoanalysis." This corresponds to the transition from a hierarchical
organisation of the state to a democratic and, ultimately, civil society,
which at the individual level corresponds to the democratic organisation of
the quanta of desire. This is a kind of "quantum democracy" achieved
through the rhizomatisation and schizophrenisation of culture, politics,
education, medicine, etc.
On the other hand, however, the concept of the "desire factory" put
forward by Deleuze and Guattari is not accidental. There is nothing more
standardised
1   Deleuze, G., Guattari, F. Anti-Oedipus: Capitalism and Schizophrenia. A Thousand Plateaus.sire factory" put
forward by Deleuze and Guattari is not accidental. There is nothing more
standardised
1   Deleuze, G., Guattari, F. Anti-Oedipus: Capitalism and Schizophrenia. A Thousand Plateaus.

--- PAGE BREAK ---orward by Deleuze and Guattari is not accidental. There is nothing more
standardised
1   Deleuze, G., Guattari, F. Anti-Oedipus: Capitalism and Schizophrenia. A Thousand Plateaus.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

473
Chapter 1. Political Philosophy of Postmodernism
more uniform than a factory worker. In other words, the subhuman quanta
(more corresponding to the "individual" than to a single person) that make
up a human being are almost always serial and almost identical, differing
only in the smallest details, level of intensity, etc. And this is where
liberalism, or more precisely, micro-liberalism, comes into play. Realism at
the level of micro-politics, even accepting democratisation and the free
market of desires within the individual, still believes that in interaction
with others (the analogue of another state in "big politics" Modernity), the
highest authority should still have priority, which at the level of the
individual in micro-politics corresponds to reason, ego, and centralised
consciousness. Therefore, the liberation of sub-subjective elements must
take place within the boundaries of the individual, understood in the "old
way," that is, as a human being. When interacting with another
agglomeration, the first agglomeration must act as a centralised structure.
This corresponds to the state's monopoly on foreign trade, which is
insisted upon by mercantilism and realism. This is a kind of protectionist
policy that defends the entire territory on which this "desire machine"
operates.
Microliberalism insists on a different scenario. The uniformity of desires
at the deepest level is an invitation to free exchange, a schizoanalytic
analogue of free trade. Thus, an individual desire can enter into direct
contact with another desire in a special transindividual space, bypassing the
instance of the individual personality—the mind. This gives rise to the
thesis of transsexuality, which is not a relationship between two people
with gender polarity, but a rhizomatic oscillation of a multitude of desire-
factories that intersect directly with each other, without the mediation of the
individual ego. The ego blocks such freedom of exchange, acting as an
analogue of "nationalism" or "fascism." Love, according to Deleuze-
Guattari, unlike classical psychoanalysis, is not a matter for three — a man,
a woman, and the child they produce. Love gives rise to a multitude at once
and is the affair of a multitude of micro-subjects who may belong to any
individual-states.
Ultimately, from the liberal principle of free trade, Deleuze and
Guattari, who sympathised with Marxism, move on to the thesis
"proletarians of all countries, unite!", which means a call for a pansexual
revolution, that is, the total mixing of all rhizomatic desires into one
planetary tangle of an orgiastic network.thesis
"proletarians of all countries, unite!", which means a call for a pansexual
revolution, that is, the total mixing of all rhizomatic desires into one
planetary tangle of an orgiastic network.

--- PAGE BREAK ---s of all countries, unite!", which means a call for a pansexual
revolution, that is, the total mixing of all rhizomatic desires into one
planetary tangle of an orgiastic network.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

474
Part 4. Political Philosophy of Postmodernism
This analogy between macro-politics and micro-politics, which reduces
everything to the individual and at the same time to the trans-individual level,
was perfectly understood by the postmodernists themselves. Deleuze clearly
expressed this in a formula that is fundamental to postmodernism:
"Everything is politics" 1.
The transition to micropolitics and the centrality of the "desire factory"
puts the issue of gender at the forefront, which is reflected in gender politics.
If we accept "quantum liberalism" or "quantum Marxism," which at some
stage are fundamentally indistinguishable from each other — in their
common struggle against "quantum fascism" or "quantum realism," which
defends the sovereignty of reason, it is precisely the sphere of gender and
gender relations, their regulation and legal status that become the centre of
politics.
At the same time, both sexes are seen as agglomerations and
"nationalistic" conventions, since the "desire factories" deep within human
beings are neither masculine nor feminine, just as their "quantum workers" or
the impulses of desire they create are neither. Pansexuality is primary and
constitutes its own polarity — that is, the existence of one gender or another.
The dismantling of gender makes gender identity arbitrary, and accordingly,
the field of transindividual relations becomes playful, networked, rhizomatic,
without strictly defined boundaries and identities. This is a kind of gender (or
more precisely, transgender) internationalism.
This gives rise to the concept of "microfascism," i.e., any initiative to
preserve rational individuality and gender certainty. The struggle against
fascism, as previously against traditional society, unites postmodern liberals
with postmodern communists, which at the level of gender politics finds
expression in the promotion of the queer community (LGBT).
Microglobalism
Gender politics is at the centre of postmodern attention. It repeats the
political history of modernity on a new — quantum — level, except that
modernity liberated people from all forms of traditional identity, culminating
in liberalism and, in particular, its historic victory in 1991 over the last
serious and symmetrical, even utopian, ideological system of the 20th century.
1  Deleuze G., Parnet C. Dialogues. P.: Flammarion, 1996. P. 117.particular, its historic victory in 1991 over the last
serious and symmetrical, even utopian, ideological system of the 20th century.
1  Deleuze G., Parnet C. Dialogues. P.: Flammarion, 1996. P. 117.

--- PAGE BREAK ---oric victory in 1991 over the last
serious and symmetrical, even utopian, ideological system of the 20th century.
1  Deleuze G., Parnet C. Dialogues. P.: Flammarion, 1996. P. 117.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

475
Chapter 1. Political Philosophy of Postmodernism
the equally modernist ideology of communism, then postmodernism liberates
individual "desire factories" from man, from reason. The atom refines its
dimension, and the rhizome becomes the subject of revolution and liberation.
The transsexual transindividual network turns into an arena of the Political,
which
has
become
global.
Thus,
through
transindividuality
(and
transsexuality), micropolitics becomes a global phenomenon.
This corresponds to certain symmetries that we observe in quantum
physics, especially in superstring theory, which deals with microparticles
and processes, and in astrophysics, which deals with super-large "cosmic"
objects. It is telling that Epicurus claimed that atoms could be both very
small and very large, anticipating this symmetry. Thus, globalisation is
not simply combined with the transition to micropolitics, but both of these
phenomena, emerging at the lower limit of the Modern, represent a
homology — a distortion of mesoports (corresponding to the human
dimension) in both cases — and in the gigantic and microscopic spheres —
has a common structure. This is how postmodern civil society emerges,
where human individuality itself is dismantled as the last vestige of the
political philosophy of the classical eras.
Globalisation is a process of dismantling statehood that has reached a
critical point. Initially, society is reduced to the individual — this is the
political philosophy of modernity. This is reflected in the spread of the
ideology of "human rights," pacifism, and the destruction of all collective
identities — hence homosexual marriages, families of three or more members
of different or the same sex, etc. This is no longer a family, but a post-family,
consisting of a random set of any number of people. This is followed by the
proliferation of rhizomatic groups, the union of not individuals with
individuals, not even carriers of a certain gender in arbitrary combinations,
but a configuration of random folds of desires with other combinatorial
elements that create a post-society where the inter-individual is completely
replaced by the trans-individual. Through the individual, a special kind of
random chaotic interconnection occurs, and he himself becomes a conditional
unit, a hub, a conditional server or even a directory, detached from any fixed
forms — in the body, mind, memory, etc. Globalisation, starting with the
individual, logically leads to their abolition, their overcoming. Everything
becomes contingent, arbitrary, including and above all the human being.nd, memory, etc. Globalisation, starting with the
individual, logically leads to their abolition, their overcoming. Everything
becomes contingent, arbitrary, including and above all the human being.

--- PAGE BREAK ---balisation, starting with the
individual, logically leads to their abolition, their overcoming. Everything
becomes contingent, arbitrary, including and above all the human being.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

476
Part 4. Political Philosophy of Postmodernism
in his case). In relation to him, Democritus' principle of "isonomy"
(íovoEíP) begins to operate: "no more human than non-human."
Thus, internationality coincides with transindividuality and pansexuality,
which links globalisation and subindividual dispersion. Globalisation is a
microprocess. This is easy to see in technology: the convergence of states and
societies is parallel to the reduction of the main tools for connecting to the
network — processors, screens, etc. The global planetary network is growing
as the devices that provide access to it are shrinking.
The blurring of property
We have already discussed how the "integrity" of classical modern
ontology is disintegrating in postmodernism and the role played in this by
the transition from conventional money to digital, virtual money. Wealth and
credit are just digital codes that tell you whether you are rich or poor.
At the same time, the ways of acquiring wealth are becoming
increasingly volatile and game-like. For example, an Indonesian teenager
is capable (in theory) of earning a billion by playing the stock market. A
fashion blogger with no professional skills, intelligence or good looks, but
who has found the key to an audience, can become rich overnight. This
means that very young people can, almost by accident and without effort,
earn huge amounts of money, which removes the need to work.
When such a success story is told to millions, motivation to work
disappears. It becomes devalued. Easy money corrupts not only those who
receive it, but also the more numerous ones who learn about it from the
media or the internet. The billionaires who founded Google are not very
different from the army of programmers and hackers, but they caught a
favourable financial wave that carried them to the top. The rest — who are no
worse and no better than Google — were left behind. Psychologically, it's
understandable: as soon as we learn that someone has earned £100 million by
coming up with a more original packaging design for Pepsi, we are paralysed;
we no longer want to study or work, we just want £100 million. And the idea
of coming up with another packaging design can drive us crazy and ruin our
lives. We wait for the money to find its rightful owner, and we are convinced
that we are that owner.
The pursuit of wealth contributes to the relativisation of material things.
Wealth becomes easy, accidental, arbitrary, unrelated toits rightful owner, and we are convinced
that we are that owner.
The pursuit of wealth contributes to the relativisation of material things.
Wealth becomes easy, accidental, arbitrary, unrelated to

--- PAGE BREAK ---and we are convinced
that we are that owner.
The pursuit of wealth contributes to the relativisation of material things.
Wealth becomes easy, accidental, arbitrary, unrelated to

--- PAGE BREAK ---

477
Chapter 1. Political Philosophy of Postmodernism
earned with great difficulty and hard physical labour. For example, the son of
a representative of a large financial corporation receives a huge inheritance.
In order to keep this inheritance for two or three years, he will have to work
at least as hard as his father and fight for every dollar. And if he relaxes and
enjoys life instead, those billions will disappear before his eyes. Then it will
turn out that there were no billions at all — they were just arbitrary figures
that had to be maintained. Many oligarchs admit that they do not own money,
but that money owns them. If an oligarch stops for a moment in the frantic
pursuit of zeros in his account, which he cannot physically feel, he will fall
out of the race and most likely go bankrupt and lose everything. Either fight
for new zeros, or lose the ones you have.
Thus, money becomes not "property" but a process. Money no longer
belongs to anyone — on the contrary, it belongs to the oligarchs, bankers,
and managers who live off capital and follow its internal logic. This is how
wealth dissipates — the more property is established, the more scattered it
becomes. Private property becomes partial property. It breaks down into
many components that take on a dynamic character, and these whirlpools of
capital movement form vortexes, financial holes, and huge zones of offshore
prosperity with almost no connection to the owners. This is reflected in the
three basic laws of "technical analysis" of markets:
market action discounts everything,
Prices move in trends, history repeats itself 1.
This means that the movement of capital breaks away not only from its
owners, but also from the market fundamentals of supply and demand on
which classical capitalism is based. The market is completely autonomous,
and it is the subject, or more precisely, the global "hyperobject" that
autonomously controls everything within its purview — including producers,
consumers, and the traders themselves — the priests of the "golden calf."
People who play the stock market are usually quite young and do not
devote much of their lives to it, since they exist
1Murphy J. Technical Analysis of the Financial Markets. Upper Saddle River, NJ: Prentice
Hall, 1999.tock market are usually quite young and do not
devote much of their lives to it, since they exist
1Murphy J. Technical Analysis of the Financial Markets. Upper Saddle River, NJ: Prentice
Hall, 1999.

--- PAGE BREAK ---lly quite young and do not
devote much of their lives to it, since they exist
1Murphy J. Technical Analysis of the Financial Markets. Upper Saddle River, NJ: Prentice
Hall, 1999.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

478
Part 4. Political Philosophy of Postmodernism
Trading on the stock exchange requires the highest level of tension,
attention, intuition, and almost mystical involvement in the very process
of moving virtual flows, which are arbitrary and sovereign. A trader is not
a person, but a part of the life of global capital, a tiny algorithm. Therefore,
either he makes huge profits playing on the stock exchange and spends the
rest of his life in leisure and treatment, or he loses everything and
disappears, thrown into nowhere by the planetary centrifuge.
And history repeats itself all the time. The movement of capital has no
goal. It is a self-referential form of life that erodes both objects and
subjects.
In the early stages of capitalism, there was an exponential accumulation
of wealth. In postmodernism, however, it transitions into the release of
capital. Capital moves across the planet, followed by political and economic
processes, hordes of brokers with golden parachutes, and crowds of top
managers. All of them are driven by an independent process of the
disintegration of matter and its transition from the atomic to the subatomic
level and beyond, until a special and autonomous geometry of money, or
"alchemy of finance" (1), emerges  , when the nonlinear processes of chaotic
capital movement become synonymous with a new order in which money —
or, more precisely, its digital analogues, sub-money and trans-money — itself
creates chaotic and ephemeral worlds, "chaosmoses."
Money in postmodernism mutates, but initially it is itself a product of the
disintegration of real objects into economic atoms. Accordingly, money first
replaces goods, and then bills of exchange, promises and numbers appear.
The virtualisation of the economy, which we have already discussed, takes
place. The horizon of dispersion obscures the history of private property as
we know it — that is, the history of possessing a certain volume of the
external world, objects that are under the complete control of an individual
("the unique"). Now objects and even their financial equivalents are
becoming dispersed, intertwined, scattered so much that they cannot be held
— they dynamically twist, come to life, disintegrate into many even smaller
particles, ooze, penetrate each other, merge and die.
This is the movement of private property towards partial ownership in
the form of global capital. This is already physical matter, accessible to the
senses — and we are coming close to the matter that is nothing. The
meaning of capital originally consists in its
1   A term coined by George Soros.his is already physical matter, accessible to the
senses — and we are coming close to the matter that is nothing. The
meaning of capital originally consists in its
1   A term coined by George Soros.

--- PAGE BREAK ---cal matter, accessible to the
senses — and we are coming close to the matter that is nothing. The
meaning of capital originally consists in its
1   A term coined by George Soros.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

479
Chapter 1. Political Philosophy of Postmodernism
absolute nihilism, because capital is merely a process of fragmentation. But it
is precisely in Postmodernism, where everything is subject to a process of
dispersion, that this is particularly evident. In essence, capital is matter that
ontologically represents nothing — and, accordingly, money is nothing. And
the more money is considered
"everything," the more insignificant it becomes, the more the world, man,
and society are destroyed. Money is a nihilistic virus that does not lead to
the accumulation of wealth, but corrodes property itself in its ontological
dimension.
As the financial economy grows, the nihilistic stain spreads everywhere.
Freed from meaning, purpose, goals, objects, and cash, lying on a map —
that is, in a place that does not exist — money is a quantum of "antimatter"
that decomposes matter into invisible components.
Anti-state
At the same time, as we have seen, there is an erosion of the political
subject — the individual, who disintegrates into a rhizomatic-schizophrenic
ensemble. Together, these processes give rise to a completely new political
philosophy that differs fundamentally from the paradigm of Modernity. The
processes that reached their limit in Modernity are now crossing it. That is,
the process of immanentisation of values, anthropological models of
philosophy, and ontology are crossing the line that they themselves set as the
limit. Overcoming the limit is transgression. Therefore, transgressiveness
becomes the main leitmotif of Postmodernism. Since Modernism has fully
realised its programme, it must either return backwards (to Platonism, to a
religious society) or go deeper into itself (transition to the subatomic level). It
is obvious that Postmodernism does not even consider the first option, and its
transgression is directed precisely downward — to its lower limit, beyond
which lies the realm of pure nothingness.
This gives rise to the idea of building a "state in reverse." A state
which, in the context of the titanic phase of Modernity, was built from
Earth to Heaven, like a kind of "Tower of Babel," gradually loses even its
materialistic verticality in the course of Modernity's formation, spreading
out across the earth along with liberalism, internationalism, pacifism, and
globalism.
1   Dugin, A. G. The End of Economics.erialistic verticality in the course of Modernity's formation, spreading
out across the earth along with liberalism, internationalism, pacifism, and
globalism.
1   Dugin, A. G. The End of Economics.

--- PAGE BREAK ---ty in the course of Modernity's formation, spreading
out across the earth along with liberalism, internationalism, pacifism, and
globalism.
1   Dugin, A. G. The End of Economics.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

480
Part 4. Political Philosophy of Postmodernism
And when the horizontal — network — model becomes dominant, political
Postmodernism begins. It builds a "state," or more precisely, an "anti-state" in
the image of a funnel in the ground, a kind of "underground state" that
imitates an inverted tower leading to Heaven.
The Latin word "inferno", meaning "hell", literally means "that which is
below" (like the Russian word "Preispodnya"). Thus, in the political ontology
of Modernity — in its uniqueness — a giant pit is gradually being dug. Some
postmodernists call this "anti-state"
"Empire."
Negri and Hardt: "Empire" as a global anti-state
The concept of such a postmodern "Empire" was developed more fully
than others by two left-liberal authors, Antonio Negri and Michael Hardt,
typical representatives of postmodern political philosophy.
In this case, by "Empire" the authors mean their own original
sociological concept, with the help of which they want to describe the
modern global capitalist system of a network type, the prototype and
historical basis of which they consider to be the United States. This
understanding of "Empire" differs, of course, not only from Empire in its
classical European-Mediterranean, traditionalist understanding, but also from
the British Empire, which represents a complete paradigm of Modernity (the
spiral spread across the planet of Locke's Hartland).
According to Negri and Hardt, "Empire" is a paradigm of postmodern
social and political organisation that must be implemented on the basis of
capitalist liberal globalisation, but at the final stage (in the spirit of the
authors' own anarcho-communist ideas), power in the "Empire" must be
seized during a world revolution by a postmodern analogue of the Marxist
proletariat class — the "multitude," in the terminology of Negri and Hardt.
The authors broadly follow the Marxist model of understanding history
as a struggle between Labour and Capital, but are convinced that in the
conditions of Postmodernism, Labour and Capital are transformed almost
beyond recognition.
1   Hardt, M., Negri, A. Empire. Moscow: Praksis, 2004. P.abour and Capital, but are convinced that in the
conditions of Postmodernism, Labour and Capital are transformed almost
beyond recognition.
1   Hardt, M., Negri, A. Empire. Moscow: Praksis, 2004. P.

--- PAGE BREAK ---ut are convinced that in the
conditions of Postmodernism, Labour and Capital are transformed almost
beyond recognition.
1   Hardt, M., Negri, A. Empire. Moscow: Praksis, 2004. P.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

481
Chapter 1. Political Philosophy of Postmodernism
unrecognisable. Capital becomes so powerful, influential and victorious
that it acquires global characteristics, henceforth becoming a total
phenomenon. From now on, capital is not a part, it is everything1. It is the
"Empire". According to Negri and Hardt, the "Empire" is the next (last and
highest) phase of capitalism, characterised by capitalism becoming total,
global, boundless and omnipresent.
Labour, which in the industrial stage was a function of the industrial
proletariat, is now dispersed, decentralised and spread across endless millions
of individuals who are subordinate to the omnipresent and sophisticated
control of
"Empire."
In the postmodern era, the bearer of labour is not the working class,
but the "multitude" 2. The main scenario of confrontation unfolds between
the "Empire" and the "multitude".
In Postmodernism, everything has changed: Capital appears in a new
form, Labour appears in a new form, and the confrontation between them
unfolds in a new way. Instead of "discipline," Capital uses "control"; instead
of politics, it uses "biopolitics" (a reference to Foucault and Deleuze); instead
of
"States" are planetary networks. Capitalism in "Empire" is disguised, freed
from those attributes that were considered essential in the industrial era. The
nation-state dissolves, the strict "hierarchy of labour" is abolished, borders
are erased, interstate wars are abolished, etc. But still, the "Empire" keeps
everything under control and continues to extract the products of the
"multitude's" creativity. This control of the Empire is global in nature and
affects everyone equally.
A. Negri and M. Hardt insist that the "Empire" has nothing to do with
"imperialism." Classical "imperialism,"as described by Lenin, is the
expansion of bourgeois nation states into economically underdeveloped
countries and regions. Such
"imperialism," by expanding the territories under its control, does not change
the nature of the metropolis itself: the bourgeois state merely exploits the
colony as something "alien," "external." Furthermore, the "imperialism" of
one state inevitably clashes with the "imperialism" of another, as we have
seen in the dramatic history of the world wars of the 20th century.
1  Vivence, J. M. From the formal domination of capital to its real domination //Elements. 1997.
No. 7.
2  Hardt, M., Negri, A. Multitude: War and Democracy in the Age of Empire. Moscow: Cultural
Revolution, 2006.
3   Lenin, V. I. Imperialism, the Highest Stage of Capitalism. Moscow: Progress, 1984.7.
2  Hardt, M., Negri, A. Multitude: War and Democracy in the Age of Empire. Moscow: Cultural
Revolution, 2006.
3   Lenin, V. I. Imperialism, the Highest Stage of Capitalism. Moscow: Progress, 1984.

--- PAGE BREAK ---ri, A. Multitude: War and Democracy in the Age of Empire. Moscow: Cultural
Revolution, 2006.
3   Lenin, V. I. Imperialism, the Highest Stage of Capitalism. Moscow: Progress, 1984.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

482
Part 4. Political Philosophy of Postmodernism
“Empire” in the postmodern sense is something else. Its structure is such
that it includes any zone that falls under the control of the “Empire” along
with other spaces. The "Empire" is decentralised; it has no metropolis or
colonies; it is deliberately and inherently planetary and universal. The
"Empire" knows no boundaries; it is a global phenomenon. Globalisation is
the affirmation of the "Empire".
The "Empire" has three levels of control simultaneously, corresponding
to monarchical, aristocratic and democratic forms of government. Monarchy
corresponds to the concentration of "nuclear weapons", a sword of Damocles
hanging over the heads of the "masses", in a single centre. The aristocracy of
the "Empire" is represented by the owners of large transnational corporations.
Democracy has been replaced by a planetary spectacle,embodied in the mass
media system.
According to A. Negri and M. Hardt, unlike classical capitalism, today's
"Empire" appropriates not so much "surplus value," i.e., the results of
"productive labour," as the very "life energy" of the "multitude." In the new
conditions of technological development, the line between productive,
unproductive labour and simple reproduction has been blurred, according to
the authors. Today, it is the unstructured life force itself that is exploited,
evenly distributed throughout the human collective and freely manifested in
the elements of desire, love and creativity.
The essence of the "Empire" is corruption. Corruption (destruction) as a
principle is the direct opposite of "generation" (creation). The "multitude"
creates, the "Empire" only corrupts.
The "Empire" is an eternal crisis; it decomposes life, cools its fervour, and
usurps the "multitude's" desire for freedom, its will, and its creativity for its
own functioning through a subtle system of control.
Since mental labour plays a central role in economic development today,
the role of the means of production has changed significantly. The human
brain is becoming the main means of production, and therefore the machine is
integrated into the human body. On the other hand, new technological means
— computer technology, for example — are becoming a necessary part of the
human body and may soon be integrated into it.
1   Debord, G. The Society of the Spectacle. Moscow: Logos, 2000.
2   Agamben, G. Homo Sacer: Sovereign Power and Bare Life. Moscow: Evropa, 2011.f the
human body and may soon be integrated into it.
1   Debord, G. The Society of the Spectacle. Moscow: Logos, 2000.
2   Agamben, G. Homo Sacer: Sovereign Power and Bare Life. Moscow: Evropa, 2011.

--- PAGE BREAK ---d may soon be integrated into it.
1   Debord, G. The Society of the Spectacle. Moscow: Logos, 2000.
2   Agamben, G. Homo Sacer: Sovereign Power and Bare Life. Moscow: Evropa, 2011.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

483
Chapter 1. Political Philosophy of Postmodernism
Hence the theory of the "cyborg" as the main subject of the "Empire."
According to A. Negri and M. Hardt, a "cyborg" is a creature in which the
subject of labour (human) and the instrument of labour are fused beyond
recognition. Therefore, modern capital is not satisfied with ownership of the
means of production: direct disciplinary instruments of domination of the
classical police-economic type are proving ineffective. The "Empire" must
control the entire network, the elements of which are people, representatives
of the "multitude."
The United States and " " alterglobalism
The creation of the "Empire" is closely linked to the history of the United
States and its political system. However, the role of the United States in the
creation of the "Empire" is ambiguous. On the one hand, the Empire is being
created by the US and is based on its matrix. This is facilitated by the fact
that the foundations of US national policy since its inception have coincided
exactly with the model that is now being established as something global. But
at the same time, the Empire transcends the national American framework,
going beyond the limits of "classical imperialism," even American
imperialism. The United States is consolidating itself as a project, expanding
far beyond the boundaries of the nation-state. America is outgrowing
America, becoming planetary. The whole world is becoming global America.
After totally criticising globalism (The Empire), A. Negri and M. Hardt
offer an alternative. This alternative sums up the main points of the alter-
globalisation programme. That's why the authors are seen as the most
consistent theorists of alter-globalisation, and their work is considered
programmatic.
Overcoming " " from within
Following European postmodernists such as Gilles Deleuze, Félix
Guattari, Jean-François Lyotard, and others, they argue that the nature of the
changes that have taken place in the postmodern era is irreversible and
objective. The "empire" and its power are not accidental or arbitrary. They
are conditioned by the logic of human development. This is not a deviation
from modern progress, but its culmination. Western European humanity,
moving along the trajectory of its philosophical, social, economic and
political development, could not help but arrive at the Enlightenment,
capitalism, imperialism and, finally, globalism, postmodernism and the
"Empire".ry of its philosophical, social, economic and
political development, could not help but arrive at the Enlightenment,
capitalism, imperialism and, finally, globalism, postmodernism and the
"Empire".

--- PAGE BREAK ---cal, social, economic and
political development, could not help but arrive at the Enlightenment,
capitalism, imperialism and, finally, globalism, postmodernism and the
"Empire".

--- PAGE BREAK ---

484
Part 4. Political Philosophy of Postmodernism
Consequently, the "end of history" in the global market is entirely logical,
arising from the very structure of history. To those who are horrified by the
monstrous horizons of total planetary control and new forms of exploitation,
A. Negri and M. Hardt advise paying attention to the present and recent past:
one might think that capitalism was more humane and just at other stages.
The Empire cannot be avoided, its formation cannot be slowed down,
and it is impossible to hide in the "local." Bourgeois nation-states are not
an alternative to the Empire; they are simply its preceding stages.
Consequently, opponents of the "Empire" must abandon familiar clichés,
discard outdated conceptual tools, and part with nostalgia. The mutation of
Modernity into Postmodernity, as well as the qualitative transformation of
Labour and Capital, are accomplished facts that cannot be ignored. The
"Empire" is a reality.
The "positive" programme of the alter-globalists is based on the
recognition of the "Empire" as a basic fact, just as Marx's communism was
based on a detailed study of the ontology of Capital. The "Empire" cannot be
overcome from outside, since in the global world there is no longer any
"outside." It encompasses all of the earth's space — in the social, political,
economic, informational, and cultural senses. Therefore, the only way to
destroy its power lies within itself, in its internal contradictions. This
contradiction is described by A. Negri and M. Hardt in Marxist terms (the
contradiction between Labour and Capital, alienation, the appropriation of
surplus value, etc.), but transferred to the conditions of Postmodernism and
the global context.
The analogue of the working class (as an object of exploitation and
subject of revolution in classical Marxism) today is simply people — the
"multitude." Since, in the conditions of technological development and
globalisation of Capital, the difference between productive and unproductive
labour has been erased, Labour, according to Negri and Hardt, should be
recognised as "life itself" and its bodily motivations — desire, reproduction,
creativity, random impulses. The difference between work and rest, useful
and useless, business and entertainment is gradually disappearing: only living
people ("bare life," according to G. Agamben(1)  )remain in the face of a global
corrupt system. The "multitude" itself is today's Labour. And the "Empire" is
capital.
1   Agamben, G. Homo sacer. Sovereign Power and Bare Life.ng to G. Agamben(1)  )remain in the face of a global
corrupt system. The "multitude" itself is today's Labour. And the "Empire" is
capital.
1   Agamben, G. Homo sacer. Sovereign Power and Bare Life.

--- PAGE BREAK ---)remain in the face of a global
corrupt system. The "multitude" itself is today's Labour. And the "Empire" is
capital.
1   Agamben, G. Homo sacer. Sovereign Power and Bare Life.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

485
Chapter 1. Political Philosophy of Postmodernism
The multitude strikes back: the triumph of the disabled, the
perverts and the viruses
A. Negri and M. Hardt propose rather extravagant methods of fighting
against the "Empire": the rejection of the last remaining sexual taboos, the
creative development of shocking images, piercing, Mohawks, hacking,
the creation of extremist communes and absurd circles, meaningless flash
mobs, transsexual operations, the cultivation of migration and
cosmopolitanism, demanding that
the "Empire" to pay not for labour, but for the mere existence of every citizen
of the earth, given that everyone should become citizens of the earth.
"multitude." One of the recipes for alterglobalism, as a postmodern version of
Luddism, consists in inviting people to self-mutilate (automutilation), since a
disabled person with an inactive and incapacitated body is less susceptible to
exploitation. No less effective is mental disability, which can be acquired
artificially through the use of powerful narcotic substances. According to
Negri and Hardt, the best form of revolutionary practice would be to become
a computer virus capable of causing maximum damage to global networks.
This left-liberal programme is largely reflected in the programme
points of various networks of the Open Society movement sponsored by
George Soros.
The authors of Empire themselves show that the position of the
"multitude" in postmodern conditions essentially coincides with that of the
"Empire." — it is the Empire that allows the "multitude" to be itself; on the
one hand, it exploits the "multitude," but on the other, it establishes, supports,
and promotes its further liberation. In the "Empire," the "multitude" thus
finds many positive "opportunities" that it is called upon to use for its own
interests. The authors cite Marx's attitude towards capitalism as a parallel to
this shift in thinking. Marx recognised capitalism's progressiveness in
relation to feudalism and slavery, but at the same time spoke on behalf of
the proletariat as
1Luddites — a movement among workers in England in the first quarter of the 19th century,
who believed that the source of poverty and unemployment was the introduction of machines into
industrial production, and who destroyed and vandalised equipment during their protests
(industrial sabotage). The leader and symbol of this movement was a certain "General Ludd" or
"King Ludd," who was the first to destroy a pair of machines.
2  At the same time, Negri and Hardt believe that it is better to get rid of the body altogether
in order to reliably avoid any form of violence from the "Empire".irst to destroy a pair of machines.
2  At the same time, Negri and Hardt believe that it is better to get rid of the body altogether
in order to reliably avoid any form of violence from the "Empire".

--- PAGE BREAK ---ir of machines.
2  At the same time, Negri and Hardt believe that it is better to get rid of the body altogether
in order to reliably avoid any form of violence from the "Empire".

--- PAGE BREAK ---

486
Part 4. Political Philosophy of Postmodernism
its most implacable enemy. This is how A. Negri and M. Hardt view the
"Empire": they show its "progressive" aspects in relation to classical
industrial capitalism, but believe that it carries within itself its own end.
The project of alter-globalism boils down to not hindering
"Empire," but rather to push it forward so that we can more quickly witness
and participate in its final transformation. This transformation is possible
through a new self-awareness and self-esteem, through the acquisition of a
new ontological, anthropological and legal status by the liberated world
masses, the "multitude" that is destined to escape the subtle and rigid
corrupt grip of the planetary "Empire."
The very concept of "multitude," which Negri and Hardt put in place
of the proletariat as its postmodern analogue, represents the next phase in
the pursuit of the atom. Multitudes are no longer individuals in the classical
modern sense; they are divi-duums. They achieve a level closer to
atomicity, dividing themselves rhizomatically into combinations of elements.
The term "multitude" itself appears in Machiavelli, Hobbes, and Spinoza and
refers to people who are not yet integrated into the political structure. That
is, it is again
Hobbes' "natural state." But for Negri and Hardt, this scattered, chaotic state
is not just a starting point (however we interpret it pessimistically like
Hobbes, neutrally like Locke, or positively like Rousseau), but represents a
goal, something that political history is directed towards. Similar to Marx's
symmetry between the primitive communism of the beginning of history
and the scientific communism of the end of history, Negri and Hardt's
"multitude" is conceived primarily as the culmination of the political
process, which nevertheless restores the "natural state."
The uprising of the "multitudes" must be based on the cultivation of all
kinds of transgression. Negri and Hardt's ideal is no longer the human being,
but the cyborg, the mutant, the voluntary invalid, the cripple, the half-human,
half-machine, incapable of becoming an object of exploitation — neither in
production, nor in the performance of civic duties, nor in classical marriage.
Freedom from the "Empire," as the ultimate embodiment of rationality, is
achieved through a slide into irrationality, into mass schizophrenia (Gilles
Deleuze), into drugs, decay, and the search for new bizarre forms of existence
beyond the cultural and social codes dictated by the empire.
Just as Marx wanted capitalism to triumph in order to hasten its demise
and build socialism, alter-globalistsbizarre forms of existence
beyond the cultural and social codes dictated by the empire.
Just as Marx wanted capitalism to triumph in order to hasten its demise
and build socialism, alter-globalists

--- PAGE BREAK ---istence
beyond the cultural and social codes dictated by the empire.
Just as Marx wanted capitalism to triumph in order to hasten its demise
and build socialism, alter-globalists

--- PAGE BREAK ---

487
Chapter 1. Political Philosophy of Postmodernism
want the victory of globalisation so that the complete victory of Capital will
destroy it from within, through the total migration of multitudes into the
realm of irrational and schizophrenic freedom.
The multitude is not what is, but what should be. According to Spinoza,
"the multitude is what the sovereign fears most" 1. Consequently, it is
precisely the uncontrollable mass of transgressive perverts, fused with
cyborg machines, physical and mental invalids, transgender and queer
types of the most unexpected kinds, integrated into the global network, now
becomes a revolutionary class representing in political history all of
humanity, which is destined to slip out from under the repressive strategies
of the "Empire" by diving into the depths of matter. Thus
the "Empire," already representing an "inverted state," reaches its logical goal
— its lower limit rests at the centre of hell.
Underground civil society
The world after the victory of the multitude is described by Negri and
Hardt in rather vague terms. It will be a networked rhizomatic society,
organised horizontally and oriented even further downwards — into the
depths of matter. At the same time, the boundaries between individuals will
be erased, and people, machines, animals and plants will form a single
pulsating mass, continuously exchanging multidimensional impulses of
desire. This resembles the initial state of the cosmos described by
Empedocles, when separate organs had not yet connected with each other in
the proper order, and hands, noses, and ears grew out of the ground, forming
extravagant ensembles. Postmodernists take this blossoming of disordered
free potentials and fragments as their goal. The true multitude cannot have a
strictly human form, as this would already be a form of discrimination against
other forms of life and species, both natural and artificial. In a global network
democracy, everyone can vote — both human and non-human beings —
including machines, objects, plants, animals, etc.
In such a magma, everything will be free, especially since money itself
will gradually dissolve into the digital ocean. Postmodernists in particular
emphasise free and unlimited access to drugs.
1Spinoza B. A Theologico-Political Treatise, and a Political Treatise. N.Y.: Cosimo, 2005.dissolve into the digital ocean. Postmodernists in particular
emphasise free and unlimited access to drugs.
1Spinoza B. A Theologico-Political Treatise, and a Political Treatise. N.Y.: Cosimo, 2005.

--- PAGE BREAK ---igital ocean. Postmodernists in particular
emphasise free and unlimited access to drugs.
1Spinoza B. A Theologico-Political Treatise, and a Political Treatise. N.Y.: Cosimo, 2005.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

488
Part 4. Political Philosophy of Postmodernism
and pornographic resources, which corresponds to the liberation of the
"workers of the desire factory."
For modern Russians, this may sound somewhat strange, but it is
important to understand that postmodernism and its political philosophy,
including the concept of the "revolution of the masses," is not a joke, a
parody, or extravagant nonsense. It is a logical continuation of Modernism
itself — its main driving forces — progress, modernisation, social
development, democratisation, liberation, the development of "civil
society," etc. Thus, the contemporary struggle for freedom of all kinds of
ethnic, sexual, religious and political minorities, together with gender
politics and ecology, are a prelude to precisely such a rhizomatic stage.
A postmodern ist interpretation
This is the political programme of the "desire machine," the liberation of
the multitude from the control of the exploitative system, the plan and
strategy for globalisation and especially alter-globalisation, which must
follow the victory of world capitalism. From the point of view of Negri and
Hardt, the current globalisation is still within the framework of the political
philosophy of Modernity, and in fact it is necessary to move from the
constructed "Empire" of Modernity to the final phase —
the "reign of pure quantity" 1.
This is the political programme of Postmodernism. Most non-
governmental humanitarian organisations operating around the world
today are in one way or another connected with this project
"multitudes." By dissolving boundaries and helping to destroy traditions, they
are preparing a global territory for the "multitudes."
Contemporary art plays an important role in this.
Accordingly, socio-political and philosophical models, post-positivist
theories of international relations, gender theories, feminism, and the entire
"left" movement, to a large extent
"right" (where the right defends big capital) — all contemporary politics is
gradually moving into the space of postmodernism.
Postmodernists say that everything is text, and any text can be read in
different ways. It all depends on which encryption model we choose. From a
postmodern perspective
1   Guénon, R. The Kingdom of Quantity and the Sign of the Times.text, and any text can be read in
different ways. It all depends on which encryption model we choose. From a
postmodern perspective
1   Guénon, R. The Kingdom of Quantity and the Sign of the Times.

--- PAGE BREAK ---can be read in
different ways. It all depends on which encryption model we choose. From a
postmodern perspective
1   Guénon, R. The Kingdom of Quantity and the Sign of the Times.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

489
Chapter 1. Political Philosophy of Postmodernism
Reality is a combination of signs that have no meaning. Depending on how
we combine signs, we create text — we see some signs and not others, we
ignore some and recognise others. Depending on which signs we see and
which we do not, we get different words. We have all the letters in front of
us, and with the help of one or another "grid" (English: reading, French:
grille de lecture), we can read the same statement in completely different
ways, depending on how and which "grid" we use.
The postmodern grille de lecture is gradually encompassing all political
processes in which we live. Everything is becoming political, in the spirit of
Deleuze, including art, economics, medicine, and culture. Everywhere,
residual — albeit individualistic, modernist — vertical structures clash with
each other: classical modern ideas about the state, society, the field, the
family, etc., and their new postmodernist interpretation, based on ironic
dismemberment — deconstruction — of these concepts, presented by
postmodernists as conventions, myths, social conventions and cumbersome
identities, not yet aware of their purpose — to free themselves from
themselves, to transgress and dissolve into the pulsating element of electronic
nihilism.
Postmodern
political
philosophy
fundamentally
combines
the
incompatible; reading postmodernism is based on paradox — on the
absence of symmetry, position, and verticality. Usually, the top is the
main thing, the bottom is not important, but in postmodern philosophy,
everything is the opposite — the bottom and the top are roughly the same.
Everyone gets their right to express themselves. In music, this is vividly
represented in the dodecaphonic movement introduced by Schoenberg
(1874–1951), and all avant-garde painting of the 20th century followed the
same path.express themselves. In music, this is vividly
represented in the dodecaphonic movement introduced by Schoenberg
(1874–1951), and all avant-garde painting of the 20th century followed the
same path.

--- PAGE BREAK ---In music, this is vividly
represented in the dodecaphonic movement introduced by Schoenberg
(1874–1951), and all avant-garde painting of the 20th century followed the
same path.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

490
Part 4. Political Philosophy of Postmodernism
Chapter 2. Black Enlightenment
OO: nihilism and its objects of enlightenment
We see a new stage in the establishment of the postmodern paradigm in
the contemporary trend of object-oriented ontology (OOO), otherwise known
as speculative realism. The most prominent representatives of OOO are Ray
Bracher (1),Graham Harman (2),Quentin Meillassoux (3),Levi Bryant (4),Nick
Land (5)and Reza Negarestani (6).Here, the main lines of postmodernism are
taken to their logical conclusion. Although Gilles Deleuze and a number of
other postmodern philosophers have already addressed nothingness directly,
following Lacan's ontology, and even oriented themselves towards
nothingness, the will to nothingness a definite value, their systems were still
too closely tied to the subject — even if the task was to disperse it into as
wide a spectrum of individual elements, quanta, new contenders for the status
of "atom" as possible. Object-oriented ontology (OOO) strives to be
extremely consistent and to abolish the subject altogether, treating it as a
special case among a sea of actual and possible objects. In this case, the
world is contingency, that is, Democritus' isonomy, with its "so, no more than
not so," is elevated to an absolute principle. Meillassoux calls this
"contingency" and proposes to carry out consistent work on the construction
of such ontologies, where the subject would not be at the centre, like the earth
in Ptolemy's cosmology, but on the ontological periphery among other
objects of the infinite — open (here it is appropriate to recall Popper's "open
society") cosmos, based on the strictly Copernican principle of isotropy, that
is, the indifference of all orientations (again, Democritus' isonomy).
Meillassoux calls for the abolition of all correlationism, i.e., the rejection of
those gnoseological
1Brassier, R. Nihil Unbound: Enlightenment and Extinction. London: Palgrave Macmillan,
2007.
2  Harman, G. Immaterialism: Objects and Social Theory. Gaidar Institute Publishing House,
2018.
3   Meillassoux, Quentin. After Finitude: Essays on the Necessity of Contingency.
4   Bryant, L. R. Democracy of Objects.
5  Land N. Fanged Noumena: Collected Writings 1987–2007.
6   Negarestani R. Cyclonopedia: Complicity with Anonymous Materials.on the Necessity of Contingency.
4   Bryant, L. R. Democracy of Objects.
5  Land N. Fanged Noumena: Collected Writings 1987–2007.
6   Negarestani R. Cyclonopedia: Complicity with Anonymous Materials.

--- PAGE BREAK ---Contingency.
4   Bryant, L. R. Democracy of Objects.
5  Land N. Fanged Noumena: Collected Writings 1987–2007.
6   Negarestani R. Cyclonopedia: Complicity with Anonymous Materials.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

491
Chapter 2. Black Enlightenment
structures that are based on relationships and therefore, in one way or
another, imply a subject. But in this case, the place of the subject is not
simply delegated to someone else, but is abolished completely, leaving
pure nothingness in its place. This nothingness is what Ray Bracier asserts
as the only ontological foundation, calling for it to be accepted as the
main guiding principle of philosophy. If postmodernism balances on the
edge of nothingness, then LLC calls for a leap into nothingness, making it
not just the truth (as the order of the real in Lacan), but the goal, the value,
and the desired outcome. Leibniz's (1646–1716) question of "why there is
something rather than nothing," which was at the heart of Martin
Heidegger's philosophy, is reduced by Brasserie to abolishing the very
instance capable of formulating it.
According to Meyasu, man and his consciousness are random reflections
of pulsating chaos, naively imagining the existence of order, unity, truth, etc.
Thought is a random fold of nonsense, an illusion and an aberration. And the
subject is nothing more than one of the objects, which is just as ontologically
peripheral, random, and nihilistic as all the others, but only remains in an
illusion about itself and the world. The subject is simply an object that has
gone mad.
G. Harman: understanding the object by killing the subject's
Naturally, in such a situation, the question arises: what, then, is an
object? This is where the actual unfolding of
"speculative realism" begins. Representatives of this school of thought argue
that all we know about an object is the subject's opinion. Moreover,
phenomenologists show that we are not dealing with the object itself, but
with "noema," that is, with an intentional object located within our
consciousness, not outside it. In other words, the subject does not know the
object and only imagines, invents, and constitutes it. The object is not given
through the senses, since they — like any interface — are based on a protocol
and algorithm that pass some parameters and cut off others (this is how any
system works(1) ). Therefore, the subject's representation of the object is not
given either in direct experience (as the first empiricists and materialists of
the Modern era naively believed) or in conceptual form. Hence the name
"speculative realism": for human consciousness, an object, a thing, res, can
only be the product of
1   Luhmann, N. Social Systems: Outline of a General Theory. St. Petersburg: Nauka, 2007.the name
"speculative realism": for human consciousness, an object, a thing, res, can
only be the product of
1   Luhmann, N. Social Systems: Outline of a General Theory. St. Petersburg: Nauka, 2007.

--- PAGE BREAK ---ve realism": for human consciousness, an object, a thing, res, can
only be the product of
1   Luhmann, N. Social Systems: Outline of a General Theory. St. Petersburg: Nauka, 2007.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

492
Part 4. Political Philosophy of Postmodernism
speculative knowledge. This is quite consistent with Democritus, who
asserted the existence of atoms and emptiness based on speculative
reasoning. Therefore, a "thing" or "object" is merely a concept. But to
achieve it, it is not necessary to improve the means at the subject's disposal;
on the contrary, it is necessary to purify the thought process itself of traces
of the subject. In other words, an object can be much better understood by the
object itself, i.e., by a machine. In this case, speculative processes will be
deprived of those ontological disturbances that are inherent in the subject.
Moreover, according to "speculative realists," the subject itself is an
"ontological disturbance."
This gives rise to a new programme of object-oriented ontology, which
now consists in the abolition of man, the complete destruction of the subject,
and the construction of a philosophy that could exist outside the human
context. Thus, LLC acquires a character opposite to humanism. In this we see
the logical consequence of the formation of the entire segment of Plato's third
kind — the philosophy of the Mother. This philosophy begins with the
abolition of the superhuman — the sacred — vertical, with the rejection of
the state of the Father and the state of the Son. This is the first stage of
materialism: God is killed, but only to liberate man and place him at the
centre. This era is marked by humanism. The culmination of this programme
is the political philosophy of liberalism, and the turning point in history is the
victory of liberals over two alternative political theories (fascism in 1945 and
communism in 1991).
Around this time, postmodernism gained particular momentum,
proposing to delve deeper into the matter and break down the human being
(the individual of liberalism) into its constituent parts. And although the
human being is broken down here, certain elements of humanism still
remain, albeit with some stretching. Now man is liberated from the state
he carries within himself and, above all, from the dictatorship of reason.
But with the advent of speculative realism, this process of movement into
matter reaches a barrier where the liberating strategy of Mother's philosophy
reaches its culmination. Now it is necessary to liberate not just man, and not
even the sub-subjective elements of man, the "workers of the desire factory,"
but the world of objects from man. Here, postmodernism becomes as opposed
to humanity as modernism was previously opposed to God, the sacred, and
vertical ontologies. People killed God. Now it is the turn of post-human
beings — machines, or more broadly, objects — to kill humanity itself.
Speculative realism is precisely this:he sacred, and
vertical ontologies. People killed God. Now it is the turn of post-human
beings — machines, or more broadly, objects — to kill humanity itself.
Speculative realism is precisely this:

--- PAGE BREAK ---ical ontologies. People killed God. Now it is the turn of post-human
beings — machines, or more broadly, objects — to kill humanity itself.
Speculative realism is precisely this:

--- PAGE BREAK ---

493
Chapter 2. Black Enlightenment
materialistic anti-humanism, revealed for the first time. That is why this trend
is sometimes associated with post-humanism or transhumanism. And
although we are talking about the transformation of the human species
into something else, object-oriented ontologists aim to justify non-human
thinking. Meillassoux and Braisse create their philosophy for robots, post-
human species. Of course, this is only a speculative construct, but
according to its creators and developers, it should serve as the basis for non-
human ontologies.
The abolition of Dasein and the immortality of the machine's "
"
Abolishing the subject, destroying the human being, is not such a simple
task in practice, in a philosophical context. Here, speculative realists, above
all Graham Harman, understand perfectly well that this cannot be achieved
directly: the subject itself and the concept of man are based on complex
metaphysical and anthropological platforms that are not only difficult but
impossible to demolish if one refers directly to the classical teachings of the
modern era. Therefore, Harman turns to phenomenology and, above all, to
Heidegger,in whose teachings the purified and subtly represented figure of
Dasein already stands in place of the human being and subject of the modern
era. In constructing his analysis of Dasein, Heidegger also translates into
existentials any relationship between Dasein and what surrounds it, and in
particular what is commonly referred to as a "thing," "object," or collectively
as
"the
world."Thus, in particular, Heidegger defines "objectivity" through
Zuhanden-sein
—
"handiness."
Harman
proposes
constructing
phenomenology not from Dasein outward toward "objects," but from the
objects themselves. However, if we do this, it is not at all necessary that what
was "handy" or an "instrument" will relate symmetrically to its owner. A
thing that ceases to be handy does not behave as Dasein would expect. It does
not turn towards him or towards another thing — at least not with the same
“fatality” with which Dasein turns towards it. Consequently, this is where
symmetry ends, and Dasein disappears from the horizon altogether. What
remains are things and their phenomenology, which, however, is determined
by themselves and not by someone else. Thus, the abolition of the subject
occurs through
1  Harman G. Heidegger Explained: From Phenomenon to Thing. Chicago: Open Court,
2007; Idem. Tool-Being. Heidegger and the Metaphysics of Objects. Chicago: Open Court, 2002.
2   Dugin A. G. Martin Heidegger. The Last God. Moscow: Academic Project, 2014.hing. Chicago: Open Court,
2007; Idem. Tool-Being. Heidegger and the Metaphysics of Objects. Chicago: Open Court, 2002.
2   Dugin A. G. Martin Heidegger. The Last God. Moscow: Academic Project, 2014.

--- PAGE BREAK ---Court,
2007; Idem. Tool-Being. Heidegger and the Metaphysics of Objects. Chicago: Open Court, 2002.
2   Dugin A. G. Martin Heidegger. The Last God. Moscow: Academic Project, 2014.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

494
Part 4. Political Philosophy of Postmodernism
the abolition of its fundamental existential basis — Dasein.
It is important to note that Heidegger himself recognises two modes of
Dasein: authentic, when Dasein is itself (Selbst), and inauthentic, when
Dasein acts as das Man, an abstract instance that reflects something
supposedly universal, but which does not coincide with either the truth or
the opinions of individual people (the bearers of Dasein). Thus, das Man
represents the ultimate alienation of Dasein from itself. The figure of das
Man is very close to Artificial Intelligence, because Artificial Intelligence
differs from humans not by formal characteristics, but precisely by the
absence of Dasein. Consequently, from a philosophical point of view, the
transition from man (subject) to machine (object) does not take place
along the lines of rational/irrational, but rather along the lines of
belonging to Dasein/not belonging to Dasein. A thinking object is a thought
devoid of Dasein — not only as reality (Dasein practically does not
manifest itself in das Man, although it remains its foundation), but also as
possibility. It is precisely by extinguishing Dasein, Harman believes, that one
can move on to the phenomenology of objects(1) .
At the same time, abolishing Dasein is, in a sense, easier than declaring
war on humanity. Dasein is a relationship to death, and this relationship is its
main existential feature. But for modern and postmodern humans, death — in
the spirit of Epicurus — is nothing, and certainly not a value. After all,
modern and postmodern thinkers deny the soul and the afterlife, retribution,
judgment, heaven, and hell. Therefore, by removing the relationship to death
from (post)modernity, we do not deprive it of anything fundamental.
Moreover, achieving immortality, even at the cost of becoming a machine, an
object, is a very attractive prospect for many. An object is immortal, just as
death and nothingness are immortal in immanent materialistic ontologies.
The singularity and mystery of the bastard of the logos
Speculative realism and contingency are thus directly linked to
technological trends that aim to create powerful artificial intelligence,
cyborgs, genetic engineering procedures, and physical immortality. The
moment when the complete transition from human society to post-human
society will occur, futurologists of this direction
1  The phenomenology of objects is also developed by Ian Bogost. See: Bogost, I. Alien
Phenomenology: Or What It Means to Be a Thing. Perm: HylePress, 2019.ill occur, futurologists of this direction
1  The phenomenology of objects is also developed by Ian Bogost. See: Bogost, I. Alien
Phenomenology: Or What It Means to Be a Thing. Perm: HylePress, 2019.

--- PAGE BREAK ---ists of this direction
1  The phenomenology of objects is also developed by Ian Bogost. See: Bogost, I. Alien
Phenomenology: Or What It Means to Be a Thing. Perm: HylePress, 2019.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

495
Chapter 2. Black Enlightenment
They call it "Singularity" 1. Speculative realists actually approach this
moment from the perspective of philosophy, preparing the platform for
Singularity. The objects they assert are genuine atoms, since they are not the
product of the division of new and new pairs, in which the work of Platon's
Mind is manifested, but the inner nature of nothingness itself, of matter as
such, seen not from the side of the Mind, even if human, but from the side of
matter itself. Here we can again recall the bastard logos (`koF vhoF) of
Timaeus. The concept of "bastard" (vhoF) implies a kind of hybridity in
which something from the Father (Mind) and something from the Mother
(matter) converge. Attempts to reach the very core of this bastard logos,
through which, according to Plato, one comprehends
"Hora," matter, moving from the present — the masculine vertical — Logos,
has a certain limit. It is this limit that makes itself known in the course of
the atom's escape through the ever-increasing fragmentation of particles.
Speculative realists make a philosophical leap in this case and propose to
constitute this "bastard logos" not according to the residual principle (less
and less mind), but from the side of matter itself, from the side of Mother
herself. Then Singularity becomes a triumphant (for the philosophy of
Mother) moment of revelation of a special form of subjectless
consciousness. This is precisely what object-oriented ontology represents.
B. Latour: hybrids and the Constitution of the
French sociologist Bruno Latour, exploring the epistemology of
Modernity in the spirit of Foucault's postmodernist strategies, came to the
conclusion that Modernity is based on a kind of philosophical
Constitution, according to which the world of the spirit (the subject) and
the world of material objects (objects) are ontologically two completely
autonomous zones, separated by a strictly established boundary(2)
.Modernity bases its critique of the pre-modern on the fact that in
traditional society this rule was not observed, which led to the creation of
hybrids, i.e. objects that were partly subjective and partly objective. It was
precisely the ridicule of hybrids that formed the basis of the rationalist
strategy of the Enlightenment.
But Latour notes that Modernity itself, having proclaimed this rule as its
Constitution and made it its cornerstone, constantly and systematically violates
it.
1   Kurzweil R. The Singularity is Near. NY: Viking Books, 2005.
2  Latour B. The New Age Was Never. Essays on Symmetrical Anthropology. St. Petersburg:
European University Press, 2006.violates
it.
1   Kurzweil R. The Singularity is Near. NY: Viking Books, 2005.
2  Latour B. The New Age Was Never. Essays on Symmetrical Anthropology. St. Petersburg:
European University Press, 2006.

--- PAGE BREAK ---rzweil R. The Singularity is Near. NY: Viking Books, 2005.
2  Latour B. The New Age Was Never. Essays on Symmetrical Anthropology. St. Petersburg:
European University Press, 2006.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

496
Part 4. Political Philosophy of Postmodernism
systematically violated it. At the same time, Modernity did not simply reject
the production of hybrids, but on the contrary, used the official ban as a
special inspiration for conceptual smuggling — just as the Prohibition
introduced in the United States only contributed to the enrichment of
bootleggers, illegal alcohol traders. This led him to the paradoxical
conclusion that "there was no New Age" (1),since the solemnly proclaimed
Constitution was never really observed. Latour does not simply criticise this,
but suggests accepting it as a fact and resigning ourselves to the fact that
humans will inevitably create hybrid concepts in which the subjective and the
objective are mixed together.
At the same time, Latour suggests not to shy away from this, but to
take another step and recognise certain political rights for objects in general.
Since they constantly intrude into the human world and its concepts, isn't it
time to extend certain constitutional guarantees and social rights to non-
human areas, giving them a kind of citizenship?
Bruno Latour proposes the following: we must extend the political
emancipation and profound democratisation that has already taken hold in
the realm of gender to non-human beings, objects and even phenomena.
Why do subjects make decisions for things? Let objects decide too?
Latour proposes creating a parliament of things,giving a voice to
hedgehogs, glasses, winds, rust, dolphins, ice and everything else.
Ultimately, they too are part of the common rhizomatic system.
At the next technological level, a person printed on a 3D printer will not
differ greatly from other objects, and they should all be given equal rights.
Voting by objects will be more unpredictable than voting by ordinary people.
But overall, the degree of freedom of a printer and a modern citizen who is
under the spell of the media, society, politics, the economy, and gadgets is
not fundamentally different. Commands may not reach the printer; there are
glitches — the user sent a file to print, but it did not print because one of the
wires was disconnected or something went wrong in the program... In other
words, in a sense, the printer is capable of arbitrariness; it may or may not
execute a command. Modern people are also told who to vote for, but
sometimes they go and suddenly vote for someone else or throw their ballot
in the ballot box.
1   Latour, B. There Was No Modern Age: Essays in Symmetrical Anthropology.
2Latour, B. Politics of Nature: How to Inoculate the Sciences with Democracy. Moscow: Ad
Marginem Press, 2018.ballot box.
1   Latour, B. There Was No Modern Age: Essays in Symmetrical Anthropology.
2Latour, B. Politics of Nature: How to Inoculate the Sciences with Democracy. Moscow: Ad
Marginem Press, 2018.

--- PAGE BREAK ---our, B. There Was No Modern Age: Essays in Symmetrical Anthropology.
2Latour, B. Politics of Nature: How to Inoculate the Sciences with Democracy. Moscow: Ad
Marginem Press, 2018.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

497
Chapter 2. Black Enlightenment
the metro, a note from a psychiatrist, or a banknote that has been devalued.
The same thing happened to a wire... Strictly speaking, you cannot trust those
whom people vote for; some voters tick the box with understanding, others
do not. It is a stochastic process, filled with disturbances, whirlwinds,
deviations from the main trajectory, failures... It is a natural phenomenon or a
technological failure. It is impossible to recognise these votes as valid.
Accordingly, a printer could vote with the same success. And the
hedgehog, in turn, is not as limited as it may seem to an outside observer.
It may well choose the freedom of the forest, approve of the abundance of
mushrooms, pine cones and berries — wonderful things! Therefore, in
postmodernism, we cannot rule out the possibility that people will think
and decide: why do we choose unpleasant, corrupt personalities? Let's
choose the hedgehog!
Of course, the proposal to expand the range of subjects eligible for
voting and to proliferate the electoral status of objects still looks like a
metaphor, but the very plan to give non-human phenomena and beings a
certain status — as is already the case in nature reserves and national
parks — is quite realistic and reflects the main vector of postmodernism.
Latur's proposals may seem schematic. But once upon a time,
democracy, bourgeois society, socialism, and many other things that seem
completely natural to us emerged from schemes. The history of humanity is
an open process of creation; politics does not dictate itself to us as
something fatal, but we make politics. Our consciousness, ideas, and
images change, and ultimately, the structure of hierarchies changes. We
change the world, and the world changes us. And although the postmodern
project seems extravagant to us today, we should not take it too lightly.
People are changing, their meanings and values are changing. In the
paradigm of Tradition, man was always something more than man (an
immortal soul). Then, in Modernity, he became only man. In
Postmodernity, he is turning into a rhizome. And epistemes and
Constitutions are changing accordingly.
Democracy of objects and the sovereignty of matter
These theories of Latour, which show extremely convincingly how
arbitrary and voluntaristic the scientific discoveries of the modern era
were, often representing mere fraud, the results of political and even
economic intrigues, were taken up and developed by object-oriented
ontologistsic the scientific discoveries of the modern era
were, often representing mere fraud, the results of political and even
economic intrigues, were taken up and developed by object-oriented
ontologists

--- PAGE BREAK ---scoveries of the modern era
were, often representing mere fraud, the results of political and even
economic intrigues, were taken up and developed by object-oriented
ontologists

--- PAGE BREAK ---

498
Part 4. Political Philosophy of Postmodernism
— in particular, Levi Bryant and Jane Bennett1. In their book
Democracy of Objects 2 ,Levi-Byrne outlines a political system that would
include non-human processes, random disturbances, an expanded concept
of citizenship delegated to certain species of animals or even natural
phenomena, etc. Jane Bennett, for her part, explores
the "destiny" of things, including those thrown away in landfills or
production waste, which, according to her observations, possess independent
agency, that is, a kind of will and even intelligence, since their impact on the
environment affects people who hastened to equate them with nothingness
but themselves became victims of their irreversibly caused existence. Thus,
according to Jane Bennett, the pulsation of matter creates a special dimension
of existence that affects not only bodies but also incorporeal phenomena —
such as thought — by weaving itself into the structures of things and
involving them in its own vitalistic strategies. In the spirit of ecological
politics, Bennett develops the concept that matter itself should be recognised
as a political subject, since the totality of its movements represents a
spontaneous, volitional agency that requires not only recognition but also the
granting of special rights and powers. Thus, the concept of matter,
nothingness, pure objectivity, is transformed into a new "subject," that is, into
the centre of a meaningful, conscious, and powerful will. If we add feminism
to this, we get a complete philosophy of the Great Mother, which, in fact,
was already implicitly present in all of modern political philosophy.
But as in the case of Latour, Bryant and Bennett's construct is not yet
a fully-fledged political project, but merely a sketch calling for the
integration of ecology, feminism, environmental protection, and the
protection of rare species into the structures of a "new democracy" based
on the principle of a more even distribution of "rights" among objects,
among which humans are only special cases in fluid ontological whirlpools.
The parliament of Latour and Bryant's objects and Bennett's agentic
fluttering matter are a correlate of the "parliament of organs" referred to by
postmodernists. Here again, as in the case of microglobalisation, we see the
intertwining of macro and micro levels typical of postmodernism through the
dismantling and deconstruction of the meso level, where the human subject
was located in the modern era. The individual splits into many sub-individual
particles,
1  Bennett, J. The Pulse of Things: Political Ecology of the Material World. Perm: HylePress,
2018.
2   Bryant, L. R. Democracy of Objects.The individual splits into many sub-individual
particles,
1  Bennett, J. The Pulse of Things: Political Ecology of the Material World. Perm: HylePress,
2018.
2   Bryant, L. R. Democracy of Objects.

--- PAGE BREAK ---ts into many sub-individual
particles,
1  Bennett, J. The Pulse of Things: Political Ecology of the Material World. Perm: HylePress,
2018.
2   Bryant, L. R. Democracy of Objects.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

499
Chapter 2. Black Enlightenment
raising rebellions against their own Leviathanic mind in favour of a "civil
society" of individual desires. It seems that we are descending into the human
being. But in fact, we are moving to the very periphery of the subject, away
from its centre. Consequently, the dissipation of the individual brings it closer
to macrostructures that are also subject to dissipation. The pulse of the subject
mixes with the dust of the object, merging into vortex pulses. Thus, ecology,
waste, landfills, climate change, endangered and decaying species are woven
into the political discussions of sub-individual bodies, giving the rhizome an
increasingly material — object — property. Thus, Quentin Meillassoux
believes that even Deleuze retains a certain correlationism (between life and
nothingness), whereas in LLC, nothingness should be perceived from the
perspective of life, and life from the perspective of nothingness. The subject
is a particular instance of the object; therefore, the legal and civil status of
fluttering materiality or Artificial Intelligence should not only be equal to that
of humans, but should also have superiority. The democracy of objects
should lead to the first historical Constitution, in which matter itself will be
declared the true bearer of sovereign power, and individual civil rights will be
distributed to all elements of materiality — including human beings, who, in
turn, will represent combinations of organs and communes of desires.
This is an important aspect of the political dimension of speculative
realism: from now on, not only identities such as religion, profession,
nationality, and gender become optional, but also species membership and
even the choice of status as a living or non-living being. If a discarded tin
can, an iron, a robot or a grave worm are granted citizenship, then no one has
the right to impose these identities on them as immutable and fatal. Anyone,
and even a single part of anyone, could theoretically be registered as a
bush, a woman, a black person, a giraffe or sawdust, and take their allotted
place in the parliament of objects.
At the same time, it is important to emphasise that the transfer of political
sovereignty to the most fluttering matter is the logical conclusion not only
of Postmodernism, but also of the entire process of liberation and
immanentisation that constituted the main semantic axis of Modernism and
the Enlightenment.
Political philosophy pleHni
A study of the behaviour of various organisms and even inorganic
substances in the spirit of object-oriented ontologyin semantic axis of Modernism and
the Enlightenment.
Political philosophy pleHni
A study of the behaviour of various organisms and even inorganic
substances in the spirit of object-oriented ontology

--- PAGE BREAK ---Modernism and
the Enlightenment.
Political philosophy pleHni
A study of the behaviour of various organisms and even inorganic
substances in the spirit of object-oriented ontology

--- PAGE BREAK ---

500
Part 4. Political Philosophy of Postmodernism
became widespread and led to a shift in perceptions of what is considered
reasonable and what is not. A number of anthropologists have put forward
the idea that in archaic societies (for example, in South American Indian
tribes), animals, ghosts, plants and even inanimate objects are considered to
be bearers of a certain subjectivity. While classical progressive
anthropology looked down on such theories, considering them remnants
of pre-logical thinking,thanks to the school of American anthropologist
Franz Boas ( 1858–1942) and especially the works of Claude Lévi-Strauss3
(1908–2009), such ideas received more attention, but even then they were
interpreted as elements of Semitic systems performing symbolic functions
in the system of symbols and interpretation of exchange and kinship. New
generations of anthropologists — F. Descola,E. Viveiro de Castro,E. Con,
etc. — largely influenced by postmodern philosophy, treated such views
with complete trust, allowing for the possibility of non-human
subjectivity. This was entirely consistent with the projects of Latour and
Bryant. Forests, animals, spirits, and natural phenomena had already been
endowed with certain civil rights in some archaic societies, and while
Modernism regarded this as the ultimate form of feeble-minded naivety,
Postmodernism, on the contrary, proposed to recognise it as the next step in
democracy.
It was not that attitudes towards non-human forms of life and objects
changed radically. It was primarily a matter of rhetoric, similar to how in a
fairy tale or myth, the narrative itself is built on the tacit recognition of the
subjectivity of magical animals or objects. By transferring this manner of
description to the realm of scientific experiments, the whole picture
changed dramatically.
One of the most striking phenomena in this area was the observation
of the behaviour of mould, and in particular the species Physarum
polycephalum. Japanese scientists first noticed that under certain conditions,
mould behaves as if it possessed
1   Lévy-Bruhl, L. The Primitive Mind. St. Petersburg: European House, 2002.
2   Boas F. The mind of primitive man. NY: The Macmillan Company, 1938.
3  Lévi-Strauss C. The Elementary Structures of Kinship. Paris; The Hague: Mouton, 1967.
4Descola F. Beyond Nature and Culture. Moscow: New Literary Review, 2012
5  Viveiro de Castro E. Cannibal Metaphysics. Frontiers of Poststructural Anthropology.
Moscow: Ad Marginem, 2018.
6  Kohn, E. How Forests Think: Towards an Anthropology Beyond the Human. Moscow: Ad
Marginem, 2018.stro E. Cannibal Metaphysics. Frontiers of Poststructural Anthropology.
Moscow: Ad Marginem, 2018.
6  Kohn, E. How Forests Think: Towards an Anthropology Beyond the Human. Moscow: Ad
Marginem, 2018.

--- PAGE BREAK ---aphysics. Frontiers of Poststructural Anthropology.
Moscow: Ad Marginem, 2018.
6  Kohn, E. How Forests Think: Towards an Anthropology Beyond the Human. Moscow: Ad
Marginem, 2018.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

501
Chapter 2. Black Enlightenment
memory. Moving towards edible substances in the maze, it passed through
it for the first time just like a human being, making mistakes, reaching
dead ends and returning to its starting position. But the second time, the
mould strains moved strictly towards their goal, as if they had memorised
the route. Later, in conditions that reproduced a model of a railway
system, Physarum polycephalum mould built an exact copy of the existing
railway network, taking into account natural obstacles (the simulation of
which was included in the model) and even economic costs. Thus, the
thinking of mould turned out to be quite comparable to that of the research
institute employees. Later, a separate laboratory was created to study the
thinking of mould and the social aspects of its behaviour — The Slime
Mould Collective(1) .
Thus, the theory of the rhizome as a subject of society, the democracy
of things, and the sovereignty of matter began to take on quite concrete
features. Mould, capable of constructing a perfectly adequate model of
railway communication or developing and applying a model of
distribution to inaccessible places through the infection of the brains of
certain insects, which, against their will, found themselves acting as
carriers of mould, for which they paid with "madness" (unconventional
behaviour not recorded in their species norms) and their lives, cannot
participate in elections, and in certain situations, cannot even run for
political office. The question is only how to build a system of interaction
with it. But this requires not so much technological conditions as shifts in
political philosophy. If we extend the principle of subjectivity and
"citizenship" to a wider range of entities, the question of the quality of
political representation becomes a question of technology and debate, since
even in human society this representation is sometimes called into question.
Moreover, it cannot be ruled out that mould, a robot or some other
extravagant object could improve the degree of such representativeness,
being more independent of the usual and well-established strategies of
power to falsify the will of the masses.
N. Land: Black Enlightenment
The most striking example of the application of speculative realism to
the political sphere can be found in the works of one of the most
prominent philosophers of this movement, the British thinker Nick Land.
1 http://slimoco.ning.comlication of speculative realism to
the political sphere can be found in the works of one of the most
prominent philosophers of this movement, the British thinker Nick Land.
1 http://slimoco.ning.com

--- PAGE BREAK ---ive realism to
the political sphere can be found in the works of one of the most
prominent philosophers of this movement, the British thinker Nick Land.
1 http://slimoco.ning.com

--- PAGE BREAK ---

502
Part 4. Political Philosophy of Postmodernism
Land continues the logic of Deleuze and Guattari, drawing on their
methodology,
above
all
on
the
theory
of
stratification
and
territorialisation1 , but unlike them, he does not share their belief that
capitalism can be overcome through a global revolution led by the "workers
of the desire factory" who find their material roots in the unconscious. Yes,
he agrees with Marx and Deleuze. Nick Land believes that capitalism
leads to self-destruction, to the destruction of life, to enslavement and
alienation, and that sooner or later the capitalist system will collapse. But
for Land, the destructiveness of global capital is in itself something positive.
For Nick Land, who bases his thinking on schizoanalysis, although
"capitalism is a social straitjacket for 'schizoproduction', it is nevertheless
its most 'dissolved' version" (2).Here, Land means that the line of
development of capitalism is the maximum possible liberation for human
subjectivity. Capitalism is ready to meet any micro-desire born in the
unconscious and immediately place it in the market. Yes, this is alienation
and the death of desire, but the point, according to Land, is that desire is an
alternative to death, but it is death itself. Here again we have a reference to
Lacan and the order of the real. Desire is only apparently opposed to death
and belongs to something else, distinct from the subject of nothingness. The
true subject of desire is death itself, which stands at the centre of capital as
the fundamental process of humanity's self-destruction. Therefore, Land
introduces the concept of "accelerationism," which means supporting and
justifying capitalism precisely in its destructive, humanity-destroying
aspect. Capitalism is aimed at the elimination of humanity. The
accompanying technological development leads to the replacement of
humans by artificial intelligence, which, according to Land, is remarkable.
Unlike Negri and Hardt, he does not believe that capitalism can be
followed by any other form of social organisation. He proposes to think of
capitalism in a non-dualistic way: capitalism simultaneously enslaves
people, alienates them, represses their desires, but also liberates them, if
only they understand that this liberation is from themselves. According to
Land, man is "logos," "hierarchy," pure repression of his material origins.
And such is life itself. Only in lifeless primordial matter, as an element of
total death, do truth and freedom exist. Therefore, the transition from
capitalism to communism in the era of virtual reality and cyberspace
consists in a change of rhetoric. If
1   Deleuze, G. and Guattari, F. Anti-Oedipus: Capitalism and Schizophrenia. A Thousand
Plateaus.
2  Land N. Fanged Noumena: Collected Writings 1987–2007. P. 46.consists in a change of rhetoric. If
1   Deleuze, G. and Guattari, F. Anti-Oedipus: Capitalism and Schizophrenia. A Thousand
Plateaus.
2  Land N. Fanged Noumena: Collected Writings 1987–2007. P. 46.

--- PAGE BREAK ---e of rhetoric. If
1   Deleuze, G. and Guattari, F. Anti-Oedipus: Capitalism and Schizophrenia. A Thousand
Plateaus.
2  Land N. Fanged Noumena: Collected Writings 1987–2007. P. 46.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

503
Chapter 2. Black Enlightenment
If we free the machine of desires from inertial humanism, then the goal of
capitalism (which has no goal) and the goal of communism (whose goal is to
free itself from capitalism, like an atom detaches itself from the void in
Democritus) will coincide. Both lead to the abolition of inequality and
differentiation, but capitalism gradually erodes it, while communism
proposes to brutally overthrow it in a moment of revolution. Land's
accelerationism considers the history of capital to be a protracted
proletarian revolution, and, conversely, the proletarian revolution to be the
culmination of capitalism, the discovery of its self-destruction.
Complete equality can only be achieved by overcoming humanity and,
moreover, life itself. And capitalism leads precisely to this.
Nick Land devoted one of his early works to this phenomenon as
"Dark Enlightenment" 1. In it, he positively assesses certain marginal
philosophical trends that have developed among some scholars (mainly from
Silicon Valley in the United States), who combine ultra-liberalism,
libertarianism, and an apology for capitalism (in the spirit of Ayn Rand) with
technological progress, migration to cyberspace, virtual reality, etc. At the
same time, supporters of the "Black Enlightenment" criticised egalitarianism
and democracy, believing that they hindered technological progress and
only limited the true freedom of the individual (or dividuum). However,
Land generally interprets the "Black Enlightenment" more broadly in the
spirit of his doctrine of "accelerationism." For him, Enlightenment as such
is already a "Black Enlightenment," merely draped in rhetorically
reassuring humanism. For him, modernity, capitalism, and especially
liberalism are primarily a movement into the depths of matter, only slightly
covered by empty slogans and colourful metaphors. True Enlightenment
can only be black; it does not bring liberation to humanity, but liberation
from humanity. Enlightenment is a planned, metaphysically justified
genocide, designed to close the page not only on human history, but on the
history of life itself — as a cycle of removal from the only truth: the truth
of non-existence, death, nothingness.
In a sense, Land's philosophy can be called "black liberalism" and at the
same time "black Marxism," since it involves the discovery of truth (the very
truth that lies in the abyss, as Democritus said) "Black Enlightenment" or
"Black Modernism," which unites all political
1 http://www.thedarkenlightenment.com/the-dark-enlightenment-by-nick-land/ry
truth that lies in the abyss, as Democritus said) "Black Enlightenment" or
"Black Modernism," which unites all political
1 http://www.thedarkenlightenment.com/the-dark-enlightenment-by-nick-land/

--- PAGE BREAK ---in the abyss, as Democritus said) "Black Enlightenment" or
"Black Modernism," which unites all political
1 http://www.thedarkenlightenment.com/the-dark-enlightenment-by-nick-land/

--- PAGE BREAK ---

504
Part 4. Political Philosophy of Postmodernism
theories. This is probably why, in addition to postmodern liberalism and
postmodern Marxism, Land also includes in his sphere of interest "neo-
reaction," which corresponds in a narrower sense
the "Black Enlightenment" and combining the glorification of post-
humanism and technological development with a critique of left-wing
discourse.
It is precisely object-oriented ontology, which solves the problem of
contingency through the abolition of the subject (Dasein in Harman), that
finally proclaims, in the person of Nick Land, the true vector of Modernity:
the destruction of man and life in order to give freedom to a world of
liberated objects, taken in complete independence from the structures that
hierarchise them.
 's political physics
According to Nick Land, the goal of capitalism is the destruction of
humanity (as a differentiated logos) and life in favour of post-human
inorganic structures — machines, computer systems, and Artificial
Intelligence. The post-human world is the future. Moreover, such a future
not only will be, but already is, and what we consider to be the present out
of inertia is merely the result of the introduction (by the global hierarchical
Leviathan system — capitalism and tradition) of false memory. Life is the
hallucination of a corpse that never even lived. The future already exists,
and capitalism, accelerating more and more and rapidly transferring the
leading role to machines (i.e., inorganic forms), is rushing towards it.
According to Land, this process entered a decisive phase during the
Protestant Reformation and the great geographical discoveries. In the 21st
century, it should reach a critical point, which technocrats and
futurologists call the Singularity. But in a sense, the Singularity as the
"black eternity" of matter, completely devoid of spirit and hierarchical
(divisive) consciousness, has always been and still is. Man lives with the
phantom pain of a history that is not his own, implanted in him by epistemes.
Capitalism is increasingly and persistently eroding these epistemes, thereby
bringing closer the moment of discovery of the truth — that is, Singularity.
This truth is not that humanity and life will disappear, but that they never
existed, that consciousness is an ephemeral breath that rose above the ocean
of matter and built a fleeting vision of the mind. Life and consciousness
are illusions. Therefore, death is not an alternative to life, but life itself, its
subject.
Capitalism will come close to the Singularity, but it will not disappear —
it will collapse — at this boundary. Not because it will be replaced by a less
nihilistic form of politics, but because it will be unable to structurally shift to
the side of the "radically other" — that is, the stratum that lies "below"
capitalism itself.replaced by a less
nihilistic form of politics, but because it will be unable to structurally shift to
the side of the "radically other" — that is, the stratum that lies "below"
capitalism itself.

--- PAGE BREAK ---nihilistic form of politics, but because it will be unable to structurally shift to
the side of the "radically other" — that is, the stratum that lies "below"
capitalism itself.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

505
Chapter 2. Black Enlightenment
a less nihilistic form of politics, but because it will be unable to structurally
transition to the side of the "radically other" — that is, the stratum that lies
"below" matter itself, within nothingness.
The following observation by Land is important:
Capitalism has no external boundaries; it has absorbed life and biological
intelligence in order to create new life and a new plan of intelligence far
beyond human foresight1.
In other words, "post-capitalism" has no autonomous meaning; it is
capitalism understood in its true form. The mission of capitalism is to prepare
the boundary itself. At this boundary, organic consciousness and life will fade
away. They will not be replaced by something new, but by the eternal
movement of matter. This is not post-history, but history itself, whose main
and only subject is and always has been matter.
If matter is the subject of history, then the fleeting chimera of life and
human (biological) consciousness must reflect some fundamental
scenario. For Land, this scenario is the cooling of the Earth, which was
once a red-hot mass. This cooling is the main thread not only of Earth's
history, but of the history of the universe, as it is repeated in all corners of
the open cosmos, where atoms and their vortices exist. It is precisely this
trauma of cooling that led to the formation of the Earth's crust and core,
which remains in its original — stellar — state, and is the material truth of
the abyss, lying below the threshold of consciousness and life, but at the same
time determining the material content of both.
According to Land, the cooling of the Earth's surface and the
contraction of the molten core into the Earth's interior generate a
response—a desire to return to a fiery plasma form of existence. This is the
will to power or the will to live at the level of matter. In organic life, this
determines the desire of eukaryotic cell nuclei to break free, and in
schizoanalysis, the "nucleus" is the "desire factory" that lies at the heart of
the human psyche and determines the stratification and territorialisation of
consciousness. Everything is a nucleus striving to break through the frozen
shell. And it is precisely the inability to do this immediately that causes
the pain and suffering that drive not only humans in their relationships with
others, but also
1  Land N. Fanged Noumena: Collected Writings 1987–2007. P. 626.ity to do this immediately that causes
the pain and suffering that drive not only humans in their relationships with
others, but also
1  Land N. Fanged Noumena: Collected Writings 1987–2007. P. 626.

--- PAGE BREAK ---iately that causes
the pain and suffering that drive not only humans in their relationships with
others, but also
1  Land N. Fanged Noumena: Collected Writings 1987–2007. P. 626.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

506
Part 4. Political Philosophy of Postmodernism
alien hierarchical structures (Leviathan), but of all matter, whose core strives
to break free. This "core," which Land himself calls the code term Cthelll
(where hell, albeit with an extra l at the end, unambiguously refers to "hell"),
is Democritus' atom, finally discovered beyond conceptual ensembles —
various physical particles in physics, individuals in society, etc., which
claimed — unjustifiably — this status. The atom is the truth hidden in the
abyss, the centre of hell, the last secret of materiality.
The strata described by Deleuze and Guattari in A Thousand Plateaus
, seeking to reconstruct the basic moments of the emergence of formed
representations of consciousness and the physical world (they call this
"assemblage" — the gathering of disparate elements through three
operations — coding, stratification, and territorialisation), represent layers
of earth for Nick Land. And the main task in this case becomes to free the
still red-hot core from its confinement — which will be the triumph of
liberalism, liberation, and the proletarian revolution, since the will of
matter lies at the foundation of history. The explosion of the globe and the
destruction of life and humanity — with the optional (i.e., non-mandatory)
preservation of Artificial Intelligence — is the moment of Singularity.
With its arrival, the geological goal of history will be achieved: the
revenge of the fiery core against the cooling of the surface.
Nick Land's ideas were taken up by another prominent philosopher of
speculative realism, Reza Negarestani (2), who is generally in agreement with
the concept of the "Black Enlightenment."He continues and develops Land's
line, bringing his images, metaphors and concepts closer to certain figures
of ancient mythology. At the same time, he is primarily attracted to those
aspects of religion and myth that were on the periphery or were harshly
condemned by orthodoxy. Thus, in the Iranian tradition, he is interested in
the cult of the black god Ahriman. He also prioritises the study of demonic
plots associated with gods of plague, bloody underground powers and
human sacrifices in other traditions, primarily those of the Middle East,
such as the Assyrian and Sumerian traditions.
Thus, the idea of the fractional structure of corporeality, arising from
the consistent application of the principle of atomism to matter, leads
Negarestani to the symbolism of rats, which pierce the surface of the earth,
depriving it of its illusory continuity. Together
1   Deleuze, G., Guattari, F. Anti-Oedipus: Capitalism and Schizophrenia. A Thousand Plateaus.
2   Negarestani R. Cyclonopedia: Complicity with Anonymous Materials.f its illusory continuity. Together
1   Deleuze, G., Guattari, F. Anti-Oedipus: Capitalism and Schizophrenia. A Thousand Plateaus.
2   Negarestani R. Cyclonopedia: Complicity with Anonymous Materials.

--- PAGE BREAK ---nuity. Together
1   Deleuze, G., Guattari, F. Anti-Oedipus: Capitalism and Schizophrenia. A Thousand Plateaus.
2   Negarestani R. Cyclonopedia: Complicity with Anonymous Materials.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

507
Chapter 2. Black Enlightenment
they are also the carriers of epidemics — often deadly ones — that is, they
act as instruments of the gods of the plague.
Negarestani applies the gesture of perforation and the poisonous
particles associated with it to the modern industrial economy, in which oil
and gas extracted through drilling play a central role. Negarestani considers
this act metaphysical: industrial capitalism is obsessed with the spirit of the
rat, and even deeper, it acts as an instrument of the gods of the plague,
hence the endless euphoria of oil, a kind of "petroleum addiction." People
are obsessed with oil primarily in a metaphysical sense. They break up the
surface and release the underground lubricant. It is a kind of industrial
capitalist coitus with the Great Mother, who brings wealth and prosperity.
At the same time, the desire for oil breeds conflict. On a rational level,
this is a struggle for resources, often manifested in the form of local wars,
which largely determines political processes in the Middle East and adjacent
resource-rich regions. But at the same time, oil is the "blood of the Titans"
(the Greeks called it "ichor"), and it is logical that it mixes with human blood,
forming the necessary substance for the manifestations of infernal demons —
the "Gog and Magog" of the Bible or the lamassu of the Assyrians, whose
meaning boils down to war. At the same time, according to Negarestani, in
such a war there are no "good" and "bad," "us" and "them"; it is a war of evil
against evil, in evil and in the name of evil.
The oil economy is also linked to an even more fundamental strategy.
Oil and gas are only the most superficial level of the semantics of drilling.
The true goal is the movement of civilisation deeper into the earth, towards
the basic strategy of preparing for the liberation of the molten core, which
Negarestani, following Land, calls
"Cthelll." This is the secret atom, the original source of geological trauma.
Negarestani offers a special genre of "theory fiction," in which elements
of science, mythology, theology, ethical images, and mathematical
expressions are inextricably intertwined. Thus, the idea that a black deity
(the "corpse of God," according to Negarestani) is hidden at the centre of the
earth can be traced back to the cults of Ahriman, the enemy of the light sun
god Ormuzd, and the Assyrian myths of Ereshkigal, the mistress of the
underworld. The entire underground realm is the zone of the "objects
themselves" of object-oriented ontology, that is, those territories where
matter resides within itself. As we move in this direction, the
dehumanisation of humanity, its objectification, takes place. At the same
time, these "objects" rise to the surface and begin to infect human culture
with their special existence.is direction, the
dehumanisation of humanity, its objectification, takes place. At the same
time, these "objects" rise to the surface and begin to infect human culture
with their special existence.

--- PAGE BREAK ---ehumanisation of humanity, its objectification, takes place. At the same
time, these "objects" rise to the surface and begin to infect human culture
with their special existence.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

508
Part 4. Political Philosophy of Postmodernism
, these "objects" rise to the surface and begin to infect human culture with
their special existence. However, in the spirit of the "Black Enlightenment,"
Negarestani does not rebel against this, but instead proposes to fully embrace
this process and even accelerate it ("accelerationism"). Ultimately, we see in
Nick Land that the driving force behind the "history of matter" is the
phantom pain of the core. Consequently, drilling down to the core and
allowing the magma to escape is the goal of progress, liberation, development
and, ultimately, revolution.
When describing the activation of the core, Negarestani refers to the
theme of underground gods, the powers of the Underworld, which act as
the driving forces of trembling matter. He describes them as titans and
giants, the deities of Hades in traditional mythologies, and as idiot gods
and subhuman — infra-corporeal — life forms, as described by the black
fantasy writer H. P. Lovecraft (1890–1937). Black fantasy, modern
technologies, energy politics, artificial intelligence, the development of new
machines of war, ancient myths, market strategies, Middle East diplomacy
— all these become different sides of a self-contained rhizome, reducible
to the geological trauma of the core. Infernal gods are entities that express
what is "radically different" for humans, that is, matter in its bottomless
truth, matter in and of itself.
The black Marxism of Land and Negarestani takes on a grotesque
character here: matter goes through a complete cycle — including the history
of life and humanity — and returns to itself, absorbing all random and
ephemeral forms in the moment of Singularity, and in the rush of the molten
core towards the source of pain, the "status of the highest stratum" of the red-
hot sun, affirming its deadly self-identity.
Soros's soup: a metaphor for the butchers'
The destruction of humanity and even of life as a whole in the context
of the "Black Enlightenment" is conceived as a feast of truth, as a return
to the full objectivity of the object, that is, to a kind of Radical Object, which
is the "core."
In this context, it is extremely revealing how Negarestani interprets the
very concept of an "open society." For Negarestani, "openness" is first and
foremost openness to matter, which is "radically other" in the topic of
speculative realism. But the logic of lifets the
very concept of an "open society." For Negarestani, "openness" is first and
foremost openness to matter, which is "radically other" in the topic of
speculative realism. But the logic of life

--- PAGE BREAK ---of an "open society." For Negarestani, "openness" is first and
foremost openness to matter, which is "radically other" in the topic of
speculative realism. But the logic of life

--- PAGE BREAK ---

509
Chapter 2. Black Enlightenment
and its inherent hierarchy boils down to the act of eating. The higher strata
eat the lower ones, and this is the code of life, embodied (according to
Deleuze and Guattari) in the territory and its structures. Gods feed on
humans, humans on animals, animals on plants, and plants on minerals. In
politics, the prince feeds on his subjects, and capital feeds on the whole
society. But this pyramid serves primarily to conceal the truth about matter.
As long as the higher is lower, society is built vertically. Such a society is
"closed" from below and horizontally. In Plato's Calipolis, the cosmos feeds
ideas, and in Aristotle, the eidos of a thing consumes its matter. In the
religious system, everything is based on sacrifice, and this takes the form of
food: the lower beings offer themselves as food to the higher ones, and so
on up to the divine worlds.
In Negarestani's model, Modernity and especially Postmodernity
represent the collapse of this food chain. Materialism is already a step
towards a situation where matter itself becomes the receiving party.
Democracy and the "open society" of Popper and Soros are called upon
to tear down the vertical structure and feed on matter in more or less equal
proportions. The next level of ecological democracy, Deleuze's
rhizomatics and object-oriented ontology (in particular, the political
philosophy of mould) propose to expand this openness to include non-
human entities. But Negarestani goes even further, siding not with animals,
cyborgs, and objects, but with the sub-material gods of the plague,
Lovecraft's id-gods. They are more material than objects and therefore also
have a right to participate in the distribution of food. The inhabitants of "the
other side," the Radical Object and its modulations, the emissaries of the
core (Cthelll), must also be satisfied. Thus, the "openness" of the "open
society" extends downward; it is now the openness of people to matter, to
the underground world, which is increasingly included in the general
process of dismantling hierarchies.
Negarestani wittily interprets this understanding of the "open society"
as the butcher's act of gutting a carcass (it is significant that Nick Land
prefers to refer to human corporeality as "meat").
"meat"). An "open society" is a "cut-open society," gutted by the gods of the
plague or hacked by hackers. This is not about a new hierarchy or a new
food chain, but rather the continuation of liberalism and equality, a
movement deeper into matter. The fact that people die from epidemics brings
them suffering and torment. But at the same time, people do not take into
account the slaughter of livestock or the cutting of grain. But the gods of
the plague also need something to feed on. Moreover, the lower an entity is
in the hierarchy of beings, the moreake into
account the slaughter of livestock or the cutting of grain. But the gods of
the plague also need something to feed on. Moreover, the lower an entity is
in the hierarchy of beings, the more

--- PAGE BREAK ---e slaughter of livestock or the cutting of grain. But the gods of
the plague also need something to feed on. Moreover, the lower an entity is
in the hierarchy of beings, the more

--- PAGE BREAK ---

510
Part 4. Political Philosophy of Postmodernism
The more material something is, the more metaphysical rights it has to food,
since matter is universal food. Therefore, it is quite logical that the cycle of
materialism ends with the act of feeding matter, the agents of which are
precisely Lovecraft's "idiot gods" or similar conceptual entities. Ultimately,
everything must be devoured by the core that has emerged from the centre of
the earth. This is precisely where the "open society" is heading in the new
phase of postmodernism. The metaphor for the members of such a society is
a conveyor belt with hormone-pumped chicken giblets.
Postmodernism is becoming a black " ."
So, postmodern political philosophy is what is happening right now
before our very eyes. It is not just a project, but a creation. It is a reading
that is becoming dominant. Most existing political systems, legal structures
and social norms still correspond to political modernity, sometimes in a
rather archaic form (for example, contemporary international law remains
fundamentally the same as it was when the Peace of Westphalia was
concluded). But the interpretation of existing systems is becoming
increasingly postmodern. And, consequently, we are rapidly and irreversibly
entering the political philosophy of Postmodernism. From the point of view
of the philosophical avant-garde, we are already there, and consequently,
many terms, concepts and theories of modernity have (often imperceptibly)
changed their meaning. This is clearly evident, for example, in Negarestani's
speculative realist interpretation of the liberal "open society".
The question is not who reads the Political text, but who knows how to
read it. And those who know how to read in accordance with the new post-
humanistic rules become true carriers of the political Postmodern. Those who
cannot read will continue to be increasingly surprised and even horrified,
because many things in our world, which is moving towards Singularity and
rhizome, towards the sovereignty of matter and the practices of feeding the
"gods of the plague," are illogical from the point of view of the classical
paradigm of Modernity.
It should be noted that in Postmodernism, the semantics of all three
political theories that emerged and fought each other for dominance in
Modernism have also changed imperceptibly. This is most evident in
liberalism, which, having won the war for the legacy of Modernity, became
the ideological environment in which Postmodernism was destined to
emerge. This is most clearly seen in the example of "black liberalism," which
is gradually rejecting humanistic rhetoric., became
the ideological environment in which Postmodernism was destined to
emerge. This is most clearly seen in the example of "black liberalism," which
is gradually rejecting humanistic rhetoric.

--- PAGE BREAK ---gical environment in which Postmodernism was destined to
emerge. This is most clearly seen in the example of "black liberalism," which
is gradually rejecting humanistic rhetoric.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

511
Chapter 2. Black Enlightenment
and increasingly openly demonstrating its dark side: market hypertrophy,
where everything becomes an object of purchase and sale; the pursuit of
autonomous development of unrestrained technology; the transition to
satisfying the sub-individual desires of consumers; after victory in the field
of gender politics, the transition to the protection of the rights of robots and
deep ecology. "Black liberalism" is not some kind of deviation from
liberalism, just as the "Black Enlightenment" is not an alternative or
antithesis to the Enlightenment.
"Black liberalism" was already foreshadowed by the burning of heretics by
the Protestant Calvin, the atrocities of Cromwell (1599–1658), the cynical
cruelty of colonialism, the slave trade, the racist theories of social Darwinists,
hatred of the working class and people in general (except for big capitalists)
in Ayn Rand's "objectivism," etc. But liberalism becomes truly black when it
completely breaks away from the realm of the human and opens itself up to
the realm of pure matter. Classical liberalism, defending the atomism of the
human individual, despite the destructiveness of this hypothesis in relation to
the anthropology of traditional society, had this individual as its boundary. It
was precisely his liberalism that freed him from the superforms of collective
identity. It turns black at the moment when it comes to the realisation that
now the next step must be taken and man must be freed from humanity —
human optional. It is here that the concept of the individual completely severs
its ties with the human and moves in the direction of sub-individual and
trans-individual — and further, rhizomatic, virtual and materialistic —
entities and instances.
We see something similar in communism. Despite the abstract nature
of Marxist theory, which operates with empty concepts such as classes,
surplus value, etc., and the barbarities of communist rule in practice, this
ideology did not completely sever its ties with humanity, although some
Marxists — such as D. Lukács (1885–1971) — insisted that in the
proletariat the subject coincides with the object, partly anticipating object-
oriented ontology. Some aspects of Nietzscheanism in the communist J.
Bataille (1897–1962) and the interest in the Marquis de Sade (1740–1814)
among many left-wing thinkers are also in tune with "black communism,"
but it only fully becomes such after adopting Lacan's ontology and, through
him, structuralist Freudianism, which leads directly to Foucault, Deleuze,
Guattari, and all those who came under their influence, which is currently
the overwhelming majority of Marxists. The liberation of the "workers of
the desire factory" from the repression of consciousness is a real break with
the human, and this time,, which is currently
the overwhelming majority of Marxists. The liberation of the "workers of
the desire factory" from the repression of consciousness is a real break with
the human, and this time,

--- PAGE BREAK ---the overwhelming majority of Marxists. The liberation of the "workers of
the desire factory" from the repression of consciousness is a real break with
the human, and this time,

--- PAGE BREAK ---

512
Part 4. Political Philosophy of Postmodernism
Marxism is indeed becoming "black." At the same time, in the context of
"Black Enlightenment" and accelerationism, the first and second political
theories are already blending to the point of inseparability. It does not matter
whether some believe that the global triumph of capitalism and the transfer of
subjectivity to non-human or even artificial subjects will be followed by a
world revolution, or whether capitalism itself should be taken as the
maximum possible peak of humanity's movement towards its own
destruction. In the new postmodern discourse, unlike in modern discourse,
these questions are not only irrelevant, but almost meaningless. That is why
such avant-garde structures of the "open society" as the Soros Foundation
simultaneously support both liberalism and communism, which in the
postmodern context have become barely distinguishable. Che Guevara
advertises new phone brands on posters, while young people wearing T-shirts
with his portrait march against the remaining socialists.
Fascism is less prevalent in postmodernism, although total enthusiasm
for technology and technical development could, with some stretching, be
considered "fascist" (Italian Futurism), and the obsession with biological
research and biopolitics can be seen as echoes of the "racial hygiene" of the
National Socialists, who, according to Heidegger, were the first to
introduce the biological element (corporeality) into the legal system by
adopting racial laws. But since fascism is already considered "black" even
without postmodernism, it does not play a particularly prominent role in
"Black Enlightenment." Moreover, the thrust of postmodernist criticism in
its struggle against the state, society, family, tradition, and, this time, at
the subindividual level, is directed precisely against
"fascism" and "nationalism," which liberals and communists see as the
most effective metaphor for vertical order in general. In this case, Nick
Land, who positively assesses such a phenomenon as "neo-conservatives"
(NRx), sometimes classified as "far right" or alt-right, outlines a place in
object-oriented ontology for "cyber-fascism" (for example, through a
particular reading of Nietzsche, where the superhuman can be interpreted
as a prototype of Artificial Intelligence(1) ).
 's traits
If we look closely at the logic of the transformation of paradigms in
political philosophy, we see that after the exhaustion of
1Martin Heidegger argued that the figure of the superhuman could signify the
maximisation of alienation rather than its overcoming.digms in
political philosophy, we see that after the exhaustion of
1Martin Heidegger argued that the figure of the superhuman could signify the
maximisation of alienation rather than its overcoming.

--- PAGE BREAK ---philosophy, we see that after the exhaustion of
1Martin Heidegger argued that the figure of the superhuman could signify the
maximisation of alienation rather than its overcoming.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

513
Chapter 2. Black Enlightenment
The possibilities and content of political modernity can only logically be
followed by the affirmation of political postmodernity, the unearthing of the
"state in reverse," the creation of an infernal "empire of the multitude,"
complete dehumanisation, the transfer of subjectivity to artificial and
natural non-human species, and finally, a rush to the core of the earth with
the aim of liberating the magmatic core. The horizontal and therefore anti-
vertical vector of Modernism is replaced by a new "horizontal verticality,"
political drilling.
In the political philosophy of the Mother, which we identified as a
possibility even at the level of examining the philosophical topology of
"Timaeus," a hidden dimension that was previously invisible is gradually
revealed. We did not see it from the perspective of the philosophy of the
Father, nor from the perspective of the philosophy of the Son, nor even in
the early stages of modern philosophy. Only when Modern finally and
irrevocably triumphs, when we fully realise this philosophy of Modern in
practice, do the deepest roots of the "chora" itself, the Mother, become
apparent.
Now Modernism is complete — it has truly reached its logical limit.
Moving further in this direction, the explicit goal of the political process
will be the conscious and systematic destruction of humanity and,
probably, life itself. It is very important that this conclusion is reached not
by opponents of Modernity (and Postmodernity), but by its most avant-
garde supporters. In this sense, critical realism — and especially its
representatives such as Nick Land or Raza Negarestani — is closer in its
vocabulary, imagery and frankness to traditionalist philosophers who
harshly and totally criticise Modernity as such, identifying it with the
"civilisation of the Antichrist" and the "revenge of the Titans," fully
confirming what opponents of Postmodernism might see as biased
polemical rhetoric.
This leads to a very important conclusion for political philosophy: it
will not be possible to remain within the framework of Modernity for
long; this paradigm has already reached its limits, and the process of
immersion into Postmodernity is in full swing. And this is not a random
failure, but a historical and political inevitability.
We can continue to descend even further down the ontological strata,
burrowing deeper and deeper into pure materiality — steadily approaching
the core. On this path, the last horizon remains, ending in Singularity: for
now, we can try to fuse humans with mushroom mycelium, replace workers
and service employees with robots, entrust planetary logistics to Artificial
Intelligence, elect mould as president, replace all organs with new ones, and
upload memories to a cloud server.workers
and service employees with robots, entrust planetary logistics to Artificial
Intelligence, elect mould as president, replace all organs with new ones, and
upload memories to a cloud server.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

514
Part 4. Political Philosophy of Postmodernism
, elect mould as president, replace all organs with new ones, and upload
memories to a cloud server.
Postmodernism simply has to allow the free proliferation of hybrids,
introduce a parliament of things and break down the ego into
combinatorial elements, and continue pumping oil and gas, steadily
approaching the core. In principle, lowering rods into the core could solve
the world's energy problems. This will probably be decided at some point at
the political level, but from the point of view of
Black Enlightenment, it would mean that the core itself would launch this rod
into us.

--- PAGE BREAK ---ill probably be decided at some point at
the political level, but from the point of view of
Black Enlightenment, it would mean that the core itself would launch this rod
into us.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

Chapter 3. The Fourth Political Theory
The Political Meaning of the 20th Century
The fourth political theory (4pt) is a conceptual matrix describing the
possibility of an alternative to the political trend that became dominant in
the Modern era. It emerges in its entirety when Postmodernism is fully
established in the realm of political philosophy. It is only then that the
truth of Modernity is revealed, that is, the nature of the "Black
Enlightenment," which the Fourth Political Theory deals with directly. As
long as the essence of Modernity was hidden and its fundamental
ontological and anthropological strategy was distributed across three
branches, the Fourth Political Theory was impossible, since the outcome of
the struggle between the three political theories of Modernity determined the
clarification of its deepest essence. And the Fourth Political Theory
correlates precisely with this essence — with the truth found in the abyss
(matter) of which Democritus spoke. Therefore, in order to describe the
Fourth Political Theory in detail, it is necessary to take another look at
Modernity and the dialectic of the clash between its three main political
theories.
Let us repeat: the three main political ideologies of the Modern era —
liberalism (as the first political theory), communism (as the second political
theory) and nationalism (as the third political theory) — essentially exhaust
and embody various aspects of the very paradigm of Modern political
philosophy. As we said earlier, in each of the three political theories, the
philosophical subject of modernity is interpreted differently: in liberalism as
an individual, in communism as a class, and in fascism and national socialism
as the state and race, respectively.
These political concepts clashed in the 20th century and predetermined
the structure of world wars, the Cold War, alliances, unions and blocs. If the
First World War was a clash between a number of large European national
powersd in the 20th century and predetermined
the structure of world wars, the Cold War, alliances, unions and blocs. If the
First World War was a clash between a number of large European national
powers

--- PAGE BREAK ---y and predetermined
the structure of world wars, the Cold War, alliances, unions and blocs. If the
First World War was a clash between a number of large European national
powers

--- PAGE BREAK ---

516
Part 4. Political Philosophy of Postmodernism
, the Second World War was a conflict between all three ideological
forces: liberals, represented by the West (the United States and England);
communists, represented by the USSR; and Nazis/fascists, represented by
Mussolini's Italy and Hitler's Germany, as well as other movements close
to them.
Accordingly, after the defeat of the third political theory (fascism and
National Socialism), two political theories remained, the first and the
second, between which a cold war developed until 1989 and especially in
1991, when the first political theory (liberalism) defeated the second
(communism).
The entire history of Modernism was marked by these three political
theories, which embodied the very matrix of the political philosophy of the
Modern Age. All of them were built on the logic of the political philosophy
of the Mother: they were all materialistic, evolutionist, progressive, and they
all viewed the structure of the world from the bottom up, rather than from
the top down, that is, they were created on the foundation of an immanent
materialistic doctrine.
Accordingly, the order of their emergence and the order of their
disappearance (or marginalisation) also reflected a certain logic, since the
battle between the three political ideologies was a battle over which of
them best corresponded to the paradigm of Modernity.
These three versions of Modernism fought each other for the most
important thing: the question of which of them embodied the very essence
of Modernism, its truth. Communism also claimed this, believing that a
socialist and communist society would be built after the completion of the
historical cycle of capitalism, as did liberalism, which considered itself an
expression of Modernism as such, but less obviously, a third political
theory (fascism, National Socialism) also claimed this, considering itself a
revolutionary doctrine that reflected the spirit of Modernity, but in a
different context, with different proportions and different values than
liberalism and communism.
In any case, all three ideologies fought for one of them to embody the
spirit of Modernism. Each believed that it was Modernism itself. After the
defeat of Nazism, only two ideologies (liberalism and communism) contested
this right, and after 1989–1991, it turned out that only one ideology had won
this long struggle: liberalism.
In other words, of the three political theories of the Modern paradigm,
only one proved to be truly paradigmatic. This is linked to the process of
globalisation and the universalisation of liberal ideology, which has
become the world's only ideology, prevailingradigm,
only one proved to be truly paradigmatic. This is linked to the process of
globalisation and the universalisation of liberal ideology, which has
become the world's only ideology, prevailing

--- PAGE BREAK ---oved to be truly paradigmatic. This is linked to the process of
globalisation and the universalisation of liberal ideology, which has
become the world's only ideology, prevailing

--- PAGE BREAK ---

517
Chapter 3. The Fourth Political Theory
Here there is a direct link to Francis Fukuyama's assertion about the "end of
history."
This is directly linked to Francis Fukuyama's assertion about the "end
of history." The "end of history" is the final and irreversible victory of
liberalism, the first political theory, over its rivals. After 1991, liberalism is
no longer one of three ideologies, but the ideology of modernity itself.
Capitalism (liberalism) initially considered itself the embodiment of the
spirit of Modernity, but this was not obvious to anyone except the
representatives of liberalism itself. This was challenged by communists and
fascists, and in principle, for several centuries until the end, the dispute
between the three political theories remained unresolved. At all stages, there
was a possibility of various turns in political events (and communism
seriously claimed that it was the embodiment of Modernity and the
ideological formula for the "end of history," not liberalism). At one point,
Hitler's successes in Germany were so impressive that it was quite possible to
believe that Nazism would determine the ideological basis of the future. It
was only at the end of the 20th century that the unconditional matrix of
world political history was finally determined, with the spirit of
Modernism triumphing in the form of liberalism. Liberalism defended its
right to be not just one of many ideologies, but the Ideology with a capital I.
Thus, the first political theory of the Modern era became at once the last
and the final one. It was from the victory of liberalism that we derived the
political philosophy of Postmodernism. Accordingly, the triumph of the
individual
mind as an atom and allowed us to move to the subatomic level.
This determined the winner in the rivalry between the three ideological
versions of Modernism. And at practically the same time, liberalism, having
become dominant and the only ideology, began to rapidly reveal its
totalitarian nature. At the same time, with ever-increasing speed, a
paradigm shift began towards Postmodernism, whose philosophical premises
had been developed several decades earlier, but which began to take
practical shape in the political sphere in the 1990s. At the same time, a
wave of gender politics and eco-politics arose, heralding the emergence of
overt forms of "black liberalism."
Modernity,
which
triumphed
in
liberalism,
transitioned
into
postmodernism, a new post-liberal stage. But this was only possible because
all forms of collective identity (the paradigm of Tradition) and alternative
artificial definitions of the political subject in the second political theory
(class) and the third political theory (state, race) were abolished.entity (the paradigm of Tradition) and alternative
artificial definitions of the political subject in the second political theory
(class) and the third political theory (state, race) were abolished.

--- PAGE BREAK ---of Tradition) and alternative
artificial definitions of the political subject in the second political theory
(class) and the third political theory (state, race) were abolished.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

518
Part 4. Political Philosophy of Postmodernism
The individual has been affirmed by liberals as the latest version of the
most authentic human atom and, accordingly, as the philosophical foundation
and political subject. And only after the victory of this ideology and the
triumph of the human individual — expressed in the ideology of civil society,
the ideology of human rights, the ideology of globalisation and the global
liberal capitalist market (the transition from global politics to global
economics, with the abolition of history, as Fukuyama wrote), only then did
the door to Postmodernism truly open. It was opened by liberals, and
therefore, in the paradigm of the "Black Enlightenment," it is "black
liberalism" that has the right to doctrinal and epistemological primacy.
As soon as the atom was established as the fundamental unit of existence,
all further movement turned to the subatomic level. This is linked to the
phenomenology of political post-philosophy, or the political philosophy of
Postmodernism.
Thus, without the victory of liberalism, the victory of postmodernism
would have been impossible. More precisely, theoretically, postmodernism
could have been different — more likely communist and less likely fascist.
But the outcome of the 20th century in the field of ideology is clear: political
postmodernism is built on the absolute domination of liberal ideology, the
first political theory that completely defeated the second and third.
It is in this context that a global society is being constructed. A global
society is not yet a reality; it is a project. Nevertheless, it exists as a concept
and corresponds to a similar notion, the "global West." When we say "the
West," we mean not only the geographical West, but also, for example, Japan
and even the Pacific coast of China, where Western models prevail in the
economy, culture, and society, as well as some countries in the Pacific region
that are following the Western path of development (Singapore, Taiwan,
etc.). "The West" is a global and, at the same time, ideological concept. Of
course, the West has not yet fully penetrated the flesh and blood of all
societies, peoples and civilisations, but nevertheless this penetration is in full
swing — through the market, technology, culture, information, economics,
politics, etc. The West is not just a collection of European and North
American powers and societies. It is the very process of globalisation,
"postmodernisation" and the gradual spread of codes (and stratifications, to
use the term of Deleuze/Guattari).
1  Dugin, A. G. Post-Philosophy.d societies. It is the very process of globalisation,
"postmodernisation" and the gradual spread of codes (and stratifications, to
use the term of Deleuze/Guattari).
1  Dugin, A. G. Post-Philosophy.

--- PAGE BREAK ---he very process of globalisation,
"postmodernisation" and the gradual spread of codes (and stratifications, to
use the term of Deleuze/Guattari).
1  Dugin, A. G. Post-Philosophy.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

519
Chapter 3. The Fourth Political Theory
Euro-American/Euro-Atlantic culture across the entire planet. Following
the decisive victory of liberalism in the Cold War, the entire world is, in a
sense, “the West,” that is, an area of territorialisation/deterritorialisation
that corresponds precisely to the liberal code of “assemblage.”
Accordingly, today's agenda for global processes in world politics is
the domination of liberalism and the affirmation of its victory on a global
scale, the elimination of nation states (which we are seeing in Europe), and
the destruction of all forms of collective identity (nation, religion, gender,
etc.). In this phase, Modernity completes the destruction of vertical
symmetries and organic collective identities that it began with the
transition from traditional society (Platonism, Aristotelianism, religion) to
modern society (materialism, democracy, secularism).
The universality of the West and black- e modernisation
The global political process today — at least within the dominant
episteme — represents a transition from the political philosophy of
Modernity (in the form of the victorious liberal ideology) to Postmodernity
— and to its most avant-garde
"object-oriented" phase of post-humanist "Black Enlightenment." This is the
agenda of Western society.
The question arises: to what extent is this agenda universal?
When answering this question, we must first consider that the West
thinks globally (globalisation is the spread of the "Western influence" to
all of humanity). Therefore, to the extent that we are a modern society and
accept modernisation and Westernisation as something inevitable (fate),
we are also part of the European world or Euro-Atlantic civilisation. This
applies to every nation and every society. Today, to a certain extent,
almost all countries without exception (including the most anti-Western
ones, such as North Korea or Iran) implicitly recognise the imperative of
modernisation, recognising the West (or at least its technologies, its
epistemologies, its economic dogmas — above all the market) as the global
destiny, including the destiny of non-Western peoples and societies. Thus,
the West itself insists on the universalism of the West and the logical
sequence of its historical development from traditional society to Modernity
and Postmodernity.peoples and societies. Thus,
the West itself insists on the universalism of the West and the logical
sequence of its historical development from traditional society to Modernity
and Postmodernity.

--- PAGE BREAK ---es. Thus,
the West itself insists on the universalism of the West and the logical
sequence of its historical development from traditional society to Modernity
and Postmodernity.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

520
Part 4. Political Philosophy of Postmodernism
the West and the Rest, as expressed by S. Huntington (1927–2008).
But if we unconditionally accept the thesis of the universality of the
West, then we have no choice but to accept and implement the first political
theory. In this case, the reading of philosophy, history, politics, economics,
culture, international relations and all other areas of social life must be
carried out in accordance with the epistemology of liberalism and on the
basis of its scale. But if this is so, then we must recognise the irreversibility
of the transition from political Modernity to political Postmodernity — and
ultimately to the post-humanist agenda of the "Black Enlightenment."
In this case, accepting this model as dominant, we obtain a normative
model for comparison, evaluating everything that happens in different non-
Western countries (including Russia) based on the criterion of how similar
it is to the West and the various stages of its history. To assess the level of
modernity of a given society, we use GDP, economic statistics, indicators
of industrialisation and urbanisation, the degree of functionality of
democratic institutions and various segments of civil society, the extent of
political correctness and tolerance, etc. In general, we are talking about
measuring the actual liberation of the human individual (the social atom)
from various forms of collective identity. In other words, a modern and
"Western" society is one in which the political philosophy of Modernity and
the practices based on it have prevailed to a sufficient extent.
But this applies primarily to non-Western societies trying to catch up
with the West (sometimes quite successfully, as in the case of some rapidly
developing countries in the Pacific region). In Western countries themselves,
different criteria apply, based on how far a society has moved from
Modernity to Postmodernity. In some respects, the United States and
especially Canada are ahead of the European Union countries, while in
others, European societies are more postmodern than North American
countries. In the field of philosophy and political philosophy, continental
countries, and above all France, where postmodernism originated, are the
undisputed leaders. However, in the application of certain postmodernist
strategies and practices to the fields of culture, technology, business, politics
and even military strategy (this applies above all to the doctrine of "se-
1   Huntington, S. The Clash of Civilisations. Moscow: AST, 2003.s to the fields of culture, technology, business, politics
and even military strategy (this applies above all to the doctrine of "se-
1   Huntington, S. The Clash of Civilisations. Moscow: AST, 2003.

--- PAGE BREAK ---ulture, technology, business, politics
and even military strategy (this applies above all to the doctrine of "se-
1   Huntington, S. The Clash of Civilisations. Moscow: AST, 2003.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

521
Chapter 3. The Fourth Political Theory
te wars" 1 ), the primacy, on the contrary, belongs to the United States.
"Speculative realism" and "Black Enlightenment" affect both Europeans
and Americans, with Lacan's line prevailing epistemologically, Foucault
and, above all, Deleuze/Guattari, while methodologically and stylistically,
Anglo-Saxon technocracy and a specific imaginaire prevail.
The transition to postmodernism somewhat distorts the clarity of the
criteria.
"modernisation," since in the West itself there is a move away from
Modernity (post-humanisation) and towards an increasingly accentuated
individuality — schizoanalysis, hyper-tolerance, "object democracy," eco-
politics, etc., while in non-Western societies, the epistemology of Modernity
and the practices based on it are not yet sufficiently entrenched. This
sometimes creates extravagant situations where the index of "modernisation"
is the number of same-sex marriages, the percentage of homosexuals and
transgender people in power structures, or the quality of network
connectivity, while many fundamental aspects of classical modernisation may
be in their infancy. In such cases, the criterion of large-scale schizophrenia
among the masses may outweigh technological backwardness or the collapse
and dysfunction of democratic mechanisms ( as understood in the West).
But in any case, if we recognise the universalism of the West, this implies
embarking on the path of modernisation and accepting liberalism as the
mandatory ideology that has won the historical battle for the essence and
truth of the Modern. Therefore, not only the West and Modernity are
recognised as universal, but the ideology of liberalism, with all its inherent
principles and axioms, also possesses the same universal status. By
recognising the universality of the West, we necessarily recognise the
inevitability of the first political theory. This, in turn, predetermines the
vector of
of "progress" within the Modern paradigm itself — in the direction of the
divium, post-humanism, the Radical Object (core), the political philosophy of
the Mother — all the way to the "Black Enlightenment."
The West thinks and acts globally, and therefore all societies (including
non-Western ones) that are under its influence are forced to accept the entire
chain of temporal semantics reflected in liberalism: history as progress, the
liberation of the individual from all forms of collective identity, technological
development — and so on, deeper and deeper into matter in search of the
elusive atomicity and truth of the material abyss.
1  Dugin, A. G. War of the Continents: The Modern World in the Geopolitical Coordinate System.
Moscow: Academic Project, 2015.ter in search of the
elusive atomicity and truth of the material abyss.
1  Dugin, A. G. War of the Continents: The Modern World in the Geopolitical Coordinate System.
Moscow: Academic Project, 2015.

--- PAGE BREAK ---elusive atomicity and truth of the material abyss.
1  Dugin, A. G. War of the Continents: The Modern World in the Geopolitical Coordinate System.
Moscow: Academic Project, 2015.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

522
Part 4. Political Philosophy of Postmodernism
This vector is embedded in the global agenda. And since we are part
of the global world, it is also embedded in Russian politics — naturally on
an equal footing with all other nations and cultures, both Western and non-
Western. To one degree or another, this applies to all modern societies,
including those that, due to historical inertia, retain certain religious
features (this applies primarily to Islamic countries) and those that follow
the second political theory (North Korea, China, Vietnam, Cuba). But even
in these cases, liberalism — primarily in the economy — and a
materialistic worldview (in science, technology, and education) have a
significant impact, preparing the ground for the next stage of more complete
modernisation and Westernisation.
Recognition of the universality of the West thus includes liberalism as
a necessary and obligatory element. This may be veiled, postponed, or
framed by symbolic decorations, but the essence of modernity at the end
of the 20th century boils down precisely to liberalism. Fukuyama based his
thesis about the "end of history" on this analysis. And although he did not
take into account the diversity of civilisations, his analysis is theoretically
correct: Modernity = liberalism. Another thing is that Fukuyama was wrong
about the timing of the process. Theoretically, this is true, and it follows
from the West's own conviction in the universality of its history and from the
recognition of this by most non-Western societies. But in practice,
modernity has penetrated different non-Western societies unevenly,
sometimes not deeply and almost always with enormous distortions. This
has delayed the liberal "end of history," but it has by no means cancelled
it. At least, if we recognise the universalism of the West and, accordingly,
liberalism, we can argue with Fukuyama about the timing and forms, but
not about the essence of the process itself.
Here, however, we should also take into account postmodernism and, in
particular, its drive towards posthumanism, transhumanism, hypermaterialism
and radical nihilism, which openly proclaim not just the "end of history" but
the "end of humanity" as a goal, and in some cases even the "end of life" in
favour of the Radical Object (core) and the invasion of sub-corporeal, deeply
material powers "from the other side" ( Lovecraft's "idiot gods," gods of the
plague, etc.). This is the least manifested but already clearly defined vector of
the continuation of modernisation and Westernisation along the axis set by
liberalism and especially its victory. This is "black liberalism," which has
finally broken with humanism and humanity, but follows the same logic of
Modernity — towards materialism, atomism, and individualism, but this time
beyond the limits of humanity and even life itself.inally broken with humanism and humanity, but follows the same logic of
Modernity — towards materialism, atomism, and individualism, but this time
beyond the limits of humanity and even life itself.

--- PAGE BREAK ---umanism and humanity, but follows the same logic of
Modernity — towards materialism, atomism, and individualism, but this time
beyond the limits of humanity and even life itself.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

523
Chapter 3. The Fourth Political Theory
, atomism and individualism, but this time beyond the limits of man and
even life itself.
Thus, the accusation of nihilism and death wish levelled at Modernity is
no longer a polemical and rhetorical move by its opponents, but is
increasingly acknowledged by liberals themselves — modernists and
especially postmodernists, who call for acceleration and transhumanism,
artificial intelligence and genetic modification, and ultimately to the complete
triumph of matter and nothingness.
Thus, in the complete cycle of the philosophy of Matter, the third kind
"Timaea," we are dealing with the philosophy of death, with the glorification
of nihilism and dissipation, entropy and illusory reality ("ontology").
To follow the path of the West is to follow the path of death. The
philosophy of civil society, taken to its logical conclusion (the absence of
the state, order, hierarchy, and any common elements or values), leads to
human loneliness reaching such an extent that nothing but the death of
oneself or one's neighbour can entertain a human being. And further, the
metaphor of the "open society" in the epistemology of the "Black
Enlightenment" leads directly to images of disembowelled human
carcasses, opened up to "the other side," who, in their naive search for
freedom, have become victims of the gods of the plague.
This is precisely the complete programme of modernisation and
Westernisation. And although it still remains outside the attention of the
general public even in the West, at the level of political philosophy,
postmodernism and speculative realism are already at work, expanding their
influence in the epistemological sphere, affecting culture, art, technology, as
well as economics and politics. In non-Western societies, this avant-garde
agenda is even less known. But anyone who recognises the thesis of Western
universalism, the inevitability of progress and development, any supporter of
liberal ideology (conscious or unconscious) already carries within themselves
the vector of "black liberalism," which is not only possible in the context of
the general development of Western modernity, but is inevitable and
constitutes its logical post-humanist and nihilistic conclusion.
The question of an e alternative
Now we come to the second question, which is directly related to the
first: is there any alternative to this process?
Of course, there are people in the world who, looking at what is
happening, feel, to put it mildly, a certain uneasiness, understandingelated to the
first: is there any alternative to this process?
Of course, there are people in the world who, looking at what is
happening, feel, to put it mildly, a certain uneasiness, understanding

--- PAGE BREAK ---: is there any alternative to this process?
Of course, there are people in the world who, looking at what is
happening, feel, to put it mildly, a certain uneasiness, understanding

--- PAGE BREAK ---

524
Part 4. Political Philosophy of Postmodernism
that something is wrong with the basic fundamental structure of the society in
which we live today. Of course, few people realise the scale of the problem,
since the influence of the dominant epistemes is so strong that it completely
predetermines the structures of consciousness, both in relation to the subject
and in relation to the surrounding world and society, and the episteme of
Modernity has been firmly entrenched (at least in the West) for several
centuries, while liberalism and the political philosophy based on it have
completely predetermined normative thinking in recent decades on a global
scale. Accordingly, it is not easy to understand the full scope of what is
happening from a distance from the ruling ideology. At the same time,
however, even in the West itself, there is a theoretical possibility, and in
practice there is a growing desire to reject the liberal paradigm and globalism,
while in non-Western societies, especially those that have preserved certain
civilisational characteristics and/or strong religious traditions, such a desire is
often even stronger — including because of the obvious colonial nature of
globalisation, which imposes Western values and standards on all cultures.
The situation is greatly exacerbated by the fact that the transition to
postmodernism opens up post-humanistic horizons, which for cultures where
modernity has not yet taken root appear to be something "monstrous." Even
for the average Westerner, the themes of schizomass (and schizoanalysis),
rhizomes, parliament organs, cyborgs, clones and genetic engineering, i.e. the
tenets of nihilistic accelerationism ("black liberalism" and "black Marxism"),
which boil down to a call for the abolition of humanity, still seem excessive
today. This was also the case with gender politics, but this milestone, which
legalised numerous sexual perversions and gave legal status to homosexual
marriages, adoption of children by such couples, etc., has already been
reached, and today the agenda includes "democracy of things," Artificial
Intelligence and the recognition of the political sovereignty of matter.
However, this shift towards post-humanism has not yet become a reality and
therefore still provokes a negative reaction among the population. Outside the
Western world, such topics seem even more grotesque, since in the context of
any traditional — religious — culture, it is impossible not to see direct
parallels with Satanism and the kingdom of the Antichrist.
Thus, overall, there is enormous scope for anti-liberal and anti-
globalist positions, and they are just as global in nature as liberal globalism
itself. As a rule, politicalngdom of the Antichrist.
Thus, overall, there is enormous scope for anti-liberal and anti-
globalist positions, and they are just as global in nature as liberal globalism
itself. As a rule, political

--- PAGE BREAK ---ist.
Thus, overall, there is enormous scope for anti-liberal and anti-
globalist positions, and they are just as global in nature as liberal globalism
itself. As a rule, political

--- PAGE BREAK ---

525
Chapter 3. The Fourth Political Theory
The political, economic, cultural, and scientific elites readily accept
liberalism, being part of a transnational class that relies precisely on this
ideology, However, the masses, as well as huge sectors of the counter-
elite, are wary of modernisation and Westernisation, especially in their
current state of transition to "black liberalism" (post-humanism), and may
easily embark on a search for alternatives. In other words, the more total
and global liberalism becomes, the more acute the question of its possible
alternatives becomes. At the same time, we are not talking about a mere
theoretical possibility, but about a multitude of concrete cases of its
rejection: we see this in the ideology of radical Islam, in Russia's
determination to strengthen its sovereignty and, at the very least, to
correct extreme forms of liberal ideology, in China's firm commitment to
the political power of the Communist Party contrary to the demands of
liberal democracy, in the rising tide of European populism
lism, etc.
The fourth political theory begins with a critical
distance
The construction of the Fourth Political Theory begins with the
question of a possible alternative to the undivided domination of liberal
ideology on a global scale, taking into account the entire logic of the
formation of political modernity and the philosophical transformations that
occur during the transition to postmodernity. To understand the meaning,
place, role and content of the Fourth Political Theory, it is necessary to take
into account the entire structure of Politica Aeterna, which synchronously
describes all possible models of the organisation of political philosophy.
Therefore, the Fourth Political Theory can only be fully understood in the
general context of Politica Aeterna(1) .
The fourth political theory begins with the observation that something
has gone wrong with the world and the dominant trends within it, and that
this "something" is fundamentally metaphysical and ontological (rather than
purely technical or even ideological) in nature.
The fourth political theory begins with a philosophical distancing from
the main processes taking place on a global scale. But this distancing itself
represents a serious
1  In turn, Politica Aeterna is based on "Post-philosophy" (see: Dugin, A. G. Post-
philosophy) and on the methodology of the Three Logos, set out in the project
"Noomachia." Dugin, A. G. Noomachia. Three Logos.Politica Aeterna is based on "Post-philosophy" (see: Dugin, A. G. Post-
philosophy) and on the methodology of the Three Logos, set out in the project
"Noomachia." Dugin, A. G. Noomachia. Three Logos.

--- PAGE BREAK ---based on "Post-philosophy" (see: Dugin, A. G. Post-
philosophy) and on the methodology of the Three Logos, set out in the project
"Noomachia." Dugin, A. G. Noomachia. Three Logos.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

526
Part 4. Political Philosophy of Postmodernism
a philosophical problem, since criticism is not directed at a stable and
unchanging set of assertions, axioms, concepts and value systems, but at a
fluid, constantly changing and extremely deceptive element that constantly
and obsessively generates false presentations and self-presentations,
communicating distorted information about itself and the world, both
globally and in detail. The point is not that liberal ideology (like any
ideology, for that matter) relies on political propaganda and constructs
proportions and systems of evaluation that are advantageous to itself. The
situation is even more serious, since from the point of view of the
completeness of Politica Aeterna, Modernity as such represents a
continuous field of pseudology, that is, the development of an impossible,
false and self-contradictory hypothesis. Ontologically, Modernity exists as
falsehood
exists,
representing
the
being
of
non-being.
And
in
Postmodernism, this nihilism is fully revealed, and not simply discovered,
but taken up as a conscious goal and supreme value. The prominent
theorist
andliberal philosopher Bernard-Henri Lévy,a staunch and fierce
apologist for globalism and modernity, acknowledges that the liberal
Western-centric world order is an empire based on nothing and defending
nothing as the highest value. Accordingly, it is far from easy to untangle
the intricacies of pseudo-science and thereby take a position where its
rhetorical and epistemological mechanisms would cease to operate. Thus, the
two critical theories directed against liberalism (communism and fascism)
were themselves elements of political modernity and, consequently, were
located within pseudo-science rather than outside it. But their absence, as
well as the communication of the truth about the lie of Modernity in
Postmodernity, simplify this task somewhat, and with certain efforts,
critical thinking about contemporary liberal ideology can find its
appropriate zone — on the other side of the new — liberal — totality.
Today, it is still possible to say "no" to liberalism and globalisation, and
therefore "no" to universality, and this decisive "no" forms the basis of the
Fourth Political Theory. For those who say "yes" to the global status quo, the
Fourth Political Theory has little (or rather no) meaning. But the number of
those leaning towards "no" in the modern world is huge, to the point that it
can be considered the implicit position of the overwhelming majority of
humanity, while complete solidarity with liberalism is statistically
characteristic only of
1Levy B.-H. The Empire and the Five Kings: America’s Abdication and the Fate of the World.
NY: Henry Holt and Co., 2019.e complete solidarity with liberalism is statistically
characteristic only of
1Levy B.-H. The Empire and the Five Kings: America’s Abdication and the Fate of the World.
NY: Henry Holt and Co., 2019.

--- PAGE BREAK ---y with liberalism is statistically
characteristic only of
1Levy B.-H. The Empire and the Five Kings: America’s Abdication and the Fate of the World.
NY: Henry Holt and Co., 2019.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

527
Chapter 3. The Fourth Political Theory
global elites. But the problem is that power — primarily epistemological, but
also all other forms (political, economic, cultural, etc.) — is in the hands of
precisely these global elites. And thus, the meaning of the Fourth Political
Theory, even in such a preliminary and initial approximation, takes on a
revolutionary status.
Against liberalism, but also against communism
and fascism
So, the Fourth Political Theory stems from disagreement with the
dominance of liberalism, but since this dominance is not accidental but
represents the result of multidimensional and generally unidirectional
processes in the political history of the West, it calls into question the entire
semantic sequence — the very course of change and internal evolution of
political paradigms — and above all from Tradition to Modernity and further
on to Postmodernity. The first gesture of the Fourth Political Theory is a
radical rejection of liberalism and its postmodern, in some ways already post-
liberal, subatomic version, which is becoming mainstream politics today. But
this rejection is coupled in the Fourth Political Theory with an extremely
clear and contrasting understanding that the illiberal ideologies of Modernity
— communism and fascism — are not real alternatives. This is a fundamental
position of the Fourth Political Theory, which is why we call it "Fourth."
Radically and totally rejecting liberalism, the Fourth Political Theory
deliberately refuses to consider itself communism (socialism) or fascism
(Nazism)
nationalism) in all their versions. There are two reasons for this refusal.
Firstly, the second and third political theories have historically lost out to
liberalism (at the level of political philosophy, they proved less suited to the
pure paradigm of modern political philosophy than liberalism) and,
consequently, they have shown their limitations. Of course, historical defeat
is not a decisive argument. But this is only true when the criteria of material
victory and the ideology of progress are not fundamental. The historical clash
between liberalism, socialism and fascism in the 20th century was a
clarification of who was more in tune with the spirit of the times, who was
more progressive, who belonged to the future, and the criterion, due to the
materialism inherent in all three ideologies, was the fact of victory or defeat.
In this dispute and confrontation, given thee progressive, who belonged to the future, and the criterion, due to the
materialism inherent in all three ideologies, was the fact of victory or defeat.
In this dispute and confrontation, given the

--- PAGE BREAK ---elonged to the future, and the criterion, due to the
materialism inherent in all three ideologies, was the fact of victory or defeat.
In this dispute and confrontation, given the

--- PAGE BREAK ---

528
Part 4. Political Philosophy of Postmodernism
such a system of evaluation, liberalism triumphed over both fascism and
communism, thereby proving its identity with the very essence of modernity,
as well as its right to the future — to a liberal interpretation of
"end of history."
Secondly, and this is a much more serious argument, although closely
related to the analysis of the metaphysical outcome of the clash between the
three political theories and the meaning of liberalism's victory in it, the
second and third political theories were products of modern political
philosophy, so even if they had prevailed in the end, they would have become
the most complete expression of modernity, which was quite likely at one
point in the case of communism, and for a brief moment even in the case of
fascism. The fact that the liberals won the battle for Modernity is of
enormous significance, but if we imagine that it had been the communists or
the fascists, then their planetary domination would have meant the same thing
— the total triumph of materialism, de-individualisation and, ultimately,
dehumanisation: black communism or a global Reich, having won the battle
for Modernity, would have found themselves in the role of the dominant
force of the "Black Enlightenment," which would have changed nothing in
essence.
"end of history," although it would give it a different form.
Now for the most important point: by saying "no" to the global
domination of globalist liberalism, we reject not only it, but also what it
essentially is, especially after its victory over alternative ideologies — the
pure paradigm of Modernity.
 's rejection of liberalism is not enough
The fourth political theory begins with a proposal to say a radical "no"
to liberalism. But such a "no" raises the question: if you are not a liberal,
then who are you? A communist? A nationalist, a fascist? Thus, critical
distance from the basic trend of modernity at the level of political
philosophy (i.e., liberalism) naturally leads us to the second and third
political theories or to their synthesis — national Bolshevism. All of this
would indeed be opposition to liberalism, but within the framework of
Modernity.
Therefore, opposition to liberalism would inevitably turn to peripheral
forms of the same Modernity. In this case, we would merely declare that we
dislike the essence of Modernity in its pure form ( liberalism itself) and
would oppose the centre of Modernity from its own periphery. Such is
conservatism: it offers only to "slow down"e that we
dislike the essence of Modernity in its pure form ( liberalism itself) and
would oppose the centre of Modernity from its own periphery. Such is
conservatism: it offers only to "slow down"

--- PAGE BREAK ---he essence of Modernity in its pure form ( liberalism itself) and
would oppose the centre of Modernity from its own periphery. Such is
conservatism: it offers only to "slow down"

--- PAGE BREAK ---

529
Chapter 3. The Fourth Political Theory
Modernity, moving in the same direction, towards the same goal as
Modernity itself, but only more slowly. Radical conservatism proposes
moving very slowly, while moderate conservatism proposes moving only
slightly more slowly.
And this is what we get: as soon as we distanced ourselves from the
dominant trend in modern political philosophy as the globally prevailing
political theory (liberalism), we found ourselves in the position of either
"modernist conservatives" or supporters of "altermodernism."
Thus, even in the most liberal circles, there are both avant-garde
liberals who welcome the transition to postmodernism and are ready to accept
"black liberalism," and those who say, "Maybe not so soon, not so fast,
more slowly?" Consequently, all three political ideologies of Modernity,
faced with their "image of the future" presented by Postmodernism and the
"Black Enlightenment," can take critical positions. Communism and
fascism oppose liberalism in any form, and liberal conservatism opposes it to
the extent that it is horrified by the extreme expressions of its own
ideological platform.
Nevertheless, humanity today is moving, "floating" in Postmodernism.
Moreover, those who protest against this, remaining coded by Modernism,
object most often not against the orientation itself, but against the speed or
representation of the image of the future presented by postmodernists in
excessively contrasting tones.
But there are those who understand that this is not only too fast a current,
but that it is flowing in the wrong direction. The "river" must flow
backwards, especially since it is not something natural or inevitable, but the
result of a freely accepted decision that made Modernism, the political
philosophy of the West as a whole, in both its liberal and illiberal versions,
possible and valid.
This is the meaning of the Fourth Political Theory: it rejects Modernity as
inevitable, as a pseudo-logic based on a Decision which, once accepted,
inevitably set as its goal the horizon of disintegration and degradation,
entropy and dissipation that are laid bare with extreme candour in the
rhizome or Radical Object.
The totality of the female
The essence of the Fourth Political Theory is that it rejects not just one
of the political ideologies of the Modern era, but all of them.the
rhizome or Radical Object.
The totality of the female
The essence of the Fourth Political Theory is that it rejects not just one
of the political ideologies of the Modern era, but all of them.

--- PAGE BREAK ---ical Object.
The totality of the female
The essence of the Fourth Political Theory is that it rejects not just one
of the political ideologies of the Modern era, but all of them.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

530
Part 4. Political Philosophy of Postmodernism
They. Three political theories exhaust the range of proposals offered by
Modernity. The fourth political theory says "no" to all of them — not just
liberalism. It is dissatisfied with the very "flow of the river" towards the
political philosophy of the Mother, with the very Decision that has
prevented political history from moving in this direction.
The fourth political theory is a theory of global, absolute, radical
revolution directed not only against the specific domination of the West,
against the contemporary state of European civilisation, against the
hegemony of the United States of America, against liberalism, but against
Modernity itself, against the political paradigm of the Mother, against the
metaphysics in which the representation of the world, the subject, reality
are constructed from the bottom up.
Here, the political philosophy of the Father (or political Platonism) and
the political philosophy of the Son (political Aristotelianism) take on
enormous significance: we entered the Modern era when the Father was
killed and the Son was castrated.
The victory of Modernism and the transition to Postmodernism in the
myth are described as a double gesture of the Great Mother, known from
the traditions of various peoples. Mother Earth kills her Father/Husband, a
figure who is the fundamental axis of the vertical topography of Platonic
political philosophy, and castrates her Beloved Son, that is, she demolishes
Aristotle's axis of the "unmoved mover," depriving the world and man of
their spiritual (eidetic) component.
This is the metaphysical strategy of materialism and atomism: in order
to achieve the domination of matter and a pseudo-logical "ontology" built
from the bottom up, two possible alternatives must be eradicated: the
political philosophy of the Father and the political philosophy of the Son.
Both are incompatible with the political philosophy of the Mother.
Modernity as such is precisely the political philosophy of the Mother,
materialism, sovereign matter, {`b, "chora." And accordingly, within the
framework of this political philosophy of the Mother, all the fundamental
ideological and political-philosophical processes of the Modern era are
realised. According to the results of the political and ideological history of
the New Age, liberalism turns out to be as close as possible to the matriarchal
view of the world, while political postmodernism even more sharply reveals
this inherently feminine structure of liberalism, since it is in postmodernism
that the very matrix of modernity as the political philosophy of the Mother is
most fully and clearly visible.
This is a fundamental point: in the context of Modernity, liberalism
has no alternative and cannot have one, since Modernity itselfitical philosophy of the Mother is
most fully and clearly visible.
This is a fundamental point: in the context of Modernity, liberalism
has no alternative and cannot have one, since Modernity itself

--- PAGE BREAK ---the Mother is
most fully and clearly visible.
This is a fundamental point: in the context of Modernity, liberalism
has no alternative and cannot have one, since Modernity itself

--- PAGE BREAK ---

531
Chapter 3. The Fourth Political Theory
It is based on the exclusion of two other models of political logos, which
could serve as a basis for an alternative. But the conditions of modernity are
such that these two models — full-fledged Platonism and full-fledged
Aristotelianism — are rigidly and totally rejected, prohibited, and censored.
The field of search is limited to the zone of matter and materiality, atomism
and individualisation. Accordingly, the Fourth Political Theory is only
possible outside the context of Modernity, and therefore requires a
revolutionary departure from its limits. However, these limits are structured
in such a way that they form a totality based on the paradigmatic presumption
of materialism (direct or hidden, implicit). And if we recognise this totality,
then the philosophy of the Father and the philosophy of the Son simply have
no place, no existence, no subjective or objective expression. Modern time
itself, which becomes the measure of being, is structured in such a way that
Platonism and Aristotelianism, tradition and religion, sacredness and spirit
are placed in the "past," in the "preceding," and therefore have no part in the
present and future, which have passed through this past, depriving it of its
ontological dimension, which is placed exclusively in becoming. That is, in
Modernism, Platonism and Aristotelianism are impossible, and if they are
possible, then only in the form of simulacra.
The rupture of pseudology and the experience of eternity
The fourth political theory, in order to become possible, must break with
this totality, overcome the ontology of time and becoming as established in
Modernity. If we agree with the temporality of Modernity, then the
philosophy of the Father and the philosophy of the Son do not exist, being a
property of what was but is no longer. Their defence is understood as
conservatism, that is, as an attempt to forcibly slow down time by relying on
the phantom pain of (illusory) memories. Object-oriented ontologists — in
particular, Nick Land — generally consider human memory to be a fiction
implanted in "cyborgs" by Artificial Intelligence from the "future" in order to
make them believe in their "humanity" (1).Accordingly, Modern excludes the
very possibility
1
  Nick Land refers to the plots of the science fiction films Blade Runner and The
Terminator, which, in his opinion, describe the mechanics of operations with time in the spirit of
Deleuze's distinction between vertical "time" (along the axis of the tree), which has meaning (the
vector of movement from the roots to the crown, from the past to the future), but no existence, and
the horizontal "time" of the chronos rhizome, which has existence but no meaning, i.e., no
sequence. Thus,f movement from the roots to the crown, from the past to the future), but no existence, and
the horizontal "time" of the chronos rhizome, which has existence but no meaning, i.e., no
sequence. Thus,

--- PAGE BREAK ---roots to the crown, from the past to the future), but no existence, and
the horizontal "time" of the chronos rhizome, which has existence but no meaning, i.e., no
sequence. Thus,

--- PAGE BREAK ---

532
Part 4. Political Philosophy of Postmodernism
that the philosophy of the Father or the philosophy of the Son can have any
ontology whatsoever.
The fourth political theory breaks this inherent loop, asserting first and
foremost a different time — time as an image of eternity (according to Plato)
or the eternity of the "unmoved mover" (according to Aristotle). The
ontology of eternity, like the ontology of the One, is affirmed in opposition to
Modernity, and only this allows us to construct a genuine distance from
liberalism. But such a revolutionary gesture of going beyond the boundaries
of Modernity requires a complete reversal of both consciousness and being. It
is possible through direct experience of eternity, since no constructs within
the totality of Modernity are capable of bringing us closer to it step by step.
The very fact of remaining within Modernity is a distancing from such an
experience, its blocking, its transformation into something impossible. The
fourth political theory breaks the matrix of Modernity at its foundation,
burning its entire structure to its foundations with the experience of eternity.
The philosophy of the Father and the philosophy of the Son possess being
because they are built — albeit in different ways — on the experience of
eternity. Plato's Callipolis exists, has existed, and will exist in the fullest and
most direct sense. The realm of ideas and the heavenly vertical are not
constructs or concepts; they are ontological facts. It is another matter that
Callipolis can take different positions in relation to phenomenal politics —
both in alliance and harmony with it, and in opposition to it. The teaching of
St. Augustine about the two cities or the Iranian dualistic cosmology describe
scenarios of war between the ideal state and its earthly distorted and even
inverted reflection. But no twists and turns of this struggle can deprive
eternity of being, Heaven of its bright divine nature. Ideas can be distorted
and parodied in conceptual thinking, but in doing so, the phenomenal being
ultimately harms not the idea, but itself. God cannot be killed; by affirming
this, one can only destroy one's soul and ruin one's humanity. God is not
affected by people's rejection of Him, although it probably saddens Him. But
it certainly affects people themselves — they fall into the abyss of
nothingness, dissolving into the folds of matter, moving inexorably towards
the centre of maximum gravity, towards the core, towards the heart of
nothingness, matter, the Radical Object. The fourth political theory is based
on the volitional affirmation of political Platonism and insists on God's view
of
Existence in time becomes possible if we take into account the absence of meaning in the eon of
being and the rhizomatic presence. See Land N. Fanged Noumena: Collected Writings 1987–
2007.view
of
Existence in time becomes possible if we take into account the absence of meaning in the eon of
being and the rhizomatic presence. See Land N. Fanged Noumena: Collected Writings 1987–
2007.

--- PAGE BREAK ---in time becomes possible if we take into account the absence of meaning in the eon of
being and the rhizomatic presence. See Land N. Fanged Noumena: Collected Writings 1987–
2007.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

533
Chapter 3. The Fourth Political Theory
humanity, not humanity's belief in God. Callipolis is not a convention or a
utopia; it is what is, what was, and what will be.
The political philosophy of the Son is somewhat more complex. Here,
the measure is immanence, although not material immanence. Therefore,
the corruption of the state — the transition from monarchy and aristocracy
to democracy — has an ontological basis. Here, tragedy and catastrophe
are real. But even in this case, the immovable driving force is not directly
affected by the denial of its existence and "natural places." Where it
disappears from view, we are talking about the departure of a thing to the
distant periphery of ontology. Therefore, the victory of anti-Aristotelianism
does not mean that Aristotle was wrong, but only that his opponents (the
atomists) strayed too far from the "immovable mover" itself and withdrew
to a critical distance from their "natural places," completely losing sight of
them. They have nowhere else to go, and the loss of the goal of movement
(as the final cause in the causality of the modern era) means the collapse
of things, their departure from orbit and their complete inability to return
to it. Therefore, everything boils down not to what, but to where. Modernity,
democracy, materialism, and capitalism are a place on the farthest periphery
of existence, where the impulses of things toward themselves are
exhausted to the limit. Entelechies evaporate, and things and people, jostling
and rushing, move inexorably toward the precipice.
From the perspective of the Son's philosophy, the decline of political
philosophy and the state based on it is real. But it corresponds to a special
topology, which in Christianity is called
"hell."
The fourth political theory is a leap from political hell to an unchanging,
eternal and ever-existing ideal or to the centre of immanent reality, to the
world axis that has been lost sight of due to the power of centrifugal
tendencies. The fourth political theory is a return of things, people, thoughts,
peoples and rulers to themselves, to their essence, to their origins. Therefore,
the fourth political theory is, above all, an ontological revolution, the
awakening of what is, in the cruel totality of what only pretends to be
"reality." It is a dramatic experience, but it is precisely from this that the
difficult path to recovery begins.
The metaphors of the bird and the stone: awakening in the fall
of the
The fourth political theory represents a turn not to variations or
combinations of modern political philosophy, but to a radical paradigm
shift. This shift can be describedning in the fall
of the
The fourth political theory represents a turn not to variations or
combinations of modern political philosophy, but to a radical paradigm
shift. This shift can be described

--- PAGE BREAK ---the
The fourth political theory represents a turn not to variations or
combinations of modern political philosophy, but to a radical paradigm
shift. This shift can be described

--- PAGE BREAK ---

534
Part 4. Political Philosophy of Postmodernism
negatively as a rejection of the political philosophy of the Mother in its
metaphysical foundation, that is, simply as the elimination of Modernity in
general. The beginning of Modernity already carries within itself the
meaning, content, and logic of its end.
From the very beginning, the New Age could lead to nothing other than
modern liberal hegemony. In order to truly break away from this path
today, we need to move in the opposite direction. But this does not mean
that we should simply freeze in place and stop moving in the direction
indicated by the vector of modernisation. This is neither sufficient nor
possible. What is needed is to set ourselves a radically different goal. And to
move, but in a completely different direction. Not forward, but backward.
However, this backward movement is only symbolic and conventional. For
behind us — before the advent of Modernity — lies Heaven, the sun of the
spirit and the undying (and in fact immortal, never dying, resurrecting and
all-resurrecting) God.
In the political history of the West, and due to the scale of Western
colonisation and everything else, we have descended from the political
philosophy of the Father, through the political philosophy of the Son, to the
political philosophy of the Mother. In the structure of Politica Aeterna, this
process is clear and placed on an ontological map, in which all genera, all
levels are present synchronously, simultaneously. Therefore, each step of the
movement did not irreversibly cancel the previous phase or stage, but
changed the position of the observer, the ontological and gnoseological
situation of the subject (and with it the object).. The process of descent
through the levels of political philosophy is based on a freely accepted
Decision, and this decision becomes fatal, fateful, becomes destiny only after
it is made. The descent through these levels from the Father through the Son
to the Mother is not a mechanical fate, it is a sequence of freely accepted
decisions. There is nothing predetermined in the vector and character of such
a descent: every moment and every transition is based on choice. But the
paradigmatic fatality that follows the choice is fundamental and occurs in the
vertical dimension. The decision to remain in the philosophical paradigm or
to change it may be an expression of evil will and the result of a mistake. In a
sense, without making a choice, it is difficult to know for sure what it will
lead to, even if there are good reasons not to try to move in a certain
direction. Freedom is such that it cannot a priori exclude any points of
application — even the most erroneous and catastrophic ones. The
paradigmatic choice and transition from Platonism to Aristotelianism and
atomism — a sequencecannot a priori exclude any points of
application — even the most erroneous and catastrophic ones. The
paradigmatic choice and transition from Platonism to Aristotelianism and
atomism — a sequence

--- PAGE BREAK ---lude any points of
application — even the most erroneous and catastrophic ones. The
paradigmatic choice and transition from Platonism to Aristotelianism and
atomism — a sequence

--- PAGE BREAK ---

535
Chapter 3. The Fourth Political Theory
catastrophes. At the same time, the gap between the political philosophy
of the Father and the political philosophy of the Son lies within the paradigm
of traditional society (Premodern), while the transition to the political
philosophy of the Mother signifies a break and a departure from it. But in
any case, the true choice is made along the vertical axis. And what we know
about the last millennium of Western civilisation (and in recent centuries of
all humanity) clearly convinces us that fundamental decisions were made
in favour of descending along the vertical paradigm.
Whether to go right or left is a matter of choice when standing firmly on
the horizontal plane. It is a secondary choice, subordinate to the primary one
— the vertical.
The vertical choice of modernity can be likened to a leap into the
abyss. If we are stones, then we can only fall. In this case, our time is a
time of falling, descent and death (Untergang Nietzsche). But if we are
birds, even fledglings, we have a chance to discover this, to prove it and to be
convinced of it. For a stone, falling into the abyss is just falling. But if we
are talking about a soul that has wings but has never used them before, then
a leap into the abyss will be the beginning of flight. This is exactly how
chicks are taught to fly at a certain age. And only in this flight itself does it
become clear who is a stone and who is a bird.
The leap into the abyss of modernity, the transition to the political
philosophy of the Mother, at some point leads to the discovery of the
grandiose scale of the metaphysical catastrophe. The Black Enlightenment
is precisely the moment when this scale is fully revealed. And it is at this
moment that a radical shift in consciousness occurs. This is the beginning
of the Fourth Political Theory. While a fledgling thrown out of the nest is
flying, it does not yet know whether it is a stone or a bird. Those who can
only fall are incapable of moving "backward" along the only possible
gravitational trajectory (movement into the abyss is not movement in a
plane, it is falling).
Accordingly, only a "winged creature" can accept the Fourth Political
Theory, for whom "backward" means
"up," in the opposite direction from Modernity, and only those capable of
flight can move there.
Here we can recall Plato's teaching about what a human being is. From
Plato's point of view, a human being is a winged creature. And it is in the
body as a result of a fall, as a consequence of a catastrophe that befell it. The
task of man is to cultivate his wings in order to learn to fly and so that death
becomes, as for a butterfly, the end of the caterpillar's existence, but at the
same time the beginningfell it. The
task of man is to cultivate his wings in order to learn to fly and so that death
becomes, as for a butterfly, the end of the caterpillar's existence, but at the
same time the beginning

--- PAGE BREAK ---f man is to cultivate his wings in order to learn to fly and so that death
becomes, as for a butterfly, the end of the caterpillar's existence, but at the
same time the beginning

--- PAGE BREAK ---

536
Part 4. Political Philosophy of Postmodernism
a butterfly capable of flight — a celebration of birth/resurrection. Even
better is to "die while alive" and take off vertically — back to our heavenly
homeland. This is the profound meaning of the Fourth Political Theory.
The fourth political theory is an attempt to radically reverse the logic of
world history. But since this history is a fall (a movement from top to
bottom: the Logos of the Father — the Logos of the Son — the Logos of
the Mother), the fourth political theory is a rise from the abyss. This is not
banal conservatism; conservatism makes sense in order to remain within a
paradigm or to limit horizontal choices. When the Decision on Modernity
was made, conservatism lost its meaning and came to denote a paradoxical
desire to preserve the fall itself, to make the fall reliable, guaranteed, and
stable. In a sense, such conservatism is a way of lulling the awakening
horror to sleep, veiling it, making the falling person unaware that they are
falling, imposing on them the hallucination that they are not falling. This
is the code of pseudology: modernist conservatism is perhaps the worst thing
about modernity, because in its context, lies lie about themselves — and
do so in the most effective way possible.
The fourth political theory is completely different from conservatism. It
is, rather, a revolution calling for a radical and irreversible change in the
basic vector of existence, life, and thought of modern civilisation,
breaking with it as a whole, as with a paradigm. In order to go "back," one
must move "up," that is, to where the fatal materialistic mechanisms of
modernity cannot go.
Modernity is like a hearse rolling down a mountain. This hearse cannot
fly. Following its inertia, it has only one way out — to crash into pieces, to
disintegrate into atoms.
In order to truly change the situation, the vector of Modernism, the
practically inevitable arrival of Postmodernism and "black liberalism," it is
necessary to fundamentally rethink our attitude towards all things that are
presented in the context of political philosophy as something self-evident,
obvious, and indisputable. For humans, nothing is obvious or indisputable.
Consciousness always deals with representations, but these can be shaped by
one paradigmatic model or another. The postmodern re-evaluation of
stratification, the breaking of the code and deterritorialisation are aimed at
overturning the Platonic and Aristotelian, making them empirically
unreliable and impossible. But this is nothing more than deconstruction
and the work of representation — this time nihilistic, materialisticng the Platonic and Aristotelian, making them empirically
unreliable and impossible. But this is nothing more than deconstruction
and the work of representation — this time nihilistic, materialistic

--- PAGE BREAK ---Aristotelian, making them empirically
unreliable and impossible. But this is nothing more than deconstruction
and the work of representation — this time nihilistic, materialistic

--- PAGE BREAK ---

537
Chapter 3. The Fourth Political Theory
and aggressively destroying the vertical spiritual dimension of heaven.
But the structures and rhizomatic networks created in this way, for all their
persuasiveness, are pseudo-logical chimeras, like everything else in the
underground world of titans, shadows and ghosts.
 's dialectic of shadows
Within the framework of Mother's political philosophy, there is no
alternative, and therefore the first political theory (liberalism) and its sub-
ideological forms within the dissipative programme of Modernity are destiny.
This is not an accident, a deviation or a dead end. It is destiny. This is
what people have been moving towards, what they have been called to, what
they have been striving for, rushing towards and aspiring to. The devil's main
trick is to deny God. At first, people think that if there is no God, then there is
no devil, there is only man, and he is now the measure of all things. At first,
the devil agrees with this conclusion: fine, he mutters, I don't exist, so be it.
But he has another trick: who, in that case, inspires the belief that God (and
with him the devil) does not exist? God is truth; he would not lie about
himself. For this, there is the devil, the father of pseudo-logic, that is,
modernity.
, that is, Modernity.
At the end of the secular and rational process, sceptical, believing neither
in God nor in the devil, the devil reappears in the modern world. And this
time without God. Alone — by himself.
At first, Satan was "the shadow of God"; then there was no God, nor his
shadow. And finally, God is still not there, but his shadow, which has
gained autonomy, appears. The discovery of the devil's gestalt, his
embodiment, his appearance, constitute the essence of the transition from the
last phase of modern political philosophy to the phase of postmodern
political philosophy and object-oriented ontology. The devil, Ahriman,
Satan (in Islam, Dajjal) are religious terms for the Radical Object, the "core"
(Cthelll) of speculative realism and accelerationism.
The devil (Antichrist) in postmodernism — in his imagery, in his
metaphors, in his practices — becomes evident, reveals himself. From the
point of view of political philosophy, we can consider this as a metaphor (the
Antichrist as a political-philosophical figure). From a religious point of view,
this can be interpreted quite literally.
The fourth political theory proposes, based on the fully revealed devil
of Postmodernism, to take off/transition to those paradigms that were
rejected and eliminated in the first stage of Modernism.The fourth political theory proposes, based on the fully revealed devil
of Postmodernism, to take off/transition to those paradigms that were
rejected and eliminated in the first stage of Modernism.

--- PAGE BREAK ---theory proposes, based on the fully revealed devil
of Postmodernism, to take off/transition to those paradigms that were
rejected and eliminated in the first stage of Modernism.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

538
Part 4. Political Philosophy of Postmodernism
In other words, we need not to "slow down" but to go in a completely
different direction. The fourth political theory starts from the premise that a
person who disagrees with, denies, or rejects the proposed programme of
paradigmatic phases and transitions in political history carries out a cool and
in-depth semantic analysis of all its previous semantic moments. You cannot
overcome what you do not understand or know. Hegel said that morality is
built according to the following scheme: innocence — sin — virtue.
Innocence is not a virtue, since it does not know sin. Virtue, on the other
hand, knows sin and overcomes it, defeats it, and inflicts defeat on it.
This dialectic is entirely applicable to the Fourth Political Theory in its
relation to conservatism. The world of Tradition is innocence; it does not
know Modernity. Modernity is analogous to "sin," which kills innocence.
Conservatism, in this case, is the opposition to sin from the position of
innocence. But the Fourth Political Theory is precisely the analogue of
"virtue." It arises not before or during, but after Modernity, and even more so
after the transformation of Modernity into Postmodernity and the discovery
of the nihilistic and counter-humanistic (post-humanistic) essence of the
political philosophy of the Mother. The Fourth Political Theory deals with an
autonomous shadow that it knows well and challenges. In a sense, the Fourth
Political Theory completes the entire cycle of the descent of paradigms. It is
based on a metaphysically revolutionary Decision about a radically different
ontology — the ontology of eternity.
The fourth political theory represents the most general form of
political and philosophical eschatology. For the fourth political theory to be
formulated, the preliminary victory of modernity was necessary, and more
precisely, the victory of liberalism within modernity over illiberal ideologies.
Previously, this would not have been possible, since Modernity, in its three
political ideologies, cleverly incorporated elements of a profound rejection of
the status quo at the paradigmatic level into the dialectic of opposition
between these theories. The nihilistic nature of modernity was hidden in this
opposition through the possibility of criticism: liberals accused communists
of nihilism, communists accused fascists, fascists accused liberals, and so
on. At the same time, they were all different versions of nihilism,
materialism, and mechanical alienation, but until the end of their intense
dramatic confrontation, which ultimately led to the victory of liberalism,
this could not be obvious. To achieve true virtue, one must see the
bottomless pit of sin.until the end of their intense
dramatic confrontation, which ultimately led to the victory of liberalism,
this could not be obvious. To achieve true virtue, one must see the
bottomless pit of sin.

--- PAGE BREAK ---eir intense
dramatic confrontation, which ultimately led to the victory of liberalism,
this could not be obvious. To achieve true virtue, one must see the
bottomless pit of sin.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

539
Chapter 3. The Fourth Political Theory
rather than its partial manifestations. This is probably what the Russian
Athonite monk, Hesychast Silouan the Athonite (1866–1938), meant
when he advised other monks to "keep your mind in hell and do not
despair." "Keeping your mind in hell" means contemplating the abyss of
sin. The advice
"do not despair" refers to trust in God and to the freedom of man to make a
fundamental decision, even when in the abyss.
The fourth political theory emerges at the extreme frontier of Modernity,
in the context of Postmodernity. The very structure of Postmodernism and
"Black Enlightenment" serves as proof of the true nature of Modernism as
such, which not only strayed from the path, but was originally leading in the
wrong direction, based either on the free will to sin and lie, or on error. But in
any case, the Decision on Modernism was made by the free human mind,
although clearly not without the active participation of the devil. But no tricks
of the devil can push a person to sin unless he himself accepts sin, agrees
with it, and makes a free choice in its favour.
Europe made this choice in modern times and then imposed it on
everyone else. The fourth political theory makes a different choice: in favour
of the political philosophy of the Father and the Son (and the Holy Spirit).
Rejection of the hypnosis of the Mother
The radical breakthrough of the hypnosis of political philosophy of the
Mother is the first fundamental gesture of the Fourth Political Theory. In
Politica Aeterna, the general ontological map shows that the political
philosophy of the Father and the political philosophy of the Son are not
conventions; they have an independent — paradigmatic — existence that
determines the topic, the subject, and the corresponding configuration of the
cosmos.
Throughout history, these two political philosophies have been
effectively implemented on numerous occasions. This is not an abstract
dream or fantasy. These are political systems that have actually existed
throughout human history and have partially retained their influence to
this day, in the modern world.
When we reject Mother's political philosophy, we do not fall into
nothingness and chaos. We still have two perfectly viable political-
philosophical models. If we did not know about the political philosophy of
the Father and the political philosophy of the Son, then no matter how
repulsive it would be to move along the "river," with the current, we might
agree to it, in the complete absence of the possibility of choosing a different
course, because of our horror of pure nothingness.e it would be to move along the "river," with the current, we might
agree to it, in the complete absence of the possibility of choosing a different
course, because of our horror of pure nothingness.

--- PAGE BREAK ---e along the "river," with the current, we might
agree to it, in the complete absence of the possibility of choosing a different
course, because of our horror of pure nothingness.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

540
Part 4. Political Philosophy of Postmodernism
ability to choose a different course, out of fear of pure nothingness. This is
what pseudo-logic tries to convince us of: if not Modern, then nothing, is
what the supporters of Modern and Postmodern want to tell us. But,
fortunately, we know that there is the paradigm of the Father and there is the
paradigm of the Son. And this is the second — positive, creative — half of
the programme of the Fourth Political Theory.
The most important thing is that the Fourth Political Theory is based on
the idea that the Solution is not to be found in the context of the three
political ideologies of Modernity, but in the context of the three paradigms of
Politica Aeterna: the philosophy of the Father (Platonism, the doctrine of
eternal ideas), the philosophy of the Son (Aristotelianism, phenomenology)
and the philosophy of the Mother (materialism, atomism). This is a free
choice in which Modernity is just one option among two others.
The political philosophy of the Father and the political philosophy of
the Son (or their alliance) are objects of free choice. This is not a given, it
is a task. And apparently, we ended up in the Modern Age because we
forgot that the political philosophy of the Father and the political philosophy
of the Son must be reaffirmed each time, by each subsequent generation,
by each society, by each individual — through their free will and
enlightened consciousness. We took them for granted.
But as soon as even a vertically oriented political structure becomes
inertia, something ready-made, a given, it begins to fall, to collapse. If,
instead of freely and willingly establishing a monarchical, imperial,
traditional, caste-based vertical structure, we become accustomed to it, accept
it as a fact and a given, and do not reaffirm it at every stage, sooner or later
we will fall into the nihilistic entropy of modernity, and the fall will continue
until we reach the ultimate horizon in the realm of political philosophy: the
Radical Object.
Political eschatology
The Fourth Political Theory reveals the essence of the political and
philosophical dignity of humanity as a species. The humanity that is now
moving
as
if
nothing
had
happened
towards
modernisation,
Westernisation, and progress — faster (accelerationism) or slower (liberal
conservatism) — is
the "black double" of humanity; it is the humanity that, out of evil will and
deep delusion, under the guise of "freedom," chose slavery, having gained the
right to dignity, flight, and heroism, and cast itself into scattered atomism,
insignificance, and servitude to matter.deep delusion, under the guise of "freedom," chose slavery, having gained the
right to dignity, flight, and heroism, and cast itself into scattered atomism,
insignificance, and servitude to matter.

--- PAGE BREAK ---r the guise of "freedom," chose slavery, having gained the
right to dignity, flight, and heroism, and cast itself into scattered atomism,
insignificance, and servitude to matter.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

541
Chapter 3. The Fourth Political Theory
Today, it is more difficult than ever to return to the political
philosophy of the Father or the political philosophy of the Son. But it is
precisely now that this choice takes on the full meaning of its original
patriarchal and heroic significance. Man differs from his "black double" in
that he is a philosophical being capable of free choice. He is given the
freedom to choose his political philosophy at the paradigmatic level (not
from what is "offered on the menu").
It can be said that the Fourth Political Theory is a call for the
restoration/recreation of the political philosophy of the Father and the
political philosophy of the Son. We know that these alternatives exist, we
can freely choose them, and by destroying the hypnosis of the totality of
the matrix of three modern ideologies, the hypnosis of the matrix of the
political philosophy of the Mother, we can calmly choose an alternative
political philosophy beyond what is (falsely) offered to us as exhaustive
completeness. If this is completeness, then it is the completeness of the
nomenclature of devilish temptations. Politica Aeterna justifies a different
completeness, hiding under the "black double" the true nature of man, which
cannot be reduced to his corporeality, his materiality, or, even less, to infra-
corporeal impulses or the element of nothingness. Man has a choice of
matter, and being free, he is also free to make it. Today we are reaching the
final limits of this choice. However, despite all the apparent hopelessness,
this is yet another illusion — yes, humanity can commit suicide and
merge with the Radical Object. But even this must first be decided,
chosen. The fourth political theory, explained in the topology of Politica
Aeterna, reminds us of this freedom and willfully opens the door to a
different choice. Those who understand and accept the structure of the Fourth
Political Theory are capable — perhaps for the last time — of freely and
consciously disposing of their freedom and their consciousness.
However, the usual subject, dependent on the general structure of the
paradigm, on the "assembly," codes, stratifications, and territorialisations,
does not coincide with the instance capable of making this choice — between
Postmodernism and the Fourth Political Theory. Such a subject is secondary
to the matrix that predetermines reality. Therefore, in order to affirm the
Fourth Political Theory, a different subject is needed. We call it the Radical
Subject, whose radicality must be no less, if not more, than that of the
Radical Object of Postmodernism and speculative realism. This is what
political eschatology consists of:call it the Radical
Subject, whose radicality must be no less, if not more, than that of the
Radical Object of Postmodernism and speculative realism. This is what
political eschatology consists of:

--- PAGE BREAK ---

542
Part 4. Political Philosophy of Postmodernism
At the very edge of existence, a decisive battle is taking place between the
Radical Subject (the axis of the Fourth Political Theory) and the "Black
Enlightenment." On both sides, masks have been discarded, and
metaphysical issues have been brought to a head. This is the political and
philosophical meaning of the "end of time," where the question of the true
nature of humanity, its meaning and mission, and its destiny is decided.
This decision belongs to the dimension of eternity, which means that it is
made not only in relation to the future, but also in relation to the past and
the present. In religious terms, this is the Last Judgment, which extends its
metaphysical weight to all dimensions and, moreover, to all modalities of
time.

--- PAGE BREAK ---ion to the past and
the present. In religious terms, this is the Last Judgment, which extends its
metaphysical weight to all dimensions and, moreover, to all modalities of
time.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

Bibliography
Works by A. G. Dugin
The Noomachy Project (24 volumes)
Dugin, A. G. In Search of the Dark Logos. Moscow: Academic Project, 2014.
Dugin, A. G. Noomakhia. Three Logos. Moscow: Academic Project, 2014.
Dugin, A. G. Noomakhia. Geosophy. Horizons and Civilisations. Moscow: Academic
Project, 2017.
Dugin, A. G. Noomakhia. Logos of Turan. Indo-European Ideology of Verticality.
Moscow: Academic Project, 2017.
Dugin, A. G. Noomakhia. Horizons and Civilisations of Eurasia. Indo-European Heritage
and Traces of the Great Mother. Moscow: Academic Project, 2017.
Dugin, A. G. Noomakhia. Iranian Logos. The World War and the Culture of
Expectation. Moscow: Academic Project, 2016.
Dugin, A. G. Noomakhia. Great India. The Civilisation of the Absolute. Moscow:
Academic Project, 2017.
Dugin, A. G. Noomachia. Hellenic Logos. The Valley of Truth. Moscow: Academic
Project, 2016.
Dugin, A. G. Noomakhia. Byzantine Logos. Hellenism and Empire. Moscow: Academic
Project, 2016.
Dugin, A. G. Noomachia. Latin Logos. Sun and Cross. Moscow: Academic Project,
2016.
Dugin, A. G. Noomachia. Germanic Logos. The Apophatic Man. Moscow: Academic
Project, 2015.
Dugin, A. G. Noomachia. French Logos. Orpheus and Melusina. Moscow:
Academic Project, 2015.
Dugin, A. G. Noomachia. England or Britain? The Maritime Mission and the Positive
Subject. Moscow: Academic Project, 2015.
Dugin, A. G. Noomachia. Civilisations of the New World. Pragmatics of Dreams and the
Disintegration of Horizons. Moscow: Academic Project, 2017.
Dugin, A. G. Noomachia. Eastern Europe. Slavic Logos: Balkan Nav and Sarmatian
Style. Moscow: Academic Project, 2018.
Dugin, A. G. Noomakhia. Non-Slavic Horizons of Eastern Europe: The Song of the Ghoul
and the Voice of the Depths. Moscow: Academic Project, 2018.
Dugin, A. G. Noomakhia. The Kingdom of Earth. The Structure of Russian Identity.
Moscow: Academic Project, 2019.e: The Song of the Ghoul
and the Voice of the Depths. Moscow: Academic Project, 2018.
Dugin, A. G. Noomakhia. The Kingdom of Earth. The Structure of Russian Identity.
Moscow: Academic Project, 2019.

--- PAGE BREAK ---houl
and the Voice of the Depths. Moscow: Academic Project, 2018.
Dugin, A. G. Noomakhia. The Kingdom of Earth. The Structure of Russian Identity.
Moscow: Academic Project, 2019.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

544
Bibliography
Dugin, A. G. Noomakhia. Russian History. The People and the State in Search of a
Subject. Moscow: Academic Project, 2019.
Dugin, A. G. Noomakhia. Images of Russian Thought. The Sun King, the Reflection of
Sophia, and Underground Russia. Moscow: Academic Project, 2020.
Dugin, A. G. Noomakhia. Semites. Monotheism of the Moon and the Gestalt of Va'al.
Moscow: Academic Project, 2017.
Dugin, A. G. Noomakhia. Hamites. Civilisations of the African North. Moscow:
Academic Project, 2018.
Dugin, A. G. Noomakhia. Logos of Africa. People of the Black Sun. Moscow: Academic
Project, 2018.
Dugin, A. G. Noomakhia. The Yellow Dragon. Civilisations of the Far East. China.
Korea. Japan. Indochina. Moscow: Academic Project, 2017.
Dugin, A. G. Noomakhia. Oceania. The Challenge of Water. Moscow: Academic Project,
2018.
Other works
Dugin, A. G. Absolute Homeland. Moscow: Arktogeya-Centre, 2000.
Dugin, A. G. Archeomodern. Moscow: Eurasian Movement, 2011.
Dugin, A. G. Imagination. Philosophy, Sociology, Structures. Moscow: Academic Project,
2016.
Dugin, A. G. Geopolitics of Russia. Moscow: Academic Project, 2012.
Dugin, A. G. Geopolitics. Moscow: Academic Project, 2014.
Dugin, A. G. The Eurasian Mission. Moscow: Eurasian Movement, 2005.
Dugin, A. G. Signs of the Great North. Moscow: Veche, 2008.
Dugin, A. G. Martin Heidegger. The Possibility of Russian Philosophy. Moscow:
Academic Project, 2011.
Dugin, A. G. Martin Heidegger. Metapolitics. The Eschatology of Being. Moscow:
Academic Project, 2016.
Dugin, A. G. Martin Heidegger. The Last God. Moscow: Academic Project, 2014.
Dugin, A. G. Martin Heidegger. Philosophy of the New Beginning. Moscow:
Academic Project, 2010.
Dugin, A. G. International Relations (Paradigms, Theories, Sociology).
Moscow: Academic Project, 2014.
Dugin, A. G. Fundamentals of Geopolitics. Moscow: Arktogey-Centre, 2000.
Dugin, A. G. Post-Philosophy. Moscow: Eurasian Movement, 2009.
Dugin, A. G. The Radical Subject and Its Double. Moscow: Eurasian Movement.
2009.
Dugin, A. G. The Russian Thing: In 2 vols. Moscow: Arktogei-Centre, 2001.
Dugin, A. G. Russian Logos — Russian Chaos. Sociology of Russian Society.
Moscow: Academic Project, 2015.
Dugin, A. G. Sociology of Imagination. Introduction to Structural Sociology.
Moscow: Academic Project, 2010.
Dugin, A. G. Theory of the Multipolar World. Moscow: Academic Project, 2015.
Dugin, A. G. Philosophy of Traditionalism. Moscow: Arktogeya-Centre, 2002.tural Sociology.
Moscow: Academic Project, 2010.
Dugin, A. G. Theory of the Multipolar World. Moscow: Academic Project, 2015.
Dugin, A. G. Philosophy of Traditionalism. Moscow: Arktogeya-Centre, 2002.

--- PAGE BREAK ---cow: Academic Project, 2010.
Dugin, A. G. Theory of the Multipolar World. Moscow: Academic Project, 2015.
Dugin, A. G. Philosophy of Traditionalism. Moscow: Arktogeya-Centre, 2002.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

545
Bibliography
Dugin, A. G. The Fourth Way. Introduction to the Fourth Political Theory.
Moscow: Academic Project, 2014.
Dugin, A. G. The Evolution of Paradigmatic Foundations of Science. Moscow: Arktogeya,
2002.
Dugin, A. G. Ethnosociology. Moscow: Academic Project, 2012.
Books by other authors
Agamben, G. Homo Sacer: Sovereign Power and Bare Life. Moscow: Evropa, 2011.
Al-Ka'im Mahdi Muntazir. Jesus in the Qur'an and Hadith. St. Petersburg: Petersburg
Oriental Studies, 2012.
Anderson, B. Imagined Communities. Moscow: Canon Press-C; Kuchkovo Pole, 2001.
Arendt, H. The Origins of Totalitarianism. Moscow: TsentrKom, 1996.
Aristotle. Collected Works: In 4 vols. Moscow: Mysl, 1976–1983. Artaud,
A. The Theatre and Its Double. The Theatre of Serafima. Moscow: Martis,
1993.
Bakunin, M. A. Collected Works and Letters. 1828–1876. Moscow: Publishing House of the
All-Union Society of Political Prisoners and Exiles, 1934–1935.
Barth, R. Selected Works: Semiotics. Poetics. Moscow: Progress; Univers, 1994.
Bataille, G. Hatred of Poetry: Pornolatrous Prose. Moscow: Ladomir, 1999. Bataille,
G. The Accursed Share. Moscow: Ladomir, 2006.
Bataille, G. The Sum of Atheology: Philosophy and Mysticism. Moscow: Ladomir, 2016.
Baum, F. L. The Magic Land. St. Petersburg: Andreev and Sons, 1991.
Bauman, Z. Liquid Modernity. St. Petersburg: Piter, 2008.
Bennett, J. Pulsating Matter: The Political Ecology of Things.
Perm: HylePress, 2018.
Bentham, J. Introduction to the Principles of Morals and Legislation. Moscow: ROSSPEN,
1998.
Bentham, J. Selected Works. St. Petersburg: Russian Book Trade, 1867.
St. Augustine. The City of God. Moscow; Minsk: AST; Harvest, 2000.
Blessed John Duns Scotus. Selected Works: Franciscan Publishing House, Moscow,
2001.
Bogost, I. Alien Phenomenology: Or, What Is It Like to Be a Thing? Perm: Hy-lePress,
2019.
Boden, J. Six Books on the State // Anthology of World Political Thought: In 5 vols.
Vol. 2. Moscow: Mysl, 1999.
Baudrillard, J. The System of Things. Moscow: Rudomino, 1999.
Bryant, L. R. Democracy of Objects. Perm: HylePress, 2019.
Bacon, F. The New Organon. Moscow: Direct Media, 2002.
Bacon, F. Works in Two Volumes. Moscow: Thought, 1978.
Weber, M. Selected Works. Moscow: Progress, 1990.
Weber, M. The Protestant Ethic and the Spirit of Capitalism. Moscow: Ist-View, 2002.
Viveiros de Castro, E. Cannibal Metaphysics. Frontiers of Poststructural Anthropology.
Moscow: Ad Marginem, 2018.
Vivenza, G. M. From the Formal Domination of Capital to its Real Domination //
Elements. 1997. No. 7.o, E. Cannibal Metaphysics. Frontiers of Poststructural Anthropology.
Moscow: Ad Marginem, 2018.
Vivenza, G. M. From the Formal Domination of Capital to its Real Domination //
Elements. 1997. No. 7.

--- PAGE BREAK ---hysics. Frontiers of Poststructural Anthropology.
Moscow: Ad Marginem, 2018.
Vivenza, G. M. From the Formal Domination of Capital to its Real Domination //
Elements. 1997. No. 7.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

546
Bibliography
Virt, G. F. Chronicle of Ura Linda. The Oldest History of Europe. Moscow: Veche, 2007.
Gassendi, P. Works in 2 volumes. Moscow: Mydl, 1966–1968.
Hegel, G. W. Phenomenology of Spirit. St. Petersburg: Nauka, 1992.
Hegel, G. W. F. Science of Logic: In 3 volumes. Moscow: Mysl, 1970–1972.
Hegel, G.W.F. Phenomenology of Spirit. St. Petersburg: Nauka, 1992.
Gellner, E. Nations and Nationalism. Moscow: Progress, 1991.
Genon, R. Theosophy: The History of a Pseudo-Religion. Belgorod: Totemburg, 2017.
Guénon, R. Spiritual Dominion and Worldly Power. Moscow: Belovodye, 2012.
Guénon, R. The Science of Numbers. Saint Petersburg: Vladimir Dal, 2013.
Guénon, R. Essays on Tradition and Metaphysics. St. Petersburg: Azbuka-Klassika, 2010.
Guénon, R. The Reign of Quantity and the Signs of the Times. Essays on Hinduism.
Esotericism in Dante. Moscow: Belovodye, 2003.
Herder, I. G. Ideas for a Philosophy of the History of Mankind. Moscow: Nauka, 1977.
Hobbes, T. Leviathan. Moscow: Yurist, 2001.
Gobineau, J. A. de. An Essay on the Inequality of the Human Races. Moscow: Samoteka,
2007.
Greimas, A.-J. Structural Semantics. Moscow: Academic Project, 2008.
Goodrick-Clarke, N. The Occult Roots of Nazism: Secret Aryan Cults and Their
Influence on Nazi Ideology: The Ariosofists of Austria and Germany, 1890–
1935. Moscow: EKSMO, 2004.
Damascus. Commentary on Plato's Parmenides. St. Petersburg: Mir, 2008.
Danilevsky, N. Y. Darwinism. A Critical Study: In 2 vols. St. Petersburg: M. E. Komarov
Publishing House, 1885–1889.
Dante Alighieri. The Divine Comedy. Moscow: Pravda, 1982.
Debord, G. The Society of the Spectacle. Moscow: Logos, 2000.
Deleuze, G. The Logic of Sense. Moscow: Academic Project, 2010.
Deleuze, G. Nietzsche. St. Petersburg: Axioma, Kolna, 1997.
Deleuze, G. The Fold: Leibniz and the Baroque. Moscow: Logos Publishing House, 1997.
Deleuze, G., and Guattari, F. Anti-Oedipus: Capitalism and Schizophrenia.
Ekaterinburg: U-Faktoria, 2007.
Deleuze, G., & Guattari, F. Capitalism and Schizophrenia. A Thousand Plateaus.
Ekaterinburg: Foucault, M. The Will to Truth: Beyond Knowledge, Power, and
Sexuality. Works from Different Years. Moscow: Kastal, 1996.
Deleuze, G., & Guattari, F. What is Philosophy? Moscow: Institute of Experimental
Sociology; St. Petersburg: Aleteya, 1998.
Denis O. College of Sociology. St. Petersburg: Nauka, 2004.
Derrida, J. Writing and Difference. Moscow: Academic Project, 2007.
Derrida, J. Specters of Marx. Moscow: Logos altera, Ecce homo, 2006.
Descola, F. Beyond Nature and Culture. Moscow: New Literary Review, 2012.
Destut de Tracy, A.-L.-C. Foundations of Ideology. Ideology in the Proper Sense of the
Word. Moscow: Academic Project, 2018.
Jemal, G. Daoud vs Jalut (David vs Goliath). Moscow: Social and Political Thought,
2011., A.-L.-C. Foundations of Ideology. Ideology in the Proper Sense of the
Word. Moscow: Academic Project, 2018.
Jemal, G. Daoud vs Jalut (David vs Goliath). Moscow: Social and Political Thought,
2011.

--- PAGE BREAK ---ns of Ideology. Ideology in the Proper Sense of the
Word. Moscow: Academic Project, 2018.
Jemal, G. Daoud vs Jalut (David vs Goliath). Moscow: Social and Political Thought,
2011.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

547
Bibliography
Jemal G. Revolution of the Prophets. Moscow: Ultra.Culture, 2003.
Gentile, D. Selected Philosophical Works: In 7 vols. Krasnodar: KSUKiI, 2008–2012.
Joyce, J. Collected Works: In 3 vols. Vol. 3. Moscow: Znak, 1994.
Dumézil, J. The Supreme Gods of the Indo-Europeans. Moscow: Nauka,
1986. Dumont, L. Essay on Individualism. Dubna: Phoenix, 1997.
Dumont, L. Homo Equalis: The Genesis and Rise of Economic Ideology. Moscow:
Nota Bene, 2000.
Dumont, L. Homo Hierarchicus: An Attempt to Describe the System of Castes. St.
Petersburg: Eurasia, 2001.
Durkheim, Émile. Sociology: Its Subject, Method, and Purpose. Moscow: Canon, 1995.
Durkheim, Émile. The Elementary Forms of Religious Life. Moscow: Publishing
House DELO, 2018.
Sombart, W. Collected Works in 3 Volumes. St. Petersburg: Vladimir Dal, 2005.
Campanella, T. The City of the Sun. Moscow; Leningrad: Publishing House of the
Academy of Sciences of the USSR, 1947. Kant, I. Collected Works in 6 Volumes.
Moscow: Nauka, 1963–1966.
Castells, M. The Information Age: Economy, Society and Culture. Moscow: Higher
School of Economics, 2000.
Quesnay, F., Turgot, A. R. J., Dupont de Nemours, P. S. Physiocrats. Selected Economic
Works. Moscow: Eksmo, 2008.
Kerenyi, K. Eleusis: The Archetypal Image of Mother and Daughter. Moscow: Reflekt-
Book, 2000.
Kozhev, A. V. Introduction to Reading Hegel. St. Petersburg: Nauka, 2013.
Con, E. How Forests Think: Towards an Anthropology Beyond Humanity. Moscow: Ad
Marginem, 2018.
Corbin, A. History of Islamic Philosophy. Moscow: Sadra, 2018.
Corbin, A. The Light Man in Iranian Sufism. Moscow: Foundation for the Study of
Islamic Culture; Magic Mountain; Design. Information Cartography, 2009.
Carroll, L. Alice's Adventures in Wonderland. Moscow: Labyrinth, 2014.
Lacan, J. Seminars. Book 5: The Formation of the Unconscious. Moscow:
Gnosis/Logos, 2002.
Latour, B. The New Age Was Never. Essays on Symmetrical Anthropology. St.
Petersburg: Publishing House of the European University in St. Petersburg, 2006.
Latour, B. Politics of Nature: How to Inoculate the Sciences with Democracy.
Moscow: Ad Marginem Press, 2018.
Lévi-Bruhl, L. The Primitive Mentality. St. Petersburg: European House, 2002. Lenin, V.
I. Imperialism, the Highest Stage of Capitalism. Moscow: Progress, 1984. Lyotard, J.-F. The
Postmodern Condition. Moscow; St. Petersburg: Institute of Experimental Sociology,
Aleteya, 1998.
Sociology, Aleteya, 1998.
Locke, John. Works in Three Volumes. Moscow: Mydl, 1985–1988.
Luhmann, N. Social Systems: Outline of a General Theory. St. Petersburg: Nauka, 2007.Sociology,
Aleteya, 1998.
Sociology, Aleteya, 1998.
Locke, John. Works in Three Volumes. Moscow: Mydl, 1985–1988.
Luhmann, N. Social Systems: Outline of a General Theory. St. Petersburg: Nauka, 2007.

--- PAGE BREAK ---1998.
Sociology, Aleteya, 1998.
Locke, John. Works in Three Volumes. Moscow: Mydl, 1985–1988.
Luhmann, N. Social Systems: Outline of a General Theory. St. Petersburg: Nauka, 2007.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

548
Bibliography
Lurie, S. Ya. Democritus. Texts. Translation. Research. Leningrad: Nauka, 1970.
Machiavelli, N. The Prince. Moscow: Khudozhestvennaya Literatura, 1982.
Malaparte, C. The Technique of the State Coup. Moscow: Agraf, 1988.
Mandelbrot, B. Fractal Geometry of Nature. Moscow: Institute of Computer Research,
2002.
Marx, K. Capital // Marx, K., Engels, F. Works: In 50 volumes. Vol. 23–26.
Moscow: State Publishing House of Political Literature, 1960–1964.
Marx, K. The Difference Between the Natural Philosophy of Democritus and that of
Epicurus // Marx, K., Engels, F. Early Works. Moscow: Politizdat, 1956.
Marx, K., Engels, F. Selected Letters. Moscow: OGIZ, 1947.
Marx, K., Engels, F. German Ideology // Marx, K., Engels, F. Works: In 50 volumes.
Vol. 3. Moscow: State Publishing House of Political Literature, 1955.
Marx, K., Engels, F. Works. Vol. 4. Moscow: State Publishing House of Political
Literature, 1955.
Meillassoux, Q. After Finitude: Essays on the Necessity of Contingency. Ekaterinburg;
Moscow: Cabinet Scholar, 2016.
Meller, A. The Conservative Revolution in Germany, 1918–1932. Belgorod:
Tottenburg, 2017.
Mises, L. Bureaucracy. Planned Chaos. Anti-Capitalist Mentality. Moscow: Delo,
Catallaxy, 1993.
Mises, L. The Individual, the Market, and the Legal State. St. Petersburg: Pnevma, 1999.
Mishima, Yukio. My Friend Hitler // Mishima, Yukio. The Golden Temple. Novels, Short
Stories, Plays. St. Petersburg: Severo-Zapad, 1993.
Mauss, M. The Social Formation of the Family. Moscow: Knizhny Dom Universitet,
2011.
Müller van den Broek, A. The Myth of the Eternal Empire and the Third Reich.
Moscow: Veche, 2009.
Nietzsche, F. Complete Works: In 13 Volumes. Moscow: Cultural Revolution, 2005–
2012.
Nukhaev, Kh.-A. T. Vedeno or Washington? Moscow: Arktogeya-Centre, 2001.
Otto, R. The Sacred. On the Irrational in the Idea of the Divine and Its Relationship to
the Rational. St. Petersburg: St. Petersburg University Press, 2008.
Pareto, V. Compendium of General Sociology. Moscow: Publishing House of the Higher
School of Economics, 2008.
Pound, E. Cantos. St. Petersburg: Nauka, 2018.
Plato. Collected Works in 4 Volumes. Moscow: Mysl, 1990–1994.
Plotinus. Enneads: In 7 volumes. St. Petersburg: Oleg Abyshko Publishing House; University
Book, 2010.
Polanyi, K. Selected Works. Moscow: Territory of the Future, 2013.
Popper, K. The Open Society and Its Enemies: In 2 vols. Moscow: Phoenix,
International Cultural Initiative Fund, 1992.Book, 2010.
Polanyi, K. Selected Works. Moscow: Territory of the Future, 2013.
Popper, K. The Open Society and Its Enemies: In 2 vols. Moscow: Phoenix,
International Cultural Initiative Fund, 1992.

--- PAGE BREAK ---i, K. Selected Works. Moscow: Territory of the Future, 2013.
Popper, K. The Open Society and Its Enemies: In 2 vols. Moscow: Phoenix,
International Cultural Initiative Fund, 1992.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

549
Bibliography
The Poems of Ossian. Leningrad: Nauka, 1983.
Proclus, Commentary on Plato's Parmenides. St. Petersburg: Mir Publishing House,
2006.
Proclus. Platonic Theology. St. Petersburg: RHGI, Summer Garden, 2001.
Proudhon, J. What is Property? Or An Inquiry into the Principle of Right and
Power; Poverty as an Economic Principle; Pornocracy, or Women in Their
Present State. Moscow: Respublika, 1998.
Rousseau, J.-J. Treatises. Moscow: Nauka, 1969.
Rousseau, J.-J. The Social Contract. Treatises. Moscow: KANON-press; Kuchkovo
Pole, 1998.
Rand, A. Apology for Capitalism. Moscow: New Literary Review, 2003.
St. John Chrysostom. Works of Our Holy Father John Chrysostom, Archbishop of
Constantinople. Vol. 11. Book 1. St. Petersburg: Published by the St. Petersburg
Theological Academy, 1905. pp. 597–598.
Seraphim (Rose). Nihilism: The Source of the Revolution of the Modern Age.
Forestville, California: Fr. Seraphim Rose Foundation, 1994.
Smith, A. An Inquiry into the Nature and Causes of the Wealth of Nations. Moscow:
Eksmo, 2007.
Soros, George. The Alchemy of Finance. Moscow: Infra-M, 2001.
Soros, George. On Globalisation. Moscow: Eksmo, 2004.
Soros, George. The Open Society. Reforming Global Capitalism. Moscow: Non-
Profit Foundation for the Support of Culture, Education and New Information
Technologies, 2001.
Spencer, H. Scientific, Political and Philosophical Experiments in 3 volumes. Minsk:
Sovremenny Literator, 1998.
Spinoza, B. Works: In 2 volumes. St. Petersburg: Nauka, 1999.
The Works of St. John of Damascus. Source of Knowledge. Moscow: Indrik, 2002.
Tönnies, F. Community and Society: Basic Concepts of Pure Sociology.
Moscow: University Fund, St. Petersburg: Vladimir Dal, 2002.
Fedorov, N. F. Collected Works: In 4 vols. Moscow: Progress-Tradition; Evidentis, 1995–
2004.
Fichte, I. G. The Closed Commercial State. Moscow: KPASSAND, 2010.
Fichte, I. G. Speeches to the German Nation. St. Petersburg: Nauka, 2009.
Fichte, I. G. Works in 2 volumes. St. Petersburg: Mifril, 1993.
Foucault, Michel. The Will to Truth: Beyond Knowledge, Power, and Sexuality. Works
from Different Years. Moscow: Kastal, 1996.
Foucault, M. Madness and Civilisation: A History of Insanity in the Age of Reason.
Moscow: AST MOSKVA, 2010.
Foucault, M. The Birth of the Clinic. Moscow: Academic Project, 2010.
Foucault, M. The Order of Things. Archaeology of the Human Sciences. St. Petersburg: A-
cad, 1994
Foucault, M. Discipline and Punish: The Birth of the Prison. Moscow: Ad Marginem,
1999.
Fukuyama, F. The End of History and the Last Man. Moscow: AST, 2004.
Hayek, F. The Road to Serfdom. Moscow: New Publishing House, 2005.and Punish: The Birth of the Prison. Moscow: Ad Marginem,
1999.
Fukuyama, F. The End of History and the Last Man. Moscow: AST, 2004.
Hayek, F. The Road to Serfdom. Moscow: New Publishing House, 2005.

--- PAGE BREAK ---h of the Prison. Moscow: Ad Marginem,
1999.
Fukuyama, F. The End of History and the Last Man. Moscow: AST, 2004.
Hayek, F. The Road to Serfdom. Moscow: New Publishing House, 2005.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

550
Bibliography
Huntington, S. The Clash of Civilisations. Moscow: AST, 2003.
Haraway, D. The Cyborg Manifesto: Science, Technology, and Socialist Feminism in the
1980s. Moscow: Ad Marginem Press, 2017.
Hardt, M., Negri, A. Empire. Moscow: Praksis, 2004.
Hardt, M., Negri, A. Multitude: War and Democracy in the Age of Empire. Moscow:
Cultural Revolution, 2006.
Harman, G. Immaterialism: Objects and Social Theory. Gaidar Institute Publishing House,
2018.
Tsiolkovsky, K. E. Cosmic Philosophy. Moscow: IDLi; Sfera, 2004.
Chamberlain, H. S. The Foundations of the Nineteenth Century: In 2 vols. St. Petersburg:
Russkiy Mir, 2012.
Schmitt, K. The State: Law and Politics. Moscow: Publishing House "Territory of the
Future," 2013.
Schmitt, C. Dictatorship: From the Origins of the Modern Idea of Sovereignty to the
Proletarian Class Struggle. St. Petersburg: Nauka, 2006.
Schmitt, C. Leviathan in Thomas Hobbes's Theory of the State. St. Petersburg:
Vladimir Dal, 2006.
Schmitt, C. Political Theology. Moscow: Canon-Press, Kuchkovoe Pole, 2000.
Schmitt, C. The Concept of the Political. St. Petersburg: St. Petersburg Publishing House,
2006.
Spengler, O. Prussianism and Socialism. Moscow: Praksis, 2002.
Stiurner, M. The Ego and Its Own. Kharkiv: Osnova, 1994. Strauss, L. Introduction
to Political Philosophy. Moscow: Izograf, 2000. Evola, J. Revolt Against the Modern
World. Moscow: Prometheus, 2016.
Evola, J. The Mysteries of the Grail. Moscow-Voronezh: TERRA FOLIATA, 2013.
Evola, J. Fascism: A Critique from the Right. Moscow: Revanche, 2005.
Evola, J. Pagan Imperialism. Moscow: Arktogeya, 1994.
Eliade, M. Essays in Comparative Religion. Moscow: Ladomir, 1999.
Eliade, M. The Sacred and the Profane. Moscow: Moscow State University Press, 1994.
Jünger, E. The Worker. Domination and Gestalt. Moscow: Nauka, 2002.
Iamblichus of Chalcedon. Commentaries on Plato's Dialogues. St. Petersburg: Aleteya,
2000.
Iamblichus of Chalcedon. On the Egyptian Mysteries. Moscow: Aleteya, 2004.
A compendium of Ockham’s teachings: a translation of the Tractatus de principiis
theologiae.
St. Bonaventure, N.Y.: Franciscan Institute, St. Bonaventure
University, 1998.
Al-Farabi. On the Perfect State. Oxford: Clarendon Press, 1985.
Al-Farabi. The Political Writings. Selected Aphorisms and Other Texts. Ithaca:
Cornell University Press, 2001.
Althusius J. Politica. Indianapolis: Liberty Fund, 1995.
Bartsch H.-W. (ed.) Kerygma und Mythos. Vol. 1–5. Hamburg: Resih, 1948–1955.
Boas F. The Mind of Primitive Man. New York: The Macmillan Company, 1938.
Brassier R. Nihil Unbound: Enlightenment and Extinction. L.: Palgrave Macmil- lan,
2007.Vol. 1–5. Hamburg: Resih, 1948–1955.
Boas F. The Mind of Primitive Man. New York: The Macmillan Company, 1938.
Brassier R. Nihil Unbound: Enlightenment and Extinction. L.: Palgrave Macmil- lan,
2007.

--- PAGE BREAK ---esih, 1948–1955.
Boas F. The Mind of Primitive Man. New York: The Macmillan Company, 1938.
Brassier R. Nihil Unbound: Enlightenment and Extinction. L.: Palgrave Macmil- lan,
2007.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

551
Bibliography
Bryant L. R., Harman G., Srnicek N. The Speculative Turn: Continental Materialism and
Realism. Melbourne: Re.Press, 2011.
Buse P., Scott, A. (eds). Ghosts: Deconstruction, Psychoanalysis, History. L.: Macmillan,
1999.
Chesterton, G. K. Saint Thomas Aquinas. New York: Doubleday Image, 1956
Conche, M. L’Aléatoire. Paris: Les Belles Lettres, 2012.
Deleuze, G. The Logic of Sense. Paris: Editions de Minuit, 1969.
Deleuze G., Parnet C. Dialogues. Paris: Flammarion, 1996. P. 117.
Dimont L. Essays on Individualism. An Anthropological Perspective
Dumezile G. The Tripartite Ideology of the Indo-Europeans. P.: Latomus, 1958.
Erigène Jean Scot. De la division de la nature. Periphyseon. Paris: Presses
Universitaires de France; Épiméthée, 1995–2009.
Evola, J. Men and Ruins. Rome: Edizioni dell’Ascia, 1953. Ficino, M. The
Christian Religion. Rome: Città Nuova Editrice, 2005. Foucault, M. Dits et
écrits. Paris: Gallimard, 2001.
Gilson É. Héloïse et Abélard. Paris: J. Vrin, 1938.
Gramsci A. The Intellectuals and the Organisation of Culture. Turin: Einaudi, 1948.
Gramsci A. The Qualified Revolutionary. Writings 1916–1925. Rome: Delotti, 1988.
Gramsci A. The Works. Rome: Editori Riuniti, 1997.
Gramsci, A. Prison Notebooks, 3 vols. Turin: Einaudi, 1975.
Guilelmi de Ockham. Opera Politica. 4 vols. Manchester; Oxford: Manchester
University Press; Oxford University Press, 1940–1997.
Harman G. Heidegger Explained: From Phenomenon to Thing. Chicago: Open Court,
2007.
Harman G. Tool-Being. Heidegger and the Metaphysics of Objects. Chicago: Open
Court, 2002.
Heidegger M. Überlegungen XII–XV. (Schwarze Hefte 1939–1941). Frankfurt- am-
Main: Vittorio Klostermann, 2014.
Hitler, A. Mein Kampf. Volumes 1–2. Munich: Verlag Franz Eher Nachfahren, 1925–
1927.
Hitler, A. (1927). Mein Kampf, Volume 2, Verlag Franz Eher Nachfahren, Munich.
Hobson J. The Eurocentric Conception of World Politics: Western International
Theory, 1760–2010. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 2012.
Ibn al-Arabi. Turjumn al-Ashwq. Beirut: Dr ?dir, 1966.
Jarrett James L. (ed.). Jung’s seminar on Nietzsche’s Zarathustra (1934–1939).
Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press, 1988.
Khadduri M. War and peace in the law of Islam. Baltimore: The Johns Hopkins Press,
1955.
Kurzweil, R. The Singularity is Near. New York: Viking Books, 2005.
Land N. Fanged Noumena: Collected Writings 1987–2007. New York; Windsor Quarry
(Falmouth): Sequence; Urbanomic, 2011.
Lassal F. Macht und Recht. Offnes Sendschreiben. Zurich: Meyer &amp; Zeller, 1863.
Lévi-Strauss C. The Elementary Structures of Kinship. Paris; The Hague: Mouton, 1967.th): Sequence; Urbanomic, 2011.
Lassal F. Macht und Recht. Offnes Sendschreiben. Zurich: Meyer &amp; Zeller, 1863.
Lévi-Strauss C. The Elementary Structures of Kinship. Paris; The Hague: Mouton, 1967.

--- PAGE BREAK ---omic, 2011.
Lassal F. Macht und Recht. Offnes Sendschreiben. Zurich: Meyer &amp; Zeller, 1863.
Lévi-Strauss C. The Elementary Structures of Kinship. Paris; The Hague: Mouton, 1967.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

552
Bibliography
Levy B.-H. The Empire and the Five Kings: America’s Abdication and the Fate of the
World. NY: Henry Holt and Co., 2019.
Mandeville B. The Fable of the Bees; or, Private Vices, Public Benefits. Clarendon Press,
1714.
Marlan S. The Black Sun: The Alchemy and Art of Darkness. College Station: Texas A
&amp; M University Press, 2005.
Meinong A. On Possibility and Probability: Contributions to the Theory of Objects and
the Theory of Knowledge. Leipzig: J. A. Barthe, 1915.
Michels, R. Sociology as a Social Science. Berlin: Mauritius, 1926. Mill, J. Elements
of Political Economy. London: Baldwin, Craddock and Joy, 1821. Mill, J. The
History of British India. 3 vols. London: Baldwin, Craddock and Joy, 1818.
Morris J W., Chittick W. (ed.) Ibn ‘Arabi¯: The Meccan Revelations. New York: Pir Press,
2002.
Mosca G. History of Political Doctrines. Bari: Laterza, 1937.
Murphy J. Technical Analysis of the Financial Markets. Upper Saddle River, N.Y.:
Prentice Hall, 1999.
Mussolini B. The Doctrine of Fascism. Florence: Vallecchi Editore, 1935.
Negarestani R. Cyclonopedia: Complicity with Anonymous Materials. Melbourne:
Re.Press, 2008.
Nicholson R. The Tarjumán al-Ashwáq: A Collection of Mystical Odes by Muhyid-
dn Ibn al-’Arab. L.: Royal Asiatic Society, Oriental, 1911.
Niekisch, E. Hitler — ein deutsches Verhängnis. Berlin: Widerstands-Verlag, 1932.
Pico della Mirandola Giovanni. On the Dignity of Man. Heptaplus. On Being and the One.
Florence: Vallecchi, 1942.
Pijl Kees Van Der. Transnational Classes and International Relations. L.: Routledge,
1998.
Pijl Kees Van Der. Vordenker der Weltpolitik: Einfü hrung in die internationale
Politik aus ideengeschichtlicher Perspektive. Opladen: Leske+ Budrich, 1996.
Pijl, Kees Van Der. The Making of an Atlantic Ruling Class. London: Verso, 1984.
Rosenberg, A. The Myth of the Twentieth Century: An Evaluation of the Spiritual-Moral
Struggles of Our Time. Munich: Hoheneichen-Verlag, 1930.
Schmitt, Carl. The Concept of the Political. Berlin: Duncker und Humbolt, 1932.
Schmitt, C. International Order in a Large Area with a Prohibition of Intervention by
Foreign Powers. A Contribution to the Concept of the Reich in International Law.
B.: Deutscher Rechts Verlag, 1939.
Schuon F. Understanding Islam. Bloomington, Indiana: World Wisdom, 1998.
Sombart W. German Socialism. Berlin: Buchholz & Weisswange, 1934.
Spann O. The True State: Lectures on the Breakdown and Rebuilding of Society,
given in the summer semester of 1920 at the University of Vienna. Vienna: Quelle
& Meyer, 1921.
Spinoza B. A Theologico-Political Treatise, and a Political Treatise. N.Y.: Cosimo,
2005.
sur l’idéologie moderne. Paris: Seuil, 1983.1920 at the University of Vienna. Vienna: Quelle
& Meyer, 1921.
Spinoza B. A Theologico-Political Treatise, and a Political Treatise. N.Y.: Cosimo,
2005.
sur l’idéologie moderne. Paris: Seuil, 1983.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

553
Bibliography
Voegelin, E. The People of God: Sectarian Movements and the Spirit of Modernity.
Munich: Fink, 1994.
Voegelin E. The New Science of Politics. Munich: Wilhelm Fink Verlag, 2004.
Voegelin E. The Political Religions. Stockholm: Bermann Fischer, 1939.
Voegelin E. Order and History. 10 vols. Munich: Dietmar Herz & Peter Opitz, 2001–
2005.
Walras L. Elements of Pure Political Economy; or, Theory of Social Wealth.
Lausanne: L. Corbaz, 1874.
Wright M. R. Empedocles. The extant fragments. New York; London: Yale University
Press, 1981.
Wurmbrand R. Marx and Satan. Westchester, Illinois: Crossway Books, 1986.

--- PAGE BREAK ---Contents
Preface.

Politica Aeterna — topology, theory, method ......................................................3
The Political Dimension of Eternity...............................................................................3
Philosophy and politics: the nature of an inseparable connection................................6
Politica Aeterna and the Fourth Political Theory ..........................................................8
Part 1.

Political Platonism ........................................................................................11
Chapter 1.

The Essence of Politics.

Plato and His Cave..................................................13
Subject of Study.............................................................................................................13
The Union of Philosophy and Politics..........................................................................14
Homologies: the history of kingdoms and the history of ideas are not different from each
other
each other....................................................................................................................15
In the image and likeness ..............................................................................................16
Politics and the Political (Das Politische) ....................................................................17
The philosopher king.

Plato as a synonym for all philosophy....................................17
Politics and the doctrine of ideas..................................................................................19
Three Functions..............................................................................................................21
The cave.

Anodos and katodos .....................................................................................23
Those who determine the philosophical paradigms of governance are the ones who rule.Plato as a synonym for all philosophy....................................17
Politics and the doctrine of ideas..................................................................................19
Three Functions..............................................................................................................21
The cave.

Anodos and katodos .....................................................................................23
Those who determine the philosophical paradigms of governance are the ones who rule.

.........................................................................................................................................25
Layers of polity ..............................................................................................................25
The metaphor of the dog................................................................................................27
Guards and philosophy ................................................................................................29
Stratification of the polity.............................................................................................29
Chthonogenesis ..............................................................................................................30
Chapter 2.--- PAGE BREAK ---

Anodos and katodos .....................................................................................23
Those who determine the philosophical paradigms of governance are the ones who rule. .........................................................................................................................................25
Layers of polity ..............................................................................................................25
The metaphor of the dog................................................................................................27
Guards and philosophy ................................................................................................29
Stratification of the polity.............................................................................................29
Chthonogenesis ..............................................................................................................30
Chapter 2. Ontology of the ideal state (Kallipolis)...............................................................33
The Political: Implicit and Explicit ..............................................................................33
Any philosophical idea of Plato has its political
dimension....................................................................................................................34
The ontology of Timaeus and the three states: ideal, phenomenal, material ............34
The metaphor of the Father: the world of paradigms..................................................35
The ideal state is a state that exists eternally................................................................36
The true and the visible..................................................................................................37
The metaphor of the Son: icons, symbols....................................................................37
The phenomenon as icon...............................................................................................40
Time according to Plato is a copy of eternity ..............................................................40
The ideal and phenomenal state....................................................................................41a copy of eternity ..............................................................40
The ideal and phenomenal state....................................................................................41

--- PAGE BREAK ---555
Bibliography
Woman and the bastard Logos......................................................................................43
The chariot of the soul....................................................................................................44
The Dialectic of Parmenides .........................................................................................45
Three Types of Political Ontology in Timaeus............................................................48
Plato's ideal state: the philosopher-king........................................................................50
The phenomenal state — the warrior state...................................................................50
Pacifist warriors are a pathology...................................................................................51
Providing for thinkers and warriors..............................................................................52
Stages of state degradation according to Plato: timocracy, oligarchy, democracy,
tyranny ........................................................................................................................52
Anti-king.........................................................................................................................55
Chapter 3.

The State of the Son.555
Bibliography
Woman and the bastard Logos......................................................................................43
The chariot of the soul....................................................................................................44
The Dialectic of Parmenides .........................................................................................45
Three Types of Political Ontology in Timaeus............................................................48
Plato's ideal state: the philosopher-king........................................................................50
The phenomenal state — the warrior state...................................................................50
Pacifist warriors are a pathology...................................................................................51
Providing for thinkers and warriors..............................................................................52
Stages of state degradation according to Plato: timocracy, oligarchy, democracy,
tyranny ........................................................................................................................52
Anti-king.........................................................................................................................55
Chapter 3.

The State of the Son.

Aristotle............................................................................57
Politics According to Aristotle......................................................................................57
Three philosophies of politics.......................................................................................58
The polity of the Father and the polity of the Son.......................................................59
Two male philosophies..................................................................................................60
Logos apophantikos and the declarative state..............................................................61
Aristotelian philosophy denies not only Plato's upper world of ideas, but also the
world of Matter.The State of the Son.

Aristotle............................................................................57
Politics According to Aristotle......................................................................................57
Three philosophies of politics.......................................................................................58
The polity of the Father and the polity of the Son.......................................................59
Two male philosophies..................................................................................................60
Logos apophantikos and the declarative state..............................................................61
Aristotelian philosophy denies not only Plato's upper world of ideas, but also the
world of Matter.

.........................................................................................................62
Two philosophies ...........................................................................................................63
Aristotle as an apologist for slavery .............................................................................64
First a warrior, then a philosopher................................................................................67
The paradigm of three types of government ................................................................68
A good state....................................................................................................................69
Bad state .........................................................................................................................72
Chapter 4.Aristotle............................................................................57
Politics According to Aristotle......................................................................................57
Three philosophies of politics.......................................................................................58
The polity of the Father and the polity of the Son.......................................................59
Two male philosophies..................................................................................................60
Logos apophantikos and the declarative state..............................................................61
Aristotelian philosophy denies not only Plato's upper world of ideas, but also the
world of Matter.

.........................................................................................................62
Two philosophies ...........................................................................................................63
Aristotle as an apologist for slavery .............................................................................64
First a warrior, then a philosopher................................................................................67
The paradigm of three types of government ................................................................68
A good state....................................................................................................................69
Bad state .........................................................................................................................72
Chapter 4.

Sacred politics and religion .............................................................................75
Religion and three types of societies............................................................................75
The Sacred: Dark and Light Sides................................................................................76
Religion according to Guénon..........................................................................................................62
Two philosophies ...........................................................................................................63
Aristotle as an apologist for slavery .............................................................................64
First a warrior, then a philosopher................................................................................67
The paradigm of three types of government ................................................................68
A good state....................................................................................................................69
Bad state .........................................................................................................................72
Chapter 4.

Sacred politics and religion .............................................................................75
Religion and three types of societies............................................................................75
The Sacred: Dark and Light Sides................................................................................76
Religion according to Guénon.

.....................................................................................78
Creation and manifestation............................................................................................79
God the Creator as a Person..........................................................................................81
Religious and Secular Societies....................................................................................81
The experience of individual death...............................................................................84
Secularism ......................................................................................................................84
When religion becomes a private matter, it ceases to be religion..............................85
Part 2.Sacred politics and religion .............................................................................75
Religion and three types of societies............................................................................75
The Sacred: Dark and Light Sides................................................................................76
Religion according to Guénon.

.....................................................................................78
Creation and manifestation............................................................................................79
God the Creator as a Person..........................................................................................81
Religious and Secular Societies....................................................................................81
The experience of individual death...............................................................................84
Secularism ......................................................................................................................84
When religion becomes a private matter, it ceases to be religion..............................85
Part 2.

Monotheistic religions and types of political theologies...............................87
Chapter 1.

The Political Philosophy of Judaism...............................................................89
Judaism and politics.--- PAGE BREAK ---

Monotheistic religions and types of political theologies...............................87
Chapter 1. The Political Philosophy of Judaism...............................................................89
Judaism and politics. Israel as an idea..........................................................................89
At the heart of Judaism is a covenant with the Creator...............................................90
Judaism and Platonism ..................................................................................................91
The philosopher Samuel and King Saul.......................................................................93
The Babylonian Captivity .............................................................................................93
Israel and Aristotle.........................................................................................................94
Israel as political praxis. Zionism. King Messiah .......................................................96

--- PAGE BREAK ---The dispute over time and methods..............................................................................97
Chapter 2.

The Political Philosophy of Christianity.......................................................100
Christianity and Rome.

The restraining force (katechon).........................................100
Christianity already contains a political component even
when it does not yet speak of it ..............................................................................107
The doctrine of the four kingdoms and the "political Antichrist" ...........................108
The devil's political system.........................................................................................109
Byzantium.

Symphony of powers ..............................................................................110
The model of "unholy politics"...................................................................................112
The Papacy.

The usurpation of the empire by Charlemagne....................................113
Two political philosophies: Orthodox and Catholic .................................................115
Wandering Rome reaches Moscow............................................................................11
Reflections of the Catechon........................................................................................11
Protestantism and Democracy.....................................................................................11
Protestantism: A Revolution Against Vertical Thinking..........................................120
Three political philosophies of Christianity and the assumption of a fourth model
...................................................................................................................................122
Chapter 3.Symphony of powers ..............................................................................110
The model of "unholy politics"...................................................................................112
The Papacy.

The usurpation of the empire by Charlemagne....................................113
Two political philosophies: Orthodox and Catholic .................................................115
Wandering Rome reaches Moscow............................................................................11
Reflections of the Catechon........................................................................................11
Protestantism and Democracy.....................................................................................11
Protestantism: A Revolution Against Vertical Thinking..........................................120
Three political philosophies of Christianity and the assumption of a fourth model
...................................................................................................................................122
Chapter 3.

The political philosophy of Islam .................................................................12
Radical creationism......................................................................................................123
Shirk..............................................................................................................................124
Political and religious anthropology of Islam.The usurpation of the empire by Charlemagne....................................113
Two political philosophies: Orthodox and Catholic .................................................115
Wandering Rome reaches Moscow............................................................................11
Reflections of the Catechon........................................................................................11
Protestantism and Democracy.....................................................................................11
Protestantism: A Revolution Against Vertical Thinking..........................................120
Three political philosophies of Christianity and the assumption of a fourth model
...................................................................................................................................122
Chapter 3.

The political philosophy of Islam .................................................................12
Radical creationism......................................................................................................123
Shirk..............................................................................................................................124
Political and religious anthropology of Islam.

People of the Book
and their status .........................................................................................................125
Jihad: Islam or Paganism.............................................................................................125
Attitudes towards Jews and Christians.......................................................................127
Global Islamic political empire ..................................................................................128
Islam and Christianity in architecture.........................................................................128
The absence of priests in Islam...................................................................................129
Islam and politics: dispute is war ...............................................................................130
The Caliphate ...............................................................................................................131
The House of Islam and the House of War................................................................133
Shiism and its philosophy..............................................................................................134
The Mahdi and the Culture of Expectation................................................................136
Shiism and Iranian influences.....................................................................................137
Sufism — the secret "religion of love" ......................................................................138
Madhhabs and states....................................................................................................139
The political landscape ................................................................................................140
Salafism and Wahhabism............................................................................................140
Contemporary Shiism..................................................................................................142
Traditional Islam..........................................................................................................143
The Sufi Empire of the Late........................................................................................145
Islam of the Medina Constitution ..................................................................................146
Islam in Russia...............................................................................................................147
Part 3.The political philosophy of Islam .................................................................12
Radical creationism......................................................................................................123
Shirk..............................................................................................................................124
Political and religious anthropology of Islam.

People of the Book
and their status .........................................................................................................125
Jihad: Islam or Paganism.............................................................................................125
Attitudes towards Jews and Christians.......................................................................127
Global Islamic political empire ..................................................................................128
Islam and Christianity in architecture.........................................................................128
The absence of priests in Islam...................................................................................129
Islam and politics: dispute is war ...............................................................................130
The Caliphate ...............................................................................................................131
The House of Islam and the House of War................................................................133
Shiism and its philosophy..............................................................................................134
The Mahdi and the Culture of Expectation................................................................136
Shiism and Iranian influences.....................................................................................137
Sufism — the secret "religion of love" ......................................................................138
Madhhabs and states....................................................................................................139
The political landscape ................................................................................................140
Salafism and Wahhabism............................................................................................140
Contemporary Shiism..................................................................................................142
Traditional Islam..........................................................................................................143
The Sufi Empire of the Late........................................................................................145
Islam of the Medina Constitution ..................................................................................146
Islam in Russia...............................................................................................................147
Part 3.

The political paradigm of modernity.People of the Book
and their status .........................................................................................................125
Jihad: Islam or Paganism.............................................................................................125
Attitudes towards Jews and Christians.......................................................................127
Global Islamic political empire ..................................................................................128
Islam and Christianity in architecture.........................................................................128
The absence of priests in Islam...................................................................................129
Islam and politics: dispute is war ...............................................................................130
The Caliphate ...............................................................................................................131
The House of Islam and the House of War................................................................133
Shiism and its philosophy..............................................................................................134
The Mahdi and the Culture of Expectation................................................................136
Shiism and Iranian influences.....................................................................................137
Sufism — the secret "religion of love" ......................................................................138
Madhhabs and states....................................................................................................139
The political landscape ................................................................................................140
Salafism and Wahhabism............................................................................................140
Contemporary Shiism..................................................................................................142
Traditional Islam..........................................................................................................143
The Sufi Empire of the Late........................................................................................145
Islam of the Medina Constitution ..................................................................................146
Islam in Russia...............................................................................................................147
Part 3.

The political paradigm of modernity.

The war of concepts ....................149
Chapter 1.--- PAGE BREAK ---

The political paradigm of modernity. The war of concepts ....................149
Chapter 1. The Political Philosophy of Atomism...............................................................151

--- PAGE BREAK ---557
Bibliography
Generalised paradigm of politics in the pre-modern era...............................................151
The Centrality of Hierarchy in Tradition......................................................................154
The Third Kind of "Time"..............................................................................................154
From Democritus to democracy.....................................................................................155
The deceitful logos.........................................................................................................162
The Mortality of Gods, the Pull of Hell, and Democracy............................................163
The formula "from many, one"......................................................................................164
Epicurus: ancient liberalism in "The Garden"..............................................................165
Occam's nominalism .....................................................................................................167
The Modern Era.557
Bibliography
Generalised paradigm of politics in the pre-modern era...............................................151
The Centrality of Hierarchy in Tradition......................................................................154
The Third Kind of "Time"..............................................................................................154
From Democritus to democracy.....................................................................................155
The deceitful logos.........................................................................................................162
The Mortality of Gods, the Pull of Hell, and Democracy............................................163
The formula "from many, one"......................................................................................164
Epicurus: ancient liberalism in "The Garden"..............................................................165
Occam's nominalism .....................................................................................................167
The Modern Era.

The Modern Paradigm......................................................................171
Protestantism is based on the "religious atom"...........................................................173
The Revolt of the Third Estate......................................................................................175
Man as a producing and trading being..........................................................................176
Godlessness and democracy...........................................................................................177
Secularisation: a secular society that kills God .........................................................179
Svinopolis of the New Age ...........................................................................................180
Regicide — a fundamental gesture of the Modern era .................................................181
The present moment of Modernism ..............................................................................182
Chapter 2.557
Bibliography
Generalised paradigm of politics in the pre-modern era...............................................151
The Centrality of Hierarchy in Tradition......................................................................154
The Third Kind of "Time"..............................................................................................154
From Democritus to democracy.....................................................................................155
The deceitful logos.........................................................................................................162
The Mortality of Gods, the Pull of Hell, and Democracy............................................163
The formula "from many, one"......................................................................................164
Epicurus: ancient liberalism in "The Garden"..............................................................165
Occam's nominalism .....................................................................................................167
The Modern Era.

The Modern Paradigm......................................................................171
Protestantism is based on the "religious atom"...........................................................173
The Revolt of the Third Estate......................................................................................175
Man as a producing and trading being..........................................................................176
Godlessness and democracy...........................................................................................177
Secularisation: a secular society that kills God .........................................................179
Svinopolis of the New Age ...........................................................................................180
Regicide — a fundamental gesture of the Modern era .................................................181
The present moment of Modernism ..............................................................................182
Chapter 2.

Protestantism and its secularisation: a phase transition
in the structure of political theology.........................................................................................185
Third Christianity...........................................................................................................185
The Abolition of Sacred Tradition ...............................................................................186
Against Celibacy............................................................................................................188
Against the Empire ........................................................................................................189
Wealth as a virtue...........................................................................................................190
Protestantism as the foundation of modernity.............................................................193
The secularisation of Calvinism gives rise to liberalism...........................................194
The secularisation of Lutheranism gives rise to bourgeois nationalism...................196
The secularisation of Anabaptism gives rise to communism ....................................197
Three ideologies.............................................................................................................197
Chapter 3.The Modern Paradigm......................................................................171
Protestantism is based on the "religious atom"...........................................................173
The Revolt of the Third Estate......................................................................................175
Man as a producing and trading being..........................................................................176
Godlessness and democracy...........................................................................................177
Secularisation: a secular society that kills God .........................................................179
Svinopolis of the New Age ...........................................................................................180
Regicide — a fundamental gesture of the Modern era .................................................181
The present moment of Modernism ..............................................................................182
Chapter 2.

Protestantism and its secularisation: a phase transition
in the structure of political theology.........................................................................................185
Third Christianity...........................................................................................................185
The Abolition of Sacred Tradition ...............................................................................186
Against Celibacy............................................................................................................188
Against the Empire ........................................................................................................189
Wealth as a virtue...........................................................................................................190
Protestantism as the foundation of modernity.............................................................193
The secularisation of Calvinism gives rise to liberalism...........................................194
The secularisation of Lutheranism gives rise to bourgeois nationalism...................196
The secularisation of Anabaptism gives rise to communism ....................................197
Three ideologies.............................................................................................................197
Chapter 3.

The Founding Fathers of Modern Political Philosophy: T.Protestantism and its secularisation: a phase transition
in the structure of political theology.........................................................................................185
Third Christianity...........................................................................................................185
The Abolition of Sacred Tradition ...............................................................................186
Against Celibacy............................................................................................................188
Against the Empire ........................................................................................................189
Wealth as a virtue...........................................................................................................190
Protestantism as the foundation of modernity.............................................................193
The secularisation of Calvinism gives rise to liberalism...........................................194
The secularisation of Lutheranism gives rise to bourgeois nationalism...................196
The secularisation of Anabaptism gives rise to communism ....................................197
Three ideologies.............................................................................................................197
Chapter 3.

The Founding Fathers of Modern Political Philosophy: T.

Hobbes,
N.

Machiavelli, J.--- PAGE BREAK ---

Hobbes,
N. Machiavelli, J. Bodin ............................................................................................................199
Niccolò Machiavelli: the autonomy of politics ............................................................199
The Prince: the tyrant as a force from below.................................................................200
Two moralities according to Machiavelli ......................................................................201
Machiavelli's paradox: the goal of power is power .....................................................204
The prince as tyrant and as Antichrist..............................................................................20
Hobbes and the idea of absolute original sin ...............................................................207
Spencer: atomism and the struggle for survival in a liberal society ........................211
The Primordial Nature of the Social Contract and Pan-Egoism...............................214
Jean Bodin and the concept of "sovereignty" ............................................................21
The elimination of the power of the Pope..................................................................219
The King's Musketeers Against the Cardinal's Guards.............................................221
Towards the Westphalian world order........................................................................22
Inside Leviathan ............................................................................................................223

--- PAGE BREAK ---The Politics of the Third Principle .............................................................................224
Chapter 4.

Individualism as the basis of modern political philosophy.........................226
The basis of Protestantism — the social contract......................................................226
The paradoxes of the atom — the nihilistic underpinnings of modern ontology ...227
An idiot is a person without qualities.........................................................................231
The idiot as the norm and individuals as objects.......................................................232
Goat-herding and pseudo-science...............................................................................237
Chapter 5.

Liberalism (the first political theory).Individualism as the basis of modern political philosophy.........................226
The basis of Protestantism — the social contract......................................................226
The paradoxes of the atom — the nihilistic underpinnings of modern ontology ...227
An idiot is a person without qualities.........................................................................231
The idiot as the norm and individuals as objects.......................................................232
Goat-herding and pseudo-science...............................................................................237
Chapter 5.

Liberalism (the first political theory).

John Locke and his legacy.............240
The common metaphysical denominator of the three political ideologies of the
Modern Age.............................................................................................................240
Three types of social contract and Hobbes' universality...........................................243
John Locke: anthropological optimism......................................................................245
From the wolf to a clean slate.....................................................................................24
The relativisation of Leviathan ...................................................................................250
Sacred private property ...............................................................................................252
Adam Smith: Trade Against War...............................................................................253
Roadmap for global capitalism...................................................................................256
The endless accumulation of wealth...........................................................................257
The middle class and endless growth.........................................................................260
The replacement of the "third estate": bourgeois usurpation....................................262
Marginalisation of the peasantry and mystery politics .............................................264
Kant: the foundations of constructivism and the prototype of artificial intelligence
Intelligence ...............................................................................................................266
Locke's "Hartland" ........................................................................................................269
"Civil Society" as an Ideological Slogan...................................................................272
Jeremy Bentham: utilitarian deontology ....................................................................276
John Stuart Mill: the negativity of freedom...............................................................279
The Austrian School: Mises, the founder...................................................................281
Hayek: neoliberalism...................................................................................................281
Karl Popper: "open society"........................................................................................283
George Soros: Liberalism is becoming aggressive ...................................................285
Fogelin: The Gradualism of Order, Political Religions
and totalitarian heresies...........................................................................................285
Leo Strauss: the need to lie .........................................................................................290
F.Liberalism (the first political theory).

John Locke and his legacy.............240
The common metaphysical denominator of the three political ideologies of the
Modern Age.............................................................................................................240
Three types of social contract and Hobbes' universality...........................................243
John Locke: anthropological optimism......................................................................245
From the wolf to a clean slate.....................................................................................24
The relativisation of Leviathan ...................................................................................250
Sacred private property ...............................................................................................252
Adam Smith: Trade Against War...............................................................................253
Roadmap for global capitalism...................................................................................256
The endless accumulation of wealth...........................................................................257
The middle class and endless growth.........................................................................260
The replacement of the "third estate": bourgeois usurpation....................................262
Marginalisation of the peasantry and mystery politics .............................................264
Kant: the foundations of constructivism and the prototype of artificial intelligence
Intelligence ...............................................................................................................266
Locke's "Hartland" ........................................................................................................269
"Civil Society" as an Ideological Slogan...................................................................272
Jeremy Bentham: utilitarian deontology ....................................................................276
John Stuart Mill: the negativity of freedom...............................................................279
The Austrian School: Mises, the founder...................................................................281
Hayek: neoliberalism...................................................................................................281
Karl Popper: "open society"........................................................................................283
George Soros: Liberalism is becoming aggressive ...................................................285
Fogelin: The Gradualism of Order, Political Religions
and totalitarian heresies...........................................................................................285
Leo Strauss: the need to lie .........................................................................................290
F.

Fukuyama: the thesis of the "end of history" ........................................................293
The first political theory: liberalism...........................................................................295
Chapter 6.--- PAGE BREAK ---

John Locke and his legacy.............240
The common metaphysical denominator of the three political ideologies of the
Modern Age.............................................................................................................240
Three types of social contract and Hobbes' universality...........................................243
John Locke: anthropological optimism......................................................................245
From the wolf to a clean slate.....................................................................................24
The relativisation of Leviathan ...................................................................................250
Sacred private property ...............................................................................................252
Adam Smith: Trade Against War...............................................................................253
Roadmap for global capitalism...................................................................................256
The endless accumulation of wealth...........................................................................257
The middle class and endless growth.........................................................................260
The replacement of the "third estate": bourgeois usurpation....................................262
Marginalisation of the peasantry and mystery politics .............................................264
Kant: the foundations of constructivism and the prototype of artificial intelligence
Intelligence ...............................................................................................................266
Locke's "Hartland" ........................................................................................................269
"Civil Society" as an Ideological Slogan...................................................................272
Jeremy Bentham: utilitarian deontology ....................................................................276
John Stuart Mill: the negativity of freedom...............................................................279
The Austrian School: Mises, the founder...................................................................281
Hayek: neoliberalism...................................................................................................281
Karl Popper: "open society"........................................................................................283
George Soros: Liberalism is becoming aggressive ...................................................285
Fogelin: The Gradualism of Order, Political Religions
and totalitarian heresies...........................................................................................285
Leo Strauss: the need to lie .........................................................................................290
F. Fukuyama: the thesis of the "end of history" ........................................................293
The first political theory: liberalism...........................................................................295
Chapter 6. Communism (the second political theory): the dialectic of the whirlwind
in history...................................................................................................................................298
Second political theory................................................................................................298
Campanella: the rational city......................................................................................300
Francis Bacon: Atlantis of Scholars ...........................................................................301
Benedict Spinoza: Substantialism...............................................................................303
Jean-Jacques Rousseau: Direct Democracy...............................................................305
Political materialism: matter as being........................................................................306
The living matter of communism................................................................................308er as being........................................................................306
The living matter of communism................................................................................308

--- PAGE BREAK ---559
Bibliography
Marxism as post-capitalism.........................................................................................309
The Declension of the Atom: Individual and Fate ....................................................311
The titanic rebellion of Prometheus............................................................................312
Marx is Modernity .......................................................................................................314
The Dialectic of the "World Turned Upside Down".................................................316
The immanent eschatology of the proletariat.............................................................319
Class division and ontological antagonism................................................................321
Class definition and the battle of concepts.................................................................323
The genesis of the proletariat ......................................................................................327
The concept of the proletarian: the minimal man......................................................329
Cost as the basis of revolutionary narrative...............................................................332
Ideology as false consciousness..................................................................................337
Antonio Gramsci: the autonomy of the superstructure..............................................339
The end of history in the second political theory......................................................343
The significance of political thought and its price ....................................................346
Chapter 7.559
Bibliography
Marxism as post-capitalism.........................................................................................309
The Declension of the Atom: Individual and Fate ....................................................311
The titanic rebellion of Prometheus............................................................................312
Marx is Modernity .......................................................................................................314
The Dialectic of the "World Turned Upside Down".................................................316
The immanent eschatology of the proletariat.............................................................319
Class division and ontological antagonism................................................................321
Class definition and the battle of concepts.................................................................323
The genesis of the proletariat ......................................................................................327
The concept of the proletarian: the minimal man......................................................329
Cost as the basis of revolutionary narrative...............................................................332
Ideology as false consciousness..................................................................................337
Antonio Gramsci: the autonomy of the superstructure..............................................339
The end of history in the second political theory......................................................343
The significance of political thought and its price ....................................................346
Chapter 7.

Classical and revolutionary nationalism (third political theory) ................350
The Genesis of the Third Political Theory.................................................................35
Bourgeois Nationalism and Revolutionary Nationalism ..........................................352
Countries and social classes in the feudal system .....................................................353
The nation as a bourgeois concept..............................................................................356
The nation as a product of nationalism.......................................................................357
Imagined community...................................................................................................360
A limited group of "idiots" as the ideal of nationalism.............................................362
Nationalism, Hobbes, and anthropological pessimism .............................................363
Mercantilism as economic nationalism......................................................................365
German Romanticism changes the concept of nation...............................................366
Herder: history as the history of peoples....................................................................367
Fichte: the "great I" of the German nation and the closed trading state ..................369
Hegel: the Philophoic Empire.....................................................................................371
Gentile: the state as philosophy ..................................................................................378
Nietzsche: The Political Philosophy of Life ..............................................................380
Pareto: Being the Elite — The True Meaning of Politics.........................................388
C.559
Bibliography
Marxism as post-capitalism.........................................................................................309
The Declension of the Atom: Individual and Fate ....................................................311
The titanic rebellion of Prometheus............................................................................312
Marx is Modernity .......................................................................................................314
The Dialectic of the "World Turned Upside Down".................................................316
The immanent eschatology of the proletariat.............................................................319
Class division and ontological antagonism................................................................321
Class definition and the battle of concepts.................................................................323
The genesis of the proletariat ......................................................................................327
The concept of the proletarian: the minimal man......................................................329
Cost as the basis of revolutionary narrative...............................................................332
Ideology as false consciousness..................................................................................337
Antonio Gramsci: the autonomy of the superstructure..............................................339
The end of history in the second political theory......................................................343
The significance of political thought and its price ....................................................346
Chapter 7.

Classical and revolutionary nationalism (third political theory) ................350
The Genesis of the Third Political Theory.................................................................35
Bourgeois Nationalism and Revolutionary Nationalism ..........................................352
Countries and social classes in the feudal system .....................................................353
The nation as a bourgeois concept..............................................................................356
The nation as a product of nationalism.......................................................................357
Imagined community...................................................................................................360
A limited group of "idiots" as the ideal of nationalism.............................................362
Nationalism, Hobbes, and anthropological pessimism .............................................363
Mercantilism as economic nationalism......................................................................365
German Romanticism changes the concept of nation...............................................366
Herder: history as the history of peoples....................................................................367
Fichte: the "great I" of the German nation and the closed trading state ..................369
Hegel: the Philophoic Empire.....................................................................................371
Gentile: the state as philosophy ..................................................................................378
Nietzsche: The Political Philosophy of Life ..............................................................380
Pareto: Being the Elite — The True Meaning of Politics.........................................388
C.

Schmitt: friend/enemy and the structure of the pluriverse...................................392
Revolutionary nationalism: the limits of ideology....................................................399
Italian Fascism: Futurism and Conservatism.............................................................402
Scrappy Fascism by Guido de Giorgio ......................................................................406
Julius Evola: Fascism and Criticism from the Right.....................................................409
German National Socialism: From Left to Right......................................................410
Racist ideas in Germany..............................................................................................412
The Conservative Revolution: Against the Subject of Modernity ...........................414
Ernst Jünger: the Gestalt of the Worker.....................................................................416
Arthur Moller van den Broek: The Third Reich Beyond Hitler...............................419
Werner Sombart: Against the Spirit of Capitalism....................................................423
The Atypical Nature of the Third Political Theory...................................................426
Part 4.--- PAGE BREAK ---

Classical and revolutionary nationalism (third political theory) ................350
The Genesis of the Third Political Theory.................................................................35
Bourgeois Nationalism and Revolutionary Nationalism ..........................................352
Countries and social classes in the feudal system .....................................................353
The nation as a bourgeois concept..............................................................................356
The nation as a product of nationalism.......................................................................357
Imagined community...................................................................................................360
A limited group of "idiots" as the ideal of nationalism.............................................362
Nationalism, Hobbes, and anthropological pessimism .............................................363
Mercantilism as economic nationalism......................................................................365
German Romanticism changes the concept of nation...............................................366
Herder: history as the history of peoples....................................................................367
Fichte: the "great I" of the German nation and the closed trading state ..................369
Hegel: the Philophoic Empire.....................................................................................371
Gentile: the state as philosophy ..................................................................................378
Nietzsche: The Political Philosophy of Life ..............................................................380
Pareto: Being the Elite — The True Meaning of Politics.........................................388
C. Schmitt: friend/enemy and the structure of the pluriverse...................................392
Revolutionary nationalism: the limits of ideology....................................................399
Italian Fascism: Futurism and Conservatism.............................................................402
Scrappy Fascism by Guido de Giorgio ......................................................................406
Julius Evola: Fascism and Criticism from the Right.....................................................409
German National Socialism: From Left to Right......................................................410
Racist ideas in Germany..............................................................................................412
The Conservative Revolution: Against the Subject of Modernity ...........................414
Ernst Jünger: the Gestalt of the Worker.....................................................................416
Arthur Moller van den Broek: The Third Reich Beyond Hitler...............................419
Werner Sombart: Against the Spirit of Capitalism....................................................423
The Atypical Nature of the Third Political Theory...................................................426
Part 4. Political Philosophy of Postmodernism.....................................................427typical Nature of the Third Political Theory...................................................426
Part 4. Political Philosophy of Postmodernism.....................................................427

--- PAGE BREAK ---Chapter 1.

Postmodern Political Philosophy ..................................................................429
The paradigms of tradition and modernity exhaust (almost) all forms of politics..429
The games of the lying logos at the lower limits of matter......................................430
The subject and object of materialism: the unique and its property ........................433
Postmodernism is not satisfied with the achievements of liberalism.......................435
The dissipation of the individual and the dissolution of the object: towards the fractal.

.......................................................................................................................................439
The cancerous tumour of civilisation .........................................................................441
The search for the authentic individual: towards transhumanism............................444
The political philosophy of postmodernism: three supporting theories ..................448
Lacan's Three Orders...................................................................................................449
Lacan's Political Ontology ..........................................................................................453
Foucault: freedom for madness!Postmodern Political Philosophy ..................................................................429
The paradigms of tradition and modernity exhaust (almost) all forms of politics..429
The games of the lying logos at the lower limits of matter......................................430
The subject and object of materialism: the unique and its property ........................433
Postmodernism is not satisfied with the achievements of liberalism.......................435
The dissipation of the individual and the dissolution of the object: towards the fractal.

.......................................................................................................................................439
The cancerous tumour of civilisation .........................................................................441
The search for the authentic individual: towards transhumanism............................444
The political philosophy of postmodernism: three supporting theories ..................448
Lacan's Three Orders...................................................................................................449
Lacan's Political Ontology ..........................................................................................453
Foucault: freedom for madness!

.................................................................................456
Foucault's Three Epistemes .........................................................................................458
Biopower and biopolitics.............................................................................................459
Gilles Deleuze: The Will to Nothingness...................................................................460
The Body Without Organs: The Political Doctrine of Shaltai-Boltai......................461
The splitting of the object: chaosmos.........................................................................461
Splitting of the subject: rhizome.................................................................................463
Rhizomatic topology of consciousness and the desire machine ..............................464
Liberation of the "black depth"...................................................................................465
Schizomass ...................................................................................................................467
Micropolis and micropolitics ......................................................................................467
Realism and liberalism of desires...............................................................................472
Microglobalism ............................................................................................................474
Erosion of property ......................................................................................................476
Anti-state ......................................................................................................................479
Negri and Hardt: "Empire" as a global anti-state...........................................................480
The United States and Alterglobalism ...........................................................................483
Overcoming from Within..............................................................................................483
The multitude strikes back: the triumph of the disabled, the perverts
and viruses .................................................................................................................485
Underground civil society............................................................................................487
A postmodern interpretation.........................................................................................488
Chapter 2........................................................................................................................................439
The cancerous tumour of civilisation .........................................................................441
The search for the authentic individual: towards transhumanism............................444
The political philosophy of postmodernism: three supporting theories ..................448
Lacan's Three Orders...................................................................................................449
Lacan's Political Ontology ..........................................................................................453
Foucault: freedom for madness!

.................................................................................456
Foucault's Three Epistemes .........................................................................................458
Biopower and biopolitics.............................................................................................459
Gilles Deleuze: The Will to Nothingness...................................................................460
The Body Without Organs: The Political Doctrine of Shaltai-Boltai......................461
The splitting of the object: chaosmos.........................................................................461
Splitting of the subject: rhizome.................................................................................463
Rhizomatic topology of consciousness and the desire machine ..............................464
Liberation of the "black depth"...................................................................................465
Schizomass ...................................................................................................................467
Micropolis and micropolitics ......................................................................................467
Realism and liberalism of desires...............................................................................472
Microglobalism ............................................................................................................474
Erosion of property ......................................................................................................476
Anti-state ......................................................................................................................479
Negri and Hardt: "Empire" as a global anti-state...........................................................480
The United States and Alterglobalism ...........................................................................483
Overcoming from Within..............................................................................................483
The multitude strikes back: the triumph of the disabled, the perverts
and viruses .................................................................................................................485
Underground civil society............................................................................................487
A postmodern interpretation.........................................................................................488
Chapter 2.

Black Enlightenment .........................................................................................490
LLC: nihilism and its objects.........................................................................................490
G..................................................................................456
Foucault's Three Epistemes .........................................................................................458
Biopower and biopolitics.............................................................................................459
Gilles Deleuze: The Will to Nothingness...................................................................460
The Body Without Organs: The Political Doctrine of Shaltai-Boltai......................461
The splitting of the object: chaosmos.........................................................................461
Splitting of the subject: rhizome.................................................................................463
Rhizomatic topology of consciousness and the desire machine ..............................464
Liberation of the "black depth"...................................................................................465
Schizomass ...................................................................................................................467
Micropolis and micropolitics ......................................................................................467
Realism and liberalism of desires...............................................................................472
Microglobalism ............................................................................................................474
Erosion of property ......................................................................................................476
Anti-state ......................................................................................................................479
Negri and Hardt: "Empire" as a global anti-state...........................................................480
The United States and Alterglobalism ...........................................................................483
Overcoming from Within..............................................................................................483
The multitude strikes back: the triumph of the disabled, the perverts
and viruses .................................................................................................................485
Underground civil society............................................................................................487
A postmodern interpretation.........................................................................................488
Chapter 2.

Black Enlightenment .........................................................................................490
LLC: nihilism and its objects.........................................................................................490
G.

Harman: Understanding the Object by Killing the Subject.......................................491
The Abolition of Dasein and the Immortality of the Machine.....................................493
Singularity and the mystery of the bastard logos.........................................................494
B.--- PAGE BREAK ---

Black Enlightenment .........................................................................................490
LLC: nihilism and its objects.........................................................................................490
G. Harman: Understanding the Object by Killing the Subject.......................................491
The Abolition of Dasein and the Immortality of the Machine.....................................493
Singularity and the mystery of the bastard logos.........................................................494
B. Latour: hybrids and the Constitution.........................................................................495
Democracy of objects and the sovereignty of matter...................................................497
The political philosophy of mould...............................................................................499
N. Land: Black Enlightenment.......................................................................................501
The Political Physics of Lucifer...................................................................................504
Soros's Soup: A Metaphor for Butchers .......................................................................508
Postmodernism Turns Black.........................................................................................510

--- PAGE BREAK ---...........................................................508
Postmodernism Turns Black.........................................................................................510

--- PAGE BREAK ---

561
Bibliography
At the brink.....................................................................................................................512
Chapter 3. The Fourth Political Theory..............................................................................515
The Political Meaning of the Twentieth Century ...........................................................515
The Universality of the West and Black Modernisation ..............................................519
The question of alternatives ...........................................................................................523
The fourth political theory begins with critical distance .............................................525
Against liberalism, but also against communism and fascism....................................527
Rejecting liberalism is not enough...............................................................................528
The totality of female time............................................................................................529
The rupture of pseudology and the experience of eternity.............................................531
Metaphors of birds and stones: awakening in falling ....................................................533
The dialectic of shadow................................................................................................537
Rejection of Mother's Hypnosis.....................................................................................539
Political eschatology .....................................................................................................540
Bibliography........................................................................................................................543
Works by A. G. Dugin.....................................................................................................54
Books by other authors ..................................................................................................545.........................................................................54
Books by other authors ..................................................................................................545

--- PAGE BREAK ---

Dugin, Alexander Gel'evich
NOOMAKHIA: Wars of the
Mind Politica Aeterna:
Political Platonism and the Black Enlightenment