MARTIN DIES^

STORy

Martin Dies


bookmailer

New York


Copyright 1963 by Martin Dies
Library of Congress Catalog Card Number: 63-14766


All rights reserved, including the right to reproduce this
book or portions thereof in any form.


PubUshed by

THE BOOKMAILER INC.
New York 16, N. Y.


Distributed by

The Bookmailer, Inc.

Box 101, Murray Hill Station
New York 16, N, Y.

"The Complete Bookstorc-by-Mail Service"
Representing All U.S.

Publishers


manufactured W the united states of AMERICA


Dedication


This book Is


wife. Myrtle


affectionately dedicated to my


CONTENTS


9

Foreword ^ n

1. We are Losing • / ’ ‘ ‘ . 19

2. What Communism and does ' * ' ' ^ 29

3. The Washington Climate . • • ‘ ‘ ‘ 41

4 Sit-down Strikes and the Unions . • •

6. The “Dies Committee” is Born • • * ’ ' gg

6. Why not the FBI? ’ 77

7. Politics and Politicians ^ ^ gg

8. Minorities into Majorities • ' * *

9. Bookburning— Liberal Sty e . • • • ^ ^

10. All in a Day’s Work 129

11. The Isms ’ * . . 133

12. The Fourth Estate 437

13. F.D.R. . • ’ • ‘ u ■ ■ ’ ‘ . 149

14. Mrs. Franklin D. Roo^ve . •

15. What the Dies Committee Di ’ * ' 473

16. “Me Too” ■ ‘ . 181

17. Youth . ’ ^ . 193

18. They arc Still Here . . • • ^ ^ gQg

Notes . . • 218

Appendix ‘ ‘ . 269

Exhibits . 276

Index


7


CHAPTER X
ALL IN A DAY’S WORK

“When Tm not thank'd at all, I'm thank'd enough,

I've done my duty, and I've done no more."

— Henry Fielding

One wintry day in 1939, a very beautiful woman
called at the office. She was dressed in the best of taste,
was well educated and intelligent She said that she
taught school in Baltimore, was keenly interested in
Communism, and had been gathering information on
the subject. She claimed to know the names and ad-
dresses of some of the most active Communists in
Philadelphia and promised to furnish them when she
completed her investigation. I thanked her, and told her
that this would be a real help to the Committee.

Every Saturday morning she came back to report,
but did not bring the information I sought She kept
putting me off with one excuse after another. One
snowy day, she telephoned, saying that she was taking
a cold, and had decided to spend the night in the May-

115


'•4


flower Hotel. She said she finally had obtained the
information wanted, and asked if I would stop by her
room for it on my way home. "You will be on your way
home anyway, and it will only take a moment for you
to run by my room and pick up the file.”

I said I would come, but explained that I could not
leave before the House adjourned at 5 o’clock. As I
hung up, questions popped into my mind. How did
Miss R — know where I lived, and why had she gone
to the trouble of finding out my residence? I decided
to skip the hotel and go directly home. The decision
was fortunate.

Our investigator checked at the hotel. In the room
adjoining hers, there was a photographer. It was the
old badger game. Had I gone to her room, she would
have asked me to be seated, slipped into my lap, and
embraced me, and at that precise moment the door
would have opened from the room where the photog-
rapher was stationed. They would have had my picture
in a compromising position, and Dies and the Com-
mittee would have been thoroughly and completely
discredited.

Close on the heels of this incident was another, more
serious since it involved my young son Bobby. We had
received threats of kidnapping, and we had warned
Bobby never to get in a car wi^ a stranger. One day
he came running home as fast as his little legs could
carry him. Out of breath, he explained between gasps
that two men in a car had asked him to get in, and
had told him they would drive him home. Bobby, heed-
ing our warning, took off like a scared rabbit, and got
home in nothing flat

Then, when my wife arrived home from visiting
me in the hospital following my operation in 1940,
there was a steady stream of telephone calls all night
long, with comforting remarks like these:

“Well, is your husband dead yet?”

■ 116


‘Tm doin a lot of praying, but not for what you
think. I am praying that Dies dies.” We finally had to
have an unlisted telephone installed.

This is one of the most powerful weapons used
against an anti-Communist: harassment of his loved
ones.

These are typical of our constant torment for
seven years. But more important, as well as more
tragic, were the experiences of some former Soviet
officials.

General Walter G. Krivitsky, who had served un-
der Stalin for a long time, fled to the United States
when he became disgusted with the brutality of Com-
munism in practice, as distinguished from Communism
in theory. He told an astounding story of the plans and
purposes of the Kremlin; how they had built secret
armies in every country, and had spent millions of
dollars for propaganda purposes. He declared that the
ultimate goal of Stalin was the conquest of Europe,
Asia, and the Americas. I wanted him to testify before
the Committee because it was vital that the American
people should have the benefit of his information, but
he was afraid that the OGPU, the Kremlin Secret
Police, would assassinate him.

From notes I made at the time, this is the sub-
stance of our convei’sation.

I asked “Surely they are not that powerful in the
United States?”

He replied: “I was chief of the Western Division
of the Soviet Intelligence, and I know that there isn’t
a country, there isn’t an industry of impoiiance, and
there isn’t a town of industrial importance where
OGPU members are not gathering information, and
transmitting it to the Soviet Union. They have their
agents in the Soviet Emba.ssics, and not even the
Soviet Ambassadors know the identity of the OGPU
operatives.”


117


‘i!


I ,


General Krivitsky was prevailed upon to testify
on the assurance that we would protect him and con-
ceal his identity. I tried to get a commitment from our
Government that it would help to protect him, but ap-
parently no one in our Government wanted him to
testify. Shortly after his startling revelations, which
told so accurately the plans of the Kremlin, he was
found in his hotel room in Washington, D. C., shot to
death. The death was pronounced suicide, but there
are too many similar instances to accept that verdict
without reservations.

Another former agent of the Soviet Union who
had given us valuable information was found shortly
afterward dead from a reported heart attack. Exami-
nation disclosed that he had been shot through the eye
with a fine steel bullet. Still another informant was the
victim of a hit and run driver.

In another case. Communist Party leaders created
a justifiable suspicion that they knew more about what
happened to one Juliet Stuart Poyntz than they were
willing to tell. From our established knowledge of what
the Soviets do to spies when they are through with them
we may safely assume that the lips of this American
woman had been sealed forever. Witnesses have testi-
fied that she know too much and was on the point of
breaking with her Soviet masters.

This is no complete roster of anti-Communists
who have met untimely ends under suspicious circum-
stances, even in the United States. More recently, on
Thanksgiving morning 1959, the lifeless body of Povl
Bang-Jensen, Danish representative to the UN, who
had refused to betray the Hungarian Freedom Fight-
ers, was discovered on a well-traveled path in a New
York City park. The circumstances were such as to
lead many Imowledgable people to believe that this was
a case of murder by the Communists.*

In September 1938, when I tentatively suggested


118


the formation of a patriotic organization to combat
Naziism, Fascism, and Communism I received a letter
from Herbert Bayard Swope saying that he was inter-
ested. I was beginning to have doubts about the advis-
ability of the plan, and so advised him. Following my
address in October at the Herald-Tribune Forum in
New York City, Swope’s representative insisted that I
call at his office. Swope told how he had been respon-
sible for Roosevelt’s early success, and was very flatter-
ing to me personally. He implied that he, or someone
acting for him, was in a position to change the Presi-
dent’s opposition to me to an attitude of friendliness.
He offered to make a contribution to set up a powerful
anti-Nazi organization which I would head. I told Mr.
Swope I had never accepted a contribution from anyone,
did not intend to, and was going to keep the investi-
gation on a high plane. That night, I learned that the
President had issued his bitterest personal attack on me.

On my return to Washington, I wrote Swope,
summarizing our conversation and my refusal. My let-
ter was fortunate, because shortly afterward the news
correspondent Marquis Childs, one of the ardent chron-
iclers and trumpeters of the New Deal, came to me
and said that he had “heard that I had gone to see
Herbert Bayard Swope for money, and that there was
going to be a big expose of it. I told him to go ahead,
and expose but to remember that when he did I would
release the real story, including my fortituous letter
to Swope. Childs never wrote the story, nor did Harlan
Miller, who spoke to me about it later.

What was perhaps the most incredible and am-
bitious attempt to destroy the Dies Committee was
made early in 1940, following our second Committee
report As I look back, it takes on a certain antique
Venetian flavor; it was the kind of device some old
courtier of the Middle Ages might well have used to
rid his master of a troublesome enemy.

119


It began on January 22, 1940, when Frank E.
Hook (D.-Mich.) rose in the House of Representa-
tives, and declared in tragic tones that it was his
duty, “as a red-blooded American,” to present certain
facts.

Hook proceeded to unfurl his “facts.” Congress-
man Martin Dies had attended a banquet at which Fritz
Kuhn, the Nazi Bund leader, was present. Dies had
corresponded, or lunched with, or consorted in several
diverse ways, with men who had known men who had
once spoken to men who were mixed up with Nazi and
Fascist elements in Congressman Hook’s beloved Amer-
ica. Then came Hook’s piece de resistance, the final
thrust intended to end this Dies person and his devilish
investigation.

All that was uttered up to now was a mere pro-
logue to this finale, this fatal morsel which Hook pro-
ceeded to fling down before the horrified House of Rep-
sentatives. “The House,” said Mr. Hook, “knew well that
William Dudley Pelley was a Fascist. The Dies Com-
mittee had, after investigating him for ninety days,
brought forth nothing — absolutely nothing — that
would incriminate him.” “Why?” demanded Hook.
“Why was this man Dies shielding Pelley?” The answer
to this question. Hook said, he held in his hand. He held
in his patriot’s hands photostatic copies of certain let-
ters, which he told the House, had been written by
William Dudley Pelley.

Could one doubt it? They were on P^y's own
letterheads. They were written to David Mayne,
Pellcy’s “resident” in Washington, and a member of
the Silver Shirt Legion, and they were signed “Pelley.”
They referred to various friendly relationships that
existed between Policy and Dies.

Pelley was not worrying about a Dies investiga-
tion, these letters revealed, — not unless Dies changed
his mind. “As I travel through the country,” ran one
of the damning epistles Hook waved at the House,

120


“frequently discussing 1940 political issues, I am more
than ever convinced that the greatest issue to bo de-
cided will be the continuance of the Dies Committee.
The issue rests between Dies’ supporters and the White
House. If F.D.R. wins. Dies is done; and if Dies wins,
there will be no third term for Roosevelt, neither will
there be a dictatorship. Furthermore, whoever wins
Mr. Dies’ endorsement for the Presidency will be
elected.” Thus spake Pelley’s letters. There it was —
the case against Dies — in all its hideous lineaments.
Dies, a political hero of Pelley, the Fascist villian !

This was expected to solve the Dies problem.

However, the real story was different. It was
Gardner Jackson, formerly and subsequently on the
Government payroll, who had conceived the brilliant
idea of disposing of Dies by linking him with Pelley.
Jackson had been connected with some of the organi-
zations investigated by the Committee. Jackson em-
ployed a youth named Harold Weisl^g, who had been
with the LaFollette Civil Liberties Committee, to get
evidence that Dies was trafficking with Pelley. Weis-
bur got in touch with Mayne, and promised him a Gov-
ernment job if he could link Dies with Pelley. Weisburg
spent three weeks raking through files furnished by
Mayne, and found nothing. Mayne, pressed for results,
and tempted by the prospect of a Government job,
finally produced a letter, which he sold to Jackson
for .jll05.

Jackson invited a group of ten Congressmen, in-
cluding Hook, and two New Deal members of our
Committee to his home for dinner, for a strategy meet-
ing on how to destroy the Dies Committee. 'The company
being properly softened with drinks and a good dinner,
Jackson passed around photographs of the Icttera sup-
plied by Mayne, and asked his guests to join in an
attack on the Committee and myself, in an effort to
defeat the resolution to extend the Committee's life.

121


' • ■ •‘Vt:


John M. Coffee, (D.-Wash,), an ardent New
Dealer, observed the letters did not look genuine to him,
and he wanted no part of it. Hook, however, declared
himself perfectly satisfied, and prepared to make the
attack. On the day before the Rules Committee was to
decide about continuation of the Committee, Hook took
the floor, and delivered the speech.

Naturally, the story was widely published in the
newspapers. I was in Texas, but Secretary Stripling
went to Jerry Voorhis, a member of the Committee, and
asked to examine the letters. When Voorhis called
Hook, to ask him to grant the request. Hook refused!

Stripling located Mayne at his home, and asked
him to come to the Committee office. Under question-
ing, Mayne readily admitted that the letters were
forged, and had been purchased by Jackson. Stripling
demanded to know the whereabouts of Pelley, and when
Mayne seemed frightened at this, hinted that a Com-
mittee subpoena might save Pelley from the North
Carolina authorities who were looking for him to serve
a suspended sentence involving blue sky laws. Next
morning Pelley walked into the Committee office. The
Committee was called, and Pelley denied that he had
ever met or written to Dies. Pelley later repeated his
denials before the Rules Committee.

The typewriter on which the forged letters were
written was located, and while Hook was on the floor
commencing his second tirade against the Committee,
Rep. Frank Keefe walked in with the evidence,
denounced the attack, and demanded that Hook’s re-
marks be expunged from the record. Hook was dis-
credited, and took a severe beating at the hands of the
Rules Committee.

But this was not quite all. 'Through the Attorney
General, two FBI men were immediately assigned,
ostensibly to investigate the authenticity of the letters,
but actually to investigate Stripling and myself, while


Hook repeated his charges. The Administration got into
the act. A stooge working for the Federal Communica-
tions Commission volunteered to the press the informa-
tion that “Representative Dies has received as many
favorable references in Axis propaganda in this coun-
try as any living American public figure.” When I
immediately announced that F.C.C. employees assigned
to monitoring Axis propaganda would be subpoenaed
the Commission quickly repudiated its falsehood.

One of my lesser crimes, trumpeted by Hook in his
original tirade, was my delivery of a speech to the
Economic Council of New York. It was a dinner
meeting for which anyone could buy a ticket. As I sat
down, I spotted Fritz Kuhn, fuehrer of the German-
American Bund, and four or five of his lieutenants,
seated at a table. I knew that the Liberals might seize
upon the mere presence of these Nazis to charge that
I was addressing a Nazi group. Therefore, when I
arose to speak I addressed my initial remarks directly
to Herr Kuhn and his cohorts. I denounced the German-
American Bund as a tool of Hitler, called for its prose-
cution, and made a plea for the religious and racial
tolerance which is the basis of true Americanism,

Notwithstanding my studied efforts the Liberal
press throughout the country carried pictures of the
Bund leaders, headlining the fact that I was the prin-
cipal speaker at this dinner meeting which they had
attended ! Liberal radio commentators and columnists,
and New Deal office holders, continued for years to rake
up and repeat the lies of the forged Pelley letters, and
my speech to the Economic Council dinner.

New Dealers, in and out of the Government,
blamed the Dies Committee for Frank Murphy’s defeat
in his bid for reelection as Governor of Michigan. The
President consoled Murphy by making him U. S. At-
torney General, and later appointed him Associate Jus-
tice of the Supreme Court

123


The late Mrs. Evelyn Walsh McLean was at that
time an outstanding hostess in Washington, and a
warm and devoted friend of Mrs. Dies and myself-.-Mrs.
McLean was a remarkable woman, with a brilliant
mind and deep loyalties. She believed deeply in the
work of the Committee, and her varied contacts often
enabled her to furnish us invaluable information. When
she telephoned me to say that Justice Murphy had asked
her to arrange a private conference with me in her
home, I was reluctant, but accepted.

When Mrs. Dies and I arrived to meet Justice
Murphy, I could see that he was visibly agitated and
troubled. He shook hands and said, “Mr. Dies, I know
you have no reason to like or respect me. I am ashamed
of my role in the sit-down strikes, but I was under
terrific pressure from the President and many of my
political friends, and I let them pressure me against my
better instincts. But be that as it may, it is all now past
and beyond recall. My purpose in asking you to meet
me here is to tell you that I am deeply concerned about
the future of our country. I know that the Communists
have infiltrated our Government, and that they are
sending valuable information to Moscow, and are in-
fluencing our foreign policy. You, Mr. Dies are the
only man in American who can say this, and regard-
less of the beating you are taking, I urge you to con-
tinue your work.”

There was much more along the same line, but
this was the substance of his confession. I assured
Justice Murphy that I would persevere as long as my
health permitted and as long as I could be reelected.
Murphy’s story was not news to me, but his frank and
sincere confession confirmed my convictions. His heavy
obligations to the President, and his Supreme Court
position, precluded a public admission of his deep re-
gret for his mistake. His confession changed my feeling
toward him. I felt pity and sympathy for a good man

124


■


who was not strong enough to stand up in the face of
the power and prestige of the Presidency.

One more revealing case history deserves mention
here bcause of its underlying significance. The story,
has been told by the Dies Committee Secretary Stripling
(with all the deep-seated sense of humor and philosoph-
ical resignation necessary for all anti-Communists) in
his book, published in 1949, and now unfortunately
long out of print. His chapter heading is “One Way to
Join the Army.’”

It happened that two of the final items on the Dies
Committee agenda had to do with the issuance of a
visa for Mrs. Earl Browder, and with the CIO’s Polit-
ical Action Committee (PAC).

In October 1944, Secretary of State Cordell Hull
had informed his staff that a visa must be issued to
Mrs. Browder “for the good of the country,” since the
President was planning to meet again with Stalin.

Because of the number of its founders and sup-
porters listed in our files the Dies Committee had been
interested in the formation of the PAC by the late
Sitlney Hillman. We subpoenaed from the New York
Telephone Company its record of incoming and outgoing
long distance calls at PAC headquarters. These showed
an astonishing number of calls to the White House,
made by Hillman and others. Calls from the White
House to PAC were largely made by David Niles, vari-
ous Presidential secretaries, and Mrs. Roosevelt

Stripling at the time was in his thirties, married,
a pre-Pearl Harbor father, and had been placed on
the deferred list by the Legislative Deferment Com-
mittee, headed by Senator Burnet R. Maybank. (D-
S.C.) Nevertheless, after the PAC story was out
Stripling was called up by his draft board, and was
advised that there was a lot of pressure to put him in
the Army on “direct ordera from the State Director of
Selective Service.” Shortly thereafter. Stripling was

125


asked to call incognito at the Selective Service Head-
quarters, where two elderly Colonels suggested that he
get a job with Glenn Martin Company, which they be-
lieved would make him eligible for deferment He de-
clined the suggestion.

As he was winding up his duties as Secretary of
the Committee, to enter military service. Stripling was
advised that Senator Maybank had arranged for a
thirty-day deferment Within five days he was ordered
to report Pressures on the draft board, including the
needling by columnist Drew Pearson and others, proved
more powerful than the normal and orderly procedures
of a Congressional Committee. One week after induc-
tion soldier Stripling was visited by an Army Captain
from Washington, D.C., who offered him a commission,
and a permanent assignment, and stated that he
would send for him in a couple of days. Although he
could not reveal this at the time, what the Captain had
in mind was security work on the A-bomb project.

Nothing came of this, nor of at least two more re-
quests for assignment in intelligence work. Packing to
go overseas with his outfit. Stripling was told that the
Secretary of War had ordered him kept in the States.

Visiting Washington in October 1945, Chairman
John S. Wood, (D-Ga.) of HCUA told Stripling that
they needed him, and that he was going to get him out
of service immediately. Upon his return to camp.
Stripling was told that orders had been received to
send him to Tokyo. He used the customary overseas
orders furlough to visit his family. When he returned
to camp to pack for his Tokyo assignment, he was told
that order from the Secretary of State had taken him
off orders. His book thus relates the wind-up of his
fantastic Army career:

“For the next few months, I functioned as a casual
around the camp, working now and then at latrine duty
and at other times as sweeper at the Officers’ Club.

126


Toward the end of the period I became messenger
boy, but in January, 1946, I got my first definite
assignment” This was as a member of the faculty of the
Counter-Intelligence course, with his subject “Sub-
versive Activities in the United States.” His story
concludes:

“It was in this role that I completed my Army
career. I got a kick out of it, of course, and was a little
proud to rise dizzily to the estate of Master Sergeant
after having been a yardbird for so long. The extra
money, I might add, came in very handy. We had had
a difficult time in that department.”

While Stripling, with seven years experience in-
vestigating Communism, picked up scrap paper and
cigarette butts from the Army parade grounds, Alger
Hiss sat at the elbow of the Chief Executive and
Commander-in-Chief at Yalta.


I

i

»

i

»

1


I

i

}

j


127
