/ ' 
1 .

God.

Why?

a gangster a gambler, owner of a nightclub with 
entertainment, nakedness and everything, with a reputation 
as a tough, a killer, managed to place himself in front of 
the assassin, or better said in front of the supposed assassin, 
this individual known for what he was by all the police, a 
gambler, an owner of an imoral amusement center, a man with a 
record known by these same police.

How could these police confuse 
him with a newspaperman, with a reporter, there were all the 
policemen knew him perfectly?

How could that character remain 
there passing himself off as a newsman?

He fired calmly.

And 
what did he claim later the most ridiculous, the most absurd 
thing?

This gambler, this man of crime?

This gangster with 
a known record declared that he did it to prevent the widow of 
the President from having to return to Dallas to the trial.

It 
was very difficult to make anyone believe that an act of that 
type was for revenge, for vengeance against the guilty.

If .he 
v/ere the one who v/as really guilty.

The electric chair was 
waiting for him.

How can one believe anyone had tried to take 
justice into his own hands?

This only happens when there is 
no justice, when the guilty party in a crime that arouses indignation 
is not punished.

In this case they murdered a man for whom the 
electric chair was v/aiting.

In effect they murdered a dead man, 
they murdered a dead man.

That is what this gangster did.

How 
could he make anyone believe that he did it for emontional 
reasons?

Never before, perhaps, has a greater scandal been heard.

Never 
before, perhaps, have even in the worst gangsters acted as 
basely, as stupidly, as scandalously.

And this demonstrates that 
the persons guilty for the death of Kennedy needed and urgently 
had to eliminate the accused at any cost.

They were imperatively.v 
required to for some reason.

Possibly so that he would not talk.

They had to eliminate him, and they calmly eliminated him.Possibly so that he would not talk. They had to eliminate him, and they calmly eliminated him. Once 
the alleged assassin v/as eliminated the Dallas police and Justice 
authorities declare the case closed, as if it v/ere the matter, not 
of the President of the United States, but of a dog killed in the 
street. They declare the case closed v/ithin 48 hours. The case 
was closed when the case v/as becoming less closeable, when the 
case v/as becoming more mysterious, when the case v/as becoming more 
suspicious, when the case was becoming more v/orthy of investigation 
from the judicial and criminal point of view. I am certain that 
no judge who acts objectively as such, v/ould close any case under 
circumstances in which the principle suspect is murdered. Cf course, we carefully read the cables that gave the news of the 
second assassination, particularly the UPI reports. Immediately, 
the same emphasis UPI had placed in presenting Oswald as a 
pro-communist, as a Castro-communist, as a Castro admirer, v/as 
placed in presenting this Mr. Jack Ruby as a Kennedy admirer, a 
great admirer of Kennedy. - 36

--- PAGE BREAK ---enting Oswald as a 
pro-communist, as a Castro-communist, as a Castro admirer, v/as 
placed in presenting this Mr. Jack Ruby as a Kennedy admirer, a 
great admirer of Kennedy. - 36

--- PAGE BREAK ---

I 
,x<V ) 
■ i 
The first thing it does, v/hat the UPI immediately begins to do 
immediately, is to give the version that it v/anted, to try to 
present a case of murder caused by emotion, a case of 
sentimentalism, patriotism. 
The UPI does a poor service to the man who was the President of 
its country by presenting this gangster, this gambler, this man 
of vice, this base subject as a great admirer of Kennedy, as 
such an extraordinary admirer that he was ready to face the 
electric chair in order to avenge his death; an individual who 
only exploited vice, gambling, and immorality all his life. 
Why come now with those incredible attacks of morality from a 
depraved and degenerate individual? Y/hy come now with those 
altruistic feelings? The UPI tried to give that impression in 
its first cable. They wont and questioned his sister and she-said . 
that he could not sleep since the assassination of the President. 
They interrogated the family and elaborated the theory, that is, 
they interrogated the sister of this Mr. Ruby in order to 
elaborate the entire theory that it was because of emotional and 
sentimental reasons. UPI did not hesitate in attributing such 
a admirer to the murdered President of the United States. How 
unscrupulous! how dishonest! what a scandal! The same emphasis 
they used to present the other as an admirer of Castro, they 
immediately use to present this one as an admirer of Kennedy. 
That is how imperialism works. That is how reaction works. That 
is how they make up their campaigns and their lies but everything 
appears to indicate that this shot has backfired (applause). 
There are other reports. The doctors that attended the 
assassinated President now report that they cannot say for sure 
that there were one or two bullets which ended his life, and that 
they cannot establish which are the entry and exit wounds from the 
bullet or bullets. There is also what Connally said in an 
interview he granted the newsmen from his bed in the hospital. 
Among other things he said "v/hat was demonstrated in Dallas was the 
hate that exists in our society. The same hate that placed a bomb 
Birmingham killing five children." That was said by the other 
wounded man who was v/ith Kennedy. 
It is going to be very difficult to continue to dress this doll. It 
is going to be very difficult to continue to maintain what they 
have been maintaining. Y/e even think that it is unlikely that 
there will be no investigation. It is very difficult to conceive 
that there are not enough North Americans, regardless of their 
political positions or their ideology, who with an elemental sense 
of decency, shame, and prestige will demand that events be made 
clear, that all these strange circumstances be explained. 
37heir 
political positions or their ideology, who with an elemental sense 
of decency, shame, and prestige will demand that events be made 
clear, that all these strange circumstances be explained. 
37

--- PAGE BREAK ---tions or their ideology, who with an elemental sense 
of decency, shame, and prestige will demand that events be made 
clear, that all these strange circumstances be explained. 
37

--- PAGE BREAK ---

-rvimva-tf.:^^'\t/-A;*»kV<i«v^'-.-.«i*. .vv,v.S«*.i. .••vW^^.v && . 
•4 
it will be very difficult, and only at an extraordinary loss of 
prestige for the United States can those guilty of the 
assassination be concealed, nor can the true reasons, the true 
purposes, and the guilty intellectual and organizing authors of 
the crime remain in secret and in mystery. But they themselves, 
the ones who forged these plans against peace, against Cuba, 
against the Soviet Union, against humanity, against the progressive 
sectors, including the liberal ones of the United States, the 
ones who were guilty, are very unlikely to remain in secret and 
mystery until the end. 
That is why we should await calmly but not confidently--and not 
confidently  so you can see what dangers threaten humanity, what 
dangers imperil the peoples, what a lack of scrupules, how much 
evil exists, and how much cynicism is embodied in the imperialist 
society, among the most reactionary elements of that society.- How . 
many dangers, how many sinister plans, that is why I say wait 
calmly but not confidently because it is one more example, one 
more lesson. 
• \ 
Meanwhile, let us see how those who organized that maneuver will 
stew in their own juice, because even the Olympic champions of^ 
marksmanship are giving their opinions throughout the world. In 
any event, our fatherland was threatened once more. We saw how 
a finger was pointed at us, how weapons of aggression were pointed 
at us. We saw how they tried to dump a downpour of infamy on 
Cuba and its revolution. It has been placed in evidence. V/e 
have seen the behavior of individual people once more. Our 
revolution emerges with reason on its side and with a higher sense 
of morality from this test and from all other tests to which it 
is submitted, because before the eyes of the world it is clear, 
and it will be clearer each time, how the U.S. reactionaries 
wanted to make our country and the world the victims of their 
criminal designs, even at the price of the assassination of their 
own president in that country. 
Th^s eoisode more and more resembles an FBI novel, a gangster 
episode, rather than a political incident. All the circumstances, 
the scandalous manner with which the two assassinations were 
carried out, reminds us of the gangster films we saw so many times 
filmed precisely in Hollywood. Not lacking in the minutest detail, 
the one"in charge of liquidating or lynching the accused was no 
less than a gambler from Chicago. How will they be able to 
explain those things to the world? How will those who have 
proceeded with such lack of respect for world opinion, who have 
shown such lack of human sensibility, be able to defend that 
shameful thing? With this I conclude the reference v/e have been 
compelled to make to clarify some aspects in connection with those 
events." 
- 38 - 
«