h


PRINCETON,    N.    J.


Presented  by  Mr.  Samuel  Agnew  of  Philadelphia,  Pa.


Agnew  Coll.  on  Baptism,  No.


A    CATECHISM


ON  THE


SEVEN  SACRAMENTS.


BY  THE  REV.  C.  D.  BRERETON,  A.M.

RECTOR  OF  LITTLE  MASSINGHAM,  NORFOLK.


LONDON :

J.  HATCHARD  &  SON,  187,  PICCADILLY.

1834.


LYNN:

PRINTED    BY    J.    W.     AIKIN,
HIGH    STREET.


fttC.  APfi  188/  V


It  may  be  necessary  to  inform  the  reader,  that
the  following  Catechism  was  undertaken,  in  the
first  instance,  for  the  use  and  benefit  of  the
Author's  children.  Having  been  obliged,  during
the  past  year,  for  the  health  of  a  member  of  his
family,  to  reside  for  some  months  in  France  ;
the  services  of  the  Roman  Catholic  Church,
naturally  attracted  the  attention  of  children,  and
induced  them  to  put  many  questions  respecting
the  ceremonies  and  offices  which  they  frequently
witnessed.  This  circumstance  suggested  the
idea  of  drawing  up,  for  their  use,  a  catechism,
which  might  give  them  a  knowledge  of  the  Ro-
man Catholic  Religion,  and  of  the  value  of  their
own.

The  subject  of  ceremonies,  however,  was  so
extensive  and  diversified,  and  at  the  same  time
calculated  to  give  such  trivial  notions  of  Chris-
tianity, that  it  was  found  advisable  to  drop  the
distinct  consideration  of  them,  and  to  confine
the  attention  to  some  more  substantial  parts  of
the  Roman  Catholic  system.     For  this  purpose,


IV

the  Seven  Sacraments,  as  developing  the  essen-
tials of  that  religion,  seemed  to  present  the  most
complete  and  instructive  subject  for  investiga-
tion. The  Author  had  not  proceeded  far  with
his  object,  when  the  interest  and  importance  of
it  convinced  him,  that  it  might  be  useful,  not
only  to  children,  but  to  many  others  at  the  pre-
sent time,  to  have  a  succinct  and  consistent
statement  of  the  doctrines  of  the  Roman  Catho-
lics, as  well  as  of  the  opinions  of  Protestants  in
general,  and  of  the  Church  of  England  in  parti-
cular, on  those  topics  fsome  of  them  essential^
to  which  the  Seven  Sacraments  refer.  Such  is
the  brief  history  of  this  book,  and  of  the  form
which  it  has  assumed.

By  essays,  letters,  or  some  other  form,  the
discussion  of  the  Seven  Sacraments  might  have
appeared  less  dogmatical  and  more  interesting,
but  these  advantages  have  been  sacrificed  to  the
deliberate  conviction,  that  it  may  be  a  help  and
satisfaction  to  many,  to  have  some  of  the  impor-
tant questions,  which  are  now  so  freely  pro-
pounded, set  before  them  in  the  form  in  which
they  actually  occur,  viz.  of  questions  proposed
and  answers  given.     Religious,  and  indeed  all


opinions,  by  means  of  the  press,  pass  in  a  too
rapid  succession  before  the  minds  of  those,  who
have  only  leisure  to  read  or  hear  superficial  and
occasional  statements,  and  arranged  collections
of  sentiment  on  moral,  religious,  and  civil  ques-
tions are  become  desirable,  and  indeed  necessary
antidotes  to  mischiefs,  which  must  always  arise
from  delusive  notions  of  knowledge  on  impor-
tant and  difficult  questions.  It  may  be  neces-
sary to  introduce  instruction  of  this  sort  (though
not  always  in  the  form  which  it  has  assumed
in  this  tract)  into  schools  and  seminaries  of
learning,  that  young  men  when  they  are  called
to  mix  in  the  world,  may  not  be  surprised  by
bold  assertions,  but  may  be  able  (even  if  they
are  not  always  willing)  to  give  a  sufficient  reason
for  the  sentiments  they  entertain,  and  to  which
they  adhere.

Many  individuals  are  to  be  found,  who,
through  the  want  of  instruction  on  the  most
important  subjects,  have  picked  up  unconnected
and  discordant  opinions,  that  are  painful  to
themselves,  and  render  them  uncharitable  in
their  judgment  of  others,  for  it  is  ignorance  and
not  real  knowledge  that  is  the  enemy  of  charity.


VI


To  such,  the  clear  exhibition  of  the  capital
truths  and  maxims  of  the  Christian  religion,  and
of  th^  principal  duties  of  civil  life,  are  more  val-
uable than  separate  disquisitions  on  individual
points,  which  are  more  fitted  for  the  gratification
of  those  v.'ho  have  learned  leisure.  At  the  same
time  it  must  be  observed,  that,  learning  is  now  so
generally  divulged,  (however  superficially  it  may
be  understood)  that  it  is  not  suliicient  to  put
forth  elementary  treatises,  (as  was  formerly  the
case)  in  which  all  disquisition  shall  be  excluded.
In  the  following  treatise,  therefore,  the  more  in-
teresting topics  have  been  discussed  with  ^as
much  freedom  as  the  limits  of  question  and  an-
swer would  allow ;  and  if  a  catechism  shall  not
be  suited  to  the  taste  of  general  readers,  the
Author  will  indulge  the  hope,  that  some  may
derive  instruction,  and  that  others  will  share,
(even  under  this  antiquated  form)  the  pleasure
which  he  has  derived  from  discovering  the  reli-
gious and  moral  truths  which  lie  concealed  under
the  mysteries  of  the  Seven  Sacraments.


CONTENTS.


PART  I.

Chapter  I.     On  Baptism  and  Confirmation page    1

II.     On  the  Lord's  Supper   15

PART  II.

On  the  rejected  Sacraments.

Chapter  I.     On  Penance ..;...  45

II.     On  extreme  Unction 74

III.  On  Orders 137

IV.  On  Marriage 222


In  consequence  of  a  distant  residence  from  the  press,  some  errors  have
escaped  uncorrected.  The  reader  is  requested  to  observe  and  excuse  the  fol-
lowing, as  well  as  those  in  the  punctuation.


4

for  there  are  things  read  these  are  things

11
35

36

Stephanus
Christ's  persons
word

Stephanas

person

words

49

is  it

it  is

62

enfores

enforces

161

by  councils

by  the  councils

167

doctrines

doctrine

168
175
179

popes
to  opus
overwhelmed  it

pope
the  opus
them

193

veracular

vernacular

224

Jews  and  Christians

Jews  and  Gentiles

238

at  the  same

at  the  same  time

241

fornication

fornicator

CATECHISM,


&c.


PART  I.


CHAPTER  I.


0:1


"Tli


^TAr


#*¥*V1


"  I  mean  an  outward  and  visible  sign  of  an  inward  and  spiritual  grace  given
unto  us,  ordained  by  Christ  himself,  as  a  means  whereby  we  receive  the  same,
and  a  pledge  to  assure  us  thereof."  Catechism  of  the  Church  of  England,


^Hpti^m  antr  C^onfirmatiott*

Q.  What  is  the  name  by  which  you  are  called  ?

A.  By  my  christian  name,  which  I  consider  my
greatest  honor  and  distinction.

Q.  Why  do  you  consider  your  christian  name
an  honor  ?

A.  Because  it  calls  me  to  the  greatest  duties,
best  consolations,  and  highest  rewards  of  my  ex-
istence.

Q.  Why  do  you  consider  it  your  greatest  dis-
tinction *?

A.  Because  it  distinguishes  me  from  the  rest
of  mankind,  Jews  and  Pagans,  and  entitles  me
to  peculiar  privileges  here  and  hereafter.


2

Q.  How  have  you  J)ecome  a  Christian  ?

A.  Through  the  grace  of  God,  1  am  a  Chris-
tian by  my  birth,  baptism,  and  public  profession.

Q.  How  are  you  a  Christian  by  birth  ?

A.  Being  born  of  christian  parents,  1  am  en-
titled, according  to  the  promise  of  God,  to  the
privileges  of  the  visible  Church  which  my  pa-
rents enjoyed.

Q.  How  are  you  a  Christian  by  baptism  ?

A.  By  my  baptism  I  was  formally  admitted,
according  to  Christ's  command,  to  the  privileges
of  the  christian   church,  to  which  by   my  birth,  •
and  the  promise  of  God,  I  was  entitled.

Q.  Are  you  entitled  to  the  privileges  of  a  Chirs-
tian,  through  the  merits  of  your  parents?

A.  No,  but  by  the  grace  and  promise  of  God,
of  which  baptism  under  the  christian  covenant  is
the  divine  sign  and  seal.

Q.  Of  what  is  baptism  the  sacramental  sign
and  seal  ?

A.  It  is  the  sign  and  seal  of  God's  promise  of
the  remission  of  sins  through  Christ,  and  of  rege-
neration through  the  Spirit.

Q.  Do  you  hence  infer  the  general  necessity
of  Baptism  ?

A.  "  Since  all  men  are  conceived  and  born  in
sin,"  and  it  is  hereby  that  they  are  "  made  mem-
bers of  Christ,  "  I  infer  the  necessity  of  bap-
tismal regeneration,  the  authorised  means  of
admission  into  Christ's  kingdom  for  all  mankind.


Q.  Does  Christ  command  it  universally  ?

A.  Yes,  he  asserts,  that  except  a  man  be  horm
of  water  and  of  the  Spirit,  he  cannot  enter  into
the  kingdom  of  heaven ;  and  he  commands  his
Apostles  and  their  successors,  "  Go  ye,  make  dis-
ciples of  all  nations,  baptizing  them  in  the  name
of  the  Father,  and  of  the  Son,  and  of  the  Holy
Ghost."

Q.  How  did  the  Apostles  execute  this  com-
mand to  baptize  ?

A.  They  baptized  or  authorised  to  be  baptized
all,  who,  from  among  Jews  or  Heathens  believed
in  Christ,  with  their  families.

Q.  Why  do  you  consider,  that  children  in
christian  countries  ought  to  be  baptized  ?

A.  Because  they  are  included  in  the  promise
and  command  of  God,  and  because  they  are  ca-
pable, from  their  infancy,  of  his  acceptance  and
the  regeneration  of  the  Spirit,  which  is  the  pro-
mise of  the  gospel  to  all  the  world.

Q.  Does  the  doctrine  of  baptismal  regenera-
tion invalidate  the  necessity  of  the  continual  aid
of  the  Holy  Spirit  ?

A,  No,  baptismal  regeneration  is  but  a  part
of  a  whole,  but  it  recognises  the  necessity  for
"the  daily  renewing  of  the  Holy  Spirit,  "  and
seals  the  promise  of  it  in  the  most  solemn  manner.
It  is  the  germ  or  graft  of  the  future  tree,  which,
according  to  the  future  culture,  brings  forth  fruit
to  perfection.

B  2


Q.  Is  it  necessary,  that  when  those  who  are
baptized  in  their  infancy  come  to  years  of  discre-
tion, they  should  make  a  public  profession  of
their  Repentance  and  Faith  *?

A.  Yes.  A  christian  calling,  without  a  chris-
tion  life,  is  unavailing.  Unbelief  and  final  im^
penitence  will  forfeit  the  blessings  which  God  has
promised  to  us,  whether  in  this  Sacrament  par-
ticularly, or  in  the  Gospel  generally.

Q.  Is  it  then  necessary,  that  you  become  a
christian  by  your  own  public  profession  and  prac-
tice, as  well  as  by  your  birth  and  baptism  ?

A.  Certainly.  I  am  bound  by  solemn  vows
and  stipulations,  to  maintain  a  good  conscience,
believing  what  God  reveals,  and  obeying  what
he  commands,

Q.  Is  this  public  profession  to  be  renewed  by
a  repetition  of  Baptism  ?

A.  "I  believe  one  baptism  for  the  remission
of  sins,"  for  if  by  baptism  we  are  regenerate  and
ingrafted  into  Christ's  church,  there  are  things
which  can  be  no  more  repeated,  than  that  a  man
should  enter  into  his  mother's  womb  and  be  born
again.

Q.  Do  you  consider  the  administration  of
Baptism  of  essential  importance  to  the  world  ?

A.  Yes.  I  consider  it  of  essential  importance,
that  the  will  of  God  in  this,  as  in  every  respect,
should  be  obeyed  ;  but  besides  the  positive  autho-
rity for  this  institution,  I  believe  that  it  was  made


for  man,  and  has  been  one  great  means,  by  which
the  conversion  of  the  nations,  has  been  and  will
be  confirmed;  and  by  consequence  the  great
blessings  of  the  Gospel  conveyed  to  mankind.

Q.  Do  you  consider  it  essential  to  the  interests
of  the  Church  of  Christ?

A.  Yes,  I  consider  it  essential,  as  a  positive
institution  of  Christ,  as  a  means  of  salvation  and
of  preserving  the  doctrines  of  Christianity  pure
and  undefiled.

Q.  In  what  way  do  you  consider  that  the
neglect  of  this  institution  would  be  injurious  to  the
christian  cause  *?

A.  It  would  be  injurious ;  because,  it  can  be
only  neglected  by  a  misinterpretation  or  unbelief
of  the  Christian  Scriptures,  and  by  a  consequent
substitution  of  the  will  of  man  for  the  will  of  God.
Besides,  the  neglect  of  the  Sacrament  would  re-
duce Christianity  from  a  divine  institution,  to  a
mere  philosophical  or  sophistical  sentiment,
which  would  deprive  it  of  its  popular  and  moral
effects.

Q.  Do  you  consider  it  of  importance,  that  the
Name  which  every  one  bears  in  a  christian  coun-
try, should  be  associated  with  the  administration
of  christian  baptism  *?

A.  Yes,  inasmuch  as  this  sacramental  associa-
tion consecrates  the  relations  of  society,  and  tends
to  implant  in  the  minds  of  all,  a  sacred  obligation
to  Christ,   and   an   honorable   affection  to  each

B    3


6

other,  as  the  members  of  his  Church.

Q.  Would  the  secular  imposition  and  registra-
tion of  a  Name  be  equally  beneficial  ?

A.  No ;  such  a  procedure  would  not  only
disturb  society,  and  throw  into  disuse  one  of  the
most  ancient  practices  of  revealed  religion,  but
AYould  endanger  many  moral  and  social  blessings
which  a  national  Christianity  secures ;  such  as,
the  early  religious  instruction  of  youth,  the  duties
of  parents  and  children,  the  sacredness  of  mar-
riage, and  the  universal  recognition  of  a  religious
responsibility  to  observe  the  reciprocal  duties  of
the  gospel.  In  a  country  professing  the  Christian
name,  it  would  impair  both  faith  and  practice,
as,  in  fact,  the  exclusion  ot  religious  sanctions
from  important  civil  acts  has  done  in  a  neigh-
l)ouring  country,  where  in  a  highly  civilized  soci-
ety, breaches  have  been  made  in  morals  and
social  confidence,  which  neither  the  refinements
of  legislation  nor  the  substitutions  of  police,  nor
any  thing  but  a  national  and  social  religion,  will
repair.

Q.  Are  there  negligences  in  the  administra-
tion of  this  Sacrament?

A.  Yes,  many,  arising  from  the  low  conception
of  its  importance  to  the  world,  and  which  will  be
most  effectually  removed  by  a  pious  recognition
of  its  authority  in  the  Church.

Q.  Was  Baptism  peculiar  to  Christianity  ?

A.   As  a  rite  of  ecclesiastical  use  it  was  not,  as


a  Sacrament  of  divine  institution  it  was.

Q,  How  was  it  used  as  an  ecclesiastical  rite
amons:  the  Jews  and  other  nations  ?

A.  Baptisms  or  lustrations  were  frequent
among  the  Jews  and  other  nations,  but  it  was
performed  in  a  peculiar  manner  in  the  initiation
of  the  Gentile  converts  into  the  Jewish  Church.

Q.  Was  every  proselyte  to  Judaism  baptized  ?

A .  Yes,  he  was  both  circumcised  and  baptized .

Q,  Was  it  the  practice  of  the  Jews  to  baptize
the  children  of  proselytes  ?

A.  Yes,  the  children  with  their  believing  pa-
rents.

Q.  Was  the  Baptism  of  John  from  heaven  *?

A.  Yes.  John  the  Baptist,  the  promised  Elias,
and  harbinger  of  the  Messiah,  had  a  divine  com-
mission to  preach  repentance,  and  to  baptize  all
who  believed  in  the  advent  of  Christ.

Q.  Was  John's  baptism  the  same  as  the  bap-
tism of  Christ  ?

A.  No ;  the  outward  sign  was  the  same,  but  the
things   signified  were  in  many  respects  different.

Q.  Did  John  preach  the  remission  of  sins,  or
promise  the  Holy  Ghost  in  his  baptism  "?

A.  It  does  not  appear  that  he  did  either,  and
some  who  had  been  baptized  only  according  to
John's  baptism,  did  not  know  whether  there  were
any  Holy  Ghost.

Q.  Was  John's  baptism  freely  administered,
and  generally  accepted  *?

A.  Yes  :  "  then  went  out  unto  him  Jerusalem,


8

and  all  Judea,  and  all  the  region  round  about
Jordan,  and  were  baptized  of  him  in  Jordan  con-
fessing their  sins."

Q.  Did  John,  or  Jesus,  or  the  disciples  of
either  complain  of  or  insinuate  against  this  gene-
ral administration  ?

A.  They  did  not,  nor  do  we  find  that  the  ad-
ministration of  it,  in  any  individual  case,  was
questioned.  It  was  generally  administered,  and
the  initiated  were  exhorted  to  bring  forth  the  fruits
of  repentance,  while  those  who  did  not  submit  to
it  themselves,  or  hindered  others,  were  expressly
condemned.

Q.  Did  John  acknowledge  that  his  mission  was
preliminary,  and  his  baptism  imperfect  ?

A.  Yes,  he  said  publicly,  "  he  that  cometh  af-
ter me,  is  greater  than  I ;  whose  shoes  I  am  not
worthy  to  bear ;  he  shall  baptize  you  with  the
Holy  Ghost  and  with  fire."

Q.  Do  you  suppose  that  our  Lord  imitated  this
Jewish  rite,  which  was  provisionally  authorized
under  John  the  Baptist,  in  the  institution  of
Christian  Baptism  for  the  world  ?

A.  Yes,  as  he  also  graciously  substituted  the
Sacrament  of  the  Lord's  Supper  for  the  Passover,
the  Passover  being  the  type,  as  the  Lord's  Sup-
per was  the  memorial  of  Christ's  sacrifice  and
death.

Q.  What  do  you  consider  essential  to  the  ad-
ministration of  this  Sacrament  ?


9

A.  The  outward  and  visible  sign  which  is  wa-
ter, with  the  words  of  consecration,  "  in  the
name  of  the  Father,  and  of  the  Son,  and  of  the
Holy  Ghost."

Q.  Was  water  used  by  the  Apostles  and  their
successors  ?

A.  Yes,  the  testimonies  to  this  fact  are  deci-
sive.

Q.  How  is  the  water  to  be  used  ?

A.  Water  in  baptism  may  be  used  by  immer-
sion, or  effusion,  or  aspersion.

Q.  Have  all  these  methods  been  employed  in
the  Church  ?

A.  Yes,  all  of  them  ;  and  all  are  equally  suffi-
cient to  signify   the  inward  and  spiritual  grace.

Q.  Do  you  consider  that  any  of  these  methods
may  be  now  used  *?

A.  To  satisfy  the  conscience  of  any,  immer-
sion, effusion,  or  aspersion  may  be  adopted ;
but  in  this  climate,  and  in  the  present  state  of
society,  the  last  method  appears  to  be  the  most
decent,  convenient,  and  charitable.

Q.  Why  is  it  essential  to  baptize  "  in  [or  unto]
the  name  of  the  Father,  and  of  the  Son,  and  of
the  Holy  Ghost?"

A.  Because  Christ  has  so  commanded  it,  and
because  every  baptized  person  must  be  discipled
to  this  essential  doctrine  and  mystery  of  Chris-
tianity, without  the  belief  of  which  no  one  is
really  a  christian,  and  built  upon  the  rock.


10

Q.  Has  it  been  the  g^eneral  practice  of  the
christian  church  to  administer  baptism  before
christian  witnesses,  or  sureties  ?

A.  Yes,  for  since  Baptism  is  to  be  adminis-
tered in  infancy,  and  only  once,  since  a  christian
state  and  title  are  required,  to  Christian  com-
munion, and  since  it  is  always  accompanied  with
solemn  stipulations  and  vows  ;  witnesses,  or  god-
fathers and  godmothers,  or  sponsors  of  some
kind,  have  been  considered  (except  in  cases  of
necessity)  as  formally  requisite,  when  a  candi-
date is  presented  in  and  by  the  church,  for  christ-
ian baptism.

Q.  Does  it  not  lessen  the  importance  of  bap-
tism, that  Jesus  Christ  did  not  baptize  himself  ?

A.  By  no  means.  Jesus  Christ  did  not  baptize
himself,  but  (qui  facit  per  alium  facit  per  se,)
he  ordained  others  to  do  it  provisionally  before
his  crucifixion  and  he  afterwards  commissioned
the  Apostles  and  their  successors  to'the  end  of  the
world,  to  baptize  sacramentally  and  universally.
Baptism,  as  a  christian  sacrament,  was  not  insti-
tutedtill  immediately  before  our  Lord's  ascension.

Q.  Did  the  Apostles  consider  themselves  as
commissioned  to  baptize  as  well  as  to  preach  ?

A.  Yes.  No  sooner  were  they  baptized  with
the  Holy  Ghost  and  with  fire,  than  they  entered
upon  their  apostleship  at  Jerusalem,  m.ade  con-
verts or  disciples,  who  were  instantly  command'
edto  be  baptized,  and  after  baptism  admitted  to


11

Christian  fellowship  and  communion,  in  the
Lord's  Supper.

Q.  Does  not  St.  Paul  appear  to  slight  the  in-
stitution of  Baptism,  when  he  says,  Christ  sent
me  not  to  baptize,  but  to  preach  the  gospel,  and
declares  that  he  baptized  only  two  eminent  indi-
viduals, and  one  household  at  Corinth  ?

A.  No.  St.  Paul  in  this  historical  allusion,
plainly  asserts,  that  he  did  baptize  himself  in  his
career  of  fulfilling  his  apostleship  to  the  Gentiles  ;
his  work  brought  him  in  contact  with  Crispus,
the  leader  of  the  synagogue.  Gains  his  host,
and  Stephanus  the  first  fruits  of  Achaia,  who
was  also  called  to  a  christian  office.  These
eminent  individuals  he  did  baptize  himself,  but
the  detail  of  catechizing  and  baptizing,  he  could
not  possibly  execute,  without  neglecting  the  great
work  of  converting  the  heathen,  to  which  he  was
called.  That  part  of  the  ministry,  therefore,  he
deferred  to  others.  St.  Paul  had  also  another
reason  for  not  baptizing  generally,  lest  with  the
extraordinary  success  that  attended  his  ministry,
and  the  constant  propensity  of  mankind  to  attach
themselves  to  names  and  sects,  any  should  sup-
pose that  he  baptized  in  his  own  name,  or  made
proselytes  to  his  own  fame.

Q.  But  did  not  St.  Paul  and  the  other  Apostles
ordain  others  to  administer  this  sacrament  in  the
church,  and  did  they  not  confirm  by  the  imposi-
tion of  hands,  those  who  were    so  baptized  and


12

admitted  into  christian  fellowship  ?

A.  Yes.  St.  Paul  and  the  other  Apostles  con-
firmed the  discipleS;,  and  bestowed  by  the  impo-
sition of  hands  the  gifts  of  the  Holy  Ghost,  on
such  as  were  discipled  and  baptized.

Q.  Have  the  extraordinary  gifts  of  the  Holy
Ghost  ceased  *?

A.  Yes,  they  ceased  with  the  Apostles,  and
those  on  whom  they  conferred  extraordinary
powers;  and  we  expect  now  in  the  worship,  sacra-
ments, and  services  of  the  Church,  the  ordinary
spiritual,  and  moral  gifts  and  graces  of  the  Spirit.

Q.  Has  not  the  practice  of  the  Church,  with
the  exception  of  communicating  extraordinary
powers,  conformed  to  the  apostolic  example  ever
since  ?

A.  Yes,  the  administration  of  Baptism  with  its
details,  has  usually  been  performed  by  the  pres-
byters and  deacons,  on  converts  and  the  child-
ren of  christian  parents ;  and  these,  when  further
instructed,  have  been  confirmed,  on  a  public  pro-
fession of  their  vows,  in  the  presence  of  the
presbyters  and  the  Church,  by  the  bishops  and
fathers  of  the  Church,  the  successors  of  the
Apostles.

Q.  Do  you  consider  confirmation  to  be  an
apostolic  practice,  and  a  christian  usage,  useful  at
all  times.

A.  Yes,  we  have  historical  testimony  to  con-
vince us,  that  it  was  primitive,  and  continued  to


13

the  time  of  the  reformation,  when  the  most  emi-
nent reformers  acknowledged  its  antiquity,  and
commended  its  use,

Q.  Do  you  consider  confirmation  to  be  a  sa-
crament ?

A.  No,  the  Romish  Church  has  made  it  one  of
the  seven  sacraments,  but  there  is  no  authority,
scriptural  or  apostoHcal,  for  enforcing  it  as  such,
now  that  the  extraordinary  gifts  that  accompa-
nied the  apostolic  practice  of  it  have  ceased.

Q.  Does  the  Roman  Catholic  Church  enforce
confirmation,  as  absolutely  necessary  to  salvation
as  Baptism  ?

A.  At  the  time  of  the  reformation,  it  was  held
in  more  veneration  than  baptism  ;  but  now  it  is
held  to  be  not  so  necessary.  This  admission,
with  respect  to  the  importance  of  this  and  some
others  of  the  seven  sacraments,  would  seem  to
impeach  (  considering  the  nature  of  such  institu-
tions) their  sacramental  authority.

Q.  How  do  the  Roman  Catholics  give  to  con-
firmation the  appearance  of  a  sacrament  ?

A.  By  using  the  Holy  Cream,  made  of  oil  and
balm  and  consecrated  by  the  Bishop  on  Holy
Thursday,  as  an  outward  and  visible  sign  of  an
inward  spiritual  grace.

Q.  Is  there  any  scriptural  or  apostolic  autho-
ty  for  such  a  sacramental  use  of  the  chrism  in
confirmation  ?

A.    No,  and  therefore  confirmation,  though  an


14

ecclesiastical  rite  of  great  use  and  antiquity,  is
not  a  sacrament.

Q.  What  are  the  principal  uses  of  confirma-
tion ?

A.  It  is  of  use  in  admitting  to  communion,
without  reiteration  of  baptism,  those  whose  bap-
tism has  been  doubtful  or  irregular.  It  is  the
means  of  instructing  and  confirming  youth  in
christian  principles,  at  the  most  critical  period  of
their  lives  ;  while  at  the  same  time,  it  gives  the
office  of  bishop  an  important  and  affectionate
influence  among  clergy  and  people,  and  brings
down,  by  prayer  and  blessing,  the  grace  and  favor
of  heaven.


CHAP.  11.


I  mean  an  outward  and  visible  sign  of  an  inward  and  spiritual  grace  given  unto
us,  ordained  by  Christ  himself,  as  a  means  whereby  we  receive  the  same,  and  a
pledge  to  assure  us  thereof.''  Catechism  of  the  Church  of  Ent/land,


Uorti*^  Supper*

Q.  Do  you  consider  the  Sacrament  of  the
Lord's  Supper,  to  rest  upon  the  same  authority
as  the  Sacrament  of  Baptism,  and  to  be  equally
necessary  ?

A.  Yes,  it  is  the  second  Sacrament  generally
necessary  to  salvation.

Q.  What  is  the  outward  visible  sign  in  the
Lord's  Supper  ?

A.  Bread  and  Wine,  which  the  Lord  has  com-
manded to  be  received.

Q.   Is  this  outward  and  visible  sign  necessary?

A.  Yes,  it  is  necessary,  because  Christ  has
commanded  it  by  express  form  and  institution.
The  outward  and  visible  signs,  or  the  elements
and  material  substances  designated  and  conse-
crated for  this  especial  purpose,  are  absolutely
necessary  to  the  christian  sacraments.     Without


16

this,  tliey  would  be  mere  rites  or  vows,  or  pray-
ers, or  thanksgiving,  or  spiritual  services,  but  not
Sacraments  of  divine  institution  for  the  Catho-
lic Church.  Those,  therefore,  who  reject  the
outward  and  visible  sign,  disuse  the  Sacrament
and  disobey  the  commandment  of  Christ,  who
has  enjoined  it  to  be  perpetually  observed.

Q.  Is  it  an  error  so  to  spiritualize  the  Scrip-
tures, as  to  reject  this  Holy  Sacrament  ?

A.  Yes,  it  is  a  great  error,  though  held  by  few,
and  held  in  charity,  for  though  the  spiritual  know-
ledge of  God,  his  attributes,  and  will,  is  the
highest  attainment  of  the  human  soul,  and  will
constitute  the  perfection  of  heaven ;  yet  this  is
no  apology,  for  the  neglect,  in  the  present  state
of  imperfection,  of  baptism,  the  Lord's  Supper,
public  worship,  the  christian  sabbath,  which,
though  positive  duties,  are  the  means  of  convey-
ing instruction  and  edification  to  man  :  nay  more,
the  injuctions  to  preach  the  gospel,  and  to  believe
the  gospel,  are  positive  commandments,  and  yet,
no  christian  would  say,  that  being  the  commands
of  Christ,  they  are  not  of  the  highest  moral  obli-
gation.

Q.  But  are  not  these  outward  signs,  weak
elements  and  inconsistent  with  the  simplicity  and
spirituality  of  the  gospel  ?

A.  If  Christ  has  ordained  them  in  his  Church
they  cannot  be  weak,  nor  are  they  any  where  re-
presented as  such  in   sacred  scripture.     When


17

«

moreover,  we  consider,  that  in  the  present  con-
dition of  human  nature,  some  visible  signs  are
necessary  to  build  and  preserve  a  visible  Church,
to  make  the  necessary  outward  distinction  be-
tween those  that  believe,  and  those  that  do  not,
and  that  as  the  christian  symbols  are  designed  to
abolish  all  types,  and  abrogate  all  sacrifices
throughout  the  world  for  ever,  it  does  appear  that
signs  more  simple  than  water,  bread,  and  wine  can
scarcely  be  imagined:  signs  so  significant  of
that  washing  and  regeneration  of  the  soul,  that
strengthening  of  the  spirit  of  man  in  virtue  and
grace,  that  consolation  of  the  heart,  which  the
gospel  is  intended  to  convey  to  all  people.

Q.  What  is  the  thing  signified  by  the  Bread
and  Wine,  which  the  Lord  has  commanded  to  be
received  ?

A.  *'  The  body  and  blood  of  Christ,  which  are
verily  and  indeed  taken  and  received  by  the
faithful  in  the  Lord's  Supper."

Q.  What  are  the  benefits  whereof  we  are  par-
takers thereby  *?

A.  "  The  strengthening  and  refreshing  of  our
souls  by  the  body  and  blood  of  Christ,  as  our
bodies  are  by  the  bread  and  wine."

Q.  Do  not  these  answers  appear  mystical  *?

A.  Yes,  we  acknowledge  that  the  Christian
sacraments  contain  mysteries,  and  that  for  the
right  understanding  of  them,  we  must  inquire  dili-
gently into  the  design  and  nature  of  Christianity

c


18

and  into  the  meaning  of  the  Scriptures.  St.  Paul
called  this  subject,  the  union  and  communion  of
Christ  and  his  Church,  a  great  mystery.  The
mysterious  doctrines,  however,  and  sacraments  of
Christianity  involving  these  doctrines,  are  not
to  be  considered  unintelligilole  in  their  design,
practice  or  efficacy,  though  the  human  mind  may
not  in  speculation  he  able  to  scan  and  comprehend
entirely  the  purposes  of  the  divine  will.

Q.     What  is  the  design  of  this  Sacrament  ?

A.  As  Baptism  was  designed  to  initiate  us  into
the  Church,  and  unite  us  to  Christ,  so  the  Sacra-
ment of  the  Lord's  Supper  is  designed  to  strength-
en that  union  with  Christ  and  his  members.

Q.  In  what  parts  of  Scripture  do  we  find  the
institution  of  this  Sacrament  ?

A.  The  principal  passages  are  the  following;
St.  Matthew's  account  of  the  institution  is  thus
given — "  And  as  they  were  eating,  Jesus  took
bread,  and  blessed  it,  and  brake  it,  and  gave  it
to  his  disciples,  and  said,  Take,  eat,  this  is  my
body  ;  and  he  took  the  cup,  and  gave  thanks,
and  gave  it  to  them,  saying,  Drink  ye  all  of  it,
for  this  is  my  blood  of  the  New  Testament,  which
is  shed  for  many,  for  the  remission  of  sins."

St.  Mark's  account  is  this — "And  as  they  did
eat,  Jesus  took  bread,  and  blessed,  and  brake  it,
and  gave  to  them,  and  said,  Take,  eat  :  this  is
my  body.  And  he  took  the  cup,  and  when  he
had  given  thanks,   he  gave  it  to  them,   and  they


19

all  drank  of  it,  and  he  said  unto  them,  This  is  my
blood  of  the  New  Testament,  which  is  shed  for
many."  St.  Luke  thus  states  the  institution,  "And
he  took  bread  and  gave  thanks  and  brake  it  and
gave  unto  them  saying,  "this  is  my  body,  which
is  given  for  you  :  this  do  in  remembrance  of  me  :
Likewise  also  the  cup  after  supper,  saying.  This
cup  is  the  new  Testament  in  my  blood  which  is
shed  for  you."  St.  Paul  thus  ;  "  I  have  received
of  the  Lord  that  which  also  I  delivered  unto  you,
that  the  Lord  Jesus  the  same  night  in  which  he
was  betrayed,  took  bread,  and  when  he  had  given
thanks  he  brake  it  and  said,  Take  eat,  this  is
my  body,  which  is  broken  for  you,  this  do  in  re-
membrance of  me.  After  the  same  manner  also
he  took  the  cup,  when  he  had  supped  saying.
This  cup  is  the  new  Testament  in  my  blood ;
this  do  ye  as  often  as  ye  drink  it  in  remem-
brance of  me.  For  as  often  as  ye  eat  this  bread
and  drink  this  cup  ye  do  shew  the  Lord's  death
till  he  come.  Wherefore  whosoever  shall  eat  this
bread  and  drink  this  cup  of  the  Lord  unworthily
shall  be  guilty  of  the  body  and  blood  of  the  Lord."
Q.  Does  not  the  sixth  chapter  of  St.  John  refer  to
the  institution  of  the  sacrament  of  the  last  supper?
A.  No  :  that  chapter  referred  to  the  spiritual
fulfilment  of  the  Jewish  types,  especially  the  dai-
ly manna  in  the  person  of  Christ,  and  though  the
doctrine  is  similar  to  the  doctrine  of  the  Sacra-
ment, it  is  not  an  exposition    or    a  commentary

c2


20

upon  it,  because  the  institution  was  not  yet  made
and  Christ's  hearers,  of  course,  would  have  then
no  knowledge  or  conception  of  it.  If  however  this
discourse  of  Christ,  be,  as  by  a  fair  analogy  it
may  be,  referred  to  this  subject ;  and  we  inter-
pret it,  as  Christ  expressly  commands,  in  the  spirit
and  not  in  the  letter,  it  will  in  nowise  alter  the
decision  of  this  question.

Q.  What  are  the  opinions  which  have  been
entertained  respecting  the  body  and  blood  of
Christ  in  the  Lord's  Supper  ?

A.  There  have  been  three,  that  of  the  Roman
Catholics  or  Transubstantiation ;  of  the  Luthe-
rans or  consubstantiation ;  and  that  of  the  Church
of  England  &  the  Reformed  Churches,  sometimes
called  Sacramentarians.

Q.  Are  not  the  doctrines  of  Transubstantiation
and  Consubstantiation  absurd,  and  unworthy  of
consideration  ?

A.  We  consider  them  to  be  unfounded  and
erroneous  in  the  extreme ;  but  they  are  held  by
large  bodies  of  our  fellow  Christians ;  one  by  the
whole  of  the  Romish  Church,  and  the  other  by
the  followers  of  the  great  reformer  Luther.  They
are  not  therefore  to  be  dismissed  without  exami-
nation, lest  we  should  appear  to  deny  what  we  do
not  understand  or  cannot  refute.

Q.  What  is  the  doctrine  of  Transubstantiation
in  the  Eucharist  as  taught  by  the  Church  of  Rome?

A.  The  Chm'ch  of  Rome   teaches,  that  the


21

Eucharist  is  the  Sacrament,  which  contains  really
and  in  truth,  the  body,  blood,  soul,  and  divinity
of  our  Saviour  Jesus  Christ,  under  the  appear-
ance of  the  bread  and  wine — that  Jesus  Christ
in  the  institution,  when  he  took  the  bread,  and
said.  This  is  my  body,  and  the  cup,  saying,  Drink
ye  all  of  this,  performed  a  wonderful  miracle,
and  changed  these  elements  into  his  body  and
blood — ^that  when  Christ  said  to  his  Apostles,  Do
this  in  remembrance  of  me,  he  gave  to  the  Apos-
tles, and  through  them  to  the  Bishops  and  Priests
for  ever,  power  to  perform  the  same  miracle —
that  consequently,  in  the  sacrifice  of  the  Mass
when  in  the  consecration  the  Priest  uses  the  same
words,  the  same  miracle  is  performed,  the  Tran-
substantiation  takes  place,  the  bread  is  no  longer
bread,  the  wine  is  no  longer  wine,  each  of  them,
and  the  smallest  part  of  each  of  them,  is  the  en-
tire person  of  Christ,  body,  blood,  soul,  and  divi-
nity ;  and  that  each  communicant  receives  the
entire  body  of  Christ,  which  was  conceived  in  the
Virgin  Mary,  nailed  to  the  cross,  and  is  now  in
heaven,  being  thus  united  to  Christ,  by  actually
eating  his  sacred  flesh,  and  drinking  his  precious
blood.  Moreover,  not  only  what  is  eaten  is  the
body  and  blood  of  Christ,  but  the  whole  Christ
is  in  each  of  the  wafers  which  remain  after  par-
ticipation, and  in  every  particle  of  them.

Q.  What  do  we  object  to  in  the  doctrine   of
Transubstantiatiou  ?


22

A.  Not  to  mention  the  enormous  idea  of  the
power  of  working  a  miracle  vested  in  and  depen-
dent on  the  intention  of  all  priests  in  all  ages,
and  under  all  circumstances,  and  that  the  power
of  "  making  the  body  of  Christ,"  (which  we  con-
sider a  great  imposture)  we  object  to  the  specu-
lative error  on  which  it  is  founded,  and  especially
to  the  superstitious  and  idolatrous  practices  with
which  it  is  attended.

Q.  What  is  the  speculative  error  of  the  doc-
trine of  Transubstantiation  ?

A.  It  is  an  error  respecting  the  real  and  cor-
poral presence  of  Jesus  Christ,  founded  upon  a
misconception  of  God  in  Christ,  and  Christ  in
us.  Christ  being  both  God  and  Man  we  acknow-
ledge, that  it  is  only  through  him,  who  is  one
Christ,  that  there  can  be  communion  between
God  and  Man ;  and  that  thus  the  grace  of  our
Lord  Jesus  Christ,  and  the  love  of  God,  and  the
communion  of  the  Holy  Ghost,  can  be  with  the
Church.  On  this  communion,  the  Christian
Church  is  built,  and  of  this  communion  the  Sa-
crament is  not  only  the  sign,  but  the  instrument
and  seal.  But  the  Church  of  Rome,  by  the  doc-
trine of  Transubstantiation,  makes  the  participa-
tion of  Christ's  body  and  blood  literal,  and  not
mystical  or  spiritual ;  asserting,  that  in  the  Sa-
crament there  is  not  only  the  real  presence  of
Christ,  but  the  actual  presence  of  that  body  with
which  he  died,    rose  again,    and    ascended   into


m

heaven.  We  admit  that  Christ,  in  his  divinity,
is  everywhere  present,  and  that  the  human  body
as  well  as  soul  is  indissolubly  united  to  his  divine
person,  through  his  incarnation  by  the  Holy
Ghost ;  yet  the  body  itself  being  human  and
finite,  it  is  now  no  more  filling  all  space,  and  per-
vading all  being,  or  (what  amounts  to  the  same
thing)  in  any  number  of  places,  in  any  number  of
wafers,  or  persons,  at.  any  moment  of  time,  than
it  was  when  our  Saviour  was  upon  earth  ;  for  if
the  body  of  Christ  were  really  thus  capable  of
omnipresence  or  omnipotence,  and  infinite  multi-
plication, it  could  not  be  of  the  nature  of  man.
Though  therefore  the  Church  of  Rome  is  gene-
rally orthodox,  as  to  the  fundamental  doctrines  of
the  Trinity,  the  Person  of  Christ  and  of  the  Holy
Ghost,  as  maintained  in  the  three  creeds  (par-
ticularly in  the  Athenasian)  yet  by  the  doc-
trine of  Transubstantiation,  it  is  guilty  of  a
great  error  in  maintaining  the  corporal  presence
of  Christ,  in  every  wafer,  and  in  every  communi-
cant, whenever  and  wherever  the  Sacrament  is
administered,  the  Mass  celebrated,  the  transub-
stantiated bread  distributed  and  reserved,  or  the
host  uplifted.

Q.  What  superstitious  practices  have  arisen  out
of  this  error  ?

A.  The  sacrifice  of  the  Mass,  the  feast  of  St.
Sacrament,  the  adoration  of  the  Host,  and  the
Half  Communion,  and  many  others  which  render


1


9A

the  Church  of  Rome  guilty  of  heresy,  though
many  of  her  children,  not  reflecting  on  these
things,  may  by  faith  and  charity  partake  of  the
blessed  body  and  blood  of  Christ,  and  hold  com-
munion with  the  head  and  members  of  the  Chris-
tian Church.

Q.  What  is  the  sacrifice  of  the  Mass  *?

A.  The  Church  of  Rome  maintains,  that  Christ
has  not  only  given  himself  to  us  in  the  commu-
nion, but  that  he  has  instituted  the  Eucharist  to  of-
fer himself  up  continually  as  a  victim  and  sacrifice
in  the  Mass — that  the  Mass  is  not  only  a  memo-
rial of  the  sacrifice  of  the  cross,  but  the  same
sacrifice — that  as  on  the  cross  Jesus  Christ  was
both  the  Priest  and  the  Victim,  so  in  the  Mass,
Jesus  Christ  offers  up  himself  by  the  Ministry  of
the  Priest,  and  is  himself  the  Victim,  and  that
consequently  the  sacrifice  of  the  Mass  is  propiti-
atory, and  offered,  not  only  for  those  who  partake
of  it,  but  for  the  living  and  the  dead,  for  all  man-
ner of  sins,  punishments,  and  satisfactions.

Q.  Do  Roman  Catholics  make  no  difference
between  the  sacrifice  of  the  Mass  and  of  the
Cross  "^

A.  Yes,  while  they  assert  it  is  the  same  sacrifice,
they  admit  a  difference  in  the  manner  in  which
Christ  is  offered  ;  and  the  difference  asserted  is
this,  that  Jesus  Christ  offered  himself  upon  the
Cross  by  the  shedding  of  his  blood,  but  that
Jesus  Christ  offers  himself  upon  the  Altar  by  the


25

ministry  of  the  Priest,   without  the   eftusion  of
blood

Q.  Is  not  this  explanation  inconsistent  with  the
doctrine  of  transubstantiation,  and  with  the  more
early  opinion  of  the  mi-bloody  sacrifice  maintain-
ed in  the  ancient  Church  *?

A.  This  asserted  difference  is  consistent  with
neither ;  for  it  is  at  variance  with  the  idea  of  a
real  transubstantiation  of  the  elements  into  the
body  and  blood  of  Christ,  and  that  by  a  sacrifice
similar  to  the  typical  sacrifice  of  the  Jews  ;  and  it
is  inconsistent  with  the  ancient  opinion  of  the
sacrifice,  ( in  the  Eucharist )  which  was  simply
this,  that  the  whole  service  of  the  Church  (of
which  the  Eucharist  was  always  the  chief  part )
was  an  oblation  of  charity,  prayer,  thanksgiving,
and  self  devotion,  through  the  sacrifice  of  Christ
upon  the  Cross,  by  which  God  was  already  glori-
fied and  reconciled.

Q.  Does  the  Church  of  England  reject  alto-
gether the  doctrine  of  the  sacrifice  of  the  Mass  ?

A.  Expressly  in  her  thirty-first  Article,  "  The
offering  of  Christ  once  made  is  that  perfect
redemption,  propitiation,  and  satisfaction,  for  all
the  sins  of  the  whole  world,  both  original  and
actual,  and  there  is  none  other  satisfaction  for
sin  but  that  alone  : "  and  further  in  her  Com-
munion Service  throughout,  where  sheasserts
the  sacrifice  of  Christ  upon  the  cross,  to  be  final
and  complete,  and  where  she  admits  no  other  but


the  moral  and  reasonable  sa<^rifice  of  praise,  gra-
titude, obedience,  and  self-devotion.

Q.  Have  not  some  learned  men  in  the  Church
of  England  held,  that  the  Eucharist,  is  a  repre-
sentative and  commemorative  sacrifice?

A.  Yes,  but  (thoug'h  the  opinion  as  held  by
these  individuals,  may  have  some  color  from  the
language  of  St.  Clement,  St.  Ignatius,  and  per-
haps of  St.  Peter  himself,)  the  Church  of  England
is  not  responsible  for  it,  as  she  has  not  adopted
it  in  her  articles  or  formularies.  Besides  this
opinion  of  the  representative  or  un-bloody  sacri-
fice is  perfectly  abhorrent  from  the  corruption  of
the  Church  of  Rome  maintained  in  the  sacrifice
of  the  Mass,  that  is,  a  real  hypostatical  oblation
of  Christ  himself,  by  the  ministry  of  the  Priest,
which  is  a  blasphemous  doctrine,  held  by  no
writer  of  the  Church  of  England.

Q.  For  what  purpose  was  the  feast  of  St.  Sacra-
ment instituted  in  the  Roman  Catholic  Church  ?

A.  To  commemorate  the  institution  of  the
Sacrament,  by  a  procession,  which  is  intended  as
a  recompense  and  indemnification  to  Christ,  for
the  insults  he  receives  in  the  Eucharist,  from  the
impious  and  from  heretics.  This  procession  all
good  Catholics  are  required  to  follow,  and  to
give  to  the  Host,  in  the  street  as  in  the  Church,
the  highest  worship  called  Latria,  which  is  due
to  the  true  God  only,  for  that  on  these  occasions
Jesus  Christ  is  in  the  wafer,  and  passing  through


27

the  streets,  doing  good.

Q.  In  what  light  djo  we  regard  this  practice
and  the  adoration  of  the  Host  ?

A.  We  regard  them  as  childish,  superstitious,
and  idolatrous,  without  any  authority  from  Rea-
son, Scripture,  or  ancient  Tradition  ;  we  believe
them  also  to  have  been  the  cause  of  infidelity,
indifference,  and  impiety  in  those  Christian
countries  where  they  prevail.  The  Church  of
England  has  publicly  denounced  them  in  these
words,  "  The  Sacrament  of  the  Lord's  Supper,
was  not  by  Christ's  ordinance  reserved,  carried
about,  lifted  up  and  worshipped."  Such  a  profa-
nation is  not  openly  practiced  in  this  country,
and  since  the  late  revolution  in  France  it  has
been  publicly  suppressed,  or  confined  to  the
walls  of  Churches.

Q.  Are  there  any  other  practices  in  the  Church
of  Rome  connected  with  the  heretical  doctrine^
of  transubstantiation  ?

A.  Yes,  private  Masses  and  half  communion,
in  the  former  of  which  the  Priest  receives  alone
for  the  living  and  the  dead,  and  in  the  latter
(which  is  the  universal  practice  whenever  the
Eucharist  is  administered  to  the  Laity)  the  bread
or  wafer  only  is  given,  and  the  cup  denied.

Q.  What  are  private  Masses  ?

A.  They  are  Masses  which  are  performed  for
the  benefit  of  the  living  or  the  dead,  in  which
the   Priest  receives  alone   the  sacred  elements,


28

and  as  the  efficacy  of  the  sacrifice  of  the  Mass,
depends  on  the  intention  of  the  Priest,  his  good
will  in  these  masses  may  he  purchased  at  a  cer-
tain price  for  the  living  and  the  dead.

Q.  How  do  you  refute  this  practice  in  the
Church  of  Rome  *?

A.  We  think  it  unnecessary  to  refute  it  in  any
other  way  than  by  denominating  it  a  gross  im-
position on  the  credulity  of  mankind,  and  a  pro-
fane abuse  of  the  Christian  religion,  but  if  private
masses  were  not  prostituted,  by  sale  and  the  dan-
gerous opinions  attached  to  them,  we  should  still
maintain  that  the  communion  of  Christian  bre-
thren is  necessary  to  constitute  a  sacrament.  The
Sacrament  is  the  symbol  of  the  union  of  Chris-
tians in  one  body  and  fraternity,  and  therefore
for  the  Priest  to  receive  alone,  for  the  congrega-
tion and  for  the  dead,  is  a  Priestcraft,  inconsis-
•tent  with  the  nature  and  design  of  the  Eucharist.
"  We  being  many  are  one  bread  and  one  body,  for
we  all  are  partakers  of  that  one  bread."

Q.  Is  it  contrary  to  the  intention  of  Christ  to
refuse  the  cup  to  the  laity  in  the  Holy  Commur
nion  ?

A.  It  is  inconsistent  with  the  genius  of  the
gospel  to  make  such  an  unauthorized  reservation
in  the  administration  of  the  most  gracious  ordi-
nance of  the  Christian  Church — It  has  the
appearance  of  craft  to  make  such  distinctions
between  the  priest  and  the  laity  as   are  no  way


29

necessary  to  the  execution  of  the  ministerial
office,  and  moreover,  Christ  himself  in  the  words
of  consecration,  (of  which  the  Church  of  Rome
enjoins  a  literal  interpretation)  has  seen  good  to
give  a  more  universal  and  unlimited  command
with  respect  to  the  cup,  than  to  the  bread  ;  "  He
took  the  cup  and  gave  thanks,  and  gave  to  them
saying,  drink  ye  all  of  it,  for  this  is  my  blood  of
the  New  Testament  which  is  shed  for  many  for
the  remission  of  sins."

Q.  Is  it  likewise  contrary  to  apostolic  au-
thority ?

A.  Yes.  In  St.  Matthew  the  words  are  "  Drink
ye  all  of  it^"  and  in  St.  Mark  *'  they  all  di^ank
of  it^^*  and  St.  Paul  after  repeating  the  words  of
Christ  with  respect  to  the  institution  of  the  cup
reasons  thus,  "For  as  often  as  ye  eat  this  bread
and  drink  this  cup  ye  do  shew  the  Lord's  death
till  he  come.  Wherefore,  whoever  shall  eat  this
bread  and  drink  this  cup  of  the  Lord  unworthily  y
shall  be  guilty  of  the  body  and  blood  of  Christ."

Q.  Is  it  contrary  to  the  practice  of  the  primitive
Church?

A.  It  is  contrary  to  the  practice  of  the  primitive
Church,  of  all  Churches  except  the  Church  of
Rome,  and  even  contrary  to  the  practice  of  that
Church  itself  for  a  thousand  years.

Q.  How  do  the  Roman  Catholics  justify  this
practice  *?

A.  Chiefly  by  two  reasons ;  first  they  say,  that


30

after  the  Apostles  had  in  the  first  institution  re-
ceived the  bread,  our  Saviour  before  he  adminis-
tered the  cup,  ordained  them  and  made  them
priests  in  these  words,  "  Do  this  " — and  that
therefore,  when  Christ  administered  the  cup,  they
did  not  receive  it  as  laymen  or  representatives  of
the  people,  but  as  priests  distinguished  from  the
laity.  Secondly,  they  advert  again  to  the  doc-
trine of  Transubstantiation,  and  say  that  the
whole  Christ  as  he  lived  in  the  flesh,  is  under
the  appearance  of  the  bread,  and  under  the  ap-
pearance of  the  wine,  and  that  consequently,
whoever  receives  the  bread,  receives  the  body  and
blood  of  Christ,  which  is  all  that  is  necessary.

Q,  What  do  you  reply  to  these  reasons  ?

A.  We  reply,  that  they  are  gratuitous  and  have
neither  force  nor  authority  ;  that  Christ  and  his
Apostles,  and  the  whole  Catholic  Church  (except
the  Roman  Catholic  Church,  since  the  council  of
Constance  )  were  either  ignorant  of  them  or
thought  them  unworthy  of  regard  ;  and  moreover,
if  this  explication  respecting  the  cup,  be  a  neces-
sary inference  from  the  doctrine  of  Transubstan-
tiation, it  is  a  deductio  ad  absurdum,  either  against
that  doctrine  or  the  institution  itself.

Q.  Why  do  we  contend  so  earnestly  against
Transubstantiation,  and  the  corruptions  which
have  been  built  upon  it  ?

A.  Because  in  speculation  we  believe  them  to
propagate  dangerous  heresies ;    and  in    practice


31

(enforced  as  they  are  on  pain  of  damnation}  we
think  them  to  have  caused  the  most  mischievous
schisms  which  have  ever  disgraced  the  cause  of
christian  truth.  They  have  opened  breaches  by
which  the  christian  temple  has  been  profaned,
deserted,  or  attacked,  and  have  gendered  in  the
minds  of  too  many  pious  and  sincere  friends  of
the  gospel,  an  irreverence  and  a  prejudice  towards
the  christian  Sacraments  themselves  ;  which  have
impeded  the  propagation  of  the  gospel,  and  the
unity  of  the  lioly  catholic  Church.

Q.  What  is  the  doctrine  of  Consubstantiation  P

A.  While  the  Papists  maintain  that  the  ele-
ments are  transubstantiated,  and  no  longer  remain
bread  and  wine,  but  in  outward  appearance,  Lu-
ther and  his  followers  assert,  that  the  elements;
are  not  changed,  but  that  the  omnipotent  body  of
Christ  is  coexistent  with  the  sanctified  creatures
of  bread  and  wine  before  participation.

Q.  Is  this  doctrine  liable  to  objection  ?

A.  Yes.  While  it  avoids  one  glaring  absurdity^
the  doctrine  of  Consubstantiation  or  impanation
is  liable  in  speculation  to  the  same  objections  as
Transubstantiation ;  but  in  practice,  the  Luther-
ans do  not  enforce  exclusive  restrictions  or  impose
idolatrous  superstitions,  and  therefore  (though
under  a  lamentable,  and  as  we  think  heretical
misconception)  they  hold  the  spiritual  commu-
nion of  the  body  and  blood  of  Christ,  without  any
violations  of  essential  charity.


32

Q.    Were  Transubstantiation  or  Consubstantia-
tion  maintained  by  the  early  christian  fathers  *?
A.  Notvvithstandino:  that  the  lanffuaire  of  the

o  Or)

early  fathers  was  eastern,  and  highly  excited,  par-
ticularly on  this  subject,  there  is  no  traditionary
authority  for  these  doctrines  before  the  fourth
century,  and  no  public  avowal  of  them  till  a  much
later  and  darker  period.

Q.  Are  these  doctrines  contained  in,  or  can  they
be  fairly  deduced  from  the  sacred  Sriptures  ?

A.  No,  and  this  question  will  lead  us  to  ex-
amine the  real  doctrine  of  the  Sacrament ;  for  it
is  not  enough  on  a  question  of  such  importance,
to  refute  error,  (though  in  this  case  it  seems  to  lay
open  the  truth)  we  must  also  be  prepared  to  vin-
dicate our  own  opinions  and  shew  that  they  are
truth.

Q.  Do  all  the  Sacramentarians  and  the  Church
of  England  in  particular,  reject  the  corporal
presence  ?

A.  Yes  ;  though  there  are  shades  of  difference
in  the  statements  of  the  reformed  churches,  yet
they  all  agree  in  denying  the  corporal  presence
of  Christ  in  a  gross,  strict,  and  literal  sense.

Q.  What  is  the  doctrine  of  the  Church  of  Eng-
land?

A.  We  believe  that  Christ's  death  upon  the
cross  was  a  real  and  final  sacrifice  for  the  sins  of
the  whole  world ;  that  in  this  Sacrament  that  mo-
mentous fact  is   sealed  and  represented  for  ever ;


33

and  moreover,  that  in  this  feast,  the  inestimable
benefits  of  that  sacrifice  are  conveyed  to  the  faith-
ful ;  and  thus  that  our  souls  are  refreshed  after  a
spwitual  manner^  by  the  body  and  blood  of  Christ
(which  are  the  things  signified)  as  our  bodies  are
naturally  by  the  bread  and  wine,  which  are  the
outward  and  visible  signs.

Q.  Do  you  believe  Christ's  presence  in  the  Sa-
crament ?

A.  Yes,  certainly.  As  it  is  the  solemn  and
perpetual  commemoration  of  his  death  upon  the
cross  ordained  by  Christ  himself, — as  it  is  the  re-
cognition of  his  full,  perfect,  and  sufficient,  obla-
tion, and  satisfaction  for  the  sins  of  the  whole
world, — as  it  is  the  federal  communion  of  the  body
and  blood  of  Christ  in  the  Church, — and  as  he  has
promised  to  be  with  the  assembled  members  of  his
body, — so  we  believe  the  real  presence  of  Christ
with  all  true  participants^  to  strengthen  and
refresh  their  souls,  with  his  body  broken,  and  his
blood  shed,  on  the  cross,  of  which  this  is  the
communion  till  his  coming  again.

Q.  Do  the  Roman  Catholics  consider  that  there
is  any  thing  in  this  doctrine  contrary  to  sense  and
reason  ?

A.  They  admit  that  neither  human  reason  nor
common  sense  suffer  the  least  violence  in  this
explanation,  but  they  maintain,  that  it  is  con-
trary to  the  dogmas  ot  the  Church  of  Rome,  and
therefore  damnable.     When  they  descend  to  dis-


34

cuss  the  matter  in  fair  argument,  they  confess  thai!
they  are  justified,  and  we  condemned,  by  tlie  lan-
guage of  Christ  himself,  which  admits  (as  they
say)  of  none  but  the  literal  interpretation.

Q.  Is  it  not  a  strong  presumption  (to  say  the
least  of  this  matter)  against  any  doctrine  to  admit
that  it  is  contrary  to  sense  and  reason,  especially
in  a  matter  where  sense  and  reason  seem  to  be
the  proper  guides  ?

A.  Yes,  if  we  consider  that  the  evidence  for
the  truth  of  the  christian  religion  itself,  depends
on  the  truth  of  the  senses,  that  is,  on  the  accuracy
of  the  Apostles,  who  as  eyewitnesses  relied  for  the
truth  of  their  testimony  on  the  certainty  of  their
senses,  as  to  what  Jesus  did  and  said  in  their
presence.

Q.  Do  you  consider  that  we  are  bound  to  inter-
pret the  words  of  the  institution  literally  ?

A.  No  ;  we  are  no  more  bound  to  interpret
these  words  in  a  literal  sense  than  any  others  ;  we
are  no  where  told  by  Christ  or  his  Apostles,  that
the  literal  is  the  only  sense.  If  these  words  are
to  be  interpreted  literally,  why  not  the  last  words
of  Christ  on  the  cross,  which  are  less  figurative,
and  equally  solemn — "  It  is  finished  "  and  then
what  becomes  of  the  Sacrifice  of  the  Mass  ?  or
the  address  of  Christ  to  St.  Peter,  which  is  said
to  contain  an  express  institution,  "  Thou  art  Pe-
,ter,  and  on  this  Rock — "  yet  whoever,  even
among  the  most  zealous  Papists,  ever  maintained


S5

that   this   metamorphosis   literally  took   place.

Q.  Is  there  any  thing  in  the  words  *'  this  is
my  body,"  if  taken  with  the  context  "  which  is
is  given  for  you,  "  or  "  this  is  my  blood  "  taken
with  the  context,  "  which  is  shed  for  many  for
the  remission  of  sins,"  that  requires  a  literal  in-
terpretation, and  no  other  ?

A.  On  the  contrary,  the  words  seem  with  the
context  to  be  spiritual,  and  peculiarly  symbolical.
Indeed,  the  Apostles  would  scarcely  have  under-
stood them  literally,  for  at  the  time  of  the  insti-
tution, the  body  of  Christ  was  not  given,  and  his
blood  was  not  shed,  and  if  it  be  replied,  that  they
were  so  by  anticipation,  then  we  rejoin  that
when  the  body  was  give  q  and  the  blood  was  shed
upon  the  cross,  the  Apostles  certainly  understood
that  literal  sacrifice  to  have  been  for  a  spiritual
purpose,  and  ever  referred  to  it  as  such.  We  are
therefore  not  bound  to  tie  down  the  apprehensions
of  mankind  to  an  absurd  idea,  because  a  particu-
lar church  has  adopted  and  enforced  it  on  pain
of  damnation.

Q.  Is  the  literal  interpretation  consistent  with
the  analogy  of  scripture  '?

A.  By  no  means,  the  scriptural  expressions
applied  to  Christ's  persons  are  metonymical ;  I  am
the  Vi.e — I  am  the  Door — That  Rock  was  Christ
and  many  others  ;  and  if  it  be  asserted,  that  these
expressions  are  allegorical,  and  not  sacramental
(which  is  no  sufficient  reply)  we  assert  further,

d2


S6

that  the  Scriptures  call  the  sign  the  thing  signi-
fied, and  the  contrary.  Circumcision  which  an-
swers to  Baptism,  is  called  the  covenant,  of  which
it  was  the  sign.  The  Paschal  Lamb  was  called  the
Passover,  and  Christ  was  called  both  the  Lamb
and  the  Passover,  though  he  was  literally  neither,
but  figuratively  both.

Q.  But  if  we  take  the  word  apart  from  the  con-
text, and  in  the  strictest  independence  of  any  anal-
ogy, by  the  scriptural  use  of  the  terms  themselves,
are   we  obliged   to  arrive  at  the   literal  sense  ?

A.  On  the  contrary,  there  are  no  two  words  of
equal  importance  used  in  so  great  a  latitude  in  the
sacred  writings.  For  example,  the  body  is  used
to  express  the  material  part  of  man,  the  whole
man,  the  unrenewed  part  of  man,  the  sensitive
powers  and  corrupt  human  nature ;  the  substance
of  a  shadow  or  ceremony ;  the  human  nature  of
Christ;  the  Church  of  Christ  firmly  united  to
Christ,  and  among  themselves,  or  Christ's  mys-
tical body.  We  conclude,  therefore,  that  there
is  no  harshness  whatever  in  the  interpretation
which  we  give  of  these  words.  "  This  is  my  body
which  is  given  for  you."  This  bread  is  a  sign,
and  is  hereafter  to  be  a  memorial  of  my  body,
and  of  my  sufferings  in  it,  as  well  as  a  seal  and
pledge,  whereby  I  make  over  to  you  all  the  be-
nefits I  have  purchased  for  you.

Q.  Is  the   term   blood    generally   used  in   a
figurative  sense  ?


37

A.  Yes,  this  term  also  is  used  in  a  still  greater
latitude  in  the  sacred  scriptures.  The  blood
signifies  the  humour  of  the  body,  death,  murder
and  the  punishment  for  shedding  of  blood,  that
which  is  bought  or  purchased  with  blood — the
first  man  Adam — fallen  nature — the  guilt  or  pu-
nishment of  sin — human  reason — the  juice  of
grapes, — the  death  and  sufferings  of  Christ — the
blood  of  the  covenant,  i.  e.  the  blood  of  Christ,
whereby  the  new  covenant  was  ratified,  and
therefore  we  again  conclude,  that  there  is  no
harshness  whatever,  but  that  the  language  of
scripture,  if  there  were  no  absurdity  in  Transub-
stantiation,  requires  us  to  interpret  the  sacramen-
tal use  of  the  fruit  of  the  vine  as  symbolical.
"This  (cup)  is  my  blood  of  the  New  Testament
which  is  shed  for  many  for  the  remission  of  sins,"
as  a  very  short  time  after  the  institution  of  the
Sacrament,  Christ  expresses  again  the  thing  sig-
nified by  the  sign  "  O  my  Father,  if  it  be  possible
let  this  cup  pass  from  me.*'

Q.  What  is  the  communion  of  the  Sacrament  ?

A.  Our  eating  of  the  bread  and  drinking  of
the  cup  are  religious  actions,  by  which  Christ
communicates  himself  and  his  gTace  to  us,  and  we
communicate  our  souls  and  the  faculties  of  them
to  his  service.

Q.  What  is  the  communion  of  the  Saints  in
this  Sacrament  ?

A.  The  communion  of  the  Saints  is  that  fel-
D  3


38

lowship  which  true  christians  have  with  Christ  and
all  his  benefits,  by  faith,  and  among  themselves
by  a  perfect  charity,

Q,  May  it  not  be  sufficient  to  consider  the
Sacrament  a  memorial  feast  of  Christ,  as  the
ffreat  benefactor  of  mankind  ?

A.  The  very  phrase  "the  communion  of  the
body  and  blood  of  Christ,"  is  sufficient  to  shew,
that  such  a  feast,  especially  if  it  were  performed
without  a  religious  administration,  and  not  as  a
sacramental  act,  would  be  an  *  unworthy  '  and
untrue  representation  of  the  christian  Eucharist.
For  in  that  Eucharist  we  commemorate  the  death
of  our  Redeemer  for  the  sins  of  the  whole  world,
with  a  thankful  remembrance,  we  use  the  sym-
bols which  he  has  ordained,  as  signs  of  inward
and  spiritual  grace,  and  moreover  as  pledges  that
his  benefits  are  given  to  the  faithful  in  that  Sa-
crament.

Q.  Was  the  Sacrament  of  the  Lord's  Supper
ordained  for  the  exercise  of  the  social  principle
in  matters  of  religion,  or  to  graft  the  duties  of
religion  on  the  propensities  of  our  nature,  or  to
be  a  badge  of  church  membership  in  all  the  se-
parate communities  into  which  the  christian
Church  is  or  may  be  unhappily  divided  ?

A.  Some  of  these  benefits  and  effects,  result
from  the  administration  of  the  Sacrament,  but  the
great  design  of  it  is  not  merely  philosophical  or
economical,  but  spiritual  and  catholic,  to  comme-


39

morale  Christ's  death  for  the   sins  of  the  whole  <
world,  and  to  confirm  the  union  of  particulars  with
Christ  and  with  the  Holy  Church  throughout  all
the  world.

Q.  Is  it  unworthy  of  this  great  and  simple  in-
stitution to  fetter  the  administration  and  enjoy-
ment of  it,  with  the  rules  and  regulations  of  a
club  or  friendly  association  ?

A.  Yes,  these  impositions  are  inconsistent  with
the  spirit  of  the  gospel,  the  design  of  the  Sacra-
ment, the  practice  of  the  primitive  and  the  use-
fulness of  any  catholic  church.  Such  religious
associations  may  exist  without  the  administration
of  the  Lord's  Supper,  and  the  Lord's  Supper
may  be  duly  and  better  administered  without  such
narrow  feelings,  and  ti'ivial  terms,

Q.  Does  it  not  tend  to  promote  purity  in  the
administration  of  the  Sacrament  that  individuals
should  by  writing  or  orally  make  a  declaration  of
their  experience  before  the  assembled  Church  or
some  select  members  of  it  ?

A.  We  read  of  no  such  practices  or  distinc-
tions in  the  scriptures  ;  we  believe  that  the  gos-
pel requires  the  same  rule  of  life  and  manners  for
all  christians,  and  that  peculiar  associations  for
sanctity  within  the  bosom  of  the  church,  have  ten-
ded to  engender  pride,  hypocrisy,  and  divisions,
in  modern  times  ;  as  the  same  principles  in  for-
mer ages  of  the  Church  by  the  double  doctrine  of
precepts  and  counsels,  that   is   precepts   for   all


40

christians  and  counsels  for  a  select  few,  tended
to  produce  all  the  pride  and  folly  of  ascetick  in-
stitutions and  practices.

Q.  What  discipline  with  respect  to  this  Sacra-
ment seems  to  be  the  most  pure  and  evangelical  ?

A.  A  public  discipline  by  law  and  ordinance
known  and  received  of  all  men,  which  is  not  in-
quisitorial, and  which  can  shock  the  modesty  of
no  virtuous  individual.  With  this  a  voluntary
discipline  of  concience  and  confidence,  either  with
a  christian  minister  or  christian  friend, — ^that
which  confounds  public  and  private  discipline,
and  is  compulsory,  either  by  auricular  confession
to  the  priest,  or  an  imposed  social  declaration  of
private  experience,  seems  to  be  the  worst,  and
the  least  calculated  to  promote  sincerity,  humili-
ty, or  charity.

Q.  To  what  do  you  ascribe  the  defects  of  dis-
cipline in  the  Church  at  the  present  time  ?

A.  To  general  ignorance  of  the  capital  princi-
ples of  Christianity,  to  a  laxity  of  morals  arising
from  luxurious  and  commercial  habits,  and  espe-
cially to  the  proselyting  spirit  of  the  christian  sects
which  renders  it  as  easy  for  a  man  who  offends
or  is  offended  with  the  discipline  of  his  own  com-
munion, to  pass  over  to  another  as  to  pass  from
room  to  room,  or  to  change  the  fashion  of  his
dress.  While  underhand  and  officious  envy  and
strife,  and  a  frivolous  and  frequent  change  of  sect
and  sentiment  shall  be  so  prevalent  as  they  are,


41

the  efficacy  of  public  discipline,  and  the  tone  of
pubHc  morals,  especially  in  the  uninformed  part
of  the  community,  must  be  greatly  impaired.

Q.  Why  do  you  regard  the  Sacraments  of  the
christian  Church  rather  in  a  public  than  a  social
point  of  view  ?

A.  Because,  as  ordinances  of  Christ,  they  are
designed  like  his  religion  itself,  for  the  incorpo-
ration of  all  nations  of  the  earth  into  the  church
or  family  of  God — ^because  they  are  the  appoint-
ed substitutes  for  all  other  sacrifices,  symbolical
ceremonies,  or  badges  of  profession,  Jewish  or
Pagan.  As  baptism  is  the  porch  by  which  all
Jews  or  Gentiles  must  enter  into  the  Christian
Temple,  so  the  Eucharist  is  that  altar  at  which
the  disciples  of  Jesus  must  adore  his  name,  com-
memorate his  death,  receive  his  spirit,  and  devote
themselves  sacramentally  as  faithful  soldiers  to
his  service.

Q.  Why  do  you  consider  the  Sacrament  of
importance  with  reference  to  the  conversion  of
the  Jews  ?

A.  At  the  first  promulgation  of  the  Gospel
the  Christian  sacraments  contributed  essentially
to  bring  over  many  of  the  Jews,  from  the  syna-
gogue to  the  church.  They  saw  in  these  the
milder  symbols  of  the  new  covenant  which  was
established  on  better  promises.  These  symbols,
to  minds  invcterately  accustomed  to  carnal  ordi-
nances, facilitated  the  apprehension  of  the  great


42

doctrine  of  the  atonement  of  Christ's  sacrifice,
which  was  the  truth  of  all  their  types,  and  espe-
cially of  the  Paschal  sacrifice.  At  the  first
promulgation  of  the  Gospel  there  was  a  large
conversion  of  the  Jews,  since  that  time  there
have  been  scarcely  any  converts  from  that  peo-
ple. They  were  then  provoked  by  the  conver-
sion of  the  nations,  to  consider  the  christian  reli-
gion, and  the  sacraments  aided  their  transition
from  Moses  to  Christ.  In  our  own  times,  when
that  interesting  people  shall  see  as  we  anticipate,
a  full  harvest  of  the  Gentiles,  by  the  communion
of  the  Christian  sacrifice,  grafted  into  the  Church,
they  may  be  again  provoked  to  acknowledge
that  the  Desire  of  the  nations  is  come,  that  what
they  vainly  anticipate  is  already  accomplished,
that  tlie  religion  of  Moses  is  complete  in  Christ,
that  Christ  the  passover  is  sacrificed  for  us  and
them ;  and  thus,  the  veil  being  taken  from  their
eyes,  they  may  keep  the  feast,  not  with  the  old
leaven  of  malice  and  wickedness,  but  with  the  un-
leavened bread  of  sincerity  and  truth.

Q.  Is  this  sacrament  necessary  and  of  great
use  in  confirming  gentile  converts  ?

A.  Yes,  if  to  our  minds,  which  have  been  fami-
liar with  Christian  verities  from  infancy,  the
emblems  of  the  body  and  blood  of  Christ,  impress
our  hearts  through  the  medium  of  our  senses,
and  seem  almost  necessary  to  keep  up  the  re-
membrance of  Christ's  death  ;  how   much   more


43

requisite  must  the  outward  and  visible  signs  be,
when  the  gospel  is  preached  unto  the  Gentiles,
to  enable  them  to  apprehend  its  great  mysteries  !
To  minds  accustomed  to  abstract  ideas,  and  in-
tricate research,  the  Sacraments  as  means  of
knowledge  (though  never  as  instruments  of  grace,
pledges  of  mercy  and  bonds  of  union)  may  be  less
necessary  ;  but  to  those  who  have  had  no  con-
ceptions of  a  supreme  Being,  but  through  a  gross
and  sensual  idolatry ;  who  have  had  no  religious
impressions,  but  through  an  image,  a  sacrifice,  or
a  ceremony,  some  outward  and  visible  signs  (and
those  of  Christianity  are  the  simplest  and  most
expressive  that  can  be  conceived)  are  absolutely
necessary  for  their  instruction  in  truth,  and  com-
fort in  Christ,  that  being  no  more  strangers  and
foreigners,  they  may  be  made  fellow  citizens  with
the  saints  and  of  the  household  of  God.  In  a
country  placed  in  the  world  by  Providence  as
Great  Britain  is  in  connection  with  all  lands,  be-
nevolence and  charity  no  less  than  the  command
of  Him,  who  knew  what  was  in  man,  charge  it
upon  our  Church,  its  rulers,  and  members,  to
hold  in  high  estimation  and  holy  use,  the  sacred
symbols  of  christian  truth,  and  of  man's  rege-
neration and  redemption.

Q.  Is  this  Sacrament  of  great  use  in  the  chris-
tian Church  when  established  ?

A.  Yes,  it  is  the  communion  of  that  favored
society  where  there  is  no  distinction  between  men
of  different  nations  or  ranks  of  life,  where  there


44

is  neither  Greek  nor  Jew,  Barbarian,  Scythian,
slave,  nor  free — where  there  is  neither  indepen-
dence nor  inferiority,  but  all  are  in  subjection  to
Christ,  and  to  their  brethren.  Happy  would  it  be
for  the  Church  and  the  world,  if  this  communion
of  charity  and  bond  of  perfectness,  were  better  un-
derstood and  regularly  observed  by  the  friends
of  the  gospel.  Then  might  this  ordinance  of
Christ,  controul  the  foolish  conceits  and  angry
pretensions  of  many  who  seem  neither  to  know
what  they  say,  nor  whereof  they  affirm ;  and  then
might  men  learn,  through  that  consistency  of  sen-
timent and  behaviour  in  true  christians,  which  is
the  ornament  and  security  of  the  Church,  that
the  spirit  of  division  for  trivial  reasons  and  per-
sonal caprice,  is  not  the  spirit  of  a  true  disciple
of  Jesus  Christ.

Q.  Is  this  Sacrament  calculated  to  promote  as
well  the  virtue  and  happiness  of  individuals  as
the  honor  of  Christ  and  the  unity  of  the  Church  ?

A.  Yes,  by  recalling  us  from  our  errors  to  self-
examination  ;  to  repentance  for  our  trespassess
against  God  and  our  brethren ;  to  serious  pur-
poses of  amendment ;  to  lively  faith  in  God's
mercy  through  Christ,  and  to  a  perfect  charity
with  all  men ;  it  is  effectual  to  calm  our  passions,
strengthen  virtue,  and  cherish  hope,  amidst  the
suff*erings  and  changing  scenes  of  this  sublunary
world,  while  at  the  same  time,  it  is  the  earnest
and  antepast  of  heaven.


PART  11.
CHAPTER  I.

"  No,  No,  these  opinions  have  youth  in  their  countenance,  antiquity  knew
them  not,  it  never  thought  nor  dreamed  of  them."     Hooker.

(Bn  J^enance*

Q.  How  many  Sacraments  has  Christ  ordained
in  his  Church  ?

A.  "  Two  only,  as  generally  necessary  to  Sal-
vation, that  is  to  say,  Baptism  and  the  Supper  of
the  Lord."

Q.  Why  do  you  say  there  are  only  two  ?

A.  Because  Christ  himself  has  ordained  no
more,  with  the  material  substance,  form,  institu-
tion, and  spiritual  grace.

Q.  Does  the  Church  of  Rome  maintain  more
than  two  Sacraments  ?

A.  Yes,  the  Church  of  Rome  teaches,  that
there  are  seven,  viz.  Baptism,  the  Lord's  supper,
Confirmation,  Penance,  extreme  Unction,  Orders,


46

and  Marriage.  The  three  first  have  been  con-
sidered and  reasons  have  been  assigned  why  we
reject  Confirmation  as  a  Sacrament,  and  retain  it
as  a  christian  ceremony  and  practice  apostoHcal.

Q.  Why  do  we  reject  the  other  four  called
Sacraments  by  the  Church  of  Rome  ?

A.  Because  they  want  the  conditions  required
to  make  them  Sacraments,  being  either  not  insti-
tuted by  Christ  himself,  or  not  having  the  out-
ward signs,  or  since  the  times  of  the  Apostles
and  of  miracles,  being  destitute  of  the  things
signified,  and  generally  as  applied  to  supersti-
tious practices,  which  are  inconsistent  with  the
truth  of  the  gospel.

Q.  Has  Christ  informed  us  that  there  are  only
two  Sacraments  under  the  christian  dispensation  ?

A.  Yes,  by  instituting  no  more,  for  though  the
term  Sacrament  is  never  used  by  Christ  or  his
Apostles  ( it  being  as  is  well  known  a  Roman
military  term  adopted  by  the  fathers)  yet  the  two
great  institutions,  considered  apart  from  this
adopted  term,  are  the  only  two  which  will  bear
the  same  definition  and  conditions.

Q.  Did  not  the  ancient  fathers  fi-equently  use
the  word  in  their  writings  ?

A.  Yes,  they  not  only  used  it  to  express  Bap-
tism and  the  Lord's  supper,  but  the  Scripture,
the  gospel,  its  institutions,  and  indeed  all  the  arti-
cles of  faith  and  duties  of  religion,  both  under  the
old  and  new  covenant,    which  flesh  and  blood,


47

that  is,  sense  and  reason,  could  not  reveal  to  us.

Q.  Why  have  the  Romanists  fixed  upon  seven?

A.  This  number  was  not  fixed  till  a  thousand
years  after  Christ,  and  it  was  then  chosen  as  beinj^
the  sacred  number  of  the  scripture  ;  but  if  tradi-
tion must  be  followed,  and  the  sacred  number
retained,  the  number  of  Sacraments  might  as
well  be  fixed  at  seven  times,  or  seventy  times
seven.

A.  If  they  are  not,  accurately  speaking,  Sa-
craments, yet  are  they  all  as  required  by  the
Church  of  Rome,  divine,  christian  or  apostolical
institutions  ?

Q.  Marriage  is  a  divine  institution,  but  not  of
christian  origin ;  Confirmation  and  extreme
Unction  were  apostolical,  of  whicli  the  Church
of  Rome  has  adopted  a  corrupt  following  :  Or-
ders is  a  christian  institution,  yet  not  having  the
like  nature  of  Baptism  and  the  Lord's  Supper;
and  Penance  as  a  Sacrament  is  without  any
authority  from  scripture,  or  early  discipline  :  but
these   we    shall   consider    separately,    and    first

OF  PENANCE.

Q.  What  is  the  Sacrament  of  Penance,  as
taught  by  the  Church  of  Rome  ?

Q.  The  schoolmen  have  diff*ered  much  on  al-
most every  part  of  this  Sacrament,  as  to  the  form,
sign,  spiritual  grace  and  absolution  itself;  and
even  since  the  council  of  Trent,  it  is  evident  from


48

the  writings  of  Ronian  Catholics,  and  the  cate-
chisms of  different  countries,  that  the  precise
nature,  requirements  and  benefits  of  this  Sacra-
ment are  not  infallibly  defined.  Penance,  how-
ever, as  taught  by  the  Church  of  Rome  generally,
is  that  Sacrament  which  is  necessary  to  salvation
for  all  who  have  lost  the  grace  of  God,  by  the
commission  of  mortal  sins  after  Baptism ;  institu-
ted by  Christ,  when  he  said  to  his  Apostles,
"  Receive  ye  the  Holy  Ghost,  Whosoever  sins
ye  remit,  they  are  remitted,  and  whosoever  sins
ye  retain,  they  are  retained ;"  which  power  of
remitting  and  retaining  sins,  is  vested  in  the
bishops  and  priests,  who  remit  them  by  absolu-
tion, and  retain  them  by  denying  or  deferring
absolution.

Q.  Is  Penance  a  scriptural  term  *?

A.  Not  in  the  sacramental  sense  in  which  it  is
interpreted  as  above  described.  The  Romanists
certainly  do  render  in  their  versions  the  original
Greek  word,  which  we  translate  Repentance,  by
the  Latin  term  Penance,  but  since  the  exegetical
theology,  and  scriptural  criticism,  which  were
introduced  by  Calvin,  Beza,  and  other  Reform-
ers, and  which  have  been  so  perfectly  studied  in
Protestant  Universities  to  the  present  time,  have
ascertained,  beyond  the  possibility  of  doubt,  the
proper  use  of  the  word  in  the  original  and  its
special  use  in  the  christian  scriptures,  it  is  im-
possible for  any  well  informed   Roman  Catholic,


49

to  rest  the  Sacrament  of  Penance  on  the  scriptu-
ral and  critical  meaning  of  the  original  term.

Q.  Do  then  the  Roman  Catholics  themselves
distinguish  between  the  virtue  of  Repentance  and
the  sacrament  of  Penance  ?

A.  Yes;  they  say,  that  the  grace  of  Repen-
tance is  to  be  used  by  Jews,  Heathens,  and  all
before  Baptism ;  but  that  sins  after  Baptism  do
not  obtain  remission  through  Repentance  as  a
grace,  but  through  Penance  as  a  sacrament.
This  difference  they  illustrate,  by  saying  that  St.
Peter  exhorted  the  Jews,  that  were  yet  unbap-
tized  to  the  grace  of  Repentance,  and  Simon
Magus  after  Baptism  to  seek  remission  through
the  sacrament  of  Penance  ;  though  here  again  the
identical  term  mars  the  illustration,  destroys  the
difference,  trips  up  the  argument,  and  leaves  it  a
naked  or  rather  false  assertion.

Q.  What  is  then  required  in  this  Romish  sa-
crament of  Penance  ?

A.  It  is  required  that  there  be  these  four
essential  constituent  parts,  viz.  contrition  of
heart,  confession  of  mouth,  absolution  of  priest,
and  satisfaction  of  works.

Q.  What  contrition  is  required  ?

A.  There  are  two  kinds  of  contrition,  perfect
and  imperfect,  which  is  also  called  attrition.

Q.  What  is  perfect  contrition  *?

A.  Perfect  contrition  is  a  true  sorrow  for  hav-
ing offended  God  because  he  is  infinitely  good  and

E


50

hates  sin ;  and  the  Church  of  Rome  teaches,  that
by  this  perfect  contrition  all  sins  are  effaced,
even  before  the  absolution  of  the  priest,  and  so  far
at  least,  contrition  which  is  a  part  of  the  virtue  of
Repentance  as  well  as  of  the  sacrament  of  Pe-
nance, is  available  to  remove  sins  after  Baptism.

Q,  How  then  is  Penance  necessary  to  salva-
tion for  the  perfectly  contrite  ?

A.  They  are  not  exempt,  say  they,  from  the
reception  of  that  Sacrament,  because  as  it  is  an
institution  of  Jesus  Christ,  there  can  be  no
perfect  contrition,  without  a  resolution  to  obey
Christ's  commandment.  If  therefore  Penance
be  not  a  sacrament  of  Christianity,  but  an  eccle-
siastical discipline,  contrition  avails  without  it.

Q.  What  is  Attrition  ?

A.  Attrition  or  imperfect  contrition  is  a  sor-
row for  having  offended,  arising  either  from
shame,  or  fear,  or  secondary  motives,  which  does
not  efface  sin,  but  prepares  for  the  Sacrament,
and  becomes  effectual  through  the  absolution  of
the  priest ;  for  the  absolution  itself  creates  that
quantity  of  the  grace  of  contrition,  which  was
wanting  in  the  penitent,  and  thus  puts  the  im-
perfect on  as  good  a  ground  as  the  perfect,  who
was  indeed  absolved  before  absolution,  and  there-
fore is  no  better  for  it  quoad  the  remission  of
his  sins.  It  is  unnecessary  to  point  out  the  im-
morality of  such  distinctions.

Q.  What  is  the  second  thing  required  ?


51

A.  Confession  with  the  mouth,  by  which  the
penitent  detects  and  accuses  himself,  makes  pri-
vately and  secretly  into  the  ear  of  the  priest
(whence  it  is  called  auricular)  an  avowal  of  all,
at  least  of  all  mortal,  sins  ;  for  the  confession  of
venial  sins  is  recommended  not  commanded.

Q.  Is  the  injunction  respecting  the  confession
of  mortal  sins  strict  and  peremptory  ?

A.  Yes,  there  must  be  nothing  omitted,  or  the
absolution  is  void,  at  least  as  to  the  punishment
of  purgatory,  and  the  penitent  contracts  the  guilt
of  sacrilege  which  may,  however,  be  remitted
on  a  subsequent  confession.

Q.  How  do  we  regard  this  part  of  the  sacra-
ment of  Penance  *?

A.  As  it  is  required  by  unmarried  priests,
bound  in  one  confederacy  without  respect  to  the
laws  and  institutions  of  particular  countries,  we
regard  it  as  an  usurpation  inconsistent  with  the
liberties  of  mankind  :  as  it  is  compulsory  and  not
voluntary,  it  is  a  tyranny  over  individuals,  and
destroys  confidence ;  as  it  extends  to  all  the
actions,  desires,  thoughts,  with  all  their  circum-
stances, of  all  persons,  sexes,  and  ages,  whatever
may  be  the  state  of  their  passions  or  the  habits
of  their  lives,  it  is  disgusting,  mischievous,  and
immoral.

Q.  What  is  the  absolution  of  the  priest  ?

A.  It  is  the  sentence  by  which,  in  the  name  of
Christ,  and  by  his  authority,  the  priest  remits  all

E  2


52

the  sins  to  the  penitent,   which  he  has  confessed
and  is  the  principal  part  of  this  sacrament.

Q.  Why  is  Absolution  the  principal  part  of
this  sacrament  ?

A.  Some  have  contended  that  the  matter  of
Penance  consisted  in  the  duties  of  the  penitent,
while  others  have  asserted  that  those  acts  were
only  preparations,  and  that  the  Sacrament  itself
was  wholly  in  Absolution.  Since  the  council  of
Trent,  the  Church  of  Rome  has  held,  that  the
services  of  the  penitent  are  the  material  cause,
the  words  of  absolution  the  form,  and  to  that  ab-
solution, pronounced  by  the  priests,  the  Roman-
ists universally  ascribe,  the  chief  force  and  efficacy
of  the  sacrament  of  Penance.  Of  course,  there-
fore, the  power  to  remit  sins  after  Baptism,  is  the
priest's  only  ;  for  without  his  injunction,  authori-
ty, and  absolution,  there  is  no  Penance.  Con-
trition, grief,  confession,  satisfaction,  and  resti-
tution, avail  nothing  but  through  his  agency,  and
without  that  agency  and  consent,  there  is  no
remission  of  sins.

Q.  Do  we  find  any  where  in  scripture  such  a
discipline  as  this  enforced  upon  penitents,  or  such
an  absolution  pronounced  upon  individuals  in  the
history  of  the  Acts  of  the  Apostles,  the  practices
of  the  Churches  founded  by  them,  or  their  suc-
cessors for  many  generations  ?

A.  No,  though  no  subject  is  more  frequently
referred  to  than  Repentance,  or  more  frequently


53

enjoined  with  all  its  attendant  duties  and  circum-
stances, we  cannot  find  a  single  case,  in  which  the
conditions  of  this  Romish  sacrament  are  required.
Not  a  single  case  can  be  collected,  from  the
scriptures  or  the  writings  of  the  early  fathers,  in
which  the  Apostles  or  their  successors  discovered,
that  sins  could  be  remitted  only  by  a  priest,  and
by  a  priest  only,  after  auricular  confession,  by
sacramental  absolution.  For  Baptism  and  the
Lord's  Supper  there  are  proofs  and  attestations
innumerable  ;  for  the  sacramental  use  of  Confir-
mation, and  extreme  Unction,  and  Marriage,
there  are  some  strong  facts  and  allusions  ;  but
for  Penance  as  a  sacrament,  distinguished  from
personal  Repentance  and  public  discipline,
there  is  not  a  shadow  of  proof.  And  yet  the
priesthood  of  the  Church  of  Rome  maintain  that
they  have  power  to  alter  the  state  of  mens'  souls,
to  take  away  sin,  to  make  men  innocent,  or  to
retain  them  guilty,  without  bounds  or  limi-
tations with  respect  to  God  or  Man.  To  this
priesthood  of  like  passions  with  other  men,  and
without  the  social  restraints  of  other  men,  all
christians  are  called  upon  on  pain  of  damnation,
to  open  periodically  the  inmost  recesses  of  the
heart,  and  the  secret  actions  of  their  lives,  and  at
the  same  time  to  implore  at  the  hands  of  a
man  the  absolution  of  their  sins  as  necessary  to
their  salvation,  with  a  solemn  promise  to  do  the
Penance  which  he  enjoins,  whether  by  acts  of
E    3


54

charity,  or  by  corporal  inflictions,  and  mortifica-
tions.    We  have  not  so  learned  Christ.

Q.  What  is  meant  by  the  satisfaction  of  works
in  the  sacrament  of  Penance  ?

A.  It  is  the  reparation  of  the  injury  which  our
sins  have  done  to  God,  and  the  wrong  which  we
have  done  to  our  neif^hbours.  This  satisfaction
is  necessary,  because  Jesus  Christ  will  not  apply
the  merit  of  his  satisfaction,  but  to  those  who  join
their  satisfaction  to  his.  Satisfaction  must  be
fulfilled  after  absolution,  for  though  absolution
effectually  remits  the  eternal  pains  of  hell,  it
does  not  irreversibly  remit  the  punishments  of  this
life  or  of  purgatory.

Q.  What  objections  lie  against  these  doctrines?

A.  We  do  not  deny  that  satisfaction  is  due  to
God  and  man,  for  our  sins.  God's  law  is,  "the
soul  that  sinneth  it  shall  die,"  and  as  by  our  sins
we  have  broken  that  law,  its  sentence,  which  is
eternal  death,  can  only  be  averted  by  a  satisfac-
tion for  sin ;  that  satisfaction  Christ  has  made
full  and  perfect  for  all  who  believe  in  his  merits  ;
it  is  an  error,  therefore,  contrary  to  scripture  and
that  engenders  pride,  where  humility  alone  is  be-
coming, to  say  that  our  merits  are  to  be  joined  to
the  merits  of  Christ.  It  is  also  absurd  to  say
that  a  sinner  must  make  satisfaction  for  his  sins,
when  a  full  and  complete  pardon  is  already  grant-
ed. Nor  is  it  enough  to  assert  (and  that  without
any  authority)  that  satisfaction  is  made  for  eter-


55

nal  bnt  not  for  temporal  punishment ;  for  if  God
does  not  impute  to  us  our  sins,  temporal  suffer-
ings are  not  the  punishments  of  our  sins,  but  the
trials  of  our  virtues,  which  work  for  us  a  far  more
exceeding  and  eternal  weight  of  glory.  As  to
the  satisfaction  which  is  due  to  man,  by  every
restitution  and  reparation  in  our  power  of  injury
done  to  our  neighbour's  character,  property  or
happiness,  the  Church  of  Rome  maintains,  and
justly,  that  the  Church  can  never  dispense  with  it,

Q.  Are  there  any  other  errors  connected  with
the  doctrine  of  satisfaction  of  works  *?

A.  Yes.  We  admit  the  importance  of  prayer,
fasting,  and  alms  deeds,  when  performed  (  as
Christ  commands  with  respect  to  all  these  duties)
secretly  and  sincerely  to  God,  and  not  to  be  seen
of  men,  for  then  God  is  satisfied  to  see  our  duty
to  himself,  self  denial,  and  benevolence  to  our
fellow  creatures.  But  that  a  priest  can  deter-
mine the  proportion  which  ought  to  exist  between
sins  and  satisfaction  ;  that  Christ's  satisfaction  is
partly  for  temporal  and  partly  for  eternal  punish-
ments ;  that  our  good  works  are  meritorious,  not
only  in  our  own  behalf,  but  for  the  benefit  of
souls,  which  have  departed  this  life  in  debt,  and
are  now  in  purgatory  ;  and  that  the  treasure  of
the  accumulated  supererrogated  merit  of  Christ
and  the  Saints,  is  at  the  disposal  of  the  Church  and
may  be  distributed  for  indulgences,  that  is,  the
remission  of  punishments  due  to  sin  for  the  living


56

and  the  dead  ; — these  are  idle  and  dangerous  in-
ventions contrary  to  scriptui'e,  reason,  sound  mo-
rals, and  true  repentance,  and  therefore,  we
reject  them,  and  wipe  the  disgrace  and  dishonour
of  them  from  the  christian  name.

Q.  When  we  thus  reject  the  sacrament  of  Pe-
nance, auricular  confession  to  a  priest,  and  his
final  absolution  as  necessary  to  salvation,  do  we
also  reject  the  virtue  of  repentance,  confession,
and  remission  of  sins  ?

A.  No,  while  we  refuse  the  evil,  we  must  take
heed  that  we  also  choose  the  good.  These  cor-
ruptions which  have  overgrown  in  a  systematic
form,  the  christian  ministry,  doctrine,  and  prac-
tice, must  be  removed,  not  with  rustic  and  reck-
less ignorance,  but  with  the  tender  zeal  of  the
antiquary,  who  expects  to  find  beneath  the  rub-
bish, pearls,  and  coins,  and  precious  things ;  and
having  found,  knows  how  tc  value  them.  Re-
pentance, confession,  and  absolution  of  sin,  the
pleasure  of  God  in  the  reconciliation  of  his  chil-
dren ;  his  satisfaction  in  their  restoration  to  peace
and  happiness  in  this  world,  and  their  joy  and
glory  in  the  next,  are  the  invaluable  provisions  of
Christianity,  which  it  is  the  duty  of  the  ministers
of  the  gospel,  not  only  to  rescue  from  the  scorn
of  fools,  but  to  commend  to  the  consciences  of
the  wise  and  good.  That  repentance,  which  the
Church  of  Rome  allows  to  be  necessary  before
Baptism,  we  proclaim  to  be  necessary  for  every


57

sill  we  commit ;  those  satisfactions  (so  far  as  they
are  reasonable)  which  they  enjoin  by  the  priest,
we  say  are  the  natural  consequences  of  that  con-
version from  sin,  by  which  the  truth  of  our  re-
pentance is  known,  as  a  good  tree  is  known  by  its
good  fruits ;  this  repentance  without  the  absolu-
tion of  a  priest,  either  given  or  desired,  "  is  a
recovery  of  the  soul  of  man  from  deadly  sickness,
a  restitution  of  glorious  light  to  his  darkened
mind,  a  full  restoration  to  the  seat  of  grace  and
throne  of  glory,  a  triumph  over  sin  and  saving
victory."

Q.  Was  confession  required  among  the  Jews,
both  as  a  ceremonial  and  moral  act  ?

A.  Yes,  under  the  Jewish  religion  no  repen-
tance was  valid  that  was  not  accompanied  by
confession.  On  the  day  of  expiation,  each  Jew
confessed  to  God  for  himself,  and  the  priest
for  himself,  the  nation,  his  family  and  order.
They  confessed  on  their  conversion  from  any  par-
ticular crime  or  sin.  When  a  man  was  publicly
punished  and  executed  for  his  crimes,  he  was
taught  that  his  repentance  was  unavailing,  with-
out confession  of  his  sins.  In  the  case  of  trans-
gressions between  brethren,  confession  of  wrong
done  and  restitution  were  always  required.  The
confession  of  the  Jews,  at  the  Baptism  of  John,
shews,  that  they  were  prepared  by  their  religious
habits,  to  make  a  confession  of  sins,  as  a  proof  of
their  repentance.


58

Q.  Now  that  the  ceremonial  law  has  ceased,
are  contrition,  confession,  and  restitution  re-
quired as  moral  acts  ?

A.  Yes,  these  religious  acts  are  required,  and
peculiarly  recommended  by  the  gospel.  It  is,
moreover,  probable  that  most  of  our  Lord's  dis-
ciples had  been  men  of  irregular  lives,  who  had
been  trained  in  the  baptist's  school  to  these  duties.

Q.  Is  voluntary  confession  a  part  of  Christian
Repentance  ?

A.  Yes,  both  private  and  public  confession
to  God  and  Man,  are  required  by  the  Gospel.

Q.  What  do  you  understand  by  private  con-
fession to  God "?

A.  It  is  so  essentially  the  character  of  all
Men,  that  we  "  have  sinned  and  come  short  of  the
Glory  of  God,"  that  it  is  impossible  to  conceive
that  a  Christian  can  humbly  seek  God's  favor,
or  thankfully  acknowledge  his  mercies,  without
a  confession  of  his  great  unworthiness ;  moreover
w^e  are  all  so  prone  to  offend  in  many  things,
and  through  the  force  of  our  passions,  love  of
pleasure,  forgetfulness  of  God  and  our  duty,  to
offend  seriously  ;  that  the  private  and  contrite
confession,  of  our  particular  violations  of  God's
will,  our  own  conscience,  and  other  men's  happi-
ness, must  be  a  necessary,  as  it  is  a  commanded
ingredient  in  true  repentance,  to  which  the  re-
mission or  absolution  of  sins  is  promised  in  the
gospel.


59

Q.  What  is  public  confession  of  sins  before
God?

A.  Public  confession  is  made  in  the  Church,
when  in  her  daily  service  the  minister  and  con-
gregation, at  the  commencement  of  public  wor-
ship confess  their  sins.  This  confession  is  also
made  in  the  communion  service  with  singular
tenderness  and  effect.  After  these  confessions
the  minister,  according  to  the  promise  and  com-
mand of  the  gospel,  pronounces  to  "  the  people,
being  penitent,  the  absolution  and  remission  of
their  sins,  "  in  order  that  repentance  may  be
accompanied,  with  a  lively  faith  in  God's  mercy,
through  Christ,  without  which  it  is  impossible  to
please  God  in  our  devotions.  That  absolution
we  believe  God  in  heaven  ratifies  to  the  penitent
and  faithful,  and  whosoever  sins  are  thus  remit-
ted on  earth,  will  we  doubt  not  be  remitted  in
heaven.

Q.  What  is  the  public  confession  of  sins  before
the  Church  ?

A.  It  would  require  more  reference  to  ecclesi-
astical history,  than  is  compatible  with  our  design,
to  explain  fully  the  occasion  of  this  species  of  con-
fession. It  may  be  sufficient  to  observe,  that  during
the  great  persecutions  which  took  place  before  the
reign  of  Constantine  many  professing  Christians
(  as  might  be  expected  )  lapsed  into  idolatry,  and
to  avoid  persecution  and  death,  libelled  Christian-
ity itself,  and  were  guilty  of  apparent  if  not  real


«p«VN<ttoy  rtrt«M*  IVuptixm.  As  llus  wunji  \io1»(iou
ottluMr  «luty  io  n»ns(,  mUo  hus  (;»n}.vh(  us,  (hut
**  whtVHoovt^r  Mill  stwo  his  hTo  shall  los<^  i(.  n\u\
xvhosoovti  >mII  Kvho  his  lilo  fwr  m\  s.ik*^  n\u\  i\\v
^>sii\>t>W  i\\^^  }M\\\o  shall  Nuvo  »(.'*  (ho  »hns(i;u»
Ohutvhos  o»tl«inc^»l.  tha(  uo  h)|>sSO()  ohrisOMU
shouUl  ho  »vooiYc^«l  into  oon\nu\uio\i  without  n
fM^hho  ooutVssiou  !*(' his  l'aul(.  auil  (ho  »vu»issu>u
or  »Ksnhititvu  oV  th«>  Ui9^h\>|^s  uud  jmstoi^  oCtho
i'hvuvh*

ij.  P\il  |>v\\;\(o  ooutVssiou  l>ot'o\v  tho  {unost
anso  o\>(  o(  (h»s  jucuMioo  V

A.  Vos.  whou  (.'hnstirtuity  o\(o\\»UhI  o\<m-  (ho
>vt\ston\  o\\\j>i»v.  inu\  ooiupi-x^houtUnl  \ujutv  Ivu^lm-
vxMW  «iu^  iV»>vss\y  i|^*uor.n\(  uaCious.  k  Ihs\-u\\o
inn>\vssihh>  to  out\MVo  this  *U?^Mpliu<c>.  ai\il  (hr
pmotioo  of  private  ooulVvssiou  tt>npi>oiiit«Hl  priovsts
Wtts  AuKs(\(uto<\  IW  it^  This  was  Sih>u  }»ir:\iu
oo\TU\>(«tsl.  t»U  hy  <lo4»nvos  ^  u»  (ho  ajj^^s  which
m*y  U^  tnUy  oaUo«l  ilark  )  tho  |M«otioo  or«urir^b>
lwM>tMit\\^o»\  (v>  (ho  priost,  «t  K^st  ouor  «  Y<H\r,
\v»5k  tWlaivt^  ««H''<\ssttry  t\>  »>ht<uu  tho  ahsolution
t^t^tho  l''hu»vh  autlot'tu>»l  )\in»sv^lt'.

i^\  IVh-'s  (ho  Clwuvh  ot'  Kuiilauvl  wsjuiiv  (ho
^Mihlio  i>xxut'ossiou  ot'i^nwss  oriuios  i

A  \  OS,  lH>th  iho  <HvWi«stio«l  «»u\  oivU  /^imns
^xi'  Um<H>«utry  »v<(«i4v  t\\<>  K\\i\(<^\w\  of  w4\m**m*
^mhlio  i^ourtuoo,  wml  satistuotiow  tor  puhlio  s%^aiw
<lals  auJ  sUmloi's,  It  must  l>o  ooutVss<\U  that  ihs-
C4|>llWo  iit    praotioo.    is  uo(    what    iu    thtSMV  (ho


(  Mmirli  f»i  pri  Imps  jiiiMir  viihio,  rrfjiiiirq  if
hIkmiM  1)1-.  'riiis  vi  not,  liownvrr,  fi  (lillirully  (rli
only  l»y  Hn-  ( 'lnmli  ol'  l''np;lMiul.  Aiirirulnr  ron-
(oHMioii  iiiiil  |Miriliiiiii'nl  <li»('i|)liiir  linv<'  not  Im(mi
iiKjfo  MurroHHriii.  Till-  ( 'liurrli  ol  lOnf^lniKJ,  ron-
liidrriii^;  i\w  miinl»<'rvj  williiii  Iht  |>nl«\  is  us  JVin
from  (lisj/rncrriil  roiniiiiiiiictiulK,  ii«  mruilhn'  Boric-
fio«.  It  imml  hIho  ]u^  iMumidonMl,  flint  wm  nvr»w
Mild  iimtiiydiir  pnii«'i|»i'-  nf  pt ticlirr  (liiii  II  iiiinm*
Id  imi'il  n(.(  net.  I'roin  priviito  opinion  or  mirr^t
slnndnr,  Imt  tVoin  tlir  rvidiMUMMil'  t'Hrt»,  ronl'ossion
ol'iniilt  or  «l«'rision  or«'«»iirt«4.  I  lo  innst  not  nmko
liimH'ir  iicrnwcr,  jnry  »ind  jn(l|/i\  nnd  RrpMiuto
without  tliii  HMfirtion  ol*  tlio  ordiniiry  or  «MM*l»^«i»m-
ticjil  courts,  on  lii*4  own  rrsponsiliility,  liom  llir
(•oiiiiriMiiKin  or<Ilnisl,  "  IVInny  lluTo  fin^  rrr-lnini*
v(\  (14  l'rl«r;  nifiny  us  .Indus,  known  well  rnon^rli
and  t(d(<nit<-.d  ;  ninny  wincli  trnist  ronuiin  nndis-
rov<T^d  till  tlir  duy  (»t' liis  iipprhrunrc,  l»y  whom
th«-  Mivn'-t   r.orniTs  oT  durknrss  will    h«-  hronjrht

into  open   lirrlil . "

(yK    |)o«'R  th«-    (ylnirrlidf   I'wijrhinrI  nvotrnn^nd
tho  disciplino  (»!'  ronsiirnrc   nnd  privnt^  ronlV'^
«ion  V

A.  Shr  exhorts  nil  to  «xnirniw'  nnd  pid^^i
fln"niH«'.lvr««,  thnt  th«y  l»r  not  pid^-;**!  mT  tiw  I.omI.
Am  to  privnt<i  r.ofd'c>*«ion  of  f'nultM,  tho  (ylnncli
n-fpiircs  it,  nnd  with  it  restitution  nnd  r'pnrntion
of  wron^.  The  prrc.ept  ol'C'hrist  is  hindni^  on
ulU  find  to  there  own  Master  all  will  Mlnnd  or  tall.


62

"  If  thou  bring  thy  gift  to  the  Altar,  and  there
rememberest,  that  thy  brother  hath  ought  against
thee,  leave  there  thy  gift  before  the  Altar,  and  go
thy  ways,  first  be  reconciled  to  thy  brother  and
then  come  and  offer  thy  gift."  The  absolution
of  sin  and  the  benefits  of  the  Eucharist  are
conditional  on  our  "  love  and  charity  to  our
neighbour  "  and  if  for  their  railing  many  would
render  to  the  Church  their  blessing,  for  slander
love,  and  for  causeless  separation,  unity,  the  dis-
cipline of  concience  and  of  charity,  would  be  far
more  effectual  than  any  which  human  laws,  civil,
ecclesiastical,  or  regimental,  can  secure.

Q.  Does  the  Church  of  England  enforce  pri-
vate confession  to  the  priest  and  private  absolu-
tion in  all  cases  before  the  communion  and  before
death  ?

A.  No,  she  never  enforces  private  confession,
or  private  absolution  in  any  case,  she  recom-
mends it  to  none,  but  when  the  penitent  in  order
to  his  reconciliation  to  the  Church,  desires  it,
cannot  satisfy  his  concience  without  it,  or  is  like-
ly to  die  with  a  heavy  burden  on  his  soul.  Here
the  Church  uses  the  authority  of  the  Church,
releases  the  sinner  tied  and  bound  with  the  chain
of  his  sins,  unties  the  heavy  burden,  and  lets  the
oppressed  go  free.  This,  however,  is  only  ac-
cording to  the  "  power  and  commandment "  given
to  the  minister  of  the  gospel,  as  we  shall  ex-
plain, when  we  come  to  speak  of  the  sacrament


63

of  extreme  Unction,  and  the  visitation  of  the
sick.

Q.  Are  there  any  illustrations  in  the  gospel
history  of  contrition,  confession,  absolution,  res-
titution and  excommunication  ?

A.  Yes,  many  very  remarkable,  highly  inter-
esting to  humanity  aud  explanatory  of  this  entire
subject.

CASE    I.

Q.  In  the  personal  ministry  of  our  Lord  do
we  read  of  any  instance  of  contrition  of  heart,
without  a  verbal  avowal  of  acts  and  absolution
without  penance,  through  faith  ?

A.  Yes,  that  of  Mary  Magdalen,  who  though
a  great  sinner  was  absolved  by  our  Lord,  on  her
repentance  and  faith.  The  story  is  related  with
inimitable  simplicity  and  pathos  by  the  Evange-
list St.  Luke,  and  is  unrivalled  in  its  kind.
"  And  behold,  a  woman  in  the  city,  who  was  a
sinner,  when  she  knew  that  Jesus  sat  at  meat  in
the  Pharisee's  house,  brought  an  alabaster  box
of  ointment,  and  stood  at  his  feet  behind  him,
iveeping,  and  began  to  ivash  his  feet  with  her
tears^  and  did  ivipe  them  ivith  the  hairs  of  her
head,  ajid  kissed  his  feet,  and  anointed  them
with  the  ointment.  Now  when  the  Pharisee
which  had  bidden  him  saw  it,  he  spake  within
himself,  saying.  This  man,  if  he  were  a  Prophet,
would  have  known  who  and  what  manner  of  wo-
man this  is  that  toucheth  him  :    for  she  is  a  sin-


64

new  And  Jesus  answering  said  unto  him,  Simon,
I  have  somewhat  to  say  unto  thee.  And  he
saith,  Master,  say  on.  There  was  a  certain  cre-
ditor which  had  two  dehtors  :  the  one  owed  five
hundred  pence  and  the  other  fifty.  And  when
they  had  nothing  to  pay,  he  frankli/  forgave
them  both.  Tell  me,  therefore,  which  of  them
will  love  him  most  *?  Simon  answered  and  said,
I  suppose  that  he,  to  whom  he  forgave  the  most.
And  he  said  unto  him,  Thou  hast  rightly  judged.
And  he  turned  to  the  woman,  and  said  unto
Simon,  Seest  thou  this  woman'?  I  entered  into
thine  house,  thou  gavest  me  no  water  for  my
feet  :  but  she  hath  washed  my  feet  with  tears,
and  Miped  them  with  the  hairs  of  her  head.
Thou  gavest  me  no  kiss  ;  but  this  woman  since
the  time  I  came  in,  hath  not  ceased  to  kiss  my
feet.  ]My  head  with  oil  thou  didst  not  anoint ;
but  this  woman  hath  anointed  my  feet  with  oint-
ment. Wherefore  I  say  unto  thee,  Her  sins,
which  are  many  are  forgiven^  for  she  loved
much,  for  to  whom  little  is  forgiven  the  same
loveth  little.  And  he  said  unto  her,  Thy  sins
are  forgiven.  And  they  that  sat  at  meat  with
him  began  to  say  within  themselves.  Vv'ho  is
this  that  forgiveth  sins  also  "?  And  he  said  to  the
Woman,  Thy  faith  hath  saved  thee,  go  in
peace."

CASE  II.

Do  Me  find  any  instance,  in    the   Evangelical


65

history,  of  public  confession  of  guilt,  where  satis-
faction could  not  be  made,  and  which  will  justify
the  Church,  in  offering  the  mercy  and  sacrament
of  the  gospel  to  persons  on  their  death  bed,  and
even  to  condemned  criminals  on  their  repentance
and  faith?"

A.  Yes,  the  following.  "And  one  of  the  ma-
lefactors, which  were  hanged,  railed  on  him
saying,  If  thou  be  Christ,  save  thyself  and  us.
But  the  other  answering  rebuked  him,  saying,
Dost  not  thou  fear  God,  seeing  thou  art  in  the
same  condemnation?  And  loe  indeed  justly^
for  we  receive  the  due  reward  of  our  deeds,  but
this  man  hath  done  nothing  amiss.  And  he  said
unto  Jesus,  Lord  remember  me  when  thou  com-
est  into  thy  Kingdom.  And  Jesus  said  unto
him.  Verily  I  say  unto  thee  to  day  shalt  thou
he  with  me  in  Paradise.''

CASE    III.

Q.  Do  we  find  in  the  gospel  history  any  case
of  repentance,  confession  without  avowal  of  acts,
with  voluntary  restitution  and  almsdeeds,  followed
by  absolution,  without  any  express  form  ?

A.  Yes,  the  case  of  Zaccheus  the  publican.
"  And  behold  there  was  a  man  named  Zaccheus,
which  was  the  chief  among  the  publicans,  and  he
was  rich.  And  he  sought  to  see  Jesus  who  he  was,
and  he  could  not  for  the  press,  because  he  was
little  of  stature.  And  he  ran  before,  and  climbed
up  into  a  sycamore  tree,  to  sec  him ;    for  he  was

F


66

to  pass  that  way.  And  when  Jesus  came  to  the
place,  he  looked  up,  and  saw  him,  and  said  unto
him,  Zaccheus,  make  haste  and  come  down,  for
to-day  I  must  abide  at  thy  house.  And  he  made
haste  and  came  down  and  received  him  joyfully.
And  when  they  saw  it,  they  all  murmured,  say-
ing, That  he  was  gone  to  be  guest  with  a  man
that  was  a  sinner.  And  Zaccheus  stood  forth
and  said  unto  the  Lord ;  Behold,  Lord,  the
half  of  my  goods  I  give  to  the  poor,  and  if  I
have  taken  any  thing  from  any  man  by  false
accusations,  1 7'estore  him  fourfold.  And  Jesus
said  unto  him,  This  day  is  salvation  come  to  this
house,  forasmuch  as  he  also  is  a  son  of  Abra-
ham. For  the  Son  of  Man  is  come  to  seek  and
to  save  that  which  was  lost."

CASE    IV.

Q.  Do  we  find  any  example  in  the  gospel  of
attrition,  confession  of  deeds,  and  unavailing  res-
titution made  not  to  the  injured  party,  or  from
true  repentance,  but  from  the  horrors  of  a  guilty
conscience,  to  the  partners  of  his  crime  ?

A.  Yes,  one  wretch,  Judas  Iscariot,  who  by  a
course  of  deceit,  pretended  virtue,  hypocrisy,  and
love  of  money,  prepared  his  soul  for  that  diabol-
ical act  of  treachery  by  which  he  sold  his  master
for  thirty  pieces  of  silver.  The  history  of  this
horrid  transaction  is  thus  graphically  recorded
by  the  Evangelists — **  Then  one  of  the  tw  elve
called  Judas  Iscariot,  went  unto  the  chief  priests,


67

and  saitl  unto  them,  What  will  ye  give  me,  and
I  will  deliver  him  unto  you  ?  And  they  cove-
nanted with  him  for  thirty  pieces  of  silver.  And
from  that  time  he  sought  opportunity  to  betray
him.  Now  when  even  was  come,  Jesus  sat  down
with  the  twelve.  And  as  they  did  eat,  he  said,
Verily  I  say  unto  you,  that  one  of  you  shall  be-
tray me.  And  they  were  exceeding  sorrowful
and  began  every  one  of  them  to  say  unto  him,
Lord  is  it  I  ?  And  he  answered  and  said,  he
that  dippeth  his  hand  with  me  in  the  dish,  the
same  shall  betray  me.  Then  Judas,  which  be-
trayed him,  answered  him  and  said,  Master,  is
it  I?  He  said  unto  him,  thou  hast  said.  And
afterwards,  while  Jesus  spake  (to  his  disciples  in
the  garden)  Behold  a  multitude,  and  he  that
was  called  Judas,  one  of  the  twelve,  went  before
them,  and  drew  near  unto  Jesus  to  kiss  him.  But
Jesus  said  unto  him,  Judas,  betrayest  thou  the
Son  of  Man  with  a  kiss  ?  Then  took  they  him,
and  lead  him,  and  brought  him  unto  the  high
priest's  house.  Then  Judas  that  had  betrayed
him,  when  he  saw  that  he  was  condemned,  re-
pented himself^  and  brought  again  the  thirty
pieces  of  silver  to  the  chief  priest,  and  elders,
saying,  /  hcwe  sinned  in  that  I  have  betrayed
innocent  blood.  And  they  said,  what  is  that  to
us,  see  thou  to  that.  And  he  cast  doion  the
pieces  of  silver  in  the  temple^  and  departed  and
went  and  hanged  himself."

f2


68

Q.  What  do  vve  learn  from  these  scriptural
cases  ?

A,  We  learn  that  a  confession  of  our  offences
is  necessary,  when  we  are  convinced  that  we  have
offended  God  or  man ;  that  in  such  confession  it
is  not  necessary  to  detail  publicly  or  into  the  ear
of  a  priest,  all  the  cirumstances  of  our  crimes  ;
that  works  meet  for  repentance,  chastity,  restitu-
tion, charity  and  almsdeeds  should  accompany  it ;
and  that  the  absolution  of  sins,  may  be  expressed
by  the  minister  of  the  gospel,  with  or  without  a
particular  form.

CASE    V.

EXCOMMUNICATION.

Q.  Do  we  find  that  Jesus  Christ  has  vested  in
the  Church  any  power  of  discipline  for  the  sup-
pression of  divisions  and  heresies,  or  for  the  cor-
rection of  scandalous  offenders.

A.  Yes,  Jesus  Christ  has  told  us  that  such
cases  are  to  be  settled  and  corrected  if  possible,
by  private  conference  and  admonition,  that  where
that  fails  they  must  be  examined  by  two  or  three
witnesses — and  that  on  the  evidence  of  such  wit-
nesses the  matter  is  to  be  heard  and  decided  by
the  Church.  "  If  he  shall  neglect  to  hear  them
(the  witnesses)  tell  it  unto  the  Church,  but  if  he
neglect  to  hear  the  Church,  let  him  be  unto  thee


69

as  a  heathen  man  and  a  pnbUcan."  To  this  pub-
lic discipline  of  the  Church,  and  not  to  auricular
confession,  Christ  adjudges  an  ultimate  and  su-
preme authority  of  excommunication  and  absolu-
tion. In  the  case  of  the  Apostles  who  were
infallible  in  their  ministry,  the  sentences  passed
under  their  authority  were  infallible  :  but  we  can-
not conceive,  that,  sentences  (though  they  may
be  presumed  just  when  founded  on  due  course
of  law  and  evidence)  are  now  without  error,
cither  through  false  witnesses,  or  the  fallibility  of
all  human  judgments,  when  not  directed  by  divine
inspiration.  The  words  of  Christ,  therefore,
which  when  applied  to  the  Apostles  may  be  taken
strictly,  when  applied  to  the  Church  in  other
ao'es,  must  be  taken  with  a  due  allowance  for  hu-
man  frailties.  "  Verily  I  say  unto  you,  whatsover
ye  shall  bind  on  earth,  shall  be  bound  in  heaven,
and  whatsoever  ye  shall  loose  on  earth,  shall  be
loosed  in  heaven."

Q.  Was  the  authority  which  was  given  to  St.
Peter  the  same  as  that  which  was  ti'iven  to  the
rest  of  the  Apostles  and  to  the  Churches,  under
their  direction  ?

A.  When  St.  Peter  expressed  the  true  faith  of
the  divinity  and  Messiahship  of  Christ  on  which
the  Church  is  built,  our  Lord  gave  to  him  indivi-
dually, the  same  power  as  he  gave  to  the  Apostles
generally,  and  which  was  exercised  by  them  in
the  Churches  "  Thou  art  Peter,  and  on  this  Rock

F  3


70

will  I  build  my  Church,  aud  the  jj'ates  of  hell  shall
not  prevail  against  it,  and  I  will  give  unto  thee  the
keys  of  the  kingdom  of  heaven,  and  whatsoever
thou  shalt  bind  on  earth  shall  be  bound  in  heaven,
and  whatsoever  thou  shalt  loose  on  earth  shall  be
loosed  in  heaven."  In  other  words,  thou  shalt
have  a  plenary,  infallible  apostolic  authority  to
preach  the  gospel,  and  to  direct  the  establishment
and  discipline  of  the  infant  Churches.

Q.  Were  extraordinary  powers  vested  in  the
Apostles  for  directing  the  establishment  and
government  of  the  first  Churches  ?

A.  It  is  evident  that  the  Apostles  were  autho-
rized to  defend  the  discipline  and  purity  of  the
Church  with  miraculous  power.  This  power
was  exercised  by  St.  Peter,  in  a  case  of  disci-
pline, by  the  infliction  of  death  on  Ananias  and
Sapphira,  when  the  gates  of  hell  were  opened
against  the  infant  Church,  and  the  faith  and
purity  of  the  first  Christians,  as  well  as  the  Chris-
tian cause  itself,  were  endangered  by  lying  and
fraud.  The  same  power  was  exercised  by  St.
Paul  on  Elymas  the  sorcerer,  who  was  stricken
blind  for  blasphemy  and  impugning  the  Christian
doctrine — on  Hymenoeus  and  Alexander  for  apos-
tacy  and  blasphemy,  and  on  the  Corinthian  ex-
comunicate,  for  illicit  marriage  and  incest — in
which  case  the  sentence  (or  as  the  word  implies,
die  piniishment  established  by  law,  i.  e.  the  law
of  Christ,  or  the  lawful  authorised  punishment  of


71

excommunication  )  was  reversed  on  the  repen-
tance of  the  criminal,  who  was  again  restored  to
the  communion  of  the  Church.  This  guilty  per-
son, by  a  public  sentence  of  excommunication,
given  to  St.  Paul  by  the  Spirit  (  as  in  the  case  of
the  discipline  of  the  Sacrament  )  and  confirmed
by  the  power  of  Christ,  had  been  delivered  to
Satan,  i.  e.  cut  off  from  the  Christian  body  and
treated  as  a  Heathen  man.  It  is  probable  also,
that  the  sentence  was  accompanied  with  a  per-
sonal chastisement,  inflicted  by  the  miraculous
power,  as  a  mark  of  the  justice  of  the  excommu-
nication, and  of  the  sinfulness  of  his  crime.

Q.  Do  these  cases  justify  the  Church  of  Rome
in  assuming  to  herself  the  apostolical  and  mira-
culous powers  of  the  keys,  the  infallible  right
of  excommunicatinii'  and  anathematiziu"'  all
christian  kings,  nations,  and  Churches,  that  may
not  adopt  her  doctrines,  practices,  and  man-
dates ?

A.  The  Church  of  Rome  has  no  more  power
to  anathematize  all  other  Christians,  as  she  has
done  in  the  decisions  of  the  council  of  Trent,
than  she  has  power  to  strike  men  blind,  or  sick,
or  dead — By  such  anathemas  she  has  adopted
schism  and  made  it  incurable.  The  Apostles
used  their  powers  but  seldom  ;  they  left  no
orders  respecting  them,  because  they  were  not  to
be  permanent  functions  of  the  Church.  They
did  not  teach  the  Church  of  Antioch  to  excom-


72

iiUHiicate  the  Church  of  Corinth,  or  the  Church
of  Jerusalem  to  anathematize  the  Church  of
Rome  ;  nor  did  they  teach  Churches  to  anathe-
matize individuals  for  not  worshipping  images,
the  souls  of  Saints,  the  Mass-god,  and  the  like  ;
They  instructed  each  Church,  and  all  Churches,
to  correct  scandalous  offenders,  in  extreme  cases,
for  gross  crimes,  and  that  with  a  view  to  their
edification.

Q.  What  does  the  doctrine  of  Christ  himself,
with  respect  to  the  authority  of  the  Church,  con-
sidered apart  fi'om  the  infallible  authority  of  the
Apostles,  teach  us  ?

A.  It  teaches  that  in  all  divisions  respecting
faith  and  practice,  the  decisions  of  the  Church,
if  they  be  according  to  scripture,  are  to  be  res-
pected— that  in  matters  of  discipline  and  order,
her  decisions,  if  they  be  not  opposed  to  scripture,
or  justice,  or  charity,  are  to  be  obeyed — that  for
open  apostacy,  blasphemy  and  impugning  of
Christianity,  as  well  as  for  incest,  illicit  marriage,
and  gross  vices,  offenders  are  to  be,  on  evidence
of  facts  and  witnesses,  excommunicate ;  but  that
such,  on  repentance,  may  receive  absolution,  and
be  again  restored  to  communion  by  proper  au-
thority. It  is  for  the  interest  of  the  laity  that
they  should  sanction  cordially,  as  they  have
legislatively,  the  order  and  discipline  of  the
Church — That  discipline,  however,  can  never  be
brought  about  by    unseasonable   and  indiscreet


73

zeal,  or  by  the  affectation  of  infallible  power,
which  would  destroy  the  moral  as  well  as  the
disciplinarian  restraints  of  the  Church,  as  it  has
done^in  those  countries  where,  by  confounding  in
trifles  positive  and  moral  obligation,  it  has  been
attempted.  After  all  that  can  be  done,  the  tares
will  grow  with  the  wheat,  and  if  we  attempt  too
rigidly  or  prematurely  to  pluck  up  the  one,  we
shall  probably  root  out  the  other.  The  Church
of  England,  therefore,  has  done  wisely  in  confin-
ing its  canons  of  excommunication  to  gross
offenders,  on  conviction  of  witnesses,  and  in  pro-
viding for  the  absolution  and  restoration  of  such
on  their  repentance,  by  proper  authorities —
while  it  still  maintains  the  right  of  the  Church
to  excommunicate  according  to  the  authority  of
Christ;  *'  That  person  which  by  open  denuncia-
tion of  the  Church,  is  rightly  cut  off  from  the  com-
munion of  the  Church,  and  excommunicate,  ought
to  be  taken  of  the  whole  multitude  of  the  faithful
as  a  heathen  or  a  publican  :  until  he  be  openly
reconciled  by  penance  and  be  received  unto  the
Church  by  a  Judge  that  hath  authority  there-
unto."   Art.  33.


CHAPTER  IL


"  Id  vero  perspicuum  fiet,  si  verba  quibus  Sanctus  Jacobus  Apostolus  hujus
Sacrameoti  legem  promulgavU  attendamus. "

Catechismus  ConcUii  Tridentini.


lExtumc  Mmtion*

Q.  What  is  the  next  Romish  Sacrament  which
we  reject  ?

A.  The  sacrament  of  extreme  unction,  which
comes  naturally  to  be  considered  in  connexion
with  the  sacrament  of  penance.  For  as  penance
requires  contrition,  confession,  and  absolution  for
all  Christians  during  life  and  health,  so  in  the  sa-
crament of  extreme  unction,  the  same  conditions
( if  possible  )  are  required,  with  the  superadded
unction  and  prayers  of  the  Priest,  who  thus  gives
the  final  pardon  of  all  remaining  sin,  and  all  ne-
cessary assistance  in  the  last  agony,  whence  it  is
sometimes  called  the  sacrament  of  the  dying.

Q.  Does  the  Church  of  Rome  teack,  that  the
anointing  the  sick  and  dying  with  oil,  is  a  sacra-
ment instituted  by  Jesus  Christ  ?

A.    Yes.     They  teach  that  the  sacrament  of


75

extreme  unction  was  instituted  l)y  Jesus  Christ
for  the  spiritual  and  bodily  relief  of  the  sick,  that
it  consists  in  the  unction,  which  the  Priest  makes
with  the  holy  oil  consecrated  by  the  Bishop  on
holy  Thursday,  accompanied  with  his  prayers.
This  unction  is  applied  to  the  five  senses  of  the
sick  person  in  these  or  similar  words,  '*  Per  banc
sacram  unctionem  et  suam  piissimam  miserecor-
diam,  indulgeat  tibi  Deus,  quicquid  peccasti  per
visum,  auditum,  olfactum,  gustum  et  tactum,"  the
proper  word  being  repeated,  as  the  organ  of  each
sense  is  anointed.

Q.  Did  Jesus  Christ  institute  any  sacrament
expressly  for  the  sick  and  dying,  with  an  out-
ward and  visible  sign,  a  form  of  sacramental
words,  and  the  promise  of  a  spiritual  and  cor-
poral blessing  ?

A.  He  did  not;  He  gave  to  his  Apostles
miraculous  powers,  and  amongst  them  the  power
of  healing  the  sick.  This  power  may  also  have
been  extended  to  others  during  the  Apostolic
age,  but  in  all  cases,  in  which  it  was  employed,
it  was  a  gift  and  not  a  sacrament,  exercised  in
the  name  and  by  the  power  of  Jesus  Christ,
without  a  particular  form  of  words,  or  the  con-
stant use  of  a  sign  to  produce  the  promised
effect.

Q.  But  if  the  Sacrament  was  not  instituted  by
Jesus  Christ  himself,  do  we  not  find  that  the
Apostles  had  in  their  practice  converted  this


76

gift,  by  the  use  of  holy  oil,  into  a  Sacrament  ?

A.  Thoiio'h  this  Sacrament  had  not  been  insti-
tuted by  Christ  himself,  or  not  completely  sanc-
tioned as  one  of  the  seven  till  the  council  of  Trent  ;
yet  if  we  could  be  assured,  that  it  had  the  autho-
rity of  the  Apostles  as  such,  we  should  not  (ad-
mitting a  distinction  of  divine  and  apostolical)  be
desirous  to  dispute  its  sacramental  efficacy  ui  the
hands  of  those  who  had  miraculous  powers,
Calvin  maintained  or  allowed  that  Confirmation
and  extreme  Unction  were  sacraments  apostolical.
With  respect  to  the  former  he  contended,  that
though  it  has  ceased  to  be  apostolical,  in  its  proper
sense,  with  respect  to  the  dispensation  of  miracu-
lous gifts,  yet,  that  it  was  a  rite  handed  down  from
the  Apostles,  of  great  use,  and  accompanied  with
great  blessings,  and  as  such  he  defended,  and
warmly  recommended  the  practice  of  it  in  the
Church.  The  sacrament  of  extreme  Unction,
however,  he  rejected  altogether  for  reasons  which
arc  amply  sufficient,  to  reftite  what  we  call  the
**  corrupt  following  "  and  Calvin  "  the  aping"
of  the  Apostles  pretended  by  the  Papists.

Q.  Admitting  that  extreme  Unction  was  a
sacrament  apostolical,  M'hy  do  we  conclude  that
it  was  not  intended  to  be  permanent  ?

A.  An  outward  sign,  which  is  not  the  seal  or
pledge,  or  instrument  to  convey  the  grace,  bless-
ing, or  promise  signified,  is  not  a  sacrament,  but
a  ceremony,  and  if  used  as  a  sacrament,    a  mis-


77

chicvous  deception.  Circumcision  was  a  sacra-
ment, but  it  has  ceased  to  be  so,  and  if  christians
should  employ  it  now,  they  would  be  guiltly  of
presumption,  and  a  dangerous  heresy.  Admitting
that  extreme  Unction  was  a  sacrament  apostoli-
cal (and  we  make  the  admission  merely  for  the
sake  of  argument)  yet  all  the  world  knows,  that
the  gift  of  healing  and  other  miraculous  powers
(whatever  fanatics  may  pretend)  were  not  per-
petual or  of  long  continuance.  By  these  signs
and  wonders  God  was  pleased  to  confirm  the  first
preaching  of  the  gospel,  and  to  establish  it  in  the
world ;  nor  can  we  conceive,  that  it  could  have
been  established,  on  the  ruins  of  philosophy  and
superstition  and  Judaism,  by  such  men  as  the
Apostles,  without  a  divine  power,  and  a  manifes-
tation of  that  power ;  nor  can  we  conceive  that
such  men  as  the  Apostles  would  unanimously
have  undertaken  such  a  work  and  persisted  in
it  to  their  lives'  end,  if  they  had  not  been  per-
fectly persuaded  that  it  had  been  and  was  attest-
ed by  the  7nanifestation  of  miraculous  power.
It  is  ridiculous,  however,  and  worse  than  ridicu-
lous to  boast  of  the  power  of  healing,  or  to  use  the
outward  symbols  with  reference  to  such  a  gift,
which  is  never  given  or  expected.  When  the
Apostles  anointed  they  healed  the  sick,  but  the
Roman  Catholics  defer  the  unction  till  all  hope
and  even  all  sense  and  reason  are  past.  If  St.
James  intended  this  sacrament  to  be  perpetual


78

for  all  sick  persons,  and  for  their  recovery,  why
do  the  Priests,  if  they  believe  that  grace  and
power  are  contained  in  this  sacrament,  and  that
the  dispensation  of  it  rests  with  them,  confine  and
defer  it  to  dangerous  and  fatal  sickness  ?

Q.  If  the  Apostles  did  actually  use  the
anointing  with  oil,  would  this  unction  consti-
tute a  sacrament  accompanied  with  a  healing
power  ?

A.  No ;  it  might  still  be  no  more  a  sacrament
than  the  pool  of  Siloam,  or  than  the  action  of
St.  Paul  falling  on  the  dead  youth  ( as  Elijah
did  )  and  restoring  him,  or  than  Christ's  making
clay  with  his  spittle  was  a  sacrament  for  restoring
the  sight.  Such  outward  signs,  unless  they  are
accompanied  with  the  institution  of  Christ  him-
self in  express  and  unalterable  terms,  and  accom-
panied with  a  promised  and  inseparable  blessing,
are  not  sacraments  of  the  Christian  Church.

Q.  But  if  the  gifts  of  healing  have  ceased,  do
we  not  read  in  the  Epistle  of  St.  James  of  the
particular  use  of  this  ceremony,  by  the  elders  of
the  Church,  who  might  not  have  been  Apostles
and  which  will  justify  us  now,  in  retaining  the
custom  of  holy  unction?

A.  We  contend  that  if  the  gift  of  healing  the
sick  miraculously  has  ceased,  the  outward  cere-
mony ought  in  all  reason  to  cease  also,  even  if  it
were  not  applied  to  superstitious  and  delusive
purposes.       But  as  the  mistaken  assumption  or


79

imitation  of  these  powers  and  gifts,  which  were
confined  to  the  Apostolic  ages,  has  contributed
so  largely  to  superstition  on  the  one  hand,  and
fanatical  conceit  and  enthusiasm  on  the  other,  we
will  examine  minutely  this  passage  in  the  Epistle
of  St.  James.  Though  it  was  our  intention  to
avoid  as  much  as  possible  all  minute  criticism,  and
to  found  the  opinions  expressed  in  this  treatise  on
a  reference  to  plain  Scripture,  known  authority,  or
common  sense  ;  yet  as  it  is  impossible  to  examine
the  sacrament  of  extreme  unction  without  a  re-
ference to  this  passage  of  Scripture,  we  proceed
to  investigate  it  in  its  various  parts.  We  have
hitherto  kept  patiently  along  our  road,  nor  have
we  turned  aside  to  ramble  over  the  wild  hills  or
picturesque  glens  and  vallies  that  have  in  this
romantic  country  crossed  our  path ;  but  as  this
resting  place  may  be  found  safe  and  convenient
for  future  travellers,  we  will  here  stop  awhile  and
sketch  the  scene  and  objects  around  us,  and  the
rather,  because  we  think,  they  have  not  been
observed  as  they  deserve  to  be.

Q»  What  is  the  passage  in  St.  James's  Epistle
on  which  this  sacrament  and  auricular  confession
are  founded  ?

A.  It  is  contained  in  the  5th  chapter,  beginning
at  the  14th  verse,  and  as  we  consider  the  whole
passage  from  that  verse  to  the  end  of  the  chap-
ter, which  is  the  end  of  the  Epistle,  to  apply  to
one  particular  subject,  and  that  neither  extreme


80

unction  for  the  sick  and  dying,  nor  auricular
confession,  nor  the  recital  of  experience,  we  will
catechise  it  in  its  various  parts.

Q.  What  is  the  14th  verse  ?

A.  *'  Is  any  sick*  among  you  ?  Let  him  call
for  the  elders  of  the  Church  and  let  them  pray
over  him,  anointing  him  with  oil  in  the  Name
of  the  Lord.  "  The  sickness  here  mentioned
cannot  mean  all  kinds  of  sickness,  for  then  no
one  would  have  died,  nor  can  it  mean  cases  of
fatal  sickness,  for  the  prescription  is  for  cases  of
recovery  ;  we  must  therefore  conclude  that  it  was
some  particular  kind  of  sickness  that  was  not
always  unto  death.  The  sickness  was  similar  to
that  which  fell  upon  many  of  the  Corinthiansf  for
their  abuse  of  the  Sacrament,  and  particularly
on  one  member  of  that  Church,  for  his  inces-
tuous marriage  or  concubinage  ;  similar  also  to
the  case  supposed  by  St.  John  of  a  brother  sin-
ning a  sin  not  unto  death ;  all  of  them  cases  of
discipline  falling  within  the  canon,  laid  down  by
our  Lord,  for  the  government  of  his  Church,  and
applied  extraordinarily  in  the  age  of  the  first
propagation  of  the  Gospel.

Q.  What  is  that  rule  of  Christ  ?

A.  It  is  contained  in  the  18th  chapter  of  St.
Matthew,  which  from  the  beginning  to  the  end,
refers  to  cases  of  scandal,  and  offences  arisins",
whether  from  the  private  passions  of  individuals


81

(  illustrated  by  the  parable  of  the  offending  mem-
bers) against  their  own  souls;  or  from  lapses
from  the  doctrine  and  discipline  of  the  Church,
(  illustrated  by  the  parable  of  the  lost  sheep  )  or
from  irreconcilable  disputes  among  brethren,
in  which  the  guilt  of  parties  was  ascertained  on
the  evidence  of  witnesses,  or  generally  from  a
rejection  of  the  authority  of  the  Church.  "  If  he
neglect  to  hear  the  Church  ( says  Christ )  let
him  be  unto  thee  as  a  heathen  man  and  a  pub-
lican. Verily  I  say  unto  thee,  Whatsoever  ye
shall  bind  on  earth  shall  be  bound  in  heaven,"

Q.  In  the  Apostolic  age,  did  the  ban  of  the
Church  and  the  scourge  of  heaven  fall  upon  such
as  vitiated  the  purity  or  violated  the  discipline
of  the  Church?

A.  It  is  evident,  as  we  have  before  observed,
th^-t  the  Apostles  had  the  power  of  preserving
the  purity  and  discipline  of  the  Church  by"super-
natural  means.  That  power  which  was  given
by  our  Lord  to  the  Apostles  generally,  and  to  St.
Peter  personally,  was  also  given,  expressly  by
divine  direction,  to  St.  Paul  as  to  one  "  born  out
of  due  time.  "  This  power  he  executed,  by  ex-
press revelation,  on  the  Corinthian  excommuni-
cate, for  his  salvation  and  the  edification  of  the
Church.  As,  therefore,  this  is  a  point  asserted
by  our  Lord  and  all  the  Apostles,  whose  writings
have  come  down  to  us,  we  conclude,  that  there
did  exist  in  the  first  age  of  the  Church,  the  power

G


82

of  excommunication,  accompanied  with  bodily
chastisements,  as  marks  of  the  divine  displeasure.
It  is,  however,  of  great  importance  to  distinguish
between  these  powers  which  ceased  with  the
Apostles  and  their  immediate  communications,
and  those  which  are  transmissive  from  as:e  to  ag-e.
Q.  Does  our  Saviour's  law  provide  for  the
reconciliation,  as  well  as  the  punishment,  of  such
offending  members,  and  was  prayer  a  means
ordained  in  this  transaction  ?

A.  Christ  says  "  whatsoever  ye  shall  loose  on
earth  shall  be  loosed  in  heaven,"  and  he  instructs
his  Apostles  that  the  removal  of  excommunication
should  be  effected  by  unanimous  prayer.    "  Again
( that  is  in  continuation  of  this  subject )   I  say
unto  you,  that  if  two  of  you  shall  agree  on  earth,
touching  any  thing  that  they  shall  ask,  it  shall
be  done  for  them  by  my  Father  which  is  in  hea-
ven, for  where  two  or  three  are  gathered  together
in  my  name  there  am  I  in  the  inidst  of  them.  *'
The  universal  application  of  this  promise  to  pri-
vate   Christians   in   all    circumstances,  without
limitation,  would  be  enthusiastic,   but  its   refer-
ence to  the  particular  case  before  us,  is  natural
and    free    from    question — Besides  our   Saviour
says,not  only  that  the  prayer  shall  be  answered,
but  that,   as   if  some  special  transaction   Avere
referred  to,  he  would  he  in  the  midst  of  them.
— St.  John,    alluding  to   this  promise,   directs
prayers  to  be  made  for  him  who  had  sinned  the


83

sin  not  unto  death ;  and  St.  James,  in  this  text,
applies  the  absolution  generally  ordained  by
Christ  for  excommunicants,  to  the  case  of  those
who  were  under  a.  judicial  sickness^  which  pre-
vented them  from  making  their  public  co7ifessioji
and  penance  before  the  Church — These  were
permitted  to  send  for  the  elders  of  the  Church  to
their  oivn  houses,  that  by  prayer  in  the  name  of
the  Lord  (which  was  the  form  both  of  excommu-
nication and  absolution  )  the  offending  brother,
whose  sickness,  through  repentance,  was  not  unto
death,  might  be  saved  and  healed.

Q.  Who  were  the  elders  of  the  Church  ?

A.  They  were  the  chosen  and  ordained  officers
and  ministers  of  the  Churches,  appointed  to  go-
vern them,  when  they  were  first  formed,  under
the  authority  of  the  Apostles,  and  afterwards
under  the  Bishops,  as  Titus  and  Timothy,  who
were  ordained  by  the  Apostles  with  power  to
ordain  others.  They  did  not  set  the  Church  in
order,  but  maintained  the  order  of  the  Apostles,
to  whom  they  referred  for  counsel  in  all  impor-
tant matters  of  discipline,  as  is  evident  from  a  re-
ference to  those  passages  in  the  New  Testament,
in  which  the  Presbyters  are  described  in  their
office,  or  in  synod.  (Acts  xi.  30.  xiv.  23.  xv.  2.
4.6.22.23.  xvi.4.  xx.  ]7.  xxi.  18.  1st  Timothy
V.  17.  Titus  i.  5.  James  v.  14.    1st  Peter  v.  1.  )

Q.  When  the  elders  were  assembled  at  the
sick  man's  house,  is  it  necessary  so  suppose  that

G  2


84

they  were  invested  with  the  same  powers  as  the
Apostles,  or  that  they  ^vaited  till  they  had  a  par-
ticular impresdon  to  work  a  miracle  ■?

A.  On  the  supposition  that  the  sickness  spoken
of  was  any  kind  of  sickness,  one  of  these  hypo-
theses would  be  necessary,  but  if  it  were  a  case
o^  judicial  sickness,  it  is  only  necessary  to  sup-
pose that  Christ  was  in  the  midst  of  them.     All
cases  of  judicial   sickness  were  not  inflicted  by
express  sentence.     St.  Paul  and  the  other  Apos-
tles intimate,  that  there  were  many  inflicted  by
the  providential  government  of  Christ.     In  the
case  of  St.  Paul,  the  judgment  was  inflicted  by
Christ  himself,   but  as  his  sin  was  against  the
Church,  he  was  directed  to  seek  his  cure  from
Ananias,  who  was  the  presiding  elder   in  the
persecuted  Church  at  Damascus.     In  this  case,
both  the  judgment  and  the  cure  were  miracu-
lous ;    the  latter  by   the  intervention  of  human
agency,  and  the   former  without  it.     In  other
cases  we  may  suppose  that  this  method  was  re-
versed, and  where  the  judgment  was  through
man,  the  healing  was  through  Christ;  and  again
in  other  cases,   where  both  the  judgment  and
the   cure   were  from   providence,  but  the   cure
effected   through   the    prayers    of  the   Church.
Moreover,  in  the  case  supposed  by  St.  James^
and  in  that  stated  by  St.  Paul,  the  cure  may  not
have  been  instantaneous  but  progressive  ;  so  that
the  difficulty  which  occurs  to  many  in  explaining


85

this  text  is  removed,  and  no  actual  instigation
to  work  a  miracle  may  have  been  necessary.  It
was  sufficient  for  the  elders  to  know  that  in  all
cases  of  judicial  sickness  ( though  not  in  all  cases
of  sickness )  that  on  repentance,  the  penitent
should  be  absolved,  with  a  sure  and  certain  hope
that  his  sickness  should  not  be  unto  death.
The  rule,  therefore,  might  be  applicable  to  all
Churches  at  that  time,  whether  there  were  mira-
culous powers  in  the  particular  elders  or  not.
This  opinion  does  not  impeach  the  truth  of  the
miracles  wrought  in  the  Apostolic  age,  both
in  attestation  of  the  Christian  doctrine  and  in
vindication  of  the  authority  of  the  Church — for
it  is  clear  that  our  Saviour's  promise  was  literally
fulfilled  in  the  case  of  the  Apostles,  and  in  the
various  dispensation  of  gifts  to  those  that  believ-
ed, "  And  these  signs  shall  follow  them  that  be-
lieve ;  In  my  name  shall  they  cast  out  devils,
they  shall  speak  with  new  tongues,  they  shall
take  up  serpents,  and  if  they  drink  any  deadly
thing,  it  shall  not  hurt  them  ;  they  shall  lay  hands
on  the  sick  and  they  shall  recover.  "

Q.  Was  the  anointing  with  oil  commanded  by
Christ  to  be  used  in  healing  the  sick  ?

A.  It  was  neither  commanded  nor  forbidden
by  Christ,  but  it  was  a  custom  among  the  Jews,
which  the  Apostles  sometimes  used  and  some-
times omitted.  Unction  with  oil  was  used  for
civil  and  religious  purposes  as  well  as  medicinally

G  3


86

In  that  warm  climate  it  was  used  to  preserve
as  well  as  to  restore  health,  for  ornament,  and
comfort.  Oil  was  enjoined  in  the  use  of  offer-
ings, to  encourage  the  cultivation  of  the  olive
which  was  a  source  of  wealth  to  Palestine,  and
a  means  of  attaching  the  Israelites  to  their  coun-
try. When  used  in  sacred  things  it  was  gene-
rally symbolical,  and  especially  of  the  Spirit,
whence  Jesus  was  called  Christ  because  he  was
anointed  with  the  oil  of  gladness  above  his  fel-
lows. It  is  not  necessary,  therefore,  to  suppose
that  the  oil  was  used  medicinally,  much  less
sacramentally,  to  imply  an  infallible  cure  through
that  as  an  instrument  and  means.  We  rather
understand  the  use  of  the  oil  to  have  been  in  a
general  symbolical  sense.  "  Is  any  excommuni-
cate sick  among  you  and  pining  in  despair  ?  let
him  send  for  the  elders  of  the  Church — let  them
pray  over  him  for  his  forgiveness  and  his  cure —
let  them  anoint  him  as  a  guest  and  a  stranger  at
their  table,  or  rather  as  a  friend  and  a  brother
on  his  return — let  that  emblem  of  the  Spirit's
unction  and  return  to  his  body  as  a  temple,  and
of  the  good  and  pleasant  unity  of  brethren,
cheer  his  desponding  soul,  make  him  of  a  cheer-
ful countenance,  encourage  faith,  and  thus  pre-
pare him  for  his  absolution  and  his  cure."

Q.  What  is  the  15th  verse  ?

A.  "  And  the  prayer  of  faith  shall  save  the
sick  and  the  Lord  shall  raise  him   up  and  if  he


87

have  committed  sins  they  shall  be  forgiven  him."
Q.  Was  it  necessary  that  the  prayer  of  the
sick  should  be  added  to  the  prayer  of  the  elders  ?
A.  Yes ;  when  our  Saviour  healed  the  sick,
he  said  it  was  their  faith  that  saved  them,  that
is,  their  faith  had  its  proper  place  in  the  cure.
So  the  prayer  of  faith  in  this  verse  applies  to  the
sick  penitent  and  not  to  the  elders.  The  copu-
lative conjunction*  does  not  necessarily  imply
that  the  same  agency  is  supposed  in  this  verse  as
in  the  preceeding,  it  is  rather  an  addition  of
another  part  of  the  same  transaction,  and  per-
haps, as  referring  to  the  efficacy  of  faith  in  the
sick,  when  healing  was  to  be  performed,  may
have  a  hortatory  force.  At  any  rate  the  expres-
sion is  entirely  changed.  The  prayer  of  faithf
that  is  the  vow  of  the  Nazarite,  made  in  the
hope  or  enjoyment  of  any  deliverance  from  im-
minent peril  or  grievous  sickness.  The  word  is
only  used  in  two  other  passages  of  the  New  Tes-
tament, and  in  both  for  the  Nazarite  vow,  once
in  the  case  of  St.  Paul  himself  at  Cenchrea,
having  made  the  Nazarite  vow  after  his  escape
and  deliverance  at  Corinth ;  and  again  when  he
joined  himself  to  four  others  in  the  temple,  who
were  under  the  same  vow ;  by  the  direction  of
this  Apostle,  St.  James,  who  presided  over  the
Jewish  Converts,  maintained  many  Jewish  cus-

*  Kcit.  •\'  'H  (vxTj  TTjs  nisfcos-


88

toms,  and  wrote  this  Epistle  to  the  twelve  tribes
scattered  abroad.*

Q.  What  is  the  meaning  of  the  next  expres-
sion, "  The  Lord  will  raise  him  up  V

A.  It  seems  to  imply  that  the  deliverance  was
to  be  effected,  not  by  the  miraculous  power  of
the  elders,  but  by  the  power  of  Christ,  who  would
be  "m  the  tnidst  of  them.  "  Though  the  sick
man  were  sinkingf  under  a  burthen  too  heavy
for  him  to  bear,  yet  the  Lord  will  revive  both
body  and  soul,  and  restore  him  again  to  his  pro-
per state  and  place. §

Q.  What  is  the  meaning  of  the  next  expres-
sion, "  and  if  he  have  committed  sins,  they  shall
be  forgiven  him  ?"

A.  St  Paul,  describing  the  very  individual  who
had  sinned,  says,  that  man  who  has  done  this
deed,;};  but  St.  James,  speaking  hypothetically,
says,  II  although  he  be  one  of  those  who  have
committed  sins  worthy  of  death,  and  that  are
judicially  visited,  yet  thus  repenting,  confessing,
and  praying  in  faith,  through  the  intercession  of
the  Church,and  the  power  of  the  Lord  Jesus,  his
absolution  and  cure  shall  be  certain,   as  it  were

*  The  word  is  used  for  the  Nazarite  vow  by  the  Septuagint,
which  is  the  version  used  in  the  New  Testament,  Numbers,  vi.

2.  'Avtjp  t)  yvVT}  OS  av  fieyaXas  ev^rjrai  ivxT^v,  )

f  Toy  Ka/ivoi/To,  the  picture  of  a  man  labouring  in  conscience,
and  languishing  in  body.

§  Eyepet.      *  6  ro  fpyovTOVTOTioiijcras^      \\  Kav  afiaprias  7  TTfTTOirjKus.


89

by  a  physical  that  is,  a  miraculous  power  ;*  but
as  the  word  which  expresses  this  is  impersonal
and  future,  we  conclude  that  the  Apostle  has  not
yet  described  the  whole  case,  and  that  something
more  remains  to  be  done  before  it  is  completed.

Q.  What  is  the  next  verse  connecting  this
description  ?

A.  "  Confess  your  faults  one  to  another  and
pray  one  for  another,  that  ye  may  be  healed. f
The  effectual  fervent  prayer  of  a  righteous  man
availeth  much.§  The  expressions  "may  be  heal-
ed "  and  "  availeth  much  "  naturally  refer  to
the  case  of  sickness,  and  cannot  without  violence

*  'A(}>€6^(T€Tai.  This  word  is  used  with  great  latitude,  but  in
the  Ixx,  it  is  used  with  reference  to  a  curse  or  ban,  threatened  or
inflicted,  as  in  the  case  of  Job's  friends,  when  God  as  a  judge,
absolved  the  guilty,  and  in  the  case  of  Cain,  who  by  the  murder
of  his  brother  had  sinned  the  sin  unto  death.  With  respect  to
this  sin,  Cain  exclaims  Mei^av  fj  diria  fiov  tov  dcfjedfjvai  fie,  my  sin
is  too  great,  ever  to  be  remitted  to  me.  It  was  a  sin  worthy  of
death ;  but  as  no  one  but  his  near  relations  could  have  executed
it,  God  set  a  mark,  or  some  bodily  judgment  on  Cain,  which  was
probably  to  be  incurable,  and  terminate  in  death.  So  in  the  xxii
Isaiah,  14  v.    The  sin  of  the  Jews  unto  death,  is  declared  by  this

word,  m  the  Ixx.    6vk  dipedrjcrfTai  vjjuv  avrq  fj  afxapTia  ecos  I'lv  arroda-

j/jjre,  which  Grotius  translates  "  per  totam  vitam  eos  qui  haec  fece-
runtpaense  sequentur,"  a  sense  which  Vitringa  admits  to  be  literal
and  true.  In  this  text  the  use  of  the  precise  term  would  intimate
that  St.  James  had  that  sort  of  sin  in  his  view,  which  if  not  remit-
ted in  the  prescribed  manner,  would  have  been  followed  with
divine  punishments  unto  death.


90

and  harshness  be   separated   from  it,   or  applied
to  any  other  case.      The  term   "  confess  "*  was

*E^ofjioXoy€Lade,  As  the  Roman  Catholic  writers  have  seized  upon
this  verse,  to  justify  the  practice  of  auricular  confession,  the  German
protestant  critics  have  laboured  much,  to  shew  that  the  term
translated  confess,  has  nothing  peculiar  in  it,  that  the  preposition
in  composition  is  expletive,  and  the  term  not  a  scriptural  but  a
common  term.  Eisner  has  quoted  a  number  of  passages  to  shew
that  it  was  used  by  other  Greek  writers,  but  they  were  all  subse-
quent to  the  Christian  ^ra,  and  wrote  at  periods  when  the  religion
and  customs  of  Jews  and  Christians  were  well  known  to  the  phi-
losophers and  scoffers  among  the  heathen,  such  as  Plutarch  and
Lucian.  Krebsius  has  quoted  many  passages  from  Josephus  also,
to  shew  that  the  word  was  used  by  the  Jewish  writers,  who  under-
stood the  Greek  language  ;  but  all  this  seems  to  prove  little  more
than  that  this  word,  which  was  used  by  the  Jews  and  Christians,
was  adopted  by  subsequent  writers,  and  that  too  generally  to  ex-
press the  confession  of  a  fact  concealed,  or  a  public  avowal.
This  is  certainly  the  sense  in  which  it  is  used  in  the  Ixx,  in  the
case  of  Daniel,  when  with  windows  open  in  his  chamber  towards
Jerusalem,  he  prayed  and  gave  thanks,  or  made  his  public  con-
fession, before  his  God.  So  by  the  Jews  who  were  baptized  of
John  in  Jordan,  confessing  their  sins,  before  that  great  assembled
multitude.  So  also  in  the  case  of  those  in  the  Acts  of  the  Apostles,
who  confessed  and  declared  their  deeds,  and  burnt  their  books.
In  all  these  cases,  the  term  has  undoubtedly  the  pecuHar  and  eccle-
siastical sense  of  public  confession  of  sins,  a  sense  sufficiently
removed  from  the  Roman  Catholic  doctrine,  though  the  word  be
interpreted  with  the  full  force  of  the  preposition.  If  the  preposi-
tion were  without  emphasis,  we  should  expect  that  the  simple
verb  were  obsolete  or  of  rare  use,  or  that  the  preposition  was  used
with  great  latitude,  and  that  the  article  was  not  used  between  the
preposition  and  the  verb — but  in  this  case  none  of  these  supposi-
tions are  true.  We  may,  therefore,  without  any  apprehension  of
the  Romanists,  allow  the  preposition  in  composition  here,  its  full


91

applied  by  the  Jews,  who  studied  the  Greek  lan-
guage, to  express  the  public  confession  of  sin
which  their  religion  required,  and  on  the  other
hand,  it  was  used  by  those  Greek  writers  only,
who,  after  the  translation  of  the  Septnagint,  and
especially  after  the  publication  of  the  Christian
Scriptures,  became  acquainted  wdth  Jewish  and
Christian  affairs,  and  used  the  term  to  express
the  public  avowal  of  facts  that  had  been  con-
cealed. In  the  Christian  Church  it  was  a  forensic
ecclesiastical  term,  used  to  express  the  confes-
sion of  penitents  made  befo7^e  the  Chmxh,  on
their  readmission  to  communion,  after  a  lapse  or
public  scandal.  In  the  case  of  the  judicially
sick,  this  confession  was  allowed  to  be  made
before  the  elders  of  the  Church  m  pr-ivate  houses,
and  their  absolution  was  also  then  declared.  In
the  case  of  St.  Paul,  one  elder  \va.s  directed  to  go
to  the  house  where  he  lay  sick,  blind,  and  praying,
to  declare  his  absolution  and  his  cure.  Our
Lord  asserts  (  St.  Matthew,  chapter  xviii.,)  and
St.  James  here  seems  to  intimate,  that  scandals
would  generally  arise  from  injuries  and  quarrels
among  brethren.  In  all  cases  of  excommunica-
tion, which  were  made  on  the  evidence  of  wit-
force — that  the  confession  implies  a  recital  of  the  whole  in  its
several  parts,  that  it  is  the  removal  of  the  knowledge  of  facts  from
one  party  to  other  parties — but  after  all,  this  confession  is  a  public
not  a  private  whispering  act,  and  such  was  the  public  confession
( e^oiioXoyrjais )  of  penitents  in  the  Church.


92

nesses,  there  would  remain  some  lurking  ani-
mosities and  root  of  bitterness,  which  must  be
entirely  removed — In  almost  all  cases  there
would  be  the  injured  and  innocent,  as  well  as  the
guilty  party,  for  it  was  sins  against  the  brethren
or  the  Church,  and  not  secret  sins  against  God,
that  were  punished  by  judicial  sickness,  Christ,
therefore,  and  his  Apostles,  required  that  there
should  be  confession  of  faults  ( mutual  where
more  than  one  guilty  party  were  concerned  )  and
deprecation  of  judgment  by  the  righteous  or
innocent  many  for  the  penitent  sufferer,  called
•by   St.  James,  the   deprecation  accomplished^*

*  ber](TLs  8i<aiov  ^rvepyoviiivq.  derjais  in  the  New  Testament,
is  generally  used  to  express  intercession  or  deprecation.  Had
the  Apostle  intended  to  express  the  deprecation  or  prayers  of
the  elders,  the  church,  or  a  community,  he  would  scarcely  have
said  8iKaiov.  His  closing  the  entire  account  of  the  prescribed  disci-
pline with  'evepyovfiepT],  implies  that  it  was  tl>e  accomplishment  of
the  rule.  Luther  following  the  interpretation  of  the  Vulgate,  renders
it  "fervent  "  which  is  certainly  loose.  Our  translators  have  im-
proved it  by  an  additional  epithet  effectual  fervent,  and  this  might
perhaps  be  again  improved  by  a  transpostion  fervent  effectual.
But  after  all,  it  may  be  fairly  questioned  whether  the  passive  or  mid-
dle voice  of  this  verb  is  used  in  an  active  sense  in  the  New  Testament,
certainly  it  will  bear  a  passive  or  reciprocal  construction,  in  most,
if  not  all  places  where  it  is  used.  The  passive  sense  seems  more
applicable  here,  and  in  the  2  Cor.  i.  6.  where  St.  Paul  exactly  ex-
presses that  which  is  wrought  in  one  party,  to  be  common  to,  and
effectual,  and  effected,  in  another  party,  ElVf  Se  6\i^6fie6a,  xmkp  Tfjs

v(j.aiv  TrapaKXrjaecos  /cat  a'coTTjpLas,  ttJs  evepyovpeirqs  iv  vTrofiovrj  rSy
avTuiv  iradrjpaTcov,  ap  Koi  impels  rracrxopfv.  And  so  ivepyovpivrf  here
may  be  considered  as  a  deprecation  brought  about  aitd  effected  in


93

and  which  when  brought  about  and  effected  by
the  elders  of  the  Church,  according  to  the  law
of  Christ  and  the  Apostles,  immediately  (without
any  thing  future  or  left  undone  }  availeth  much.
The  prayer  of  the  elders,  and  the  vow  of  the
sick,  would  be  unavailing,  or  at  least  the  absolu-
tion and  the  cure  would  be  suspended,  till  this
part  of  the  process  should  be  cordially  and  legi-
timately executed.

Q.  Do  you  suppose  that  St.  James  had  in
view  a  case  of  this  confession  and  humiliation  of
the  guilty  party,  and  of  the  successful  depreca-
tion of  the  7'ighteous  man  *?

A.  St.  James,  throughout  his  Epistle,  enriches
his  practical  instructions  with  apposite  images
and  striking  illustrations,  drawn  from  the  man-
ners and  examples  of  the  ancient  Jews.  He
concludes  his  Epistle  with  directions  to  the
afflicted  in  general,  and  to  the  judicially  sick  in
particular.  He  exhorts  the  Churches  to  take
for  their  example  the  prophets,  and  of  these
prophets,  he  selects  Job  and  Elijah,   and  in  this

the  innocent  party  to  the  help  and  assistance  of  the  sufferer."  As

the  Apostles  again  in  the  2  Cor.  iv.  12,  uses  this  verb  in  its  pas-
sive sense,  and  in  relation  both  to  himself  and  other  parties  for

their  benefit.       "Qje   6  fiev  Qdvaro^   eV    f]fuv  ivepyfirai,  rj  8e  (cot]  iv

Ifxiv.  The  word  is  again  used  to  express  an  effect  communicated
from  one  party  and  accomplished  in  and  to  the  benefit  of  another
^Ayavi^ofiepos  Kararijvepipyeiav  avTou  TTjv  (vepyoviJ-ti'ijv  iv  ip.o\  iv
bovap.(U  Col.  i.  29.


94

passage  seems  to  refer  to  the  history  of  both
these  illustrious  saints  for  instances  of  successful
deprecation.

Q.   What  was  the  reference  to  Job  ?

A.  It  seems  probable  that  the  Apostle  does
not  lose  sight  of  this  example  of  Job  from  the
first  mention  of  it  in  the  eleventh  verse,  for  the
exhortation,  clothed  in  the  language  of  Christ,
asrainst  cursins;  and  svvearino;,  which  seems  to
occur  so  abruptly  in  the  twelfth  verse,  may  refer
to  the  most  remarkable  part  of  the  history  of  Job ;
that  righteous  man  when  under  the  heaviest
calamities  permitted  of  God,  and  under  the  most
unjust  and  cruel  provocations  from  his  friends,
and  even  when  stimulated  by  his  wife  to  curse
God  and  die,  kept  himself  (  from  that  which  is
the  most  common  temptation  under  such  circum-
stances )  and  swore  not  at  all — The  most  patient
man,  however,  like  the  meekest  man  on  earth,
spake  unadvisedly  with  his  lips,  repined  and
found  fault  with  God's  providence  and  govern-
ment— Hence  his  remarkable  confession .  '"  Then
Job  answered  the  Lord  and  said,  I  know  that
thou  canst  do  every  thing,  and  that  no  thought
can  be  withholden  from  thee.  Who  is  he  that
hideth  counsel  without  knowledge  *?  therefore
have  I  uttered  that  I  understood  not^  thi7igs  too
wonderful  for  me  ivhich  I  knew  not.  Hear  I
beseech  thee  and  I  will  speak ;  I  will  demand
of  thee,  and  declare  thou  unto  me.    I  have  heard


of  thee  by  the  hearing-  of  the  ear  but  now  mine
eye  seeth  thee.  TVherefoi^e  I  abhor  myself  and
repent  in  dust  and  ashes."

Q.  On  this  confession,  was  Job's  chastisement
removed,  and  was  he  restored  to  his  former  hap-
piness ?

A.  Not  immediately.  The  absolution  and
blessing  seem  to  have  been  suspended,  even  with
respect  to  Job  himself,  till  his  reconciliation  was
completed  with  his  friends,  and  till  he  had  pray-
ed for  them  who  had  judged  him  so  uncharitably,
and  treated  him  so  despitefuUy  in  his  calamity.
These  friends  were  commanded  with  sacrifice  to
God  to  confess  their  faults  and  humble  them-
selves before  Job,  and  Job  was  instructed  to  in-
tercede for  them,  and  deprecate  their  ignominy
and  destruction.  It  is  the  most  striking  instance
of  the  prevailing  deprecation  of  the  righteous
man  recorded  in  the  Scriptures.  To  avert  their
just  punishment  Eliphaz  and  his  two  ft'iends
were  directed  to  go  to  Job,  to  take  their  sacri-
fice to  him,  with  this  assurance  "  My  servant
Job  (this  is  the  Septuagint  version)  shall  pray  for
you,  for  him  will  I  accept,  and  but  on  his  account
I  would  destroy  you,  for  ye  have  not  spoken  truly
in  your  controversy  against  my  servant  Job.  So
Eliphaz  the  Temanite  and  Bildad  the  Shuhite,  and
Zophar  the  Naamathite,  went,  and  did  according
as  the  Lord  commanded  them  ;   and  the  Lord  re-


96

mitted  their  sins  to  them  on  Job's  account.  And
the  Lord  magnified  Job,  and  when  also  he  prayed
for  his  friends  the  Lord  remitted*  to  them  their
sin."  Here  therefore  was  in  an  example  of  the
Prophets,  a  striking  illustration  of  the  Christian
rule  of  mutual  reconciliation,  and  of  the  absolute
necessity  of  applying  it  by  the  confession  and
humiliation  of  the  guilty  party,  and  the  depreca-
tion of  the  righteous  man.  The  deprecation'
here  clearly  refers  to  a  case  of  justice  between
Job  and  his  friends,  and  in  the  case  of  St.  James
between  the  offender  and  his  brethren  or  the
Church.  The  intercession  availed  for  the  remis-
sion of  a  temporal  judgment  whether  threatened
or  inflicted,  for  the  intercession  of  no  man  could
prevail  for  the  remission  of  the  eternal  punish-
ments of  sin.  Indeed  the  doctrine  here  laid
down  of  temporal  visible  judgments  for  parti-
cular sins  is  peculiar  to  these  cases,  for  the
general  doctrine  of  the  Gospel  is  opposed  to  it.
This  rule,  our  Saviour  has  illustrated  negatively
in  the  parable  of  the  cruel  servant  (  Matt,  xviii.)
He  was  frankly  forgiven  all  his  eyiormous  deht^
but  on  his  refusing  to  forgive  his  fellow  servant,
who  owed  him  a  few  pence,  he  was  delivered  by
his  Lord  to  the  tormentors,  till  he  should  pay  all
that  was  due  unto  him.  Our  Saviour  concludes
this  whole  subject  of  the  discipline  of  forgiveness
with   these    intense   expressions,    "  So  likewise

*  a(j}rJK€v


97

shall  my  heavenly  Father  do  also  unto  you  if  ye
from  your  hearts  forgive  not  every  one  his  bro-
ther their  trespasses."  Who  then  will  say  that
ecclesiastical  discipline  is  not  useful,  charitable,
and  moral,  to  the  highest  degree  ?  Jesus  Christ
has  promulgated  to  the  world  two  laws,  which
though  imperfectly  observed  by  Christians,  have
done  more  to  civilize  and  bless  mankind  than
any  two  that  were  ever  enacted.  I  mean,  the
law  of  Christian  forgiveness,  in  opposition  to  the
strong  passions  of  resentment  and  revenge  ;  and
the  law  of  marriage  to  abrogate  polygamy,  check
adultery,  and  regulate  divorce.*

But  why  does  St.  James  refer  to  the  history  of
the  prophet  Elijah  in  illustration  of  this  subject,
and  particularly  to  the  case  of  the  rain  withheld
and  the  rain  vouchsafed  ?

A.  The  illustration  is  important.    If  St  James

*  If  this  law  of  forgiveness  were  carried  into  full  effect,  it
would  be  impossible  that  duelling  should  exist  in  Christian  coun-
tries. It  would  not  be  necessary  to  have  recourse  to  Dr.  Paley's
fiction  of  a  Court  of  honor  established  by  law.  It  is  undoubtedly
true  that  life  without  honor  is  worthless,  and  that  a  man  had  better
part  with  his  life  than  his  character,  but  as  no  one  will  justify
duelling  on  any  other  principle  than  this,  and  no  one  will  justify  it
for  the  gratification  of  passion  and  revenge — we  contend  that  no
one  ought  to  hesitate  to  submit  his  honor  or  his  pride  to  the  deci-
sion of  disinterested  christian  friends  or  witnesses,  and  that  friends
should  be  called  in  not  to  arrange  a  decision  by  battle,  but  by  jus-
tice and  charity ;  and  to  such  a  decision,  every  christian  ought  to
submit  (even  if  he  be  not  convinced  of  its  justice)  as  an  officer
would  submit  to  a  court  martial.

II


98

had  intended  in  this  passage  of  Scripture  to  pro-
mulgate the  law  of  the  sacrament  of  extreme  unc-
tion or  of  auricular  confession  he  would  have  refer-
red to  another  case  in  the  history  of  Elijah  which
affords  remarkable  illustrations  of  both,  he  would
have  referred  to  the  widow  of  Zarephath.*    But
for  unction  in  extremis  the  widow's  son  was  re-
markably applicable,  "  It  came  to  pass  after  these
things,  that  the  son  of  the  woman  the  mistress  of
the  house  fell  sick,  and  his  sickness  was  so  sore
that  there  was  no  breath  left  iji  him,"  but  by  the
prayer  and  cry  of  Elijah  in  this  extremity  he  was
healed.     A  case  more  in  point,  therefore,  could
not  have  been  chosen  by  the  Apostle,  and  his
omission  of  it,  is  as  strong  a  negative  proof  against
any  institution  of  a  sacrament  for  the  sick  and
dying  as  can  be  conceived.     The  exclamation  of
the  widow,  too,  was  illustrative  of  auricular  con-
fession to  the  priest.     "  O  thou  man  of  God,  art
thou  come  unto  me  to   call  my   sin  to  remem-
brance ?"  yet  this  also  St.  James  has  left  unno-
ticed in  the  history  and  example  of  Elijah.     But
the  case  adduced  by  St.  James  is  one  strictly  in
point  as  illustrative  of  the  case  of  the  judicially

*  Bellarmine  asserts  that  the  expression  applied  to  the  sick  is
precisely  *'  de  mortuo  "  and  argues  hence  the  propriety  of  extreme
unction  in  articulo  mortis,  but  then  according  to  the  phraseology  of
scripture  in  such  cases,  the  reading  would  not  have  been  t6v  KOfi-
vovra  but  TOP  Koiixavra,  as  St.  Paul  expresses  himself — Aia  rovro

(V  vixlv  TToXXoi  aa-Oeveis  Koi  appcosoi,  Kcii  KOificovrai  iKavoi,  I  Cor.  XU  30.


99

sick.  It  was  the  case  of  a  hail  injlicted  for  a
similar  crime,  and  removed  under  similar  cir-
cumstances by  similar  means,  and  consequently
both  an  example  and  a  proof  in  poifit,

Q.  What  was  the  case  of  Elijah  referred  to  by
the  Apostle  ?

A.  It  was  a  case  of  judgment  inflicted  on  Ahab
and  the  Jewish  nation,  for  their  rebellion  against
God,  his  Church  and  Prophet  divinely  commis-
sioned. The  apostasy  of  Jeroboam  the  son  of
Nebat  was  great,  but  it  was  "  a  light  thing  "  in
comparison  of  the  abominations  of  Ahab.  Ahab
reared  an  altar,  built  a  temple,  made  a  grove  to
Baal  and  served  and  worshipped  him.  "Ahab  did
more  to  provoke  the  Lord  God  of  Israel  to  anger
than  all  the  kings  of  Israel  that  were  before  him."
It  was  in  this  apostasy  and  blasphemy  when  all
restraint  was  gone,  and  Elijah's  mission,  though
sanctioned  by  the  Almighty,  was  frustrate,  that
Elijah  said  to  Ahab  "  As  the  Lord  God  of  Israel
liveth,  before  whom  I  stand,  there  shall  not  be
dew  nor  rain  these  years,  but  according  to  my
word."*  The  judgment,  therefore,  was  inflicted
for  the  same  sin  as  that  which  those  committed
in  the  Apostolic  Churches,  who  with  the  signs
and  wonders  before  their  eyes,  rebelled  against  the
authority  of  the  Church,  and  it  was  inflicted  for
the  same  object,  viz.  to  bring  back  the  rebellious
to  acknowledge  their  sin  and  the  authority  of  the

*  1  Kings,  xvii.  1.

h2


100

doctrine  and  discipline  of  the  Church.  At  the
end  of  three  years  and  six  months,  the  rebellious
Jews  were  willing  to  hear  the  voice  of  Elijah,  and
he  therefore  returned  among  them.  When  they
saw  the  miracle  which  he  wrought  before  them  ;
all  the  people  "  fell  upon  their  faces  and  they
said  the  Lord  he  is  God ;  the  Lord,  he  is  God."
After  this  public  confession,  Elijah,  having  slain
the  apostate  priests  who  had  sinned  the  sin  unto
death,  proceeded  to  intercede  for  the  removal  of
the  sentence  from  those  who  by  repentance,  had
not  sinned  the  sin  unto  death.  "And  he  prayed
again,  and  the  heaven  gave  rain,  and  the  earth
brought  forth  her  fruit,"  A  more  striking  pa-
rallel can  scarcely  be  conceived,  and  it  is  of  itself
sufficient  to  convince  us,  that  St.  James  in  this
passage  was  referring  to  the  cases  of  the  judicially
sick  in  the  Apostolic  Churches,  when  the  open
manifestation  of  divine  power ^  rendered  those
who  impugned  or  resisted  it,  liable  to  a  punish-
ment inflicted  by  the  same  poiver ;  but  here  is  no
vestige  of  extreme  unction  for  venial  sins,  or  of
auricular  confession.  They  exist  not  in  the  chris-
tian scriptures.

Q.  How  are  the  concluding  verses  connected
with  this  subject  ?

A.  "  Brethren,  if  any  of  you,*  (any  member
of  the  christian  community)  do  err  from  the  truth
and  one  convert  him  :  let  him  know  that  he  which

*  Tis  eV  Vfjup,


101

converteth  a  sinner  from  the  error  of  his  way  shall
save  a  soul  from  death,  and  shall  hide  a  multitude
of  sins."  St.  James  evidently  refers  to  the  para-
ble of  the  lost  sheep,  by  which  our  Lord  illustrates
the  case  of  offending  and  erring  brethren,  their
recovery  and  the  joy  of  the  Church  on  their  return.
(St.  Matt,  xviii.)  If  any  one  will  compare  this
text  in  St.  James  with  that  parable,  especially  in
the  original  Greek,  he  will  see  that  the  following
paraphrase  is  legitimate,  and  explains  the  true
design  of  charitable  discipline,  whether  ordinary
or  extraordinary.  If  any  among  you  as  a  sheep
from  among  the  flock,  shall  err  and  go  astray,
from  the  truth  (i.e.  the  Gospel  of  which  the
Church  is  the  pillar  and  ground )  and  one
Christian  friend  or  pastor,  with  zeal  and  charity,
shall  search  for  the  wanderer,  and  induce  him  to
return  to  the  fold,  and  seek  again  the  care  of
the  shepherd,  and  the  communion  of  the  flock,
without  which  every  sheep  must  pine  and  die,
and  be  lost ;  let  him  rejoice  to  know  that  he
which  causeth  an  offending  brother  to  return*
shall  save  his  life  from  destruction,  (from  the  sin
unto  death)  and  by  love  and  reconciliation  shall
cover  and  bury  in  eternal  oblivion  a  multitude  of
sins.  The  Church  thus  repealing  the  temporary
sentence  of  discipline,  with  the  everlasting  law
of  wisdom  and  charity,  "  Hatred  stirreth  up
strifes,  but  love  covereth  all  sins."

*    6  fTTispi'i'as  anaprmKov  fK  n\aur)s  ofiov  nvrov^

h3


102

Q.  Are  the  Roman  Catholics  guilty  of  great
error,  in  maintaining  the  spurious  Sacraments,
urging  them  upon  mankind,  as  necessary  to  sal-
vation, and  especially  in  applying  a  flattering
and  delusive  unction  to  the  soul  in  death  ?

A.  We  think  it  a  great  heresy  to  add  such
inventions  to  the  Gospel  of  Christ,  to  maintain
that  Christians  cannot  die  in  safety  without  them,
or  to  assert  their  infallible  efficacy.  It  is  not
necessary  to  refer  to  the  abuses  of  this  abuse  for
its  refutation.  It  has  no  authority  from  Christ,
or  any  inspired  Apostle.  In  this  passage  of  St.
James,  which  is  the  "  primo  "  in  the  arguments
of  the  council  of  Trent,  and  on  which  the  merits
of  the  question  turn,  we  contend  that  there  is
not  the  slightest  foundation  for  extreme  unction
as  a  Sacrament,  or  as  a  custom  of  any  use  or
decency,  for  all  the  sick  and  dying,  or  even  for
any  case  of  sickness  or  death,  in  the  absence  of
n.iraculous  power.  We  regret  these  supersti-
tous  practices,  but  at  the  same  time  we  sincerely
acknowledge  that  many  pious  Roman  Catholic
priests  display  in  their  visitation  of  the  sick  and
dying,  and  in  administering  the  offices  of  their
religion,  a  zeal  and  humanity,  which  are  worthy
of  praise  and  imitation.  Among  the  death-bed
scenes  or  rather  scenes  of  death,  which  will  be
annexed  to  this  chapter,  one  of  great  interest  is
selected  from  the  annals  of  the  Roman  Catholic
Church.     It  is  the  well  known  case  of  Bossuet


103

and  the  Princess  Henrietta  Anne.  Here  the  faith
and  patience  of  the  sufferer,  the  pious  zeal  of
the  minister  of  the  Gospel,  and  the  affection  of
the  christian  friend,  are  found  in  perfect  contrast
with  the  rigid  injunctions,  and  histrionic  actions
of  a  mere  confessor.  Such  virtue  must  be  ad-
mired wherever  it  is  found,  whether  in  an  ancient
heathen  or  modern  christian,  but  love  of  virtue
must  not  cancel  our  love  of  truth.  We  sincerely
deplore  that  the  Roman  Catholics  root  and  im-
bed some  of  their  most  dangerous  errors  on  the
best  and  strongest  feelings  of  humanity,  and
especially  we  lament  that  they  substitute  in  the
time  of  sickness  and  in  the  hour  of  death,  their
will  worship,  spurious  viaticum,  and  spurious  Sa-
crament for  the  truth,  hope  and  Sacrament  of  the
Gospel.  The  Roman  Catholics  often  triumph
over  us,  because,  as  they  say,  we  have  not  a
Sacrament  for  the  dying.  We  certainly  have  not
theirs,  but  we  have  that  which  is  far  better,  the
Sacrament  of  Jesus  Christ,  which  he  instituted
and  communicated  on  the  eve  of  his  own  death.

Q.  Is  it  not  remarkable  that  we  do  not  find  in
the  Gospel  frequent  exhortations,  to  visit  the
sick,  and  general  instructions  given  to  the  minis-
ters of  the  Gospel,  respecting  the  fulfilment  of
this  duty  "?

A.  The  absence  of  such  exhortations  and  in-
structions to  this  duty  (  under  a  religion  which
makes  our  acceptance  or  condemnation,  at  the


104

judgment  day  to  depend  upon  the  performance
of  it )  is  a  proof  that  it  is  not  only  the  duty  of
the  ministers  of  religion,  but  of  all  who  bear  the
christian  name ;  it  is  a  proof  that  it  is  a  duty  not
of  a  doubtful  nature,  or  that  needs  a  specific  law
from  heaven  to  establish  it,  but  one  that  must  be
known  and  admitted  of  all  Christians,  without
any  revealed  regulations.  The  precise  regula-
tions laid  down  by  St.  James,  for  the  direction
of  the  Church  in  particular  cases  of  sickness,
being  the  only  rules  which  are  prescribed  in  the
New  Testament,  clearly  manifest  that  in  all  ordi-
nary cases  divine  rules  are  not  required,  but  that
such  as  are  convenient  may  be  used.  Certainly
it  would  be  both  a  great  injury  to  humanity,  and
a  great  injustice  to  Christianity  to  confine  these
offices  of  love  and  charity  to  the  officers  of  the
church.  All  will  stand  before  the  judgment  seat
of  Christ,  and  all,  whether  laity  or  clergy,  who
have  not  visited  the  sick,  administered  alms,
or  certified  charity,  will  appear  at  that  great
inquest  with  confusion.

Q.  But  do  we  not  infer  from  the  instructions
of  St.  James,  some  particular  and  important
duties  which  belong  to  the  Church  and  its
Ministers  ?

A.  Yes ;  though  it  is  absurd  to  pretend  to
heal  the  sick,  except  by  proper  medicines,  with-
out a  special  and  divine  commission  to  do  so ;
yet  we  admit  from  this  passage  of  Scripture  that


105

it  is  the  bounden  duty  of  the  ministers  of  the
Gospel,  to  visit  the  sick  at  their  own  houses,
especially  Avhen  they  are  sent  for — that  it  is
lawful  in  such  cases  when  the  sick  desire  it,
and  are  not  able  to  reach  the  Church,  to
administer  in  private  houses  the  ordinances  of
the  Church,  to  receive  their  confession,  reconcile
them  to  their  enemies,  absolve  in  cases  of  excom-
munication, and  administer  the  consolations  and
Sacrament  of  the  Gospel.

Q.  In  what  cases  does  the  Church  recommend
especially  confession  and  reconciliation  ?

A.  Before  the  communion  in  the  Church,  and
before  the  communion  when  administered  to  the
sick  and  dying.  Before  the  Eucharist  in  the
Church  all  Christians  are  required  to  compose
their  quarrels  and  reconcile  themselves  to  their
brethren,  that  they  may  be  in  love  and  charity
with  all  men,  when  they  approach  the  table  of
the  Lord,  who  makes  love  the  true  and  necessary
badge  of  discipleship,  and  that  without  which  we
cannot  expect  the  forgiveness  and  blessing  of
God.  Again  the  Church  considers  that  all  per-
sons who  habitually  abstain  from  the  communion,
whether  from  carelessness  or  scruple  ipso  facto
excommunicate  themselves.  Such  as  separate
themselves  from  ignorance  and  scruple  are  direct-
ed to  seek  the  counsel  of  the  Minister,  who  is  to
remove  their  doubts  by  the  word  of  God,  and
absolve  them  without  any  express  form  of  words


106

from  their  virtual  excommunication  and  admit
them  to  communion.  The  same  absolution  is
permitted  for  those  who  through  carelessness
have  lived  like  heathens  in  neglect  of  their
Christian  duties,  but  who  desire  to  repent  and
amend  their  lives  in  this  particular.  Such  is  the
advice,  not  the  command  of  the  Church.  "  If
there  be  any  that  cannot  by  other  means  quiet
his  own  consience  but  requireth  comfort  or
counsel^  let  him  go  to  some  discreet  and  learned
minister  of  God's  word  and  open  his  grief:  that
by  the  ministry  of  God's  holy  word  he  may  re-
ceive the  benefit  of  absolution,  together  with
ghostly  counsel  and  advice,  to  the  quieting  of
his  conscience  and  avoiding  all  scruple  and
doubtfulness."

Q.  Do  all  foreign  protestant  Churches  recom-
mend this  private  and  voluntary  confession  in
such  cases  ?

A.  Yes,  all  the  foreign  Churches  recommend
it,  the  Bohemian  brethren,  the  Dutch  and  French
Churches,  and  particularly  the  Lutheran  Church.
Calvin  is  supposed  to  have  been  the  most  lax  of
the  reformers  in  these  respects.  He  confesses
himself,  that  he  had  not  been  sufficiently  careful
in  this  matter,  and  regretted  that  he  had  it  not
in  his  power  to  correct  his  error,  by  inserting  the
form  of  absolution  which  he  had  omitted  in  his
service.  Calvin  thus  expresses  himself  respecting
confession,  "  Let  every  faithful  Christian  (says  he)


10?

remember,  that  when  he  is  burdened  and  afflicted
with  the  sense  of  his  sins,  that  he  cannot  quiet  him-
self without  the  help  of  others,  it  is  then  his  duty
not  to  neglect  that  remedy  which  the  Lord  hath
prescribed  to  him,  viz.  that  for  the  easing  of  his
conscience,  he  resort  to  private  confession  with
his  pastor  :  and  that  for  the  gaining  comfort  to
himself,  he  fetch  in  the  assistance  of  him,  whose
office  it  is,  both  privately  and  publicly,  to  com-
fort the  people  of  God  by  the  doctrine  of  the
Gospel.  But  yet  this  moderation  is  always  to  be
used,  that  where  God  hath  not  laid  impositions,
w^e  should  not  lay  impositions  on  our  own  con-
sciences. Hence  it  follows  that  this  private
confession  ought  to  be  free,  and  should  not  be
required  of  all,  but  only  recommended  to  those
who  find  they  have  need  of  it.  "

Q.  Does  the  Church  recommend  with  this
confession  reconciliation,  restitution,  and  mutual
forgiveness,  after  the  rule  of  St.  James  ?

A.  Yes,  the  rubric  enjoins  and  enforces  this
point  more  earnestly  than  any  other.  It  is  to  be
the  great  object  of  the  curate  that  no  one  comes
to  the  Sacrament  who  has  been  openly  injurious
to  his  neighbour,  till  "  he  has  recompensed  the
parties  to  whom  he  has  done  the  wrong.  "  The
same  rule  is  prescribed  where  "  malice  and  ha-
tred reign,  "  and  it  would  be  well  for  the  church
and  society  if  these  rules  were  more  strictly  ob-
served,  but  for  their  observation  the  evidence


108

of  the  laity  and  the  sanction  of  ecclesiastical
authorities  are  necessary.  In  the  visitation
of  the  sick  and  the  discipline  of  the  sick,  the  case
is  materially  altered,  for  there  the  matters  in
question  being  entirely  voluntary  and  discretion-
ary, the  Curate,  as  no  injury  is  done  to  fame  or
character,  may  act  definitively,  and  execute  him-
self, with  the  consent  of  the  sick  man,  the  rule
and  order  of  the  Church.  Nothing  can  be  more
open  than  the  discipline  of  the  Church  of  England
is  upon  this  much  misrepresented  point.  In  the
first  place  it  is  at  the  discretion  of  the  sick  man
to  send  or  not  for  the  minister.  In  the  next
place  it  is,  I  conceive,  at  the  discretion  of  the
minister  to  use  the  service  ])rescribed  by  the
Church,  or  any  other  that  may  seem  more  suited
to  the  case  of  the  sick  man,  provided  only  that
the  sacrament  be  administered  according  to  the
rules  prescribed.  At  the  time  of  the  reformation,
partly  from  the  want  of  competent  and  well  in-
structed clergy,  and  partly  from  the  poverty  of
many  of  the  benefices,  there  was  a  distinction
observed  between  the  unpreaching  clergy  and
licensed  preachers.  Licensed  preachers  were
allowed  to  expound  and  perform  important  duties
according  to  their  own  discretion,  which  others
were  permitted  to  perform  only  according  to
certain  prescribed  rules.  This  distinction  is  es-
pecially observed  with  respect  to  unpreaching
ministers  and  preachers  in  the  visitation  of  the


109

sick.  "  When  any  person  is  dangerously  sick
in  any  parish ;  the  minister  or  curate  having
knowledge  thereof  shall  resort  unto  liim  or  her
( if  the  disease  be  not  known  or  probably  sus-
pected to  be  infectious,)  to  instruct  and  comfort
them  in  their  distress  according  to  the  order  of
the  Communion  book,  if  he  be  no  Preacher^  or  if
he  be  a  Preacher  the7i  as  he  shall  think  most
fieedful  and  convenient."  There  is  in  fact  no
part  of  the  service  of  the  Church  of  England,
which  is  left  so  open  as  this,  and  very  justly,  for
it  is  the  discretionary  and  special  application  of
the  discipline  of  the  Church  to  extreme  and
special  cases.

Q.  In  the  visitation  of  the  sick  and  dying  what
are  to  be  the  great  objects  of  the  minister  ?

A.  To  clear  and  settle  the  conscience  of  the
sufferer,  and  then  to  administer  the  consolations
and  sacrament  of  the  Gospel.  The  main  point
of  Christian  discipline  is  to  root  out  malice  and
to  establish,  beyond  the  possibility  of  self  decep-
tion, forgiveness  and  perfect  charity.  *'  Then
shall  the  minister  (having  ascertained  his  Chris-
tian faith )  examine  whether  he  repent  him  truly
of  his  sins  and  be  in  charity  with  all  the  world  :
exhorting  him  to  for'give  fi'om  the  bottom  of  his
heart  all  persons  that  have  offended  him^  and  if
he  have  offended  any  other  to  ask  their  forgive-
ness :  and  when  he  hath  done  injury  or  ivrong
to  any  man  that  he  rnake  amends  to  the  utter-


110

most   of  his  poiver."     (1st   James   v.    16.)

Q.  Does  it  sometimes  happen  that  men  who
have  been  guilty  of  very  gross  sins,  which  press
heavily  upon  the  conscience  in  the  prospect  of
death,  desire  to  confess  them  ;  and  are  there  cases
also  of  persons  who  for  great  offences  have  been
excommunicated  and  cast  off  from  the  communion
of  the  Church,  that  desire  reconciliation  before
they  die  ?

A.  Yes;  such  cases  occur,  and  if  discipline
were  better  observed  such  cases  would  be  more
frequent  than  they  are.  In  such  cases  of  con-
science and  offence,  the  minister  has  the  power,
acting  in  this  extremity,  to  receive  the  voluntary
confession  of  the  offender  and  to  reconcile  him
on  his  own  authority  to  the  Church.  "  Here
shall  the  sick  person  be  moved  "  (this  is  evidently
a  special  case,  for  the  general  case  has  been  dis-
posed of  in  the  foregoing  paragraph  )  "  to  make
a  special  confession  of  his  sins  if  he  feel  his
conscience  troubled  with  any  weighty  matte7\  "
After  which  confession,  the  minister  shall  absolve
him  fif  he  humbly  and  heartily  desire  it  J  with
the  express  form  provided  for  such  cases.

Q.   In  what  sense  is  this  absolution  given  ?

A.  It  is  given  as  an  ecclesiastical  act.  It  is
not  sacramental,  final,  or  irreversible,  it  is  made
on  the  presumption  of  the  faith  and  sincerity  of
the  penitent,  and  it  is  charitable  and  without
doubt  relying  on  the  disciplinarian  instruction  of


Ill

Christ,  "  whatsoever  ye  shall  loose  on  earth
shall  be  loosed  in  heaven."  In  the  case  of  a  per-
son suspended  and  excommunicate  by  the  disci-
pline of  the  Church,  and  when  the  authority  of
the  Church  cannot  be  procured  without  delay,
the  minister  as  officer  of  the  Church,  is  instruct-
ed to  unloose  the  bonds  of  discipline,  and  in  cases
of  danger  and  repentance  to  restore  "  such  an
one  "  as  has  been  "'  a  heathen  man  and  a  pub-
lican "  to  the  privileges  of  a  brother  and  member
of  Christ — To  remove  or  continue  sin  is  not  in
the  power  of  a  priest.  So  far  as  the  remission  of
sins  before  God  is  concerned,  absolution  is  but  a
declaration  of  the  remission  promised  and  grant-
ed by  the  Gospel.  It  is  but  the  application  to
particular  cases  of  the  alternatives  of  the  Gospel^
which  as  they  are  declared  on  earth  by  Christ's
command  will  be  ratified  in  heaven.  "  Who-
soever sins  ye  remit  they  are  remitted,  whosoever
sins  ye  retain  they  are  retained,  he  that  bclieveth
and  is  baptised  shall  be  saved  and  he  that  be-
lie veth  not  shall  be  damned."  A  minister  can
declm^e  neither  the  one  nor  the  other  of  these
texts,  but  by  authority  of  heaven.  "  Let  it
suffice  thus  far  to  have  shewed  how  God  alone
doth  truly  give,  the  virtue  of  repentance  alone
procure,  and  private  ministerial  absolution,  but
declare  remission  of  sins."

Q.  But  is  it  not  inconsistent  with  the  design  of
the  christian  eucharist,  to  administer  it  in  private


\\2

houses,  and  is  it  not  popish  to  make  these  regula-
tions for  the  sick  and  dying  *?

A.  We  conceive  that  the  Sacrament  of  the
Lord's  supper  is  an  institution  to  be  observed
publicly  in  the  Church,  and  the  Church  of  Eng-
land expressly  forbids,  except  in  cases  of  neces-
sity, its  administration  in  private  houses.  "  No
minister  shall  administer  the  holy  communion
in  any  private  house,  except  it  be  in  times
of  necessity,  when  any  being  either  so  impotent
that  he  cannot  go  to  the  Churchy  or  very  dan-
gerously  sick,  are  desirous  to  he  partakers  of
that  holy  Sacrament"  and  when  it  is  adminis-
tered in  houses,  it  must  be  with  christian  breth-
ren assembled.  It  is  difficult  to  conceive  that
the  Church  could  have  more  exactly  consulted
in  this  respect  the  dictates  of  humanity,  and  the
scriptural  rule  of  bringing  the  Church  and  its
ojffices  to  the  Chi^istian,  where  the  Christian
cannot  approach  the  Church — Yet  this  is  one
of  the  offices  for  which  the  Church  of  England
is  denounced  as  vicious,  popish,  and  unscriptural.
The  administration  of  the  Sacrament  to  the  sick
is  one  of  the  unscriptural  scandals  of  the  present
day.  We  maintain  however  that  the  office  of
the  sick,  in  all  its  parts,  is  one  of  the  most  scrip-
tural services  (considering  the  occasion)  which
is  to  be  found  in  the  discipline  of  any  Church.
So  far  from  making  it  a  subject  of  defence,  we
regard  it,  when  left  open  and  voluntary,  as  a


113

theme  for  panegyric.  Christ  has  not  intrusted
the  Gospel  and  its  ordinances  to  the  Church
with  injunctions  like  these,  "  Go  ye  into  all  the
world  and  preach  and  administer  my  gospel ;
but  remember,  that  you  are  particularly  re-
strained from  applying  its  ordinances  to  the
sick  and  dying" :  Go,  and  proclaim  the  great
amnesty  of  heaven,  but  remember,  that  you  give
the  bread  to  the  full,  and  refuse  it  to  the  hungry  ;
give  the  waters  to  him  who  can  drink  abundantly
of  the  stream,  but  not  a  drop  to  him  who  is  too
feeble  to  reach  the  bank ;  throw  out  the  rope  of
safety  to  him  who  braves  the  waves  and  feels  con-
fident he  can  reach  the  shore;  but  remember,
that  it  must  lie  coiled  and  forbidden  to  him  who
is  sinking  in  weakness  and  despair."

Q.  But  considering  the  prejudices  that  exist
against  this  discipline,  and  the  administration  of
the  Sacrament  to  the  sick,  would  it  not  be  better
to  remove  these  things,  in  order  to  render  the
Church  more  popular  and  less  liable  to  exception  ?

A.  This  discipline  is  scriptural,  and  far  more
moral  and  humane  than  what  is  called  a  popular
discipline  might  prove  to  be.  These  practices
in  substance  are  according  to  the  gospel  and  the
apostolic  practice,  and  were  held  sacred  in  the
ancient  Church  long  before  popery  was  thought
of.  They  resemble  the  case  stated  by  St.  James,
as  far  as  ordinary  law  and  discipline  can  or  ought
to  imitate  that  which  is  extraordinary.     If  these

I


114

thiiiiJ's  were  removed,  the  Churfoh  of  England
would  be  less  scriptural,  less  apostolical,  and  less
cliaritablc,  and  suited  to  all  cases,  than  she  now  is.
So  tar  from  considering  them  abuses,  they  serve
to  shew  that  the  Anglican  Bishops  who  effected
the  Reformation  of  the  Clmrch  of  England,  were
men  of  learning  and  sound  discretion,  who  avoid-
ed many  weak  resiliencies  into  which  many  re-
formers of  that  and  subsequent  periods  have
fallen.  When  we  consider,  too,  the  practices
(many  of  them  lawful  and  charitable )  of  other
great  divisions  of  the  Catholic  Church  ;  the  ex-
tensive jurisdiction  of  the  Church  of  England  in
all  her  fleets,  colonies  and  armies  ;  the  extraordi-
nary lives  of  many  men  ;  the  peculiar  feelings  of
many  dying  men,  with  respect  to  these  christian
duties,  who  can  have  no  other  spiritual  guide  but
a  chaplain  of  our  own  communion ;  surely  these
sacred  things  are  not  to  be  igmorantly  swept
away,  without  much  better  evidence  than  we
have  yet  had,  that  any  evil  and  no  benefits  result
from  them,  merely  to  satisfy  scruples  which  may
be  unfomided,  and  prejudices  that  may  be  remov-
ed, more  especially  as  the  use  of  them  is  perfect-
ly discretionary,  and  consequently  no  personal
grievance  can  possibly  exist.  The  visitation
of  the  sick  never  yet  made  a  dissenter,  and  the
removal  of  this  christian  discipline,  will  never
make  a  churchman.  It  may  make  many  papists,
as  the  idle  and  unhallowed  disregard  of  the  in-


115

firmities  of  human  nature  often  has  done.

Q.  But  in  the  jjresent  general  circulation  of
the  scriptures,  and  the  common  preaching  of  the
doctrines  of  the  gospel,  are  not  such  services  fit-
ted only  to  the  superstitious  and  ignorant,  and
are  they  not  useless  ?

A.  It  is  to  be  feared  that  the  circulation  of  the
scriptures  is  sometimes  substituted  for  the  use  of
them,  and  the  preaching  of  the  doctrines  of  the
gospel,  for  the  knowledge  and  application  of  them
to  mankind.  But  christian  symbols,  sacraments,
and  offices,  are  not  vanities  ;  they  are  not  mere
officious  ceremonies,  not  transient  acts  of  peni-
tence to  avert  the  terrors  of  superstition,  but  means
by  which  many  apj^rehend  the  promises^  and
hopes  of  the  gospel.  They  minister  (we  speak
from  observation)  to  the  peace  and  comfort  of
many  a  dying  man,  and  the  disuse  of  them  de-
prives many,  in  the  hour  of  death,  of  consolation
which  they  might  derive  through  them.  In  the
perturbations  of  life,  the  comforts  of  religion  are
not  always  communicated  by  a  theological  dis-
quisition, but  more  frequently  by  sympathy,
communion,  and  the  public  ministrations  of  the
Church  :  "  Incorporated  minds"  says  our  great
moralist,  "  will  always  feel  some  inclination  to-
wards exterior  acts  and  ritual  observances.  Ideas
not  re[)rescnted  by  sensible  objects  are  fleeting,
variable,  evanescent.  We  are  not  able  to  judge
of  the  degree  of  conviction   'which    operated  at

I  2


IIG

any  particular  time  upon  our  own  thoughts,  but  as
it  is  recorded  by  some  certain  and  definite  effect."
Those  know  little  of  death  bed  scenes,  who  imagine
that  at  such  times  the  intellect  is  all  vigour,  the
imagination  all  energy,  and  the  heart  all  peace.
Conscience  is  often  at  such  moments  the  secret
intruder  that  absorbs  all  the  powers  and  faculties
of  the  soul.  And  even  when  this  great  monitor  is
tranquil,  how  feeble  often  is  the  hold  which  the
soul  can  then  take  of  its  dearest  interests !  How
often  is  a  friend,  who  could  not  have  been  recalled
by  an  effort  of  the  memory  to  recollection,  at
such  a  moment  when  present,  valued,  loved,  and
cherished  !  The  sight  of  an  affectionate  wife,
or  husband,  and  of  dutiful  children,  revive  and
reanimate  the  dying  embers  of  the  heart ;  and  so
the  memorial  of  a  Saviour's  mercy,  the  tokens  of
his  presence,  and  the  pledges  of  his  favour,  re-
assure the  fainting  soul  of  its  hope  full  of  im-
mortality, even  in  agony  and  death.  But  it  will
be  said,  that  though  the  ministrations  of  religion,
are  desirable  for  the  sick,  and  the  christian  sa-
crament seems  applicable  to  the  circumstances  of
the  dying,  yet  most  men  die  with  faculties  much
enfeebled,  or  with  sanguine  imaginations  strongly
excited  by  the  prospect  of  death,  and  therefore
the  whole  subject  must  be  left  a  matter  of  opinion^
If  it  must  be  a  matter  of  opinion,  let  it  be  so  ;
but  it  is  too  interesting  to  be  left  as  a  question  of
opinion  undecided.     Let  it  be  put  upon  its  trial


117

and  submitted  to  tlie  evidence  of  facts.  As  these
facts  are  interesting"  to  every  philanthropist,  as
well  as  to  every  christian,  we  will  relate  a  few,
of  the  great  number,  that  might  be  adduced.
They  shall  be  cases  in  which  the  intellect  was
undoubted,  the  faculties  unimpaired,  and  the
approach  of  death  distinctly  marked  and  known.
These  cases,  also  shall  be  selected  with  a  view  to
illustrate  the  various  points  of  this  discussion.
CASE  I.
Bossuet  and  the  Pi^incess  Henrietta  Ann.
"Henrietta  Ann  was  the  daughter  of  our  Charles
the  first,  and  wife  of  the  duke  of  Orleans.  On
the  29th  of  June  1 670,  after  drinking  a  glass  of
cold  water,  in  her  apartment  at  St.  Cloud,  she
was  seized  with  a  shivering,  succeeded  by  a  burn-
ing heat,  which  threw  her  into  the  most  excruci-
ating torments.  She  cried  out  that  she  was
poisoned  :  the  physicians  were  sent  for ;  when
they  saw  her,  they  were  struck  with  horror,  at
her  livid  appearance — pronounced  her  beyond
medical  aid,  and  advised  her  to  receive,  without
delay,  the  last  sacraments  of  the  Church.  The
princess  heard  them  pronounce  her  fate  with
firmness ;  and,  recollecting  the  manner  in  which
Bossuet  had  attended  her  mother,  the  queen
dowager  of  England,  she  desired  that  an  instant
should  not  be  lost  in  sending  for  him.  Three
couriers  were  successively  despatched  to  him ;  and
he  arrived  between  eleven  and  twelve  at  night  at

i3


lis

St,  Cloud.  Ill  the  interval,  she  suffered  the  most
dreadful  pains,  and,  her  immediate  dissolution
being  apprehended,  she  made  a  general  confes-
sion of  her  sins  to  the  abbe  Feuillet,  a  person
generally  esteemed,  but  of  a  harsh  character.
When  her  confession  was  finished,  her  attendants
were  called  in  :  the  whole  scene  was  afflicting  and
horrible.  The  account  which  we  have  of  the
conduct  of  the  confessor  makes  us,  perhaps  un-
reasonably, blame  his  merciless  austerity.  Her
lamentable  shrieks,  he  treated  as  acts  of  rebellion
against  the  divine  will,  and  told  her,  that  her
sins  were  not  punished  as  they  deserved.  In  the
midst  of  her  convulsions,  she  received  his  re-
proofs Avith  mildness,  but  often  enquired  of
Madame  de  la  Fayette,  (who  was  at  her  bedside)
if  Bossuet  were  not  yet  come.  Before  he  came,
she  received  extreme  unction  from  the  abbe
Feuillet.  Having  exclaimed  in  an  agony  of  pain,
"Will  these  torments  never  end*?"  "Don't
forget  yourself  in  this  manner,"  said  the  austere
abbe,  "  you  ought  to  be  better  disposed  for  suf-
fering ;  but  I  must  tell  you,  that  your  torments
loill  soon  end."  At  length,  Bossuet  arrived  :  as
soon  as  the  princess  saw  him,  she  made  him  pro-
mise not  to  quit  her  till  she  breathed  her  last.
He  knelt  down,  dissolved  in  tears,  leaning  on  her
bed,  and  holding  a  crucifix  in  his  hand.  With  a
tremoulous  voice,  often  interrupted  by  his  own
feelings,  he  invited  her  to  join  him,  as  far  as  her


119

sufferings  allowed,  in  the  reflections,  prayers,  and
acts  of  contrition,  faith,  hope,  and  charity,  which
he  should  address  to  God,  for  her,  in  her  name.
He  was  exceedingly  moved,  and  every  person
present  sympathized  in  the  scene.  Nothing
could  exceed  the  tender  and  affecting  sentiments
of  devotion  and  piety,  which  Bossuet  suggested
to  her ;  he  finally  subdued  by  them,  in  a  great
measure,  the  sense  of  the  cruel  sufferings  she  en-
dured. The  princess  heard  him  with  mild  and
composed  constancy  ;  if  he  stopped  for  a  moment,
she  gently  entreated  him  to  continue,  assuring
him,  that  his  words  were  of  inestimable  value
to  her.  He  then  read  over  to  her,  the  recom-
mendation of  the  soul,  in  the  liturgy,  explained
it  to  her,  made  her  gently  repeat  with  him  its
soothing  prayers,  and  softly  instilled  into  her
the  sentiments,  which  they  are  intended  to  con-
vey ;  filled  her  soul  with  faith,  with  compunction,
with  calm,  with  resignation,  and  above  all,  with
divine  love  to  him,  into  whose  hands  she  was  so
soon  to  yield  her  soul.  She  herself,  at  last,  felt  a
consciousness  of  her  serene  triumph  over  pain  ;
"  Oh  !  my  God,"  she  exclaimed,  "  why  did  T  not
always  adhere  to  thee  !  "  She  recollected  that
the  crucifix,  which  Bossuet  had  in  his  hands,  was
the  same  which  he  had  given  to  her  mother  the
queen  dowager  of  England,  to  hold  in  her  agony.
She  took  it  from  him,  and  kept  it  in  her  hands,
till  she  l)rcathed  her  last."


120


CASE  II.

Serapion,  who  was  excommunicate^  and  on
his  death-bed  absolved  and  received  by  com-
munion i?ito  the  Church.

"  The  case  of  Serapion  was  this.  He  was  a
faithful,  aged  person,  and  always  of  a  very  up-
right life,  till  fear  of  persecution  in  the  end
caused  him  to  fall  back.  After  long  sorrow  for
his  scandalous  offence,  and  suit  oftentimes  made
to  be  pardoned  of  the  Church,  Serapion  fell  at
length  into  a  grievous  sickness,  and  being  ready
to  yield  up  the  ghost,  was  then  more  instant  than
before  to  receive  the  sacrament ;  which  sacra-
ment was  necessary  in  this  case,  not  that  Serapion
would  have  been  deprived  of  everlasting  life
without  it,  but  that  his  end  was  thereby  made  to
him  the  more  comfortable."

CASE    III.

Private  Confession.

D M had   been  for  many  years  a

soldier  in  the  English  army,  into  which  he  had
entered  when  a  young  man,  and  in  which  he  had
served  in  Spain,  Italy,  and  Sicily.  At  the  time
of  the  general  peace,  he  had  obtained  his  dis-
charge, married  and  settled  in  one  of  our  large
cities.  He  was,  however,  an  unhappy  man,  and
after  some  years,  partly  from  disease  contracted
in  a  warm  climate,  but  principally  from  anxiety
of  mind,  his  strength  gave  way,  and  he  sent  for
the  minister  of  the  parish  to  visit  him,  on  his  sick


121

bed,  which  proved  his  death  bed.  He  was  found
in  a  small  garret,  and  in  great  apparent  poverty,
but  there  was  an  unusual  degree  of  submission  to
his  misfortunes,  and  indeed  a  manifest  indiffer-
ence to  them  except  as  they  occasioned  fatigue
and  anxiety  to  his  wife.  Any  observation  with  re-
spect to  his  wants,  he  received  thankfully  but  with
an  indifference  that  was  remarkable.  He  listened
to  religious  instruction  with  interest,  but  for  two
or  three  visits  with  unbroken  reserve.  At  last,
when  the  minister  one  day  read  to  him  the  exhor-
tation to  the  sick,  he  became  distressed  in  his
mind,  though  he  never  lost  his  self  possession.
He  begged  his  wife  to  go  to  some  short  distance
for  some  object  which  he  mentioned  to  her,  and
then  finding  himself  alone  with  the  minister,  he
desired  to  make  a  confession  of  his  guilt,  which
lay  like  an  intolerable  burden  on  his  heart.  He
was  told  that  it  might  be  sufficient  to  confess  to
God  secretly  and  honestly  ;  when  he  replied  that
he  knew  God  saw  all  that  was  in  his  heart,  and
that  for  years  he  had  confessed  his  sins,  but  that
the  recollection  of  a  horrible  crime  of  which  he
had  been  guilty  was  so  intolerable  to  him,  that  he
begged  that  he  might  unburden  his  mind,  and  by
God's  blessing,  be  better  prepared  to  meet  his
death,  which  he  knew  was  not  far  distant.  He
was  again  reminded,  that  he  might  disclose  his
heart  to  God,  and  that  with  further  instruction
he  might  find  tj^at  peace  which  he  sought ;  when


122

he  again  replied,  that  his  mind  was  so  weighed
down  by  the  pressure  of  his  guilt,  that  though  he
knew  full  well  the  promises  of  the  gospel,  he
could  not  apply  them  to  himself,  and  find  that
rest  which  be  earnestly  desired  to  find  before  he
died.  When  the  minister  assented  to  hear  him,
he  mentioned  the  vices  of  his  life,  and  afterwards,
Avith  a  compunction  that  was  overwhelming,  de-
tailed the  horrid  crime,  which  he  had  committed
when  his  regiment  was  in  Sicily,  and  which  had
for  many  years  filled  his  mind  with  the  deepest
remorse.  He  was  not  ignorant ;  he  knew  that
no  sin,  much  less  his  great  and  enormous  crime,
could  be  blotted  out  but  by  the  merits  and  atone-
ment of  Jesus  Christ.  But  he  declared,  that  he
never  could  have  applied  to  himself  the  promises
of  the  gospel,  unless  assisted  by  some  singular  in-
terposition of  Providence,  and  such  he  considered
the  offices  of  the  Chur<;h,  the  counsel  of  the  mi-
nister and  the  opportunity  of  a  full  confession  of
his  guilt.  Life  had  no  charms ;  death  had  no  ter-
rors but  that  which  the  consciousness  of  this
horrid  deed  presented  to  his  troubled  soul.  He
could  not  confess  to  his  wife,  for  that  would  have
embittered  her  sorrovv  and  her  life  ever  after.  He
had  no  friend  to  M^hom  he  could  declare  his  grief,
but  through  the  offices  and  administrations  of  the
Church,  he  found  that  help,  and  those  pledges  of
grace  which  composed  his  soul  in  death.


123

CASE    IV.
KING  CHARLES  THE  FIRST  AND  LORD  STRAFFORD.

Public  confessson  of  injustice  to  others  and
forgiveness  of  iyijuries.

The  impeachment,  trials,  and  executions  of
these  two  illustrious  men,  distinguished  by  birth,
talents,  private  worth,  and  political  martyrdom,
are  confessed  to  rank  among  the  most  interesting-
annals  of  our  history.  Romance  and  history,
law  and  politics,  loyalty  and  dissaffection,  have
ransacked  these  transactions  with  the  most  eager
attention.  We  refer  to  these  vivid  and  dismal
tragedies,  however,  as  illustrations  of  the  great
principles  of  religion.  If  in  the  case  of  Lord
Strafford  the  law  was  defined  and  defended  by  a
reputed  criminal,  and  (so  far  as  that  law  was  con-
cerned) an  innocent  sufferer,  certainly,  both  in
the  case  of  the  royal  master  and  his  faithful  ser-
vant, the  principles  of  religion  were  developed
in  an  eminent  degree,  by  those  who  were  then  its
reputed  enemies.  These  illustrious  persons  were
not  only  public  characters  and  politicians,  they
were  christians ;  and  we  adduce  them  as  remark-
able instances,  the  one  of  public  confession  of  his
guilt  and  just  punishment,  though  by  an  unjust  sen-
tence for  an  act  of  injustice  to  his  friend  and  ser-
vant ;  and  both,  of  forgiveness  of  injuries,  whether
inflicted  by  untoward  conjuncture  of  circumstan-


ces  or  malicious  dcsii^n.  It  is  well  known  that
King  Charles,  when  he  dismissed  Lord  Strafford
from  his  service,  gave  his  honor,  as  a  king,  that
he  should  not  suffer  in  life,  honor,  or  fortune,  and
that  he  afterwards,  not  without  great  anxiety  of
mind  and  struggle  of  concience,  consented  to  his
death.  It  is  said  that  the  king  never  could  sup-
press his  grief  and  remorse  for  this  unrighteous
act.  Upon  the  scaffold  he  referred  to  it  in  the
most  solemn  manner.  After  declarint>:  his  inno-
cence  of  the  crime  for  which  he  suffered,  and  ex-
cusing the  Parliament,  as  far  as  he  could,  of  the
guilt  of  his  death,  he  referred  to  the  death  of
Lord  Strafford  with  the  following  confession —
"  Yet  for  all  this,  God  forbid  I  should  be  so  ill  a
christian,  as  not  to  say  that  God's  judgments  are
just  upon  me ;  many  times  he  does  pay  justice  by
an  imjust  sentence,  that  is  ordinary,  I  will  only
say  this.  That  an  unjust  sentence  that  I  suffered
to  take  effect,  is  punished  noiv  by  an  unjust  sen-
tence upon  me." — and  again,  shewing  himself  a
christian,  forgiving  others,  as  he  hoped  for  for-
giveness himself.  "  I  hope  there  is  a  good  man,
{  pointing  to  Bishop  Juxon)  that  will  bear  me
witness,  that  I  have  forgiven  all  the  world,  and
even  those  in  particular  that  have  been  the  chief
causes  of  my  death  :  who  they  are  God  knows,  I
do  not  desire  to  know  ;  I  j)ray  God  forgive  them.
But  this  is  not  all,  my  charity  must  go  further,
I  wish  that  they  may  repent  ;    for    indeed   they


125

have  committed  a  great  sin  in  that  particular  ;  I
pray  God  with  Stephen,  that  this  1x5  not  laid  to
their  charge."

The  generosity  and  christian  forgiveness  of
Lord  Strafford,  were  still  more  remarkable.  He
was  a  man  of  the  most  eminent  talents  and  capa-
city, and  had  a  mind  (as  his  immortal  defence
shewed)  capable  of  estimating  the  iniquity  of  his
sentence,  the  malice  of  his  enemies,  and  the  dis-
honourable weakness  of  the  king.  He  was  placed
under  circumstances  that  must  have  been  galling
to  his  pride ;  and  under  which  it  must  have  been
extremely  difficult  for  the  wisest  and  the  best  of
men  not  to  have  felt  and  expressed  his  contempt
for  his  friends  and  his  enemies.  But  to  both  he
shewed  the  most  christian  dispositions,  during  his
confinement,  at  his  trial  and  before  his  execution.^
His  soul  seemed  to  have  been  trained  to  the  hio-h-
est  elevation  by  the  true  principles  of  a  gentle-
man, and  a  christian ;  and  his  letter  to  the  king,,
(though  it  has  been  construed  into  an  artifice)  is
so  in  keeping  with  his  whole  conduct,  that  it  seems
difficult  to  doubt  either  the  genuineness  of  the  let-
ter or  his  expressions.  In  his  last  letter  to  his  son
he  strictly  enjoins  him,  "to  avoid  as  much  as  you
can  to  enquire  after  those  that  have  been  sharp
in  their  judgments  towards  me,,  and  I  charge  you
never  to  suffer  thought  of  revenge  to  enter  your
heart."  There  can  be  no  doubt  that  this  noble
conduct  proceeded  from  his  christian  principles.


126

It  is  well  known  that  Lord  Strafford  prepared  for
his  death,  like  a  christian,  and  suffered  at  the
last  with  the  greatest  fortitude  and  composure.
The  iniquity  of  Lord  Strafford's  sentence  was  ge-
nerally felt  after  his  death,  and  his  enemies  to
blacken  his  memory,  and  reconcile  that  puritani-
cal age  to  their  villainy,  charged  him  with  disso-
lute habits.  His  vindication  by  Sir  George
Radcliffe  supplies  us  with  an  instance  of  true
and  christian  friendship,  w  here  mutual  confession
soothes  and  purifies  the  heart ;  with  it  we  shall
conclude  these  instances  of  confession  and  for-
giveness in  these  illustrious  persons.  "  He  was
defamed,"  says  Sir  George,  "  for  incontinence,
wherein  I  have  reason  to  believe  that  he  was  ex-
ceedingly much  wronged.  I  had  occasion  of  some
speech  with  him  about  the  state  of  his  soul,  seve-
ral times,  but  twice  especially,  when*  I  verily
believe  he  did  lay  open  unto  me  the  very  bottom
of  his  heart :  once,  when  he  was  in  very  great
affliction  upon  the  death  of  his  second  wife  ;  and
then  for  some  days  and  nights  I  was  very  few
minutes  out  of  his  company.  The  other  time
was  at  Dublin  on  a  Good  Friday  (his  birthday)
when  he  was  preparing  himself  to  receive  the
blessed  Sacrament,  on  Easterday  following.  At
both  these  times,  I  received  such  satisfaction,  as
left  no  scruple  with  me  at  all,  but  much  assurance
of  his  chastity.  I  knew  his  ways  long  and  inti-
mately ;  and  though  I  cannot  clear  him  from  all


12?

frailties,  (for  who  can  justify  the  most  innocent
man)  yet  I  must  give  him  the  testimony  of  con-
scientiousness in  his  ways,  that  he  kept  himself
from  gross  sin,  and  endeavoured  to  approve  him-
self rather  unto  God  than  unto  man,  to  be  reli-
gious inwardly  and  in  truth,  rather  than  out-
wardly and  in  shew."

CASE    V.

Sir  Mattkew  Hale.

"  He  was  attended  on,  in  his  sickness,  by  a;
pious  and  worthy  divine,  Mr.  Evan  Griffith,,
minister  of  the  parish,  and  it  was  observed  in  all
the  extremities  of  his  pain,  whenever  he  prayed
by  him,  he  forbore  all  complaints  or  groans,  but
with  his  hands  and  eyes  lifted  up  was  fixed  in  his
devotion  ;  not  long  before  his  death,  the  minister
told  him,  "  there  was  to  be  a  Sacrament  next
Sunday  at  Church,  but  he  believed  he  could  not
come  to  partake  with  the  rest  ;  therefore  he  would
give  it  to  him  in  his  own  house,"  but  he  answered
"  No,  his  heavenly  Father  had  prepared  a  feast
for  him,  and  he  would  go  to  his  Father's  house  to
partake  of  it."  So  he  made  himself  carried  thi-
ther in  his  chair,  where  he  received  the  Sacra-
ment on  his  knees  with  great  devotion,  which  it
may  be  supposed  was  the  greater  because  he  ap-
prehended it  was  to  be  his  last,  so  he  took  it  as
his  viaticum  and  provision  for  his  journey."


\2S


CASE    VI.

irorrf  William  Russell.

Ill  the  last  week  of  Lord  Russell's  life  after  his
condemnation,  and  before  his  execution,  he  was
much  with  Dr.  Burnet,  and  the  dean  of  Canter-
bury, Dr.  Tillotson.  When  alone  with  Dr.  Bur-
net he  spoke  with  the  greatest  seriousness  ;  he
said,  that  as  for  death,  he  thanked  God,  that  as
a  man,  he  never  was  afraid  of  it ;  and  did  not
consider  it  with  so  much  apprehension  as  the
drawing  of  a  tooth.  But  he  said,  he  found  that
the  courage  of  a  man,  that  could  venture  in  the
heat  of  blood,  was  very  different  from  the  cou-
rage of  a  dying  christian,  and  dying  in  cold  blood.
That  must  come  from  an  inward  peace  of  con-
science and  an  assurance  of  the  mercy  of  God ;
and  he  had  that  to  such  a  degree,  that  though
from  the  first  day  of  his  imprisonment,  he  reck-
oned he  was  a  dead  man,  it  had  never  given  him
any  sort  of  trouble.  He  added,  that  though  he
had  been  guilty  of  many  defects  and  failings
f  among  which  he  reckoned  the  seldom  7'eceivi7ig
the  Sacrament  J  yet  he  thanked  God  he  had  a
clear  conscience.

He  asked  Dr.  Burnet,  if  the  scorn  he  had  of
some  ill  men,  particularly  the  Lord  Howard,  was
inconsistent  with  a  perfect  forgiveness  ;  he  said,
he  heartily  prayed  God  to  touch  his  heart,  and
was  sure  that  if  it  was  in  his  power,  he  would  do
him  no  hurt,  but  good.     But  he  could  not  forbear


129

thinking  very  ill  of  him,  and  despising  him.  Dr.
Burnet  satisfied  him  on  this  head  by  shewing  him
from  the  15th  psalm,  that  a  part  of  the  character
of  one  that  shall  dwell  on  God's  holy  hill,  is  he  in
whose  eyes  a  vile  person  is  despised."

In  his  letter  to  the  king,  which  he  wrote  to  be
presented  after  his  death,  he  says,  "  My  chief
business  is  humbly  to  ask  your  pardon  for  any
thing  that  I  have  either  said  or  done,  that  might
look  like  want  of  respect  to  your  majesty,  or  duty
to  your  government;  in  which  though  I  do  to
the  last  moment  aquit  myself  of  all  design  against
your  person^  or  of  altering  the  government,  and
protest  1  know  of  no  design,  now  on  foot,
against  either,  yet  I  do  not  deny  but  I  have  heard
many  things,  and  said  some  things  contrary  to  my
duty,  for  which,  as  I  have  asked  God's  pardon,
so  I  humbly  beg  your  majesty's."

Friday  being  the  day  he  fixed  for  receiving
the  Sacrament^  he  determined  to  pass  the  day,
as  he  would  have  done  the  Sunday,  had  he  lived
so  long.  The  Sacrament  was  given  him  early
in  the  morning,  (his  servant  receiving  it  with
him)  by  the  dean  of  Canterbury  (Tillotson).  After
he  had  received  it,  the  dean  asked  him  if  he  be-
lieved all  the  articles  of  the  christian  religion,  as
taught  by  the  Church  of  England  ?  He  answered,
"yes,  truly."  Then  he  asked  him  if  he  forgave
all  persons  ?  That  he  said  he  did  from  his  heart.
Then  the  dean  told  him  he  hoped  he  would  dis-

K


t30

charge  his  conscience  in  fall  and  free  confession.
He  said  that  he  had  done  it.

Dr.  Burnet  and  Dr.  Tillotson  accompanied  him
to  his  execution.  Just  as  they  were  entering  Lin-
coln's Inn  Fields  he  said,  "  This  has  been  to  me
a  place  of  sinning,  and  God  now  makes  it  the  place
of  my  punishment."

On  the  scaffold  he  said,  "  In  the  words  of  a
dying  man,  I  profess  I  know  no  plot,  either  against
the  king's  life,  or  the  government ; — but  I  have
now  done  with  this  world,  and  I  am  going  to  a
better.  I  forgive  all  the  world,  heartily  ;  and  I
wish  all  slnce7'e  profesta7its  may  love  one  another^
and  not  make  way  for  popery  hy  their  animosi-
ties. I  pray  God  forgive  them,  and  continue
the  protestant  religion  amongst  them,  that  it
may  flourish  so  long  as  the  sun  and  moon  endm'e.
I  am  now  more  satisfied  to  die  than  ever  I  have
been.''

CASE    VII.

Reverend  Thomas  Scott,

AUTHOR   OF  THE   COMMENTARY   ON   THE  BIBLE.

In  the  biography  which  has  been  published  of
this  venerable  and  laborious  Commentator  on  the
scripture,  there  is  a  very  remarkable  account  of
his  last  illness  and  death.  It  appears,  that  in  his
last  moments,  his  mind  was  oppressed  with  an
extraordinary  degree  of  conflict,  and  even  gloom,
at  the  prospect   of  dissolution.     It  might  have


131

been  expected,  that  a  man,  who  had  thought  so
intensely  on  the  subject  of  rehgion,  would,  with
his  strong  mind,  have  felt  the  awfulness  of  death.
We  are  informed  of  Dr.  Johnson,  that  before  his
death,  his  foreboding  dread  subsided  into  a  pious
trust  and  humble  hope  of  mercy  at  the  throne
of  grace.  But  in  his  decline  and  last  illness,  his
mind  was  continually  agitated  by  the  thought  of
death.  For  a  long  time,  when  he  was  not  en-
gaged in  conversation,  he  was  heard  repeating
from  Shakspeare :

**  Ay,  but  to  die,  and  go  we  know  not  where  ;
To  lie  in  cold  obstruction  and  to  rot ;
This  sensible  warm  motion  to  become
A  kneaded  clod  ;  and  the  delighted  spirit
To  bathe  in  fiery  floods  "

It  is  not  uncommon  for  strong  and  upright
minds  to  have  the  fear  of  death  in  a  great  degree  ;
but  considering  the  pious  and  laborious  life  of
Mr.  Scott,  his  clear  views  of  the  mercy  of  the
gospel,  there  was  certainly  something  remarkable
in  the  gloom  and  agony  of  his  death  bed.  His
case,  however,  is  adduced  to  shew  the  efficacy  of
divine  signs,  and  seals,  and  pledges  of  divine  love,
to  an  agitated  and  sinking  mind.  It  is  well
known,  that  this  good  man  had  not  been  supposed
to  entertain  any  superstitious  veneration  for  the
Sacraments.  He  had  taken  a  part  in  controver-
sy which  might  seem  to  indicate  a  laxity,  of  sen-
timent with  respect  to  these  divine   institutions.

K  2


132

His  commentary  on  the  5th  chapter  of  St  James,
^vith  reference  to  the  visitation  of  the  sick,  and
the  administration  of  the  sacrament  to  the  dying
is  cold  and  suspicious.  He  had,  however,  a  mind
too  just,  and  a  knowledge  of  the  scripture  and  of
the  human  heart  too  sincere,  ever  to  have  enter-
tained a  regardless  opinion  of  the  sacrament.
Still  we  should  have  expected  m  his  death,  that
he  would  have  derived  his  consolation  rather
from  the  doctrines  than  the  symbols  of  the  gospel.
But  what  says  his  affectionate  biographer.  After
a  scene  of  gloom  and  distress,  that  was  painful  to
witness,  he  observes,  *'  His  first  clear  consolation
was,  after  receiving  the  Lord's  Supper,  he  had
previously  observed  an  undue  stress  is  by  some
laid  upon  this  ordinance,  as  administered  to  the
sick,  and  I  think  others  of  us  are  in  danger  of
undervaluing  it.  It  is  a  means  of  grace  and
may  prove  God's  instrument  of  conveying  to  me
the  comfort  I  am  seeking.  The  scene  was  in-
describable, and  can  never  be  forgotten  by  any
who  witnessed  it.  His  fervour,  his  humility,  the
way  in  which  he  raised  his  emaciated  hands  to
heaven,  his  pallid,  dying  countenance,  so  full  of
love  and  expression  of  every  thing  heavenly  and
holy,  the  tears  and  sobs  of  those  present  altoge-
ther were  most  overpowering.  Surely  God  was
with  him  in  a  peculiar  manner.  Shortly  after
the  service  was  concluded  he  said,  "  Now,  Lord,
lettest  thou  thy  servant  depart  in  peace,  for  mine


133


eyes  have  seen  thy  salvation.  Throu<>;h  the  re-
mainder of  the  day,  though  much  exhausted,  and
during  the  night,  he  continued  in  a  very  happy
state  of  mind.  To  his  son-in-law,  who  came  in
the  evening  and  regretted  his  absence  when  the
sacrament  was  administered,  he  said,  "  It  was
beneficial  to  me.  I  received  Christ,  and  he  re-
ceived me.  I  feel  a  composure  which  I  did  not
last  night ;  I  have  not  a  triumphant  assurance,
but  something  which  is  more  calm  and  satisfac-
tory, I  bless  God  for  it."  And  then  after  quoting
many  beautiful  passages  of  scripture,  he  frequent-
ly repeated  Perfect  Peace.

CASE    VIII.

Richaj'd  Hooker.

AUTHOR  OF  THE  ECCLESIASTICAL  POLITY  AND  THE
JUDICIOUS   DEFENDER  OF   THE  CHURCH  OF  ENGLAND.

The  following  narrative  of  the  death  of  this
immortal  man,  is  thus  exquisitely  described  by
his  admirable  biographer.  It  is  a  death  bed
scene  the  most  pure,  peaceful,  and  heavenly,  that
can  be  conceived,  affording  an  irresistible  testi-
mony to  the  sincerity  and  efficacy  of  his  opinions,
and  to  that  practice,  and  discipline  of  the  Church
of  England,  which  he  had  so  judiciously  and  zea-
lously advocated  and  defended.

"  About  one  day  before  his  death.  Dr.  Saravia,
who  knew  the  very  secrets  of  his  soul  (for  they

k3


134

were  supposed  to  be  confessors  to  each  other)  came
to  him,  and  after  a  conference  of  the  beneftt,  the
necessity,  and  safety  of  the  Church's  absolution,
it  was  resolved  that  the  Doctor  should  give  him
both  that  and  the  sacrament  the  day  following.
To  which  end  the  Doctor  came,  and  after  a  short
retirement  and  privacy,  they  returned  to  the  com-
pany ;  and  then  the  Doctor  gave  him  and  some
of  those  friends  that  were  with  him,  the  blessed
sacrament  of  the  body  and  blood  of  our  Lord
Jesus;  which  being  performed,  the  Doctor
thought  he  saw  a  reverend  gaiety  and  joy  in  his
face,  but  it  lasted  not  long,  for  his  bodily  infir-
mities did  return  suddenly,  and  became  more
visible ;  insomuch  that  the  Doctor  apprehended
death  ready  to  sieze  him,  yet  after  some  amend-
ment left  him  at  night,  with  a  promise  to  return
early  the  day  following  ;  which  he  did,  and  then
found  him  better  in  appearance,  deep  in  contem-
plation, and  not  inclinable  to  discourse  ;  which
gave  the  Doctor  occasion  to  require  his  present
thoughts  :  to  which  he  replied,  "That  he  was  me-
ditating the  number  and  nature  of  angels,  and
their  blessed  obedience  and  order,  without  which
peace  could  not  be  in  heaven  ;  and  Oh  !  that  it
might  be  so  on  earth!"  After  which  words  he
said,  "  I  have  lived  to  see  this  world  is  made  up
of  perturbations,  and  I  have  been  long  preparing
to  leave  it,  and  gathering  comfort  for  the  dread-
ful hour  of  making  my  account  with  God,  which


135

I  now  apprehend  to  be  near;  and  though  1  have  by
his  grace  loved  him  in  my  youth,  and  feared  him
in  mine  age,  and  laboured  to  have  a  conscience
void  of  offence  to  him  and  to  all  men ;  yet  if  thou,
O  Lord,  be  extreme  to  mark  what  I  have  done
amiss,  who  can  abide  it  ?  and  therefore,  where  I
have  failed.  Lord  shew  mercy  to  me,  for  I  plead
not  my  righteousness,  but  the  forgiveness  of  my
unrighteousness,  for  his  merits  who  died  to  pur-
chase a  pardon  for  penitent  sinners.  And  since  I
owe  thee  a  death,  Lord,  let  it  not  be  terrible  ;  and
then  take  thine  own  time,  I  submit  to  it.  Let  not
mine,  O  Lord,  but  let  thy  will  be  done."  With
which  expression  he  fell  into  a  dangerous  slumber,
dangerous  as  to  his  recovery ;  yet  recover  he  did,
but  it  was  to  speak  only  these  few  words;  "Good
Doctor,  God  hath  heard  my  daily  petitions,  for  I
am  at  peace  with  all  men,  and  he  is  at  peace
with  me,  and  from  which  blessed  assurance,  I  feel
that  inward  joy,  which  the  world  can  neither  give
nor  take  from  me."  More  he  would  have  spoken,
but  his  spirits  failed  him ;  and  after  a  short  con-
flict betwixt  nature  and  death,  a  quiet  sigh  put
a  period  to  his  last  breath,  and  so  he  fell  asleep."
And  here  (continues  Isaac  Walton  and  every
disciple  of  this  master  in  Israel  will  join  his
reflections  and  prayers)  I  draw  his  entrain,  till
with  the  most  glorious  company  of  the  partri-
archs  and  apostles,  the  most  noble  army  of  mar-
tyrs  and   confessors,    this    most   learned,   most


136

humble,  holy  man,  shall  also  awake,  to  receive
an  eternal  tranquillity,  and  with  a  greater  degree
of  glory  than  common  christians  shall  be  made
partakers  of.  In  the  mean  time,  bless,  O  Lord^
Lord,  bless  his  brethren,  the  clergy  of  this  na-
tion,  with  ardent  desires,  and  effectual  endea-
vours to  attain,  if  not  to  his  great  learning,  yet
to  his  7'emarkable  meekness,  his  godly  simplicity
and  his  christiaji  moderation ;  for  these  are
pj^aiseworthy,  these  bring  peace  at  the  last ;
and  let  the  labours  of  his  life,  his  most  excellent
writings,  be  blest  with  what  he  designed  when
he  u7ide7'took  them,  which  ivas  glory  to  thee,
O  God,  on  high,  peace  ifi  thy  Chu7xh,  and
goodivill  to  mankind.


CHAPTER  III.

Jampridem  equidem  nos  vera  rerum  vocabula  amislmus.

Q.  What  do  you  understand  by  the  Church  of
Christ,  in  which  holy  orders  are  ordained  ?

A.  The  Church  has  been  taken  by  many  (and
among  these  by  the  Roman  CathoHcs)  for  all  in-
telligent beings  angels  as  well  as  men  who  worship
God.  It  has  also  been  considered,  as  including
the  dead  as  well  as  the  living,  all  who  have  be-
lieved in  God  from  the  foundation  of  the  world.
Whatever  relation  may  subsist  between  men  and
invisible  spirits,  and  however  sentiment,  sympa-
thy, and  communion  may  range  into  invisible
regions  of  thought  or  imagination,  certainly  this
intercourse  is  not  subject  to  any  known  rules,  nor
can  it  fall  within  the  limits  of  the  discipline  and
orders  of  the  visible  Church.  At  that  day  when
Christ  shall  present  unto  himself  a  glorious
Church,  holy,  and  without  blemish,  all  the  saints
at  whatever  age  of  the  world  they  may  have  lived
or  died,  will  form  one  holy  Catholic  Church,  re-
deemed by  Christ  out  of  all  nations.  But  by  the
Christian  Church  oii  earth,   in  which  Christ  has


338

instituted  doctrines,  discipline,  and  orders,  we
understand  not  those  who  lived  under  other  dis-
pensations ;  or  angels  whose  nature  and  condition
the  christian  dispensation,  so  far  as  we  know  is
not  designed  to  change  or  affect,  whatever  offices
in  the  secret  of  God's  providence  they  may  fulfil.
By  the  Christian  Church  we  understand  that
which  was  founded  by  Christ  himself,  and  which
after  the  day  of  Pentecost,  was  extended  by  St.
Peter,  (according  to  our  Saviour's  promise)  when
three  thousand  souls  were  added  to  the  hundred
and  twenty  disciples,  and  so  the  Church  of  Jeru-
salem was  the  mother  of  all  other  Churches.
Here  was  the  first  Church  consisting  of  the  Apos-
tles who  governed,  the  presbyters  who  ministered,
and  the  faithful  disciples  who  repented,  believed,
were  baptized,  received  the  Sacraments  adminis-
tered, joined  in  prayer,  and  lived  in  charity.  This
Church  was  one  under  the  government  of  the
Apostles.  But  those  persons  who  composed
that  Church  came  from  different  countries,  and
as  the  gospel  was  to  be  preached  not  only  at
Jerusalem,  but  throughout  all  the  world,  and  as
the  Apostles  were  to  go  into  all  the  world  to
preach  it,  so  we  find  that  the  Church  was  settled
under  one  bishop,  at  Jerusalem,  with  presbyters,
and  deacons,  and  became  the  model  of  all  other
Christian  Churches.  After  this  we  read  of  other
Chui'ches,  as  the  Churches  of  God,  of  the  Saints,
ofGalatia,  of  Asia,  and  others.  But  again,  these


139

Churches,  though  many  in  different  districts,  are
called  one  in  those  districts,  as  the  Churches  in
Judea  are  called  the  Church  of  Jerusalem.  Again,
all  these  different  Churches,  in  different  cities  and
countries,  divided,  with  respect  to  their  lan-
guage, habits,  civil  customs,  and  jurisdiction  were
all  one  in  Christ,  who  is  the  supreme  governor
and  bishop  of  souls.  By  the  Christian  Church,
therefore,  we  understand  ( as  it  is  expressed  in
our  canonical  prayer)  "  the  whole  congregation
of  Christian  people  dispersed  throughout  the
world."  Not  the  Church  of  England  and  its
professors,  or  the  Church  of  Russia,  or  Abyssi-
nia or  the  Greek  Church,  or  the  Roman  Church
and  its  professors,  but  all  Christian  Churches
throughout  the  world,  that  are  derived  from  the
same  source,  hold  the  same  faith,  receive  the  same
sacraments,  and  maintain  subtantially  that  order
and  discipline  by  which  Christ  governs  in  the
Church.  These  Churches  have  existed  from  the
times  of  the  Apostles  to  the  present  day,  and  we
believe  they  will  continue  and  increase,  till  all
the  kingdoms  of  the  world  shall  become  the  king-
doms of  our  Lord  and  of  his  Christ.

Q.  Did  Jesus  Christ  establish  his  Church,  to
be  a  perpetual  institution  in  the  world,  for  the
instruction  and  salvation  of  mankind  ?

A.  Jesus  Christ  has  founded  his  Church  upon  a
rock,  against  which  the  gates  of  hell  shall  not  pre-
vail. It  is  built  upon  the  foundation  of  the  Apostles


140

and  Prophets,  Jesus  Christ  himself  being  the  chieF
corner  stone."  Had  Christianity  been  merely  an
opinion  or  a  system  of  opinions,  it  would  never
have  extended  itself  in  the  world,  or  if  it  had  been
partially  received  for  a  time,  it  would  long  ago
have  been  buried  in  the  same  obscurity,  with  the
systems  of  Pythagoras,  Plato  and  other  Philoso-
phers, Had  not  the  christian  religion  been  esta-
blished with  a  written  word  that  was  to  be
preached,  and  permanent  sacraments  that  were
to  be  administered  by  a  permanent  ministry,  it
would  long  ago  have  expired,  and  we  should  not
now  be  called  upon  to  discuss  any  questions  res-
pecting the  Church,  for  no  Church  would  have
existed.  It  is  a  wonder  to  the  world  that  the
Jews  have  continued  for  so  many  ages  a  distinct
people.  Philosophers,  or  those  who  call  them-
selves such,  viewing  revealed  religion  merely  as  a
system  of  opinions,  and  overlooking  its  divine
institutions,  written  word,  sacraments,  and  minis-
try, have  been  puzzled  to  account  for  this  strange
phenomenon  in  the  moral  and  political  history  of
mankind.  It  is  impossible  to  account  for  their
long  dispersion  and  distinct  condition,  but  on  the
supposition  of  an  overruling  and  righteous  pro-
vidence. There  are,  however,  circumstances  in
their  history,  that  are  more  influential  than  many
imagine,  for,  though  they  have  lost  their  country,
their  independence,  their  temple,  and  system  of
sacrifice  :  they  have  preserved  their  written  word,


141

their  sacraments  and  the  administration  of  them,
and  these,  under  God's  providence,  have  preser-
ved the  Jews  a  distinct  people.

Q.  If  the  administration  and  goverment  of  the
Church  be  so  important  and  necessary,  both  for
its  existence  and  usefuhiess,  did  Christ  ordain  any
permanent  system  for  its  regulation  ?

A.  The  government  of  the  Church  and  the  ad-
ministration of  its  offices  and  functions,-are  quite
as  important  as  the  rules  for  the  private  duties  of
individuals,  and  Christ  has  given  us  such  direc-
tions as  are  sufficient  to  guide  our  judgment  in
this  important  particular.  There  are  many
things  in  matters  of  discipline,  which  may  and
must  change  with  the  natural  course  of  human
affairs,  but  there  are  others,  which  can  never  be
changed  without  a  departure  from  the  foundation
of  the  Apostles  and  Prophets,  Jesus  Christ  him-
self being  the  chief  corner  stone  ;  and  such  per-
manent institutions  are  the  word  or  doctrine,  the
sacraments  and  orders  of  the  Church.  It  is  diffi-
cult to  conceive,,  how  any  considerate  man,  who
examines  the  bible,  and  the  application  of  its
doctrines  to  the  world,  should  imagine  a  Christi-
anity without  a  Church,  or  a  Church  without  a
regular  ministry.  One  would  imagine,  that  such
a  conceit  could  be  entertained  only  by  the  igno-
rant, fanatics  or  philosophers  falsely  so  called.
From  whatever  motives  men  may  act  (  and  of
these  we  are  not  the  judges)    they    are  not   the


142

friends  of  the  Christian  cause  who  affect  to  re-
gard its  poUtical  usefuhiess  or  awful  alternatives,
as  independent  of  the  mode  and  form  of  its  ad-
ministration in  the  world.  The  administration
itself  derives  its  importance  from  the  infinite
value  of  Christianity  to  mankind,  but  mankind
would  never  have  enjoyed  or  continue  to  enjoy
that  religion,  without  the  administration  and
functions,  w^hich  God  has  commanded  for  its
communication  and  transmission  from  age  to  age.
It  is  the  importance  of  the  religion,  which  ren-
ders the  question  of  its  administration  and  its
orders  so  essential,  and  consequently  the  admin-
istration and  the  orders  can  never  be  opposed  to
the  substance  of  Christianity  itself.

Q.  Does  the  Church  of  Rome  maintain  the
doctrine  of  the  Church,  its  sacraments  and
orders  *?

A.  The  Church  of  Rome  and  its  ablest  writers
have  maintained  the  divine  institution  of  Christi-
anity with  great  ability.  The  Church  of  Rome
itself,  within  its  proper  limits,  is  a  Christian
Church,  in  which  the  word,  sacraments,  and
orders  have  been  preserved  and  transmitted  from
age  to  age,  mixed  and  overlaid  as  we  contend
with  horrid  superstitions,  a  word  that  is  not  true,
sacraments  that  are  spurious,  and  orders  that  are
vain,  unchristian,  and  tyrannical.  No  sincere
protestant,  I  suppose,  certainly  no  member  of  the
Church  of  England  would  wish  to  see  the  Church


143

of  Rome,  or  the  bishop  of  Rome  exterminated.
Our  war  with  the  Pope,  has  not  been  for  his  ex-
termination or  injury,  but  for  the  gospel,  and  for
our  own  rights  and  independence.  All  that  the
Church  of  England  desires,  is,  that  the  Church  of
Rome  may  do  what  she  herself  has  done,  cast  off
vain  and  antichristian  superstitions,  and  that  the
bishop  of  Rome  may  confine  himself  to  his  pro-
per place,  without  attempting  to  usurp  a  juris-
diction, to  which  he  has  no  divine,  apostolical,,
or  reasonable  claim  over  other  Churches  and
bishops  of  independent  christian  nations.

Q.  Does  the  Church  of  Rome  regard  orders  or
order  as  a  Sacrament  ?

A.  Yes,  order  is  regarded  as  a  Sacrament,  and
of  the  highest  importance,  because  the  other
sacraments  cannot  be  performed  or  administered
without  it.  This  sacrament  is  considered  of  the
greatest  dignity,  because  they  say  that  the  bis-
hops and  priest  hold  the  power  and  divinity  of  the
immortal  God  amongst  men,  especially,  the  pow-
er of  making  and  offering  the  body  of  Christ,
and  forgiving  the  sins  of  men,  which  exceeds  all
reason  and  understanding  (as  indeed  it  does)  to
such  a  degree  that  nothing  on  earth  can  be  equal
to  it.  That  as  God,  the  Father,  sent  Christ,  and
Christ  the  Apostles,  so  now  the  priests  have  the
Apostles'  power  and  authority  for  the  edification
of  the  Church ;  that  all  Christians  are  to  be  sub-
ject to  the  various  orders  of  the  Church,   as   an


144

army  is  subject  to  its  officers,  whether  prefects,
centurions,  or  generals  ;  that  the  essential  part  of
order,  is  the  consecration  and  administration  of
the  body  of  Christ  in  the  Eucharist,  and  all  that
relates  to  the  sacrifice  of  the  mass,  but  that  juris-
diction extends  over  the  mystical  body  of  Christ,
and  all  its  members  in  their  various  duties  and
callings ;  that  order  is  a  sacrament  because  by  an
external  consecration,  grace  is  given  to  those
who  are  ordained.  These  positions  have  been  in
part  examined,  but  they  will  fall  again  under  con-
sideration, as  we  proceed  to  investigate  the  differ-
ent orders  of  the  Romish  Church.

Q.  Is  orders  a  Sacrament  ?

A.  We  believe  it  to  be  an  institution  as  settled
by  Christ  and  the  Apostles  in  the  Church,  and
we  continue  it  therefore  as  such,  with  the  degrees
which  were  ordained  in  the  apostolic  Churches,
but  we  deny  it  to  be  a  Sacrament.  All  who  are
called  to  any  holy  office  ought  to  be  dedicated,
after  they  are  examined  by  the  imposition  of
hands  and  prayer  (which  was  the  Apostolic  prac-
tice) to  fulfil  it ;  but  as  there  is  no  matter  or
institution  of  matter  and  form,  and  as  it  is  not
generally  necessary,  but  only  for  a  particular
office,  we  conclude  that  it  is  not  a  Sacrament.
In  the  ordination  of  the  different  orders,  as  we
shall  see,  the  Roman  Catholic  Church  has  intro-
duced many  outward  forms  and  signs,  on  account
of  which  they  make  out  orders  to  be  a  Sacrament.


145

but  as  we  consider  many  of  these  forms  and  the
offices  to  which  they  relate,  not  to  be  apostoUcal
or  necessary,  these  ceremonies  of  course  do  not
convince  us  that  orders  is  a  Sacrament  of  the
like  nature  v\dth  baptism  and  the  Lord's  Supper.

Q.  Do  the  Romanists  maintain   different  de-
grees of  order,  and  how  many  ?

A.  There  are  various  degrees,  and  they  are  so
arranged  that  all  who  are  stamped  with  the  cle-
rical tonsure  may  ascend  through  the  lower  to
the  higher  degrees.  The  orders  are  of  two  kinds,
the  greater  and  the  inferior.  The  higher  orders,
(according  to  the  peculiar  view  of  the  Latin
Church)  which  are  also  called  holy,  are  priest,
deacon,  and  sub-deacon.  The  inferior,  in  a  de-
scending scale,  are  acolythist,  exorcist,  lector  or
reader,  and  ostiarius  or  porter.  As,  therefore,
there  are  seven  sacraments,  so  there  are  seven
orders,  all  of  which  are  said  to  be  necessary  to  per-
form rightly  the  sacrifice  of  the  mass,  for  transub-
stantiation  and  the  sacrifice  of  the  mass,  arc  the
essential  points  of  the  Roman  Catholic  Religion,
to  which  orders  are  chiefly  referred.

Q.  What  is  the  clerical  tonsure  with  which
orders  must  begin  ?

A.  The  tonsure  is  the  preparation  for  orders
as  exorcism  is  for  baptism,  and  espousals  for  ma-
trimony. The  tonsure  is  made  on  the  head  in
the  form  of  a  crown,  which  must  be  perpetually
preserved  and  the  radius  of  the  orb  must  increase

L


146

witli  the  increasing  rank  of  the  order.  The  ton-
sure is  derived  as  they  say  from  Apostolic  tradi-
tion, and  (not  from  the  vestal  virgins,  for  they
were  so  vain  as  to  let  the  hair  grovy  again)  but
from  the  grave  father  Dionysius  the  Areopa-
gite,  ( that  is  the  author  who  wrote  under  that
name  )  who  was  followed  by  other  grave  fathers.
The  form  of  the  crown  is  said  to  have  been  in-
troduced by  the  prince  of  the  Apostles,  to  com-
memorate the  crown  of  thorns,  but  it  is  also  an
imitation  of  a  royal  crown,  because  priests  are
kings,  and  also  of  the  circle,  the  most  perfect
mathematical  figure,  to  represent  the  perfection
of  the  priests  and  their  office.

Q.  Are  these  practices  with  respect  to  the  cle-
rical tonsure  of  any  real  authority,  in  the  Church,
and  is  it  necessary  and  advisable  to  make  these
distinctions  in  the  person,  dress,  and  habit  of  the
clergy  ?

A.  The  tonsure  has  no  authority  as  a  mystical
rite.  So  far  from  being  commanded  by  the  an-
cient fathers,  it  was  condemned  and  prohibited.
St.  Jerome  interpreting  Ezekiel  xliv.  20.  says,
"  This  evidently  demonstrates  that  we  ought  nei-
ther to  have  our  heads  shaved  as  the  priests  and
votaries  of  Isis  and  Serapis,  but  that  our  priests
should  appear  with  a  venerable  and  grave  coun-
tenance ;  neither  are  they  to  make  themselves
bald  with  a  razor,  nor  poll  their  heads  so  close
that  they  may  look  as  if  they  were  shaven,    but


147

they  are  to  let  their  hah'  grow  so  long  that  it  may
cover  their  skin."  This  practice  of  the  clerical
tonsure  has  tended  to  render  the  priesthood  in
many  countries,  especially  in  France,  ridiculous
and  we  may  here  observe  with  respect  to  prac-
tices that  relate  to  habit  and  dress,  that  nothing
is  required  of  the  clergy,  but  that  their  manner
and  dress  be  decent,  and  becoming  their  profes-
sion. The  dress  which  they  use  (whether  acade-
mical or  ecclesiastical  )  is  for  the  purpose  (as  in
other  professions)  of  shewing  to  all  persons  who
might  not  otherwise  distinguish  or  respect  the
office,  that  the  individuals  so  habited,  are  author-
ized to  perform,  or  are  in  the  act  of  performing
the  public  of  offices  of  the  Church.

Q.  What  are  the  duties  of  the  inferior  orders,
and  on  what  authority  do  they  rest  ?

A.  They  have  various  duties  but  are  all  infe-
rior to  the  sacred  administration  of  the  holy  altar.
The  ostiarii  are  the  porters  or  doorkeepers,  who
have  the  keys  of  the  Church  which  at  their  ordi-
nation they  receive  from  the  bishop  with  a  certain
form  of  words.  The  reader  is  appointed  and  con-
secrated to  read  parts  of  the  scripture,  and  ex-
plain the  rudiments  of  the  Catholic  religion.  He
receives  his  ordination  from  the  bishop  with  a
book  (delivered  with  a  certain  form  of  words)
that  contains  the  rules  of  his  duty.  The  exorcist
is  appointed  to  the  office  of  calling  on  evil  spirits
in  the  name  of  the  Lord,  which  is  absurdly  ap-

l2  •


148

plied  especially  to  children  in  baptism.  He  re-
ceives his  ordination  from  the  bishop,  with  the
book  of  exorcism,  and  the  power  of  laying  hands
on  the  energumens  (that  is  persons  possessed  or
supposed  to  be  possessed  with  devils)  whether
l)aptizcd  or  catechumens.  The  fourth  and  last
inferior  order  is  the  acolythist  whose  duty  it  is
to  assist  the  deacon  and  subdeacon  in  the  admin-
istration of  the  altar,  and  especially  to  bear  the
candles  whence  they  are  called  ceroferarii.  Their
consecration  is  made  in  the  following  manner,  the
bishop  giving  them  the  candles  (we  mention  it  as
one  of  the  forms  which  constitute  the  inferior
orders)  says, "  Receive  ye  the  candlestick  with  the
taper,  and  know,  that  you  are  devoted  to  light  the
lamps  of  the  Church  in  the  name  of  the  Lord,"
and  then  giving  the  pitchers. in  which  the  water
and  wine  are  served  in  the  sacrifice  of  the  mass,
the  bishop  says,  "  Take  the  pitchers  to  bear  the
wine  and  water  for  the  Eucharist  of  Christ's,
blood  in  the  name  of  the  Lord."

Q.  What  is  the  order  of  sub-deacon  ?

A.  Candidates  must  pass  through  the  inferior  to
the  higher  and  holy  orders  of  which  the  sub-dea-
con, in  the  Latin  Church,  is  the  first  and  lowest
degree.  His  office  is  to  serve  the  deacon  at  the
altar,  and  to  prepare  the  linen  vessels,  bread  and
wine  for  the  sacrifice  of  the  mass.  The  epistle
which  was  formerly  read  by  the  deacon  is  read  by
the  sub-deacon.     He  takes  the  vow  of  perpetual


149

celibacy  at  his  ordination,  which  is  made  hy  the
bishop,  without  the  imposition  of  hands.  He
receives  the  chaUce  and  paten  from  the  bishop,
and  the  pitchers,  filled  with  wine  and  water  from
the  archdeacon,  when  the  bishop,  after  an  admo-
nition in  a  particular  form,  invests  him  with  the
sacred  vestments,  and  concludes  by  giving  him
the  book  of  the  epistles  addressing  him  in  these
words,  "  Receive  the  book  of  the  Epistles  and
have  authority  to  read  them  in  the  holy  Church
of  God  as  well  for  the  living  as  the  dead."
This  order,  which  was  originally  one  of  the  infe-
rior orders,  we  reject,  because  it  has  no  Scrip-
tural authority.  It  has  no  Apostolical  sanction
and  was  not  known  to  be  in  use  till  the  third
century.  Most  of  the  functions  ascribed  to  it
are  services  and  offices  which  may  be  performed
by  laymen,  and  those  which  appear  of  a  sacred
character,  properly  belong  to  the  office  of  deacon.
However  this  order  may  be  necessary  for  the
celebration  of  the  sacrifice  of  the  mass,  it  has  no
place  in  the  Church  of  England,  which  renoun-
ces the  sacrifice  of  the  mass  as  human  and  idola-
trous. Many  of  the  French  Catholic  writers,
who  have  not  received  absolutely  the  decrees  of
the  Tridentine  fathers,  confess  that  these  inferior
orders,  are  merely  ecclesiastical  institutions,  and
recommend  that  they  should  be  expunged  from
the  catalogue  of  the  sacrament.  They  have  no
authority  in  the  Christian   scriptures,    were  not

l3


150

known  during  the  lifetime  of  the  apostles,  had
their  beginning  in  the  third  century,  were  not
originally  fixed  in  number  or  introduced  into  all
Churches  at  the  same  time,  and  depend  for  their
authority  as  orders  upon  spurious  writings.  On
these  grounds,  as  well  as  because  superstitions
and  ridiculous  attributes  are  added  to  them,  we
reject  all  the  inferior  orders  of  the  Roman  Cath-
olic Church.

Q.  What  is  the  order  of  Deacon  in  the  Roman
Catholic  Church  ?

A.  The  office  of  Deacon  is  the  second  of  the
Holy  Orders,  and  his  office  is,  to  attend  on  the
bishop  when  preaching,  to  be  present  or  ready
when  the  bishop  or  priest  celebrates  the  mass
or  other  sacraments,  to  read  the  gospel,  to  excite
the  faithful  to  attend  the  services  of  the  church,
formerly  to  administer  the  cup,  to  vvatch  the
conduct  of  the  faithful  and  report  to  the  bishop,
to  prepare  the  list  of  catechumens  and  candidates
for  orders,  and  in  the  absence  of  the  bishop  and
priest  to  expound  the  gospel,  but  not  from  the
altar.

Q.  Do  we  admit  the  order  of  deacons  to  be
one  of  the  holy  orders.

A.  Yes,  it  is  the  first  of  the  seven  of  which  we
find  any  mention  in  the  Sacred  Scriptures  and
we  therefore  admit  it.  The  term  deacon  is
sometimes  used  in  a  large  sense  to  express  any
one  who  ministers  in  the  service  of  God,  in  which


151

sense  apostles,  bishops,  and  presbyters  are  some-
times called  deacons.  (  Acts  i.  25.  2  Cor.  vi.  4.
2  Tim.  iv.  5.)  We  generally  consider  it  in  a
more  peculiar  sense,  for  (according  to  our  reck-
oning )  the  third  or  lowest  order  in  the  Church.
It  is  the  first  degree  to  which  ministers  are  called
and  is  by  no  means  to  be  considered  a  lay  office.
Deacons  were  evidently  considered  a  part  of  the
sacred  ministry  in  the  Scriptures,  and  all  anti"
quity  unites  in  ascribing  to  them  sacred  orders.
They  are  represented  by  the  apostolic  fathers
as  "  ministers  of  the  mysteries  of  Christ,"  not
only  *'  ministers  of  meats  and  drinks,  but  of  the
Church  of  God,"  as  *'  those  to  whom  is  commit-
ted the  ministry  of  Jesus  Christ  "as  "  ministers
of  episcopacy  and  the  Church."  They  were  not
however,  of  equal  degree  with  presbyters.  They
were  ordained  with  a  different  form,  they  had
separate  and  subordinate  duties  to  perform,  they
read  the  gospel,  ministered  but  did  not  consecrate
the  bread  and  wine,  they  were  alloAved  to  baptize
and  with  the  bishop's  licence  to  preach ;  they
also  performed  some  other  ministerial  services
of  discipline.  This  office  has  not,  perhaps,  been
confined  or  extended  strictly  to  its  original  func-
tions, but  yet  the  powers  and  limitations  of  this
order  are  marked  with  considerable  precision.  It
may  however  be  considered,  whether  this  office
might  not  be  made  more  subsidiary  to  the  higher
orders,  whether  all  persons  ordained  under  a  cer-


152

tain  age  or  with  certain  defects  of  qualification
might  not  be  required  to  remain  longer  in  it,  and
whether  it  might  not  contribute  with  certain
licences  from  the  bishop,  to  insure  a  greater
degree  of  unity  in  discipline  and  practice,  and
extend  the  influence  of  the  Church  amongst  all
classes  of  the  laity,  especially  in  large  towns.

Q.  What  is  the  office  of  Presbyter  or  Priest
in  the  Latin  Church  ?

A.  It  is  the  third  and  highest  of  the  holy
orders.  The  Romanists  assert  very  properly  that
the  ancient  term,  which  signifies  literally  an  elder,
does  not  imply  that  all  persons  who  filled  this
office  were  always  far  advanced  in  years,  but
that  they  were  persons  of  experience,  and  cor-
rect in  their  morals.  The  term  priests  was  used
to  signify  that  they  ministered  in  holy  things,
but  is  employed  by  the  Romanists  to  signify  that
they  are  appointed  to  administer  the  sacraments,
and  especially  the  sacrifice  of  the  mass,  which  is
held  to  be  a  propitiatory  sacrifice,  similar  to
that  of  the  Jews.  The  priest  is  therefore  or-
dained by  the  bishop  with  imposition  of  his
hands  and  of  all  the  presbyters  present,  with  these
words,  "  Receive  the  power  of  offering  the  sacri-
fice to  God,  and  of  celebrating  the  mass,  both
for  the  living  and  the  dead."  With  these  words
the  vessels  are  delivered,  which  are  considered
to  be  the  matter,  and  the  words  the  form  of
the  sacrament.     He  is  thus  constituted  (as  they


153

suppose)  the  intercessor  and  mediator  between
God  and  man, which  is  esteemed  the  chief  func-
tion of  a  priest.  Tiiis  is  considered  the  power
of  consecrating,  that  part  of  tlie  ordination  which
follows,  refers  to  the  power  of  absolving.  The
Bishop  again  imposing  his  hands  alone,  says
"receive  the  Holy  Ghost,  whosoever  sins  ye  remit,
they  are  remitted,  and  whosoever  sins  ye  retain,
they  are  retained."  Thus  they  assert  that  the
same  power  is  given,  not  only  that  was  given
to  the  Apostles,  but  that  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ
himself  had  to  remit  or  retain  sins.

Q.  Do  we  object  to  this  mode  of  ordination  in
the  Latin  Church  ?

A.  We  believe  that  priests  and  other  minis-
ters, according  to  the  example  of  Christ  and
his  Apostles,  ought  to  be  dedicated  to  their
offices,  after  due  examination,  by  imposition
of  hands,  and  by  prayer — that  these  were  the
only  rites  preserved  by  the  Apostles — that  those
who  are  thus  consecrated,  have  authority  to  per-
form the  sacred  functions  in  the  Church,  to
preach  the  word,  and  administer  the  sacraments
for  the  comfort  and  edification  of  Christians,
and  that  persons  without  a  consecration,  cannot
lawfully  minister  in  these  holy  things.  Orders
not  being  a  sacrament,  the  forms,  both  in  the
eastern  and  western  Churches,  have  been  fre-
quently changed ;  but  the  ceremony  of  giving
the  vessels,  which  was  introduced  in  the  tenth


11)4

or  eleventh  century,  and  is  applied  to  the  mis-
chievous doctrines  oj*  tninsuhstantiation,  and  the
sacrifice  oi"  the  mass,  we  reject,  as  also  the  mate-
rial unction.  Rejectin<»;  the  idea  of  a  priest  hav-
ing the  same  power  to  remit  or  retain  sins,  as
Jesus  Christ  himsell  harl,  or  that  he  can  remi(^
them  at  all,  in  the  strict  sense  of  the  term,  per-
sonally and  individually,  excej)t  l)y  the  declara-
tion of  the  promise,  mercy,  and  <i;rant  of  tlie
Gospel,  we  have  retained  the  latter  form  of  ordi-
nation, as  being  that  which  was  used  hy  our
Saviour  himself,  in  his  ordination  of  the  Apostles.
Since,  ther(;fore,  the  forms  have  chan<^ed,  and
no  stress  can  be  placed  upon  them,  on  the  j^round
of  anticpiity,  either  orders  is  no  sacrament,  or
the  Latin  Church  for  ten  centuries  had  no  law-
ful orders.

Q.  But  is  it  not  a  i^reat  prcsum|)tion  and  folly
in  episcopal  ordination  for  the  Hisliop,  who  can-
not properly  give  the  Holy  Ohost,  to  say  to  the
persons  ordained,  "  Receive  the  Holy  Ghost?"

A.  We  think  this  form  in  the  sense  in  which
it  is  used,  proper  to  the  occasion,  and  both  just-
ifiable and  scriptural.  If  the  Bishop  should
imitate  the  action  of  our  Lord,  and  breathe  on
the  candidate,  to  imply  that  he  ( and  not  the
Holy  Ghost )  could  convey  from  his  own  inherent
virtue  or  power,  a  spiritual  character  to  another,
and  that  the  communication  of  it  depended  on
his  own  intention,  we  should  say  that  it  was  an


155

error  niid  presumption,  ll"  iUc,  Bisliop  sliould
prctotid  to  coiitroul  and  dispense  the  person  of
the  Holy  Ghost,  in  order,  5is  the  priests  pretend,
to  nink(^  and  dispense  tlie  person  of  Christ  in  the
Kueharist,  we  should  admit  it  to  he  a  |)resump-
tion,  lolly,  and  impiety.  Il'tln^  hishop  or  eandi-
date,  pretended  that  they  were  under  an  ini'allihh;
and  sensihh"  imprt^ssion  and  instigation,  to  <!;ive
and  receive  miraculous  powers,  to  speak  with
new  tongues,  to  heal  the  sick  without  medicine,
we  should  allow  that  the  use  of"  this  form  to  sig-
nify such  thin<i;s,  was  ianatieal,  vain,  and  super-
stitious. But  we  use  these  words  in  another
sense,  and  that  we  think  in  good  part  the  sense
in  which  our  Saviour  himself  used  them.  Wc
profess  to  Indieve  that  orders  are  a  divin(^
and  Christian  institution,  and  that  the  hishop
mider  the  Christian  disptnisation,  is  the  proper
officer,  in  the  stead  of  Christ  and  his  apostles,  to
dispense  the  ghostly  j)ower  of  orders  which
Christ  has  ordained  in  his  church,  and  that  the
power  is  such  as  **  neither  prince  nor  potentate,
king  nor  C;rsar  can  give,"  that  this  power  is
spiritual,  and  that  in  the  giving,  receiving,  and
exercise  of  it,  wc  pray  for,  and  helieve  spiritual
aid  and  hlessing.  When  the  apostle  asked  tlu;
disciples  "Have  ye  rece/ycYi  the  Holy  (i  host,"
he  did  not  mean  to  enipiire  whether  they  had
received  his  person,  hut  his  gilts  and  graci^s —
graces  at  that  time  evidenced  in  some  cases  with


156


supenvatural  gifts — These  manifest  gifts  have
ceased,  and  in  receiving'  the  Holy  Ghost  we  now
expect  his  grace  and  assistance.  When  our  Lord
used  tlie  words  himself,  and  breathed  on  the
apostles,  to  show  his  own  divinity  and  power,  he
did  not  communicate  the  person  of  the  spirit,  or
even  the  extraordinary  gifts  of  the  spirit,  ( for
they  were  not  given  till  the  day  of  Pentecost )
but  he  gave  that  which  in  a  subordinate  degree
the  bishops  are  empowered  to  give,  a  ghostly
power  to  preach  repentance  and  remission  of
sins  in  his  name  among  all  nations.  In  this  sub-
ordinate sense  of  a  commission,  and  ordination,
and  spiritual  power  to  minister  the  gospel,  we
see  a  greater  propriety  in  these  words  than  we
should  in  paraphrastical  sophistries,  substituted
for  them.  The  bishops  are  but  the  ambassadors
fi'om  Christ,  but  by  the  imposition  of  their  hands
the  persons  ordained  derive  an  authority  to  per-
form the  functions  of  the  Christian  ministry,
which  it  would  be  a  presumption  to  perform  with-
out this  spiritual  power  and  a  reliance  on  the
influence  of  the  holy  spirit,  both  in  the  ministers
and  flock  of  Christ.  Since  the  ascension  of  our
Lord  our  creed  is,  that  the  church  is  under  the
guidance  of  the  spirit,  and  there  tore  the  article
of  the  Holy  Catholic  Church,  is  placed  after  that
of  the  Holy  Ghost.  It  is  certain  that  the  apostles
ministered  the  gospel  and  received  the  full  power
of  their  commission   through  the  same  authority


1:57

and  agency.     They  refer  all  administrations  anr?
graces  in  the  Church  to  the  same  person.     They
speak    of  the    Holy   Ghost    setting   apart    and
authorising  the  ministers  of  the  gospel,  and  they
address  the  ministers  who  had  neither  infallibility
nor  special  inspiration,   as  those  whom  the  Holy
Ghost  had  made,  through  the  imposition  of  their
hands,  the  overseers  of  the  Christian  flock.   The
ordination  therefore  and  the  power  to  administer
the  Gospel,   both  in  the  language  of  Christ  and
the  apostles,  -were  always  referred  to  "  the  Holy
Ghost."     It  is  no  inconsiderable  presumption  in-
favor  of  the  form  adopted  by  our  Lord,  that  no'
other   was    preserved  in  the  apostolic  ChurcheSo.
Certainly   learned   men,  with  all  their  diligence
and  anxiety,  have  not  been  able  to  discover  the
early  and  certain  record  of  any  other.     The  lan-
guage of  the  apostles,  however,  seems  always  to
refer  to  the  same  principle,  and  so  far  as  we  can
judge,   to  the   recognition  of  the  Holy  Ghost  as
the  acknowledged  agent  in  all  ordinations.     We
think  therefore  that  our  reformers,  in  the  absence
of  all  authority    for   any   other  form,  acted  con-
sistently with  their   own   principle   of  referring
only  to  scripture  in  matters  of  such   importance,,
and  that  they   have  by  this  form,  defended  the
Church  from  many  heretical  and  sophistical  opin-
ions, that  might  otherwise  be  introduced  amongst
us.     We  maintain  not  by  this  form  the  infalibil-
ity  of  the  minister  or  his  immediate  inspiration ;


158

we  farther  distinguish  the  qualifications  of  the
function  from  the  qualities  of  the  person,  and  we
believe  that  the  influence  of  the  Holy  Spirit,  and
the  blessed  eff"ects  of  the  Gospel  and  its  sacra-
ments, may  accompany  their  administration  in
the  Church,  though  the  minister  himself  at  the
hazard  of  his  own  salvation,  be  unworthy  of  his
high  calling,  for  that,  as  miracles  have  ceased,
and  no  new  revelation  is  to  be  made,  the  holy
spirit  may  accompany  the  function  where  in  indi-
vidual cases  he  has  forsaken  the  functionary,
who,  though  he  cannot  be  detected  and  punished
by  the  Church,  is  responsible  to  God.

Q.  Does  the  Roman  Catholic  Church  main-
tain any  higher  orders  than  the  priesthood  ?

A.  No.  It  does  not  teach  that  there  are  more
orders,  but  more  degrees  of  the  same  order.
Besides  the  simple  priest,  whose  office  has  been
considered,  there  are  four  other  dignities  of  the
same  order,  viz.  bishops,  archbishops,  patriarchs,
and  popes.  The  bishops  are  those  priests  who
preside  in  the  different  dioceses  over  both  the
priests  and  laity.  The  Roman  Catholic  Church
teaches  that  the  administration  of  orders  belongs
to  bishops  by  authority  of  the  sacred  scriptures,
the  most  certain  tradition,  the  testimony  of  all  the
fathers,  the  decrees  of  councils  and  the  practice
of  the  Church  uninterrupted;  that  this  is  the
peculiar  and  undoubted  office  of  the  bishops,  to
whom  alone,  and  no  one  else,  it  belongs  to  admit


159

to  holy  orders ;  and  that  the  bishops,  by  immemo-
rial usage  from  the  times  of  the  Apostles,  have
been  consecrated  by  three  bishops.  The  arch-
bishops or  metropolitans,  preside  over  the  bishops
in  different  countries  or  provinces,  and  have  a
superior  power,  though  they  differ  nothing  in  or-
der from  bishops.  The  patriarchs  are  the  fourth
class.  They  are  the  chief  fathers.  Besides  the
bishop  of  Rome,  there  are  four  partriarchs.  Of  Je-
rusalem, where  James  the  brother  (or  kinsman)  of
our  Lord,  presided  ;  of  Antioch,  where  the  chris-
tian name  was  first  assumed  among  the  gentiles  :
of  Alexandria  founded  by  St.  Mark  the  evangelist,^
and  of  Constantinople  the  last,  founded  on  the  di-
vision of  the  empire.  The  last  asserted  order  is
that  of  popes.  The  bishop  of  Rome  is  asserted
to  be  the  priest  of  priests,  the  archbishop  of
bishops,  and  archbishops,  the  patriarch  of  patri-
archs, the  spiritual  monarch,  who  sits  in  St.
Peter's  chair,  receives  his  authority  not  from  acts
of  synods,  but  from  heaven,  who  presides  over
all  priests  and  all  christians,  whatever  be  their
rank  or  order,  as  the  successor  of  St.  Peter,  and
the  vicar  of  Christ  upon  earth.

Q.  What  opinions  do  we  entertain  of  the  degree
of  episcopacy,  asserted  by  the  Church  of  Rome  ?
A.  We  agree  generally  with  the  Church  of
Rome,  respecting  the  office  and  functions  of
bishops,  because  for  the  reasons  assigned  by
that  Church,  we  believe  them  to   be  a  scriptural


160

and   indisputable    institution.      Those  functions
and  powers  constitute  them  a  separate  Apostoli-
cal  order,    though   we    admit  that  it    is   not   a
material  point  whether  episcopacy   be  a  distinct
order  or  a  different  degree  of  the  same    order.
We  agree  also  that  archbishops  differ  nothing  in
order  from  bishops,  but  that  they  preside    over
the  bishops  in  different  countries  and  provinces,
that  they  may  secure  the  regular  appointment  of
bishops,  publish  the  civil  and  ecclesiastical  laws
in  the  churches  under  the  direction  of  the  civil
power,  correct  abuses,  hear  appeals,  and  register
ordinations,  and  thus  in  different   countries   pre-
serve unity  and  subordination  in  the  church.  Me-
tropolitans existed  before  patriarchs,  and  popes ;
and    bishop    Usher    and    others    assert    on   the
authority  of  Eusebius  and  Chrysostom  that  they
were  apostolical ;  that  Titus   exercised  a  similar
authority  over  the  bishops  in  Crete,  and  Timothy
over  the  whole  region  or  province  of  Asia.    It  is
certain  that  the  Cyprian  bishops  in  the  council
of  Ephesus  pleaded  the  privileges  of  their  metro-
politan to  be  as  ancient  as  the  apostles,  and  that
their  plea  was  admitted.     It  is  clear,  therefore,
that  the  dignity  originated  at  a  very  early  period,
if  not  with  the    apostles    themselves.       It  was
adopted  and  preserved   in  consequence    of  that
respect  which  the  other  bishops  were  disposed  to
pay  the  bishop  of  the  civil  metropolis,  and  of  the
necessity  which  always  existed  for  the  unity  of


161

the  church,  both  for  its  edification  and  defence.
This  office  was  certainly  in  existence  before  the
council  of  Nice  and  before  patriarchs  and  popes
were  recognized.  In  their  essential  character,
however,  primates  are  bishops,  and  in  this  view
v,^e  regard  them  with  respect  to  holy  orders,
thoughtheirdignity  and  jurisdiction  in  this  coun-
try is  of  the  greatest  importance  for  the  domestic
peace  and  independence  of  the  national  church.

Q.  What  was  the  dignity  of  patriarchs  ?

A.  Patriarchs  was  a  human  institution  erected
by  the  prudence  and  policy  of  princes,  and  of
great  use  during  some  ages  of  the  church.  They
were  the  exarchs  of  the  dioceses  of  the  Roman
empire.  The  five  patriarchs  were  absolute  and
independent  of  each  other.  They  had  not  all
the  same  powers  and  privileges.  Their  dio-
ceses were  fixed  according  to  the  geographical
division  of  the  Roman  empire.  In  some  respects
their  customary  jurisdiction  was  restrained  by
the  decisions  of  councils  held  under  the  authority
of  the  emperors,  and  even  their  jurisdiction  al-
tered, as  when  the  bishop  of  Jerusalem  was  made
subject  to  the  bishop  of  Csesarea.  They  were
first  regulated  by  the  council  of  Constantinople,
in  the  year  381,  and  afterwards  by  councils  of
Ephesus  andChalcedon.  The  patriarch  of  Con-
stantinople had  the  title  of  oecumenical  or  uni-
versal patriarch,  on  account  of  the  great  extent
of  his  jurisdiction,  and  that  a  century  before

M


162

the  time  of  Gregory  the  great.*  Constantinople
was  also  declared  by  the  rescripts  of  Justinian
to  be  the  head  of  all  the  churches,  that  is,  the
patriarchs  of  Constantinople  had  the  precedency
of  honor  because  Constantinople  was  the  capital
city  of  the  empire.  In  like  manner  the  bishops  of
Rome  had  a  precedency  among  the  bishops  of
the  west,  because  Rome  was  the  capital  city  of
the  west.     We  might  as  well  suppose,  that  the

*  Gregory  the  I.  writing  to  the  Bishop  of  Constantinople,  who
had  admitted  the  title  of  universal  bishop,  or  patriarch,  thus  ad-
dresses hira,  "  What  wilt  thou  say  to  Christ,  the  head  of  the
universal  church,  in  the  trial  of  the  last  judgment,  who  by  the
appellation  of  universal  dost  endeavour  to  subject  all  his  members
to  thee  ?  Whom,  I  pray,  dost  thou  mean  to  imitate,  in  so  perverse
a  word,  but  him,  who  despising  the  legions  of  angels,  constituted  in
fellowship  with  hira,  did  venture  to  break  forth  unto  the  top  of
singularity,  that  he  might  both  be  subject  to  none,  and  alone  be  over
all  ?  Who  also  said  I  will  ascend  into  heaven,  and  will  exalt  my
throne  above  the  stars — for  what  are  thy  brethren,  all  the  bishops
of  the  universal  church,  but  the  stars  of  heaven  ;  to  whom  while
by  this  haughty  word  thou  desirest  to  prefer  thyself,  and  to  tram-
ple on  their  name  in  comparison  to  thee,  what  dost  thou  say,  but
I  will  climb  into  heaven?"  Again,  in  another  epistle  to  the
bishops  of  Alexandria  and  Antioch,  (reproving  the  same  patriarch
for  assuming  this  title)  he  complains,  "  That  he  attempteth  to
ascribe  all  things  to  himself,  and  studieth  by  the  elation  of  pom-
pous speech,tosubjecttohiraself  all  the  members  of  Christ,  which
do  cohere  to  one  sole  head,  viz.  to  Christ."  Again, "  I  confi-
dently say,  that  whoever  doth  call  himself  universal  bishop,  or
desireth  to  be  so  called,  doth  in  his  elation,  forerun  Antichrist,
because  he  pridingly  doth  set  himself  before  all  others*"


163

empire  was  standing,  that  the  dioceses  and  provin-
ces were  sempiternal,  and  that  all  Europe,  Asia,
and  indeed  all  the  world  were  to  be  governed  by
civil  laws  and  imperial  edicts,  as  that  the  patri-
archs were  to  maintain  an  everlasting  and  abso-
lute supremacy,  over  all  the  independent  nations
and  churches.  During  the  time  of  the  empire,
and  the  patriarchal  power,  there  were  metropoli-
tans independent  of  the  patriarchs,  as  the  metro-
politans of  Cyprus  and  Iberia  who  were  declared
independent  of  the  patriarch  of  Antioch  by  the
council  of  Ephesus.  The  same  was  the  case  with
the  Armenian  Churches,  which  were  independent
of  the  patriarch  of  Constantinople.  The  same
was  the  case  with  the  Britannic  Churches,  before
the  coming  of  Austin,  which  were  subject  to  the
archbishop  of  Caerleon  and  St.  David's  and  ac-
knowledged no  other  spiritual  superior,  as  the
abbot  of  Bangor  told  Austin  in  the  name  of  all  the
Britannic  Churches  "  That  they  owed  no  other
obedience  to  the  pope  of  Rome  than  they  did
to  every  godly  Christian,  to  love  every  one  in
his  degree  in  perfect  charity ;  other  obedience
than  this  they  knew  none,  due  to  him  whom  he
named  Pope.  But  they  were  under  the  govern-
ment of  the  Bishop  of  Caerleon  upon  Uske,  who
was  their  overseer  under  God."  The  Romanists
have  attempted  to  dispute  the  authority  of  this
declaration,  but  without  effect.  It  is  certain,
that  for  six  hundred  years,  the  Bishop  of  Rome

m2


164

had  no  jurisdiction  in  this  country,  and  that  the
Scotch  and  English  bishops  for  a  long  time  resis-
ted his  usurpation,  and  for  it  were  held  excom-
municate by  the  tools  of  the  Pope.  Whether
the  English  Churches  were  founded  by  St.  Paul
or  Simon  Zelotes,  or  some  apostolic  evangelist,
it  is  certain  that  Christianity  did  not  originate
with  the  Pope,  and  from  the  question,  of  the  time
of  Easter,  it  is  probable  that  there  was  some
connexion  with  the  oriental  Churches,  before
one  was  formed  with  the  western.

Q.  Of  what  nature  do  you  consider  the  patri-
archal dignity  and  power  to  have  been  ?

A.  We  think  it  to  have  been  of  human,  not
divine  or  apostolic  authority,  and  that  whether
we  consider  the  occasion  of  its  origin,  or  the
reason  of  its  existence,  it  must  be  to  a  great
extent  obsolete  and  impracticable.  The  apostles
indeed,  in  the  first  propagation  of  the  gospel,
seem  to  have  followed  the  civil  form  of  govern-
ment ;  as  each  city  of  importance  in  the  empire
had  its  senate  and  president,  so  each  Church  had
its  presbyters  and  bishop.  According  to  this
model  St.  Paul  directs  Titus  to  ordain  elders  in
Crete  *  in  every  city.  The  division  of  the  Roman
empire  into  provinces  was  coeval  with  Christian-
ity, and  each  province  was  under  a  Praetor  or
Proconsul ;  about  the  time  of  Constantine  these
provinces  were   consolidated  into   dioceses,  the

*  Kara  rroXiv.


165

governors  of  which,  residing  in  the  metropolis,
were  called  eparchs  or  vicars.  The  Church,
following  the  civil  government,  had  in  each
province  a  metropolitan,  and  in  each  diocese  a
patriarch.  The  patriarchal  authority,  therefore,
was  geographical,  and  arose  out  of  the  political
state  of  the  world  at  that  time.  When  the  em-
pire ceased,  and  Europe  was  formed  into  separate
and  independent  kingdoms,  the  patriarchal  and
geographical  authority  of  the  patriarchs  ceased
also,  and  the  Church  in  all  reason  ought  again
to  conform  in  its  external  form  to  the  civil
o'overnments.  As  the  Russian  Church  is  now
independent  of  the  patriarch  of  Constantinople,
so  all  the  independent  nations  of  Europe,  have  a
right  to  their  own  national  Christianity.  That
which  is  predicated  and  justly  of  bishops,  can
never  be  affirmed  of  patriarchs,  that  they  derive
their  authority  from  the  sacred  scriptures,  the  most
certain  tradition,  the  testimony  of  all  the  Fathers,
the  decrees  of  all  councils,  and  the  practice  of  the
Church  uninterrupted.  The  patriarchal  power  of
the  bishop  of  Rome  was  constantly  repudiated
by  the  African  Churches,  and  those  of  Britain
and  Milan,  and  it  is  probable  that  the  patriar-
chal authority  of  the  bishop  of  Rome,  properly
speaking,  extended  no  farther  than  the  civil
authority  of  the  civil  vicar  of  the  city,  which  was
the  suburbical  Churches  of  the  ten  provinces.
Dupin,  a  Romanist,  exempts  on  the  best  histor-

m3


166

ical  evidence,  Germany,  Spain,  France,  Britain,
Africa,  Illyricum,  and  seven  Italian  provinces,
from  the  jm'isdiction  of  the  Pope  in  the  primitive
ages.  The  spiritual  monarchists  are  angry  with
this  assertion,  but  they  have  never  been  able  to
refiite  it,  and  if  they  had,  we  should  never
be  convinced  or  cajoled  to  believe  that  a  power
raised  on  a  political  or  geographical  basis  which
no  longer  exists,  is  binding  on  the  independent
nations  of  Christendom.

Q.  What  is  the  dignity  and  authority  assumed
by  the  popes  *?

A.  It  is  difficult  to  describe  the  authority  and
jurisdiction  claimed  by  the  popes,  even  according
to  the  authentic  documents  of  the  Roman  Cath-
olic Church.  It  certainly  was  the  opinion  of
Baronius,  Bellarmine,  the  council  of  Lateran,  and
the  council  of  Trent,  so  far  at  least  as  it  sanc-
tioned the  other  councils  of  the  Church,  that  the
bishop  of  Rome  had  a  supremacy  in  temporals
as  well  as  spirituals.  It  is  certain  that  the
popes  affected  to  exercise  this  universal  monar-
chy over  many  kings,  princes,    and  kingdoms.*

*  The  following  is  an  extract  from  the  Bull  of  Pope  Pius  v.
against  Queen  Elizabeth,  "  He  that  reigneth  on  high,  to  whom  is
given  all  power  in  heaven  and  earth,  hath  committed  the  one
Holy  Catholic  and  Apostolical  Church,  out  of  which  there  is  no
salvation,  to  one  alone  on  earth,  namely  to  Peter,  prince  of  the
Apostles,  and  to  the  Roman  Pontiff,  successor  of  Peter,  to  be
governed  xoith  a  plenitude  of  power :  This  one  he  hath  consti-
tuted prince  over  all  nations,  and  all  kingdoms,  that  he  might


167

The  assumption  of  such  a  power  is  so  impudent,
on  the  confession  of  its  ablest  advocates,  so
novel,  and  by  the  judgment  of  many  Roman
Catholics,  so  entirely  condemned,  that  the  tem-
poral jurisdiction  of  the  pope  is  not  now  directly
and  openly  asserted  by  the  popes  or  their  advo-
cates. It  has  not,  however,  been  authoritatively
renounced,  and  it  is  to  be  feared  that  there  are
many,  especially  among  the  Jesuits,  who  hold  the
universal  supremacy  of  the  pope  in  its  extreme
sense,  though  they  are  ashamed  or  afraid  to  own
it.  The  universal  spiritual  supremacy,  is,  how-
ever, acknowledged  by  all  Catholics,  though  in
different  senses,  and  with  different  limitations.
The  French  Church,  the  doctors  of  Sorbonne,
and  some  German  Catholics,  have  held  the
pope's  supremacy  very  lightly,and  the  popes  from
necessity,  have  tolerated  the  liberties  of  the
Oallican  and  other  Churches  ;  though  they  have
never  acknowledged  their  principles.  These
Catholics  have  been  looked  upon  as  mongrels
and  semi-romanists,  and  the  true  doctrines  of  the
Church,  court,  and  popes  of  Rome,  is,  the  pope's

pluck  up,  destroy,  dissipate,  ruinate,  plant,  and  build."  And
again,  "  He  thereby  deprives  the  Queen  of  her  pretended  right
to  the  Kingdom,  and  of  all  dominion,  dignity,  and  privileo-e  what-
soever ;  and  absolves  all  the  nobles,  subjects,  and  people  of  the
kingdom,  and  whoever  else  have  sworn  to  her,  from  their  oath,
and  all  duty  whatsoever,  in  regard  of  dominion,  fidelity,  and
obedience."  Barrow  on  the  Pope's  Supremacy,  from  which  treatise
the  few  facts  relating  to  this  point  are  chiefly  selected.


168

absolute  sovereignty,  that  he  is  the  universal
pastor  of  all  Christians  by  God's  appointment,
indefectibly  and  unalterably.  The  authority  of
bishops  is  referred  to  scripture,  history,  councils,
and  practice  uninterrupted,  but  the  supremacy
or  universal  primacy  of  the  popes  rests  upon
peculiar  grounds,  and  indeed  abstractions.  The
argument  for  it  has  been  thus  stated.  That  St.
Peter  had  a  primacy  over  the  apostles,  that  this
primacy,  with  its  prerogatives,  was  derivable  to
his  successors  the  bishops  of  Rome — that  St.  Peter
was  bishop  of  Rome  and  continued  so  till  his
death — That  the  bishops  of  Rome,  by  original
right  derived  from  him,  have  an  universal  supre-
macy and  jurisdiction  over  the  Christian  Church,
that  they  have  always  enjoyed  and  exercised
this  sovereign  power,  and  that  that  power  is  in-
defectible.

Q.  What  do  we  think  of  this  universal  supre-
macy and  spiritual  monarchy  assumed  by  the
popes  and  acknowledged  by  his  adherents  ?

A.  We  think  it  an  arrogant  impiety  ;  the  most
impudent  and  indefensible  fraud  that  ever  was
practiced  on  the  world,  and  that  it  has  been  "  the
pest  of  Christendom."  With  respect  to  St.  Peter,
we  admit  that  he  was  probably  the  oldest,  and
the  first  ordained,  or  rather  called,  of  the  apos-
tles ;  that  he  had  great  worth  and  excellence ;
that  his  confession  and  conduct  showed  his  sin-
cerity ;  that  his  age,    experience,   and  superior


169

talents,  gave  him  a  precedency  in  action  on
many  occasions  that  was  perfectly  natural,  but
that  though  in  many  respects  on  these  accounts
he  appeared  to  take  the  lead  in  the  early  pro-
ceedings of  the  Church,  he  had  no  superiority
defined,  and  no  personal  prerogative  given  above
the  other  Apostles.  On  the  contrary  that  the
idea  of  such  a  superiority  and  personal  primacy
is  excluded  by  the  few  following,  amongst  a  host
of  facts  and  reasons,  in  bar  of  such  an  authority.
Such  an  authority  could  not  be  claimed,  but  by
an  express  commission,  granted  in  terms  which
admit  of  no  doubt,  and  which  are  so  clearly  re-
vealed that  the  world  may  understand  them.  It
must  be  as  clearly  revealed  that  St.  Peter  was
appointed  primate  and  monarch  of  the  Apostles,
as  that  our  Lord  appointed  twelve  Apostles,
and  it  must  as  clearly  appear  in  the  acts  of  the
Apostles,  that  St.  Peter  claimed,  and  that  the
Apostles  acknowledged  this  superiority,  as  that
the  Apostles  asserted  their  apostolic  authority.
But  nowhere  in  the  evangelical  or  apostolic  his-
tory, can  we  find  this  institution,  or  the  current
recognition  of  it,  as  we  do  the  institution  and
authority  of  the  Apostles.  We  find  that  during
the  life-time  of  our  Lord,  and  even  at  the  last
supper,  that  the  twelve  disputed  which  should
be  the  greatest,  which  they  would  hardly  have
done  if  Christ  had  already  determined  that  Peter
was  their  prince  and  king.     When  our  Lord  de-


170

cided  their  question,  he  did  Dot  determine  Peter
or  any  other  to  be  the  chief,  he  pronounced  them
equal ;  he  placed  a  little  child  in  the  midst  of
them,  and  told  them  that  whoever  should  in
innocence,  simplicity,  and  submission,  most  re-
semble that  infant,  should  be  morally  the  great-
est. St.  Luke  tells  us,  that  after  a  most  patient
enquiry  among  the  Apostles,  he  had  acquired  a
perfect  understanding  of  all  things  of  importance
believed  among  Christians,  and  he  wrote  his
book  of  the  acts  of  the  Apostles,  to  explain  the
manner  in  which  the  Apostles  at  the  first  execu-
ted their  commission ;  but  neither  in  the  gospel,
nor  in  the  acts  of  the  Apostles,  do  we  find  a
single  word  of  Peter's  supremacy.  The  scrip-
tures on  which  the  Romanists  found  their  impos-
ture, were  not  so  understood,  asserted,  explained,
or  alluded  to,  by  Peter  or  any  other  Apostle.
What  Apostle  ever  understood  that  by  the  me-
taphor of  a  rock,  was  intend  ed  an  universal  bishop?
When  did  St.  Peter  so  understand  it  ?  What  man
of  common  sense  can  so  understand  it  ?  Of  all
the  thousand  interpretations,  which  have  been
given  of  that  metaphor,  where  is  one  of  equal  ab-
surdity with  this  to  be  found  ?  If  the  power  of
the  keys  gave  to  St.  Peter  an  independent  and
plenary  authority  as  Apostle  to  found  and  estab-
lish christian  churches,  that  same  authority  had
Paul  and  all  the  other  Apostles.  So  far  as  that
authority,  in  a  subordinate  sense   is  derivative,


171

so  far  as  it  is  proper  and  reasonable,  it  is  exer-
cised not  only  by  the  bishop  of  Rome,  but  by
every  church  in  which  the  word  and  sacraments
are  rightly  administered,  and  which  exercises  a
christian  discipline  over  its  members.  Who  in  his
senses  can  believe  that  by  the  power  of  the  keys
was  meant  the  papal  tyranny  ?  What  scripture,
what  early  fathers,  councils  or  synods  teach  us  to
believe  that  those  keys  are  exclusively  deposited
with  the  bishop  of  Rome  ?  It  is  indeed  asserted
by  the  Papists,  that  St.  Peter  left  them  by  will,
but  that  testament  has  never  been  found,  no
certificate  of  it  has  ever  been  proved.  What
Apostle,  Father,  Council,  what  man  of  common
sense,  that  is  not  deluded  or  wishes  to  cajole
others,  ever  imagined  that  our  Lord's  admonition
to  St.  Peter  after  his  fall  "Feed  my  sheep,"  "  feed
my  lambs,"  conveyed  to  him  (any  more  than  his
look  did  when  Peter  denied  him)  a  supremacy
over  the  other  Apostles,  and  to  his  successors  a
supreme  monarchy  over  the  church  ?  St.  Peter's
epistles  indicate  a  modesty,  affection,  and  sym-
pathy with  human  infirmities  that  are  in  perfect
accordance  with  our  Lord's  parting  injunction,
but  who  ever  found  the  pope's  supremacy  in
those  epistles,  in  which  less  authority  is  assumed
than  in  any  other  inspired  document  *?  St.  Peter
does  assert  the  king's  supremacy  "  under  God"
"  Fear  God  honour  the  king;"  but  there  is
not  a  word  of  his  own  supremacy,  or  his  succes-


172

sors  for  ever.  St.  Paul's  assertion  of  his  inde-
pendence and  equality  is  also  as  clear  a  proof  as
can  be  wished  that  no  such  superiority  or  infallible
jurisdiction  existed  and  this  indeed  is  confessed  by
the  most  learned  advocate  of  the  papacy  to  be
"  a  history  hard  to  be  understood,  a  stone  of
offence,  a  rock  of  scandal,  a  rugged  place  which
St.  Austin  himself,  under  favour  could  not  pass
over  without  stumbling."

St.  Peter  therefore  had  no  primacy,  but  admit-
ting for  the  sake  of  argument,  that  he  had,
whatever  it  was,  it  was  personal.  St.  Peter  was
an  eye-witness  of  all  our  Lord  did  or  suffered — he
had  a  plenary  inspiration,  and  miraculous  power
— he  could  instruct  the  nations,  and  govern  the
Churches;  but  these  were  powers  granted  by  a
special  commission  for  the  establishment  of  the
christian  Church,  and  such  as  no  one  now
can  assert  without  imposture  and  hypocrisy.
With  respect  to  the  assertion,  that  St.  Peter
was  bishop  of  Rome  (which,  if  true,  would
not  amount  to  much )  as  it  has  never  been
proved,  so  it  may  be  fairly  denied,  and  for  these
among  other  reasons.  He  was  an  Apostle  and
fulfilled  the  genet'al  duties  of  an  Apostle,  and
therefore  it  was  neither  necessary,  nor  probable
that  he  should  assume  the  stated,  local  and  infe-
rior office  of  bishop.  His  particular  designation
to  be  the  Apostle  of  the  circumcision,  would  not
harmonize  with  such  an  appointment,  especially


173

as  the  emperor  had  at  that  time  banished  all  the
Jews  from  Rome.  If  he  were  bishop  of  Rome,
he  must  have  been  non-resident,  for  all  the  histo-
ries we  have  of  him,  represent  him  as  performing
the  duties  of  an  Apostle,  in  distant  and  various
countries.  He  must  have  been  frequently  absent
from  Rome,  for  St  Paul  in  his  epistles  to  the  Ro-
mans, and  in  his  epistles  written  from  Rome,
makes  no  particular  mention  of  St.  Peter.  That
St.  Peter  was  at  Rome  as  well  as  St.  Paul,  it  is
not  necessary  to  deny,  but  who  made  him  bishop
there,  or  whether  he  appointed  himself  no  one
knows.  The  fact,  is,  however,  that  he  appointed
other  bishops,  Linus  and  Clement  at  Rome  as  he
did  St.  Mark  at  Alexandria,  and  others.  If  all
these  things,  however,  were  true  of  St.  Peter ;  if
his  primacy  among  the  Apostles,  and  his  episco-
pacy at  Rome,  were  matters  of  certainty,  how
does  the  divine  institution  of  an  universal  bishop
and  the  indefectibility  of  the  pope's  authority
follow  *?  Is  it  not  strange,  that  such  an  impor-
tant fact  is  unattested  by  scripture  ?  that  practice
for  centuries,  that  ancient  creeds,  councils,  and
synods,  that  heretics,  pagan  historians,  kings  and
emperors,  who  might  have  been  jealous;  that  all
the  ancient  writers  mostly  relied  upon  by  the
Romanists ;  the  apostolical  canons ;  Ignatius,
Cyprian,  and  many  popes  themselves,  are  posi-
tively and  absolutely  silent  respecting  the  supre-
macy ?  In  all  the  writings  of  the  ancient  fathers,


174

who  discuss  the  most  trivial  matters,  this  is  un-
defined and  overlooked.  For  a  long  period  the
christian  Church  was  governed  by  patriarchs,
whose  authority  was  equal  and  independent,  and
during  that  time,  the  popes  themselves  protested
against  the  title  and  authority  of  an  universal
bishop.  Surely  these  facts  are  decisive  against
any,  much  less  an  universal  and  indefectible,  su-
premacy in  the  bishop  of  Rome.  The  pretended
succession  has  often  failed,  and  been  extremely
doubtful.  For  seventy  years  the  popes  were
popes  of  Avignon  and  not  of  Rome  ;  and  no  more
bishops  of  Rome  than  the  bishop  of  London  is
bishop  of  Jerusalem.  During  the  invasion  of  the
Goths,  there  were  no  bishops  of  Rome  ;  at  va-
rious times  there  have  been  heretics,  atheists,
and  two  or  three  usurpers  at  the  same  time.  These
things  might  not  in  any  degree  affect  the  general
doctrine  of  an  apostolical  episcopacy,  but  they
are  absolutely  destructive  of  an  indefectible  uni-
versal monarchy  over  the  christian  Church  exer-
cised by  the  bishop  of  Rome.

Q.  What  is  the  doctrine  of  infallibility,  asser-
ted by  the  Church  of  Rome  ?

A.  The  Romanists  dispute  among  themselves
whether  the  infallibility  is  vested  in  the  pope,  or
in  the  Church.  The  Jesuits  maintain  that  the
pope  is  infallible,  that  he  is  the  only  source  of
that  universal  and  unlimited  power  which  Christ
has  granted  to  his  Church,  that  the  Bishops  and


175

subordinate  ministers  derive  from  him  alone  their
authority  and  jurisdiction,  that  he  is  the  supreme
lawffiver  of  the  Church,  and  that  his  edicts  and
commands  cannot  be  disobeyed  without  grievous
sin.  On  the  other  hand,  there  are  Romanists
that  maintain  that  the  pope  is  liable  to  error —
that  his  authority  is  inferior  to  that  of  general
councils — that  he  is  bound  to  obey  councils
which  represent  the  Church — that  councils  may
deprive  him  of  the  papal  chair,  and  that  in  conse-
quence of  these  principles,  the  bishops  derive
their  authority  not  from  the  Roman  pontiff,  but
from  Christ  himself.  Such  contradictions  are  a
sufficient  reply  to  the  barbarous  doctrine  of  in-
fallibility. But  there  are  other  contradictions.
The  Romanists  dispute  all  the  doctrines  of  grace
and  have  maintained  the  opposite  extremes  of
Arminianism  and  Calvanism.  No  disputants
have  subtleized  religious  controversies  as  they
have  done.  They  dispute  to  opus  operatum  of
the  sacraments,  and  especially  of  penance  and
the  eucharist — the  extent  and  prerogatives  of  the
Church  itself — the  doctrines  of  morality,  and
rules  of  practice.  They  differ  also  about  the
question  of  instruction,  some  maintaining  that
children  are  to  be  instructed  in  the  doctrines  and
duties  of  the  Christian  religion,  and  others  that
a  devout  ignorance,  and  blind  and  implicit  obe-
dience to  the  Church,  are  quite  sufficient.  Vain
therefore  and  foolish,  is  the  argument  of  Bossuet


176

against  protestants,  derived  from  the  variety
of  their  opinions  and  confessions  of  faith.  His
own  exposition  of  the  Roman  Catholic  faith
was  condemned  by  one  pope  and  approved  by
another — censured  by  the  Sorbonne  in  one  cen-
tury, and  declared  by  the  doctors  of  the  same
society,  a  true  exposition  of  the  Catholic  faith,
in  the  next.  Surely  the  popes  cut  a  poor  figure
with  their  infallibility,  if  we  may  believe  the  hor-
ror which  some  Catholics  now  express  at  certain
doctrines.  They  must  have  greatly  erred  who
allowed  it  lawful  to  murder  persons  who  were  ex-
communicate, who  pretended  to  dispense  king-
doms, depose  princes,  and  absolve  subjects,  from
their  allegiance ;  who  asserted  the  perfection  of
scripture,  and  the  communion  of  infants,  and  who
condemned  communion  in  one  kind,  the  wor-
ship of  images  and  the  title  of  universal  bishop.
What  are  we  to  think  of  the  infallibility  of  a
Church  which  will  declare  the  man  who  shall
read  the  new  Testament  accursed ;  and  pronounce
to  every  one  who  shall  read  the  revelations  of
St.  Bridget  ten  times,  a  plenary  indulgence  of  all
sin ;  if  a  woman  with  child,  safe  deliverance  ;  and
whether  man  or  woman,  escape  from  purgatory
themselves,  and  a  rescue  for  their  father  and  mo-
ther if  they  are  tormented  in  those  flames.  We
have  our  own  reasons  also  for  rejecting  this  pre-
tended infallibility.  We  think  that  every  man
and  every  church  is  fallible,  but  that  the  scriptures


17T

are  an  infallible  rule.  The  christian  religion  is
in  no  way  unreasonable,  but  commends  itself  to
mankind.  There  may  be  many  things  which
natural  reason  could  not  have  discovered,  but
which  when  discovered  are  perfectly  plain.  We
may  not  be  fully  able  to  comprehend  all  that  is
revealed  to  us,  or  to  remove  all  the  difficulties
that  attend  revealed  religion,  (and  who  would
expect  to  do  so  ^)  but  reason  has  done  more  to  re-
move difficulties  and  vindicate  truth,  than  ever
infallibility  did.  In  all  ordinary  and  necessary
points  of  doctrine  and  morals,  a  wayfaring  man
will  not  materially  err,  who  takes  the  scriptures  in
their  plain  sense  as  his  guide,  and  in  many  points
in  which  he  would  err,  those  who  know  better
can  put  him  right.  But  it  is  treating  men
like  brutes  and  irrational  creatures,  to  say  that
God  has  made  a  revelation  to  them,  but  that  they
are  forbidden  to  examine  it.  Man  is  not  infal-
lible, nor  ought  we  to  allow  any  human  being  to
exercise  that  authority  over  us,  which  such  an
infallibility  assumes.  The  judgment  of  wise  and
good  men  is  to  be  respected,  and  we  must  be  slow
to  set  up  our  judgment  against  that  of  the  Church
or  its  teachers,  but  we  are  not  tied  and  bound  to
the  opinions  of  others.  The  right  use  of  reason  and
the  advantages  of  it  in  elevating  our  sentiments
and  enjoyments  have  been  too  happily  illus-
trated in  the  history  of  our  country,  to  allow  such
an  imposition  to  gain  ground  amongst  us.    Many

N


178

of  the  most  valuable  blessings,  which  the  common
instinct  of  humanity  prompts  us  to  hope,  and
which  religion  instructs  us  to  believe,  reason  and
grace,  applying  the  true  principles  of  science  to
the  investigation  of  moral  truth,  have  taught  us
to  knoio  to  be  true.  By  the  right  use  of  reason,
we  have  discovered  that  many  things  in  religion
and  morals,  which  an  impious  infallibility  taught,
and  a  stupid  credulity  believed  to  be  true,  were
mere  impostures ;  and  that  many  moral  truths
and  doctrines  of  the  christian  religion,  which  the
same  infallibility  and  credulity  taught  and  be-
lieved to  be  false,  are  verities  of  the  greatest  con-
sequence, to  the  independence  and  wellbeing  of
mankind  in  this  life,  and  for  their  preparation  for
happiness  in  the  next.

Q.  But  where  was  the  Church  before  the  Re-
formation and  the  Protestant  Religion  ?

A.  We  also  ask  one  question,  where  was  the
true  Philosophy  before  Sir  Isaac  Newton  ?  till
he  discovered  and  settled  the  true  theory  of  the
earth  and  the  heavens,  men  were  under  the  most
palpable  mistakes  and  errors  ;  but  still  they  man-
aged to  plant  and  sow,  and  enjoy  the  comforts
of  life,  though  they  supposed  that  the  earth  stood
still.  Who  will  therefore  say  that  the  discove-
ries of  that  great  man,  who  drew  the  veil  from
the  mysteries  of  nature,  were  not  of  infinite  im-
portance to  science  and  to  humanity  ?  It  argues
no  love  of  truth  to  start  such  questions  as  these,


J  79

and  to  attempt  to  strangle  the  truth  by  means  of
them.  We  mig;ht  as  well  ask,  where  was  salvation
before  the  Roman  Catholic  Church  had  its  uni-
versal monarchy,  since  there  is  now  no  salvation
out  of  it  ?  Where  was  the  Jewish  Church,  during
many  of  its  great  apostacies  ?  It  was  then  among
the  Jews,  though  not  visibly.  When  a  prophet
thought  there  was  only  one  saint  and  himself  that
one,  God  saw  and  knew  thousands.  The  Ro-
man Catholic  Church  made  a  great  and  flagrant
apostacy,  but  the  Church  of  Christ  and  the  light
of  the  gospel  were  never  wholly  extinguished  in
the  greatest  darkness,  that  through  the  infallibi-
lity of  the  universal  monarch,  overwhelmed  it.
The  seven  thousand  in  Israel  were  not  separated
into  another  visible  church,  but  during  the  great
apostacy  maintained  their  .integrity  among  the
nation  of  the  Jews,  who  were  still,  in  a  certain
sense,  the  church  and  people  of  God.  Where
was  the  true  Church  in  the  time  of  Manasseh,
when  the  ten  tribes  were  carried  away,  and  only
the  tribes  of  Judah  and  Benjamin  left,  and  they
«o  wholly  given  to  idolatry,  that  even  the  altar  of
God  in  the  temple  was  destroyed,  and  in  its  place
were  erected  altars  to  Baal,  the  sun,  the  moon,
and  the  host  of  heaven  ?  God  had  then  a  Church
though  not  visibly  distinguished  from  the  rest  of
the  nation,  as  is  apparent  from  the  fact  that  when
Josiah  began  to  reign  at  eight  years  of  age,  there
was  a  party  of  true  Israelites,  who  with  their  young

N  2


180

king  effected  a  thorough  religious  reformation.
There  Avas  true  gold  mixed  Avith  the  alloy  in  the
Roman  Catholic  Church  before  Luther,  and  when
Luther  appeared,  that  true  gold  appeared  in  Ger-
many, There  was  true  gold  in  the  Church  of
England,  before  the  Reformation,  for  there  were
many  thousands  and  tens  of  thousands,  who,  like
Wickliffe  lived  and  died  in  the  Roman  Catho-
lic Church,  abhorring  its  abominations ;  and
when  the  Reformation  was  effected  and  drew^  the
veil  from  the  mysteries  of  grace,  the  visible  and
true  Church  of  Christ  appeared.

Q.  Are  there  any  other  orders  in  the  Roman
Catholic  Church  *?

A.  Yes,  the  monastic  orders  and  religious  so-
cieties, always  considered  as  the  principal  support
of  the  Papacy.  The  Reformation  swept  away
from  protestant  countries  a  shoal  of  Franciscans,
Dominicans,  and  other  orders,  and  the  Church  of
Rome,  therefore,  found  it  necessary  to  erect  a
new  order,  which  should  be  particularly  devoted
to  the  Roman  See,  and  could  act  with  or  with-
out religious  establishments.  This  was  the  -ori-
gin of  the  famous  religious  fraternity  of  the
Jesuits,  composed  from  the  ruins  of  the  other
orders  and  zealots  in  all  countries,  who  were
the  abettors  of  the  unlimited  supremacy  of  the
pope.  Ignatius  Loyala  was  the  fortuitous  head
of  this  conspiracy.  The  whole  order  is  divided
into  three  classes.    The  professed  members  who.


181

where  they  arc  tolerated,  live  in  professed  houses,
and  beside  other  oaths,  take  a  vow  of  unUmited
obedience  to  the  pope  :  the  scholars,  who  are
wealthy,  and  instruct  the  youth  in  colleges  and
schools ;  and  the  novices  who  live  in  houses  of
probation.  Tiie  professed  members  are  the  gen
nine  Jesuits,  men  of  the  world,  acquainted  with
all  the  transactions  of  life,  commerce,  law,  and
politics.  The  companions  and  assistants  of  this
order,  who  are  not  professed  members,  are  very
numerous.  The  secrets  of  the  society  are  not
revealed,  even  to  all  the  professed  members.
Those  who  are  intrusted  with  the  grand  myste-
ries, and  set  apart  to  transact  their  affairs,  em-
ploy, at  their  pleasure,  the  dangerous  doctrines
of  philosophical  probability,  and  mental  reserva-
tion to  carry  on  their  desperate  projects.  They
endeavour  to  secure  the  high  places  of  authority
in  the  Roman  Catholic  Church.  In  former  times,
especially  in  France,  they  were  attacked  and
exposed  by  Catholic  writers,  and  for  the  sake  of
humanity,  we  would  hope  that  their  enemies  must
have  aggravated  their  crimes  and  wickedness ;  but
now,  when  they  are  not  restrained  by  the  tempo-
ral power,  and  where  the  inquisition  is  abolished,
they  are  ascendant  among  Catholics.  They  are
the  connecting  power  between  the  regulars  and
the  secular  clergy,  and  where  the  latter,  from
their  intercourse  with  their  flocks  and  the  world,
are  disposed  to  shew  a  more  social  disposition,

N.S


\S2

patriotic  spirit,  or  religious  and  pious  temper  than
is  convenient  for  political  purposes,  then  the
great  leading  Jesuits  issue  the  threat  of  letting
loose  the  regulars  upon  the  seculars,  to  supplant
them.  It  M^as  this  domineering  spirit  that  ren-.
dered  the  Jesuits  so  odious  to  many  pious  Catho-
lic bishops,  and  parochial  clergy,  who  have
often  been  disposed  to  make  considerable  refor-
mations in  their  Church.  The  Jesuits  are  the
agents,  not  only  of  religious,  but  political  move-
ments, in  favor  of  the  papal  superstition.*    They

*  The  character  and  spirit  of  the  Jesuits  is  thus  described  in
a  Sermon  preached  in  DubHn  by  Dr.  George  Brown,  archbishop
of  Dublin,  155 1.  "  But  there  are  a  new  fraternity  of  late  sprung
up,  who  call  themselves  Jesuits,  which  will  deceive  many,  who
are  much  after  the  Scribes  and  Pharisees'  manner.  Amongst  the
Jews  they  shall  strive  to  abolish  the  truth,  and  shall  come  very
near  to  do  it.  For  these  sorts  will  turn  themselves  into  several
forms  ;  with  the  heathens  a  heathenist,  with  the  atheists  an  atheist,
with  the  Jews  a  Jew,  with  the  reformers  a  reformer,  purposely
to  know  your  intentions,  your  minds,  your  hearts,  and  your  incli-
nations, and  thereby  bring  you  at  last  to  be  like  the  fool  that  '  said
in  his  heart  that  there  was  no  God.'  These  shall  spread  over  the
whole  world,  shall  be  admitted  into  the  councils  of  princes,  and
they  never  the  wiser  ;  charming  of  them,  yea  making  your
princes  reveal  their  hearts,  and  the  secrets  therein,  and  yet  they
not  perceive  it,  which  will  happen  from  falling  from  the  law  of
God,  by  neglect  of  fulfilling  the  law  of  God,  and  by  winking  at
their  sins ;  yet  in  the  end,  God,  to  justify  his  law,  shall  suddenly
cut  off  this  society,  even  by  the  hands  of  those  who  have  most
succoured  them,  and  made  use  of  them,  so  that  at  the  end,  they
shall  become  odious  to  all  nations.  They  shall  be  worse  than  Jews,
having  no  resting  place  upon  earth,  and  then  shall  a  Jew  have
more  favour  than  a  Jesuit."  Harleian  Miscellany.


intrig'ue  in  courts,  take  advantage  of  all  divi-
sions and  political  struggles  in  protestant  coun-
tries, and  endeavour  to  obtain,  by  the  squeeze  of
parties,  a  political  influence  over  the  civil  and
ecclesiastical  authorities.  Where  they  have  the
opportunity,  they  denounce  the  institutions,  the
clergy,  the  judges,  the  legislature,  the  executive
authorities,  and  even  the  king  and  his  peroga-
tive  in  protestant  countries.  Where  denuncia-
tion is  not  likely  to  succeed,  they  have  recourse
to  artifice ;  where  controversies  and  discussions
are  likely  to  turn  to  their  account,  they  will  em-
ploy them ;  where  they  are  likely  to  fail,  then  little
stress  is  to  be  laid  on  matters  of  controversy —
things  that  were  formerly  looked  upon  as  import-
ant, are  no  longer  so,  and  all  Christians  are  to
live  in  brotherly  charity.  Another  method  is
to  set  protestants  to  dispute  with  each  other,  to
suggest  occasions  of  quarrel,  one  while  praising
one  set  of  combatants,  and  the  next  moment
their  opponents,  with  a  view  of  exposing  the
frailties  of  both.  When  their  case  is  desperate,
then  they  will  encourage  infidelity  and  indiffer-
ence to  all  religion,  (the  most  horrible  thing
where  they  are  ascendant )  and  if  the  govern-
ment be  free  or  protestant,  then  republicanism
is  the  best  form  of  government  for  the  liberties
of  mankind ;  though  in  other  cases  republicanism
is  worse  than  death.  By  these,  and  various
other  means,  they  pursue  their  grand  object,  the


18*

supremacy  of  the  pope,  and  the  extension  of  his
jurisdiction  over  the  world.  On  these  accounts
their  estabhshments  have  been  suppressed  in
different  countries.  On  various  occasions  they
have  been  banished  from  our  own  country,  from
Russia,  from  Portugal,  and  from  France.  At  the
late  revolution  in  France,  of  which  they  were
the  chief  cause,  their  establishments  were  sup-
pressed, and  many  of  them  have  been  removed
to  England.  In  France,  by  the  mad  pursuit  of
their  tyranny,  they  have  destroyed  the  principle
of  legitamacy,  as  they  did  in  England,  and  have
hurled  Charles  the  tenth,  as  they  did  James  the
second  from  the  throne.  Intelligent  men  in
France  are  determined  to  have  a  constitutional
government;  they  are  endeavouring  to  encourage
the  study  of  greek  literature,  and  the  moral  sci-
ences, which  have  been  miserably  neglected ;
they  are  beginning  to  circulate  the  new  Testa-
ment, the  greatest  instrument  of  moral  order  and
social  happiness,  but  they  will  never  secure  their
liberty  against  foreign  intrigue  and  domestic
faction,  till  they  have  a  national  Church,  with  a
social  and  well-instructed  clergy,  that  may  har-
monize with  all  their  other  institutions.

Q.  What  are  the  holy  orders  which  are  retain-
ed in  the  Church  of  England  *?

A.  There  are  three,  bishops,  presbyters,  and
deacons.  In  the  Scriptures  we  find  frequent
mention  of  these  three  orders.    Before  our  Lord's


185

ascension,  he  ordained  twelve  apostles  and
seventy  disciples,  who  ministered,  after  the  day
of  Pentecost,  in  the  church  of  Jerusalem.  We
do  not  read  of  the  apostolical  ordination  of  pres-
byters in  the  church  of  Jerusalem,  because  they,
who  first  ministered  there,  had  been  ordained  by
Christ  himself.  We  do  read  of  the  ordination  of
deacons  in  consequence  of  the  increase  of  the
church  and  the  duties  of  the  ministry.  In  other
churches  we  read  of  presbyters  and  deacons
ordained  by  the  hands  of  the  apostles.  Apostles
therefore,  and  presbyters,  and  deacons,  were  the
three  degrees  of  power  in  the  apostolic  churches.
When  the  apostles  were  permanently  removed
by  absence  or  death  from  the  churches,  bishops
or  presiding  presbyters,  raised  to  this  specific
office,  performed  those  apostolical  functions
which  were  intended  to  be  permanent  for  the
order  and  edification  of  the  church,  and  as  suc-
cessors of  the  apostles,  ordained  presbyters  and
deacons,  by  the  imposition  of  hands,  as  the  apos-
tles whom  they  succeeded,  and  by  whom  they
were  authorized,  had  done.

Q.  Do  we  not  read  of  other  spiritual  persons
in  the  early  Churches  '?

A.  Yes,  we  read  of  evangelists,  prophets  and
other  spiritual  persons,  and  great  confusion  and
mistakes  have  arisen  from  confounding  these  per-
sons, who  in  the  apostolic  age  had  peculiar  gifts,
with  the  regular  and  permanent  orders  of  the


186

Church.  These  gifts  were  evidently  contined  to
the  period  between  the  day  of  pentecost  and  the
general  establishment  of  Christianity.  Many  of
the  duties,  performed  by  these  persons,  were  offi-
ces and  services  that  might  be  performed  by  per-
sons not  in  regular  orders.  There  were  also  in  after
ages  many  who,  though  they  had  not  these  gifts,
yet  as  catechists  and  teachers,  performed  many
pious  and  useful  services.  But  in  the  ancient
fathers,  as  in  the  Scriptures,  we  read  of  three
regular  orders,  bishops,  presbyters,  and  deacons.
"  When  your  Captains,  (says  TertuUian)  that  is
to  say,  the  deacons,  presbyters,  and  bishops  fly,
who  shall  teach  the  laity  that  they  must  be  con-
stant?" The  primitive  fathers  clearly  speak  of
three  orders,  deacons  as  the  first,  presbyters  the
second,  and  bishops  the  third  and  highest  order.
We  think,  therefore,  that  we  have  now  in  the
Church  of  England,  the  three  orders  which  had
their  beginning  with  the  Apostles  themselves.

Q.  Has  episcopacy  been  long  established  in
England,  and  has  it  been  invariably  preserved  ?

A.  Yes,  there  is  some  probability  that  it  might
have  been  established  by  some  of  the  Apostles,
or  by  apostolic  Evangelists  in  the  lifetime  of  the
Apostles.  Before  the  end  of  the  second  century,
there  were  christians  in  England  under  the  go-
vernment of  their  bishops.  At  the  council  of
Ariminum  A.  D.  359,  the  English  had  their
bishops.     When  the   Saxons  who   were  pagans


187

conquered  the  country,  tlie  English  retired  into
Wales  under  the  government  of  their  bishops.
When  Austin  the  monk,  sent  by  Gregory  the
Great  about  600  years  after  Christ,  came  to  con-
vert the  Saxons,  he  found  the  ancient  Britons
under  the  government  of  their  bishops.  Under
this  form  Christianity  remained  till  the  Norman
conquest,  and  from  the  Norman  conquest  to  the
present  time,  the  kings  of  England  have  sworn  to
preserve  the  Church  of  England  under  that  form.
For  more  than  1600  years  episcopacy  has  existed
in  England,  and,  for  more  than  1200  years,  there
have  been  archbishops  of  Canterbury  appointed
with  the  consent  of  the  kings  of  England.  While
England  shall  remain  an  independent  nation,  she
will,  we  doubt  not,  have  her  own  clergy,  under
the  ancient  episcopal  form  of  goverment,  which
has  been  preserved  by  God  for  the  unity  and  edi-
fication of  the  Church,  and  the  happiness  and
wellbeing  of  the  nation.

Q.  Were  not  presbyters  called  bishops  in  the
scripture,  and  were  not  all  ministers  on  an  equal-
ity?

A.  The  presbyters  are  called  bishops,  and  so
are  the  Apostles  called  presbyters,  and  sometimes
deacons  and  disciples.  There  is  certainly  a  pro-
miscuous use  of  these  terms,  when  they  are  allud-
ed to  in  an  occasional  manner;  but  who  would  con-
clude from  this  that  every  disciple  was  a  deacon,
every  deacon  a  presbyter,  and  every  presbyter  an


188

apostle,  or  that  disciples,  deacons,  presbyters  and
apostles  were  all  the  same  and  on  an  equality  ?
The  term  bishop  is  a  greek  term,  alluded  to  by
some  latin  writers,  and  the  derivation  of  the  word
would  lead  us  to  conclude,  that  it  expresses  a
distinct  office  of  inspection,  visitation  and  juris-
diction. But  the  actual  use  of  the  word  is  more
important,  and,  whether  we  trace  it  downward
from  the  Apostles  to  the  present  day,  or  backward
from  our  own  time  to  the  commencement  of  Chris-
tianity, we  shall  clearly  find  that  it  was  attributed
to  those,  who  not  only  administered  the  word
and  sacraments  (which  is  the  office  of  all  pres-
byters) but  had  a  distinct  power  of  order  and
jurisdiction  over  the  clergy  and  their  flocks.  The
apostles  exercised  a  general  jurisdiction  over  all
Churches,  during  the  first  propagation  of  the
gospel,  but  when  the  Churches  were  settled  or
the  time  of  their  departure  was  at  hand,  then
bishops  were  appointed  in  the  several  Churches,
as  St.  James  at  Jerusalem,  Titus  in  Crete,  Tim-
othy in  Ephesus,  Polycarp  in  Smyrna,  Ignatius
in  Antioch,  Linus  and  Clement  in  Rome,  and  so
in  all  the  Churches  of  Europe,  Asia,  and  Africa,
the  bishops  as  St.  Jerome  says  "were  the  succes-
sors of  the  apostles."

Q.  But  when  St.  Paul  wrote  to  Timothy  and
Titus  expressly  respecting  order  and  discipline,
did  he  not  speak  of  presbyters  and  deacons  and
not  of  bishops  ?


189

A.  When  he  wrote  to  Timothy  and  Titus  he
wrote  to  bishops  who  had  received  their  authori-
ty and  commision  from  himself.  It  was  not  ne-
cessary, therefore,  to  instruct  them  respecting  the
ordination  of  bishops,  and  probably  while  the
Apostles  were  living  they  generally  retained  that
power  in  their  own  hands.  Those  Churches  over
which  Titus  and  Timothy  presided,  were  then
filled  with  these  Officers.  He  did,  however,  in-
instruct  them  to  ordain  presbyters  and  deacons,
whom  the  Apostles  had  ordained  when  they  were
present,  and  who  were  the  officers  that  the  con-
stant increase  of  disciples  rendered  it  necessary
for  them  to  ordain.  Timothy  and  Titus  had  not
the  miraculous  powers  which  the  Apostles  had
for  censure  and  discipline,  and  yet  they  were  evi-
dently ordained  with  espiscopal  function  to  pre-
side over  others  and  ordain  others,  as  the  Apos-
tles had  done.  To  Timothy  St.  Paul  writes  as  to
one  in  a  superior  office  "  Against  a  presbyter  re-
ceive not  an  accusation,  but  before  two  or  three
witnesses."  And  again  to  Titus,  writing  by  in-
spiration, he  says,  "  For  this  cause  left  I  thee  in
Crete,  that  thou  shouldst  put  in  order  the  things
that  remain  (jurisdiction),  and  shouldst  ordain
(ordination)  presbyters  in  every  city  (a  diocese)
as  I  appointed  thee."  Surely  this  is  decisive
against  an  equality,  and  for  a  presidency.  The
titles  of  the  epistles  to  the  seven  Churches  are
very  important,  because  they  were  written  at  the


190

close  of  the  apostolic  age,  when  the  Churches
were  uniformly  settled.  There  were  manifestly
in  those  Churches,  and  the  adjacent  conntry  many
congregations,  ministers, and  a  considerable  laity.
Yet  the  epistles  are  not  directed  to  the  Churches
or  presbyters  and  deacons,  because  they  were  not
intended  to  convey  a  new  revelation  of  doctrine,
but  exhortations  to  preserve  the  unity  and  purity
of  the  Churches.  These  letters,  therefore,  are
addressed  to  the  angels  or  bishops  of  those
Churches.  Surely  if  there  had  been  no  angels  or
presiding  bishops,  or  if  Christ  had  laid  down  the
law  of  equality,  these  letters  must  have  been  es-
teemed as  spurious,  if  not  addressed  to  the  congre-
gation meeting  in  such  a  city,  not  to  the  ministers
or  consistories  of  those  Churches,  but  to  one  pre-
siding, contrary  to  the  supposed  law  of  equality,
with  authority  and  jurisdiction  over  others,  both
laity  and  clergy.

Q.  But  since  it  is  evident  that  there  were
bishops  in  the  apostolic  Churches,  may  we  not
still  suppose  that  episcopacy  was  not  a  divine  or
apostolical  institution  but  human,  adopted  by  the
Churches  themselves,  in  consequence  of  the  di-
visions that  arose,  expedient  at  that  time,  but  not
universally  or  at  all  times  necessary  ?

A.  This,  or  something  like  this,  is  the  opinion
of  Bulinger,  Calvin,  and  some  others.  But  is  it
possible  to  suppose,  that  episcopacy,  which  pres-
byterians   themselves   confess  to    have  been  so


191

ancient  and  so  catholic,  should  have  been  merely
human?  Beza,  indeed,  supposes  three  kinds  of
episcopacy,  divine,  human,  and  satanic,  but  these
suppositions  are  absurd,  as  the  foundations  of  an
argument  in  such  a  matter.  Can  we  suppose
that  this  office  should  have  been  appointed  in
the  apostolic  Churches,  if  the  Churches  had  not
known  it  to  have  been  sanctioned  by  the  scrip-
ture or  the  apostles  themselves  ?  Could  the
disciples  and  friends  of  the  Apostles,  who  were
the  first  bishops,  have  been  ignorant  of  their  in-
tentions respecting  the  order  and  discipline  of  the
Church  *?  or  would  they  have  adopted  an  order
contrary  to  their  known  intentions  ?  If  episco-
pacy rested  on  no  higher  authority  than  that  al-
lowed by  the  presbyterian  writers  (and  a  lower  it
cannot  have)  it  is  an  institution  not  unworthy  of  re-
spect, and  we  may  suppose  not  less  expedient  now
than  it  was  formerly.  Are  there  no  divisions  among
christians  now  *?  Are  there  no  propensities  in
human  nature  to  vanity,  caprice,  and  distraction,
at  the  present  moment  ?  Did  Calvin's  discipline
succeed  in  his  own  case "?  Is  there  no  necessity  for
leading  men  to  be  placed  in  permanent  offices  in
the  Church  of  Scotland  at  the  present  moment  ?
Would  not  eminent  individuals,  (of  whom  there  are
many)  placed  in  prominent  stations  in  the  Church
of  that  country,  render  that  Church  more  secure,
more  eminent,  and  influential  over  all  classes  ?  It
is  unreasonable   to  suppose,    that   such  an  insti-


192

tution  should  have  arisen,  in  the  manner  in  which
it  is  manifest  it  did  arise,  by  human  authority.
There  can  be  no  more  doubt  of  bishops  in  the
apostoHc  Churches,  than  of  consuls  and  senators
in  ancient  Rome.  It  is  also  certain  that  those
bishops  who  filled  the  first  apostolic  sees,  were
almost  without  exception  martyrs,  not  only  to  the
christian  cause,  but,  to  the  episcopal  office.  In  ev-
ery christian  Church  they  were  the  first  to  suffer.
The  office  was  perilous  and  attended  with  no
worldly  honor.  It  exposed  its  possessors  to  cer-
tain persecution  and  death.  It  is  asserted,  that
more  than  thirty  of  the  first  bishops  of  Rome,  with
one  exception,  suffered  martyrdom.  Now,  if  it
was  a  mere  human  institution,  and  not  necessary
or  divine,  can  w^e  suppose  that  the  early  chris-
tians would  have  elected  their  chosen  friends  and
pastors  to  such  an  office,  and  to  certain  destruc-
tion ?  Can  we  suppose  that  they  would  always
have  avowed  an  unbroken  determination  to  exer-
cise their  functions,  or  that  they  would  have  died,
not  only  as  christians,  but  as  bishops,  if  they  had
not  believed,  as  they  professed,  that  their  office
was  divine  and  apostolical  *?  These  suppositions
are  incredible,  and  they  are  the  only  suppositions
by  which  an  apostolical  episcopacy  can  with  any
face  be  evaded.

Q.  What  do  you  conceive  were  the  real  mo-
tives that  induced  Calvin  to  adopt  the  Presbyte-
rian form  of  o;overment  ?


193


A.  There  is  the  greatest  reason  to  suppose  that
he  did  not  adopt  it  from  conviction  or  choice,  but
that  he  elected  and  defended  it  from  what  he
conceived  to  be  an  overruling  necessity.  In  this
he  was  probably  mistaken,  for  if  he  had  adopted
a  moderate  episcopacy  it  is  highly  probable
that  with  his  transcendent  talents,  he  would
have  carried  the  reformation  not  only  in  Swit-
zerland but  in  France,  and  perhaps  in  Italy
and  in  Spain.  He  certainly  had  many  friends
and  adherents  in  all  these  countries.  Had  the
protestants  of  France  adopted  a  moderate  episco-
pacy, that  is  a  form  of  government  adapted  to  a
monarchy,  the  edict  of  Nantes  would  probably
have  never  been  passed  or  revoked,  for  the  kings
and  nobility  of  France  would  have  adopted  the
protestant  faith.  At  this  moment,  if  the  bishops
and  clergy  of  France  were  to  declare  a  Refor-
mation, their  independence  of  the  pope,  the  mar-
riage of  the  clergy,  the  abolition  of  the  supersti-
tious ceremonies  and  the  confessional,  the  liturgy
in  the  veracular  tongue  and  the  sole  authority  of
scripture  in  matters  of  faith  and  practice,  the
French  nation  and  the  best  and  wisest  part  of  it
would  follow  such  a  reformation.  The  French
do  not  reject  Christianity,  but  in  the  form  and
manner  in  which  it  has  been  presented  to  them
by  the  Jesuits  who  have  represented  Jesuitism  and
Christianity  as  synonimous,  and  who  have  thrown
that  thoughtless  and  sensitive  nation  into  appa-

o


194

rent  infidelity  and  atheism.  Had  not  the  dis-
gusting ambition  of  the  Jesuits,  in  the  courts
of  France,  attempted  to  carry  their  tyranny
with  a  reckless  disregard  of  the  rights  of  con-
science and  of  thought,  there  never  would  have
been  a  Voltaire,  certainly  not  such  a  Voltaire  as
there  was.  The  influence  of  Voltaire,  as  a
scoffer,  is  not  now  what  it  has  been,  and  if  reli-
gion were  presented  to  the  people,  in  a  moderate,
decent,  and  rational  form,  they  would  recover
from  their  apparent  atheism,  and  flippant  scof-
fing would  soon  be  obsolete.  The  protestants  of
France,  with  the  fairest  prospects  of  success,  have
not  made  any  progress,  for  consistories  are  neither
fitted  for  enterprise  nor  suited  to  monarchical
institutions.  Presbyterianism  was  not  established
in  France  by  consistories  but  by  Calvin,  and  in
Scotland  by  Knox.  In  Scotland  the  Church  has
been  united  with  the  State,  and  has  proved  a
great  blessing  to  that  country.  But  the  history
of  the  reformed  Church  in  France  shews,  that  a
body  politic  erected  in  the  bosom  of  a  State,  and
unallied  to  the  supreme  authority,  must  be  sus-
pected, precarious,  and  limited  in  its  usefulness.
Calvin  did  not  begin  the  reformation  in  France
or  Switzerland.  In  the  latter  country  he  was  pre-
ceded by  Zuingle  and  CEcolampadius  who  had
used  every  possible  means  and  entreaty  with
the  bishops  of  their  country  to  sanction  their
orders.     When  ( notwithstanding   all  their   in-


195

treaties,  concessions,  and  promises)  they  failed
of  obtaining  the  sanction  of  the  Roman  Hier-
archy, who  were  now  urged  and  threatened  by
the  popes,  they  thought  it  expedient  to  place  at
their  head  a  perpetual  superintendent.  Calvin,
however,  was  not  a  man  to  be  foiled  by  those
whom  he  despised.  That  he  did  not  reject
episcopacy,  that  he  believed  it  under  some  inter-
pretation to  be  apostolical  is  manifest  from  his
institutes,  his  treatise  on  the  true  reformation  of
religion,  his  voluntary  subscription  to  the  confes-
sion of  St.  Austin,  of  which  episcopacy  was  an
article,  and  his  correspondence  with  Archbishop
Cranmer  and  other  learned  men.  His  disciple
John  Knox,  proposed  to  place  presbyterianism
in  Scotland  under  ten  permanent  superintendents
(that  is  bishops  under  another  name)  but  the
spoilers  were  over  the  prey,  and  he  failed.  When
Calvin  determined  that  a  Church  irregular  in
discipline  was  to  be  preferred  to  one  false  in  doc-
trine and  idolatrous  in  practice,  he  made  the  best
of  his  case.  He  saw  that  presbyters  at  the  first,
under  the  episcopacy  of  the  Apostles,  were  equal ;
that  the  Bohemian  brethren  held  episcopacy
without  the  name  ;  that  the  Church  of  Rome  held
bishops  and  presbyters  to  l)e  of  the  same  order,
and  that  the  bishops  of  Rome,  for  avaricious
purposes,  had  sometimes  invested  presbyters  with
the  power  of  orders  and  confirmation,  and  he
therefore  declared  the  Church  of  Geneva  a  sepa-

o2


196

rate  body  and  introduced  that  form  of  ecclesiasti-
cal government  called  presby  terianism.  In  France,
the  Huguenots  had  as  nearly  as  possible  resem-
bled the  Lollards  in  England.  They  had  been  chief-
ly remarkable  for  their  hostility  to  the  corruptions
and  usurpations  of  the  see  of  Rome,  but  the  refor-
mation of  Calvin  produced  a  remarkable  eifect  on
these  Churches,  and  about  the  middle  of  the  1 6th
century  they  entered  into  the  communion  of  the
Church  of  Geneva.  The  principles  of  ecpiality  were
thus  introduced  into  France,  and  as  they  were
never  controlled  by  an  union  with  the  supreme  au-
thority of  the  state,  and  coming  in  contact  with  the
principles  of  Jesuitism  which  led  directly  to  athe-
ism, they  spread  the  seeds  of  that  anarchy  and  in-
fidelity which  have  desolated  France,  though  the
Jesuits  may  be  the  last  to  acknowledge,  or  the
protestants  to  have  wished,  such  consequences.

Q.  What  were  the  opinions  of  Luther,  with
respect  to  orders  *?

A.  Luther  seems  to  have  been  too  much  occu-
pied with  the  pope  to  have  been  sufficiently  pre-
cise in  this  matter.  It  is  evident,  however,  that
he  had  no  wish  to  disturb  the  orders  of  the
Church,  or  to  subvert  episcopal  ordination  and
o'overnment.  The  Lutheran  Church,  as  it  has
existed  since  the  time  of  Luther,  is  held  by  its
Doctors,  to  be  a  lawful  and  complete  hierarchy,
independent  of  the  laws  and  jurisdiction  of  the
Roman  Pontif,   in  consequence  of  the  treaty  of


197

Passau.  The  main  principle  of  the  Lutheran
Church  is  the  same  as  that  of  all  the  reformed
Churches,  that  the  holy  scriptures  are  the  only
source  from  whence  we  are  to  derive  our  reli-
gious sentiments.  They  have  authorized  formu-
laries and  confessions  of  faith .  They  have  adopted
litanies  for  public  worship,  rites  and  ceremonies.
In  every  independent  state  the  supreme  civil  ruler
performs  the  functions  of  supremacy  in  the
Church.  In  some  Churches  the  government  is
episcopal  as  in  Sweden,  where  there  is  one  Arch-
bishop, and  in  Denmark,  by  superintendents,  with
episcopal  powers.  In  other  states  the  government
is  by  consistories,  but  in  all  cases,  they  admit
that  subordination  and  diversity  of  rank  are  not
only  highly  useful,  but  absolutely  necessary  to
preserve  the  unity  and  communion  of  the  Church.

Q.  Do  you  not  consider  that  it  has  been  a
great  advantage  to  the  Church  of  England,  that
it  is  not  founded  on  the  acts  and  opinions  of  any
individual  ?

A.  It  has  certainly  been  a  misfortune  to  the
Lutheran  and  Reformed  Churches  in  general,
that  they  have  been  founded  too  much  upon  the
acts  and  opinions  of  individuals.  Luther's  par-
ticular opinion  respecting  the  Eucharist,  and  the
various  illustrations  which  he  gave  of  it,  have
led  in  many  cases  to  fanaticism,  and  a  bigoted
communion.  The  extreme  opinions  of  Calvin,
respecting  the  decrees  of  God,  and  the  doctrine

o3


198

of  St.  Augustin,  have  led  to  violent  controversies
and  reactions  of  opinion.  Both  Churches  having
missed  the  true  spirit  of  moderation,  have  fallen
too  much  into  the  modern  neology,  so  prevalent
in  Germany  and  France.  The  Church  of  Eng-
land we  think  has  been  happily  preserved  from
these  extremes.  In  throwing  off  the  usurpation
and  superstitions  of  the  Church  of  Rome,  she
had  no  new  system  of  government  to  erect.  She
maintained  the  ancient  government  of  the  Church,
and  effected  her  separation  from  Romish  idola-
try, with  the  greatest  moderation.  She  has  not
been  tied  down  to  the  opinions  or  interpretations
of  any  individual,  however  illustrious.  Dr.  Bur-
net observes  that  it  is  difficult  to  know  who  were
the  authors  of  any  particular  articles.  At  the
precise  period  of  the  Reformation,  the  articles
of  religion  were  drawn  up  to  oppose  the  decrees
of  the  council  of  Trent ;  they  were  submitted  to
the  learned  and  leading  men  of  the  time ;  the
peculiar  phraseology  and  dogmas  of  individuals
were  as  much  as  possible  avoided,  and  the  dis-
cretion, ability,  and  pacific  spirit,  with  which
these  articles  of  peace  and  unity  were  framed,
are  sufficiently  manifest  in  the  fact,  that  all  the
nonconformists,  all  the  methodists  and  calvinists
of  the  present  day,  refer  and  appeal  to  those
articles  of  the  Church  of  England,  which  are
articles  of  faith  and  practice,  as  decisive  in  mat-
ters of  controversy,  and  the  best  authority  next


199

to  scripture  for  their  opinions.  So  far  as  the
Lutheran  or  any  other  Church  holds  the  scrip
ture  to  be  the  sole  rule  of  faith  and  practice  we
hold  communion  with  them ;  so  far  as  the  Roman
Catholic  Church,  or  any  other  Church,  holds  the
fundamental  doctrines,  we  hold  communion  with
them ;  but  we  have  avowed  the  written  word  of
God  as  our  supreme  law,  and  we  cannot  allow
any  Church  to  legislate  any  other  rule  over  us.
As  a  national  Church,  of  an  independent  nation,
we  have  chosen  such  rites  and  ceremonies,  as  suit
our  country  and  habits  ;  such  as  promote  order,
decency,  and  edification  among  us;  and  which  we
anxiously  cherish  as  "  the  leaves  that  preserve
the  fruit,  the  shell  that  preserves  the  kernel
of  religion  from  contempt."  The  Church  of
England  exists  with  her  endowments,  which
secure  a  learned  and  liberal  education  for  the
clergy,  which  renders  them  independent  of  the
highest,  and  able  to  promote  the  comfort  and
edification  of  the  poorest.  The  Church  and  its
possessions  are  the  patrimony  of  the  laboring
classes,  and  of  the  middle  ranks  of  society,  while
at  the  same  time  they  are  a  rock  of  defence  to
the  aristocracy  and  the  throne.  The  christian
ministry  is  one  of  the  honorable  professions  by
which  the  children  of  persons,  even  in  humble
circumstances,  may  and  do  often  open  to  them-
selves a  road  to  fame  and  christian  usefulness ;
it  is  a  profession  in  which  all  ranks  meet  on  an


200

equality.  The  Church  has  enabled  this  country
to  preserve  its  internal  tranquillity,  almost  with-
out a  police,  affectionately  supported,  it  will
continue  to  do  so;  it  has  contributed  essenti-
ally to  preserve  our  national  independence  from
foreign  intrigue,  with  a  less  standing  army
than  any  other  country  in  the  world,  in  pro-
portion to  its  dignity,  population,  and  power,
and  that  in  defiance  of  the  world,  sometimes
in  league  against  us.  It  has  been  blessed
with  bishops  and  learned  men,  whose  memo-
ries are  in  all  the  churches,  whose  writings  are
the  models  of  our  language  and  the  records
of  our  noblest  sentiments,  who  have  defended  the
liberties  of  their  country,  been  eminent  for  learn-
ing, piety,  and  charity,  and  have  carried  the
cultivation  of  the  moral  sciences  and  of  christian
morality  as  a  science,  to  a  higher  degree  of  ex-
cellence than  was  ever  known  in  the  history  of
any  christian  nation.

Q.  What  is  the  king's  supremacy  in  England  ?

A.  It  is  expressed  in  the  following  oath.*
"  That  the  king's  majesty,  under  God,  is  the  only
supreme  governor  of  the  realm,  and  of  all  other
his  hio-hness's  dominions  and  countries,  as  well
in  all  spiritual  and  ecclesiastical  things  or  causes,
as  temporal,  and  that  no  foreign  prince,  person,
prelate,  state,  or  potentate,  hath,   or  ought  to

*  We  assume  the  old  canonical  oath  as  the  best  text  for  explain-
ing this  subject.


201

have  any  jurisdiction,  power,  superiority,  preem-
inence, or  authority,  ecclesiastical  or  spiritual,
within  his  majesty's  said  realms,  dominions,  and
countries."  This  oath  we  will  consider  first  in  its
defensive  and  negative  assertions  ;  and  secondly
in  its  positive  declarations  and  affirmations.

Q.  What  does  this  oath  solemnly  deny  ?

A.  It  denies  "  that  any  foreign  prince,  person,
prelate,  state,  or  potentate,  hath  or  ought  to  have
any  jurisdiction,  power,  superiority,  preemi-
nence, or  authority,  ecclesiastical  or  spiritual,
within  his  majesty's  said  realms,  dominions,  and
countries."  The  power  expressed  in  this  clause,
the  pope  claimed  in  this  country  by  his  legates
and  commissioners,  and  this  power  he  exercised
with  the  most  impudent  and  tyrannical  usurpa-
tions in  defiance  of  the  remonstrances  of  the
king,  parliament,  clergy,  and  people  of  Eng-
land. The  whole  nation,  therefore,  determined
to  cast  it  off  once  and  for  ever.  And  it  is  worthy
of  remark,  that  this  was  virtually  done  before  the
Reformation .  The  usurpation  of  the  pope  was
boldly  attacked  by  Wickliffe,  and  those  who  em-
braced his  opinions.  His  principles  and  the  cir-
culation of  the  New  Testament  in  English,
produced  a  great  change  among  all  classes.  Many
who  did  not  follow  the  whole  of  Wickliffe 's  creed,
and  indeed  those,  who  persecuted  the  Lollards  as
a  sect,  denied  the  pope's  supremacy  and  juris-
diction   in  England.     Before  the  Reformation,


202

(though  indeed  it  was  the  great  pubHc  step  to-
wards it)  the  national  synods,  the  universities,
the  king  and  parUament,  and  the  people  of  Eng-
land and  Ireland,  declared  and  resolved  (as  the
only  way  of  shaking  off  his  disgusting  usurpation)
that  the  bishop  of  Rome  had  no  greater  jurisdic-
tion within  England,  conferred  upon  him,  by
God,  in  scripture,  than  any  other  foreign  bishop.
For  this,  the  pope  excommunicated  the  king
and  whole  Church  of  England,  before  the  refor-
mation made  by  protestants.  It  is  true  the  Ro-
man Catholics  did  not  deny  the  primacy  of  the
pope's  order,  but  his  supremacy  and  power,  and
if  the  bishop  of  Rome  had  been  contented  with
his  title  of  honor,  he  might  perhaps  have  had  it
to  this  day.  It  is  absurd,  therefore,  to  say,  that
the  protestant  clergy  (as  a  new  race  of  invaders)
drove  out  the  real  possessors  of  the  Church,  its
functions,  and  endowments,  and  made  a  new
Church.  It  was  the  same  Church  of  England
after  the  excommunication  of  the  pope,  that  it
was  before  ;  such  a  thing  as  that  could  make  no
possible  alteration  in  it.  When  Elizabeth,  (after
the  desolations  in  queen  Mary's  reign)  passed
the  act  which  separated  for  ever  (we  hope)  the
nation  and  Church  of  England,  from  the  odious
papal  tyranny,  so  completely  had  the  spirit  of
disgust  and  independence  spread  among  the
clergy  and  their  flocks,  that  of  9400  ecclesias-
tical persons,  but  177,  and  those  chiefly  cathedral


203

and  conventual  clergy,  officially  connected  with
the  see  of  Rome,  left  their  livings  to  continue
"in  their  Romish  idolatry."  We  might  with
more  reason  say,  that  a  new  Church  was  made
at  the  revolution,  when  probably  there  were
more  non-jurors  (and  those  the  flower  of  the
English  clergy)  to  the  supremacy  of  king  Wil-
liam, than  there  had  been  recusants  to  the
supremacy  of  queen  Elizabeth.

Q.  Is  this  defensive  oath  now  absolutely  ne-
cessary ?

A.  Yes,  it  is  more  necessary  than  ever  to  know
who  are  the  true  friends  of  the  religion  and  con-
stitution of  their  country.  The  Roman  Catholics
acknowledge,  and  their  clergy  swear  that  they
acknowledge,  that  there  "is  a  foreign  prince,
prelate,  potentate,  who  hath  and  ought  to  have  a
jurisdiction,  power,  superiority,  pre-eminence,
and  authority  ecclesiastical  and  spiritual  within  his
Majesty's  said  realms,  dominions  and  countries,"
— that  is,  that  they  "  will  ever  henceforth  be  faith-
ful and  obedient  to  the  blessed  Apostle  St.  Peter,
and  to  the  Holy  Roman  Church,  and  to  our*  holy
Father  the  Pope  and  his  canonical  successors.

*  In  the  oath  set  forth  in  the  Roman  Pontifical  by  the  order  of
Pope  Clement  VIII.  instead  of  our  Holy  Father  the  Pope  the
expression  is  and  "  to  our  Lord."  In  the  oath  taken  by  the  French
bishops  some  other  clauses  are  omitted,  as  "  Heretics,  schismatics
and  rebels  to  our  said  Lord,  or  his  aforesaid  successors,  I  will
to  ray  power  persecute  and  oppose."


204

That  any  counsel  which  they  may  intrust  to  them
by  themselves,  their  messengers  or  letters  they
will  not  knowingly  reveal  to  any  to  their  preju-
dice ;  that  they  will  aid  them,  saving  their  order,
to  preserve  and  defend  the  Roman  See  and  the
sovereign  rights  of  St.  Peter^  that  they  will
treat  with  honor,  the  legate  of  the  Apostolic  See
on  his  journeys,  and  assist  him  in  his  necessities  ;
That  they  will  endeavour  to  presej've,  defend^
increase,  and  advance  the  rights,  honors,  pri-
vileges, and  authorities  of  the  holy  Roman
Church,  of  our  holy  Father  the  Pope  and  his
successors."  Besides  this,  the  various  orders  and
congregations  take  separate  vows  and  oaths,  and
the  Jesuits  take  again  an  especial  oath  of  unre-
served obedience  to  the  pope,  to  go  wherever  he
may  direct  them,  to  promote  and  advance  the
universal  dominion  of  the  universal  monarch.  It
is  therefore  the  grossest  hypocrisy  on  the  part  of
the  members  of  that  Church,  in  which  the  swear-
ing of  obedience  to  the  pope  is  an  article  of  their
creed,  and  which  has  commanded  more  vows  and
secret  oaths,  than  all  other  Churches  in  the  world ,-
to  pretend  such  sympathy  with  tender  consciences
and  a  dislike  to  oaths  of  a  particular  kind.  The
sacramentum  is  the  strongest  bulwark  of  human
institutions  ;  it  is  the  end  of  strife  and  the  begin-
ning of  safety,  None  are  better  convinced  of
this  than  many  persons  who,  while  they  propose
the  repeal  of  all  oaths  which  are  to  defend  the


205

religion,  and  with  it  the  monarchy  and  institu-
tions of  their  country  from  usurpation,  are  them-
selves, perhaps,  under  secret  and  solemn  vows
and  oaths  to  promote  that  usurpation  to  the  ut-
most of  their  power.  Since  the  repeal  of  the
test  and  corporation  acts,  (the  worst  possible  kind
of  test,  and  which  nothing  but  absolute  necessity
could  justify)  it  is  more  than  ever  necessary  to
preserve  those  bulwarks  which  impose  no  penal-
ty, and  which  only  require  allegiance  and  fidelity
distinct,  open  and  avowed  to  a  protestant  king
and  coastitution.  The  time  is  come  not  only  to
defend  these  with  oaths  but  with  great  vigilance,
against  the  spiritual  militia,  the  Janizaries  and
factors  of  the  pope.  Had  not  the  constitution  of
the  country  been  defended  with  oaths,  and  among
others  with  the  oath  of  supremacy,  it  had  been
betrayed  long  ago  into  the  hands  of  its  enemies.
Oaths  have  an  influence  on  those  who  are  not
restrained  by  other  obligations.  Oaths  may  be
painful  to  skilful  interpreters  of  oaths,  but  they
restrain  even  such  casuists,  if  not  for  conscience,
yet  for  credit's  sake.*

*  Philosophical  probability  will  carry  those  who  profess  it  to
great  lengths.  We  know  that  the  order  of  Bishops  has  been  the
great  means  of  preserving  the  Protestant  Religion  in  England.
The  order  of  Bishops  in  the  English  Church  and  the  supremacy  of
the  King  are  the  two  great  bulwarks  which  have  defied  the  Pa-
pists, and  how  they  regard  them,  particularly  the  former,  history
sufficiently  attests ;  witness  the  murderous  hate  with  which  they


^06

Q.  What  are  the  positive  affirmations  of  this
oath?

A.  *'  That  the  king's  majesty,  under  God,  is
the  only  supreme  governor  of  this  realm,  and  of
all  other  his  highness'  dominions  and  coun-
tries, as  well  in  all  spiritual  or  ecclesiastical
things  or  causes  as  temporal."  This  is  an  oath
which  not  only  every  churchman,  but  every  wise

seized  and  slaughtered  Hooper,  Ridley,  Latimer,  and  Cranmer,  on
their  recovery  of  power ;  witness  the  Cain-like  malignity  with
which  the  Jesuits,  when  they  thought  they  had  secured  power
under  King  James,  seized  the  seven  patriotic  Bishops ;  witness
the  pleasure  with  which  the  suppression  of  the  twelve  Irish  Bish-
opricks  was  received  an  "  odour  of  a  sweet  smell,  a  sacrifice  accept-
able, well-pleasing;"  witness  the  confession  of  one  of  their  advocates
at  the  time  of  the  reformation  "  I  could  be  contented  there  were  no
Priests  ( i.  e.  Popish  Priests)  in  England,  so  there  were  no  Bishops
there  ".  Yet  it  is  now  doing  no  injury  to  the  Church  of  England
to  endeavour  to  deprive  the  Bishops  of  their  titles  which  they  enjoy
according  to  law,  while  at  the  same  time  the  same  titles  are  revived
to  those  who  hold  them  contrary  to  law.  It  would  be  no  injury
to  vote  unanimously  the  suppression  of  all  the  cathedral  estabHsh-
ments  in  England  from  the  Church  of  England,  and  to  buy  them
up,  or  vote  them  for  the  Church  of  Rome.  All  this  is  no  violation
of  an  oath,  under  an  interpretation  or  dispensation.  We  know
however  the  value  of  episcopal  ordination,  and  our  country  we
sincerely  believe  will  draw  to  it  more  and  more.  What  the  Ro-
man Catholics  think  of  the  king's  supremacy  is  evident  from
Bossuet's  assertion  that  it  is  the  only  thing  among  the  Protestants
in  England  that  has  not  changed,  and  no  sophistry  will  make  it
mutable,  notwithstanding  the  authorised  system  of  another  su-
preme head,  "  to  pluck  up,  destroy,  dissipate,  ruinate,  plant,  and
build."


207

and  conscientious  protestant  ought  to  take.
There  are  many  that  object  to  this  oath,  who
probably  never  read  it,  much  less  considered
why  and  for  what  important  objects  it  was
required.  There  are  those  who  object  to  the
prerogative,  which  the  laws  have  vested  in  the
crown,  and  who  maintain  that  the  separation  of
Church  and  state  ought  to  be  personal  and  per-
petual. We  think  there  are  many  persons  who
do  not  understand  the  alliance  which  the  oath
affirms,  and  consequently  misrepresent  the  case
altogether.  In  the  abstract  we  admit  as  willingly
as  those  persons  do  a  distinction  between  the
Church  and  the  state.  They  are  not  necessarily
the  same,  but  that  is  not  a  reason  why  they  should
always  be  separate,  and  in  the  present  state  of
Christendom,  and  the  relations  of  this  country,
there  are  the  highest  reasons  why  they  should
be  legally  and  firmly  miited.  The  direction  of
every  community  is  by  power,  and  if  that  power
be  left  undefined  by  law,  it  will  still  exist,  and
sooner  or  later  become  absolute.  The  exercise
of  the  christian  religion  is  a  power,  and  the  direc-
tion of  the  exercise  of  the  christian  religion  is
a  power  and  authority,  and  if  left  undefined,
it  will  still  rest  somewhere^  and  though  for  a
short  time  the  secret  may  not  be  discovered,  the
tyranny  of  an  undefined  power,  will  soon  declare
itself.  Those  who  direct  the  state,  must  have  a
perception  of  the  powers  within  the  state.    They


208


will  soon  perceive  the  powers  ecclesiastical,  and
the  powers  ecclesiastical,  whatever  they  may  pre-
tend, will  soon  see  the  value  of  the  civil  power
and  the  royal  power,  and  to  obtain  their  support
will  enter  into  league  and  covenant  with  them.
It  is  therefore  of  the  greatest  consequence  that
that  alliance  or  league  should  not  be  secret  but
known  ;  not  only  personal,  but  legal ;  not  vague
and  undefined,  but  limited  and  invariable ;  and
that  on  oath ;  not  between  fellow-citizens  and
foreign  potentates,  but  between  the  king  and  his
people.  The  investment  of  the  supreme  power
ecclesiastical,  as  well  as  civil,  in  the  crown,  so
long  as  the  crown  shall  remain  protestant,  has,
"  under  God,"  preserved  the  gospel  light,  the
civil  and  religious  principles  of  this  country,
the  exclusion  of  foreign  intrigue  and  usurpation  ;
and  the  true  spirit  of  independence  has  turned
upon  it.  It  is  in  vain  to  argue  with  those  persons
who  object  to  oaths,  because  they  do  not  wish  to
be  tied  to  any  principles,  or  with  those  who  wish  to
choose  what  oaths  shall  be  administered  to  them  by
the  state.  But  there  are  virtuous  and  conscientious
individuals,  who  scruple  to  sanction  this  oath,
though  they  admit  that  the  protection  which  it
designs  to  secure  is  necessary.  To  such  persons
we  sincerely  say  we  mean  as  they  do,  by  a  Church,
a  society  united  in  a  public  form  of  government,
and  distinguished  from  all  other  societies  by  the
exercise  of  the  christian  religion,  the  profession


209

of  the  gospel,  the  administration  of  the  word  and
sacraments  and  union  and  communion  under  law-
ful pastors;  we  mean  as  explicitly  as  they  do,  that
no  king  can  ordain  those  pastors,  administer
those  sacraments,  alter  that  word,  or  destroy  that
union.  If  the  Church  existed  under  a  Pagan
government,  we  will  allow  that  no  union  could
take  place,  and  moreover,  that  to  avoid  an  alli-
ance with  idolatry,  the  Church  and  its  professors
must  be  prepared  to  suffer  persecution  unto  death.
The  Roman  Emperors  persecuted  the  christians
not  because  they  maintained  their  own  religion,
but  because  they  would  not  admit  the  principle  of
Roman  policy,  the  freedom  and  intercommunity
of  all  religions  which  the  philosophers  of  that  day
(professing  themselves  wise  and  becoming  fools)
considered  necessary  to  the  public  utility.  The
government  under  which  christians  then  lived,
was  not  christian,  and  consequently  they  could
not  join  with  the  state,  and  persecution  and  not
toleration,  under  the  principles  of  comprehension
and  intercommunity,  was  the  consequence.  But
when  the  state  became  christian,  the  case  changed
naturally,  and  of  itself.  A  christian  nation  is
distinguished  by  the  exercise  and  profession  of
the  christian  religion.  Why,  then,  should  not
the  princes,  nobles,  clergy,  and  people,  where  all
are  christians,  exercise  the  christian  religion  as  a
nation  without  violating  scripture,  or  conscience,
or  the  laws  of  Jesus  Christ  ?     If  the  members  of

p


210

the  state  be  christians,  and  if  the  christian  reli-
gion be  divine  and  benevolent,  and  if  the  Church
be  in  no  way  by  foreign  jurisdiction  and  allegi-
ance alienated  from  the  state,  one  would  suppose
that  in  proportion  as  the  union  became  legal  and
cordial,  the  influence  of  the  christian  religion
and  the  happiness  of  the  people  would  be  in-
creased. So  far  from  the  excellence  and  purity
and  moral  efficacy  of  the  christian  religion  being
an  argument  against  the  alliance  it  is  the  strong-
est argument  for  it,  if  not  in  the  eyes  of  particular
individuals  with  particular  feelings,  certainly  in
the  judgment  of  wise  and  christian  legislators.  If
conscience  be  as  clearly  a  part  of  human  nature
as  the  appetites,  and  if  the  state  (as  all  expe-
rience shews)  must  have  the  support  of  religious
sanctions  on  the  conscience,  the  more  harmoni-
ously religion  is  combined  with  the  state,  without
imparing  its  truth,  the  happier  that  state  must
be.  The  State  and  the  Church,  considered  in
the  abstract,  are  not  the  same  thing.  There  are
differences  in  their  nature  and  administration,  (as
there  are  between  mind  and  matter,  though
these  differences  do  not  prevent  their  union)  and
the  real  difference  between  civil  and  spiritual
functions  must  be  preserved.  Orders  therefore
are  preserved  in  the  Church,  and  when  the
Church  is  allied  to  the  state,  those  orders  for  the
preservation  of  this  distinction,  must  be  represen-
ted in  the  state.     The   supremacy  of  kings  in


^211

their  dominions  is  reasonable  in  itself.  It  is  ne-
cessary that  no  foreign  power,  prelate  or  poten-
tate, may  have  or  presume  to  have  any  authority
over  them  or  their  subjects.  It  is  necessary  also
that  no  domestic  faction  may  form  "  an  imperium
in  imperio"  and  disturb  the  peace  of  society.
Upon  every  principle  of  reason,  civil  liberty,  and
christian  charity,  all  persecution  for  religious
opinions  is  hateful  and  unjustifiable ;  but  the
christian  religion  ought  not  to  be  exercised  in  such
a  manner  as  to  disturb  civil  society  or  endanger
the  christian  religion  itself, which  is  a  part  and  par-
cel of  the  law  of  the  land,  and  necessary  to  secure
the  enjoyments  and  happiness  of  a  christian  peo-
ple. However  men  may  talk  against  the  protec-
tion of  the  christian  religion,  by  the  law  of  the
land  or  the  supremacy  of  the  king  in  things  spi-
ritual as  well  as  temporal,  they  find  practically
that  they  cannot  live  as  christians  in  the  enjoy-
ment of  their  rights  and  conscience  without  an
appeal  to  these  shocking  principles.  The  most
pure  congregation  that  ever  derived  their  religion
(as  they  say)  not  from  men  or  angels,  but  from  the
throne  of  God,  must  if  they  have  any  rules,  any
common  consent,  any  deed  of  trust,  and  especially
any  endowments^  acknowledge  the  supremacy  of
the  king.  When  any  disputes  arise  respecting
these  endowments  and  the  due  admimsirati07i
of  the  christian  religion  in  chapels  as  well
as  churches,  the  most  religious  dissenters  refer

p2


212

matters  of  pure  relig-ioii,  their  solemn  deeds,
abstract  faith,  versions  of  the  scriptures,  and  cate-
chisms, to  ungodly  counsellors,  judges,  and  our
most  religious  king  as  supreme.  However  against
conscience  the  examination  may  be,  pastors,  dea-
cons, and  flocks  must  submit,  and  in  their  religious
disputes  and  controversies,  (especially  on  the  sub-
ject of  endowments)  do  imllingly  acknowledge
the  king's  supremacy.  They  cannot  refer  to  the
court  of  heaven,  they  will  not  refer  to  the  court
of  Rome,  they  must  do  as  the  naughty  Church
of  England  does,  refer  to  the  law  and  to  the
king.  So  that  however  against  conscience  it
may  be,  whether  the  verdict  be  given  for  the
presbyterian  or  the  independent,  it  is  after  all
the  chHstian  religion  according  to  law.  The
king  does  exercise  a  supreme  authority  accord-
ing to  the  laws  of  the  congregation,  whatever
they  may  be,  provided  they  be  not  blasphemous
or  do  not  contravene  the  law  of  the  land,  and  just
so  the  king  exercises  his  authority  over  the  exter-
nal affairs  of  the  Church,  according  to  the  laws
of  that  Church,  which  cannot  contravene  the  laws
of  the  land,  because  they  are  happily  a  part  and
parcel  of  them,  and  perfectly  known  and  under-
stood.*    There  never  was  a  religion  connected

*  The  decree  of  deprivation  and  the  conge  d'elire  issued  by  Sir
Launcelot  Shadwell,  or  Lord  Brougham,  eminent  lawyers  holding
commissions  or  patents  under  the  crown,  are  painful  exercises  of
the  supremacy  to  the  Babylon  that  is  fallen,  but  to  the  Zion  deliv-


213

with  a  community  of  mortals,  that  could  exist
without  some  form,  authorities,  means  of  admin-
istration, financial,  economical,  and  political.
Men  may  have  entertained  abstract  notions  in
their  brains,  and  so  long  as  they  are  confined  to
these  regions,  no  law,  or  king,  can  exercise  any
jurisdiction,  and  so  far  they  are  not  of  this  world.
But  no  sooner  do  these  pious  imaginations  find
citizens  to  advocate  and  espouse  them,  make
laws  and  regulations  for  their  agreement,  lay  a
foundation  stone  with  an  oration,  than  they  be-
come, in  case  those  who  are  not  of  this  world
should  dispute,  subject  to  the  equitable  and
supreme  jurisdiction  of  the  laws  and  the  king.
If  the  civil  power  under  some  malignant  influ-
ence, should  condemn  not  only  bishops,  but  min-
ters  and  members  of  other  congregations,   who

ered  are  a  conscientious  delight,  a  captivity  turned,  a  very  dream
of  joy.  This  subject  might  be  traced  out  still  further  in  its  details,
but  we  forbear

"  motos  proestat  componere  fluctus."

we  will  observe  with  respect  to  the  nomination  of  the  bishops
being  vested  in  the  crown,  that  it  must  rest  somewhere  and  we
know  not  where  it  could  rest  with  more  advantage  to  the  Church
or  the  Nation.  An  eminent  foreign  writer  has  observed  with  great
justice  that  this  power  "  corrected  many  corruptions  and  abuses
that  prevailed  every  where  when  every  Church  chose  its  bishop.
The  right  of  christian  communities  to  choose  their  leaders  cannot
be  exercised  by  such  large  bodies  without  confusion  and  many
inconveniencies.  The  subject  by  intrusting  the  sovereign  with
the  government  of  the  state  invests  him  ipso  facto  with  an  autho-
rity of  preserving  peace  and  giving  protection  over  the  Church
which  is  a  part  of  the  state  and  its  noblest  part."


214

would  not  renounce  their  faith,  to  be  burnt,  and
the  civil  power  so  instigated  should  carry  such
an  iniquity  into  execution,  the  prelate,  and  the
minister  and  the  lay-brothers  must  be  turned  into
ashes  together.  All,  however,  have  been  oppo-
sed to  this  sort  of  supremacy,  and  partly  to  keep
out  persecution  and  foreign  tyranny,  and  partly
to  secure  the  blessings  of  a  national  and  social
religion,  and  partly  to  secure  to  all  societies  of
christians  a  toleration  with  the  legal  enjoy-
ment of  their  laws  and  endowments,  the  nation
has  legalized  the  ancient  national  church  with
its  laws,  institutions  and  endowments.  No  king,
no  faction,  no  foreign  power  hath  or  ought  to
have  any  right  to  interfere  with  the  dissenter  in
his  legal  privileges,  and  no  king,  faction,  or  fo-
reign power,  ought  to  interfere  with  the  Church
with  her  legal  privileges,  for  the  king  and  the  law
are  supreme  to  protect  us  both.

Q.  But  if  the  establishment  of  religion  by  law
is  reasonable,  is  it  not  unscriptural  ?

A.  In  matters  of  this  sort  we  think  that  reason
and  scripture  are  not  often  opposed.  They
are  not  opposed  in  this  case  if  the  religion
established  by  law  recognizes  the  scripture.  If
the  religion  established  by  law  rejects  the
scripture,  then  it  is  not  the  Christian  religion
which  is  established,  and  the  Christian  dissenter
cannot  urge  his  conscientious  objections.  But
scripture  is  scripture,  and  if  the  scripture  forbid
the   establishment   of  the   christian    religion  by


215

law,  it  must  say  so  in  plain  and  express  terms.
If  any  persons  in  this  country  think  this  point
clearly  proved  (as  we  certainly  do  not)  out  of
the  scripture,  then  they  have  the  full  liberty  to
exercise  their  own  religion  in  their  own  way,
make  their  own  endowments,  establish  their  own
schools  and  colleges,  build  their  own  churches,
sit  under  their  own  vine  and  their  own  fig  tree,
none  making  them  afraid ;  but  all  these  enjoy-
ments are  still  under  the  supremacy  of  the  king
and  according  to  law.  It  seems  hard,  however,
that  while  they  have  the  exclusive  enjoyment  of
their  privileges,  the  church,  because  she  simply
acknowledges  a  legal  fact,  the  supremacy  of  the
king,  should  not  have  the  exclusive  enjoyment
of  her  vineyard.  The  church  does  not  interfere
with  dissenters  in  the  enjoyment  of  their  rights
and  endowments,  does  not  covet  a  share  in  their
colleges,  schools  of  learning  or  chapel  patronage,
provided  they  do  not  interfere  with  the  rights
and  property  of  the  Church,  and  then  the  Church
appeals  against  the  dissenter  as  the  dissenter
does  against  his  brother  dissenter  to  the  law  and
to  the  king.  Why  are  the  dissenters  (those  who
use  such  language,)  if  they  are  really  convinced
that  their  principles  are  more  pure,  less  mundane,
more  elevated  than  ours — that  purity,  holiness,
and  learning,  are  on  their  side,  and  vanity,
ambition,  and  ignorance  on  ours,  not  contented
with   the   calm   and   dignified    consciousness   of


216

their  own  superiority  ?   But  further,  witli  regard
to  the  authority  of  scripture,  we  think  as  revela-
tion does  not  assert  that  christian  kings  should
not  have  a  supremacy  in  ecclesiastical  causes,  as
well  as  civil,    and  as  "  the  blessed  Apostle,    St.
Peter  "  does  assert  generally  without  exceptions,
the  authority  of  kings  over  their  people,  that
this  supremacy  may  be  fairly  inferred.    If  scrip-
ture is  silent,  then  reason  and   philosophy  must
be  our  guides.     The  will  of  God  may  be  learnt
in  many  things,  and  those  very  important  things,
even  where  the  scripture  is  silent.     The  scrip-
ture supposes  that  reason  and  natural    religion
will  teach  us   many   important   lessons  without
the  aid  of  revelation,  or  at  least  in  subserviency
to  it.  If  God  has  established  Christianity,  and  de-
clares that  it  is  for  all  nations^  is  it  unreasonable
or  unscriptural  for  all  nations,  and  every  nation^
(as  well  as  all  individuals)  to  accept  and  recog-
nize it  ?   If  christian  states,  consulting  the  unity
and  wellbeing  of  their  members,  knowing  that
morality  cannot  be  secured  by  laws,  or  enforced
by  police,  choose  the   christian  religion  as  the
most  intelligible  and  the  best,  and  that  religion
secures  the  bonds   and  alliances,  which  preserve
and  bless  society,  then  we  contend  that  God  by
these  means  declares,  in  the  course  of  his  provi-
dence, that  the  maintenance  of  the  christian  reli-
gion is  according  to  his  will,  and  that  a  moral
obligation    ensues  to    kings   and  legislators,  to


2\7


defend  and  preserve  it.  All  christians  profess
to  believe  that  the  Church  is  providentially
not  miraculously  preserved  in  the  world,  and
can  we  suppose  that  the  Church  can  be  better
preserved  in  its  external  state,  than  by  those
christian  princes  and  christian  laws,  by  which
God  preserves  society  itself?  When  the  pres-
byterians  were  in  power,  they  called  upon
the  parliament  to  perform  its  religious  duties.
Scripture  then  spoke  as  expressly  for  religion
established  by  law,  as  it  does  now  against
it,  and  the  parliament  religiously  legalized  the
directory.  When  the  independents  acquired
a  share  in  the  political  power  of  the  state,
they  also  quoted  scripture  to  the  same  effect,
acknowledged  the  protector  as  supreme,  refer-
red to  king  David  and  king  Solomon,  and
called  upon  their  godly  governors  to  defend
and  support  their  godly  discipline,  with  that
power  with  which  the  Almighty  had  invested
them.*    Of  the  bulls,  legates,  and  commissioners

♦  What  would  the  dissenters  think  of  a  dean  of  Christ's  Church
who  should  in  the  present  day  quote  Ovid  and  Horace  and  talk
Latin  in  the  following  style  ?  "  Et  sane  ad  veternum  nobis  excu-
tiendum,  nunquam  post  natum  in  orbe  christianum  nomen,  donis,
quibus  veritatis  divinse  cultores  liberaliter  instruxit  pater  Clemen-
tissimus,  magis  opus  est.  Quam  enim,  Deus  bone !  detestanda
turma,  quam  foeda  hoereticorum,  fanaticorum,  et  enthusiastarum
coUuvies  sponsara  Christi  sub  ipsis  sponsi  sanctissimis  oculis  poene
rapit,  stupiatque  ?  In  earn  scilicet  puram,  castam,  undique  turba


218

of  the  pope,  and  of  their  religious  use  of  the  civil
power,  it  is  unnecessary  to  speak,  though  we  are
now  told  that  his  kingdom  is  not  of  this  world.
It  is  not,  however,  supremacy  of  this  sort  of
which  we  speak,  we  do  not  commend  a  supre-
macy of  caprice,  but  of  law,  defined  within  cer-
tain known  bounds  and  limitations.  However,
therefore,  men  may  pretend  that  Churches  must
be  governed  by  spiritual  means,  that  religious
decisions  must  be  made  as  those  at  the  council
of  Jerusalem  were  made  ( that  is  by  persons  di-
vinely inspired)  that  a  christian  man's  liberty
is  lost,  if  laws  are  passed  for  the  government  of
the  Church ;  to  all  these  and  the  like  assertions
(which  imply  no  less  than  an  apostolical  and
plenary  power)  we  reply  that  the  advocates  of
them  do  not  themselves  trust  to  them ;  that
human  laws,  in  all  external  regulations,  whether
ecclesiastical  or  civil,  will  be  necessary,  so  long
as  men  are  liable  to  passions  and  interest,  unless
God  shall  make  a  particular  revelation  to  every

ruunt  luxuriosa  proci.  Quin  igitur.

Ut  jugulent  homines,  surgunt  de  nocte  latrones  :
Ut  teipsum  serves,  non  expergisceris  ?

Et  quod  ad  cumulum  addit,  satis  nequiter  proventum  est  ?  quo
enim  quisque  ab  orani  solida  doctiina  imparatior  est,  eo  majori
cum  supercilio,  et  confidentius  de  gravissimis  quaestionibus  judi-
cium sibi  arrogat.  Proveniunt  oratores  novi,  stulti,  adolescentuli,
qui  nee  eruditi  sunt,  nee  se  non  esse  erudites  sentiunt."

Dr.  Owen^s  oration  when  Cromwellian   Vice  Chancellor
of  Oxford,  and  Dean  of  Christ's  Church.


219

congregation,  and  every  individual,  on  every
occasion,  determine  who  is  right  and  who  is
WTong,  and  add  to  that  revelation  a  power  to
enforce  it.  Moreover,  we  affirm  that  since  God
has  made  known  to  us  that  all  men  must  live  in
families  and  nations,  and  in  their  social  relations
and  christian  communion,  must  live  decent-
ly according  to  laMS,  we  are  in  conscience
bound  to  obey  human  laws,  which  do  not  oppose
the  law  of  God,  revealed  to  us  in  scripture.  If
we  live  under  a  tyranny,  we  must  take  the  conse-
quence and  suffer  persecution,  till  that  tyranny
be  removed,  but  if  we  enjoy  a  rational  liberty,  we
must  endeavour  to  preserve  it.  By  maintain-
ing in  England  the  principle  of  law  in  Church
and  state  ;  by  sanctioning  the  constitution  of  the
christian  religion,  in  its  discipline  and  doctrines  ;
doctrines  which  reveal  the  great  principles  of
moral  truth,  and  discipline  consecrated  to  its
administration,  the  best  interests  of  all  classes
have  been  consulted,  the  doctrines  of  Christianity
have  been  rescued  from  superstition,  and  disci-
pline freed  from  enthusiasm  and  tyranny,  has
been  executed  with  moderation  and  charity.
For  these  reasons,  as  well  as  in  opposition  to
foreign  usurpation  and  domestic  faction,  our
motto  is  religion  and  law.

Q.  If  your  opinions  are  so  decided  in  favor  of
one  system,  do  you  not  condemn  all  who  differ
from  it  ?


220

A.  In  a  certain  sense  all  opposing  sentiments,
especially  on  subjects  of  importance,  must  con-
demn each  other,  but  this  is  no  reason  why  the
investigation  of  truth  should  not  lead  to  conclu-
sions, or  why  an  honest  man  should  not  be  guided
by  his  convictions.  As  for  judging  the  motives
or  eternal  salvation  of  other  men,  that  is  not  the
province  and  ought  not  to  be  the  inclination  of
any  candid  inquirer.  Differences  of  opinion
respecting  systems  of  faith  do  sometimes  inter-
fere with  the  cordiality  of  private  intercourse,
but  this  is  a  frailty  and  defect  which  never  tends
to  promote  the  cause  of  truth.  The  assertion
cannot  be  too  often  reiterated,  that  social  and
christian  virtues  are  not  confined  to  sect,  or  par-
ty. We  allow  to  the  Roman  Catholic  all  the
advantage  he  can  desire  from  the  bigoted  quib-
ble that  there  is  salvation  out  of  our  Church,
and  not  out  of  his.  We  allow  to  the  dissenters,
that  while  we  are  persuaded  that  our  doctrine
and  discipline  are  scriptural,  apostolical,  highly
expedient,  and  need  not  seriously  offend  the  con-
sciences of  any,  we  have  also  another  persuasion,
that  the  kingdom  of  heaven  is  open  to  all  be-
lievers ;  that  no  church  can  alter  the  terms  of
repentance  and  faith,  and  that  every  man  will  be
judged  by  his  conscientious  and  predominant  love
of  truth.  Many  things  that  are  laudable,  are  not
absolutely  necessary,  and  great  defects  and  even
unsightly  deformities  in  religion,  may  not  destroy


221

the  Christianity  of  a  church,  or  an  individual.
Still  human  nature  is  what  it  always  has  been,
and  these  charitable  convictions  are  not  to  shut
our  eyes  to  the  merits  and  demerits  of  various
schemes,  which  design  or  weakness  may  from
time  to  time  suggest.  One  of  these  schemes
is  the  comprehension  and  intercommunity  of
all  religious  persuasions  in  one  fixed  society.
Experience  has  shewn,  that  this  imagination  is
impracticable,  and  that  many  who  praise  it,  have
no  intention  to  apply  it  to  themselves.  Intercom-
munity, when  not  only  opinions,  but  sentiments
and  the  strongest  feelings  and  habits  are  opposed,
can  only  end  (such  is  human  nature)  in  mutual
hostility  and  triumphant  persecution.  Respect
for  others,  and  respect  for  ourselves,  without  pre-
tending on  our  part  or  expecting  of  others,  a
compromise  of  genuine  sentiments,  is  the  practi-
cal point  at  which  all  conscientious  men  must
aim,  and  at  which  they  must  rest.  Within  this
limit,  differences  may  be  reconciled,  and  causes
of  division  removed ;  but  if  mistaken  candour
attempt  to  step  beyond  this  boundary,  mutual
respect,  justice,  and  charity,  by  which  alone  the
true  spirit  and  wholesome  practice  of  entire  tole-
ration can  be  preserved,  will  infallibly  be  en-
dangered.


CHAPTER  IV.


"  By  thee
Founded  in  reason,  loyal,  just,  and  pure,
Relations  dear,  and  all  the  charities
Of  father,  son,  and  brother,  first  were  known.
Far  be  it,  that  I  should  write  thee  sin  or  blame,
Or  think  thee  unbefitting  hoUest  place."


Q.  What  is  the  doctrine  of  the  Church  of
Rome  respecting  marriage  ?

A.  The  Tridentine  fathers  have  determined
the  points  relating  to  marriage  with  great  pre-
cision. With  respect  to  the  contract  itself  they
declare,  that  it  is  the  mamage  union,  within
lawful  degrees,  of  man  and  woman,  which  binds
them  to  live  in  constant  unity  and  love.  To  this
contract  are  required,  the  inward  consent  of  both
parties,  outward  agreement  expressed,  the  obli-
gation and  bond  which  is  effected  by  that  agree-
ment, and  the  consummation  of  wedlock.  They
enact,  that  marriage  is  of  two  kinds,  natural  and
sacramental ;  that  natural  marriage  is  not  an  iu-
vention  of  men,  but  coeval  with  our  nature,  and


223

instituted  of  God  immediately  after  the  creation
of  Eve,  when  he  said,  "  Be  fruitful  and  multiply,
and  replenish  the  earth,"  and  again,  "  Therefore
shall  a  man  leave  his  father  and  his  mother,  and
shall  cleave  unto  his  wife,  and  they  shall  be  one
flesh."  They  further  teach,  that  this  divine  insti-
tution was  recognized  by  Christ,  and  declared  by
him  to  be  indissoluble,  though  the  indissoluble
nature  of  marriage  is  to  be  chiefly  referred  to  its
sacramental  character,  in  which  view  marriage
is  of  greater  excellence,  and  to  be  referred  to
nobler  ends.  For  as  natural  marriage  favors  the
propagation  of  the  human  race,  and  educates
children  as  servants  of  their  Creator,  so  sacra-
mental marriage  raises  up  true  worshippers  of
our  Lord  and  Saviour  Jesus  Christ,  and  extends
the  true  religion.  The  religious  sentiment  of
this  statement  we  respect,  whilst  we  object  to  its
main  position.

Q.  What  are  declared  to  be  the  matter,  form,
institution  and  effects  of  sacramental  marriage  ?

A.  The  matter  assigned  by  the  Roman  doctors,
is  the  inward  assent  of  both  parties,  and  the  form
consists  in  the  words  or  signs  by  which  it  is  ex-
pressed. The  institution,  as  a  sacrament,  is  as-
serted to  be  in  the  words  of  St.  Paul  (Ep.  v.  23.)
where  according  to  the  Latin  version,  he  says,
"  This  is  a  great  sacrament."  Marriage,  there-
fore, though  as  a  mutual  contract  it  rests  upon
the  law  of  nature,  yet,  as  it  is  a  great  sacrament.


224

contains  an  inherent  divine  virtue,  which  sancti-
fies the  lawful  union  of  man  and  woman  ;  gives
grace  to  the  married  pair,  to  perform  the  duties
and  support  the  trials  of  this  estate  in  a  christian
manner,  and  renders  the  union  indissoluble.  All
who  are  not  married  by  their  own  pastor,  are
declared  to  live  in  disobedience  to  the  Church,
and  in  a  continual  state  of  sin.

Q.  Does  the  scripture  quoted,  or  do  these  fic-
tions of  the  Romish  doctors  prove  marriage  to
be  a  sacrament  ?

A.  The  translation  of  the  vulgate  is  "  This  is
a  great  sacrament,"  but  if  we  turn  to  the  original
we  find  the  text  to  be  as  we  translate  it,  "  This
is  a  great  mystery."  A  sacrament  is  a  mystery,
but  in  this  case,  as  in  numberless  others,  terms
are  not  convertible.  The  interpretation,  there-
fore, is  not  legitimate,  and  moreover,  the  con-
text shews  it  to  be  unfounded.  The  apostle  is
merely  employing  a  mystical  argument  or  illus-
tration, to  confirm  the  duties  of  husbands  and
wives,  and  to  explain  the  union  and  communion
of  Christ  and  the  Church.  When  speaking  of
the  christian  Church,  the  apostle  shews  that  it  is
one  body,  the  mosaic  law  being  abolished,  and
Jews  and  Christians  being  one  in  Christ.  This
Church  is  Christ's  spouse,  and  just  as  Christ
loves  the  Church,  and  the  Church  is  obedient
to  Christ,  so  the  husband  is  to  love  the  wife,  and
the  wife  to  reverence  the  husband.     Just  as  a


225

man,  who  should  have  more  than  one  wife,  would
not  live  in  lawful  marriage,  so  there  would  be  an
unchaste  impropriety  in  calling  the  Church  the
spouse  of  Christ,  if  all  the  members  of  it,  Jews
and  Gentiles,  did  not  constitute  one  body.  Here
is  a  double  argument  for  unity  and  love,  both  in
the  Church,  and  between  husband  and  wives,  but
both  the  text  and  context  shew  that  there  can  be
no  institution  of  a  sacrament.  Besides  it  is  a
curious  thing  to  make  thoughts  the  matter,  and
words  the  form  of  a  sacrament ;  for  according  to
such  a  definition,  every  contract  or  promise  might
be  called  a  sacrament.  Such  a  definition  also  is
absurd,  and  calculated  to  encourage  scruple  and
fraud.  Parties  often  marry  against  their  inward
intention  and  desire,  and  according  to  this  sacra-
mental doctrine,  if  the  inward  consent  of  either
party  fail,  the  marriage  may  be  null  and  void,
and  all  persons  who  are  in  that  situation,  may
ever  live  in  uncertainty  about  the  lawfulness  of
their  marriage.  Lewd  and  vicious  men  too,  may
entangle  others,  and  yet,  by  secret  reservation
of  giving  their  consent,  may  keep  themselves  free,
and  where  the  fallacious  doctrines  of  intention
and  reservation  prevail,  as  it  is  to  be  feared  they
often  do,  a  door  is  open  to  every  species  of  perfidy
and  treachery.

Q.  Does  not  Jesus  Christ  declare  marriage  to  be
indissoluble,  and  is  it  not  therefore,  a  sacrament  ?

A.  Jesus  Christ  instructs  us  to  consider  mar-
Q


226

riage  both  as  a  natural  and  divine  institution ;  that
the  human  race  began  by  a  pair,  and  that  they
were  made  by  God's  ordinance  man  and  wife ;
that  divorce  was  sinful,  and  contrary  to  the  will
of  God,  who  had  ordained  this  union  of  one  man
and  woman  in  constant  wedlock.  "What  God  hath
joined  together  let  no  man  put  asunder."  At
the  same  time,  however,  that  our  Lord  condemn-
ed polygamy  and  extrajudicial  divorce,  he  ex-
pressly declared,  that  fornication  (a  general  term
for  unchastity)  did  dissolve  the  marriage  con-
tract, and  that  a  man  was  justified  in  this  case,
(as  indeed  reason  and  experience  testify)  in  put-
ting away  his  wife.  The  exception,  therefore,
which  Christ  expressly  makes  to  the  indissolubi-
lity of  marriage,  is  a  proof  that  it  is  not  a  sacra-
ment however  convenient  it  may  be  to  popish
policy  to  make  it  such.

Q.  Does  the  Roman  Catholic  Church  forbid
marriage,  and  recommend  the  disuse  of  it,  decla-
ring celibacy  and  virginity  to  be  higher  states  of
perfection  than  the  holy  estate  of  matrimony  ?

A.  The  Romanists  teach,  that  though  at  the
beginning  God  commanded  marriage,  yet  now,
that  the  world  is  peopled,  the  command  is  not
binding  on  all.  On  the  contrary,  they  say,  that
both  Christ  and  St.  Paul  recommended  celibacy
and  virginity  as  a  higher  state  of  perfection.
Celibacy  is  recommended  to  all,  as  a  high  attain-
ment, but  to  the  priests  it  is  absolutely  enjoined.


227

Marriage  in  their  case  is  the  greatest  sin.  Virgins
too  are  taught  to  believe  that  they  live  in  a  more
holy  state,  and  that,  while  married  women  cannot
be  saved  without  a  purification  in  purgatory,  a
virgin  and  a  nun  will,  after  death,  pass  immedi-
ately into  paradise.

Q.  Are  these  interdictions  and  injunctions  con-
trary to  scriptvu'e  ?

A.  Yes,  there  is  no  command  in  scripture  to
forbid  the  marriage  of  any  whether  clergy  or
laity,  men  or  women.  In  the  New  Testament
marriage  is  declared  to  be  honorable  in  all,  and
the  younger  women  are  advised  to  marry ;  and
though  under  certain  circumstances,  (as  those
under  which  the  Christians  were  placed  to  whom
St.  Paul  wrote)  marriage  may  be  imprudence,
yet  the  Apostle  no  where  forbids  marriage.  On
the  contrary  he  teaches  us  to  regard  such  prohi-
bitions and  the  practices  that  have  accompanied
them,  as  the  decided  marks  and  proofs  of  the
heretical  apostacy  of  the  visible  Church.

Q.  Where  does  St.  Paul  teach  us  to  consider
these  practices  in  that  light  *?

A.  Particularly  in  the  I  Tim.  iv.  1,  2.  "Now
the  Spirit  speaketh  expressly,  that  in  the  latter
times  some  shall  depart  from  the  faith,  giving
heed  to  seducing  spirits  and  doctrines  of  devils,
speaking  lies  in  hypocrisy,  having  their  con-
science seared  with  a  hot  iron,  forbidding  to
marry  and  commanding  to  abstain  from  meats."

Q  2


2^8

Here  the  Apostle  tells  us  that  the  spirit  speaks
not  obscurely  but  expressly,  the  truth  word  for
word.  The  prophesy  is  remarkable,  and  so  is
the  fulfilment.  The  apostacy  here  spoken  of
is  under  the  visible  Church,  and  it  consisted  in
giving  heed  to  eroneous  doctrines  particularly  the
doctrines  of  demons  or  soul- worship,  which  was  the
popular  religion  of  the  gentiles,  and  which  St. Paul
frequently  condemns.  Two  kinds  of  demons  were
worshipped  by  the  gentiles,  those  who  never  dwelt
in  bodies  answering  to  angels,  and  those  had  lived
on  earth  or  canonized  mortals.  These  spirits  were
supposed  to  be  the  intercessors  and  agents  be-
tween gods  and  men,  and  to  carry,  from  earth  to
heaven,  and  from  heaven  to  earth,  prayers,  sup-
plications, rewaros,  and  gifts.  They  were  wor-
shipped in  images,  relicks,  and  shrines,  for  the
temples  of  the  heathen  were  the  sepulchers  of
dead  men,  in  which  they  were  worshipped  as
present.  This  idolatrous  theology  of  demons  or
soul-worship  has  been  for  many  centuries  prac-
tised in  the  Roman  Church  in  the  worshipping
of  saints,  angels,  and  the  Virgin  Mary ;  in
acknowledging  them  as  mediators  and  interces-
sors, in  addressing  prayers  to  them  and  bowing
down  to  their  images ;  and  in  worshipping  other
objects  such  as  the  host,  crosses,  relicks,  and
shrines.  This  species  of  idolatry  is  not  only  in-
consistent with  the  simplicity  and  purity  of  the
christian  religion,  and  opens  the  door  to  gross


229

superstition  but,  above  all  other  errors  and  acci-
dental heresies,  determines  the  manifest  charac-
teristics of  the  <^reat  apostacy  which  the  spirit
by  St.  Paul  foretold.  This  is  still  more  evident
if  we  consider  the  manner  and  persons  by  whom
it  has  been  introduced  and  supported,  viz.  by
those  who  forbad  marriage  and  commanded  to
abstain  from  meats.  It  was  monkery  with  its
vows,  and  trade  in  images,  relicks  and  lying  mi-
racles that  introduced  and  propagated  the  gentile
idolatry  under  christian  forms  and  sanctions.  And
though  both  charity  and  the  language  of  St.  Paul
induce  us  to  consider  the  apostacy  heretical  and
not  total,  yet  the  forbidding  to  marry,  and  the
interdicting  the  use  of  meats  and  regular  food,  as
maintained  by  the  Church  of  Rome  in  all  the
monastic  professions,  (of  which  these  are  the
essential  characteristics,)  as  well  as  with  respect
to  all  the  regular  and  secular  clergy,  nuns  and
consecrated  virgins,  are  plain  and  decided
marks  of  the  departure  of  that  Church  from  the
simplicity  and  purity  of  the  christian  faith  and
worship.

Q.  Has  not  experience  proved  that  the  ex-
treme doctrines  of  the  Church  of  Rome,  are
detrimental  to  morals  and  public  virtue  ?

A.  Common  sense  would  iead  us  to  expect
mischievous  results.  The  sacramental  doctrine,
the  dependance  of  marriage  on  intention  and  its
indissolubility,  connected  with  the  forced  celibacy

Q  3


230

of  the  clergy  and  monastic  orders,  have  propaga-
ted adultery  in  Roman  Catholic  countries.  The
indissolubility  of  marriage  is  so  evidently  a
policy  in  favor  of  those  who  have  no  wives,  and
who  have  every  advantage  for  making  use  of
those  of  other  men,  that  we  cannot  be  surprised
to  find,  that  adultery  is  prevalent  in  Roman
Catholic  countries,  and  especially  in  the  holy
city  itself.  Such  laws  are  so  evidently  opposed
to  nature  and  reason,  that  it  is  no  wonder  they
should  be  worse  than  vain.  The  appearance  of
hardship  provokes  resistance,  and  sin  taking
occasion  by  the  commandment  becomes  exceed-
ing sinful.  The  statutes  and  canons  in  force
prior  to  the  reformation,  and  the  lawful  marriage
of  the  clergy,  clearly  shew  that  concubinage
was  connived  at.  It  was  provided  that  priests
should  not  keep  their  concubines  puhllcly  in  their
houses,  nor  elsewhere  with  scandal^  nor  bequeath
property  to  them ;  that  none  should  let  houses
to  priests  that  kept  concubines,  and  that  a  severer
punishment  should  be  inflicted  for  the  sin  of
marriao;e  than  concubinasre.  Laws  are  not  made
for  righteous  men,  but  for  the  lawless  and  disobe-
dient, and  if  we  consider  that  great  facilities
existed,  by  monastic  institutions,  for  vicious  in-
dulgences, we  must  conclude  that  the  whole
system  of  the  Church  of  Rome,  w  ith  respect  to
marriages,  contravenes  morality,  as  it  does  na-
ture, reason,  and  scripture.    While  we  condemn


231

a  system  which  has  often  rendered  marriages  in
christian  countries  what  they  were  in  Rome  in
the  time  of  Tacitus  and  Suetonius,  a  "concubitus
promiscuus,"  we  must  be  far  from  judging  in-
dividuals in  the  Roman  CathoKc  priesthood,
amongst  whom  there  have  been  and  are  chari-
table men,  confidential  friends,  and  excellent
christians.

Q.  Have  some  countries  gone  into  a  contrary
extreme,  and  declared  marriage  to  be  a  civil  con-
tract without  any  reference  to  religion  *?

A.  When  the  errors  and  abuses  of  the  papacy
were  exposed,  those  evils  which  arose  out  of  the
doctrine  of  the  Church  respecting  marriage,  its
indissolubility  to  the  laity  and  its  interdiction
to  the  clergy,  attracted  particular  attention.  To
avoid  these  evils  some  had  recourse  to  the
remedy  of  declaring  marriage  a  civil  contract
and  nothing  more.  Abstracted  from  the  decla-
ration of  the  Jewish  and  Christian  scriptures,
and  indeed  from  the  sacramental  doctrine  of  the
Church  of  Rome,  marriage  may  be  regarded  as
a  civil  contract,  which  undoubtedly  it  is.  In
many  countries  where  marriage  could  only  be
solemnized  as  a  sacrament,  the  enacting  it  to  be
a  civil  contract  was  a  manifest  relief.  It  may,
however  be  questioned  whether  this  extreme  has
not  been  detrimental  to  morals.  In  France  the
system  has  been  adopted,  but  it  does  not  appear
to   have   contributed    to   a    very  high  degree  of


232

morality  or  social  happiness  in  that  country.
Some  public  documents  *  would  lead  us  to  con-
clude that  when  matrimonial  en2:aa:ements  are
guaranteed  only  by  civil  acts,  little  regard  is  paid
to  the  confirmation  of  the  contract,  or  the  faith-
ful observation  of  it  when  contracted.  In  Paris,
(if  we  take  into  the  account  intrigue  and  adultery)
promiscuous  intercouse  must  be  dreadfully  pre-
valent. In  such  habits  adultery  must  be  a  venial
gallantry,  which  husbands  and  wives  may  or  must
overlook.  The  French,  who  are  alive  to  the
sense  of  honour,  and  are  great  duellists,  seldom
retaliate  a  wrong  of  this  sort,   but   pass  it   over

*  Mouvement  de  la  population  de  la  ville  de  Paris,   pendant
I'annee  1831,  fourni  par  la  Prefecture  du  Departement.


en  mariage

S    gar9ons9430
I    filles       9055

7

18485

hors  mariage

C    gar^ons  2554
1   filles       2400

;

'

4954

en  mariage

\    gardens    320
I    filles         347

\

667

hors  mariage

(    gar9ons2812
I   filles       2612

5424

Total        29530


Total  hors  mariage    10378

Legitimations  d'enfans  naturel  posterieure-   1      i  OQQ
meat  a  leur  naissance /


Total  11477


It  must  be  remembered,  that  this  is  not  a  criterion  of  fornication
in  Stews  but  of  promiscuous  concubinage  in  the  place  of  mar-
riao'e,  and  also  that  infanticide  and  other  crimes  and  vices  not  to
be  named  are  extremely  common.


233

with  the  greatest  composure,  a  tact  which  might
be  illustrated  by  many  well  known  stories.  The
absence  of  religious  sanctions,  at  least  such  as
are  reasonable  and  practicable,  and  the  substitu-
tion of  those  which  are  unreasonable  and  imprac-
ticable, seem  to  conduct  to  the  same  immoral
results.  Under  such  a  system  of  morality,  where
the  legitimacy  of  children  born  in  wedlock  must
be  extremely  doubtful,  we  cannot  be  surprised  to
find,  a  corresponding  disregard  of  the  law  of  suc-
cession, hereditary  rights  and  the  reciprocal
duties  of  parents  and  children  ;  that  the  disre-
spect of  the  young  to  their  superiors  should  be
notorious,  and  that  the  law  should  find  it  neces-
sary to  protect  children  from  the  partiality  and
jealousy  of  their  parents.  It  must  be  confessed
that  a  certain  description  of  fornication  and  con-
cubinage has  increased  in  England,  but  this  must
be  ascribed  to  a  mischievous  law  which  contra-
venes, as  applied,  all  reason  and  decency.  Adul-
tery, however,  is  extremely  rare  among  the
peasantry,  and  when  once  marriage  is  contracted,
or  as  it  is  usually  expressed,  the  parties  "go  to
Church,"  fidelity  is  the  consequence,  and  that  in
cases  where  it  could  be  scarcely  expected.  A
fair  comparison  of  domestic  virtue  in  England
and  France,  would  lead  us  to  conclude  that  reli-
gion gives  the  greatest  firmness  to  morals,  and
that  without  it,  other  defences  to  virtue,  are
weak  and  untenable.     Where  the  law  proclaims


234

marriage  to  be  a  civil  contract,  and  provides  no
religious  sanctions  or  solemnization,  the  inference
with  vulgar  minds  is  direct  and  certain,  that  the
agreement  of  the  sexes  alone  is  sufficient  to  con-
stitute a  legitimate  union.

Q.  In  what  light  has  marriage  been  considered
by  theologians,  moralists,  and  statesmen  in  Eng-
land ?

A.  It  has  been  considered,  that  marriage,
though  not  a  sacrament,  is  in  part  a  religious  and
in  part  a  civil  contract.  Our  civil  law  considers
(and  perhaps  can  consider)  marriage  in  no  other
light  than  a  civil  contract,  and  the  law  regarding
marriage  as  it  does  all  other  contracts,  must  treat
unlawful  marriage  and  breaches  of  marriage,  not
as  sins,  but  civil  inconveniences.  The  law,  how-
ever, considers  no  marriage  as  lawful,  even
where  the  parties  are  willing  and  able  to  contract,
and  actually  do  contract,  unless  it  be  confirmed
by  the  religious  vows  and  solemn  forms  which
the  law  prescribes.  Our  legislators  and  states-
men seem  to  have  been  aware,  that  this  is  one  of
those  things  in  which  "  you  cannot  dishonour  the
sanctity  of  religion,  without  disordering  the  har-
mony of  civil  life"  for  this  is  precisely  one  of
those  cases  in  which  religion  is,  not  only  the  orna-
ment, but  the  support  of  civil  society.  The  law
of  the  land,  therefore,  has  sanctioned  the  reli-
gious solemnization  of  matrimony ;  and  the  due
publication  of  marriage,   the  religious  and  deco-


235

rous  espousals,  and  the  solemnization  before
God  and  the  Church,  have  contributed  to  pre-
serve the  domestic  virtue  and  confidential  inter-
course, which  characterize  the  people  of  England.
We  should  suppose,  that  this  is  a  system,  against
which  few  plaintiffs,  on  mature  deliberation,  could
be  found.  Ceremonies  are  of  great  consequence
and  legislators  and  governors,  and  honest  peo-
ple too,  ought  to  be  well  aware  what  rites  and
ceremonies,  employed  in  the  solemnization  of
marriage,  receive  the  legislative  authority.  If  it
should  be  allowed  for  any  number  of  individuals
to  form  immoral  associations,  and  the  solemniza-
tion of  marriage  become  one  of  the  social  acts
which  licentious  and  ignorant  men  may  attempt
to  regulate  ;  if  for  instance  a  St.  Simonian  sect,
should  open  the  door  to  anew  species  of  political
fanaticism,  which  may  at  the  same  time  let  loose
the  most  violent  passions,  we  have  not  even  a
correctional  police  to  restrain  them.  In  fact,  it
is  absurd  to  suppose,  that  the  system  of  registra-
tion, which  prevails  from  necessity  in  France,
could  be  applied  to  the  habits  of  English  society,
without  the  greatest  offence  to  the  feelings  of  the
people,  as  well  as  hazard  to  their  morals.  Licen-
tious rites  and  ceremonies  would  more  than  any
other  instruments  of  mischief,  undermine  and
sweep  away  those  mounds  and  sluices,  which  our
fathers  have  erected  against  the  tide  of  lawless,
immoral,  and  indecent  practices.


236

Q.  Did  Moses  provide  a  religious  ceremony
for  marriages  among"  the  Jews  ?

A.  Moses  did  not  provide  any  religious  ritual
or  ceremonies  for  the  celebration  of  marriage,
and  this  circumstance  is  certainly  worthy  of  ob-
servation. We  are  not,  however,  hastily  to  infer
that  he  was  indifferent  to  it,  either  as  a  legislator
or  a  moralist.  It  may  be  worth  while  to  examine
this  point.  Moses  certainly  did  not  institute  any
formality  of  a  religious  nature  for  the  celebration
of  marriage,  and  it  is  probable,  that  the  priest  or
minister  of  religion  was  not  particularly  concerned
in  the  consecration  of  the  marriage.  It  is  also
true,  that  in  all  civilized  societies  there  must  be
some  fixed  form  by  which  marriage  is  authorized,
and  by  which  it  may  be  precisely  distinguished
from  concubinage.  The  difficulty  is,  therefore,
that  Moses  did  not  provide  any  religious  or  any
civil  form  of  celebration.  How  is  this  omission
to  be  accounted  for  *?  If  Moses  had  instituted
any  form  of  celebration  of  marriage,  we  must
infer  from  the  analogy  of  his  whole  system,  that
it  would  have  been  a  religious  one.  He  was  not
indifferent  to  the  importance  of  marriage,  as  the
keystone  of  every  social  system ;  he  guarded
chastity  in  women,  before  marriage,  during  their
espousals,  and  after  marriage,  by  the  strictest
laws,  severe  guarantees,  and  the  most  solemn
religious  sanctions  which  were  accompanied  with
religious  ceremonies,  and  oaths  administered  by


237

the  priests  in  the  temple.  Moses,  therefore,  did
not  consider  marriage  merely  a  civil  contract,
but  one  that  was  to  be  recognized  by  appeals
(the  most  solemn  of  any  to  be  found  in  his  system)
to  conscience  and  to  heaven.  Why  then  did  he
omit  the  consecration  of  religion  (applied  to  so
many  affairs  of  infinitely  less  moment  and  applied
in  other  respects  to  marriage  itself)  in  the  so-
lemnization of  marriage  ?  There  appears  to  be
only  one  reasonable  explanation  for  this  omission,
and  a  clue  to  it  we  have  in  the  reason,  which  our
Lord  has  assigned,  for  Moses'  connivance  at  poly-
gamy and  divorce.  He  says  it  was  because  of  the
hardness  of  their  hearts.  The  Jews  certainly  disco-
vered, under  his  government,  attested  as  it  was,
a  rebellious  spirit,  and  we  may  well  suppose  that,
as  polygamy  and  divorce  were  common  in  all  the
world  at  that  time,  and  as  the  Jews  who  came
out  of  Egypt  lived  in  the  practice  of  them  to  a
very  great  extent,  (as  is  evident  from  the  census
of  the  people,  and  the  number  of  the  first-born)
it  would  have  been  a  moral  impossibility  to  have
annihilated  those  practices.  As  a  moralist,  how-
ever, and  as  the  inspired  historian  of  the  creation,
he  must  have  known,  that  those  practices  were
contrary  to  the  divine  institution  of  marriage.
As  a  civil  magistrate,  and  as  a  philanthropist,  he
was  obliged  (as  many  governors  are)  to  tolerate
evils  which  he  could  not  remove  without  convul-
sion and  inhumanity.       As   a  moralist,   and  a


238

divine  lawgiver,  he  could  not,  and  he  did  not,
apply  the  sanctions  of  religion  to  the  solemniza-
tion of  marriage,  because  those  sanctions  would
have  authorised  and  perpetuated  what  was  only
from  necessity  permitted — would  have  given  the
highest  moral  sanction  to  immoral  contracts,  and
dissolutions  of  contracts.  There  were  consuetudi-
nary ceremonies  for  the  celebration  of  marriage,
which  Moses  left  in  force.  It  is  probable  also,
from  the  distinctions  drawn  between  wives  and
concubines,  that  in  lawful  marriage  there  was  a
known  solemnity.  We  may  fairly  suppose  that
religion  was  introduced,  by  the  father  of  the  fam-
ily in  some  partriarchal  form,  and  that  these
customs  were  on  the  side  of  virtue  and  morality.
Those  cases  in  which  the  morality  was  clear,  as
seduction  and  the  proofs  of  chastity,  he  did  autho-
rize and  regulate.  Where  vice  was  to  be  tried
and  convicted,  he  appointed  oaths  and  religious
formularies,  but  where  under  a  system  of  divorce
and  polygamy,  he  could  not  have  enacted  oaths
and  religious  sanctions  for  the  marriage  of  one
wife,  which  was  a  moral  act,  without  at  the
same  sanctionino*  the  marriao;e  of  more  than  one
wife,  which  w'as  an  immoral  act  and  contrary  to
the  design  of  the  Creator,  he  applied  no  religious
ritual  of  the  altar,  but  provided  by  other  indirect
laws  to  secure,  as  much  as  possible,  the  virtue  of
society,  and  to  restrain  those  customs  and  habits
which   endangered  both   virtue   and  happiness.


239

The  Mosaic  system,  therefore,  when  thoroughly
examined,  comes  out  as  peculiar,  but  each  pecu-
liarity shews  the  divine  legation  of  TVloses.  This
omission  is  a  strong  argument  against  polygamy
and  divorce,  from  which  the  highest  moral  sanc-
tions were  withheld,  and  vindicates  the  morality
ot  the  character  and  system  of  Moses.  It  not
only  leaves  the  general  arguments,  which  have
prevailed  with  wise  and  good  men,  for  the  appli-
cation of  the  most  solemn  sanctions  to  marriage,
unimpaired,  but  we  think  also  further  confirmed
by  the  strongest  facts  and  implications.

Q.  Did  Jesus  Christ  provide  any  religious
ritual  for  marriage  ?

A.  It  was  not  to  be  expected  that  he  would
provide  a  religious  ritual  for  marriage  or  any
other  service.  Moses  was  a  civil  lea;islator  and
magistrate  for  one  nation,  and  therefore,  it  was
to  have  been  expected  that  he  would  have  ap-
plied the  sanctions  of  religion  (which  he  applied
to  less  important  contracts)  to  the  consummation
of  the  most  important  of  all  civil  contracts.  He
approached  this  point  of  legislation,  by  a  great
variety  of  laws,  but  we  have  seen  why  he  stopped
short,  and  did  not  apply  a  precise  religious  sanc-
tion to  this  contract,  in  a  state  of  society,  where
polygamy  prevailed.  Jesus  Christ  did  not  ap-
pear as  the  civil  lawgiver  or  king  of  the  Jews,
but  as  the  Saviour,  Prophet  and  Moralist  of  all
nations.    In  this  last  character  Christ  prescribed


240

a  moral  law,  and  not  a  civil  contract,  but  a
moral  law  that  was  to  effect  the  greatest  change
in  that  contract.  Christ  did  that  as  a  moralist,
which  Moses  as  a  civil  magistrate,  and  which
(speaking  after  the  manner  of  men)  Christ  him-
self as  a  civil  legislator  could  not  have  done.
Had  Christ  enacted  laws  in  detail  for  the  polity
of  the  christian  Church,  they  never  could  have
been  carried  into  effect  over  heathen  nations^
without  a  miraculous  conquest  of  the  world.
Moses  was  opposed  by  the  obduracy  of  one  nation
that  generally  acknowledged  his  divine  mission,
but  Christianity  was  to  be  spread  over  the  world  by
the  servants  of  Christ,  and  what  the  moral  state  of
the  world  was,  under  the  Roman  emperors,  is  well
known.  Christianity  for  its  morality  and  ministry
was  persecuted  with  a  vengeance  that  is  unparal-
leled in  the  history  of  mankind ;  and  what  must
have  been  the  consequence  if  Christ  had  made
positive  laws,  for  instance,  edicts  for  the  celebra-
tion of  marriage  and  the  suppression  of  polygamy
and  divorce  ?  If  the  virtuous  Pliny  or  the  generous
Trajan  had  discovered  such  edicts,  what  must
have  been  the  consequence  ?  What  must  have
been  the  fate  of  such  positive  laws  in  a  state  of
society,  where  marriage  was  neglected  to  such  a
decree  that  there  was  an  aversion  to  the  female
sex,  and  where  infamous  vices  (which  always
prevail  in  proportion  as  marriage  is  lightly
regarded  )  demoralized  the  people  to  the  lowest


241

degree,   and  depopulated    the    country  ?      The
Apostles  were   perfectly  aware  of  the   state   of
morals  among  the  heathen,  and  especially  among
the   enlightened    Romans   under   the  emperors.
St.  Paul  has    given,    in    his  first   chapter  of  his
epistle  to  the    Romans,   a   masterly    description
(restrained  as  it   was   by  a  sense  of  delicacy  )  of
the  infamous  vices  that  prevailed.     He  has  also
given  us   an    account,  in  his  first  epistle  to  the
Corinthians,  of  the  discreet  and  decided  manner
in  which  the  Christian  marriage  law  was  enforced
on  Christians,    and  on  Christians  only.     In  the
case  of  the  incestuous   marriage  in  the  church  of
Corinth  there  were  two  parties,  the  man  a  chris-
tian and  the  woman  a  heathen.     In  the  case  of
adultery,   Moses   applied  the   law  of  purgation
which  Michael  is  justly  considers  one  of  the  strong-
est proofs  of  his  divine  legation,  and  in  the  case
of  the  incestuous  marriage,  St.  Paul,    by  an  ap-
peal, in  the  name  of  Christ,  to   a   special  Provi-
dence (the  strongest  proof  of  the  divine  mission
of  Christ)  applied   a   similar    discipline    to   the
Corinthian  fornication,  but  of  the  heathen  woman
he  expressly  says,  "  What  have  I  to  do  to  judge
them  that  are  without  !<?"     Christ,  therefore,  and
his  apostles  applied  the  principles  of  the  christian
morality    to    Christians  and  not  to  the  heathen.
Moses  was  a  civil  le»:islator  and  inao:istrate,   and
therefore  did    not   enact  an   impracticable   law,
but  Christ  and   his   Apostles  confining  christian

R


242

morality  to  christians  and  enforcing  marriage  not
as  a  civil  but  as  a  religious  cojit7'act,  were  ena-
bled to  uphold  the  true  principles  of  morality  in
the  midst  of  the  greatest  vices.  It  is  religion,
therefore,  and  the  christian  religion  alone  that  is
the  support  of  christian  marriage.  It  is  the  chris-
tian religion  that  ameliorates  men's  hearts  and
renders  christian  laws  practicable.  The  wonder  is,
that  Christianity  by  the  force  of  its  morals,  effect-
ed the  regeneration,  which  it  did  effect  in  this  par-
ticular, among  the  christian  converts  at  the  first,
and  on  the  conversion  of  the  empire,  among
whole  nations.  The  force  of  christian  morals
effected  in  whole  nations  the  law  of  monogamy,
without  the  permission  of  extrajudicial  divorce,
in  defiance  of  the  strongest  passions  and  the  most
vicious  habits  and  practices  of  mankind.  Christ,
therefore,  did  not  enact  a  civil  contract,  but  revi-
ved the  moral  law  that  has  effected,  what  neither
heathen  legislators  nor  Moses  himself  could
effect,  the  recognition  of  a  pure  moral  principle
by  civil  law,  or  the  civil  contract  of  marriage  on
divine  and  christian  principles.  It  is,  therefore,
both  absurd  and  ungenerous,  to  speak  of  christian
marriage  as  a  mere  civil  contract.  Polygamy
and  extrajudicial  divorce,  or  what  is  almost  the
same  thing,  promiscuous  concubinage,  never  were
and  never  will  be  restrained  without  the  sanc-
tions of  Christianity.  One  husband  and  one  wife
is  the  peculiarity  of  Christian  countries,  and  it  is


243

an  excellency  and  blessing  which  we  owe  not  to
the  wisdom  of  legislators  and  civilians,  (who  are
too  much  disposed  to  lean  to  the  hardness  of
men's  hearts)  but  to  the  influence  of  the  christian
religion.  If  that  influence  be  scouted,  and  a
change  be  effected  in  the  sentiments  and  feelings
of  the  community,  we  must  expect  a  hardness
of  heart,  and  a  corruption  of  practice,  (not  con-
fined to  the  higher  orders)  that  will  defy  legisla-
tors and  civilians,  though  they  were  as  wise  as
Moses.  Let  us  hope,  however,  that  truth  and
reflection  will  have  their  due  weight,  and  that
no  such  change  will  be  predestinated  in  the  mo-
ral feelings  of  our  country,  a  change  which  every
honest  man  and  virtuous  woman  must  sincerely
deprecate.  The  law  of  the  creation,  the  morali-
ty of  the  gospel,  and  the  law  of  the  land  are  now
in  perfect  harmony.  Whatever  errors  there  may
be  in  men's  opinions  or  practices,  the  religious
celebration  of  marriage,  as  a  vow  and  covenant
before  God  and  the  christian  church,  does  not
imply  the  application  of  solemn  sanctions  to  im-
moral principles.  On  the  contrary,  religious
solemnization  prevents  error,  negligence  and
clandestine  marriage,  and  strengthens  conscience
and  principle  in  the  contracting  parties.*  When

*  Though  we  differ  with  Roman  Catholics,  respecting  their
doctrines  and  regulations  on  this  subject,  we  agree  with  them  in
their  religious  sentiment,  that  marriage  ought  to  be  a  contract  of
the  altar.  This  is,  in  fact,  not  merely  the  sentiment  of  Christianity,

r2


S44

the  civil  contract  has  been  tried,  it  has  tended  to
demoralize,  as  in  France  where  the  christian
Church  is  degraded,  and  during  the  usurpation
in  England,  when  marriages  were  allowed  to  be
contracted  before  a  justice  of  the  peace,  for  no
other  reason  (as  Dr.  Paley  observes)  but  to  de-
grade the  clergy.  Whatever  was  the  motive
immorality  was  the  consequence — an  immorality,
which  nothing  but  the  virtuous  principles  inculca-
ted by  the  clergy  (commonly  called  the  moral  or
latitudinarian  writers)  under  God,  restrained.
There  is  nothing  more  liable  to  absurdity  and
abuse  than  religious  ceremonies  applied  to  mar-
riage. It  is  evident,  that  the  greatest  mischiefs
must  arise  from  abstract  legislation  applied  to
tenets,  opinions,  ceremonies,  and  ministrations
unknown.  As  laws  cannot  quadrate  with  the
wishes  or  interests  of  all,  reasonable  and  well  dis-

but  of  all  men  when  they  express  their  best  and  strongest  feelings.

Dum  queror,  et  divos,  quanquam  nil  testibus  illis
Profeci,  extrema  moriens  tamen  alloquor  hora.

The  vow  and  covenant  in  Christian  marriage  is,  however,
a  peculiar  protection  to  females,  as  might  be  illustrated  in  a  great
number  of  examples.  When  a  man  treats  his  wife  with  injury,
he  is  commonly  reminded  of  his  vow  to  protect.  At  the  last
county  assizes  for  Norfolk,  there  was  a  case  of  this  kind,  and  the
learned  judge  in  endeavouring  to  convince  the  criminal  of  his  sin,
expressed  a  sentiment  which  was  in  accordance  with  the  feelings
of  every  christian  present ;  "The  object  upon  whom  your  malicious
and  abominable  design  was  intended,  was  her  whom  you  had  led
to  the  altar  of  God  and  there  vowed  to  protect  and  support."


245

posed  christians,  will,  on  reflection,  be  content
with  those  consuetudinary  practices,  which  have
obtained  a  wholesome  controul  over  the  senti-
ments and  feelings  of  a  christian  country.  There
may  be  theoretical  difficulties,  and  practical  in-
conveniences, but  they  will  yield  to  great  and
common  advantages.  This  is  certainly  one  of
the  most  delicate  subjects  of  human  policy,  and
that  on  which,  it  is  the  fundamental  duty  of  the
legislature  to  legislate  only  for  the  morals  of  the
country.  Gratitude  and  truth  demand  the  ac-
knowledgment that  christian  marriage  is  partly
a  religious  and  partly  a  civil  contract,  and  that
Christianity  has  made  the  contract  what  it  now  is.
Sound  policy  must  avow,  that  the  best  means  of
preserving  christian  marriage,  as  it  now  exists,
is  by  the  application  of  religious  sanctions,  and
that  when  religion  and  law  combine  to  conse-
crate that  contract,  which  is  the  fountain  head  of
the  relations  of  life,  marriage  is  most  likely  to  be
both  morally  and  legally  observed,  as  it  has
generally  been  in  this  country  to  the  happiness
and  honour  of  the  community.


FINIS.


Lynn ;   Printed  by  J.  W.  Aikin,  High  Stre«t.
