What’s Up There, Where Is It, and What’s It Doing? The U.S. Space Surveillance Network

Published: Mar 13, 2023 | Briefing Book # 824 | Edited by James E. David and Charles Byvik

Documents detail 65-year effort to monitor an increasingly crowded orbital environment

[This memo from the Director of Central Intelligence to the director of the Advanced Research Projects Agency states that CIA personnel would assist the DoD in determining the requirements for “surveilling” foreign space vehicles. At the time, the Department of Defense (DoD) had no centralized space surveillance program nor any specific requirements. Both would be established in 1960 when NORAD was assigned responsibility for the mission.]

Russian Peresvet laser that entered service in 2018. It reportedly can “blind” satellites up to altitudes of around 1,000 miles. (Photo credit: Russian MoD)

Illustration of the 2019 Indian test in which a direct ascent anti-satellite weapon destroyed a target satellite at an altitude of about 200 miles. China, Russia, and the United States also have this type of weapon.

U.S. Delta II rocket third stage component that landed in Saudi Arabia in January 2021. Certain objects made of heat-resistant materials can survive reentry and impact on the land or oceans. (Photo credit: Space Research Institute, Saudi Arabia)

Baker-Nunn camera at Edwards AFB in California during the 1960s. These optical systems remained operational into the next decade. (Photo credit: Air Force)

Ground-based electro-optical deep space surveillance system in Diego Garcia. The three GEODSS sites entered service in the 1980s and track objects from 6,000 to 28,000 miles altitude. (Photo credit: Air Force)

Space surveillance radar at Eglin AFB in Florida that became operational in 1969. Among other things, it was the first sensor at the time capable of detecting and tracking objects at altitudes greater than 6,000 miles or with inclinations of less than 30 degrees. (Photo credit: Air Force)

Six Geosynchronous Space Situational Awareness Program satellites have been launched since 2014. Carrying electro-optical sensors, they provide data on objects in the near-geosynchronous region in which they operate. (Photo credit: Air Force)

Space Fence Radar on Kwajalein Atoll. Entering service in 2019, it provides improved coverage over the decommissioned Space Surveillance Fence. (Photo credit: Lockheed Martin)

Part of one of the antenna arrays at the Space Surveillance Fence transmitter site in Texas in the 1980s. Built in the late 1950s, the three transmitter and six receiver sites across the southern United States were decommissioned in 2013. (Photo credit: Air Force)

Built by the United States, the Royal Australian Air Force began operating the Space Surveillance Telescope in 2022. It is the second Space Surveillance Network sensor in the southern hemisphere and provides coverage of objects in geosynchronous orbit. (Photo credit: U.S. Air Force)

This 2022 map shows the three categories of sensors that provide data to the Space Surveillance Network. (Photo credit: U.S. Air Force)

Washington, D.C., March 13, 2023 – The 65-year U.S. effort to detect and track objects in space, from the days before Sputnik 1 to today’s much more crowded orbital environment, is the subject of a fascinating new article and briefing book posted today by the National Security Archive.

Obtained through Mandatory Declassification Review (MDR) requests and archival research, these 25 documents reveal how U.S. policymakers conceived and built the U.S. Space Surveillance Network to detect, track and collect information on an increasingly busy and complex array of satellites and debris.

Compiled and annotated by James E. David, curator of national security space programs at the Smithsonian National Air & Space Museum, and Charles Byvik, the documents trace the origins and evolution of the program, including the development, beginning in 1956, of the first cameras specifically designed to photograph and track U.S. scientific satellites. Other documents detail how in subsequent years the development of the Space Detection and Tracking System (SPADATS) greatly expanded the array of radars and optical sensors to keep up with the ever-increasing number of space objects, especially Soviet military satellites, which represented a potential threat to national security.

Today’s posting draws from a variety of declassified sources, including early CIA memos on requirements for “surveilling” foreign space vehicles, Pentagon reports on various Soviet satellite launches, and the 1965 report of a high-level working group established to review the entire U.S. space surveillance program.

* * * * *

by James E. David and Charles Byvik

The mission of the Department of Defense’s Space Surveillance Network is to detect, track, and identify all artificial objects orbiting the Earth and provide data on them to a range of users. Ground-based radars and telescopes, augmented in recent years by telescopes on a small number of satellites, acquire the raw data, which is then analyzed to determine specific information on each object detected and tracked. This information is used for a variety of purposes: to maintain unclassified and classified catalogs of all known space objects (U.S. and foreign active satellites and space debris); for Space Object Identification to determine the size, shape, and motion of satellites to assist in determining their missions; to support the targeting of anti-satellite weapons systems; to determine the arrival time of satellites over a certain point on Earth; to predict the decay of objects that enter into the Earth’s atmosphere and their impact point if they survive reentry; and to predict collisions of objects in space. [1] Although there are many gaps in the network’s history due to continuing classification, this briefing book describes the evolution of the Space Surveillance Network from the Sputnik era to the present, based on the available declassified materials and other sources.

1957-1970

The first U.S. assets specifically developed to conduct space surveillance were the large Baker-Nunn cameras built by the Smithsonian Astrophysical Observatory (SAO) to track and photograph U.S. scientific satellites scheduled for launch during the International Geophysical Year from July 1957 through the end of 1958. The SAO oversaw the building, deployment, and operation of these cameras at 12 fixed sites worldwide beginning in 1958 and, starting in 1957, the establishment of Moonwatch teams of amateur astronomers using small telescopes in the United States and abroad. Using information from the Moonwatch teams and other sources to determine where to point their cameras, the Baker-Nunn equipment could photograph satellites up to altitudes of 2,000 miles for a limited number of inclinations. Additionally, two worldwide networks of ground stations—with radars, antennas, and other equipment to track, receive telemetry from, and send commands to, U.S. scientific satellites—were established: the Naval Research Laboratory’s (NRL) Minitrack network for Vanguard satellites and the Jet Propulsion Laboratory’s Microlock network for Explorer satellites. [2]

The performance of these and other assets was first tested when the Soviets launched Sputnik 1 into a low-Earth orbit (an altitude below 1,200 miles) on October 4, 1957. Moonwatch teams quickly obtained information on the orbit that enabled the NRL’s radio array in northern Virginia to acquire the satellite’s continuously transmitted signals beginning on its third orbit to help refine the orbital parameters. Tracking by these passive systems was augmented by several existing operational U.S. radar facilities around the world such as the Air Force radar at Diyarbakir, Turkey, used to detect and track Soviet missiles launched from Kapustin Yar, and selected radars at the Atlantic Missile Range. The Millstone Hill radar under development for the planned Ballistic Missile Early Warning System (BMEWS) by Lincoln Laboratory in Massachusetts was the first U.S. radar to both detect and track Sputnik 1 .

Both the Army’s Vanguard Computing Center and the Air Force’s Air Research and Development Command, under Project Harvest Moon, processed data collected by passive and active sensors at these civilian and military facilities to accurately predict current and future orbits. These detection, tracking, and processing assets were quickly exercised again in November with the launch of Sputnik 2 into the same orbit, the world’s second successful satellite. They monitored the new satellite until it reentered the Earth’s atmosphere in early 1958.

Improvements in the collection and processing of data were made during the remainder of the decade that addressed some deficiencies. In 1958, the NRL began construction of the first station of the Naval Space Surveillance (NAVSPASUR) system. Completed early the next year, it had three transmitter and six receiver sites across the southern United States on the 33rd parallel and a control and computational center in Virginia. NAVSPASUR continuously transmitted signals straight up into space and could initially detect objects passing through the signals up to an altitude of 2,000 miles. The Air Force moved the Harvest Moon project to a new National Space Surveillance Control Center in 1958 and began expanding the capabilities for processing data. The next year, it initiated SPACETRACK, a program to deploy improved optical and radar sensors. One of the early actions taken was the acquisition of several Baker-Nunn cameras, the first of which was deployed in Norway in 1960. [3]

The USSR launched more than 150 spacecraft in the following eight years, including photoreconnaissance satellites and spacecraft carrying cosmonauts beginning in 1961, weather satellites starting in 1964, and communication satellites beginning in 1965. Except for communications satellites placed in highly elliptical orbits—also called Molniya orbits—and probes exploring the Moon or planets, all were in low-Earth orbit. [4]

The aggressive Soviet space program clearly presented a potential threat to U.S. national security. The shortcomings of the fragmented DoD space surveillance efforts for global coverage and timely response were addressed in November 1960 when Secretary of Defense Thomas S. Gates, Jr., assigned operational control of the newly designated Space Detection and Tracking System (SPADATS) to the North American Air Defense Command (NORAD). SPADATS included NAVSPASUR, SPACETRACK, and the National Space Surveillance Control Center (which would soon be renamed the SPADATS Center). NORAD quickly took steps to improve the collection and processing of data, such as procuring advanced computers for the SPADATS Center, integrating BMEWS and SPADATS, and initiating the design of a dedicated space surveillance radar for deployment at Eglin Air Force Base in Florida. [5]

NORAD and NASA entered into an agreement in 1961 that detailed their respective responsibilities regarding space surveillance. Based on data from its own and other sensors, NORAD was to include information on all known objects in orbit in a classified space catalog, while NASA was to provide NORAD with all the tracking data its networks acquired on U.S. and foreign spacecraft. NASA would receive all unclassified information on U.S. and foreign spacecraft from NORAD and disseminate it publicly in a separate, unclassified, space catalog. NORAD would provide NASA with classified information when the latter demonstrated a “need to know.” [6]

NORAD published an updated set of space surveillance requirements in early 1965 after extensive consultation with users of its data. The high-level Ad Hoc Working Group on Department of Defense Space Detection, Surveillance, Tracking and Data Processing, established by the Deputy Secretary of Defense the prior year, quickly reviewed the requirements as part of its comprehensive examination of the space surveillance program. Among other things, its lengthy March 1965 report gave a detailed analysis of the capabilities of SPADATS and other military and civilian sensors, as well as SPADATS computer processing and communications facilities. SPADATS had no dedicated radars yet and relied on the three BMEWS radars (in Alaska, Greenland, and the United Kingdom), the missile detection/space surveillance radar on Shemya Island in the Aleutians, the RCA radar at Moorestown, New Jersey, the Millstone radar in Massachusetts, and the Diyarbakir radar in Turkey. All these facilities conducted space surveillance as a secondary mission and had varying capabilities to detect objects, but between them they detected, within the first few orbits, most Soviet satellites and other objects up to altitudes of 2,900 miles that were at least one square meter in size and orbiting at inclinations of 45 degrees and higher. These radars and the SPADATS optical sensors provided a good tracking ability and could predict an orbit after 12 hours of tracking with an accuracy of roughly one mile. The radars and optical sensors also obtained good Space Object Identification information. NAVSPASUR detected within the first five or six orbits most Soviet satellites and other objects up to altitudes of 4,000 miles that were at least one square meter in size and orbiting at inclinations of 30 degrees and higher. [7]

With respect to other military and civilian sensors, a major contributor in several areas was what the report designated the “Intelligence Network.” Although not described further because of higher classification, the “Intelligence Network” referred to the National Security Agency’s worldwide network of ground stations, aircraft, and ships, and Central Intelligence Agency ground stations in several countries, that intercepted telemetry from foreign missiles and spacecraft. Telemetry from these vehicles to ground stations contains information on vehicle performance or data the spacecraft is acquiring, such as photography from weather satellites. It also includes commands from ground stations to these vehicles. The intelligence obtained from the collection and analysis of telemetry was critical to determining the missions of foreign satellites. Certain radars of the “Intelligence Network” and its communications intercept facilities (which monitored launch complex and downrange tracking station traffic) provided alerts on impending launches and enabled faster detection of any payloads that achieved orbit. Lastly, the “Intelligence Network” acquired limited tracking information. Tracking data on DoD satellites came from the Satellite Control Facility and on NASA satellites from NASA networks. Additionally, the Royal Canadian Air Force Satellite Tracking Unit had several sensors that provided information. [8]

The Ad Hoc Working Group also assessed the extent to which SPADATS met user needs. It predicted the arrival of satellites at a given position to better than plus or minus 15 seconds, which was acceptable to most users. SPADATS provided needed support to many military and NASA space programs, including locating malfunctioning objects, predicting the decay of objects of particular interest (e.g., Soviet satellites and rocket stages), and tracking U.S. reconnaissance satellites to assist the Satellite Control Facility. The ability to determine the orbital elements of Soviet satellites and obtain their radar signatures (from which estimates of their size, shape, stability, and orientation could be made) were important contributors to Space Object Identification. Precision tracking information provided by SPADATS was sufficient for the two operational anti-satellite systems (the Air Force’s nuclear-armed Thor missiles on Johnson Atoll and the Army’s nuclear-armed Nike-Zeus missiles on Kwajalein Atoll) to be able to intercept a limited number of spacecraft in low-Earth orbit. [9]

Although the Ad Hoc Working Group agreed with many of NORAD’s new requirements, it recommended disapproval based on technology availability, realistic future needs, and costs. Most significantly, the Working Group believed there was no justification for the technological improvements envisioned by 1970 (to extend altitude coverage to 23,000 miles, to increase the detection capability to objects 0.1 square meter in size without regard to altitude, and to improve the detection probability to 95 per cent for all objects before completion of their first orbit without regard to inclinations or altitude). The Deputy Secretary of Defense approved the Ad Hoc Working Group’s report and directed the Joint Chiefs of Staff to have NORAD revise the requirements to conform with it. The new set was approved by the Joint Chiefs of Staff and the Office of the Secretary of Defense in 1966. [10]

One of the major challenges SPADATS faced was the rising number of spacecraft and the increasing amount of debris in orbit. From January 1967 to June 1969, for example, the USSR launched almost 200 spacecraft and the United States about 85. Almost all were in low-Earth orbit, except for probes, human spaceflight missions to the Moon, Soviet communications satellites, U.S. communications satellites in geosynchronous orbit (22,236 miles above the equator), and U.S. early warning satellites in medium-Earth orbit (an altitude between 1,200 and 22,236 miles). The number of publicly reported tracked objects increased from around 100 in 1961 to over 2,000 by the end of the decade. Although posing little threat to active satellites, there were increasing amounts of space debris in low-Earth orbit, and more of the debris in the lower regions of that orbit (up to 300 miles altitude) was surviving reentry and impacting on land or in the oceans, generating growing public concern about the possibility of damage or injury caused by objects falling from space. (Debris in the upper regions of low-Earth orbit remains in space for hundreds of years, while debris in medium-Earth and geosynchronous orbits can remain there for thousands of years.) [11]

U.S. intelligence agencies were eager to collect the debris left behind by Soviet rockets, missiles, and satellites for analysis. Similarly, they wished to keep U.S. debris (particularly from missiles and classified U.S. satellites) out of Soviet hands to prevent their exploitation. To enable operational commands to take passive defensive action against Soviet photoreconnaissance satellites (such as moving their forces or using camouflage), the Defense Intelligence Agency and the Air Force’s Foreign Technology Division established the Satellite Reconnaissance Advanced Notice Program in late 1965. The system provided data to commands on the orbital elements, swath, and resolution of the satellites, and information on how to predict when they would be overhead. Testing of Soviet offensive space weapons began in 1966 with a fractional orbital bombardment system, a missile-launched nuclear weapons delivery system that flew a sub-orbital path. This system became operational in 1968 but was decommissioned in the early 1980s. The USSR also first successfully tested a co-orbital anti-satellite weapon in 1967. These exploded within 60 feet of the target satellite, releasing shrapnel to destroy it. [12]

SPADATS increased its capabilities in several areas during the remainder of the decade. The SPADATS Center moved to the command’s new underground facility at Cheyenne Mountain in Colorado, procuring improved computer capability and upgrading communications with the sensor sites. Modifications to NAVSPASUR in 1966 increased the detection coverage to 6,000 miles, more than double any other SPADATS sensor. The first phased-array (electronic-steered) space surveillance radar, the AN/FPS-85, began operations at Eglin Air Force Base in Florida in 1969. It was the first sensor with the capability to provide detection and tracking coverage above 6,000 miles, extend surveillance to objects with orbital inclinations below 30 degrees, and simultaneously track multiple objects (200 known objects or 20 unknown objects). The AN/FPS-85 soon was able to identify numerous unknown objects which had been detected but not tracked. The ARPA Lincoln C-Band Observables Radar on Kwajalein entered service in 1969 to image objects in support of the Space Object Identification mission. Two Baker-Nunn cameras were moved to other nations, and all received upgrades that reduced from 24 to 12 hours the amount of time needed to search, locate, and produce an accurate observation of an object, and report the data to the Space Defense Center. [13]

1970-2000

The orbital environment became increasingly crowded and complex between 1970 and 2000. Soviet reliance on satellites to support military operations rapidly increased, and, by 1985, the intelligence community estimated that the Soviet Union had about 140 such satellites in orbit. Because some were now in medium-Earth orbit (such as the GLONASS navigation satellites launched beginning in the 1980s) or geosynchronous orbit (including the early warning satellites launched starting the same decade), it was critical that SPADATS improve its deep space capabilities. More than 30 nations joined the United States, USSR/Russia, United Kingdom, France, Italy, West Germany, and the European Space Agency in becoming owner/operators of satellites. Spacecraft were performing new missions such as remote sensing and navigation. Initiating the commercial development of remote sensing spacecraft, Digital Globe launched Ikonos in 1999. Reflecting both the growth in active satellites and space debris in orbit and the increased detection capabilities of sensors, by 2000 there were nearly 9,000 objects publicly reported as being tracked. [14]

The Soviets declared their co-orbital anti-satellite weapon as operational in the early 1970s, and testing of the system continued until 1982. It was tested successfully against targets at altitudes up to approximately 1,000 miles and inclinations between 40 and 140 degrees. There is evidence that the USSR was developing another system designed to destroy satellites in medium-Earth and geosynchronous orbits, but Russia abandoned the program in the early 1990s. [15]

Major improvements to SPADATS took place during this period, although most details regarding sensor coverage, the improvements in detectability and tracking, and other important aspects remain classified. Defense Support Program early warning satellites entered into service in 1971, augmenting existing sources for launch detection. These satellites reduced the time needed to determine whether a launch was a missile test or space launch from 20-30 minutes to only several minutes. Three years later, the former Safeguard anti-ballistic missile system radar in North Dakota was modified to provide space surveillance information as a secondary mission to its new primary mission of detecting and tracking intercontinental and submarine-launched ballistic missiles in flight. A new phased-array radar, designated Cobra Dane, began operating at Shemya in 1977, increasing the number of objects that could be tracked simultaneously and extending the detection and tracking range. Lincoln Laboratory’s Haystack radar was modified to begin conducting space surveillance the same year. The missile-tracking ARPA Long-Range Tracking and Instrumentation Radar on Kwajalein underwent upgrades in 1982 to enable it to track objects up to geosynchronous altitudes as a secondary mission. New phased-array radars were built at the three BMEWS sites beginning in 1987. In the 1990s, Lincoln Laboratory built the Haystack Auxiliary Radar near Millstone in Massachusetts to collect images of satellites. [16]

Telescopes from the Maui Optical Tracking and Identification Facility entered service the following year to provide both tracking and Space Object Identification data on objects at altitudes of about 3,400 miles and higher. Ground-based electro-optical deep space surveillance (GEODSS) systems in New Mexico, Maui, Diego Garcia, and South Korea, with low-light-level TV cameras, computers, and large telescopes, began operations in the 1980s to track objects from approximately 6,000 miles to 28,000 miles (the South Korean site closed in the early 1990s). [17]

By 2000, the Eglin Air Force Base radar was the most important in tracking objects in low-Earth orbit (over 40 percent of the total). The three GEODSS sites were the most significant for tracking objects in medium-Earth orbit (33 percent) and in geosynchronous orbit (nearly 44 percent). [18]

The processing of data also underwent improvements. Beginning in 1994, the newly established Space Control Center took major steps to automate many tasks being performed manually. These resulted in a much shorter time for providing orbital information to users. New software was installed to determine current and predicted future orbits more accurately. [19]

2000-Present

U.S. and allied military forces have greatly increased their dependence on satellites for reconnaissance, communications, navigation, weather data, and early warning since the turn of the century. While these systems have always been vital for strategic intelligence, they have also become critical for tactical operations. Individuals, non-governmental organizations, businesses and governments around the world depend heavily on a wide range of satellites for communications, navigation, disaster relief, weather information, environmental and agricultural monitoring, geology, oceanography, and many other applications.

Just as the United States and others are becoming more dependent on space systems, however, the threats to their safety and security are increasing. One of the most critical threats is the growing number and sophistication of anti-satellite weapons, particularly those of China and Russia. The two nations have developed robust space situational awareness systems that are critical in their targeting. (Space surveillance is now commonly referred to as space situational awareness.) In 2021, Gen. David Thompson, the U.S. Space Force’s second-in-command, stated that, “Both China and Russia are regularly attacking U.S. satellites with non-kinetic means, including lasers, radio frequency jammers, and cyberattacks.” Information on most of the attacks remains classified. However, a few have been disclosed such as the February 24, 2022, Russian cyberattack on ViaSat communications satellite ground infrastructure that interrupted service to Ukraine and several European nations. Russia has periodically jammed GPS signals in several areas, including in Ukraine since its 2014 invasion and in northern Norway during NATO exercises there. China and Russia also have operational direct ascent (missile-launched) anti-satellite weapons armed with conventional explosive warheads that can destroy satellites in low-Earth orbit. Each are also conducting rendezvous and proximity tests, in both low-Earth and geosynchronous orbits, in which a satellite closely approaches another. These tests could be for the purpose of developing space situational awareness satellites or for the inspection and servicing of satellites. For example, China’s Shijian-21 satellite docked with and towed one of its defunct satellites out of geosynchronous orbit in 2021. However, many experts believe that the tests are part of the development of co-orbital anti-satellite weapons. [20]

Another threat to the safety and security of satellites is the increasing congestion in space. The number of publicly reported tracked objects has grown from 8,927 in 2000 (2,671 active and inactive satellites, 90 space probes, and 6,096 pieces of debris) to about 47,800 today (7,200 active satellites, 19,600 pieces of debris of known origin, and 21,000 pieces of debris of unknown origin or which cannot be tracked repeatedly). Most of the increase in active satellites is the result of the massive number of small satellites launched to form constellations in low-Earth orbit starting in the 2010s, primarily by private firms. For example, the Starlink constellation of small communications satellites now has over 2,000 spacecraft with several thousand more to be added in the coming years. OneWeb is close to completing its constellation of about 900 small communications satellites. Planet’s constellation has around 200 small Earth-observation satellites. In addition to the tracked debris, there are an additional estimated 600,000 to 900,000 fragments between 5 mm and 10 cm in size, and many hundreds of thousands of pieces smaller than 5 mm in size, that cannot be tracked. Several factors contributed to the increase in space debris: the growing number of pieces (sometimes intact) left over from rocket stages and inactive satellites, the 2007 Chinese direct ascent anti-satellite weapon test, the accidental collision between an Iridium communications satellite and an inactive Russian satellite in 2009, and the 2021 Russian direct ascent anti-satellite weapon test. Several active satellites have been damaged by debris in recent years, and the risks to active civilian, commercial, and government satellites of all nations are increasing. [21]

Beginning in the early 2000s, the U.S. government took several steps to share more space situational awareness data with commercial and foreign entities to lessen the risk of collisions damaging or destroying active satellites and to reduce the amount of debris from them. The Air Force established the Space Track website that provides registered owners or operators with basic orbital data from the unclassified Satellite Catalog. These organizations can also receive planning assistance in fixing certain launch and on-orbit anomalies, emergency conjunction assessment messages (specifying the point and time of the closest approach of their satellite with another tracked object when the chance of a collision exceeds a certain threshold), and review of their proposed maneuver plans to avoid collisions. It also began signing agreements with foreign governments and commercial entities under which they receive more information (apparently including limited data from the classified High Accuracy Catalog when needed) and additional assistance such as deorbit and reentry support. To date, the U.S. Space Force has signed agreements with 30 nations and approximately 120 commercial and academic entities. It will shortly transfer responsibility for sharing space situational awareness data with civilian and commercial operators to the Department of Commerce. [22]

Several nations and international organizations have also adopted guidelines that seek to reduce the future growth of debris. In 2001, the U.S. government issued the Orbital Debris Mitigation Standards (updated in 2022), which are applicable to all U.S. satellite launches and operations. Among other things, the document established rules limiting debris release during normal operations and minimizing the potential for post-mission breakups resulting from stored energy (propellants and batteries). The United Nations General Assembly endorsed the Space Debris Mitigation Guidelines of the Committee on the Peaceful Uses of Outer Space in 2007 that set forth general, non-legally binding rules and encouraged members to use “national mechanisms” to implement them. The European Space Agency, Japan, France, and Russia have since adopted similar guidelines (Russia’s compliance is regarded as mixed). Several commercial entities have tested equipment in space to capture existing debris, but any programs to achieve a significant reduction are many years away. [23]

The Space Surveillance Network’s processing capabilities and sensors have undergone significant improvements. Extensive advancements in the former have resulted primarily in more accurate orbital predictions. A new, classified High Accuracy Catalog has incorporated more precise data since its inception in 1999. The new Globus II radar in Norway, reportedly capable of detecting objects smaller than 10 cm at distances of up to almost 28,000 miles, became operational in the early 2000s. The Space Surveillance Fence, transferred to the Air Force in 2004, was decommissioned nine years later. Its replacement on Kwajalein began operations in 2020 and mostly targets objects in low-Earth orbit. GEODSS received new digital cameras, computer resources and supporting equipment. The new Space Surveillance Telescope was moved to Australia in 2017 and became operational in 2022. As with GEODSS, the primary mission is to monitor objects in medium-Earth and geosynchronous orbits. To overcome the limitations of ground-based optical sensors and to provide better coverage of deep space, a series of satellites with telescopes has been deployed. The Midcourse Space Experiment satellite was the first and operated from 2000 until 2008. It was followed by the Space Based Space Surveillance and Advanced Technology Risk Reduction satellites beginning in 2011 and the Canadian Sapphire satellite in 2014. All are in low-Earth orbit. Six Geosynchronous Space Situational Awareness Program satellites have been launched since 2014. They are in drift orbits below and above geosynchronous orbit to monitor objects in that region. [24]

The challenges to the Space Surveillance Network will undoubtedly grow in the coming years. One will be the detection, tracking and identification of the increasing number of active satellites and debris in orbit. As noted above, Starlink will likely add several thousand additional satellites to its constellation. Amazon’s Project Kuiper plans to establish a constellation of 3,236 small communications satellites in low-Earth orbit from 2023 to 2029. The U.S. Space Force intends to launch between 300 to 500 small communications satellites into low-Earth orbit to form the Transport Layer constellation. China will soon complete the Hongyan constellation of 320 small communications satellites in low-Earth orbit. [25]

Another challenge for the Space Surveillance Network will be monitoring the increasing threats to space systems, such as the development of direct ascent and co-orbital anti-satellite weapons. China and Russia will undoubtedly continue to improve their capabilities to attack U.S. military satellites through these and other means. North Korea and Iran have developed several non-kinetic anti-satellite weapons but not direct ascent or co-orbital ones. [26]

Discussions are ongoing at the national and international levels to strengthen the guidelines now in place to reduce the future growth of debris from the ever-increasing number of launches and satellites. One of the most important forums is the United Nations Committee on the Peaceful Uses of Outer Space. However, major disputes over key issues make the prospect of arriving at an effective agreement unlikely.

[1] Detection and Tracking of Satellites, A Report of the Ad Hoc Working Group on Department of Defense Space Detection, Surveillance, Tracking and Data Processing , March 1965, pp. x-xiii; Record Group (RG) 330, Entry UD-06W #31, 471.96 File; National Archives and Records Administration, College Park, Maryland (NARA).

[2] Rick W. Sturdevant, “From Satellite Tracking to Space Situational Awareness: The USAF and Space Surveillance, 1957-2007”, Air Power History , Winter 2008, pp. 5-23. Fred L. Whipple, “Optical Tracking of Artificial Earth Satellites”, Science , Vol. 128, No. 3316 (July 18, 1958), pp. 124-129.

[3] Detection and Tracking of Satellites. “Chronology of Selected Events in Optical Space Surveillance.”

[4] Ibid.

[5] “From Satellite Tracking to Space Situational Awareness.”

[6] Ibid.

[7] Detection and Tracking of Satellites , pp. xiii-xvi, 49-70.

[8] Ibid, p. 50. Richard L. Bernard, United States Cryptologic History, Special Series, Volume 8, The Foreign Missile and Space Telemetry Collection Story – The First 50 Years, Part 1: The 1950s and 1960s (Center for Cryptologic History, National Security Agency, 2004), pp. 1, 31-51.

[9] Ibid, pp. x-xiii.

[10] Ibid, pp. 85-87. Cyrus Vance to The Secretary of Army, et. al. , 5 May 1965, RG 330, Entry UD-06W #31, 471.96 file, NARA. NORAD/CONAD Historical Summary, January-December 1966 .

[11] National Intelligence Estimate 11-1-67, The Soviet Space Program , March 2, 1967, and National Intelligence Estimate 11-1-69, The Soviet Space Program , June 19, 1969 , CIA FOIA Electronic Reading Room. European Space Agency graph . List of First Satellites by Country . Orbital Debris (Washington, D.C.: National Aeronautics and Space Administration, 1985), pp. 22-29.

[12] National Intelligence Estimate 11-1-67 and National Intelligence Estimate 11-1-69 . Joseph F. Carroll, Lt. Gen, USAF, Director to Chairman, Joint Chiefs of Staff, 4 September 1965, RG 373, Entry UD-05D 60, Box #2, NARA. James David, “Was it Really ‘Space Junk’? U.S. Intelligence Interest in Space Debris that Returned to Earth,” Astropolitics , Vol. 3 (2005), pp. 43-65.

[13] Ibid. “From Satellite Tracking to Space Situational Awareness,” pp. 12-13.

[14] National Intelligence Estimate 11-1-85, Soviet Space Programs, Volume I – Key Judgements and Executive Summary, December 1985 , pp. 5-10. Gene H. McCall, Space Surveillance Briefing .

[15] Brian Weedon and Victoria Samson, eds., Global Counterspace Capabilities, An Open Source Assessment (Secure World Foundation, 2022), pp. 02-01 - 02-06. National Intelligence Estimate 11-1-80, 6 August 1980, pp. 50-52.

[16] “From Satellite Tracking to Space Situational Awareness”, pp. 13-15. Major Michael J. Muolo, Space Handbook, A Warfighter’s Guide to Space, Volume One (Maxwell AFB, Alabama: Air University Press, 1993), pp. 17-22. Melvin L. Stone and Gerald P. Banner, “Radars for the Detection and Tracking of Ballistic Missiles, Satellites, and Planets,” Lincoln Laboratory Journal , Vol. 12, No. 2 (2000), pp. 221, 228, 236-238.

[17] “From Satellite Tracking to Space Situational Awareness,” pp. 13-15. Space Handbook , chapter 3.

[18] Space Surveillance Briefing.

[19] “From Satellite Tracking to Space Situational Awareness”, pp. 13-15.

[20] Chris Vallance, “ UK blames Russia for satellite internet hack at start of war ,” BBC News , 10 May 2022. Joseph Trevithick, “ U.S. Satellites Are Being Attacked Every Day According To Space Force General ,” The War Zone , November 30, 2021. Elizabeth Howell, “ How Russia’s GPS satellite signal jamming works, and what we can do about it ,” Space.com , April 14, 2022. Brian Chow, “ The critical importance of resiliency for US missile warning satellites ,” The Space Review , January 3, 2023. Defense Intelligence Agency, 2022 Challenges to Security in Space, Space Reliance in an Era of Competition and Expansion , pp. 17-18, 27-29. Global Counterspace Capabilities, pp. 02-01 – 04-01.

[21] 2022 Challenges to Security in Space , pp. 37-39. Space Surveillance Briefing. SSA Sharing and Orbital Data Requests .

[22] U.S. Space Force Press Release . SSA Sharing and Orbital Data Requests. National Orbital Debris Implementation Plan , July 2022.

[23] Ibid. A Brief History of Space Debris . Mitigating space debris generation .

[24] “ From Satellite Tracking to Space Situational Awareness ,” pp. 15-20. Space Security Index, Space Situational Awareness, September 2020 . Space Surveillance Telescope in Australia achieves initial operating capability , September 22, 2022. GSSAP Satellite Overview .

[25] Mikayla Rivera, “ Project Kuiper Review 2023: Launch dates, specs, and what it means for you .” Hongyan fact sheet .

[26] 2022 Challenges to Security in Space , pp. 30-32.

Documents

Memorandum from Allen W. Dulles to Roy W. Johnson, October 9, 1958, SECRET
Oct 9, 1958 | Source CIA FOIA Electronic Reading Room

National Aeronautics and Space Administration and Department of Defense – A National Program to Meet Satellite Tracking and Surveillance Requirements for FY 1959 and 1960, January 10, 1959, SECRET
Jan 10, 1959 | Source Record Group (RG) 59; Records Relating to Atomic Energy Matters, 1944-1963; Box #265; Space Council Jan-June 1959, National Archives, College Park, Maryland (NARA)
This agreement signed by NASA’s Administrator and the Secretary of Defense was the first between the recently established NASA and the DoD on this topic. It followed internal NASA and DoD studies and discussions between the two agencies. The agreement briefly describes existing NASA networks for command and control of its spacecraft, needed improvements to those networks, NASA’s separate tracking network of Baker-Nunn cameras, and the ability of these networks to assist the DoD. It also briefly discusses the DoD command and control network for Discoverer satellites (the cover name for CORONA photoreconnaissance satellites) and the contributions of DoD sensors such as the radar at Millstone, Massachusetts, and the newly built Space Surveillance Fence to detect “non-radiating” satellites.

Agreement between the Department of Defense and the National Aeronautics and Space Administration on Functions Involved in Space Surveillance of U.S. and Foreign Satellites and Space Vehicles, January 16, 1961, SECRET
Jan 16, 1961 | Source Detection and Tracking of Satellites, A Report of the Ad Hoc Working Group on Department of Defense Space Detection, Surveillance, Tracking and Data Processing, March 1965; RG 330, Entry UD-06W #31, 471.96 File; NARA
This agreement signed by NASA’s Deputy Administrator and DoD’s Director of Defense Research and Engineering was the first between the two on this subject following the assignment to NORAD of the space surveillance mission. It sets forth the general responsibilities of each in the area, including sharing information. In this regard, NASA’s Goddard Space Flight Center would maintain an unclassified space catalog and furnish NORAD with the orbital elements of NASA and non-NASA scientific satellites while they were operational and any other DoD and non-NASA launched objects that NASA was requested to support. In turn, NORAD would provide NASA with unclassified tracking information from its classified space catalog, which could be freely shared with the scientific community. NASA could request classified data from the catalog when it demonstrated a “need to know.” This basic arrangement remained in place for many years.

Memorandum from L.H. Frost, Vice Admiral, USN, Director, National Security Agency to Director of Defense Research and Engineering, 15 March 1961, SECRET
Mar 15, 1961 | Source National Security Agency
In this memo, Adm. Frost notes that his agency has reviewed NORAD’s development plan for the SPADATS radars and optical sensors. He says that with respect to the critical objective of determining the mission of a spacecraft the SPADATS sensors are insufficient and that communications and electronic intelligence are required. Frost notes that the National Security Agency has published the “United States COMINT/ELINT Requirements Study for the Collection of Foreign Satellite and Space Vehicle Transmissions,” detailing the systems needed to acquire this intelligence. Frost then describes the budgetary actions being taken to build it.

NORAD/CONAD Historical Summary, January-June 1961, CONFIDENTIAL
Source North American Aerospace Defense Command
This excerpt from a semi-annual history describes developments in the space surveillance program for the six months in question. The program’s current and future detection and tracking requirements are redacted, but that is probably because it was declassified in 2006.

Satellite Situation Report, January 2, 1962, UNCLASSIFIED
Jan 2, 1962 | Source NASA
This is an early Satellite Situation Report produced for public dissemination by the Space Operations Control Center of NASA’s Goddard Space Flight Center. Based mostly on data provided by NORAD, it provides unclassified information on then-active satellites and space debris, such as the launch date and orbital elements. Classified U.S reconnaissance satellites are referred to by their cover names: Discoverer (the CORONA photoreconnaissance satellite), Greb (the NRL electronic intelligence satellite), and Samos (the Air Force photoreconnaissance satellite).

Department of the Air Force, Staff Message Branch, Incoming Messages, 12 November 1963, SECRET
Nov 12, 1963 | Source Air Force Declassification Office
This is the first NORAD message concerning Sputnik 46 . The Shemya radar detected the launch 17 minutes after liftoff from Tyuratam, and several SPADATS radars soon tracked two pieces of debris and the payload. Because no telemetry had been collected since the first revolution, the tumbling of the payload, and the lack of Soviet press announcements on the mission, NORAD concluded that the payload had probably failed. This was firmly established several days later.

Department of the Air Force, Staff Message Branch, Incoming Messages, SECRET, 14 November 1963
Nov 14, 1963 | Source Air Force Declassification Office
In the second NORAD message regarding Sputnik 46 , now also designated Cosmos 21 , one of two pieces of debris from the launch, a large upper stage of the launch vehicle that reentered late on November 12, is described in detail. The orbiting payload is similarly described in considerable detail and is predicted to decay within a few days. Although not explicitly stated, this appeared to be a failed photoreconnaissance satellite mission.

Department of the Army, Staff Communications Division, SECRET, 30 November 1963
Nov 30, 1963 | Source Record Group 319, Entry NM-3 47-R3, Box #16, NARA
This is an initial NORAD message indicating that the Shemya radar detected and tracked an object, tentatively designated Sputnik 83 , for several minutes at a range between 599 and 895 nautical miles. Based on this data, it was concluded that the object was launched at Tyuratam approximately 17 minutes before Shemya first detected it. U.S. officials had apparently determined that this time period was a good window for the Soviets to launch a Mars probe. As a result, the message predicts that if the object is a Mars probe that it would be injected into an interplanetary orbit at a certain position later that day.

Department of the Army, Staff Communications Division, 30 November 1963, SECRET
This NORAD message concerns a rocket body and fragment in the parking orbit (an orbit from which the payload is boosted into a higher orbit) of Sputnik 83 . Based on the time of launch, telemetry intercepts, visual sightings, and similarity to the parking orbits used on previous lunar and planetary probes, NORAD concludes that it was a Mars probe.

NORAD/CONAD Historical Summary, July-December 1963, CONFIDENTIAL
Source Air Force Declassification Office
This excerpt from a semi-annual history sets forth recent developments in space surveillance, including plans for SPADATS to acquire Baker-Nunn cameras and its assumption of the operation of the radar in Diyarbakir, Turkey.

Defense Intelligence Agency, Special Intelligence Summary, New Soviet Cosmos Satellite, 24 September 1964, Top Secret Dinar
Sep 24, 1964 | Source Interagency Security Classification Appeals Panel
This is an initial report on Cosmos 46 (also designated Sputnik 77 ), which the Soviets launched from Tyuratam on September 24. Based on the orbital elements and the time of year (both of which were ideal for photographing the United States), as well as still-classified signals intelligence, the report concludes that it was another Soviet photoreconnaissance satellite and predicts that it would deorbit after eight days, the timeline that previous photoreconnaissance satellites followed. (In contrast to the United States, which only deorbited the film return capsules of photoreconnaissance satellites, during this period, the Soviets deorbited the entire satellite.)

Department of the Army, Staff Communications Division, 11 December 1964, SECRET
Dec 11, 1964 | Source Record Group 319, Entry NM-3 47-R3, Box #16, NARA
This NORAD message lists all the Soviet objects in near-Earth orbit currently being tracked, the objects that have decayed since the last report, and the active satellites whose telemetry has been recently intercepted.

Department of the Army, Staff Communications Division, 9 December 1964, SECRET
Dec 9, 1964 | Source Record Group 319, Entry NM-3 47-R3, Box #16, NARA
This is the initial report on Sputnik 84 and two associated objects. The Diyarbakir radar first detected and tracked the launch on December 9 from Kapustin Yar. Additional tracking by that and two other SAPDATS radars, as well as unspecified telemetry intercepts, established preliminary orbital elements of the payload and the associated two pieces of debris and their approximate size. Based on all the available information, the report concludes that the satellite was the latest in the series of scientific satellites launched from the complex.

L.J. Kirn, Rear Admiral, USN, Deputy Director, Joint Staff to Secretary of Defense, 6 February 1965, SECRET
Feb 6, 1965 | Source RG 330, Entry UD-06W #31, 471.96 File; NARA
This memo transmits the proposed “NORAD Qualitative Requirement for a Space Detection and Tracking System (NQR 2-65)” and “User Requirements for SPADATS Information.” The former was apparently the first planned update to the original set of requirements promulgated in 1961. The Joint Chiefs of Staff was withholding judgement on them until after the Ad Hoc Working Group on Department of Defense Space Detection, Surveillance, Tracking and Data Processing completed its review. Generally, the proposed requirements state that, by the end of 1966, “A detection capability must be provided for all Soviet space vehicles launched from presently known sites. System saturation level must be raised to cope with an increasing number of objects. These capabilities must be primarily oriented toward detecting and keeping track of space objects in earth orbit with 0 to near-polar inclinations.” From 1966-1970, the system must expand coverage “to include launches from countries other than the USSR, orbital paths of any inclination, and the ability to cope with maneuvering spacecraft. Appropriate elements of the system must be designed to support active space defense systems of the future.” More specifically, the proposed requirements set forth improvements in altitude coverage, the minimum size of objects that could be detected and tracked, detection probability for different inclinations and during the object’s first orbit, catalog accuracy, space weapons support, and the time required to achieve the accuracy needed for space weapons support. The “User Requirements for SPADATS Information” lists 20 specific types of intelligence users requested from NORAD.

Detection and Tracking of Satellites, Report of the Ad Hoc Working Group on Department of Defense Space Detection, Surveillance, Tracking and Data Processing, March 1965, SECRET
Source RG 330, Entry UD-06W #31, 471.96 File; NARA
This is the lengthy report by this group at the request of the Deputy Secretary of Defense “to review the Department of Defense’s space detection, surveillance, and tracking systems for the purpose of determining their capability, adequacy, redundancy and efficiency with respect to their primary missions” and recommend “suitable reductions and consolidations, allocation of resources and organization of the systems concerned, especially with a view to their operation as a coordinated program.” It summarizes the uses of space surveillance, evaluates the performance of space surveillance facilities, and makes specific recommendations. Among the latter are that the proposed NORAD requirements should be disapproved since they contain some data requirements for which there is little need and overestimate the Soviet threat in key respects. The Deputy Secretary of Defense quickly approved the report.

Memorandum from the Deputy Secretary of Defense to Chairman, Joint Chiefs of Staff, 20 July 1965, SECRET
Jul 20, 1965 | Source RG 330, Entry UD-06W #31, 471.96 File; NARA
This memo summarizes the resolution by the Joint Chiefs of Staff of the issues it had with the March 1965 report. The one major remaining disagreement was that the Joint Chiefs of Staff believed that by 1970 there was a need to have the capability “to detect and track one meter square space objects up to an altitude of 20,000 nm with a detection probability of 99%.” The Deputy Secretary of Defense suggests the requirement be changed to state that R&D should be pursued to attain coverage at higher altitudes and of smaller objects so when the need arose it could become operational quickly. The change was made, and the Joint Chiefs of Staff and the Deputy Secretary of Defense approved the new “NORAD Qualitative Requirement for a Space Detection and Tracking System” in 1966.

Joseph F. Carroll, Lieutenant General, USAF to Chairman, Joint Chiefs of Staff, 4 September 1965, SECRET
Sep 4, 1965 | Source RG 373, Entry UD-05D60, Box #2
This memo informs the Joint Chiefs of Staff that the Defense Intelligence Agency and the Air Force Foreign Technology Division established the Satellite Reconnaissance Advance Notice program on August 3, 1965. Under it, NORAD sent information to the participating military commands of the orbital elements and other technical data for each Soviet reconnaissance satellite launch. Using an instruction manual prepared by the Foreign Technology Division, the commands plotted when the satellite would be in range to take the appropriate measures to avoid or minimize observation.

GFSC Operations Control Center, Satellite Situation Report, Vol. 6, No. 7, April 15, 1966, UNCLASSIFIED
Apr 15, 1966 | Source NASA
This is a periodic Satellite Situation Report prepared by NASA’s Goddard Space Flight Center for public dissemination. Based largely on data provided by NORAD, it provides unclassified information on active satellites and space debris, such as the launch date and orbital elements. It is unclear whether classified U.S. satellites and Soviet reconnaissance satellites are referred to solely by their Object Number or are not listed at all. There are more objects than in the 1962 Satellite Situation Report, above, because of the launches since then and the increased capabilities of Space Surveillance Network sensors.

NORAD/CONAD Historical Summary, January-December 1966, SECRET
This excerpt from an annual history describes developments in the space surveillance program for 1966. It describes in detail the new “NORAD Qualitative Requirement for a Space Detection and Tracking System” approved by the Office of the Secretary of Defense.

NORAD Weekly Intelligence Review, Issue No. 27/68, 5 July 1968, SECRET
Jul 5, 1968 | Source Interagency Security Classification Appeals Panel
This section of the report sets forth information on several Soviet reconnaissance satellites launched in June and the separation of a secondary payload from a reconnaissance satellite launched in March.

NORAD Weekly Intelligence Review, Issue No. 2/70, 9 January 1970, SECRET
Jan 9, 1970 | Source Interagency Security Classification Appeals Panel
This section of the report sets forth information on a Soviet reconnaissance satellite that was launched in December. It was the fourth such satellite to maneuver, an action that increased the coverage of targets, before deorbiting on January 5.

Memo from W.D. Robertson, Vice Admiral, USN, Vice Director of Production to DR [Director of the Defense Intelligence Agency], 30 November 1977, SECRET
Nov 30, 1977 | Source RG 373, NARA
This memo sets forth the policies governing the sharing of Satellite Reconnaissance Advance Notice (SATRAN) data—which was classified Secret or lower—with NATO countries, South Korea, and Japan. For many years, the United Kingdom and Canada had been authorized to receive all SATRAN data but had used it infrequently. Other NATO nations had previously received only limited information but could now obtain it “to effect operational security measures during exercises, maneuvers, operations, and in general defense planning.” South Korea and Japan were also now authorized to receive it for the same purposes.

Air Force Space Command, Space Surveillance, January 23, 2001, UNCLASSIFIED
Jan 23, 2001 | Source Federation of American Scientists
This Power Point presents basic information on each of the Space Surveillance Network’s sensors and some of the issues involved in processing the data for intelligence. At the time, the phased-array radar at Eglin Air Force Base in Florida tracked the largest number of objects in near-Earth orbit (42.3%), the GEODSS optical systems and the Eglin radar tracked the largest number of objects in deep space orbits (32.9% and 22.3%, respectively), while GEODSS tracked the largest number of objects in geosynchronous orbit (43.9%).

Duane Bird, Major, USAF, Sharing Space Situational Awareness Data, September 1, 2010, UNCLASSIFIED
Sep 1, 2010 | Source Defense Information Technical Center
This paper was presented at a U.S. Strategic Command conference (the command that then had the space situational awareness mission). It focuses on the data provided to commercial and foreign owner/operators of satellites under recent changes in U.S. law. The presentation describes the limited data shared with commercial satellite and foreign satellite owner/operators at www.space-track.org and the more extensive data shared with owner/operators who have signed agreements with the command. Emergency warnings could be issued to any owner/operator, regardless of whether they have signed an agreement with the command, when another object was predicted to come within a certain distance to their satellite. Improvements in computer processing permitted the command to determine increases in collision probabilities for all active satellites and issue emergency warnings, if needed, not just a small subset, as before. Ongoing improvements to the Space Surveillance Network are also summarized.
