Se brbloprplk
Lret-page-
e.9z
Bruadcaet
m
laafd&undag %
Fb- 24, 1912
oren.pubke
dixr
ua
1
atillit
Visisns
NY
THE GARRISON_INTERVIEW with Dayid Mendelsohn - 5/2S/89
DavidMendelsohn (D.M.):Judge Jim Garrison (J.G.)is a former New Orleans
District Attorney who successfuliy indicted Clay Shaw for conspiracy to
assassinate President Kennedy.

Shaw was later acquitted, but we now have a
recordof that period.from Judge Garrison, a book calledOn_the_Irail_of
the_Assassins.In the afterword to that book,Carl .Oglesby, who was an
earlypresidentof SDsand author ofwhatIconsidertobetheseminal
Yankee__and Cowboy__War, outlines his view of  the basic ideas that Judge
Garrison covers in the book.They are a) that rabidly anti-Communist
elements of the CiA's Operations Division,.often moving through extra-
governmental channels,were deeply involved at the top of the assassination
planning and managementprocess and appear to have beenthe makers of the
decisian to kill the President; b) the conspiracy was politically motivat-
ed; its purpose was to stop JFK's movement toward detente in the Cold War,
and it succeeded in doingthat.

It must therefore be regardedas a palace
blame.As Oswald himself put it,"I'm apatsy."
D.M.: Jim, JFK was known to many as a cold warrior.

Many people say, for
instance,
he started the Vietnam War.

Why do you say it was his desire to
find an accommodation across the Iron Curtain that led to his death?

J.G.: I'll answer that in some detail in just a moment.

But let me say,
since you've opened with Carl Oglesby; that Carl Oglesby's book is one of
the most accurateand most important booksthat you've justquoted about
the assassination.

Everything that you've quoted is precisely true.

It's a
book that should be read by every American, because it  does put the
assassinationin a total perspective,and in an historical and philosophi-
cal perspective it's awfully important.With regard to John Kennedy,he
never was in any serious sense a cold warrior.Everything that you've quoted is precisely true. It's a
book that should be read by every American, because it  does put the
assassinationin a total perspective,and in an historical and philosophi-
cal perspective it's awfully important.With regard to John Kennedy,he
never was in any serious sense a cold warrior. As a matter of fact, every
major move he made, and I'm saying move, not words on this day he was sworn
in, which were written for him by members of his staff,I mean every major
decision hemade as President was toward ending the Cold War.So if you
hear anybody describe him with a straight face as a cold warrior, you're
talking to somebody whodoesn't know what he's talking_about. Kennedy did
coldwarriorswhowereinour
government had to kill him in orderto keep
theColdWargoing-
D.M.:  What changes in policy can you point to that occurred after his
assassination where we might see a turnabout from earlier Kennedy policies
to the new Johnson policies along those lines? J.G.: There were a series of them. The most immediate one occurred within
72 hours after his assassination. His successor,Lyndon Johnson, who was a
closet cold warriorall the time and whoin the Senate was knownas "the
Senator.from the Pentagon" becauseof his war-oriented philosophy,within
72 hours of John Kennedy's death,right after the eulogy in the Rotunda,

--- PAGE BREAK ---2
dor to South Vietnam, Henry Lodge, and said in effect, "You can go back and
tell the Vietnamese now that we're going_to back them all the way." In
other words, what he was .

doing, within 72 hours, no position papers, no
six-week or two-month studies by the military and intelligence, within a
few days he was meeting with Lodge and telling him, "We are changing the
enough,in18months.hewas pouringhalf amillionAmerican soldiers in
there, an expedition force, with no reason.

We were not even invited, we
weren't wanted by South Vietnam.

Of course, the result, as you know, was
that not only did we lose 55,ooo fine young men, died, murdered by our own
government,in a sense,but we got in awar which was not supported by the
peoplebutwas keptalive neverthelesssuccessivelybyJohnsonandthenby
Nixon to the point where in riots in Washington, D.C., they had to arrest
20,ooo American citizens protesting the war.

By those Nazi methods they
managed to make a war nobody wanted last nine years.But with Kennedy, we
of October, 1963, he told Kenny 0'Donnell, it"s in Kenny O'Donnell's book
Johnny.

We _Hardly Knew You, "we're getting out of Vietnam.

We'll be com-
pletely out byi965.That means the helicopters andeverything."And
incidentally,when he said that,even then we did not have a single combat
combat soldier.Anytime you hear anybody say that John Kennedy, like Lyndon
Johnson,had something to do with our getting involved in the war in
Vietnam, you are listening to a man who doesn't  know what he's talking
about.

D.M.:I understand also that he signed an executive order actually return-
ingtroops?--- PAGE BREAK ---

We'll be com-
pletely out byi965.That means the helicopters andeverything."And
incidentally,when he said that,even then we did not have a single combat
combat soldier.Anytime you hear anybody say that John Kennedy, like Lyndon
Johnson,had something to do with our getting involved in the war in
Vietnam, you are listening to a man who doesn't  know what he's talking
about. D.M.:I understand also that he signed an executive order actually return-
ingtroops? J.G.: The first order he gave in that regard was to return 1,ooo of our
troops as a gesture that could not be misunderstood, 1,ooo troops by the
endof December1963.Half of thetroops hadcome as far as Hawaiiwhenit
was killed,butthey were turned around overnight andsent back.That was
countermanded within 24 hours of his death, which gives you  some idea of
howmuchbackinghehadfromhisowngovernment. D.M.:Let'slook at his Cuba policy.Bay of Pigs wouldcertainlyseem like
it was an anti-Communist move. What about the missile crisis,where he was
standingdowntheCommunists? J.G.: Let's take those two. The Bay of Pigs was not his policy. The Bay of
Pigs was inherited from the previous administration, and the main designer
and supervisor of the Bay of Pigs was a man named Richard Nixon, who later,
when he got back in office, helped to keep the Vietnam War going. He was
one of the cold warriors, a dedicated cold warrior from  the first time he
entered public office. But that was not Kennedy's policy.Kennedy inherited
that, and his position, and there was no doubt about it, was, "I don't have
much alternative. People think that I'm failing to follow up on the previ-
ous President if I don't go ahead with something that he's initiated." But
he was not very enthusiastic about it. He was most reluctant. And to leave
no doubt about that,when he was asked...The Bay of Pigsimmediately
began failing because the invasion of the Bay of Pigs of Cuba, as you know,

--- PAGE BREAK ---3
was being accomplished by anti-Castro Cubans,  trained and backed, of
course, by American advisors, by the CiA.

It was a CiA project.

But it was
insufficiently backed.

This agency thought it could jam Jack Kennedy into
bringingintheNavyfighterplaneswhich'werejust overthe horizononthe
Navy flattops.

Their engines were even warmed up, so they were obviously
intended to beused.But Kennedydidn't intendto bringus into WorldWar
II1.

that casually.So when the man in charge of the Bay of Pigs, General
Charles Cabel，who just by a strange coincidence happened to be the brother
ofMayorEarl Cabel，inwhosetownJack Kennedywasmurdereda year ortwo
later,.whenGeneralCharles Cabel calledon President.Kennedytomake the
Navy planes available, Kennedy said,"Absolutely not" and turned him down.

Sothat was not really John Kennedy's project.at all.The second thing that
you mentioned was the Cuban missilecrisis.

The Cuban missile crisis,when
that was laid on John Kennedy, he recognized it for the crisis it was, for
the possible beginning of world War Ill，but it's important to see that in
i’ts perspective.

It's becoming increasingly apparent, I think, to most
thinking_ Americans, and I certainly have to brief with the Russians,
becauseIhappenedtobeontheAmericansideformostofmyadultlifein
the service,but it's becoming increasingly apparent to Americans that the
reason that the Russians putthe missiles in there was that they wanted to
discourage any further American adventurism or landing in Cuba.

And in any
case, whichever view you take, the crisis was laid upon us by those mis-
siles.

Kennedy's view,  certainly the right view, was that we had to get
our intelligence advisors around Kennedy,was to bomb and invade Cuba,much
desired, of course,by the military intelligence.

But Kennedy replied, as
only Kennedy could，"wouldn't that killoff a lotof Cubans?" Andso he
found a solution that they didn't dream of， because you can't deny his
intelligence norhis imagination.--- PAGE BREAK ---

Kennedy's view,  certainly the right view, was that we had to get
our intelligence advisors around Kennedy,was to bomb and invade Cuba,much
desired, of course,by the military intelligence. But Kennedy replied, as
only Kennedy could，"wouldn't that killoff a lotof Cubans?" Andso he
found a solution that they didn't dream of， because you can't deny his
intelligence norhis imagination. The solutionwhich he was ableto work
out, communicated through the Russian Ambassador, with Khruschev of
Russian, they worked out a solution in which they didn't  suggest it, but
they responded toit in a way we desired.Kennedy'ssolutionwas a block-
ade, without firing shots,  without bombing Cuba, without killing Cuba, we
simply set up a blockade, at first reluctantly, and finally realizing that
that was the best solution.The Russians endeduppuiling out their
missiles.That was what I think canfairly be described as a resolution of
the Cuban crisis without drawing the United States into war. At the same
time it was not aCold War move. It was an anti-Cold War.move,because it
usedreasonratherthanforce to resolve theproblem. D.M.: I think it's fair to go to New Orleans and foliow up on the policies
that President Kennedy followed in Cuba and to look  at the  anti-Castro
Cuban community,intelligence community in New Orleans.what was their
reaction to these policies in the Bay of Pigs and the missile crisis? Wasn't the CiA, which is supposed to be an arm of the executive branch,
wasn't theexecutive branch through the CiA helping to arm and train these
anti-CastroCubans? J.G.: Yes.To answer the first part first,the reaction of the anti-Castro
individuals who were being trained, they  were being trained north of Lake
of the Chicago office,by 1962 and 1963 was working for the CIA. His right-

--- PAGE BREAK ---4
operating this anti-Castro movement,which wascompletely in opposition to
everything that Kennedy was talking about and hadin mind.It contemplated
nothing less,ultimately,than another.invasion of Cuba.The Cubans
themselves,  and anti-Castro adventurers with them, had come ·to hate John
wasquite different.Itwas acase of avoidingawaronhispartwhenhe
agreedwithKhruschevnotto invade Cuba again.Theyneverforgavehimfor
that.

Nevertheless, even worse,  they.

were  continuing to violate the
President's specific order, the law of the land, and they were training
kept secret, but it has surfaced in recent years.

It was called Operation
Mongoose.

It looked, on the surface, like a legitimate series of forays
against Cuba, ostensibly in the national interest,but if you look at the
actualdescriptionin a1961 memorandum of OperationMongoose,it's
described by Major General Lansdale, who spent years in Vietnam keeping the
Vietnam War going, you will see that it was clear that he had in mind once
more theultimate invasionof Cuba and nothingless.Sowhat you hadunder
thecoverof OperationMongoose was this dailytraining northof Lake
Pontchartrain.

That's how New Orleans comes into it.

I didn't put New
Orleans into it.

The answer,.

of course, is if I had been.the D.A.

of
Pittsburgh, it wouldn't have been me.

But I was D.A.

of New Orleans, and
New Orleans was where they were setting up the next invasion of Cuba.

Every
day or so Dave Ferrie would drive dressed in army combat outfits and black
boots from Banister's office'across the lake'and check thetraining,which
consisted largelyof shooting，and comeback and give hisreport.It was
movingforwardpretty_steadily,until Kennedylearnedinlate1963,
precisely August 1，1963,that for several years now his orders against any
more anti-Cuba activity, much less preparation for a new land invasion of
Cuba, were being violated.

So he had to call on the FBI to actually raid
theCIA campwhere the Cubans and otheranti-Castro people were being
trained.--- PAGE BREAK ---

Every
day or so Dave Ferrie would drive dressed in army combat outfits and black
boots from Banister's office'across the lake'and check thetraining,which
consisted largelyof shooting，and comeback and give hisreport.It was
movingforwardpretty_steadily,until Kennedylearnedinlate1963,
precisely August 1，1963,that for several years now his orders against any
more anti-Cuba activity, much less preparation for a new land invasion of
Cuba, were being violated. So he had to call on the FBI to actually raid
theCIA campwhere the Cubans and otheranti-Castro people were being
trained. But even then the FBl, because the intelligence community protects
different parts of each other,did not make it public to the people until
we were able to find out that troops had been trained there,too, to land
in Cuba. But they broke in up forthe time being.I'm not sure that made a
lot of difference. By then a lot of men had been trained, since this was
August1of1963,andwereavailabletodo some shooting whenNovembercame
inDallas. D.M.: This reminds me a little of some of the Iran/contra activities, that
certain elementsof intelligence throughNSC seemed tobe carryingona
foreign policy that was separate at least from the espoused policyof the
executive branch and certainly the foreign policy of the Congress.But in
this case the President acted through the FBl to break up this secret
team'sactivities. J.G.: That's a very good analogy, metaphor. But it's not just a little like
the Iran/contra controversy.Itreally is the predecessor toit.In other
words, the CIA in the Kennedy thing was not using just CIA individuals. It
was going off the shelf，which is the phrase,going outside the agency and
so forth,taking some civilianand other groups'off-the-shelfoperation.

--- PAGE BREAK ---as not using just CIA individuals. It
was going off the shelf，which is the phrase,going outside the agency and
so forth,taking some civilianand other groups'off-the-shelfoperation.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

5
It was building up by 1963, whichIjust described,from which you had the
Central ingredients that actually murdered John Kennedy, which again leaves
nothing butaCiAmurderof JohnKennedy.But thecovertelements of the
CIA,that's what I want to emphasize. But it was indeed the predecessor of
the Iran/contrabusiness.It wasthe grandfather ofthat and theothers
which followed. I think Casey had in mind setting up a series of off-the-
shelf operations.It probably wasn't thefirst one that North was involved
in.
D.M.:Let's focus inon New Orleans.Let's look at544 Camp Street.Let's
lookattheactivities of GuyBanister andmaybe starttotalkabout how
Banister and this group was.connected on the one side to,I think you say,
tonavalintelligence andontheotherside to individuals thatwe've heard
about:'Lee Harvey Oswald,how is he connected to Banister?
J.G.: I'm going to tell you about that. First of all, sometimes I wonder at
some of these books written, at the mentality of the writers. Obviously
    e        i
but theAgency. For sometime a seriesof books wouldsay Castro killed
Kennedy; and I think the current vogue now for the Agency is to publish
books saying the Mob killed Kennedy, and all these ridiculous things,when
any thinking person could look at the facts and see clearly that the main
conflict was between Jack Kennedy and the Central IntelligenceAgency.In
fact，it was on thefront page ofthe New_York.Timesin 1963,the split
between the two of them.It came.to the point where Jack Kennedy. said,"I'm
All these people, all these experts, I don't understand them. I was 16
years in theD.A.'s office,andI feellike I knewsomething about New
Orleans,but all of a sudden I find there are people I never heardof. One
of them wrote his book in  Italy, telling all about the situation in New
Orleans and how it is and organizedcrime down there，which is nothing like
the way they describe it. Theydon't even know what they're talking about.
But suddenly they're experts because the CiA's paying them $5,ooo a week.
experts are turning out all this garbage to fool the American people. Well;
since I was in the city and happened to be D.A.  and had the responsibility
of seeing what Lee Harvey was doing the summerof 1963,I went down to 544
this is a side entrance toGuy Banister's office."I knew Guy.Heused to
be head of the Chicago FBl office during World War Il. He was in the Office
ofNavalIntelligence.
D.M.: I should interject here,544 Camp is an address that those of us who
have looked at the case know about,because Lee Harvey Oswald,when hewas
Committee, S44 Camp Street was stamped on the literature. So this is where
S44 comes into the case, through Oswald having worked there in the same
buildingwhereBanisterwasoperating.
J.G.:That's accurately told. But just to underscore the significance of
what you just said,what you are describing is a situation in whichg worked there in the same
buildingwhereBanisterwasoperating.
J.G.:That's accurately told. But just to underscore the significance of
what you just said,what you are describing is a situation in which

--- PAGE BREAK ---6
ostensibly Communist material has stamped on it an address,544 Camp, which
isthe locationof partof theintelligencecommunityin NewOrleans,
meaning, without a question of a doubt, there's prima facie evidence, that
Lee Oswald was  not a Communist  at all, he was an aqent_provocateur.In
other words, you can visualize it with no strain in the morning.

We later
found out that on the third floor of Banister's office,he located asmall
room and cleaned it out andgave it to Oswald to keep his pamphlets in.But
you could see Oswald starting out in the morning and Banister with his
some more of those pamphlets out today, son.

They like what you're doing in
Washington." So he goes out and hand them out like he's a Communist, but
he'sthe one who calls the newspeopleto come and take the pictures.He's
actingouta roleas aCommunist，buthedoesn't knowthey're really
fattening him up to be the turkey for Thanksgiving.

He's the scapegoat.

They're goingtohave himmurdered,bymakinghimlook like aCommunist.

D.M.: Guy Banister was once the Chief of the FBI office in Chicago.

How did
hefirstcometoyourattentioninrelationshiptotheassassination?

J.G.: He first came to my attention before the assassination, when I was
District Attorney.

Seth Morrison, the Mayor of New Orleans, said, "We have
a man named Banister who looks like he might be a good Assistant Superin-
tendent of Police.for that vacancy."Ididn't know much abouthim,butI
said, if he's got a good FBl background, he's certainly is organized and
sounds good to me.But how he first came to my attention.was.when I, after
spending some night with the Warren Commission, had put to the side the
address S44 Camp to check because I saw that Lee Oswald was putting his
little rubberstamp on the papers.

He only did it one day and then they
stopped him.

They kind of had a heart attack, I'm sure, when he was putting
that on the papers he was handing out to the public.--- PAGE BREAK ---

He only did it one day and then they
stopped him. They kind of had a heart attack, I'm sure, when he was putting
that on the papers he was handing out to the public. But he didn't know
that he was set  to be the scapegoat, so he was doing what he thought was
natural. But what actually happened was, when he was arrested on August 9
andbrought to the First District， the first thing he did was to ask to
speak to an FBI agent. The FBI agent came over，Agent Quigley, and promptly
Quigleyand Oswaldwerelockedinprivateconference forsometime. D.M.: He was arrested, Oswald was arrested? J.G.: Yes,he was arrested on the ninth of August because of a controversy. It was a set up controversy with other Cubans. In other words, one of those
things with another Cuban who at the right time Oswald said,"Hit me,
just to make it look 1ike hewas a troublemaker for the Communists.It was
eye,though， and ultimately availableto me.So I put them onthe side to
I'm surprised nobody else found it first, I found myself reading Colonel
Folsom's 2o1, his personnel file,. Lee Oswald in the Marines, and he
casually mentioned,"Here's Lee Oswald's grade in a Russian test." Somebody
must have kicked him under the table, because he said he didn't do too
well, he got almost as many right as he got wrong, but I wouldn't get any
right in a Russian test.With all myyears in the military,I was amajor

--- PAGE BREAK ---7
by then,Inever took aRussian test.Here'sa private takinga Russian
examination.SoIrealizedthenthatthereweresignsofintelligence
before he left the house, intelligence training of Oswald for some mission.

This was, when he took this test, not long before he left for Russia.

So
obviously in retrospect he didn't leave as a Communist.

He left as a young
Marine but with an intelligence assignment.Otherwise the Marines wouldn't
be teaching him Russian.But I wanted too see what sort of place this
"Russian-studying Marine" was operating out of.

That caused me to go down
my God, this  so-called Communist, the lone assassin, the man who is
supposed to have murdered John Kennedy,the man who  was butchered before
anybody couldask himtoo manyquestions,was an aqent_provocateur working
for the United States government.

He was working at that address.

544 Camp
was a side entrance to Guy Banister'soffice.

Around the corner on Lafay-
ette Street was the entrance to Banister's office.Across the street in the
Post Office building was an Office of Naval Intelligence.Banister was in
Naval Intelligence inWorld War II.I knew some of these people.Secret
Service,asDistrict Attorney.inNew Orleans Iknew where someof these
...

Secret Service was also across the street.

Around the corner, just
across LafayetteSquare around thecorner was theOffice ofthe Federal
Bureau of Investigation and also, on another floor, the Office of the
Central Intelligence Agency.Secret Service was also across the street.

Around the corner, just
across LafayetteSquare around thecorner was theOffice ofthe Federal
Bureau of Investigation and also, on another floor, the Office of the
Central Intelligence Agency.

That lone assassin, this person who had been
describedtoallAmericans andliedabout bythefederalgovernment to all
the world as a Communist was a Marine soldier doing his assignment, doing
what hewas taught to do after he was given intelligencetraining:operat-
ingright out of the veryheartof the intelligence community.The reason
that the heart is located there so close to the riverfront is that's where
all theshipsgo fromNewOrleans down to Central AmericaandSouth
America,anda lotofthe membersof theships’staffs,as youmight
imagine, are intelligence men, too, so the bases were near the ships they
used.

D.M.:Just so wecan fill the picture in: for about how long was Oswald
operating outof this office.or coming toand from the office?Is there
evidence of some period of time when he was in this environment,which is
obviouslyoneofintelligencedomination?

J.G.:It's totalintelligence.Nobody was inthat office who was not
intelligence，
Banister's office.The time that he began operating, the
week，is not specific，butit's known that it wasthrough August that he
was handing out the pamphlets.Earlierinthe summerhewas working around
the corner at the Reilly Coffee Company.

Mr.

Reilly was not necessarily
involved at all, but apparently the nesting.

place was made available for
some request that thecoffeecompany didn"t knowthe reasonfor.The
was operating out of the ReillyCoffee Company-He didn't havethatmuch to
do,so he spent most of his time at the Alva Garage next door, which
happened to be the garage, and that was something else I was aware of, the
automobiles.It was filled up with intelligence community.

So that's where
he spent the earlier part of the summer.--- PAGE BREAK ---

place was made available for
some request that thecoffeecompany didn"t knowthe reasonfor.The
was operating out of the ReillyCoffee Company-He didn't havethatmuch to
do,so he spent most of his time at the Alva Garage next door, which
happened to be the garage, and that was something else I was aware of, the
automobiles.It was filled up with intelligence community. So that's where
he spent the earlier part of the summer. when August came, he was handing
out thepamphlets as anaoent_provocateurtolooklike aCommunist so that

--- PAGE BREAK ---telligence community. So that's where
he spent the earlier part of the summer. when August came, he was handing
out thepamphlets as anaoent_provocateurtolooklike aCommunist so that

--- PAGE BREAK ---

8
whenJack Kennedywasmurderedbythecovert actionelements gettingready
Cold War policy, he was being trained like a turkey being fattened for
Thanksgiving.
D.M.:'I wanted.to stick with Reilly. The Reilly Coffee Company was one of
where you recount the number, I think four or five, co-workers, people that
Oswaldworkedunder.
J.G.: Let me give you an example. I was curious, after I found out how
unquestionably,how clear it was that Oswald was an aoent_proyocateur,that
he was working: for government intelligence from the outset.  I was wonder-
ing, how did the U.S. government, the intelligence community handle his co-
workers so that they wouldn't be telling too many people, well, he didn't
get many assignments. This was just a nesting place.He didn't have to do
too much. That's why I sentmy chief investigator over there.He wasback
inahour and a half with alist of paper.Every man that had been working
with Oswald at the Reilly Coffee Company or above him,within two weeks,
hadbeenmoved outtoa higher-payingjobout atNASA,the National
Aeronautics andSpace Administration.Branyonhad gone toChrysler,this
man had gone to Boeing;  this man was working for NAsA itself,  another man
wasworking for NASA.The same thinghappened to anybody who helped in the
assassination. For example, we arrested, even though we didn't know who we
were arresting;we knew thatit was a strange time to make it,we arrested
David Ferriewithin 72hoursof theassassination when westumbled across
the fact thathe drove across a former friend ofLee Oswald's when he was
in the CAP, we had a Sunday meeting to review the  whole thing. Kennedy's
body's still warm.we found out that this odd character,David Ferrie,who
we later learned was working with Oswald out of Banister's office, had
waitedfor him to comeback，and when he cameback that Monday morning I
had him arrested and brought to my house.  I said, "what were your reasons
forgoing into Texasat this strangetime?" He explainedthat he hadn'tim to comeback，and when he cameback that Monday morning I
had him arrested and brought to my house.  I said, "what were your reasons
forgoing into Texasat this strangetime?" He explainedthat he hadn't

said, "That's very interesting, but how did you happen to pick the heaviest
storm in many years to drive there?" He couldn't think of an answer to
that，so I had him taken over to the FBI， the First District，to be held
for the FBI for investigation. You couldn't give these guys .·. I'm

Case. They dropped Ferrie like a hot potato, even made a public announce-
ment because I guess members of the intelligence community recognize one
another,that it was not the FBI's idea to arrest Mr. Ferrie,but Jim
Garrison's. But we got one of the guys involved pretty darn early.
D.M.: I think the listeners probably didn't get why it was that you picked
up Ferrie.Did you already know that he was an associate of Oswald's?
J.G.:You're probably right.Imight have jumpedover that.Whenever a
major crime occurred it was a habit of my office to have a Sunday meeting
ofthe top members of the staff.And wheneverthere was any sign pointing
to New Orleans where we might help, for example in the Chicago murders some

--- PAGE BREAK ---y office to have a Sunday meeting
ofthe top members of the staff.And wheneverthere was any sign pointing
to New Orleans where we might help, for example in the Chicago murders some

--- PAGE BREAK ---

9
years backwhere thisman murderedabout sixor eight nurses,horrible
murders,he used a seaman's knot afterwards,before he killed them.So just
on the outside chance, since it was a seaman's knot, that he was a seaman,
because New Orleans is a port of shipping, I had a meeting and we spent
hours going through every possible lead. We did the same thing here, and in
this case it paidoff.we were looking for somebody who was associated with
LeeOswaldandeventhoughhe apparentlywas anaoent_proyocateur，more and
more as it turned out,'we wanted to see who was associated with him. We
found, soon enough, that David Ferrie was with him frequently. It was a
on it. So we went over to Dave Ferrie's house to see what was happening,
and wefound several friends ofhis waiting there forhim.They admitted
that he'd gone to Texas. They were waiting for him to come back from Texas.
I noticed amap of Cuba on the wall,.all kinds of rifles, all kinds of
military equipment. I realized I wasn't dealing with Joe Smith American. So
wewaitedforhim to come back and that'swhenIquestionedhim.Hedidn't
answerthe questions very effectively. To makea long story short，we got
the right guy. The House Committee, although it didn't do a very effective
job,did conclude that there was a conspiracy.It went on to say, ten years
later, that one of the signs that a conspiracy. existed was Lee Oswald's
association with David Ferrie. It said, _that's very strange, but that
ten years earlier.But then it went on to say, now it's too late to look
intoit.
D.M.: I think this is a good point for  me to jump in with my hostile
question, so to speak. David Ferrie,I understand, the Friday of the
J.G.: Isn't that funny? I had the impression he was working for his. boss,
D.M.: I hear you. But Gill was Marcello's attorniey at the time.
J.G.: On that particular weekend  that's right._The next week hewas
somebody's. else's attorney,at which time David Ferrie was still working
forwrayGill.
D.M.: I hear you, and I want to hear more. .I want to just put in the
question that, as you say, the big theory that's being put forward now is
that elements of organized crime were responsible for killing Kennedy.
J.G.: Let's go straight to that. Have you got a stopwatch? Let me just see
how many seconds it takes me to dispose in the mind of a reasonable man of
organized crime being involved.First ofall， the reason given forthe
contended organized crime, and the listener should understand that idea is
conceivedand is spread consistently by the Central Intelligence Agency so
that you will look away from its covert operations and its other murders;
Attorney General, truly, all you have to do,  Bobby Kennedy it was at the
time,is shoot him when he goes to his Justice Department office in theaway from its covert operations and its other murders;
Attorney General, truly, all you have to do,  Bobby Kennedy it was at the
time,is shoot him when he goes to his Justice Department office in the

--- PAGE BREAK ---t operations and its other murders;
Attorney General, truly, all you have to do,  Bobby Kennedy it was at the
time,is shoot him when he goes to his Justice Department office in the

--- PAGE BREAK ---

10
morning or on theway out in the afternoon,because hedidn't even have a
bodyguard. All he had was a driver who was also the bodyguard. Compare that
to gettingridof him in the waythat the Agency wants you tobelieve that
the Mafia . ·. you've got to give the Mob credit for having more sense
that this.To have to penetrate the hugeguard around the President of the
United States, the Secret Service protection, the FBl protection,all the
other  agencies, the  protection of the police  and  the city, in order
ultimately to cause his Attorney General to end up withouta job is really
not verylogical.Butlet's takeanother step further.One ofthe most
critical  steps in accomplishing the murder was the change of  the parade
route at the last second.On the morning of the parade,the Dallas morning
newsshowed that the parade route for.the President was to continue as it
came toDeally Plaza,continue onMain Street all theway through Deally
Plaza. That map was five sixths, leaving just one column on the left of the
page, showing it so everybody couldsee the route ofthe President. What
actuatly happened was that when the Presidential motorcade reached  Deally
Plaza,without warning it turned right. It turned right downHouston and
left into Elm.It was a cul-de-sac,where the ambush was waiting- Secondly,
that double turn, the last leg of which was 12o degrees to the left， slowed
been going 25 mph as he hadbeen and would be out in the meadow as planned,
through thecenter of Dealy Plaza on Main,they wouldn't have been able to
hit the sideof the car.That'swhat happened.The paradewas changed at
the last moment. The parade with the President of the United States.Now I
ask you, who has the most power to change the route at the last minute of
the President of the United States: BigTuna Accardo,or the security
forces of the United States government assigned to protect? That's not all.
overthe verbal，vocal protests oftheDallas officials,becausethe
autopsy is requiredunder Texas lawto be held in Dallas for reasonslike
  .
military hospital.In that military autopsy.there were approximately 30
men,most in uniform,almost all military officers of highrank except for
one  of the pathologists, who was a civilian,the other pathologists were
military. There were several FBl agents and several Secret Service.So you
had entirely federal people. Yet that was one of the most rigged autopsies
ever held. It was so badly rigged that the members of the Warren Commission
them from being embarrassed, the autopsy papers and the x-rays weren't even
presented to them. They never saw them. Furthermore, the chief pathologist
on that Sunday weekend burned the original autopsy in his fireplace.There
you have arigged autopsy.what room was there for a member ofthe Mob to
D.M.:I certainly agree that the coverup couldn't have been carried out
findthetruthfindthe truthafteralltheseyears?replace.There
you have arigged autopsy.what room was there for a member ofthe Mob to
D.M.:I certainly agree that the coverup couldn't have been carried out
findthetruthfindthe truthafteralltheseyears?

--- PAGE BREAK ---11
J.G.: Let me tell you something about the coverup.But I'd.like to say
something about the significance of thismurder，because I think it's been
underestimated.First ofall,I think I've made thepoint to a reasonable
individual that elements of the covert operations,not the entire structure
of the CIA,because John McCohn,who was appointed by Jack Kennedy;I know
cared for Jack Kennedy, but elements ofthe covert operations,which was
the muscle part,the murder part of theCiA and consists even nowof two
thirds of the CiA,that'sone of the first things we ought todo after we
change the name of the‘CiA is get rid of covert operations.You shouldn't
have covert operations inside the United States against American citizens.

But we doevery day,and that's one of the things that has caused this
country to cease being a democracy.

But to gobeyond that.I think that to
getat bringing outthe truth.it'sso criticalthat thesewords must be
said.

TheAmericanpeople haveto face thefact thatthis isnot an
.oversight, not a mistake on somebody's.

part.

Every day that passes high
individuals atthe very top of the United States government are playing an
active role in concealing from you the truth of John Kennedy's murder.

Most
ofthe men who are inthe Congresswho have anIQ of 1oo or above,or let's
say5o andabove,haveto know thathe wasbrutally murderedand torn
apart.

But they no longer really care,apparently, because they are no
longer doing anything.

His name is never even mentioned any more.And look
at the attitude of the Presidents,one after the other.These are the chief
executives of our country, and yet we've had a succession of Presidents now
and not one even mentions thename of John Kennedy.Apparently they expect
us to believe that Jack.

Kennedy.is..on sabbatical up at Hyannisport and
everything's all right.--- PAGE BREAK ---

His name is never even mentioned any more.And look
at the attitude of the Presidents,one after the other.These are the chief
executives of our country, and yet we've had a succession of Presidents now
and not one even mentions thename of John Kennedy.Apparently they expect
us to believe that Jack. Kennedy.is..on sabbatical up at Hyannisport and
everything's all right. Well, everything isn't all right.I suggest that if
the government,including the Presidents and including Presidents who speak
softly of wanting a kinder; gentlernation, how about also a more honest
nation that tells the people the truth,which it hasn't done,and tell the
Presidents and the Congress itself，do something about bringing out the
truth? I donot think this republicwill last.Ithink it will fall.If
this happens, and it falls because the government will not tell the truth,
thenitdeservestofall. D.M.:Again，I'm on your side onthe issue of whether intelligence rather
thanorganizedcrimewas responsible,certainlyultimately,forthe
assassination. However,I feel as an assassination buff myself and somebody
whohas been following the literature,the issue of organized crime versus
intelligence is at the center of discussion,if only because,as you say;
there are many books published by, as you say, intelligence, that are
saying it'sorganizedcrimeto getus offthe trail.I justwanted to
follow up, because it's in. the literature, why wouldn't they have killed
BobbyKennedy?Whywouldn't theyhavemoreeasily killedBobby Kennedy
rather than President Kennedy? The answer given is, if you kill Bobby
the President,he'll get a new Attorney General and go after organized
crime like crazy. Theother elementthat's addedis thatBobby Kennedy
ordered thedeportation of Carlos Marcello andleft himunceremoniously
without his shoes in Guatemala and that Marcello therefore had a motive to
come backand get President Kennedy in order toget Bobby Kennedy off his
back.I know people are interested in hearing your response to this.oes in Guatemala and that Marcello therefore had a motive to
come backand get President Kennedy in order toget Bobby Kennedy off his
back.I know people are interested in hearing your response to this.

--- PAGE BREAK ---12
J.G.: My.response is your arguments are impeliing.

You have won me over.

For the firsttimeI seethat it isso clear thatorganized crimedidit
thatI don't see how any thinkingperson could miss it.As amatter of
playeda major role inchanging our foreignpolicy on November 22,1963,
was probably helped, not alone, but probably helped by Donald Duck and
MickeyMouse.

D.M.: Okay.

Let's go back to the weekend of the assassination.

What tipped
you off that NewOrleans might be at the centerof a possible conspiracy?

Guy.

Banister was booked that night for beating upsomeone.What didyou
findoutaboutthat?

J.G.: First of all，those things did not tipme off that anything was
happening.You must  understand,and I pleadguilty to believing the
government's lie, the biggest lie it told in the history of the human race,
now see, was told by the United  States government and continues to be
told.

I am one of the people who believed it.

One of the reasons I believed
it was that I had been in the army all my life, five years in World War Il
been deceptive, and the army was the government to me.

So I accepted these
things without question.

Now the way that I happened to stumble across and
beating of Jack Martin, which you described, the police report is dated 22
November 1963, the night of the assassination.

Even though I believed.the
government's pronouncements,how my office happened tocatch David Ferrie
when he came back in from his weekend trip to Texas was because I was just
doing my duty as the District Attorney because the President had  been
killed, Lee Oswald had spent the summer in New Orleans, so we were what you
might say grabbing suspicious people.

It just happens, in hindsight it's
clear, but by accident we grabbed people whowere relevant.

But we did not
know that  at the time.

So that's why Ipromptly turned Ferrie over to the
FBI  and things like that.

For the next three years I concentrated on
burglaries, robberies, murders, and so on.--- PAGE BREAK ---

So that's why Ipromptly turned Ferrie over to the
FBI  and things like that. For the next three years I concentrated on
burglaries, robberies, murders, and so on. So don't give me too much
credit.I'm not that quick.I did not see that something was wrong which I
should have. It was apparent, but I didn't see it for years. D.M.:Why did Banister beat Martin that night? J.G.:  The reason Banister beat Jack Martin that night was Banister,
probably not unrelated to his years as head of the FBl in Chicago, while he
was Capableof drinking heavilyat night，hewould not'drinkduring the
day.He was soberas ajudge during the day.But the day of the assassina-
tion, he was with Jack Martin, who worked for him. Jack Martin did the
detective work, and the office had on the front of it, "Guy Banister,
logistics and theproblems ofgetting additional ammunitionto Cubafor
raids on Cuba and the training.He was totally working forthe CiA.Jack
Martin, who was intelligent, did his detective work. So they were friends,
even though they were tremendously different personalities. They both had
been drinking,  and Banister, for the first time to anybody's memory,.got
completely drunk on the afternoonof theassassination. Theygot inan

--- PAGE BREAK ---13
argument,it doesn't haveto be a great reason between twodrunks.Onthe
way home, at nightfall, home meaning around the corner from the Katzenjam-
mer Bar on Camp Street,around the corner to Lafayette Street and Guy
Banister's office, somewhere on the way 'upstairs or on the second floor,
where the office was, Banister blew up and out of the blue, as Jack finally
told me, said that Jack had been looking into his filing cabinets.

Of
course, Banister was very careful about his filing cases because there was
nothing in there but intelligence.

As we later learned, there were no
private cases in there at all.He usually kept them locked.

But Jack
Martin, who was something of a character, nevertheless was a  thoroughly
honest man.

He was outraged.

He replied the best way he knew how..As he
said,he was referring  to.Lee Oswald atthe time.He said,"Look,I saw
certain people coming into your office allsummer long; and I can say
something about that if I want to." At that point，Banister,who did not
carry a regular sidearm, carried a .357 magnum, pulied out his .357 magnum,
which was something else he had never done, besides drink in the daytime.

He pistol-whipped Martin until they had to get an ambulance over to cut the
bodyaway.That's the waythat thing developed.

D.M.:This on November22.

J.G.: Yes,because the specific point again was, it's funny how quickly it
took in time,_it was a matter of hours after the arrest ofOswald.

He was
arrested at 3:0o Dallas  time.

This is roughly 5:45 or 6:0o New Orleans
time..Already, too.soon for Banister, already someone Banister knows has
called his attention that he hasn't forgottenseeing Oswald in and out of
thatoffice.That'swhyheblewup.

D.M.: Let's get to Clay Shaw, who, as we mentioned earlier， you had gotten
hearaboutClayShaw'sinvolvementintheconspiracy?Whatevidencedidyou
developagainsthim?--- PAGE BREAK ---

This is roughly 5:45 or 6:0o New Orleans
time..Already, too.soon for Banister, already someone Banister knows has
called his attention that he hasn't forgottenseeing Oswald in and out of
thatoffice.That'swhyheblewup. D.M.: Let's get to Clay Shaw, who, as we mentioned earlier， you had gotten
hearaboutClayShaw'sinvolvementintheconspiracy?Whatevidencedidyou
developagainsthim? J.G.:We did not hearabout his involvement inthe conspiracyprecisely.We
learned that from an attorney, again I seem to have been in the accident of
knowing all these individuals, which probably helped because I knew who was
lying andwho wasn't.Istumbledacross thefactearly onthat Dean
Andrews, an attorney who for years had handled cases for Clay Shaw,
triedcases against himback whenIwas Assistant District Attorney. Andrews specialized in municipal court cases,largely, and was also
handling some papers for Lee Oswald with regard to getting citizenship for
Marina. Banister had made a call on the day after  the assassination to
Dallas, Texas, to Oswald's jail. The setup for Oswald,. incredibly enough,
bynowyou've seenthe curiousnonchalance of the Dallaspolice force in
operation,Oswaldwas both receivingand makingcalls.Here's aman who
just supposedly, supposedly, I emphasize, killed the President, because he
killed no one and the jailer, as far as the jailer knows he killed the
President, but nevertheless he'd say, "Lee, here's another call for you."
They'd bring him to the phone. Whenever he wanted to make a call he'd give
thenumberto thejailerandthejailerwouldmakethecallandbringhim
over and keep all those papers together. So Andrews had received a call, as

--- PAGE BREAK ---14
hetestifiedlater，andhetoldme when I questioned him,.and he told the
FBI and the Commission,he received a call from aman he identified as Clay
Bertrand asking him to represent Lee Oswald.

He said something about him in
thehospital.He was inCharity Hospital at the time."I don't know if I
Can,.and let me think that over,"and about the time he put down the
receiver about 25 FBl men hit the door.

They were monitoring those lines
coming into the hospital andasking to speak to Lee Oswald.So they picked
that up very quickly.

Parenthetically, some listener might be curious as to
what happened to all the calls that Oswald made and received, which
certainly got my curiosity up,..I must have spent 5o hours digging them
down.

The bottom line was that the jailer said he kept them religiously.

He
looked in his drawer and they were all gone.He doesn't know what happened
to them.But anyway, that's how we've learned that Dean Andrews had
receivedsuch acall.But the name ClayBertrandwe weren't that familiar
with.

When we found that obviously, going through the questions, we had
copies of the FBl interview of Oswald, and we got copies of...this went
on for several years.

By the late spring of 1964, Dean Andrews had testi-
fied before the Commission." I studied his testimony and observed how
increasingly frightened he became when he was asked whoClay Bertrand was.

As a matter of fact, the more he was asked about Clay Bertrand's identity,
themoresteadilyClayBertrandshrunk.Hewas 6'3"whenAndrewsfirst
described him to the FBI.By thetime the Warren Commission asked how tall
Clay Bertrand was, he was only 5' tall.

Surely that's a sign that the man
who's answering the question isn't  completely comfortable with his  situa-
tion, he"s trying to get out of it.

But we knew that he’ couldn't be both,
and we knew that Andrews was lying.

After I had along,long conversation
with Andrews, and told him, "Look, Dean, we went to law school together.--- PAGE BREAK ---

But we knew that he’ couldn't be both,
and we knew that Andrews was lying. After I had along,long conversation
with Andrews, and told him, "Look, Dean, we went to law school together. You're a friend ofmine.I like you.But let me make one thing clear.If
youcontinue to lieto me like you didtotheFBI andtheWarrenCommis-
sion, you're not just going to walk out. You're going to go in front of the
Grand Jury, and if you lie to the Grand Jury you're going to jail." That's
what happened, of course,and we convicted him for perjury in front of the
Grand Jury. That was the first conviction in the Kennedy case. There was a
conviction, unlike what people  say. That was the first. Anyway, what
happened is,we then realizedthat the identityof Clay probablyled in
Dean Andrews’night life.Most of hiscases camefrom thebars inthe
the time. He also spent a lot of his time there. So we started going every
night.We formedteamsand fanned outand went allthroughthe Quarter. Pretty soon we started encountering the answers. It took a while, but
realize my chiefinvestigator wasn't a bad guy after they had a few beers. We kept on. After a few weeks we were getting, "well, you want to know who
ClayBertrandis? Ithought everybodyknew.You're talking about Clay
Shaw." About the seventh or eighth time we got it we started getting state-
peoplewho knewboth Clay Shaw andDavid Ferriewho connectedthe two
together. And since we had Ferrie in the scene in the company of Lee Harvey
Oswald,we knew we were on to something. We kept on digging， and the day
came when finally, for example, you might say the culmination of it came

--- PAGE BREAK ---15
when afterquestioning 6oo  witnesses inthe little town of Clinton,we
foundsix ofthemwho recognizedhavingseenClayShawandDavidFerrie in
the company of Lee Oswald on two separate days, two of the strongest
witnesses in the case..So that's how we found out who Clay Shaw was.It
tooka long time,but wefound him.

D.M.:Whatotherevidence didyou have that Shawwas involvedinaconspir-
acy to kill President Kennedy?

Why doyou feel he was not convicted by the
jury?

J.G.: There's a great deal of evidence.A circumstantial case can involve
as much as.thirty or forty pieces you have toput together.Let me take a
simple example and show you the kind of thing which left no other alterna~
tive.I think nevertheless it was a tough case.We continued digging away
-and ultimately we found not only a very honest person,  because he didn't
like Jack Kennedy, oddly enough.

He felt very strongly about the Cubans.

He
was Perry Russo, a man who will not tell a lie, and ·there are some people
who will not do that,regardless of how they might feel otherwise.

He
happened to be present.

He was a friend of Ferrie's.Ferrie was a remark-
able intellect, a natural teacher.

The man could speak three or four
languages and even intrigued Shaw, who was certainly no second-rate mind.

But above all he intrigued Ruso, and it was obvious because of this meeting
andnot just because of the presence ofall three of them,it was obvious
atthismeetingat LouisianaAvenueandParkwaythat DavidFerrie's
apartment.where.Shaw.and Oswald.was,present, and Perry Russo was present,
that Perry Russo was accepted by both Ferrie and Shaw,although Oswald
didn't pay much attention to him.

The upshot of Russo's testimony was a
detailed description ofthe impending assassination ofJohn Kennedy,even
downtothe pointwheretheywerediscussingwheretheywere goingtogo.--- PAGE BREAK ---

But above all he intrigued Ruso, and it was obvious because of this meeting
andnot just because of the presence ofall three of them,it was obvious
atthismeetingat LouisianaAvenueandParkwaythat DavidFerrie's
apartment.where.Shaw.and Oswald.was,present, and Perry Russo was present,
that Perry Russo was accepted by both Ferrie and Shaw,although Oswald
didn't pay much attention to him. The upshot of Russo's testimony was a
detailed description ofthe impending assassination ofJohn Kennedy,even
downtothe pointwheretheywerediscussingwheretheywere goingtogo. As I recall, the specific responses when Shaw and Ferrie were thinking out
loud to each other, Shaw said, “Well, I'm definitely going to be out on the
I'll go to some university." Just to make that long story short, Shaw ended
up arriving to make a speech in San Francisco,which was canceled when he
arrived, but I swear he showed up on the day of the assassination. And
Ferrie tumbled intobed north of the Lakeat Southwest Louisiana Institute
at Hamlin and spent the night in a bunk there, so they did just what they
said.Anyway, that's just an example. Nevertheless, that was a tough case. All I can say in response to that is, any honest District Attorney is going
to win some casesand lose some.All I can say isin a true democracy you
don't want a District Attorney who wins every one of his cases. That was a
case we lost. we won most. That was a case we lost. D.M.: What was the role of David Ferrie? What was the role of Clay Shaw, as
far as you.can see,in the conspiracy? J.G.: The role of David Ferrie was, as you might as gathered in my descrip-
tion of Guy Banister and the anti-Cuban activity,essentially the right-
hand man of Banister.From that we were able to make certain surmises.I'11
give you an example. We knew they were associated with Lee Oswald over the
years becausethere were so manywitnesses. In addition tothe fact that
witnesses.ultimately at Banister's whosaid he was always spending timemple. We knew they were associated with Lee Oswald over the
years becausethere were so manywitnesses. In addition tothe fact that
witnesses.ultimately at Banister's whosaid he was always spending time

--- PAGE BREAK ---16
with,when he wasn't meeting with Banister he was talking with Ferrie，"the
kid," they called him the kid.

His role was the liaison man,the extension.

Guy Banisterwas like the commander.Thebattalion had too muchto do to
leave headquarters.Apparentlythatwas'related toFerrie's functionof
rolling right into Texas on the day of the assassination.

He never told us,
apparent that he was some form of liaison, because he knew so many of the
Cuban shooterswho had beentraining north ofthe lake,and heknew the
kid.

Postulate just one of the many possibilities for one brief second and
you can see if many men were worried about Oswald talking while he was
alive until theycould get to himand kill him,thinkof the value ofa
familiar voicelike DaveFerrie callingfrom Dallas,where he can'tbe
traced, and saying, "Lee, thank God I've got you on the phone.

I'm here in
Dallas and we  wanted to reassure you everything is great.

You've done a
beautiful job.

Just keep cool.

Everything's working.

You're going to be a
hero." Something along that line is what I suggest.

That's my first
postulation.

I don't like to speculate, but he was something along those
lines.

The functionof Clay Shawbecame more clear as time went on,and
ultimately,.although they denied it at the time, first one high-level
employee of the Central Intelligence Agencyacknowledged that Shaw was
during the.trial, "Are we taking care of him?

How's he doing?" Ultimately,
at longlast， afterthe trial wasall over，theformer Directorof the
Agency himself saidthat Claw  Shaw worked for the CIA.While we were
digging away, even after.The functionof Clay Shawbecame more clear as time went on,and
ultimately,.although they denied it at the time, first one high-level
employee of the Central Intelligence Agencyacknowledged that Shaw was
during the.trial, "Are we taking care of him?

How's he doing?" Ultimately,
at longlast， afterthe trial wasall over，theformer Directorof the
Agency himself saidthat Claw  Shaw worked for the CIA.While we were
digging away, even after.

the trial, by :that time we got in the habit  of
digging away, we were able to find material which had been on the front
pages of the Italian papers, we didn't know that, in 1962, when Clay Shaw
and other directors ofanorganizationcalledthe CentralMondialCommer-
cial，the World Trade Center, were kicked out of Europe for their extreme
involvement with a war-like extreme right-wing, past all reason,  in other
words, someof the elements wereconnected with the familyof the former
king ofItaly, and·one of them was married to a daughter of Hjalmar
Schacht,Adolf Hitler's financial minister.So Clay Shaw wasn't exactly in
a youngster's hobby class in that outfit.

To make along story short，they
were kicked out of Italy, and the Italian newspaper in the course of doing
itdescribed Clay Shawas obviously a memberof the Central Intelligence
Agencyand that unit itself that he was the director of had to move down to
Johannesburg, South Africa.

But he was a rather big guy internationally.

We
just happenedto catch bythe bigtoe one of the internationalemployees of
the CiA,and I think that concerned the Agency more than anything.

D.M.: This was a period when theCiA was I think pumping money intoItaly
sothattheCommunists.

J.G.: As a matter of fact that's very accurate.

Not just the Communists,
the Socialists were both making progress, in other words,1iberals, left-
legislature and so forth.

They were pumping money into Italy.--- PAGE BREAK ---

Not just the Communists,
the Socialists were both making progress, in other words,1iberals, left-
legislature and so forth. They were pumping money into Italy. One of the
sources, you know a lot more than I knew about it initially, for bringing
the money into Italy was the Central Mondial Commercial, and  Clay Shaw was
 a       a

--- PAGE BREAK ---o Italy. One of the
sources, you know a lot more than I knew about it initially, for bringing
the money into Italy was the Central Mondial Commercial, and  Clay Shaw was
 a       a

--- PAGE BREAK ---

17
D.M.:Hewas on the board ofsomething called the Permandex Corporation?
J.G.: Yes.That was like thefirst cousin of theCentral Mondial Commer-
cial. Clay Shaw was on the board of it. If anybody remains who thinks that
Clay Shaw was a special kind of angel,the way to understand Permandex was
that Permandexwas one of thesponsors of the eight separate attempts to
assassinate GeneralDeGaulle.
D.M.: It sounds awfully like Propaganda Due,P2.I don't know if you've
followedthe conspiracytrail to that point.It's anorganization that
interests me, anyway. Have you looked into that at all?
J.G.: No. It's obvious now that you're at a more arcane understanding
moreabout theintelligence communitydeveloping suchpower inour own
country.I haven't reached what you're talking about. I've heard about it,
but I haven"t reached any understanding of it.
D.M.: The function does sound similar to Permandex, the World Trade group.
From Shaw, again,if you could characterize Shaw's role just in two
sentences,what would that be?
J.G.: Fundamentally,to the CIA he was a high-level contact in Europe,
especially in Italy and France,largely because of his great ability to
relate to people, especially people of quality and background. But he was
secondlyused temporarily in the bit ofbusiness down in Louisiana as the
babysitter for Oswald, because he was very good at details like that.
D.M.: Let's look above Banister.Maybe we're jumping too high,but I'd like
to hear your view of the role, if any, in the conspiracy to carry out the
Allen Dulles, Earl Warren, President Johnson. What's your view about those
atdoad
J.G.: Let's take each one of those four. First of all, it goes much higher
than I've described..Naturally I'mdescribing a tacticallevel whichwe
stumbled across with just handling.  But a President is not removed to
change foreign policy just because a handful of tactical people decide to
do so. I think that you can safely say that individuals such as J. Edgar
Hooverwereactivelyinvolvedat the outset.Hoover not only wanted tosee
Johnson in office,he lived across the street from·his in Washington for 19
years, probably his closest friends. I see now, frankly, it's fine to be
against Communism, I am,  and everybody is,.probably, to a reasonable
degree, but when you reach a point like J. Edgar Hoover where you  think
that every man who doesn't wear a hat and a handkerchief in his pocket is a
Communist, he became a very dangerous man. I would put him as one of the
peopleinvolved at the highest level.As to Johnson,there's an old adage
in intelligence which is very  seriously regarded. It's important, on a
need-to-know basis. You don't give information, no matter how trustworthy
they are, to people who don't need to know. It saves the number of people
you have to tell. Johnson was such a natural hawk that they knew they could
changethe policy back to the Cold War without telling him,so I suggest ao don't need to know. It saves the number of people
you have to tell. Johnson was such a natural hawk that they knew they could
changethe policy back to the Cold War without telling him,so I suggest a

--- PAGE BREAK ---18
likelihood that on a need-to-know basis they didn't bother to tell him,be-
causehewas so totallycorrupt theydidn't have totell himanyway.Allen
Dulles is without the slightest doubt a major participant in the conspiracy
to kill Kennedy and to change to foreign policy.

To appreciate Dulles,you
have to understand that he is the man, even though the CiA was formed out
of the OSS,it was really when Dulles took over,because of its origins in
the Oss,special emphasis was given early on to the covert operations, but
it was really under Dulles that kiiling became a science in the CiA and
somethingregularlydoneandacceptedanddonetoAmericanswithinAmeri-
can.

He was truly an evil man.

I am satisfied that of  all the corrupt
things that Lyndon Johnson never.

did, appointing Allen Dulles to sit on the
Warren Commission and find out who killed John Kennedy.was very much like
appointing a Brutus to investigate the death of Julius Caesar.

He knew
exactly who killed him and how he was killed, and that he was  going to be
killed beforehand.

I have no doubt about that.

Earl Warren I have to look
at that in a different way.I really think he was fooled.He was called in,
it happened in a confrontation with Johnson.

They had structured in so many
false sponsors, one you've asked me about, with  justification, the Mob,
theystructuredin Castroand the oilbarons.It wasa beautifuliy done
plan,and probably with the final approvalof people at the Dulles level,
even though he was covert operations.

Anyway, you have to assume that in
the case of Warren that by getting.

him in youstopped the liberals from
coming in too deeply, and that was what was so cynicalabout the plan, but
it was beautifuliy  done.

When  he left Warren's office he knew nothing
about.

Whenhe left Warren's office he'had tears running down his face from
what theytoldhim.They'd also structuredin the possibilityof some kind
of  Russian response, that there was going to be a sign of warfare, some-
thing like that.--- PAGE BREAK ---

When  he left Warren's office he knew nothing
about. Whenhe left Warren's office he'had tears running down his face from
what theytoldhim.They'd also structuredin the possibilityof some kind
of  Russian response, that there was going to be a sign of warfare, some-
thing like that. I can almost visualize Johnson, the man who would climb a
tree to tell a lie, saying, "Chief, we need your help. The nation needs you
now more than ever." So they got an honest,well-intentioned man who wasn't
the greatest intellectual in the world and fooled him. He was sitting there
surrounded by people who were really running the thing, like Allen Dulles. ofaDullesoraHoover?Doyouhaveinformation? J.G.: No. I can't pretend to have a magic globe and I've been carefully
insulated from all that, so I won't speculate. I can see clearly up to
Banister.I can see.how he worked. But I don't pretend to have inside
knowledge of that upper gap whereby .it goes up to the top level. of covert
operations.But I do think it had to go to some of thehighest individuals
with covert operations. Because you're not merely changing foreign policy. You're removing aPresident of the United States.In that regard I have to
reiterate one more time that it was not just another murder，not just
another assassination. I insist, I would stake my life on it, much as I
love this country, this country will not  survive as a republic if they
continue, the Congress and the Presidency, the two offices that I hold most
responsible,if they continue to fool  the people about  Jack Kennedy,
continue to postpone telling them the truth, our country will not survive.

--- PAGE BREAK ---y, the two offices that I hold most
responsible,if they continue to fool  the people about  Jack Kennedy,
continue to postpone telling them the truth, our country will not survive.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

19
D.M.:I thinkthe question is,ifsome secret group is able to pull this
offand get away with it,what elsehave they been doing between 1963 and
now? Perhaps a great deal.
J.G.: That is ahell of a good question，and I wishI knew the answer.If
not a 'great deal,certainly a lot more than nothing. You can see the
capabilities, the smooth coordination, the timing, everything else. This
was a  professional operation of the highest order,so slickly that it
didn't leave a trail.
D.M.: And I think we have Jack Ruby as one of the people who testified or
.spoke to that, saying that the conspiracy was huge.I think that was in
your book.
J.G.: He was trying to tell. He made no secrets about it. He was he was
scared to death of some members of the sheriff's office he didn't identify.
He told warren, Ford was present，too,he said,if you would just get me
out of here I'il tell you the biggest conspiracy you ever heard of. But I
can't do ithere.About that time somebody looked attheir watch and said
it was time for lunch, literally.
D.M.: He wanted to get out of Dallas and to Washington, at least.
J.G.: Yes,at the very least.Then we would have learned something about
the' dimensions: But the''people in'Washington were  crazy about that idea,
because they didn't want to know any more than they knew.
D.M.: I think Ruby was on tape saying that it was Nazis and fascists who
wereinvolved.
J.G.: Actually that's true. When we get mad sometimes at somebody who tends
to be a clear fascists, we don't have a lot of them, but we have some, and
we call·them a Nazi.But it's an accurate way of describing a manwho's so
far to the right he'salmost inhuman.There were Nazisand fascist in-
volved, and certainly at the operational level, those guys training north
of Lake Poncetrain,wehad an idea of who some ofthese people were,some
oftheAmericans fromthe rightwingworking withthe anti-Communists
Cubans, and they were virtually Nazis. They called themselves Minutemen, so
to speak, but they were of the most vicious order. They were killers.
D.M.:Your editor, Zach Sklar, said that you've taken'something of an
interest in Reinhard Gehlen recently.Maybe this would be the place to tell
our listenerswho that man isand where hecamefrom and whathe's been
doing supposedly forthis country.
J.G.: I'm afraid that the role of Reinhard Gehlen is something I cannot go
into at this time because it would limit my opportunities of going into him
farther. But just to put a cap on  what .you're saying, which is quite
relevant, one of the things Allan Dulles did was to bring over the entire
German what they call the"Gehlen apparatus."Gehlen was the  master of
intelligence in the German army back in Bavaria in a hill called Misery
Meadow. Whenthey knew they lost the war Gehlen retreatedthere with histhey call the"Gehlen apparatus."Gehlen was the  master of
intelligence in the German army back in Bavaria in a hill called Misery
Meadow. Whenthey knew they lost the war Gehlen retreatedthere with his

--- PAGE BREAK ---apparatus."Gehlen was the  master of
intelligence in the German army back in Bavaria in a hill called Misery
Meadow. Whenthey knew they lost the war Gehlen retreatedthere with his

--- PAGE BREAK ---

20
staff  and there were  2o huge cartons  of all the  material they gathered,
Russian intelligence, from Estonians, from white Russians and so forth.
What the Agency-to-be, the OSS then,obtained from Gaylen was not only
Gaylen and hisstaff,they promptly made Gaylen an American general，he
flew back here with American  stars on, and the 20 cases, and all this
with them many, many members of the Gehlen apparatus, many of whom were
used by the CiA in some of its other adventures, which I'm not free to talk
about.
D.M.: I would finish the loop a 1ittle bit. As I understand it, some  of
them went into NASA,and we had a lot of German scientists in NASA.Earlier
we touched on how many of the people who workedwith Oswald at Reily then
got jobs at NASA. I hear you don't want to talk about it but .·*
J.G.: Not just NASA. It goes even farther than that. You have people like
German General von Dornberger, the head of Bell Helicopter, which was on
the verge of bankruptcy before the assassination  and ended up banking
millions and millions and millions after the assassination.what did you
See in Vietnam in those nine years except Bell helicopters?Every time you
Saw a Bell helicopter, you were seeing one of the German general's helicop-
ters. It might have had an American name,but they were one of Dornberger's
helicopters.
D.M.:Peopledon'trealizethat there'sa 1ot ofmoneytobemade andhas
been made in keeping the Cold War going.
J.G.: Billions, just billions. That's all. Keeping the Cold War going means
many billions coming  in.That's one of the.reasons they killed Jack
Kennedy，tokeepitgoing.
D.M.:Perhaps we'd finish with maybe wherewe might have begun,if people
still have a question in their minds whether Lee Oswald was acting alone or
not. What  comes to your mind as some of the most obvious and strongest
proofs that Oswald was acting in concert with others? Also, what do  you
feel Oswald's role was in the assassination?
J.G.: You asked two questions, but I'll try and take them that way. Look at
what really happened. First of all, later after the assassination, when the
world's leadingexpertsattempted toduplicatethe featwithOswald's
indicates that Oswald did not do it. But even more than that,Oswald's gun
was so bad, that Manlicher-Carcano rifle was so bad that it was predictable
it couldn't be done. But furthermore, even before the experts could hit the
side of a barn, they had to have the sight adjusted.The sight was loose
and not adjusted,and if you looked through the sight you weren't looking
down the same line as the tube. But moreover, and  the final, most tragic
thing of all, most Americans,I think,have a feeling about other people in
the human race. That's the great thing about our country, that we know that
we're not made up of a dominant portion of cruel people. Lee Oswald was
exonerated from firing a rifle on the evening of theassassination. The.
nitrate test showedhe hadn't fired arifle at all.And yet，the meninmade up of a dominant portion of cruel people. Lee Oswald was
exonerated from firing a rifle on the evening of theassassination. The.
nitrate test showedhe hadn't fired arifle at all.And yet，the menin

--- PAGE BREAK ---21
charge of this operation,.

not only the assassination, but now the_coverup,
were so cruel and so heartless thatit wasn't enough to kill the President
and sit idlyby and let Oswald be killed asan assassin when they knew he
hadn't killedthe President,but ittook eight months beforethe rest of
Americafoundout that Oswaldhadnotfiredarifleat all becauseit was
in the small print of the Warren Report.

So that's one of the most terrible
things to happen.

But now that can't be undone.Finally, what did he think
he wasdoing?

It has become prettyclear ingeneral terms what hewas
doing, but in precise terms, nobody from the FBl has told us.

He was
warking with the FBl, a piece of news that surfaced early on, and the
Warren Commission almost went to pieces tryingto cover it up.

While they
gave another source'as the origin,it's quite likelyit came from Oswald,
when he said in effect，"Look,fellas,I don"t know what you'retrying to
do to me,but I'm working_for the FBI.I'm trying to find out what's going
on, too.

My number is Si79." That was part of the standard number for an
FBI informant.

Of course, that was squashed before anybody could even get a
start on it.

But essentially ·that's what he was doing.

Remember in New
Orleans one ofthe first things he did when hewas arrested was to ask to
Speak to Agent  Quigley.

When a special agent  of the FBl is  asked some
defendant wants  to talk to him, he doesn't immediately agree.

But with
Oswald he immediately met him  in a room alone, a long, private meeting.

When Oswald came to Texas in the months prior to the assassination, more
closely timewise, he met regularly with Agent Hosty,and just before the
assassination he sent a letter to Agent Hosty.

I think it's only reason-
able, once you see the scheme'in its overall proportion,to understand that
this was a written report.

That's how they handled it.

They handed it to
the switchboard operator in an envelope with the agent's name on it.--- PAGE BREAK ---

That's how they handled it. They handed it to
the switchboard operator in an envelope with the agent's name on it. After-
wards, with Oswald dead, this wasn't volunteered by the Agency. They denied
it at first. Then they finally  admitted that such a message had existed. This was Oswald's written report to Agent Hosty about what he was learning
about the assassination. But instead they converted it into, Hostey said it
wasa warning to himto keep away from Oswald'slife,if you can believe
that. The switchboard operator, who had an even more exciting sense of
drama, said that she looked at it and it was a warning from Oswald that he
Was going to blow up the FBI building. I leave you with this one thought to
give you an ideaof the truth that comes out ofthe United States govern-
ment:If beforethe assassination LeeHarvey Oswald had leftbehind in
writing a warning that he was going to blow up the FBI building, he would-
n't have been anywhere around Dealy Plaza when the President went by. D.M.: The finalquestionI have is what peopleshould do to trytobring
book, On the Irail of the Assassins, so that they have a clearer picture of
what's going on in this country. what do you think people can do? Is there
anythingwecando? J.G.: I think the only thing that can be done,I do think that would be a
The reason I put six years on On the Irail ofthe Assassins was to make it
irrefutable, so .that even someone who begins doubting my position will have
to endup seeingwhat happenedand what thegovernment did.The second
thing, and I cannot tell the people how to do this because I'm not aseer

--- PAGE BREAK ---who begins doubting my position will have
to endup seeingwhat happenedand what thegovernment did.The second
thing, and I cannot tell the people how to do this because I'm not aseer

--- PAGE BREAK ---

22
of my heart i have the feeling; that they must then somehow communicate to
two groups, the Congress and the executive department, that they will no
longer take the lie. If they have to do'like  the Chinese youths did, the
students, and block the military from coming into the square, whatever they
have to do, .they have to tell the government that they will not take this
lie any more. Make this government the way it's supposed to be and stop
telling us an unbelievable lie,because we won't take it.
D.M.: Thank you very much for the interview, and thank you very much, I can
Speak for the country, for your work on this most important question of our
time.
J.G.: My pleasure. Thank you so much.
CopyWrite VISION PROGRAMS 1992
A1s0
availab1ethroughVISIONPR0GRAMS(800-USA-1963):thetwohouraudio
documentary The_Assassination_of_JEK:_THE_GARRISON_INTERVIEW.
The producers of THE_GARRISON_INTERVIEW, David Mendelsohn, also a televi-
sion producer, and Andrew Phillips, who is  program director for wBAI-FM in
New York, Can be contacted through VISION PROGRAMS, 117 Stanton Street #6,
New York, New York 10002, 212-254-6802.

--- PAGE BREAK ---cer, and Andrew Phillips, who is  program director for wBAI-FM in
New York, Can be contacted through VISION PROGRAMS, 117 Stanton Street #6,
New York, New York 10002, 212-254-6802.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

VISION PR0GRAMS 117 Stanton Street #6 NYC 10002 212-254-6802
The AsSasSinationOfJEK:THE GARRISONINTERVIEW READING_LIST
ON THE TRAIL OF THE ASSASSINS, Jim Garrison, Sheridan Square
Press,. 1988
THE YANKEE AND COWBOY WAR: Conspiracies from Dallas to Watergate
and Beyond,·Carl Oglesby, Berkley Medallion, 1976
CONSPIRACY, Anthony SummerS; Paragon House, 1980
THE FINAL ASSASSINATIONS REPORT: Report of 1the HouSe Select
Committee on Assassinations, Bantam Books, 1979
Kennedy, S.P.I. Books, 1989
HIGH TREASON, Robert J. Groden and Harrison Edward Livingstone,
Berkley Books, 1989
CROSSFIRE: The Plot That Killed Kennedy, Jim Marrs, Carroll and
Graf, 1989
CONTRACT ON AMERICA, David E. Scheim, Shapolsky Books, 1983
THE KENNEDY CONSPIRACY: An Uncommissioned Report on the Jim
Garrison Investigation, Paris Flammonde, Meredith Press, 1969
PLAUSIBLE DENIAL, Mark Lane, Thunder's Mouth Press, 1991
SPY SAGA, Dr. Phillip Melanson, Praeger, 1990
THE HOFFA WARS, Dan E. Moldea, Paddington, 1978
THE ASSASSINATION OF ROBERT F. KENNEDY: A Searching Look at the
Christian, Random House, 1978
THE ROBERT F. KENNEDY ASSASSINATION: New RevelationS on the
Conspiracy and Cover-up, Shapolsky Books, 1991
WHO KILLED JFK?, Car1 Ogelsby, Odonian PreSS, 1992
THE ASSASSINATION OF MARTIN LUTHER KING,JR.: New RevelationS on
the Conspiracy and Cover-up, Dr. Phillip Melanson, Shapolsky
Bo0ks, 1991
A personal inspiration_(David Mendelsohn). recommended to "6o's
types"who.are_concernedabout_the assassinations_but have never
consideredthat_what_we_believe.may_imprisonus:
THE COSMIC TRIGGER: The Final Secret of the Illuminati, Robert
Anton Wilson, Falcon Press, 1977