I 
CITY OF MIAMI. FLORIDA 
INTER-OFFICE MEMORANDUM 
rot Lieut. II. Swilley 
Intelligence Unit 
"OM!Sgt. Everett Kay 
Intelligence Unit 
DATCi 
Feb, 20. 1967. 
FILE: 
• UUECTi Suspect in 
Presidential Assassination 
REFERENCES: 
ENCLOSURES: 
I received information this date that a possible suspect as an 
acoompllce in the assassination of President John Kennedy is a 
Cuban male, t!AMUE."AN'f.'EL) GARCIA GO.'!Z.\J_ Z"Z, 
This subject. GONZALEZ, is unknown to this office, but to the fact 
that Sgt. McCracken, on Friday, J30. 20, 1967, was contacted by 
State Attorney Investigator Martin Dardas, who reguested that 
Sgt. McCracken meet with two investigators from the Mew Orleans 
District Attorney's Office, Det. Lester Otillio, Jr. and Douglas 
Ward. 
At this meeting the name of EMANUEL or MANUEL GARCIA GONZALEZ was 
brought forth by the New Orleans investigators as they were attempting 
to locate this man reference narcotics and a possible nurdsr. 
Sgt. McCracken made report reference this meeting (report attached). 
At no time did the investigators from the New Orleans office indicate 
iJiat tbyy v;cre looking for this Cuban male fox involvement in the 
assassination of the President. 
It has been reported to this writer that a group picture showing 
this Cuban male, also identifies Harvey Lee Oswald, suspected 
assassin of the President. 
\ 
Attempts are being rnrr.In by this unit to locate this EilWJCL 1V.1CIA 
GONZALEZ, but we have no further information as to the thereabouts 
of this subject, physical description, etc. as all this pertinent 
information was withheld by the two investigators from the district 
Attorney's office in Mcr: Orleans. Had we been taboo into their 
confidence, we could have pursued this natter further. 
A private investigate 
working c:: this a seas 
District Attorney's o 
bigs organization and 
as f'Inte 1 ligenee M for 
r by the nano of i s supposedly 
sination plat, being paid by b*r Hew Orleans 
-dice. Torres has been active in the bry of 
other Cuban organizations in Mjani, acting 
these groups. 
elrsrh