GALILEO.


I.

School-children are frequently told that in a
time of most dense ignorance, Galileo, an Italian
astronomer, discovered that the earth moves around
the sun; that this doctrine was contrary to that
of the Catholic Church, and that therefore the un-
fortunate scientist was seized by the Inquisition,
thrown into a dungeon, and tortured; that finally
he retracted his teaching, but that, nevertheless,
even while ostensibly yielding, he muttered: “And
yet the earth does move.” Very few Protestants
even suspect any exaggeration in these assertions;
still fewer appear to know that Galileo did not
discover that the earth moves around the sun ;
that this doctrine was not contrary to that of
the Catholic Church; that the imprisonment of
Galileo was merely nominal, and that he was sub-
jected to no torture whatever; that the famous re-
mark “E pur si muove ” is a work of imagination.

Galileo did not discover that the earth moves
around the sun. The ancient Greeks certainly knew
that the earth is round, that it is isolated in space,
and that it moves. Aristotle and Ptolemy under-
took to refute the last theory. According to Cicero,
Nicetas asserted the motion of the earth. Philolaus,

80


Galileo


81


says Eusebius, thought that the earth moved around
the region of fire, in an oblique circle. Aristarchus
of Samos, says Archimedes, sustained the immo-
bility of the sun, and that the earth turned around
it as around a centre. Seneca thinks it 4 4 well to
inquire whether the rest of the universe moves
around a stationary earth, or whether the earth
moves in a stationary universe.”* The Irish
Ferghil (Virgilius), Bishop of Salzburg in the
eighth century, taught the existence of the anti-
podes. Dante certainly believed in the antipodes
and in central attraction.! Copernicus himself
never pretended to be the author of the system
which bears his name, although to this humble
Polish priest belongs the glory of having precisely
formulated that system, and at a time when a
knowledge of it had almost vanished from among
men. Galileo needs not to be regarded as a prince
among astronomers in order to merit the homage
of the scientific; his greatest glory is that of a
mechanician.

The heliocentric system was not contrary to the
doctrine of the Catholic Church. She never has
proposed and she can not propose to her children
any system of merely physical science as a matter
of faith. Certainly, if any system contradicts her
teachings she exercises her right to condemn it.
Most churchmen of the early seventeenth century,


* “Nat. Questions,” vii, 2.
t “Hell,” canto 34.


82


Galileo .


quite naturally followers of the generally received
scientific theories of their day, rejected the idea of
a motion of the earth around the sun; but the
Church did not force them to such rejection. Had
such been the mind of the Church, Copernicus and
his many forerunners would not have been regarded
as good Catholics; and Copernicus himself would
not have dedicated his “Revolutions of the Heavenly
Orbs” to Pope Paul III., saying: “If men who are
ignorant in mathematics pretend to condemn my
book, because of certain passages of Scripture which
they distort to suit themselves, I despise their vain
attacks.” Calcagnini, who died in 1540, would not
have pubicly taught at Ferrara that “the heavens
stand, but the earth moves.”

But if the Church was not hostile to purely
scientific innovations, Luther and Melancthon w T ere
not so liberal. In his “Table Talk” Luther says:
“Men pay heed to an astrologer who contends that
it is the earth that moves, and not the heavens or
the firmament, the sun and the moon. If a man
yearns for a reputation as a profound scientist, he
should invent some new system. This madman
would subvert the whole science of astronomy ; but
Scripture tells us that Joshua bade the sun, and not
the earth, to stand still.” In his “Principles of the
Science of Phj^sics,” Melancthon says: “The eyes
testify that the heavens revolve every twenty-four
hours ; and nevertheless some men, either from love
of novelty or to parade their genius, insist that the


Galileo .


83


earth moves, and that the eighth sphere and the sun
do not revolve. Every true believer is obliged to
accept the truth as revealed by God, and to be con-
tented with it. ”

It is certain that for many years Galileo was ad-
mired and cherished by the most learned ecclesiastics
of Rome; that three successive Pontiffs gave him
many tokens of esteem ; that he was one of the
most honored members of the celebrated Academy
of the Lincei. The Cardinal del Monte, writing to
the Grand Duke of Tuscany, says: “During his

sojourn at Rome Galileo has given much satisfac-
tion, and I believe that he has received the same;
for he has enjoyed good opportunities to exhibit
his inventions, and the best-informed men of the
Eternal City regard them as most wonderful and
accurate. If we were living in the olden days
of Rome, the worth of Galileo, I think, would be
recognized by a statue on the Capitoline.”

A famous scientist, the Carmelite Foscarini, pub-
lished in 1615 — only a year before Galileo’s first
trouble with the Inquisition — a theological apology
for the philosopher and the Copernican system,
which was dedicated to Fantoni, General of the
Carmelites, and approved by the ecclesiastical
authorities of Naples. On May 15 of the same year
Mgr. Dini, a Roman prelate and an old pupil of
Galileo, writes that there is no fear that the Coper-
nican system will be condemned; and that as to
Galileo himself, “he should fortify his position
with arguments well-founded both in Scripture and


84


Galileo .


mathematics;” and that in the meantime he may
be assured of the writer’s own influence with the
Sacred College in his favor, and of the protection
of Prince Cesi, the founder and president of the
Lincei. Indeed, as late as February 16, 1616,
Galileo wrote to Picchena that he found among
the highest ecclesiastical dignitaries much dis-
pleasure because of “the diabolic opposition of his
persecutors.”

Before approaching the main object of our article
we must reply to a question which naturally occurs
to one who observes that the Church of the seven-
teenth century was not hostile to the Copernican
system, and that so many churchmen were favorable
to Galileo. How happened it that Galileo found
himself cited before an ecclesiastical tribunal? In
accounting for this fact little weight need be at-
tached to the sentiments and conduct of those who,
in his day as at all times, appear to be tolerated
by God for the trial of genius. Men who argued
against the movement of the earth because the earth
has no limbs, muscles, and sinews;* men who
would decry the heliocentric system with the words,
“Ye men of Galilee, why stand ye looking up to
heaven ?”f — such persons could have had no influ-

* Thus Chiaramonti of Cesena.

t Thus the Dominican Caccini, preaching the Advent
course in S. Maria Kovella in Florence. But MarafR, General
of the Dominicans, writing to Galileo on January 10, 1615,
deplored the extravagance of Caccini, who, he said, had
previously been forced to apologize in Bologna for other
absurdities in the pulpit.


Galileo.


85


ence upon the Roman Congregations. Nor would
these tribunals have exercised their power merely
because Galileo was contradicted by Tassoni, Vieta,
Montaigne, Bacon, Pascal, and other great thinkers
of the time.* The fault of Galileo consisted in
his confusing revealed truths with physical discov-
eries, and in teaching in what sense Scripture
passages were to be taken, explaining them by
demonstrations of calculation and experience.
Every one admits with Dante f that the Scriptures
adopt popular ideas for the sake of perspicuity.
But Galileo said that in the Scriptures “are found
propositions which, taken literally, are false; that
Holy Writ out of regard for the incapacity of the
people, expresses itself inexactly, even when treat-
ing of solemn dogmas; that in questions concerning
natural things, philosophical argument should avail
more than sacred. ”

These assertions unsettled all science, founded as
it then was on revelation; “the earth,” says Cantu,

* Tassoni, a very independent thinker, thus reasoned:
“Stand still in the middle of a room, and look at the sun
through a window opening toward the south. Now, if the
sun stands still and the window moves so quickly, the sun will
instantly disappear from your vision.” Yieta, a consummate
algebraist, thought the Copernican system derived from a fal-
lacious geometry. Montaigne said that probably before a
thousand years a third system would supplant the two others.
Descartes sometimes denied the Copernican theory. Bacon
derided it as repugnant to natural philosophy. Pascal, in his
“Thoughts,” deemed it “wise not to sound the depths of the
Copernican opinion.” As late as 1806 the Milanese Pini, in
his “Incredibility of the Movement of the Earth,” sustained
the Ptolemaic idea.

f “Paradise,” iv, 43-45.


86


Galileo .


“ceased to be regarded as the largest, warmest,
and most illuminated of the planetary bodies. It
no longer enjoyed a pre-eminence in creation as the
home of a privileged being, but became one of many
in the group of unexplored planets and in no way
distinguished from the others. Fearing that science
was aggrandizing itself only to war on God, the
timid repudiated it. Only later did the better minds
understand that the faith fears no learning; that
historic criticism can be independent and impartial
without becoming irreligious. Then good sense
estimated at their true value the accusations
launched against the Church because of the affair
of Galileo ; it distinguished simple assertions from
articles of faith, positive and necessary prohibitions
from prudential and disciplinary provisions, the
oracles of the Church from the deliberations of a
particular tribunal. To such a tribunal a denun-
ciation was made that Galileo or his disciples had
asserted that God is an accident and not a substance,
a personal being; that miracles are not miracles at
all. Then the Pontiff declared that, for the ter-
mination of scandal, Galileo should be cited and
admonished by the Sacred Congregation.”*

In endeavoring to discover what followed on
Galileo’s second summons before the Inquisition
(concerning his first trial in 1615 there is no ques-
tion as to either imprisonment or torture), it would


* “Illustrious Italians,” Milan, 1879.


Galileo .


87


appear to us that no better source of information can
be desired than the original “Process.” But since
Libri,* Perchappe,f Bertrand, J and others insin-
uate — according to what principles of criticism the
reader must judge — that as this record has been
nearly always in the hands of ecclesiastics, they
may have destroyed evidence of their own cruelty,
we will here adduce the testimony of the Tuscan
Ambassador, Niccolini. This evidence ought to be
acceptabe to our adversaries ; for the writer was an
intense partisan of Galileo, and would not have
hidden anything likely to excite sympathy for his
hero. Add to this the fact that these dispatches
are directed to Galileo’s own sovereign, himself a
warm admirer of the philosopher. Galileo arrived
in Borne on February 13, 1633, and under date of
March 13 Niccolini writes:

“The Pope told me that he had shown to Galileo
a favor never accorded to another, in allowing him
to reside in my house instead of in the Holy Office.

. His Holiness said that he could not avoid
having Galileo brought to the Holy Office for the
examination; and I replied that my gratitude would
be doubled if he would exempt Galileo from this
appearance, but he answered that he could not do


* “History of Mathematical Science in Italy,” Paris, 1841;
vol. iv, pp. 155-294.

f “Galileo: His Life and Discoveries,” Paris, 1S66.
t “Founders of Modern Astronomy,” Paris, 1S65. — When
Napoleon invaded Pome in 1809, among the literary and his-
torical monuments which he stole was the original Process of


88


Galileo .


so. . . . He concluded with the promise to assign
Galileo certain rooms which are the most convenient
in the Holy Office.” On April 16 the Ambassador
says: “He has a servant and every convenience.
The reverend commissary assigned him the apart-
ments of the judge of the tribunal. My own serv-
ants carry his meals from my house.”

About two months later (June 18 ) Niccolini con-
tinues : “I have again besought for a termination of
the cause of Galileo, and His Holiness replied that
the affair is ended, and that Galileo will be sum-
moned some morning of next week to the Holy
Office, to hear the decision. . . . In regard to the
person of Galileo, he ought to be imprisoned for
some time, because he disobeyed the orders of 1616 ;
but the Pope says that after the publication of the
sentence he will consider with me as to what can be
done to afflict him as little as possible.” On June
26 : “Monday evening Galileo was summoned to
the Holy Office, and on Tuesday morning he pro-
ceeded thither to learn what was required of him.
He was detained, and on Wednesday he was taken

Galileo. The Holy See vainly demanded it from the govern-
ment of the Restoration. While it was yet in France the
astronomer Delambre consulted it, but very negligently, as is
evinced by the inexactness of his quotations when writing to
Venturi the letter published in 1S21 by the latter. Delambre
did not appreciate the Process very highly, probably because,
like Barbier (“Critical Examination of Historical Diction-
aries, ’’Paris, 1S20), he could find no proof of his own assertion
that Galileo had been tortured. The volume was finally con-
signed to Count Rossi, to be restored to the Vatican in
1S46, and there it still remains.


Galileo.


89


to the Minerva, before the lords-cardinals and the
prelates of the Congregation, where the sentence
was read, and he was forced to abjure his opinion.
The sentence includes the prohibition of his book,
and his condemnation to the prison of the Holy
Office during the pleasure of His Holiness, because,
as they declare, he disobeyed the order given him
sixteen years ago in this matter.* But his con-
demnation was commuted by His Holiness to a
residence in the gardens of the Trinita dei Monti. ”
On July 3: “His Holiness told me that although it
was rather early to diminish the penance of Galileo,
he had been content to allow him to reside at first
in the gardens of the Grand Duke, and that now
he could proceed to Sienna, there to reside in a
convent or with my lord the Archbishop.” t

According, therefore, to Niccolini, the imprison-
ment of Galileo was merely nominal, and there is
no mention of any infliction of torture. But let us
examine further this question of torture. It is said
that the Process itself furnishes an indication of the

* Of the ten cardinals forming the tribunal, and all of
whose names are at the head of the preamble, three did not
sign the document. These were Gaspar Borgia, Zacchia, and
Francis Barberini, nephew of Urban VIII. One of the signers,
Anthony Barberini, a brother of the Pontiff and a Capuchin
friar, tried hard to obtain a remission of the entire penance.

f July 6 found Galileo at Sienna, dwelling with his old
friend and disciple, the Archbishop Ascanio Piccolomini.
On December 16, the Cardinal Francis Barberini having
obtained this favor, he arrived at his own villa of Arcetri, and
here he resided almost constantly until his death on January
8, 1642.


90


Galileo.


infliction of torture ; that in the fourth interroga-
tory, on June 21, torture was menaced; that in the
sentence the judges declared that they had “deemed
it necessary to proceed to a rigorous examination”
of the accused. It is true that torture was
threatened, but the menace was not executed. In
a decree issued by Urban VIII. on June 16, 1633,
and first published by L’Epinois, it was ordered
that Galileo “should be questioned as to his inten-
tion [in publishing the ‘Dialogue’], and that he
should be menaced with torture. If he does not
yield to the threat, he must be made to pronounce,
in full session of the Holy Office, an abjuration for
strong suspicion of heresy.”

On June 21, in the fourth and last interrogatory,
but without any mention of the above decree,
Galileo was questioned as to his intention in the
“Dialogue” in regard to the Copernican system.
In reply he would only admit that, cherishing
his hypothesis, and feeling proud of the arguments
adduced for it before 1616, he had given in the
“Dialogue” more strength to the Copernican than
to the other opinion. Refusing, therefore, to avow
the imputed intention, he was threatened with tor-
ture. Then he replied — with what truth let his
ultra-admirers imagine: “I have not held the

Copernican system since I was ordered to abandon it
[seventeen years before]. But I am in your hands.
Do with me what you will.” This refusal to
acknowledge the imputed intention had been fore-


Galileo .


91


seen by Pope Urban, and, as he had provided for
the contingency, the tribunal did not fulfill the threat
of torture, but proceeded to the act of abjuration.
As for the words “rigorous examination” used in
the sentence, they do not necessarily imply that tor-
ture had been inflicted; they can easily refer to the
threat pronounced in the fourth interrogatory.

But, according to the code of laws binding upon
the inquisitors, which are fully given in the “Direc-
tory” of Eymeric,* the official guide of the Holy
Office, torture could not have been inflicted on Gali-
leo. It is prescribed that when the accused denies
the charges, and they have not been substantiated,
and he has not yet furnished a good defence, he
shall “be put to the question, in order that the
truth may be reached,” — provided, however, that
the consulters so advise. Now, Galileo was not
obstinate; he had no inclination to become a martyr
for science. In his sentence the judges say: “We
deemed it necessary to proceed to a rigorous ex-
amination, and thou didst reply like a Catholic —
respondisti Oatholice .” Having thus answered, he
could not be tortured. It is sad to hear him utter-
ing what his judges must have known to be a lie:
“For some time before the determination of the


* “Directory for Inquisitors, by Friar Nicholas Eymeric,
of the Order of Preachers; Commentated by Francis Pegna,
S. T. D. and J. U. D., Auditor of Causes in the Apostolic
Palace.” Part III., on the “Practice of the Inquisitorial
Office,” chapter on the “Third Way of Ending a Trial for
Faith.” Venice, 1595.


92


Galileo .


Holy Office, and before I received that command
[the order of 1616], I had been indifferent as to the
two opinions of Ptolemy and Copernicus, and had
held that both were disputable and that both could
be true in nature. But after the above mentioned
determination, being assured by the prudence of
my superiors, all my doubts ceased, and I held, as I
now hold , the theory of Ptolemy as true , — that is,
that the earth does not , and the sun does move .” If
Galileo had undergone torture, he would scarcely
have omitted to mention it among his many griev-
ances, when, a few days after his departure from
Eome, on July 23, he wrote from Sienna to Gioli,
minister of the Grand Duke: ‘ ‘I address you,

prompted by a desire to escape from the long weari-
ness of a more than six months’ imprisonment, and
from the trouble and affliction of mind of a whole
year, coupled with many inconveniences and bodily
dangers .”

And now a few words as to the authenticity of
the 66 P pur si muoveP In the formula of abjura-
tion, after having avowed that his 4 ‘Dialogue” favors
the “false” doctrine of the movement of the earth
around the sun, and having admitted his violation of
the prohibition of 1616, Galileo “affirms and swears,
with his hand on the holy Gospels,” that “with a
sincere heart and unfeigned faith he abjures, anathe-
matizes and detests the aforesaid errors and here-
sies,” for which he has been justly condemned as
“strongly suspected of heresy.” And he promises
not only to abstain hereafter from all heretical


Galileo .


93


doctrine, but also to denounce all heretics to the
Inquisition or to the ordinary of the locality. Mo-
tives of both personal and general interest certainly
decided an act of apparent submission; but in
performing it Galileo could not, without risk of
destroying himself, have given himself the ques-
tionable satisfaction of a merely childish contra-
diction. Undoubtedly he thought that the earth
moved, and probably the inquisitors knew that he so -
thought. But had he made the famous remark, he
would not have been dismissed two days afterward.

If Galileo risked so much by the quoted ebullition
at so fatally decisive a moment, how comes it that
never after, either by speech or in writing, did he
expressly contradict his abjuration by openly pro-
fessing his system? Certainly, when writing in
confidence to some intimates, he would insist upon
his innocence from a religious point of view; but
in all other instances his reticence was persistent.
Every opportunity and temptation to break this
imposed silence was presented when he wrote to
Diodati, then in Paris, on July 25, 1634, complain-
ing of the violence of his enemies toward himself
and his teachings, — a violence which he would
answer only by silence. Nor does he contradict his
abjuration in his letter written in 1637 to King
Ladislaus of Poland, whom he asks to compare his
“Dialogue” with the sentence pronounced against
its author, and to see if its doctrine is more perni-
cious than that of Luther and Calvin, as Urban
VIII. was said to believe. Nor, again, does he


94


Galileo.


advocate his system in his letter to Pieresc on Feb-
ruary 21, 1636, in which he insists on the injustice
of his condemnation. When he writes to Rinuccini
on March 29, 1641, he evades a direct answer to an
attempt to obtain an avowal of his real mind.

II.

Having shown in the previous pages that the im-
prisonment of Galileo was merely nominal, and that
no torture was inflicted upon him, w r e must now
briefly examine the decisions of the Roman Con-
gregations in his case, with a view to their doctrinal
consequences. Protestant polemics gladly proclaim
these decisions as destructive of the Catholic doc-
trine of Infallibility. Certain Catholic writers have
enunciated views on the matter which can serve only
to confirm the opinion that the Church and science
are implacable foes. For instance, the Viscount de
Bonald, with that severity which is generally char-
acteristic of lay theologians, insists that the double
movement of the earth has never been and never can
be proved; that even to-day he who defends the
Copernican system is “guilty of rashness” in con-
tradicting the natural sense of the Scriptures; that
if the old system was an illusion, the Bible favors
said illusion.* This author would advise, therefore,


* “Galileo, the Holy Office, and the System of the World,”
in the Correspondent of Dec. 25, 1854. See also this author’s
“Moses and Modern Geologists,” Avignon, 1835.


Galileo .


95


if he were logical, the Pope and the Roman In-
quisition to revoke the decree of toleration issued in
favor of the Galilean theory on September 17, 1822,
and would have them condemn the many scientific
ecclesiastics, like Secchi and Matignon,who “rashly
oppose the natural sense” of the Scriptures.* * * §
Again, there are other Catholic critics whose
views, though far more moderate than those of De
Bonald, are almost equally untenable. Thus it is
quite common to hear that Galileo was always
allowed to teach his system “as an astronomical
supposition;” whereas the official documents show
that our philosopher was prohibited, in 1616, to
uphold “said opinion in any way whatsoever;”
and that in 1633 he was punished for having
disobeyed this injunction by publishing a work
in which there were no interpretations of sacred
texts. Among the critics of this class the most
eminent are the astronomer Lalande, f the Abbe
Berault-Bercasteljt Bergier,§ and Feller, || — all of
whom copy the Protestant Mallet du Pan, whose
errors are carefully noted by Theodore Martin. If

* In 1842 a certain Abb6 Matalene published in Paris abook
entitled “Anti-Copernicus, a New Astronomy;” but his ec-

clesiastical superiors sharply reminded him that he had no
right to compromise the clergy by such extravagancies,

f “Voyage in Italy,” 1786. J Eccl. Hist., 1778-85.

§ Diet. Theol. || Diet. Hist., art. “Galileo.”

f “Galileo and the Eights of Science,” Paris, 1868. — Among
the errors of Mallet du Pan, which Martin with undue sever-
ity stigmatizes as “lies,” are to be noted his pretence that
Bellarmine did not, in 1616, interdict any astronomical hy-


96


Galileo .


Other Catholic polemics, such as Alzog* * and
Hoffier,f hold that the Copernican system, having
been advanced too soon, was dangerous to both
science and religion, and that this pretended fact
justifies the action of the Inquisition. But the
official records evince that the new system was con-
demned as 6 ‘false and altogether contrary to Scrip-
ture,” and not as a mere matter imprudently or
prematurely advanced. Nay, more : the sentence of
1633 expressly states that even though Galileo had
presented his system only as probably true, still he
would have offended; for, in the words of the de-
cree, “an opinion cannot be probable when it has
been declared and defined to be contrary to Sacred
Scripture.”

M. Adolphe Valson t contends that the Coperni-
can proposition concerning the movement of the
earth was not condemned as “heretical,” if taken by
itself ; and that in condemning the other Copernican

pothesis; the assertion that Galileo caused his apologetic let-
ter to Christendom to he printed before his condemnation; the
declaration that no imprimatur was really given for the publi-
cation of Galileo’s “Dialogue.” Pretending to give extracts
from a certain dispatch of Guicciardini, Mallet du Pan asserts
that they show that Galileo wished to force the Pontiff to
make a religious dogma of his system; whereas the reading
of the dispatch causes one to almost justify Martin when he
says that Mallet “not only mistakes, but is an imposter.”

* Church Hist., Fr. transl., Paris, 1855, vol. iii, p. 249.
f Encyc. Diet. Theol. Cath., art. “Galileo.”

t In the “Review of Christian Economy” for Dec., 1865, and
Jan. and Feb., 1866.


Galileo .


97


theory on the non-movement of the sun, the In-
quisition was right, since the sun has a movement of
its own. As to the first assertion, it is true that the
theory of the earth’s movement was not condemned
as “heretical,” but it was declared “false and al-
together contrary to Scripture.” As to Valson’s
second remark, there was no question of this special
movement of the sun ; this movement, toward the
constellation of Hercules, was utterly unknown at
that time; but what the Inquisition forbade Galileo
to deny was the movement of the sun around the
earth .

Very different from the opinions of the above
critics is that of Tiraboschi,* who admits that vulgar
prejudices caused the prohibition of 1616, and the
condemnation of 1633, and declares that these de-
cisions were pronounced by a fallible tribunal, and
not by the Church. He shows that at first Galileo
found his discoveries favorably received in Rome,
but that the angry Peripatetics soon adopted the
Bible as a weapon against him. However, being
ignorant of the fact that the Preface to the con-
demned “Dialogue” had been written, not by Galileo,
but by the examiner Riccardi, Tiraboschi accuses
the scientist of bad faith. He declares that the
Congregations erred because of a too great devotion
to Peripateticism.

* “First Historical Memoir, on the First Advocates of the
Copernican System,” read in the Modenese Academy dei dis -
sonanti in 1792, inserted in the Venetian edition of the “Hist.
Ital. Litt.,” 1796. “Second Memoir, on the condemnation of
Galileo and the Copernican System,” read in 1793.


98


Galileo .


About the year 1825 Olivieri, General of the Do-
minicans and commissary of the Holy Office, wrote
a dissertation on the affair of Galileo,* in which
he gave a very curious apology for the Congre-
gations. The teachings of Copernicus and Galileo,
said Olivieri, were not condemned because they did
not agree with the Bible, but because these two
scientists upheld them with bad arguments, which,
being contrary to sound philosophy, seemed there-
fore opposed to Scripture. If Galileo, continued
Olivieri, had known the gravity of the air, and had
not obstinately attributed the tides to a combination
of the diurnal and annual revolutions of the earth,
things would have gone differently ; for the Church
has ever encouraged any real progress — one which
is free from errors. Olivieri also contended that the
real cause of all the misfortunes of Galileo was his
having provoked the “vengeance 5 5 of Urban VIII. f

* Not edited until 1855, in the “Universite Catholique.”

t In bis “Dialogue on the Two Principal Mondial Sys-
tems,” published in 1632 with the approbation of the Master
of the Apostolic Palace, Galileo assigns the exposition of his
opinions to his friend and pupil, Salviati of Florence, then
some time dead. Galileo himself is not named, but he is often
indicated by the title of Linceo. The part of an investigator, im-
partial and judicious, is filled by the Venetian senator, Sagredo,
another deceased friend of the author. The defence of the
Peripatetic system is confided to one Simplicius, who uses
absurd arguments and will yield to none; who is, in fine, a
fair representative of many of Galileo’s opponents. Whether
or not Urban VIII. credited the assertion of Galileo’s enemies,
that under the guise of Simplicius he himself was held up to
ridicule, it is certain that now he manifested less sympathy


Galileo .


99


A decisive refutation of all these assertions has
been given by Govi.* *

From the beginning of the affair of Galileo, re-
marks Theodore Martin, five courses were open to
the ecclesiastical authorities. The philosopher and
his friends would have been satisfied if, firstly, it
were acknowledged that the new system was not
contrary to Catholic faith; secondly, if liberty of
discussion were allowed in its regard; and, thirdly,
if both the Copernicians and Peripatetics were for-
bidden to adduce Biblical texts in their debates.
Certainly ecclesiastical tradition as well as prudence,
both ever favorable to toleration in such matters,
would seem to have counselled one of these three
courses. Cardinal Matthew Barberini, afterward
Pope Urban YIII., Cardinal Bellarmine, and other
moderate Peripatetics, preferred a fourth course, —
namely, to leave liberty only to the Peripatetics,
and, while not deciding against the new system,
to interdict it as rash and dangerous under the
circumstances. In 1632 Urban YIII. adopted a

for the philosopher. Just previous to this period the Pontiff
had declared to the Beuedictine Castelli that if it had de-
pended on him, the decree of 1616 would not have been issued.
On March 16, 1630, Castelli wrote to Galileo that in an inter-
view with the celebrated Campanella, “his Holiness used
these very words: ‘We never desired that decree; and had it
depended on us it would not have been issued.’ ” This letter
is found in Alberi’s edition of the “Works of Galileo,” vol. ix,
p. 196.

* “The Holy Office, Copernicus, and Galileo, considered in
reference to a posthumous dissertation of Father Olivieri,”
Turin, 1872.


100


Galileo .


fifth course, — namely, to procure the condemnation
of the Copernican sj^stem as false in philosophy,
erroneous in theology, and contrary to Sacred
Scripture.

Now arises the question : By whom was the doc-
trine of the movement of the earth thus condemned?
Certainly, it was through the influence of Paul Y.
and of Urban VIII., respectively, that the decisions
of 1616 and 1633 were rendered; but neither their
authority as Pontiffs nor that of the Church was
implicated. As men these Popes were opposed to
the system of Galileo, but as Popes their names are
not signed in the famous decisions. Both are pub-
lished only in the name of the Congregations. This
absence of the Pontifical ratification is remarked
by Descartes in three letters to Mersenne, and by
Gassendi.*' The Jesuit Ricciolif invokes against
the teachings of Galileo the authority of “the Con-
gregations delegated by the Pope, 5 ’ but he does not
contend that the Pope can delegate his infallibility.
The absence of the Pontifical ratification in the
decisions against Galileo is noted by the Benedic-
tine Caramuel,^ who, after declaring that the new
system is absurd, asks himself what the Church
would do if, “which is impossible,’ ’ the movement
of the earth were ever demonstrated. He replies
that the Church would declare that “the Roman


* ‘‘Impressed Motion,” Lyons, 1658, vol. iii, epist. 2.
f “Almagestum Novum,” Bologna, 1651, vol. i, pt. 2, p. 4S9.
X “Fundamental Theology,” Lyons, 1676. The passages
are cited by Bouix, in his “Condemnation of Galileo,” Arras,
1866, pp. 25-29.


Galileo .


101


Congregations, having decided without the Papal
ratification, were mistaken.”

In fine, let it be remembered that neither in 1616
nor in 1633 did the supreme authority of the Church
pronounce a decision concerning the Copernican
system. Muratori, writing in Italy a century before
the works of Galileo were removed from the Index,
says that the Copernican system was condemned
“not by an edict of the Supreme Pontiff, but by
the Congregation of the Holy Office. . . . To-day
this system is everywhere in vogue, and Catholics
are not forbidden to hold it. ” * Tiraboschi specially
insists on our admiring the “Providence of God in
favor of His Church; since, at a time when the
majority of theologians firmly believed that the
Copernican system was contrary to the Sacred Scrip-
tures, the Church was not permitted to give a solemn
decision on the matter. ”f No Catholic will assert
that the Roman Inquisition has never committed
any errors ; and in the case of Galileo it was the
Inquisition that erred, and not the Pontiff; and
even though the Pontiff had erred, the decision was
not one concerning faith or morals, — one, that is,
which can form the object matter of Infallibility.

“Whenever,” says Cantu, “there is opened anew
scientific, or philosophical horizon, even the most
elevated intellects are stricken with fright, as when
America was discovered, and when steam and elec-


* “Annals of Italy,” at year 1633.
t “Memoir II.,” loc. cit.


102


Galileo .


tricity were first applied. What wonder if contra-
diction befell the Copernican system, which ap-
peared to subvert the order not only of the physical
but of the moral world; which seemed to threaten
faith and morals, just as it changed the reciprocal
position of the heavenly bodies? What wonder if
it seemed impious and scandalous to subject man
and his habitation to the same laws which regulate
the other phenomena of nature? Was it not for
this reason that, quite recently, Hegel denied the
movement of the earth? When the Reformation
had spread, and men were substituting their in-
dividual for the canonical interpretation of the
Scriptures, churchmen were frightened on seeing
certain verses interpreted in a new manner, and
they went so far as to condemn Galileo. Nor
should we forget that until Faucolt furnished it, in
our own days, there was no physical proof of the
movement of the earth. Faucolt gave it in the
progressive deviation of the oscillating plane of a
pendulum suspended from a fixed point. But no
serious person will repeat the absurdities of Libri,*
of Arduini, t and of similar writers, confuted by
Biot,$ Alberi, Martin, and by common-sense.”

He who would understand the great catastrophe
in the life of Galileo must consult the writings of the


* Loc , tit.

t “The first Born of Galileo,” Florence, 1864.
t In Michaud’s “Universal Biography,” and in two disser-
tations in the Journal des Savants for March, July and October,
1858.


Galileo .


103


scientist, and the invaluable documents published
by Alberi in his great edition of the “Works.”*
It is not true , as Libri and, after him, many
Protestants insist, that the officers of the Inquisi-
tion destroyed or secreted nearly all the papers of
Galileo. All his principal works remain, and nearly
all the minor ones. A few of his MSS. were de-
stroyed by one of his grandsons, who felt some
scruples about preserving any writings of one con-
demned by the Holy Office. Most of the important
works and of the correspondence were collected by
Galileo’s disciple, Viviani, who bequeathed them to
a nephew, Panzanini ; the heirs of this nephew sold
some of them as waste-paper, but nearly all were
recovered by Giambattista Nelli, whose son Clement
used them and part of Viviani’s collection in his
“Life of Galileo,” published in 1793. When
publishing his edition of the “Works,” Alberi
promised to give to the world a Life based upon
documents in his hands, but he failed to do so.
However, this Life would not have been complete,
as there were many documents which he could not
procure. Thanks to Father Theiner, Prefect of
the Vatican Archives, who communicated these
papers to M. Henri de l’Epinois, the world received,
in 1867, much light on the affairs of the great
scientist, in the valuable work of L’Epinois. f


* In sixteen large volumes, Florence, 1842-56.
t “G-alileo : His Process and Condemnation, According to

Unedited Documents.”
