Chapter 20
Boulder
“Evil on this scale is impossible to comprehend. To know who
murdered JonBenét Ramsey is to know what world we live in.”
—James R. Gaines, Time, January 20, 1997
In death, she looked more like the six-year-old child that she was than she had in
many of the photos taken of her when she was alive. Her lifeless body was found
lying on a cold basement floor, wrapped in a blanket. A strip of duct tape pur-
portedly covered her mouth. Her right wrist, raised above her head, was loosely
bound with a length of cord. The same type cord was wrapped around her neck,
with a broken paintbrush handle taken from her mother’s art supplies fashioned
into a makeshift garrote.
To some investigators, her bindings looked staged.
She was dressed in a sweatshirt that covered a long-sleeved undershirt. White
pajama bottoms covered her white panties, which an autopsy report later revealed
were stained with blood. Inspection with a blacklight indicated that there was
semen on both of her thighs, but the medial examiner would make no mention of
that in his report.
To some investigators, it looked as though she had been ‘re-dressed’ after her
death.
She had been sexually abused, severely beaten about the head—causing a mas-
sive skull fracture—and then strangled to death. Rigor mortis had fully set in and
police on the scene reported the smell of decomposition. She had undigested
food in her stomach and small intestine, identified as pieces of pineapple. On the
palm of her left hand was drawn a small red heart. Around her neck was a chain
bearing a crucifix. On her wrist was a bracelet; engraved on one side was her
315

--- PAGE BREAK ---f pineapple. On the
palm of her left hand was drawn a small red heart. Around her neck was a chain
bearing a crucifix. On her wrist was a bracelet; engraved on one side was her
315

--- PAGE BREAK ---

name, JonBenét Ramsey, and on the other, the probable date of her death:
December 25, 1996.
The previous evening, JonBenét had attended a party at the home of family
friends with her parents, John and Patsy,41 and her brother Burke. The Ramsey
family had returned home at 9:30 PM, by which time JonBenét had fallen asleep.
She was carried inside and put to bed, allegedly last seen alive at around 10:00 PM.
Patsy Ramsey claims that she woke up the next morning sometime after 5:00 AM
and headed down the back stairs, which were generally used only by those who
were familiar with the house. There she found a ransom note that she quickly read
before entering her daughter’s room to find that the child was missing.42 At 5:52
AM, she placed a frantic 911 call. It was later realized that Burke Ramsey’s voice
could be heard on the recording of that call, although John and Patsy steadfastly
maintain that Burke was not yet up from bed when the call was placed.
Boulder police arrived at the Ramsey home seven minutes later to find Patsy
hysterical, and John collected, but pacing. This was the second time in just three
days that a 911 call had been placed from the Ramsey home. The first was on the
night of December 23, during a party attended by an estimated 100 guests drawn
316
•   Programmed to Kill
41 John Ramsey is the son of a WWII pilot who later served as the director of the
Michigan Aeronautics Commission, where he was known, certainly not affection-
ately, as “Czar” Ramsey. John himself served as a Naval officer and pilot in the
Philippines in the late 1960s. He later formed a company that he named Access
Graphics. That company later became a subsidiary of Lockheed-Martin, one of the
nation’s largest military/intelligence contractors. After the buyout, John served as
the company’s president and CEO. His vice-president of operations was Donald
Paugh, his father-in-law and a former Union Carbide engineer. Patsy, a former
beauty queen, was the oldest of Paugh’s three daughters. A Miss America pageant
judge once described her as “a little automaton.” In his book on the Ramsey case,
Cyril Wecht described the Paugh family as “insular, like a closed society unto itself.
Nedra [Patsy’s mother] appeared to exert extraordinary influence over her adult
daughters.” John Ramsey also exerted considerable influence over one of her adult
daughters.
42 That is the version of events that Patsy Ramsey has long held to. By her initial
account, however, she discovered the disappearance before finding the note.fluence over one of her adult
daughters.
42 That is the version of events that Patsy Ramsey has long held to. By her initial
account, however, she discovered the disappearance before finding the note.

--- PAGE BREAK ---her adult
daughters.
42 That is the version of events that Patsy Ramsey has long held to. By her initial
account, however, she discovered the disappearance before finding the note.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

from the elite of Boulder society. The guest list for that party has never been made
public, nor has the reason for the first 911 call.43
The first officers to arrive at the Ramsey home were presented with the pur-
ported ransom note: two-and-a-half hand-written pages of bizarre ramblings that
were withheld from the press and the public for nine months. The note’s authors
demanded a ransom of exactly $118,000 in cash, which happened to be the
amount of the Christmas bonus that John had just received. They claimed, rather
preposterously, that they represented a “small foreign faction.” They warned that
if their demands were not met, JonBenét would be decapitated. The Ramseys
were instructed to expect a telephone call that very morning between 8:00 and
10:00 AM, but that call, of course, never came.
For reasons that have never been adequately explained, the investigation was
compromised from the very beginning. Officers inexplicably failed to secure the
crime scene, allowing the family’s pastor and a number of friends to freely come
and go from the home. No effort was made to prevent contamination of any
potential evidence. Detectives did not arrive on the scene until 8:10 AM, over
two hours after the first patrol officers arrived. It took another twelve hours for
the coroner to arrive (and once there, he reportedly spent just ten minutes exam-
ining the body and the crime scene). At around 10:00 AM, detectives allowed
John Ramsey to leave the house unescorted for over an hour. He was purportedly
on a mission to pick up the mail, although it is unclear why such a trivial errand
had such a sense of urgency at a time of family crisis. It is also unclear why it took
John so long to complete the errand and why he chose to go alone when several
family friends were available to accompany him.
317
David McGowan   •
43 One man who is known to have attended is Bill McReynolds, who played Santa Claus
for the event. On December 26, 1974, exactly twenty-two years before the murder of
JonBenét, Bill’s own daughter had purportedly been abducted, along with a friend,
from the McReynolds’ home not far from Boulder. The girl was released unharmed,
after being forced to witness an assault on her friend. There were no arrests made and
no charges were ever filed. Not long after that, Bill’s wife Janet wrote a screenplay,
entitled Hey Rube, that concerned the abduction, torture and murder of a young girl
whose battered body is discovered lying on a cold basement floor. When Bill
McReynolds was extended an invitation to speak at JonBenét’s memorial service, he
used the opportunity to share memories of not just the slain beauty queen but of a few
other kids with whom, bizarrely, he had been close before their untimely deaths. The
Ramseys considered McReynolds one of their prime suspects—along with 160+ other
people whose names appeared on their self-serving suspect list.ely, he had been close before their untimely deaths. The
Ramseys considered McReynolds one of their prime suspects—along with 160+ other
people whose names appeared on their self-serving suspect list.

--- PAGE BREAK ---One of the most grievous, and baffling, errors committed by detectives was
their failure to separate the Ramseys for questioning.

Even though detectives had
Patsy alone for over an hour, while John was running his errand, no one purport-
edly thought to question her.

Just as baffling is the fact that there was no initial
search of the house, by either the family or police.

When a detective on the scene
finally suggested, at 1:00 PM, that it might be a good idea to conduct a search, it
had been nearly eight hours since the family had first discovered the disappear-
ance, seven hours since police had arrived on the scene, and five hours since detec-
tives had arrived, and yet no one had thought to search the home.

Are we really to
believe that after finding the ‘ransom’ note, the family immediately accepted that
their beloved daughter had been taken from the home?

What parent would not
first conduct a room-by-room search of the house before accepting that eventual-
ity?

Indeed, what parent would not search the house repeatedly, in the desperate
hope that, somehow, something had been overlooked during an earlier search?

Amazingly enough, when it finally occurred to police that it might be a good
idea to search the crime scene, they assigned that task to the prime suspect, John
Ramsey.

Joining John was good friend Fleet White, an oil company executive
who had hosted the party the Ramseys attended the previous evening, and who
the Ramseys placed a call to immediately after placing the 911 call.

Ramsey and
White quickly headed to the basement, where they almost immediately found
JonBenét’s body, demonstrating in doing so that no effort had previously been
made to look for the missing girl (although White later claimed that he had
checked the basement earlier and saw nothing out of the ordinary).--- PAGE BREAK ---

Joining John was good friend Fleet White, an oil company executive
who had hosted the party the Ramseys attended the previous evening, and who
the Ramseys placed a call to immediately after placing the 911 call. Ramsey and
White quickly headed to the basement, where they almost immediately found
JonBenét’s body, demonstrating in doing so that no effort had previously been
made to look for the missing girl (although White later claimed that he had
checked the basement earlier and saw nothing out of the ordinary). John Ramsey promptly picked up his lifeless daughter and removed the tape
from her mouth (strangely though, the autopsy report later made no mention of
tape residue around JonBenét’s mouth). He then carried her upstairs and laid her
on the floor. Patsy Ramsey immediately collapsed on the body of her child. A
detective then moved the corpse and covered it with a blanket. In the space of just
a few minutes, some of the most crucial evidence in the case had been hopelessly
contaminated. Ann Louise Bardach, writing for Vanity Fair, quoted one officer’s recollections
of John and Patsy’s reactions to the discovery of the body: “What was interesting
was when [John] Ramsey brought the body upstairs he never cried. But when he
laid her down, he started to moan, while peering around to see who was looking.”
Patsy, he said, “peer[ed] at him through splayed fingers” while making sobbing
sounds. The officer described being haunted by the manner in which Patsy kept
staring at him. He also noted that he never saw either of the Ramseys attempt to
comfort or console the other. The glaring incongruity of finding both a ransom note and the body of the pur-
ported kidnapping victim, coupled with what was viewed by many as inappropriate
318
•   Programmed to Kill

--- PAGE BREAK ---behavior by the Ramseys, seemed to indicate that the crime was something other
than a botched kidnapping.

The preponderance of the evidence did not support the
idea that an intruder was to blame.

No footprints were observed outside of the
home, even though snow covered much (but not all) of the ground.

There were no
signs of forced entry.

The ransom note most likely originated from within the
house.

The pages appeared to have been torn from the Ramseys’ own legal pad, and
a pen found in a cup in the kitchen was likely the writing instrument.

According to
some reports, the first page in the legal pad, which was still attached, contained
what appeared to be a false start at writing the ransom note.

The unlikely scenario that we are asked to believe is that an intruder entered
an occupied home seeking a victim to abduct, but he then inadvertently killed his
intended victim, at which time he decided to hide the body in the basement,
assuming that it wouldn’t be found.

He then searched the house for pen and
paper before composing both an unfinished draft and a final ransom note, the
latter of which rambled on at some length.

The room where the body was found was in an out-of-the-way area of the spa-
cious home’s basement.

Only a family member would have likely known of its
existence.

John Ramsey acknowledged that fact in a CNN interview: “the room
that we found her in is kind of a remote part of the basement.” “A casual guest
would not know where that room is,” Patsy added.

“It’s, you know, kind of out-
of-the-way.” Despite that early acknowledgement by the Ramseys themselves, the
Ramsey spin team later vociferously denied that the room would have been diffi-
cult to locate for someone other than a family member.

Steve Thomas, the lead detective on the case, concluded that Patsy Ramsey wrote
the ransom note.

He contends that of the 74 suspects whose handwriting samples
were reviewed by investigators, Patsy was the only one that could not be excluded as
a suspect.--- PAGE BREAK ---

Steve Thomas, the lead detective on the case, concluded that Patsy Ramsey wrote
the ransom note. He contends that of the 74 suspects whose handwriting samples
were reviewed by investigators, Patsy was the only one that could not be excluded as
a suspect. He has also accused her of deliberately changing some elements of her
writing style after the murder, in order to disguise her authorship of the note. Several days after the discovery of JonBenét’s body, the Ramsey family flew her
remains to Atlanta, their former home, for burial. Services were held on New Years
Eve, after which JonBenét was laid to rest next to her half-sister Elizabeth, another
of John Ramsey’s daughters. The following day, John and Patsy made their infa-
mous appearance on CNN, even while steadfastly claiming to be too grief-stricken
to talk to the police. Patsy was heavily sedated, and had been since the day of the
murder. She later claimed that she was unable to remember anything that occurred
during the weeks immediately following the discovery of the body. Burke Ramsey
was reportedly kept heavily drugged after his sister’s death as well. Allegations of prior abuse of the victim soon began to circulate in the media. Video footage of JonBenét’s pageant appearances was aired endlessly. The footage
offered no proof of the abuse allegations, but it did clearly demonstrate that the
319
David McGowan   •

--- PAGE BREAK ---Ramseys had unconscionably marketed their offspring as some kind of hyper-sex-
ualized woman-child.

There was, however, certainly nothing unusual about that on the kiddy pageant
circuit, as author Stephen Singular discovered when he ventured into that milieu.

What he discovered is a world that few outside of the pageant circuit are familiar
with: a world where extraordinarily young girls have had their hair dyed, their
teeth capped, their young faces sculpted by plastic surgeons, their chests bunched-
up with tape to form the appearance of cleavage, and their eye color enhanced
with contact lenses.

Singular also discovered that photographing these pre-pubes-
cent beauty queens in risqué poses is a routine business undertaken by some of the
most highly regarded child photographers in the country.

JonBenét Ramsey was
just one of an estimated 250,000 girls who are a part of this billion-dollar-a-year
business that, by all appearances, caters primarily to the pedophilic tendencies of
the adults who gravitate around the 3,000 child beauty pageants held every year.

While JonBenét’s longtime involvement in the child pageant business raises a
number of questions, it does not directly answer the question of whether she had
been molested either on the night of her death or before that time.

The autopsy
report, which was released in a severely redacted form on February 14 and in full
on August 13, made mention of chronic genital inflammation, foreign matter in
the vagina, and “epithelial erosion.” A detective working the case swore in an affi-
davit that the coroner, John Meyer, told her that someone had definitely had sex-
ual contact with the child.

Meyer drew no such conclusions in his report.

Independent experts who have examined the evidence have been far less cir-
cumspect.

Dr.

Robert Kirschner of the University of Chicago’s pathology depart-
ment noted that JonBenét’s vaginal opening was twice what is normal for a girl
her age.--- PAGE BREAK ---

Dr. Robert Kirschner of the University of Chicago’s pathology depart-
ment noted that JonBenét’s vaginal opening was twice what is normal for a girl
her age. He also stated that the “genital injuries indicate penetration, but proba-
bly not by a penis, and are evidence of molestation that night as well as previous
molestation.” Dr. Cyril Wecht, one of the most respected forensic pathologists in
the country, told an interviewer: “This to me is evidence of sexual abuse. I think
any forensic gynecologist and forensic pathologist would agree with that…If she
had been taken to a hospital emergency room, and doctors had seen the genital
evidence, her father would have been arrested.”
There was one doctor who had numerous opportunities to observe that evi-
dence. As was widely reported, JonBenét had been taken to her pediatrician no
fewer than twenty-seven times in the previous three to four years. The doctor
claimed, rather disingenuously, that that was a normal rate of visitation for a child
her age. He also claimed that he had never seen, during any of those visits, any
evidence of abuse. That claim, however, was contradicted by the forensic evi-
dence, which indicated chronic abuse. 320
•   Programmed to Kill

--- PAGE BREAK ---Cellmark Diagnostics in Germantown, Maryland, the CIA-linked forensic lab
that was thrust into the national limelight during the OJ Simpson trial, was
unable to return any conclusive findings from any of the biological materials it
received on the case.

A number of other OJ players surfaced in Buffalo as well.

Criminologist Henry Lee was hired on as a forensics adviser to District Attorney
Alex Hunter.44 DNA wunderkinds Barry Scheck and Peter Neufeld joined the
party as well.

Oddly enough, with all the DNA all-stars on board, no DNA evi-
dence has ever been produced in the case.

From the beginning, when a gag order was placed on the officers working the
case, there have been concerted efforts made to control the flow of information
that the public has received about the murder of JonBenét Ramsey.

Largely
responsible for shaping public perception of the case has been the law firm
retained almost immediately by the Ramseys: Haddon, Morgan, Mueller,
George, Mackey & Foreman.45 The tentacles of Hal Haddon’s firm seemed to
reach into every nook and cranny of the Ramsey case.

321
David McGowan   •
44 Alex Hunter, the man primarily responsible for prosecuting the JonBenét Ramsey
murder case, had been Boulder’s District Attorney since 1972.

During his tenure, he
developed a reputation for extremely lenient enforcement of drug laws, making the
city a particularly friendly place for narcotics traffickers.

Since 1969, Hunter had been
a limited partner in a business enterprise with a lawyer named William Gray, who just
happened to be John Ramsey’s civil attorney.

45 The powerful firm has, as Cyril Wecht noted, “deep connections to the Democratic
power structure that control[s] state politics” in Colorado.

Hal Haddon was the man-
ager of Gary Hart’s successful U.S.

Senate campaigns as well as his unsuccessful presi-
dential bid.

Haddon also has close ties to District Attorney Alex Hunter and former
Governors Roy Romer and Richard Lamm.--- PAGE BREAK ---

Senate campaigns as well as his unsuccessful presi-
dential bid. Haddon also has close ties to District Attorney Alex Hunter and former
Governors Roy Romer and Richard Lamm. A Los Angeles Times report from August
2003 describes his firm as having “a long history of handling high profile cases and
getting charges either dismissed outright or dramatically reduced. In cases where
clients have been found guilty, they have often been able to get sentences drastically
cut.” The Times cites as an example the case of Rockwell International Corporation’s
Rocky Flats nuclear weapons plant, which was raided by federal agents who discov-
ered “widespread and egregious environmental contamination. Radioactive waste was
being illegally dumped into rivers, fields and released into the atmosphere.” Despite
the fact that the evidence against the company was overwhelming, no company offi-
cials were ever charged in the case, which was settled with Rockwell paying a nominal
fine. In 1990, Haddon represented ‘gonzo’ journalist Hunter S. Thompson, who was
facing sexual assault charges. The charges against Thompson were dropped. Curiously, Thompson has been accused by witnesses in the Franklin case of being a
producer of child snuff films. He now pens a column entitled Hey Rube.

--- PAGE BREAK ---inst Thompson were dropped. Curiously, Thompson has been accused by witnesses in the Franklin case of being a
producer of child snuff films. He now pens a column entitled Hey Rube.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

Patsy Ramsey was represented by Haddon partners Patrick Furman and
Patrick Burke. Burke was perhaps best known for having won acquittal for the
white supremacist accused of killing Denver radio personality Alan Berg.
Throughout the Ramsey investigation, he was frequently seen in the doorway of
what was dubbed the ‘JonBenét War Room,’ often chatting with Peter Hofstrom,
an assistant to District Attorney Hunter, and Tripp DeMuth, one Hunter’s prose-
cutors on the case. John Ramsey was represented by partners Bryan Morgan and
Lee Foreman. Morgan, who had once been nominated to serve as a justice on the
Colorado Supreme Court, was regularly seen holding breakfast meetings with his
old friend, Peter Hofstrom. Burke Ramsey was represented by yet another mem-
ber of the Haddon team.
The Boulder Police Department, led by Chief Tom Koby,46 took the unusual
step of retaining its own representatives, in the form of a trio of private practice
attorneys. One of the three, Robert Miller, had recently teamed with Haddon on
a civil suit. Another of the trio, Daniel Hoffman, had previously been defended
in a malpractice suit by Haddon partner Lee Foreman.
In addition to the legal firepower, the Ramseys also hired a professional
spokesman. Filling that post was Washington spin-meister Patrick Korten, who
had served in the Reagan Administration as the consultant for the Office of
Personnel Management at the time that striking air traffic controllers were fired,
and as the chief spokesman for the outrageously corrupt Ed Meese-run Justice
Department. Also on Korten’s résumé were stints serving as mouthpieces for
Iran/Contra conspirator Oliver North and for the Pharmaceutical Research
Manufacturers of America.
Another addition to the Ramsey spin team was premier FBI profiler John
Douglas. One of his former colleagues, Gregg McCrary, was also approached to
join the team, but he declined the offer—after offering the opinion that the mur-
der looked to him like a “staged domestic homicide.” Also on the Ramsey team
were two private investigation firms whose gumshoes reportedly interviewed
nearly every witness approached by Boulder police. Rounding out the team was a
retired homicide investigator named Lou Smit, whose claim to fame was having
322
•   Programmed to Kill
46 Before coming to Boulder, Chief Koby had served as a deputy chief, and then as assis-
tant chief, of the Houston Police Department. His chief and mentor in Houston had
been Lee P. Brown, who later became the chief of the NYPD and then served in
Washington as the federal ‘drug czar.’ Before relocating to Houston, Brown had
served as Police Commissioner for the city of Atlanta, at the very time that the so-
called ‘child murders’ rocked that city (see next chapter).al ‘drug czar.’ Before relocating to Houston, Brown had
served as Police Commissioner for the city of Atlanta, at the very time that the so-
called ‘child murders’ rocked that city (see next chapter).

--- PAGE BREAK ---purportedly solved the murder of Karen Grammar, the sister of actor and accused
pedophile Kelsey Grammar.

Smit was brought out of retirement by District Attorney Hunter, ostensibly to
assist in gathering evidence against the Ramseys.

Strangely enough though, he
resigned a year-and-a-half later and went to work for the Ramseys.

When he
switched sides, he brought with him a full accounting of all the state’s evidence in
the case, which, truth be told, the Ramseys had access to all along anyway.

Boulder police loudly complained that Hunter repeatedly shared information
with the Ramseys, even going so far as to supply the couple, before their being
questioned by police, with copies of police reports and of their initial statements
to investigators.

John and Patsy were, therefore, able to insure that their stories
remained consistent with both the known facts and with their prior alibis.

To their credit, it appears that at least some of the officers on Boulder’s police
force (which had a healthy distrust of Hunter and his sidekick Smit) attempted to
honestly investigate the case.

Their efforts were impeded, however, by not only
the District Attorney’s office, but by the Denver Police Department and the FBI.

Local officials resisted, unsuccessfully, the involvement of both agencies.

In April
1997, Boulder police abruptly stopped sharing information with Hunter’s office.

Shortly after that, the computer containing the Ramsey case files in the afore-
mentioned ‘War Room’ was hacked into by persons unknown.

That same month,
John and Patsy Ramsey submitted to their first formal police interviews, four full
months after JonBenét had been laid to rest.

The date of the interviews was,
appropriately enough, April 30, 1997: Walpurgisnacht.

On that very same day, a man named James Michael Thompson, who worked
for a private company that specialized in transporting corpses, stole two pages
from the morgue book at Boulder Community Hospital.--- PAGE BREAK ---

The date of the interviews was,
appropriately enough, April 30, 1997: Walpurgisnacht. On that very same day, a man named James Michael Thompson, who worked
for a private company that specialized in transporting corpses, stole two pages
from the morgue book at Boulder Community Hospital. Those two pages had
recorded the arrival of JonBenét’s body four months earlier. On May 21,
Thompson was charged with the theft of the pages. He was also charged with
abuse of corpses, those charges arising from his macabre habit of grotesquely pos-
ing the corpses in his charge. On June 18, the very same James Michael
Thompson attempted to burn down the Ramsey home. Patsy had reportedly
expressed a desire that the house be destroyed, and had vowed that she would
never return there. Officials predictably announced that Thompson’s actions had
no connection to the murder of JonBenét. June also marked the beginning of the crumbling of the local political struc-
ture in Boulder, Colorado. City Manager Tim Honey was the first casualty. Before long, a third of the city’s council members had left office, the mayor had
decided to move on, the head of the Chamber of Commerce had left office, and
Police Chief Tom Koby and Police Commander John Eller had both opted to
step down. In his book on the case, Stephen Singular states, without elaboration:
323
David McGowan   •

--- PAGE BREAK ---and
Police Chief Tom Koby and Police Commander John Eller had both opted to
step down. In his book on the case, Stephen Singular states, without elaboration:
323
David McGowan   •

--- PAGE BREAK ---

“Numerous powerful people had been in the Ramsey’s home and had been
exposed to JonBenét.” Many of those powerful people were in the Ramsey home
just two days before JonBenét’s death, on the night that the first 911 call was
placed. It is very unlikely that any of those people will ever be named, but it is
quite possible that some of them were public officials who opted to step away
from the limelight.
*
*
*
*
*
What really happened to JonBenét Ramsey on that fateful day in 1996? And
why did the case become such a cause celebre? After all, the killing of a child in this
country is certainly not an uncommon occurrence, nor is it normally an event
deemed worthy of national media attention. As the Village Voice reported in
1997, the United States has, per capita, the highest rate of child homicide in the
world. None of the world’s people slaughter their children more frequently, or
more cavalierly, than do Americans.47 With the notable exceptions of the occa-
sional Polly Klaas or Adam Walsh, few of these murder victims are deemed wor-
thy of anything approaching a full-scale media circus.
What then are we to make of the JonBenét Ramsey case? The family would
like you believe that it was nothing more than a badly botched kidnapping plot.
That hardly seems likely, however. The kidnapping scenario was most likely con-
ceived after the fact, to cover up the accidental or intentional death of the child.
The plan probably called for the body to be disposed of and the disappearance
blamed on an unknown abductor. For whatever reason though, the body could
not be disposed of. When it became apparent that a search would quickly yield
the girl’s remains, John Ramsey made sure that he was the one to make the dis-
covery, thereby compromising the crime scene and nullifying any forensic evi-
dence linking him to the body. None of that, of course, answers the question of
why JonBenét Ramsey was killed.
One theory holds that Patsy Ramsey killed JonBenét in a fit of rage resulting
from a bedwetting incident. While that scenario is not necessarily “absurd,” as the
Ramseys have labeled it, it does seem to fall short of adequately explaining the
crime. Another theory holds that John Ramsey killed JonBenét accidentally when
324
•   Programmed to Kill
47 America’s closest ally, the United Kingdom, seems to have its sights set on catching
up. In January 2002, the Independent reported that a “record number of children
[were] murdered in Britain last year.” The rate of child homicides had risen 40% in
just one year. England’s child homicide rate is now “thought to be the highest in
Europe.”record number of children
[were] murdered in Britain last year.” The rate of child homicides had risen 40% in
just one year. England’s child homicide rate is now “thought to be the highest in
Europe.”

--- PAGE BREAK ---ldren
[were] murdered in Britain last year.” The rate of child homicides had risen 40% in
just one year. England’s child homicide rate is now “thought to be the highest in
Europe.”

--- PAGE BREAK ---

his ongoing abuse got out of hand. While that is probably closer to the truth, it
still appears to fall short of providing a full explanation. Stephan Singular has put
forth a more disturbing theory: he believes that JonBenét was killed because of
her involvement in a child pornography and prostitution ring. Singular theorizes
that one of the parents was involved, essentially acting as a pimp in selling the
young girl to the ring. The cover-up of her death took place, according to
Singular, when the guilty party had to conceal that fact from the other parent,
who was not involved.
While Singular is on the right track, his analysis still probably falls a little short
of the mark. The truth likely is that both of the Ramseys were involved in pimp-
ing their daughter out to other pedophiles. The massive cover-up that has
shrouded the investigation from day one is indicative of the type of systemic cor-
ruption that leads to these types of cases being routinely covered up. Such a far-
reaching effort certainly could not have been orchestrated by one parent working
to fool the other.
Rumors of child pornography have surrounded the case from the earliest days
of the investigation. Police records indicate that warrants were sought to search
the Ramsey home for pornographic materials. The San Jose Mercury News
reported that police investigators “had a strong initial suspicion that someone in
the family had an interest in child pornography…three days after the girl’s bludg-
eoned body was discovered in the basement of her family’s upscale home,
Boulder, Colo. police seized computers, computer disks, CD-ROMs, and video
and still photography equipment, according to the search warrants.” At least 150
videotapes were seized from the home. It was also alleged that John Ramsey had
been seen frequenting a seedy Denver porno shop. In the tabloid press, it was
reported that the computers at Access Graphics were loaded with child pornogra-
phy. While the credibility of that story may be in dispute,48 it is interesting to
note that after the murder, Access Graphics added guards and greatly increased
security at its headquarters.
A California woman recently presented to Boulder police—through her ther-
apist—information that she claimed to have about the case. The therapist, Mary
Bienkowski, spoke of a pedophile ring operating in the Boulder area. She identi-
fied her client of ten years as a past victim of the ring, which she said had direct
links to the Ramsey family. She also said that her client had provided police with
325
David McGowan   •
48 There is a possibility that the story was dumped in the tabloid press for the express
purpose of discrediting it. Konformist editor Robert Sterling and others have noted
that the tabloid press is frequently used to taint stories that are threatening to break in
more respectable avenues of the media.crediting it. Konformist editor Robert Sterling and others have noted
that the tabloid press is frequently used to taint stories that are threatening to break in
more respectable avenues of the media.

--- PAGE BREAK ---mist editor Robert Sterling and others have noted
that the tabloid press is frequently used to taint stories that are threatening to break in
more respectable avenues of the media.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

the names of several people who had witnessed the murder of JonBenét.
Bienkowski also claimed that the witness had provided evidence of the ongoing
abuse of other children. The unidentified witness was interviewed by agents of
the FBI. Shortly after that, she went into hiding, afraid for her life. The Boulder
Sheriff’s office portrayed the woman as a crank, claiming that she had a history of
making false reports. The woman, however, maintained that while she had
indeed made previous reports, they were not false reports, but rather uninvesti-
gated reports. There is no indication that the leads she supplied on the Ramsey
case were ever investigated.
Could such a ring have existed in Boulder? And if so, could that have provided
the hidden subtext of the JonBenét Ramsey murder? Conclusive evidence is hard
to come by, but a few tantalizing bits and pieces have surfaced.
Randy Simons was considered the best, and the most expensive, child photog-
rapher in the Boulder area. At least one pageant mother reported to author
Singular that Simons had approached her about shooting nudes of her daughter.
She declined the offer. How many pageant mothers consented to such offers is
unknown. In June 1996, just months before JonBenét’s death, Simons took what
were described as ‘cover-girl’ shots of the oft-photographed beauty queen (who
on several occasions had been photographed with Daphne White, her best friend
and the daughter of Fleet White).
Just after JonBenét’s death, Simons abruptly left his wife and daughter in
Denver and moved to a remote area of eastern Colorado. No one seemed to know
why he had done so. He was said to be extremely distraught over the murder. He
reportedly placed several frantic calls to friends, during which he expressed a pro-
found fear for his life. He wrote an article for Stagelines, a pageant newsletter, in
which he claimed that he was being pursued by “paramilitary types.” He also
expressed concern to the newsletter’s publisher about the possibility of someone
releasing “inappropriate” photos of JonBenét.
When the Wonderland raids swept through a number of American cities, one
of those arrested was Richard Bruce Thomas, a computer consultant living in Ft.
Collins, Colorado, about an hour’s drive from the Ramsey home. Thomas was
found shot to death in his home on September 5, 1998. His death was ruled, as
always, a suicide. When a man named James Partin was arrested on charges of
distributing child pornography on the Internet, his Columbus, Ohio home was
found to contain a photograph of JonBenét Ramsey. Partin was a prime suspect
in the 1983 disappearance of a fourteen-year-old girl from Idaho Springs,
Colorado.
Stephan Singular took some of these scraps of evidence that he had collected
and presented them to District Attorney Alex Hunter, and then to Detective
Sergeant Tom Wickman of the Boulder Police Department, and then to Ellis
326
•   Programmed to Killnce that he had collected
and presented them to District Attorney Alex Hunter, and then to Detective
Sergeant Tom Wickman of the Boulder Police Department, and then to Ellis
326
•   Programmed to Kill

--- PAGE BREAK ---ected
and presented them to District Attorney Alex Hunter, and then to Detective
Sergeant Tom Wickman of the Boulder Police Department, and then to Ellis
326
•   Programmed to Kill

--- PAGE BREAK ---

Armistead, one of the Ramseys’ private investigators. All three took his informa-
tion but offered nothing in return, and all three chose not to investigate the leads
that he provided.
*
*
*
*
*
What could prove to be a key piece of evidence in the case has been largely
ignored by the media and by various theories of the crime: the undigested food in
JonBenét’s stomach and small intestine, which indicated that the girl had eaten in
fairly close proximity to her death.
According to the Ramseys’ version of events, JonBenét had eaten earlier in the
evening, while at the White’s party, but she had not eaten at home before being
put to bed, since she was, according to the Ramseys, already asleep. The existence
of the largely undigested food matter has, therefore, never been satisfactorily
explained. In fact, it has been almost entirely ignored by most theorists, although
some have tried to explain it away with the theory that JonBenét’s would-be
abductor(s) fed her before killing her. Such theories require belief in the dubious
notion that although the mysterious intruder(s) forgot to bring materials to write
a ransom note (or an already prepared ransom note), they did remember to pack
a snack for their abductee.
A more reasonable explanation for the undigested food is that JonBenét was
killed shortly after she was known to have last eaten. She was, to be more specific,
killed before the Ramsey family returned home from the party they had been
attending. Such a scenario would help to explain some of the other facts and per-
sistent rumors that have surrounded the case. For example, it was mentioned pre-
viously that JonBenét’s body, despite being in the cold confines of the basement
of the Ramsey home, had decomposed to the point of emitting a noticeable odor.
It is unlikely that decomposition would have advanced to that stage had JonBenét
been killed between 10:00 PM (when she was allegedly put to bed) and 5:00 AM
(when her disappearance was allegedly discovered).
Some investigators believe that JonBenét’s clothing was changed after her
death. The Ramseys have acknowledged that she was in fact changed before being
put to bed, after the family had returned home from the party. If she was already
dead at that time, then she was indeed re-dressed after her murder. It is interest-
ing to note here that in the Ramseys’ own telling of the story, the limp figure of
JonBenét was carried into the house upon the family’s return home.
Some investigators also believe that some elements of the crime scene, partic-
ularly the ligatures, were staged. That is also consistent with the child having
been killed elsewhere and then deposited in the basement. It is possible that the
327
David McGowan   •scene, partic-
ularly the ligatures, were staged. That is also consistent with the child having
been killed elsewhere and then deposited in the basement. It is possible that the
327
David McGowan   •

--- PAGE BREAK ---

ligatures were added after the fact, when it became apparent that it was not
going to be possible to dispose of the body. It is also possible that the ligatures
were an artifact of the party, necessarily loosened when the body was re-dressed,
and then retied.
The claim by the California woman that there were numerous witnesses to the
murder is also consistent with JonBenét having been killed at the party. One of
those witnesses would have been sibling Burke, who some suspect witnessed or
was involved to some degree in the killing. That would explain the Ramsey fam-
ily’s concerted efforts to shield the boy from the media and from inquisitive
police (the Ramseys claim that the extraordinary security afforded Burke is
intended to protect him from the still-at-large killer).
As a final note on the Ramsey case, John and Patsy have on occasion publi-
cized the fact that a stun-gun was possibly used to incapacitate JonBenét prior to
her death. That fact is supposed to bolster the intruder theory, since the Ramseys
claim that they have never owned a stun-gun. One of the videotapes seized from
their home, however, included instructions on how to use, of all things, a stun-
gun.
328
•   Programmed to Kill