The Attractiveness of the Tridentine Mass

b y

Alfons Cardinal Stickler


Cardinal Alfons Stickler, retired prefect of the Vatican Archives and
Library, is normally reticent. Not so during his trip to the New York
area in May [1995], Speaking at a conference co-sponsored by Fr.
John Perricon's ChistiFideles and Howard Walsh's Keep the Faith,
the Cardinal scored Catholics within the fold who have undermined
the Church — and in the final third of his speech made clear his view
that the "Mass of the post-Conciliar liturgical commission" was a
betrayal of the Council fathers.

The robust 84-year-old Austrian scholar, a Salesian who served as
peritus to four Vatican II commissions (including Liturgy), will
celebrate his 60th anniversary as a priest in 1997. Among his many
achievements: The Case for Clerical Celibacy (Ignatius Press), which
documents that the celibate priesthood was mandated from the
earliest days of the Church. Cardinal Stickler lives at the Vatican.


The Tridentine Mass means the rite of the Mass which was fixed by
Pope Pius V at the request of the Council of Trent and promulgated
on December 5, 1570. This Missal contains the old Roman rite, from
which various additions and alterations were removed. When it was
promulgated, other rites were retained that had existed for at least
200 years. Therefore, is more correct to call this Missal the liturgy of
Pope Pius V.

Faith and Liturgy

From the very beginning of the Church, faith and liturgy have been
intimately connected. A clear proof of this can be found in the
Council of Trent itself. It solemnly declared that the sacrifice of the
Mass is at the center of the Catholic liturgy, contrary to the heresy of
Martin Luther, who denied that the Mass was a sacrifice.

We know from the history of the development of the Faith that this
doctrine has been fixed authoritatively by the Magisterium in the
teach of popes and councils. We also know that in the whole Church,
and especially in the Eastern churches, the Faith was the most
important factor in the development and formation of the liturgy,
particularly in the case of the Mass.

There are convincing arguments for this from the early centuries of
the Church. Pope Celestine I wrote to the bishops of Gaul in 422:
Legem Credendi, lex statuit supplicandi — the law of praying
determines the law of believing. This has subsequendy been
commonly expressed by the phrase, lex orandi, lex credendi [the law
of prayer is the law of belief].

The Orthodox churches preserved the Faith through liturgy. This is
very important because in the last letter the Pope wrote, seven days
ago, he said the Latin Church must learn from the Eastern churches,
especially about the liturgy...


Conciliar Statements


A matter often neglected is the two types of conciliar statements and
decisions: doctrinal (theological) and disciplinary.

In most of the councils we have both doctrinal and disciplinary. In
some councils we have no disciplinary statements or decisions; we
have some councils without doctrinal statements, with only
disciplinary statements. Many of the Eastern councils after Nicaea
treated only questions of faith. The Second Council of Toulon in 691
was stricdy an Oriental council for only disciplinary statements and
decisions, because the Eastern churches had been neglected in the
prceding councils. It brought discipline up to date for the Eastern
churches, especially the Church in Constantinople.

This is important because in the Council of Trent we have explicitly
both: we have chapters and canons which belong exclusively to faith;
and then, in nearly all the sessions, after the theological chapters and
canons, we have exclusively disciplinary matters. The distinction is
important. In all the theological canons we have the statement that
anyone who opposes the decisions of the Council is excluded from
the community — anathema sit. But the Council never states an
anathema for purely disciplinary matters — the Conciliar sanctions
are only for doctrinal statements.

Trent on the Mass

This is important for our reflections now. I've already pointed out the
connection between faith and prayer — liturgy — and especially
between faith and the highest form of liturgy, the common worship.

This connection has its classic expression in the Council of Trent,
which dealt with the topic in three sessions: the thirteenth in October
1551, the twentieth session in July 1562, which dealt with the
Sacrament of the Eucharist, an especially the twenty-second in
September 1562, which produced the dogmatic chapters and canons
on the Holy Sacrifice of the Mass. There is also a particular decree


that concerns those things that have to be observed and avoided in
the celebration of Mass. This is a classical and central statement,
authoritative and official, of the Church's mind on the subject.

The decree first considers the nature of the Mass. Martin Luther had
clearly and openly denied its very nature by stating that the Mass was
not a sacrifice. It is true that, in order not to disturb the simple
faithful, the Reformers did not immediately eliminate all those parts
of the Mass which reflected the true Faith and ran contrary to their
new doctrines. For example, they retained the elevation of the Host
between the Sanctus and the Benedictus.

For Luther and his followers, worship consisted mainly in preaching
as a means of instruction and edification, interwoven with prayers
and hymns. The reception of Holy Communion was only a secondary
event. Luther still maintained the presence of Christ in the bread at
the moment of its reception, but he strongly denied the Sacrifice of
the Mass. For him the altar could never be a place of sacrifice.

From this denial we can understand the consequent flaws in the
Protestant liturgy, which is completely different from that of the
Catholic Church. We can also understand why the Council of Trent
defined the part of the Catholic Faith which concerns the nature of
the Eucharistic sacrifice: it is a real saving, force. In the sacrifice of
Jesus Christ the priest is a substitute of Christ himself. As a result of
his ordination he is a true alter Christus. By means of the
Consecration the bread is changed into the Body of Christ and the
wine into His Blood. This implementation of His sacrifice is the
adoration of God.

The Council specifies that this sacrifice is not a new one, independent
of the unique sacrifice of the Cross; rather it is dependent upon that
unique sacrifice of Christ, making it present in a bloodless way such
that the Body and Blood of Christ are substantially present, while still
remaining under the appearance of bread and wine. Consequently
there is no new sacrificial merit; rather, the infinite fruit of the bloody


sacrifice of the Cross is effected or realized by Jesus Christ constantly
in the Mass.


It follows that the action of the sacrifice consists in the Consecration;
the Offertory (by which bread and wine are prepared for the
Consecration) and the Communion are integral parts of the Mass, but
are not essential ones. The essential part is the Consecration, by
which the priest, in the person of Christ, and in the same way,
pronounces the consecrating words of Christ.

Thus, the Mass is not and cannot be simply a celebration of
Communion, or a mere remembrance or memorial of the sacrifice of
the Cross, but rather a true, unbloody making present of this self-
same sacrifice of the Cross.

For the same reason we can now understand that the Mass is an
effective renewal of the sacrifice of the Cross. It is essentially an
adoration of God, offered only to Him. This adoration righdy
involves other elements: praise, thanksgiving for all the graces
received, sorrow for sins committed, petitions for necessary graces.
Naturally the Mass can be offered for one or all of these various
intentions. All these doctrines were established and promulgated in
the chapters and canons of Session 22 in the Council of Trent.

Trent's Anathemas

Various consequences derive from this fundamental theological
nature of the Mass. First, the Canon Missae.

In the Roman liturgy there has always been only one Canon, which
was introduced by the Church many centuries ago. The Council of
Trent expressly stated, in Chapter 4, that this Canon is free from
error; in fact it contains nothing that is not full of sanctity and piety
and that does not raise the faithful to God. In composition it is based
on the words of Our Lord himself, the tradition of the aposdes and


the regulation of saintly popes. Canon 6 of Chapter 4 threatens with
excommunication those who maintain that the Canon Missae
contains errors and should therefore be abolished.

In Chapter 5 the Council stated that human nature requires external
signs in order to raise the spirit to divine things. For that reason the
Church has introduced certain rites and signs: silent or vocal prayer,
blessings, candles, incense, vestments, et cetera. Many of these signs
have their origins in apostolic prescriptions or tradition.

Through these visible signs of faith and piety, the nature of the
sacrifice is underscored. The signs strengthen and encourage the
faithful in their meditation on the divine elements contained in the
sacrifice of the Mass. To safeguard this doctrine, Canon 7 threatens
with excommunication all those who consider these external signs as
inducing impiety instead of piety. This is an example of what I
discussed before: this kind of statement, with the canon of sanctions,
has largely a theological meaning, not only a disciplinary meaning.

In Chapter 6 the Council emphasizes the desire of the Church that all
the faithful present at Mass should receive Holy Communion, but
states that if only the priest who celebrates the Mass receives Holy
Communion, this Mass should not then be called private and so be
criticized or forbidden. In this case the faithful receive Communion
spiritually, and, further, all sacrifices offered by the priest as a public
minister of the Church are offered for all the members of the
Mystical Body of Christ. Thus, Canon 8 threatens with
excommunication all those who say that such Masses are illicit and
should therefore be forbidden — another theological statement.

Chapter 8 is dedicated to the peculiar language of worship in the
Mass. It is known that in the cult of all religions a sacred language is
used. In the Roman Catholic Church during the first three centuries
the language was Greek, being the common language employed in
the Latin world. From the fourth century on, the Latin language
developed into the common idiom in the Roman Empire. Latin


remained for centuries in the Roman Catholic Church as the only
lanuuage for worship. Quite naturally, Latin was also the language of
the Roman rite in its central act of worship, the Mass. This remained
the case even after Latin was replaced as the living language by the
various Romance languages.

Trent on Latin, Silence

Now we come to the question: why not chance again? We answer:
divine Providence establishes even secondary things. For example,
Palestine — -Jerusalem — is the place of the Redemption by Jesus
Christ. Rome is the center of the Church. Peter was not born in
Rome. He came to Rome. Why? It was the center then of the Roman
Empire — that means, of the world. That is the practical background
of the diffusion of the Faith by the Roman Empire, only a human
thing, a historical thing. But it enters certainly in divine Providence.

A similar process can be seen even in other religions. For the
Moslems, the old Arab language is dead and yet it remains the
language of their liturgy, of their cult. For the Hindus, the Sanskrit.
Due to its necessary connection with the supernatural, worship
naturally requires its own particular religious language, which should
not be "vulgar" one.

The fathers of the Council knew very well that most of the faithful
assisting at the Mass neither understood Latin nor were able to read
translations. They were generally illiterate. The fathers also knew that
the Mass contains a great deal of instruction for the faithful.

Nevertheless they did not agree with the view held by Protestants
that it was necessary to celebrate the Mass only in the vernacular. In
order to provide instruction for the faithful, the Council ordered that
the old custom approved by the Holy Roman Church — the mother
and teacher of all churches — be maintained everywhere, and that care
should be had for souls in explaining the central mystery of the Mass.


Canon 9 threatens with excommunication those who affirm that the
language of the Mass must only be the vernacular. It is noteworthy
that in both chapter and canon the Council of Trent only rejected the
exclusivity of the "vulgar" language in the sacred rites. On the other
hand, we need once again to take into account that these various
Conciliar regulations do not only have a disciplinary character. They
are based on a doctrinal, theological foundation that involves the
Faith itself.

The reasons for this concern can be seen, firsdy, in the reverence that
is due to the mystery of the Mass. The decree which immediately
followed concerning what has to be observed and avoided in the
celebration of the Mass states, "Irreverence cannot be separated from
impiety." Irreverence always involves impiety. In addition, the
Council wished to safeguard the ideas expressed in the Mass, and the
precision of the Latin tongue safeguards the content against
misunderstanding and potential errors based on linguistic
imprecision.

For these reasons the Church has always defended the sacred tongue
and even recently Pius XI expressly stated that this language should
be non vulgaris. For these self-same reasons Canon 9 established
excommunication against those who affirm that the rite of the
Roman Church, in which a part of the Canon and the words of
consecration are pronounced silendy, must be condemned. Even
silence has a theological background.

Finally, in the first canon of the reform decree, in the twenty-second
session of the Council of Trent, we find other regulations which have
a somewhat disciplinary character but also complete the doctrinal
part-for nothing is more fit to guide worshipers to a deepened
understanding of the mystery than the life and example of the
ministers of cult. These ministers should mold their lives and
behavior to this end, and that is reflected in their dress, their bearing,
their speech. In all this they should be dignified, modest and
religious. They also are to avoid even slight faults since in their case


they would be considered grave. Thus superiors were to demand of
the sacred ministers the living out of the whole tradition of proper
clerical behavior.

The Mass of Pius V and the Mass of Paul VI

Now we can better appreciate and understand the theological
background and foundation of the discussions and regulations of the
Council of Trent concerning the Mass as the summit of the sacred
liturgy. In response to the serious challenge of Protestantism we can
now understand the theological attractiveness of the Tridentine Mass,
not only for that particular historical period but also as a pattern for
the Church and liturgical reform of Vatican II.

In the first place, we have to determine here the correct meaning of
this reform. As in the case of the Tridentine Mass, we emphasize the
importance of a correct understanding of what was understood by
the Mass of Pope Pius V which fulfilled the wishes of the Council
fathers at Trent.

Now, we must underline what should be considered the correct name
of the Mass of the Second Vatican Council: the Mass of the post-
Conciliar liturgical commission. A simple glance at the liturgical
constitution of the Second Vatican Council immediately illustrates
that the will of the Council and the will of the liturgical commission
often do not coincide, and are even evidently contrary.

We'll briefly examine the main differences between the two liturgical
reforms as well as what we might term their theological
attractiveness.

Firsdy, in the light of the Protestant heresy, the Mass of Pius V
emphasized the central truth of the Mass as a sacrifice, based on the
theological discussions and specific regulations of the Council. The
Mass of Paul VI (so-called because the liturgical commission for the
reform after Vatican 11 worked under the ultimate responsibility of


the Pope) emphasizes rather the integral part of the Mass,
Communion, with the result that the sacrifice is transformed into
what could be termed a meal. The great importance given to the
readings and to preaching in the new Mass, and even the faculty
given to the priest to add private speeches and explications, is
another reflection of what can be called an adaptation to the
Protestant idea of worship....

French philosopher Jean Guitton says that Pope Paul VI revealed to
him that it was his [the Pope's] intention to assimilate as much as
possible of the new Catholic liturgy to Protestant worship. Clearly, it
is necessary to verify the true meaning of this remark, since all the
official statements of Paul VI — especially his excellent eucharistic
encyclical Mysterium Fidei of 1965, issued before the end of the
Council, as well as the Credo of the People of God demonstrate his
absolute orthodoxy. Now, how can we explain this opposite
statement?

Along these same lines we can try to understand the new position of
the altar and the priest. According to the well-founded studies of
Msgr. Klaus Gamber concerning the position of the altar in the old
basilicas of Rome and elsewhere, the criterion for the old position
was not that it should face the worshiping assembly, but rather that it
should be turned towards the East, which was the symbol of the
rising sun of Christ who was to be worshiped. The completely new
position of the altar and priest in facing the assembly, previously
forbidden, today becomes an expression of the Mass as a meeting of
the community.

Secondly, in the old liturgy the Canon is the center of the Mass as
sacrifice. According to the testimony of the Council of Trent, the
Canon traces itself back to the tradition of the apostles and was
substantially complete at the time of Gregory the Great, 600. The
Roman Church never had other canons. Even for the mysterium fidei
in the Consecration form, we have evidence from Innocent III,
explicitly, at the inauguration of the Archbishop of Lyons. I don't


know if the majority of liturgy reformers know about this fact. St.
Thomas Aquinas in a special article justifies this mysterium fidei. And
the Council of Florence explicitly confirmed the mysterium fidei in
the Consecration form.

Now, this mysterium fidei was eliminated in the Consecration words
brought about in the new liturgy. Why? We also find permission
given for new canons. The second one — which does not mention the
sacrificial character of the Mass — with its merit of being the shortest,
has virtually supplanted the old Roman Canon everywhere. Thereby,
the profound theological insight given by the Council of Trent has
been lost.

The mystery of the divine Sacrifice is actualized in every rite, though
in different ways. In the case of the Latin Mass it was emphasized by
the Tridentine Council with the silent reading of the Canon in Latin.
This has been discarded by the proclamation of the Canon in the new
Mass out loud.

Third: the Vatican II reform destroyed or changed the meaning of in
much of the rich symbolism in the liturgy (though it remains in the
Oriental rites). The importance of this symbolism was emphasized by
the Council of Trent....

This fact was deplored even by a well-known atheistic psychoanalyst,
who called the Second Vatican Council the "Council of
Bookkeepers."

Vulgarizing the Mass

There is one theological principle completely overthrown by the
liturgical reform but confirmed both by the Council of Trent and by
the Second Vatican Council, after a long and sober discussion. (I
assisted, and can confirm that the clear resolutions of the final text of
the Council constitution substantially reaffirmed it). That principle:
the Latin language is to be preserved in the Latin rite. As in the


Council of Trent, so in Vatican II the Council fathers admitted the
vernacular only as an exception.

But for the reform of Paul VI, the exception has become exclusive.
Theological reasons which were stated in both councils for the
retention of Latin in the Mass can now be seen to have been justified
in the light of the exclusive use of the vernacular introduced by the
liturgical reform. The vernacular has often vulgarized the Mass itself,
and the translation of the original Latin has resulted in very serious
doctrinal misunderstanding and errors.

Furthermore, the vernacular was not formerly permitted for people
who were not only illiterate but also completely different from one
another. Now that different languages and dialects can be used in
worship, by Catholic people of varying tribes and nations, all living
closely in a world that becomes smaller every day, this Babel of
common worship results in a loss of external unity in the world-wide
Catholic Church which was once unified in a common voice. Further,
it has become on a number of occasions the cause of internal disunity
even in the Mass itself, which should be the spirit and center of
external and internal concord among Catholics throughout the world.
We have many, many examples of this fact of disunion caused by the
vulgar tongue.

And another consideration.... Before, every priest in the whole world
could say the Mass in Latin for all the communities, and all the priests
could understand Latin. Unfortunately, today no priest can say the
Mass for all the people in the world. We must admit that, only a few
decades after the reform of the liturgical language, we have lost that
possibility of praying and singing together even in the great
international gatherings, such as Eucharistic conferences, or even
during meetings with the Pope, the center of the unity of the Church.
No longer can we sing and pray together.


Finally, we have to consider seriously the behavior of the sacred
ministers in the light of the Council of Trent — the behavior of the


sacred ministers whose deep relationship with their sacred ministry
the Council of Trent emphasized. Correct clerical behavior, dress,
bearing, comportment, encourage people to follow what they say and
teach. Unfortunately, the wretched behavior of many clerics often
obliterates the difference between sacred minister and laity, and
emphasizes the difference between the sacred minister and the alter
Chris tus.

Summarizing our reflections, we can say the theological attractiveness
of the Tridentine Mass corresponds with the theological
incorrectness of the Vatican P] Mass. For this reason the Christi
Fidelis of the theological tradition should continue to manifest, in the
spirit of obedience to legitimate superiors, the legitimate desire and
pastoral preference for the Tridentine Mass.

http:/ /www.latinmassmagazine.com/ stickler.asp
