May 26, 1966 
it 
Mr.

Marlon Johnson 
The National Archives 
Washington, D.C.

Dear Mr.

Johnson, 
You are probably not the person to whom this letter should be addressed.

In that event, may I ask that you direct it to the proper authority?

I 
am writing in some haste prior to seeing you today because overnight 
reflection convinces me the matter is of great important.

Prefacing 
what I am about to say, I want to make clear that nothing is reflected 
in my research or experience that Justifies any criticism of either the 
National Archives or you.

Prom my limited experience, both the organi- 
zation and its personnel have a proper dedication to their important 
function in our national life and history, and I do appreciate the co- 
operation and assistance that you and others have extended.

As you know, I have devoted a vast amount of time to an analysis of the 
work of the Warren Commission.

It is reflected in my book, which you 
have, entitled WHITEWASH - THE REPORT ON THE WARREN COMMISSION.

To say 
that even the most cursory examination of this record leaves the analyst 
with deep misgivings is a considerable understatement.

There are the 
most fundamental contradictions in the evidence, with the most credible 
disproving the official version of the account of the assassination of 
President Kennedy.

And there has been what on the basis of what I now 
know what I can only call suppression of the most fundamental evidence.

We have briefly discussed some of this recently, and I have already 
written the heads of those agencies chiefly involved, the FBI and the 
Secret Service.

For example, when I examined Document 371 yesterday (this is Exhibit 397 
in the published material) I found a receipt that included material not 
in the file.

There was no indication of what the Secret Service did 
with this data.

Yet of all the information that should be in the Ar- 
chives, whether or not classified, there is little that can be more im- 
portant than what is missing.There was no indication of what the Secret Service did 
with this data. Yet of all the information that should be in the Ar- 
chives, whether or not classified, there is little that can be more im- 
portant than what is missing. It is the working papers, the contempo- 
raneous notations or the notes of the doctors as they performed the 
autopsy. From his testimony, which you will find quoted on page 183 
of my book, Dr. Humes identified these as "various notes in longhand 
made by myself, in part, during the performance of the examination of 
the late President ..." There is absolutely nothing of this character 
in either Document 371 or printed Exhibit 397. Yet Exhibit 397 contains 
an Autopsy Descriptive Sheet which shows no bullet wound in the back of 
the ^resident's neck, which is the account of the written autopsy and 
the representation of the artist's conceptions. Exhibits 385 and 386. If, as this official document made at the autopsy and part of it shows, 
the late President was not struck in the neck and was struck much lower 
in the back, then here alone the entire investigation is destroyed. There is apple evidence to confirm the chart. The significance of the 
notes is here apparent, as is also their exclusion from both the file 
and the Archives. I am disquieted by the reported return of the Betzner pictures on the 
ground they show nothing but the front of the Depository building. This

--- PAGE BREAK ---2 
/# 
could be the most important thing they could do.

for the entire 26 vol- 
umes are barren on just this, the most fundamental of evidence.

That 
building was never secured, and the exclusion from the record and the 
Archives of such pictures serves only to suppress what could be the 
most important kind of evidence.

For example, in one version, Oswald 
is said to have claimed he just walked out of the building.

If one of 
these photos showed that, need I say what significance it would hold?

Also, who were the other people who freely entered and left the building 
or who were standing around, or who might have been in other adjacent 
windows?

In this connection, I want to draw the attention of the Archives 
to pages 202-3 of my book.

Here you will find a comparison between the 
cropped version of the Altgens picture used by the Commission and a more 
complete but apparently still incomplete version I obtained.

The more 
complete picture shows an open window on the second floor of the adjoin- 
ing building, directly facing the back of the motorcade as it proceeded 
toward the Triple Underpass.

Then there are other pictures of this sort 
not in the record and, from what you have told me, not in the Archive.

For example, extensive footage showing the front of the building and 
people entering and leaving.

Either or both Crouch and Underwood, 
Dallas TV photographers, took these, according to the testimony.

Most 
assuredly, if this archive is to approximate completeness, they should 
be included.

I realize the obtaining of such essential documentation may not be the 
responsibility of the Archives.

But with the termination of the Commis- 
sion, who else can I address?

You will recall that yesterday we dis- 
cussed the fact that the bibliography contains no entry later than 
November 196lj..

Is there to be no depository for scholars, especially 
in the future, for any data that now comes to light?

Has no part of 
the government any responsibility here?--- PAGE BREAK ---

Is there to be no depository for scholars, especially 
in the future, for any data that now comes to light? Has no part of 
the government any responsibility here? If there were those on the 
staff of the commission who decided not to include data, and if they 
were wrong, is there no mechanism for correcting such error? I am apprehensive of the exclusion of existing data from the Archive, 
such as the photographs. X-rays and notes of the autopsy, the spectro- 
graphic analysis of the bullet and the fragments, of the windshield of 
the car and the curbstone and things like that. Here there is no con- 
ceivable element of national security and there is an obvious element 
of suppression, for the data is in the possession of those agencies that 
have the greatest reason for suppression, the FBI and the Secret Service, 
both of whom, innocently or not, bear responsibility for some of the 
tragic events in Dallas. Here I want to allude to the nature of some of the material that is 
still classified and to inquire, generally, of the basis for and reasons 
why there is such classification and who makes the determination. Agen- 
cies that might seek self-protection? We are here concerned with the 
assassination of an American President and a most dubious inquest. The 
most cursory examination of the bibliography indicates a character to 
many of these documents that cannot possibly relate to national security. And if they did, there must be some mechanism by which impartial analysts 
may confirm the judgments made, both of fact and national security. Un- 
less this is done, there will never be an end to questioning, and there 
never should be. Among the things apparently classified is some of the testimony. I am 
particularly anxious to examine the testimony of Mrs. Kennedy that has 
not been printed. From what I have been told, the reason is good taste, 
and the implication is that the descriptions are unpleasant. Yet the

--- PAGE BREAK ---he testimony of Mrs. Kennedy that has 
not been printed. From what I have been told, the reason is good taste, 
and the implication is that the descriptions are unpleasant. Yet the

--- PAGE BREAK ---

printed record abounds in the most elaborate sore alreadv uti-v, 
tlo„s of the splattering of the President's\?a£s ^p^lfSd lS?a‘ 
The gore is not my interest. Mrs. Kennedy appears to have been the onlv’ 
feurwoind9 Pr?31^"1 ^ Iho^ing at him when he recXHis 7 
re™ined by constantly» while he was transported 
into the hospital, while he was in the hospital, while the valiant „ff>r,T.t 
a*3 ?“[de 3av® him* Her testimony, especially because of the highly 
questionabie nature of the entire official version of these events? can 
be of the greatest importance. Whether or not it in fact is can be de 
termined only by analysis of it, and by now I believe it is clear the 
examination by the staff of the Commission does not satisfy the reauire 
ments of either the present or of history. y q 
I would like you to regard this as a formal request for access to Mrs 
£n"dj' a *rtin,$ny' !nd only f°r «“ ««ona itated! Thlrrie«.S?; 
^win°xqUe3t^0j of nafcional security involved. Nor do I believe that y 
any^^Moi^’r^i^3 alr9ady demonstrated a ™re murage, would want 
sio£e ques3i°n °f the off-the-record sessions of the Commis- 
ch^?acter thev^^h °f SS£*/£fcriCk Dean is ample evidence of the gamy 
character they may have. Had he not demanded a hearine before the Cnm* 
?£!??!?< lt?elf\“\“°V,ld ”0t kno" - and "°»t P.2STS nlfjet taoS " 
imP°rtant witness, who was important in both the Ruby trial 
and the Commission's investigation, as he was in those events in Dallas 
sire accesf tn J®**'*** bJ a" assistant counsel of the Commission. i^e- 
WSE?-and asain 1 aaaart n°propar ■»“*“<» 
Also, I want to make it clear that in demanding access for mvself I do 
not mean exclusively. It is merely that I can speak ?or no Sers ? 
it ie^® none °f this should be denied any who have a proper interest in 
g«TTY!S.'S.Iw: Lr 
in the future more questions will be tailored. ° wtlictl 
«n“AmerSLaK?dilhlaSrr hava ?he "“snitude of the assassination of 
SuSjlfiSKISV^.uoSt.°rdan<!i' 1 ^no«loOgo, to b, the 
A?ohi"»nfidItSo“e t? ;s1?t.
a?r?ib°\tha adi“--»'>^ «<• <*• M.ti0n.i 
zr?-r r rkddd" r 
want to thank you, personally, for your help and thoughtfulness. 
Sincerely, 
Harold Weisberg