7/22/70


Dear Jack,

Today I to s 33 ted about the enclose! usgas from “'arr.R. "omr.ission
Exhibit 2121 by 3 omeoaa else working castas Beasssinatlon. 1 believe we discussed
tbls Ions ago, but I’ve forgot ton. diet ycu told me and I apparently made no
notes on it. So, I’d appreciate it if you take tue time to comment on the^
reports, pointing put any errors or omissions, giving tue name or nsraes of
tkose who" interviewed you, etc., end anytuing they went into besides waet is
aerein reported, e both know tilings tuey 3aould neve.

It uus bsen a long time since I’ve aosrd from anyone do n there.

,7iien I was there left some boo'c3 on ® nsignment with you. If you've
sold any of then, I'd appreciate it if you could send me a check to cover those
soles. If at any time yea want to return any, }>l8S33 do.

There may have been some things you’ve heard that you may think would
Interest me. If this is the case, I’d like to be told, if you could take the
time.

I've continued my work, and in turns of what it uns produced it has
been exceedingly fruitful. I’ve won tue first suit a Gainst the government on
tae sup’ resslon of Information, tuat one on tae Hoy case. I 11 scon be filing
otnera. Theao will relate to the JI?‘C assassination only.

jfror, time to time you ses those to wuom you know I'd like to be
remembered. I wish, whan you do, you'd give than ny best regards. I think it
unlikBly tnat I'll be there soon again.

tnd whan ycu see tuat lazybones Jack 'Sir sing, remind him of his
uokept promise to print wuat i regard as one of tue boat pictures I've even
see, the one of Kelly and th • pidgeons. I’d still like, to nove it.

Best wishes.


Jim-1 read the pages as soon as l could after .

getting home. It is wierd. There is no reseDiblance U6roj - cl ,eis org
at all between Oswald and ^owie ^ohen, wnose picture

Bud copied from my file* nowie is bald, for one obvious thing, Be end Jack were
partners in Ryder. Thornley and Oswald were both tnere. And a number of friends
of A aornley f 3 . Y/ill Brady, to^. But none of tnis can be said to mean anything,
because it wes a public place and many people went there, for such things as
poetry readings, etc. I checked ray file and, typically, • hen 1 gave the guest
book to Garrison and asked for a copy, I got neither thai ks nor tne copy. Cohen
had sortie kind of criminal record. My recollection may be wrong, but I think it
had to do with boys. HW
