PROPAGANDA
JACQUES
ELLUL

--- PAGE BREAK ---

BERSERKER
BOOKS

--- PAGE BREAK ---

Preface
Propaganda, by whatever nane we may call it, has become a very
general phenomenon in the rnodem wur!d. Diferences in politcal
regimes inatter bttie; diferences in social levels are more Isnpor-
tant: and most important is national sell-awareness. In the world
todny there are three great prupaganda blocs: the U.S.S.R., China,
Ind the United Stales. These are the most important propagands
systems in terns of scope, depth, and coherence. Incidentally.
-odod o spoous pre sadi sarayp apua zan uasardai ia
ganda.
Next are the propaganda systems--in various stages of develop-
meut ard effectiveness. but less advanced than in the Three"
of a whole group of countries. These are the socialist republics of
Europe and Asia: Poland, Czechoslovakia, Hungary, Yugoulavda,
Eat Germany, North Vietmam; they model their propaganda on
thet of the U.S.s.R., albeit with some gaps, some lack of under-
standing, and without ndequate resources. Then there are West
Germany. France, Spain, Egypt. South Vietham, and Korea, with
les elaborate and rather difuse forms of propaganda. Countries
such as Italy aad Argentina, which once had powerful propagends
sryitems, no longer use this wea pon.
Whatever the dtverrity of coum tries and methods, they have ooe

--- PAGE BREAK ---nda. Countries
such as Italy aad Argentina, which once had powerful propagends
sryitems, no longer use this wea pon.
Whatever the dtverrity of coum tries and methods, they have ooe

--- PAGE BREAK ---

characteristiciu common:concorn with cffectiveness.Propa-
ganda ls made, first of all, because of a will to acbion, for the
purpose of effectively arning policy and giving iresistible power
to its decisions. Wwhoever handles this instrument can be con-
cermed soleiy wlth effectiveness. This is the supreme law, which
must never be forgotten when the phenomenon of propaganda is
analyzed. Ineffective propaganda is no propaganda. This instru-
ment belongs to the technological universo, shares its charncteris.
tics, and is indissolubly linked to it.
Not only is propaganda itself a technique, it is aiso an indis.
pensable condition for the devulopment of technicnl progress and
the establishment of a technological civilization. And, as with all
techniques, propaganda is subject to the law of eficiency. But
whereus it is rclatively easy to study a precise technique, whose
scope can be defined. a study of propaganda ruus into some ex-
traordinary obstacles.
From the outset it is obvious that there is greut uncertainty
about the phcnomenon itself, arising 6rst of all from a priori
moral or political concepts. Propnganda is usually regarded as an
evil: this in itself makes a study dificult. To study unything prop.
erly, one must put asirle ethicul jutlgments. Perhaps an objective
study will lead us back to them. but only later, and with full
cognizance of the facts.
A second source of confusion is the general conviction, derived
from past experience, that propaganda consists mainly of "toll
stories." disseminated by means of les. To adopt this view is
to prevent oneself from understanding anything about the ac
tual phenomenon, which is very different from what it was in the
past.
Euen wchen theseobstocleshoce been remoced,it lsstill pery
dificult to deternine what constituses propaganda in our worid
and what the nature of propaganda is. This is because it is a secret
action. The temptation is then twofold: to egret with Jacques
And F. C. Banlet accuately stateg that be goal of propeganda  not to Locreae
poltical understanding of cvents.hut tn obtain reults through action.
Haruld D.Luswells definitdon of tho goal of propaganda s ccurte:To
reduciog tht msterial cow of power. Simllarly,in wsr, propugands s a attempl
u 4substitute lor phyricavloleace;during tbe wv,t is a lupplement o (tlls definitdon of tho goal of propaganda s ccurte:To
reduciog tht msterial cow of power. Simllarly,in wsr, propugands s a attempl
u 4substitute lor phyricavloleace;during tbe wv,t is a lupplement o (t

--- PAGE BREAK ---o goal of propaganda s ccurte:To
reduciog tht msterial cow of power. Simllarly,in wsr, propugands s a attempl
u 4substitute lor phyricavloleace;during tbe wv,t is a lupplement o (t

--- PAGE BREAK ---

Prefoce
(z1
in the political or economic spheres seems to be penetrated and
molded by this force; or, as centain modem American social scien-
tists have done, to abandon the lerm propaganda altogether be
cause it cannot be defned with any degree of precision. Either
course is inadmissible Intellectual surrender. To adopt either att-
tude would lexd us to abandon the study of a phenomenon that
exuists and needs to be defined.
We then came up against the extreme difficulty of debnition.
We canimmediately discardsuchsimplisticdefinitionsasMar.
bury B. Ogle's: "Propaganda is any effort to change opinlons or
attitudes. . . . The propagandist is anyone who conmunicules his
ideas with the intent of infuencing his listener." Such a defnition
would include the teacher, the priest, indeed any person convers.
Apeao aogop peoq e qons ordon hue uo iaoue qim Su
does not help us to understand the specific character of props.
ganda.
As far as definitions are concerned, there has been a character-
Istic evolution in the United States. From 1g2o to about 1933 the
main emphasis was on the psychological: Propaganda is a mani
Iisteneris not conscious.
Since the appearance of Lasswells studies, propaganda by
other means and with stated objectives has been considered pos
sible. Attention then became focused on the fntention of the
propagandist. In more recent books, the otm to tindoctrinate--
particularly in regard to political, economic, and social matters
has been regarded as the hallmark of propaganda. Within this
frame of reference one could determine what constituten propa-
ganda by looking at the propagandist-such and such a person
I  propagandist, therefore his words and deeds are propaganda.
But it appears that American euthors eventually accepted the
deinition given by the Institute for Propaganda Analysis and
inspired by Lasswell:
"Propaganda is theexpression of opinions or actons carledout
deliberately by inlividuals or groups with a view to infuencing
 John Albig has camed theoe elementa of defnidon: the socrel charecter of the
wwrces and goais of propaganda; tbe intenton to tmodify ouinions; tbe dipeming
ton ofcoeclusiara odoubdulvalidity;the potion of incukabing idea retber thas
mpintalng tben. Thi i gertally corect, bat outdated.nd goais of propaganda; tbe intenton to tmodify ouinions; tbe dipeming
ton ofcoeclusiara odoubdulvalidity;the potion of incukabing idea retber thas
mpintalng tben. Thi i gertally corect, bat outdated.

--- PAGE BREAK ---da; tbe intenton to tmodify ouinions; tbe dipeming
ton ofcoeclusiara odoubdulvalidity;the potion of incukabing idea retber thas
mpintalng tben. Thi i gertally corect, bat outdated.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

the opinlons cr actions of otber individuals or groups for predeter.
mined ends and through psychological manipulations."
We could quote definitions for pages on end. An Italinn author.
peioos yo anbruqooi, e s! epuesedosd stq sies 'ojosn opuouy
ha sdnois poos so peotopoqnasd aynano oi spuai qorym amssard
 unifed structure across the homogeneity of the afechive and
mental states of the individuals under consideration. For Leonard
W. Doob. the well-known American specialist, it is "an attempt
to modily personalities and coutol the behavior of individuals
in relation to goals considlered non-scientific or of doubtful value
in a specific society and tine period."
And we would find eveu more remote dlefinitions, if we exam-
ined the German or Russian literature on the subject,
I will not give a definition of my own here. I only wanted to
show tbe uncertainty among specialists on the question. I consider
it more useful to proceed with the auialysis of the characteristics
of propagande as an eristing sociulogical phenomenon. It is per.
haps proper to underline this term. We shall exumine propaganda
in both its past and present forns: for obviously we cannot elini-
Date from our study the bighly developed propuganda systerms of
Hitler's Germany, Stalin's Russia, und Fascist ltaly. This seems
obvious, but is not: many writers do not agree with thls approach.
They establish a certain image or defnitian of propaganda, and
proceed to the study of whatever corresponds to their definition:
or, ylelding to the attraction of a scientific shudy. they try to ex.
periment with some particular method of propaganda on smail
groups and in small doses-at which mouent it ceases to be
propaganda.
To study propaganda we rmust turn not to the psychologist, but
to the propagandist; we must examine not a test group. but a
whole nation subjected to real and efective propeganda. Of
course thls excludes all so-cailed scientifc (that is, statistical)
types of study, but at least we shall have respected the object of
our study-unlike many present-day specialists wbo establish a
rigorous method of observation, but, in order to apply it, lose the
group. More profouod Is Duuel Larer'i ides that propagaoda  a Dean a
symboi. Howerer, [am not entiraly ia egrewment wnth the earluively pychojogical
churctur of tls deEndtion.er to apply it, lose the
group. More profouod Is Duuel Larer'i ides that propagaoda  a Dean a
symboi. Howerer, [am not entiraly ia egrewment wnth the earluively pychojogical
churctur of tls deEndtion.

--- PAGE BREAK ---the
group. More profouod Is Duuel Larer'i ides that propagaoda  a Dean a
symboi. Howerer, [am not entiraly ia egrewment wnth the earluively pychojogical
churctur of tls deEndtion.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

Preface
object to be studiod. Rather, we shalil conader what the nahure
of propaganda is wlserever it is applied snd wherever it b doml.
nated by a concern for effectiveness.
Finally, we take the tern propaganda in its brcadest sense, s0
that it embraces the following areas:
Psychological ucHon: The propagandist seeks to modify opinlon
by purely psychological meauis; mosl often he pursues u soml
educative objective apd addresses himself to his fellow cldzons.
Prychological varfare: Here tbe propagandist is deeling with a
fareign adversary whose morale he seeks to destroy by prycbo
logical means so that the oppopent begins lo doubt the validity
of his beliefs and acbons.
Re-education und bruinwashing: Complex methuds of transform
Ing an adversary luto ut ally which cun be used only on privonurs.
Pubitc and Fiumun relurlons: These must nocessurily be included
in propaganda. This statement rnay shock some readers, bu! we
shall show that these activities are propaganda because they eoek
to adap the individual to a society. to a living stapdard, to tn
activity. They serve tu make him conform, which is the aim of
all propaganda.
Propaganda in its broad sense includes all of these. In the nar-
row sense it is characterized by an institutlonal quality. In propa-
ganda we And techniyues of psychologicul influence comblned
with techniquen of organization and the envelopument of people
with the intention of sparking action. This, then, will be the broad
6eld of our inquiry.
From this conplcte universe of propeganda I have delberately
excluded the Following subjects found in most propaganda studies:
Historical accounts of propaganda. purticularly of the recent
past: propaganda in igi4 or ig40, and so forth.
Propaganda and public opinivn as an entity, considering publlc
opinion, its formation, and so forth, =s the major problem. mnd
propaganda as a simple insirument for forming or changing
oplnlon es the minor problem.
Psychological founda ions of propaganda: On what prejudices,
drives, motvations, passions, conplexes, does the propegandint
play? What psychic force does he utllize to obtain his rooult?
The techniques of piopaganda: How does the propngendist
: Maunce Meget's analyiu ditinguisbes three partu: I propagaoda aguocy (tucoor
population by technicel. pua-volent meens ); : coberent thought ryitas.chniques of piopaganda: How does the propngendist
: Maunce Meget's analyiu ditinguisbes three partu: I propagaoda aguocy (tucoor
population by technicel. pua-volent meens ); : coberent thought ryitas.

--- PAGE BREAK ---da: How does the propngendist
: Maunce Meget's analyiu ditinguisbes three partu: I propagaoda aguocy (tucoor
population by technicel. pua-volent meens ); : coberent thought ryitas.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

put the psychic force Into action, bow can he reach people, how
chn be induce them to nct?
The media of propagande: tbe mues media of commumication.
Such are the fve chapter beadings found everywhere.Some
what less common are studies on the characteristics of the great
examples of propaganda: Hltlerite, Stalinist, Amerlcen, and so on.
These are omitted here precisely because they have been fre
quently analyzed. The reader wili find in the bibliography all that
L useful to know on each of these questions. I bave instead tried
point of view, a perspective, an unorthodox view. I have sought
to use a method that is neither abstract nor statistical, but occa-
sionallyrelieson existingstudies.Thereadershouldkaowthatbo
is not dealing with an Encyclopedia of Propaganda, but with a
work that assumes bis familiarity with its psychological founda.
tions,techniques,and methods, and that endeavors to bring con-
temporary man a step closer to an awareness of propaganda--the
very phenomenon that conditions and regulates him.
On tbe other hand, I have considered propaganda as a whole.
It is usual to pass ethical judgments on its ends, judgments that
tben redound on propaganda considered as a means, such as:
Because temocracy ls good and dictatorship bad.propaganda
serving a democracy is good cven if as a technique it is identical
with propaganda serving a dictatorship. Or, becuuse Socialism is
good und Fascism bad, propaganda is not altogelher evil in the
hands of Socialists, but is totally evil in Fascist hands. I repudiate
this attitude. Propaganda as a phenomenon is essentially the same
in China or the Soviet Union or the United Stales or Algeria
Techniques tend to align themselves with one another. The media
of dissermination may be more or less perfected, more or less
directly used, just as organizations may be more or less effective,
but tlhat does not change the heart of the problem: those who
accept the principle of propaganda and decide to utilize it will
inevitably empioy the most efecbive organization and methods.'
Moreover, the premise of this book is that propaganda, no matter
wbo makes it--be he the most upright and best-intentioned of
 Thlg li what Serge Tthukhodin claimy.
Vletnameve prnyagunla had alluver-all political viewthatsubsututed Itelfor
tho "tragmeraled usc of the teclhnkcal meansof propaganda; all thu u part of the
progresulon from old Idess to tew phenomens.Vletnameve prnyagunla had alluver-all political viewthatsubsututed Itelfor
tho "tragmeraled usc of the teclhnkcal meansof propaganda; all thu u part of the
progresulon from old Idess to tew phenomens.

--- PAGE BREAK ---a had alluver-all political viewthatsubsututed Itelfor
tho "tragmeraled usc of the teclhnkcal meansof propaganda; all thu u part of the
progresulon from old Idess to tew phenomens.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

Preface
menhas certain ldentical results in Commumixn or Hitlerlmm
or Western democracy, inevitable results on tbe individua oe
groups, and diferent from the doctrine promulgated, or the
regine supported, by that propaganda. In other words, Hitlerism
As a regime had certain effects, and the propaganda used by the
Nazis undeniably had certain specific characteristics. But whereas
most analysts stop at this specificity, I have tried to eliminate lt
Ln order to look only at the most general chzracteristics, the effects
common to all cases, to all methods of propaganda. Therefore I
have adopted the same perspective and the same metbod in study-
Iing propaganda as in studying any other technigue.
1 shall devote much space to the fact that propaganda ha
become an inescapable necessity for everyone. In this connection
I have come upon & source of much misunderstanding. Modern
reality. He is convinced that what L, is good. He believes that
facts in themselves provide evidence nd proof, and he willingly
subordinates values to them; he obeys what be believes to be
Decessity. which he somehow connects with the idea of progres.
This stereotyped ideological attitude inevitably results in  con-
fusion between judgments of probability and judgments of value.
Because fact is the sole criterion, It must be good. Consequently
judgment on it) is, therefore, in favor of it. Anyone who assert
( simply stating a judgment of probability) that the Communist
will win some elections is immediately considered pro-Commumlst;
Anyone who says that all human activity is increasingly dominnted
by technology is vlewed as a "technocrat'; and so on.
As we proceed to analyze the development of propeganda, to
consider its inescapable infuence in the modem world and iu
connection with all structures of our society. the reader will be
ternpted to see an approval of propagande. Because propaganda
is presented as a Decessity. such a work would therefore force the
author to make propaganda, to foster It, to intensify it. I want bo
emphasize that nothing is further from my mind; such an assmp
tion is possible only by those who worshlp facts and power. Ln
my opinion, necessity never establishes legitimacy; the world of
necessity is e world of weakness, a world that denies man. To my
that a phenomenon is necessary means, for me, tbat it denies men:
its Decessity is proof of its power, not proof of its ezcellence.of
necessity is e world of weakness, a world that denies man. To my
that a phenomenon is necessary means, for me, tbat it denies men:
its Decessity is proof of its power, not proof of its ezcellence.

--- PAGE BREAK ---orld of weakness, a world that denies man. To my
that a phenomenon is necessary means, for me, tbat it denies men:
its Decessity is proof of its power, not proof of its ezcellence.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

However, confronted by a necessity, man must become aware
of it, if he is to master it, As long as maa denies the inevitability
of a phenonienon, as long as he avoids facing up to it, he will go
astay. He will delude himself, by submitting in fact to "neces-
because he claims to be free. Only when he realizes his delusion
will he experience the beginning of genuine freedom-in the act
ofrealization itself-be it onlyfrom theeffort to standbackaad
look squarely at the phenomenon and reduce it to raw fact.
The force of propaganda is a direct attack against man. The
question is to determine how great is the danger. Most replies
are based on unconscious a priori dogmas. Thus the Communists,
who do not believe in human nature but only in the human con-
dition, believe that propaganda is all-powerful, legitimate ( when-
ever they ermploy it), and instrumental in creating a new type
of man. American sociologists scientifically try to play down the
effectiveness of propaganda because they cannot accept the idea
that the individual--that comerstone of democracy--can be so
fragile;and because theyretain theirultimatetrust in man.Per-
sonally、I. too, tend to believe in the pre-eminence of man and,
consequently. in his invincibility. Nevertheless, as I observe the
facts, I realize man is terribly malleable, uncertain of himself,
ready to accept and to follow many suggestions, and is tossed
about by all the winds of doctrine. But when, in the course of
these pages, I shall reveal the full power of propaganda against
man, when I advance to the very threshold of showing the most
profound changes in his personality, it does not mean I am anti-
democratic.
The strength ofpropaganda reveals,of course,one of the most
dangerous faws of democracy. But that has nothing to do with
my own opinions. If I am in favor of democracy, I can only re-
gret that propaganda renders the true exercise of it almost impos-
sible. But I think it would be even worse to entertain any illusions
about a co-existence of true democracy and propaganda. Nothing
is worse in times of danger than to live in a dream world. To
imply an attack against it, but is the greatest service one can
render the system. The same goes for man: to wam him of
his weakness is not to attempt to destroy hin, but rather to
encourage him to strengthen himself. I have no sympathy witheatest service one can
render the system. The same goes for man: to wam him of
his weakness is not to attempt to destroy hin, but rather to
encourage him to strengthen himself. I have no sympathy with

--- PAGE BREAK ---an
render the system. The same goes for man: to wam him of
his weakness is not to attempt to destroy hin, but rather to
encourage him to strengthen himself. I have no sympathy with

--- PAGE BREAK ---

Preface
(xD毒
the haughty aristocratic intellechua! wbo judges from on bigh.
believing himself iuvulnerable to the destructive forces of his
tine, and disdainfully considers the common people as cattle to
be manipulated, to be molded by the action of propaganda in the
most intimate aspects of their being. I insist that to give such
waning is an act in the defense of man, that I am not judging
propaganda with Olympian detnchment, and that having suffered.
felt, and analyzed the impact of the power of propaganda on my.
self, having been time and again, and still being. the object of
propagaada, I want to speak of it as a menace which threntens
thetotalpersonality.
ID order to delineate the real dimensions of propagands we
must always consider it within thecontextof civilization.Per-
haps the mostfundamentaldefectofmost studiesmadeon the
subject is their attempt to analyze propaganda as an isolated phe
nomenon. This corresponds to the rather prevalent attitude that
separates socio-political phenomena from each other and of not
establishing any correlation between parts, an attitude that in
tum reassures the student of the validity of the various systems.
Democracy,for example, is studled as if the citizen were @n en-
tity separate from the State, as if public opinion were a "thing
in itself°; meanwhle, the scientific shudy of public opinfon and
propaganda is left to other specialists, and the specialist in pubiic
opinion in tum relies on the jurist to define a suitable legal framo-
work for democracy. The problems of the technological society
arestudiedwithoutreferencetotheirpossibleinfuenceonmental
and emotional life; the labor movement is examined without atten-
tion to the changes brought about by psychological means, and so
Again I want to emphasize that the study of propaganda must
be conducted within the context of the technological society.
Propaganda is called upon to solve problems created by tech-
nology, to play on maladjustments, and to integrate the individ.
ual into a technological world. Propaganda is a good deal less
the political weapon of a regime (it is that also) than the effect
of a technological society that embraces the entire man and tends
to be a completely integrated society. At the present time, prop
aganda is the innermost, and most elusive, manifestation of
this trend. Propaganda must be seen as sihuated at the center
of the growing powers of the State and governmental and sd.present time, prop
aganda is the innermost, and most elusive, manifestation of
this trend. Propaganda must be seen as sihuated at the center
of the growing powers of the State and governmental and sd.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

8011)
Cu what kind of a State makes use of propaganda" But if we
really bave understood the technological State, such a statenent
becomes meaningles. In the midst of Increasing mechanization
and technological organization, propaganda is tirmply the mean
used to prevent these things from being felt us too oppressve
om aq aoe pol qm iqns m merr opensiod o p
will be fully adapted to this technologlcal society, when be wil
end by obeying with enthusiasn, convinced of the excellence of
what he is forced to do, the constraint of the organization will
no longer be felt by him; the tnuth is, it will no longer be a coz-
straint, and the police will bave nothing to do. The clvic and
technological good will and the enthusiasm for the right social
myths-both created by propagande—will finally bave solved the
problem of man.
JAOQUESELLUL

--- PAGE BREAK ---

Contents
CB± PTt 1--The Characterirtict of Propagands
1.KITEANAL CEARACTIRISTICS
The Indioidual and the Marsns
Total Propaganda
Continuity and Duration of Propaganda
17
Organization of Propagonda
Orthopnay
S.INTERNAL CRAIACTZRIETICS
33
Knowledge of the Prychoiogical Terrow
33
Funiamental Currsnts ins Soclety
Timeliness
43
Propogorda cnd the Undecided
48
Propaganda ond Truth
54
The Problem ol Factualty
$3
Lnteutions and Lntarprettioos
57
JCATECORIZS OP PROPACANDA
6
Poiltical Propoganda and Sociologicel Propagonda
6s
Propaganda of Agttation and Propaganda of Intagraton
70

--- PAGE BREAK ---actualty
$3
Lnteutions and Lntarprettioos
57
JCATECORIZS OP PROPACANDA
6
Poiltical Propoganda and Sociologicel Propagonda
6s
Propaganda of Agttation and Propaganda of Intagraton
70

--- PAGE BREAK ---

x加）
Verticol and Horlzonted Propagands
79
Ratlonel and Irattonal Propaganda
84
CHAPTEn I1-The Condition for the Eriatence
of Propaganda
I.TEE SOCIOLOCICAL CONDITEONS
g
Indicidualint Socirty and Maes Soclety
g
Opinson
66
The Yau Medlo of Communicotion
102
S.OBJECTIVZ CONDITIONS OP TOTAL
PROPACANDA
105
The Need of an Averoge Stondard of Living
105
An Aoerage Culturs
108
Information
111
The Ideologies
116
CBAPTRR IlI-The Necessity for Propaganda
THE STATE'S NRCESJITY
121
The Dilemma of the Modem Slate
121
-he State and Ite Function
133
2. TeE individual's necEssity
138
The Objective Situotton
139
The Subjective Sstuolion
47
CAPTlA Iv-Prychological Effect of Propagonda
Prychological Cryntallzation
163
Alienation through Propoganda
16g
The Psychic Disociation Efect of Propagonda
178
Crertion of the Need for Propoganda
182
Mithridatization
183
Sensibilization
184
The Ambiguity of Prychoiogical Efects

--- PAGE BREAK ---

Contents
(xz1
CHAPTEn v-The Socio-Poliuical Efecta
1.PROPACANDA AND IDEOLOCY
193
The Trodttiunal Relationship
193
The Nru Relationship
2.SFFECTS ON THE STRUCTUAE OP PUBLIC
OPIKION
Modificasiun uf she Conutitwen Elementa of Public
Opindun
Con
From Gpinion to Action
10
3.PHOPACANDA AND CROUPINC
s1s
The Partittoning vf Croups
318
Efectu on Pulitical Portkes
216
Efects un the W'orid of Labor
Efects vn the Churches
18
4.PROPAGANDA AND DEMOCRACY
838
Demccracy's Need of Propaganda
232
Democratc Peopaganda
235
Eferts of IntermrtionalPropogandg
Efecta of Inlernal Propogando
oSs
APPENDix I—Efectivenes of Propaganda
I.DIFPICULTIES OF MEASURINC
EFFECTIVENESS
6Ss
Dificulry of the Subject
b
Inadeguecy of Methods
Sge
2.INRFFECTIVENES9 OF PROPACANDA
J. EFrrCTIVENESS OT PROPACANDA
Lge
4.THE LIMITS OP PROPACANDA

--- PAGE BREAK ---ES OF MEASURINC
EFFECTIVENESS
6Ss
Dificulry of the Subject
b
Inadeguecy of Methods
Sge
2.INRFFECTIVENES9 OF PROPACANDA
J. EFrrCTIVENESS OT PROPACANDA
Lge
4.THE LIMITS OP PROPACANDA

--- PAGE BREAK ---

AP?EN Di1 I1--Moo Tse-tung': Propoganda
1. tHr WAR: P10α 1926 TO 1949
384
Educotlon
304
Orgondzation
305
s.0iNCE 1949
307
Educatlon
308
Encurclement
310
3.JIAINWASEING
311
BIRLIOCHAPHY
315
follooe peee 3a0

--- PAGE BREAK ---

PROPAGANDA

--- PAGE BREAK ---

--- PAGE BREAK ---

CHAPTER
[1
THE
CHARACTERISTICS
OF PROPAGANDA
True moder propaganda can only function within tbe context
of the moderu scientifc rystem. But what is ltP Many observen
Jook upon propagunda ss a colection of “ginmicks" and of more
or less serious practices. And psychologists and sociologists very
often reject the scientific charscter of these prnctices. For our part.,
we completely agree that propngandn i a technique rather then
I science.? But it Is a moderm technique-that Is, it is based oa
one or more branches of science. Propaganda ls the exprenslon of
these braoches of science; it moves with them, shares im their suc-
phdad plde: pa op nnoppot ouied pes Dedbopced galy oH;
in this oonnectlon Albig is right to ctreu that peopagands canoot be  eio
becawse in the Beld in whlch it applies than can be sethrr vald genelisto
oor oungtant factoel

--- PAGE BREAK ---ed galy oH;
in this oonnectlon Albig is right to ctreu that peopagands canoot be  eio
becawse in the Beld in whlch it applies than can be sethrr vald genelisto
oor oungtant factoel

--- PAGE BREAK ---

4#)
THE CEARLCTITICS OF PMOPAGANDA
cesea, and bears witness to their failuresa. The time i part when
propaganda was a matter of individual inspiration, personal sub-
tlety, or the use of unsopbisticated tricks. Now scieace has eatered
propaganda, as we shall reveal from four diferent points of view.
Finst of all, moderm propaganda Is based on scientific analyses
of paycbology and sociology. Step by step, the propagandist builds
his techniquea on the basis of his knowledge of man, bis tenden-
cies, his desires, his needs, his psychic mechanisms, his conditdoo-
Aoouoasd qdap uo se Csopouoked pepos uo qonu se pue-sn
He shapes his procedures on the basis of our knowledge of groups
and their laws of formation and dissolution, of mass infuences, and
of environmental limitatons. Without the scientifc research of
modern prychology and sociology there would be no propaginda,
or rather we still would be in the prinitive stages of propaganda
that existed in the time of Pericles or Augustus. Of course, propa-
gandists may be insuficlently versed in theso branches of science;
they may misunderstand tbem, go beyond the caubious conc!usions
of the psychologists, or claim to apply certain psychological dis
coveries tbat, in fact, do not apply it all. But all this only showg
sought to apply the psychological and sociological sclences. Tbe
mportant thing is that propaganda has decided to submit itself
to scdence and to make use of it. Of cowrse, psychologista may be
scandalized and say that this is a misuse of their science. But this
argument carries no welght; the same applies to our physicisb
and the ntomic bomb. The sctentist should know that he livea in
2 world In which hls discoveries will be utilized. Propagandists
Inevltably wll have e better wnderstanding of sociology and psy.
chology. use them with iocrearing precision, and as I result be.
Second, propaganda b sclentifc In that it tends to establish 
set of rules, rigorous, precise, and tested, that are not merely
recipes but impose themselves on every propagandist, who Is less
and less free to follow his own impulses. Hc must apply, increas
ingly und exactly. certain precise formubas tbat can be applied by
technique besed on sdence.
Third, what is needed nowndays is an ernct analyrds of both
tbe environment and the tndlvidual to be subjected to propaganda
No longar does the men of talent determlne the method the ap-ed on sdence.
Third, what is needed nowndays is an ernct analyrds of both
tbe environment and the tndlvidual to be subjected to propaganda
No longar does the men of talent determlne the method the ap-

--- PAGE BREAK ---what is needed nowndays is an ernct analyrds of both
tbe environment and the tndlvidual to be subjected to propaganda
No longar does the men of talent determlne the method the ap-

--- PAGE BREAK ---

Propaganda
(3
proach, ar tbe subject; all that is now being calculated (ar mur?
panos oq m upazedond jo odk) ouo snojarqL '( paemoles 9g
suitable in one situation and completely useles in anotber. To
umdertake an active propaganda operation, it u necessary to make
a scientifc, cociological, and psychological anulysis first, and then
utlize those brancbes of sclenca, which are becoming increarlngly
well known. But, bere again, proper training b necesary lor
those who want to use them with their full effectivenesy.
Finally. one last trait reveals the scientifc charucter of modern
propaganda; the increasing attempt to control it use, mearure
Its results, defne lta effects. This is very difcult, but tbe propa-
gandist is no longer content to bave obtained, or to believe be
hat obtained, a certain result; be reeks preciso evidence. Even
successful political results do not completely satsfy him. He wanb
to understand the how and why of them and measure tbeir eract
elfect. He is prompted by a certain spirit of experimentation and
I desire to ponder the results. From this point on, cuo can ieo
tbo beginning of scientific method. Adnittedly. it is sot yet very
widespread, and tbose who enalyze results are pot ective prope
gundists but philosophers. Cranted, that reveals a certain division
of labor, nothing more. It indicates that propaganda is no loager
I self-contained action, covering up for evil deeds. It is an object
of serious thought, and proceeds along sclentibc channels.
Some people object to this. One frequenty beurs psychologist
ridicule the claim to a scientibc basis advanced by the prope-
gandist and reject the latter's clalms of having cmployed scientiBc
techniques. -The psychology he uses is not scientifc psychology.
he sociology he uses ls not scienbific soclology. But after 
careful look at the controversy one comes to this concluson:
Stalinist propaganda was in great measure founded on Pavlov'
theary of the conditioned refex. Hitlerian propaganda was im grest
measure foumded on Freud's theory of repression and libido
American propaganda is founded in great measure on Dewey's
theory of teaching. Now, if a psychologist does not accept the
Idez of the conditioned refea and doubts that it can be created t
man, be then rejects Pavlov's interpretation of psychological
pbepomena and concludes that all propaganda based on it bs
psezdo-scientifc. It is obviously the same for those who questlon
the fndings of Freud, Dewey, or anybody else.
Whet does thls mean, then? That propaganda does aot "ast onll propaganda based on it bs
psezdo-scientifc. It is obviously the same for those who questlon
the fndings of Freud, Dewey, or anybody else.
Whet does thls mean, then? That propaganda does aot "ast on

--- PAGE BREAK ---on it bs
psezdo-scientifc. It is obviously the same for those who questlon
the fndings of Freud, Dewey, or anybody else.
Whet does thls mean, then? That propaganda does aot "ast on

--- PAGE BREAK ---

6）
THE CHARACTERISTICS OF PROPACANDA
8 sclentfc base? Certainly not. Rather, that scientists are not
greed among themselves on the domains, methods, or conclusions
of one of his colleagues rejects a scientific theory and not merely
the lnferences that a techinician may draw from it. One cannot
blame the propagandist if he has conidence in a particular sociolo.
is, at a given time and in a given country, considered a scientist.
Moreover, let us not forget that if this theory, put to use by the
propagandlst, brings results and proves to be efective, it thereby
reoelves additionalconfirmation and that simple doctrinalcritl-
cism can then no longer demonstrate its inaccuracy.
1.External Characteristics
The Individual and the Masses
Any moderm propaganda will, frst of all, address itself at one
and the same time to the individual and to the masses. It cannot
separate the two elements. For propaganda to address itself to
the individuei, in·his isolation, apart from the crowd, is impossible.
The individual is of no interest to the propagandist; as an isolated
unit he presents much too much resistance to extermal action. To
be efectve, propaganda cannot be concermed with detail, not
only because to win men over one by one takes much too long.
but also because to create certain convictions in an isolated in-
dividual is much too dificult. Propaganda ceases where simple
dialogue begins. And that is why, in particular, experiments un-
dertaken in the United States to gauge the effectiveness of certain
propaganda methods or arguments on isolated individuals are not
conclusive: they do not reproduce the real propaganda situation.
Conversely. propaganda does not aim slmply at the mass, the
crowd. A propaganda that functioned only where individuals are
gathered together would be incomplete and insufficient. Also, any
propaganda aimed only at groups as such--as if a mass were a
ipecifc body heving a soul and reachions and feelings entirely
different from individuals' souls, reactions, and feelings—would
be an abstract propaganda that likewise would have no efec
tveness. Moderm propaganda reaches individuals enclosed in the
mass and as participants in that mass, yet it also aims at a crowd,
but only as a body composed of individuals.kewise would have no efec
tveness. Moderm propaganda reaches individuals enclosed in the
mass and as participants in that mass, yet it also aims at a crowd,
but only as a body composed of individuals.

--- PAGE BREAK ---efec
tveness. Moderm propaganda reaches individuals enclosed in the
mass and as participants in that mass, yet it also aims at a crowd,
but only as a body composed of individuals.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

Propaganda
(7
What does this moan? Firrt of all, that the individual never is
considered as an lndividual, but always in terms of what he has
in common with others, such as his motivations, his feelings, or
his myths. He is reduced to an average; and, except for a small
percentage, action based on averages will be effectual. Moreover,
the individual is considered part of the mass and included in it
(and so far as possible systematically integrated into it), because
in that way his psychic defenses are weakened, his reactions are
easier to provoke, and the propagandist profts from the process of
diffusion of emotions through the mass, and, at the same bime,
alism,impulsiveness, excess,etc.—all these characteristics of the
individual caught up in a mass are well known and very helpful
to propaganda. Therefore, the individual must never be consid-
ered as being alone; the listener to a radio broadcast, though
actually alone, is nevertheless part of a large group, and he is
aware of it. Radio listeners have bcen found to exhibit a mass
mentality. All are tied together and constitute a sort of society
in which all individuals are accomplices and infuence each other
without knowing it. The samc holds true for propaganda that is
carried on by door-to-door visits (direct contacts, petitions for
signatures); although apparently one deals here with a single
individual,one deals in reality with a unit submerged into an in-
visible crowd conposed of all those who have been interviewed,
who are being interviewed, and who will he interviewed, because
they hold similar ideas and live by the same myths, and especially
because they are targets of the same organism. Being the target
of a party or au administration is enough to immerse the individual
in that sector of the population which the propagandist has in his
sights; this simple fact makes the individual part of the mass. He
is no longer Mr. X, but part of a current fowing in a particular
direction. The current fows through the canvasser (who is not a
one segment of an administration,an organization,a collective
movement ); when he enters a room to canvass a person, the mass,
and moreover the organized, leveled mass, enters with him. No
relationship exists here betwecn man and man; the organization
is what exerts its attraction on an individual already part of a rmass
because he is in the same sights as all the others being canvassed.
Conversely, when propaganda is addressed to a crowd, it must
touch each individual in that crowd, in that whole group. To bea rmass
because he is in the same sights as all the others being canvassed.
Conversely, when propaganda is addressed to a crowd, it must
touch each individual in that crowd, in that whole group. To be

--- PAGE BREAK ---s in the same sights as all the others being canvassed.
Conversely, when propaganda is addressed to a crowd, it must
touch each individual in that crowd, in that whole group. To be

--- PAGE BREAK ---

8）
THE CHARACTERISTICS OF PHOPACANDA
effective, it must give the impression of being personal, for we
must never forget that the mass s composed of individuals, end
μ ln fact nothing but asseubled tndividuals. Actually, just bo
catse men are in a group. and therefore weakened, receptive,
and in a state of psychological regression, they pretend all the
human, but pretendis to be muperman. He is more suggestible,
but nsists be is morc forceful; he is more unstable, but think be
ijs finm in his convictions. If one openly breats the mass as a mass,
theindividualswhoform itwillfeel themselvesbelitledandwill
refuse to participate.If one treats these individuals as children
(and they are chilren because they are in a group), they will
not accept their leader's projections or identify with him. They
will withdraw and we will not be able to get anything out of them.
On the contrary, each one must frel individualized, each must
have the impression that he is being looked at, that he is being
addressed personally. Only then will he respond and cease to be
anonyuious (althougb in reality temaining anonymous).
Thus all modern propaganda profits from the struchure of the
mass, but exploits the Lndividual's need for self-affrmation; and
the two actions must be conducted jointly, simulaneously. Of
course this operation is greatly facilitated by the eristence of the
modem mass media of communication, which have precisely this
remarkable effect of reaching the whole crowd all at ouce, and yet
reaching each one in that crowd. Readers of the evening paper,
radio listeners, movie or TV viewers certainly constitute  mas
that has an organic existence, although it is difused and nol
assembled at one point. These individuals are moved by the same
motives, recelve the same inpulses and impressions, ind them-
selves focused on the same centers of interest, experience tho
same feelings, have generally the same order of reactions and
Ideas, participate in the same mythsand all this at the same
time: what we have here is really a psychological, if not a biologi.
cal mass. And the individuals in it are modified by this eristenct,
even if they do not know it. Yet each one is alone-the newspaper
reader, the radio listener. He therefore feels hinself individually
Is alone; though elbow to elbow with his neighbors, he still u.
because of the darkncss and the bypnotic attracbion of the screen.
perfectly alone. This is the situation cf the "lonely crowd," ar ofy
Is alone; though elbow to elbow with his neighbors, he still u.
because of the darkncss and the bypnotic attracbion of the screen.
perfectly alone. This is the situation cf the "lonely crowd," ar of

--- PAGE BREAK ---lbow to elbow with his neighbors, he still u.
because of the darkncss and the bypnotic attracbion of the screen.
perfectly alone. This is the situation cf the "lonely crowd," ar of

--- PAGE BREAK ---

Propagando
(9
isolation in the mas, which is a natural product ot presenl-day
society and which is both used and deepeued by the mass media.
The most favorable moment to seize a man and inBuence bim l
when be is alone in the mass: lt is at this point that propagands
can be most effective.
W'e must emphasize this circle whlcb we shal weet agai
and again:the structwre of present-day society places the in-
dividual where he is most easily reached by propagunda. The
media of mass communication, which are part of the technical
evolution of this society, deepen this sltuation while maldng it
pussible to reach the individual man, (ntegruted in the mass; and
what tlhese mnedia do is exactly what propagunda must do in order
tw attain its objectives. In reality propagandu cannot exist without
usiung these mass media. I, by chance, propuganda is addressed
dividuals before that group has been iragmented. Such frag-
Dentation can be achieved througb acton, but it is equally
possible to fragruent a group by psychological means. Tbe trans
uem peoopqasd kamd kq sdnore meus aa po nonruog
t one of tbe most important texhniques ol propaganda. Oaly
when very small groups are thus annililated, wlen the individual
Ends uo more delenses, no equilibrium, no resistance exercised
by the group to which be belongs, does total action by propaganda
become possible.
Total Propagando
Propaganda must be total. The propagandlst must utlize all
of the technical means at his disposalthe press, radio, TV,
movies,posters, meetings,door-to-door canvassing. Modem prop
Bganda inust utilize all of these media. There is no propaganda
es long as one makes use, in sporadic fashion and at random, of
I newspaper article here, a poster or a radlo program there, of-
ganizes a few meetings and lectwres, writes a few slogans on walls:
that is not propaganda. Each usalle medium has its own partic.
ular way of penetration--peciic, but at the same time localized
Edwad A. Shla ard Merns Ianowiz heve demontrated tbe tmportaoce df
ezrnup  the fc cdpropagda:be Germn,they clalm,d mot yleld
tatlicr Ln Warld War Il because the vaniou groupe f thez militery structu
poydnoaqnqonproutpdoe
ard: the play of upinioas bas rtlately birtle tmporanca.See below,Agpendir 1
IS below, Appendiz IL.