llonor:ble Louis Stokes
louse of Representetives
[DECEMBER 12, 1979 (W.PosT)]
Washington,D. C. 20515
Dear Congressncn Stokes:
The Department of Justice has initiated its review of the
Report of the Select Committec on Assassinations of the U. S.
House of Representatives.We regret the delay in commencing
the Department's inability to obtain a complete copy of the
Committce's report.we expect to proceed promptly now that
all nccessary ncterials are in our posscscion.
I have Gisscminated copies of the report to the appropriate
units of the Dep.rtnent for review.Attorneys in the Lcgal
Divisions involvcd are also.in the proccss of reviewing FBI
reports which were prepared in support of the Connittee's
investigation.
I have requested that the FBI conduct further,limited
investigation into several aspects of the 2ssassination of
Presidcnt Kenncdy.These investicative tasks stem irom FBI
invcstigeticns initiated during the Coimittec's existence。
I have sought recommendaticns from the Federal Bureau of
proccdures fcr crranging the further review of acoustical
aterialc which rcl.te to the investigation of thc assessination
of Presidcnt Kcnnedy.I have also solicited from those cgencics
all other information or recoinnendations which they are able to
provide relating to physical evidence in this matter.The
conccpt of conducting furthcr acoustical analysis, as proposed
Itis
by the Committce,is fully supported by the Department.
envisioned that the cooperation of the National Science
Foundation will be utilized to arrange independent scientific
review of the acoustical evidence..Your previous efforts in
arranging National Science Foundation involvement in this
regard are greatly appreciated.
It is 2lso envisioned that several other investigative
tasks will be conducted at Department request pursuant to the
findings 2nd recommendations of the Committee in its final
report.
I will continue to advise you of the results of Department
activity relating to the work of the Select Committee on
Assassinations.Your comments or recommendations regarding any
aspect of this matter would be appreciated.
Sincerely.
ROBERT L.KEUCH
Special Counsel to
the Attorney General
cC：
Honorable Richardson Preyer
HonorableWalter E.Fauntroy