Dear PaulJ/O

It was good j
still asleep. You

Art is among those who phoned after I got home today, e had spoken to you.
This is a brief report to you and others, including those I'd hoped to see, on
what happened. Some of it is sort of on the comic side but it was all very good.


I was wrong to refuse to do the A.M. America Show. Now that I did it I know it. I

I wanted to continue my work and get out there. But until I was foreed to stop and think |

I did not realise how much 1 accomplished in a very short period of time most of which
was devoted to helping reporters on the Ray escape, acting to >4 in the morning, too, |

gdd beginning early. 1 jji

When I got the request 1 asked the local Dallas ABC station to offer to originate


from there. 1 also asked ABC N.Y. to do tills. They finally explained to the Dallas station ['

that they can Q t have the Washington questioning as well and the cost is 4 times as much.

Two of the news staff od the Dallas station really pressured me to accept. But reporters l

still believe that getting your name in the paper in and of itself is important. * don$t. |

There was so much pressure X decided to phone Jim ^esar. His wa« a sound and persuasive |

view, that this provided an opportunity to let the major media and a fair part of the l

TV public know that there is a third view, not that of say the i’EIs and the Janes. he |

was right. - |

Jim's one concern war. that ^ not tire myself too much. I had not thought of this. f

^e was right. I sonked out sitting at my desk this afternoon and after Lil moved me to my o

chair three times thereafter. But it is because 1 listened to J im tnat I did not accept ~ |

the ABC offer to fly me to LA from the show. They apparently did want me much and 1 think
I now know why. i

(For that matter early in the Ray matter so did CBS. Wild what they told Id.1, but f

it was before I leamedhow to operate the special Dallas "hold" on a single phone. They
told her from NY that they were in a bind and really needed me. Happily they did not reach me.)

I think it was in a story in the Lew York Times that made only the very last editions, |

those that did not get cut of NYC, by Mo iligX8£5XS Waldron. Others on the Times and other S,

papers did use what they got from me bit I'm told Mo went into me some. X think this is |

what reached the research/ produo tion staff of the A.M. America Show. In addition I did an |

impromptu interview with their Dallas station too late for the Saturday ABC net evening s

TV news but it excited them so much they phoned w ew Yor. When told it was too late for the 1

eve ning new they asked about piping it for the late news, ft was carried on the net then. |

There was a DPI story for Sundays that has a completely fabricated lead and what ■ says 1

opposite what I said and opposite what the rest of the story says. 1 never believed there t

was an external conspiracy to get Ray out of jail. If I do not in tiredness return, to the §

correction remind me. ^t was not by UH. i;

Everybody in Dallas was just wonderful to me. I'll probably say more about this later. |

a So was ABC. They even sent their stretch model Lincoln limousibe to the airport to meet
me. Really. They take a conventional Lincoln and send it to a special place in Dallas where |

they”cut it in half and add a section. Most comfortable and quietest car I've ever been in.

Contrary to their forms for such purposes they put me up in a suite at the Warwick. (I'd |

probably have been happier with a Turkish bath to relax me.) I've never had an entire suite f

before and have no need for one again. But I started waking up early and after almost 6 hrs. I

I did. I was ready a half hou± before pickup time do phoned the show to tell them that if |

they had another pickup earlier I was ready. Here is where it get richer. They guy who |

answered the phone to,d me ^r. Weisberg, the limousibes are all scheduled but we thank you. I

esides, Amy (Hirsch) is coming to get you herSelf. She NEVER does this. And you will never §

see a more beautiful w esc an." rt was no exaggeration. Sfte began several hours earlier because
for some reason she wanted to talk to me. On the way to the studio, while they were making
me up, after the airing until B had to leave. She appears to be the brains of the show. I

^raiaaas well as incedi bly uhysical beauty she appears to have. |

In person SaTtman appears to be identical with the character he protrayed in some »;

hospital series of years ago. They did have me on the prime spot, the last segment of the
first hour. After we were on dead air he reached over and said he'd like to talk to me more.


6/15/77


ito call me in D ilas yesterday morning, I think while you Here
sounded it and I would have liked to have been.


I said I'd wait until the second hour was over. He thanked me butt said he had to take
his wife to the obstetrician.

Hot lkng after he parted, when I was in the reception or hold room on the floor
below, whatever they call it, he was down to question me more. Only to have the producer
and pthers down almost immediately to pull him back to the set. Hr asked me to wait and
I agreed, only to be dragged off by the ataff because of the limo schedule. The one
fancy-schmancy they have that time of the day, according to the chauffeur, had to get me to
the airport and back in time to get him and his wife to the doctor.

But while I was there just about all of the top part of the production staff looked
me iip. ^rom past experience I know that this not only i3 not necessary but subjects them
to other pressures. So I take it as a measure of the impact on these pros. (By the way,

Smy began by telling me that she did not like ^ane. And hopid that made me happy. I
never mentioned Lane to her.)

What else was unusual feiks is the reception I received from Aynesworth. When the
man with whom I stayed, the other person wounded in the JFK assassination, picked me up at
the airport I tola him I'd be asking help of ^ugh and would like to go there first, ge
said I could call him from his home. 1 said that because *nigh is the other side and we'd never
met or spoken I'd rather just say hello in person. Frpm there on it was all stars and flowers.
He said he was glad to meet me, that while we probably disagreed I am the only one on my side
he respected, and he did respect me. This for oponerc-s. h e did try to help me. We had
several meetings. I think I'm getting one of the things I want from another sources so
J told him to hold off on those efforts to see if I do. is also trying to get me some
TV footage, film, from people who aae dead sot against it. Or, I can't lose. I was quite

surprised to find that he wrote a friendly story about me. A t appeared in yesterday's

paper. I neither expected it nor asked for it. We'll make a "copy*.

Furthermore, I expect him to do some stories with which we will agree.

What follows is confidential.

I have always had a friendly relationship with a anry fc^de, the Dallas DA. I saw him
yesterday morning. For so long I was six hours late phoning the A.M.Amorica people so they
fiould prepare the questions for ^artman. § Only the first one or two were prepared. The

rest were ad lib and 1 hops I did not show it.) When I walked in after the handshake and

the greetings he said, good-ole-cpuntryhoy stylo, which is his natural style, ’'When are
you going to give me a case I can take to court?"

I likw him personally and I believe, from what 1 have seen, and £ have been in his
office and overheard phone conversations, that he really does seek justice. Including by
means other than prosecution. For Dallas he is a very liberal msn.And deservedly popular.

Tom Dillard, Morning Nevis photographer, now chief of thi&r photographic department,
gave me what nobody knows existed, the other pictures he took of the impact on the curbstone
by the missed shot. It appears that the FBI never returned the negative of the shot the
Commission used. This is to say the best.

There is more, I hope that I can remember what I did not have time to make notes on.

I look back with some gratification on the yield of two non-weekend days, the last day
ending at about 2»3Q so I could get to %w York, (i was not idel on the weekend, though.)
Except for a signed affidavit I realty do have all I'd hoped for from a week. I'll draft •
the affidavit and get it executed, by mail.

I wonder what I might have done if the ^ay escape had not been an all-day, all-night
phone business, ]jdl used remarkable fine judgement in telling those who phoned where I
could bd reached. I should say her judgement was perfect. There is no time I have not left
Dallas without regret I could not stay longer, no time without me anin gful accomplishment,
no time without new and worthwhile contacts.

The man in whose home I stayed phoned tonight. He missed the ABC airing this a.m.
because he is making up the time he spent with me. (i know this-he did not tell me.) He
told me that when he got home tonight his fine human being/wife told him there were times
she could feel the fire from my eyes. Even Jim and Lil did not say that!

If I had been able to remain in Dallas longer I'd have spoken to Will *ritz. I t hink
something rajty have come of it. But even n arry ^ean phoned this a.m. to tell ^il, am ong

other things, "Bravo!" So I guess it was right and good. But I am sorry not to have gotten
out there. The accumulation of my absence is more than §,000 pages, est.
