30CASECLOSED
reading materials,Delgado saw Das Kapital,Mein Kampf,and
griped about a
George Orwell's Animal Farm.*
mented, “Well
Another Marine who knew Oswald even better was Kerry
Oswald's voict
Thornley.When Thornley met him, around Easter 1959,"he [Os-
hands in his p
wald] had lost his clearance previously,and if I remember,he
himself.He ne
was assigned to make the coffee,mow the lawn, swab down
I just thought
decks,and things of this nature."Thornley enjoyed debating phi-
had a definite
losophy, politics, and religion with him. Thornley, who described
tional instabil
himself as “an extreme rightist,” thought Oswald such an
by a“persecul
unusual character that he wrote a preassassination novel based
affection to ar
on him (it was not published until 1991).² Over the course ofhalf
the end of the
a dozen discussions,Thornley was convinced Oswald believed
thetic."57*
thatcapitalism exploited workers and that"Communismwas the
There is, of
best system in the world."Oswald was also“quite sure that Cas-
Oswald's flag!
tro was a great hero."53 Once, Thornley recounted, "he looked at
language nev
me and he said, What doyou think of communism?And Ireplied
Worker.None
I didn't think too much of communism,in a favorable sense, and
Communism
he said, Well, I think the best religion is communism. '* Thorn-
in Japan. He
ley found it difficult to debate issues regarding the Soviet Union
thought to be
since Oswald challenged any information“on the grounds that
but not in the
we were probably propagandized in this country and we had no
one of his co1
knowledge of what was going on over there."
While he ma
Thornley thought he was“emotionally unstable”and“unpre-
Marines no r
dictable.”“He got along with very few people,”he recalled.“He
Only after :
seemed to guard against developing real close friendships."56
*Jim Garrisc
Before long,Thormley andOswald hadafallingout,whenOswald
they never hee
Cuba.He concl
*Delgado tried to deflectOswald's interest in Cuba by telling him towrite
Marine base we
to the Cuban embassy inWashington,D.C.Oswald later told Delgado he
tioninthe direc
had been in contact with the Cuban consulate in Los Angeles,but Delgado
Assassins,pp.!
thought he was lying until he saw aletterin Oswald's belongingswith agold
Oswald as long
seal on it and assumedit was from theCubans.On another occasion,Oswald
part of the base
received a visitor at the base,and althoughDelgado did not see theperson
dicted Thornley
and did not even know if it was a man or woman,he assumed it might be
as Oswald,tho
someonefrom the Cuban government.Henever asked Oswald.Although
The other Mari
Delgado's speculation hasno factual foundation and is only his hunch,some
only said Oswe
critics use it to assert Oswald may have had a Cuban intelligence connec-
with Thornley.
tion. The Cuban government has officially denied having had any contact
Groden and Ha
with Oswald in1959.
Mark Lane, anuse it to assert Oswald may have had a Cuban intelligence connec-
with Thornley.
tion. The Cuban government has officially denied having had any contact
Groden and Ha
with Oswald in1959.
Mark Lane, an

--- PAGE BREAK ---ald may have had a Cuban intelligence connec-
with Thornley.
tion. The Cuban government has officially denied having had any contact
Groden and Ha
with Oswald in1959.
Mark Lane, an

--- PAGE BREAK ---

JleetherDlqedohn
mented,“Well, comes the revolution you will change all that."
Oswald's voice cracked as he screamed at Thornley.He put his
hands in his pockets,pulled his cap low over his eyes,and sat by
himself.He never spoke to Thornley after that."Well, at the time
I just thought,”"recalled Thornley,“well, the man is a nut.... He
had a definite tendency toward irrationality at times,an emo-
tional instability."He also found Oswald“impulsive,”burdened
the end of their relationship Thornley thought Oswald was“pa-
thetic.57*
There is,of course,the question of why the Marines tolerated
Oswald'sflagrant study of Russian and subscription to Russian-
language newspapers as well as leftist publications like The
Worker.None of his fellow Marines reported that he proselytized
Communism during basic training or during hisfourteen months
in Japan.He complained about the Marines, but that was not
thought to be unique. Oswald did study the Russian language,
but not in the conspicuouswaythat he did later at El Toro.Even
one of his commanding officers in Japan studied the language.
While he may havebeen considered a Russophile,he gave the
Marines no reason to believe he might be a security threat.
Only after arriving at El Toro, and following his two court-mar-
*Jim Garrison provides snippets of quotes from seven Marines saying
they never heard Oswald talk about Communism,the Soviet Union,or
Cuba.He concludes,“The statements of Oswald’s other associates at the
Marine basewere almost uniform in their agreement that he had noinclina-
tioninthe directionof communism oranythingleftwing"(OntheTrailof the
Assassins,pp.52-53).Garrison writes that Thornley“had not served with
Oswald as long as a number of others and had not even lived on the same
part of the base....The other Marines'affidavits...overwhelmingly contra-
dicted Thornley's claims."But Thornley didliveonthe samepartofthebase
as Oswald, though they were in different Quonset huts (WC Vol.XI, p.85).
The otherMarines'affidavitsdid not contradict Thornley'stestimony—they
only said Oswald did not talk to them about the same things he discussed
with Thornley.Thornleyis not even listed intheindexesforbooks byRobert
Groden and Harrison Livingstone,Henry Hurt,John Davis,David Scheim,
Mark Lane,and Josiah Thompson.t the same things he discussed
with Thornley.Thornleyis not even listed intheindexesforbooks byRobert
Groden and Harrison Livingstone,Henry Hurt,John Davis,David Scheim,
Mark Lane,and Josiah Thompson.

--- PAGE BREAK ---discussed
with Thornley.Thornleyis not even listed intheindexesforbooks byRobert
Groden and Harrison Livingstone,Henry Hurt,John Davis,David Scheim,
Mark Lane,and Josiah Thompson.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

32-CASE CLOSED
tials and nervous breakdown while on guard duty,did Oswald
quest for a depende!
flaunt his controversial and brazen behavior.By then,he had
On September 4,19
been busted tobuckprivate,had spent time in the brig,and was
the H&H, in prepal
already known as an eccentric troublemaker. Instead of working
plied at the superic
as a trained radar operator,he had been reduced to doing janito-
port. Citing the pri
rialworkaroundthebase.
89
Schweitzer College
Only one officer is known to have taken him seriously.When an
land, he also listed
E1 Toro mailroom clerk informed his operations chief, Captain
and the Dominican
Robert E. Block, that Oswald was receiving leftist literature,
passport was routir
Blockconfrontedhim.Oswalddissembled thathewasmerely
Oswald was disc
trying to indoctrinate himself in the enemies'philosophy, accord-
1959, and he travel
ing to Marine Corps policy.Although skeptical, Block dropped
his mother's house
the matter.Except for Block,others viewed Oswald as peculiar
The next day he sl
but harmless.
was about to board
Near the end of his tour of duty, Oswald began a series of ma-
export business. F
neuvers intended to sever hisMarine ties and prepare for his de-
attheWestSide St
fection to theUSSR.In March 1959,he applied for admission to a
New Orleans on Se
small liberal arts school in Churwalden,Switzerland,theAlbert
ticket for passage
Schweitzer College. After a discharge from the Marines, Oswald
leave for Le Havre
night in New Orlea
remember above a
valid reason.Attending a Swiss school would qualify him for
ert's or your's. It is
overseas travel.He lied extensively on the school application, and
thisis whatImust
he was accepted.*
you could hardly b.
On August 17, Oswald submitted a request for a dependency
Although comple
discharge on the ground that his mother needed his support.8" A
rine acquaintance
candyjar had fallenoff a shelf whileMargueritewas atwork and
they had known.1
hurt her nose.Although several doctors could find nothing wrong
why he did not go
with her,she claimed shewas totally disabled and finallyfound a
plied that he was
physician who agreed.62 She sent her own affidavit, as well as
the effect that on
affidavits from a doctor and two friends, attesting to her injury
make him famous
and maintaining she could not support herself.? Oswald's re-
of fame.“He wan”
*On the application,he said he intended to take a summer course at the
years from now pe
University of Turku in Finland. He never contacted that school.However,
Well, this man 
since heintendedto applyfora Sovietvisa in theless-trafficked consulate in
lookedbackupon
Helsinki,the statement on the application provided him an excuse for trav-
cerned with his in
eling to Finland.
to accept him onapplyfora Sovietvisa in theless-trafficked consulate in
lookedbackupon
Helsinki,the statement on the application provided him an excuse for trav-
cerned with his in
eling to Finland.
to accept him on

--- PAGE BREAK ---a in theless-trafficked consulate in
lookedbackupon
Helsinki,the statement on the application provided him an excuse for trav-
cerned with his in
eling to Finland.
to accept him on

--- PAGE BREAK ---

88=CASE CLOSED
Mohrenschildt shared with Oswald an outcast's perspective on
life.And the politics of both de Mohrenschildt and his wife was
band.... He was ju
another common bond with Oswald. Not only were the de Moh-
Oswald about politic
renschildts aggressive atheists,* but Igor Voshinin considered
atheistand“idealist
both of them leftists. Delcan Ford, the husband of émigrée
Katya Ford, said de Mohrenschildt had“a reputation for being a
you like to be a comn
leftwing enthusiast ..."6 In his own Warren Commission testi-
And he said—-he sor
mony,de Mohrenschildtadmitted he waspoliticallythe furthest
lightful idea. To me
left of the Dallas Russians. He said that Communism “"is a sys-
took me seriously."?
tem that can work and works, and possibly for a very poor man,
educated hillbilly,":
and a very undeveloped nation it may be a solution.... I have
[and] mixed-up." V
seen through mylifethatcommunism in certainplaces hasdevel-
could have been ar
missed the thought:
Oswald took to de Mohrenschildt as he had no other person.
would be stupid eno
Marina said he quickly became Lee's best friend. De Mohren-
De Mohrenschildi
schildt was his mentor,almost a political and social guide whom
his first months in t!
Oswald respected.Oswald had never had anyone of such status
hedisliked theémis
pay attention to him.He relished the opportunity to talk to some-
Oswaldwanted a ch
onehe viewed ashis intellectual equal.And de Mohrenschildt
tober.Severalof th
cultivated Oswald by doing somethingfewhad ever donehe
weekend. Oswald s:
was attentive to him.“"He [Oswald] was a fellow who needed at-
plained he couldn't
tention,”de Mohrenschildt later said."If somebody expressed an
that Dallas would
Before the day had1
interest in him,he blossomed,absolutely blossomed.If you asked
him some questions about him, he was just out of this world.... I
to stay in her home
think that is his main characteristic.He wanted people to be in-
latertoldMarinah
terested in him, not in Marina."70 While the rest of the emigrés
stead he justfailed
andJune moved t
fawned overMarina and shunned Oswald,deMohrenschildt had
looking for work.**
time for both,especially Lee.He noticed Oswald was egocentric,
WhenElenaHall
and “that is probably the reason he was clinging to me....He
blue over half of he
would call me.Hewould trytobe next to me-because let's face
when Marinamove
it, I am a promoter and a salesman.So I know how to talk to
people.... I am interested in them. And he appreciated that in
*Although de Mohr
me. The other people considered him, well, he is just some poor,
attention to Marina w
miserable guy, and disregarded him."71
stead he was asexual.
**He stayed at the!
De Mohrenschildt,of course,also noted less admirable sides of
in Dallas,but though
Oswald's nature.“He was not particularly nice with her [Ma-
Near the YMCA, in tl
rina],”he noted. “He didn't kiss her. It wasn't a loving hus-
rooming houses,wher
he probably stayed atllas,but though
Oswald's nature.“He was not particularly nice with her [Ma-
Near the YMCA, in tl
rina],”he noted. “He didn't kiss her. It wasn't a loving hus-
rooming houses,wher
he probably stayed at

--- PAGE BREAK ---ld's nature.“He was not particularly nice with her [Ma-
Near the YMCA, in tl
rina],”he noted. “He didn't kiss her. It wasn't a loving hus-
rooming houses,wher
he probably stayed at

--- PAGE BREAK ---

"I'll Never Go Back to That Hell"=95
From a nearby
the larger home of Katya and Delcan Ford.Three days later,Os-
ig, pleaded for
wald began telephoning.Marinawas initiallyhesitant to speak
ir one-bedroom
tohim,butKatyaFord said Marina finally tookthe phone to tell
s very nervous
him“not to call on her again,and not to bother, she was not going
lad beaten her.
to return to him."10 Marina confessed to the Fords how badly Lee
regarding Ma-
mistreated her and told Katya that she originally“felt sorry for
t Lee, the com-
Oswald because everybody hated him, even in Russia.*105 There
vas on her own.
was talk of divorce.After a week with the Fords,Marina and
self.100
June moved to the home of an émigre couple,Frank and Valen-
whocould even
tina Ray. That same day,Oswald called Mrs.Ray and asked if he
apartment the
could come to their house and visit Marina.She acquiesced.He
Igs. Lee greeted
arrived in the late afternoon, and Marina and Lee went into a
1g to do it [move
guest bedroom and spoke for an hour. Oswald begged her to re-
:ak allthebaby
turn."He cried, and you know a woman's heart,"Marina recalled.
"If you don't be-
im in return, “I
lented.Before leaving theRays',the Oswalds stayed for dinner.
:Mohrenschildt
Lee engaged Frank Ray in a discussion on economics,and eventu-
aschildt to even
ally gave Ray a lecture about the shortfalls of capitalism.“My
the inevitable."
husband justcamein huffing,puffing,and said henevermetany-
na's goods, Os-
body dumberin hislife,doesn'tunderstand simple economics or
d his affinity for
how anything works in this country,”recalled Valentina Ray.“He
side in the mari-
considered him a complete idiot."106
is point of view.
The reunion was not a happy one.Within days,they were fight-
you make some
ing again.“It seems to me that it was at that time that Leebegan
they have more
to talk about his wanting to return to Russia,”remembered Ma-
dtheyarejust
rina. “I did not want that and it is why we had quarrels."7 Al-
e time.Poor guy
though he now liked his job,he did not get along with most of his
Mohrenschildt,
co-workers,had completely alienated the local Russian commu-
"He sleeps with
nity,and had concluded, according to Marina,that“it was very
tion out of it."103
hard for him here [in the U.S.1."io8 He took his frustrations out on
:h time a doctor
her.Mrs.Mahlon Tobias, a next-door neighbor of the Oswalds,
1, Marina left for
remembered there was an “awful lot of trouble."io9 As the apart-
ment complex's manager, Tobias's husband often listened to
sfullysuedonsev-
other tenants complaining they could hear thumping sounds“as
dinghis statement
1lie.I never asked
window after Oswald smashed itwhen shovingMarina around
rtanttomethenor
se we had so little
the rooms,and another time rushed to their apartment when a
etimes."as
dinghis statement
1lie.I never asked
window after Oswald smashed itwhen shovingMarina around
rtanttomethenor
se we had so little
the rooms,and another time rushed to their apartment when a
etimes."

--- PAGE BREAK ---1lie.I never asked
window after Oswald smashed itwhen shovingMarina around
rtanttomethenor
se we had so little
the rooms,and another time rushed to their apartment when a
etimes."

--- PAGE BREAK ---

100-CASECLOSED
vent JamesMeredith from enrolling as the first black student at
ters to theSoviet
the University of Mississippi,Walker became a moving force for
Russia,” she said.
thepoliticalright.*The endemic conservatismof Texas,coupled
way.*3 Two days
with fears engendered by the cold war and the 1962 CubanMis-
rina's great stress
sile Crisis, in which Russia and the U.S. came close to nuclear
characteristic of 1
confrontation, all boosted Walker's public standing. In 1962,he
to theUSSR to“a
ran for governor of Texas,and while he lost in a six-man primary
beg you once mor
to John Connally, he received over 138,000 votes.Following the
life with Oswald,
press coverage of Operation Midnight Ride, the papers and local
warned her that
radio and television had additional stories about the general,
was too embarra
focusing on his radical anti-Castro stance.
Marina's predical
De Mohrenschildtnever hid his own distasteforthe JohnBirch
Russia was one tl
Society and people likeWalker.“I don't like that movement per-
On Friday ever
sonally,”he said.“I dislike it very much.... I get sometimes into
dinner party give
heateddiscussionandsometimesIsaythingswhichmaybeyou
don't think." DeMohrenschildt's attitude was so evident that
Schmidt.Schmid
bered “it was a 
Katya and Delcan Ford, as well as Marina, shared the feeling
this fellow and l
that hehad said to Oswald in mid-February that anyonewho
“"knocked off Walker” would be doing society a favor.
they made of hin
12
dinner, as were
A coupleofweeksafterhisorderfor therevolver,andnearthe
Russian, includin
time of the de Mohrenschildt party,Marina noticed Lee spent
the Russian lang
several evenings in the kitchen, poring over maps of Dallas and a
singing group fr
bus schedule.When she asked him what he was doing,he said he
guage barriers, I
was tryingtofind thequickestroutefromhisjob atJaggarsto the
Marina. Ruth P:
typing course in which he had enrolled. That satisfied Marina,
but it was a lie. The typing institute was only a few blocks from
strong conscienc
her, Marina imn
Jaggars, a walk of less than five minutes.
Ruth and her hu
That same day,February 14, when.Oswald read the news cov-
a cold),were AC
erage aboutWalker's OperationMidnightRide,he and Marina
of a liberal poli
also celebrated their daughter June's first birthday.The next
become theOsw
day,Marina told Oswald she was pregnant.While he was tempo-
the assassinatio
rarily pleased with the news,it did not stop him from instituting
But on that ni
a new punishment for her."Anytime I did something which didn't
membered:“He
please him,he would make me sit down at a table and write let-
would take an i
*Walker's segregationist stance was another factor that must have in-
*Michael Paine1
furiated Oswald. De Mohrenschildt described Oswald as a “ferocious ..
Paines were temp
advocate ofintegration."
each other frequenationist stance was another factor that must have in-
*Michael Paine1
furiated Oswald. De Mohrenschildt described Oswald as a “ferocious ..
Paines were temp
advocate ofintegration."
each other frequen

--- PAGE BREAK ---another factor that must have in-
*Michael Paine1
furiated Oswald. De Mohrenschildt described Oswald as a “ferocious ..
Paines were temp
advocate ofintegration."
each other frequen

--- PAGE BREAK ---

"I'll Never Forget It for as Long as I Live”= 229
Jarolyn Arnold
There areother witnesseswho claimtheynotonlysaw two
BillyLovelady
men,either in the Depository or in Dealey Plaza,but that the
lee him either.28
men also had a rifle. Julia Ann Mercer said she was caught in a
yee on the sixth
trafficjam at Dealey on the morning of themotorcade and noticed
rguments have
two men in a green Ford pickup.One took a gun case from the
year-old Bonnie
is lunch and see
She later identified the truck's driver as Jack Ruby,and said Os-
1 the motorcade.
wald was the man with the rifle. However, subsequent investi-
a, which he said
gation revealed that the truck,which had stalled,belonged to a
hat while there,
local construction company;it had three men inside,and they did
ty feet from the
take tools from the rear of the truck to fix it. They were under
r, however, were
constant surveillance by three Dallas policemen,and all of them
>anything...9
leftwhenanothertruckarrived topushthestalledvehicleaway.*
he left by 12:05
In 1978, a Dallas newspaperman encountered the second wit-
) friends, Junior
ness toclaimthereweretwomenconnectedtoarifleinDealey
lere to watch the
Plaza.John Powell said he was a prisoner on the sixth floor of the
Dallas County Jail, one of the buildings on Houston Street south-
y places Oswald,
east of the Depository, on November 22, 1963." According to
)ealey Plaza also
Summers,the cell provided“an ideal vantage point for observa-
window. There is
tions of the famous Depository window.* Powell insisted that
ses say they saw
"quite a few”prisoners watched two men in the sniper's-nest win-
ting who did not
dow“fooling with the scope”on a high-powered rifle. Summers
Uvnlrs
charged that“during the Warren inquiry, an official failed to re-
: floors of the De-
spond toaspecificreminderthatobserversintheCountyJail had
1ad dark hair and
had a perfect view and should be questioned.*37
ummers does not
But a December 15, 1964, FBI memo reported the results of
enderson said the
just such an inquiry. There had been accusations that“seventeen
could have been
witnesses to the assassination in [the] hospital ward of Dallas
hey were on." On
County Jail [were] never interviewed.*8 
There were several large
nest,were three
cells that overlooked Dealey Plaza.One was the jail's mental
nior Jarman, and
ward.While it provided a view of the motorcade,theFBl's inves-
ler FBI statement
tigation showed the Book Depository“was not visible from this
eeyoungmenona
*The Mercer story was fully discredited byDecember 9,1963, just over
ror.
two weeks after the assassination.However, that did not stop Mark Lane
loor until12:20.That
frombeginninghis bookRush toJudgmentwith an excerpt fromMercer's
it was approximately
statement. Recent authors who have also.cited the Mercer story,unchal-
estimateof12:05,he
lenged,include Garrison (1988),Marrs (1989),and Dr.Charles Crenshaw
. III, p. 173).
(1992).
DuDony hewagrao
Wnlinraeb?t. Recent authors who have also.cited the Mercer story,unchal-
estimateof12:05,he
lenged,include Garrison (1988),Marrs (1989),and Dr.Charles Crenshaw
. III, p. 173).
(1992).
DuDony hewagrao
Wnlinraeb?

--- PAGE BREAK ---288：CASECLOSED
mouth and down h
saw anyone with a head wound like that,with the amount of
hookeduptothetu
brain matter scattered about, that survived.We put the Presi-
find avein)were d
dent on the gurney and wheeled him into emergency room one.

wound in the head,
Mrs.Kennedy would not leave his side.She went in with us as the
Jenkins had taken t
gurney was rolled into the hospital,walking right beside him,
head of the table.“
holdinghis hand.Shewas absolutely deadpan quiet.One of the
recalls.“And as the
nurses offered to clean off her clothing,and she said,‘Absolutely
knew then, and I k1
not.I want the world to see what Dallas has done to my husband.'
he had a head inju
Someone else asked if shewanted to waitoutside the emergency
and he was lying w
room while they worked on herhusband,and she saidnoand
we had the EKG[
wentinsidewith thegurmey.

5
showed a dying hes
“Everyone claims to be there first,”says Dr.Jenkins,“but the
shot, but they didr
only doctor there when I arrived was Carrico, and Drs.Baxter
lot of blood,it was
and Perry arrived shortly after me.Mrs.Kennedy was also
Jones's account is
there." The President was on the stretcher on his back.

He was
was a head woun(
blue-white, had fixed, dilated eyes, slow, spasmodic breathing,
aware there was a
and was unconscious.There was initially no pulse or heartbeat.

Dr.Malcolm P
“He had a death look,”recalls Jenkins.“He was on the way out."
which an artificia
Two nurses,Diana Bowren and Margaret Henchliffe,cut away
and inserting a tt
the President's clothes and his back brace, which was wrapped
rico was trying to
with Ace bandages about his waist and thighs.7* The doctors im-
the trachea,” Dr.

mediately noticed anexternal wound,a small wound in theneck
dreds of times bef
almost directly under the windpipe.

Dr.

Carrico placed his hands
cheal wound was.

under thePresident's back and feltfor any other major wound.--- PAGE BREAK ---

Carrico placed his hands
cheal wound was. under thePresident's back and feltfor any other major wound. the tube at the p
Hedid notfind any.Hemissed the small bullet entrance inJFK's
surgical procedur
upper shoulder/neck.Nobody atParkland ever turned him over. and therefore, w
Dr.Carrico inserted a breathing tube into the President's
wound was oblite
Drs. Baxter, P
*Examination of JFK's clotheslaterconfirmed that the bullet that struck
chest cavity to d
him in the shoulder/neckcame from the rear.Thebackofhis suitjacket had
the chest and pu
a bullet hole thatpushed the threads inward,indicating the entrance pqint
(WC Vol.V,p.59).The size of the hole corresponded to a 6.5mm bullet. ers,“and someo1
Spectrographictests showed residues ofcopper atthe edges of thejacket's
on the left ankl
hole,the same metal that jacketed Oswald's ammunition.JFK's shirt also
he said, ‘Get hin
had one hole in the rear, with the threads pushed in as well (WC Vol. V, p. 60).The front of the shirt had nicks near the collar,with the threads pushed
*The admiral w:
out, confirming an exit (WC Vol.V,p.61).There was also a nick in his silk
who had been in t
tie,near theknot,and because of the thread pattern,it is furtherevidence
after thePresiden
the bullet exited at the President's neck (WC Vol.V, p.62).

--- PAGE BREAK ---in his silk
who had been in t
tie,near theknot,and because of the thread pattern,it is furtherevidence
after thePresiden
the bullet exited at the President's neck (WC Vol.V, p.62).

--- PAGE BREAK ---

458CASECLOSED
For some time,Blakey had had a suspicion about possible orga-
nized crime involvement,partlybecause ofthe mob's well-known
end of the deca(
hatred for attorney general Robert Kennedy, and partly because
including two t
MafiaKingfish
earmarks of a mob hit."13* Although it could never prove Oswald
Whatdid the
had personal contactwith anymobster,the Select Committee
vestigation? Is
nevertheless,under Blakey,concluded that while the“national
and Marcello v
syndicate of organized crime, as a group, were not involved in the
Kennedy?
assassination,itcould notprecludethepossibilitythatindividual
As for Hoffa, 1
members may have been involved."l4 Suspicion focused on Team-
about wanting]
ster boss JimmyHoffa,Tampa godfather Santo Trafficante,and
show his intere
New Orleans boss CarlosMarcello.The committee's conclusion
JFK. The witnt
infused new life into the arguments for a conspiracy,which now
convicted felon
trusted Partin,
had the imprimatur of a government investigation that had not
only concluded therewas a conspiracy,but evenhighlighted the
he would almos
suspects. To the buffs, Garrison's investigation was now only a
in the summer
distant,badmemory.
not John---Keni
RFK or using pl
For many,the CIA remained a leading suspect,**but now the
also said that w.
mafiamovedtotheforefront asthemostcredibleplot-master.
The same year that the Select Committee completed its work,
any further ste]
Seth Kantor's book,Who Was Jack Ruby?, concluded Ruby was a
a concrete plan
mafia hit man.1 In 1979, The Washington Post ran a long article
Teamster offici:
headlined DID THE MOB KILL KENNEDy??And Blakey published his
plottoeliminal
him, saying tha
own best-seller,ThePlot toKill thePresident,in1981.By the
be contemplate
*Though the mobhated RobertKennedy becausehewasrelentlessly pur-
Hoffawouldha'
suing them,the committee implied that individual mobsters may have as-
the President al
sassinatedJFK in the hope thatby their removing him,Robert would lose
gation by the I
hispowertoprosecutethem.
that the balanc
**Books like High Treason, by Robert Groden and Harrison Livingstone,
that Hoffa had.
and Conspiracy, by Anthony Summers,charged that the CIA,or a rogue
The sole evi
group of agents,was responsible for the assassination.In First-Hand
Knowledge (1992), ex-CIA contract agent Robert Morrow weaves an intri-
Santo Traffican
cate intelligence plot,of which he claims tohavebeena part.OliverStone,in
exile, Jose Alen
his film JFK,regurgitated almost all of Garrison's original contentions
although he on
against theintelligence community.Yet not onlyhave theunderlyingfacts
confided to him
to such accusations been disproved,but the CIA theories necessarilyinvolve
tember 1962 co
thegreatest numberof conspirators,sometimes numberinginthehundreds.
hit."23 He claim
As the House Select Committee concluded,“The more complicated a plot
becomes, the less likely it will work"(HSCA Rpt., p. 179).
1962 and 1963,
not record anys numberinginthehundreds.
hit."23 He claim
As the House Select Committee concluded,“The more complicated a plot
becomes, the less likely it will work"(HSCA Rpt., p. 179).
1962 and 1963,
not record any

--- PAGE BREAK ---"What Happened to the Truth?" : 459
cion about possible orga-
ofthemob'swell-known
end of the decade,there were many successful conspiracy books,
edy, and partly because
including two that embellished the mafia theme,JohnDavis's
ch he says“had all the
uld never prove Oswald
Whatdid the Select Committee uncoverin itsmultiyear in-
theSelectCommittee
vestigation?Is there credible evidence that Hoffa, Trafficante,
latwhilethe“national
and Marcello were involved in the assassination of President
vere not involved in the
Kennedy?

;sibility thatindividual
AsforHoffa,the committee found evidence that he had spoken
icion focused on Team-
aboutwantingRobertKennedy dead,but it could find nothing to
Santo Trafficante, and
show his interestwent beyond the talking stage or extended to
ommittee's conclusion
JFK.The witness was Edward Partin,a Hoffa lieutenant and
:onspiracy, which now
convictedfelonturnedfederalinformant.Hoffacompletely
stigation that had not
trusted Partin, and if there had been a plot to kill thePresident,
he would almost certainly have known of it.According to Partin,
;even highlighted the
ation was now only a
in the summer of 1962, Hoffa said he would like tokill Robert—
not John—-Kennedy.

Partin said Hoffa discussed either shooting
RFK or using plastic explosives to blow up his house.2 But Partin
ispect,** but now the
credible plot-master.

also said thatwas the extent of Hoffa's interest,and he nevertook
completed its work,
any further steps.Moreover,in early1967,when presented with
oncluded Ruby was a
a concrete plan to murder RFK,Hoffa rejected the opportunity.--- PAGE BREAK ---

Partin said Hoffa discussed either shooting
RFK or using plastic explosives to blow up his house.2 But Partin
ispect,** but now the
credible plot-master. also said thatwas the extent of Hoffa's interest,and he nevertook
completed its work,
any further steps.Moreover,in early1967,when presented with
oncluded Ruby was a
a concrete plan to murder RFK,Hoffa rejected the opportunity. Teamster official Frank Chavez told Hoffaaboutthe details of a
'ost ran a long article
plottoeliminateRobertKennedy,andHoffastronglyrebuked
3lakeypublished his
nt, in 1981.7 By the
him,saying that such an action was dangerous and should never
be contemplated." The committee “strongly doubted ...that
le was relentlessly pur-
Hoffa would have risked anything so dangerous as a plot against
mobsters may have as-
thePresident at a time that he knew he was under active investi-
him,Robert would lose
gation by the Department of Justice.” It “concluded, therefore,
that thebalance of theevidence argued thatitwas improbable
Harrison Livingstone,
that Hoffa had anything to do with the death of the President.r2
it the CIA, or a rogue
The sole evidence the Select Committee found implicating
tation.In First-Hand
rrow weaves an intri-
Santo Trafficante in a plot against JFKwas provided by a Cuban
1 part. Oliver Stone, in
exile,JoseAleman.Heboasted to committeeinvestigators that
original contentions
although he only casually knew Trafficante,the mob boss had
theunderlyingfacts
confided to him, over a year before the assassination, in a Sep-
es necessarily involve
tember 1962 conversation,that the President was“going to be
ring in the hundreds. hit." He claimed he had reported that information to the FBI in
e complicated a plot
79). 1962 and 1963, but a review of Bureau reports on his contacts did

--- PAGE BREAK ---"What Happened to the Truth?" - 469
[OTKENNEDY-ANDI
lished work is a dangerous mixture of good information with a
liberal dose of falsehoods.Sifting out the truth is increasingly
llas policeman, was
difficultforthosenotwellversed inthefacts.

dence was in his fa-
Even the few critics who approach the subjectfrom an aca-
y, Ricky declared it
demic's viewpoint,such as University of Wisconsin professor
Iments that “prove”
RichardWrone,decry thefield'sdeclineinqualityfueledbythe
as forgeries.

Mean-
rporation, MATSU,
assassination syndrome,this terriblecollapse ofthe criticalpeo-
icoe White story as
ple—witnessLane,and Lifton,and Garrison and the rest-it's a
considered paying
suggestion that we are really in trouble as a society.

These theo-
decided to buy the
rists take us away,fly us away to this unknown land of Oz,wher-
of the Assassins for
ever they take us.Theydivertour attention fromthereality.

Every book that asks the question Who shot John Kennedy?'or
an exciting tale of
tries to answer the question Who shot JohnKennedy?'has fallen
3ritish producer be-
short of the mark, and sometimes egregiously so.

Now,as you
)r a television docu-
know,there are a bunch of books that are just old-fashioned nut
hough it was later
books,like the umbrella man.And then there are a number of
in the French army
ere in Dallas.

There is an increasing emphasis by the critics on commerciali-
91, was the culmi-
zation,disguised often as research.An annual convention in Dal-
)nspiracy press.* It
las, dubbed an information symposium, is actually a three-day
avely to the forces
gathering where buffs pay $150 per person to shop at tables of
 of fact and fiction
assassination memorabilia and alsolisten to published authors
Ighout the assassi-
and other self-appointed experts speak on topics such as"Strange
g amount of pub-
and Convenient Deaths,”“Media Cover-up-Then and Now”
sassination.--- PAGE BREAK ---

Now,as you
)r a television docu-
know,there are a bunch of books that are just old-fashioned nut
hough it was later
books,like the umbrella man.And then there are a number of
in the French army
ere in Dallas. There is an increasing emphasis by the critics on commerciali-
91, was the culmi-
zation,disguised often as research.An annual convention in Dal-
)nspiracy press.* It
las, dubbed an information symposium, is actually a three-day
avely to the forces
gathering where buffs pay $150 per person to shop at tables of
 of fact and fiction
assassination memorabilia and alsolisten to published authors
Ighout the assassi-
and other self-appointed experts speak on topics such as"Strange
g amount of pub-
and Convenient Deaths,”“Media Cover-up-Then and Now”
sassination. In 1973,
"FBI/Hoover Cover-up."DealeyPlaza witnesses important to the
mentary in which a
conspiracy, such as Jean Hill and Ed Hoffman, are treated as
Parallax View (1974)
celebrities, complete with autograph sessions. For only $20 a per-
e gunman. In Winter
the slain President's
(Prouty,JFK [NewYork:Birch Lane Press,1992],p.306).The implication is
sassination. that some intelligence agency,robably the CIA,released an early,prepack-
ysterious intelligence
aged set of details about the assassin to the media. But there is nothing
im about the motiva-
mysterious about the“extra”edition of the Christchurch Star.Because of
y. Mr.X was loosely
the nineteen-hour time difference,it was7:30A.M.on November23in New
x-Army colonelwho
Zealand when JFK was assassinated.Oswald was arrested when it was
ime of the assassina-
shortly after 9:00 A.M.in Christchurch.Culling information from press sto-
ber 22,1963.Prouty
ries around the time of Oswald's defection,plus information released bythe
"edition containing
Dallas police, the Star managed to get a thin“extra”on the street within
vith a crime in Dallas
three hours,by noon (Prouty,JFK,p.306).

--- PAGE BREAK ---formation released bythe
"edition containing
Dallas police, the Star managed to get a thin“extra”on the street within
vith a crime in Dallas
three hours,by noon (Prouty,JFK,p.306).

--- PAGE BREAK ---

486Appendix B
·Bill Chesher (heart attack) was unconnected to the case, but
Penn Jones later claimed, without giving supporting evidence,to
Beckley and saw (
have a reliable source who asserted that Chesher could link Os-
nation.
-Dallas police (
wald and Ruby.
·Guy Banister (heart attack) was the New Orleans private in-
thatMartin witn
Commission,"The
vestigator repeatedly and incorrectly linked to Oswald.Marrs
don't say it."i In :
writes that Banister was the“ex-FBI agent in New Orleans con-
mission what he W
nected to Ferrie, CIA, Carlos Marcello, and Oswald."
enced in handlin!
there “was no org:
1965
Judge JoeBro
·Paul Mandal (lung cancer) was a Life reporter who wrote a
the Ruby trial.“F
single article on the assassination.
"ate like a hog,
·David Goldstein (heart attack)is listed by Marrs as a“Dallas-
death."
ite who helped FBI trace Oswald's pistol.Actually, Goldstein
·Clarence Olive
was simply the owner of a Dallas gun shop, Dave's House of
vestigator who w
Guns.He supplied a half-page affidavit,as did every other Dallas
known."l2 What!
gun-store owner,that he did not sell a Smith and Wesson.38-
theDA's officefro
caliber revolver, serial number 65248,the gun Oswald used to
office when the F
kill Tippit."
part of it. The on
·Mrs.Earl Smith(heartfailure)hadnothing todowith the
was what he rear
Kennedy case.She is listed solely because she was a friend of
listing-hell, ther
Dorothy Kilgallen, a syndicated columnist who wrote about the
a series of heart 
Ruby trial (see pg. 494).
·Tom Howard (heart attack)was one of Jack Ruby's defense
attorneys.“He had a history of heart disease,”says assistant dis-
JackRuby (bl
trict attorney Bill Alexander.*“He had a heart attack several
he was injected w
years earlier, and was a heavy drinker."
Ruby was deranf
thathewasbein
1966
Jews were being
·Hank Suydam (heart attack) was a Life editor who worked on
.Jimmy Leven
a couple of theKennedy articles.
who casually kne
·Earlene Roberts (heartfailure and pneumonia)had a history'
·Harold Russel
of heart disease.She was the cleaning woman at 1026 North
which was made
thathe saw Osw
*Bill Alexander, who prosecuted Ruby, was familiar with everyone con-
had no involvem
nected to the Ruby trial. The author asked him to comment on the Ruby-
related deaths,and he is quoted whenever they appear.
"killed by cop in 1
party in Oklaho1iar with everyone con-
had no involvem
nected to the Ruby trial. The author asked him to comment on the Ruby-
related deaths,and he is quoted whenever they appear.
"killed by cop in 1
party in Oklaho1

--- PAGE BREAK ---n-
had no involvem
nected to the Ruby trial. The author asked him to comment on the Ruby-
related deaths,and he is quoted whenever they appear.
"killed by cop in 1
party in Oklaho1

--- PAGE BREAK ---

Notes - 511
12.Testimony of John Donovan,WC Vol.VIlI, p.295.
13. Testimony of Daniel Powers, WC Vol. VIll, p. 270.
14.Folsom Exhibit 1,WC Vol.XIX,p.3.
. I, pp. 198, 200; Carro Ex-
15. Ibid., p. 111.
ecember 18,1963,of inter-
16.Affidavit of Paul Edward Murphy,WC Vol.VIll, p.320.
CE 2240, WC Vol. XXV, p.
17. Folsom Exhibit 1, WC Vol.XIX,p.5.
18. Ibid., p. 3.
ffidavit ofPalmerMcBride
19.Letter from Lee Oswald to Robert Oswald,November 26,1959,CE
252.
295, WC Vol.XVI, p.816.
20.Folsom Exhibit 1, p.8.
21. Affidavit of Paul Edward Murphy, WC Vol. VIll, p. 320.
J Vol. IX, p. 247.
22.Testimony of George de Mohrenschildt,WC Vol.IX, p.243.
:d by Aline Mosby in Mos-
23.Ibid., p.242.
C Vol. XXII, p. 703.
24.Based on interview with confidential intelligence source.
l, dated August 30, 1956,
25.Notes of interview of Lee Oswald conducted byAline Mosby in Mos-
rtment, and Oswald's per-
cow,November 1959 (CD 352),CE 1385,WC Vol.XXII, p.705.
public schools, Arlington.
26.Edward Jay Epstein,Legend:TheSecretWorld of LeeHaruey Oswald
f, WC Vol. xXI1l, pp. 671-
(New York:McGraw-Hill,1978), p.68.
27. Testimony of Daniel Powers, WC Vol. VIll, p. 287.
[,p.234.
28.Testimony of John Donovan,WC Vol.VIll, p.300.
29. Epstein, op. cit., p. 70.
I, p. 64; testimony of Dr.
30. Testimony of John Donovan, WC Vol. VIll, p. 297.
31. Testimony of Nelson Delgado, WC Vol. VIll, p. 265.
375-76.
32.Testimony of Daniel Powers,WC Vol.VIlI, p. 275.
,p.227.
33.Affidavit of Peter Connor,WC Vol. VIII, p.317.
34.Affidavit of John Rene Heindel,WC Vol. VIll, p.318.
2me
35.Testimony of Lt. Col. Allison Folsom, WC Vol. VIII, p. 308.2
36. Folsom Exhibit 1, WC Vol. XIX, pp. 3, 10.
Chh
37.
Epstein, op. cit., p. 79.
MUNISM"
38. Testimony of Daniel PowersWC Vol. VIlI, p. 278.
39.Affidavit of John Rene Heindel, WC Vol. VIll, p. 318.
I. XI, p. 302.
40.
Epstein, op. cit., p. 81.
41.Folsom Exhibit 1,WC Vol.XIX, p.3.
I. VIII, p. 304.
42.
Epstein, op. cit., p. 82.
,p.296.
43.
Testimony of Robert Oswald, WC Vol. I, pp. 294, 327.
. VIII, p. 304.
,p. 308; see also Folsom,
44.Folsom Exhibit 1,WC Vol.XIX, p.3.
45.Affidavit of Donald Camarata,WC Vol.VIll, p. 316.
46.Affidavit of James Botelho,WC Vol. VIll, p. 315.
47.
Affidavit of Richard Call,WC Vol.VIll, p.323.
llen R.Felde (CD 1229),
48.
Affidavit of Mack Osborne,WC Vol.VIll, p.322.
49.
Testimony of Nelson Delgado,WC Vol.VI1I,pp.233,240,241,243.
268.
50.
Ibid., p.243.
51. Ibid., p.262.
.06.
52.KerryThornley,The IdleWarriors (NewYork:IllumiNet,1991).ck Osborne,WC Vol.VIll, p.322.
49.
Testimony of Nelson Delgado,WC Vol.VI1I,pp.233,240,241,243.
268.
50.
Ibid., p.243.
51. Ibid., p.262.
.06.
52.KerryThornley,The IdleWarriors (NewYork:IllumiNet,1991).

--- PAGE BREAK ---ll, p.322.
49.
Testimony of Nelson Delgado,WC Vol.VI1I,pp.233,240,241,243.
268.
50.
Ibid., p.243.
51. Ibid., p.262.
.06.
52.KerryThornley,The IdleWarriors (NewYork:IllumiNet,1991).

--- PAGE BREAK ---

512=Notes
11. Ibid.
54. Ibid., p.87.
12. Ibid.
55. Ibid., pp. 94, 95, 102.
13. Ibid.
56. Ibid., pp. 101-2.
14. Ibid.
57. Ibid.,pp. 101-2, 108.
15. Epstein, Legend, pI
58. Affidavit of James Anthony Botelho,WC Vol. VIll, p. 316; testimony of
16. Nosenko interview,
Kerry Thornley,WC Vol. XI, p.84.
17.
Epstein, op. cit., p.
59.Application form filled out byLee Harvey Oswald on March 4,1959,
18.1
Mangold, op. cit., p
for entry to the Albert Schweitzer College, CE 228, WC Vol. XVI, pp.
19.
Nosenkointerview
621-25.
20.
Ibid.
60.Folsom Exhibit 1,WC Vol.XIX,p.28.
21.
Ibid.
61. Ibid., p. 84.
22.
Ibid.
62. Oswald, Lee: A Portrait, pp. 94-95.
23.
Mangold, p. 402.
63. FBI report, January 17, 1964, of interview with Saner Davis (CD 329,
24.
Ibid., p. 204.
p. 172), WC Vol. XXV, p. 141; Folsom Exhibit 1, WC Vol. XIX, pp.
25.
Ibid., p. 231.
86-91.
26.
Ibid.,note 53, p.4(
64. Folsom Exhibit 1, WC Vol. XIX, p. 4.
27.
Nosenko interview
65. U.S. passport application of Lee Oswald, dated September 4, 1959 (CD
28.
Ibid.
1114, X-80[3]), CE 1114, WC Vol. XXII, pp. 77-79.
29.
Ibid.
66.Passport of Lee Oswald,issued September 10,1959,CE 946,WC Vol.
30. Ibid.
XVII1, pp. 160-71.
31. Mangold, op. cit., 1
67. Testimony of Marguerite Oswald, WC Vol. I, pp. 201-2, 212.
32. Nosenko interviev
68. Testimony of Marguerite Oswald, WC Vol. I, pp. 201-2.
33.Ibid.
69. FBI reports,December 4,1963, concerning passenger records of
34.Ibid.
steamship on which Oswald sailed from New Orleans to Le Havre,
35. Mangold, op. cit.,1
France (CD, pp. 3046), CE 2665, WC Vol. XXVI, p. 305.
36. Ibid., p. 93.
70.Undated letter from LeeOswald to Marguerite Oswald,with envelope
37. Ibid., pp. 197-98.
postmarked September 19,1959,CE 200,WC Vol.XVI, p.580.
38. Ibid., p. 198.
71.Testimony of Kerry Thornley,WC Vol. XI, pp.94, 97-98.
39. Ibid., pp. 200, 400
40.Nosenko intervier
3THEWAROFTHEDEFECTORS
41. Mangold, op. cit.,
42. Summers,Conspi
1.Tom Mangold,Cold Warrior: James Jesus Angleton--The CIA's Mas-
43.Epstein,op.cit.,I
ter Spy Hunter (NewYork:Simon & Schuster,1991),p.165.
44. Marrs, Crossfire,
2.Interview with Yuriy Nosenko, September 1, 1992.
45.HSCA Rpt., p.10:
3.Mangold, op. cit.,pp. 167-68; Nosenko interview, September 1,1992.
46. Ibid.
4.David Wise,Molehunt:TheSecret Search forTraitors ThatShattered
47. HSCA Vol. II, p. 4
the CIA (New York:Random House,1992),pp.75-77;Nosenko inter-
48. Mangold, op. cit.,
view,September1,1992.
49.Ibid., p. 196.
5.Mangold, op. cit., p. 168.
50. Nosenko intervie
6. Ibid., p. 169.
51. Aline Mosby inte
7. Nosenko interview, September 1, 1992.
Vol. xxI1.
8. Ibid.
52. Passport of Lee (
9. Ibid.
XVIIl, pp. 1636
10.Ibid.
53. Passport of Lee (.
50. Nosenko intervie
6. Ibid., p. 169.
51. Aline Mosby inte
7. Nosenko interview, September 1, 1992.
Vol. xxI1.
8. Ibid.
52. Passport of Lee (
9. Ibid.
XVIIl, pp. 1636
10.Ibid.
53. Passport of Lee (

--- PAGE BREAK ---ie
6. Ibid., p. 169.
51. Aline Mosby inte
7. Nosenko interview, September 1, 1992.
Vol. xxI1.
8. Ibid.
52. Passport of Lee (
9. Ibid.
XVIIl, pp. 1636
10.Ibid.
53. Passport of Lee (

--- PAGE BREAK ---

Bibliography = 583
Sprague, Richard E. “"The Assassination of President John F.
aennea
Kennedy: The Application of Computers to thePhotographic
Evidence."Computers and Automation,May 1970.
Appointment inDal
Stafford,Jean.A Mother in History:Mrs.Marguerite Oswald.
nNew York:Zebra
New York: Farrar, Straus & Giroux, 1966.
0.1975.
Summers, Anthony. Conspiracy. New York: McGraw-Hill, 1980;
New York: Harper
Paragon House,1989.
Thompson,Josiah.Six Seconds in Dallas: A Microstudy of the
nt. London: Michael
Kennedy Assassination.New York:Bernard Geis Associates,
1967; Berkley, 1976.
ngleton-The CIA's
ThreePatients atParkland."TexasState Journal of Medicine,
,1991.
Vol. 60 (January 1964).
ennedy.NewYork:
Trillin, Calvin."The Buffs." The New Yorker, June 10, 1967.
Weisberg,Harold.Whitewash(Vols.I-IV).Self-published,1965-
Report and Hear-
ess,1966.
. Post-Mortem. Self-published, 1975. Neiden,A0 @f22 -23 .
n Commission,the
-Wills, Garry, and Ovid Demaris. "The Avenger: You All Know
bbs-Merrill, 1967;
:wald and U.S. In-
quire,May and June,1967.
Wrone, David R."The Assassination of John Fitzgerald Kennedy:
An Annotated Bibliography."State Historical Society of Wis-
itiveBook onthe
consin, 1973.
as:The Summit
51 on Lee Harvey
Government Reports
Land. Lee: A Por-
rd-McCann,1967.
"Alleged Assassination Plots Involving Foreign Leaders," In-
rels:The Casebook
terimReportof theSelect Committee toStudyGovernmental
dom House, 1982.
Operations,with Respect to Intelligence Activities,U.S.Sen-
York: Avon Books,
ate. Washington, D.C.: U.S. Government Printing Office, 1975.
Hearings Before the Sub-Committee on Civil and Constitutional
ist theMob.New
Rights of the Committee on the Judiciary, House of Represent-
atives,onFBI Oversight,1976.
a Murders of John
Investigation of the Assassination of President John F. Kennedy,
3ooks, 1988.
BookV,Final Report of the Select Committee to Study Govern-
York: Chilmark
mental Operations, with Respect to Intelligence Activities,
U.S. Senate, 1976. LehaM
ommaNhy