Stingrays and IMSI-Catchers

Published: Nov 15, 2019 | Edited by Ian M. Sotnek

Over the past few years surveillance using IMSI-catchers has become a significant issue for law enforcement and counter-intelligence. The International Mobile Subscriber Identity (IMSI) serves as the identity that a mobile carrier uses to identify a subscriber, essentially acting as a virtual thumbprint linking an individual to their mobile telephone.

Here’s how it works: The physical location of an individual can be monitored through the use of IMSI-catchers, which execute a man-in-the-middle attack wherein the IMSI-catcher impersonates a cell tower and queries the targeted person’s cell phone IMSI, informing the IMSI-catcher of the target’s location. The attack lasts only a few moments before the IMSI-catcher hands the cell phone off to a legitimate tower, preventing the target from becoming aware of the surveillance. Using this technique, the movement of individuals can be surveilled throughout an area where there is a network of IMSI-catchers, such as the network that was uncovered in the Washington, D.C. area as early as 2014. The discovery of a network of IMSI-catcher devices in 2014, and rediscovery in 2017, prompted anxious communications between Congressional Leaders, the Department of Homeland Security, and the Federal Communications Commission (FCC); as well as hearings before the House Committee on Science, Space, and Technology from subject-matter experts, and increased study of the threat by the FCC.

While IMSI-catchers (sometimes known as Stingrays) are considered legitimate tools of law enforcement in some countries, civil libertarians have voiced serious concerns about the risks they pose to privacy and have called for more information and safeguards regarding their use. Additionally, state actors allegedly including Russia and China have also been reported to use the technique for their own purposes, raising concerns around the use of these devices on US soil. In September of this year three US officials confirmed to Politico’s Daniel Lipman that the IMSI-catcher devices discovered in the Washington, D.C. area in 2017 were thought to be connected to an Israeli intelligence operation, specifically to track the movements of individuals within the Trump administration.

The documents below indicate that the presence of IMSI catchers and the threat they pose has been known to the Congressional Leadership since at least 2014 and trace the evolution of thought around the presence of foreign IMSI devices on American soil. These communications are presented with reports from the FCC to provide immediate context and the state-of-knowledge on the issue.

Documents

Representative Alan Grayson, Letter to Chairman of the Federal Communications Commission Tom Wheeler, July 2, 2014. Unclassified.
Jul 12, 2014 | Source Federal Communications Commission .

Chairman of the Federal Communications Commission Tom Wheeler, Response to Representative Alan Grayson, August 1, 2014. Unclassified.
Aug 1, 2014 | Source Federal Communications Commission .

Federal Communications Commission, Consumer Guide: Interception and Divulgence of Radio Communication, November 7, 2017. Unclassified.
Nov 7, 2017 | Source Federal Communications Commission .

Senator Ron Wyden, Letter to National Protection and Programs Directorate SOPDUS Christopher Krebs, November 17, 2017. Unclassified.
Nov 17, 2017 | Source Senator Ron Wyden .

National Institute of Standards and Technology, NIST Special Publication 800-187: Guide to LTE Security, December 2017. Unclassified.
Dec 1, 2017 | Source National Institute of Standards and Technology .

Federal Communications Commission, Consumer Guide: Mobile Wallet Services Protection, December 8, 2017. Unclassified.
Dec 8, 2017 | Source Federal Communication Commission .

Christopher Krebs, Response to Senator Ron Wyden, March 26, 2018. Unclassified.
Mar 26, 2018 | Source Associated Press .

Department of Homeland Security, Attachment to Response to Senator Ron Wyden’s November 17, 2017 Letter, March 26, 2018. Unclassified.
Mar 26, 2018 | Source Senator Ron Wyden .

Eliot L. Engel, Frank Pallone, and Bennie G. Thompson, Letter to Chairman of the Federal Communications Commission Ajit Pai, April 5, 2018. Unclassified.
Apr 5, 2018 | Source House Committee on Energy and Commerce .

Chairman of the Federal Communications Commission Ajit Pai, Response to Congressman Pallone, June 1, 2018. Unclassified.
Jun 1, 2018 | Source Senator Ron Wyden .

Charles Clancy, Professor of Electrical and Computer Engineering, Virginia Tech, Statement before the House Committee on Science, Space, and Technology, “Bolstering Data Privacy and Mobile Security: An Assessment of IMSI Catcher Threats,” June 27, 2018. Unclassified.
Jun 27, 2018 | Source House Committee on Science, Space, and Technology .

Charles H. Romine, Director of the Information Technology Laboratory, NIST, Statement before the House Committee on Science, Space, and Technology, “Bolstering Data Privacy and Mobile Security: An Assessment of IMSI Catcher Threats,” June 27, 2018. Unclassified.

Jonathan Mayer, Assistant Professor of Computer Science and Public Affairs, Princeton University, Statement before the House Committee on Science, Space, and Technology, “Bolstering Data Privacy and Mobile Security: An Assessment of IMSI Catcher Threats,” June 27, 2018. Unclassified.

Christopher Krebs, Letter to Senator Ron Wyden, May 22, 2018. Unclassified.
May 22, 2018 | Source Senator Ron Wyden

Corey Gardner, Ron Wyden, Edward Markey, Rand Paul, Letter to Christopher Kreb, April 18, 2018. Unclassified.
Apr 18, 2018 | Source Senator Corey Gardner
