BERSERKER


BOOKS


Heine thre heift (reue


A Selection of the History
and Works
Of Heinrich Himmler
and certain SS Members


Dedicated to Reichsfiihrer-SS Himmler
To His fellow Esotericists
And to those who served in the Greatest Crusade


Table of Contents


CeO AB esaeciseatanetrecnieeonnseneentnstecanouleretetermen yarn IZ
Pie ita t Ne io scyctied cantedetancnce VastusissetasoiensaciReeiiascnsencs je)
Introduction Biography.........cccccsccccccssesscesecesecseecseeeeesseesseseecseceeeeneseneeenes 20
Himmler and the Occult.......cccecccccssceseeeeeeseeseeseceeecseecseceseesaeeenesseeeseeegs 27
The RAG all, Blitet sc: ceecenite te cierianten. sale, bhotsc bane esgteee: c1caedeemiacsateesseste ae 32
Ordens Bur eM es.ccsisisceccceise sdesvedoasesvecsssesicascaviaeisdeaaleaediunseuiwssewueedeaesseees 35
Castle Wewelsburg..........:ccscssccsescesceseeseeseeseeseeaceneeneeeeeeeeesecaeeseeaneaneeeneents 39
OrdenStaat-SS Burgin icsccscswstecnsicntnivsveis teed aiencvnvievigns 43
THE SS vescssccvsevsevscoscoscesccacavcavcevsavienscoucoscadcascavcencevsabsdevcosenscesescaviavdavsavsawsanss 45
Policy Concerning Population During the Wat...........:esesesseseceeeeeeeeeenees 53
Follow Up Order Concerning Population..............cccecccseeseeeteeseeeteeseeeeees 55
Himmler’s Letter to Heydrich concerning the Swing Youth................... 56
The SS Marriage Order..........ccesessessescesececsecseceeceeceaeeaeeneeaeeaecneeneeeeeeseaees 57
Description of an SS Wedding.........cccceseesesseeseeseceeeeseceseeeseeeeeeeeseeeneees 58
The Committee for Police Law.......cccccescesesssesssesseeeeceeecseeesecssensneeeeeseeens 59
SS=Defender Against Bolshevism............c:cccssescsseseeeeseeeseceseeeeeeecesseeeseenes 60
On Homosexuality.....cccccccccsccsecssecseceseceseceececeseesesssseeseseseseeseeseeeneeenes 76
Das Reich und Europa..........ssssoscsesessssssoscossstsstsnsssrsstsessesssanssnsssonsenneens 85
Name-Giving Rite......cceccecsccsscesceseeseeseescesceaecaecaeeneceeeeeeaeeaeeaeeateaeeneeneenees 88
Eulogy to Reinhard Heydrich..........ccccccecsecsseesseseeseeceseeseeceeeseeeeseresseeeaees 90
Attack on Christianity... cceccccccceceeceeceseeseescesceeceeceeceeceecseesceseeeeeeeneeneens 94
The Totenkopt Ran 9 oocsc0:2cieoriiesedishievewiivecerciee ieee cadc rede 96
Query With a Priest... ccccccccccsccsecesecesecesceseesseeeseceeeeecesecnseeseeeseeeseneneea 99
MGs IM GUINAZI: cout ohs ch nat cta cin, soaceeeutevaccts actean:cesee tosses santaneye axecetentast 100
Der Untermenschiii.s sce ticadiiuccitiescasicieaieiasacavseneiaetenvnvnvaveadeien 107
Freedom Day Speech........cccccccccesseesesesessecesecseccsecesecsseseeeseeeeseaeeeesseeneees 158
The: Principles -0f the: SS v..cesscscssvavisveca tastiscsttetetin soe ienmaniades. 172
Sn TOYA sacra tare souin’ hplnbdanbuinveseaheunbswiabbemvoeny 176
Bui Sap ay si xi.ass saviszia sizes cpaceseheanaleeatad chdehansetsedd aia biavhish nodes ten bssessesbdeeteehiantes 176
The Transformation of Our Struggle........cccceccccsessceseceseessceeeseeeeesseeees 185
Fighting the Enemies of the State... cccccccccesecsseceeeeseesteeseesseeeeeneees 193
Speeches of Heydrich.........cccecsseesesscssecesecseeeseceseeeseeeeeeeeecsecseeeneeeneeeaeees 197
On the Day of German POlice.......ccccceccccsccsseesseeseeeeeeeesesesecsseeneeeneeeneens 197
Declaration to the Protectorate... cccecscsssscesceeeceeceeeeeceeeeeeeeseeeeeseeees 198
Reopening of the RudOlfinUM.......... eee eeceeseeseecceeeceeceeceeceeceaeeaeeaeeneeaeenees 199
The Wenceslas Tradition... ccccecsseesesseeseeeeceeeaeceeneceeeeeeeseeaeeeeaeeats 202


Richard Walter Darre........cccccccssssesesccceccccssseseececececececceeees 206


Blood and Soil: Fundamental Idea of National Socialism...............06 208
Goal and Path of the NatSoc Agricultural policy..........cceceseeseeseeeeeeees 216
Reordering Our Thinking... ceceeeseeseeeeeesceseceeceeceeceeceaseaeeaeeaeeaeeaees 224
The National Food Estate... cccceccesesseeseessesseeeceecneeneeeeeeeeesessesseeeeseteee 241
an IVA cite WY Oil cas oiniicess cist oaetnn dase iiieaecetiaandaiaianeness 245
Description of the Evolution of Humanity... cececeseeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeees 249
AG SPMANIA ss is sessdseciaciacsaceacencansaaeaaetvetueced ise centuatenteweseessateateeledeedteatentenssayanys 252
Whispering: Of GOtOS fax; sxcsievecesssteade tes opeivsieednettecouset Aeetinsir Bae s 253
The Creative Spiral of the “World Egg”’........cececeeceeceeeceeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeneees 266
Zodiacal Signs and Constellations...........::cccccscesseesceeseeeseesteeseeesecseeeneeenes 270
Maidenschaft in the Pre-Historic Aryo-Germanic Age........c:cccceeeeeerees 274
The Hal garita: Charms ..:.c:cistiscsacsanastanceusetnvav dviseicvavadecetencnonean 277
GOtOS-Kaland as cisscssisccsscsecssdectevdesceveeveew codecs esvetasies concen canton caucswetuetuatectedtes 282
The Cosmos in the Concept of Our Ancestors.........ccecceseeseeeeeeeeseeeeeeeees 286
The AWGN er D0: cincncitncetimcriatentaagahennanabale: 290
Heerimans W wth ss sicss. tics teins Receoes dtu eha ch shaphocdaneeteeticde haces 294
Rumnic and Nordic Mythology.......ccccccccssesseeseesssssecssscssecseceeceseesseseeesseeees 298
Tris... eeceeseeeseesseeseesseceseceeceeecseceseceecsecsaecaeeaeeceessececsaeenseseeeensens 303
The SS Witch Division.........ccccccessessessecesececeseecesecseeceeecseecseceseesaeseesseeens 307
Germanic Magic and Vili... ccccccccescesccesecssceeeeeesseseessecseeeneseseeeseenees 310
EAD OU xecaes tate aacoe esate akcapechahsesceneicdcestuctstensescueetasstss Getic Gee es 316
The Lost Aryan Homeland.........cceccccccecsssssesssesseeeseceeceseceseeeeeseeeseeeseeeeenes 318
Glacial. Cosimolo PY iis i5:23.giseielesies aieinndahedsci thie ase 326
The End of the Ahnenerbe..........ccccceceseecscecesceseceseesseeeeeseeeseeeaeeeseeneensees 329
Hitler's UFO against the New World Order by Miguel Serrano.............. 330
Excerpt from Unternehmen Aldebaran.............:ccceseseeseeseeeeeeeeeeeneeeeeeeeees 372
DAG VV AE BCG Sirsyes tctcncubccuvsyerrcnbinasiatrayr bomber sovertynesuctend 392
GSS Sa ATMS, 5 s6255hesnc055ctetesseensotceneecssuesecacaessh cobeth eee ceecdibeeadec eaeseeteess 399
The New German Ordet......ccececcescescsseeseeseeseeteececeeeneeeeeeeeesesseeneeeeeeeees 406
In the Lands of the Gods..........ccccccccsessecseceneeeseceeeeseeeeeseseceeesseeneeeneseneens 412
The Swastika Over the Caucasus.......c.cccccccessscsseseeeseeeeesseseeeseeneeeeeeeneens 417
Panzer on the Steppe.......ccccccscccsccssccsscesecseccneceseeeseeeeeeeesseesecseeneeeseseneees 423
The Fall of the Waffen SS... cccesccsscessceseeeeseseeseceeeeseecseesseesaeenseesees 429
Paull AUS SOW icsts cds 2esneces ch soashetsechctcsshessdendes xc xancesiescancadecoatins sid seeeetassseieiceied 434


Teeon, Deprelle: si scstcts ties taeda etn aid 442


The History of the Waffen SS... ccccceescesessecsseceeeeseeeseeeseenseseeeseenseeses 446
Hitler’s Social Revolution. .........cccccceccesssesceesseeseeeseesecesecesecseeeeeseeeseesseees 462
A Selection of Various WritingS.........c:cccccccecceseeseseeeeeees 466
The SS Handb0ok........eececcesesseeseescescesceceeceeeeeeeseeseeseescescesceneeneeeeeeeeeaeens 466
The Organization of the SS and the Police 0... esesseseeseeneereeeeeeeeeeees 479
The Syllabus for Ideological Training.........ccccccecccessceceeseeseeeteeeeeeeeneees 493
The SS Family... cccccccccccsccsesscceseceseessecsecsseceseeeseeeseeeseseesecseseneeeseseeeees 554
The Voice of Our ANncestors.......ccsesssccsseeseeeeeeceeeeseeeesceneceeeeeeenseneeneens 586
NatSoc Racial Policy: A Speech to German Woman...........:cscsseeeenees 594
AGN ATi ANG V OK sais cine sscsnessauscvonseneshicecepesdtsvons des ecevconde bese ianceouseienieveateazomeats 602
BlOOd 18: HOLY <0..cscs.t8sccescsncscevaaeegandzeceecescescesvenvebapespbadenceacansarseveeucenssuapegend 608
The Breeding Goal of the SS... cece cccecccesecseeeneceeeeseeseeseeesecneeseseneees 611
SS Race Theory.....c.cccesccssssssesssessecssecesecseceeeeseeeseeeseseeeseseceesseenseeseeeeeaes 618
For the Victory of Our Kind... ee ceceseeseeseeseeeseceeeeececeeeeeeeseeaeeeeaneats 636
The Germanic Revolution......ccccccceeecsesssessesseeeceseceeceeceeceeceesaeeeeeeeeeneens 646
SECUPING: HULOPS: ssseiscssssssessensanassdaveavsedeesgendoeseeiesiseietiense-aecasnesveaiaacaenateents 660
Alfred Rosenberg on Racial Soul........cecceeseseeseeseeseeneeneeneeeeeeeeeeeaeenes 698
Friedrich Nietzsche ins icvssssssscoscoccesceecescescevsevecvetossecabecvenssevecesceecavdevdavsevsense 708
Juils EB violas SS Le CHites i crcvicucianvetseredeinusactoacien V2
Aryan Doctrine of Holy Wat......ccccsccsccscecescesecseeseeseececeeecereeeeeneeseeseens 712
Grail as Nordic MYyStery.......cccccsscsscesceseesseseseeceeeseeeceeeeeeeeeeaeeaeseeeeeneees 721
The weapons of the Secret Wal......ccccscsccssccsscseceseeeeeeseseeeetecseeseseneees 728
The SS, guardians and “Order” of the Swastika Revolution...............4+ 734
Die: VY Ci ONE OIG: ccs ssceraisseentsennnocorsemnteunciseaiimaxbeianGteuoes 739
Instruction Manuel: ..::.:.22.cneushcunsiacty, bee andiededovedbeetedtieetenenioes 741
Mionel Serrano 091 the SS. .scicccccaisseaneerseretceaiederarrrnnvstcens 774


Invocation of the Black Sune... eee ee eeeccccceeeeeeeeeeeees 776


Che Blact Order


Jean Mabire


Munich, capital of the Movement. Heinrich Himmler speaks before senior SS
officials. Once again, he defines what the SS is.


You are all familiar with the official definition: “The SS constitutes a National
Socialist military formation composed of men of the Nordic race and constituting a
community loyal to its ethnic origin. I would like you to be clear about the place of our Order
in the Third Reich....”


The men are attentive, impeccable in their black uniforms. On their lapels shine,
silvery, the insignia of rank. The Reichsfiithrer-SS detaches each sentence to make it more
effective


“Every state needs a Chosen Corps. The Chosen Corps of the National-Socialist State is the
SS. They are the lineage in which, on the basis of racial selection, combined with the needs of
today, the German military tradition, the dignity of the German nobility, and German
industrial efficiency are perpetuated.”


The SS do not applaud. They listen. They know they are part of an Order that &, depending
on circumstances, army, school, church. They have the certainty that they carry within them
the germs of a new state. The country sings that new times have come. They constitute,
already the future.... But, before " becoming" one must " be." Hence the importance given, in
recruitment, to selection. Himmler first insists on the 'physical appearance of the SS
candidates. They must reach a certain height. Those who do not reach six feet are discarded.
Those who meet these requirements must have a "Germanic" appearance, that is, blond hair,
blue, green or gray eyes, and a head of the dolichocephalus type.


The Reichsfihrer-SS, however, trusts his intuition more than "measurements." At
first he himself examines photographs of candidates, discarding those who, even on the
surface, appear to have odd somatic data, especially Asiatics. In him, still vivid, is the
unpleasant memory of those "soldiers' councils" that arose after the 1918 defeat, in which
numerous were the men with protruding cheekbones who had obvious Asiatic origins. “Every
man”, he says, “can one day be betrayed by his blood, even if he is brave and valiant in war.”
Like all German nationalists of that time, he lives in the fear of possible betrayal and the
legend of the "stab in the back." But Himmler knows that outward appearance is not the only
requirement. In order to attract what he calls men of valor to the SS, the Reichsfiihrer-SS
starts from the principle that they should not be offered easy service and a nice uniform, but
impose difficult tests and require continuous sacrifices


After the seizure of power, Heinrich Himmler decides to raise the social standard of
the SS. He cares nothing for the antisocial and unemployed. He demands that every candidate
for the Black Order practice a trade. The problem is not to strengthen the ranks of the SS with
do-nothings as had been the case with the SA enlistments. The Black Order naturally attracts
a large part of the Prussian nobility and those who do not like the proletarian character of the
SA, 1.e., career officers, former World War I combatants and the Frankish Corps. The
aristocrats and officers are joined by volunteers from the bourgeoisie.


12


Among them, Himmler particularly seeks out those who have taken university
courses. For the bulk of the troop he prefers peasants.... Volunteers stream in. "They are
minutely checked and examined. Out of a hundred men, ten to fifteen at the most can be used.
We require from them the political record of their parents, brothers, sisters, their family tree
up to 1750, and of course we demand a report on hereditary traits and finally the approval of
the special Racial Commission, composed of anthropologists and SS doctors." The aptitudes
of the candidate must then be judged. They must have something innate, pill than acquired,
something one might call "SS style." The SS admits only young men who have already served
in the Hitler-jugend and fulfilled their national obligations in the Arbeitsdienst and the
Wehrmacht, as the Reichswehr is now called. From age 19 to 21, all German youth in the
Third Reich must serve their country first with a shovel then with a rifle. When the candidate
for the SS leaves the barracks where he has received solid sports and military training, he
undergoes real ideological "imbibing." On Nov. 9, the anniversary of the putsch, before the
Feldernhalle in Munich, he takes the SS oath by torchlight:


"I swear to you, Adolf Hiller, Fiihrer and Chancellor of the Reich, to be faithful and
valiant. I promise to obey you and those you have given us as leaders, until death. May God
assist me."


On the night he took the oath, the new member of the SS receives his dagger, a
sword of Germanic fashion that bears engraved on the blade the motto: Mein Ehre heisst
Treue (my honor is called loyalty). From that day, he is entitled to defend his honor with arms.
By now he is part of the Black Order whose black uniform he wears on the lapel of his
uniform, the two silver SS in runic letters. The SS uniforms the color of their uniform at night.
Black is the cavalry breeches, jacket and cap. Black leather the boots, the belt and the visor of
the cap. Of black steel the helmet.


Brightening this funereal uniform is the glitter of a few silver plates: the buckle of
the belt, the edge of the epaulette; on the cap, the eagle of the National Socialist Party, which
became the symbol of the Reich and the skull emblem of the Hitler Stosstrupp and before that
of the Kaiser's Hussars. On the lapel, on the left, the insignia of rank, on the right the letters
SS in runic characters.


The party armband from a scarlet note, but this too edged in black as if to emphasize
that the SS are not National Socialists like the others. Everything about this elegant but
funereal uniform was chosen to impress. Those who wear it imagine, by wearing it, that they
are part of a caste unto themselves. He dresses it like a medieval suit of armor. Now they can
begin their service.


Most of the SS are part of the Allgemeine SS, which soon groups together pits of two
hundred thousand men and serves as a reserve for the encamped units. Its members are "
civilians" subjected to military obligations multiple times a week and, almost always, on
Sundays. The SS are now on the march. On all roads their columns move singing warrior
hymns. "Most of the people, they don't march anymore," Himmler complains. They take the
subway, the train, the car. Since they no longer have time to walk they all end up getting fat,
and this does not benefit the state."


To these people who are mobilized all the time for some national-socialist holiday or
festivity, the SS ensures, always in the front row the orderly service... They are present at the
Harvest Festival and Heroes' Day. They are present to celebrate labor or culture renewed, for
the occasion, in its Germanism.


They even emulate the warriors of the time of Arminius, the victor of the Roman
legions, parading before a chariot carrying a sunburst. On the summer solstice, June 21, they


13


take I annual sports exam then go to" conquer" as some vikings, with blond braids, around the
bonfires that blaze all over the hills of Germany.


The SS constitute a militia capable of assembling, within a few hours, and crush a
‘possible insurrection against the regime-the regular army does not have to intervene here-and
are, at the same time, guardians of the Nordic heritage throughout Germany. According to F
national-socialist ideology, the past prevails over the future. The great ancestors" are the pre-
Christian Germans.


So the Black Order exalts the fortifications of Altechristenburg, East Prussia, or
explores the Viking resorts of Haithabu, Silesia. Himmler declares:


“I wish that in every region, where there is an SS company, a cultural center
consecrated to the greatness of Germany and its glorious past should arise. I wish that this
cultural center be put back in order in a place worthy of our people. And he cites as an
example the Externsteine or Sachsenhain near Verden. In that locality Charlemagne
massacred 4,500 Saxons who had been unwilling to convert to Christianity. With four
thousand five hundred prehistoric erratic blocks - as many stones as the men martyred - the
SS built primitive dwellings in the presumable style of those very distant times.”


Himmler concludes:


“We want to prove to every German that everything that is on earth & a creation of
his ancestors. The oath, the uniform, the marches, the stones have only one purpose: to make
of each SS aman who is not built" like the others." The nation's leaders proclaim it: the
German people are different from all others. I leaders of the Black Order, they add: the SS
are different from all other Germans. And for them, to be different means to be superior. Thus
anew kind of individual is born. The same in the Allgemeine SS in peacetime and in the
Waffen SS in wartime. For Himmler, every SS must embody the Black Order. Despite the
absolute discipline he wants to reign in the ranks, he is concerned with developing the spirit
of initiative. SS are not robots, they must be the opposite of robots: they must be certain that
they are part of an elite and the will to remain loyal to it.”


A proverb states, “He who listens within himself hears the voice of his conscience,
which is the voice of the ancestors. The SS does not care what the rest of the world thinks of
them. They embody a Truth and fight for it. Alone, against everyone, if necessary.”


The teaching of Ignatius of Loyola has not been lost. Obedience, certainly, but also
pride. The SS form a whole where, however, each one is a depository of what constitutes the
moral heritage of the SS. In this the principles of a new religion can be recognized. “Himmler,
this Jesuit general” say his enemies. He pays them no mind. He strives, with all energy, to
build his edifice on blood and for blood. To his SS all the rights and all the duties. And, above
all, as the very name of the Black Order indicates, "protection." To protect the people from
which they come, eliminating according to their conception, morally and materially if
necessary, those whom they consider to threaten the safety of the German nation and the
Nordic race. The very notion of good and evil is subordinate to their mission.


They are ruthless, but they show themselves, as Himmler states, "faithful to the
immutable laws of ‘education, integrity, chivalry, and defense of the weak and oppressed." As
in any religion, there are in the SS fundamental virtues that constitute, for the men of the
Black Order, an inseparable trilogy-faithfulness, obedience, courage. When the Reichsfiihrer -
proud that Hitler himself calls him the faithful Heinrich - speaks of the qualities demanded of
these men, he always mentions fidelity in the first place. And it is loyalty that stamps the SS.


14


Everything can be forgiven - he will say one day - but one thing is most important:
loyalty. Fidelity to the Reich, to the Fiihrer, certainly. But above all, loyalty to oneself.


To what the SS called their honor.


In wartime, as in peacetime, the SS will not sign any written contract. The given
word, the handshake have the value of a contract.... The word of a member of the Black Order
& sacred. Obedience is a consequence of loyalty. Orders given by superiors must be carried
out, not only to the letter, but in their spirit. A member of the SS cannot refuse to carry out an
order. He can only point out that he does not feel able to carry it out and ask to be relieved. If
his superiors confirm the order he must carry it out, even unwillingly.


Himmler, when he speaks of courage, places it in third place:


“I believe that courage is the last force to be appealed to, for we are all courageous.
These virtues are not imposed on SS members by anyone but themselves. Each of them,
therefore, must be driven by his own courage, his own obedience, his own loyalty.”


The SS remain, first and foremost, volunteers who have freely chosen to belong to
the Black Order. Discipline & in themselves.They have made the ancient Germanic motto
their own: "Honor is compulsion enough". Before the rise to power, Heinrich Himmler , had
decided to make the SS the crucible of the new Reich. And so of vital importance in the life of
a member of the Black Order was to create a family....


One of the key texts remains the SS Order promulgated on December 31, 1931, a
year before Hitler became Chancellor. It is ten paragraphs of paramount importance for those
who want, to understand the SS.


1st - The SS is a union of Germans with Nordic characteristics, chosen according to particular
criteria.


2nd - In accordance with the national-socialist conception of the world, conscious that the
future of our people rests on the selection and preservation of hereditary characteristics of
pure and healthy blood, I introduce "approval for marriage" for all unmarried members of the
SS. The provision takes effect on January 1, 1932.


3rd - The family, hereditary healthy and valuable for its German and Nordic character, & the
ultimate goal.


4th - Approval for marriage will be granted or refused solely on racial grounds.

5° - All SS who intend to enter into marriage are required to seek the approval of the
Reichsfiihrer-SS.

6th - The members of the SS who marry despite rejection are expelled; they may also resign
voluntarily.


7th - Evaluations of marriage applications are entrusted to the SS Race Office.


8th - The SS racial office keeps the "SS family booklets". Families of SS members are
enrolled after approval of the marriage or official acceptance of the application.


9° - The Reichsfiihrer-SS the director of the Race Office and the officials of the Office itself
are bound by professional secrecy.


15


10th - The SS is fully aware that it is making, through these provisions, an important step
forward.


Mockery, irony and misunderstanding do not affect us in the least: the future belongs to us.


Author of this order, Heinrich Himmler never neglects to remind us that the marriage
is a sacred duty and sets at four the minimum number of children who must raise these new
hearths of the New Order. The Reichsfiihrer-SS determines not to grant promotions to those
officers who were still unmarried at the age of thirty; at the same time he points out to the
others that for promotion to the higher rank account will be taken not only of their aptitude for
the rank, but also, and especially, of their ability as heads of families.


Inspired by Walter Darré's theories on peasants and heredity, Heinrich Himmler
wants as many of these SS nuclei as possible to settle in the countryside, far from the moral
and physical contamination's of the large centers. For him, these new SS families represent
the future of order and of the Reich, the only eternity permitted by racist doctrine. They will
have to live in traditionally rural housing. Thatched roofs and beams will be the raw material.
The interior will be decorated with motifs inspired by Germanic folk art. Wrought iron,
pottery, wooden floor, inscriptions on the walls in Gothic characters, everything should
appear Nordic-inspired.


The inscriptions, which are of enormous importance to the SS, are taken from the
phrases of speeches of the Fuhrer or from the books of the great German writers. In the
libraries, books published by Nordland have the place of honor. This publishing house
publishing house depends directly on the SS and has two hundred and fifty works in its
catalog, Founded 1 December 8, 1934 in Magdeburg, the Nordland publishing house is
directed by Frithijot Sérensen whose book Die Stimme des Ahnen (The Voice of the
Ancestors) has exceeded half a million copies. Another best-seller is Gottfried Griesmayr's
book Unser Glaube (Our Belief) in which he denies all immortality, even biological
immortality.


Heinrich Himmler places a very special emphasis on prehistoric and ethnographic
research. In 1935 he placed under the SS the Ahnenerbe Institute founded in 1933 by
Professor Wurst, assisted by Wolfang Siewers. The aim of this institute is to confirm,
actualize, and complete the racist theories of the previous century. Under the impetus of the
SS, the Ahnenerbe is oriented in three different directions. Proper inheritance , its expansion,
and the spirit . In this way prehistory merges with geopolitics and philosophy. A popular
monthly periodical, Germanen spreads the Institute's theories of Nordic heredity.


With a few years of patient and discreet work, the SS has become much more than a
state within a state. They are the germ of a new era. They are at every level: in the Germanic
past, in the German present, in the Nordic future, though still very nebulous.


Heinrich Himmler controls all the police, or rather, has them controlled by his right-
hand man Reinhard Heydrich. Thus Arthur Nebe's Kripo (criminal police), Heinrich Muller's
Gestapo (state secret police), Kurt Daluege's Orpo (police for order), Otto Ohnlendorf's S.D.
Inland (internal security service), and Walter Schellenberg's S.D. Ausland (foreign security
service) develop. All those in charge belong to the Black Order.


Other men of the Black Order occupy key positions in the Reich: August Heissmeyr
controls the Napola (National-Socialist Institutes of Political Education), Walter Darré and
then Richard Hildebrandt organize the Rasse und Siedlund Hauptamt (central race and
population service), Werner Lorenz crosses the border with the Volksdeutsche Mittelstelle
(association of people of Germanic origin living abroad). Ulrich Greifelt thinks about future


16


colonization with the Hauptamt fiir die Festigung deutschen Volksturm (central service for
the consolidation of Germanism).


Undeterred, new directorates are created at the top of the SS: 1* Intendency with
Oswald Pehl, Recruitment with Gottlob Berger, and Organization with Hans Jiittner. Assisted
by his personal Chief of Staff Karl Wolff, always smiling and unobtrusive, and who of all
"tough guys" passes for a moderate, Heinrich Himmler also controls a newspaper, Das
schwarze Korps (The Black Corps) of which he entrusted the editorship to a very bright
young SS man: Gunther d'Alquen. The first issue sees the light of day on March 6, 1935. The
circulation will soon increase from forty thousand to two hundred thousand copies.


Very "oriented," the Thursday weekly of the SS, will not be long in establishing
itself, more and more, for interesting and attractive content. Heinrich Himmler wants to make
the Black Order an army at any cost. He knows, however, that the result will be negative if
"the Order" is not materialized with a new mysticism, if it does not constitute, in other words,
a Church. And & that is why he will give a very special importance to the recruitment of
leaders and the training of cadres. While the Junkers are attracted to the Military Schools of
Bad Tolz and Brunswich, Himmler has the feudal castle of Wewelsburg transformed for the
needs of the Black Order. He wants to make it an academy and a monastery. The castle is
named after a little-known knight: Wewel von Biiren. It is located near Paderborn in
Westphalia. Like most German castles it has medieval walls with Baroque additions.


The castle is vast but not immense. The whole is not lacking in austerity and the
decorations are in style: wrought iron, wall hangings, fixtures and wooden floors. The library
holds about twelve thousand volumes bound in dark leather. Inside the building, there are
marble statues of German rulers from Heinrich the Lion to Adolf Hitler, from Barbarossa to
the Hohestaufen.


The Reichsfither often summons the high hierarchies of the Black Order to meetings
that are somewhere between a council of the General Staff and a religious retreat. Himmler
takes the meals, in a vaulted hall, but he admits to his table only twelve comrades, carefully
chosen. And the symbolic number of the knights of King Arti's Round Table. The meetings of
the supreme leaders of the Black Order, are held in a fairly large hall where each of them sits
on a leather armchair with a very high back, adorned with the ‘heraldic emblem.


André Brissard, of the Black Order, describes the most mysterious part of
Wewelsburg as follows: "Under the hall is a grand dungeon with elongated vaults and walls
two meters thick. Here is the ‘sanctum sanctum' of the Black Order, the gathering place of the
SS. There are symbols of their worship: the skull, a black marble tribune adorned with the
SS's two runic signs in white marble. At the base a well-like opening. Two ladders allow one
to reach the bottom of this cavity illuminated by resin flashlights, embedded in wrought-iron
flashlights and shaped like a silver shell. Here the heraldic crests of the knights of the Black
Order who died were to be cast, while their bodies were to find eternal rest under the chapel."


The study of the mysticism of the SS is indispensable to understanding their warrior
aspect. These merciless soldiers are the heirs of the Teutons, Inquisitors, and Puritans. But
their religion has broken all ties with Christianity... Their children, who bear a northern
name, receive a special baptism. The Black Order offers the newborn child,on the day of his
birth a candelabra with his name engraved in runic characters. A motto reminds the child of
the fundamental principles of the SS. “You are but a link in the ‘eternal chain of kinship.”
The baptism ceremony is preceded by a short poem read by an SS officer:


17


“We believe in a universal God
We believe in the mission of our blood


that springs eternally young from the German soil
We believe in the guardian people of the race


And in the Fuhrer whom God has sent to us.”


For the baptism of the son of Karl Wolff, Reichsfihrer-SS’s Chief of Staff four
godparents, all high dignitaries of the Black Order, attend. They offer the child, who received
the proud Germanic pre-name of Thorismann, four symbolic objects: the ruby of fidelity, the
cup of life, the spoon of nutrition, and the family ring.


Heinrich Himmler, who was present at the ceremony, delivers a speech and,
addressing the child says:


According to the wish of your parents, and the SS ritual, I impose on you the names
Thorismann, Heinrich, Karl, Reinhard. It is up to you, parents and godparents, to make this
child, a pure and brave German, according to God's will. To you, dear child, my wish and
exhortation to be worthy of the proud name of Thorismann, a pride you will retain all the
years of your life. May our God watch over you.


The religious aspect of the Black Order is especially revealed in the family festivities
at the end of the year. While the summer solstice gives rise to popular festivals, the winter
solstice is celebrated within the family. On the pit long night of the 'year. the family is
gathered around a strange object. It looks like a truncated pyramid, of rough reddish-brown
earthenware, about twenty centimeters high. Its four faces are adorned with Nordic
ornamental motifs; a sun wheel surmounted by a heart... This object, inspired by ancient
archaeological finds, and a Juleuchter, a Jul (Scandinavian name for the Christmas holiday)
candlestick. A candle burns inside. Gradually its light fades. At midnight, a second candle is
lit at its flame, which is located at the top of the candlestick. Symbolically, they represent
light and life that are transmitted from one year to the next, just as life is transmitted from one
generation to the next. During this ceremony, which is clearly pagan-inspired, verses are
recited, the Lichtspruche (proverbs about light). There are twelve, a figure, this one, evidently
symbolic. The head of the family announces:


The value of inheritance gives value to life.

And again:

The family guards the shrine where the flame of life is fed.

With each proverb a candle is lit in the house, at the end everyone repeats:

The light will shine.

This is how Heinrich Himmler's SS lives, which he wants to become a Block, a
Corps, an Order. In the hearths and barracks of the Black Order the flames shine on this


winter solstice evening. At dawn, the high-pitched notes of the long copper trumpets will
return men to the stadium runways and fields of maneuver.


18


heinrich Himmler


Introduction Biography


Heinrich Luitpold Himmler (7 October 1900 — 23 May 1945) was the Reichsfiihrer-
SS, a military commander, and a leading member of the Nazi Party. As Chief of the German
Police and later the Minister of the Interior, Himmler oversaw all internal and external police
and security forces, including the Gestapo (Secret State Police). Heinrich Himmler was born
in Munich to a Roman Catholic Bavarian middle-class family. His father was Joseph Gebhard
Himmler, a secondary-school teacher and principal of the prestigious Wittelsbacher
Gymnasium. His mother was Anna Maria Himmler (maiden name Heyder), a devout Roman
Catholic. He had an older brother, Gebhard Ludwig Himmler, who was born on 29 July 1898,
and a younger brother, Ernst Hermann Himmler, born on 23 December 1905.


Heinrich was named after his godfather, Prince Heinrich of Bavaria of the royal
family of Bavaria, who was tutored by Gebhard Himmler. In 1910, Himmler attended
Gymnasium in Landshut, where he studied classic literature. Himmler's father was the
principal of the Gymnasium. Young Heinrich did well in his schoolwork. Also, at the behest
of his father, Himmler kept a diary from age 10 until age 24. He enjoyed chess, harpsichord,
stamp collecting, and gardening. Throughout Himmler's youth and into adulthood, it has been
suggested that he was never at ease in interactions with women. Himmler's diaries (1914—
1918) show that he was extremely interested in war news. He implored his father to use his
royal connections to obtain an officer candidate position for him. His parents eventually gave
in, allowing him to train (upon graduation from secondary school in 1918) with the 11th
Bavarian Regiment. In 1918, the war ended with Germany's defeat, thus ending Himmler's
aspirations of becoming a professional army officer.


From 1919-1922, Himmler studied agronomy at the Munich Technische Hochschule
following a short-lived apprenticeship on a farm and subsequent illness. In his diaries, he
claimed to be a devout Roman Catholic, and wrote that he would never turn away from the
Roman Church - although he was also a member of a dueling fraternity. From late 1923 to
early 1924, however, Himmler's reading included books on spiritualism, second sight,
astrology, telepathy and the like. Himmler was interested also in herbalism, rural life and
agriculture - he was rather a "back-to-nature", "New Age" sort of man. His activities and
growing beliefs led him to renounce his once strong faith in the Catholic Church by the
summer of 1924. Himmler had already been moving nationalist circles and was associated
with the Germanenorden (a secret society which established lodges based on those of
freemasonry) and its offshoot the Thule Society, which had also inspired the birth of the
German Workers Party (which was to be taken over by Adolf Hitler and become the National
Socialist Workers Party). The Thule Society was named after the Ultima Thule, the alleged
birthplace of the Germanic race - members had to prove racial purity for at least three
generations - and it was there where he made contact with Dietrich Eckart (see right below).
Himmler's theology was Ariosophy, Theozoologie, and Gnosticism, combined with his own
religious dogma of racial superiority of the Aryan race and Germanic Meso-Paganism,
developed partly from his interpretations of folklore and mythology of the ancient Teutonic
tribes of Northern Europe. During this time, he was again obsessed with the idea of becoming
a soldier. When Himmler joined the Nazi Party in 1925, he was already a member of the
Thule society, which believed in the greatness of German history, reaching back to the year
9AD, when the Teutonic tribes defeated the Roman legions. It promoted the superiority of the
Aryan race, an ancient northern European people.These ideas formed the basis of Nazi racial
philosophy that was to have such an impact on history.


20


He wrote that if Germany did not soon go to war, he would go to another country to
seek battle. In 1923, Himmler took part in Adolf Hitler's Beer Hall Putsch, serving under
Ernst Rohm. In 1926, he met his future wife in a hotel lobby while escaping a storm.
Margarete Siegroth (née Boden) was seven years his senior, divorced, and Protestant. On 3
July 1928, the two were married. During this time Himmler worked unsuccessfully as a
chicken farmer. They had their only child—Gudrun—on 8 August 1929 whom Himmler
adored, and called her Piippi (English: "dolly"). Margarete later adopted a son, in whom
Himmler showed no interest. Heinrich and Margarete Himmler separated in 1940 without
seeking divorce. At that time, Himmler became friendly with a secretary, Hedwig Potthast,
who left her job in 1941 and became his mistress. He fathered two children with her: a son,
Helge (born 1942), and a daughter, Nanette Dorothea (born 1944). Himmler was also very
interested in agriculture and the "back to the land" movement. He and his wife had romantic
ideals of making a farming life. He joined the Artamanen society, a sort of idealistic back-to-
the-land youth group, but mixed with racialist ideology. He became one of the leaders of this
movement. Through this movement, he also apparently met Richard Walther Darré, who
would later work in the RuSHA (race and resettlement office) of the SS.


The Schutzstaffel, translated to "Protection Squadron' or 'defence corps’, abbreviated
SS - or with stylized "Armanen" sig runes, was a major paramilitary organization under
Adolf Hitler and the NSDAP. It began at the end of 1920 as a small, permanent guard unit
known as the "Saal-Schutz" (Hall-Protection) made up of NSDAP volunteers to provide
security for Party meetings in Munich. Later in 1925, Heinrich Himmler joined the unit which
had by then been reformed and renamed the "Schutz-Staffel". Under Himmler's leadership
(1929-45), it grew from a small paramilitary formation to one of the largest and most
powerful organizations in the Third Reich. However, the SS was more than simply a
bodyguard or an adjunct to the police force for the SS structure was originally formed as a
magic order. Up until 1940, every SS commissioned officer was to take a special course in the
runic magic. The emblem is a double rune Sigel which is well known as a victory symbol.
The mystics say that it was the runic magic that paved the way for the Third Reich. Himmler
joined the SS in 1925 as an SS-Fiihrer (SS-Leader). His NSDAP number was 14,303 and his
SS number was 168.


Heine thre heift (reue’
(My Honour is my Loyalty)


The SS grew from a small paramilitary unit to a powerful force that served as the
Fuhrer's "Praetorian Guard", the Nazi Party's "Protection Squadron" and a force that, fielding
almost a million men (both on the front lines and as political police), managed to exert as
much political influence in the Third Reich as the Wehrmacht.


The motto of the SS was 'Meine Ehre heiBt Treue! - (My honour is my loyalty).
Himmler's first leadership position in the SS was that of SS-Gaufiihrer (District Leader) in
Bavaria. In 1927, he became Deputy—Reichsfiihrer-SS, with the rank of SS-Oberfiihrer, and
upon the resignation of SS commander Erhard Heiden, in 1929, Himmler was appointed
Reichsfiihrer-SS (Reichsfiihrer was, at that time, simply a title for the National Commander of
the SS). At that time, the SS had 280 members and was merely an elite battalion of the much
larger Sturmabteilung (SA). Over the next year, Himmler began a major expansion of the
organization and, in 1930, he was promoted to the rank of SS-Gruppenfiihrer. By 1933, the SS
numbered 52,000 members. The organization enforced strict membership requirements
ensuring that all members were of Hitler's Aryan Herrenvolk ("Aryan master race"). Himmler


21


and his deputy Reinhard Heydrich began an effort to separate the SS from SA control. Black
SS uniforms replaced the SA brown shirts in July 1932 and by 1934 enough quantities were
manufactured for general use by all. In 1933, Himmler was promoted to SS-
Obergruppenfihrer. This made him an equal of the senior SA commanders, who by this time
loathed the SS and envied its power. Himmler, Hermann Goring, and General Werner von
Blomberg agreed that the SA and its leader Ernst R6hm posed a threat to the German Army
and the Nazi leadership. R6hm had socialist and populist views, and believed that the real
revolution had not yet begun, and so called for a “second revolution’ to purge out those who
Réhm saw as standing in the way of the complete and total transformation of Germany into a
socialist nation, that being the capitalistic forces. R6hm also felt that the SA should become
the sole arms-bearing corps of the state, wanting to completely replace the Wehrmacht. This
left some Nazi, military and political leaders believing R6hm was intent on using the SA to
undertake a coup. Persuaded by Himmler and Goring, Hitler allowed for R6hm to be
eliminated. He delegated this task to Reinhard Heydrich, Kurt Daluege, and Werner Best, who
ordered R6hm's execution (carried out by Theodor Eicke) and other senior SA officials, on 30
June 1934, in what became known as the Night of the Long Knives.


The next day, the SS became an independent organization responsible only to Hitler,
and Himmler's title of Reichsfiihrer-SS became the highest formal SS rank. He launched a
massive recruitment campaign that took the SS from fewer than than three hundred members
in 1929 to ten thousand in 1931. Once the SS had grown, Himmler began its transformation
into a "racial elite" of young Nordic males. This was to be accomplished by a new
bureaucracy in the SS, the 'Race and Settlement Office' of the SS (Rasse- und
Siedlungshauptamt-SS) known as RuSHA. Himmler named SS Obergruppenfiihrer Richard
Walther Darré to lead the organisation, which determined if applicants were racially fit to be
in the SS. This brought about a sudden campaign meant to educate the new applicants about
their Nordic past through weekly classes taught by senior RuSHA graduates using the
periodical 'SS-Leitheft’. On 1 January 1932, Reichsfiihrer-SS Himmler appointed him chief of
the newly established SS Race and Settlement Main Office (Rasse- und Siedlungshauptamt or
RuSHA).


With time, the RuSHA's power progressively grew in scope and other organizations
came under its umbrella, such as the Ahnenerbe. In December 1935 Himmler ordered the
RuSHA to establish the Lebensborn network of maternity homes, whose purpose was "to
accommodate and look after racially and genetically valuable expectant mothers." Following
the invasion of the Soviet Union in 1941, the RuSHA worked in partnership with VOMI in
the "Germanization" of captured territory, monitoring of settler welfare, and the plantation of
ethnic Germans in areas designated for settlement by the SS, particularly in occupied Ukraine.
This involved in part, the resetting of Germans in the Nazi occupied Eastern territories and
ejecting the native families from those lands. On 20 April 1934, Goring transferred authority


22


over the Gestapo (Geheime Staatspolizei)—the Prussian secret police—to Himmler, who was
also named chief of all German police outside Prussia. On 22 April 1934, Himmler named
Heydrich the head of the Gestapo as well as the SD. On 17 June 1936, Himmler was named
Chief of German Police after Hitler announced a decree that was to "unify the control of
Police duties in the Reich". The actual powers granted to him were some that were previously
exercised by the ministry of the interior. It was only in 1943, when Himmler was appointed
Minister of the Interior, that the transfer of ministerial power was complete. In September
1939, following the outbreak of World War II, Himmler formed the
Reichssicherheitshauptamt (RSHA: Reich Main Security Office) wherein the SiPo (Gestapo
and Kripo) along with the Sicherheitsdienst (SD: security service) became departments under
Heydrich's command therein. On 13 April 1934, Heinrich Himmler, the Reichsfiihrer-SS,
ordered the 'Leibstandarte Adolf Hitler ' to be renamed "Leibstandarte SS Adolf Hitler".
Himmler inserted the SS initials into the name to make it clear that the unit was independent
from the SA or army. In late June, the Leibstandarte SS Adolf Hitler was called into action for
the first time. Stabschef-SA Ernst Réhm began to push for greater power for his already
powerful SA. Hitler was persuaded that the SA had to be put in its place, and ordered
Himmler and Hermann Goring to prepare their elite units, Himmler's Leibstandarte and
Goring's Landespolizeigruppe General Goring, for immediate action. The LSSAH formed two
companies under the control of Jiirgen Wagner and Otto Reich, and these formations were
moved to Munich on 30 June. Hitler ordered all SA leaders to attend a meeting at the
Hanselbauer Hotel in Bad Wiessee, near Munich. On 30 June, Hitler joined Sepp Dietrich and
a unit from the Leibstandarte and travelled to Bad Wiessee to personally command Réhm's
arrest. This action succeeded in effectively controlled the SA, removing Réhm's threat to
Hitler's leadership. In recognition of their actions, both the Leibstandarte SS Adolf Hitler and
the Landespolizeigruppe General Goring were expanded to regimental size and motorized. In
addition, the SS became an independent organization, no longer part of the SA. As the SS
swelled with new recruits, the Leibstandarte SS Adolf Hitler represented the pinnacle of
Hitler's Aryan ideal. Strict recruitment regulations meant that only those deemed sufficiently
Aryan—as well as being physically fit and National Socialists - would be admitted. The
Leibstandarte SS Adolf Hitler provided the honour guard at many of the Nuremberg Rallies,
and in 1935 took part in the reoccupation of the Saarland. The Leibstandarte was in the
vanguard of the march into Austria as part of the Anschluss, and in 1938 the unit took part in
the occupation of the Sudetenland. By 1939 the Leibstandarte SS Adolf Hitler was a full
infantry regiment.


Black was seen as sombre and authoritative. The black-white-red color scheme was
characteristic of the German Empire, and was later adopted by the NSDAP. Further, black
was popular with fascist movements: a black uniform was introduced by the blackshirts in
Italy before the creation of the SS. There was a traditional reason, as well. Just as the Prussian
kings' and emperors' life-guard cavalry (Leibhusaren) had worn black uniforms with skull-
and-crossbones badges, so would the Fihrer's bodyguard unit. As with many more formal
military uniforms, these SS uniforms were tailored to project authority, and foster respect.
During the war, the German clothing factory that eventually became the international
menswear powerhouse Hugo Boss produced thousands of SS and other uniforms. The SS can
trace its origins to several early Freikorps and NSDAP formations, among them the Erhardt
Naval Brigade, Stahlhelm, and most significantly the Sturmabteilung (SA), of which the SS
was originally a subordinate organization. The very first SA uniforms and insignia were
paramilitary uniforms which incorporated parts from World War I uniforms to include such
features used by other Freikorps formation such as high boots, daggers, and the kepi hat. The
8-man Stabswache (staff guard), Hitler's bodyguard, soon renamed the Stosstrupp (shock
troop), also adopted in May 1923 the death's head and oak leaf as a means of insignia, both of
which were already deeply rooted in European military history. In 1924, while the NSDAP
was legally banned following the Munich Hall Putsch, Frontbann (underground SA) leader
Gerhard Rofbach located a large store of war-surplus brown denim shirts in Austria,


23


originally intended for tropical uniforms. When the SA (which included the nascent SS) was
re-founded in 1925 following Hitler's release from prison, these brown shirts were issued as
uniforms. The only insignia was the swastika armband, except for the handful of men
constituting the Stosstrupp's successor, the Schutzkommando ("protection command"), who
continued the use of the Totenkopf pinned to cap or collar. In mid-1925, the
Schutzkommando was renamed the Sturmstaffel (storm squadron) and in December the
Schutzstaffel (SS) (protection squadron), and in the following year adopted its first
recognizable rank insignia system which was used mainly by senior SS personnel at major
rallies, with the rank and file of the SS, like the rest of the SA, still wearing a variety of brown
shirts or paramilitary uniforms with no recognizable insignia. By 1927, the Sturmabteilung
had greatly increased its numbers and had standardized the "brown shirt" uniform which
would thereafter be permanently associated with that group: shirt, tie, breeches, boots, and
cylindrical kepi, all brown. As the SS was at this time a small unit within the SA, SS
personnel during this period likewise wore brown shirt uniforms but distinguished themselves
as an elite among the SA by wearing black neckties and black kepis with Totenkopf and Party
eagle badges. Hitler's personal guard, known at this stage by the original SS name of
Stabswache (later to be known as the "Leibstandarte Adolf Hitler"), was also expressing its
independence and increasing its size under the leadership of Sepp Dietrich. The Stennes
Revolt of August 1930, in which members of the SA attacked the Berlin party Gau
headquarters which was defended by the SS, had profound consequences for the SA and its
relationship to its subordinate organization. In an open letter to Berlin SS leader Kurt Daluege,
Adolf Hitler proclaimed “SS Mann, deine Ehre heift Treue !” ("SS soldier, your honour is
called loyalty !"). Subsequently, 'Meine Ehre heiBt Treue' ("My honour is my loyalty") was
adopted by the SS as its motto.


More significantly, Hitler cashiered SA head Franz Pfeffer von Salomon and
assumed the position of Oberste SA-Fihrer personally, and simultaneously promoted both
Himmler and Daluege to the new rank of SS-Obergruppenfiihrer. Daluege was the SS leader
of Northern Germany while Himmler controlled southern SS units out of Munich while
serving as the National Leader for the SS; this move had the effect of rendering the loyal SS
practically independent of the suspect SA, since Himmler and Daluege now outranked all SA
commanders. In 1932, the SS introduced the black uniform, designed by Karl Diebitsch (later
to become an SS-Oberfiihrer) and graphic designer SS-Sturmhauptfiihrer Walter Heck. The
shirt remained brown as a nod to the SA, of which the SS was still nominally a part, but all
else was black from high boots to the new military-style peaked cap, aside from the red
armband. SS men were also issued black wool greatcoats for inclement weather, which
similarly carried the armband, epaulette and collar patches. Around this time a belt buckle
featuring the motto 'Meine Ehre heifit Treue' in its design was produced by the Overhoff firm
to replace the SA buckle. In 1933, the runes insignia was introduced which would eventually
become known as the symbol for the entire SS. The first use of the SS runes was as a unit
insignia limited only to members of the Leibstandarte Adolf Hitler which had transferred their
headquarters from Munich to Berlin and had replaced the Army Chancellery Guard to become
Hitler’s main protectors. It was at this time that the Leibstandarte moved from being a
"paramilitary" formation to "military", equipped with rifles, bayonets, and steel helmets. Their
SS runes unit collar patch was to be worn on the right side of the tunic collar. The adaptation
of this particular unit insignia was largely the work of Sepp Dietrich who on 4 November
1933, declared the unit an independent formation and, although a part of the SS, answerable
to Hitler alone. After being appointed Commissioner for the Strengthening of the German
Race, Himmler set to work with Konrad Meyer on developing a plan for three large German
colonies in the eastern occupied territories. Leningrad, northern Poland and the Crimea would
be the focal points of these colonies intended to spread the Aryan race. The Crimean colony
was called Gotengau, or “Goth district” in honor of the Crimean Goths who had settled there
and were believed to be Aryan ancestors of the Germans. Himmler estimated Aryanization of
the region would take twenty years, first expelling all the undesirable populations, then re-


24


distributing the territory to appropriate Aryan populations. In addition to changing the
demographics of the region, Himmler also intended to plant oak and beech trees to replicate
traditional German forests, as well as plant new crops brought back from Tibet. To achieve
the latter end, Himmler ordered a new institution set up by the Ahnenerbe and headed by
Schafer. A station was then set up near the Austrian town of Graz where Schafer set to work
with seven other scientists to develop new crops for the Reich. Himmler presented Master
Plan East to Hitler and received approval in July, 1942. Full implementation of the plan was
not feasible because of the ongoing war, but a small colony was in fact founded around
Himmler’s field headquarters at Hegewald, near Kiev. Die Quelle des Lebens Verein -
Lebensborn - (Fount of Life Society) was founded on December 12, 1935, in part as a
response to declining birth rates in Germany, in order to promote the policies of Nazi
eugenics in an attempt to produce the very best Aryan children. Located in Munich, the
organization was partly an office within the Schutzstaffel (SS) responsible for certain family
welfare programmes. The purpose of the programme was to provide incentives to encourage
Germans, especially SS members, to have more children. On September 13, 1936, Himmler
wrote the following to members of SS:


‘The organization "Lebensborn e. V." serves the SS leaders in the selection and
adoption of qualified children. The organization "Lebensborn e. V." is under my personal
direction, is part of the race and settlement central bureau of the SS, and has the following
obligations:


(1) aid for racially and biologically-hereditarily valuable families.

(2) the accommodation of racially and biologically-hereditarily valuable mothers in
appropriate homes, etc.

(3) care of the children of such families

(4) care of the mothers


It is the honourable duty of all leaders of the central bureau to become members of
the organization "Lebensborn e. V.".'


In 1939, membership stood at 8,000 , of which 3,500 were SS leaders. The
Lebensborn office was part of SS Rasse und Siedlungshauptamt (SS Office of Race and
Settlement) until 1938, when it was transferred to Hauptamt Persénlicher Stab Reichsfiihrer-
SS (Personal Staff of the Reich Leader SS), i.e. directly overseen by Himmler. Leaders of
Lebensborn e. V. were SS-Standartenfiihrer Max Sollmann and SS-Oberfiihrer Dr. Gregor
Ebner. It is sometimes thought that Himmler developed the idea for this experiment in
"accelerated evolution" during his short-lived career as a chicken farmer in the early 1920s.
But, in actuality, Himmler was a member of an occult group called the 'Artamen', which drew
its inspiration from both esoteric and "racial hygiene" sources. In the Nineteenth Century, Sir
Edward Bulwer-Lytton wrote a novel called 'Vril, or The Coming Race’, which imagined
humanity taking charge of its own evolution and developing "the new race." Elena Petrovna
von Hahn Blavatsky, better known as Madame Blavatsky, elaborated on the idea in her two-
volume book, 'Die Geheimlehre' (The Secret Doctrine). Once installed at Hitler's right hand,
and subject to Hitler's influence, Himmler, started up a flurry of projects, of which the
Lebensborn was only one. The occult purpose of the Lebensborn was to provide boys who
would eventually be sent to the 'Burgs'. The stated purpose of the society was to care
particularly for unmarried mothers of good blood made pregnant by SS or police officers, and
to allow them to have their children in private. These children were then placed with SS
families who wanted to adopt a child, or efforts were made to induce the father to shoulder his
responsibilities and marry the girl. At first the Lebensborn was under the Rasse-und-
Siedlungshauptamt (Race and Settlement Main Office), Sippenamt (Family and Clan Office)
division. Initially, the programme served as a welfare institution for wives of SS officers; the


25


organisation ran facilities—primarily maternity homes—where women could give birth or get
help with family matters. Furthermore, the programme accepted unmarried women who were
either pregnant or had already given birth and were in need of aid, provided that both the
woman and the father of the child were "racially valuable". Later, such facilities also served
as temporary homes, orphanages, and as an adoption service. When dealing with non-SS
members, parents and children were usually examined by SS doctors before admittance. The
first Lebensborn home (known as 'Heim Hochland’) opened in 1936 in SteinhGring, a tiny
village not far from Munich. The first home outside of Germany opened in Norway in 1941.
While Lebensborn e. V. established facilities in several occupied countries, activities were
concentrated around Germany, Norway and the occupied north-eastern Europe, mainly
Poland. The main focus in occupied Norway was aiding children born by German soldiers and
Norwegian women; in north-eastern Europe the organisation, in addition to services provided
to SS members, engaged in the movement of children, mostly orphans, to families in
Germany.


26


FIMIMLER > TRE OCCULT


Credited retrospectively with being the founder of "Esoteric National Socialism",
and certainly a figure of major importance for the officially sanctioned research and practice
of mysticism by a Nazi elite, Reichsfiihrer-SS Heinrich Himmler, more than any other high
official in the Third Reich was fascinated by pan-Aryan (i.e., broader than Germanic)
racialism, and by certain forms of Germanic neopaganism. Himmler's capacity for rational
planning was accompanied by an "enthusiasm for the Utopian, the romantic and even the
occult."


It also seems that Himmler had an interest in astrology. He consulted the astrologer
Wilhelm Wulff in the last weeks of the Second World War. (One detailed but difficult source
for this is a book written by Wulff himself, "Tierkreis und Hakenkreuz', published in Germany
in 1968. That Walter Schellenberg had discovered an astrologer called Wulf is mentioned in
Hugh Trevor-Roper's The Last Days of Hitler.) Himmler possessed more occult tendencies
than any other Nazi leader, he was involved in the preparations for the Ubermensch which
involved the creation of the Herrenrasse The German journalist and historian Heinz Héhne, an
authority on the SS, explicitly describes Himmler's views about reincarnation as occultism.
The historic example which Himmler used in practice as the model for the SS was the
Teutonic Knights, since Himmler found in the Knights what he perceived to be the core
element of any order, the doctrine of obedience and the cult of the organization. The SS were
to be a new order of racial elite and warriors who would serve the Reich with full obedience.
As an order, the SS needed a coherent doctrine that would set it apart. Himmler attempted to
construct such an ideology, and to this purpose he deduced a "Germanic tradition" from
history. In a 1936 memorandum, Himmler set forth a list of approved holidays based on pagan
and political precedents which was meant to wean SS members from their reliance on
Christian festivities. The Winter Solstice, or Yuletide, was the climax of the year. It brought
SS folk together at candlelit banquet tables and around raging bonfires that harked back to
German tribal rites. The SS-Julleuchter was both an award and trophy of the German
Schutzstaffel that was presented to members of the SS from approximately 1936 until 1944.
Manufactured by the Allach porcelain company, the SS Julleuchter was presented to any SS
member who participated in a Nordic pagan-based holiday, such as the winter solstice.
Heinrich Himmler originally had the intention to make the Julleuchter a standard gift to all SS
members and there were no criteria attached to its presentation. For reasons which are not
entirely clear, by the start of World War IL, the Julleuchter had begun to be viewed as an SS
decoration, and was entered as such in SS service records once the Julleuchter had been
presented. However, as the SS-Julleuchter was considered "non-portable" (much like the
Luftwaffe Honor Goblet), there was no outward display on an SS uniform indicating its
presentation. Made of unglazed stoneware, the Julleuchter was decorated with early pagan
Germanic symbols. Its common design is originally based on artifacts found at an
archaeological dig in/ around Haithabu (Hedeby), and is attributed to the Frisians who once
settled there.


Himmler said,
“I would have every family of a married SS man to be in possession of a Julleuchter.


Even the wife will, when she has left the myths of the church find something else which her
heart and mind can embrace.”


27


Production numbers for Julleuchter in 1939 alone were 52,635, probably the largest
production for any single item produced at the Porzellan Manufaktur Allach. In 1937
Himmler's personal staff began to plan a cultural framework designed to replace Christianity,
a project that led to the opening of the 'Deutschrechtliche Institute' at the University of Bonn
the following year which researched into Germanic pre-history. Himmler also set himself to
constantly improve the solstice celebrations that he felt had the deepest significance, and
designed special SS wedding ceremonies. Himmler was the Grand Master of a coven of 12 SS
men, with himself as the 13th member. He is believed to have conducted numerous black
magick rituals at Wewelsburg Castle which were conducted in the utmost secrecy. They
included necromancy (communication with the dead). Wewelsburg had many powerful occult
symbols. In 1945, under orders from Himmler, Wewelsburg was blown up to keep it from the
invading armies, however, some of the castle survived and much has been restored. The
symbol of the Black Sun is seen in many places and one room is designed much like
Stonehenge. True Paganism is known for its emphasis on the Sun, and SS men were strongly
discouraged from participating in Christian religious ceremonies of any kind and were
actively encouraged to formally break with the Church. Pagan religious ceremonies took the
place of Christian ones, for example the Winter Solstice ceremonies replaced Christmas and
starting 1939 the word “Christmas” was forbidden to appear on any official SS document. In
addition the Summer Solstice was formally celebrated. These ceremonies were celebrated the
old way with sacred fires, and torch lit processions. Weddings and baptisms were replaced by
SS rituals and gradually the entire Christian liturgical rubric was in the process of being
replaced by a completely pagan version. Even the Hitler Youth were not immune, with the
Official Handbook for Schooling the Hitler Youth even stating the Christians were enemies.


Himmler’s dream was to create, out of the SS, a new religion based on the pagan
elements of what he perceived to be the original, Ur-Aryan religion of Ancient India and
Europe. Himmler set up a school of occultism in Berlin, and many of the leading ranks of the
Totenkopf SS, the Sicherheitsdienst and the Gestapo were ordered to attend courses in
meditation, transcendentalism and magic. It was in this establishment that Himmler was
persuaded to found the Ahnenerbe, the Nazi Occult Bureau. The Ahnenerbe incorporated the
membership of various occult organizations such as the Vril and the Thule Gesellschaft into
the Black Order of the SS. The Ahnenerbe was at first independent, it later became the
ancestral heritage branch of the SS. Headed by Dr. Hermann Wirth, it was dedicated primarily
to archaeological research, but it was also involved in proving the superiority of the 'Aryan
race’ and in occult practices.


A great deal of time and resources were spent on researching or creating a popularly
accepted “historical”, “cultural” and “scientific” background so the ideas about a “superior”
Aryan race could be publicly accepted. For example, an expedition to Tibet was organized to
search for the origins of the Aryan race. To this end, the expedition leader, Ernst Schafer, had
his anthropologist Bruno Beger make face masks and skull and nose measurements. Another
expedition was sent to the Andes.


Concerning the Thule Gesselschaft, Reichsfuehrer SS Heinrich Himmler first
became involved with the outer circle of the Thule Gesselschaft and the Reichskriegsflagge in
1923, by which time he was already declaring an interest in occultism.The Reichskriegsflagge
was part of the Kampfbund, which was a league of patriotic fighting societies in Bavaria,
Germany, in the 1920s. It also included Hitler's NSDAP party and their Sturmabteilung (SA
or brown shirts), the Oberland League. Its military leader was Hermann Kriebel, and its
political leader was Adolf Hitler. It was Captain Ernst Ré6hm who proposed that Hitler be the
political leader of the Kampfbund. The Kampfbund conducted the Beer Hall Putsch of 1923
in Munich, Germany. (Kampfbund is German for "Battle League"). The league was created
on 30 September 1923 at Nuremberg, where Hitler joined other patriotic nationalist leaders to
celebrate German Day, which marked the anniversary of the Prussian victory over France in


28


1870. Himmler's later interest in occultism, encouraged by his involvement in 'Artamanen-
Gesellschaft and 'Lebensreform' centered on reincarnation and karma (individual and racial),
and he became subsequently, and inexplicably convinced that he was the reincarnation of
King Heinrich I the Fowler (10th c).


Karma means action, work or deed; it also refers to the principle of causality, where
intent and actions of an individual influence the future of that individual. Good intent and
good deed contribute to good karma, while bad intent and bad deed contribute to bad karma
and future suffering. Karma is closely associated with the idea of rebirth in some schools of
Asian religions. In these schools, karma in the present affects one's future in the current life,
as well as the nature and quality of future lives. Himmler was similarly enamored with
legends of the medieval order of Teutonic Knights (a secret brotherhood which required
Germanic racial purity for eight generations), the meaning of ancient Nordic Runes, and the
Hindu and Buddhist idea of sacrificial detachment from the consequences of daily life. When
he was given command of the SS, he molded his so-called 'Black Guards' after a combination
of all these. He required his officers to read the mystical research of SS Colonel and
Ahnenerbe member Otto Rahn: 'Crusade Against the Grail' (1933) and 'Lucifer's Court in
Europe' (1936). Otto Wilhelm Rahn (February 18, 1904—March 13, 1939) was a German
medievalist and a Obersturmfiihrer (First Lieutenant) of the SS, born in Michelstadt, Germany.
Speculation still swirls around Otto Rahn and his research. From an early age, he became
interested in the legends of Parsifal, Holy Grail, Lohengrin, and the Nibelungenlied. While
attending the University of Giessen he was inspired by his professor, the Baron von Gall, to
study the Albigensian (Catharism) movement, and the massacre that occurred at Montségur.
Rahn is quoted as saying that "It was a subject that completely captivated me".


In 1931 he traveled to the Pyrenees region of southern France where he conducted
most of his research. Aided by the French mystic and historian Antonin Gadal, Rahn argued
that there was a direct link between Wolfram Von Eschenbach's Parzival and the Cathar Grail
mystery.He believed that the Cathars held the answer to this sacred mystery and that the keys
to their secrets lay somewhere beneath the mountain pog where the fortress of Montségur
remains, the last Cathar fortress to fall during the Albigensian Crusade. Rahn believed it was
possible to trace the Cathars, who guarded the Holy Grail in their castle at Montsegur, back to
Druids who converted to Gnostic Manichaeism. The Druids in Britain were forerunners of the
Celtic Christian Church. He saw that the culture of the medieval Cathar stronghold of
Languedoc bore strong a resemblance to the ancient Druids. Their priests were akin to the
Cathar Parfaits. The Cathar secret wisdom being preserved by the later Troubadours, the
travelling poets and singers of the medieval courts of France. Rahn wrote two books linking
Montségur and Cathars with the Holy Grail: Kreuzzug gegen den Gral (Crusade Against the
Grail) in 1933 and Luzifers Hofgesind (Lucifer's Court) in 1937. After the publication of his
first book, Rahn's work came to the attention of Heinrich Himmler, the head of the SS, who
was fascinated by the occult and had already initiated research in the south of France. Rahn
joined his staff as a junior non-commissioned officer and became a full member of the SS in
1936. Journeys for his second book led Rahn to places in Germany, France, Italy, and Iceland.


On March 13, 1939 nearly on the anniversary of the fall of Montségur, Rahn was
found frozen to death on a mountainside near Séll (Kufstein, Tyrol) in Austria. His death was
officially ruled a suicide. Himmler, like many in the Thule Gesellschaft, wished to transform
the notion of the existence of objective reality. Not surprisingly, therefore, Himmler went on
to advocate freeing science in order to pursue research, unhampered by generally accepted
notions of provable truth - especially science dealing with ancient origins. This attitude was
shared by the many in leadership of the Third Reich, and led their apparent rejection of
contemporary astronomy and physics in favor of occult-based theories such as the
Welteislehrer (the Doctrine of Eternal Cosmic Ice) created by Hans Hoerbiger. However, it
was the true occultist, Dietrich Eckart, who introduced his protege, Hitler, to Hoerbiger's


29


work, and it was Eckart who recognized its similarity to Thule mythology with regard to new
ages birthed from ice. Hoerbiger himself declared war on what he termed "objective science"
as "a pernicious invention", advocating substituting the "uselessness" of mathematics with a
mystical, occult "knowing" of the universe, and targeted Albert Einstein as an arch-enemy
(emphasizing the latter's Jewish origin no less than his pernicious scientific work).
Hoerbiger's cause was taken up by the Hitler Youth, and later by the SS Ahnenerbe.


True to Hitler's vow,


"We shall wash off the Christian veneer and bring out a religion peculiar to our
race"


SS soldiers underwent occult initiations and ceremonies, to replace their Christian
faith, and named their children with ancient Germanic names, and performed rites to harness
latent spiritual forces believed to reside in the Aryan psyche. This was not an abrupt change,
since these SS candidates had grown up in 1920s Germany, where the occult, psychic
phenomena and paganism were part of the 'zeitgeist'. Presumably their parents, school
teachers, civic leaders and other role models had already contributed to the next generation's
conditioning by their own immersion in ancient Germanic mysticism and spiritism. Secrecy, a
total dedication that erased all other loyalties, unquestioning obedience, isolation from
‘common society’, a sense of self-sacrifice, a place in an exalted and ancient line of
"guardians", and a strict observance of hierarchical status were the methods used for fostering
unity - and all of these methods were borrowed from occult societies.


As for Himmler himself:


"T try to reach a compromise in my own life; I try to help people and do good, relieve
the oppressed and remove injustices wherever I can. Do you think my heart is in all the things
which have to be done simply from reasons of state ?"


The extreme sacrifices of the SS, he said, were required in part by German racial
Karma; an individual "oughtn't to think of himself”. It was also 'German Karma', Himmler
said, that they be "saved" by "a figure of the greatest brilliance" - meaning not Hitler, but the
spirit "incarnate" in him (Hitler) and possessing him. An inner circle of SS officers took on
the roles of Teutonic knights, complete with coat-of-arms, and met regularly at Himmler's
Wewelsburg fortress for deep meditation, week-long visualization sessions, and possible
contacts with disembodied spirit masters. The very insignia of the SS was loaded with occult
meaning; the twin lightning bolts were an ancient Nordic power Rune. The runic alphabets are
a set of related alphabets using letters known as runes to write various Germanic languages
before the adoption of the Latin alphabet and for specialized purposes thereafter. Runes are
equivalent to the Roman, Greek, Cyrillic, or Hebrew alphabets. But they are much more than
an alphabet. “Rune” means “secret”, “mystery”, or “hidden”, and is related to the German
raunen, meaning “to whisper”, and the Irish run, meaning “a secret.” The Swastika, a runic
symbol of the Sun, became the official emblem of the National Socialist Party and the Third
Reich. Up until 1940, every SS commissioned officer was to take a special course in the runic
magic. The emblem “SS” is a double rune 'Sigel' which is well known as a victory symbol.
The mystics say that it was the runic magic that paved the way for Vélkisch Nationalism. The
Ahnenerbe branch of the SS invested huge sums in trips to Tibet to search for an ancient
Aryan clan, and exhaustive efforts were made to harness supernatural powers for the Nazi war
effort: everything from pendulum divination and ESP (extra sensory perception) to yoga and
Zen Buddhism was investigated. Hitler's strict vegetarianism was a matter of principle
because of reincarnation of human souls into animal bodies. (This was not only Hindu and
Buddhist belief but also Cathar). Yet another ancient belief adopted by Himmler for the SS
was the doctrine of the dualist cycle of the universe - a cosmos full of energies at polar


30


opposites, carrying on a continual battle, colliding to bring temporary balance, and
transmuting to a higher state of being, and then evolving into a new polarization, renewed
battle, and on, endlessly. Fire and Ice, Light and Darkness, Matter and Spirit, Good and Evil,
the human races all followed this spiral path. Each "new world order" could not proceed
without the destruction of the "old order"; therefore destruction was seens as healthy as the
following restructure. This cosmology was shared by many cultures: the Zoroastrians of
Persia (who greatly impressed Nietzsche), the Hindu writers of the Veda, the Greek Gnostics
(particularly Pythagoras, who carried the concept from Egypt), the Manachaeans (Gnostic
Christians), the Cathars, Nordic legends, and Germanic lore transmitted mostly through
Wagner . This dualist philosophy is also a pillar of Theosophical teaching.


31


The RACIAL ELITE


In January 1935, Himmler addressed an audience of senior Wehrmacht officers on
his vision of the Third Reich.


“Tam a convinced supporter of the idea that the only thing which really matters in
the world is good blood. History teaches us that only good blood, in particular the blood
engaged in military activity and, above all, Nordic blood, is the leading creative element in
every State. I have always approached my task from this angle, and will continue to do so.”


This exert reflects a notion that had long been present within the various Germanic
circles, such as the more general Volkish movements and of the Thule Society, that the
Germanic master race or Herrenvolk was endowed with an inherent superiority, contrasting
particularly sharply with the corrupt characteristics of Slavs, Latins and Jews, with such a
notion having enjoyed widespread support in Germany since the mid-nineteenth century.
There were many theories which regularly propounded that stronger peoples, in this case the
Germans, had a natural right to dominate or even exterminate weaker nations in the general
struggle for survival, and various versions of the message, often supported by the claims of
scientific research, appeared in German, British and other European journals over the years.
One of the early twentieth-century proponents of racial ideology was Alfred Rosenberg, born
the son of an Estonian shoemaker in 1893. Rosenberg studied in Russia, and received a degree
in architecture from the University of Moscow. Having fled to Germany after the Russian
Revolution, he settled in Munich and joined the Thule Society, whose members specialized in
Volkish mysticism and philosophy. In 1920 he enrolled in the Nazi party with membership
number 18, and immediately won Hitler’s attention with the publication of the first of his
many books attacking Judaism. In 1923, Rosenberg was nominated by the Fihrer as editor of
the NSDAP newspaper, the Vélkischer Beobachter, which thereafter vigorously denounced
the many enemies of the NSDAP such as communists, Jews, Freemasons and Christians.
Rosenberg ultimately proposed a new religion which would counter the weak doctrine of
Christian love with a strong ideal of racial superiority. In 1930 he produced his masterpiece,
The Myth of the Twentieth Century, a massive tome which correctly concluded that any given
culture would always decay when humanitarian ideals obstructed the right of the dominant
race, Herrenvolk, to rule those whom it had subjugated. The latter were degraded in the book
to the level of Untermenschen, or sub-humans. According to Rosenberg, the mixture of blood,
and the sinking of the racial standard contingent upon it, was the primary cause for the demise
of all cultures. Richard Walther Darré, a former First World War artillery officer who turned
to agriculture after 1918 and whose consuming enthusiasm was the peasantry, read and
admire Rosenberg’s theories. In 1929 he wrote a book entitled Blood and Soil — The
Peasantry as the Life Source of the Nordic Race, which called for an energetic programme of
selective breeding to ensure the increase of Nordic peasant stock and their domination of the
Jews and Slavs. In Darré’s view, blood alone determined history, ethics, law and economics,
and the blood of the German farmer was related to the ground he worked. The argument ran
like this. The farmer who toiled the land would be buried in the same soil, therefore the
farmer’s daily bread was, in fact, the blood of his forefathers, which fertilized the earth.
German blood would be passed on from generation to generation by means of the soil.
Himmler loved Darré’s book, befriended its author, and took him into the SS to pursue his
research with official sanction and financial backing. At Hitler’s request, Darré later prepared
an agricultural policy for the NSDAP which favoured Aryan farmers and re-established the
medieval hereditary system by which no farmland could ever be sold or mortgaged. Heavily
influenced by Darré, Himmler now began to use agricultural metaphors to justify his new SS
recruitment policy of racial selection. In 1931 he wrote:


32


“We are like a plant-breeding specialist who, when he wants to breed a pure new
strain, first goes over the field to cull the unwanted plants. We, too, shall begin by weeding
out people who are not suitable SS material.”


Applicants for the SS were soon being categorized according to their racial
characteristics, from I-a-M/1 (racially very suitable) to [V-3-c (racial reject). Himmler’s
devotion to keeping Germans racial pure began to motivate more and more of his actions
during the 1930s. At his behest, the SS kept a genealogical register of its members, and the
Reichsfiihrer-SS often pored over it like a horse-breeder examining a stud book. He ordered
elaborate investigations into his own ancestry and that of his wife, to gather irrefutable
evidence of their pure German lineage, and he dreamed of a new feudal Europe, cleared of
Untermenschen, in which model farms would be operated by a racial elite. The spearhead of
that elite was to be the SS, an ‘Orden Nordischer Rasse’, or Order of Nordic Men, of the
purest selection, acting as guardians of the German people. The SS would become a
“‘Blutgemeinschaft’, a blood community. To paraphrase Himmler, they would:


“March onward into a distant future, imbued with the hope and faith not only that
they might put up a better fight than their forefathers but that they might themselves be the
forefathers of generations to come, generations which would be necessary for the eternal life
of the Teutonic German nation. “


Under Himmler, the SS was to regard itself not merely as a temporary political
association but as a ‘Sippe’, i.e. a tribe or clan. The same racial qualities looked for in the SS
man were therefore also required of his wife. The Engagement and Marriage Order of the SS,
one of the oldest fundamental laws of the organization, was issued by Himmler on 31
December 1931, and read as follows:


1. The SS is an association of German men, defined according to their Nordic blood and
specially selected.


2. In conformity with the National Socialist conception of the world, and recognizing that the
future of our people is founded on selection and the preservation of good German blood, free
from all taint of hereditary disease, I now require all members of the SS to obtain the


authorization of the Reichsfiihrer-SS before marriage.


3. Consent to marry will be given solely on the grounds of racial or physical considerations,
and with a view to congenital health.


4. Any SS man who marries without seeking the prior authorization of the Reichsfiihrer-SS, or
who marries in spite of being refused such authorization, will be dismissed from the SS.


HT. HIMMLER


"Never forget. We are a knightly order from which one cannot withdraw, to which
one is recruited by blood, and within which one remain body and soul"


33


ORDENSBURGEN


“My teaching is hard. Weakness has to be knocked out of them.

In my Ordensburgen a youth will grow up

before which the world will shrink back.
A violently active, dominating, intrepid, brutal youth --
that is what I am after.
Youth must be all those things. It must be indifferent to pain.
There must be no weakness or tenderness in it.
I want to see once more in its eyes the gleam of pride

and independence of the beast of prey....

In this way I shall eradicate the thousands of years of human domestication.
Then I shall have in front of me the pure and noble natural material.
With that I can create the New Order
- mankind born anew.”


Adolf Hitler


The Ordensburg program began in the spring of 1933 when Adolf Hitler visited a


trade school in Bernau. As a result Hitler became convinced that similar academies were
needed to educate the rising generation. The schools were planned in various remote locations
such the Pomerania lakes District in West Prussia, the Eifel in west Germany, the Allgau in
Bavaria and along the Nogat River in East Prussia. Ordensjunkers (Castle Squires) candidates
were required to be at least 5 ft 4, between 23 and 26, racially pure and in good health, and


without any physical limitations.


The Falkenburg at Kréssinsee was (renamed as such on May 16, 1941) completed in


less two years and dedicated simultaneously with Vogelsang and Sonthofen on April 24, 1936
by Adolf Hitler, Kréssinsee represented the program's first year of training and ending four
years later at Marienburg. Built by architect Clemens Klotz, the Volkish styled complex of


35


buildings consisted of numerous buildings with granite foundations, rustic stone facades and
thatched roofs and cost an estimated 20 million Reichsmarks to complete. The complex was
laid out on a grid system and consisted of two 150-foot (46 m) towers, the barracks called the
Kameradschafthausen, a court of honor, sports hall and mammoth administration building.
Classes began each morning at 7 am and included studies in philosophy, politics and world
history. Afternoons were devoted to military drills, battle tactics, sports and equestrian
techniques. The school was recognized for its outstanding equestrian program. The nearby
lake provided the means for students to develop their rowing and sailing skills.


The second year of study in the Junker program was held at Burg Vogelsang locating
on a slope overlooking the Urft river in the region of west Germany called the Eifel. Built by
Clemens Klotz, the sprawling complex included the Adlerhof (Eagle court), a church like
structure called the Gemeinschaftshaus (community house), Wirtschauftgegebaude
(economics building), Haus des Wissens or (House of Knowledge), the
Kameradschaftshausen or (Barracks), the Burgsschenke or cantine, Swim and sports Hall. The
daily rountine consisted of 6:00 early morning exercise 7:00 muster, 8:00 - 10:00 project
groups, 10:00 - 12:00, mess followed by lectures and afternoon sports, group projects 5:00 -
6:30 pm and rest at 10:00 pm. Studies consisted of National socialist race science, geopolitics
and intensive sportive education (especially equitation). It was at Ordensburg Sonthofen that
the Junkers would have begun their third year of study. Designed by one of Hitler's favorite
architects, Hermann Giesler, the huge complex underwent revisions and expansions lasting
eight years at a cost of 150 million German Reichsmarks. Phase one which took two years to
build was dedicated simultaneously with Kréssinsee and Vogelsang on April 24, 1936 and
included the Burg (central castle) with its Ehrenhof (court of honor), Wohnhof (assembly
grounds) and the east and west wings of the structure consisting of the Fuchsbau (Wolf's
Den/cantine) and Gemeinschaftsraum (community room). Phase two completed in 1937
included the Unterkunftsgebaéude (accommodations or barracks building), Turnhalle
(gymnasium) and the 140-foot (43 m) Palace (tower) which was completely functional. Phase
three consisted of the Schwimmhalle (pool), Musiksaal (music room), Gymnastiksaal,
Technisches Haus, Seminarbau as well as several other structures. The day began with
inspection at 6 am followed by a rigid class room study of German history, geography, Social
studies, World history, studies in racial doctrine, fine arts and metal works. Sports and
conditioning, a vital part of the program was conducted in the late afternoon. Skiing played an
essential role during the long winter months.


Nestled on the banks of the Nogat river is one of the greatest castles of the middle
ages. Built during the 13th and 14th century by the legendary Teutonic Knights, Marienburg
not only served as the order's principal fortress but during the Third Reich it was used as a
Nazi shrine for mythical Germanic worship. Youth groups from all over Germany would
descend on the castles to partake in a variety of ceremonies, rituals and theatrical pageants.
The leadership of the Reich found the strict military and monastic life style of the Teutonic
order very conducive to the development and training the Fiihrer's rising generation.
Ordensjunkers advanced from their third year at Sonthofen to their fourth and final year at
Ordensburg Marienburg. Within the shadows of the historic Teutonic fortress where the
legendary knights ruled the Prussian lands five centuries before, the Junkers of the Third
Reich would've completed their training just outside the wall of the lower castle.


And the completion of their training would be the 'act of creation, the divine
operation, the goal of a biological mutation which would result in an unprecedented exaltation
of the human race, and the appearance of a new race of heroes, demi-gods and god-men'.
Each young man would be a chalice into which the essence of the divine would be poured,
like a spear penetrating the cup of the grail - erlésung ist dem erléser


"Tam founding an Order.


36


It is from the burgs that the second
stage will emerge — the stage of the 'Man-God',
when Man will be the measure and centre of the world.


The 'Man-God',, that splendid Being, will be an object of worship ...


But there are other stages about which
Iam not permitted to speak ..."


Adolf Hitler


ay


CASLLE WEWELSBURG


The centre of the SS, Himmler's new order of knights, an "aristocracy of soul and
blood", was the Wewelsburg castle. This was Himmler's “Camelot”, with SS commanders
cast as the Knights of the Round Table. Rooms were dedicated to figures of Nordic history
and mythology like King Arthur. Himmler's room was dedicated to King Heinrich I, founder
of the first German Reich (empire). Heinrich Himmler even claimed to have been the spiritual
successor and reincarnation of Heinrich the Fowler, having established special SS rituals for
the old king and having returned his bones to the crypt at Quedlinburg Cathedral. Himmler
even had his personal quarters at Wewelsburg castle decorated in commemoration of Heinrich
the Fowler. Another room was set aside to house the Holy Grail, which was to be searched for
all over the world. Himmler's goal was to "create a focus point of all the aspirations he had
towards religion and science’. To this end, Himmler set out to re-establish an ancient Aryan
religion within Germany in opposition to Christianity, as a basis for Nazi ideology. Himmler
maintained that many sacred symbols had been stolen from a more ancient Aryan religion and
set out to restore them. One such symbol was the Holy Grail. One leading academic recruited
to the Nazi cause was Otto Rahn, the leading German authority on the Holy Grail. He was
brought into the SS to lead the search for it the world over.


Himmler had visited the Wewelsburg on 3 November 1933 and April 1934; the SS
took official possession of it in August 1934. The occultist Karl Maria Wiligut (known in the
SS under the pseudonym 'Wiligut') accompanied Himmler on his visits to the castle.
Wewelsburg is a Renaissance castle located in the northeast of North Rhine-Westphalia,
Germany, in the village of Wewelsburg (the same name as the castle) which is a quarter of the
city Biiren, Westphalia, in district of Paderborn in the Alme Valley. In its current form the
Wewelsburg was built from 1603 to 1609 as secondary residence for the prince-bishops of
Paderborn namely Fiirstbischof Dietrich von Fiirstenberg. Significantly, its location is near
what was then believed to be the site of the Battle of the Teutoburg Forest. Legend suggests
that the castle held thousands of accused witches during the 17th century, who were tortured
and executed within its walls. During the Seven Years' War (1756-1763) the basement rooms
were probably used as military prison. Till the end of the prince-Episcopalian times in 1802
prison cells existed in a dungeon in the basement of the west tower.


Initially, the Wewelsburg was intended to be a museum and officer's college for
ideological education within the SS, but it was subsequently placed under the direct control of
the office of the Reichsfiihrer-SS (Himmler) in February 1935. The impetus for the change of
the conception most likely came from Wiligut. Wewelsburg is a Renaissance castle located in
the northeast of North Rhine-Westphalia, Germany, in the village of Wewelsburg (the same
name as the castle) which is a quarter of the city Biiren, Westphalia, in district of Paderborn in
the Alme Valley. The castle has the outline of a triangle. After 1934 it was used by the SS
under Heinrich Himmler and was to be expanded to the central SS-cult-site. After 1941 plans
were developed to enlarge into the religious and ideological Center of the World for the SS.
In 1934 SS-leader Heinrich Himmler signed a 100-year lease with the Paderborn district,
initially intending to renovate and redesign the castle as a "Reich SS Leadership School"
("Reichsfiihrerschule SS"). Who called Himmler's attention to the castle is unknown, but there
is speculation that Karl Maria Wiligut advised him. Wiligut allegedly was inspired by the old
Westphalian legend of the "Battle at the birch tree" (Schlacht am Birkenbaum). The saga tells
about a future "last battle at the birch tree" in which a "huge army from the East" is beaten
decisively by the "West". Wiligut supposedly predicted to Himmler that the Wewelsburg
would be that "bastion". Himmler expected a big conflict between Asia and Europe. Himmler
visited the Wewelsburg for the first time on 3 November 1933. He was impressed by the


39


triangular shape of the castle (reminiscent of an ancient spearhead) and the north-south-axis of
the castle. On the same day he decided to restore the castle. In January 1934 the voluntary
labour service started with the rebuilding work.


The first SS commandant of the castle, Manfred von Knobelsdorff, envisioned a kind
of Nordic academy. Scientists in the SS practiced "Germanic applied research" ("germanische
Zweckforschung") at the castle, with a purpose of supporting the racial doctrine of the SS.
Wewelsburg castle was also a center for archaeological excavations in the region. Fields of
activity included study of prehistory and ancient history (directed by Wilhelm Jordan, who led
excavations in the region), study of medieval history and folklife (directed by Karlernst Lasch
from March 1935), build-up of the "Library of the Schutzstaffel in Wewelsburg" (directed by
Dr. Hans Peter des Coudres), and strengthening the National Socialist worldview in the
village of Wewelsburg (directed by Walter Franzius, this included such work as renovation of
a timbered house in the center of the village of Wewelsburg - the "Ottens Hof"—between
1935 and 1937 for use as a village community center; Franzius also undertook various other
architectural tasks). Also working at the castle were proponents of a kind of SS esotericism
consisting of Germanic mysticism, an ancestor cult, worship of runes, and racial doctrines:
Himmler, for example, adapted the idea of the Grail to create a heathen mystery for the SS.


The redesign of the castle by the SS referred to certain characters in the legends of
the Grail: for example, one of the arranged study rooms was named Gral ("Grail"), and others,
K6nig Artus ("King Arthur"), Konig Heinrich ("King Henry"), Heinrich der Lowe ("Henry
the Lion"), Widukind, Christoph Kolumbus ("Christopher Columbus"), Arier ("Aryan"),
Jahrlauf ("course of the seasons"), Runen ("runes"), Westfalen ("Westphalia"), Deutscher
Orden ("Teutonic Order"), Reichsfiihrerzimmer ("Room of the Empires Leader(s)";
"Reichsfiihrer-SS", or "the Empire's Leader of the SS" (was Himmler's title), Fridericus
(probably in reference to Frederick II of Prussia), tolle Christian (probably referring to
Christian the Younger of Brunswick, Bishop of Halberstadt), and Deutsche Sprache ("German
language"). In addition to these study rooms, the SS created guest rooms, dining room,
auditorium, a canteen kitchen, and a photographic laboratory with an archive. Oak was used
to panel and furnish these rooms. All interior decoration was shaped by an SS sensibility in art
and culture; the preferred elements of design were based on runes, swastikas, and
Germanically interpreted sense characters. Tableware, decorated with runes and Germanic
symbols of salvation, was manufactured specifically for Wewelsburg castle. Himmler's
private collection of weapons was housed in the castle. From 1939, the castle was also
furnished with miscellaneous objects of art, including prehistoric objects (chiefly arranged by
the teaching and research group "Das Ahnenerbe"), objects of past historical eras, and works
of contemporary sculptors and painters (mainly works by such artists as Karl Diebitsch,
Wolfgang Willrich, and Hans Lohbeck—that is, art comporting with the aesthetics of
National Socialism).


In 1934, the eastern castle bridge was built and the castle moat lowered. The exterior
plaster was removed to make the building look more castle-like. The following year, a smithy
was established on the ground floor of the North Tower for manufacture of the wrought-iron
interior decoration of the castle. The western and southern wings of the castle were rebuilt
between 1934 and 1938; the eastern, between 1936 and 1938. The first new building, the
guardhouse (Wachgebaude), was constructed next to the castle in 1937; historical
documentation of "Wewelsburg 1933-1945" has been housed there since 1982. The North
Tower was strengthened and rebuilt between 1938 and 1943. The first commandant of the
castle (Burghauptmann von Wewelsburg), from August 1934, was Obersturmbannfiihrer
(equivalent to Lieutenant Colonel) Manfred von Knobelsdorff. Von Knobelsdorff was
succeeded by Siegfried Taubert on 30 January 1938.


40


So called "SS-marriage-consecrations" (SS-Eheweihen) took place at the castle.
Since 1936 Himmler (who was often present at the castle) wanted more and more to expand
the Wewelsburg to be a representative and ideological center of the SS Order. At first planned
to be an educational training center, during the 1930s more and more measures were taken to
transform the castle into an isolated central meeting place for the highest ranking SS-officers.
For financing the project Himmler founded in 1936 the "Gesellschaft zur Forderung und
Pflege deutscher Kulturdenkmiler e.V." (association for the advancement and maintenance of
German cultural relics (registered association)) and assigned the association as building
developer.


Two dozen miles northeast of Wewelsburg, near Detmold, were the Externsteine,
another religio-cultural centre for the SS. Many vélkisch thinkers, including Wiligut, Wirth,
and Himmler, believed it to be a pagan Germanic religious centre, the ‘Irminsul’, the
sanctuary of the Saxon chief killed by Charlemagne. The Wewelsburg and Externsteine were
chosen to be the first positive spaces that were meant to replace Christian holy sites and
churches. Himmler created the ‘Saxon’s grove’ (Sachsenhain) near Derven to commemorate
the horrific execution of 4,500 Saxons by Charlemagne in 782, which he and Rosenberg
jointly inaugurated in 1935. Himmler even sent an Ahnenerbe expedition to Karelia in
Finland (‘the land of witches and sorcerors’) to recover the Ur-Germanic religion drawn from
the Edda. Based on this expedition and the SD’s witchcraft research, Himmler commissioned
popular children’s literature as well as more adult-oriented ‘Witch novels in the form of a
trilogy’. Such efforts were at least moderately successful in expanding popular interest in
Ario-Germanic religiosity and as a form of religious warfare against Christianity.


Although most German soldiers would surrender within a couple of years, the
esoteric cult around Himmler and the Wewelsburg echoed long after 1945. Rumours persisted
that the SS had removed an object from the Wewelsburg — possibly what they thought was the
Holy Grail or one of the wunderwaffe devices— and buried it on the Hochfeiler glacier in
Zillertal, Austria, waiting for a time when the Third Reich might be reborn. Rosenberg was a
chief advocate for ancestral worship, a cult of the dead, and pagan Germanic rituals of which
Himmler was in complete agreement with, even stating in a 1937 speech that “The worst blow
which Christianity ever took against us has been the blow against ancestors and ancestor
worship”. Himmler had a preferred an array of ‘symbols, insignias, myths and shrines,
festivals and rituals’, which might give a sensuous expression to the religiosity that he sought
to cultivate and encourage the SS’s ‘elite character as keeper of the Holy Grail of National
Socialism’. Picking up on this idea of the ‘warrior yogi’, the Reichsfithrer promoted Ernst
Schafer’s (an SS explorer who was sent to Tibet) film Secret Tibet as a way of encouraging
martial values and rituals across the SS and the Wehrmacht. Schafer interpreted the Tibetan
Buddhist lamas, ‘magic, incantation, and meditation’, as well as ‘ritual dances for the
invocation of the war gods’, as a model of education for the German troops. Himmler gave a
propaganda speech in which he cited the ‘military tradition of the lamas’ in order to inspire
German morale and willingness to sacrifice. To spread Indo-Aryan martial values within the
SS Himmler further advocated regular meditation sessions according to ‘Indian religious
leaders’. He also ritualized the Night of the Long Knives and other events by citing ‘the
sacralization of violence’ embodied in the Kshatriya code and Bhagavad Gita. There was also
the comparison of the martial traditions of the samurai to the Teutonic knights, of which was a
grave interest to Himmler, who saw the SS as the Teutonic Knights reborn. Wartime
publications made similar arguments about the Japanese people’s ‘courageous willingness to
sacrifice one’s life’ embedded in the ‘deeper’ religious feeling of ‘Zen education’, with an
obvious parallel to that of Himmler’s desire for obedience from not only the SS but the wider
population. The situation in Japan was also an interest to Himmler due to the fact that ‘life,
politics, and military engagement’ are based on ‘a non-Christian religious-ideological
foundation’, which many believed could provide a model for the German people.


41


Wewelsburg was to be the center of all of this ideological and religious expression, it
was to be greatly expanded upon after the war but construction was halted due to the change
in the tide of the war. Wiligut greatly desired that Wewelsburg be transformed into a centre
for the 3,000-year-old Irminist faith, an ‘Atlantean castle’ for the returning Germanic
paganism.


42


OrdenStaat-55 Burgund


With the defeat of France rapidly approaching, on May 20 1940, Hitler spoke of
what should be done with the resulting territorial gains, concerning at this time the Benelux
region specifically. Luxembourg was to be completely annexed into the Reich itself, but
Hitler and Himmler both had a different plan concerning the regions of Belgium and Holland,
that they along with territorial from France should be carved out and formed into a buffer
state, with many within the main leadership advocating for this idea. The new state would be
a renewal of the old Burgundy, with territory extending from the French border with
Switzerland to that of the English Channel. This was not a new idea, going back as far as
Charlemagne, there had at one point or another been a “middle kingdom” between what
would later become both France and Germany. This idea of a middle kingdom was attempted
once before as well, for in the late 15" century, Duke Charles the Bold attempted to revive the
Burgundian Kingdom but ultimately failed. Prussian, and later German Empire, chancellor
Otto von Bismark considered carving off a buffer state from France after the defeat of France
in the Franco-Prussian war, but decided to be lenient with France.


This idea was brought up once again on April 25", 1942, at a dinner conservation
where Hitler emphasized that Germany had historical precedent through the cultural values
that Burgundy represented within Germanic history, with Himmler lamenting the fact that
Burgundy was reduced to being known for its wine production rather than an ancient
economic and cultural center. The general idea was to settle over a million German peasants,
while the French speaking population was to become re-Germanized, all of this was to be
implemented by the SS who would be in control of state functions. The collaborating French
speaking Walloon leaders would be approached so as to incorporate them into the wider
culture of Burgundy.


How the Ordenstaat would function on a governmental level is implied in the name,
for the Ordenstaat is taken from the Teutonic Ordenstaat, a militaristic theocratic state ran
completely by the knights from their castles who would muster out to face the “barbarians of
the east”. Himmler saw the Teutonic Knights as warriors who were spreading Germanic
civilization and those who fought against the Baltic and Slavic hordes. Combined with the
idea of the wehrbauer, or defensive settlers, Himmler’s Ordenstaat-SS Burgund would have
been the Reich’s western front against any assault from the Anglo-American alliance, of
which was correctly seen to be the chief architect of the globalizing liberal capitalist order.
Himmler was apart of the Artamanen League, and so would have known of the idea of the
wehrbauern, which to the Artamanen League were to expel all non-Germans from an area
along with protecting Germanic society from invaders. This goes along with the idealization
of ancient Sparta that prevailed the higher echelons of the NSDAP leadership, for the Spartans
believed that they were invaders who had conqueror the helot people’s and enslaved them. In
the Wehrbauern communities, Nordic families would live traditional rural lifestyles of which
were idealized by the SS leadership, going so far as to plan out which areas where to be
colonized directly, such as Crimea. Himmler even expressed that he had Hitler’s full support
in his polices, a sentiment that Himmler expressed to his own private physician.


The compulsory savings of the individual SS men would fund the foundation of the
settlements. Each settlement was to be planned in advance and would comprise 30 to 40 farms,
each of 121.5 hectares (300 acres); a NSDAP party headquarters; a manor house for the SS or
party leader; an agricultural instruction center; a house for a community nurse; and a cinema.
The houses of the settlement were to be built "as in the old days" - two or three stone courses


43


thick and in medieval architectural style. Baths and showers were to be available in every
house. The SS calculated the exact amount of weaponry for delivery to each individual
soldier-peasant. An SS or NSDAP leader of merit, chosen, possibly by Himmler himself, for
his qualities as a man and a soldier, would occupy the manor. This individual would become
the Leader of the settlement, acting on the administrative side as a Burgomeister and on the
Party side as the political leader of the local group, effectively combining the jurisdictions of
the Party and the State. He would also act as the military commander of a company-sized
force consisting of the community's peasants, their sons and laborers. In a fashion similar to
that of the Roman Republic, after twelve years of military service, soldiers would receive
completely-equipped farms located in the conquered East. The last two years of their military
service would focus on agricultural education. The soldier was not to be allowed to marry a
townswoman, but only a peasant woman who, preferably, had not been living with the soldier.
This would enable the settlers to live out the blood and soil principles along with encouraging
large families. This would also apply to the settlers being moved into the area that would
become the Ordenstaat-SS Burgund, but with direct control from Reichsfiihrer-SS Himmler
himself, allowing Himmler to realize his ambitions of becoming King Heinrich reborn.


“At the peace conference,” said Himmler in March 1943, “the world will be
appraised of the resurrection of the old province of Burgundy, formerly the land of the arts
and sciences, which France has reduced to the role of an appendix preserved in spirits of win.
The sovereign State of Burgundy with its own army, its own laws and currency and postal
system, will be the model SS State. The official language, naturally, will be German. The
NSDAP will have no jurisdiction over it, for it will be governed by the SS alone, and the world
will be astonished by and full of admiration for this state in which the ideals of the SS will be
embodied.”


44


Che 55


The history of our people


If we look at the history of our people, it is the most sorrowful history that a people,
blessed with all the gifts of the spirit and the body, could have and had in the last 2000 years.


We ask the big question of why?


I would like to limit myself to give a few examples, which only a few of the great
series can do, and then I will try to give an answer.


The liberator of Germania from the rule of the Roman Empire was, as mentioned,
Hermann the Cherusfer. He fell, killed by men of his own fine blood, after his father-in-law
had played his own daughter, the wife of the liberator, into the hands of the Romans.


I recall the whole living centuries of the Roman Empire, whose rule and greatness
were underpinned, because, beginning with Caesar, whose close collaborator and friend, a
Teuton, organized Gaul for Rome, up to the times of the migration of the peoples again and
again Germanic creative power, Germanic genius as a leader, Germanic ability as a leader and
Germanic solvency served the corrupt Roman state, which had already been condemned to
death, against its own blood.


I recall the desperate struggle of Widukind, which had to be lost because the nobles
of his own tribe and his own people, men of the same blood, who had not been able to submit
before, played into the hands of his own duke.


I remember the often mentioned battle of the Alemanni, which was lost because their
own free Germanic tribes did not tolerate that their dukes, of the same blood as they were, to
fight the battle on horseback, because they would have been half a human length taller than
they were.


I remember the peasant wars, in which a death-defying struggle was confronted with
a great disorder, fragmentation and lack of discipline, in which a pure will and the wisely
conceived ideal of the best peasantry for a German state, after a lost battle, fell into the pit
together with the bloody corpses of ignorant Germanic peasants, and at the end of which only
the tragic and inventive death would befall them.


Certainly, one of our most important virtues is our irrepressible will for freedom.
Certainly, the best inheritance, which has been preserved until our present time, is the purity
of our blood, the goodness of our righteousness. Both of them alone, however, as they are in
our principles of the German nation, which were developed by the people who loved freedom,
were not only the incentive and impetus for cultural greatness and heroic struggle, but just as
much the obstacles to the formation of a great state of all Germans and also the cause of all
the defeats that we had to accept in our entire history, century after century.


It was not possible, due to the overspread estimation of the value of the I, proud of
equal good blood, that one noble obeyed the other, that one duke was loyal to the other, that
one subordinated himself to the other. Our leaders and our State Treasurers, which without
doubt were often present - starting from Widukind up to Florian Geyer - were never given the
possibility by the Teutons of the same blood to create the German state. And in the end,


45


because of these mistakes, empire after empire fell into ruin, be it the empires of the Goths,
the Vandals, the Burgundians, the Alemanni and many others.


Now that in the German area a state formation created by Germans and filled with
German spirit did not come into being, the rule and conquest into an empire dictated by other
Germans, but with a foreign spirit in blood and tears and misery, had to be accepted under the
hardest fist.


Every time we see the same picture: the disobedience, the non-submission, the
undercutting of the opponent and an unrealistic wishing of conditions, of political sayings and
of realities that were just not there. And again and again we were confronted with an opponent
in some form, who, soberly, calculating with the real realities of the political struggle of this
earth, advanced step by step and, in spite of the inferior quality and inferior culture, overcame
us again and again.


Our people - we want to establish it for ourselves as Germans - went the other way of
the last 2000 years by our own fault. Do not reproach any adversary for being victorious and
demanding our blood; for the law of the wide world of God, the law of this earth and the law
of the nations does not count the one who means better in his overflowing heart, but counts
the one who is victorious.


One will now silently, reproachfully, raise the question: why the terrible statements
of guilt and faults despite all virtues? Do we have a vision for the future?


We want to say openly that nothing strengthens us in our faith in the future of our
people and our blood as much as the fact that our people and our people, despite all mistakes
and despite all suffering, are still alive today and have risen to greatness again. We believe in
the destiny and the issue of our blood and see in the history of the last two millennia not only
defeat and misfortune, but a way of necessary learning from our own failures.


The way to obedience


At the beginning of our millennium, according to the commandment of the Church,
almost all the descendants of the best German families entered the service of the Church as its
priests and church leaders. A great number of them took up the cross and walked the way of
the cross of German blood in the far east, in the desert and in the sand. A part of these
knightly orders brought with them German valor, German leadership, German
imperturbability and went to the school of obedience, submission and state authority in the
order of the Roman Church, a school that was already older than the Church itself.


Thus, the Order of Knights participated in the creation of the first modern state of
Frederick II in Sicily, built on the principles of state administration and authoritarian
obedience. In the first half of the thirteenth century, the Order was transplanted close to the
German East by the civic wisdom of the priestly nobleman Hermann of Salza, who
established here the most famous German state of the Order in the Eastern region.


It was easy to introduce obedience for the first time in the German area, because
besides the absolute rule of the Christian religion, the circumstance contributed to the fact that
a knighthood of the noblest families, racially selected from the best German blood by struggle,
was placed as a leading class above peoples and blood mixtures, which racially were not
equal in value to the people, so that besides the ecclesiastical obedience, the value difference
of performance and personality arose.


46


The principles of the organization of administration, cleanliness and, above all,
unconditional obedience were applied to Prussia, which was taken over by the Electors of
Brandenburg as kings. The Prussian army with its mercenaries became the first great school
of absolute discipline in the inner Germany. Discipline was not only based on noble motives
of the human soul, but in many cases on the power of the strongest, on the state, on pay and
livelihood, and on the fear of the subordinate officer's chastisement.


This lasted for some time until a heroic spirit, the greatest Prussian king, the Old Friz,
himself led this disciplined army in three great wars. It is true that even in the greatest battles
of the third Silesian war, behind the musketeer, there was the Prussian officer with a fine
sense of spontaneity, who had been educated in the Cadet Forces to the level of a leader. And
in spite of that, this honor was already ennobled by the love for the leader, by the love for the
future fatherland Prussia, by the honor to be able to be not only a mercenary, but also an army
hero of the heroic Prussian army.


The next step leads over a terrible defeat to the people's army of the wars of
liberation from 1812 to 1815, in which the citizen's son and student already feel it as an honor
to be able to join the Prussian army in voluntary service. And further on the history goes in
more and more rapid steps. More and more the concepts of freedom and honor as well as of
obedience have begun to approach the people.


In 1864 and 1866, Prussia, with the army of a strong spirit, was able not only to
physically conquer the freedom-loving Schleswig-Holsteiners, Bavarians, Wiirttembergers,
and the other southern Germans, who are of our blood, but who had not gone along the
straight path, but also conquered them internally and integrated them into the order of the
German empire.


And once again the battle goes half a century ahead in our side, in the world war.
Honor, freedom and obedience find each other even closer. And two million of the prayerful
Germans not only volunteer to fight for freedom, but also willingly to join the order of the
powerful organization, the German army.


4 years we are assaulted, and once again the fate shows us that we had not yet
learned. Fate showed it to those who commanded and who forgot in some places that the last
command in the time of the greatest, most severe test, when all crowns, symbols and outer
insignia of state authority are soaked in hardship, mud and misery, is only given by the people
of the same blood to leaders, and only when honor, freedom and command are not forgotten.


And now, as we hope, the last school of our way to obedience began for the
unhinged German people. The fate found the leader. As an obedient soldier of the great
German army, he carried the whole fight for freedom, honor and goodwill of our people and
took us to a fine school. In now 15 years of struggle and victory he educated first a few, then
more and more of the most freedom-loving minds, the members of the militant German blood
into National Socialists, into men who consciously find the value of our race and our blood,
knowing that blood is the necessary prerequisite for culture and greatness. He also
strengthened the will for freedom and honor of the fanatics to even stronger energy, to no
more unbending will, and thirdly, he tamed the forces of the same value of the blood, of the
unrestrained will for freedom and of the sharply felt sense of honor in a voluntary and the
more obliging obedience arising from blood, honor and the will for freedom.


I believe that the clear history and the self-inflicted suffering of our people should be


viewed with those eyes of ours, and I believe that it reveals a meaning to the eternal,
benevolent God of the world, and thus becomes at the same time an indication and a


47


commitment that our people is not at the end, but at the beginning of its mission and task
given to it within the framework of the peoples of the earth.


This brings me to the SS itself, which is a part of the National Socialist German
Workers! Party created and educated by Adolf Hitler and which, within the framework of the
movement, has been given by the Fiihrer its special task of safeguarding the Reich internally.


The Creation of the SS


Years ago, in 1925, when the Fuhrer gave the order to establish the SS, and then, in
January 1929, the order was given for the larger organization of the unit, it was not in 1929
that the SS could fulfill its task only if it was established to the greatest extent possible in
accordance with the principles and virtues instilled in it by the Fuehrer of the movement.


Knowledge of the value of blood and selection


The knowledge of the value of the blood and the blood products was and is valid for
us as the first guideline. This principle was valid in the year 1929 and will be valid as long as
there will be a SS.


Like the seed breeder, who is breeding an old, good variety, which is mixed and
degraded, pure again, we first went over the field, to the so-called perennial selection, to
remove purely externally the people, whom we thought we could not use for the building up
of the SS.


The type of selection focused on the selection of those who physically most closely
resembled the desired image, the Nordic-determined man. External characteristics such as
height and racially representative appearance played and still play a role.


I do not need to explain that this principle has been developed more and more over
the years as we have gained more and more experience. We are fully aware that there can
never be a standstill in the implementation of this principle. Year after year our demands are
becoming firmer and firmer, just as the rise of German mankind is increasing as a result of the
impact of the German racial movements and the ever more awakening awareness of blood and
breeding.


It must be so that the standards which in a hundred or more years will be set by our
successors will demand many times more from the individual than it can be the case today.


We also know that the selection made from external points of view - today from
genealogical tables and many interviews - can only be the first, but also the very first selection
principle, that a selection process going through all the years of life in the SS must be the
continuation and that the selection of those who are not suitable for us in terms of character,
will, heart and therefore blood must follow.


By means of the laws which we give ourselves, we want to ensure for the future that
not every son of an SS family registered in the SS clan book has the eligibility or even the
right to become an SS man again, but we want to ensure that only a part of the sons of these
families will be accepted by us as SS men, that only a portion of the sons of these families
will be accepted and recognized by us as SS men, and we will continue to insist that the
selection and the flow of German blood of the gathered people into the SS should be constant.
This is to the principle of selection.


48


Performance tests


The second guideline and virtue, which we try to instill in the SS and give it as an
inherent, irredeemable characteristic for the future, is the will for freedom and the fighting
spirit.


We have always had the ambition to be the best in every fight and in every place. We
are happy about every man and every association that equals ours or surpasses us with fine
efforts and fine fighting spirit, for every one who comes to us is a gain for Germany and
would be proof for us that we had too little strength in us and that we should redouble our
efforts, purify our will to fight and still increase our toughness against us.


By means of hard schooling, through which each one of us has to pass throughout his
life, and by means of training examinations to be taken year after year, we ensure that the
courage and fighting spirit of each individual, but above all of the Fuehrer Corps, is put to the
test again and again. At the same time, through the annual examinations demanded of us, we
will prevent the coziness that has often become a deadly danger to the German people from
entering our ranks. Furthermore, a community from which physical and volitional efforts are
demanded in the same conditions up to old age will remain simple and in the long run will
refuse things which may be fine for a leisurely life, but which could diminish our strength for
Germany and bring the fighting spirit to a standstill.


Loyalty and honor


As the third guideline and virtue, which is necessary for building and working of the
shooting squadron, the concepts of loyalty and honor are to be mentioned. Both are
inseparable from each other. They are laid down in two words, in the command which the
Fuehrer gave us: "My honor is called fidelity" and in the sentence of the old German saying:
"All honor comes from loyalty."


Many things we teach the SS man can be forgiven on this earth, but one thing never
can: disloyalty. Whoever misplaces fidelity, is out of our society. For fidelity is a matter of the
heart, never of the touch. The fidelity may be a matter of trust. This is sometimes harmful, but
never ever unjustifiable. The heart, however, always has the right pulsation to beat, and if it
stops, the man dies, just as a nation dies when it breaks faithfulness. By this we mean loyalty
of every kind, loyalty to the Fiihrer and thus to the Germanic Volk, to fine weapons and fine
ways, loyalty to blood, to our ancestors and descendants, loyalty to our clan, loyalty to
comrades and loyalty to the unfailing blessings of decorum, cleanliness and chivalry. A
person offends against loyalty and honor not only when he is unfaithful or when he lets the
honor of the SS be misplaced, but especially when he does not respect the honor of others,
when he betrays things that others find sacred, or when he does not stand up for those who are
averse, weak, or shot in a manly and decent way.


Obedience


The fourth guideline and virtue that applies to us is that of obedience; the obedience
that comes unconditionally from the highest voluntarism, from the service to our world view,
which is ready to make any, but also any sacrifice of push, of external honors and all that is
personally dear and worthy to us; of obedience that never once hesitates, but unconditionally
obeys every order that comes from the leader or is rightfully given by those in front of us; of
obedience, who, even in the time of political struggle, when the will for freedom believes that
it is necessary to outrage him, refuses to do so, who, with his senses wide open and his
attention on the enemy at its utmost, if it is forbidden, does not lift a finger, who obeys


49


unconditionally and goes on the attack, even if he thinks that he cannot overcome it in his
heart.


We find it honest not to claim that we have grasped all the battles to the last man and
to the deepest understanding. But we believe to be able to assert that in 9 years now the SS
has started, has been built up and is working according to those guidelines. We want to
incorporate more and more of these virtues, year after year, and to make them more and more
a part of the field life of the SS man. We are convinced that if, sooner or later, we do not find
the same virtues in the next generation, we will be able to pass them on as a full heritage, as a
tradition, to those who will find us SS men close by.


Marriage law


We have been following these guidelines and virtues and have set up the life of our
community and paved the way for a distant future. - The first law issued in 1931 was the SS
order, which required marriage and engagement licenses for every man. We drew the
conclusion from the knowledge of the value of the blood. We have come to the conclusion
that it would be unwise to try to gather men together and not to think of the clan. We did not
want and will not want make the mistake of the soldiers' and unions of the past, which may
well survive for centuries and then, because the bloodstream of breeding and the tradition of
the clan are missing, sink into nothingness, we know from deep, inner conviction that a
community will only be able to go the way into the future if it lives in awe of the ancestors of
the distant and gray past, convinced of the eternal origin of its people. We want, that only the
knowledge of the whole blood to be passed on as a sacred inheritance, for then a race and the
Volk will have eternal life. We are imbued with the conviction that only the generation which
is embedded between ancestors and grandchildren takes the right measure for the greatness of
its task and its heritage and for the minuteness of its own and transient significance.


The victory of the child


We have learned that only the man of this conviction learns to be modest even in
times of success and to avoid the mistake of arrogance, that likewise only the following
people endure the times of heavy burden with the same zealous calmness as they survive the
times of happiness with pity and spartan simplicity. Therefore, we teach our SS-men to go
beyond the command to marry, beyond the education to choose the right kind of woman,
because all our struggle, the death of the two millions of the World War, the political struggle
of our fifteen years, the building up of our defense for the protection of our borders would be
in vain and futile, if the victory of the German child would not follow the victory of the
German child.


We have made it one of our tasks to lead the way here, not by word and speech, but
by deed and example in our own ranks. Today and in the future we will impress upon our men
that the most sacred and valuable person of our people is the mother of our blood, who is
conscious of the sacredness of her duty, and that the most valuable asset is the German child.


Honorary seal of the SS man


As another law, on November 9, 1935, it was established by order that every SS man
had the right and duty to defend his honor with arms. At the same time it was laid down in the
order that SS-man, in the sense of joining the Order, will be accepted into SS after a period of
1 1/2 years as an aspirant, after taking the fine SS-oath to the Fiihrer, after honorably taking
the fine oath of service and military service at the age of 21 years is awarded the SS-dagger,
the weapon, and is thus accepted as a full SS-man in the Order of the SS. An SS-man is every
one of us, whether man by rank or Reichsfiihrer-SS. We have given ourselves this honorary


50


rank because we are convinced that only the man who knows that he will be called to account
for his fine deeds and fine words at some point will grasp the living meaning of our
community and learn again to serve as a blamelessly clean soldier of life. For this honor
obliges him to preserve his own honor, as it is demanded of him by the attitude of others, and
as it is our duty to do, with all our basic generosity, kindness and generosity toward fine
comrades, fine soldiers and fine fellow men.


I may now comment on a few problems. In a booklet entitled "50 Questions and
Answers for the SS-Man", the first question is


The first question is: "What is your oath?"


The answer is: "We swear allegiance and bravery to you, Adolf Hitler, as Fuhrer and
Chancellor of the German Empire. We pledge to you and to the people you have appointed
obedience until death. So help us God!"


The second question is: "So you believe in a God?"
The answer is, "Yes, I believe in a Lord God."


The third question is: "What do you think of a person who does not believe in a
God?"


The answer is: "I think he is arrogant, a megalomaniac, and stupid; he is not suitable
for us."


I have given these three questions an answer in order to clearly state our position on
religion. We would not be able to be this united corps if we did not have the conviction and
faith in a Lord God who is above us, who has given us our fatherland, our Volk and the earth,
and who has given us our Fuhrer.


Blood and soil


The idea of blood, which has been advocated in the SS from the very beginning,
would be condemned to death if it were not inextricably linked to the conviction of the value
and sanctity of the soil. From the very beginning, the Race and Settlement Main Office has
put down in fine name the concept of "blood and soil" in other words, but in the same sense. I
may declare that it is a fine coincidence that the Reichsbauernfiihrer of the German Reich has
been a member of the SS for years, just as it is a fine coincidence that I am a farmer by
descent, blood and soil, and a member of the Reichsbauernrat. Farmers and SS-men do not
belong to the kind of men who chase many kind and friendly words. However, here it is
clearly and perceptibly stated: the way it was before, it will be fine for the future, too,
according to our will. Where the peasants stand by Adolf Hitler, they will always have the SS
at their side as a loyal friend, just as we want that where the SS stands by Adolf Hitler, the
German peasant stands by him as a true comrade and friend. So it is today and so it will be for
all the future.


Security and police


I know that there are some people in Germany who feel bad when they see our black
skirt; we understand that and do not expect that we are loved by too many. We will and
should be respected by all those who care about Germany, but we should be feared by those
who at some time or other have a guilty conscience towards the Fiihrer and the nation. For
these people we have built up an organization called SD, and likewise we as SS provide the


51


leaders and men for service in the German police. We will ceaselessly fulfill our task of being
the guarantors of Germany's security at home, just as the German Wehrmacht guarantees the
Reich's honor, greatness and peace to the outside world. We will fight for it, because never
again in Germany, the heart of Europe, from within or by emissaries from without, the Jewish
revolution of the Untermenschen can be unleashed. Mercifully, we will be a readied sword
against all these forces, whose existence and activity we know, on the day of even the
slightest attempt, be it today, in decades or in centuries.


Bolshevism is not a daily phenomenon.


I would like to emphasize that we do not see in Bolshevism a phenomenon of the day
which could easily be debated out of the world or removed according to our wishes. We
recognize the Jews, this people, which from the overflowing perfumes of all peoples and
nations has gathered the globe and has stamped all of them with its Jewish blood, whose
desire is the world terror, whose desire is destruction, whose will is extermination, whose
religion is godlessness, whose idea is Bolshevism. We do not underestimate the Jew, because
we have fancied him since the beginning of time, we do not overestimate him, because we
believe in the divine mission of our people and in our power, which has been reestablished by
Adolf Hitler's leadership and work.


The black corps


In this newly rebuilt nation, we, the SS, have been founded and established by the
Fuehrer's order. If I tried to describe the organization, structure and task of the SS, no one will
be able to understand it who does not try to understand it with fine blood and fine heart. It
cannot be explained why we, so few in number, within the framework of the German people
about two hundred thousand men, have the power within us. It is not possible to explain
logically why today each of us who wears the black skirt, no matter where he is, is carried by
the power of our community; It may be that he fits in the saddle of the racing horse, fights on
the sports field, it may be that he serves as a civil servant, it may be that he carries stones as a
worker on the building site, or it may be that he venerates in the highest position of state, that
he serves as a soldier, it may be that he creates works of German spirit of a different kind, it
may be that he has to be a fine man somewhere - perhaps unheard of - in human terms. Each
of us knows that he does not stand alone, but that the unheard-of strength of two hundred
people, who have come together, gives him immeasurable strength, just as he knows that he,
as representative of this black corps, has to do honor to this fine community through his
foundation in fine work. Thus we find ourselves marching, after an unalterable blessing, as a
national socialist, soldierly order of Nordic men and as a vowed community of their clans, the
way into a new future, wishing and believing that we do not only want to honor the
grandchildren who have lived through it, but also the ancestors of the latest generations
necessary for the eternal life of the Germanic people.


52


Policy Concerning Population
During the Bar,
28 Oct 1939


To all men of the SS and Police,


The old proverb that only he can die in peace who has sons and children must again
hold good in this war, particularly for the SS. He can die in peace who knows that his clan and
everything that his ancestors and he himself have wanted and striven for will be continued in
his children. The greatest gift for the widow of a man killed in battle is always the child of the
man she has loved. Beyond the limits of bourgeois laws and conventions, which are perhaps
necessary in other circumstances, it can be a noble task for German women and girls of good
blood to become even outside marriage, not light-heartedly but out of a deep moral
seriousness, mothers of the children of soldiers going to war of whom fate alone knows
whether they will return or die for Germany ...


During the last war, many a soldier decided from a sense of responsibility to have no
more children during the war so that his wife would not be left in need and distress after his
death. You SS men need not have these anxieties; they are removed by the following
regulations:


1. Special delegates, chosen by me personally, will take over in the name of the
Reichsfiihrer-SS, the guardianship of all legitimate and illegitimate children of good blood
whose fathers were killed in the war. We will support these mothers and take over the
education and material care of these children until they come of age, so that no mother and
widow need suffer want.


2. During the war, the SS will take care of all legitimate and illegitimate children
born during the war and of expectant mothers in cases of need. After the war, when the fathers
return, the SS will in addition grant generous material help to well-founded applications by
individuals.


SS-Men and you mothers of these children which Germany has hoped for show that
you are ready, through your faith in the Fuhrer and for the sake of the life of our blood and
people, to regenerate life for Germany just as bravely as you know how to fight and die for
Germany


53


folloro Up Order
Concerning Population,
30 jan 1940


SS Order for the whole of the SS and Police


You are aware of my order of 28 October 1939, in which I reminded you of your
duty if possible to become fathers of children during the war.


This publication, which was conceived with a sense of decency and was received in
the same sense, states and openly discusses actual problems. It has led to misconceptions and
misunderstandings on the part of some people. I therefore consider it necessary for every one
of you to know what doubts and misunderstandings have arisen and what there is to say about
them.


1. Objection has been taken to the clear statement that illegitimate children exist, and that
some unmarried and single women and girls have always become mothers of such children
outside marriage and always will. There is no point in discussing this; the best reply is the
letter from the Fiihrer's Deputy to an unmarried mother which 1 enclose together with my
order of 28 October 1939.


2. The worst misunderstanding concerns the paragraph which reads: ‘Beyond the limits of
bourgeois laws and conventions . . .” According to this, as some people misunderstand it. SS
men are encouraged to approach the wives of serving soldiers. However incomprehensible to
us such an idea may be, we must discuss it. What do those who spread or repeat such opinions
think of German women? Even if, in a nation of 82 million people, some man should
approach a married woman from dishonourable motives or human weakness, two patties are
needed for seduction: the one who wants to seduce and the one who consents to being
seduced.


Quite apart from our own principle that one does not approach the wife of a comrade,
we think that German women are probably the best guardians of their honour. Any other
opinion should be unanimously rejected by all men as an insult to German women.


Furthermore, the question has been raised as to why the wives of the SS and police
are looked after in a special way and not treated the same as all the others. The answer is very
simple: because the SS through their willingness to make sacrifices and through comradeship
have raised the necessary funds, through voluntary contributions from leaders and men, which
have been paid for years to the Lebensborn [Life spring] organization.


Following this statement all misunderstandings should have been cleared up. But it is
up to you SS men, as at all times when ideological views have to be put across, to win the
understanding of German men and women for this sacred issue so vital to our people and
which is beyond the reach of all cheap jokes and mockery.


55


Firaraler'f Letter to Reydrich
Concerning the Sewing Youth
26 jan 1942


I endorse a report which the Reich Youth Leader Axmann has sent to me about the
“Swing Youth” in Hamburg. I know that the Secret State Police has already acted, but in my
view the whole problem must now be radically eliminated. I am against half measures here.


All leaders, and that means both male and female, and those teachers who are hostile
and supportive of the Swing Youth, are to be sent to a concentration camp. There the young
people should first receive a beating and then be subjected to a tough regime of drill and then
be made to work. I consider that a work camp or a youth camp would be incorrect for these
boys and these useless girls. The girls are to be made to work at weaving and in the summer
on the land.


These young people must remain in the concentration camp for a long time, of 2-3
years, it must be made clear that they will never be able to study. Their parents must be
investigated to see how far they have supported them. For if they have, then they too are to be
sent to a concentration camp and their property must be confiscated.


Only if we act brutally will we be able to avoid a dangerous spreading of these
Anglophile tendencies at a time when Germany is fighting for its existence. Please send me


further reports.


Please carry out this action in association with the Gauleiter and the Higher SS and
Police Leader.


56


The 55 Marriage Order


When he took over the SS in 1929, Himmler was determined to turn it into the elite
order of National Socialism. In order to achieve this, he insisted that even the wives of SS
men should be racially pure:


1. The SS is an association of German, Nordic-determined men selected according to special
standards.


2. In accordance with the National Socialist world view and in recognition that the future of
our folk lies in the selection and preservation of the racially and congenitally healthy good
blood, I am introducing marriage permission for all unmarried members

of the SS effective January 1, 1932.


1. The desired goal is the congenitally worthy clan of German, Nordic-determined kind.


4. Marriage permission will be given or denied solely and only according to racial and
congenital health standards.


5. Each SS-man who plans to marry must receive marriage permission from the Reichsfiihrer-
SS.

6. SS-members who despite refusal of marriage permission nonetheless marry will be stricken
from the SS; they will be given the option of resignation.


7. The appropriate processing of marriage requests is the task of the Race Office of the SS.
8. The Race Office of the SS will keep the "Clan Book of the SS" into which the families of
SS-members will be entered following the granting of marriage permission or approval of an


entry request.


9. The Reichsfithrer-SS, the head of the Race Office and the expert advisors of this office are
obligated by their word of honor to silence.


10.The SS is aware that it is taking a step of great importance with this order. Scorn, mockery
and misunderstanding do not bother us; the future belongs to us!


In fact, however, marriage certificate statistics for 1932-40 show that only 958
applicants out of 106,304 were turned down; but only 7,518 satisfied every requirement.


57


Defcription of an 55 wedding


The central point in the ceremonial was represented by the wedding table decorated
by two conjoined runic figures. On the table lay a yellow sun disc made of flowers on a blue
background; to the left and right stood torchbearers and behind the table a bowl, containing
fire, and the pulpit. The choir opened the ceremony with a chorus from Lohengrin. A
representative of the new usage, SS Comrade Elling, gave the dedication an address based
upon the song from the Edda Helga and Sigrun. The choir chanted both before and after the
address. Then the bridal pair were offered bread (representing the germinating force of earth)
and salt (the symbol of purity) on silver vessels. Finally, the pair thus married according to
German custom received their wedding rings.


58


Excerpt from a fpeech by Reich{fihrer-55
feinrich Fimmiler in the Conftituent Seffion
of the Committee for Police Lavo of the
Academy of berman Low


...When we, the National Socialists, came to power in 1933, some of us were given
the task of taking over the police. I can speak here from personal experience: in March 1933 I
took over the post of Police-President of Munich, and later of Munich and Nuremberg. We
National Socialists found a police force which had originally been formed as an instrument of
power, blindly obedient to an absolutist State; its main and most important legacy from that
period, however, was the dislike, indeed, the hatred, of the population for it; yet it had lost the
absolute power which distinguishes the police of an absolutist State. It was still called ‘a
power structure’ but in reality it was not; it was a helpless organization, tied hand and foot.
Whenever police officers arrested a criminal they had to watch out that they did not get into
trouble themselves while the criminal got away scot-free. We National Socialists then set to
work-it may sound odd that I should say this in the Academy of German Law but you will
understand what I mean-not without justice behind us since we had that within ourselves, but
possibly outside the law. Right from the start I took the view that it did not matter in the least
if our actions were contrary to some paragraph in the law; in my work for the Fuhrer and the
nation, I do what my conscience and common sense tells me is right. During those months
and years when the life and death of the German people was at stake, I was completely
indifferent about the fact that others were bemoaning ‘violations of the law’. There was of
course talk abroad—to a large extent inspired by elements within Germany—about the police,
and therefore the State, being in a condition of lawlessness. They called it lawless because it
did not correspond to their conception of law. It was in reality through our work that we laid
die foundations for a new code of law, the law governing the life of the German people......


59


§5-Defender
againft Bolfhevifin


Bolshevism


Today much is said about Bolshevism. Most people think Bolshevism is
phenomenon that emerged during the present time. Many even believe that Bolshevism - this
Jewish organized and led struggle of sub-humanity - is totally new in world history. We
believe it is important to establish that as long as there have been men on earth, the struggle
between humans and sub- humans has been the historical rule. This Jewish led war against the
folks has belonged to the natural course of life on our planet as long back as we can see. One
can comfortably say this struggle for life and death is as much a law of nature as man’s fight
against pestilence and the attack by pestilence against the healthy body. It is hence necessary
to study a few very clear examples of the methods of their struggle from the past to our
present time in order to recognize the tactics of the Jewish- Bolshevik enemy.


Purim


The bible gives us one of the historical examples of the radical annihilation of an
Aryan folk by Bolshevik -Jewish methods. Read this a part of Jewish history where it is
written that the Jews were distributed among the Persians, in all cities and villages and in the
capitol Sufa. The Aryan Persians recognized the danger posed by these Jews. The will to
solve the Jewish question in Persia was personified by Minister Haman. The king, who the
Bible calls Ahasveros but who was really Xeres, was separated from his Persian wife Basthi
by the extremely clever intrigue of the court Jews. The king was influenced by Jewish girls,
especially by the Jewish harlot Esther. We read how, against the will of the folk-oriented and
racially-conscious Minister Haman the elaborate Jewish intrigue ended with the unscrupulous
and blinded king delivering the loyal Minister Haman to the Jew Mardochei to be hanged.
This detestable practice is also seen later throughout history. Mardochei was made a Vice-
King. He issued his orders with that cold-blooded, sober and pitiless calculation typical of
Bolshevism. He had the most noble Persians and all enemies of the Jews in the towns and
cities murdered by Jews protected by a king’s edict on a specific day. The Bible says 75,000
Persians were butchered that day. This was crowned by a royal edict making the 14th and
15th of the month of Adar a holiday. To this very day this holiday is celebrated as Purim, the
great Jewish victory festival. It is obvious that the ancient Persian folk never recovered from
this blow. One can see the entire tragedy in that this folk, struck and destroyed by Jewish
Bolshevism, did not only lose it high, pure religion of Zoroastrianism, but also its native
language. Only after two thousand years were German scholars able to translate the ancient
Persian language into German after painstaking, scientific labour. This is always the path of
Bolshevism: A folk’s leadership is cut down. It falls into slavery: economic, scientific,
cultural, spiritual, psychological and physical slavery. The remnants of the folk, robbed of its
own value and degenerated by endless race- mixing, disappears within the historically short
span of a few centuries. Later one only knows that such a folk once existed.


60


Other Examples


How many other tragedies - completed or not - have occurred on this earth, we do
not know. In many cases we can just suspect that the eternal enemy of all of us, the Jew, had
his bloody hand in the game in one way or another. Throughout the ages we see the
executioner’s sword fall again and again as in Cannstadt and Verdun. We see the burning
stakes where tens of thousands were martyred - the mutilated bodies of the mothers and girls
of our folk burned to ashes. In our mind’s eye we see the tribunals of the inquisition that
depopulated Spain just like the Thirty Years War that in the course of one lifetime reduced
our blooming German folk from 24 million to a half-starved remnant of four million.


The French/Freemason Revolution


Now I pass over to more recent times for the sake of a certain European
completeness. the methods of the terror regime of the French revolution reached full-scale
Bolshevism in the Jacobins and in the time of the law “for the removal of the suspicious”: the
slaughter of the blonde-haired and blue-eyed, of the best sons of the French folk. For the sake
of truth it must be mentioned that the French Revolution was solely the revolution of the order
of the Freemasons, this distinguished Jewish organization. The Freemasons have not only
admitted their “glorious” revolution, rather they praise it as their triumph in every lodge
throughout the world right down to the most harmless German lodge.


The Russian Revolution


I now come to the Russian revolution. It is not my task to once again repeat the dates.
Instead, the important thing in this context is the reference to the methods.


First the discontent of Russia’s socially suffering folk is systematically exploited and
used for revolutionary propaganda. A number of Russian leaders who wished to abolish
serfdom, especially Minister Stolypin, are eliminated before they can carry out their reforms
for Russia’s benefit by Jewish anarchists. All possible means are used to agitate Russia into
war against Germany. Remember the role of Jewish/Free-Mason activity to start the World
War.


The next phase of the Bolshevik revolution then starts in Russia. Freemasonry calls
this the shift from the “ System of the Yellow Flag” to the “ System of the Red Flag”. In
parliamentarian jargon: rule passes form the democratic - bourgeois parties to the moderate
socialist party - by us the social democrats and over there the Mensheviks. At their head
stands the Jew Kerenski, a man whose treatment is a classic example of Aryan kindness. His
Jewish mother - if I may here insert this instructive episode - had been sentenced to death
because of involvement in anarchist attacks, but she had been pardoned by the father of the
last Czar, because she was pregnant with Kerenski. Precisely this man, who owed his life to
Aryan kindness, deposes the last Czar and paves the way for Bolshevism.


But there were still too many forces of resistance left in Russia. This folk is again
cold-bloodedly agitated into an offensive. Once again, Aryan Russians are sent to the
butcher’s block. The final dissolution is made possible. There is another change, to use the
Freemason’s jargon, the “system of the red flag” is replaced with the last system, the “system
of the black flag”. In parliamentarian terms: rule passes from the moderate socialist party into
the hands of the radical socialist party, the Bolsheviks. Nothing more stands in the way. With
the full power of the state the Jews complete the radical slaughter of the good blood that


62


resists them. All the others bow in fear and terror. One could quote from the Book of Esther
where it says: many Persians become Jews out of fear of the Jews! In the system of the black
flag all of the Non- Jews of weak character defect to the Jews. They become executioner
helpers and helpful spirits, informers and spies against their own people.


The perfection of these methods of extermination can be seen from the tactics of the
Russian Secret Police. Again and again, they themselves systemically organize rebellions with
key agents against their own regime in order to again and again find the leaders who would
participate in such an uprising and neutralize them. Every resistance leader - everyone in this
tortured Aryan folk still able to think or even become a leader against the Bolsheviks and
Jews - falls.


If you examine the Russian Revolution, you will find many parallels to the German
revolution of 1918. The only difference here was that a benevolent God, a kind Providence
created a dam and summoned resistance forces. At the right time, in 1919, Adolf Hitler started
his work.


Looking at everything, you can add countless more evidence, minor and major, for
this blood picture of bolshevism in the history of nations .


I hardly think you will disagree with me. I ask you to look - not at specifics with
exaggerated Aryan/German objectivity - rather at the general line. You will see that in Jews,
sub- humans and their auxiliary organizations - we are confronted by skilfully opponents.
They are clever and capable in the organization of destruction. They know how to use every
opportunity and possibility, in the saloon or in the chamber of the state minister or monarch.
They master assassination, poison, direction of lethal steel, starvation of entire undesired
population segments, intrigue, defamation of individual leaders, playing personalities against
each other (who should be friends to the death), the fight on the street and in the comers of
bureaucracy, uprooting the peasant and misuse of religion. They realize better than we that
there is no key to peace in these battles, rather only victor and vanquished and that defeat in
this conflict means the death of a folk.


You will also note that this enemy has won not a small number of victories. He could
write the names of the nations destroyed by him on his flag of destruction.


All of you should never forget that these observations deal not just with the
Bolshevism of the past and present, but also of the future.


63


Germanic Law


Ancient Germanic law prevented any unauthorized individual from destroying
anything in nature that is holy for all men and created by God. Until relatively recent times it
was forbidden in Germanic settlements to cut down a tree within the village without the
agreement of the other peasants. If a tree was cut down, this was tied to the obligation to plant
three new young trees.


The Divine Order


This concept of law included the holy conviction of our ancestors that everything in
life and on earth was created by God and had a soul. Silly, malicious and stupid people have
twisted this into the fable that our ancestors worshiped gods and trees. No, according to
ancient knowledge and ancient teachings, they were convinced of the Divine Order of this
whole world, of all of the plant and animal kingdoms.


The Right of the Animal


Only the Aryan, Germanic man, could include animals - who have no rights in
countless other lands of this world - in his jurisprudence. Here, too, we find remnants into the
late Middle Ages. Even in cases where the damage done by animals was obvious, for example
a plague of rats or mice, we know from historical accounts that the city council could not
without further ado order the extermination of these small, but for humans destructive animals.
For they were anchored in the divine order and had been created by God. So they were put on
trial, and the decent German even provided the small defendant with a defence attorney. Only
after legal proceedings and proof that the small rodent had harmed the order and harmony of
this piece of earth could the campaign against them be ordered.


Today we might laugh at these ancient, by our standards childish views. It will be
better for us men without piety of the modem time to bow our heads to the depth and
greatness of this world-view, of this deeply rooted faith in God and in this order based on God.


Cultural Finds


I may show you other pictures. When we dig into German earth here and there along
the edge of the field, we find, just a few hand-widths beneath the surface, precious copper,
silver and gold pieces. The quality of their workmanship, artistry and classical beauty is
hardly achievable by us modem, technologically so advanced men.


Veneration of Ancestors


We stand in front of a giant stone graveyard and call up the thought within us about
people in distant millennia before us. They were not miserly like us, who build cemeteries that
have to be cleared after a few generations, the bones put into a chest and then demolished.
Rather our ancestors built a memorial for millennia, before which we today reverently stand.
Perhaps the idea again dawns on many of us today that the veneration of the ancestors is a
source of strength for a folk, that each one who reveres his ancestors also measures his own
greatness and his own importance with the correct measuring stick.


64


Courage and Strength


Or I can again present the Roman writers’ description of the first tribes entering
Roman history, the Cimbri and Teutons. They were large, very strong and beautiful. Their
attack was impetuous and their inexhaustible strength smashed one Roman army after another
until they fell victim to our ancestors’ mistakes. Then they were defeated and annihilated by
Roman discipline and military order.


Knowledge of Astronomy


I can offer you a peaceful image. When we today look at a map and draw in the old
settlements, we see that they form a harmonious pattern far beyond what is visible by the
naked eye. They were organized with an unprecedented knowledge of astronomy unsurpassed
to this day. They were founded by men with the deepest reverence for the divine being who
created these stars as well as our own.


The Oldest Plough


Another peaceful example is the plough, our folk’s oldest weapon, that is known to
have been drawn through our soil five thousand years ago with an unprecedented, sensible
order of the cultivation including crop rotation.


We wish to remember and stress that we did not acquire the plough from others,
rather that the Romans adopted the improved plough from our Germanic ancestors.


The Alphabet


A final example is the Runic alphabet, the mother of all writing symbols for probably
most folks. The earliest ancestors of the Aryan/German folk consciously conceived and
created it. We still have a few specimens from prehistory thought to have been devoured by
nature, namely the cliff writing. We know Karl the Frank collected countless other writings,
but his Jewized son, Ludwig the Pious, in union with an intolerant church burned them almost
without exception.


Our Folks’ Tormented History


That was, briefly summarized, our Folk.


But when we view the history of this folk, we see for the past 2 000 years the most
tormented history that a folk - blessed with all gifts of spirit and body - could have had.


We ask the great question why?


Here, too, I wish to limit myself to just a few examples from the many in order to
then attempt an answer.


65


Hermann the Cherusker


The Liberator of Germania from Roman rule was, as is known, Hermann the
Cherusker. He was killed by men of his own clan, of his own blood, after his father-in-law
delivered his own daughter, the liberator’s wife, to the Romans.


The Germanic Secretary


I remind you of the last few centuries of the Roman Empire. Caesar’s closest co-
worker was a Germanic man who organized Gaul for Rome. From that time onward, the
splendour and greatness of the Roman Empire was again and again secured by Germanic
creativity, Germanic leadership genius, Germanic leadership ability and Germanic soldiery
serving the decayed and racially doomed Roman state against its own blood.


Widukind’s Desperate Battle


I refer to Widukind’ s desperate battle that was doomed, because the nobles of his
own tribe and of his own folk, people of the same blood, could not unite and later stabbed
their duke in the back.


The Aleman Battle


I refer to the above mentioned Aleman battle that was lost, because the so free
Germanic men could not bear the sight of their dukes, men of their same blood, on horseback,
because that would make them taller than the others.


The Peasant Wars


I finally refer to the Peasant Wars where a heroic struggle was accompanied by great
disorder, splintering and lack of discipline. The pure desire and the wisely conceived vision of
a German state - thought up by the best minds of the peasantry - sank into the grave along
with the bloody corpses of incurable, foolish Germanic men after a lost battle. At the end only
the tragic and insightful wish remained that the grandchildren would fight more successfully.


Our Virtues and Faults


Certainly, one of our best virtues is our mighty will for freedom ! Certainly, the
selection of our blood is the best blood that remains preserved to this day as the goodness of
our race. However, both alone are not just incentive and drive toward cultural greatness and
heroic struggle, rather also obstacles to the creation of a great state of all Germans and hence
also the cause of all the defeats we have suffered throughout our entire history, century after
century.


The excessive valuation of the value of the equally good blood, of the proud self,
made it impossible for a nobleman to obey somebody else, for a duke to remain loyal to
another, for one to subordinate himself to another. Germanic men of the same blood never
made it possible for their own leaders and rulers - who no doubt existed, from Widukind to
Florian Geyer - to create a German state. In the final analysis empire after empire fell into


66


ruin because of these faults - the empires of the Goths, Vandals, Burgundians, Alemans and
others.


When Germans could not create a state based on Germanic spirit, other Germans
forced them with a mailed fist to accept a state based on foreign spirit - with bloodshed, tears
and misery.


Each time we see the same story: disobedience, non-subordination, underestimation
of the enemy and an unrealistic desire for conditions , for political situations and factors that
simply did not exist. Again and again an enemy in whatever form confronted us who
calculated coldly with the realities of political conflict on this earth. He advanced step by step
and again and again defeated us - despite lower quality, inferior blood and poorer culture.


Our Own Fault


Thus, has our folk - we wish to ascertain this for us Germans - travelled this difficult
path for the last 2 000 years through our own fault. Do not reproach any enemy because he
has defeated us and demanded our blood. For the law of God’s vast world, the law of this
earth and the law of nations does not calculate who meant well in his big heart, rather it
counts who triumphs.


Many will silently and resentfully raise the question: Why this terrible determination
of fault and mistakes despite all the virtues? Can we have faith for the future?


We wish to here freely and openly state that nothing strengthens our faith in our
folk’s and our blood’s future like the fact that, despite all the mistakes and despite all the
suffering, our folk still lives and has today again achieved greatness. We believe in the destiny
and in the task of our blood. In the history of the past two thousand years, we see not just
defeat and misery, rather the path to learning that is necessary for our own preservation.


Service to the Church and the Teutonic Order


At the beginning of this millennium , in accordance with the church’s command,
almost all not first- born sons of the best German clans entered the service of the church as
priests and church officials. Many took up the cross and went on the crusades of German
blood far eastward into the desert sand. Some of these crusading knights were organized in
various knightly orders as knight-priests. They brought with them German courage, German
leadership and German incorruptibility. They learned obedience, subordination and state
authority - itself even older than the church - in the order of the Roman Catholic Church.


The State of Frederick II in Sicily


This knightly order participated in the creation of the first modern state, based on
principles of government administration and authoritarian obedience, that was founded by
Frederick I] in Sicily. Filled with this knowledge, the order was transplanted to the German
East by the politically wise priest-nobleman Hermann von Salza in the first half of the 13
century. There it founded the order’s German state in the east so well known to you.


67


The Teutonic Order‘s State in East Prussia


For the first time it was then easy to introduce obedience into German territory. In
addition to the absolute rule of the Christian religion came the fact that knights of the racially
best German blood - men from the noblest clans and proven in combat - formed a ruling class
over folks and mixed- bloods racially not equal to our folk. The values of achievement and
personality stood next to obedience to the church.


The Prussian Army


From this East Prussia, that was taken over by the Electors of Brandenburg as the
Kings of Prussia, the principles of organization of administration, of cleanliness and above all
of unconditional obedience were adopted by Prussia. The Prussian army with its mercenaries
became inside Germany the first great school of absolute discipline. Back then this discipline
was not based solely on the noblest motives of the human soul, rather indeed in many cases
on the might of the stronger, the state, on gold and livelihood, and on fear of the sergeant’s
whip.


The Prussia of the Old Fritz


That continued for a time until a heroic spirit, the great Prussian king, Old Fritz, led
this disciplined army in three great wars. It is probably true that even in the last battles of the
third Silesian War the Prussian officer, pitilessly trained for obedience in the cadet corps,
stood with his whip behind the musketeer. Nonetheless, this obedience was al- ready ennobled
by the love for the leader, by the love for the evolving Prussian fatherland, by the honour of
being able to be not just a mercenary, rather a hero of this heroic Prussian army. For the first
time a melody is heard in this unconditional obedience: let us be good children of our country.


The Wars of Liberation


The next step, after a terrible defeat, came with the People’ s Army of the wars of
liberation of 1812 to 1815 . The bourgeois son and the student already felt honoured to be
able to serve with voluntary obedience as militiamen and as soldiers in the Prussian army.
History then proceeds with faster steps. More and more, the concepts of freedom and honour,
as well as of obedience, come close to the people.


1864, 1866


The Sleswig-Holsteiners, Bavarians, Wiirttembergers and other southern Germans
are freedom-loving peoples who have lived in their lands since the earliest of times. Their
development was similar in many aspects and not always straight. But with the army of this
spirit Prussia could not only conquer and defeat them in 1864 and 1866, rather it could win
them inwardly for the order and the obedience of the German Reich and integrate them with
inner conviction.


68


The World War


History advances another half century to the World War. Honour, freedom and
obedience have drawn even closer together. Two million of the best Germans reported not
only for the fight for freedom, but also just as willingly for service in the order of the best
organization, of the German army.


For four and a half years we were forged. Now again, fate showed that we had not
yet learned everything. Fate showed it to those who had to command. They often forgot that
final obedience at the time of the final, most difficult trial - when crowns, symbols and the
external insignia of state authority fade in need, mud and misery will only be given to their
leaders by a folk of the same blood. Even then, it comes only if honour, freedom and
obedience stand in harmony. It showed to those who had to obey that any disobedience, even
if it appears justified by wounded honour and supposedly violated freedom, always strikes its
own master. It is a violation of loyalty, the first sin of the fathers, and it plunges the own
blood and hence the disobedient person into the abyss.


The Fiihrer and National Socialism


Any now the - hopefully final - school of our path toward obedience began for our
German folk that was coming apart at the seams. Fate sent us the Fiihrer. Himself an obedient
soldier of the great German army, he carried the entire knowledge of freedom, honour and
blood value of our folk and took us into his school. In fifteen years of struggle and victory he
trained first a few, then more and more of the men who loved freedom the most, the selection
of the most warrior-like German blood, as National Socialists. Let me today define this
concept: As men who are consciously bearers of the value of our race an d of our blood who
know blood is the most necessary prerequisite for culture and greatness. At the same time he
fanned the flames of will for freedom and honour even among the most fanatical, giving them
even more energy and even more unbending will. Finally, he bonded the strengths of equal
blood value, mighty will to freedom and a very keenly felt sense of honour with a voluntary -
and hence even more obligatory - obedience that stems from blood, honour and desire for
freedom.


I believe one can again look with these eyes at German history and the self-caused
path of our folk’s suffering. It reveals a purpose according to the eternal, good law of this
world. This is at the same time an indication and an obligation. Our folk does not stand at the
end, rather at the beginning of its mission and of the task given to it among the folks of this
world .


The SS


Now I come to the SS itself. It is a part of this National Socialist German Workers
Party created and trained by Adolf Hitler. Within the movement of the Fithrer, it has received
its special task for the protection of the Reich internally.


Creation of the SS


The Fiihrer issued the order for the creation of the SS in 1929 and another one in
January 29 to expand this formation. It was clear to us in 1929 that this SS could only fulfil its


69


task if it was based to the highest degree on the principles and guidelines established by the
movement’s Fiihrer as well as on the virtues indoctrinated into it.


Knowledge of the
Value of Blood and Selection


The first guideline was and is for us the knowledge of the value of blood and
selection. This prerequisite was valid in 1929 and it will be valid as long as there is a SS.


We proceeded like a breeder who wishes to purify an old, good strain that has
become mixed and degraded. First, he visits the field for the so-called seed selection. Initially,
on the basis of external characteristics, we rejected those people we felt were unusable for
building the SS.


Selection concentrated on those who came closest to the physical ideal of the
predominantly Nordic man. External characteristics like size and racial appearance played and
still play a role.


I do not have to tell you that this process was improved and tightened over the years
as we gained experience. I also ask you to be convinced that we have complete clarity that
this selection can never come to a standstill. Year after year, our requirements become stricter
as Germany’s racial hygiene and the growing understanding of blood and breeding elevates
German humanity.


The requirements for our descendants in a hundred or more years must demand much
more from the individual than can be the case today. We also know that the selection based on
external characteristics - today done with genealogies and examinations - can only be the
initial, the very first criteria. Throughout the years of life in the SS this selection process must
be continued. This must be followed by the elimination of those unsuited to us because of
character, will power or emotion and hence blood.


Through laws we have given ourselves we wish to ensure for all future that not every
son of an SS family registered in the clan book of the SS becomes an SS candidate or even
claims the right to become an SS - man. We wish to ensure that always only some of the sons
of these families are accepted by us as SS-men. The selection and the blood flow of the best
blood of the entire folk must constantly occur in the SS. - This is what I have to say for now
about the principle of selection.


Will to Freedom and Fighting Spirit


The second guideline and virtue that we endeavour to promote in the SS as its eternal
characteristic for all future is the will to freedom and fighting spirit.


Tests of Achievement


We have always had the ambition to be the best in every fight and in every position.
We take pleasure in every man and every formation whose achievements and fighting spirit
equals or surpasses our own. For everyone who equals us is a gain for Germany. He is also
proof for us that we had too little energy and that we must double our efforts in order to purify
our will to fight and to steel our hardness against ourselves.


70


The most difficult school - that each of us must attend our whole life - and tests of
achievement - that each of us must pass year after year - ensure that the courage and fighting
spirit of each individual, above all of the leadership corps, are put to the test again and again.
These annual tests will simultaneously guard against the complacency in our ranks that has so
often become a lethal threat to the German folk. Furthermore, a community that demands
physical and will power achievements at regular intervals up to old age will remain simple. In
the long run it will automatically reject things that may indeed be nice for a comfortable life,
but that weaken our strength for Germany and that could undermine the fighting spirit.


Loyalty and Honour


The third guideline and virtue that is necessary for the development and essence of
the SS are the concepts loyalty and honour. They are set forth in two statements. One
statement was given us by the Fihrer: “My honour is loyalty!” The other comes from old
German right: “All honour comes from loyalty.”


Many things, we teach the SS-man, can be forgiven on this earth, but one thing never,
namely disloyalty. Whoever breaks loyalty separates himself form our community. For
loyalty is a matter of the heart, never of the mind. The mind might resist. That is often
harmful, but never incorrigible. But the heart must always beat the same. If it stops, the man
dies - just like a folk dies if it breaks loyalty. Here we mean loyalty of every kind: loyalty to
the Fiihrer and hence to the German/Germanic folk, its will and its kind; loyalty to the blood,
to our ancestors and our grandchildren; loyalty to our clan; loyalty to the comrade; and loyalty
to the irrefutable laws of decency, cleanliness and chivalry. One does not only sin against
loyalty and honour if one passively allows his or the SS’s honour to be tarnished. He sins
against it above all if he does not respect the honour of others, if he mocks things that are
sacred to others or if he does not stand up, manly and decently, for the absent, the weak and
the defenceless.


Obedience


The fourth guideline and virtue valid for us is obedience, the unconditional
obedience that stems from lofty volunteerism, from the service to our world-view. We are
ready to make any, absolutely any sacrifice of pride, of outward honour or of other things that
are dear and precious to us personally. This obedience does not hesitate even once, rather it
unconditionally follows every order that comes from the Fihrer or from any proper superior.
This obedience remained silent in the period of struggle when the will to freedom wanted to
scream out. This obedience demanded watchful senses directed at the enemy - without
moving a finger unless ordered to do so. It also meant unconditional obedience on the attack,
even if he perhaps felt in his heart that he was not able to do so.


We are honest enough that we do not claim that every one of us, down to the last
man, has fully comprehended all of these laws . But we believe we can say that for the most
part the SS has for the past six years assembled according to these laws, that it has been built
on them and that it lives by them. We know that we must absorb more and more of these
virtues each year, making them the self-evident property of each SS-man. We are convinced
that years from now, sooner or later, whenever fate decides and the first generation of this SS
is no longer there, we will be able to pass along these virtues as a complete heritage and as the
best tradition to those who become SS-men after us.


71


The Marriage Law


In accordance with these guidelines and virtues we have given ourselves laws and
established the life of our community and set the path for the distant future. The first law was
established in 1931 as the SS law requiring marriage and engagement permission for each
SS-man. We have drawn the consequences from the recognition of the value of blood. We
know it would be useless to collect men of racial selection without thinking of the clan. We
do not wish to make the mistakes of the soldier and other male organization that may endure
for centuries but then perish, because the blood flow of breeding and the tradition of the clan
are lacking. We know from deepest conviction that a community can only succeed in pointing
the way to the future if it has reverence for the ancestors to the earliest times and if it lives
with the conviction of the folk’s eternal origins. We know that only when the recognition of
blood is interpreted as a holy legacy - and that a racially pure clan must be passed along - a
race and a folk can have eternal life. We are permeated by the conviction that only the
generation that is bedded between ancestors and descendants grasps the correct measure for
its task and for its obligation and the minuteness of the individual’s own, mortal self.


Victory of Child


We have learned that only the man with this conviction learns modesty even in times
of success and avoids the mistakes of over-confidence and arrogance. Likewise, only such
men can bear times of greatest distress with the same iron calm they showed in times of good
fortune, living in Spartan simplicity. We teach our SS-men - beyond the marriage law and
proper mate selection - that our whole struggle, the death of two million in the World War, the
political struggle of the past fifteen years and the expansion of our Wehrmacht to protect our
borders, would all be useless and in vain, if the victory of German spirit is not followed by the
victory of the German child.


We have made it one of our tasks to do more than talk, rather to proceed through
deed and example in our own ranks. We will today and in the future impress on our men that
the most holy and valuable person of our folk is the mother who is conscious of her sacred
duty, and that the German child is the most precious thing.


The Honour Law of the SS-Man


Another law established by the SS on November 9, 1935 that each SS-man has the
right and the duty to defend his honour with a weapon . The law simultaneously defines who
is a SS-man in the sense of the SS order. Each SS member must serve as a trainee for 1 14
years, give his SS-oath to the Fithrer, honorably perform his Work Service and Wehrmacht
service and be at least 21 years old. He is then presented with the SS-dagger and is accepted
into the SS-order as a full-fledged SS-man. Each of us is an SS-man, whether enlisted man or
officer or Reichsfiihrer. We have given ourselves this honour law, because we are convinced
that only the man who knows that he can one day anywhere be taken to account for each of
his deeds and words will grasp the final meaning of our community and learn to serve his folk
as an itreproachable, clean soldier of life. For this honour law obligates him to preserve his
own honour just like it demands others to respect him. It imposes principle, goodness and
generosity toward his comrades, his countrymen and his fellow human beings as a duty.


Now I may take a stand on a few problems. First: In a booklet entitled “50 questions
and answers for the SS -man”, the first question is: “What is your oath?”


72


Faith in God


The answer is: “We swear to you, Adolf Hitler, as Fihrer and chancellor of the
German Reich, loyalty and courage. We promise you and the superiors designated by you
obedience unto death. So help us GOD!”


The second question is: “So you believe in a God ?” The answer is: “Yes, I believe
in a God!”


The third question is: ““What do you think of a person who does not believe in God?”


The answer is: “I consider him arrogant, megalomaniac and dumb. He is not suited
for us.”


I have informed you of these three questions and answers in order to clearly present
our stand on religion. Be assured that we would not be able to form such an ironclad corps, if
we did not have conviction and faith in a God who stands over us, who has created us, our
fatherland, our folk and the earth, and who has sent us our Fithrer.


We are piously convinced that in accordance with the eternal laws of this earth we
must stand by every deed, every word and every thought . Everything that our mind thinks up,
our tongue speaks and our hand carries out does not stop with its execution, rather it is a cause
that will have an effect, an inescapable course that will return to us and our folk as a blessing
or as a curse. Believe me, people with this stance are anything but atheists. We refuse to allow
ourselves to be slandered as atheists - through misuse of the term pagan-simply because we as
a community do not embrace a particular denomination or dogma or demand this from any of
our men . We allow ourselves the right and the freedom to draw a sharp and distinct line
between religious/ church/ denominational activity and political/ world -view soldiery, and we
will fiercely combat any violation. Likewise, we teach our men - despite much justified
outrage and many bad experiences that our folk has had in this area in the past - to respect
everything that is holy to any folk comrade - due to his education and conviction - without
any insult in word or deed.


Blood and Soil


The second realization I present to you, German peasants, as Reichsfiihrer-SS who is
himself a peasant in blood and in essence. The concept of blood represented by the SS from
the beginning would be doomed to death, if it was not inseparably tied to the conviction of
the value and the holiness of the soil. From the beginning the main office for race and
settlement has set down the concept of “blood soil” in its name in a different formulation, but
with the same meaning. I an assure you that it is no coincidence that the Reich Peasant Leader
of the German Reich has belonged to the SS for years and as an Obergruppenfiihrer is chief of
this race and settlement main office . It is also no coincidence that I am a peasant and that I
belong to the Reich Peasant Council. Neither peasants nor SS-men belong to the type of
people who superfluously say a lot of nice words. It can be plainly and clearly said that, as it
was in the past, so will it remain in the future. Where Adolf Hitler’s peasants stand, they will
always have the SS at their side as their most faithful friend . Likewise, we know that where
Adolf Hitler’s SS stands, the German peasant stands at its side as best comrade and friend. So,
it is today and so it will be for all the future.


73


Security Service and
Secret State Police


I know there are many people in Germany who feel ill when they see this black
uniform. We understand this and we do not expect that we will be loved by all too many. We
should and we will respect all who hold Germany dear. Those who have a bad conscience
toward the Fiihrer and the nation should fear us. For these people we have built an
organization called security service. As the SS we also provide the men for service in the
Secret State Police . We will constantly fulfil our task of being the guarantor of Germany’s
security internally just like the German Wehrmacht guarantees the protection of the honour,
greatness and peace of the Reich externally. We will make sure that never again in Germany,
Europe’s heart, the Jewish-Bolshevik revolution of sub- humanity is ignited from within or by
emissaries from outside. We will become a pitiless executioner’s sword for all of these forces
- whose existence and activity are known to us - on the day of even the slightest attempt, be it
today or in decades or in centuries.


Bolshevism - Not a
Contemporary Phenomenon


I return to the beginning and wish to again stress that Bolshevism is not a
contemporary phenomenon that can be debated out of existence or thought away because we
wish that. We know him, the Jew, the people comprised of the refuse of all peoples and
nations of this planet, upon who it has stamped its Jewish blood kind. Its wish is world
domination, its desire is destruction, its will is extermination, its religion is godlessness and
its idea is Bolshevism. We do not underestimate him, because we believe in the divine
mission of our folk and we believe in our again resurrected strength through Adolf Hitler’s
leadership and work.


The SS


We stand and have grown within this resurrected folk as the SS, founded on the
Fuhrer's order. Although I tried today to describe the organization, foundation and task of the
SS to you, no one will understand us unless they try to inwardly with their blood and with
their heart. It cannot be explained why we, so small in number, roughly two hundred thousand
men within the German folk, have this strength within us. It cannot be logically explained
why today each of us who wears the black uniform, regardless where he may be, is carried by
the strength of this our community. Be it on the saddle of a race horse, fencing in the gym,
serving as an official, carrying stones as a construction worker, holding a high government
office, doing service as a soldier, creating works of German spirit or standing his ground
anywhere like a man, perhaps unseen.


Each of us knows that he does not stand alone, rather this unprecedented strength of
two hundred thousand men sworn together bestows enormous energy on him, just like he
knows that he is a representative of this black corps of this his community. He must honour it
with best achievement at his post. Thus, we assemble and march in accordance with in-
alterable laws as a national socialist, soldierly order of Nordic determined men and as a sworn
community of clans along the path into the distant future. We wish and we believe that we
will not only be the grandchildren who fought more successfully, rather beyond that the
ancestors of far future generations necessary for the eternal life of the German/Germanic folk.


74


On fomofexuality


When we took over power in 1933, we came across the gay clubs. The registered
members totaled two million; conservative estimates by processing officials go as high as two
to four million homosexuals in Germany. Personally I think the number was not that high
because I do not believe that all those who were in the clubs really were personally
homosexual. On the other hand, of course I am convinced that not all homosexuals were
registered in the clubs. I estimate that there were between one and two million. A million is
really the minimum which we must assume; that is the smallest and mildest estimate that is
allowed in this matter. I ask you to keep this in mind. We have in Germany according to the
latest census probably 67 to 68 million people, which means, counting very roughly, about 34
million men. Therefore there are approximately 20 million sexually potent men (i.e. men over
16 years old). The estimated number may be off by a million, but that does not matter. If I
assume the number of one to two million homosexuals, it is clear that about 7 or 8 or 10% of
the men in Germany are homosexual. If this remains the case, it means that our nation (Volk)
will be destroyed (lit.“go kaputt”) by this plague. A nation will not endure in the long run if
the balance and equilibrium between the sexes is disrupted in this manner.


Furthermore if you take into consideration the fact, which I have not yet mentioned,
that, with the number of women remaining constant, we have around two million men too few
(that many having died in the war), then you can imagine how the enormity of two million
homosexuals and two million dead, therefore altogether of around four million missing from
the number of men capable of having sex, upsets the balance of the sexes in Germany and is
leading to catastrophe. I would like to go over with you a couple of ideas on the issue of
homosexuality. Among the homosexuals there are those who take the view: what I do is
nobody else business, it is a purely private matter. However, all things which happen in the
sexual sphere are not the private affair of the individual, but impinge upon the life and death
of the nation and mean world power or swissification. A people which has many children has
the qualifications for world power and world domination. A people of good race which has
too few children has a sure ticket for the grave, for insignificance in 50 to 100 years, for burial
in two hundred and fifty years. However, even apart from this number — I have taken up only
the numerical issue-this nation can go kaput from something else. We are a men-state
(Mannerstaat), and, with all the faults which this men-state has, we must staunchly hold on to
it, for the constitution of the men-state is the better one. There have also been in history
women-states. You have surely heard of the word matriarchy. There were Amazon-states not
only in fable but in fact. There were matriarchal constitutions in the friezes — especially
among maritime peoples (lit. “Sea-peoples”). We can follow their traces and emergence even
up to our time. It is no mere coincidence that Holland gladly lets itself be ruled by a queen
and that in Holland the birth of a daughter, the Queen, is more welcomed than the birth of a
son. This is no peculiarity, but derives from the ancient instincts of maritime peoples.* For
centuries, for millennia, the Germanic peoples and especially the German people have been
officially ruled by men. This men-state, however, is now in the process of going kaputt on
account of homosexuality. In the field of government I see the main error in the following: the
state, the organization of the people, the army and whatever else is connected with state
institutions, (people in) all these attain their positions based on merits, apart from human
shortcomings (sc. of those who make the selection). Even the occasional quite unrealistic
attainment of an official post after the “First” (Einser) in the judicial examinations is
nevertheless still a selection based on merit. The selection in this case is made according to
merit because first the First is taken, and then the Bruckeinser exam and finally the Second
exam, etc., are taken.


76


In the positions of the state and the economy, in which women are employed, no
honest man will be able to claim that the position is gained purely on the basis of merit. For
be honest-there are only men here, therefore one can say it very calmly — in the moment when
you choose a typist and you have two candidates before you, a very ugly 50-year old one who
types 300 syllables (per minute), almost a genius in this field, and another who is 20 years old,
racially sound (gutrassige), and pretty and who types only 150 syllables, you will — I would
have to misjudge you all completely (sc. to think otherwise) — probably will have earned mine
and a thousand moral justifications because the other is old and could so easily get sick and
whatever, take the pretty young 20-year old candidate who types fewer syllables. Well, one
can laugh, for this is harmless and proves meaningless because, if she is pretty, she will soon
get married; and besides the position of stenographer is not crucial for the state; it now has
others to choose from. But in the moment when this principle, not to pick purely on merit — I
want to say this now in all seriousness — an erotic principle, a male-female, a sexual principle
takes root in the men-state from one man to another, the destruction of state begins. I will take
an example from life. I want to emphasize that I say: from life. I want to interject here in this
matter that I doubt that any place on the present inhabited earth has gained so much
experience in the field of homosexuality, abortion, etc., as we have in Germany as the Secret
State Police. I believe that we can really speak as the most experienced people in the field.
Councillor X is homosexual and is not selecting on the basis of the merit-principle the
assessors that he needs for his office in the government. He will not choose the best lawyer,
he will not say that assessor X may not be the best lawyer, but he has received a good score,
has been in the practice (of law), and, what is much more significant, looks good racially and
is ideologically in order. No, he does not take a well-qualified and good looking assessor, but
rather seeks out the one who is also a homosexual. These people know each other with a
glance across a room. If at a dance you have 500 men, within a half hour they have mutually
picked out those who have the same disposition as they. How that happens, we normal people
cannot at all imagine.


The councillor seeks out the assessor who has the worst score and who is also
ideologically out of order. He does not ask about his performance, but recommends him to the
director of the ministry for appointment. He praises him and justifies his recommendation in
detail. The assessor is now hired, for it will never occur to the director of the ministry to ask
for greater details and to examine the hiring more closely because from the outset as an old
official he assumes that the councilor's recommendation is based on merit. The idea that the
assessor has been recommended due to the similarity of his sexual predisposition does not
enter the head of a normal man. It does not stop with these two because the assessor, who is
now a governmental official, will proceed on the same principle. If in a men-state you have a
man with such a disposition in any position of authority, you are sure to find there three, four,
eight, ten or even more men of a similar disposition; for one draws in another, and watch out
if there are one or two normal men among these people; they are basically damned, they can
do what they want but they will be ruined. Let me give you an example of a comrade from
this very circle, for whom it went like this. SS-Obergruppenfiihrer von Woyrsch was present
in Silesia at the time of his struggle with the homosexual SA-Gruppenfiihrer Heines and the
homosexual Gauleiter and Oberprasident Briickner. Since he was the man who upset this
wonderful accord, he was persecuted not because, as was said, he is not like us, but always on
moral, political, ideological — National-Socialist grounds. Homosexuality therefore undoes in
the state every merit, every basis for merit, and destroys the state in its foundations. That is
not all: the homosexual is a thoroughly mentally-ill man. He is soft, he is in every crucial
regard a coward. I believe that he can be brave here or there in war; in the field of civil
courage however they are the most cowardly men that there are. Interconnected with this is
the fact that the homosexual lies pathologically. He is not lying-to take an extreme example —
as a Jesuit. The Jesuit lies for a purpose. He says anything whatever with a beaming face and
knows that he is deceiving you. He has a moral foundation: for the glory of God; majorum dei


77


gloriam. The end justifies the means. There is a whole moral philosophy, a moral doctrine that
Saint Ignatius worked out. The Jesuit therefore is lying and knows it; he does not forget for a
moment that he is lying. The homosexual however lies and believes it himself. If you ask a
homosexual about something: Have you done that? Answer: No. I know of cases where
homosexuals interviewed by us said: with my sacred oath, in honour of my mother, or may I
immediately drop dead here if this is not true. Three minutes afterwards, when with the help
of our evidence we said to him, “Please, and this?”, he unfortunately did not topple over, but
is still alive. I never understood that in the beginning. In the years 1933-34 we approached
these matters like ignorant fools because that was and is a world which to a normal man is so
strange that he can hardly imagine it. Gruppenfiihrer Heydrich and I and some other people
had to really learn in the field and only thanks to bad experiences. I asked myself at the
beginning if the fellows were lying. Today it is quite clear to me that they cannot help it. I
therefore think no more of asking a homosexual: can you give me your word? I do not
anymore because I know that I will get a false word. At the moment in which he says
something with watery eyes, the homosexual is convinced that it is true. In my experience
homosexuality leads to an absolute, I would almost say, mental insanity and madness. The
homosexual is of course the most appropriate object for every kind of extortion, firstly
because he is himself liable to arrest, but secondly also because he is a soft fellow and thirdly
because he lacks will and nerve. The homosexual has besides — I will show you just a few
things in this area — an insatiable desire to communicate in all areas, especially in the sexual
area. You usually find that the one who gets caught then tells you uncontrollably all the names
he knows. Since there is — I must speak from their point of view — no fidelity in the love of
man for man, as there is otherwise fidelity among men, although homosexuals pretend to love
each other. The homosexual tells everything unrestrained and does so in the hope that he can
perhaps save his own skin thereby. We need to be clear about this, if we continue to have this
vice in Germany without being able to fight it, then that is the end of Germany, the end of the
Germanic world. Unfortunately we do not have it as easy as our ancestors. With them these
select few individual cases were of an abnormal kind. The homosexual, who was called
Urning, was sunk in the swamp. The professors who find these bodies in the swamp are
determined to not realize that in ninety out of a hundred cases they have before them a
homosexual who with his robe and all was sunk in the swamp. That was not a penalty, but
rather just the extinction of an abnormal life. That had to be removed, as we pull out nettles
and throw them in a pile and burn them. There was no feeling of revenge, but the person in
question had to go. So it was with our ancestors. With us unfortunately that is, I have to say,
no longer possible. Within the framework of the SS I would like to explain very clearly the
following. I stress this point: I know exactly what I am saying. This of course is not intended
for leaders’ meetings, but you can repeat it conversationally in individual discussions with
one person or another: In the SS today we still have about one case of homosexuality a month.
In the entire SS in a whole year approximately eight to ten cases occur. I have now decided
upon the following: in each case these people naturally will be publicly degraded, expelled,
and handed over to the courts. Following completion of the punishment laid down by the
court, by my orders they will be sent to a concentration camp, and they will be shot in the
concentration camp while trying to escape. I will make this known by order to the unit to
which the person in question belonged. I hope thereby finally to have done with persons of
this type in the SS, so that we will at least keep pure the good blood which we have in the SS
and the on-going recovery of the kind of blood which we are cultivating for Germany. But
this does not solve the problem for all of Germany. One should harbour no illusions about the
following. If I bring the homosexual to court and have him locked up, the case then is not
finished, for the homosexual comes out of prison just as homosexual as he went in. Therefore
the whole issue is not cleared up. It is cleared up only to the extent that this vice has been
denounced, in contrast to the years before our seizure of power. Although we had the
paragraphs before the war, during the war, and after the war, in reality nothing happened. I
can best make that clear by an example: in the first six weeks of our activity in this area in
1934 we brought more cases to court than had the entire police department in Berlin in 25


78


years. No one should come and say that the problem got big only because of Rohm. He of
course was a big setback, but the problem flourished before the war, during the war, and even
after the war.


Now you see you can regulate everything possible with state and police measures.
One can manage the prostitute problem which in and of itself is quite harmless in comparison
to this other problem. That is a matter that by certain measures can be brought under
sustainable control for a civilized nation. We will be exceedingly generous in this matter
because one cannot, on the one hand, want to prevent all the youth from drifting toward
homosexuality and, on the other hand, block for them every sexual outlet. That is madness. In
the end every blocked opportunity to meet up with girls in big cities — even if it is for money —
has therefore a big downside.


Amid all these considerations we must not forget that Germany has unfortunately
become (up to two thirds of it) an urban nation. The village does not have these problems. The
village has its natural and healthy regulation of all these issues. There despite the clergyman,
despite Christian morality, despite a thousand years of religious education, the youth climbs
through the bedroom window of the girl. The problem is thus put in order. There are a few
children born out of wedlock; a few of them are sprinkled about the village, and the minister
is glad of it, for that gives him a topic for the pulpit. The boys do the same thing as before and
— do not be fooled — as was done in our past. The whole theory which one has rightly built up
that the Germanic girl, if she is unlucky enough not to get married until 26 or 30-years old,
lived up to that time as a nun, is a myth. The blood laws, however, were strict, that no guy and
no girl was allowed to mess around with someone of inferior blood. That law was relentlessly
and strictly observed. Furthermore this was strict: marital fidelity. If that was broken by the
woman, the death penalty was imposed. For from that there was a danger that foreign blood
come in. That was all natural; the social order then was clean and decent and acted in
accordance with the laws of nature and not as our order today against the laws of nature. As I
said, the questions which belong to this sector can somehow be brought into order. The more
that we facilitate early marriage, that our men can get married at the age of 25, the more the
other problem decreases: it then takes care of itself. The issue of homosexuality, however,
cannot bring itself into order.


Obviously I can — an issue that we often bandied back and forth-lock up all the male
prostitutes in Germany and put them in a camp. This can be done forthwith. I only pose to
myself the question: if I lock up 20,000 hustlers from the big cities, will I bring back to a
normal way of life the maybe three or four thousands of these who are young enough (17 to
18) to be brought back by means of discipline, order, sports, and work; it has been done
successfully in quite a number of cases. But the moment when the hustlers are not there — I
am not going to lock up the homosexuals — then there is a risk that the millions of
homosexuals will seek new victims for themselves. So this is a sword that cuts both ways. We
will gather up all of these 17 to 18 years old boys, except for those who are already totally
spoiled, and bring them into a camp. We will try to make these boys reasonable again,
something which, as I said, has already been done successfully in a large number of cases. All
this does not solve the whole problem. The only solution I see is as follows: we cannot let the
qualities of the men-state and the benefits of male society diminish through errors. We have
overall, in my opinion, a much too strong masculinization of our whole life; this has
proceeded so far that we militarize impossible things (sc. things that cannot be militarized),
that we — I may say it openly here — can attain perfection in nothing, whether it is to line
people up in formation or to organize them or to have them pack knapsacks. I feel as though I
were witnessing a catastrophe when I see girls and women — especially girls — who march
through the area with wonderfully well packed knapsacks. That can lead to trouble. I view it
as a catastrophe when women’s organizations, communities of women, and women’s
federations become active in an area; that destroys all feminine charm, all feminine dignity


73


and grace. I view it as a disaster if — I am talking about things in general, for it does not apply
to us (in the SS) directly — we foolish men want to turn women into logical instruments of
thought and educate them in everything, which is only possible if we so masculinize them that
in time the difference between the sexes, the polarity, disappears. Then the path to
homosexuality is not far. I see it as a disaster if, for example, just as in previous years it was
the work of the students union — to pick out an example from the movement — to pack
knapsacks wonderfully well and to drill. Clearly, I do not need a student’s union for that. I
recently spoke with the new student union leader and told him: “My dear Scheel, if I catch
you doing military drills with your comrades, then you absolutely have me as an enemy. In
student houses you have to work mentally and to lead intellectually and bring society into
order.“ I once saw a student newspaper — it was, I believe, the newspaper of the Saxon
Student Association; on the front page of this newspaper for the mental work of young
academics, eight men were shown who were lined up in two rows, while the spiritual leader
checked the direction (Richtung). That in itself is the work of the non-commissioned officer,
the sergeant, the company commander, or the battalion chief if he just has a tic to always
check the direction. However, this is definitely not the work of an intellectual institution. If
we are told from abroad, “You can really be nothing more than military,“ that is then partly
not too inaccurate. The question now is posed: the SS says it is an order. The party also says it
is an order. These claims are not at all mutually exclusive. We are very clearly and expressly a
National Socialist order — and now comes the racial determination — of definitely Nordic men
and a sworn community of their kin (Sippe). We are firstly a soldier order, not the, but a
National Socialist soldier order, bound by rearing and blood to Nordic blood, a tribal
community (Sippengemeinschaft), if you will. Previously one would have said: an association
of nobles (Adelsgenossenschaft). I do not purposely use this expression. But I want to say by
using it that our task has to do with the breeding and rearing of people (das
Menschenziichterische), while the task of the political order has to do with the political
leading of the people.


The moment in which it is clear to me that the party is a political order, it must take
on more and more a spiritual meaning and less and less a military meaning, that of packed
knapsacks and falling in line, etc. That applies right down to individual nuances. I have
spoken a lot about these things with party member Ley who has a great understanding of them.
Iasked him, for example, after the really beautiful rally of political leaders at Nuremberg:
“Why do you give a command? I would not do it.” There were 100,000 political leaders on
the field. They would have to be very well drilled soldiers, if the commands: Attention! Raise
the flags! Lower the flags! Should be well carried out by 100,000 men. Why do not you speak
in speech like this: and now we raise the flags, and now we lower the flags!“ It is exactly the
same thing, but it is not an overly virile, soldiery, military form. Why do orders have to be
given in such matters? These are just a few thoughts on this issue. I come back to this point
again. I said we are masculinizing all of life too much. I will cite a few examples, to which
you can probably add some drawn from your personal experience and from experience with
different children. I view it as disastrous for a people when boys tell their mothers: “When we
are marching in the Hitler Youth, see to it that you do not pass by. I would greet you, yes, but
the others would laugh, I would then be considered a mama's boy and a weakling.” I view it
as disastrous for a people when a boy is ashamed of his sister and his mother or is directed to
be ashamed of women, in this case of the women who are closest to him, of his mother and of
his sister who is becoming a woman. When a boy who is in love with a girl is
mocked more than the normal amount, is designated as not fully respectable and as a sissy,
and if one says to him: a guy does not bother with girls, he won’t bother with them. There are
then only friendships with other youths. Men dominate in the world: so the next step is
homosexuality.


These are the thoughts of Herr Bliher (a notorious pederast), which then prove that:
“In general, the greatest form of love is not between man and woman; with that there are


80


children; that is something animalistic. The greatest form is the sublimated love between man
and man. It is only from this that the greatest things in world history have come about.” But
that is the outrageous hypocrisy of these people who stake claim to Alexander the Great and
Bismarck. There are no great men whom the homosexuals do not claim for themselves:
Caesar, Sulla, etc. I think Don Juan is not yet claimed, but otherwise pretty much all. That is
now served up in palatable form to the young people who are already in a hugely
masculinized movement and because of the men-camps have no opportunity to get together
with girls. In my opinion we need not be surprised that we have gone down the road to
homosexuality.


I see a fundamental change only through the following:


This is something particularly urgent for us in the SS: we absolutely must re-educate
the SS man and boy — to the extent that we have influence on them — to become a chivalrous
man or a young gentleman. That is the only way in which we can draw the line very clearly so
that we do not fall into Anglo-Saxon and American conditions. I once told an English woman
who had said that she found it terrible that men greet women first: “With you probably the
hens do the courtship display around the rooster! Does this seem with you to be different from
normal?”. A consequence of the over — privileged woman is that in America no man any
more dares to look at a girl, since otherwise he will be brought before the marriage court and
made to pay for it. In America homosexuality is absolutely a defensive measure for the men
because they have fallen into such slavery to the women. The woman can behave like an ax
there: she just starts hacking away on something. She is never rebuked: the best example of a
tyranny by women!


There is no danger among us, however, that the chivalry of the man be overplayed
and exploited by the other side, since the women in Germany by habit and education are not
inclined to do that. In any case we must educate our young always to be chivalrous men, men
(Menschen) who stand up for women. I recently said to a Hitler Youth leader: “You are
usually so un-Christian, but your attitude toward women is the purest Christianity that is at all
possible.” 150 years ago someone at a Catholic university wrote a doctoral thesis with the title:
“Does a woman have a soul?” From this the whole tendency of Christianity emerges: it is
directed at the absolute destruction of women and at emphasizing the inferiority of women.
The entire substance of the priesthood and of the whole of Christianity is, I am firmly
convinced, an erotic union of men (Mannerbund) for the erection and maintenance of this
2000-year old Bolshevism. I reach that conclusion because I know very well the history of
Christianity in Rome. I am of the conviction that the Roman emperors, who eradicated
(ausrotteten) the first Christians, did exactly the same thing that we are doing with the
communists. These Christians were then the worst yeast which the great city contained, the
worst Jewish people, the worst Bolsheviks that there were. The Bolshevism of that time had
now the power to become great on the carcass of the dying Rome. The priesthood of the
Christian church which later subjugated the Aryan church in unending conflicts goes on, since
the 4th or 5th Century, to long for the celibacy of priests. It relies on Paul and the very first
apostles who derogate the woman as something sinful and permit or recommend marriage as
merely a legal way out of prostitution — that is in the Bible — and derogate the procreation of
children as a necessary evil. This priesthood continues along in this way for several centuries
until in 1139 the celibacy of priests is fully implemented. I am furthermore convinced that the
way out for the few who do not want to yield to this homosexuality, especially for the country
parsons, the majority of whom — more than 50 % — I estimate not to be gay, is to procure for
themselves in confession the necessary married and single women; I assume that in the
monasteries the homosexuality ranges from 90 or 95 to100%. If today the trials that concern
homosexuality among priests went on again and if we would treat the priests as any citizen in
Germany, then I would undertake to guarantee for the next three to four years 200 or more
such trials. The realization of the trials fails to take place not because there is a lack of cases,


81


but because we just do not have as many officials and judges as we would need to employ.
Within the next four years very conclusive evidence will be produced — I hope — that the
Church organization in its leadership, its priesthood, is for the most part a homosexual erotic
men-union (Mannerbund) that on this basis has been terrorizing humanity for the past 1800
years, demands from it the greatest blood sacrifice, and has been sadistically perverse in its
utterances in the past. I need only to recall the witch and heretic trials. The attitude about the
inferiority of women is a typical Christian attitude, and we also who have been national
socialists up to this day — many even who are strict heathens — have unwittingly adopted this
set of ideas.


I know even today very many party members who believe they have to prove the
special firmness of their worldview (Weltanschauung) and their own special masculinity
through very rowdy and truculent behaviour toward women. I recognize furthermore a certain
tendency in our ranks to exclude women from all events and celebrations. These same people
complain then about the fact that women cling here and there to the church, or are not
absolutely 100 percent won over for National Socialism. They however ought not to complain
since they treat women as second class citizens and keep them from all our inner life. No one
needs be surprised then if they are not fully won over for this inner life. We must be clear
about that: the movement, the Weltanschauung has lasting stability if it is supported by the
woman, for men comprehend all things with the mind, while the woman comprehends all
things with feeling. The German woman, not the man, has borne the greater sacrifice of blood
in the witch and heretic trials. The priests knew exactly why they burned 5000-6000 women:
exactly because they emotionally held fast to the old knowledge and the old doctrine and
emotionally and instinctively could not be dissuaded from them, while the man had already
converted by logic and thought: “There is no point. We are going under politically. I adapt, I
let myself be baptized.” I come back to our issue. I see in the whole movement an excessive
masculinization and in this excessive masculinization the seedbed for homosexuality. I ask
you now, if you have the opportunity to discuss these ideas in detail — but not before the entire
officer corps — but to talk about these things with one man or another. Please make sure that
our men — as it has been initiated by me — come together at the summer solstice celebration
with the girls to dance. I think it absolutely is right that we now and then arrange a dance for
the young candidates in the winter to which we now invite not girls who are in any way bad,
but rather the very best, and where we give the SS-man the opportunity to dance with girls
and to be happy and merry with them. I think this is particularly important for the single
reason that no one ever comes down the wrong road in the direction of homosexuality. That
would be a negative reason. But I think it important also for a positive reason: we should not
be surprised if this or that SS-man marries a completely wrong and racially worthless girl if
we do not give the men the opportunity to get to know worthy, racially sound girls. With the
youth I see the need absolutely to take care that the boy of 16-17 years comes together with
girls for a dancing lesson or some other event during communal evenings. The age of 15-16
years — that is a fact from experience — is the age at which the boy is on the tipping point. If he
has a dancing lesson heartthrob or a childhood crush on some girl, he is won over, he has been
drawn away from the dangerous plane (i.e. from the danger of tipping over). In Germany we
do not really need to be concerned — this is a serious question about which one has previously
spoken only with laughter, witty remarks, and dirty jokes, but that, thank God, has stopped —
that we bring the boy and girl together too early and encourage sexual intercourse. No, in our
climate, with our race and our people, it is the case that the 16-year old boy sees that (i.e.
sexual intercourse) as his purest, cleanest and most ideal love, and that for him from the
moment in which he is totally nuts about a girl — I must say it again clearly — a communal
masturbating with mates, a communal friendship of a sexual nature with men or boys, is out
of the question because he is generally shy before the girl. He is humanly bound (menschlich
gebunden). So in that moment the danger is past. We now need to give the opportunity for
that to take place. We must put a stop to the whole tendency, which we have today in youth
and which we may also have in the SS, to mock a man who walks with a girl, a man who is


82


respectful toward his mother, and a boy who is gentlemanly toward his sister. That is the
seedbed for homosexuality. I thought myself obliged to speak to you once on these issues, my
group leaders. This matter is deadly serious and cannot be solved with tracts and moral
theories. Merely by saying: “God, are our people so bad? It is terrible that they have become
so morally depraved,” one does not solve this issue. If we answer this question with a Yes,
then I must ask why are we still making an effort at all on this one point. Or we answer the
question with a No; then we must admit that something in our people has been very wrongly
directed in this area. ...


Gentlemen! A misguided sexuality brings about the craziest thing that the mind can


imagine. To say we are animalistic is an insult to animals, for animals do not do such things.
So, this question about properly guided sexuality is a question of life or death for every people.


83


Dof Reich und furopa


The struggle for Europe's freedom and future has begun. The Reich and Europe are
engaged in the fiercest defensive struggle of this war. Since the days of Stalingrad, the
peoples of Europe have known that only the German Wehrmacht is capable of countering the
Bolshevik danger. Since these days, however, also grows among them the realization that
without the national renewal of the Reich, Europe would have long fallen victim to
Bolshevism long ago.


In his proclamation on the 10th anniversary of the National Socialist seizure of
power, the Fuhrer once again reminded the world of the deeper meaning and goal of this
gigantic struggle of two reevaluations - "what would have become of the German people and
of Europe if on June 22, 1941, the new German Wehrmacht had not held its shield in front of
the continent at the last minute? Who wants to believe that the ridiculous guarantees or
equally unimportant paper declarations of Anglo-Saxon would have saved the world from
invasion by a power which, as American correspondents nowadays which calmly put it today,
has had only one goal for 20 years, to invade Europe as it did at the time of the Great
Migration or the Mongolian to invade Europe, to destroy its culture, and above all to
exterminate its people people in order to get slave laborers for the Siberian tundras? Which
state would have been able to counter this danger except Germany? Who else could have
done? If since 1941 the biggest part of Europe has been united around Germany in the fight
against the dangers of the East, then this can only happen because in 1933 this Germany
received the political, moral and material provisions for leading a struggle which today
decides the fate of the world. Just as at that time there were only two possibilities within
Germany: either the victory of the National Socialist Revolution and with it a planned social
construction of the Reich, or the Bolshevik overthrow and with it the destruction and
enslavement of all, so today there are only these heathen alternatives: Either Germany, the
German Wehrmacht and the countries allied with us and thus Europe are victorious, or the
inner-Asiatic-Bolshevik wave breaks over the oldest cultural continent from the East, just as
destroying and annihilating as this was already the case in Russia itself. Only unworldly
fantasists can seriously believe the Jewish fibber that any British or American paper
declaration would be able to put a stop to such a catastrophe of nations.”


In his appeal to the Wehrmacht, Reichsmarschall Goring also spoke of the truly
European mission of National Socialism, which sees its world-historical justification precisely
in its struggle against the Holschewist threat, as did Reichsmarschall Dr. Goebbels in his
speech on the occasion of the Fuhrer's proclamation. "Today," the Reichsmarschall stated,
among other things, "Germany now stands on the utmost guard for all of Europe. And
whether there are allies, friends, neutral or hostile states in this Europe, they must realize and
know that if this Germany were to collapse, the Bolshevik would not remain in front of the
Swedish or Swiss or any other new country out of inner respect. Bolshevism would at the
same moment would crash down upon Europe. Later, these states will say what they know
inwardly today. Europe is a stepping stone for Bolshevism and an appendage for the Soviet
Union, but both only when there is no German people and no German Wehrmacht. As long as
people and Wehrmacht stand, Europe is the rock on which the Bolshevik blood wave will
break."


National Socialist Germany has thus become the strongest firepower of the European


continent. The peoples of Europe, faced with the imminent Bolshevik danger, are realizing
more and more that the National Socialist revolution is not only a marker in the history of


85


Germany, but within Europe and the world. This realization is reflected in the numerous
messages, rallies and statements on the occasion of the 10th anniversary of the National
Socialist seizure of power. The Italian newspaper "Messaggero", for example, described the
10th anniversary of the National Socialist seizure of power as follows: “Adolf Hitler's
National Socialism had made Germany the insurmountable natural bulwark of Europe
against Bolshevism”, and this was the highest title of merit that Europe could pronounce on
this anniversary of the German rebirth. The Croatian leader Ante Powelitsch, writing in the
"Deutsche Zeitung in Kroatien", described the date of January 30 not only as a turning point
in the political fate of the German people, but of Europe as a whole. It was not only the
beginning of a new epoch for Germany, but also for the other European peoples, indeed for
the whole world. The President of the Hungarian House of Representatives, Andreas Nagy v.
Tasnedy, stated in "Pester Lloyd" that the National Socialist seizure of power in Europe had
ushered in an era that was unique in history, both in its history and in its fateful significance.


The Romanian Deputy Prime Minister Mikai Antonescu also spoke to the Romanian-
German Society in Bucharest about the significance of January 30 for Europe. Antonescu
stated, among other things, that in the past ten years the German Reich has represented a
stronghold of order and a healthy social community, forming at the same time a citadel of
order and strength in the heart of Europe against communism. "Today, knowing that the East
had prepared to storm Europe, one can appreciate what it meant that the Reich had hindered
the spread of dangers and Bolshevism and, as the shield-bearer of Europe, had warded off the
tide that had swamped the whole of Europe ... Aware of serving a European mission, but also
aware that we ourselves would suffer under the Bolshevik rod and the Soviet will of
oppression, we defend our soil, our property and lives, our families and our faith. We are
proud to be able to make our contribution in this War of Destiny." These examples show with
all clarity that precisely the realization of the immense danger threatening Europe from the
East is only making the process of European unification more difficult. But not only Europe,
but also East Asia clearly recognized the world political significance of the National Socialist
revolution. For example, the message addressed to the German people by the Vice-President
of the Information Office of the Japanese Government, Okumura, on January 30 over
Japanese radio states, among other things: "These ten years since the seizure of power by the
National Socialism represent a turning point with which no other event in the entire history of
mankind can be compared. This world war, which connects the Orient and the Occident, will
break the old Anglo-American tradition and their world order and eradicate it at the root.
This world war is truly a turning point in world history that will bring about a moral
reorganization of the world. Looking back over the ten years since the National Socialist
seizure of power, it is evident that the struggle of the ten years has laid the indestructible
foundation stone for the struggle of destiny to establish a world order for the eternal glory of
mankind." In this message it is clearly expressed that the new Germany is not only the leader
of Europe, but also an enormous power factor for the construction of a new world order.


In addition to these voices on the anniversary of the National Socialist seizure of
power, a whole series of statements by European statesmen can be cited which also point to
the growing unity of destiny of the European peoples in the face of Bolshevism. At a major
Falangist rally in Seville, the Spanish Party Minister Arrese declared that today more than
ever the Falangists must help to save Spain and the world from the impending danger and to
make Europe a fortress against Bolshevism. On the fulfillment of this task depended the
future of Spain; for those who believed that a Bolshevik victory would not mean the collapse
of all Europe were mistaken. If the dam holding back Bolshevism could not hold, not a single
nation on the Continent would be spared the Bolshevik wave. The Blue Division, he said, was
not a gallant gesture toward a friendly nation, much less payment for forgotten blood, but
Spain's firm resolve to fight to final victory against the Bolshevik danger. to fight. It is not
enough to take a defensive stance only on the surface, it is necessary to save Europe's unity,
culture and civilization. Spain's mission is to show Europe the common enemy and to urge it


86


as a whole to a new crusade. On the occasion of receiving a parliamentary delegation
presenting the Jarje's answer to the royal throne speech of October 28, 1942, King Boris again
emphasized Bulgaria's solidarity with the Axis powers. If the future of the world is being
forged today, he led i.a. then the Bulgarian people must adapt to all the needs and difficulties
that the world imposes on them. United, united and in the name of its national interests,
Bulgaria will accept all sacrifices and restrictions with full readiness. Even in France there is
gradually a growing realization that only Germany has the power to save Europe from
Bolshevism. The French writer and poet Alphonse de Chateauhriand recently wrote the
characteristic Sab in the magazine "La Gerbe": "Berlin or Moscow, that is the question for
France and all of Europe." Mussolini once again underlined the Axis' unconditional will to
win in a fundamental speech on the occasion of the anniversary of the fascist militia. In it, the
Duce gave above all the only correct answer to the "insane, criminal and puffery dilemma of
Casablanca", as he called the meeting of Churchill and Roosevelt in the West African city.
“On this 20th, anniversary,” he exclaimed, "we answer the nonsensical, criminal and
agitation dilemma of Casablanca that we will never yield as long as we can hold a weapon in
our hand." In this struggle against the Bolshevik-plutocratic world conspiracy, the peoples of
Europe, under the unerring leadership of Germany, have joined together in an iron community
of destiny. You have recognized the danger that threatens the whole of Europe. The order of
the day for Europe today is: mobilize all forces of resistance; Germany has already switched
to total warfare in the face of the immense danger from the East. For total war, i.e. the
mobilization of all material and moral forces, is the only means of mastering this danger. For
this reason Germany has taken a series of measures for the total mobilization of the national
force, Norway has followed the example of the Reich. At a German-Norwegian rally in Oslo,
which was marked by total war, Prime Minister Quisling announced a new blessing on the
introduction of compulsory national service for all men and women. This marks the beginning
of the mobilization of all manpower in Norway as well. Quisling pointed out in his speech
that Bolshevism and the international Jewish world conspiracy are a total threat to the life of
the European peoples, that Europe had never been exposed to a similar crisis. In view of this
dangerous development one thing is necessary: the solidarity of the European continent. All
nationally conscious Norwegians must therefore "unite with the interests of the European and
Germanic community of life".


In this context, two events deserve to be noted that must also be considered from the
point of view of the concentration of forces: the reshuffle of the Italian government by the
Duce and the re-election of the Fonte President Ryti. The Italian government reshuffle
represents a managerial act, which on previous occasions has been called a change of guard,
and signifies a consolidation of all forces under the leadership of the Duce. Ryti's re-election
as President of Finland is an impressive proof of Finnish unity, but at the same time it is also a
powerful demonstration of the Finnish will for freedom and a commitment to the Finnish
people's defensive struggle against the Bolshevik threat.


The peoples of the new Europe are today more united than ever in a common
defensive front against the Bolshevik-plutocratic world conspiracy. The aim of the Soviet
Union in this war is the Bolshevization of the European continent. The Anglo-Saxon war
against Germany is also proving more and more to be a struggle for the Bolshevization of
Europe. England and America, as pacemakers of Bolshevism, have become betrayers of
Europe. They, too, will have to fall if Europe is to live. The Reich and Europe are determined
to fight this battle until a new January 30 comes as a clear result, namely: the unequivocal
victory!


87


Name-biving fiite


[SS document, 4 January 1937]


Today on the 4th of January 1937, from his house at Schorn near Rottach-Egern on
the Tegernsee, SS-Brigadier General Karl Wolff made the following report to me, his present
Reichsfihrer-SS.


“Reichsfiihrer-SS: I am herewith announcing to you our third child, whom my wife,
Frieda, née von Rémhild, bore to me as my first son on the 14th of December 1936, at the end
of the third year of the Third German Reich.”


To this I respond:

“I thank you. I heard your report before witnesses, the God-fathers of this child, that
is myself, SS-Brigadier General Wiligut, SS-Major General Heydrich, and SS-Captain
Diebitsch. Your child will be entered into the birth-registry of the SS and noted down in the
clan-book of the SS.”

Brig. Gen. Wolff thereupon handed the child over to the mother who received it.
Then I instructed SS-Brigadier General Wiligut to carry out the name-giving. SS-Brigadier
General Wiligut wrapped the child in the blue ribbon of life and then spoke the traditional
words:


“The blue ribbon of loyalty runs through your life.


“Whosoever is German and feels himself to be German
must be loyal!


“Birth and marriage, life and death are symbolically
bound together by this blue ribbon.


“And now this, your child, is clinically bound with my
inner wish that he become a real German boy and an
upright German man.”
Now SS-Brigadier General Wiligut took the cup and spoke the traditional words:


“The source of all life is Got!


“From Got flows your knowledge, your duty, your purpose in life, and all understanding of


life.
“Each draught from this cup bears testimony to the fact that you are bound to Got.”


He then gives the cup to the father of the child. Now SS-Brigadier General Wiligut took the
spoon and spoke the traditional words:


88


“This spoon will nourish you henceforth until the time you become a young man. Your mother
declares her love for you with it and punishes you by not feeding you with it when you
transgress against the laws of Got.”


He then gives the spoon to the mother of the child. SS-Brigadier General Wiligut then took
the ring and spoke the traditional words:


“You, child, shall only wear this ring, the clanic ring of the Wolff-family, once you have
proven yourself worthy as a youth to the SS and to your clan.

“And now I give to you, according to the wishes of your parents, and by the mandate of the SS,
the names: Thorisman, Heinrich, Karl, Reinhard.


“Tt is up to you, parents and name-godis, to instill in this child a genuine, brave German
heart, according to the will of Got.


“For you, dear child, I wish that you will guard yourself in such a way that upon becoming a
young man you will want to keep the proud name Thorisman as your first name for your
whole life.”


“OUR GOT GRANT IT!!!”


I herewith sign this document and have requested the name-godis to sign it as witnesses as
well.


The commander: H. Himmler

The name-godis:

Ist name-godi: Reichsfihrer-SS H. Himmler

2nd name-godi: SS-Brigadier General K. M. Wiligut
3rd name-godi: SS-Major General R. Heydrich

4th name-godi: SS-Captain Karl Diebitsch


89


Eulogy to Reinhard feydrich


My leader!
Dear Heydrich Family!
Honored mourning guests!


With the death of SS Obergruppenfiihrer Reinhard Heydrich, the Deputy Reich
Protector of Bohemia and Moravia, Chief of the SD and Security Police, the National
Socialist Movement has made a tragic sacrifice to the fight for freedom of our people. How
incomprehensible to us is the thought that this shining, great human, scarcely 38 years old, is
no longer with us and unable to battle along with his comrades. His unique abilities and pure
character, his mind, his logic and clarity, are irreplaceable. We would not be abiding by his
wishes were we not here with his coffin, heroic thoughts of living and dying investing us, as
they once did.


Words on Heydrich's Life
and His Service in The Navy


When our people confronted the death of its dearest. In this spirit we devote our
ceremony to honoring him, recounting his life, his deeds, and then returning his mortal
remains to the earth. We will fight as he fought during his life and seek to fulfill his role.
Reinhard Heydrich was born March 7, 1904 in Halle on the Saale. He attended elementary
school and a Reform School for his secondary level of education. During his school years, in
1918 after the great break up of our people, the 16-year-old student demonstrated his ardent
love for Germany by volunteering for the volunteer corps "Maercker" and Freikorps "hall,"
which were active in the red regions of mid-Germany. In 1922, at epoch, when soldiering was
despised, he enlisted in the navy. He was a lieutenant in 1926 and a lieutenant in 1928 at sea.
He served as a radio and communications officer and broadened his horizons with foreign
duty and travel.


Heydrich's Introduction to the SS


In 1931 he left the navy. Through one of his friends, SS chief officer of Eberstein, I
met him and inducted him into the SS in July. Heydrich, who had been a lieutenant, became a
simple SS man on the small staff of Hamburg together with other noble, mostly unemployed,
young men, who found there a true calling. Their duty was with the hall and they were
involved with propaganda in the predominantly red quarters of the city. Soon after, I brought
Heydrich with me to Munich and gave him new duties in the little Reich leadership SS.
Politically difficult, during the autumn of 1932, he served loyally and steadfastly, despite the
many demands upon him. After we came to power, I became Munich police chief on March
12, 1933. I immediately gave Heydrich the so-called political division of the presidium. In no
time, he re-organized the division, and in a few weeks transformed it into the Bavarian
Political Police.


90


Heydrich's Role as a Deputy of
the Prussian State Police Force


Soon the division became a model for political police departments in non-Prussian
German territory. On April 20, 1934 the Prussian Minister President, our Reichsmarschall
Hermann Goering, appointed me to lead the State Police of Prussia and appointed Brigadier
SS Heydrich as my deputy. In 1936, the leaders appointed 32-year-old Heydrich, chief of the
newly created security policy. Besides the secret police, he was responsible for all of the
criminal police. The years 1933, 34, 35, 36 were filled with work and innumerable startup
problems. We had to deal with expelling immigrants and traitors. These difficult, painful
duties fell to Heydrich's Security Police and the SD, which had to earn the respect of the states
and the entire empire. By the beginning of 1938, the security police was a strong organization
that could carry out all tasks. Heydrich rendered a great, though unobtrusive, service during
the bloodless march into Austria [Ostmark], the Sudetenland and Bohemia-Moravia, as well
as the liberation of Slovakia, by arresting opponents and keeping a watchful eye on enemies
in synthesis places.


I remind myself to mention here publicly the thoughts of this man, who was feared,
hated and denounced by sub-humans: such as Jews and miscellaneous criminals. Even many
Germans did not understand him. In all measures and actions, he wore the deeds of a National
Socialist and SS one. From the depths of his heart and blood he made the world-view of
Adolf Hitler a reality. Heydrich solved all problems from a racial point of view. His ultimate
goal was the maintenance, protection, and preservation of our blood. To carry out his difficult
task, he had to build and lead an organization, which dealt with evil, criminal, anti-social
elements in our society. There was little joy in this work. Heydrich's view did what only the
best of our people, the racially pure of exceptional character, were viable to battle the
elements with negative social sufficient hardness.


Heydrich's Character


He himself was incorruptible. Flat character and toadies elicited only scorn from him.
But truthful, upstanding people, even if guilty, could rely on his knightly nobility and human
understanding. Yet he never let anything happen that could damage the whole nation or the
future of our blood. No. Should one forget his truly revolutionary creativity in the criminal
police. He approached the question of criminality with a healthy, sober human understanding.
But at the same time, he tired to make the German criminal police a modern and scientific
force. As chief of the International Criminal Police Commission [Interpol today] he gave to
the policemen of the world his wisdom, his experience, and his comradeship. After 1936,
when his service began, there was a continuous decrease in crime. Despite three years of war,
crime incidence has now reached its lowest level ever. People in Germany can walk down the
streets in peace, unmolested, even in the hardest times, in contrast to the "splendid, humane,
democratic countries." Germans can thank Reinhard Heydrich from the bottom of their hearts
for this security.


Both criminal and political miscreants have been severely handled and our security
police will continue to do that. Yet after innumerable conversations with Heydrich, I learned
that this man, who was externally hard and strict, suffered deeply on account of his duty. But
no matter, according to SS law, which he not allowed to save foreign or German blood. When
the life of the nation which in question. He was one of the best teachers of National Socialist
morals and educated the SS leadership corps of the security service and led it with
unimpeachable purity. To the men he commanded, he devoted love and attention, even in the


91


most difficult matters, and showed himself to be a born and bred gentleman. He was a shining
example in his willingness to accept responsibility and was a model of modesty. He let his
work speak for itself and never blew his own horn. Many people were surprised he did. He
took to the interest in all intellectual endeavors of the security service, no matter what their
nature. There was not a trace in him of the fusty old policeman. He worked out the scientific
basis for everything and applied his findings to everyday questions.


Heydrich's Involvement in
The War Front


The war arrived with its many tasks in the newly occupied areas, in Poland, Norway,
the Netherlands, Belgium, France, Yugoslavia, Greece, and above all, Russia. It was difficult
for him, this fighter and doer, not to be right at the front. Besides his tireless devotion to
assigned tasks, which he accomplished day and night as one of the most diligent in the
kingdom, he spent the early mornings of weeks and months gradually obtaining certification
as a pilot and passing his examination as a combat flier. In 1940 he flew combat missions in
the Netherlands and Norway. He was awarded the bronze medal flying and the Iron Cross
second class. But he was not satisfied. In 1941, at the beginning of the Russian campaign, he
flew combat missions, without my knowledge, and I can confirm this fact with joyous pride
and certainty. It was the one secrets he kept from me in the eleven years we worked together.
He was a fighter pilot in a German squadron in southern Russia, and won the silver medal's
front flyers and the Iron Cross first class. At this time, destiny reached out to him. Russian
flak downed his plane, but luckily he landed between the two lines and dragged himself to the
German side, only to go up again the next morning in another plane. I always held to the view
that Heydrich did more important here than as a far off front soldier, even though I understood
his need to do what he did.


He was abiding by the law: "do not save your own blood," and proved himself in
combat, even though his duty as security police chief thing in fact much more dangerous.
Overload in September of this year came his greatest task, and, as we now know, his great
task load. The leader made him Deputy Reich Protector of Bohemia and Moravia when Reich
Protector of Neurath became ill. Many Germans and Czechs thought: here comes the
fearsome Heydrich, who will rule with blood and terror. But during synthesis months, he
showed the world his positive qualities and applied his creative genius abilities in the fullest
measure. He was firm, pursued the guilty, and had enormous respect for German power and
law. Yet he gave those who were willing the opportunity to work with him. There was not a
problem in the many-faceted life of Bohemia and Moravia that this young deputy Reich
Protector did not solve with aplomb, guided by his understanding of our laws and our Empire.


Heydrich's Life Comes to an End


On May 27th, an English bomb hit him from behind . A person paid from the ranks
of the most worthless subhumans had brought him low. Fear and excessive caution were
foreign to him, the greatest sportsman of the SS, a bold fencer, rider, pentathlon champion,
and swimmer. With courage and energy he defended himself and shot twice at his attackers,
though he had been gravely wounded. For days we hoped that his hereditary strength and
disciplined, healthy body would overcome his horrible injury. On the seventh day, June 4,
1942, destiny, God the almighty ancient, ended the life of Heydrich, a deep believer but the
greatest opponent of the use of religion for political purposes. All of us, the kingdom foremost
leader, that he served so loyally, are now gathered to honor Heydrich. He was at the time of
his death a paragon of happy family life, and his two young sons are here to represent his


92


courageous wife, who is expecting another child. Heydrich the leader is awarding the gold
wound badge, and named, on the day of his death, a Waffen SS unit on the eastern front, the
6th SS infantry, "Reinhard Heydrich." Heydrich wants to live on in our holy convictions,
which were his words. He honored and advanced the cause of those who shared his blood.


He wants to endure on account of his talents. He was a musical person and a warrior
bold, happy and earnest, to indomitable spirit, a character of unblemished purity noble,
upstanding and unsullied. He has transmitted synthesis virtues to his sons, who honor his
blood and heritage. His wife and children prosthesis deserve our attention and loving care.
The SS will look after them well. He wants SS to live on in our society. His memory will aid
us when we have tasks to carry out for the leader and the Reich. He wants to fight along with
us, if we remain true to the law until the end. He wants to be our companion in good times
and bad. Therefore, he will be present when we are celebrating with our comrades. For the
security police and security service he created and founded, he wants to be a model that will
never be forgotten, a goal we can aspire to but never reach. He wants to bear witness for all
Germans as a martyr to Bohemia and Moravia which always will be German lands, as they
have been since time immemorial. There, in the world beyond, he will abide among the great
battalions of dead SS men [This is perhaps a reference to the Ancient Germanic concept of
Valhalla]. He wants to be with his old comrades: Weitzel, Moder, Herrmann, Miilverstedt,
Stahlecker, and many others who in spirit are quietly fighting with us. But it is our holy duty
to atone for his death, to take up his tasks, and to pitilessly destroy, without any sign of
weakness, the enemies of our people. I have one last thing to say: You, Reinhard Heydrich,
SS were truly a good one. On a more personal level I thank you for your unwavering loyalty
and wonderful friendship, which united us in this life and death can not obliterate it!


93


Aimer fittack on Chriftianity


We will have to deal with Christianity in a tougher way than hitherto. We must settle
accounts with this Christianity, this greatest of plagues that could have happened to us in our
history, which has weakened us in every conflict. If our generation does not do it then it
would I think drag on for a long time. We must overcome it within ourselves. Today at
Heydrich's funeral I intentionally expressed in my oration from my deepest conviction a belief
in God, a belief in fate, in the ancient one as | called him - that is the old Germanic word:
Wralda. We shall once again have to find a new scale of values for our people: the scale of
the macrocosm and the microcosm, the starry sky above us and the world in us, the world that
we see in the microscope. The essence of these megalomaniacs, these Christians who talk of
men ruling this world, must stop and be put back in its proper proportion. Man is nothing
special at all. He is an insignificant part of this earth. Ifa big thunderstorm comes, he can do
nothing about it. He cannot even predict it. He has no idea how a fly is constructed -
however unpleasant, it is a miracle - or how a blossom is constructed. He must once again
look with deep reverence into this world. Then he will acquire the right sense of proportion
about what is above us, about how we are woven into this cycle. Then, on a different plane,
something else must happen: we must once again be rooted in our ancestors and
grandchildren, in this eternal chain and eternal sequence. By rooting our people in a deep
ideological awareness of ancestors and grandchildren we must once more persuade them that
they must have sons. We can do a very great deal. But everything that we do must be
justifiable vis-a-vis the clan, our ancestors. If we do not secure this moral foundation which is
the deepest and best because the most natural, we will not be able to overcome Christianity on
this plane and create the Germanic Reich which will be a blessing for the earth. That is our
mission as a nation on this earth. For thousands of years it has been the mission of this blond
race to rule the earth and again and again to bring it happiness and culture.


94


Lhe Lotentopf fing


The most important cult-object of the SS is the “death’s head ring” Totenkopf ring. Wiligut is
widely credited with its design. The text of a document which was presented the SS-men with
the ring reads:


I bestow upon you the death’s head ring of the SS.
It is:


A sign of our loyalty to the Ftihrer, our unwavering
obedience to our superiors and our unshakable solidarity and comradary.


The death’s head is an admonition to be prepared at any time to risk our own
individual lives for the life of the collective whole. The runes opposite the death’s head are
holy signs from our past, with which we have been newly reconnected through the philosophy
of National Socialism.


The two Sig-runes symbolize the name of our protection-squad [ Schutzstaffel ]. The
Swastika and Hagall-rune are to keep our attention on our unshakable faith in the victory of
our philosophy.

The ring is crowned all around with oak leaves, the leaves of the old German tree.
This ring may not be sold, and is not allowed to be transferred to others. Upon your
withdrawal from the SS or from life, this ring is to be returned to the Reichsftihrer-SS. Copies


and imitations are punishable by law and you are to protect it from same.


Wear the ring with honor!


96


Query With a Prieft


In 1937 he (Himmler) wrote to a pastor, in reply to a query:


“Every SS man is free to be a member of a church or not. It is a personal matter,
which he has to answer for to God or his conscience.’ SS men should not, however, be
atheists, for ‘that is the only world- or religious view that is not tolerated within the SS.’ 'T
have nothing to do with denominations,’ he told army officers in July 1944, ‘I leave that to
each individual. But I have never tolerated an atheist in the ranks of the SS. Every member
has a deep faith in God, in what my ancestors called in their language Waralda, the ancient
one, the one who is mightier than we are."


"That, too, may be said calmly. Because you shall get to know my thoughts. I have
nothing to do with denominations, I leave that to every one. But I have never tolerated an
atheist in the ranks of the SS. Everybody is deeply believing in the Sdvdrsal, in the Lord God,
in what my ancestors called in their language Waralda, the Ancient One, that which is more
important than we are. And we are clear about that, that the sayings, man controls nature,
are really only arrogant and stupid sayings. We humans, who are not able to cope with a
situation, if it occurred to nature to let rain fall for eight or ten weeks, or if it occurred to
nature - let's say - to let it snow until the end of June instead of until the end of March or
April this year. Then everything what we call culture and civilization, standard of living in
our conceit, in our megalomania, would have been over.."


99


Che “findu Nazi’


International Business Times spoke with two experts on German culture to explore
Himmler and Hinduism.


Victor and Victoria Trimondi are German cultural philosophers and writers. They
have published books on religious and political topics, including Hitler-Buddha-Krishna-An
Unholy Alliance from the Third Reich to the Present Day (2002), a research about the efforts
by National-Socialists and Fascists to construct a racist Indo-Aryan warrior ideology with
strong roots in Eastern religions and philosophies.


IB TIMES:


Heinrich Himmler was reportedly fascinated by Hinduism and ancient Indian culture,
and he read the Bhagavad Gita, among other classic texts. How and when was he introduced
to Indian culture? Was it prior to his joining the Nazi party or afterwards?


MR. & MRS. TRIMONDI:


Himmler kept a diary where he not only listed the books he read but also provided
extensive comments on these manuscripts. His entries regarding India and Indians were
always very positive. Himmler's Indian reading list started in 1919 [before the Nazi Party was
formed] with a German translation of a novel called Mr. Isaacs: A Tale of Modern India by
Marion Crawfords. Six years later, in 1925, Himmler also praised Hermann Hesse's
Siddhartha as a magnificent book. Himmler was also drawn to The Pilgrim Kamanita by the
Danish author Karl Gjellerup, which was a contemporary best-seller. In his diary, Himmler
commented: A precious narration. The content is the teaching of salvation.


Gjellerup's book quoted several verses from the Vedas, including:


“The one who kills believes that he is killing. The one who has been killed believes
that he dies. Both of them are wrong, for one doesn't die and the other doesn't kill.”


Later, Himmler delivered some of these same philosophies in his speeches to his SS
officers. In the 1920s and the early 1930s, Himmler read some popular books about Hinduism
and Buddhism. Yet, his actual interest in classic Hindu texts came later, when he founded the
SS-Ahnenerbe, the brain trust of the Black Order, a group of highly qualified academics and
occultists that attempted to forge the ideology of a racist warrior religion. In 1937, Himmler
chose Professor Walter Wiist to serve as the president of the SS-Ahnenerbe. Two years later,
Wiist became the curator of this notorious organization. Incidentally, in addition to being one
of the leading Sanskrit scholars of his time, Wiist served as the president of the Maximilian
University in Munich. In the academic world, Orientalists from this particular university were
considered the top experts in their field. Wtist was keenly interested in extracting ideas from
the Vedas and Buddhism of the so-called Aryan tradition in order to give National Socialism a
religious dimension. One slogan of his was: Also above India hovers the sun-sign of the
Swastika. To Wiist, Hitler appeared as the manifestation of a Chakravartin - Indo-Aryan
world emperor. Wiist tried to support this particular speculation by verses from classical
Indian scriptures. Moreover, in one of his emotion-driven speeches, he compared Hitler with
the historical Buddha.


IB TIMES:


100


Germany's fascination with ancient India and its culture began in the 19th century,
no? That is, long before the advent of the Nazis. Is it correct?


MR. & MRS. TRIMONDI:


Indeed, Germany had been a true center for Sanskrit studies in the nineteenth century.
To be exact, there were scholars and writers in this field who either put the emphasis on the
peaceful aspects of Indian culture (e.g. Johann Gottfried Herder and Friedrich Wilhelm
Joseph Schelling) or pointed out the nihilistic side of Buddhism or Shankara philosophy (like
Arthur Schopenhauer). However, with the radicalization of German nationalism, writers
began to put more emphasis on the martial aspects of Hindu culture. One of the first who tried
to blend the warrior ideology of ancient India with Aryan racism was Houston Stewart
Chamberlain, an English-born author who lived in Germany and who was later held in a high
esteem by the Nazis.


IB TIMES:


Is it true that Himmler could read and speak Sanskrit fluently? Where and how did
he learn such a difficult foreign language?


MR. & MRS. TRIMONDI:


We do not have any evidence that he mastered Sanskrit. However, Himmler did not
need to read this ancient tongue since he always had Wiist by his side.


By constantly interacting with Himmler, Wiist was directly involved in his
philosophical and ideological projects, and he could provide an answer to any linguistic
questions coming from the Reichsfiihrer SS.


IB TIMES:


As Reichsfihrer-SS, Chief of the German Police, Minister of the Interior and head of
the Gestapo and the Einsatzgruppen killing squads, Himmler was responsible for the murder
of millions of innocent people. How did he reconcile such brutality with the tenets of
Hinduism, which is generally peaceful?


MR. & MRS. TRIMONDI:


The image of Hinduism as a totally peaceful religion is a widespread fallacy. In fact,
one can find plenty of martial aspects in Hindu culture, which had been emphasized by
various individuals even before the Nazi period, during Hitler's reign, and even today by the
extreme right wing in Europe and elsewhere. For example, in his introduction to a popular
edition of the Bhagavad Gita, Leopold Schroeder, a student of ancient India, wrote that this
poem describes the powerful ethics of Kshatriya (Warrior) religion at a time when the
warriors and kings of India provided a spiritual leadership instead of the priestly caste. It is
very likely that Himmler used this particular edition of the Bhagavad Gita. It was the
Kshatriya, the ancient Hindu warrior caste, and its ethical ideals that fascinated the Nazis so
much among other elements of Indian history and culture.


IB TIMES:


Aside from millions of Jews, Himmler was also responsible for the mass murder of
up to half-million Roma (gypsies). Was he not aware that the Roma are also of Indian descent?


101


MR. & MRS. TRIMONDI:


He must have known it. At the same time, we should remember that Western racist
intellectuals usually divided Indian society into two castes: light-skinned Aryan conquerors
(priests, warriors and merchants) and dark-skinned indigenous Dravidians or Chandalens --
the latter expression goes back to a Sanskrit word Chandala - or, 'The Untouchables.' Himmler
surely viewed the Roma as a part of this outcast group.


IB TIMES:


Bhagavad Gita partially focuses on the adventures of Arjuna, the world's greatest
warrior. Did Himmler fantasize that he was a 20th-century Arjuna fighting for the glory of the
Aryans? Did Himmler view Hitler as his god Krishna - like a reincarnation of god Krishna?


MR. & MRS. TRIMONDI:


When speaking about the Aryan culture proper and the old German or Nordic gods,
Himmler clearly viewed them as parts of the same spiritual ideology. In this sense, Himmler
was indeed fighting for the glory of the Aryans. Thus, Himmler was convinced that the
thunderbolts mentioned in both Indian and European mythologies were references to the
super-weapons of Aryan Gods, who possessed incredible knowledge of electricity. However,
we do not know whether Himmler identified himself with Arjuna or not. At the same time,
considering the fact that he did indeed compare Hitler to Krishna, it is quite possible that he
cast himself as the character of Arjuna. On one occasion, Himmler recited to other people the
following passage from the Gita, in which Krishna says to Arjuna: Every time when man
forgets the sense of justice and truth, and when injustice reigns in the world I become born
anew, that is the law. Having read these words, Himmler added: This passage is directly
related to our Fiihrer. He did arise during the time when the Germans were in the deepest
distress and when they did not see any way out. He belongs to these great figures of light
(Lichtgestalt). One of the greatest figures of light reincarnated himself in our Fiihrer. Based
on this statement, one can assume that perhaps Himmler viewed Hitler as a manifestation of
Krishna and himself as Arjuna.


IB TIMES:


Did Himmler envision the SS as a modern version of the ancient Kshatriya Hindu
warrior caste?


MR. & MRS. TRIMONDI:


This was really a sensation what we discovered in the archives: In 1925, shortly
before he became a member of Hitler's SS, Himmler read about the Freemasons and anti-
masons in Their Fight for World Domination by an Austrian writer named Franz Haiser.
Strange as it may sound, the greater part of the book deals not with Freemasons but with the
Indian caste system. Haiser praised this caste system as the most reasonable and the most
sophisticated social model. He also glorified the Kshatriya (the Warrior) caste as the natural
leaders in society.

Haiser also compared the decline of the caste system in India to the decadence of Western
culture. As a way to prevent this decline, the author proposed the creation of a well-organized,
international and racially pure elite order of warriors that he called the All Aryan Union (all-
arischer Bund). In addition, he advocated for an all-Aryan world revolution and for the
emancipation of the Kshatriya from above. Haiser derided the so-called lower races as crows,
rats, sparrows, louses and fleas and also endorsed the reintroduction of slavery. He envisioned


102


a society in which the Kshatriyas would not be permitted to mingle with other races. In
addition, he drew attention to the Hindu cosmology of global eras: the Yugas, the Holy
Trinity of Brahma, Vishnu and Shiva, and the Indian law code of Manu, which he interpreted
as a guidebook on how to keep the Aryan race pure. After familiarizing himself with all these
ideas Himmler wrote excitedly in his diary: A wonderful book [...] I agree with most of it.
One needs such books. They encourage those who instinctively feel what is right and what is
wrong, but do not dare to think about it because of their false education. Kshatriya caste [is
what] we have to be. This is the salvation. Two years later, in 1927, as a twenty-seven year
old man, Himmler already came to occupy the high position of the Stellvertretender
Reichsfihrer SS. Much of the agenda articulated in Haiser's book could be found later in the
ideology and the structure of the Black Order. Himmler was also familiar with the writings of
the Italian philosopher Julius Evola, a fascist prophet of the Kshatriya ideology.


IB TIMES:


Is it true that Himmler always kept a copy of the Bhagavad Gita in his pocket and
read passages from it every night?


MR. & MRS. TRIMONDI:


Yes, this is true. In fact, it has been well documented by Felix Kersten, his Finnish
masseur, that Himmler liked to indulge in philosophical monologues in his presence. The
Reichsfiihrer-SS called the Gita a high Aryan Canto. Kersten also reported that Himmler read
the Vedas, especially the Rig-Veda, the speeches of the Buddha, and the Buddhist Visuddhi-
magga. Himmler made frequent references to karma, especially when he was talking about
providence. He also believed in reincarnation: With one life life is not finished. What good
and bad deeds a man has done has an effect on his next life as his karma.


IB TIMES:


Discuss Himmler's fascination with Yoga and what he sought to gain from this
practice.


MR. & MRS. TRIMONDI:


The practice of Yoga was already well known during the Nazi regime -- but we do
not know whether Himmler did Yoga exercises or not. We only know about his plan to
introduce meditation practices and spiritual retreats for the elite members of the SS in a
special center located at Wewelsburg, a medieval castle. Himmler confided to Felix Kersten: I
admire the wisdom of the founders of Indian religion, who required that their kings and
dignitaries retreat every year to monasteries for meditation. We will later create similar
institutions.


IB TIMES:


Did Himmler (and other top Nazi leaders) use the Bhagavad Gita as a kind of an
ideological blueprint for the Holocaust and World War II?


MR. & MRS. TRIMONDI:
Several historians believe that Himmler's notorious Posener Speech in front of a
hundred SS officers in 1943 was highly influenced by the spirit of the Bhagavad Gita. In this


particular speech, Himmler stressed that if the destiny of the nation called for it, every
member of the SS had a duty to conduct drastic measures brutally and without pity and


103


without regard to blood relationship and friendship. This utterance brought to mind the
instructions Krishna issued to Arjuna, demanding from the latter to attack his kin and kill
them. In the same speech, after mentioning unworthy human beings who were going to be
murdered (an indirect reference to the Jews), Himmler assured his listeners: These deeds do
not inflict any damage on our inner selves, our souls, and our characters. In the same manner,
Krishna assured Arjuna that the latter acts would not pollute his higher self by completing his
murderous duty: Whatever I do, it cannot pollute me. [...] The one who merges with me, frees
himself from everything, and he is not bound by his deeds. Thus, Himmler encouraged the
members of the SS to conduct their murderous acts, unemotionally in a cool detached manner
just as Krishna instructed the charioteer Arjuna. On the whole, the Posener Speech was
focused on the spiritual dimensions of war and the conduct of the warrior, which is the chief
element of the Kshatriya philosophy of Hinduism. The German diplomat and undercover U.S.
agent in Nazi-Germany Hans Bernd Gisevius concluded: There is no doubt that for Himmler
the Bhagavad Gita is the book of the Great Absolution.


IB TIMES:


During the war, there was a community of Indian nationalists living in Berlin. The
most prominent among them was Subhash Chandra Bose, who met with many top Nazi
officials, including Himmler, Ribbentrop, Goering and Hitler himself. Is it true that Himmler
was generally interested in helping Bose to achieve independence for India, whereas most of
the other German leaders only used Bose in a ploy to stoke anti-British sentiments in India?


MR. & MRS. TRIMONDI:


Unlike other Nazi leaders, Himmler and the curator of the SS-Ahnenerbe Walther
Wiist, provided some ideological support to Bose's political agenda. Wiist spoke about the
need to work closely with Bose and contemplated holding a German-Indian congress of
Indian scholars representing both countries. Yet, except for these utterances, neither Himmler
nor Wiist did anything specific to support Indian nationalists. Bose delivered an emotional
speech for British soldiers of Indian origin, who were captured by the Wehrmacht in Africa
and who were held in Germany as POWs. He said to them: Hitler is your friend. He is the
friend of the Aryans, and you will return to India as the liberators of your motherland. The
Indian Kshatriya legacy was not the only Oriental culture that attracted Himmler and his
ideologists when they were working to construct their racist Indo-Aryan warrior religion. In
addition to Hinduism, the Reichsfiihrer SS was also interested in the militant Samurai Zen
philosophy of Japan as well as the occult scriptures of Tibetan Buddhism. Indeed, one of the
goals of the famous SS expedition to Tibet headed by Ernst Schaefer in 1939 was to find in
the Lamaist monasteries scrolls containing secret Aryan teachings.


104


“Jews have taken over capitalism and know well how to play ‘internationalism’
against peoples in the struggle for the establishment of their power. Internationalism would
nullify the individual importance of peoples and would have as its goal the enslavement of
workers throughout the world. There would be only one way to avoid this fate: the union of
all German workers based on nationalism to institute a socialist regime. The aim is to create
a powerful, nationalist, socialist, and German workers’ party”


106


Der Untermen{ch


"As long as there are people in the world, the struggle between the people and the
subhumans will be an inevitable part of history, this struggle waged by the Jews against the
peoples, is as far as we can look back, of natural outcome of life on our planet. You may
safely suppose, that the struggle for life and death is as much a law of nature as the struggle
of the plague bacillus against the healthy body." - Reichsfihrer-SS Heinrich Himmler 1935


As night rises against day, as shadow and light are eternal enemies- so the greatest
enemy of earth-controlling man is man himself. The beast-man - whose seemingly equal
natural creation with hands, feet and a kind of brain, with eyes and mouth, is nevertheless a
completely different, a terrible creature, is only a shadow of a human being, with human-like
features - spiritually and soul-wise even lower than an animal. In the interior of the creature a
terrible chaos of wild boundless appetites: untold destructiveness, primitive avarice and
undisguised meanness. Der Untermensch - nothing else! For not everything is equal that looks
like a man.


Woe to him who forgets!


Whatever great works, thoughts and arts this earth possesses - man has conceived,
created and accomplished them; he thought and invented, for him there was but one goal: to
work his way up to a greater existence, to shape the unsatisfactory, to replace the imperfect
with better. That's how the culture grew.Thus the plow, the tool, became the house. So man
sought community, so became the family, so became the people, so became the state. Thus
man became good and great. Thus he rose above all life beings. That's how he became God's
neighbor. But the beast man lived, too. He hated the work of others. He raged against it,
secretly as a thief, openly as a slanderer - as a murderer, he joined with his peers.


The beast called the beast. Never could he maintain peace, never had peace. What he
needed was the semi-darkness, the chaos. He shunned the light of cultural progress. He
needed for his self-preservation, the swamp, hell. But not the sun. And this underworld of the
beast man found its leader: - the eternal Jew. He understood them, he knew what they wanted.
He stimulated their meanest lusts and desires, he let the darkness come over them. It began at
the time of the destruction of the Persians, the Purim festival, the first glorification of
organized mass murder.75,000 Aryan Persians fell victim to Jewish hatred. Eternal is the
hatred of the beast man towards the enlightened forms, the bearers of light. Eternal threatens
the destruction of the evening land from the wastelands. Eternally, the forces of destruction
coalesce in the steppes, Atilla and Djingiz Kahn gather their hordes and rage across Europe,
leaving behind living Apocalypse, fire and death, rape, murder and dismay, so that the world
of light and thousand sciences, the powers of progress and human greatness, sinking back into
the abyss of the primordial state. Eternal is the will of the beast man. That it becomes a
wasteland again, where just for a moment the light exalted gratitude illuminated the darkness,
then his last goal was achieved, chaos. Thus the battle between the two opposites has been
going on for thousands of years according to terrible, incalculable laws, each time finding an
Atilla, a Djingiz Kahn, who is pushing open the gates of Europe, who knows only one thing:
the complete destruction of all that is beautiful. The embodiment of this urge to destroy is
today called Bolshevism! But this Bolshevism is not a sign of our times. It is not a product of
our days! It is not a novelty in the context of human history. But it is as old as the Jew himself.
His trailblazers are called Lenin - Stalin.


107


"In a people, the leading heads are massacred in a bloody way, and then it comes
into state, into economic, into cultural, into spiritual, into soul and into physical slavery. The
rest of the people, deprived of their own value by countless bloody mixtures, degenerate- and
in a short span of a few hundred years one remembers at most, that once such a people
existed."


Reichsfiihrer-SS Heinrich Himmler 1935


Endlessly the steppe of the Russian wide - eastern Europe. The cultural waste
between Central Europe and this giant region is rigid and arid. And yet, here and there across
the border is the same earth - but not the same man! For only man can leave his mark on the
landscape. Therefore on the side of Germany ordered fertility, harmonious planning of the
fields, well thought-out collections of villages, on the other side however the areas of
impenetrable thickness, of the steppe, of the endless jungles, through which the silted up
rivers struggle to find their way. Poorly used, fertile womb of the black earth, which could be
a paradise, a California of Europe, and in reality neglected, savagely neglected, labeled to this
day with an exemplary cultural disgrace, which is an eternal indictment of the beast man and
his rule. Tearful fate of the black earth. Endless, fertile, neglected but blessed with treasures
Eastern Europe - not removed from the rest of the earth, but brutally separated by a chasm of
randomness. Eastern Europe, it could not rise above a certain primitiveness. It saw only chaos,
for it lacked the human being, the valuable culture-bearer, the genius who with his system
directed the building up of peace, who commanded the meaningful valuation of the infinite
treasures and the fertility of the soil. This country knew only the limitless plundering and the
murderous war industry. Certainly, even eminent peoples of Western and Central Europe have
used this land as a destination. There were once Goths and Waregers who founded empires
and brought culture here. A Hanserian, a Swede, a Fleming, a Dutchman, a Schwabe and
Lower Saxon settlers tried to bring light into the darkness. In all centuries a voice for help was
heard. Peter the Great, Catherine I. and what are their names, cried the German peasant and
the German officer, the European scholar, Physician and engineer.But again and again the
powers of darkness prevailed, and in a wild skirmish, with a bestial fury the spirit that had
come to its aid was slaughtered senselessly and mercilessly.


108


The declaration of war by the Untermenschen began with the terrible rides of Atilla and
Djingiz Khan

The Huns rode against Europe on steppe horses that looked like they were about to
be fused to the skin of their animals; their slitted eyes glowed with murderous lust, and behind
them they left nothing but wasteland, murder, fire and destruction. Thus the chronicle reports:
The Huns are coming! How often did this call repeat itself through the centuries. Russia
became the scene where the doctrine of the Untermenschen - nihilism and Bolshevism - was


110


born. Again and again the image emerges of the East that is bent on overthrow, which sought
to destroy the "bourgeois West," the scum of Bolshevik persuasion with wild enthusiasm.
Wishing honorably for the red poet Peter Orjeschin:


"The holy mother earth trembles under the march of millions of feet. The crescent
has left the mosque, the cross the church, The end of Paris threatens. From the steppes rises
the smoke of the victim dedicated to the new god. London will sink under the heavy load.
Berlin will lie in ruins. Sweet shall be the pain of the noblest, who fall in battle. The hordes
shall skim from Mont Blanc down through Gods golden valleys. Even the Kirghiz of the
steppes will pray for the new age."


Freedom Day Speech


Oct. 24, 1943, Posen


Dear national comrades, men and women, dear guests! Dear party comrade Greiser, |
have been sincerely happy to accept your invitation to speak here at the Gautag. You know,
and I'm not saying anything new here, the degree to which I have felt personally committed to
the work of this Gau from the very beginning and above all how much I have felt personally
committed to you, and always will.


I would now like to convey some personal thoughts which I have had, related to the
present Gautag.


We Germans, everywhere in the Reich, are sometimes dissatisfied with the tempo of
events; we are sometimes dissatisfied here and there when we hear that very hard fighting is
going on here and there, and that no decision has been reached. Many people ask how much
longer the war will last. Many people believe that this or that could have been done in a
simpler way, or better or more quickly. Sometimes we forget that we are in the midst of one
of the most gigantic national conflicts, in one of the most gigantic racial struggles for many
centuries.


I first would like to outline the situation four and a half years ago. Four and a half
years ago. Four years ago was Freedom Day, the day of the birth of the Gau. Half a year
before, the German border was still only 150 kilometers from the capital city of the German
Reich. At that time, a modern adversary could reach the capital city of Germany with its
bombers and fighter aircraft within 20 minutes — today, with the speeds reached by modern
aircraft, inside ten minutes. Part of the Reich, East Prussia, was a small state, bravely
defending itself, completely cut off from the Reich, but basically unavailable. That was the
situation four and half years ago.


Now four years ago, through the decree of the Fiihrer, after the Polish campaign, the
geographical concept of the Warthe-Land became the political-governmental administrative
concept of the Warthegau, thereby introducing one of the best creations of the German Reich,
as will certainly become clear in the future. A Gau with four and a half million inhabitants,
barely 10 percent of whom were German, has now, after four years, become a Gau the capital
city of which has regained a German face and in which barely 400,000 Germans have
increased to over 800,000.


The Gauleiters and their collaborators were faced with the difficult problem: how do
we make this Gau German? How does this occur? I should recall something else here: four
years ago was a time in which many of you sitting here today were full of great melancholy.
You had just said goodbye to your homeland. The first ones to leave their homes, at the
request of the Fiihrer, came from Estonia and Latvia; others who had to leave their homes in
the following weeks and months were the Germans who made the great, later highly
glamorized columns of farmers marching from Volhynia and Galicia, from the Narev region
and other eastern lands.


The question now: how do we make this land German again? I would prefer to put it
more exactly: how do we shift the German ethnic border outwards, solidly and reliably, by so
and so many hundreds of kilometers? The German border was shifted outwards four years ago
by the Fiihrer, by drawing lines on maps, through the victory of arms, and by order of the
Fuhrer, by order of the Reich.


158


There are many ways to win over a country, to incorporate a country into a nation
and people. I would like to describe two of them as particularly distinctive in the great ethnic
struggle, and I would emphatically like to profess my clear belief in one of the two.


The first way, the older of the two, is the way countries were incorporated in the last
hundred or two hundred years. They began by taking their old particularities and outwardly
giving them different characteristics, through the schools, through education and above all
through language. At the same time, it was repeatedly stated and stressed, "We took this man,
who lived and dwelt here in this region, in the old provinces of Posen, and gave him a
faultless education. We taught him to read, write, and do arithmetic; he was illiterate before.
Now, through our German work, our German thoroughness, this same man has become, so to
speak, an educated Central European. Furthermore: we drafted him into our barracks and
taught him order, cleanliness, punctuality, obedience, even bravery, and everything else".
Let's look at the year 1919. In 1919, the ethnic Germans here in Upper Silesia, the ethnic
Germans in West Prussia, we ourselves in what remained of our small Reich territories in
1918-19, fought with partisan groups, with insurgents, with military units who unfortunately
fought very well in many places. Who were our enemies? It was, as it was said, insurgents
from the Western Frontier Association and similar organizations of the Polish nation. The
units of these organizations which fought well were often led by men whose curriculum vitae
could easily be established: this one won the Iron Cross First Class, this other one is a former
Prussian non-commissioned officer, this one is an old Feldwebel [usually: Corporal First
Class], educated in a German school; this one managed an estate for a German land owner;
this one was an official in a small town, with an absolutely perfect record; he learned a lot,
was highly capable, was always willing.


These were the most dangerous adversaries we ever came up against in the ethnic
struggle: they were dangerous, on the one hand, first, because they were of our own blood,
when that was true; and secondly, all these men learned their German obedience, their
German order, from us; they were the most dangerous when they appeared on the other side.
This example, which the Germans who still remained in Posen and in the Warthegau learned
to their sorrow in the years 1919-23, and which the Germans who remained here experienced
especially painfully in their own flesh in all the years up to 1939, should serve as a warning to
us.


It would be foolish to repeat an error committed over the course of historical
developments for the second time. We see, therefore, that in an age in which nations have
awakened to the reality of communities of blood and race, and to an awareness of their value,
their existence, the old method of granting citizenship, teaching foreigners to sing national
anthems, giving them language lessons and providing them all a different "dressage"
[training], is insufficient to truly appropriate a Gau, and turn it into part of the nation which
now controls the area concerned. That was enough during the age of the cabinet wars, that
was enough during the Middle Ages, it may have still been enough until the end of the 18th
century. It wasn't enough even during the last century, and in our modern age it certainly
cannot achieve any degree of success for the nation at all. We — party comrade Greiser, an
excellent Gauleiter, with Wilhem Rees as Reichskommissar — have therefore
uncompromisingly and unconditionally rejected precisely this method of earlier times for the
Warthegau from the very outset. As National Socialists who are defenders of this ideology,
not just in name and in words but men who believe out of the deepest conviction, on the
deepest level, we view the world and attempt to solve its problems based on this foundation,
and have decided to choose another path.


Becoming really German, for a Gau or a region, can only occur from inside out,
based on one's blood. We can speak to a person who belongs to us racially. I can, of course,


159


speak to a human being of any race, no matter what he looks like, he can be of any colour, in
exactly the same way — now, don't be offended by a hard word here — just as any trainer can
train a monkey. To speak to the heart, to his racial instincts which are born of his blood, is
only possible with someone of our blood, someone with the same descent as ourselves, the
same ancestors. With somebody like that your feelings can resonate, you can express them.
These feelings are, in the end, alone of decisive importance in the struggle for a people: the
values of the faith, a faith that moves mountains — loyalty, obedience and bravery.


For this reason, we have set about first recognizing the real Germans and then
making Reich citizens out of them. For some of them, this was merely a formal, very clear
procedure, for those who fought here, people whose parents, father and mother and
forefathers were all indisputably German.


Now came the difficult problems. You didn't need much cleverness or wisdom to
recognize the first group. But the difficult problem was: what do we do now with those who
have a German father and a Polish mother, or those who had a Polish father and a German
mother? What do we do with those who had a German mother and a German father, where
German is spoken in the family, but who have a Polish grandmother? What do we do with
those who had three German grandparents, but where Polish is spoken in the house? You see,
I have only picked out a couple of questions here. In reality, it's nowhere near as simple.
These are only a couple of problems, a couple of possibilities, and you'll see right away how
difficult the problems become. In my opinion, only a very sober decision can be crucial here.
Namely, the decision of the blood. It is quite clear that those who have overwhelmingly
German parents or grandparents generally belong to the German nation ethnically, and should
be recognized as Germans. It's more difficult when Germans like this, who had German
forefathers, have been completely absorbed by Polish state thinking. These are mostly the
bravest, because they are equipped with German and Nordic characteristics. The bravest,
toughest and stubbornest adversaries.


I must draw your attention to something here. The sentence, which I already spoke
once before: the most dangerous enemies for us, on the opposite side, are enemies of our
blood, and secondly, those with our upbringing. During the 18-day campaign against Poland,
which, for the Polish state broke out like a natural disaster, a somewhat tougher and longer
resistance broke out in several places. And where was that? A few names stand out here. In
the Polish navy, which resisted the longest out of all the Polish armed forces, there was
Admiral Unruh at Hela — a German, who nevertheless had a Polish mother. He was one of the
ones with whom we had to fight the longest. A general Rommel, in Warsaw, originally a
German. Another who stubbornly defended his fortress was General Thoma, probably a
Huguenot émigré, in Modlin [a famous fortress in Warsaw].


I believe that we could extend the list almost to infinity if we took the trouble to
compile them. I only picked them out because they were very obvious, and in so doing I
would like to stress my remark that the most dangerous enemy is an enemy who shares our
blood, when he fights on the other side. The bravest and toughest are those Germans who,
through some accident of history, became members of a foreign nation and are now the
defenders, advocates and, on the inside, the sons and daughters of a foreign ethnicity, with all
the German stubbornness, all the German idealism. It's not enough here just to say — such
weak people, forgetting their German ethnicity. It is so fearfully easy to explain. Let's take an
example: a little German boy, with good parents, arrives in a foreign country. He hears only
the foreign language. Those are the first sounds he utters. As a little boy, he learns only the
foreign script. He reads only in this foreign language, reads only the intellectual products of
this people. And this little boy, who might be descended from the bravest German parents,
will become the bravest member of this foreign people.


160


In saying this, I mean to say something important: the good properties of our blood
produce their very worst effects when they appear against us on the other side. I'd also like to
say something else: I wish to explain the degree to which the ethnic question really gets
difficult, and I wish to draw a conclusion from all this which is not suggested by our German
thinking in the past, a problem to which we were not accustomed until now. Believe me, my
party comrades, there is only one possibility here: either we win over the loyalty of a family
like that, a man like that, mentally, for Germanness [ie., living and thinking like a German] ,
or we destroy him.


There is no half-way measure. It would be crazy for us — we would be killing our
own blood — if we left our enemies someone with a capable head on his shoulders, someone
of our blood, to fight against us later. You will perhaps say: what you are demanding, what
you are proposing to do here, is endlessly cruel. I can only answer there are only two
possibilities here: Either the man produces his effects on the other side, in which case our sons
will have to die, and probably several of them, or he does not produce his effects, in which
case only one person dies — just him [dann stirbt einer allein].


Now back to the ethnicity question. We drew up ethnic lists at that time: those that
were born here in the Warthegau, are listed under racial lists 1,2, 3 and 4. There has been a lot
of talk about racial list 3. Many applications have been made to me, saying I should finally
give in. For example, a certain man is said to have been employed in an armaments factory for
a year, or spent a year at the front, and did a decent job, and if he doesn't receive irrevocable
German nationality right now, at long last, then he'll no longer take any pleasure in the whole
matter. In that case we'd have an unwilling armaments worker or official or soldier.


Here, I believe we must decide once and for all between a momentary question,
which is putting us in a tight spot, and an overall decision, in which case we would be placing
an obstacle in our way forever after. I believe that, in a time of tight spots and burdens, such
as the fifth year of a war must always be, we must, in all cases of necessity, we must solve the
daily crises or the day-to-day problems, but we must avoid making decisions based on
comfortable, small-minded cowardice, which may perhaps be useful to us now, but which
would be an obstacle when it comes to building the nation with a view to the course of
centuries.


With men who are to be accepted into the body of the people — and that includes as
an exterior formality the rights of a citizen — it is exactly like a poison, or it can act exactly
like a poison once it is ingested into the blood. Once it's in there no force on earth, no force of
nature, can get it back out again, until the person affected by this poison sooner or later
shrivels and dies.


A human being, as an individual organism, is exactly like the people as an organism.
Let everybody think about that, everybody who demands, out of small-minded comfort, that
such a person be accepted because they'd like their administrative district to be German; of
course, but they've got a German grandmother, too, of course, them, too — German, racial list
3 after one year, if he hasn't already stolen from the company cash box. OK, of course he'll be
accepted as a German citizen, he'll get all the rights of a German citizen.


That might be comfortable for us. Here, I just say: perhaps. Let nobody believe that,
in a moment of stress, such as is brought about by a world war, and will continue to be
brought about — since we're entering the final stresses and final phases of the struggle -- we
can have a truly loyal region, but rather, in such a region we would have men to whom we
have given German rights against reason, good sense and right, and who will then shoot us in
the back in the enjoyment of such privileges.


161


I furthermore believe that we Germans must all learn something from all this. The
fact that we still have so many things to learn is related to the fact, which we tend to forget,
that the German Reich only came into existence 72 years ago. Only 72 years ago did we
become a German Reich, and we've only had a Greater German Reich for 5 years now. For
centuries, particularly here in the north and east, administratively, we lived all crammed
together, we were poor as beggars and — that is the historical service of this Prussia — we only
climbed out and fought our way upwards out of the period of misery, the squalor of the Thirty
Years War, through endless living strength, back to order and a governmental personality. But
as I say, we were in a tight spot nationally, and there were a lot of things we couldn't learn in
the Old Reich. We weren't familiar with the problem of how to handle foreign ethnic
problems, because we had had no occasion to do so. We often misunderstood the value, this
truly holy value, this holy greatness contained in the concept of "The Reich". Precisely the
ethnic Germans from outside understood it much, much, better than we did.


In the Middle Ages, when one spoke of the Reich [Empire], there was only one
possibility, that was the German Reich [the Holy Roman Empire]. There was no other Reich
in Europe. You may rest assured that after the present war in Europe there won't be any other
Reich then either. This Reich will be a truly holy myth: the peacekeeping power in Europe,
the leading people of the overall Germanic Reich. And that will be drawn up after the war. It
will gradually be united; this Germanic Reich will impress its stamp upon Europe, will lead
the white race in Europe, and prepare it for the great racial struggles which surely — we won't
be around to see it — will be fought out between the continents within a few generations.

Now, when we think of the greatness of this Reich, then we should be ashamed if we
were therefore unable to maintain discipline over a half-Polish, half-German worker, who,
because Mr. Manager for all I know cannot sufficiently assert himself in his business; because
a company commander can't keep order in his company by force of personality; that we, for
this reason, due to the defects of individual persons — as I admit — ought to chase after difficult
cases and say: "Ach, do you want to accept Reich citizenship? Please be so kind, please
accept it. No, no, naturally, you'll get all the rights that we've had for 70 or 80 years".


There I say no, there's no question of that. I don't view this question just from the
current point of view of the present period of misery, the current period of stress, but rather
from the point of view of after the war. When we've won — and we will win, I am convinced —
then precisely all those who cannot do enough now handing out the rights and privileges of
the Reich, in hindsight will be the 150 percent and will have egg on their faces.


I believe, because we don't wish to deceive ourselves, that we must be rational and
economical in all the concessions which can reasonably be made; the persons concerned will
get exactly as much to eat, he'll get exactly the same wage, he'll have the use of his property,
but we have certain reservations; we don't want to look just at him, the man, who is a soldier.
Of course, he may be brave, but we also want to look at his wife, his children. What do I get
in return when I give irrevocable German citizenship to a man and his whole family, and later
I find out that he was a real good soldier, of course, as long as he was in his company, as long
as he was in a whole crowd of purely German comrades, as long as he was led by a squadron
commander who kept him in line, as long as he had a platoon commander who stopped him
occasionally when he spoke his mind too openly — but his wife wouldn't even dream of
learning German, and his children all speak Polish! Then you've got a German citizen you can
really be "proud" of.


In these matters, we wish to go carefully and slowly, the way we once evolved as
peasants, and I wouldn't even dream of allowing myself to be pushed into things. At the end
of this year, in the various Gaus, Upper Silesia, Warthegau, West Prussia and South-East
Prussia, we will have a percentage — or count per thousand, as we prefer to say — reflecting
German population numbers and the number of people in List 3. If I have to have a couple


162


hundred men who won the Iron Cross Ist Class in the field — I've made that a precondition —
or some otherwise very distinctive decoration for bravery — we'll give them irrevocable
German citizenship. That may mean 4 or 5 hundred here, and 500 in Upper Silesia. But this
citizenship is to be granted or awarded to the family in a ceremony in the villages concerned
or in the city concerned, and the others will be told: you see, you could have earned it as well,
earlier, but make an effort, you have to learn this and that and so on, beginning with the
cleanliness of your house, get rid of all the Polish dirt, and watch out for the language your
children speak, until you have a corresponding performance that in crisis, under all the strain,
doesn't fluctuate all over the place; so that, in these war years, we'll see that the family is
stable, they've acknowledged it inwardly.


For some people there should be very high degree of clemency and distinction — you
can take me at my word: it ought to be a favour from the Reich, when this powerful Reich
gives a little guy like that, who never cared about the Reich originally, when we give him
Reich citizenship after only three years, and it is an act of generosity of the Reich, when we
give it to this other guy after ten years.


We want to see things as they are — not just straighten out a picture frame, or cobble
together an edifice we won't be happy with later, just out of momentary emergency
considerations and pressure.


The best way to make a Gau German is, obviously, to fetch German people and bring
them there. I already said, four years ago many of you were sad about taking leave of your old
homelands, packing your suitcases, then being on the road and in camps, with all the
unpleasant coming and going, with your luggage getting lost, with the uncertainty — where are
we going to end up?


Today, you've overcome that difficult period, it's over for you, and believe you me,
that's why I feel so much at home here, because I see how this work, which was also difficult
at that time, has come along. I've been approached by many people, and I've received a lot of
letters of complaint about how slowly it's all coming along, and here, for the Reich Germans,
the ethnic Germans from Latvia and Estonia, from Volhynia, but I see the way in which it's
already coming along, with their youth.


These people are no longer Germans from Volhynia, and no longer just Reich
Germans, but rather Wartheland Germans — a new people who are growing together, rubbing
the rough edges off, a people who from the heritage which each person brought with him from
his own region and from his own Germanic tribe, each one has inherited some part of it. But
they're becoming a new tribe; the inhabitants of the Warthegau.


It's so beautiful the way these inhabitants put down roots and — as sad as it is — the
way their first dead are planted in the earth. These are the best roots: where you've got your
family's graves, that's where your home is. The first cradles are filling up and have already
been filled up. The first children have been born here, and the other children are growing up
into youths, and have put their farmyards in order economically. Harvests are increasing, the
wasteful, sloppy Polish economy is gradually being replaced by German businesses, and here
and there we see a model German economy. Commercial economies are thriving, a certain
well-being is coming into existence, a certain wealth; and gradually those who came here are
beginning to feel at home in the new, and yet so old, German home of the Warthegau.


Now, I would like come to a question which we will tackle after the war. It is
obvious that we will not content ourselves with the fact that out of 4 and 1/2 million
approximately 800,000 are German. That is obvious — I believe that no one who knows us
assumes that. We will tackle the problem after the war, and I believe that we will solve it in an


163


unbelievably short period of time. Among the people who live here and are not of our
nationality, there is a large quantity of blood that would be harmful to us if it belonged to our
ethnic group. We will tackle the question after the war, and you may rest assured that all those
who are of really good blood, i.e., Nordic-Germanic blood, will be given promotions and
possibilities to enter this Reich and become part of the German people.


I would like to put it this way for a start: I believe that I must furthermore say the
following: I consider it best not to speak of this matter at length at Party congresses today,
since otherwise we would introduce an unnecessary disturbance in the Polish population
whose work and whose willingness to work will be sorely needed by ourselves to win the war.


I would now like to take a short position on another big question. That is the second
part of what I wanted to say. What is the attitude of the Germans towards a foreign population,
let's say, the Slavs? We see here — for a start, I will indicate the two crassest contradictions —
two types, which we experience all over the place out there, from the Front all the way here
on the Reich border. One of them says, "No compulsion, we want to win these people over".
That is, be friendly, real friendly. This one's doing what the Slav never tolerates, and what one
should never do with Slavs. He's treating them as equals, as comrades, as companions, as
friends, he often tells them: "You see, now, how good my intentions are towards you; we only
want the best for you, after all." And many go so far as to wish to create a state for every
single Slavic tribe. Those are the guys on one side. The pal collector.


The others — it is always this way, always extreme opposites, pendulum swings all
the way to the left, all the way to the right. Others take a cruder approach. They hang
something like a sign on themselves, saying "I am a Herrenmensch" or "We are a Herrenvolk",
so that everybody can read it, since maybe they wouldn't have noticed it otherwise. And
govern only with brutal force. Some of them say, "You're Slavs, you're inferior trash".


And we move back and forth between these two extremes. Perhaps it's often purely a
matter of luck where one ends up on this scale. Sometimes things are very uncomfortable and
harmful, but one must understand them precisely based on our historical development. We
can be certain of one thing: the English could not manage their colonies as perfectly 300 years
ago as they do today. They accumulated experience over a period of 300 years, and turned
their experience to account in their education, forming a certain tradition based upon it.


And now if you wish to be quite clear about it: what should our attitude be towards a
foreign ethnic group, the Slavic ethnic group, since we must first form an idea about them?
How has this ethnic group arisen?


You will naturally, and quite correctly tell me, or object: "Yes, do you know, in the
Ukraine we have an Eastern worker who is Ukrainian. She's a girl who quite clearly looks
100% German".


I admit it. In exactly the same way, I can show you a couple of villages not far away
in the Ukraine, and I can show you a few Ukrainian girls there who look 100% Mongolian.
And then, with all Slavs — whether they're Serbs or Czechs or Slovaks or Poles or Russians,
Ukrainians, or whatever, they can call themselves whatever they want, in the end it's always
the same story of historical development — you'll find all types and variant forms of mixtures.
From the purely Germanic types, which have maintained themselves and evolved in
individual cases, or in individual villages somewhere along the line, right down to the purely
Mongolian type. You can find everything there.


I would like to come to the psychological effects of these mixtures right away. Some
of you will say, "Look, I have a Polish or Russian work crew here, I have an old worker, he's


164


the most good-natured fellow you'll ever find anywhere. A pious man who as a Catholic prays
to the Mother of God, in the Catholic way." You'll find so many Russians who pray to the
Mother of God of Kazan. You'll never find anybody so devout among us Germans. And then
somebody else will say: "Look, I've heard Cossacks choirs sing. The Russians can really
sing." I believe it. Wonderful. Magnificent.


Then still another will say, "Basically, they're all good natured. They're like big
children. Share everything. Brotherly love. They all embrace each other". OK. I'll gladly
concede that.


May I present the other side of the account? There are also those who torture people
quite horribly, men of bestial cruelty. Then there are a few who are good and true, loyal boys
for a year or two. Suddenly, in the third year, they get the idea of murdering their superior by
tossing a hand grenade under him, or something like that. In the midst of all their loyal
allegiance you get a little incident like that. That's usually quite uncomfortable for the
superior if he doesn't look out.


Then there are a few -- I'd like to give a couple of examples. How do you explain this?
One day before Stalingrad was taken by the Russians, 2,000 Russians, I believe, deserted
from the besieging army to the few hundred German defenders. Nobody can explain it, since
reason has nothing to do with it. The besieging army knew very well that for the Germans it
was all coming to an end. So 2,000 Russians desert to them!

Or in anti-partisan warfare, that is, among the Russian-born units we had on our side,
who fought for us as soldiers. Cases occurred in our own units of these Russian rifle squads,
the same evening, right after defeating a huge enemy partisan group, they had a kind of
victory celebration, and half the company deserted to the defeated enemy! Eight days later
about half of them were back!


Well, I think we have to recognize that Slavic ethnicity runs the entire scale of
feelings and characteristics, from the most sincere saintliness and good-heartedness, right
down to cannibalism -- in one type of Slavs a bit more so, in other types less, among the more
western types a bit more cultured, among the Eastern types a bit less cultured. Everything is
there, and woe to him who ever forgets that. Woe to him! They'll destroy him.


How can one explain all this? It's explicable based on the racial composition of the
Slavs. I'll sum it up very briefly. In former times, before the mass migrations, our Germanic
tribes lived in these regions, right down to the Black Sea, and far into Russia. There was a
sufficiently large Germanic population here. Through the historically, never entirely
explicable process of Asiatic incursions — the incursion of the Huns under Attila at that time,
when the [Germanic] peoples, tormented by misery, fell into serfdom to the Huns and became
their vassals, and had to join their ranks or emigrate, insofar as they could.


Part of the Germanic population remained behind. Then there was an extremely thin
upper crust [Oberschicht] of Germanic types, of Germanic blood, and a numerically huge
inferior mass of Eastern peoples, and — particularly, after the incursion of the Huns and the
migrations of the Mongolian peoples — of Mongolian character and Mongolian race. Then
came a period in which very many German families, Germanic families, emigrated to Poland,
forming the later stratum of Polish gentry, who were then invited into Russia by the Russians,
with a justification which has always been a classic and which applies to all the Slavs since
time immemorial: "Come into our land and govern us, since we can't govern ourselves". They
also invited the Varangians and the Vikings. The result, in this early period, is a clear racial
divide, with a Germanic ruling class [Oberschicht], which has nothing in common with the
lower class [Unterschicht] ruled by it. Gradually, however, there now came — due to the laws
of the land and through a failure to obey the laws of blood and race, through other things, for


165


a start — a shortage of men and women caused by war among the ruling class, and a seeping
downwards of Germanic blood into the lower class, as we find in the Baltic, to a great extent
— from the German ruling class into the Latvians and Estonians, over seven centuries, or, as it
came about precisely in Russia, in Poland — the intrusion of the lower class into the Germanic
ruling class by marrying upwards.


In this way, the Germanic ruling class [Herrenschicht] became an upper class
[Oberschicht], gradually forming a new nationality which, as a result, no longer felt German
but Polish, Russian, Ukrainian, Kashubian or otherwise reflecting an ethnicity [or tribe,
Volkstamm], and thus arose a type of new nation, a new people, with all variations and
mixtures, all the way from the residues of a still-existing purely Germanic blood, or all sorts
of mixtures, in which the Germanic blood takes precedence, but where the Germanic blood is
still present only in part, resulting, perhaps — such as we sometimes see today — in a pair of
radiant blue eyes in an otherwise Mongoloid body, upon which there sits, perhaps, a
completely Mongolian and Eastern [Ostisch] type of head, right down to the type which has
maintained itself purely Mongolian, in remote areas, such as, for example, Lysa Gora in the
Generalgouvernement. Here, too, in the Warthegau, you'll find villages where one might say:
"These people are all pure Huns”. And that's what they are today.


When you know that, the evolutionary and racial development of the Slavic peoples,
then you know that we have a task to do if we wish to purify these areas — and we must do
that, if we want to live. The only task can be: clear domination, clear detachment, without
unnecessary insults, because every once in a while, some individual factor — some part of our
own blood, which is a proud blood — causes such a person to take offense, making us
unnecessary enemies.


Constant watchfulness, never trusting, not even after you've known somebody for
years. Always on your guard, like a lion tamer with his lion or leopard. This includes very
small things. A handshake, the way we Germans customarily greet each other, must constitute
a unique distinction for the little servant or farm worker, given here and there. But it must not
be immediately refused again afterwards, either, the way we talk about it. We do a lot of
things, but we don't talk about them. It would be best not to walk around your servants with a
riding whip in your hand all the time, even if it is correct to reprimand him when he's quite
impertinent.


We have a lot to learn here, and gentlemen, there are no regulations governing the
treatment of Slavic peoples. We must learn what to do and what not to do. As riders, you
already know how to handle a horse, and what not to do with him. If you do something wrong,
you get thrown off. And if you do something wrong with a foreign ethnic group, when you're
only a thin ruling class, then the subject people [das Untere Volk] will murder you one day.

It's a shame, but in many cases, it's deserved.


If we rule this Slavic people correctly, we can derive endless values out of this mass
man, and endless strength for Germany. I am also of the opinion that it is better for a Russian
or a Pole to die in this world struggle, if I can save a German, German blood, for the same
struggle. But I must never imagine here that I can win the war with Russians alone, or with
Poles alone, as a liberation army or volunteers. We've got to win this war ourselves, with our
hearts, our own blood. But where we can have a servant die with us, then let's let him die with
us. If I can sacrifice a foreigner instead of a German, I'll sacrifice him. But let nobody forget
that these people can only be of use to us as auxiliaries, and can never win the struggle itself.
The real struggle must be won by ourselves. The Reich which must be created will belong to
us, and if it can't be won by our own efforts, with our own blood, then we won't have deserved
to have it, and won't be able to keep it. You can only keep what you've won by fighting for it
yourself.


166


When I speak of Slavs as a whole, then I'd like to note one thing: ruling the Slavs is,
of course, best learnt by studying the cases where this rule has succeeded. I'm speaking now
of the Russian land mass. Of course, they're Slavs too, after all, but they're the Great Mother
of all Slavs. There may be enmities between them, conflicts — the Poles are afraid of being
gobbled up by the Russians, the Russians don't like the Poles. That's all true. But just the same,
in their Pan-Slavism, in their commonality, they hang together again. In all cases in which
these races have been ruled successfully, the ruling classes — the Golden Horde, from Genghis
Khan to Stalin — have always been of the same type. They knew their Slavs. They knew one
thing very exactly: they all have one thing in common. In general, with the exception of a few
persons, like Lenin, Stalin, a couple of Czars, like Genghis Khan, like Tamerlane, like Attila,
they are quite incapable of building a Reich, they are incapable of governing themselves.
They are, however, always capable — we've seen this in the Polish State for seven hundred
years — of opposing an existing order, no matter how lenient it may be — of conniving,
committing sabotage and conspiring. They can do that first-class.


As a result of their knowledge of their own Slavic subjects, the Russians, or the Slavs
including the Poles, as we can well see, had — as long as they could do so — their own method
of ruling their subjects. Under Stalin, it's the same thing: he has his widespread NK VD and
GPU. Whenever five or six Russians are together, then nobody — not even when it's a family
with father, mother and children — knows with certainty which one of these six persons is
betraying the others to the GPU.


So the possibility of conspiring and whispering behind your back, talking — they'll
talk you to death — which is so typical of the Slavs, philosophizing late into the night —
philosophizing which never produces anything practical — all this is prevented by this system.


We can learn something for our practical conditions here and a few other places, too,
something that repeatedly permeates into the organization and features of our enemy — since
in most cases, he will be our enemy — and gives him the feeling that he is never alone, but
rather that we know everything. Then he'll be loyal and reliable. Otherwise, not.


When we say that is an atrocious way of governing people, then I would like to say
something. It would be atrocious for us Germans. It would be unworthy of our people, and I
can say this openly before this group here, to start with, in these ten years I and my late friend
Heydrich — have always opposed this system with the full force of our personality, and have
never permitted it — the idea of imposing a system of agents, of informers, or a kind of NK VD
or something like that for the German people. I have no agents. For me, making use of the
security forces is precisely -- we have educated our security forces with this point of view in
mind -- an affair of honour for every honourable German, just as it is a matter of honour for
an Englishman to belong to the Secret Service. It is not a question of agents and their dirty
tricks, but rather of soldiers, a military matter, a soldierly duty and a soldierly attitude.


There must be such things. You've seen that — let's take a striking example — the
liberation of the Duce. The liberation of the Duce succeeded only because Skorzeny was
brave and decent. That was the key point. The liberation was possible as the final act of
gigantically long preparation work, and it worked only because of the Sicherheitsdienst
[Security Service], as we called it, just like the English, with their Secret Service.


Now I'll come back to something: this system of informants — which we have
avoided among us Germans and which we will never have — is quite necessary for the Slavs.
But let us always and above all else avoid attributing to foreign peoples, spiritually, German
values of mind, German standards and German reservations which we have always correctly
had to maintain, and which we have maintained among ourselves and will always maintain, as


167


if this foreign people would conduct itself the way we do. Even when it hurts him, so that we
say, out of false pity: no, we can't do that to him. Maybe we will do something to him. We're
doing ourselves and our children a favour, and that's why it's done. And we must never forget
that.


When one has this attitude, and this knowledge of the history of the Slavs and their
way of thinking, then it will only be a matter of education that the Slavs, in a Gau like this one
in the broad expanse of the East, must be ruled without unnecessary severity, but never with
completely inappropriate softness. Brutal, where necessary, clear in one's own attitude, and
never let oneself go. It's bad when a servant sees that his master is drunk. That doesn't
strengthen one's authority [Herrentum] at all.


It is extremely harmful when the Untermensch sees that there's a dispute in the ruling
class — whether in the family, on the farm or estate, or in an organization, agencies, authorities,
armed forces, Party, State. That is extremely harmful. When we have disagreements among us
Germans, we can say anything in a decent way. I very much believe we should say things, not
write letters, rather sit down decently together and discuss things. That saves a great many
officials and paper pushers on both sides, many staff members, and it is clear and decent, and
we gain trust in each other and we cooperate.


But it is extremely damaging when some one of us has a dispute in front of a Pole, or
when a German superior corrects a German subordinate in front of a Pole.


Our actions and proceedings must always be dictated by the notion of protecting
German power and sovereignty, saving German blood, not just not neglecting its
multiplication and its promotion, but rather supporting it by all means. We must be attentive
to this law of the racial struggle [Rasssentumskampf] and ethnic group struggle
[Volkstumskampf] in every action, even the smallest.


I said before that there are no regulations for the handling of these people, and there
are no regulations covering all individual matters. While I obstruct anything harmful to the
mother and child, any abortion, for Germans — at the same time my point of view where Slavs
are concerned is: I am not the protector of Slavs. Let them do what they want. Here my
legality goes no further. Legally, as a German, I favour my own people. What other peoples
do, they can do by themselves. They only interest me insofar as I need them for Germany.
Otherwise they do not interest me at all. And this standpoint, this mental attitude, must we all,
as old National Socialists, out of a recognition of the laws of the blood, the evolution of the
race, the peoples, the conditions, the power relationships in the East — we must learn our
attitudes, educate each other, based on this recognition; and I am convinced that the youth
who are growing up here now will learn many things which we found hard to digest, and will
avoid many errors which we committed at first, in order to learn not to commit them anymore;
they'll learn these things by themselves. I am convinced that we will be able to master the
problem of ruling hundreds of millions of foreign peoples at least as well as the English can
do it today. The English, and we should never forget this either, are just a tiny off-splintering
of Germanic blood from our continent.


The war is difficult today. We know that. I would not like to speak too much about
the war, however, and I think that it is a matter of course — I consider it a matter of course for
everyone to do everything, even the very smallest things, to win the war; that every one of us
would send to the front every man who can be spared in his office; that every one of us will
quietly and calmly correct any deficiency which he sees anywhere, and not keep silent about
anything; that he should object to them in a good-natured way and convince others, but when
good-nature doesn't work, that he should report things. We must choke off any defeatism
which we may and will encounter here and there; we must correct anyone who becomes


168


down-hearted because Fate has struck him a hard blow, because he's lost his son; we must
grab him by the sword knot, and speak to him as a German, we must seize him by his loyalty
to the Fiihrer, by his obedience, by his gratitude which he owes to the Reich and the people.


These are all things which are so obvious, that we will never become faint-hearted.
That a war with millions of Russians, this brutally led mass from the East, involves the
greatest difficulties was clear from the outset. We can confidently predict that more
difficulties are on their way. We are going to go through many tight spots and bear many
burdens. The Russian will, this winter, this fall, he's already beginning to do it, he will return
this winter with a desperate army of certainly far more than one hundred divisions. And we'll
have to defeat them, smash them, and slaughter them [abschlacten]. When a people like the
Russians already have their whole army full of everything from 16 years olds to 50 or 55
years olds, then reason tells us that this whole mass of people is coming to an end, like
everything on this earth.


Despite everything, we will still have to overcome many trials in the other theaters of
war. Despite everything, I would like to say I know that one day the war will be over, after the
bitterest and hardest months of the hardest and most difficult testing. When our enemy has
given up, then the others will give up, too, and then this or that person will say, "See, I always
said, the war with England will end in a tie". Very sly, a real clever guy. After all, we never
wanted to conquer England. You can read absolutely all the remarks, speeches, newspaper
articles since the year 1929, or since 1934. The only demand we ever made of England was
the return of our colonies. We never wanted Ireland, we never wanted a piece of England, we
never wanted to destroy the British Empire in any way. After all, in the end, it is an empire of
white men. We never wanted it. England just wanted to interfere in Europe. And then, when
you see the fact that Germany governs Europe, that the way to the East lies open, that we've
expanded our fields and farms [Acker, agricultural properties] here in the Warthegau, in the
Generalgouvernement and further East in Russia, that it has multiplied its farms, if you
consider that a tie, gentlemen, then we are agreed.


And at the close of this war stand the following facts:


1) Recognition of all the trials which Germany has undergone until the year 1939 after the
Polish war;


2) Recognition before the world that Germany is no longer a European power, but rather, as
was confirmed for Old Fritz [Fredrick the Great] after seven years of the bitterest war, that
Germany is a world power;


3) The introduction and continuation of the process that the Great German Reich is becoming
the Germanic and Great Germanic Reich; that the unification of the Teutons — despite all
difficulties which we are experiencing with the population in the Netherlands today and in
Norway here and there, on the battlefields — has already begun, and has, of course,
substantially begun in the Germanic divisions "Viking" and "Nordland”, in the Germanic 3d
Tank Corps, that this unification has been carried much further forward.


Complete Germanisation of the new German provinces of Upper Silesia, the
Wartheland, West Prussia, South-East Prussia, Bialystok means the clear and unambiguous
expansion, further and further outwards, of an unambiguous German racial border; that is, an
area in which there will be no one but Germans and Teutons, approximately 1,000 kilometers
from the old German Reich border.


That means, economically, and, in terms of power, the occupation and linking up of
as much additional room as possible, the settlement of so-called German "jewels of


169


settlement" in the German style with German garrisons, German storage facilities, store rooms,
repair shops for automobiles and trains — small towns and garrisons, as | said, of
approximately 20,000 inhabitants, thus, every hundred kilometre settlement with an average
radius of 5 kilometers around, with German villages and German farmers around this town, so
that every town has its farmers, and the farmers have a city centre; this means the creation of a
nursery for German blood, so that we can become a people with numerous children again at
last.


That is not just a question of any outlook or opinion, but rather, it is the question of
the life of our people. It is already depressing when you know that a Russian military
generation consists of two and a half to three times as many men as a German military
generation. We would spare ourselves a good many worries today if people's attitudes, or our
own 18, 19, 20 years ago, had been different with regards to the continuation of the blood line
of our family, with regards to that which we owe our ancestors, different from what it was 20
years ago in the democratic-liberalistic but also deeply poverty-stricken period of inflation
and unemployment.


This East must and will be the nursery, as I already said, of the richest Germanic
blood. It will be the melting pot of all German and Germanic tribes; this aim should provide
us with the necessary numbers, in addition to, and based on, quality, the unique and decisive
racial value of the people who settle here. This East will therefore be the precondition which
will enable the Germanic Reich in the world, in the coming centuries, of checking and driving
back the next incursions which will come from Inner Asia sooner or later, over and over again,
in an historical rhythm, shifting the ethnic border further outwards over the coming
generations and, in the end, merely taking back that which our Germanic forefathers once
possessed as their Reich and their land. We, however, who must live in this time, wish to
prove ourselves worthy, every day and every hour, of the gifts which Fate has given us,
through the fact that it sent us the Fiihrer, to start with, and after two thousand years, who was,
we might say, sent by God. As German men and German women, we wish to be thankful that
we were born in precisely this age, that we are able to live in this age.


We want everyone to do his duty at his post, to help lighten the tasks of the Fiihrer
and his assistants, wherever we can, and we wish never to give in, when daily life or when the
enemy in the war is putting pressure on us at some position, when Fate is repeatedly weighing
and testing us on its scales, month after month. One day, these months will be over and done
with long ago, and then only one thing will be important: the goal, that I already showed you
verbally, of the Germanic Reich created by the Fiihrer Adolf Hitler, the settlement here in the
East, and our faith here — since we are sitting here in the East, conquering the land in the old-
fashioned German way, building farms, protecting them with our swords, in order to win new
ground, over and over again, time after time, in eternal growth for eternal youth, and for the
future of the German, Germanic Reich.


170


The principles of the SS


Himmler summed up the principles which the SS were to apply in Russia speech to SS leaders
in Posen on 4 October 1943:


One basic principle must be the absolute rule for the SS man: we must be honest,
decent, loyal, and comradely to members of our own blood and to nobody else. What happens:
to a Russian or to a Czech does not interest me in the slightest. What the nations can offer in
the way of goad blood of our type we will take, if necessary by kidnapping their children and
raising them here with us. Whether nations live in prosperity or kick the bucket" interests me
only in so far as we need them as slaves for our Kultur; otherwise, it is of no interest to me.
Whether 10,000 Russian females fall down from exhaustion while digging an anti-tank ditch
interests me only in so far as the anti-tank ditch for Germany is finished. We shall never be
rough and heartless when it is not necessary, that is clear. We Germans, who are the only
people in the world who have a decent attitude towards animals, will also assume a decent
attitude towards these human animals, But it is a crime against our own blood to worry about
them and give them ideals, thus causing our sons and grandsons to have a more difficult time
with them, When somebody comes to me and says, ‘I cannot use women and children to dig
the anti-tank ditch; it is inhuman, it would kill them’, then I have to say, “You are a murderer
of your own blood because if the anti-tank ditch is not dug, German soldiers will die, and they
are sons of German mothers, They are our own blood.’ ‘That is what I want to instil into the
SS and what I believe I have instilled into them as one of the most sacred laws of the future.
Our concern, our duty is our people and our blood. It is for them that we must provide and
plan, work and fight, nothing else, We can be indifferent to everything else. I wish for the SS
to adopt this attitude to the problem of all foreign, non-Germanic peoples, especially Russians.
All else is vain, false to our own nation, and an obstacle to the early winning of the war...?


If the peace is a final one, we shall be able to tackle our great work of the future, We
shall colonize. We shall indoctrinate our boys with the laws of the SS. I consider it to be
absolutely necessary to the life of our peoples that we should not only impart the meaning of
ancestry, ¢grand-children and future, but feel these to be part of our being, Without there being
any talk about it, without our needing to make use of rewards and similar material things, it
must be a matter of course that we have children, It must be a matter of course that the most
copious breeding should be from this racial elite of the German people. In twenty to thirty
years we must really be able to provide the whole of Europe with its ruling class. If the SS
together with the farmers, and we together with our friend Hacke,* then run the colony in the
east on a grand scale, without any restraint, without any question of tradition, but with nerve
and revolutionary impetus, we shall in twenty years push the national boundary
[Folbstamgerenze] 500 kilometres eastwards.


Today I have asked the Fuhrer that the SS, if we have fulfilled our task-and our duty
by the end of the war, should have the privilege of holding Germany's most easterly frontier
as a defence frontier. I believe this is the only privilege for which we have no competitors. I
believe that not a single person will dispute our claim to this privilege. We shall be in a
position there to exercise every young age-group in the use of arms. We shall impose our laws
on the east. We shall charge ahead and push our way forward little by little to the Urals. I
hope that our generation will successfully bring it about that every age-group has fought in the
east, and that every one of our divisions spends a winter in the cast every second or third year,
Then we shall never grow soft, then we shall never have SS members who come to us only
because it is distinguished or because the black coat will naturally be very attractive in
peacetime, Everyone will know: ‘If I join the SS, there is the possibility that I may be killed,’
He has contracted in writing that every other year he will not dance in Berlin or attend the
carnival in Munich, but that he will be posted to the eastern frontier in an ice-cold winter.


172


Then we will have a healthy elite for all time. Thus we. will create the necessary conditions
for the whole Germanic people and the whole of Europe, controlled, ordered and led by us,
the Germanic people, to be able, in generations to come, to stand the testing her battles of
destiny against Asia, which will certainly break out again. We do not know when that will be.
Then, when the mass of humanity of 1-14 millions lines up against us, the Germanic people,
numbering, I hope, 250-300 millions, and the other European peoples, making a total of foo-
zoo millions (and with an outpost area stretching as far as the Urals, or in a hundred years
beyond the Urals), must stand the test in its vital struggle against Asia. It would be an evil day
if the Germanic people did not survive it. I would be the end of beauty and of Avatar, of the
creative power of this earth. That is the distant future. It is for that we are fighting, pledged to
hand down the heritage of our ancestors.


We see into the distant future, because we know what it will be, That is why we are
doing our duty more fanatically than ever, more devoutly than ever, more bravely, more
obediently and more thoroughly than ever. We want to be worthy of being permitted to be the
first $S-men of the Fuhrer, Adolf Hitler, in the long history of the Germanic people stretching
before us. Now let us remember the Fuhrer, Adolf Hitler, who will create the Germanic Reich
and will lead us into the Germanic future.


Our Fuhrer Adolf Hitler


173


Reinhard Aeydrich


Born in the German city of Halle, near Leipzig on March 7, 1904, Reinhard Eugen
Tristan Heydrich was raised in a cultured, musical environment. His father founded the Halle
Conservatory of Music and was a Wagnerian opera singer, while his mother was an
accomplished pianist. Young Heydrich trained seriously as a violinist, developing expert skill
and a lifelong passion for the violin.


As a boy, he lived in an elegant home with his family enjoying elevated social status.
But young Heydrich also suffered as the target of schoolyard bullies, teased about his very
high pitched voice and his devout Catholicism in the mostly Protestant town. He was also
beaten up by bigger boys and tormented with anti-Jewish slurs amid rumors of Jewish
ancestry in his family. At home Heydrich's mother believed in the value of harsh discipline
and frequent lashings. As a result, Heydrich was a withdrawn, sullen boy, unhappy, but also
intensely self-driven to excel at everything. As he grew he excelled at academics and also
displayed natural athletic talent, later becoming an award winning fencer.


Too young to serve in World War One, after the war at age 16 Heydrich teamed up
with the local Freikorps, a right-wing, anti-Semitic organization of ex-soldiers involved in
violently opposing Communists on the streets. Young Heydrich was also influenced by the
racial fanaticism of the German Vélk movement and its belief in the supremacy of the blond
haired, blue eyed Germanic people which he resembled. He took delight in associating with
these violently anti-Semitic groups to disprove the persistent, but false rumors regarding his
possible Jewish ancestry. The German defeat in World War One brought social chaos,
inflation and economic ruin to most German families including Heydrich's. In March of 1922,
at age 18, Heydrich sought the free education, adventure and prestige of a Naval career and
became a cadet in the small, elite German Navy. Once again, however, he was teased due to
being over six feet tall, a gangly and awkward young man who still had the high, almost
falsetto voice. Naval cadets took delight in calling him "Billy Goat" because of his bleating
laugh and taunted with "Moses Handel" because of rumored Jewish ancestry and his unusual
passion for classical music. But the intense, driven Heydrich persevered and rose by 1926 to
the rank of second lieutenant, serving as a signals officer attached to Intelligence under
Wilhelm Canaris. The teasing and taunting soon gave way to resentment over the
extraordinary arrogance of this young man who was already dreaming of becoming an
admiral. but his dream ended suddenly. On December 6, 1930 he met the blond beauty Lina
von Osten at a ball in Kiel, they fell in love and secretly engaged on the 18th. Heydrich
visited the von Osten’s at Christmas and for the first time came in contact with National
Socialism. His future brother in law, Jiirgen von Osten, having joined the NSDAP, as well as
the SA, in 1928. The von Osten family, strictly nationalist, considered Hitler to be the only
one who could save Germany. Lina joined the party in 1929, membership number 1,201,380.
Heydrich in contrast was not enchanted with Hitler, scorned political parties in general and in
reality was politically naive at that time anyway, according to his widow. On the second day
of Christmas (boxing day) they were officially engaged, Heydrich sending the engagement
notice also to a former girl friend he had courted. This girl was the daughter of an influential
navy official in Berlin who in turn knew Admiral Raeder. Heydrich had visited the girl and
she saw herself already at the side of the adored marine officer and was shocked by the notice
of his engagement, arriving without any commentary. Her father complained and Heydrich
had to appear before a navy honor/disciplinary commission, and considering the whole affair
as a nuisance, performed badly. He was suspended from duty during the investigation, at the
end the commission only put in question Heydrich’s stay in the navy, but send the report to


176


Raeder. Raeder without hesitation decided against Heydrich and in April 1931 he received
notice of his dismissal from the navy, citing ‘behavior not becoming an officer” as the reason.
One year before becoming eligible for a pension his career in the navy came to an end.


With his Naval career wrecked, his fiancé, Lina von Osten, an enthusiastic Nazi
Party member, suggested he join the NSDAP and look into the SS organization which at that
time served mainly as Hitler's personal bodyguard and had about 10,000 members. In 1931, at
age 27, Heydrich joined the NSDAP and became a member of the SS (Schutzstaffel), the elite
organization of black-coated young men chosen on the basis of their racial characteristics.
Himmler, who had received Heydrich’s application including a picture, was impressed by his
Nordic appearance. He noticed that Heydrich had served as a Nachrichten officer in the navy
(The term Nachrichtenoffizier can mean short wave or intelligence, the BRD equivalent to the
CIA called BND — Bundes Nachrichten Dienst). Hitler had just asked Himmler to establish an
internal intelligence service because of the many leaks, and Himmler was on the lookout for a
suitable person to head the service when he received Heydrich’s application. Himmler was
apparently not aware of the different meanings of the term Nachrichtenoffizier, and decided to
invite Heydrich for an interview. A further applicant was considered, and Heydrich was told
to wait, but he forced the issue and visited Himmler. Only now did Heydrich become aware of
the mix-up in terminology, but relied on what he had been taught in the Navy on intelligence
matters and was accepted. His co-applicant, police captain Horninger, lost out, a stroke of
luck for Himmler, as Horninger had been encouraged by the Munich police to apply, to serve
as an informer.


Heydrich’s first office was located in the “Braunen Haus”, the party headquarters in
Munich, but he had to share his room with another SS official, Richard Hildebrandt who was
on the staff of Sepp Dietrich (later SS general). Heydrich’s office furniture consisted of an old
kitchen table and a chair, the typewriter belonged to Hildebrandt but he was able to use it at
set times. Himmler placed a stack of folders on the table and Heydrich started to organize the
files, using scissors, glue and the borrowed typewriter. Those weeks of late summer 1931 is
when the SD was born. For what had been information collected by Himmler at random was
transformed by Heydrich into an orderly assembly of files. Doing so gave him a total picture
of the puzzle, and he soon discovered that it was not just the obvious adversaries, the
communists mainly, that needed observing but that there also existed another, more potent
enemy: the international conspirators.


Heydrich categorized the opponents: first those who openly opposed National
Socialism, i.e., the KPD (communist party) and the SPD (Socialist party), as well as the other
parties to some extend. However, he considered the powers working in the background —
trying to prevent the National Socialists from reaching their goals — to be much more
dangerous: the political Church, Freemasonry, Jewry and Marxism. Then there was the
infighting, the SA having also established an intelligence service, with local party chiefs
involved as well: “Everyone considered the other a spy”. With Himmler’s and Heydrich’s
organization, the smallest and least recognized, that being somewhat of an advantage because
of the little that was known it. But that was about to change. At the beginning of September
1931 an order was issued to expand the SS intelligence service. The pile of folders on
Heydrich’s table grew and he was able to influence proceedings by uncovering a mole in the
Braunen Haus, an undercover police officer, and succeeding in ‘turning him’. From
November on the Bavarian police was blind on the ‘SS eye’, but Heydrich was well informed
about police procedures. Himmler was pleased because it had been his intelligence service
that had exposed the mole.


At year’s end 1931, Heydrich moved to a new ‘office’, the party had rented two


rooms in the flat of a widow, a party member referred to as “Mother Edrich”. He now also
had a staff, three unemployed men who were paid whenever any money was available; mother


177


Edrich helped by providing meals. The office equipment was however still basically the same,
and still no typewriter. Heydrich was also poorly paid but Himmler tried to encourage him,
promoting him to Hauptsurmfiihrer (captain) and as a wedding present on December 25, 1931
to Sturmbannfihrer (major). The newlyweds found a flat, “a dump with cracks in the floor a
finger wide” as his widow remembered, but “Reinhard had painted the walls”. The
information collected was filed in cigar boxes, the categories: these were Communists,
Marxists, Jewry, political ecclesiae, Freemasonry, the politically unsatisfied (complainers),
saboteurs, habitual criminals as well as abortionists and homosexuals, and people engaging in
treason. For Heydrich, an enemy of the state was anyone working against the people and the
government, anyone opposing the Fithrer and by it the strong Germany.


Both Hitler and Himmler quickly became aware of the rumors which were spread by
Heydrich's enemies within the Nazi Party. Himmler at one point considered expelling
Heydrich from the SS. But Hitler, after a long private meeting with Heydrich, described him
as "a highly gifted but also very dangerous man, whose gifts the movement had to
retain...extremely useful; for he would eternally be grateful to us that we had kept him and not
expelled him and would obey blindly." Thus Heydrich remained in the elite Aryan order but
was haunted by the persistent rumors and as a result developed tremendous hostility toward
Jews. Heydrich also suffered great insecurity and some degree of self loathing, exampled by
an incident in which he returned home to his apartment after a night of drinking, turned on a
light and saw his own reflection in a wall mirror then took out his pistol and fired two shots at
himself in the mirror, uttering "filthy Jew!"


Following the Nazi seizure of power in January, 1933, Heydrich and Himmler
oversaw the mass arrests of Communists, trade unionists, Catholic politicians and others who
had opposed Hitler. The “black duty” attracted renowned intellectuals, Heydrich’s SD the
“pool of the most intelligent people in National Socialism”. Heydrich had them study and
investigate potential enemies like those aforementioned. A new definition in regards to police
duties emerged, the discussion not initiated by Heydrich but because of his attitude of
identifying enemies of the state as part of police duties, it had become a necessity. The police
was no longer to be just a protection force, the nation’s night watchman of old, when police
only acted after the crime had been committed. Attorney Dr. Werner Best, perhaps the most
gifted of Heydrich’s staff, argued that this new social system/order differed substantially from
that of the bourgeois state, but was also not a police state. The prominent jurist Dr. Walter
Hamel added that the police now have an additional duty, “to incorporate the individual into
society”. Whereas, and this was Heydrich’s opinion, the liberal “night watchman state” had
the police establish order to ensure the liberties of the individual, the police of the new state
would not only be responsible for safety, but to also help build the new society according to
the guidelines provided by the political leadership.


Heydrich’s top jurist Hamel formulated it this way: The police was to gauge the
political health of the German population, to identify any virus — be it self inflicted or brought
in from the outside — and to eliminate it using appropriate measures. Thus, Heydrich
considered himself to be like a doctor, not only intend on healing but also to prevent illnesses
from occurring. Professional police officers welcomed this approach — tired of arresting the
same criminals repeatedly. However, the more liberal courts did not assist at the beginning,
but eventually also came on board. Habitual criminals were identified as those who had been
arrested three times and sentenced to prison terms, they were then send to prison camps.
Beggars and vagrant’s, prostitutes and their pimps, homosexuals, black marketers’,
psychopaths and those having turned down work without sufficient reason were considered as
antisocial and also ended up in the prison camps. There they met communists, politically
engaged clerics, jews, Marxist unionists and journalists who had been agitating against the
regime. But, even though Heydrich was legally empowered to send these persons to the
camps, this is were his competency ended, Himmler would not allow him to have control over


178


the fate of the interned. That was a concern for Heydrich and he had his people collect
material on Eicke, one of the camps inspectors and as a result, Heydrich’s people started to
criticize the treatment of the prisoners. Nevertheless, Heydrich issued instructions in 1935 to
have his officials inform the prosecutor general if the death of a prisoner was not satisfactorily
explained. Eicke complained to Himmler about the attitude of the Gestapo who charged that
conditions in the prison camps were horrible.


Heydrich’s favorite enemy was Rome, i.e., the Vatican, that even though he was
raised as a Catholic. “Are these clever attempts of undermining the political will of the
German population not infinitely more dangerous as treason — or the actions by a communist,
because they are subtle?”. Heydrich was however not the first to pick a fight with the Vatican,
Bismarck had done so before him. Thus, to Heydrich, his own “Kulturkampf” was justified —
never trust the Vatican. And even though Jews and Freemasonry hated anything to do with
National Socialism, first on the list of Heydrich’s enemies was the political clergy, according
to his widow. The Catholic Church stoked the fire, for in 1933-1935 publications they
presented St. Francis as the Fuhrer of the youth. Heydrich considered the church to be a rival
because it, as well as National Socialism, asked, or better demanded, complete devotion. Then
there were the contacts to foreign countries by church officials, and Heydrich ordered the
surveillance of all Church emissaries travelling abroad to collect information so as to have it
available at the day of reckoning, when he planned to expose the churches as enemies of the
Reich.


Heydrich was an active air force pilot, flying reconnaissance missions over England
and Scotland but always returning to Berlin between actions to his job as security chief, Hitler
and Himmler viewing those activities with mixed feelings. He was also active in sports,
fencing his favorite, and made it possible for Paul Sommer, Jew and former German fencing
champion, to escape to America. He was always the perfectionist, and what he did, he did
meticulously, according to his widow. He did not like to loose, that also true for arguments.
But if his counterpart had solid counter-arguments or proposals that differed from his, and if
that person stood his ground unwaveringly, Heydrich gave in.


More and more communists, socialists and other enemies of the regime fled to
foreign countries, some of them then continuing their subversive work against the Reich from
their new domicile. That was a concern for Heydrich, but his jurisdiction ended at Germany’s
borders, the intelligence service responsible for foreign countries. Heydrich did not have a
good working relationship with the head of that service, especially with Conrad Patzig,
predecessor of Canaris. Eventually, Patzig was removed — reconnaissance flights over the
then friendly Poland the issue — and in December 1934 replaced by Admiral Wilhelm Canaris,
picked not lastly because of his good relationship with Heydrich. Canaris promised to work
with the SD “in friendship and openness”. The two met at the end of January and renewed
their friendship, the families visiting regularly. Erika Canaris also played the violin and the
evenings were filled with music. However, competencies of the two services was the issue
and negotiations to resolve the differences were started, with Canaris representing the
intelligence service and Heydrich, with Dr. Best, the SD. A ten-point program was eventually
worked out, the “Ten Commandments”, but it was not perfect, because the borders of political
intelligence and military intelligence overlapped, naturally. Canaris deemed it necessary to
spy on enemies inside of Germany, with Heydrich doing the same in foreign countries, a
necessity if one hopes to be successful. Thus, a new agreement had been worked out, with
Canaris having his competencies curtailed. That agreement was to be signed at Prague in May
of 1942, just days before Heydrich was assassinated.


Heydrich considered suspicion to be a virtue, his SD officers called


“Oberverdachtsschépfer”, extremely suspicious, and he took this to be a compliment. We
need to remember the times here, communists had moved undercover and traitors were


179


present in all spheres of the Reich. As it turned out, he was not suspicious enough, the traitors
telling England and Moscow all they needed to know. Heydrich considered multi-national
corporations at that time already to be a threat, and placed them under surveillance.


In June 136, Himmler and Heydrich, along with Hermann Goring, successfully
removed the powerful SA chief Ernst Réhm by convincing Hitler that R6hm and his four
million SA storm troopers intended to seize control of the Reich and conduct a new revolution.
During the Night of the Long Knives R6hm and dozens of top SA leaders were arrested and
dealt with on Hitler's orders, with the list of those to be executed drawn up by Heydrich. As a
result, the SA Brownshirts lost much of their influence and were quickly overtaken in
importance by the black-coated SS. In June of 1936, all of the local police forces throughout
Germany along with the Gestapo, the SD, and the Criminal Police, were placed under the
command of Reichsfiihrer-SS Himmler, who now answered only to Hitler.


In the fall of 1936, Heydrich received a phone call at home from the attorney
Bielschowsky, a Jew, but left alone because he was one of Heydrich’s friends from his home
town of Halle. Bielschowsky asked Heydrich if he knew a party big wig by the name of
Martin Bormann, Heydrich answered something like “unfortunately yes”. This started a five-
year investigation and at the end, Heydrich was convinced that Bormann was working for the
Soviets. Reinhard Gehlen, an army intelligence officer and later head of the BDR intelligence
agency, wrote in his memoirs that Bormann had worked for the Soviets from the start of the
war. Others, like Ohlendorf, Schellenberg and Berger also attested to that at the IMT, the
latter at the Wilhelmstra8e trial. Gehlen, as well as Canaris, investigated and established that
Bormann operated the only unobserved short wave transmitter, but neither did anything,
claiming that they had been afraid, Bormann then in a powerful position. Heydrich in his
investigation found out that Bormann had not mentioned his imprisonment by the Bolsheviks
in his personal files, the “Case Bormann” file started to grow. Heydrich collected material on
Bormann, probably personally mostly to not arouse any suspicion, and in spring 1942 he was
ready to move against Bormann. But before he could do that, he was assassinated. The
assassins were not found for weeks, giving rise to speculations that Bormann might have had
his hand in it.


All over Germany, Heydrich's SD and Gestapo agents used various methods to crush
anti-Nazis and foreign subversive elements who were known to be acting against the will of
the Fuhrer. Heydrich would cultivate an aura of fear around himself, with many of the top
NSDAP officials even fearing just meeting with Heydrich or being in his presence during the
few official gatherings he attended. With his murderous glare, Heydrich could frighten even
the most hardened party member. Heydrich preferred to operate behind the scenes, he
generally avoided publicity and was rarely seen in public, unlike Himmler. Photos of
Heydrich usually show him peering suspiciously into the camera. Heydrich was also a
friendless man whose only companions were senior SS subordinates who accompanied him
during drinking bouts and womanizing at a few favored night spots.


Heydrich was a master of intrigue and pulling strings behind the scenes, sometimes
on an international scale. His exploits included involvement in prodding Soviet leader Stalin
into conducting a purge of top Red Army generals in 1937 by supplying evidence to Soviet
secret agents of a possible Soviet military coup against Stalin. In Germany, Heydrich had a
hand in the downfall of two powerful, traditionalist German Army generals who had
expressed opposition to Hitler when he announced his long range war plans in November,
1937. War Minister, Werner von Blomberg and Commander in Chief of the Army, Werner
von Fritsch, were disgraced by framed-up attacks on their personal character and forced out,
thus eliminating their influence. Following their dismissal, Hitler himself assumed the
position of commander in chief of the German Army. Soon afterward, Hitler looked to


180


increase the size of the German Reich at the expense of other nations, first targeting Austria
then Czechoslovakia.


In Austria, Himmler and Heydrich worked behind the scenes to encourage pro-
National Socialist ideas among the Austrian population. Following the annexation of Austria
in March, 1938, the SS rushed in to round up anti-NatSoc elements and the insidious Jews.
Heydrich then established the Gestapo Office of Jewish Emigration, headed by Austrian
native, Adolf Eichmann. This office had the sole authority to issue permits to Jews wanting to
leave Austria. Nearly a hundred thousand Austrian Jews managed to leave with many turning
over all their worldly possessions to the SS. A similar office was then set up back in Berlin.
As Hitler turned his attention toward Czechoslovakia, Heydrich encouraged the spread of the
National Socialist ideology amongst ethnic Germans to spread political unrest in the area
bordering Germany (the Sudetenland). On October 1, 1938, under the threat of German
invasion, the Czech government gave up the Sudetenland to Hitler. On November 9/10, 1938,
Kristallnacht occurred with the first widespread attacks on Jews and mass arrests throughout
the Reich.


When the state of Czechoslovakia was created following WWI — from parts of the
broken up Austro-Hungarian Empire, part of the plan to render powerless German dominated
middle Europe — the large minorities were to be given autonomy. Here is what von Neurath,
German foreign minister up to 1938, stated at the IMT:


“The Germans living in the Sudetenland as a compact group had been given the
assurance, at the peace negotiations in 1919 when they were attached to the Czechoslovak
State, that they would be given autonomy on the model of the Swiss Confederation, as
expressly stated by Mr. Lloyd George in the House of Commons in 1940. The Sudeten-
German delegation at that time, as well as Austria, had demanded an Anschluss with the
Reich.”


“The promise of autonomy was not kept by the Czech Government. Instead of
autonomy, there was a vehement policy of “Czechification.” The Germans were forbidden to
use their own German language in the courts, as well as in their dealings with administrative
authorities, et cetera, under threat of punishment.”


If the Entente powers would have told Czech authorities to adhere to the agreement,
there would not have been a Czech crisis. They didn’t, and things deteriorated — finally
leading to the 1938 Munich Conference when it was agreed that the Sudetenland would
become part of Germany. In a speech of September 26, 1938, following that conference,
Hitler stated that he had promised Chamberlain that if the Czechs are able to come to terms
with their minorities, peacefully, he would no longer be interested in that state. Hitler needed
a secure southern border, and was aware of the efforts by the French and Soviets to have
Czechoslovakia serve as “Russian aircraft carrier” on that border, be “a dagger in Germanys
soft underbelly”. Hitler is accused of breaking his word, he did not, the Czechs were unable to
settle their differences with the remaining minorities, the Slovaks as well as Hungarians, etc.,
and as a result Czechoslovakia disintegrated, with Hitler not the instigator of the breakup.


Konstantin von Neurath, a career diplomat, served as first Reichsprotektor, governor,
of the new protectorate. During this time, Heydrich’s security service filed report after report
about strikes and acts of sabotage, instigated by the Benes government in exile in London, and
after the start of the Russian campaign, by communists who had up to now been largely
inactive because of the Molotov/Ribbentrop pact. Thus the situation deteriorated even further.
But Bohemia and Moravia, as it was now referred to, was of vital interest to Germany: due to
one third of the tanks were produced there, one quarter of the trucks and about 40% of the
light weaponry used by the German military. The western allies, along with their new ally


181


Russia, were aware of that and jointly organized resistance groups, with the BBC broadcast
hourly: “Pomalu pracuj” (work slow). On of September 21 the German intelligence officer
and traitor, Paul Thiimmel, wired London that the Gestapo had threatened to take draconian
measures but von Neurath would not allow it. Production of war material dropped by 18% on
an average, 35% in some factories. Neurath did too little to curb the activities, Hitler therefore
decided to replace von Neurath and Heydrich was chosen as the new Reichsprotektor.
Heydrich arrived in Prague on the early morning of September 27, 1941, according to his
widow, who was not in favor of the move, Heydrich was totally neutral to the Czech
population. “You need to understand”, Heydrich told her, “that this finally is something
positive, I am tired of being the garbage bin of the Reich”. The Czechs had expected the hated
Karl Hermann Frank to replace von Neurath, but were cautiously optimistic re. the
appointment of Heydrich. General Alois EliaS, second only to president Hacha, was arrested
due to the Gestapo having collected material about his close collaboration with the resistance,
with additional information having been discovered in Paris following the defeat of France.
Numerous members of resistance groups were caught, about 90 short wave radio stations
silenced and the leaders of the groups executed. All of the verdicts were published. Heydrich
not only moved against the resistance but also against all kinds of corruption. Black
marketer’s, butcher who sold meat illegally, merchants — no one was save. The Czech
population accepted this for the most part, Heydrich had promised them that things will
improve, more food and other merchandise will become available when corruption is wiped
out. All of the black market food stuff confiscated was made available to the cafeterias in the
big factories.


Heydrich expedited the establishment of canteen’s in all big factories, a move
welcomed by the workers, because the meals were dispersed free, no ration card required. On
October 24th he invited 40 union member to visit him at the Hradéany castle, the seat of the
government. This was the first time in Czech history that a workers delegation was welcomed
in the Royal hall of the castle. After they had voiced their concerns, Heydrich spoke to them —
greeted them as “Comrade workers” — and promised that the food situation will improve
further. From the moneys confiscated from black marketers 200,000 pair of work boots were
bought and distributed free of charge. Heydrich also improved social conditions, raising
pensions and established unemployment insurance. The luxury hotels in the spa town of
Luhaéovice were turned into workers recreation facilities, three thousand workers were send
there free of charge on May 1, 1942, seven thousand in the whole of that year. Heydrich
visited the workers in the factories, shook hands with them, to the dismay of his security staff.
Slowly but surely the situation changed, production increased and Heydrich accepted as a
friend of the workers, the little people. His wife joined him, they moved into an estate only
20km (12 miles) from Prague. He travelled in an open car, even when it was rainy or cold,
telling his driver: “This helps us to keep a clear head, Klein”. Himmler insisted on a guard for
his house, Heydrich complained, convinced that “his” Czechs would not harm him, but
Himmler insisted. He worked long hours, some days 20, but tried to make it home whenever
possible. His wife later saying that this was the happiest time for her.


Heydrich’s next task was the building of a new government, a government that
would be accepted by the Czech people but of course also loyal to Germany and so made
concessions whenever necessary and on January 19, 1942 the government was formed. To
give this government a good start, Heydrich lifted all remaining restrictions the same day, and
also released a number of prisoners, along with pointed out that now a new course will be
taken, and that the attempts by local and foreign bodies to subvert will be combated, ending
the event by thanking all for their cooperation.


Heydrich’s success had become a concern to the Brits and their allies, as well as to


the Benes Czech government in exile in London and so plans were made to assassinate
Heydrich. It was hoped that the Germans would react harshly and that the countermeasures


182


taken would incite the Czech public, the operation being codenamed “Anthropoid”. A large
number of Czech soldiers fled and eventually made it to England where they were
incorporated into the Czech legion, the army of Benes. On December 29, 1941, 2 agents were
dropped from a “Halifax” of the Royal Air Force near Plzen, three others near Kolin. Their
assignment: The assassination of Heydrich and the blowing up of the Skoda factory in Plzen.
2 of them eventually made it to Prague and started to plan the assassination. By this time, the
Heydrich’s had moved into a mansion in the village of Panenske Brezany, 20km from Prague.
And, Heydrich was a creature of habit, travelling to Berlin often, either by plane or train, but
always following the same routine. His driver would take him in the open Mercedes, the same
route was taken and when he went to work he travelled at the same time. All of those strictly
against all regulations, some of them devised by Heydrich. He had ordered that the backrests
of the car seats used by officials be reinforced with steel plates, his Mercedes did not have
them. Heydrich had done his job in the Protectorate, Hitler was impressed by Heydrich’s
success and so was instructed to come to Berlin on May 27, 1942 to receive his new orders
since Belgium and Northern-France had become somewhat of a problem, London organized
acts of sabotage in the countries.


The morning of May 27th was a bright and sunny. The plane that he was to pilot to
Berlin himself stood at the ready at the airport, but Heydrich took his time getting started on
that day. He counted on a longer stay in Berlin and the good-byes stretched out, he played
with his kids, but finally, at 10:00am, he left. The car approached, Klein at the wheel with
Heydrich sitting beside him, and getting close to the hair-pin Klein slowed the car and shifted
down. When they were right beside 1 terrorist brought the gun out from under his coat,
pointed it and pressed the trigger, but nothing happened. Heydrich of course noticed the
would be assassin and ordered Klein to stop. A fatal mistake and against his own instructions,
which stated that if an event as this occurs, the driver should try and get away as fast as
possible. As the car slowed down, another terrorist threw his grenade, it exploded just ahead
of the right rear wheel, the grenade shrapnel piercing the backrest of Heydrich’s seat and
wounding him. When the car had come to a stop both jumped out to pursue the assassins. A
third terrorist tried to flee but bystanders blocked his way, he fired his colt pistol and they
dispersed. Heydrich had pulled a pistol out of the door side pocket, aimed at Jan but the gun
did not fire, Heydrich had forgotten to work the slide. Klein in the meantime had set out after
a terrorist called Josef, but his pistol also did not fire, he had inadvertently pushed the knob to
release the magazine. Josef fired at him, wounding him in the knee and Klein went down.
Heydrich had in the meantime given up pursuit and returned to the car. There he stood, bend
over in pain, completely helpless and alone. Did the people around him take advantage of the
situation, did they settle their scores with “The butcher of Prague”? No, a woman approached
him to help, a van was flagged down, Heydrich loaded into it and was transported to the
hospital. In the morning of June 4", Reinhard Tristan Eugen Heydrich died of blood
poisoning, in spite of the best care possible.


Heydrich was the impersonation of National Socialism as a new ideal/model. If
National Socialism could look into the mirror, the image of Heydrich would have looked back.
Heydrich was able to assemble the most intelligent NS people around him, he was
unburdened by party politics and realized that for a revolution to be successful in an highly
advanced industrialized nation as Germany — that it would be necessary to have people of
intelligence and conviction in all important positions. Traitors and enemies of this new ideal
had to be removed. “Two Vatican’s are issuing encyclicals today”, he told his officers, “one
is located in Rome and the other in Moscow, and we are the heretics of both religions”. He
was committed to NS ideology as well as to his conviction that a new order must be created.


183


Che Cranfformation of Our Struggle


The text that follows is a pamphlet written by Reinhard Heydrich and published in
Munich in 1935. The pamphlet, entitled Wandlungen unseres Kampfes, was intended for SS
personnel and members of the German police. In it Heydrich describes the critical turning
point that Germany had reached in 1935. After being in power for two years, Heydrich
argues that Nazi Germany's struggle against its domestic ideological enemies is beginning a
new phase. By 1935 all of the official organizations of non-National Socialist groups had been
outlawed. New racial legislation had also been published. Within this context, Heydrich
states, the SS and police must focus its attention on rooting out and destroying those enemies
of the National Socialist state and German people who remained in Germany. He particularly
discusses the concept of the "hidden enemy", people who professed loyalty to the state but
were secretly pursuing ideas hostile to the state. The section on the churches is relevant.
Theoretically, only politically "misguided" Christians are the problem. However, behind this
veil stood Himmler's intense dislike of Christianity and his desire to revive ancient forms of
German paganism.


Heydrich's pamphlet appeared at an important time in the history of the SS. Its ranks
swelling with new recruits in 1935, the SS was expanding its reach throughout German
society. Newcomers to the SS required a guide to the ideological goals of the
organization. Heydrich's pamphlet was intended to be this guide.


1. Changing the Way We Lead Our Struggle


As everywhere in the life of nature, so also the life of the people consists of eternal
struggle between the stronger, the noble, the racially superior and the inferior, the subhuman.
However, the way in which this struggle is conducted is constantly subject to change. This
form of struggle depends mainly on who has the upper hand at the moment.


The struggle of our leader and the movement began at a time of camouflaged
domination of subhumans, which was on its way to open, brutally all-destroying domination
through Bolshevism. This opponent could not be defeated from outside the state. From the
outside, an internal reconstruction of state and people was hardly possible. Thus the Fuehrer
set for his followers as the first immediate goal to be striven for: "The attainment of external
state power."


The means to this end were therefore inevitably those of the opponent and therefore
initially relatively external: elections, assemblies, organizing the masses, and organizing them
more tightly than the opponent did.


The party itself, as the motor of this electoral following, was a faithful community of
like-minded people. The faith was in the achievement of the near goal set by the leader and
the associated smashing of the visible parts of the opponent, his organizational work, party,
trade unions, etc.


Since the pace of the struggle with this well-prepared opponent was tremendously
fast, the fighting community of the party had only little time to grasp the principles of the


185


world outlook proclaimed by the leader in all their depth and to make them clear to the ever
newly arriving fellow fighters.


When suddenly the near goal was reached, most of the fellow fighters felt that with
the destruction of the opposing organizations the enemy had disappeared altogether. They
looked for him and did not find him any more, since he had mostly become the same. There
came the condition, which unfortunately still continues with many today: Unable to find the
opponent in his new positions, they dissipate their energies in senseless, irrational personal
illegalities. In this way they harm the idea of the leader and at the same time show that they
are still far away from grasping the immense size of the idea itself and the tasks connected
with it.


Unfortunately, in reality they have only seen and fought the opposing parties. They
do not realize that these parties were only the outward manifestation, most favorable to the
situation at the time, of spiritual forces which in the Fihrer and the N.S.D.A.P. are fighting
Germany, which want to exterminate Germany with all its strong forces of blood, spirit and
soil.


The same fighters of the movement, in the years of struggle before the seizure of
power, naturally remained loyal to the Fithrer and faithfully followed him, in spite of, or
precisely because, the opponent dissolved the National Socialist organizations, banned the
newspapers and took off the uniforms. They all unconsciously felt that the power of the state
leadership of that time was ineffective against their faith and ideological attitude. And now,
when the form of the struggle is changing, when the organizations of the enemy are broken,
they no longer remember their own experiences.


The organization is nothing without the forces that inspire it ideologically. If the
enemy's organizations have been smashed or are in the process of being transformed, this
means for us that only the form of the struggle has changed. The driving forces of the enemy
remain eternally the same: World Jewry, World Freemasonry and a largely political
priesthood which abuses the religious creeds. In their manifold ramifications and forms they
persist in their aim of destroying our people with its blood, spiritual and soil forces.


It is necessary that we recognize that the struggle has become deeper. It can no
longer be waged only by technical means. We must learn to recognize the enemy from the
history of the last millennia. We will then suddenly see that today, for the first time, we are
grabbing the opponent at the roots of his power. Is it any wonder that he fights back more
fiercely? that he tries to play his centuries of experience of fighting with all registers?


We must recognize that these opponents cannot be eliminated merely by external
takeover of the state apparatus, for they are seated with their cross connections in all branches
of our people's life and of the state fabric. We must calmly note that up to the last few years
the enemy was well on the way to systematically undermining the character and spirit of the
German people, to poisoning them and leaving them only the Nordic face.


We fighters must find our way through this realization: We need years of bitter
struggle in order to finally push back the enemy in all areas, to destroy him and to secure
Germany bloodily and spiritually against new incursions by the enemy.


Unfortunately, there are also with us, the S.S., some who are often not aware of this
great distant goal. When after the seizure of power everything securely adversarial had
disappeared, when the fight of the spirits began, then they lacked with the realization of the
comprehensive greatness of the adversary the armament.


186


It will be explained to them here in further episodes that the prerequisite for the
successful continuation and completion of the struggle are two things:

The correct recognition of the opponent in his deepest and the unified seeing of one's
own tasks, but also of one's own mistakes, with all prerequisites and consequences.


As in any true struggle, there are clearly only two possibilities: "Either we overcome
the opponent for good, or we perish."


2. The visible opponent


It must be said in advance that the enemy cannot be treated exhaustively here. It can
only be suggestions and hints to sharpen the view of the enemy.


In order to be able to overcome him, one must learn to recognize his changing
manifestations and his means of struggle. In order to assess it accurately, we must not be
deceived by the multiplicity of apparently feuding groups with their divergent programs. They
are all only skilful subdivisions and side-links of the great opponents. They are meant to serve
as outposts or catch-all organizations. Therefore, if Freemasonry was mentioned alongside
Judaism, it was only for better understanding. In truth, Freemasonry is an expedient
organization of Judaism, so that in the last analysis we can regard as the basis of all groups of
opponents the Jew and the political clergyman (in its most pronounced form called Jesuit).


These opponents wage their struggle on the one hand in a visible, graspable form and
on the other hand in a camouflaged and not immediately visible form. Let us first try to deal
in broad strokes with the discernible doings of the adversary.


a) The Political Misuse of the Churches


Above all, we must recognize in time the anti-state and anti-people intentions and
effects of the confessional struggles of which Germany is once again the scene. Originally,
the churches were to be servant mediators between God and man. As their founders
proclaimed, the kingdom of the churches was to be "not of this world."


However, a completely political and worldly ambitious priesthood has bent the
teachings of their founder. They all claim that they and only their church have the general
authority of God for this mediator role. Regardless of whether they are justified in making this
claim or not, they all derive their worldly political actions from this authority. Not enough that
through centuries they have tried to destroy blood and spiritual values of our people, they
pretended the preservation of these values by adopting the external forms and today they
claim to be the guardians of these values. Instead of being true selfless mediators, they
conquered one worldly position of power after another under the protection of ecclesiastical
things.


But in order to secure and underpin these worldly positions, the followers of the
churches were organized politically. Before the takeover of power, the politically secular
character was clearly expressed in the pure form of the party (Zentrum, Bayrische
Volkspartei). Today, even earlier associations founded in wise foresight as catch-all
organizations, etc., have become the successors of the parties (Katholische Aktion, etc.) In
ecclesiastical dressing up, the political penetration of all areas of our national life is demanded
and striven for here. While the ecclesiastical press of Germany denies the political character
of these associations, the foreign voices of the same churches openly admit it. The best
example of this presumption of a secular nature is probably the statement of the churches and
their attempt to sabotage the sterilization law and the racial legislation. In order to expand
their secular sphere of influence, after the seizure of power, the ecclesiastical training of the


187


non-priestly auxiliaries, the so-called laity, began in tremendous strength. In hundreds of
retreat houses they are "exercised", as the name characteristically says. l.e., everything must
be mechanized as much as possible, so that those concerned do not notice how all inherited
strengths of blood and spirit are systematically bent or killed off.


In National Socialism, the Fuehrer has finally created, after centuries, the unification
in one great community. This was only possible because in National Socialism he resurrected
the inherited foundations of our people. Now the secular ambition of the political clergy had
not taken this into account. However, since openly political or social division was not possible
to save the position, suddenly the old church dispute had to revive under the motto: "The
confessions are in danger." Thus today distrust and doubt are carried into the community of
the people united by the leader and attempts are made to sow discord in party and state.


This fight is supposedly waged against godlessness for the salvation of Christian
virtues and the preservation of "German" culture. But if one looks at the political leader corps
of clergymen, from whom the devout follower of his church takes for granted the past life in
these "endangered" virtues, one has to realize with disappointment that these preconditions
are not given.


On the contrary, mountains of documents show how mendacious in many cases is
the moral and cultural basis of this corps of leaders and also the slogan of their struggle. In
truth, they are not fighting positively for the preservation of religious and cultural values
(which are not in danger at all), but they are continuing their old bitter struggle for the secular
domination of Germany.


b) Judaism (The Jews)


The Jew has always been the mortal enemy of all Nordic-led and racially healthy
peoples. His aim was and remains the domination of the world by a more or less visible
Jewish upper class. For the achievement of this goal every means and every form of
organization is right for it, may it look outwardly still so stupid and ridiculous. The way
always remains the same.


Every nation, which in times of political and bloody weakness allowed the
immigration and above all a later bloody mixture of the Jews, was systematically decomposed.
The decomposition of the blood, in addition to the racial bastardization, resulted in a slow
blurring of the distinct racial thought of the "host people." With it also a creeping penetration
of all areas of the people's life and a systematic mental poisoning became possible. Thus, for
example, in the Middle Ages in England and in our country, the guild and building trade was
turned into purely Jewish Freemasonry through complete penetration with Jewish customs
and Jewish basic elements.


While in earlier centuries Jewry conquered the key positions at the courts of princes,
such as treasurers and political advisors (who were often disguised as court jesters), the
aristocratic German upper class, which was for the most part on good racial footing, was
disintegrated until the World War. Clever money marriages and the nobility unfortunately lent
by many princes to their Jewish backers so bastardized the upper class, which had not yet
been completely ousted from leadership, that the Marxist and Bolshevik revolts, again
developed and led by Jews, could easily overcome them.


After the seizure of power, the racial legislation did, within certain limits, severely
restrict the direct influence of Jewry. But the Jew, in his tenacity and single-mindedness, sees
it only as a limitation. At first, for him there are only the questions: How can the old position
be regained, and how can I work to the detriment of Germany?!


188


In judging the struggle of Jewry, one must distinguish between the Jewish
organizations which work openly as Jews, and between the auxiliary and special-purpose
organizations led by the Jewish world organization.


The Jews living in Germany are divided into two groups, the Zionists and the
Assimilantes (who characteristically call themselves Deutsch-Juden). Although the Zionists
hold a strong racial viewpoint and strive to create their own Jewish state by emigrating to
Palestine, they must not be taken in by the fundamentally anti-people position of the Jews.
The assimilationists deny their Jewish race either by claiming to be Germans, insisting on
their long-standing residency, or by claiming to be Christians after having been baptized. It is
these assimilationists above all who, with all kinds of declarations of loyalty and with the
intrusiveness peculiar to their race, try to overthrow the National Socialist principles.


They also tried to take advantage of the proclamation of general conscription. After
the promulgation of the law, the blinders (Reichsbund jiidischer Frontsoldaten and Verband
nationaldeutscher Juden), led by former officers of the Beurlaubtenstand, had left no stone
unturned to achieve the inclusion of Jews in the Wehrmacht.


Although the individual Jew, who is not at all interested in German conscription,
shows no particular inclination to take upon himself voluntarily the demands of soldiering, he
was urged to enlist voluntarily by the sharp action of the Verband leaders for the sake of
political goals.


While here, in order to break the Aryan law, the Jew is behaving in a tremendously
patriotic manner, the wave of Jewish boycotts and the foreign press led by Jewish emigrants
continues to roll against Germany without restriction.


The Masonic lodges and the organizations related to them, which are likewise under
Jewish supreme leadership, have only the purpose of organizing people in apparently
harmless social form and making them useful for the purposes of Judaism. for all forms of
government and occupational strata there are the corresponding organizations. No matter who
rules, a form of their lodge always fits the momentary form of the state. In the times of
liberalism and democracy the humanitarian lodges were in the foreground, at the time of
national governments the so-called national lodges. If Bolshevism had broken through, the
workers' lodges would have been in the lead.


The methods of stultification and domination of people are peculiarly similar to
those used in the retreat houses of the political priesthood. Through the most diverse exercises
of this mechanization, one blood German and spiritual characteristic after another is tried to
be killed and turned aside. In case of admission to higher degrees, a blind incomprehensibility,
not disturbed by any racial instinct, is thus guaranteed.


Moreover, this blind subservience to unknown and secret superiors is demanded in
the Lodge in stark contrast to the self-evident principles of a healthy national and state life.
This obedience is confirmed by an oath framed with gruesome Jewish customs.

That Bolshevism is one of the most important creations of Judaism will hopefully be
understood by the most forgetful fellow citizens on the basis of the experiences of the last


years and decades. A discussion of its danger is superfluous here.


With the Aryan Law, the danger of Jewry for Germany has not been banished.


189


The Jewish purpose organizations with all connections to their international
leadership are still working on the destruction of our people with all its values. All the
branches of our national life, such as art, science, economy, etc., which the Jew has almost
completely permeated with his ideas, are by no means free of the enemy, as a result of the
fulfillment of more necessary close tasks. Here are the surreptitious ways by which he tries to
extend his spheres of influence step by step through millions of channels.


His work is made easier by the fact that there are still people (the churches even
demand this attitude) who recognize the Aryan legislation only forcedly and do not want to
grasp the racial foundations.


While apart of the German people is already beginning to become indifferent to the
Jew after two years of the National Socialist revolution, we see on the part of the Jew a
tenacious, eternally unchanging striving for his goal, which is always only: the domination of
the world and the destruction of Nordic peoples.


3. The Hidden Enemy


Unlike the visible enemy, the camouflaged enemy is not organizationally tangible.
He works illegally, perhaps we can call him the invisible apparatus of the already mentioned
great enemies. Its goal is to destroy the unity of the leadership in the state and the party in
order to make it impossible to achieve the ideological tasks of National Socialism. The people
are to become reserved and uncertain towards the leadership, the leaders are to become
nervous and distrustful of each other.


To this end, there is a network of cross-connections with almost all agencies of the
state apparatus, public life and the movement. On the one hand, this system of channels
informs the enemy of the danger ahead. He thus learns in good time of all prepared state
measures, orders and laws. On the other hand, the same channel system serves the purpose of
preparing the countermeasures that are important for the enemy.


The organs of this channel system work partly consciously treacherously, partly their
personal weaknesses are abused unconsciously.


The mainstays of this opposing consciously treacherous work are some hostile
elements remaining in the state apparatus, who, behaving one hundred and ten percent,
immediately switched themselves into line. The civil service law passed them by. Believing in
the authenticity of their declarations of loyalty made in a tone of conviction, they were left in
their positions as professionals.


While we National Socialists understand by bureaucracy in a good sense the concept
of the perfect exactness of the excellent and smooth working of a created and administrative
apparatus, these soulless and hostile elements abuse the same bureaucracy for hindering,
obstructing and bending our National Socialist tasks.


The ramifications of this network are monstrous. A complete enumeration is
impossible here. The layman can recognize the ramifications only by their effect: Here,
attempts are made to turn away legislative measures.


There, attempts are made to throttle funding for areas of responsibility that are vital


to the fair movement and the state. At the universities, attempts are made to bend National
Socialist ideas in favor of liberalism through "purely scientific and objective" treatment.


190


In prehistoric research, attempts are made to play into the hands of one-sided,
unpopular elements the leadership of the excavations, so that the assertion of the "lack of
culture" of our ancestors can continue to be maintained without danger.


Through the attempt of an anti-national-socialist personnel policy, the aim is to get
important Schfissel positions in the state back into the hand so that, if a national-socialist law
goes through, the execution can be sabotaged and back doors can be opened by implementing
regulations. In the case of National Socialist well-meaning men, an attempt is made to gain
influence on them as well through social entanglements (invitations, clubs, etc.). The hot will
of National Socialist superiors to adapt German legislation and German administration to the
nature and feeling of the people, they twist in execution and thus try to bring these National
Socialist men into opposition to the movement.


In order to bend a measure of the Fuehrer or one of his agents, or to bring down
inconvenient and dangerous organizations of the movement and the state, they use the means
of systematic rumor-mongering and press agitation. Through thousands of channels it is
whispered to the authoritative bodies what "dangers" the leader's policy is allegedly
threatened by these measures or these organizations, and at the same time a wave of
complaints sets in. The versatility of these complaints often reveals in a flash the channel
system of the adversary.


At the command of usually one of the Masonic Swiss or "German" émigré
newspapers, the attack is completed by a systematic series of articles of the vilest lies. At the
same moment the apparatus for exploiting the weaknesses of character of individuals is now
set in motion. Man is only so easily inclined to believe untrue and unbelievable rumors more
than factual facts. Knowing these weaknesses and the gossip addiction of humans the rumors
are brought to personalities, who have certain sympathy or antipathy for these organizations
and provide thus of itself again in positive or negative sense for the further spreading.


Only too fast a preconceived opinion is produced, which then forms the soil for the
fulfillment of the momentary goals of the opponents.


Thus, all forms of subversion attempts to disintegrate the fabric of the state and to
drive a wedge between leadership and followers. In the underlining of the tasks not yet
fulfilled, the deeds and achievements of the first two years are to be made forgotten and the
ground of any positive work, the trust of the people, is to be gradually pulled from the leader
and his faithful.


We must see this work and tactics of the enemy to be able to counter him.


How the enemy wants to see the situation in Germany and which way seems right to
him may be shown by the following sentence from an enemy secret report: "The situation in
Germany is marked by the attempt to bring the N.S.D.A.P. into line by bureaucracy and other
clandestine opponents of National Socialism."

4. Our task


Recognition of the enemy has been discussed as a great prerequisite of the struggle.
We now know his aim, his changing methods and his new manifestations.


Now, what are the necessities for us, the movement, to meet the transformations of
the struggle?


First of all, we must be clear that the state apparatus, the state police in particular,
cannot lead this struggle alone. The police can only meet the outwardly legally tangible anti-


191


state attitude of the opponent and is therefore more an organ of defense and defense.
Weltanschauliche opponents can decisively defeat the Weltanschauung only in the spiritual
struggle. After the first months of the revolutionary conquest of the state power, therefore, the
equalization was stopped. When many fellow fighters did not recognize the necessary
transformation of the struggle, the word was coined from revolution to evolution, from the
outwardly conquered position of power to the spiritual and ideological winning of all.


What demand does this new stage of struggle make on us, the S.S.?


We must work on ourselves. In unheard-of self chastisement we must anchor in
ourselves and adhere to the eternal principles of the world view given to us by the Fihrer.
First of all, we must make ourselves spiritually equal, so that everyone thinks about every
opponent equally, rejects him equally in principle, without making personally egoistic and
pitiful exceptions. In order to preserve our nation, we must be tough with the opponent, even
at the risk of hurting the individual opponent humanly and possibly also of being called
uncontrolled brutes by some certainly well-meaning people. If we as National Socialists do
not fulfill our historical task because we were too objective and human, we will not be
credited with extenuating circumstances. It will simply be said: before history they did not
fulfill their task. If someone is our conscious opponent, he is only subjectively and without
exception to be wrested down as an opponent. If, for example, every German, out of false pity,
would exclude from the fight only the "one decent" Jew or Freemason of his circle of
acquaintances, then these were just 60 million exceptions. The work on ourselves must be
done in terms of character and performance. We must deepen the good elements of our
German heritage. With all harshness we must be just, we must be the most loyal, and there
must be no better comradeship than ours. But we must also, with as much harshness as
possible, root out the shields and shortcomings in our own ranks. To prove the correctness of
the principles of our community and our selection, we must gradually become the best in all
fields. We must provide the best recruits to the nation's armaments carrier within the
framework of compulsory military service, we should always be among the first in sports. In
the professions, too, it must become the rule that the consciously political S.S. man is also the
best specialist, both in the examinations and in practice. We must make the pure "non-
political" only specialist dispensable by our performance. We have to expand the knowledge
of our ancestors or even acquire it in the first place. It is the knowledge of all the values that
God has given to our people: Our blood, our kind, our true historical past. This also includes
our ancient folklore, which has its roots in times that, contrary to the assertion of many, lie far
before the turn of time and further before the 8th century, which is so significant for
Germanicism. We must exemplify the eternal principles given by the Fuehrer and try to win
over in a positive way the people who in the first months did not want to go along with an
outward conformity out of characteristic attitude. All these people, who could not find the
content of the idea above formal errors, we must personally conquer man by man by our
achievements and the strength of the belief that we as a National Socialist movement may be
the smallest link between the high cultural past of our people to further millennia of German
national history. And we, the S.S., want to be the ideological shock troop and the protective
squadron of the idea of the Fuehrer and at the same time, in the fulfillment of the tasks of the
State Police, as far as we are on duty in it, an inner-political protective corps of the National
Socialist state.


192


fighting the enemiel of the ftate


When, in spite of the excellent election results and the German people's vote of
confidence in the Fiihrer, there is talk here about the reason why it is spoken of as enemies of
the state is that experience teaches us that the old great opponents, who, as is well known, are
or were not only in the German people, will now redouble and triple their efforts in order to
destroy or at least hinder the work of the Fuehrer as far as possible. For it is precisely the
election result that has shown them that their previous work among the people has not had the
success they had hoped for. National Socialism, seen in historical time, can only assert itself
completely and secure and maintain the National Socialist idea among the entire people if the
fight against the enemies of the state is successful. A battle is successful only if the enemy
becomes and remains permanently incapable of fighting. In war it is not the number of battles
won that is decisive, but the outcome of the war. Whether the battle or the war ends
successfully, however, depends on whether the enemy is correctly recognized in his methods,
his means, his mental and physical condition, and whether he is correctly fought accordingly


Therefore, if we are to speak intelligibly about the struggle against enemies of the
state, we must consider the means and methods of the enemy and our own resistance.


1. The Public Enemy


The liberalist past started from the state and not from the people. It thought of the
state as a separate entity, detached from the people. If it then wanted to determine the enemy
of the state in concrete terms, it appeared as the enemy of those who controlled the state
apparatus at any given time. The enemy of the state changed, depending on whether the
government was German nationalist, centrist or Marxist.


National Socialism no longer emanates from the state, but from the people. The
Fuehrer has already said this in "Mein Kampf" in a guiding way. He calls the state "means to


193


an end", as "an institution for the particular people in question" for the preservation and
promotion of a "community of physically and mentally similar living beings".


Accordingly, we National Socialists know only the enemy of the people. He is
always the same, he remains eternally the same. It is the enemy of the racial, popular and
spiritual substance of our people. Enemies of the people were those forces which in the past
led the State and fought us National Socialists as enemies of the State. Thus we experienced
the curiosity that we were branded enemies of the state while the enemies of the people sat in
government. The then owners of the state power apparatus, enemies of the people in the truest
sense of the word, were able to deprive the German people of its vélkisch power in all spheres
of life, and in the process fight us National Socialists, who fought for the preservation of our
people and made the greatest sacrifices, apparently formally in the right, as enemies of the
state. We,however, finished off this system by its own means. We adjusted ourselves to its
rules of the game, we were "legal" as the Constitution wanted us to be, and with the
constitutional means we legally destroyed a system that, without inner substance, was ready to
give itself up at any time, if only it was done legally.


Because of our world view, it is clear to us, and we have learned from our struggles
for power, that only the leadership of a state is right for which enemies of the state and
enemies of the people are the same. This is the case today. Thus we understand by the
enemies of the State in the National Socialist State the enemies of the people. That the
enemies of the people are at the same time the fiercest opponents of the state apparatus
occupied by National Socialism, that both, enemy of the state and enemy of the people, can no
longer fall apart, results from the fact that the state is indeed the instrument of the people
under its noblest representation, the movement, is that, according to the words of the leader, it
is not the State that commands us, but we the State.


National Socialism, which as the spirit of the movement waged the struggle for
power from the ground of world outlook, also breaks with the liberalist fight against the
enemy of the state. According to liberalist thinking, only the act hostile to the state and the
organization of the enemy of the state as the bearer of this act were fought.National Socialism
is concerned with the spiritual forces of these opponents. It wants to recognize and hit them.
We know today, they are the eternal same: The Jew, the Freemason and the political
clergyman. Their aims are the same, their forms of organization adapt themselves to the
respective legal possibility. Their struggle is directed against our state form and party form
and against the spiritual foundations of the idea. The details of the tactics of the enemy have
been discussed at length elsewhere. The effective fight against the enemy must be based on
the realization that all visibly appearing opponents are only the outer feelers of the eternally
same, dangerous spiritual forces. They are sent forward to probe the terrain, they are guided
according to uniform points of view. From the experience that the adversary always proceeds
very cleverly, it can be assumed that he will try by all means to penetrate into the key position
of the state apparatus. From here he can better pursue his aims; he then knows the strength
and the weak points of the apparatus fighting him and is above all in a position to bend
measures against himself.


2. The bearers of the fight against the enemy of the state

Knowledge of the enemy leads to very definite conclusions as to the organization,
methods and choice of men of the institution which must undertake the fight against the
enemies of the state.
@ = The structure of the State Police must be such that, on the one


hand, it does not break up the large administration that sustains the State. This implies a
certain connection of the State Police with the general administration. On the other hand, it


194


must be a self-contained organization which contains within itself the possibility of a direct
line of command and reporting. This is necessary in the event that the enemy should succeed
in penetrating the administrative apparatus in a skilful manner. In addition, it is necessary that
for special tasks (e.g. defense) the working group be kept as small as possible, in order to
prevent that the forces which are to be secrets which must be preserved become known. These
necessities are currently fulfilled for Prussia by the law of 10 February 1936.


@ The human material for this fighting state police must be of a

special kind. The very necessary administrative and criminalistic training in itself is not
enough. The best specialist in burglary, with years of practice, need never become a suitable
fighter against Communism. Purely technical ability may suffice to apprehend an illegal
functionary of the KPD, to establish the objective facts of the case. To fight the enemies of the
state, moreover, belongs

the unconditional grasp of the National Socialist idea and the comprehensive knowledge of
the enemy in his foundations. The men of the State Police must therefore be absolutely like-
minded in their mental attitude. They must feel themselves to be a fighting corps. This is
doubly necessary, for experience teaches that the individual man is no match for this great,
uniformly led adversary, and the constant preoccupation with only negative things can be
sustained in the long run only if the positive counter-values bring a balance through a corps-
like community. This is also the reason why very many officers of the State Police are at the
same time SS-leaders or SS-men.


@ = The following results for the way of fighting the opponent:


a) The ideological struggle against the foundations of the enemy can only be waged by the
National Socialist idea and thus by the National Socialist movement


b) The state police must recognize the organizational forms and the strategic and tactical
intentions of the overall enemy on the basis of ideological knowledge:


* to teach the bearers of the war of ideas,


* in order to create the tactical basis for the tactical and criminalistic apprehension and
combating of the individual enemy of the state and the individual anti-state organizations.


3.The Security Service


The State Police is assisted in its duties by the Party intelligence organization, the
Security Service of the Reichsfiihrer-SS, which is not vested with executive authority. This
Sicherheitsdienst is a branch of the Gesamt-SS, to which the Reich leadership of the NSDAP
assigns intelligence research and surveillance of the ideological opponents of National
Socialism. Naturally, the structure of the Security Service corresponds geographically to the
structure of the general SS. The men of this Security Service are SS-leaders and SS-men of
the total-SS who alternately have their commands with the Security Service and in the general
SS. While on the one hand the State Police tasks are of a tactical and executive nature, on the
other hand the Security Service has the intelligence and research task of providing strategic
bases for the leadership of the movement and thus of the State. The necessary close
cooperation between the Security Service of the Movement and the State Police of the State is
ensured by the fact that the Reichsfiihrer-SS as such is the supreme chief of the Security
Service and at the same time the deputy chief of the Secret State Police, and that the head of
the Secret State Police Office under him is at the same time the chief of the Main Security
Office.


195


In summary, the following can be said: National Socialism sees the enemy of the
people in the enemy of the state. All expressions of anti-state forces lead back again and again
to the enemy of the people, are supported, directed and determined in their actions from here.
The enemy of the people can be fought properly only when he is recognized spiritually in his
methods and means. This task is fulfilled by the Secret State Police and the Security Service
of the SS, which thus set an example of unity between party and state in exemplary
cooperation.


196


Che [peechef of
Reinhard Aeydrich


On the Day of the German Police 1541


Secret State Police, Criminal Investigation Department, and Security Service are still
shrouded in the murmuring and whispering mystery of the political detective novel. Ina
mixture of dread and horror, and yet at home with a certain sense of security as to their
existence, the men of this work abroad are fond of speaking brutally, to sadistic inhumanity
and callousness. At home and supports one understanding our task. Here there is nothing,
down to the smallest egoistic wish, which one does not believe can be solved by the Secret
State Police. So we are, to put it jokingly, variable from "girl for everything" to the "trash can
of the empire". But whoever takes the trouble to see the real work and to look for the human
beings in the men who are on duty here, will be amazed to find that here, after the most
painstaking, protracted and difficult training, stand ideologically clear National Socialists who,
in a happy union of life-experienced practitioners, painstakingly and logically working
scientists, fighting political soldiers and decent, understanding people, are mastering their task
in ardent love for the Fihrer and for Germany. In addition to the delivery of many people to
pure front-line military service of the Wehrmacht, there is also the security police deployment
within the framework of the army, in small part as secret field police, but for the most part as
special security police task forces with the goal of political security of the occupied territories.
Here, of course, all tasks are multiplied many times over by the fact that there is not a
positively cooperating people, but a population that is at least uninvolved or - depending on
the attitude of the country - hostile. All this means an infinite diminution of the available
manpower in the territory of the Reich and an unimaginably increased demand on individual
performance. The work of the man of the Secret State Police and the Security Service is a
qualitatively conditioned, constant, silent individual effort with an almost unbelievable small
number of outstanding men. Always on outstanding quality is demanded here, but also
achieved.Here, of course, all the tasks are multiplied many times over by the fact that there is
not a positively cooperating people, but a population which is at least uninvolved or -
depending on the attitude of the country - hostile. All this means an infinite diminution of the
available manpower in the territory of the Reich and an inconceivably increased demand on
individual effort. The Work of the Man of the Secret State Police


One important fact makes it difficult for our men - in contrast to the comrades at the
front in the Wehrmacht - apart from the good fortune of being allowed to be on front-line duty
at all: the soldierly manhood of the front-line soldiers The soldierly manhood of the front-line
soldiers can, in view of the rapidity of the operational can very quickly be crowned by public
recognition, distinction and success. success. The political soldier of the "secret front," on the
other hand, must be silent, outrageously patient, often serving only other political factors,
creating in the certainty that his deed may be appreciated very late, often never publicly. Thus,
security police and security service stand their ground according to the instructions of the
Fiihrer, under the command of their Reichsfithrer-SS. They want only one thing: to create and
fight for Germany.


197


Declaration to the nevoly inftalled
Protectorate Government


The historical mis-development towards statehood and the period of the republic
itself have made the population of of Bohemia and Moravia from the the organic geopolitical
and historically evolved affiliation with the away. The political and intellectual masterminds
of the West, the plutocratic powers and - in the the Bolshevik powers in the guise of a so-
called pan-Slavism have promoted this misguided education by all means and have
encouraged the formation of a recently recently developed, much too numerous in percentage,
egoistic and ambitious intelligent stratum. While in the world, particularly in Central Europe,
already While in the world, especially in Central Europe, the struggle for the basic elements
of the world views was already breaking out, while the Reich was already in the decisive
struggle to shake off the same forces, the aforementioned development made the area of
Bohemia and Moravia one of the bastions most endangering Europe against the Reich. The
Fuehrer, who - in his visionary foresight - tried to mobilize all forces for the decisive struggle,
therefore had to take a front in the interest of Europe against the forces and states which, out
of a wrong view of their own history, endangered the liberation of Europe and thus their own
freedom.


While these forces in Bohemia and Moravia, on the one hand, carried out an
unheard-of material rearmament and a spiritual whipping up of the population within the
scope of their within the scope of their leadership responsibility, they were, on the other hand,
too cowardly to draw the military consequences from their previous behavior, namely: to fight
in the fall of 1938. Whereas the President of the Republic, Dr. Hacha, in his the historical
events, he returned to the Reich in terms of constitutional law and for his own the government
appointed by him, with a few changes in the person, also the last government with some
personal changes, the last government as well, did not have that consequence. that had to be
drawn internally from this external act. Thus, under the eyes of this government, a not
insignificant resistance movement could arise, which was able to disappoint the Reich, but to
endanger Bohemia and Moravia in its entirety. The last government, in spite of an otherwise
excellent knowledge of the news in the area, did not fight this development out of
incompetence or negligence or - as some prominent examples show - deliberately...


Thus, after my appointment as Deputy Reich Protector, it was up to me to inform the
the President of the Republic and to make up with a firm hand for what the Czech what the
Czech government had failed to do in two and a half years. You, gentlemen, have a great,
albeit difficult, task ahead of you. Your government rally shows that you have recognized the
problems in their full and are willing to do fundamental work. This work will take place on on
two levels: on the one hand, you will work in close contact with me and the Secretary of State.
and the Secretary of State, you will form a management and working group based on mutual
trust. working group for the solution of all tasks in this area. On the other On the other hand,
you will have the difficult task of fundamentally changing the criminal development in the
education and leadership of the Czech population and certainly, often in the face of ignorance
and rejection, to lead the Czech population to its best. The emphasis will be on a correct and
clear education of the youth. The time of parliamentary Council of Ministers decisions that
prevent practical, active government and leadership work has finally come to an end. The task
of the chairman will be, above all, to keep the unity and the thrust of the new government
always equally strong in the important work of enlightenment and education. The smaller the
ministries are in their leadership apparatus, the more active, the more successful the work will
be. The preconditions of mutual trust are that all moments of tactics must be refrained from in
this narrower circle of trust; tactics are used only against opponents.


198


On the occafion of the ceremonial
reopening of the Rudolfinum in Prague
af a German art inftitution


16 October 1941


As Deputy Reichsprotector, I have the honor today to complete in a ceremonial act
of state the structural renovation of the Rudolfinum, which was ordered by the ill
Reichsprotector, Reich Minister Freiherr von Neurath, on April 11, 1940, and which was
announced in a party ceremony on June 30 of the same year.


First of all, let me soberly outline in data the history of this cultural site. It conveys to
us, without romantic embellishment, the fateful development of this space in recent decades.


In 1872, on the occasion of its 50th anniversary, the Bohemian Savings Bank - at that
time a completely German institution - decided to erect a building "dedicated to the art of


sound, the fine arts and the decorative arts".


Built from 1876 to 1884, this house of art was named "Rudolfinum" after the then
Crown Prince Rudolf on February 7, 1885, and was ceremonially opened. For 33 years, the


199


Rudolfinum served its original purpose: to host German concert events: Men, such as Karl
Muck, and the still living opera composer Emil Nikolaus von Rezniczek took their way from
here.


The organ installed in the large concert hall was taken over by the greatest composer
of those days, Anton Bruckner.


It served as a home for the Prague Conservatory founded in 1911 by
the ,,Association for the Promotion of Musical Art in Bohemia", one of the oldest German
music educational institutions of this kind. The exhibition and collection of works of art of the
"Society of patriotic art lovers" founded in 1796.


In 1918, in October, immediately after the foundation of the former Czechoslovak
Republic, the "Association for the Promotion of Musical Art" was forced to dissolve. The
Prague Conservatory was Czechized and taken over by the state.


26 by the state. The "Society of Patriotic Friends of Art" also had to leave with its art
collections. In 1919, in April, the Rudolfinum was seized and designated as the House of
Deputies. On May 26, 1920, the first session of the Czech Parliament was held. In 1921, on
December 15, the "Bohemian Savings Bank" had to sell the building to the Czech state. The
large concert hall was converted into the Chamber of Deputies, and the organ located there
was moved to the Stadium Hall in Brno. The organ's console, where an Anton Bruckner had
sat, was "smashed with an axe" to make way for a bust of Masaryk.


In 1938, the last session of the Parliament took place on December 16. And today we
are solemnly united to now finally consecrate this place of German art. At this moment, I am
linking with this the obligations: for the artists to always be German artists in the sense of the
Reich, for us leaders: to pave the way for the creators and creators of art, to give them ideally
and materially the conditions for a creative work detached from the day. In this sense,
tomorrow at the castle I will present the "Prize of the Reich Protector 1941" to three German
artists as a reward, incentive and help. And now please delve with me briefly into the
principles of the life of peoples in view of the interaction anchored in them: especially of art
to politics, to race, but also to the character, soul and heart of the people of our nation.


Historical times of true greatness and true inner content were always followed by
times of flowering of true art and genuine skill. Historically and politically weak times let the
peoples draw from the art of the greats of their time and give themselves the strength to
overcome the political decline. At the same time, some geniuses fought their way through and
also strengthened the impetus for new political life. Political illusory blossoms, such as those
of the late 19th century, usually have an illusory blossom in art as well, because they transfer
the deceitfulness and superficiality of the political gears to art. In times of cultural and
ideological decline and rapid political change, it is all too easy for the artist to take refuge in
the superficial form: The poet into the overtones of the elegance of language, the musician
into the strictness of the laws of composition or into comfortable light music, the master
builder, sculptor and painter into expressionism.


Unfortunately, out of material need they very often slip into the dependence of the
constantly changing political parties. The Jew has now recognized this danger in his own
sense. He has intensified it and made more and more art and culture alien to the folklore, the
race, the heart and the soul of the people. In this region of Bohemia and Moravia, which is
fatefully bound to the Reich, the Jew added a completely false tribal hatred to the de-
politicization of art. He inculcated the Czech nation with the madness of statehood and
blinded it to centuries of political experience with its natural integration into the empire.
Finally, he tried to make King Wenceslas, who in truth always recognized and represented the


200


great sense of belonging to the empire, a holy symbol against the empire and against the
culture of the empire. When I, as the Deputy Reich Protector, reproduce this place of
cultivation of the art of German culture, then I address with it very seriously to all artists and
creators the admonition that they create their works as Germans, out of innermost ideological
faith, with their whole heart and pure character. The masters with their works are not
individual figures without blood and homeland, but people who consciously or unconsciously
draw their strength from the feeling of their people and the fate of their area. An eternal
example be to you all the greatest artist and designer, the greatest German: Adolf Hitler!


201


Wenceflaf tradition


On November 19, 1941, during the solemn the ceremonial viewing of the coronation
jewels in the Wenceslas Chapel, President Dr. Hacha handed over the seven keys and
received three of the seven keys in trustful hands. This symbolic act put an end to centuries of
doubts and once again marked the consistency of the decisive act of the Fuehrer on March 16,
1939,


This celebration gives reason to remember the Wenceslas tradition in all its depth
and to point out its historical importance for the relationship of this area to the empire in the
past, present and future. After the migration of a large part of the Germanic population, other
peoples entered this area from the east, from which - in the course of the centuries, in a strong
mixture with the Germanic elements - the present population grew. In its spirit as well as in its
political conception this advance was an east-west movement. In the course of political and
ethnic development, the need to find a clear relationship with the western and eastern
neighbors arose very soon. This was initially followed by the striving for independence and
autonomy and led to a number of self-assertion struggles against the neighboring peoples.


Culturally, a detachment from the East and a rapprochement to Western concepts had
emerged in the meantime. The geopolitical conditions forced, in different periods of time, to
take the help of the empire against eastern and southeastern neighbors, and resulted in a
rational subordination and insertion into the empire. From that time on, the population of
Bohemia and Moravia lived for centuries (also in terms of attitude) in the dichotomy between
East and West, the political conditionality of belonging to the Empire and the striving for
independence. Again and again in the history of Bohemia and Moravia and its inhabitants,
phenomena played a role that we have also seen fatefully emerge in the last decades, even in
the last weeks and months.


Indeed, it was unfortunately a bad habit of these people to bow their heads and
pledge allegiance after martial or political defeats, but to go the old way, breaking their word,
when the leadership of the empire to which one had pledged oneself, retreated militarily,
trusting in this word. In history, sometimes it is the kings and rulers themselves who commit
treason, sometimes it is vassals of those who rule here who call for rebellion and treason even
against their own ruler who was loyal to the leadership of the empire. In this sense, the fate of
St. Wenceslas and his following brother Boleslaus is the tragic example of this overall
development, but also the historical symbol of the clear political consequences of the present
and future. Wenceslas, recognizing the historical necessity, had finally joined the Empire and
thus for the first time took a stand against the East. The rebels who, under the leadership of
his brother Boleslaus, fought against this statesmanlike attitude of Wenceslas, even at that
time, misjudging the historical destiny of this area and its eternal interrelation with the Empire,
overthrew Wenceslas and his idea in good faith, murdered him themselves and, under
Boleslaus, tried again to be a bastion against the West. Fate and space were stronger even then.
Boleslaus himself - in the course of his experiences and adventures - found his way back to
the Empire after battles against the East.


The decision of Hacha in March 1939, which enabled the historically final decision
of the leader, corresponds to the spirit of the real Wenceslas tradition. The rebels against the


202


Reich from the September-October days of that year were judged because they not only did
not grasp this Wenceslas tradition, but also because in breaking through old Eastern habits,
practicing disloyalty, they stabbed the Reich in the back in order to create, in turn, from the
bastion against the East one against the West. They forgot that the leadership of the Empire
had to be warned by the experience of history and prepared for the recurrence of these
phenomena. The Wenceslas tradition holds the realization that Bohemia and Moravia will be
great only with the Empire and always weak without the Empire. But it also shows us that the
population - considering the existence of many German ancestors as well - finally sees the
obligation to draw the consequences from this historical experience internally in terms of
attitude and in the education of their youth. Thus, the initially external aspect of this solemn
act in the Coronation Chapel becomes a binding guideline for the population of Bohemia and
Moravia in the spirit of true Wenceslas tradition.


203


Speech at the German rally in the Prague
Opera houfe


Today's ceremony has united us for two thoughts. To remember the historically
decisive act of the Fihrer for the Reich and Bohemia-Moravia three years ago - and to express
our gratitude to the fallen heroes.


Especially in difficult times of sacrifice, German history and the heroism of those
who shaped it demand that we do not celebrate such commemorative days in a narrow and
small way, but always prove ourselves worthy of true greatness. In this sense, this celebration
is an hour for us to look back, to reflect, to gather and to look forward, both historically and
humanly. Historically, we want to look back to the recent past of the decline and discord of
the Empire, which as always - even in the long term - means times of hardship and weakness
for this space with its people. We want to look back further, but always and again recall the
successes and the mistakes from the never-ending history of our empire and keep them alive
in us as an eternal reminder for the future.


Whether it was the time of the gathering of Germanism, or in the struggle of the
emperors and popes, or the time when, supposedly for the good of faith, the German people
almost bled to death in the Thirty Years' War, or whether it was the last world war or the time
of the struggle of the National-Socialist movement, Germany was always in danger when it
was disunited, seduced by foreigners, tearing itself apart. But always Germany was victorious
and great when it found faith in itself, its strength, its superiority - without losing the clear
sense of reality and the recognition and elimination of its own mistakes. The holy faith in the
providentially given strength of our people has always overcome difficult times, the cool
mind and the irrepressible will have thereby enabled the leadership to master the dangers
soberly.


March 15, 1939 is, historically speaking, not only the fulfillment of the wishes of the
German heart, but soberly rationally the real completion of a political necessity.


The great war we are now experiencing is the life-deciding struggle for the existence
of Greater Germany and Europe. Thus, politically, economically and humanly, precisely
because of its necessary sacrifices and burdens, it will contribute as a crucible to deepen and
complete the final growing into the Reich of this area. Thus, from a political point of view,
today is a day of grateful and respectful remembrance of that March 15, 1939, which created
the foundation and the beginning, in terms of state policy and law, for that development and
those tasks which we, together with the inhabitants of Bohemia and Moravia, are willing to
advance in the sense of the Reich and to complete according to the instructions of the Fihrer.


Looking ahead, however, this day, especially in its connection with the
commemoration of heroes, bears a human obligation for each and every one of us. Those
fallen comrades, through the sacrifice of their lives, have directed an obligatory reminder to
us living to tirelessly stand our ground especially in the moments and times of fighting and
mental stress and to bravely overcome the small burdens of everyday life at home.
Pusillanimity creeps into the hearts of many people. It is precisely then that we must, in
thoughts of our heroes and in faith in our beloved Fuehrer, again and again find the inner
strength within ourselves to use all our strength, alive and fighting, for victory, for the Fuehrer
and for Germany.


204


Richard Walther Darrfi


Richard Walther Darré, the son of German parents, was born in Buenos Aires,
Argentina, on 14th July, 1895. Educated in Germany and England, Darré joined the German
Army and fought as an artillery officer on the Western Front during the First World War.


After the war he joined the Freikorps in Berlin. He then finished his studies and
qualified as a agronomist in 1922. A close friend of Heinrich Himmler he joined the National
Socialist German Workers Party (NSDAP). Darré became the main figure in the Nazi Party
interested in agriculture and was very successful in recruiting farmers into the party. When
Adolf Hitler gained power in 1933 he appointed Darré as Reich Minister for Food and
Agriculture.


Darré was given the rank of SS-Gruppenfihrer and appointed to the SS Race and
Settlement Main Office (Rasse- und Siedlungshauptamt or RuSHA) which was a department
which implemented racial policies and was concerned with the racial integrity of the members
of the SS. In his religious views, Darre would belong to the Pagan occult faction within the
NSDAP. Darré's works were primarily concerned with the ancient and present Nordic
peasantry - the ideology of 'Blut uind Boden' (Blood and Soil): within this context, he made
an explicit attack against Christianity. In his two main works (‘Das Bauerntum als
Lebensquell der Nordischen Rasse', (Peasants as the Source of Nordic Nobility) Munich, 1927
and 'Neuadel aus Blut und Boden' (The New Nobility of Blood and Soil), Munich, 1930),
Darré accused Christianity, with its "teaching of the equality of men before God," of having
"deprived the Teutonic nobility of its moral foundations", the "innate sense of superiority over
the nomadic tribes". In 1933, Darré became Reich Minister of Food and Agriculture
succeeding resigned DNVP leader Alfred Hugenberg, and Reichsbauernfiihrer (usually
translated as Reich Peasant Leader, though the word Bauer also denotes Farmer), serving
from June 1933 to May 1942. He was instrumental in founding the Nazi Reichsnahrstand
corporation as part of the Gleichschaltung process. Darré campaigned for big landowners to
part with some of their land to create new farms, and promoted the controversial
Reichserbhofgesetz. He developed a plan for "Rasse und Raum" ("race and space", or
territory) which provided the ideological background for the Nazi expansive policy on behalf
of the "Drang nach Osten" ("Drive to the east") and of the "Lebensraum" ("Living space")
theory expounded in Mein Kampf.


The Rasse- und Siedlungshauptamt-SS (SS Race and Settlement Main Office),
(RuSHA), was the organization responsible for "safeguarding the racial ‘purity! of the SS"
within the Third Reich. One of its duties was to oversee the marriages of SS personnel in
accordance with the Aryan ideology of the NSDAP. The RuSHA would only issue a permit to
marry once detailed background investigations into the racial fitness of both prospective
parents had been completed. The RuSHA was founded in 1931 by Reichsfiihrer-SS Heinrich
Himmler and Richard Walther Darré, who later rose to the rank of SS-Obergruppenfiihrer. It
was an SS office. In 1935, it was upgraded to an SS Main Office. Under its first director,
Darré, it propagated the Vélkisch ideology of 'Blut und Boden' (Blood and Soil). Darré was
dismissed by Himmler in 1938, and he was succeeded by SS-Gruppenfihrer Giinther Pancke,
SS-Gruppenfiihrer Otto Hofmann in 1940, and SA-Gruppenfiihrer Richard Hildebrandt in
1943. The RuSHA was created to monitor Himmler's 1931 order that the marital decisions of
unmarried SS men should be supervised by the Nazi state. SS men would thereafter have to
apply for a marriage permit three months before getting married so that the parents of the


206


fiancée could be investigated to ensure her racial purity. Books that he wrote at this time
reflected the influence of Nazi views on race: Das Bauerntum als Lebensquell der Nordischen
Rasse (1928), Um Blut und Boden (1929) and Neuadel aus Blut and Boden (1930). In his
books Darré claimed it was the Nordic race that had been the true creators of European
culture. He advocated the creation of what he called a "Germanic aristocracy of the soil" as a
new ruling class.


Darré's influence began to wane as Hitler and Himmler both came to feel that he was
too much of a theoretician and an incompetent administrator. By September 1938, Himmler
demanded that Darré step down as leader of the SS Race and Settlement Main Office and was
later placed on an extended leave of absence as Reich Minister on 23 May 1942, ostensibly on
health grounds, effectively sidelined from thereafter and retired to his hunting lodge in the
Schorfheide forest outside Berlin until the end of the Hitler’s Germany.


207


Blood and Soil:
a fundamental Jdea
of National Socialifm


From the doctrine of the law of the state, as it has been taught hitherto, the
conventional view is well known: To a state belong:


1. a Volk,
2. a national territory on which the people live,
3. a state power.


It has long been recognized that these three basic components of the state: "Volk", "It
is precisely this inner connection of a people with its territory and with its state order that
makes a state unique and gives it its living character, i.e., makes a problem of organization a
living organism. It is precisely this inner connection of a people with its territory and with its
state order that first constitutes the peculiarity of a state and first gives it its living character,
i.e. makes a vital organism out of a problem of organization. Thus it is no accident what kind
of people lives on its soil and what kind of state authority is established by this people on its
territory. From this alone it is evident that the State - at least according to our conception - is
not characterized by the idea of an unlimited perfection of power over its people and in its
territory, but that the power of the State is exhausted from the special kind of interaction in
which the life-legal forces of the people, the formation of its soil, the willpower of its leaders,
and the nature of the State's structure interpenetrate each other and are united into a unity. It
should not be overlooked that the State is also conditioned by the manifold forces acting
outside its borders, and that even in peace it must assert itself against these external influences.
In particular, we wish to emphasize that the character of our State is not determined by
foreign territories, as is characteristic of the great colonial empires, nor by a foreign
population which is only subject to the power of the State, but that our State has its centre of
gravity in its own life and in its own people, and that it must develop its concept of the State
on this basis. This soil and this people provide our State with its tasks; at the same time, they
offer the natural forces which make possible and limit the development of State power and
determine its nature.


The special relationship of the people to the State has always been the subject of
scientific and constitutional consideration, and today it has gained increased importance in the
cooperation between the Party and the authorities, and in the division of public administration
into State administration and the tasks to be left to self-administration. As an example of such
self-administration, I will cite here only the corporatist structure of the National Socialist food
industry. Here the markets for agricultural products were organized for the sake of the public
necessity of a secure state food basis with the help of a self-governing association under
public law.In such self-administration the interplay of state objectives, necessary for the sake
of the whole, and state outlook on the one hand, and an orderly self-administration of the
economic forces on the other, is shown - a practical example of the interlocking of the forces
of the people and the state. The inner connection between the formation of the state and the
people in the sense of blood-related connections between the people has also been recognized
and appreciated for a long time - especially thanks to Romanticism and philosophical German
idealism. National Socialism was able to build on these intellectual traditions with its concept
of people and state. In our time, the connection between state and territory has also been
scientifically clarified; I recall only the work in the field of geopolitics, which examined the


208


influences of space on historical processes and in many cases uncovered connections that are
worthy of serving in the future as prerequisites for a statesman's store of knowledge. On the
other hand, it seems to me that up to now science has not paid sufficient attention to the
relationship of the people to the soil, at least not in the sense of the life-legal effects of the
land on the people and the life-legal community of destiny existing between the two. The
connection between the people and the soil on which they live is not exhausted by the fact that
the condition of the soil, the yield of the soil, and the mineral resources have a natural
influence on the economy and the material conditions of the culture of this people. Early
historical research and modern racial research have already pointed out the importance of the
type of soil and the formation of the terrain for the settlement history of the people.But if we
go beyond the general influence of the soil on the conditions of life for a certain race and a
certain national life, and if we ask about the particular way in which a people itself forms its
relationship to the soil, in what form it owns and administers the native land, this question can
only be answered by the law of the soil. Land law determines how the land is assigned to the
life-legal forces of the people. Thus, in practice, land law at the same time decides the internal
structure of the state. This basic truth can also be extended to say that land law inevitably
determines the future ofa state. | even maintain that there is no Germanic or Indo-European
state which did not undergo a transformation of its land law before it became extinct in
history. The decline of these states is always preceded by a revolution of their land law, often
unconscious to themselves and very seldom noticed by our historians, which in the first place
creates the preconditions for bringing the vitality of their statesmanlike blood to a standstill.
In this respect the conditions in Sparta are most clearly shown, where the fate of the
hereditary courts of the Spartiates, created by Lycurgas, and the fate of the Spartan state quite
clearly go hand in hand. We have such excellent clarity about these connections in Sparta
because Busolt, who unfortunately died too early, investigated them in detail and brought
them into the light of judgment. We do not yet possess very many similar investigations of
other states of Indo-Germanic and Germanic type. But these few investigations already clearly
show that the assertion I have just made is justified, as soon as one approaches the problem of
the rise and fall of states of Indo-Germanic and Germanic nature from the point of view of the
relation of their land law to these events. I consider these connections to be so decisive and
significant that, in my opinion, they would justify the establishment of a chair at every
German university.


The political effect of the current law on land is conditioned in particular by the fact
that land and the work on it have always had a persistent, constant character. The arable land
does not yield a quick profit - as, for example, a block of shares does in times of rising
economic activity or as other movable assets do - but the arable land requires constant care,
which is determined by the nature of the soil. This peculiarity of land cultivation has always
resisted a rapidly changing right of ownership and has favoured a consolidation of land rights,
such as is known in legal history under the word of the transformation of personal property
rights into urgent and hereditary rights to the land. Especially the actual cultivation of the soil
forces the peasant family into the service of the field and the farm, and thereby connects the
generation growing up on it so firmly with the soil that the subordination of the family to the
laws of the field is felt to be the natural thing and a self-evident commandment. From this, in
turn, springs the custom or law that only one of the blood heirs should later carry on the
business, lest the law of the farm and field should suffer by division of the inheritance. Let us
compare this bound property, which requires of the owner a certain way of life and daily work,
with a banked estate.This contrast may make it clear that such a movable capital cannot point
the way to the work of the next generation and cannot form an obligatory tradition as, for
instance, the ownership of a farm can. That is why the arable land is the place of firm tradition
and constant custom. This is what gives land law its political significance. For the viability of
every state leadership is conditioned by certain basic laws of constancy, and these character
traits necessary for this develop more easily or more exclusively in the rural population than
in the structuring mass of a non-rural population driven by aspects of economic


209


conjuncture.According to this it is to be understood that, as far as the historical tradition
reaches, the right to the soil has formed a core question for the building up and downfall of
states, and that especially in our time, in the revolutionary transformation of the neighbouring
regions to the east, the agrarian reforms there are at the centre of events. I may point out that
the Russian state to this day sees in its agrarian constitution the core of its internal political
power. According to this alone, it would be clear that a lasting agrarian constitution pointing
to the future was a fundamental necessity for the construction of the Third Reich. Instead of
this, under the influence of the BGB. all rural steadiness threatened to flow away completely
and thus to achieve the opposite of what the value of a rural population is. The possibilities of
indebtedness, and with it the burden of interest, as well as the dependence on an immense,
unregulated market, which was dominated by foreign influences, brought the peasant holdings
more and more under the dominion of a foreign creditor capital. And while the BGB protected
this creditor capital and its creditors to the greatest possible extent, it had not even included
the word "peasant," this primal concept of all steadfastness, in its vocabulary, let alone
bothered about a peasant right. From this arose the task of the National Socialist legislation to
re-establish a firm land law and to secure the economic existence of the peasant farms through
orderly sales on the markets.But if we want to fully grasp this significance of land law in the
German state of today, we must go deeper and ask, beyond the value of an enduring firm
agrarian constitution, what the peasantry means to our people. And here the peculiarity of
National Socialist agrarian policy becomes apparent in comparison with the agrarian policy of
other states. For us, too, it is indispensable to link the holders of the right to the soil firmly to
the structure of the State, i.e., to do justice to the political significance of land ownership; and
we have therefore united all peasants and farmers in a public-law organization, the
Reichsnahrstand, which is closely linked to the State and the Party in terms of personnel and
administration. It is also our duty to create the economic prerequisites not only to maintain
domestic agriculture, but also to enable it to achieve the best possible increase in output. Only
a few years ago, the future of German agriculture was envisaged as being based on the
American model of farming, i.e. an agricultural economy geared to maximum profits,
dependent on the economic cycle and calculated on the basis of stock market capitalist
profitability. As we know, farming has collapsed in the United States today. If our peasantry
had really adapted to this farm economy, most farms would be at a standstill today, the
country would be desolate, and we would probably not be able to fight a battle of production.
Instead of this, the German rural economy is today in the midst of the battle of production, in
order to secure freedom of nutrition, i.e., the minimum requirements of the people from their
own soil, thus relieving our foreign trade balance and freeing up means of payment for the
import of industrial raw materials.


The National Socialist agricultural policy shares this objective with the nationalist
agricultural policy of other countries, for example, of the fascist Italy. The peculiarity of our
method, however, lies in the fact that we combine the economic policy goals with the
population and cultural policy necessities and, in short, bring politics and economics into
harmony in the sense of the one summarizing and dominating idea of National Socialism.
National Socialist agricultural policy is concerned not only with the food economy, but at the
same time with the preservation of the peasantry as the blood source of the people. And this
last circumstance is very decisive and fundamental. For it is the first time that the conclusion
has been drawn from the fact that in a state of a Germanic nature blood is preserved and
multiplied in generations only in the countryside, but that the turning away from rural life
causes a strong attrition of the sexes. If we may use the comparative image, we may say that
the blood of a people bubbles up, as it were, like a spring on its farms, only to dry up sooner
or later in the city. For peoples whose basic character is nomadic, for example for the Jewish
people, this law does not apply; on the other hand, it applies absolutely to Germanic blood
and can be called the iron law of fate of Germanic humanity. National Socialist agricultural
policy has conceived its task in the light of these fundamental ideas: by means of the same
measures it attempts at the same time to secure the nourishment of the whole people and to


210


guarantee the preservation of farms and farming families in their capacity as the blood source
of the people. We know that the number of births in the countryside is greater in proportion to
the number of the population than in the cities. In 1927 the average birth rate in the Reich was
10% lower than the birth rate needed to maintain the population: in the country, on the other
hand, there was a birth surplus of 13%! In 1933 the birth rate, calculated per 1000 of the
resident population, was 18 live births per 1000 in the municipalities with less than 2000
inhabitants, i.e. in the rural municipalities, in the middle group of municipalities from 2000 to
400,000 inhabitants only 14.5 per 1000, and in the large cities only 11.2 live births per 1000
inhabitants. But it is not only a question of the numerical existence of our people, but also of
the preservation of the hereditary factors to which we owe all the efficiency and all the
achievements of our people. Here the one-sided movement of the aspiring forces from the
countryside to the cities in connection with the development of metropolitan civilization
means a danger. The Swedish population politician Professor Lundborg, Upsala, once
described the cities as a "traps", which he’d use to describe the places from which the bearers
of good hereditary traits are lured and where their hereditary traits are wiped out in a few
generations. It is necessary to realize clearly the whole dreadful implications of this
realization. Everything that has ever been accomplished in the German people has been
accomplished out of its hereditary stock, which, in accordance with the circumstances, knew
how to master the tasks that presented themselves. The liberal-democratic delusion that talent
can be replaced by education is today recognized in all its hollowness. But talent depends on
heredity, as we know. But if this is so, then our people has only one absolute asset, namely the
hereditary values of German blood, which it possesses and which will continue to give it,
centuries from now, the leaders and inventors it needs to prove itself equal to the tasks of
those centuries and thus to be able to assert itself as a people among other peoples. No
material economic prosperity, no treasures of the world will secure the future of the German
people as much as the germs of valuable hereditary material which it possesses today. Today
we make balance sheets and statistics about all areas of our national existence, but
unfortunately none about the biological foundations of our national life. And we are still
further away from being able, on the basis of an impeccable biological balance sheet of our
national body, to also to draw up a biological budget for once. Like a parvenu who has
become rich overnight, we do not yet have any relationship to what has made us rich and, like
him, waste his money on our precious blood. With cold hearts we watch our most precious
blood lying idle or wasting away, and in this respect we act like a fool who throws precious
stones with full hands into the sea where it is deepest and no soul will ever see them again. In
this connection I am reminded of a truly revolutionary word by Gustav Frenssen, who once
related in "Seagulls and Mice" (page 247): A clever man told me that, travelling in Thuringia,
he had seen in the train a young man who had been similar to Goethe in his whole appearance,
and thought that there was probably more than one of Goethe's blood living in Thuringia and
around there. I think that this is indeed the case and said: "It is a pity that there are not more.
The time will come when, in the name of religion and morality, they will emasculate those of
bad heritage and demand many children from a man like Goethe."So much for Frenssen! And
if we are not yet able to accept this last mental demand of a thinking poet because of its
novelty, we must be fools if we do not want to do something against the fact that our rural
source of blood is drying up as a result of the law hitherto in force and is wasting itself
uselessly in the non-rural sector of our national existence. And all this after all history proves
to us that our culture is conditioned by Germanic blood and that this, in turn, depends for its
viability on the land law under which it must live.The basis for the rural exodus of the
enterprising and capable in the course of the last century was the spirit of liberal capitalism
and its liberal land law. Liberal capitalism impelled man to follow only the pursuit of profit;
as a result of the economic opening up of the world that began through it and with it, it
brought high prospects of profit in urban industrial occupations. The peasant, however, was
plunged into uncertainty as to whether he would find any market at all for the yield of his land
and his labor, and what fluctuating price he could expect. The land law of liberalism valued
the possession of farm and field no differently from the possession of movable property


211


embodied in papers, and allowed the same legal transactions and the same right of inheritance
for both. The BGB. stabilized liberalism legally and thus broke the baton over every German
peasantry that stood on the soil, but with it it also broke the baton over every affirmation of
the laws of blood in the German people.This dangerous gap in our legislation, which was in
the offing in the 19th century, was correctly recognized from the outset by Ernst Moritz Arndt,
the farmer's son and scholar. I quote from his writing "On the Care and Preservation of
Forests and Peasants in the Sense of a Higher, i.e. Human, Legislation", published in 1820:
"Persons must be free, but when sticks and stones and forests and mountains pass from one
hand to another like feathers in the wind, when even the most solid things become mobile and
fleeting, then nothing remains solid in people, even in that which should make the laws
unshakeable in the mind. But the two classes of men who preserve this core strength of a
people most simple mindedly and intimately are the peasants in the country and the craftsmen
in the cities. But these lose all their solidity and all their moral conduct when, in the country,
the farms and estates of the peasants are made easily alienable and when, by dissolving the
guilds and introducing the praised general freedom of trade, the last old strictness and
discipline of the trades is broken through. It cannot be said enough to an age staggering along
in the deluded fraud of liberty, that all is not liberty which has the appearance and name of
it."And elsewhere:"This few have considered, that if everything is left free, nothing remains
free, but a state of dissolution and debauchery must necessarily arise, which kills freedom in
its germs. This is the secret of true liberty, that by many material bonds, by institutions which
relate first to things apart from him, and only in the third and fourth instance to him, man is
kept and urged to discipline and order, and to that sacred sense of the steady and abiding,
without which no good citizens can be." So much for Ernst Moritz Arndt. For the National
Socialist agrarian policy the tasks arose from this insight: On the one hand, the liberal-
capitalist attitude in the peasantry had to be eliminated, and the conditions must be created so
that the farmer and his children, instead of being guided by a capitalist striving for economic
growth, once again become proud of their own kind and remain faithful to the law of life
of the peasantry. Only by cultivating the peasant spirit can we hope to keep precisely the
valuable peasant children as peasants in the countryside, and that on the old and on the new
settlement farms. In this way we are already directly preventing the extinction of the best
hereditary stock. The prerequisite for this change of attitude among the rural population was,
however, the detachment of agriculture from the capitalist cyclical economy and the
establishment of a steady economic form corresponding to the natural conditions of arable
farming. On the other hand, it was necessary to create the land law corresponding to the
peasant law of life. For a peasant attitude cannot be maintained in the long run if the law
denies it recognition, i.e., in our case, if the development and continuity of a peasant attitude is
counteracted in the law of succession by the legal equalization of arable land and pecuniary
property. The National Socialist agrarian legislation serves both tasks, a down-to-earth
economy and a land law affirming the peasantry.The market system creates fixed prices and
secure sales for all agricultural products. It thus re-establishes a down-to-earth economic form
for the farms, makes the farmer independent of the influences of the stock exchange and
fluctuating economic cycles, and frees him to serve the people's nutrition. It is not the striving
for temporary maximum profits through a one sided increase in this or that branch
of production, but the striving for a general increase in yield through the most versatile
possible cultivation of all the forces of the peasant enterprise that becomes the driving demand
for the peasant. This also corresponds to the life-law of the farm and the best traditions
of German peasantry.The rural form of economy is legally secured by the corresponding land
law, which is also linked to the rural tradition of Germany. It corresponds to the peasant
thinking of the Germanic people that the farm and the field are not a capital arbitrarily
available for the purposes of one generation, but an inheritance handed down from ancestors
and to be passed on to the descendants. It is an ancient German legal tradition that land and
soil are not to be counted among the landed property.


212


The living generation has to administer and maintain the inheritance, and for its
needs it is entitled to the income it earns from it. The peasant custom brought this view to bear
even at the time when the law had alienated itself from peasant thought and regarded the
property of a peasant in inheritance as divisible as a sum of money. Here the custom of
transfer contracts practically preserved in large areas an undivided inheritance of the farm.
But the conflict between the legal possibility of division and the peasant custom of undivided
inheritance endangered peasant customs and attitudes. This can be seen in particular in the
numerous state laws on inheritance of the 19th century. Although they were aimed at
transferring the farm to an heir, the calculation of most of these laws on inheritance, the
settlement shows that they basically count the farm as part of the mass to be divided and
calculate the rights of the individual co-heirs from this mass according to head shares; the
farm is here already regarded as capital, the value of which - even if after deduction of a so-
called "advance" for the an heir - is to be distributed. If the peasant tradition were to be
restored, that the farm serves the clan, the coming generations no less than the present and the
past, then the farm had clearly to be taken out of this capitalistic calculation of inheritances or
settlements. This cleared the way in the law of hereditary farms, in accordance with ancient
custom and law, to use the proceeds of the farm for the needs of the living generation, and to
enshrine this purpose in the law itself. Now the descendants of the farmer, who are soft heirs,
have again been given the right to equipment and vocational training in accordance with the
proceeds, and for emergencies the right of home refuge on the farm. Thus the rights of the
clan at the farm are preserved. Thus a new, but very old German legal concept of property has
come into effect in the farm and the connection between old custom and valid law has been
restored. The influence of custom and of the peasant's own outlook on the shaping of law in
individual cases is secured by the fact that the terms of the law of inheritance correspond to
peasant and National Socialist thinking itself: Ackernahrung, Bauernfahigkeit, peasant honor
are the prerequisites for the Erbhof. The interpretation and application of these terms is placed
in the hands of courts in which peasants participate alongside judges. Thus, as far as this is
legally possible, a guarantee is given for the harmony of law and custom, and a legal basis is
created for the peasant way of thinking. One is generally less aware of the fact that an old
peasant demand from the time of the peasant wars has finally been heeded.As a people
becomes conscious of its own values in its law, so does the individual estate become
conscious of itself in its law. This is why the right of inheritance is the basis for a peasant's
own self-awareness and thus for the strengthening and purification of the peasant's conception
of marriage. I have emphasized the connection which links all the measures of National
Socialist agricultural policy. We have seen the questions of the food economy in their
connection with the questions of the peasantry, and we have regarded the peasantry at the
same time as the nutrient state and the blood source of the people. The unified approach,
which brings together the economic, legal and political tasks of the population and integrates
them into the overall task, is rooted in the National Socialist view of the vital unity of the
farmer and the farm, the people and the soil.


This brings me back to my starting point. The connection of our people with its soil
can neither be grasped only economically, nor is it a mere question of the distribution of
power in the state. The connection of our people with its soil is rooted in the peasant character
of our people and in the indissoluble unity of life of the peasantry in the Germanic-Germanic
sense with its arable soil. The field can bring a steady yield and enables the generation that
tills it to last forever, as far as we can see. The sex that cultivates the field can attain such
duration if it maintains the field and itself on it in a form of law and economy corresponding
to arable farming. The agrarian legislation has nothing else to do than to give validity to this
vital law of the peasantry of our people under the present conditions of our national economy
and to secure it in the form necessary today. The National Socialist land law and the land-
based economic system with its market order are based on this. It is on this that the population
and food security of the State is based. In this sense, the law of unity of blood and soil is a
fundamental idea of the National Socialist concept of the state. And this concept of the state


213


of blood and soil differs fundamentally from all merely nationalistic concepts of the state in
that it makes blood, i.e. race, the axis of its world view and of all political considerations,
whereas the purely nationalistic concept of the state is also possible without the concept of
blood; in this connection I recall the concept of the state of the Soviets, which is hostile to the
peasantry and negates race, but is by all means nationalistic, and the fascist concept of the
state, which affirms the rural population but negates the question of blood. It would be wrong
to extract individual elements from the uniform and unique whole of the agrarian constitution
and to transfer them to completely different subject areas without the same natural and moral
conditions being present there. It must therefore be rejected when, in the controversy of
opinions about the structure of the industrial economy, the catchword "hereditary courts of the
economy" is coined. For the peasant hereditary farm was not created in order to stabilize, in
the liberal-economic sense, an economic form which, for nationalistic reasons, was somehow
in need of protection, but which was worthy of preservation, namely the peasant. Rather, the
Erbhof was created solely to preserve our blood for centuries to come. It is the preservation of
the blood, of the race, that is important, not the economic form. And this blood, according to
all the experiences of our history, can be preserved through generations only on peasant soil,
not on urban soil. In addition, however, the farmer must also enjoy economic protection
because he must always reckon with the uncertainties of weather and weather conditions,
which can be reduced to almost nothing in the city, because there one can make oneself
independent of them in the buildings. It is therefore, in my view, a distortion of the National
Socialist idea of peasants and hereditary farms to speak of "hereditary farms of the economy"
in the commercial sector of the economy. If there are enterprises in the commercial sector of
the economy which are to be preserved from being broken up by inheritance, or if, for reasons
of a healthy middle-class policy, it is desired that they be preserved in a family, then a right of
inheritance would suffice for this purpose, which would ensure the transfer of the enterprise to
a child. For this purpose, however, it is not necessary to water down, so to speak, the peasant
concept of the hereditary farm of National Socialism and to turn it into the opposite, so that
one no longer mentions or foregrounds its actual task, the preservation of the blood for
generations to come, but does foreground the preservation of the economic form of the farm,
and in this way achieves a quite skewed representation ofthings.The situation is similar with
the concept of the entail, which is discussed again and again in certain circles in public. In
itself, from a purely legislative point of view, there is no fundamental difference between the
old entail and the present National Socialist Erbhofgesetz,not even a difference in degree: only
the preconditions from which they were created and the objectives they serve are different in
the two institutions. In the Reichserbhof Law the German people want to secure their existence
for centuries to come, after experience has taught them that they must look to the peasantry as
the source of their blood. The German peasantry has secured the existence of the people
through the centuries up to the present day, and from this realization the legislator has drawn
the logical conclusion. In the Fideikommi8, on the other hand, a territorial principality wanted
to stabilize a family that was valuable to it and supported its rule, and it did so by protecting
this family from the increasingly noticeable mobilization of land as a result of the spread
of capitalism.Thus both institutions have in this acommon fundamental idea, that they
preserve a race, that is, the blood, from economic accidents, and thus protect it want to
stabilize. While the Reichserbhof Law, however, was created out of a national spirit and refers
to the preservation of the German people as a whole,and is therefore socialist, the idea of the
entail presupposes a territorial principality, for the stabilization of which the families devoted
to it are privileged. The Reichserbhofgesetz thus has a socialist portent, the FideikommiBrecht
presupposes the return of territorial princely feudality.


Today, the Reichserbh of Law is sufficient to link a family of great value to the
German people to the Scholle, even in the case of large landholdings, just as the Fideikommi}
did in the past. If, in spite of this, the question arises again and again whether it would not be
possible to create a right of entail in addition to the Reichserbhof Law, this can only be


214


explained by the fact that certain circles still hope to be able to occupy a special position in
National Socialist Germany in the future because they once did so under other conditions of
constitutional law. Such circles completely forget that this question can be answered in the
affirmative for them only if their services to the National Socialist State are as extraordinary
as those to their former territorial rule, so that they could also be extraordinarily rewarded.
That the National Socialist State is prepared to take such an attitude it has proved in the case
of the family estate of the von Hindenburgs. It is also no secret when I declare that the
National Socialist Government is quite prepared to proceed along this path and to reward
extraordinary services to the State and the people in an extraordinary way. This is quite in
accordance with the National Socialist principle that whoever assumes increased obligations
in the service of the German people may also enjoy corresponding privileges, but it is
senseless to demand from the present State privileges of past times without at least presenting
present services to this State as compensation. This is especially true when one takes into
account that the memory of the German people is not so bad as to forget that the catastrophe
of 1918 was due to a failure of its then ruling class and that - what is perhaps even more
significant here - the names of this responsible and privileged ruling class, especially of the
former owners of the entailed estates, do not appear among the dead of Adolf Hitler's freedom
movement, those dead who washed away with their blood a disgrace which the political
failure of those responsible at that time, after all, helped to bring about. It should also be
borne in mind that it was only through the sacrifice of hundreds of dead under Adolf Hitler's
banner that it was possible to re-establish legal conditions which today make it possible for us
to have an orderly constitutional state and protect us from Bolshevism. I therefore have no
understanding for today's discussions on entailment, which lack any prerequisite in terms of
merit or blood in the National Socialist sense. The Reichserbhofgesetz certainly gives the
possibility of binding even large estates, so to speak, in a fideicommiss like manner, if they
meet the requirements of § 5. However, this presupposes proof of the value of the lineage in
hereditary value or in its performance for the present State of Adolf Hitler, for it is on the
quality of the blood and its preservation that we are concerned. In this sense we have also
already made a number of larger estates, which met the requirements of the Reichserbhof Law,
into hereditary estates. However, the Erbhof Law has no room for persons with a Jewish
weaving defect in their genealogical table, no matter how nice-sounding their names may be
and how well-sounding they may be in history. For this would be a contradiction in terms,
since the Erbhof Law, with a view to the German future, seeks to preserve the blood source of
the people, and that also means to keep it pure. Unfortunately, practice proves that the
resistance to the Reich Hereditary Court Law on the part of individual large landowners must
often be attributed to the fact that the families concerned are afraid to correct a hitherto
carefully concealed defect in their genealogical table due to Jewish blood by applying for
recognition of their hereditary court. The only thing I can recommend today, based on rich
experience, is to always obtain a picture of the pedigree of such opponents of the
Reichserbhofgesetz, if possible back to all greatgrandparents. Today, on the basis of rich
experience, I can only recommend that in the case of such opponents of the Reichserbhof Law,
one should always first obtain a picture of their genealogical table, if possible back to all
great-grandparents, before one takes their opposition seriously from a factual point of

view. With this I may come to the conclusion: When the Deputy of the Fuehrer, Party
Comrade Rudolf Hess, said at the Reich Party Congress of the NSDAP. in Nuremberg in
1933 that National Socialism meant nothing other than applied race science, he was saying at
the same time that for National Socialism the race question is not only the key to
understanding world history, as a witty Jew who knew something about politics expressed it
in one of his novels, but also that the race question represents the axis of all political
considerations of National Socialism. But since no statesmanship in the world can disregard
the earthly conditions of the territory in which the people live, it is evident from this that the
concepts of "blood" and "soil" become the decisive fundamental idea of National Socialism.


215


Goal and path
of the National Socialift
Agricultural policy


Richard Walther Darré


Speech to the Diplomatic Corps and Foreign Press, April 17, 1934, at a Reception Evening of
the Foreign Policy Office of the N.S.D.A.P.


First of all, I would like to express my pleasure at having the privilege of presenting
to you, gentlemen, the aim and path of National Socialist agricultural policy. From the interest
shown in the measures taken by the National Government in the field of agricultural policy, it
is evident that these questions of agricultural policy are today not only questions of
agricultural policy, but that they are regarded as general economic questions, and that
accordingly interest is shown not so much in agricultural policy as such, but rather in the
effects of this agricultural policy on the whole of economic life. I therefore take the liberty
today of explaining not only the nature of German agricultural policy, but in particular its
effects on the German economy and, beyond that, on the economy of Europe as a whole.


First of all, I would like to anticipate an often-heard objection which you can still
hear very often in German economic circles. The objection is that the difficult situation in
which the German economy finds itself, like the economy of all countries, is directly and
indirectly linked to the measures we have taken in the field of agricultural policy. The mistake
is being made here of not considering the following: Of all economic processes outside of
agriculture it can be said that the methods of dealing with these economic problems were not
much different in Germany before January 30, 1933, than they were after January 30, 1933.
What has changed since then in these fields is in many cases the economic ethics, but less so
the actual economic methods. In the field of agricultural policy things are completely different.
Here it can be said that January 30, 1933, was an unheard-of turning point. Whereas
previously, since 1918, nothing, absolutely nothing, had been done for the protection of
German agriculture, after January 30, 1933, such absolute protection of German agriculture
and the German peasantry set in that it aroused the interest of all those peoples who, for their
part, were somehow facing agricultural difficulties. From this fact it is now possible to draw
the very simple conclusion and to derive the knowledge that the economic difficulties of our
present day are somehow to be traced back in their root to events which lie before the day
Adolf Hitler came to power. For since the economy of the German people, and also the world
economy as a whole, was already sick before that day, it is impossible that the German
Government should have had any part in the fact of this sickness and these agrarian measures.
This realization is so important because it makes it possible from the very beginning to keep
one's thinking and judgment free from the idea that somehow earlier concepts of a
contradiction between agricultural protection and the management of interstate economic
relations had anything to do with the problem of the present economic method.


I may therefore begin my reflections with a reference to the overall situation of the
world economy, in order to proceed from here to the special field of German agricultural
policy, and in particular to show that this German agricultural policy is suitable for promoting
a healthy relationship between the peoples, and not for standing in the way of this
development. There are an infinite number of theories about the cause of the world economic


216


crisis and about the cause of agricultural distress. And when one surveys all these theories,
one would like to despair in the hope that some clear insight would be able to help us out of
this chaos. In fact, however, things are essentially infinitely simple, and it is only a question
of keeping cause and effect exactly apart in order to recognize the source of the disease. But if
I know the source of the disease, I will also be able to overcome the disease as such. It is
claimed that the world economic crisis of today is a direct effect of the World War I maintain
that this is not true, but that the root of the world economic crisis goes back to the time before
the world war. The world war only fostered the disease condition, and after the world war, in
world economic fever, this disease made its appearance.In order to explain the cause of the
world economic crisis pictorially, allow me to show an example from history. Three hundred
years ago it was still customary in all the countries of Europe for princes, when they wanted
to wage war, to make use of officers who were financially strong enough to train a troop on
their own account and then to go to war with this troop. In other words, at that time one had
mercenary leaders working on one's own account.


Since these in turn only put their troops at the disposal of those who paid them
accordingly, the form of warfare at that time was thus definitely based on the private initiative
of such well-funded officers, who thus set up an economic enterprise. It must be noted,
however, that ethical or national considerations were not at all decisive, but that the
commanders of the troops and the waging of war represented a purely economic activity on
the part of those who could afford these things. It is undoubted that this free play of forces in
the field of private initiative in warfare has produced exceptionally great soldiers. I think I can
say that all the countries of Europe can, to a greater or lesser extent, point with pride to one or
other of these great soldiers. There is no doubt, then, that this system gave the able an
extraordinary opportunity to develop his abilities freely and unhampered by governmental or
other restraints. On the whole, however, the situation for the people as such was such that
these conditions, while benefiting the individual, turned the whole into chaos. The time of the
economic private initiatives of great agrarian mercenary leaders is characterized on the one
hand by the appearance of important generals, but on the other hand is characterized in
Germany by the ruins and rubble of the Thirty Years' War. So it was natural to me that the
only thing that was done was to bring the interest of the general welfare into harmony with
these previous methods of warfare. From this arose a phenomenon which has proceeded
uniformly throughout Europe, namely, that war and the conduct of war became the business
of the people, and in this respect the officer, the commander of the troops, conducted the war
as the servant of his people or of his prince. Thus, from the necessity of the fact, the result
was reached of curtailing the economic freedom of the private initiative of the individual
mercenary leader, in order thereby to elevate the good of the whole. What thus became a
restriction of the freedom of the individual was converted into the freedom of the whole to
which the individual had hitherto belonged.


This reference to the development of the mercenary leader of 300 to 400 years ago
into the officer of the present day who serves his people faithfully is particularly instructive
because, in the final analysis, the entire world economic crisis can be traced back to precisely
the same phenomenon that we have just outlined. There is no doubt that we owe to liberalism
the detachment of the individual from ties that have become unrelated. The only thing that
should have been done was not to satisfy oneself in the breaking down of barriers, but to take
over in a planned way the good of the old ties for the shaping of a new economic order. But
this did not happen; so it could come about that the individual, freed from all ties, could turn
to could live out his inclinations economically. If Europe had been closed off from the rest of
the world at that time, i.e. if America, Africa, Asia, Australia had not yet been discovered at
that time, then this haphazard living out of the individual in the field of economy would have
triggered in a short time exactly the same thing as was outlined above for the mercenary
leaders, namely the struggle of all against all and thus chaos. If this did not occur, it was not
because the law I have just outlined had no validity, but because an unheard-of sales market in


217


overseas countries, in areas not yet economically developed, offered itself to the individual's
need for private economic activity; these undeveloped countries were in any case ready to
accept any commodity, so that the question of selling the commodity did not enter the sphere
of thought of the European producers of commodities at all. If, however, the spirit of the
creator was allowed to prevail and the organizational skills of the leader were added to it, if
diligence and granted credit were further added to it, then it was basically easy to attain
economic prestige, for one was sure to get rid of one's goods somewhere in the world. The
demand for goods in the undeveloped parts of the world was so incredibly strong that the
European countries hardly competed with each other in terms of their industrial production. It
was possible for anyone, whether he be an industrialist in France, in England, or in Germany,
to sell his goods anywhere in the world, provided he only took the trouble to look for outlets.


This fact has had quite a devastating influence on the thinking of our economic
leaders and of all economic theorists in general, for it completely weaned people from the fact
that the old principle still holds good that the sales market is the motor of all production.
Because the sales market constantly and naturally absorbed every quantity of commodities,
people became weaned on thinking in terms of its laws and got used to looking at everything
always from the laws of production alone. - But not only did this happen, but employer and
employee both did not come to think that their existence was economically justified only as
long as their commodity was taken, but both began to determine their relation to each other
exclusively from the standpoint of production. The profit of an enterprise was so self-evident
a matter that employer and employee were concerned exclusively with the question of how
much share of this profit should be granted to the employer or the employee. And since the
employers' desire for profit was apparently not amenable to reason, they began to organize the
employees so that one day, through the state, they might be able to force the employer to hand
over a suitable percentage of their profits. As astounding and basically shameful as the fact is,
there is no doubt that the economic theories and the struggle of the last 100 years have been
exclusively concerned with how to distribute the profit from production properly, but that not
a word has been said about what is actually to happen when production as such is no longer
possible. So much has one become entangled in this false doctrine that employers and
business entrepreneurs have striven with all their energy to get free from any interference in
the possibilities of economic activity which present themselves to them, while workers have
seen in the organizational control of these entrepreneurs exclusively the purpose of their
existence. Whether democracy in this sense, Marxism, Bolshevism in another sense, in both
cases the whole conceptual world goes back to the cardinal error of thought that production is
eternal, while no one thought about the fact that production depends on sales.In the course of
the 19th century, however, it became clear that certain basic laws of economics could not be
denied with impunity. Before the world war, only a keen observer was able to recognize this.
It announced that our European industrial groups were getting into certain difficulties, which
they initially thought they could solve through cartel agreements and the like. But already
clearly in the background it became apparent that new economic producers in overseas
countries were entering the competition as competitors. This phenomenon, which was thought
to have its origins in the world war, actually began much earlier. It was triggered by
competitive difficulties, as certain production companies decided to save on the transport
costs of goods in order to reduce the cost price in absolute terms. Thus the idea was conceived
of creating industrial subsidiaries in the world's major consumer countries, without
considering that these subsidiaries might one day become competitors of the mother country.
But since, until then, all new establishments had always been a matter of personal credit, this
question was considered only from the point of view of credit, and not from the point of view
of the effect on the sales market.


Since all things in economic life have a certain law of persistence, i.e. that new


knowledge and ideas have difficulty in gaining acceptance, this narrowing of the economic
outlet of European industry was apparent to very few people. On the contrary, many


218


companies were undoubtedly gaining dividends by the new method of establishing subsidiary
branches, and it seemed as if an extraordinary advance were basically connected with this step.
But when the pressure of competition between the European countries began to become more
and more palpable and finally broke out in the World War, the extraordinary power of
resistance of the German people forced its opponents to mobilize all means to end this war in
their interest, i.e. to win it. With the unheard-of deployment of people from all over the world
on the fronts in Europe, the industry of the Entente countries, which had been spared by the
war, was not in a position to secure on its own the production of the things needed at the front.
Thus the subsidiary industries of young countries or of colonies suddenly found themselves
having to step in to help, which of course led directly again to a strong stimulation of
industrial production in these countries. This is the real reason why the World War led to an
unheard-of stimulation of industries of all kinds in the overseas countries. When the world
war was over, a peace was concluded which did not logically proceed from the lines of
thought just developed here, but which took other points of view into account on the part of
the victorious states. I do not have to speak about this in particular and in detail. But I must
point out that, logically, the end of the war did not mean the end of the question of existence
for the newly created industries in all parts of the world, but rather that these industries
wanted to live, and since they were able to use the shorter route between production and
consumer, they slowly but surely beat the European competition out of the field. Then there
was a second factor. Namely, that the overseas countries were faced with a completely
different problem than the economic leaders in Europe with regard to the question of
production costs in relation to workers' wages. For the labour force available in the overseas
countries was accustomed by special circumstances to a much lower standard of living than
the industrial workers of European industry. This was practically expressed in the fact that the
industrial workers of the overseas countries were very considerably cheaper wages than the
white workers. As a result of these wages, overseas industry became competitive with
European industry, because the costs of production were lower, and thus, in the period after
the World War, industries sprang up like mushrooms after a rainy night in all overseas
countries. These industries were now naturally looking for a way of life and so a wild
competition arose on the sales market of the world economy, which finally degenerated into a
fight of all against all. These things developed relatively quickly, and at first triggered the
phenomenon of the aggrieved countries coming together in the form of conferences to
deliberate on the common distress. But since the distress did not have its cause in these things


If the economic egoism of the individual was not to be restricted, but only in the
possibility that everyone could do what he wanted in economic life, then, from the point of
view of the world economy, no result was reached. It is true that strong countries tried to limit
the economic egoism of the individual by deciding on a kind of national economic structure,
that is, by trying to mobilize the economic egoism of the individual in the interest of the
national economy of the people. Here we have the key to understanding the things which have
inevitably brought into being a kind of national economy among most of the great states of
the world. But in fact, in principle, this has not solved the problem. For all that has been
achieved is that the economic struggle of all against all does not burst one's own national
borders. But one has not been able to prevent the struggle of all against all from continuing
within the borders. This attempt to paralyze economic liberalism in its harmfulness by
allowing it to run riot, so to speak, within the limits of the state, has stopped the problem, but
it has not changed the situation on the world economic market, and not because a whole series
of domestic industries, as well as all foreign trade, cannot do much with autarky on a liberal
basis, and now the relations of nations with one another are a necessity in economic terms.


From this realization, we National Socialists now came to the conviction that if the
economy was to be rebuilt, it must attempt to do so in a fundamentally new way. If it had
been forgotten for centuries, as I mentioned at the beginning, that the sales market is the
motor for production, then there could be no purpose whatsoever to promote the flagging


219


production by means of production-increasing means or by problems of granting credit, but
there could only be one way, that one made the attempt to replace the chaos on the sales
market by a planned reorganization. If one takes this standpoint, then the first question that
confronts the logically thinking person is how the relations of the peoples among themselves
should then take place economically. And there it was quite clear that, so to speak, each
country was trying to pull the wool over the other's eyes, but one had to make the attempt to
ascertain between two countries which economic exchange relations between them were
necessary and advisable, and then on the basis of this knowledge one had to attempt the
reorganization of the sales markets. For it is quite clear that a country can import only as
much raw material, for example, as it exports goods for. It is not a question of what raw
materials a country needs in order to build up this or that industry, but of how many goods
another country will take from me so that I can exchange goods for it. This is basically an
eternal law of the economic relationship between nations. The fact of this law is not shaken by
the fact that a grant of credit by the state temporarily enables a commodity-importing industry
to import more commodities than the people then export in goods. For this method of a state
is only possible when there is sufficient capital, formed by the labor of other industries of the
people, to be made available as credit, and thus enable that industry to maintain its strong
importation of raw materials.If, however, one first starts from the problem of the natural
economic relations of peoples to one another, one soon comes to the conclusion that a truly
good balance can only be achieved if the economy of the people is healthy in itself. But a
national economy is healthy only if it is built on a healthy agriculture, possesses an
economically necessary industry, and now carries out and introduces those branches of
production which arise according to the state of things, i.e. on the basis of the needs of the
peoples among themselves. Only when such a national economy, founded in itself and resting
in one centre of gravity, exists, will an honest exchange of goods among the peoples of the
world be possible.


National Socialism started from this thought when it decided to overcome the chaos
of the world economy by a new principle. This principle could only take shape if it was
possible first of all to put agriculture in order and from there to build up the foundation of the
national economy. From this point of view I must ask you to try to understand the agricultural
policy of the German Reich Government. For us it is not a question of giving special
advantages to one sector of the German economy, namely German agriculture, but for us it is
a question of finding, on the basis of healthy agriculture, the ground for a new German
national economy, which for its part will then be able to enter into relations with the other
nations.Previous liberal thought could not free itself from the idea that the unrestrained
private initiatives of the individual had to operate in the economy if production as such was to
be stimulated. From this consideration a genuine liberal way out was arrived at, namely, by
believing that if the inner market were kept free from foreign goods by high tariff walls, this
inner market could gain most by the free play of forces. However, it was overlooked that such
tariff walls only serve to be built on principles, i.e. that what was refused to one country must
logically also be refused to the other country. With this method, from the point of view of the
internal market, the liberal economic leader is safe from the competition of the foreign market,
but this does not exclude internal chaos, but above all it does not prevent this method from not
reaching a harmonious confrontation with the economic interests of the other peoples and
states. On the contrary, this system was bound to create all the more tension within a country,
for now an industry interested in exports had no interest in the customs duties required by
agriculture producing for domestic needs, and conversely agriculture saw in industry
interested in exports its natural opponent. Thus it came about that liberalism in economics,
which was developing into national liberalism, invented the thesis of the fundamental
opposition between national industrial production and national agricultural production,
without realizing that its entire doctrinal edifice was already wrong in its presupposition.


220


This consideration led us National Socialists to spend months thinking whether there
might not be a way out of the chaos of these contradictions.We saw clearly that, in some form
or other, customs as such are one of the most obstructive phenomena in the relations of
countries with one another, and that it must somehow be possible to build up a national
economy in which customs duties play a thoroughly secondary role. Here we were helped by
the consideration that the problem 300 years ago was the same with regard to the free
economic initiative of the mercenary leaders as it is today with regard to the free economic
initiative in the economy as such. That is to say, we came to the conclusion that the only way
to find a way out of the chaos was to decide to depart fundamentally from liberalism in
economic thought and to decide to integrate the individual as a part of the economy and to
make the law of the whole economy the standard for the economic freedom of the individual.
That is to say, we decided to follow the same path that has led today to the formation of
officer corps who, for their part, did not even think that their existence meant a confinement
of the individual officer, since they have learned today that the curtailment of their free
initiative has been to the blessing of their people and also of their State.


But we could only bring about the recovery of the economy in agricultural terms if
we established firm relations on the internal market. Thus, we came up with the idea of
guaranteeing the stability of the internal market by uniting producers, traders and consumers
of agricultural products, and of securing the internal market without, however, in any way
jeopardizing relations with foreign countries. What we have done, therefore, has nothing to do
with a problem of the estates, although we have called it the law of the Reichsnahrstand. What
we wanted to do was to establish a clear relationship between the needs of consumers of
agricultural products and domestic agricultural production, and to get an overview of where
overproduction of agricultural products on the domestic market was occurring. In this way, it
should be possible to quota, so to speak, agricultural overproduction with a view to the
internal market, if it appears that the needs of the internal market are capable of absorbing
agricultural production. On the other hand, it is possible to import from other countries only
that production which their own agricultural production is no longer capable of producing.
We have freed ourselves from the idea of a planned or compulsory economy. So we left it up
to the individual farmer to produce what he wanted. We just do not take away his entire
harvest if the internal market suffers from overproduction of these products. This is not the
place to talk about how we achieve the original key for the individual producer. All that is
essential is that, if you want that, you must have the internal market so securely in hand that
none of the producers can break out of that structure. For it is clear that if a farmer can
somehow sell a percentage of the grain not taken from him under the table, the whole system
will be ineffective. But, on the other hand, it is clear that when the agricultural producer and
the agricultural consumer are united in such a form in a national economy, the interest of both
the agricultural producer and the agricultural consumer can be guaranteed by the state or by
that body which has to determine the prices. Thus we move from the liberal Marxist fiction of
the free price to the National Socialist realization of the economically justified price.If an
internal market is organized in this way in agricultural terms, then customs duties are, in
principle, superfluous. After all, in such an economy, which is controlled by the internal
market, foreign countries can only sell their products if the state in question feels the need for
these products. Since the markets are subject to supervision, it is impossible to bring goods
onto the market that escape the supervision of the market authority.


At first, one may think that the lines of thought developed here are bold and
complicated.In fact, however, its effect on the relationship of peoples to each other is quite
different. For it is quite clear that one now finds with each country that form of mutual
exchange of goods which is most agreeable to both countries. If one knows that the market
can easily absorb this or that agricultural product, then it is not difficult to enter into mutual
exchange with another country and to offset it with a consideration, for I know that the market
needs this commodity, and so it is in the national economic interest if a trade agreement is


221


then concluded with the country that wants to export goods, in which the country then accepts
other commodity products in return.


Although these ideas may have originally been regarded as bold theories, the trade
treaties with Holland and Denmark have proved that they are not just theories. For both
treaties were concluded by my Ministry in a leading economic capacity, and it can well be
said that without this new economic conception this would not have been possible at all.
Although the Reich Food Law has only been in force in Germany for seven months, the two
trade treaties with Holland and Denmark have already proved that a new way has been opened
up to regulate the economic relations of the nations among themselves.


To sum up, I would like to say that the way is now clear to get free from the liberal
presuppositions of the world economic crisis and to make possible, only here in Europe, a
new economic order in the relations of the peoples among themselves. Paradoxical as it may
sound, I must say that on the basis of this path the peasantry becomes the pioneer of an
organic exchange of goods. And this is because in this way an honest exchange of goods
between peoples is carried out, and the exchange of goods is not the result of wild economic
struggles between countries. If liberalism, on the basis of its false premise, saw in the
peasantry the stumbling block to international understanding among the peoples, National
Socialism has proved that the peasantry of Europe is called upon, while fully preserving its
national characteristics and national self-assertion, to reorganize the economic relations of the
peoples among themselves and thus to develop an entirely new basis for an organic world
economy. And the importance of this is because this kind of economic relations among the
peoples is a much more honest one than has hitherto been possible on the basis of liberalism.
It is only a matter of bringing one's own affairs in this field to the realization that liberalism
has played out in the world and that a new field of economic relations among peoples must
take hold. And with this there is nothing to prevent us from looking confidently to the future. I
have placed this one aspect of German agricultural policy in the foreground exclusively
because it is ultimately the most important. I know that in many foreign countries the first
question is always directed to the Reichserbhofgesetz. I think it is more correct to point out
that the Reichserbhof Law is only the logical continuation of the basic idea of order and
binding within the agricultural sphere. For it is only the Reichserbhofgesetz which secures the
final attachment of the peasant to the soil as the eternal basis of all agricultural production.
However, I would like to be allowed to speak about this in more detail on another occasion. I
wanted to say today that the German peasantry is the guarantor of peaceful understanding
among the peoples, and that it is from this peasantry that the impulses emanate to advance
through internal market organization to freedom of foreign trade.


222


Reordering our thinking
Richard Walther Darre


Rarely has a century been so clear about its fundamental task from the very
beginning as our century has been. In the year 1900 three scholars independently of each
other found the scientific proof of the law of life fact of the inheritance of characteristics;
these were the Germans v. Tschermak and Correns and the Dutchman de Vries. These
discoveries were made independently and also uninfluenced by each other. The whole
scientific world took part in these discoveries at that time. But only a few scholars already
suspected the spiritual upheavals which they would trigger off; even the boldest minds among
them could hardly have dreamed of the extent to which these spiritual upheavals would
assume. The scientific world had not yet recovered from its surprise when another piece of
news of an equally surprising nature reached it, namely the fact that the discoveries of the
year 1900 were not so new at all, but had already been found before, only they had never been
taken seriously before. Already 25 years earlier another German, the Augustinian prelate
Gregor (Johann) Mendel, had come in quiet scholarly work to the same research results as the
above-mentioned three scholars, but without meeting with understanding from his
contemporaries. Whereas it had hitherto been impossible to agree which of the three scholars
should be accorded the honour of the first discovery of the law-of-life fact of the inheritance
of characteristics, this embarrassment was now removed. It was clear that this honour must go
to the Augustinian prelate at Brno in Moravia, Gregory Mendel. It was therefore agreed that
in future the process of the inheritance of properties should be called "Mendelism", in order to
link the fame of the discovery of this fact with the name of Mendel for all time. But these
discoveries might only have caused a sensation in the scientific world of scholars, had not an
event of the same direction immediately before the turn of the century stirred the spirits of
Germany. An Englishman who had chosen Germany as his adopted country had delivered in
German a scathing reckoning with the intellectual currents of the closing century, and had
proved the fact of race as the shaping principle of history, if not yet scientifically, at least
historically. Houston Stewart Chamberlain in his work, "The Foundations of the 19th
Century." His work shook the spirits to an extent that we can hardly imagine, called for a
decision, swept away traditional concepts and thus actually prepared the ground for the new
thoughts of race and blood to germinate and take root. For many years his work became
virtually the bible of all vélkisch Germans.


Both events, although born on different spiritual planes and proceeding from
different premises, have initiated and begun a triumphant march of race and blood thought
through the spiritual life of our people to a previously unimaginable degree, interacting and
mutually stimulating each other. While "Mendelism" conquered the world of natural science
in an unbelievably short time, Chamberlain revolutionized the world of science with his
"Mendelian" ideas. "Fundamentals" the whole edifice of thought of the educated world. Even
before the World War of 1914, both events, which began abruptly at the turn of the century,
had shaken up our people and are still in the process of literally turning our world view and
our thinking upside down and reshaping them. The speed with which this spiritual
development is proceeding is perhaps best illustrated by the fact that only 35 years later we in
Germany had legislation designed to eradicate Jewish blood from our national body and to
prevent hereditary offspring. In order to be able to judge the miracle of this spiritual process
of rethinking at least to a certain extent, one should bear in mind that today only 40 years have
passed since the turn of the century, 20 years of which were actually not conducive to a calm
spiritual development because of the world war and internal political turmoil. It is good and
necessary to remember these facts occasionally. For the extraordinary speed with which the
effects of this new knowledge of the heredity of qualities are spreading among our people


224


means that it still often catches the individual unprepared and therefore makes him head-shy.
Even where one knows, or at least begins to suspect, that the new knowledge of heredity
places one in the midst of the spiritual upheaval of the time, it is difficult to save oneself in
the whirl of these spiritual conflicts on a well-considered standpoint. The author of these lines
confesses that he too felt this way at first; he has not yet met anyone who would have felt
differently. Certainly, it is relatively easy to understand that the Jewish question is no longer a
question of religion, but a question of blood. The whole Jewish question is thus abruptly
answered, because, while one can still discuss how the Jews are to be treated, there is no
longer any need to argue about whether they can be made Germanic by some environmental
influence, a controversial question which has agitated our people throughout the nineteenth
century. It is also still easy to see, for example, that the whole question of criminals is put into
a new light by the new doctrine of heredity; the real criminal is hereditary, and the extension
of prisons and penitentiaries is in the future only proof for a state that its statesmen are not
capable of distinguishing the herb from the tares and also - of weeding the tares. Much more
exciting than all these mental conclusions, which lead, so to speak, to purification processes
within our national body, is the realization that the talents of our people, its great men in state
and army, in economy and art, in trade and in the civil service, have also inherited their talents.
What is so shocking about this realization is the mental conclusion that must be drawn from it.
We do not, then, owe our great men to chance or to some special grace of Providence. Rather,
our great men are part of the heritage of our people in the household of its blood.


We do not deny the grace of God in the life of the individual citizen of the earth,
which protects and conditions his destiny. Nor do we imagine that we can explain the miracle
of genius by looking for it in the inheritance of the qualities of his ancestors alone. We do not
deny the fact of a divine power superior to man. But we must nevertheless state that no genius
of our people has yet been found who has not expressed his genius in qualities and
dispositions which can also be found in his ancestors. In other words: We do not deny that
genius owes its existence to special divine grace, but we maintain that genius is always able to
work itself out only within the framework of those qualities which its ancestors have
bequeathed to it. This realization is both exciting and exhilarating. For it makes us aware that
we ourselves, but also our people, go back to the fact of qualities which we owe to the blood
of our ancestors. Thus all things around us, our public life as well as our own, receive an
entirely new illumination and evaluation. For the achievements of our German people in
modern times cannot then be separated from its achievements in its history. This means, taken
to its logical conclusion, that the whole idea of the nineteenth century of the eternal progress
of mankind is correct in all things that we human beings are capable of inventing and shaping,
but that this idea of progress does not apply to our blood, but that it determines the talent
budget of our people as a fixed quantity. If we as a people still accomplish something today,
we owe it to streams of blood that have been active throughout German history. And in the
future we will only be able to accomplish and shape as much as we will still have this German
blood at our disposal through our children and grandchildren. The decisive insight:
Volksgemeinschaft is a blood community.


This raises the decisive question: What are we actually doing in order to preserve
and increase this irreplaceable and precious national treasure, which is bound to this German
blood or to its kindred blood, of our vélkisch vitality? For this is clear: If all qualities are so
much conditioned by the ancestors, then we can indeed ponder about the divine grace to
which our ancestors once owed these qualities in the dim and distant past. But we cannot well
doubt that it is not in our power to preserve and increase hereditary qualities otherwise than
by the process of procreation and birth, which is governed by the laws of life. Above all,
however, it can no longer be doubted or disputed that any artificial generation of human
hereditary qualities which might supplement the endowment of our blood belongs to the
fabulous realm of fools who are out of touch with reality. What we are and what we can still
become as a people is determined by our blood.


225


Such considerations and insights are only the mental conclusion of given scientific
facts which the turn of the century has allowed us to find; they seem simple and almost self-
evident, but they are nevertheless of stirring force when one thinks them through and realizes
the consequences. Consider for a moment: the precious and essential hereditary qualities of
our people, its blood, are a national treasure which is unique and cannot be created anew.
What is not preserved by procreation and birth is irrevocably gone: it is as if one thoughtlessly
threw a precious treasure or the preciousness of jewels into the ocean, where it is deepest. No
power in the world can bring these jewels back to the light of day: they are gone forever and
irrevocably. It is exactly the same with the hereditary traits of our people when they die off
without progeny. A man or woman who would throw their treasures or jewels into the sea
without sense or reason, so that they are gone for ever, might justly be called insane or stupid:
of this there would be no doubt at all! And whoever would do the same with the imperial
jewels or other treasures of a unique kind of our national wealth would, if the madhouse did
not take pity on him, be sure of an embarrassing trial for conduct injurious to the people. But
how do we deal with the much, much more precious hereditary property of our ancestors? But
what do we do with this unique and unparalleled preciousness, which our ancestors in our
hereditary properties, in our blood, have handed over to us in faithful hands? Let each one ask
himself; let each one look around in his own environment; the answer will generally be
shameful enough. Man cannot be produced in retorts. Before the mystery of the origin of life
God has spread a veil which man's hand will never draw away, even though man may
investigate the processes of life himself in every detail. This denial of the ultimate knowledge
of the origin of life itself is a fundamental law of human life par excellence and a part of the
order of existence as God has placed it in this world. There are many people today who do not
want to think through to the end such questions about the value and loss of hereditary genetic
material. They say: "We are inventing so much, things are progressing so wonderfully in all
fields, why shouldn't a genius succeed for once in the chemical laboratory? "Hereditary
plants" to be invented, just as airplanes and railroads, telephones and radios have been
invented! He who asks such questions forgets that we can invent an infinite number of things
concerning the material goods of this world, but that we cannot discover the secret of life. Our
language, by the way, also tells us that we only "discover" or "invent" what was somehow
already there before, for one time we "uncover it" and the other time we "find it"; it is
therefore already there, only not yet known to us and not first created by us. Our great natural
scientists, our physicists and chemists, also know this perfectly well. Here limits are drawn for
us, which we humans are not able to cross.


That is a fact with which we must come to terms. No matter how enthusiastic we
may be about all inventions and how intoxicated we may be by the technical progress of the
time. In questions of blood, in so far as we understand human hereditary characteristics by it,
all frenzy of progress ceases. In questions of blood, only the given is valid, the hereditary
property of our ancestors, which has been handed over to us by God in faithful hands. The
only and true wealth of our people is its good blood. We can lose the material goods of this
world as a people and as individuals; that is not so bad as long as the old German blood is still
present, because it can recreate them at any time. This was the fundamental miscalculation of
the scornful victors of Versailles; they allowed their peoples, first and foremost the Jews, to
plunder us and thus believed that they had struck us to the core. But they forgot our blood and
overlooked the fact that this blood knew how to recreate what their feelings of envy and
inferiority had robbed us of. More dangerous and truly characteristic of the nature of things
was Clemenceau's harsh word: "There are 20 million Germans too many in the world!" It is
only when the life-source of valuable blood begins to dry up in our people that our nation is
really devalued and becomes in truth poor and inferior. What the peace treaties of Miinster in
1648 and of Versailles did not achieve, namely, the elimination of our people from the history
of Europe, an indifference on our part to our blood values might well achieve. Again and
again one encounters people who would like to evade this last rethinking of our national


226


conditions of existence and blood-value realities. Out of an often unconscious mental comfort,
one would like to persist in cherished ideas: After all, everything went well until 1940, why
should it not continue to go well in the future. What is the point of these uncomfortablenesses,
these references to nationally responsible thoughts about the future! One simply does not want
to look responsibly into the future; one wants to become intoxicated with contemporary
progress and success and believes that one can disregard the laws of life of one's blood with a
wave of the hand. We have today the concept of the people's property. We have the concept
of the people's pest. We have fast-working special courts to strike at the people's pest who
attacks the people's property. But these measures serve only the material values of our
national property or its mental health, but they do not yet serve its precious blood. Certainly,
since the "Nuremberg Laws" we have taken a step forward in the field of blood, in that we are
now trying to keep away from our people the blood that is most dangerous to our blood, the
blood of the Jewish people. This is undoubtedly already an enormous step forward in this new
territory of blood questions and an extraordinary revolutionary deed in our time. But the
Nuremberg Laws are only a preventive measure and not yet a constructive measure in the
sense of increasing the good blood of the German kind.


We ask not to be misunderstood: It is always the case, after all, that the best soil will
allow even the horniest weeds to proliferate if the farmer's precautionary measures do not
weed them or otherwise destroy them. The yield of a field presupposes the destruction and
keeping away of the weeds just as much as it is conditioned by the careful care of the field
and its fruit. In this peasant sense, our Jewish laws are a prerequisite for making the field of
German blood ready for sowing by ridding us of the weeds of Jewish blood. But we still have
the task of cultivating and caring for our blood in order to cultivate the field of the German
way of life and thus bring about fruit and harvest for our people. In these matters of nurturing
and caring for the German blood, we are still at the beginning. It has already been mentioned
at the beginning that this is essentially connected with the extraordinary rapidity of the
development of all the questions which play a part in this new field. Since the turn of the
century the new insights have been rushing along as if in giant strides. We must first grasp in
our souls, and above all learn to come to terms with it in our souls, that a complete revaluation
of all values has begun through the discovery of the inheritance of qualities, in short, from the
idea of blood, before we can come to a clear affirmation of these questions. We are slow to
grasp, just as one who, still drowsy between sleep and the beginning of awakening, begins to
find himself again and is slow to grasp and comprehend his surroundings, that we have
entered a new world of knowledge and with it also a world full of new standards. It is a new
world of thoughts that almost confuses and dazes us. And yet we recognize with a sense of
foreboding and knowing that it is the world of our new reality, to which we must take a stand
inwardly and outwardly, and which fate has somehow charged us to master. Out of the dance
of death of the ideas of a perishing world of thought rises anew the world view of the value
and eternity of blood and its sanctity for our people.


Blood is our people's only wealth.


That is a terrible sentence, but also a fruitful one at the same time. Like a thunderclap,
this realization jolts us. What are laws, what is the meaning of economy, what are inventions,
if they cannot be preserved in generations or developed further by the blood that once created
them! Nothing is eternal in this world that is formed from the stuff of this world. But the
blood of a people can be preserved eternally if the people profess and serve the life-laws of
their blood, i.e. consecrate their lives to them. We, as the only people of Europe, have a
history of thousands of years, tangible and continuous, since the time of the migration of
peoples. What legal institution, what form of government, what type of economy could boast
of having been decisive in this thousand-year process of the life of our people! What still
gives us existence and life today as a people and as an empire is eternally the same blood that
built up the state of the Middle Ages just as it is now preparing to build up Adolf Hitler's


227


Third Reich and lead it toward a new millennium. The institutions of our national life are
nothing, the blood of our people is everything.


We could lose everything in the Peace of Miinster in 1648 and in the Peace of
Versailles in 1919, we could be humiliated as a people, we could be plundered, in short, we
could become a laughing stock to the nations of the world. We could fall so low that the
German would be ashamed of himself. All this was not decisive. For we were able to rise
again because we still had a core of good blood at our disposal, which was sufficient to
initiate and enforce the rise of our people again. But: Germany's future now also depends on
this core of good blood. And this realization of the unconditionality of this single value of our
national treasure touches the heart and for a moment makes one hold one's breath: The
moment of realization of the unalterable fatefulness of this fact shakes every thinking member
of the people. But what about us? Are we aware of our present condition and of all the
consequences? The answer is quickly given; undoubtedly: no! Certainly, some individuals are
already aware of the facts and are striving for ways and means to master the tasks given to us
in view of our nation's future. But these individuals within our people are like the peaks of the
mountains at the rising of the dawn: they may be the first to sense the sun and the first to be
illuminated by the sun, but the night is only slowly receding from the valleys. If we were to
draw up a budget today for our blood-value heritage, we would be frightened. We would not
be frightened because this budget would no longer open up any prospects of being able to
keep our people alive in the future. Oh no! On the contrary! We still have generations and
blood values such as hardly any other people can even present to us. But we must be appalled
at the thoughtlessness and the bottomless recklessness with which still wide circles of our
people allow the precious heritage of our people, the precious blood of our ancestors, to
dissipate without preserving this valuable national heritage in descendants. We preach in all
things of our national existence that the common good must take precedence over self-interest.
But we are only very slowly beginning to realize the application of this principle to the really
only valuable stock of our people, its blood, and are scarcely getting beyond the discussion of
this question. In matters of blood, unfortunately, it is still true, and in part even legally valid,
that self-interest can take precedence over the common good. Only slowly is the National
Socialist idea of Adolf Hitler able to assert itself here. Where we have at least managed to do
some weeding (e.g. Law for the Prevention of Hereditary Diseases, Nuremberg
Laws, etc.), the German people in their broad masses still approach such questions very
timidly. Legislation is still lacking, at any rate, which would direct the care and increase of the
valuable bloodlines of our people according to the principle that the common good must take
precedence over self-interest. The transformation of our existing law according to this point of
view would be a revolutionary step of the first order.


We Germans cannot avoid the affirmation of the question of blood and the mastery
of the task of preserving the precious blood. But we will first have to come to the spiritual
realization of the importance of blood before we can one day summon up the strength to bring
this realization to life in our people through appropriate measures in the field of legislation.
Only when we make blood the prerequisite, the basis and the axis of all our considerations,
can the turning point in our people occur and the time of the negation of the idea of blood be
turned into a time of the affirmation of the idea of blood. Only then will the reorganization of
our thinking have begun, and our world-view will have been reoriented from the life-law of
the blood to the life-law of the blood. Then we will understand that this century will be a
century of blood thought, i.e. that it is a century of rediscovery of the laws of life of our nation.
If we are asked how this reorganization of our thinking should begin, we answer: We will not
do justice to this new task of our ideological thinking by intellectually stimulating discussions
about the pros and cons. We must begin with the reorganization of thought within ourselves.
For only when we attain complete clarity within ourselves can this inner clarity about our will
be translated into appropriate action. Only then will all discussions about the measures to be
taken fall on fertile ground. We must free ourselves in our world of ideas from all the dross of


228


a traditional education and schooling which allows us to think past the idea of blood. In the
sphere of our public life, in the field of legislation, in the field of economics, of art, of science,
etc., our conceptions must receive their value from blood, i.e. exclusively from the German
people. But whoever denies the idea of blood is in the future an enemy of the German people.
We must place the German man in the foreground of all our considerations. For this German
man is, after all, the bearer of German blood. Seemingly a simple demand. To many this
demand may seem self-evident. And yet it is a demand which introduces and conditions the
greatest spiritual upheaval in all fields of our public life, especially in constitutional law, in
public and private law, in economic law, in social legislation, in short, in almost all fields of
our national life, and since 1933 has already begun to be realized in some areas. The effects of
this spiritual upheaval, however, are so extensive that, although we have an inkling of them,
we cannot imagine them in their full extent. In particular, we do not believe that this
reorganization of our thinking from the idea of blood will soon find expression in
corresponding measures. The revolution of all traditional spiritual foundations from the blood
idea is far too tremendous for that. Our century will perhaps only suffice to work out the
spiritual foundations on which our children and grandchildren will be able to build and justify
their state measures for the preservation and increase of our precious blood.

But what we today can already begin to work out these spiritual foundations is already
twofold:


First:


We will develop a new relationship to our ancestors. For what we bring with us into
this world in the way of dispositions, what qualities we are able to demonstrate in the struggle
for life, we owe to our ancestors, who have bequeathed them to us. Certainly it is that which
we acquire by virtue of knowledge and will in the struggle with the environment around us
that finally makes us a personality. The extent of our consciousness, i.e. our capacity for
cognition and our will, determines our destiny. But the hereditary dispositions which
influence our cognitive faculty and whose framework even the hardest will is not able to
break in order to become a personality in this world, are nevertheless the prerequisites of our
existence and are born with us: we owe our hereditary dispositions to our ancestors.


One can also express this insight in the sentence:
Remember that you owe the conditions of your existence to your ancestors!


Certainly, we can squander the patrimony of our ancestors irresponsibly or use it responsibly
in the struggle for life; we can desecrate it or honour it! In this respect we are undoubtedly
masters of our will! In this we have been given the confidence by God to be masters of our
destiny and to be able to let our will prevail. In this, God has clearly raised us far above the
beast. The will is the divine spark in us to develop powers and to have a formative effect in
our environment. But this will is bound in two ways: on the one hand to the set order of God
in this world and on the other hand to the hereditary abilities of the acting personalities. We
cannot get out of the framework which the hereditary dispositions of our ancestors have set
for us. And this should never be forgotten, if we are not to be denied success in life. One
should neither overestimate nor underestimate both the will and the hereditary dispositions;
only the interaction of the two elevates man to a personality. But we can only honor our
ancestors if we keep them alive in our consciousness and in the consciousness of our
descendants. If we do not know who and what our ancestors were, we cannot visualize them
and therefore cannot honor their memory.


229


It has become customary today to take the final stanza of the old morality poem from
the "Edda" (67-69) to cite:


Property dies,

clans die,

You yourself die like them;
one thing I know,

that lives forever:

the glory of the dead.


Here one always wants to ask: with respect: when and by whom? For if the heroes
forgot to beget offspring, no one can testify to their fame. The Teutons at the time of the Edda
knew this very well. And therefore the moral poem begins significantly with the following
stanza:


A son is better,

whether born late

after the host's entrance: not a
memorial stone stands

on the roadside edge,

if a kinsman does not bet him.


One should no longer mention the final stanza of the old moral poem from the Edda
without also mentioning its premise, namely the opening stanza. It is only since 1933 that
some people have become aware of who they actually descended from, due to the obligation
to provide proof of their ancestry under the Reich's law; some people have thus gained a
completely new relationship to the past, but also to the present. Today many people look back
with pride on their ancestors and feel again as a link of a chain. People are happy to honour
the memory of our ancestors again. But what is still lacking in many cases is the possibility to
honour the places where our ancestors are buried. Many burial sites can no longer be found
today, many are difficult to reach, many have been leveled in the course of sober
considerations of expediency. That is unfortunately a fact. But we have to come to terms with
this fact, because it is a given. But he who wants to honor his ancestors will be able to honor
them in other ways than just by taking care of the burial places. One can always dedicate a
corner in one's home to the memory of one's ancestors. One can keep the ancestral tablet at
this place, also one can preserve or hang up the pictures of the ancestors here. In quiet hours
one can then have a dialogue with one's ancestors in such places and give account to them.
Whoever, in the course of time, makes such a practice an established custom and spends his
hours of celebration in this quiet corner of his home, will soon notice what a deep and lasting
source of spiritual strength arises from such an account before his ancestors.


Basically, such an inner dialogue with our ancestors is nothing new to us Germans: it
was actually always natural for our ancestors to proceed in this way. Our language has also
preserved for us the fact of how our ancestors thought of this dialogue with the ancestors. The
German language traces everything that we know from within ourselves, without being able
to attribute it to external circumstances, back to the voice within us. Our ancestors believed
that this inner voice goes back to our ancestors, who thus speak out in us. When our
"ancestors" speak up in us, then we "suspect" something and call it a "hunch". Whether we of
today want to or are able to recognize such connections is irrelevant in comparison with the
fact that our ancestors understood and comprehended the connections in this way, and that our
language has preserved these connections for us very clearly. It would be especially beautiful
if the custom were to be adopted on our hereditary farms that the farmer and the farmer's wife
should once again be laid to rest on their own land. What a source of spiritual strength it must
be for the grandchildren when they can approach the graves with reverence and remember


230


those to whom they owe their existence and who worked and farmed in the fields before them.
Only then would the idea of blood and soil experience its true consecration, when the farmer's
plough once again breaks the soil in the area of his ancestors' graves, when the farmer
performs the work on his farm in memory of his ancestors and fulfil in his life in the
consciousness that he himself will once again become the ancestor of his soil. What a happy
thought to be laid to rest in one's own land, to which one has devoted one's life's work,
honored by one's descendants, but also giving one's grandchildren a blessing in their work,
which has also been the work of one's own life.


Second:


We will have to see to it that we beget descendants who are worthy of us or surpass
us. The sentence: Remember that you have ancestors! has as its consequence the further
sentence: Remember that thou shalt be an ancestor! Here we stand at one of the most decisive
ideological and spiritual turning points of this century. For: either we take seriously the
realization of the importance of blood, and from this we quite coolly and objectively draw the
conclusions with regard to the descendants of the German people, and if necessary we do not
shrink from entirely new ways and means, or we no longer manage to do this, then the end of
the history of the German people has come. Whoever, in this century of hereditary doctrine, is
not able to think through to the end such mental conclusions, either does not want to think in
terms of the laws of life or, out of mental cowardice, shrinks from mental conclusions which
are inconvenient to him; perhaps he shrinks from such thoughts only because they are novel
and not conventional. This is also an iron basic law of our people: there is no German history
without sufficient German blood!


If the idea of blood is to become the axis of our worldview, the child must again
become the meaning and purpose of our existence: It is the children of our blood who matter!
For if the blood of our people is the only true wealth, its children are also the only guarantors
of its living eternity. And with this statement we are already in the midst of the spiritual
upheaval of our time, in an upheaval that can perhaps be called the most revolutionary
imaginable. We have become accustomed to speak of the coming into being and passing away
of peoples as of something immutable. Since Spengler's "Decline of the West" in particular, a
scientific school has been built up on this line of thought, which allows
peoples, like individuals, to come into being, to mature, and to perish again. The history of the
German Empire alone ought to prove the inadequacy of this school of thought. For if we find
ourselves today once more in the midst of a world war, it is not because we are already visibly
growing old, but because the world envies us the vitality of our people. But our people is the
oldest historical people in Europe, if one takes the introduction of Christianity among the
Germanic tribes as a time standard. And the peoples who are fighting us are all historically
more recent. Spengler's theory and the popular conditions of this world war contradict each
other. But the plain proof against the view that peoples are mortal like individuals is China.
This people has lived for thousands of years and will probably live for thousands more. In the
case of this very people, however, the cause and effect of this phenomenon are quite obvious.
By making the procreation of a large number of offspring for the purpose of securing ancestor
veneration the basis and prerequisite of a Chinese world-view, Confucius ensured the living
eternity of his people through a large number of children. Therein lies the whole secret of the
overflowing vitality of the Chinese people, which multiplies independently of state forms or
state shocks and thus easily compensates for all strokes of fate, devastation's and losses. The
Chinese people and their moral teachings refute Oswald Spengler. Ancestor veneration in
Shintoism has had a similar effect on Japan. The Japanese people, too, have remained alive
and energetic for thousands of years as a result of their ancestor worship. The Japanese have
families whose recorded family history spans much longer periods of time than we have
German historical sources with the entry of the Cimbri and Teutons into history. Imagine, for
example, that the descendants of Hermann the Cheruscan were still sitting on their ancestral


231


estate, on which the Cheruscan prince had already been born, and were keeping the diaries of
their great ancestor. Judging by such an example, one gets a clue as to the moral force of this
Japanese cultivation of the family tradition and its veneration of ancestors.


If we as the German people really want to enter into a new, millennial history, then
we must quite decisively relearn in the questions of the preservation of the people - and these
are questions about our descendants. We must then, like the Chinese and Japanese, once again
firmly incorporate procreation and the result of procreation, the child, into our world view and
orient the whole question of the German child towards the living eternity of our people.
Today we suffer from the fact that in all questions of the child we value too much the outward
appearances connected with the procreation of the child, but do not make the result of the
procreation, namely the child, exclusively the standard of value of all our considerations in
this question. One will not be able to deny that to-day, according to the general opinion, it is
still more important to many people to ascertain under what circumstances a child was born
than, for instance, to inquire into the hereditary value of a child. The question "born in
wedlock" or "born out of wedlock" plays a role e.g. still play a major role, in many cases even
the decisive role. Few people first ask the question of the hereditary value of a child before
they subject the circumstances of its birth to judgment. And even though the national
community may not and cannot be indifferent to questions of morality and propriety in these
matters, the only decisive factor for the national community is the blood value of the child
born, since as an adult he will one day become a member of the national community. This is
stated here only as a fact and given state of our ideas about questions of the German child.
This is in no way intended to blur the concept of marriage or to give the word to illegitimacy.
The word "marriage" originally received its essence from the word "eternity." Marriage
served our ancestors as a concept and as an institution for carrying on a lineage in eternal
sexual succession, i.e. for keeping it alive into eternity. Sense and purpose of the old, German
marriage was the child. The old land laws also still express this unequivocally. It was not until
the Civil Code, introduced in 1900, with its rational principles of a law alien to the species,
that the child was set aside as the meaning and purpose of marriage in favor of the self
referentiality of the two spouses. Liberalism as a worldview has re-evaluated everything in
this respect too, and has allowed self-interest to take precedence over the common good. In
the question of marriage, too, it will be important to make the word "common good comes
before self-interest" the guiding principle. In this connection it should be pointed out that the
novel literature of today, which makes the ego reference in the relations of the sexes to each
other the basis of its considerations, has as its premise the ideological reevaluation of all
feelings, as it was brought about by the liberal age. There is a fundamental difference in the
way of looking at things whether one sees in marriage a task to which two human beings
submit for the procreation of their blood, or whether one sees in marriage an institution which
is to serve the ego-related satisfaction of the longings of two human beings, whether in
spiritual or in bodily relations. The way for the flood of modern novel literature was only
opened when the feelings of the lovers towards each other became the main thing, but the
result of their love, the child, became a subordinate or even unimportant question.


Undoubtedly this liberal development of our emotional life has also had its good side;
it probably even had to be in order to dissolve rigid forms of our social life within our national
community and thus to clear the way for ideas of the law of life within our national
community. But there is no doubt that the overvaluing of the "I'-relatedness in all questions
of love has in many cases made marriage into what we unfortunately often encounter today.
Today's marriages often give the impression that the God-given sexual instinct of the sexes
has, so to speak, only been given free rein within a socially possible framework, because no
other way out was known. He who professes to be of the blood can only call such a marriage
of externality, based on egoistic ideas, immoral, unless it is forced for reasons of health. Such
marriages are shameful for our people. If such externalities, which are like a numb nut, are
legally recognized in public life - and we are doing so today - then we should not be surprised


232


if the questions of divorce and the aversion to marriage begin to run rampant. The meaning of
marriage has been lost and the principles of law have followed. For here it depends more on
the ideological presuppositions of our existing law than on the existing legal provisions. If one
tolerates that pure ego-reference brings two people together in a marriage, and both people no
longer understand marriage as a task to their blood, then it is also impossible to see why such
people should not part again when they have satisfied their longing and have nothing new to
give each other in this relationship. Thought through to the last, one can then actually no
longer condemn it when the coming together of man and woman is sought in ways that are not
even burdened with the awkwardness of marriage and divorce. Whoever wants to improve
and heal here must go to the root of the evil and must not be content with having clamored
over the manifestations of the evil. We must overcome liberalism also in the relations of the
sexes to each other and subject marriage to National Socialist principles, i.e., we must bring
marriage back to the fore as an institution that is called upon to secure the living eternity of
our people and no longer serves selfish interests. Then the esteem in which marriage is held
by our people will rise again, and many of today's unpleasant phenomena will disappear of
their own accord. If, therefore, marriage today no longer corresponds in many cases to its old
German meaning and purpose, then it is not marriage as such that is to blame. We ourselves
are to blame for the fact that marriage has begun to lose its meaning and has been degraded to
an externality. This disastrous development was initiated by liberalism as a world view, and
the law in force has justified this development. Our task now is to restore marriage to its old,
German meaning and purpose, i.e., to place it again at the service of the succession of the
sexes. The child must again be made the meaning and purpose of marriage, and thus marriage
must be restored to its old place in German national life.


Our people are thoroughly imbued with the feeling that things are not right in this
respect:


Our people are looking for the child again!


Our people are guided in this by a very sure feeling for life. Our people feel that both
their ancient culture and their present achievements are based exclusively on qualities which
they owe to their own blood or to blood values which are similar or at least akin to their own
species. And our nation feels that it can only maintain its cultural elevation and maintain its
position in the centre of Europe if it preserves this creative blood. But this blood is
transformed in the existence of our people only through the quantity and goodness of the
children born of its blood. One could also express it with an economic term, that such blood-
value dispositions of our people, which do not come to fruition in children, can be regarded as
investments which do not bear interest. Our people want to become again a people rich in
children, because they feel quite sure that the only real and imperishable wealth which they
can leave to our descendants is a multitude of high-quality and healthy children and
grandchildren, who will then keep our heritage alive by virtue of their endowments. Many
different ways are being discussed and recommended today in order to make Germany a
child's country again. A large number of people recoil from the confusing novelty of the task
and believe that all salvation can be found in a spasmodic adherence to outward appearances
in marriage evaluations. People stare at the "good old days" and believe that they have found
the panacea in an exaggerated evaluation of the outward appearances of a marriage, in order
to be able to return to lucid conditions of happy families with many children. These circles
overlook the fact that they sanctify the nutshell and forget that the nut is the essential thing if
a nut tree is to grow; what use is the nutshell if the nut is hollow? These circles also forget
that the "good old days" could not have been so good, if they have left us as a heritage a
condition in which we must first laboriously seek again ways and means to make the rich
blessing of children in a marriage the prerequisite of our national consciousness. Clinging to
the externals of the forms of marriage will not bring us back a morality that will make
German marriages again rich in children. It is not the outward appearance of marriage that is


233


important, but the value of marriage for our people in terms of the law of life. We must give
marriage back its old meaning and restore it to its old purpose. From this point of view
matriage can be renewed as an institution responsible to the people, and by no other standard
can marriage be evaluated. The supreme law must become again:


The purpose of marriage is the child!


Another way, which is also often discussed today, leads to the child in the result, but
does not satisfy in its presuppositions. We mean those views which no longer want to
condemn an illegitimate mother, if from the standpoint of the people one believes that one can
affirm the child born thereby. This is undoubtedly a great advance over the question of the
illegitimate child, but it is not yet a clear position on the question of the illegitimate child's
mother. This view can easily have a hurtful rather than a spiritually uplifting effect on the
illegitimate mother, because one gets stuck - perhaps unconsciously - in the condemnation of
the illegitimate mother's deed and, as it were, accepts the illegitimate child's mother only out
of a popular sense of responsibility toward the child. Such an attitude is certainly more
responsible to the people and, from the point of view of blood, also more justified than that of
such people who judge the illegitimate child only from the standpoint of purely external
marriage and therefore condemn it wholesale. But this attitude nevertheless remains only a
half-measure, because, while it has come to the recognition of the child, it does not take a
clear position towards the mother. And this ill-considered half-measure in the conception of
the illegitimate child is felt very clearly: rejoicing by those illegitimate child-mothers who
have given life to a child only through thoughtless carelessness, bitterly by those German girls
of good character who, in full consciousness of the consequences of their step, give life to one
or even more children because fate itself denied them the possibility of fulfilling in marriage
the meaning of their womanhood and of passing on in children the blood they have inherited.


A third way to make Germany a children's country is also much discussed today. It
seems to be very simple, but this way could easily become a disastrous way. What is meant is
this: It is said, for instance, that the sexual instinct as such is a fact which to deny is to be
unworldly; it is now asserted that sooner or later every healthy girl will somehow find her
way to manhood. One reckons with this fact and places oneself, so to speak, on this ground of
the given facts. One takes the conditions as they are, so to speak. And now the situation is
rightly described to the effect that every one in society knows what is going on and comes to
terms with it, but that the whole thing falls into condemnation at the moment when the
divinely willed product of such a coming
together of man and woman becomes visible in a child. Here it is desired to intervene, but not
in such a way as to combat the relations of the sexes, which are to be accepted as a fact, but
by working to make this process, which is perhaps to be deplored but not to be denied, useful,
so to speak, to the whole of the people by means of births taking place. The most significant
thing about this view of things is undoubtedly the courage to make a clear decision which this
statement presupposes. For it is beyond all doubt that the present attitude of society, which
tacitly tolerates sexual relations between the sexes but condemns the illegitimate child, is
repugnant hypocrisy. It is therefore necessary to demand here a clear either-or: either the
conditions cease, or the children of these conditions are recognized. But it seems to us that
this is not yet the decisive point in the whole question.


It is a law of life par excellence that the more highly developed a species is, the more
the young want to be cared for if they are to grow up and flourish. Applied to the high-grade
blood of our people, this means that it is not at all primarily a question of discovering, as it
were, the free intercourse of the sexes, and of standing on the ground of this fact, asking only
in return for the birth of children. Rather, the protection of mother and child until the child
matures is the decisive task, the preconditions of which want to be clarified, if one believes to
be able to take the above standpoint at all. A German child is not only born and somehow


234


raised to become a German. A German child wants and needs the spiritual care of his parents,
if possible, but at least of his mother, in order to mature spiritually into a full-fledged German.
The whole thing stands and falls with the will of the national community to recognize the
illegitimate child mother and her child or not. If the national community does not find a
justified and moral relationship to the illegitimate child mother, then all affirmations of the
preconditions are of no use, because then these preconditions are immoral in the imagination
of the national community. National Socialism is the nurturing of the blood and thus the
nurturing of the child; liberalism is always the self-referential relationship of the sexes to one
another. We can only be National Socialists, or we are not National Socialists. If one
professes this principle, then there is probably only one way out of the conflict of opinions.
We must find a new relationship to the child by reorganizing our thinking. We must take the
standpoint that our commitment to the idea of blood implies a commitment to the child, if all
talk of the idea of blood is not to remain mere lip service. But - and this thought is decisive -
we do not profess the child as such, but in accordance with the insights of this century and in
the consciousness of our irreplaceable and precious blood.


To the ancestor-responsible child.


The child born within our national community should be able to answer to the
ancestors. This is the moral demand of our time. If the child can be answered for by both
parents before the ancestors, then the child and its mother are sacred to us. Under what
external circumstances the birth of such a child came about is then a question of second order.
Marriages which are deliberately kept childless, unless health circumstances force this, or
marriages which give life to children who cannot be called ancestor responsible children, we
then judge no differently than the production of a child of inferior or even foreign blood,
which has taken place out of irresponsibility. We believe that the concept of the "ancestor-
responsible child" can provide a standard for finding a clear standpoint in today's confusion of
opinions on the question of the illegitimate child and for creating new foundations which can
serve to build up a German morality appropriate to the species and responsible for the
species.Ancestor-responsible child means the fundamental recognition of the breeding
thought. Because if one wants to answer for a child before the ancestors, it must also be born
under conditions which can let it exist before the ancestors.


Breeding is applied knowledge of heredity.


Since we have learned in this century that human qualities are hereditary, it is a
consequence of common sense to subject ourselves to the laws of breeding. While a quarter of
a century ago, and even into our own time, it may have smacked of devaluation to try to apply
the ideas of breeding to human beings, today the new knowledge of heredity, and with it our
knowledge of the sanctity of our blood, compel us to elevate breeding to the basis of
governmental reason. Breeding as applied knowledge of heredity must become the high goal
of striving humanity: That is the task of our time. When Nietzsche demanded: "You should
not plant yourself away, but up", his visionary hope now becomes for us a knowing and thus
obligatory attitude towards our people and our blood. One can almost predict that the 20th
century will not be the century of technology. Rather, the idea of blood and the knowledge of
heredity will become the mainstay of our century and will ultimately shape its face. This
century will find its expression in the demand for ancestor-responsible breeding and its
affirmation within our people. It was ordained by Providence that the seed of man should
become a germ in the womb of woman, from which the fruit would develop, and a new man
would finally come into being. In the eternal cycle of existence this law is carried out for the
preservation of the species. The woman is like the field, which needs the sower in order to
make grain grow. And as the field determines the goodness of the fruit, so the woman


235


determines the value of the child. Certainly, even a good field fails if it is badly tended or
receives bad seed; but it is also certain that the best seed is of no use if the field is no good.
Another parable may be chosen: As a good or bad mirror can reflect the image well or badly,
so the blood of the mother determines the nature of the child. The blood of the mother
determines how the father finds himself in his son. Where the mother's blood is good, the
father will find his essence restored or even enhanced; where the mother's blood was inferior,
diseased, or putrid, the son will fail to reach the father or even disgrace him. But because all
this is so, the woman of a good nature, the healthy girl of precious blood, must again become
for us what she already was for our ancestors: holy! The word "holy" says that it is to bring us
"salvation": just as "mighty" brings us "power" and "mighty" brings us "salvation. "angry"
brings the "wrath". The well-disposed, healthy girl of our blood is supposed to bring us again
"salvation". In her we want to venerate the most beautiful, because most promising expression
of our own kind. Whoever irresponsibly offends against her is a pest of the people: this must
also be raised to the new law of a new age. All these are entirely new points of view which
require a reorganization of our thinking on the widest scale. For example: thought through to
the last, the healthy beauty of the female of our blood, which is appropriate to the species, is
then no longer only a question of artistic taste or ego-related enjoyment of art, but becomes
the expression of our most sacred goods anchored in our blood. Beauty as an expression of the
species is thus both a task and an obligation. The education of the people to recognize the
beauty appropriate to the species and its recognition in itself thus becomes a noble task of the
state, which is all the more comprehensive the more clearly the state professes the blood of its
people. We do not want to be misunderstood: We do not deny the soul when we affirm the
beauty of our species in accordance with its kind as a question of blood that is obligatory for
the people. We only believe that the soul is just as subject to the condition of the species as
the body. For how else could it be explained that there are cowards and heroes, fatherless
fellows and dutiful national defenders! It is only out of the harmony of body and soul that
consciousness arises as the beginning and foundation of human understanding and formative
reason. Only out of consciousness does man shape the world around him into that order which
his inner voice commands him and which is therefore undoubtedly of soul origin. We do not,
therefore, deny the soul when we affirm the body. We do not deny the soul when we affirm
the body, but assign to both the body and the soul their respective parts in the making of the
perfect man of his kind. A noble soul may illuminate and transfigure an ignoble body; a noble
body without a noble soul may seem embarrassing: the former may delight, the latter offend.
Such observations may play a great role in the evaluation of individual human fates, indeed
they may often be of decisive importance here in the evaluation of a person. Nevertheless, this
does not relieve us of the task of considering and evaluating body and soul in questions of
species, i.e. in questions of blood. And thus, with all affirmation of the soul, the perfection of
the body, if it is an expression of beauty appropriate to the species and the species, becomes
the obligatory basic idea of an ancestor-responsible breeding task on our blood. We have said
above that it is so ordained by Providence: Man procreates only through woman. The woman,
therefore, is decisive for the hereditary level of perfection of the children born of her. Just as
the switch determines the direction of the rails on which the train can travel, so the blood of
the woman determines the hereditary value and thus the possibilities of development of his
children. The woman is the preserver, the multiplier and the keeper of our blood, just as she is
able through her blood to determine the direction of the development of a sex to its harm, or at
least to narrow down the possibilities of development of a sex.


It is a fundamental law of life that a man should prove himself by performance which
corresponds to his innate nature, in order to be able to stand before his nature. The law of
man's nature in the struggle of life is called achievement: and not achievement per se, but
achievement for his blood and for his people. It always seems ridiculous to a man to refer to
ancestors without at the same time showing himself equal to these ancestors by his own
achievements. Ancestors are always only a proof of achievements, never a proof of
achievements. Only the performance appropriate to the species proves the man. Noble nature


236


and noble form, even noble ancestors may arouse hopes in the man, but proof of his nature
always remains only his species appropriate performance. In this thought was originally
rooted the meaning of knighthood, which admitted the man born to knighthood among the
nobles only on the basis of knightly achievements; the medieval examination for the master
craftsman's certificate, which admitted the journeyman among the master craftsmen only after
he had proved his craftsmanship and his soul, was also based on such considerations. In the
officer corps of our army the principles have been preserved alive to this day. The woman's
achievement for her people and her kind are her children. Unless special circumstances make
childlessness necessary, this principle applies. Children, however, are linked to conditions
which a mature girl can only prove as a wife and mother, but not as a virgin. The woman's
noblest achievement, the child, is therefore difficult or even impossible to test before marriage
or before any choice of husband, since at best one can only ascertain the pregnancy that has
occurred, but with it one knows nothing about the child to be expected. The value of a girl as
a mother is at first not directly ascertainable for a man. The man must start from indirect
considerations in order to arrive at an evaluation. Beauty and grace, health and nobility of
blood are, for example, in the case of the young girl of our species, characteristics of
achievement to which a man can refer if he wishes to form a picture of the future mother of
his children who will be answerable to his ancestors. The knowledge of the bodily and
spiritual values of a young girl is therefore one of the most essential prerequisites for a man
not to be stupid in the face of the questions of the procreation of his blood and thus of the
questions of the regeneration of our people. The man of our people who wants children will in
future have to be trained to recognize and judge the selection example of the female of his
kind. This statement also means, in principle, a commitment to the body as the species
appropriate expression of our blood. Here the reorganization of our thinking from the idea of
blood will have very far-reaching consequences, if we do not want to remain stuck in the
realm of purely spiritual disputes. We do not serve the vital laws of our blood if, instead of
integrating them into the reality of our environment and classifying them in such a way that
they become fruitful for us, we always discuss them mentally from paper to paper. The
knowledge of the law of the blood forces us to recognize the body as the expression of our
species. If one does not do this, or is not able to do it, or is too cowardly to do it, all talk of
blood remains in the end only a half-measure. To know the right and not to do it is cowardice
or inferiority. The confession of the body includes the body as a whole. To affirm the visible
part of the body in the play of fashionable unveilings or coverings is not yet a confession of
the body. Let us be quite clear about this, too. The body as a whole is given to us by God, not
only that which the whims of fashion allow to be shown.


It is important to reintegrate the body into the order of our existence, especially our
daily life. This means, taken to its ultimate conclusion, to affirm nakedness in principle. But it
does not mean affirming nakedness for its own sake; it means affirming nakedness for the
sake of the meaning of the blood, and thus making this blood a living reality. Seen in this way,
the whole thing then becomes a question of inner attitude towards nakedness, but is thus far
from being a matter of action in the field of nakedness. The latter is a question of tact and
propriety and does not belong within the scope of these considerations. But this inner decision
on this question is necessary because the laws of life of the blood do not tolerate half
measures and require a clear statement. The only thing that is certain is that everything is
nonsense that simply equates nudity with immorality. Our ancestors were a body-affirming
people who thought in these matters without being educated. This attitude was not a barbaric
primitiveness, as people like to make it out to be. The custom of our ancestors’ unprejudiced
affirmation of the body was preserved in Germany until the Thirty Years' War, and in Sweden
and Finland until our own time. In this respect we are very well informed about the conditions
among our Germanic ancestors. Thus, for example, they say:


237


Tacitus (20):


"Throughout the bunch naked youth grows to the limb structure, to the bodily form
that we marvel at."


Caesar (Gallic War, Book VI):


"From childhood they strive for exercise and hardening. He who abstains the longest
from sexual intercourse reaps the greatest praise; this increases the growth, they believe,
increases the strength and strengthens the sinews. To have had intercourse with a woman
before the age of twenty is among the most opprobrious reproaches; and yet there is no
secrecy in these matters, as they bathe together in the rivers, and so clothe themselves that a
great part of the body remains naked."


Only the Church intervened in this question in a condemnatory manner, but it never
completely penetrated with its view. The Fathers of the Church, for example, state in regard to
the bathing of the sexes in common with virgins: "that these expose their bodies, which are
consecrated to shamefulness and chastity, to eyes greedy for lust." But only very, very slowly
was such a completely un-Germanic conception able to gain a foothold within our people.


The key to understanding this contrast of views in the history of our people can probably only
be found in the fact that the education of their youth to impartiality in all matters of the body
meant to the Teutons a means of preserving the health of their species and their blood, while
the Church, perhaps because it could not reconcile the fact of the different value of the blood
with the prerequisites of its doctrine of the equality of all that bears human traits, condemned
the body and thus cleared the way for making only the soul the value content of its doctrine.
Perhaps it was only the onesided affirmation of the soul that led ecclesiastical circles to the
attitude that the body, and in particular everything that one could call the "source of life" with
Gustav Frenssen, should only be regarded as a vessel of the instinctual and thus rejected as sin.
In any case, it finally came to the point that beautiful and well-behaved girls could virtually
become targets and fair game for the persecution based rage of fanatical people. Beauty
became a curse. In the most horrible period of German history, in the time of the spiritual
plague of the mass persecutions of witches, hundreds, yes, thousands of German girls wasted
their lives under scorn and torture, instead of preserving the vitality of their people as mothers.
These witch-hunts were undoubtedly at the expense of the servants of the Churches, but it is
very doubtful whether they were also at the expense of the teachings of the Church. There can
be no doubt today, however, that the cause and execution of this madness are largely at the
expense of the people who worship Yahweh and not our God, and who, with these witch-
hunts, have carried out a purposeful counter-selection in our blood. Just as bad in its effects
has been another waste of the precious hereditary streams of our blood during the last hundred
years: the Jewish desecration of the German woman. The Jew knew how to make the German
man go astray in himself, to alienate him from his own kind, and by the sexualization of all
life to degrade the noble blood of our women and girls to soulless matters of lust. Sexuality
received its price and finally became respectable. Nudity, too, was very soon put in the
service of Jewish decomposition work. And this very circumstance has done much to confuse
the view of our people in this matter, so that even to this day some compulsive ideas in the
field of the uncovered body can be traced back to this. While the Church, by means of the
persecutions of witches, had withdrawn masses of the most precious blood from its natural
destiny, this path of Judaism in the 19th century, especially in the period immediately behind
us, was indeed less bloody, but in its effect on our national power by no means less effective.
The Jewish desecration of the German woman corresponds to the ecclesiastical persecutions
of witches; both have a common spiritual father: Yahweh!


238


There can be no doubt that what Tacitus and Caesar tell us of our ancestors, and what
we have mentioned above, helped to lay the foundations of that irrepressible Germanic
strength of the people which has sustained the last millennium of German history, and from
which we still draw today. For what we still are and accomplish, we owe only to the
Germanic part of our blood. We have every reason to return to similar conceptions of the
morality of our Germanic ancestors, as they have been handed down to us, after our century
has again made us realize the value and significance of blood. Which way to take in this
matter need not be discussed here, and is also irrelevant, since the tact and sense of propriety
of our people will already find it, once they have recognized that this is also a task which they
must somehow master. We are coming to the end! Our century has opened the door wide for
us to see a new area with new knowledge. Largely unexplored, this territory still lies before us.
And more foreboding than knowing, we feel the new and great tasks approaching us, which
the knowledge of the heredity of blood imparts to us. These tasks want to be mastered and
will have to be mastered. German people have rekindled the light of the knowledge of
heredity at the threshold of our century. Germany has been chosen by fate as the scene of this
realization. The German people will therefore not be able to avoid its task of continuing along
this path of knowledge and of preserving the light of the consciousness of the sanctity of the
blood and of letting it shine brightly among the peoples of the world. In this way the German
people will also one day be able to break the world domination of Jewry: because the
domination of Jewry is only possible as long as the Gentile forgets his blood laws. For only
when the Gentile forgets the laws of his blood can the Jew bring his blood laws to dominion.
But with the rejection of the Jewish blood alone the question of the blood of our kind is not
yet answered, let alone the law of life of our blood mastered: just as little is a field tilled by
destroying its weeds. The affirmation of the life-laws of our blood, the veneration of the
ancestors to whom we owe our blood, and the children born of our blood in ancestor-
responsible breeding are the new tablets to a new German age. At the end of this path, which
we Germans have trodden on the threshold of this century, will be the noble man of German
stock. The task before us is to bring the modern life of our cities and our technology into
harmony with the life laws of our blood. Blood without soil flows. We know that. We also
know that blood without breeding and ancestral responsibility cannot endure. For us Germans,
the law applies that blood without soil cannot keep itself alive in the long run. We must not let
our blood seep away in a metropolitan civilization developed by Jewish liberalism. It is not
against the city that our slogan is directed, but we seek its incorporation into the life-legal
order of our people and the overcoming of its characteristics which are fatal to our blood.
Blood and soil will then again become the supporting pillars of a life-legal reality of our
people, which will keep the generations of our people alive into eternity. We oppose the
boastful ideas of 1789, the ideas of equality, liberty and fraternity, which value the criminal
like the noble, and their deification of reason, which is alien to life, which betrays the sanctity
of blood, with the law of our blood. On the basis of our blood, handed down from our
ancestors, we shall in future understand our people. We will divide this people according to
the achievements of each individual and thus give it a just and legal order of life. In the idea
of the kingdom we let our people be understood as a whole and bring it to its state effect as a
kingdom. Thus, from the idea of blood, we arrive at the reevaluation of all values, a process
which, however, gives us new knowledge of the value and essence of the German human
being and thus again creates the new basis for letting a new flowering of German nature and
German culture arise through this German human being. Here it becomes evident that the idea
of blood as such is the fundamental idea of the 20th. All the problems of the 20th century can
only be measured by their relation to the idea of blood. The victors in this spiritual
confrontation of the 20th century will not be those who, out of everyday convenience, tend to
tactical compromise solutions in the questions of the idea of blood, but those who will have
the courage to think through and affirm the idea of blood up to the last consequences. At the
beginning of all events there is always the will. If only we will first profess our blood and its
laws of life unreservedly and unconditionally, then the means and ways will soon be found


239


which are necessary to keep our blood alive into the future. We have to affirm and master our
century: Where there's a will, there's a way!


240


CHE NAGONAL OOD EStALE


When the National Socialist party acquired power on January 30th, 1933, German
agriculture was on the brink of ruin. Some 12,000,000,000 reichsmarks of new debt had
been contracted by farmers between 1924 (when the currency was stabilised) and 1932. The
area covered by the farmsteads sold by auction during that period was about equal to that of
Thuringia. The proceeds derived from the sale of farm produce decreased from some
10,000,000,000 reichsmarks in 1928-9 to 6,400,000,000 reichsmarks in 1932/3 - an amount
insufficient to recover the cost of production. On the other hand, farmers had to pay high rates
of taxes and interest and heavy social charges. As early as 1930, the National Socialist party
directed public attention to the desperate state of the farming industry and asked that the
country's agricultural policy should pay increased attention to these matters, more especially
by creating new legislation dealing with farm property, by regulating markets and by setting
up a corporate system of self administration. These demands have now been satisfied under
the National Socialist regime. Some 700,000 hereditary farms (Erbhéfe) have been
created and about 40 per cent. of the soil used for agricultural purposes has thus been liberated
from the arbitrary interference of professional speculators in real estate. The law enacted to
that end has strengthened the farmer's connection with the soil he tills and has secured his
rights of possession. Besides, the charges on farm property have been reduced to a reasonable
level, partly by lowering the rates of interest and facilitating the repayment of debts and partly
by granting tax abatement.


The National Food Estate (Reichsnaéhrstand) was set up by the Act passed on
September 13th, 1933. It is the sole organization in the country embracing all persons
associated in some way with farming or with the production and distribution of human food.
The formerly existing organizations whose objects were similar have either been incorporated
with the National Food Estate (N.F.E.) or have been dissolved. Those now incorporated with
it include, among others, the Chambers of Agriculture, the Council of Agriculture, the
National Farmers' Association, the German Agricultural Federation, etc. The highly
developed system of co-operative societies was likewise made subject to the administration of
the N.F.E. Membership of the N.F-E. includes all the owners, lessors and lessees of
agricultural land, together with their families, employees and workmen. The term
"agriculture" is understood to comprise horticulture, viniculture, and fishery as well.
Membership further includes, as has been said, all those connected with the production and
distribution of food, e.g., the producers of foodstuffs, millers, bakers, butchers, provision
dealers, etc. The extension of membership to so many trades was necessary because, without
it, the market organisation could not be controlled to the extent considered desirable in the
national interests. Organizations have been created for all the markets here concerned,
such as those for cereals, cattle, dairy products, sugar, potatoes, eggs, beer, fish, fruit,
vegetables, wine, and others. Each of these separate market organizations is composed of all
persons connected with its particular trade, thus - for instance - that for cereals consists of all
the growers, grain dealers, grain associations, mills, mill-produce dealers, and bakers. The
market organizations are partly regional and partly national, i.e., those set up for each part of
Germany (the regional ones) are subordinated to one competent for the country as a whole
(the national one). Thus, for example, the twenty regional organizations for the grain trade are
combined to form the national organization for that trade, and so on. National Socialists have
all along realized the importance of farmers as a class and that of farming as an industry.
Notwithstanding the industrialization of Germany, agriculture still absorbs almost 30 per cent
of all those who work for their living. The greater part of the country's food is produced by
the intensive cultivation of the soil, even though there are large districts where the latter is of
relatively poor quality. The promotion of farming and food production is therefore one of the


241


most essential objectives at which German agricultural policy must be aimed. The scope of
that policy extends, in the first place, to the tillers of the soil, to their families and

children, to the preservation of rural traditions and modes of thinking, and to the farmers'
views on honour and the interests of his vocation. The N.F.E., therefore, looks upon it as its
special function to establish social harmony between employers and employees, to provide the
ambitious and efficient farm labourer with facilities for advancement, to strengthen the ties
that connect him with the soil he tills, and to accord preference to him when creating new
farmsteads and new homesteads. Particular attention is also directed towards the improvement
of the conditions of labour, to the housing problem, etc. The educational system is promoted
by the establishment of vocational schools for farmers and in other ways. The feeling of
solidarity among villagers is encouraged, and it is also intended to cultivate that feeling ona
nation-wide basis. Visible expression is given to the last-named object by the National
Farmers' Congress (Reichsbauerntag) which is convened at Goslar once a year in the late
autumn. The second specific aim of the country's agricultural policy is concerned with the
farm as such, more especially with measures likely to increase and improve the output in one
form or another (production, stockbreeding, supply of high-grade seeds, soil improvement,
etc.). These important tasks can be carried out most conveniently by the close collaboration of
the N.F.E. with the competent Government departments. Other matters here concerned are:
advice on agricultural matters, vocational instruction, the machinery supply, and the holding
of agricultural shows. In this latter respect notable progress has been achieved in recent years;
and the National Food Estate's annual show always provides excellent opportunities for
studying the work already achieved.


Finally, the N.F.E. is entrusted with the control of the agricultural produce markets.
Reference has already been made to the organizations established for that purpose, it being the
special task of the N.F.E. to ensure their harmonious co-operation and their conduct along
uniform principles. Co-operation between the N.F.E. and the Government departments is very
close. Thanks to the valuable work done by the members of the National Labour Service,
large districts in the Ems country, along the shores of the North Sea and elsewhere have been
opened up for cultivation. The N.F.E. is also connected with such matters as the regional
planning of the Reich, the provision of land for public purposes, the creation of national
reservations, afforestation schemes, etc.


The N.F.E. comprises 20 regional organizations, divided into about 500 district
organisations, which-in turn-are subdivided into a large number of local groups. The "leader"
of the National Food Estate is R. Walther Darré, who is also the Reich Farmers' Leader. Each
regional organization is presided over by a Regional Farmers' Leader, each district
organization by a District Farmers' Leader, and each local organization by a Local Farmers’
Leader. The administrative organs of the N.F.E. comprise one central office domiciled in
Berlin and 20 regional offices domiciled in the various regional districts. Each administrative
office is divided into three departments, one each for the three special functions of the N.F.E.
already described (i.e., the human element, the vocational element, and the control of the
markets). The N.F.E. is not a department of the Government, even though its Leader is at the
same time the National Minister of Food and Agriculture. The ideal of self-administration is
realized by the arrangement under which the regional and sub-regional "leaders" assist in an
honorary capacity in carrying out the functions of the N.F.E.


Particular interest - not only in Germany, but also elsewhere - is taken in the market
control set up by the N.F.E., which is more consistently carried out than any corresponding
system introduced in other parts of the world. The successes achieved prove that the
fundamental principles underlying the German system are sound. According to the
calculations of the Institute for the Study of the Business Cycle, the proceeds derived from the
sale of agricultural produce increased in value from 6,400,000,000 to 8,800,000,000
reichsmarks during the three years that have passed since the introduction of the control


242


system, whilst the prices payable by consumers did not undergo a rise in any way comparable
to the benefit obtained by the producers.


The special features of the market control system have originated from the following
facts: Germany has neither the size and the natural resources of such a country as the United
States, nor does she possess an overseas empire, as does, for instance, Great Britain. Although
she has become largely industrialized, she has not abandoned her agricultural basis. Her soil is
none too rich, and has nevertheless to support a population numbering about 360 to the square
mile. Regional differences, especially between the chief centres of food production and food
consumption, are very considerable. The number of small and medium-sized agricultural
undertakings is also very large, which adds to the difficulty of organizing them. Thus, neither
the market policy of the overseas countries with their surplus production nor that of the
countries relying upon measures for the protection of the price-level could be adopted. It
would have been a mistake to give one-sided assistance to the farmer, whilst leaving the
position of the consumer as it was. The method that had to be applied was that of guiding and
supervising imports and of regulating the accumulation of stores containing such foodstuffs as
cannot be produced at home. Moreover, regard had to be paid to the special social structure of
Germany; and this could only be done by making the market organization very
comprehensive.


The introduction of that organization presented some considerable difficulties. The
various markets were in a condition bordering on chaos. In almost all of them the speculative
character of the wholesale trade tended to augment the lack of proper organization. The
uncontrolled influence of the prices ruling in the world's markets reduced those obtainable at
home to a ruinous level and made production unremunerative. The unscrupulous competition
among dealers led to widespread insolvency, the consequences of which were most disastrous
to the farmer. Unfair business methods and an excessive number of middlemen helped to
aggravate the position still further, more particularly in the "upgrading" industries.


The first step towards the restoration of healthy conditions was the reorganization of
the milk market by the National Commissioner for the Milk Trade. The experience thus
gained was subsequently utilized when the final regulations were drawn up. It goes without
saying that, in doing so, due regard was paid, to the peculiarities of the local markets and of
the individual dairy products. The terms of delivery as between the farmers, the dairies and
the retail trade were defined. Prices and price margins corresponding to the work done by
each section and to the purchasing capacity of the consumers were fixed, and excessive
margins were reduced. Unremunerative undertakings were shut down against payment of
compensation, and undertakings essentially necessary to the country's economic interests
were encouraged. Special importance was attached to the production of high-class goods and
to standardization. The recent N.F.E. Show held at Frankfort has furnished convincing
evidence of the high degree of efficiency attained by these methods. Prices have now been
stabilized, both as regards the farmer and the consumer. What was considered impossible a
short while ago has been achieved - the price of butter has, for instance, remained unchanged
for two years and a half, and the same remark applies to most of the other kinds of agricultural
produce. The interference of speculators and vested interests has been eliminated, notably in
the grain trade. Prices no longer fall to pieces when the harvest has been particularly abundant.
Neither the quality nor the extent of each farmer's production is subject to any control. He can
produce what he likes and as much as he likes. The market regulations will always enable him
to sell at adequate prices those commodities for which there is a general demand. The number
of middlemen in the process of distribution has been reduced to a minimum. During the
preceding economic era, production was rationalized. To-day it has become necessary to
organize the distribution-and therefore the supply - of the goods in accordance with the
dictates of common sense, without restricting production in any way. This makes it possible


243


to effect enormous savings, which can then be utilized for the benefit of the producer or the
consumer. The increase in the yield of agricultural production is mainly due to such savings.


The" leaders" of the market associations, assisted by a committee representing the
economic interests involved, are held responsible for the proper application of the market
regulations-which, after all, are merely the outcome of considerations governed by common-
sense principles. They are intended to serve - and they do serve - the national interests as well
as those of the economic groups affected, more especially those of the producers and
consumers. The dealers are required to be reliable, to have an expert knowledge of their trade,
and to be financially sound. These various requirements are ensured by a system of licensing.
The erection of new undertakings and the enlargement of existing ones is subject to the
consent of the market associations, so that the interests of the nation as a whole can be
properly protected. In this way, misplaced investments are prevented, and the
remunerativeness of the undertakings that are of vital importance to the country is promoted.


Considerable value must be ascribed to the system of "compensatory contributions",
the origin of which dates back to a time not so very long ago. Deductions were then made
from the prices of milk used for drinking purposes, and these amounts were utilized to
increase the prices of milk used for manufacturing purposes. The system has proved
eminently successful, as it is now possible to induce the producers of milk in remote districts
greatly to augment the volume of their production thanks to the millions of reichsmarks
diverted towards that end. It should be noted that the money employed for this purpose is not
contributed by the taxpayer, but by the industry concerned. In some instances, the system has
been used for the introduction of methods tending to cheapen production.


The application of uniform principles to the whole domain of food production and
food consumption has provided the agricultural policy of the National Socialist Government
with a degree of efficiency hitherto regarded as impossible. This is acknowledged over and
over again by the visitors from abroad who have made it a point to study conditions on the
spot, no matter whether they have come to investigate the principles underlying the system of
market control, the promotion of farming efficiency, the preservation of cultural traditions, or
matters of vocational organization. The discussion of the agricultural problems confronting
individual countries, the solution of which is taken in hand everywhere, can be made very
fruitful. It enables members of the various European nations to realize the fact that all of them
have to work shoulder to shoulder in a common task and makes them anxious to contribute
their own share for the benefit of all.


244


fiarl Maria Wiligut


Karl Maria Wiligut was born in Vienna, into a military family, and followed his
grandfather and father into the Austrian army, joining the 99th Infantry at Mostar,
Herzegovina in late 1884 and reaching the rank of captain by the time he was thirty-seven.


Throughout his years in the army, he maintained his interest in literature and folklore,
writing poetry with a distinctly nationalistic flavour. In 1903, a book of his poems entitled
'Seyfrieds Runen' was published by Friedrich Schalk, who had also published Guido von List.
Although his studies in mythology had led him to join a quasi-Masonic lodge called the
Schlarraffia in 1889, Wiligut does not seem to have been active in the vélkisch or Pan-
German nationalist movements at this time. During the First World War, Wiligut saw action
against the Russians in the Carpathians and was later transferred to the Italian front. By the
summer of 1917, he had reached the rank of colonel. Decorated for bravery and highly
thought of by his superiors, Wiligut was discharged from the army in January 1919, after
nearly 35 years of exemplary service. At around this time, Viennese occult groups were filled
with rumors concerning Wiligut, and his alleged possession of an 'ancestral memory’ that
allowed him to recall the history of the Teutonic people all the way back to the year 228,000
BC. According to Wiligut, his astonishing clairvoyant ability was the result of an
uninterrupted family lineage, extending thousands of years into the past. He claimed to have
been initiated into the secrets of his family by his father in 1890. The source of this
information about Wiligut was Theodor Czepl, who knew of Wiligut through his occult


245


connections in Vienna, which included Wiligut's cousin, Willy Thaler, and various members
of the Order of the New Templars (ONT). Czepl paid several visits to Wiligut at his Salzburg
home in the winter of 1920. According to Wiligut's view of prehistory, the Earth was
originally lit by three suns, and was inhabited by various mythological beings, including
giants and dwarves. For many tens of thousands of years, the world was convulsed with
warfare until Wiligut's ancestors, the Adler-Wiligoten, brought peace with the foundation of
the city of Arual- Joruvallas (Goslar, the chief shrine of ancient Germany) in 78,000 BC. The
following millennia saw yet more conflicts involving various now-lost civilizations. The
Wiligut family itself was originally the result of a mating between the gods of air and water,
and in later centuries fled from persecution at the hands of Charlemagne, first to the Faroe
Islands and then to Russia. Wiligut claimed that his family line included such heroic
Germanic figures as Armin the Cherusker and Wittukind. It will be evident from this epic
account of putative genealogy and family history that Wiligut's pre-historical speculations
primarily served as a stage upon which he could project the experiences and importance of his
own ancestors. In Wiligut's view, the victimization of his family was continuing at the hands
of the Catholic Church, the Freemasons and the Jews, all of whom he held responsible for
Germany's defeat in the First World War. Wiligut maintained contact with his colleagues in
various occult circles, including the ONT and the Edda Society, and after his move to Munich,
he was feted by German occultists as a fount of information on the remote and glorious
history of the Germanic people. Wiligut's introduction to Heinrich Himmler came about
through the former's friend Richard Anders, who had contributed to the Edda Society's 'Hagal'
magazine, and who was now an officer in the SS. Himmler was greatly impressed with
Wiligut's ancestral memory, which implied a racial purity going back much further than 1750
(the year to which SS recruits had to be able to prove their Aryan family history). Wiligut
joined the SS in September 1933, using the name Karl Maria Wiligut. He was made head of
the Department for Pre-and-Early History in the SS Race and Settlement Main Office in
Munich, where he was charged with the task of recording on paper the events he clairvoyantly
recalled. His work evidently met with the satisfaction of the Reichsfihrer-SS, who promoted
him to SS-Oberfuhrer (lieutenant-brigadier) in November 1934. Wiligut introduced Himmler
to another occultist, a German historian and List Society member named Gunther Kirchhoff
(1892-1975), who believed in the existence of energy lines crossing the face of the Earth.


Wiligut took it upon himself to forward a number of Kirchhoff's essays and
dissertations on ancient Germanic tradition to Himmler, who gave instructions to the
Ahnenerbe (the SS Association for Research and Teaching on Heredity) to study them.
Subsequently, however, the Ahnenerbe rejected Kirchhoff's theories. Wiligut, on the other
hand, would make one further important contribution to Himmler's SS. While travelling
through Westphalia during the Nazi electoral campaign of January 1933, Himmler was
profoundly affected by the atmosphere of the region, with its romantic castles and the mist-
(and myth-) shrouded Teutoburger Wald. After deciding to take over a castle for SS use, he
returned to Westphalia in November and viewed the Wewelsburg , which he appropriated in
August 1934 with the intention of turning it into an ideological-education college for SS
officers. Although at first belonging to the Race and Settlement Main Office, the Wewelsburg
was placed under the control of Himmler's Personal Staff in February 1935. It is likely that
Himmler's view of the Wewelsburg was influenced by Wiliguts assertion that it was destined
to become a magical German strong-point in a future conflict between Europe and Asia.
Wiligut's inspiration for this prediction was a Westphalian legend regarding a titanic future
battle between East and West. Himmler found this particularly interesting, in view of his own
conviction that a major confrontation between East and West was inevitable - even if it were
still a century or more in the future.


In addition, it was Wiligut who influenced the development of SS ritual, and who


designed the SS Totenkopf ring that symbolized membership of the order. The ring design
was based on a death's head, and included a swastika, the double sig-rune of the SS and a


246


hagall rune. In 1935, Wiligut moved to Berlin, where he joined the Reichsfihrer-SS Personal
Staff, and continued to advise Himmler. Eyewitnesses recollect that this was a period of great
activity, during which Wiligut travelled widely, corresponded extensively and oversaw
numerous meetings. Besides his involvement with the Wewelsburg, and his land surveys in
the Black Forest and elsewhere, Wiligut continued to produce examples of his family
traditions such as the Halgarita mottoes, Germanic mantras designed to stimulate ancestral
memory. In recognition of his work, Wiligut was promoted to SS-Brigadefuhrer (brigadier) in
Himmler's Personal Staff in September 1936. While in Berlin, Wiligut worked with the author
and historian Otto Rahn (1904-1939), who had a profound interest in medieval Grail legends.


In 1933, Rahn published a romantic historical work entitled Kreuzzug gegen den
Gral (Crusade Against the Grail), which was a study of the Albigensian Crusade, a war
between the Roman Catholic Church and the Cathars (or Albigensians), an ascetic religious
sect that flourished in southern France in the twelfth and thirteenth centuries. The Cathars
were eventually destroyed by Catholic armies on the orders of Pope Innocent III in the first
decade of the thirteenth century. Catharism held a particular fascination and attraction for
Himmler and other leading Nazis. This may be partly explained by the fact that the very word
‘Cathar’ means 'pure',and purity -particularly of the blood as the physical embodiment of
spirituality - was an issue of prime importance to the SS. Just as the Cathars had despised the
materialism of the Catholic Church, so National Socialists despised Capitalism, which they
equated with the ‘excesses of the Jewish financiers that had brought the nation to ruin during
the First World War and the depression that followed'. The Cathar belief that the evil god, the
Demiurge, who had created the material Universe was none other than Jehovah (Yaweh)
provided additional common ground with vélkisch anti-Semitism - which maintained that the
Jews (and other lesser races) were 'the creatures of a lesser god'. The thesis of Rahn's book
was that the Cathar heresy and Grail legends constituted an ancient Gnostic religion that had
been suppressed by the Catholic Church, beginning with the persecution of the Cathars and
ending with the destruction of the Knights Templar a century later.


From 1933, Rahn lived in Berlin and his book and his continued researches into
Germanic history came to the attention of Himmler. In May 1935, Rahn joined Wiligut's staff,
joining the SS less than a year later. In April 1936, he was promoted to the rank of SS-
Unterscharfuhrer (NCO). His second book, Luzifers Hofgesinde (Lucifer's Servants), which
was an account of his research trip to Iceland for the SS, was published in 1937. It reads quite
differently from Rahn's first book, which was an effort to portray a kind of occult underdog
group of purists who held the secret of the ages in their hands if only the rest of us would pay
attention. 'Lucifer's Servants', on the other hand, is at least partly a genuine SS tract, and
several passages make a good case for the worship of Lucifer, if one follows Rahn's exegesis
on several ancient sources including Parzival, and the surviving texts of troubadors, Cathars,
and even Persian mystics. Indeed, this idea of Lucifer as a benign or divine being was familiar
and congenial to the "white light" Theosophists of the 1920s who, after all, entitled one of
their official German publications 'Luzifer'. In February 1939, Rahn resigned from the SS for
unknown reasons, and subsequently died from exposure the following month while walking
on the mountains in S6ll, near Kufstein, Austria. As with Rahn's resignation from the SS, the
reasons for Wiligut leaving the organisation are uncertain. One possible reason is that his
health was badly failing; although he was given powerful drugs intended to maintain his
mental faculties, they had serious side effects. Although Wiligut was supported by the SS
during the final years of his life, his influence on the Third Reich was at an end. He was given
a home in Aufkirchen, but found it to be too far away from Berlin, and he moved to Goslar in
May 1940. When his accommodation was requisitioned for medical research in 1943, he
moved again, this time to a small SS house in Carinthia, where he spent the remainder of the
war with his housekeeper, Elsa Baltrusch, a member of Himmler's Personal Staff. At the end
of the war, he was sent by the British occupying forces to a refugee camp, where he suffered a
stroke. After their release, he and Baltrusch went first to his family home at Salzburg, and


247


then to Baltrusch's family home at Arolsen. On 3 January 1946, his health finally gave out and
he died in hospital.


248


Defcription of the
fvolution of fumanity


From the Secret Tradition of our Asa-Uana-Clan of Utligatis
[SS document, 17 fine 1936, marked read by H.H.(Heinrich Himmler)]


‘Terrestrial humanity, the highest expression of creation in intelligence and mental
power presently on the earth, breaks down into seven epochs, of which four have been
completed, the fifth is present humanity, and the sixth and seventh form the ages of humanity
yer to come. Each of these evolutionary epochs which have occurred up to now were,
according to the oral secret doctrine, brought about by an enormous world-wide catastrophe
culminated by unification of our earth with one of the heavenly bodies attracted onto its orbit.
During the millennia-long interregnum of time, the very few surviving remnants of the
previous human epoch gradually began to forget all the cultural advances made up to the time
as a result of the ice-age that came about in the wake of the cosmic catastrophe and they
would often regress as fur as cannibalism in the hard struggle for existence and for food and
clothing. During these transitional times (ice-ages) the sparse remnants of humanity gradually
accustomed themselves to the new living conditions. In the process, the remnants of humanity
which remained on the earth assimilated with those who came “from heaven” (stars) to the
“earth,” This assimilation brought about similar intelligence's and thus established a new
humanity which instituted new racial types. There were “first” men of these kind present
everywhere at different points around the newly forming earth. This is also why there is
almost always an “Adam” and “Eve” among all peoples of the earth, particular to their own
race.


The secret tradition of the Wiligotis-clan Asa-Uanas is called the “Irminsaga” and it
provides the following description of the seven epochs. This saga was recorded on seven
Runo-wooden tablets (of oak) in ancient Aryan linear script supplemented by images. These
were, however, destroyed along with other family documents of a similar nature in 1848
when three houses belonging to the military retiree K. M. Wiligut were burned, (These
houses in Ofen were being defended from Hungarian rebels by General Henzi, who was killed
in the effort).


K. Wiligut could therefore only hand these traditions down orally to his descendants
(always the oldest son), so that, for example, the question is unresolved as to how the
traditions could have been successfully transmitted from one human epoch to another.


1st Human Epoch:


“Aethar-beings,” found themselves in constant struggle with the “water-beings”
taking shape in the same period. They were “sexless” and propagated themselves as Hymir-
born'—in the beginning Kymir, later called Angles or Angels—by means of “the
concentration of their will,” in order, at a later time, to gain “spiritual” union with the water-
beings which were developing with the same made of propagation. How this process could be
explained in more detail is not addressed in the “Irmin saga” and without the Runo-tablets it
remains inexplicable.


2nd Human Epoch:


249


After the great 1st Cosmic Catastrophe (the crash of a moon into the earth) there
occurred an ice-age forming an “air-entity belt” around the earth, The remaining air- and
water-entities “solidified” themselves while constantly struggling with each other, into so
called “bisexual Angles” (angels), which partly lived on the earth—but also partly lived in the
water and could also fly. According to the Irminsaga they propagated themselves—partly by
means of incipient mating of “homogeneous souls” among the air-and water-entities, and had
already attained to the level of Got—Le., creative consciousness, Consciousness was
transmitted by means of a few survivors after their general destruction—these were called
“beings of knowledge” [Wissende] from here on. They could be characterized as original-
hermaphrodites.


3rd Human Epoch:


The second human epoch had recently been destroyed by a fiery collision with a
heavenly body followed by an ice-age. The remnants of the second epoch, who called
themselves the “first humans” on earth after the previous Ka-Os,' developed after extremely
heavy struggles with those who fell “from Hymil". These were ostensibly beings formed in a
way similar to the new humans (battle with the titans and giants?). During this time their
bodily structures completed their transition to being “single-sexed.” By their wills they
generated new entities of their kind in the manner of Aiyart, They could fly and partly lived in
the water, partly on land and had three eves. The third one supposedly in the middle of their
foreheads. This third eve was probably inherited as a result of their mating with the ones who
came “from Hymil.” The remnants of the “earth-men" remained as “dwarves and cave
dwellers.” Still others would have become “giants,” we were more similar to the ones who
came “from Hymil.” A few of them also had relations with animals and generated terrible
“beast-men.” ‘Thus originated “‘satyrs, fauns, centaurs and bull-men,” which were in constant
struggle with the remaining well-formed humans. ‘This third humanity, however, was
destroyed by a collision with a “fiery ball from Hymil”—only a portion were able to flee to
the “dwarves” in the caves.


4th Human Epoch:


The remnants of the third epoch of humanity under went the same cultural regression
in their struggle for existence as had the earlier epochs of intelligent beings. After a gradual
adjustment to the new living conditions on earth this humanity fought its way up to a level of
culture, which is characterized as the Uana-culture according to the secret doctrine of the
“wise Irmins” (also of the later Armanendam). In this epoch comes about great knowledge of
astrology, which has been transmitted to us through the secret sciences. There were 2 main
races: red-skins and moors... Besides these there were those with white hair and red eves—
albinos—who had great longevity, but who were not very numerous. They are said to have
invented pictographs, and together with the red-skins to have originated the Runo-script. Bur
all three main races fiercely fought against the “beast-men"—who mainly mated with the
moors, Toward the end of the 4th human epoch the third eye began to disappear. Only the
“Uana" would have stall had one, and these would have been especially intelligent. The 4th
humanity was destroyed by a subsequent collapse of a moon, which the Uana called “dress”
[kleid], and which had “illuminated” the earth together with the Su(o)n for a long time. But
they were able to prepare themselves for this for many centuries, as they saw the event
coming... These are the men who built giant caves in the mountains as a refuge, and who built
the great passage-way systems (catacombs) in the hills in order to save themselves. They also
made the “Denkstan” (monuments) so that—when their future descendants see them—the
“history of the Uana” can be known... and that Got can be known, who is the “Hari of al.”
And thus the 4th humanity perished, what followed was the


250


5th Human Epoch:


The period of transition from the 4th to the 5th epoch
lasted for millennia! Few humans survived despite the possibilities for fleeing into the interior
spaces of the earth—everywhere where the earth held “fast,” ostensibly only one couple
remained... And since they were together, cut off from any news, they thought they were the
only ones. But from the moon [Kier] there descended once more human beings with their
enormous remnants (see Jacob's Ladder!}, They called themselves Asa anal bad a
significantly longer life-span than the Vana. And they oppressed the Uana and robbed them of
their women, because they had saved none of their own. The earth once more turned green,
the sky blue, the water bright, and Got-Hari’s eye—the sun—once more shone through the
clouds and Ka-Os diminished , , , And now gradually they began not having to kill each other
in order ta eat, because there were also animals, plants and mos... And the “wise” once more
dispensed their “wisdom” and organized the clans... And the Asa established “Eden” with the
Uana in Asgard and the “Asa” no longer fought the “Uana,” for Freyr and Faja became one
and became Ymir and Freyr and Fraya... And the earth swung out and the Asa-Lana children
migrated out upon the Atta-lant and wrote their history and even gave the word to the “wise”
in support, so they would never forget, how Got created humanity . . . And the “wise” spoke
and “Weiskunig’s” advisor spake to the folk of “Teur’—the great one, who spoke the Runo—
the word from Got, and announced when the run of terrestrial Got-man would be completed:
Yet to come are the 6th and 7th holy humanity...


And they returned together homeward to the eve of Got, to the Su(o)n, which is
eternal from Ur through Re to Ur, as the history of humanity proves! Got grant it!


251


Germania...


[from Hagal 11 (1934), Heft 7, p. 1]


Eldritch homeland of Germania

Now it is Northern ice...

So the young land of the South became ours
Co the honor and praise of Gotos . ..


We bore out of the Northern track
All ‘round the whole Earth

The Will of his Ur-Nature

In accord with his “creative band”...


He is “Matter” — He is “Spirit”

Moved by His “Energy,”

Eternally praising a creative circulation —
Enclosed as “Gotos-]” . ..


Even we are conscious of His Ego!
We bear through existence

The Will of His desire for creation
In the bright sun-shine! . . .


We are Germania! Full of Energy,
Self-aware of the “Will”:

It is He, who creates our essence,
As “Got” — in our breasts! .. .


252


Whispering of Gotos — Rune- Knowledge
by Jarl Widar


[from Hagal 11 (1934), Heft 7, pp. 7-15]


1. Knowledge of the Norns


Out of the Northern soil a strong tree rises up

With an etemally green crown, to the cloud-gate of Aithar”
Chat is the World-Ash — the World-CTree, Y gdtasil;

It is the Cree of Life, it holds much of Gotos’ wonder. . .

Three roots link its power to three well-springs

In the soil of its growth — which shapes the Northem essence.
The roots and the wells are subject to the Noms.

They are the sources of truth, the tree’s way of Being...


The first — Ur-da the Norn — flows from its generative Energy,
Germination without end in Gotos’ greater world.
The eternally young spring — of life’s deepest meaning:
The structure can be transformed,
but not the germination within!


The second, called Werd-An-Di —
Always flows forth from the present,
Which spiritually quickens Energy and Matter
acconding to Gotos’ Will. . .
She roars, rages and rushes — knows no rest or calm,
Develops, forms and fixes the drive to germination constantly
In the rhythm of steady Becoming —
unperturbed toward the goal:
So that — completed in Being — seed emerges from growth...


The Third flows forth in hiding —
and rules the power of the stars ...
What Urd-Werdandi create — is completed by ber!
She forms the Energy for change,
as conditioned by Spirit and Matter
And as the process of things compels by “Reed” and “Thorn”
And shelters and measures
with careful patience whatever is ripe.
And transforms all growth. She flows forth — the Norn Skuld!!


*Aithar is explained further below as “Ur-atter.”


253


Thus grows the essence of the North —
the Life-tree of the Spirit —
Nourished by spring and roots, in Gotos’ world-wide cosmos.
The eternal movement of Spivit in Matter
by means of Energy —
It is this which creates Life according to Gotos’ will.
It draws up Energy from Gotos’ womb by roots in the well
Becoming fruit from the Life-tree and new seed as well,
Until germination begins once more from seed,
And thus it is recollected in Gotos’ governance of the Norns ...


2. Gotos’ Eye — Draugh (:Rotating €ye:)


Who is unaware of this sign — the Triangle-€ye of God?


/
vk


Wende
(SKould )


St. = Stoff [matter] G. = Geist [spirit] K. = Kraft[energy]
Bewusst-Werden = “conscious-becoming” Bewusst-Sein = “conscious-existing”
Wende = “change, turning” [Regarding Garma, see footnote]


\ 1
‘ Re neem


a“


The Ancestors called it — short and sweet: Gotos’ Draugh . ..
Got-Spirit, Got-Energy, Got-Creation
C:also called the stuff of Life:)
They are — as points — firmly fixed in Gotos’ eye...
Spirit is the “point above,”
to the left Matter and to the right Energy.
As Spirit submerges to the depths
it is set free from the restraint of both!
“Life aware of Spivit,” mindful of Energy and Matter —
Is awakened to its Garma’ — ina circular pattern . ..
And becomes a child of Gotos, a Spirit in the son of man...


254


And thus Got himself is able to recognize —
Got-Spirit on the throne . ..
And by Gotos’ power
knowledge of the highest wisdom comes to him,
Who allows the Spirit of Gotos to govern his soul's essence .. .


Thus our ancestor — the hero Teut — also viewed Got,
He became knowledgeable of the Runes,
familiar with Gotos’ Draugh . ..
He learned that Got-Spirit
steadily brings change in a cyclical way,
When the cross sinks to the depths
between the poles of Energy and Matter...
He learned that “Spirit in Matter” powerfully awakens
From the dark of night with consciousness
at the cross-point in the cycle of the Spirit . . .
He learned that the soul — only conscious at the cross-point —
Is fully awakened to Life — and to its suffering and desires . . .


By means of the Runes — by Gotos’ original script —
he made known to us
How Got spoke in the cycle of creation — His creative speech!


The children of Teut piously cared for this light
And lived — as it pleased Got — in his presence. —
But there came times of trial; for the dark blood of the South
Spoiled pure customs, and derided Rune-lore . . .
The childven of Teut — spoiled, sick in body and soul,
Became the playthings of change,
which forced them to the depths .. .
In rhythmic events of the coursing of this world
Lives, however, the Will of Gotos,
who animates Matter with Energy .. .
Ancestral Energy still pounds in our Teutonic blood —
It commands us to struggle, to fight for our Rune-lore!
We do not want to be without our Ceutonic Rune-knowledge,
We want wisdom and knowledge — for our whole earth!
It shall again be proclaimed how Gotos’ creative power
Brought the wealth of ideas to the childven of Teut!
The Spirit of the eye of Gotos,
full of light and Energy, will then rest
Upon Gotos’ folk — the Teutonics — and upon their science!


255


3. Gotos’ Rule


From Ancient times our ancestors’ kind carried forth
Noble Rune-knowledge right up to the present time.
They did not question their suffering

through the course of bad times —
Chey simply stored up their knowledge for better times.
Thus Rune-lore rises up like a granite stone,
As a sign of Ceutonic troth right up to our day.
The world may also be surprised

as to how such a thing was possible —
Got works in the queatest as well as smallest things — wondrously
His Will must be victorious, HE is the Spirit of creation,
That victoriously shows the way to His forces.


Thus you should not be surprised:
Chere ave still some living mouths,
From which noble Rune-lore is received by word of mouth!


And Gotos’ Will proclaims: “Let there be light again!”
And Rune-lore is whispered from Gotos’ presence . . .
So ‘tis then heard,
what their mouth has to proclaim to the folk —:
“In the beginning was only Gotos! And Gotos became the deed!”
And Rune-lore is whispered from Gotos’ presence... :
It proclaims the Will of Gotos — “Let there be light again!”


4. Rune-Whispering . ..


Ur-Runes whisper, speak of the beginning of all time,
Of Gotos’ noble essence, of the passage of eternity.
Of the coursing of Got as Spirit, of Ur-Matter, Got as Energy,
How eternal transformation shapes the course of Life,
How Got-Energy permeates form with Spirit
in what comes to pass,
How coming to be, being, and passing
Always brings new germination —
A well-shelteved spark of becoming fixed in Matter
And thus time and measure acknowledge the light of creation . ..
And so develops the rhythm of Life by cause/effect
The cause once move rhythmically born as an effect —


256


And so hides creative rule in the Ryta-rule
And Spirit and Energy work as A soul aware of Matter...


Che past shapes clarity, opens us to perception.

The present experience determines the course of Garma.
Ur-Runes whisper, speak and advise all the time!

They also teach the future — the course of etemity! ...


5. Ancestral Knowledge


One more thing —

before the Runes proclaim Gotos’ deed to you —
Listen to the mouth of truth, listen to the Irmins’ counsel:
The Germanics never had “Gods” as they did in Rome!
They knew only “Gothari”™ and his realm of creation!
Of course, Gotos’ names are changed, as with “Got, the Lord”...
But Got remains always

the essential kernel of creation spiritually .. .
This noble knowledge of Gotos

was the treasure of the Germanics
And it also lived on in the clanic and ancestral cult.


Thus the pillar of every high-seat was decorated with the image
Of the one from whom the clan descended,

armed with spear and shield.
So on solemn festivities

the clan only brought symbolic sacrifices
To their ancestor depicted on the Stabur™
Even the sacrifice of enemies was only atonement for blood,
For the suffering of the clan

and harm to the people and their property.
And because such thinking

was unknown to the servant of Rome,
The ancestor was identified by them as a “Roman God";
In mockery, it might have been thought ...

but it was not considered,
That such a servant of idols is always a wicked wight...
The beast-men avenged themselves

and wrote lies of the silliest kind;
Now these serve as sources — as “treasures of learning”. . .
And ina pious fury of faith what was once recorded


257


As ancestral spiritual heritage was now destroyed,
Even Rune-lore itself, in these dark times,
Was considered “sorcery” and “heathen” by the pastors,
So it could not bear witness to the ways of our ancestors;
Only servants of Latin and Greek were considered “learned”. . .
Thus “humanism” drove out the light of the tradition
In the gove of the witch-craze with fire and stake.
This is how the oppressors invented “Gods” for us
And deprived us of our ancestral heritage’
and of Got, the Lord...
And foreign idols were, to our torment,
Placed upon the high-seat pillars in our ancestral halls.
Why even the graves of our ancestors were — outrageously —
Plundered and destroyed by these desecrators of corpses . ..
Thus was primordial knowledge — just as well as Rune-lore —
Taken into “high safekeeping”
passed on from mouth to mouth
And conserved as “secret knowledge”
by those belonging to loyal clans
For the better times coming in posterity ...
Thus need tums to virtue, for intelligence commands it:
For the preservation of our heritage — the Rune-lore of Teut.
And now shall resound once more — the “high master-word,”
Now shall we once more sing at every Teutonic place
Of our Fathers’ knowledge — of Gotos’ world of creation
Awd keep well-hid9en what is “whispered” of the Runes...


6. Runes Speak!


Once the “I” was born, a matter about which the lore is silent,
In humility even creation bows, full of devotion:
The primordial | of light, the lofty one, which as Gotos’ Spirit,
Directs the quidance of our thoughts

in the transformation of all things —
This ] — the incomprehensible, was named Got-Hati by Ceut
Chis rulership in creation and His eternity! .. .


To create the world out of “Nothing,”


Matter by primordial light-Cnergy
In truth — here the science of humanity can go no further . . .


258


No struggling and no thinking of the human brain comes close
To the creator of all existence. He was and is always there!
Our earthly sphere has borne four epochs of humanity,
Which “secret knowledge” tells us about the cosmos.
And this science only knows that Gotos’ light-filled Spirit
Eternally circulates as a stream of Energy in Matter —

in His body...


Now, in order to explain Gotos’ being to the Asa-children,
Ceut carved the Rune x in a soft stone;
And said: “The stones speak” of Gotos’ essence.
Out of “Nothing” they came to be — a being by Got’s decree ...
Upon this first sign, symbolically “1,” the same as “Is,”
Ceut constructed a language,
which was therefore called “Gothic”. . .
And the Rune says “Spirit-],” and “is” in northern land,
Thus this sign became known to all the people.


In primordial Matter, with a most mysterious Energy,
there eternally circulates
The Spirit-], that creates change in the germination of Life.
In order to “interpret” its meaning —
clearly that of primordial Matter,
Ceut chose the Rune — and called it Aithar.


It was often called “tel” by the Skopes' — and skalds,
Those transmitters of old wisdom

and the customs of our ancestors.
From these two Runes the symbol became clear to us:
Spivit-] is spiritual consciousness in Matter, in the Aithar ...
From this image of circulation the lofty sign of the cross a
Ascended in luminescence and was elected by “knowledge”
To be the symbol of eternal becoming in Gotos’ creative process
And to which henceforth were sung songs of praise on earth,
Glorification without end, as long as the world exists,
Until it — following Gotos’ Will — passes away in Aithar ...


Where Spirit is submerged in circulation in Aithar’s Matter


There thought is formed, which now directs its body ...
The body — formed in Matter — Spirit confined in form —


259


Bound to the cross-form now — the Rune “man” was named ...


Spirit-], thought — begins the course of Life,
Awakens “germination” with hands upraised in Matter.
The germinating hand thus lifted to the head.
Ceut gave the sign of giving — called the Rune “kaun”
The germ — the thought of light — now resting in Datter,
It now struggles for its essence and becomes a glowing fire .. .
Kindled these flames — into a fire, light of creation
Thus that Rune was called the Rune “fa”
Germination had already split the “I” into Matter and Spirit,
Circulating in the workings of creation

without beginning or end. . .
Despite discord there was unity — therefore by a wise hand


The Rune was called “ans” or “asa” — the “knowing one”. ..


Knowledge of discord — only this alone
Provides a wealth of thoughts, “Being” rich in perception.


Out of the “fire” Becoming perceived “creative Being” —
This lofty Rune-sign — it was called “os.”
Being in creative primordial Matter,

formed from the Energy of germination
It is that, which creates the soul in Gotos’ mutations . . .
“Nothing” — and yet primordial Matter,

its cycle permeated by the glow of Energy,
The material Being of Spivit, the Life-Rune “eis”. . .


Germination in “unity” — the creative Energy of Got —


Creates a living compulsion for change. —
It is the Rune “not”?. ..


260


Matter — borne by Spirit — brings forth “knowledge.”


Knowledge and ability! — It’s the Rune “Tor”...
Matter descends to Spirit, changing forever and ever,


It becomes the cyclical victory — that is the Rune “tyr”. . .


Spirit — borne by Matter, engages the workings of gemination,


Generates eternal Life —
the Rune of primordial Energy “laf”...


Che rhythmic working of energies —
Asong of the generation of primordial fire —
Is the fluctuation of Life, “Is-sig-sal”-rune “rit”. . .


The force of change in Matter, life’s well-spring of death,
It is the Rune of generation — the wonder-rune “thorn”. . .


Being induces its workings three ways in the course of nature:


Coming, being, and passing away as the trifos-rune “ur”. . .


In the Al Gotos’ five of Spirit in Matter demonstrates —
Through Energy the “sig-sal-sol-sun-rune,”
and mastery of creation ...


Demoniacally inverted it appears to us as Zil,"
As zig and zag — this ends the game of life in vest...


But one is in the bow upside-down — a child of change —
The Rune “yr,” the sign that we are transient . . .


Thus “man” united with “yr” — becomes a high master-word:


“Hag-Al” — the cross-rune, knowledge-hoard of wisdom . . .


Hail-sign! Never written! The letter-rune “h”


Was used in its stead, whosoever was aware of its “speaking”. . .


Pietvis-mannus myth reveals our]...
Thus “man” bound to “yr,”
then the “Wend-hom”? is proclaimed. . .


261


r


—~ = * - Za FTFFen


Cibsal = Gabal — from night to light,
the Gotos’ eye does not hide


Y” AD


In his “Hagal”-Rule. There where the creator speaks “Cruth,”


Lies and deceit must freeze... !


The original law of balance
holds the zodiacal Cyr-circulation captive


The “Araryta” carries Being justly and without lament


Thus all the Runes, which are otherwise called “mutes,”


Speak as carriers from the “original-world-Matter,”
masking themselves in “Nothing.”


From three-times-three arose the world
which Gotos laid over “Nothing”


As a “point” in Aithar’s circle: The “Unnameable, Wise-one”!,


Cibsal-Gabal encompasses Hagal
and becomes oviginal-“conscience”


Commands and gives all salvation,
encompasses “universal knowledge”. . .
The Rune “tel” is receptive,
directed by “Energy and Matter”...
The diagonal Rune “bar” — it carries,
is classed with “change”
The “balk” must conceal and hide,
it's the pliable support


“Rod” speaks of “Life-Death,” as if it were nothing . ..


The significance of the three crosses
on the three green bills is highly mystical


They must “turn”-around the misery of Kala,
hold original-knowledge kalically . . .


And from the houses of free farmers
we are greeted by crossed “bar” and “balk”


262


YO «x
1" 4
om 5)
ov
<P


t+
x 10)


So this teaches us:
Germanic land can never sink into corruption!
We always carry the Spirit and world of Gotos over every land
And Energy-Matter are ina fixed bond,
animated by His Energy
And in this way only carry Gotos’ soul upon His world
They ave only bending to His Will upon its star-waves ...


The Quadrads.


And Ur-da spoke again: The many quadrads (five) (light)
Are a charming play of eternal Life. . . Ba &)
They carry carry the fire — they carry the light
Chey know, what the Earth —

what the Water says (€.) +X, (W.) &


Four signs! They bear very deep meaning
AA,;,VYV


Of hidden working inside the triangle . . .

The testimony of lunar images Ooeo
in the phases of the night — Ooooe

They show the holy power of the quadrads .. .


Chey whisper of Life — of coming and going,
Concealed, half hidden, birth and beginning... ©, B, @, ©


Of the sign of the “hoven” of fyruedal, >), ¥,

Of “sibbala — fyrbok,” ina silent number, <C, -<€.

OF Vb" — yew-bow, of the strange “Ve” AN. A

Of the “Sem”- and “Man”-sign purely in the lunar phases... VU,Y


In the Iring as in Wan — in the twofold Ing — Sed, 25
Gwo quadrads they are, and yet not limited! ‘

As Yrman as Yrmin, the spiraling horn full of Energy — if A
Brings us to completion with “Ingo” and “Ingso”. . . Vv
Other quadrads | arrange with “is” and with “bar,” , 7,

With “balk” and with “tel,” clear to all who “know”... \, —
And conclude the “signs” with “ask” and “vitri,”, 4,

With “karal” and “sal” — the “Harmony of the World!” T, 1
Thou inquiring Skope — understand Being,

“Silence” too always contains much knowledge . . .


263


Odhin’s* Rune-Song’


143. Runes will you find and staves of counsel
Very strong staves, very powerful staves.
The primeval speaker conceived them,
the great gods performed them.
Odin carved them, the most exalted of the rulers.


144. Odin among the Ases, Dainn among the elves
Doalin among the dwarves, Alsvidr among the giants.
] cut some myself.


145. Do you know how to carve? Do you know how to advise?
Do you know how to find? Do you know how to ask?
Do you know their value in prayer and sacrifice?
Do you know how they are to be sent and restrained again?


146. Better unasked than too much of sacrifice.
In this an eye always looks for a reward,
Better to send nothing than to have to restrain it later.
Thus Thundr carved before the inception of peoples,
Before he vanished, back to where he came from.


Then there follows in 18 strophes the characteristics of the 18
tunes in a particular over which served as a basis for how the skalds
constructed their numerical calculations. Then the song concludes
with a meaningful promise of salvation:


165. Now the sayings of the high-one ave said
In the hall of the high one
Useful to the sons of earth,
not useful to the (matter-bound) sons of the giants.
Blessed be the speaker, blessed be he who knows them.
Blessed he who learned them,
Blessed all those who hear them.


If even in these verses, the high-one, the original creator, is con-
cealing himself behind various names which are elsewhere — ¢g., in
the “Song of Fire-magic” of the €dda (“GrimnismAl”) — indicated
as names of Odbin, then all of these names should be understood as


264


circumlocutions for the characteristics and functions of the One,
which itself remains unnameable and inscrutable.

Nevertheless an attempt should be made to give some kind of
methodical instruction concerning the names, which also once again
form special code-words:


Hroptr: Derived from chrop, body (Latin corpus), also called
Hropta-Cyr, indicates the creator of corporeality by means of calling
out the word of creation. (This is not indicated in the translation.)


Thunder: According to the rules of the sound-shift' this might
be thought to be translated by Cinder? as the destroyer of life-forms
by fire and death. also among the Finns Tuonmali indicates the realm
of the dead.


Dainn, the rune-master of the elves in the realm of souls, could
indicate the one who generates (Dorn) the inner (inn) unified con-
sciousness (AS).


Dvalin among the dwarves, ic. Soubles and twiners, connects
bodily and spiritual being, as the name dwarf (tvergar) actually
means “belonging to two realms.”


Alsvidr, All-knowing, All-wit/Alviss is elsewhere known as a


dwarf-name which migrated to Spain along with the Goths and
returned to Bavaria as the saintly name Alois.


265


Che Creative Spiral of the “World-fgq"!


Primal law: “Above as below, below as above!” Therefore in the middle there is a
neutral force- (i.e. generational-) field! Spirals are apparently “contrary” to each other in their
rotations and despite this, form—connected at their longitudinal ends—a “unity” from an
oppositional “dyad, duality...”


© ©


From the two spirals, each triply wound and connected by the generational plane (the
middle-field), is developed the form of the two-ended pointed egg—the concept of the
“World-Egg.” (See the images of Christ in the Goldbach chapel and the altar in the church at
Oberzell.) Both points are connected by an axis which forms the is-rune or the number ans
[one], while the egg-shell forms the unity of the two halves of the spiral—so from two comes
one (ans). As long as the spiral (snail-shell form) is being “built” it is unstable in its own
duality. It becomes stable as soon as the two spirals form the “World-Egg” upon unification at
the middle surface—this is the completion of the process of “turning into ans (one).” In nature
this process can be observed precisely in a “wedding” between two snails. However, since
this “unification of Two into One” only occurs periodically at mating times it can be
convincingly seen that the concept of “eternal generation” by means of division of the
“World-Egg” is present in the technical aspects of this creative process, and there is only a
harmonious union as One/ans on certain occasions so that the “vital drive” is preserved in the
“whole.”


266


We observe the same process, which is demonstrated here by the snail whose shells
are to be found in massive deposits in all primeval limestone formations of our earth, and we
see this same process in the Al (cosmos) in the form of “spiral galaxies” . . . therefore:


CREATIVE PRINCIPLE:

Spiritual direction in Matter through Energy!
CREATIVE INFERENCE:

Eternal generation, and thus eternal Life and through this an eternal circulation,
through constant “turning” of Life-forms in Matter is implied—from cause comes effect and
from this the new cause is formed. From this ensues the law of the conservation of Energy,
which again implies the “material circulatory transformation”—that is, the concept of “eternal


Life.”


FURTHER INFERENCES:


267


Both of the spirals of the “World-Egg” therefore possess two poles. In turning
(rotation) these poles are connected as an axis. These are the poles—‘‘Above—Below,”
“Below—Above”—which are the World-Axis. Both spirals are therefore in absolute balance
within the “World-Egg” and so relative “inactivity itself.”


QUESTION:


What is the compelling reason for the rotation of the “cosmic bodies”? From
terrestrial life we recognize the aim in the two spirals: “eternal generation.” And Got-
spirituality?


CONCLUSIONS:


1. “Dying” is therefore a half-completion. Question:
Where is the second part of the “spiral’’?


2. The two poles of the spirals are the two “ends”

(Above—Below, Below—Above) of the central axis. Which is

the beginning, and which is the end?

3. A magnetic needle and the axis of the earth prove

the earth is a self-contained “‘world-existence.” Why does

the earth rotate to the East, to the sun-rise? A cosmic question which remains open!


4. I recognize that in the “‘spiral-unity” the “dyad”
(duality) becomes a “unity” in humanity through “man and woman.”


Man “giving” and therefore “Above,” woman taking him, therefore receiving and so
“Below.” And by means of this “unification to unity” (World-Egg) in generation . . . Is, ans
both an axis. This is the human being. And the earth as the World-Egg in the cosmos?


Answer: Whether human—whether earth—force is completed by means of the two spirals—
an opposition in Matter as the cosmically applied quantum “Spirit” (Got) contains both spirals
as ans, “unity,” World-Egg. The balancing (generational) plane—is the equal two pole-points
for the Spirit-(Got-)force (electrical

energy), which we indicate on a “magnetic needle” with +

and—.


This “generational plane” is therefore a “true creational plane,” it is material from
the Al, for us as humans this is
the earth in its present form.


5. Are we humans answerable to “Got the Al” as the presumed temporal “highest forms of
intelligence on this
earth’?


Answer: “Yes!” Because our Mother Erda suffers when we act contrary to His creative will!
We are moreover Nordic, i.e., polarized from above. We—as Got-seed—impregnate “Erda”
according to the Will of Got. . . From this grew “fem”—law, right . . .


6. Two spirals, as the figure at the beginning of the article shows, each turning contrary to the
other and when they are put together develop into ans, with the same “turning”. . . Therefore
two electric (Got-force) currents, flowing into one another generate according to the length of
their waves in the neutral central (magnetic) field! SchickSal 1 turning, transformation, new


268


germination, Got-Spirit,eternal Life through Got-force, eternal youth in eternal circulation!
This is generation—Got itself!


7. Three “turnings” from “Above.”Three “turnings” from “Below”; between them the “middle”
equals seven! The “neutral” and, of course, generational field itself. What a depth and height
is in this “spiraling number”. . .


8. The “self-contained double spiral,” which becomes the creative egg, the “unending eight,”
the eternal motion, the Got-concept Al itself—therefore the “high, secret eight,” the self-
contained original knowledge.


9. Completion is “Below,” the projection of the unity of the self-contained whole—the “Egg
of the World,” or of “Creation.” Below is the turning of Spirit-Energy-Matter in the Al in
accordance with the three-fold possibilities of form by means of its tri-unity. For “Below”
again becomes “Above” and back again . . . So this is “completion” in eternal circulation,
which is Got itself.


10. “Nothing”—out of which the Will of Got-Al inexhaustibly renews itself in the concept of
“turning transformation.” Immortal in Itself like the World-Egg, through the unending
spiraling time, space and mass, Self contained as the human mind is able to conceive of it,
since we are only an “Aethar-Atom” of His Spirit-Energy-Matter.


Original Our Father


[handwritten document, dated 1934]


Vatar unsar der Du bist der Aithar
Gibor ist Hagal des Aithars und der Irda!

Gib uns Deinen Geist und Deine Kraft in Stoffe
Und frome unsere Skould also gleich dem Werdandi.
Dein Geist sei unser auch in Urd
Von Ewigkeit zu Ewigheit—Om! (: Amen:)


Our Father who art the Aithar
Gibor is the hagal of Aithar and of Earth!
Give us Thy Spirit and Thy power in Matter
And from our Skould in harmony with Werdandi.
Thy Spirit be ours also in Urd
From eternity to eternity—Om! (:Amen:)


269


jodiacal Sign{ and Conftellation{


There is a difference between the twelve zodiacal [Tyr Kreis] signs and the twelve
constellations of the ecliptic. The twelve zodiacal signs are invisible! They are measurements
of an arc. They are arrived at when the zodiac—assuming the beginning of spring as the point
of division of the year—is divided into twelve zones of equal size, which results in zones of
30° each! The “face” of every “clock” even bears witness to the zodiac . . . of course, the
number “12” comes exactly in the middle and so “Aries” begins at exactly 15° between the
numbers 12 and 1, i.e., it is located at the first zone. For now we will not get into the reason
for this. In the most ancient times—most probably in the Atlantean cultural epoch—each of
these zones of 30° had a very precise meaning as understood by Astrology (:Star Logic:). As a
result of the precession of the equinox the point for the beginning of Spring migrates from one
zodiacal sign to another every 160 years, and in this way the zodiacal constellation gets
completely out of the zodiacal sign of the same name. The zodiacal constellations remain
immutable in the firmament. The zodiacal signs migrate and thus determine the cosmic ages
(Taurean Age, Arian Age, Piscean Age, etc.). And since at the present moment the beginning
of the zodiac is between the constellations of Pisces and Aquarius, the zodiacal sign Aries is
therefore superimposed over the constellation of Pisces. The sign of Aries remains, however,
0-30°. We recognize that the “face” of every clock* with its 12 numerals has a certain
meaning which most people can’t even imagine. These 12 numerals, each with its special
meaning, are also at the same time the indicators of the oldest written signs of the primordial
history [Ur-Geschichte] of humanity.


The Chaldeans and Hebrews (Kabbalah) as well as the ancient Egyptians and
Chinese possess these special “writing symbols,” which have great similarity with those of the
Toltecs and Aztecs. And not only these written signs, but also the special signs for the zodiac
are almost identical! If we take a look at the latter we will find these two among the
decorative images in Germanic cultural history and can include the old Germanic written
signs—the Runes—tright along side of the linguistic groups already mentioned, whereupon we
will find that these Runes are bewilderingly similar to these other written signs—and yet they
are different: why? Because they are the original script of Aryan humanity and at the same
time have to be the original script of the Atlantean culture. In Atlantean times, then, these
original Aryan Runes had a deep meaning by virtue of their logical ordering in the zodiacal
signs, which was apparently lost as soon as their meaning was changed in an astrologically
illogical way as a result of the variation brought on by the precession of the equinoxes. From
this presentation it is also clear that the runic writing signs have the cosmic vision of our
primeval ancestors to thank for their origin—as was already set forth in the July and August
1934 issues of Hagal. So it was only after the demise of the Atlantean cultural epoch that the
zodiacal signs and their written signs were transferred to the constellations of the elliptic. This
caused that confusion of knowledge between the processes in the great solar year and those of
a terrestrial year. This confusion is still fundamentally in operation today. But with this
knowledge the oldest cultural documents known to us can be measured and viewed not from
the perspective of terrestrial years, but rather solar ones—these can lead us to correct
knowledge of the ages. Ought not a KEY also be discovered here whereby an attempt might
be made for given points in time to adjust not only the great computations for the solar year,
but also the purposeful cultic language and all its expressions, in accordance with current
requirements? (Linguistic confusion.) A comparative study of all the old languages and
especially their linguistic roots must certainly be able to provide information about this!


Apparently we would have to bring ourselves to turn our attention to Astrology
which is needed as a key to many puzzles, and this is in order to verify how and in what way


270


astronomical knowledge came to us out of the most distant antiquity and what documents
concerning this knowledge our forefathers possessed. For it is obvious to speculate that by
this means we may gain access to knowledge about our ancestors which even in their times
could not have been foreseen!


Finally, in order to pave the way for the possibility of comparison, those Rune-rows


are herewith presented as they are revealed to us by the “talking head,” as soon as it is
understood how to loosen its tongue.


Wid-Ar YY IR (imir!) Star UW ‘h¥
Thuo-is IL x*t Ker-abe $5 UNY


Aom 9) Ah Saga Mh ‘hb
2


Forsat +W Niord Mh IA
Widi (Wili)  +T Ulr Yo 44
Friar a Xb Fa-isk He OF


Since in my opinion, with linguistic comparison of this kind, the various meanings
from the ancient period would most probably have corresponded to the zodiacal sign for the
purpose of matching them up to the current precession relationships—such an effort would be
extremely interesting! Certainly every kind of rune may not be used for such comparative
purposes, but only the so-called Ur-Aryan (Gothic) ones.


271


Kalic Solution to an Inscription
in the Church at Bergkirchen
near Wittekindsberg


by Jarl Widar


[from Hagal 12 (1935), Heft 7, pp. 98-100]


ERWEG HIERIA WOL MEIN
LIEBER CHRIST
WOZU DIS HAVS ERBAVET IST.


TRANSLATED INTO RUNES


RFt'h : KIR4 : Fdd : t+
rIBR : FR-AT
FArnN : b-H ¢ KANK : RBANT : ht.


THAT MEANS:


Ryta fyr eis gibor!

Hag-al is ryta is asa!

Fyr os laf myn eis is not!

Laf is halga-ryta: kaun ryt is suntyr!
Fa os kaun ur!

Thor is sun!

Hag-al asa ur sun!

Ryt barbar (bi6rk-bar) asa ur thor!
Ts sun tyr!


TRANSLATED INTO MODERN ENGLISH:


Rhythmic fire of material being is holy!
Preserve the All-I, rhythm


272


The fire of spiritual-being is Life, my material-I
holds Need!

The Life of the spiritual-I is hallowed rhythm:
Germination makes the “I” rhythmic by
circulating light!

Fiery Being is germination
in the primeval state
Thor’s being is light!

Preserve the Al of the Usa-Ur-light!
Rhythm holds spiritual Life through spiritual Life
in the Asa-Ur : Thor!

Light-“T” is light-circulation!


273


Hlaiden{chaft in the Dre-fjiftoric
firyo-bermanic fige


The institution of girls’ schools developed out of the extremely ancient
“Modranekht.” Since ancient times both sexes have struggled for superiority. In every place
where the Aryans—or their descendants of the same blood, the Germanic folk—established
political states, women have at once emerged as leaders as soon as the men were wiped out in
the enormous struggles for the possession of land, and so women had to take over leadership
of their tribes. Since the Atlantean Age this battle of the sexes has been distinctly
recognizable and from those times the equality of women in the struggle for the survival of
the Germanic peoples was crystallized in their culture. It was only when men were in the
minority, due to their continual struggle—sometimes on the water (Vikings), sometimes on
land—that women would lead the state. This is known to us right up to the historical periods
in the ancient world. Actual political states led by women existed, like the Amazon empire in
the south, only on a temporary basis in peace-time and were never very long-lasting. In hand-
to-hand combat they were simply not capable of physically withstanding the attacking male
troops of the neighboring peoples. So such women-led realms were always relatively quickly
destroyed after a short existence. The Aryo-Germanic tribes nevertheless recognized the
necessity of granting women their due equal social rights, because ultimately the fate of the
women was deeply connected to that of the men in the struggle for survival among the Aryo-
Germanic states which were just then forming. In this way Germanic Maidentum was
developed along with its schools as we are able to find them in history until the arrival of the
predominance of Christianity in our homeland. Their origins and lines of development can
still be ascertained today as soon as the perspective of the investigation is refined in this
respect.


Throughout the whole of Aryo-Germanic history, from the time of the Atlantean
culture until the predominance of Christianity, there was only one idea which was
authoritative for all decisions of the counsels, whether male or female—and that was the
preservation of the purity of one’s own race! Concepts such as inbreeding and incest, as
Christendom developed them, were not yet present at this time. Because it had its origins in
southern lands, Christianity was certainly justified in the establishment of these concepts, but
it disastrously interfered in the history of the Nordic peoples with a misunderstanding of the
latter’s racial characteristics, as it imposed its concepts on them as leitmotifs. The highest
principle of all Nordic people was always the preservation of the purity of their blood. This is
quite clearly proven by customs from the pre-Christian past which were characteristic of all
Aryo-Germanic folk. For example, in order to guarantee the highest racial purity and excellent
characteristics of certain leading clans, such as those of the Ase- and Wane-families, marriage
between members of their clans was directly prescribed. In particular women were subjected
to a special test in connection with their racial purity. This test culminated in the examination
and testing of all organs important for procreation by specially qualified healers (both male
and female) before the women were allowed to enter into marriage with racially pure men.
The position and inner condition of these organs as well as the form of the clitoris was
thought to be especially important. So, for example, it came about that virgins who were
chosen as BURGMAIDENS had to conform to special conditions. Of these chosen ones, it
was preferred to take those who showed traces of hermaphroditism, in order on the one hand
to ensure the limitation of their sexual activity, and on the other hand to prevent them from
generating descendants. The organization of this corps of burgmaidens (Berg-Maidenschaft,
whereby “berg” means “the concealed”) clearly indicates clues in this direction when we look


274


at its construction. The corps of maidens was organized in four groups, which are: The lowest
group, the HEXAS [witches], had as their duty the care and preservation of the eternal flame
and its kindling for purposes of signaling (by day with smoke, by night with a bright flame).
Fire was fetched from these women as a part of certain ceremonies or ritual customs (Ara-
Ryta) for the lighting the hearth-fire of newly married couples. As a part of land-taking or
new settlement ceremonies, or when perhaps the hearth-fire had gone out, fire was kindled
from live coals from these eternal fires. The Hexas were initiated into herbology and the arts
of animal-healing and served as animal-healers in some tribes and communities in addition to
their service relevant to the fire. The DRUDAS, however, provided service as “Wise Women.”
They were counselors (in all affairs having to do with love and marriage) and midwives.
Additionally, they provided service as healers of human beings. To this belonged not only
knowledge of surgery, but also knowledge of herbs with the power to heal the human body.
Therefore they had to have a considerable amount of knowledge about herbs at their disposal.
Those belonging to the third group, the WALAS, not only had to possess the knowledge of
the previous two groups, but were also in charge of the Maidenschaft which was self-
contained and lived separate from all other tribes. Additionally, they had the assignment of
being counselors in all sorts of matters having to do with the well-being or suffering of the
whole tribe. For this reason they had to have at their disposal meaningful historical data about
the tribe and its individual clans, and had to know their characteristics by reason of this
knowledge precisely. From this they drew logical conclusions as to how the tribe was to act in
certain important events. Therefore from a knowledge of the history of the characteristics of
the clans and a knowledge of the past of the tribe the concept of prophecy [Hell-sehen] as well
as necromancy [Hel-sehen ] was developed. It is therefore erroneous to believe that a kind of
“sorcery” was connected to these concepts. Pure concrete knowledge of the past as well as a
clear perception of the present situation led to the correct conclusion as to how it was
necessary for the clan or tribe to act. Because women have an innately clear vision relating to
what is important in life, the Walas very often saved heatedly agitated men from
disadvantageous actions by means of emergency decisions.


Finally, the ALBRUNAS, as the highest group of the Maidenschaft, were, like the
Walas, counselors—however, they acted as such for the entire folk. The position of Albruna
was naturally very desired. So only those women who possessed especially excellent spiritual
qualities were called upon for this from within the ranks of the Maidenschaft. From this
presentation of the basic division of the Maidenschaft it is clear what a deep meaning the
position of women had in past times. In the clan she was the protector and director of the
honor of men as well as women. In the tribe she was the representative of high idealistic
flights of thought and the kindler of enthusiasm for great aims in the interest of the tribe and
folk.


In prehistoric times no trace of concepts such as original sin, or doubts as to whether
women too had souls, was ever present in women of Aryo-Germanic blood. Closely
connected to the cosmos, to the All and to God, and reflecting the rhythmic laws of these in
her soul, she was the bearer of the whole of our tradition in our prehistoric past. It was with
this understanding that the education of the female youth was designed. Basic to this was
knowledge concerning the meaning of all the runic symbols, symbols which had their origin
in the interconnections between cosmic and earthly life and which therefore formed a guide in
the schools. Only after the inherited writing symbols were taken from our folk by means of a
ban on runology and thus reading, writing and reckoning with Runes was banned, was the
folk robbed of its ancient cultural property and made helpless and poor in spirit. Out of these
schools for maidens the female cloister life in Christianity was subsequently developed.
Usually, this was naturally developed in locations where the heathens had previously had their
places of education. Monasteries too followed from the old schools of healers and were
further developed in locations where they had been established.


275


So in a certain sense Christianity renewed the ideas of these old schools, but changed
them to serve the aims of their objectives. Certainly women had to fight for the recognition of
their very souls right up into the Middle Ages. The idea of original sin oppresses women even
today and therefore among our contemporaries we obviously face the misunderstanding of the
laws of eternal generation, of the rhythm of blossoming, being and passing away —on the
way through the transformation called death—in order to enter into the unending circulation
of the eternal rhythm of creation which the cosmos and the All kindly share out to all living
beings. The discussions presented here show in broad outlines the position of women in
prehistoric times. Many basic details could not be mentioned due to a shortage of space. But
nevertheless it can be seen from these discussions that the destiny of our folk was decided by
the natural sensitivity of women and their inner fusion with the cosmos. For this reason
woman will always have to be present—at least among our German folk—to rebel against
coercive conceptions such as original sin, because they do not conform to the laws of
primeval rhythm and probably could only come about wherever a strong base-line, rooted in
the blood, is missing due to extensive race-mixing. It is then that strict external measures of
the priesthood become necessary in order to restrain the beast in man to some extent.


276


The Aalgarita Charm


These mantra-like verbal charms have been gleaned from the archival material left
behind by Wiligut. They were meant to be used as ritual chants to awaken ancestral memory
and facilitate the breakthrough of the wisdom of the Irminist faith. In many respects they defy
translation or comprehensive interpretation. This is how they were no doubt intended. The
language of the sayings is a mixture of modern German (with dialectic variants and
orthographical oddities), Old High German, Old Norse, Gothic (and Gothic grammatical
features), and words and phrases in the special language created by Guido von List, along
with a variety of words from other languages.


1. KALAOS OF THE CHALDEANS


kalao albrune
kala kosme
kala gotai
kala utai


13.BOSO CARVED RUNES
Boso fraete (wraete) Runa


23. THIAZZI CHARM


Thiazzi kargai megog maya,
Runa gotai magog Suna.


24. ORIGIN OF THE CELTS


Kalai keltai uréd mai
Kalai gotai ritur sun
Kalai noreland ritai got
Kalai kymri wendai not


25. COSMIC ALCHEMY
Sal a Sal
laf a laf
wigun fyrmal


26. BRENNUS CHARM


Brennus tre, Brennus notri
Brennus gothai, Brennus mortri.


27. SANTUR CHARM


277


Sunur saga santur tvo
Sintyr peri fuir sprueh
Wiligoti haga tharn
Halga fuir santur tvo


28. HARZ CHARM


Harai sunwendt
Haray sunhel
Salang sun
Harai Brokund
Baltarai wundt.


36. GOTAI CHARM


Gotai Gotis
Gotayr Gotais
Gotos Godis
Godais Gotiis


41. FIRE CHARM


Fenriis fuiro frause sunai5
Trii fyrai sana ans
zwo tri fyr zena
Niull fana niull ans


44. Wiligotos Charm


Sulefad saga salrfut tatr

Wotara fuirt Wiligotos

Wetari flotr sulefad utr
Wiligotis salfar salefat lar


47. BOSO’S DESCENDANTS


Boso fraete Runa Ata, Runatal tat’r Odhinns Boso,
Mata Maya fraete Mani, Flodai fraete tithar Grodo.


54. CREATION OF LIGHT


ok hele sprukh ta ara sun

lukh aukh un aukh bem Asasun
sao fuyr ter Salang lauff sayn baan

sayn lewen umb ten Sun Ara an

sao funkt daromb tar sayn korun

Gothara stat up ten nayen Sun
ti zwiehet wart-te Hele-fraw

nun lekth gullimborsti up te saw

ter zwiespalt stat ti zwietraekht prun


278


Ays Hele waikt Gothar te Sun!
60. TEUT-BLESSING


Taito runai asa tait
Gibor stanar wendai ur
Teutopurgai sunwendstan
Gibor runai godai tait


66. KYMBRIC CHARM


Kymbra monti hailloh sun
Kymbra talai hailloh urdh


68. WAY TO THE MOTHERS


Maya faeki kloig, Kat ar sunur fraeg,
Kat ar Mani Sunur, Mani kat ar pertisur
Maya faeki kloig


77, HAILAND CHARM


Hailand hagelaind heliand
Helisuntei helisprant


79. GOTHARI CHARM


Helli krotti Gothari!
Ilp oks un oksen Arahari
Wiligoti ok Kelta!
Un spranga Ur
Un ganga Ur
Sun leif Gothari!


127. TYR-SAL-ANGE CHARM


Tyr sal ange, sal lange fyr,
Hueb i bar bjork uroad fuir


142. MERSEBURG CHARM


Phal ende Wodan
vuoren zi holza
da wart demo Balders
volen sin vuos birenkit
thu biguolen sinthgunt
sunna era suistir
thu biguolen Frua
volla era suistir
thu biguolen Wodan
so he wola conda
sose benrenki
sose bluotrenki
sose lidvrenki


279


ben zi bena
bluot zi bluoda
lid zi geliden
sose gelimida sin


179. EYLIMI CHARM


Eylimi — ai li mi
leka far
jarimi ia mi
lejka jar


218. WILIGOTO CHARM


Ur fruese Ru
Wiligoto sal ange laf
Sun wendai wilistan

Gotharai logoi (loko1) straf


281. MATARA FYRSTAN CHARM


Matara fyrstan asa Far
Arvana salur ogoi
Fyrkata salur Matharar
Arvana satur logoi


410. MANI PATME SUM13


O mani patme sum
Alfatur14 og helium


418. WOTANISM CHARM
Wotara tot gotari war,
Gothari shyn gotara sun


Uilgothos sprunk giboraltar
Uilgothis sun gotseben brun.


718. FRANCO-CELTIC CHARM
Sunai suni sunawendt
Halgaryta asasun
Suni sunai lokestan
Ghibi hribar gordifan
1012. GOTHIC-KYMBRIAN RUNE-BLESSING


asta kembra kymbraie
taraisk thursai gotaie


280


1111.


1119.


1211.


1218.


1222.


1319.


1818.


1913.


6119.


MAYA WYNELANDIS CHARM


Saleafad treaugt selafot watr
Selafat sunr salefut matr


TATVA CHARM


Flodo urai saexai ans,
Sunai, manai, maja, lans,
Irdai, jupon, kak, elans.


FEMBLUEM CHARM


Fembluem rudt lant ten true,
tue esse tue gege,
Femlant ruotrikht ten wurt
sein true hant sein true ukort


SAXO RUNA TATR
torasa sun tyr asator
Guothora slang storasa ruol
KYMBRI AND TEUTONES CHARM


Tirus Turis Taros Tyr
Zenas Zonis Ziuos Vyr


BALDUR CHARM
Baldur Baltar Belial
Salur (n) Uiligot sunas Baal
Sunfuir fyrsal
Paradair galata
CRUCIFIED SERPENT


gekruiste slang, gekruiste hant
Gothari ger, Gothara lant.


GOTHIC BALDUR CHARM


Pruntur prantai Brennus ans,
Brontax braida Wilis ans.


KING FRODE’S MARRIAGE-LAW


Kunig Frode salaf al fena
Fridleif sun ai jotunlant
Pruk tuo Frauja Fenja Menja
Gull ajd bluet Walkyrja stant
Grotto lued ai Frodi fluekh


281


Grotto lued ai Frodi spruekh
HERALDIC CHARM OF THE WISE-KING


Treve Korune, treve Pergh
treve Asa, treve Zwergh
treve Jétun, treve Mar
Aes treve Weis Kunig
trev Lew, rout Ar.


BAPHOMET CHARM


Draugs godiu obi
Adlar obi Dreaugs
Bafomatli sun Lew ans
Sun luecht Bafomatli dvo


Gotof-Fialanda


Wiligut prepared and privately published the Gotos Kalanda in a tasteful booklet
format and distributed it to a small circle of friends at Christmas, 1937. This rare artifact is not
typically included in the bibliography of Wiligut’s published ouvre. It does, however, deserve


attention when considering his work as a whole.


282


HARTUNG (January)


Love is in Creation’s reign,
His law in all Being

It is by Got for us selected
His Creation’s well-seasoned wine...

May it as ever begin anew
The measure of man, the yearly cycle,

Love knows no sense of restraint
It is of Got his song of praise!


HORNUNG (February)


The moon’s night most secret weaving
Love without space and time
Got sank His life into you,
And with it immortality!
Why make haste to kiss
When the moon’s crescent rests?
Even if all must die,
Love has always conquered anew!


LENZING (March)


Youth calls the strong urges
Spring, when it embraces itself,
And eternally young Love
Presses, pounding, into the souls
When the soul’s Gotos Faith:
Love, reaches for the stars
And Love, like the dove,
Roves through the aether’s blue.
Love, Love, alas only Love
Breathes field and forest and meadow
It knows in such a creative urge
Only Got in his greatness!


OSTERMOND (April)


May you all be fooled by many Gods
He who, in Love, trusts in Got,
Can hold out through all storms,
For Love is the bride.

True Love endures,
Whatever the weather may be.
And only he is volatile,

Who delays the fair month of May...


WONNEMOND (May)


May’s blooming May’s fount
Wonders of this eternity


283


Light of all the world’s suns
And full of Gotos’ bliss
And not even the highest knowledge
No wondrous songs
Can miss May’s blooming,

The sun’s gold of this creation!
With the strong arms of procreation
Around woman’s slender body,

Full of the glow, the warmth of life,
They find themselves there, man and wife
Twofold unites itself the will of creation,
Spatially beautiful united into One,
As only Got can still the flames,
That joined together in the flood...
May’s beauty May’s becoming
What is time and what is space?

The Will of Gotos here on Earth
Remains mankind’s most lovely dream...


BRACHMOND (June)


June poses the anxious question: Love!
Wonder-Gotos, Being Timidly stirs the lament:
Are you eternal? Are you mine?

And a wonderful stirring
Creation’s holy deeds do feel
The spirit of Gotos in strength and blessing
Must rest in high knowledge...


HEUMOND (July)


In creation, desire glows
Wondrous and full of consolation...
How should fulfillment come
From worried tears of Love?
Becoming is what the Al called itself
Beginning here in eternity
Eternally it burns, as it has always burnt:
Man’s lot calls it space and time.


ERNTING (August)


August-os, cleverest of all moons
That now reveals the thorns
O now you know, what was not worthwhile
What the Love does not fulfill!

Hot light glows amid the aether
Everywhere in the Al, in Being,
Man’s lot, sooner or later,

Always adapts to the cycle.

What are the frightened dreams of man,
Life’s fire and blessedness?:

They are only bits of foam from Gotos’ Sea


284


On the shore of eternity...

Full of secrets is the fertilization
Symbol of this whole world
And those as well, who sought Got,
They stand on Nothing, on the I...


SCHEIDING (September)


The tree, the I bears now the weight,
The fruits of its procreating womb
And are like he full or empty
Like his Love, great and small.

And these fruits, they show
To us all Love’s deep sense:

The reign of procreation, essence, circulation
Always leading us to Gotos’ spirit...
And Gotos’ spirit, truth’s love
Stands above Al, the entire world,

It rules this Al and its urges
It is He, the one who upholds true loyalty!


GILBHART (October)


October calls itself the earthly measure
Of man’s deeds and man’s appearance,
The blood rushes, it rushes forgotten
Only Love is of Got alone
Where dwell time and space those two?
Fleeting, for it is man’s mind!
Only Gotos’ Love may endure it,
That fleeting I am in Him!


NEBELUNG (November)


The dark that shatters souls,
The I knows not such dark!
Around me is Got, in me Al-one,

The dread I leave to matter.

Got is Love: clear and light,
Everything becomes quick, even in matter.
Wherever Being and Love glow through it,

There the dark must swiftly flee.


JULMOND (December)


The twelfths are of space and time
A passing measure of eternity
Only Got Al-one
Is threefold Being,
Weaving itself as light
Into existence!


Therefore a turning-point is only a beginning
Of Gotos’ essence primordial nature.


285


The Cofmof in the Conception
of our Anceftor{


According to ancient tradition the graphic representation of the cosmos among our
forebears was such that they thought of the Spirit as rotating vertically and Matter as rotating
horizontally. (Fig. 1) This concept was a basic motif in all primordial religions and represents
the so-called “Mysterium of Supreme Knowledge.” As a result of this vertical and horizontal
rotation of Spirit and Matter, two planes appear, seen schematically, to be superimposed on
each other vertically: the Planes of Spirit and Matter. If the outermost points of the two planes
are connected, there results the image of two triangles, one above and one below. These form
the basis of all “Knowledge.” In them is contained the deepest knowledge concerning “Got”
and “Al.” (Fig. 2) The Christian Church also took over this symbol, but they divided it into
something “heavenly” and “earthly.” In this way they robbed it of its meaning and most
significant context. In this they robbed—and


Fig. 1 Fig. 2


did so quite intentionally, in order to be able to better control people—Northern Man of his
basic knowledge that the “Got-ly” and “Earthly” are an indivisible unity, from which we
alone can solve the final riddles of the cosmos (Got, Al). Already in the oldest churches the
two triangles appear divided, known as the heavenly “Goteye” and the Earthly “Man on the
cross” of the terrestrial. (See Fig. 3) But the astoundingly deep meaning of these two diagrams
can only be revealed by their “unity.” (See Fig. 7) this will be demonstrated in a future
explanation. (See also Hagal 7, 8, 9 [1934]) In Wotanism the two triangles also already appear
divided, which is clarified once we understand that the Edda, which transmitted the Wotancult


Heavenly Spirit


Matter Energy


Fig. 4


Fig. 5


Fig. 3


286


to us, was recorded at a time when Christianity had already penetrated into German territory.
The upper triangle represents Spirit becoming conscious in Matter, and this actually by means
of the addition of the current of Energy. (Fig. 4) The lower triangle becomes the image of the
“crucified,” or in the Wotan-cult that of “Odhin hanging on the World-Tree.” (See Fig. 3) If
we now superimpose the two triangles over each other, the cosmic image of the “Vyrfos” (Fig.
5) emerges. Where the spiritual ray intersects the Energy-Matter Plane — common to both
triangles—consciousness arises expressed through the image of the “conscious head” or the
“talking head,” which is seen by men as the “likeness of Got,” the head as the seat of the mind.
(Fig. 6) Now let’s consider the Spirit as shown on the drawing as it moves from above
downward (in the direction of the arrow) and on the opposite side from below upward. The
arch of the circumference turned toward us, “perceptible to our senses,” is the “conscious
circulation,” the “this-sided” part of our lives, the other half is the “unconscious circulation”:
the “beyond.”


When the Spirit, in eternal circulation, approaches the Energy-Matter Plane, which is
set for release as a potential “plan”—then the “Will to Become” is awakened in this plane. It
is represented at the point of intersection of the (concealed) lines of creation in the middle-
point of the “Got-eye.” It intersects the plane of the span of the arch, i.e., it secures Matter
with the aid of the current of Energy and submerges consciousness of life in the Al into
creation.


(See drawing 7, the intersection of the vertical I-axis by the
horizontal plane of effect.) (See in this regard the presentations in Hagal 7, 8, 9 [1934].)


Got-Spirit- Point


a \ Generation in the Spirit
‘


vs,


Will to Become 7


7


Consciousness


Generation -Point XY


os
7 ¢ Will to Conscious


Becoming
Fig. 7
Turning-Point

“Death”


Now Spirit-Energy-Matter are combined into a unity. An effect-guidance-formation-
unity has been fashioned. Life as movement contains in itself a compelling drive, it comes to


287


an “eternal” generation, which is for its own part prevented, because “without essence” Spirit,

Energy and Matter tend to sink down into Nothing, into N-yule, into the Al. So here it

becomes clear to us why the drive to reproduce is necessary [not-wendig]! It turns [wendet]

the need around: the sinking back into “Nothing.” Now Spirit can enter, through this “turning”
[Wende] or “death,” into the circulation of the “beyond”—there in the “Unconscious” it now

runs through the same levels (points) as it did in the “this-sided” circulation: in this the law of
“cause” and “effect” become important. The unconscious Will awakens in the Spirit to

become aware of itself—it unconsciously becomes aware of itself in that moment when it

intersects the Energy-Matter Plane in the beyond. The Will, in order to return to Got, elevates

itself unconsciously toward generation “in the Spirit,” and so it returns to the Got-Spirit-

Point—according to the law of cause and effect, in order to enter into the conscious level of
the circulation now once more “renewed.” (Fig. 7) This primordially eternal law of “Ara-

Ryta”—of Ryt-mik (rhythm) that forms effect out of cause [Ursache], which must again

become another cause, from which a renewed effect arises, “endlessly” without end—

becomes intelligible to us by means of all this. It is, however, also clear to us that a person (a

priest for example), or any other kind of “being,” can never absolve us “of our sins” or free us

from our guilt. Only we can do that ourselves by making an evil effect of a bad cause into a

good cause, which now “compulsorily” must have a good effect as a

result according to the law of Ara-Ryta.


288


Che Agnenerbe


The Ahnenerbe was a scientific institute in the Third Reich dedicated to research the
archaeological and cultural history of the Aryan Race. Founded on July 1, 1935, by Heinrich
Himmler, Herman Wirth, and Richard Walther Darré, the Ahnenerbe later conducted
experiments and launched expeditions in an attempt to prove that Aryan Nordic populations
had once ruled the world. Its name came from an obscure German word, 'Ahnenerbe',
meaning "inherited from the forefathers." The official mission of the Ahnenerbe was to find
new evidence of the racial superiority of the Germanic people through historical,
anthropological, and archaeological research. Formally, the group was called the
Studiengesellschaft fiir Geistesurgeschichte, Deutsches Ahnenerbe - 'Study Society for
Primordial Intellectual history, German Ancestral Heritage', but it was renamed in 1937 as the
Forschungs- und Lehrgemeinschaft das Ahnenerbe - (Research and Teaching Community of
the Ancestral Heritage). Many of their interests extended beyond science into occultism.


This led to German scientists travelling around the world in search of Atlantis and
the Holy Grail, and it is reported that the Ahnenerbe sought "portals" to God. Growing out of
the Ahnenerbe-SS, the Thule Gesellschaft and the general NatSoc interest in the occult, was
'Hexen-Sonderauftrages' - a secret organization dedicated to the research and use of occult
forces for the Third Reich. Hermann Wirth was a Dutch historian obsessed with Atlantean
mythology, and Richard Walter Darré was the creator of National Socialist 'Blut und Boden'
(blood and soil) ideology, and was head of the Race and Settlement Office. Blut und Boden
refers to an ideology that focuses on ethnicity based on two factors, descent (Blood of a Volk)


290


and Heimat (Homeland - Soil). It celebrates the relationship of a people to the land they
occupy and cultivate, and it places a high value on the virtues of rural living. The German
expression was coined in the late 19th century, in tracts espousing racialism and national
romanticism. It produced a regionalist literature, with some social criticism. This romantic
attachment was widespread prior to the rise of National Socialism. Ultranationalists, predating
National Socialism, often supported 'country living' as more healthy, with the 'Artaman
League’ sending urban children to the countryside to work in part in hopes of transforming
them into 'Wehrbaueren' (Soldier-farmers).


Richard Walther Darré popularized the phrase at the time of the rise of National
Socialism in Germany; he wrote a book called A New Aristocracy Based On Blood And Soil
in 1930, which proposed a systemic eugenics program, arguing for breeding as a cure-all for
all the problems plaguing the state. Darré was an influential member of the National Socialist
party, and a noted race theorist who assisted the party greatly in gaining support among
common Germans outside the cities. Prior to their ascension to power, the National Socialists
called for a return from the cities to the countryside. This agrarian sentiment allowed
opposition to both the middle class and the aristocracy, and presented the farmer as a superior
figure beside the moral swamp of the city. The doctrine not only called for a "back to the
land" approach and re-adoption of rural values; it held that German land was bound, perhaps
mystically, to German blood. Peasants were the Vélkisch cultural heroes, who held charge of
German racial stock and German history -- as when a memorial of a medieval peasant
uprising was the occasion for a speech by Darré praising them as force and purifier of German
history.


This would also lead them to understand the natural order better, and in the end, only
the man who worked the land really possessed it. It contributed to the National Socialist ideal
of a woman: a sturdy peasant, who worked the land and bore strong children, contributing to
praise for athletic women tanned by outdoor work. That country women gave birth to more
children than city ones also was a factor in the support. It was also argued that a people would
develop laws appropriate to its "blood and soil" because authenticity required loyalty to the
Volk over abstract universals. The SS and the Ahnenerbe, under Heinrich Himmler, in general
supported and encouraged the 'Blut und Boden' ideology. There is some evidence that the
Ahnenerbe existed as early as 1928, when Wirth established the "Hermann Wirth Society" for
teaching and spreading his theories. Another candidate for precursor of the Ahnenerbe was a
research institute for "spiritual prehistory" created by the German state of Mecklenburg in
1932, when the state was governed by the NSDAP. Formally, the group was called
'Studiengesellschaft fiir Geistesurgeschichte, Deutsches Ahnenerbe e.V.' ("Study society for
primordial intellectual history, German Ancestral Heritage, registered society"), and was
renamed in 1937, as 'Forschungs- und Lehrgemeinschaft das Ahnenerbe e.V.' ("Research and
Teaching Community the Ancestral Heritage, registered society"). The emblem chosen for the
Ahnenerbe was the 'Irminsul'.


291


Irmin was an aspect, Avatar or epithet of Wodan (Odin). Irmin might also have been
an epithet of the god Ziu (Tyr) in early Germanic times, only later transferred to Odin. The
Old Norse form of Irmin is Jérmunr, which just like Yggr was one of the names of Odin.
Ygedrasil ("Yggr's horse") was the yew or ash tree from which Odin sacrificed himself, and
which connected the nine worlds. Jakob Grimm connects the name Irmin with Old Norse
terms like iérmungrund ("great ground", i.e. the Earth) or iérmungandr ("great snake", i.e. the
Midgard serpent).


It is thus often conjectured that the Irminsul was a 'World Tree’, the equivalent of
"Y gedrasil' among the Saxon tribes of Germany. The linguistic connection between Irmin- and
i6rmun/jérmun- is generally accepted, but the terms simply mean "great/mighty" or "rising
high". It is easy to see how "The great one" or "The exalted one" could become a by-name of
Odin, and become known as "great pillar" instead of "Irmin's pillar" or "Odin's pillar". The
Ahnenerbe was created as a registered club as a private and non-profit organization. Funding
for the Ahnenerbe primarily came through Darré and his position within the German Ministry
of Agriculture, but this association ended around 1936, leaving Himmler in total control of the
Ahnenerbe. The Ahnenerbe was not incorporated into the SS until April 1940, though even
before this, all but one member of the academic staff of the Ahnenerbe were at least honorary
members of the SS, and many held significant rank. Wolfram Sievers was
Reichsgeschaftsfihrer, or Reich Manager, of the Ahnenerbe from 1935, and held the rank of
SS-Obersturmfithrer since 1937, rising to the rank of SS-Standartenfiihrer by the end of the
war. There was an obvious link between the SS and the Ahnenerbe long before it became
official in 1940.


Wolfram Sievers was appointed Reichsgeschaftsfiihrer, or General Secretary, of the
Ahnenerbe, by Himmler. Sievers was born in 1905 in Hildesheim in the Province of Hanover
(now in Lower Saxony), the son of a Protestant church musician. He was musically gifted, in
that he played the harpsichord, organ, and piano, and loved German baroque music. He was
expelled from school for being active in the "Deutsch vélkischer Schutz und Trutzbund', and
went on to study history, philosophy, and religious studies at Stuttgart's Technical University,
while working as a salesman. The Deutsch vélkischer Schutz- und Trutzbund - (German
Nationalist Protection and Defiance Federation) was the largest, most active, and most
influential anti-Semitic federation in Germany after the First World War, and one of the
largest and most important organization of the German vélkisch movement during the
Weimar Republic, whose democratic-parliamentary system it unilaterally rejected. Its
publishing arm put out some of the books that greatly influenced the opinions of those who
later organized the National Socialist Party, such as Heinrich Himmler, and after it folded
many of its members eventually joined the NSDAP. The bund's symbols were a blue
cornflower and a swastika, and its motto was 'Deutschland den Deutschen! ("Germany for the
Germans"). A member of the Biindische Jugend, he became active in the Artamanen-
Gesellschaft ("Artaman League"), a nationalist back-to-the-land movement. Sievers joined the
NSDAP in 1929. In 1933 he headed the Externsteine-Stiftung ("Externsteine Foundation"),
which had been founded by Heinrich Himmler to study the Externsteine in the Teutoburger
Wald. In 1935, having joined the SS that year, Sievers was appointed Reichsgeschaftsfiihrer,
or General Secretary, of the Ahnenerbe, by Himmler. He was the actual director of Ahnenerbe
operations, and was to rise to the rank of SS-Standartenfiihrer by the end of the war.


On February 1 of that year, Dr. Walther Wiist was appointed the president of the
Ahnenerbe. Wiist was an expert on India, and a dean at Ludwig Maximilians University of
Munich, working on the side as a Vertrauensmann for the SS Security Service. Referred to as
“The Orientalist” by Sievers, Wiist had been recruited by him in May 1936 because of his
ability to simplify science for the common man. After being appointed president, Wiist began
improving the Ahnenerbe: moving the office to a new headquarters that had cost 300,000
Reichsmark, in the Dahlem neighborhood of Berlin. Walther Wiist (7 May 1901,


292


Kaiserslautern — 21 March 1993) was a German Indo-Europeanist and Vedicist in the first

half of the 20th century who served as Rector of the University of Munich from 1941 to 1945.
Wiist was a committed Nazi, joining the SS in 1936 and being appointed President of the
Research Institute of the Ahnenerbe SS in 1937. He eventually attained the rank of Oberfiihrer.


He also worked to limit the influence of “those he deemed scholarly upstarts,” which
included cutting communication with the RuSHA office of Karl Maria Wiligut. The
organization was incorporated into the larger SS in January 1939. The Ahnenerbe had several
different institutions or sections for its departments of research. Most of these were
archeological but others included the Pflegestatte fiir Wetterkunde (Meteorology Section)
headed by Obersturmfiihrer Dr. Hans Robert Scultetus, founded on the basis that Hans
Horbiger's "Welteislehre" could be used to provide accurate long-range weather forecasts, and
a section devoted to musicology, whose aim was to determine "the essence" of German music.
It recorded folk music in expeditions to Finland and the Faroe Islands, from ethnic Germans
of the occupied territories, and in South Tyrol. The section made sound recordings,
transcribed manuscripts and songbooks, and photographed and filmed instrument use and folk
dances. The lur, a Bronze Age musical instrument, became central to this research, which
concluded that Germanic consonance was in direct conflict to Jewish atonalism. The
Ahnenerbe was part of Himmler's greater plan for the systematic creation of a "Germanic"
culture that would replace Christianity in the Greater Germany to exist after the war, - a kind
of SS-religion that would form the basis of the new world order. This new culture would be
based on the vélkisch beliefs of the NSDAP, and it was the role of the Ahnenerbe to marshal
scientific research in an interdisciplinary program to support the "development of the
Germanic heritage".


Himmler himself served as the "chairman of the Kuratorium" of the Ahnenerbe, and
held the real power within the Ahnenerbe. As Reich Manager of the Ahnenerbe, Wolfram
Sievers was responsible for all administrative tasks, with day-to-day business matters handled
by the deputy "Kurator" Dr. Herrman Reischle. Professor Walter Wiist joined the Ahnenerbe
in 1937 and, as trustee and "Kurator" of the organization, replaced Hermann Wirth as its
intellectual leader. Wiist had been dean of the University of Munich, and his presence brought
a number of reputable academics into the Ahnenerbe. The Ahnenerbe was funded by the
Ahnenerbe-Stiftung, the German Forschungsgemeinschaft, member fees, and "from funds of
the Reich and from contributions of industry" (including a group of financiers called the
‘Circle of Friends' led by Wilhelm Keppler). The budget of the Ahnenerbe was as much as
over one million German marks (400,000 American dollars). Besides financial support,
enlistment in the Ahnenerbe was attractive as it placed scholars in the academic elite of Nazi
Germany, gaining them the patronage of the Reichsfiihrer-SS himself. A central function of
the Ahnenerbe was the publication of materials as part of the effort to investigate and "revive"
Germanic traditions.


Before the war, the Ahnenerbe set up its own publishing house in the academic
suburb Berlin-Dahlem, and went on to produce a monthly magazine ('Germanien'), two
journals on genealogy (‘Zeitschrift fiir Namenforschung' and 'Das Sippenzeichen’'), and
countless monographs. The Ahnenerbe had fifty different research branches, named
"Institutes", which carried out more than one hundred extensive research projects. Some of
the institutes, particularly those responsible for Tibetan research and archaeological
expeditions, could be quite large, but most made do with less than a dozen personnel.


293


herman Wirth


Born in Utrecht of the Netherlands on 6 May 1885, Herman Wirth was neither
Theosophist, Anthroposophist, nor Ariosophist. His understanding of the various occult and
mystical currents was unconventional, and, at time clashed with the official ideology of the
Third Reich. Wirth began his professional life as a musicologist, writing a dissertation on
Dutch folk song and giving concerts of early music, with his first post in 1909 at the
University of Berlin as Reader in Netherlandish Language and Literature. During World War
The threw himself into activism on behalf of freedom for Flanders and solidarity of the
“Duitch” with the “Deutsch”, ultimately earning him a promise from the Kaiser that after
Germany won the war, he would become professor of musicology at the Brussels
Conservatory.


Wirth’s antiquarian attention was drawn to the peculiar symbols carved on
farmhouses that went back to the sixteenth century on the bleak shores of the North Sea.
Wirth began to collect and compare these various examples of folk art, becoming more and
more convinced that the old Frisian carpenters had preserved the symbols of an incredibly
ancient culture. Gradually he assembled an unrivaled collection of early and prehistoric
inscriptions and pictographs found on rock, bone, and wood throughout the Northern
Hemisphere which contained certain themes like the swan, the wheel, and the oared boat
recurred in widely separated times and places. Over time Wirth was able to reconstruct a
theological system and an astronomically based cosmology, containing internal evidence of
being at least 10,000 years old. With this came the realization that a common culture had once
encircled the entire North Atlantic region, and that it was responsible for the invention of
writing. Wirth concluded that this earlier culture existed within the Arctic Circle and was that
of Atlantis. To Wirth, the reasons that the former Arctic continent changed climate and
became uninhabitable, forcing its indigenous inhabitants to migrate south were: (1) the
location of the North Pole is not stable, but has wandered as much as 30° from its present
position; (2) the movement of continental plates and the wandering of the poles cause the
rising and sinking of lands; (3) Europe, Greenland, and North America once formed a single
landmass that broke up in the Quaternary Era. After the pole shift and the consequent ice age,
the Arctic-Nordic race migrated southward, and the two original races began to mingle and
produce variations. Wirth mentions the Asiatic race as a “mixovariation” containing elements
of both original groups, and the Atlantic-Nordic as an “idiovariation” within the Arctic-
Nordic.


294


Based on the analysis of blood groups, which was the most advanced technology of
his time, Wirth posits two original groups. One was the light Nordic race, in its Arctic home;
the other was the original black race, which originated in Gondwanaland (Lemuria), a now
vanished continent that covered the Indian Ocean. As for the first evidence of Europeans, the
Aurignacians, to Wirth, seem to have been a black race, to judge from the peppercorn hair and
steatopygy of their “Venus” figurines. Nor were the famous Cro-Magnons, appearing about
30,000 years ago, the ancestors of the white race, because Cro-Magnons descended from a
mixture of Nordics with Eskimos, thanks to intrepid sailors who were navigating the northern
seas at least 50,000 years before conventional prehistory allows. Cro-Magnons brought
culture, writing, law, religion, agriculture, and art to all the less-developed races, leaving
megalithic relics such as Stonehenge and the dolmens. Wirth felt that the ideograms and
symbols had given him the key to the theology and religion of the Arctic-Nordic race who
perceived the great moral law of the universe as the eternal return, the perpetual coming into
being and passing away. Wirth proposed that the annual journey of the sun, especially in the
Arctic region, where it rose and set only once a year, represented for them the Son of the
immutable God and the revelation of that God in time and space. Wirth found the concept of
God the Father as a sexless and impersonal being, distinct from his Son, who brings light to
the land, dies, and is reborn. Third of this pagan trinity was the All-Mother Earth, to whose
bosom the Son/sun goes each winter, and from whom he is reborn at the solstice.


Due to the mixing and interactions with lower races the spirituality of the Nordics
decayed due to animistic beliefs of spiritually inferior peoples, which would lead to the
development of cults of demons and ghosts, anthropomorphism, and a whole pantheon of
gods. Zoroastrianism, Aryan-Indian Brahmanism, the Samkya school, Buddhism, Greek
philosophy, the Galilean’s reform of faith, Roman Christianity, the Nordic Reformation of the
sixteenth century, and the development of Western epistemology, right up to the natural
philosophy of the present day are all included within the lower spirituality according to Wirth.
Wirth’s spiritual genealogy, unlike his colleagues (such as Evola or the Theosophists),
excluded the religions of temple, church, and mosque, as well as all revealed scripture, all
ritual, and anything redolent of a sentimental or person-to-person relationship with God. Nor
had he any truck with the esoteric-exoteric division. There was only the authentic Ur-Religion
based on the lived experience of a spiritually sensitive race, and then there was all the
pernicious nonsense that later ages superimposed upon it. Wirth was conceived of the Arctic-
Nordics as a spiritual and pacific race that took its direction mainly from its wise “mothers”
and accorded women commensurate rights. The tragedy was that it had been driven by
climatic changes from its Arctic cradle. Looking back in 1960, he wrote:


“Our whole historical outlook is limited to the period of rupture that is the Eurasian migration
epoch, the age of male rights and male domination. We stand today within the unmitigated
collapse of this epoch, on the edge of the abyss of utter destruction of humanity, life, and
earth. Yet the West is still trying, with all the “restorative means” of the Mosaic-Christian
ideology, to maintain the fictions of this failed androcentric belief system. This male world of
the period of rupture, the organized world of State, Church, and God, is no onger organic,
ever since the “Mothers” were driven out. For that severed the organic connection between
“heaven and earth,” cosmos and mankind, which is what the “world” used to be.”


Eberhard Baumann, Wirth’s biographer and bibliographer, was convinced that
Wirth possessed a higher state of consciousness, such as was the universal possession of the
ancient race. Baumann adds a comment about Frau Wirth’s contribution to the great project,
which although it surely did not take the form of “mesmeric trance,” has something
mysterious about it. He writes:


295


“Wirth was sometimes able to observe higher consciousness “in action.” A few years ago it
was important for us, on beginning our study, to read his dedication in Aufgang der
Menschheit: “Margarete Wirth-Schmitt. To her, who gave me this book (my italics, E.B.), the
noble seeress of our spiritual heritage . . . it is returned in deep and grateful love.” So inner
perceptions poured out from the very lively consciousness of his wife, which he was then only
able to acknowledge as “ancestrally remembered” (erb-erinnert). We do not know today to
what extent Frau Wirth determined the contents and message of her husband’s research.”


In 1933 he received a professorship in Berlin and the commission to found an open
air museum of the old German religion and would take the fateful step of publishing an
edition of the Ura-Linda-Chronik. This was Wirth’s enhanced his translation with
commentaries and illustrations in the spirit of his Aufgang of the Oera Linda Book manuscript
that had first come to light in 1867, purporting to be a chronicle compiled over millennia and
preserved in a Frisian family, the Over de Lindens. The first portions of the Oera Linda Book
were supposedly penned by a survivor of the flood that destroyed Atland, the Frisian’s
paradisal homeland, in the year 2194 BCE. Here are the relevant passages from William
Sandbach’s 1876 translation:


“Before the bad time came our country was the most beautiful in the world. The sun rose
higher, and there was seldom frost. . .. The years were not counted, for one was as happy as
another.On one side we were bounded by Wr-alda’s Sea, on which no one but us might or
could sail; on the other side we were hedged in by the broad Twiskland (Tusschenland,
Duitschland), through which the Finda people dared not come on account of the thick
forests and the wild beasts.Eastward our boundary went to the extremity of the East Sea, and
westward to the Mediterranean.”


“During the whole summer the sun had been hid behind the clouds, as if unwilling to look
upon the earth. There was perpetual calm, and the damp mist hung like a wet sail over the
houses and the marshes. The air was heavy and oppressive, and in men’s hearts was neither
joy nor cheerfulness. In the midst of this stillness the earth began to tremble as if she was
dying. The mountains opened to vomit forth fire and flames. Some sank into the bosom of the
earth, and in other places mountains rose out of the plain. Aldland, called by the seafaring
people, Atland, disappeared, and the wild waves rose so high over hill and dale that
everything was buried in the sea. Many people were swallowed up by the earth, and others
who had escaped the fire perished in the water.”


Later members of the Over de Linden family, we are assured, dutifully copied this
document while adding their memoirs of the Frisians’ migrations, their encounters and battles
with other tribes, and especially their customs and laws. The last contribution is dated “in the
3449th year after Atland’s sinking, that is, 1256 in the Christian reckoning.” The book was
written in a unique runic styled alphabet based on the sixfold division of the circle, which
Wirth immediately recognized as one of the primal solar symbols of his Arctic-Atlantic race.


Wirth’s Ura-Linda-Chronik was beautifully produced, as Der Aufgang der
Menschheit had been, by the Jena publisher Eugen Diederich. If its erudite apparatus was not
clear to everyone, its message was: this was the true history of the German Volk. According
to the reports from Baumann’s bibliography, every newspaper in the land reviewed it, and
they continued to report on the controversy that exploded as soon as the academic world got
hold of it. Experts in history, philology, religion, and philosophy proclaimed almost
unanimously that the Oera Linda Book was a nineteenth-century forgery, Wirth himself
admitted that since the manuscript was written on nineteenth-century paper, the copying had
continued, and that a “humanist” had had a hand in improving the original text. But still, he
maintained, the core of it was authentic. The debate over the Oera Linda Book degenerated


296


into a squalid name-calling in which each side accused the other of not being in accordance
with standing National Socialist ideology, and Wirth fought hard for his beliefs.


However, Ura-Linda-Chronik was an important book and a consequence of the
development of the book was the formation of the Ahnenerbe. The final impetus for the
formation of the Ahnenerbe was a panel discussion which included Darre, Wirth, and
Himmler. The subject of this panel discussion was a work published for the first time in 1872
was the Ura-Linda-Chronik. The panel took place on May 4, 1934, from 4 pm to 8 pm in the
Audimax of the Uniaula of Berlin. Wirth sought to elevate the Ura-Linda-Chronik to the
status of a Nordic Bible, which provoked a number of not only scholars in attendance but also
from Rosenberg and those within the NSDAP who surrounded Rosenberg. To Wirth’s defense
and advocates for the authenticity of the Ura-Linda-Chronik were Walther Wust and Otto
Huth (representative of the Reichsbund fur Volkstrum und Heimat). However, Arthur Hiibner,
one of the most respected Germanists of his generation, denounced the Oera Linda Book as a
hoax and his verdict settled the defeat of Wirth's party. Himmler was given a translation of the
Oera Linda Book by Herman Wirth and was apparently besotted by the contents, giving rise
to the work being “Himmler’s Bible”. But with the subsequent events at the discussion panel,
Himmler formed the Ahnenerbe to research into the Nordic past.


Wirth still had patronage in high places, and in June 1935 Heinrich Himmler
appointed him president of the Ahnenerbe (“ancestral heritage”) research bureau. He led an
expedition to Bohuslan in southwestern Sweden, to study the region’s thousands of granite
engravings. He interpreted the numerous circular designs and disc shapes he observed as
ideograms for the sun, claiming that they traced its annual movements across the sky. Based
on the long periods of darkness in the North followed by periods of light, the worship of a
Nordic rebirth or resurrection god was self evident to Wirth, whom he referred to as Odal.
Thus, the monotheistic religion of Nordic Atlantis preceded that of Christian monotheism; the
notion of divine resurrection came from the North.


Otto Huth (1906-1998) was a German theologian, ethnologist, archeologist and an
expert on folklore, who taught at the University of Tiibingen. Huth was the son of a
neuropathologist in Bonn. He earned his PhD in 1932. In 1937 he joined the Ahnenerbe.
During World War II he led the "Institute for Indo-Germanic Religious History" at the "Reich
University" in StraBburg. After the war Huth was professor at the Protestant faculty at the
University of Tiibingen. In 1935 Otto Huth met Herman Wirth and became Wirth's disciple
and together studied German folklore. When Herman Wirth left the Ahnenerbe in 1937 Huth
pursued his interest in ethnology and archeology. In 1939 with permission from Heinrich
Himmler he was granted an expedition to the Canary Islands with a small research team, but
this was ultimately canceled due to political tension with Franco’s Spain. The focus upon the
Canary Islands is due to accounts written by some early European explorers who described
the Canary Islanders as being blond and fair skinned. Huth would proclaim, “Separated from
the disturbances of European world history, the ancient Nordic civilization blossomed
undisturbed on the happy islands until it was destroyed”.


297


Rune/ and Mordic Mythology


Linguistic study was at the forefront of Ahnenerbe activity, and the Ahnenerbe was
the first institute to be established to specialize in the study of Norse runes (the symbol of the
Ahnenerbe was the life rune). This institute was under the command of Hermann Wirth until
he left the Ahnenerbe in 1937. In 1936, Wirth's successor, Professor Wiist, headed up another
institute for broader research in linguistics, where great attention was paid to Sanskrit (Wiist's
area-of-expertise) and the connection of the language to the Aryans. Runes are equivalent to
the Roman, Greek, Cyrillic, or Hebrew alphabets. But they are much more than an alphabet.
“Rune” means “secret”, “mystery”, or “hidden”, and is related to the German raunen, meaning
“to whisper”, and the Irish run, meaning “a secret.” The Ahnenerbe had an Institute to study
the Eddas (considered by Himmler a sacred text) and Iceland itself, which the Ahnenerbe
considered something of a holy land, like Tibet. Based on the ariosophical beliefs like those
that gave rise to the Thule Gesellschaft, the Ahnenerbe saw Iceland as the last surviving
comnection with Thule, the mystical homeland of the pure Germanic race of prehistory. The
Eddas contained secret knowledge for the Ahnenerbe, keys by which they could unlock their
ancestral heritage. Besides study of the Eddas, the Ahnenerbe also wanted to study Icelandic
artifacts, and, as they had in Tibet, perform "the recording of human images", using calipers
to measure facial dimensions based on ethnological science. The Ahnenerbe succeeded in
sending a mission to Iceland in 1938.


On orders from Himmler himself, the expedition was to search for a hof, a place of
worship of Norse gods such as Thor and Odin. The Ahnenerbe also had a department to
research the 'Welteislehre' (World Ice Theory) of Hans Hérbiger , under the command of Dr.
Hans Robert Scultetus. This theory was based on the Blavatsky thesis that there had been
several moons in the past, that the approach of these moons results in a polar shift and a
cataclysmic Ice Age, which are responsible for the fall and rise of the various root-races of
Theosophy. According to the theory, the world itself was created when a giant chunk of ice
collided with the sun. Hérbiger died in 1931, but his theory was adopted by some
Theosophists, who used it to prove the existence of Andean civilization with parallels to
Atlantis and Thule (this may have been part of the reason behind Ahnenerbe expeditions to
South America), and by Himmler and the Ahnenerbe, as "our Nordic ancestors grew strong
amidst the ice and snow, and this is why a belief in a world of ice is the natural heritage of
Nordic men". The Ahnenerbe were most concerned with practical applications of the "World
Ice Theory' focused on meteorology, vital to military operations. Scultetus sent Edmund Ki8,
a German playwright well-known for his novels on Atlantis, to Abyssinia to find evidence to
support the "World Ice Theory’. German rocketry may have even been delayed because of
fears based on Hérbiger's theory that a rocket released into space would initiate a global
catastrophe. The runic alphabets are a set of related alphabets using letters known as runes to
write various Germanic languages before the adoption of the Latin alphabet and for
specialized purposes thereafter.Runes are equivalent to the Roman, Greek, Cyrillic, or
Hebrew alphabets but they are much more than an alphabet. “Rune” means “secret”,
“mystery”, or “hidden”, and is related to the German raunen, meaning “to whisper”, and the
Irish run, meaning “a secret.” To a certain extent, even the Chinese hieroglyphs resemble the
runic variations. The same applies to some characters of Turk written languages which were
believed to have developed independently from European languages. According to a theory,
even the Cyrillic alphabet in its earlier form is a runic system. The art of the runes was in use
up till the end of 19th century. Germany was the first European country that started to restore
the knowledge of the runes back in the 19th century. A number of secret societies emerged.


298


For example, Hitler and Himmler both employed runic symbolism. The Swastika, a
runic symbol of the Sun, became the official emblem of the Nazi Party and the Third Reich.
Up until 1940, every SS commissioned officer was to take a special course in the runic magic.
The emblem “SS” is a double rune Sigel which is well known as a victory symbol. The
mystics say that it was the runic magic that paved the way for Nazism. But all the magi were
prevented from practising in 1940, and Hitler was doomed from that time onward. The
Scandinavian variants are also known as futhark (or fupark, derived from their first six letters
of the alphabet: F, U, b, A, R, and K); the Anglo-Saxon variant is futhorc (due to sound
changes undergone in Old English by the same six letters). Runology is the study of the runic
alphabets, runic inscriptions, runestones, and their history. Runology forms a specialized
branch of Germanic linguistics. The earliest runic inscriptions date from around AD 150. The
characters were generally replaced by the Latin alphabet as the cultures that had used runes
underwent Christianization by around AD 700 in central Europe and by around AD 1100 in
Northern Europe. However, the use of runes persisted for specialized purposes in Northern
Europe. Until the early 20th century runes were used in rural Sweden for decoration purposes
in Dalarna and on Runic calendars. The three best-known runic alphabets are the Elder
Futhark (around 150 to 800 AD), the Anglo-Saxon Futhorc (400 to 1100 AD), and the
Younger Futhark (800-1100). The Younger Futhark is further divided into the long-branch
runes (also called Danish, although they were also used in Norway and Sweden), short-branch
or R6k runes (also called Swedish-Norwegian, although they were also used in Denmark), and
the stavesyle or Halsinge runes (staveless runes). The Younger Futhark developed further into
the Marcomannic runes, the Medieval runes (1100 AD to 1500 AD), and the Dalecarlian
runes (around 1500 to 1800 AD). The origins of the runic alphabet are uncertain. Many
characters of the Elder Futhark bear a close resemblance to characters from the Latin alphabet.
Other candidates are the Sth to 1st century BC Northern Italic alphabets: Lepontic, Rhaetic
and Venetic, all of which are closely related to each other and descend from the Old Italic
alphabet. In Norse mythology, the runic alphabet is attested to a divine origin (Old Norse:
reginkunnr). This is attested as early as on the Noleby Runestone from around 600 AD that
reads "I prepare the suitable divine rune ..." and in an attestation from the 9th century on the
Sparlésa Runestone which reads "And interpret the runes of divine origin".


More notably, in the Poetic Edda poem Havamal, Stanza 80, the runes are also
described as reginkunnr:


‘That is now proved,
what you asked of the runes,
of the potent famous ones,
which the great gods made,
and the mighty sage stained,
that it is best for him if he stays silent.


The poem Havamal explains that the originator of the runes was the major god Odin.
Stanza 138 describes how Odin received the runes through self-sacrifice:


'I know that I hung on a windy tree
nine long nights,
wounded with a spear, dedicated to Odin,
myself to myself,
on that tree of which no man knows from where its roots run.'


299


In stanza 139, Odin continues:


'No bread did they give me nor a drink from a horn,
downwards I peered;
I took up the runes,
screaming I took them,
then I fell back from there."


This passage has been interpreted as a mythical representation of shamanic initial
ritual in which the initiate must undergo a physical trial in order to receive mystic widsom. In
the Poetic Edda poem Rigsbula another origin is related of how the runic alphabet became
known to man. The poem relates how Rig, identified as Heimdall in the introduction, sired
three sons (Thrall (slave), Churl (freeman) and Jarl (noble)) on human women. These sons
became the ancestors of the three classes of men indicated by their names. When Jarl reached
an age when he began to handle weapons and show other signs of nobility, Rig returned and,
having claimed him as a son, taught him the runes. In 1555, the exiled Swedish archbishop
Olaus Magnus recorded a tradition that a man named Kettil Runske had stolen three rune
staffs from Odin and learned the runes and their magic. The pioneer of the Armanist branch of
Ariosophy and one of the more important figures in esotericism in Germany and Austria in
the late 19th and early 20th century was the Austrian occultist, mysticist and vélkisch author
Guido von List. In 1908, he published in 'Das Geheimnis der Runen' ("The Secret of the
Runes") a set of 18 so-called "Armanen runes", based on the Younger Futhark and runes of
List's own introduction, which were allegedly revealed to him in a state of temporary
blindness after a cataract operation on both eyes in 1902. In November of 1902, List wrote to
his dear friend, the respected industrialist and publisher, Friedrich Wannieck, stating that, due
to his operation, it would have been “impossible to begin to work mentally on my intended
unravelling of the secret of the runes, but at that time previously unperceived 'Laws of
Generation and Evolution"”’ came to him.


And on April 29th 1907 List again wrote to Wannieck, thanking him for his
“encouraging interest” saying that he can now give himself “over to research and am able to
dedicate myself to these almost unlimited areas of interest.” List must be accredited as being
the pioneer of vélkisch runic mysticism and Armanenschaft occultism. List must also be
noted as the very first to have ever linked a runic scriptural series, and actually associating a
specific individual rune of his eighteen rune Armanen Futharkh, to each of the eighteen runic
stanzas which were revealed to Odin in the ‘Havamal’ (Words of the High One) in the section
known as 'Runatals-thattr-Odhins' (Odin's Rune Wisdom) of the Edda. List was indeed a
pioneer and a visionary. The runes are a powerful magickal system and one that should never
be abused, especially by those that don’t truly understand what they are getting involved in.
The path of the runes is a spiritual esoteric journey in which the final destination is a
gradually elevating, multi-layered, realisation of enlightenment and spiritual consciousness,
similar to the 'mystic vision of the universe' referred to by Hitler.


The runic insignia of the SS, the double sig or sowil6, were used from the 1920s to
1945 on SS flags, uniforms and other items as symbols of various aspects of Vélkisch
ideology and Germanic occultism and mysticism. They also represented virtues seen as
desirable in SS members, and were based on vélkisch mystic Guido von List's Armanen runes.
The sig or sowild rune (or Siegrune) symbolized victory (sieg). In its original form as the s-
rune of the Younger Futhark, it represented the sun; however, von List reinterpreted it as a
victory sign when he compiled his list of "Armanen runes". It was adapted into the emblem of
the SS in 1933 by Walter Heck, an SS Sturmhauptfiihrer who worked as a graphic designer


300


for Ferdinand Hoffstatter, a producer of emblems and insignia in Bonn. Heck's simple but
striking device consisted of two sig runes drawn side by side like lightning bolts, and was
soon adopted by all branches of the SS — though Heck himself received only a token payment
of 2.5 Reichsmarks for his work. The device had a double meaning; as well as standing for the
initials of the SS, it could be read as a rallying cry of "Victory, Victory!". The symbol became
so ubiquitous that it was frequently typeset using runes rather than letters; during the Nazi
period, an extra key was added to German typewriters to enable them to type the double-Sig
logo with a single keystroke. The Eif rune is a rotated version of the Eihwaz rune. During the
early years of the SS it was used by Hitler's personal adjutants, such as Rudolf Hess. The Ger
rune was used to symbolize the communitarian ideal of the SS. The 11th SS Volunteer
Panzergrenadier Division Nordland, a Waffen-SS unit, adopted the rune as a variant of its
divisional insignia. The Hagall rune was widely used in the SS for its symbolic representation
of "unshakeable faith" in Vélkisch philosophy, as Himmler put it. It was used in SS weddings
as well as on the SS-Ehrenring (death's head ring) worn by members of the SS. It is roughly
similar to the Haglaz rune of the Younger Futhark, which stood for "hail", but it was modified
by von List for his Armanen runes. List considered it to be the "mother rune" of his runic
alphabet and envisaged it as a representation of a hexagonal crystal. The Lebensrune or "life
rune" was used by the Lebensborn e. V., the SS body responsible for the Lebensborn
programme which supported the "racially, biologically, and hereditarily valuable families" of
SS members and other "Aryans". This interpretation of the "man" rune is not based on List,
but it occurs as early as the 1920s in the literature of Germanic mysticism and occultism, and
it came to be widely used within the NSDAP and the Third Reich, e.g. in official prescriptions
for the various uniforms of the Sturmabteilung. The Yr rune came to be seen as the "life rune"
inverted and interpreted as "death rune" (Todesrune) During the World War II era, these two
runes came to be used in obituaries, and on tomb stones, as marking birth and death dates,
replacing asterisk and cross symbols (* for "born", t for "died") conventionally used in this
context in Germany. The Odal rune symbolised several values of which were of central
importance to Vélkisch ideology. It was adopted from the Elder Futhark rune. During the
Second World War it was used by the 7th SS Volunteer Mountain Division Prinz Eugen, as
well as the SS-Rasse- und Siedlungshauptamt, which was responsible for maintaining the
racial purity of the SS. The use of the Opfer rune - which, like the Eif rune, is a rotated
version of the Eihwaz rune - preceded the National Socialists, as it was first adopted after
1918 by the Stahlhelm war veterans' movement that eventually merged with the Nazi
Sturmabteilung (SA). The symbol was adopted by the NSDAP after 1923 to commemorate
the party members who died in Hitler's failed Beer Hall Putsch. The Todesrune is the inverted
version of the Lebensrune or "life rune". It was based on the Yr rune, which originally meant
"yew". It was used by the SS to represent death on documents and grave markers in place of
the more conventional cross symbol used for such purposes. The Tyr rune followed the design
of the Tiwaz rune, named after Tyr, the god of single combat, victory and heroic glory in
Norse mythology. Its association with war meant that the SS thought of it as the "Kampf" or
battle rune, symbolising military leadership. The SS commonly used it in place of the
Christian cross on the grave markers of its members. It was also used by graduates of the SA
Reichsfiihrerschule, which trained SS officers until 1934; they wore it on their upper left arms.
It was adopted as an emblem by the 32nd SS Volunteer Grenadier Division 30 Januar, which
was assembled from the members of SS schools in January 1945, as well as by the SS
Recruitment and Training Department.


301


Irminifm


Irminenschaft (or, Irminism, Irminenreligion) is a current of Ariosophy based on a
hypothetical Germanic deity Irmin (a backformation from Irminsul "great pillar" and
informed by Tacitus' Hermiones; The Old Saxon adjective irmin "great, strong" may also
have been an epithet of Ziu (Tyr) or Wodan (Odin)). Stronger scientific evidence stems from
the occurrence of the word "Irmingot", as found in the Old High German "Hildebrandslied".
Notably Karl Maria Wiligut claimed a historical Irminism, established in 12,500 BC, later
ousted by Wotanism. In 1889 Wiligut joined the Schlaraffia, a quasi-masonic lodge.


When he left the lodge in 1909, he held the rank of knight and the office of
chancellor. His first book, Seyfrieds Runen, was published in 1903 under the pseudomym of
Lobesam. "Seyfrieds Runen" was a collection of poems about the Rabenstein at Znaim on the
Austrian-Moravian border. In 1908 followed the 'Neun Gebote Gots', where Wiligut first
claimed to be heir to an ancient tradition of Irminism. Both List and Wiligut were influenced
by Friedrich Fischbach's 1900 'Die Buchstaben Gutenbergs'. Wiligut claimed to be in the
tradition of a long line of Germanic mystic teachers, reaching back into prehistoric times. He
also claimed to have spiritual powers that allowed him direct access to genetic memories of
his ancestors thousands of years previously. From 1908, Wiligut was in contact with the
occultist Ordo Novi Templi in Vienna. Wiligut claimed that the Bible had originally been
written in Germanic, and testified to an "Irminic" religion - Irminenreligion or Irminism - that
contrasted with Wotanism. He claimed to worship a Germanic god whom Christianity was
supposed later to have appropriated as their own saviour Christ. Germanic culture and history,
according to Wiligut, reached back to 228,000 BC. At this time, there were three suns, and
Earth was inhabited by giants, dwarfs and other mythical creatures. Wiligut claimed that his
ancestors, the Adler-Wiligoten, ended a long period of war. By 12,500 BC, the Irminic
religion of Krist was revealed and from that time became the religion of all Germanic peoples,
until the schismatic adherents of Wotanism gained the upper hand. In 1200 BC, the Wotanists
succeeded in destroying the Irminic religious center at Goslar, following which the Irminists
erected a new temple at the Externsteine, which was in turn appropriated by the Wotanists in
AD 460.


The Externsteine is a distinctive rock formation is situated in the Teutoburger Wald,
not far from Detmold. This series of tall, narrow rock columns rise from the wooded hills and
appear to be the only such stone formations in the entire area, though on the hills on either
side of the formation, the Knickenhagen and Barenstein, similar rocks are hidden, only visible


303


as perpendicular ribs along their northern flanks. But it’s what is visible that counts, and
hence, the Externsteine are a unique series of four sandstone columns up to forty meters tall,
forming a wall several hundreds of meters long. The Ahnernebe, following the theories of
Wilhelm Teudt, found ancient Germanic "star temples" where sightlines supposedly radiated
out towards important positions of sun, moon, and stars. Wilhelm Teudt (7 December 1860,
Bergkirchen — 5 January 1942) was a vélkisch lay archaeologist searching for an ancient
Germanic civilization. His 1929 work Germanische Heiligtiimer continues to have currency in
esoteric and neopagan communities to this day. He trusted in his paranormal faculty of
picking up the "vibrations" of his ancestors helping him visualize ancient sceneries of the sites
he was researching. Teudt was particularly interested in the Externsteine. According to Teudt
this was where the sacred pillar of the Saxons, Irminsul, stood until toppled by Charlemagne
and a carving of a "weeping Irminsul" is supposed to be on one of the pillars of rock. The
Externsteine was at the centre of alignments and was supposed to have been a sacred centre
before Stonehenge. In 1933 Teudt joined the Nazi Party and proposed to turn the Externsteine
into a “sacred grove” for the commemoration of the ancestors. Hence, it should be he, not
Wiligut, who was responsible for making the Externsteine part of the Nazi doctrine. Heinrich
Himmler was open to the idea, and in 1933 initiated and then presided over the ““Externstein
Foundation”, though it was actively run by SS-Standartenfiihrer Wolfram Sievers. He led the
German excavations at the site until 1940 when it was turned over to the Ahnenerbe's control.


Wiligut's own ancestors were supposedly protagonists in this setting: the Wiligotis
were Ueiskunings ("Ice kings") descending from a union of Aesir and Vanir. They founded
the city of Vilna as the center of their Germanic empire and always remained true to their
Irminic faith. During the 1920s, Wiligut wrote down 38 verses (out of a number purportedly
exceeding 1,000), the so-called Halgarita Spriiche, that he claimed to have memorized as a
child, taught by his father.

Wiligut had designed his own "runic alphabet" for this purpose. Werner von Biilow and Emil
Riidiger of the Edda-Gesellschaft (Edda Society) translated and annotated these verses. They
claimed that numbers 27 and 1818 are connected with the Black Sun.


Verse number 27 according to Willigut is a 20,000 year old "solar blessing":
‘Sunur saga santur toe Syntir peri fuir sprueh Wilugoti haga tharn Halga fuir santur toe!


Werner von Biilow translates this as follows:


"Legend tells, that two Suns, two wholesome in change-rule UR and SUN, alike to the
hourglass which turned upside down ever gives one of these the victory

The meaning of the divine errant wandering way dross star in fire's sphere became in fire-
tongue revealed to the Earth-I-course of the race of Paradise god willing leaders lead to the
weal through their care in universal course, what is visible and soon hidden, whence they led
the imagination of mankind polar in change-play, from UR to SUN in sacrifical service of
waxing and waning, in holy fire Santur is ambiguously spent in sparks, but turns victorious to
blessing".


Santur is interpreted as a burnt-out sun that was still visible at the time of Homer.
Riidiger speculates that this was the center of the solar system hundreds of millennia ago, and
he imagines a fight between the new and the old Suns that was decided 330,000 years ago.
Santur is seen as the source of power of the Hyperboreans.

Werner von Biilow (1870-1947), the translator of these verses, was the Grrand
Master of the Edda Society. On 29 November 1925, Gorsleben founded the Edda Society
(Edda-Gesellschaft), a mystic study group, at Dinkelsbiihl in Franconia. He himself was
Chancellor of the Society and published its periodical Deutsche Freiheit (German Freedom),
later renamed Arische Freiheit (Aryan Freedom). Assisted by learned contributors to his
study-group, Gorsleben developed an original and eclectic mystery religion founded in part


304


upon the Armanism of List, whom he quoted with approval. Rudolf John Gorsleben was
associated with the Thule Society during the Bavarian Soviet Republic of 1919 and, along
with Dietrich Eckart, he was taken prisoner by the Communists, narrowly escaping execution.


He threw himself into the ferment of Bavaria's vélkisch politics and formed a close
working relationship with the local Germanenorden before devoting himself to literary
pursuits. The treasurer of the Edda Society was Friedrich Schaefer from Mihlhausen, whose
wife, Kathe, kept open house for another occult-vélkisch circle (the 'Free Sons of the North
and Baltic Seas’) which gathered around Karl Maria Wiligut in the early 1930s.


Mathilde von Kemnitz, a prolific vélkisch writer who married General Erich
Ludendorff in 1926, was an active member of the Edda Society. Feldherr Erich Ludendorff
also held Adolf Hitler in the highest regard, although he later broke with Hitler because he
regarded the Nazi leader as too moderate! At Hitler's urging, Ludendorff took part in the Beer
Hall Putsch in 1923. The plot failed and in the trial that followed Ludendorff was acquitted. In
1924, he was elected to the Reichstag as a representative of the NSFB (a coalition of the
German Vélkisch Freedom Party and members of the Nazi Party), serving until 1928.


He ran in the 1925 presidential election against former commander Paul von
Hindenburg. Ludendorff's reputation may have been damaged by the Putsch, but he conducted
very little campaigning of his own and remained aloof, relying almost entirely on his lasting
image as a war hero, an attribute which Hindenburg also possessed. Ludendorff, like Hitler
and Eckart, was a Social Darwinist who believed that war was the "foundation of human
society", and that military dictatorship was the "normal" form of government in a society in
which every resource must be mobilized. After the Great War (1914-1918), Ludendorff
wanted Germany to go to war against all of Europe.


He also became a pagan worshipper of the Nordic god Wotan, and he detested not
only Jews but also Christianity, which he regarded as a weakening force. After 1928,
Ludendorff went into retirement. In his later years, Ludendorff went into a relative seclusion
with his second wife, Mathilde von Kemnitz (1874-1966), writing several books and leading
the 'Tannenbergbund'. He concluded that the world's problems were the result of Christians
(especially of the Jesuits and Catholicism), Jews, and Freemasons. Together with Mathilde, he
founded the 'Bund fiir Gotteserkenntnis' (German Society for the Knowledge of God), a small
and rather obscure esoterical society of Theists that survives to this day.


305


Che 55 Witch Divifion


Within the Ahnenerbe there was need for a retrieval unit, a unit that would scour the
earth for any and all documents concerning the occult and the esoteric, this unit was the
Special Task Force on Witches’ (Hexen-Sonderauftrages). When the unit was officially
created within the Ahnenerbe in 1939, it drew its members from within the Ahnenerbe, the
disbanded Thule Gesellschaft, and a little known section of Archive Department VII of the
Reichssicherheitshauptamt (RSHA, Reich Security Central Office), originally working within
the framework of Heydrich’s SD. Occult research had been conducted by various arms of the
SS for quite some time before the creation of the Hexen-Sonderauftrages. Heydrich’s SS-
Hauptamt section investigated, or collected occult books. Heydrich wrote this letter to
Himmler on Margareth Himbler in 1939, explaining that Margareth had been burned at the
stake. In the Ahnenerbe, the Abteilung zur Uberpriifung der Sogenannten
Geheimwissenschaften (literally, Department for the Examination of Secret Sciences) had
analyzed the occult since 1933. Suitable members of these organizations were drawn to the
Hexen-Sonderauftrages, as were former members of the Thule Gesellschaft and scholars from
Nazi-allied regimes and occupied countries. Kabbalists and Gypsy practitioners were even
forcibly recruited out of labor camps, as well as those occultists rounded up through Aktion
Hess, a decree was issued banning all public performances of clairvoyance, astrology,
fortune-telling or telepathy leading to the Gestapo rounded up hundreds of occultists, psychics
and astrologers. In June 1941 more so than any other group researching the paranormal for
their government during the Second World War, the Hexen-Sonderauftrages sought to exploit
the occult to its fullest. With the full backing of the SS and the Government of the Third
Reich, they raided the libraries and museums of Europe in an insatiable search for arcane
power. No avenue of study was left unexplored, no matter how unlikely it might seem to the
more established academics of the Ahnenerbe. The Hexen-Sonderauftrages was shielded from
inquiry within and without by direct patronage of Himmler, who passed certain information
on to Hitler. Members of the Hexen-Sonderauftrages were known by their initials in SS
documents, and by their rune-names in internal correspondence, the names given upon
induction into the unit.


Himmler had a parallel goal for Hexen-Sonderauftrages, besides just collecting
occult material, the other being of ‘great wartime importance’ (kriegswichtig) that went
beyond research. This second task, which feel right under the SD’s jurisdiction of ‘opposition
research’ (Gegnerforschung), explains why the Witch Division was entrusted not to the
academics of the Ahnenerbe but to Heydrich’s SD. This secondary goal of Gegnerforschung
was to conduct research on oppositional groups, including Jews, Communists, and Masons,
assumed to be a racial and/or ideological threat to the Third Reich. And it was with this goal
in mind that Himmler wanted to solve the riddle of how the ‘dominant Aryan-Germanic
religion of Nature could be defeated by the decadent Jewish-Christian religion?’ Himmler
believed that researching Judeo-Christian attempts to wipe out Germanic ethnic religion
would provide insights into combating Abrahamist attempts to undermine the Third Reich.
The Hexen-Sonderauftrages collected records of the Catholic Inquisition against witchcraft
from libraries in Germany and Austria. These records were collated into the Hexenkartothek,
a catalog of over 33,000 index cards, each providing the details of a victim of the witch trials.
While most of the Hexenkartothek concentrated on witch trials in Germany, Hexen-
Sonderauftrages researched cases from as far away as India and Mexico. The research of
Hexen-Sonderauftrages was meant to provide propaganda that would justify an SS crackdown
on the Catholic Church, as well as discover the ancient Germanic religion that Himmler
believed had been eradicated by the Inquisition. The SS witch researchers came to the
conclusion that witches were the ‘guarantors of German faith’ and ‘natural healers’ from the
oldest Germanic sagas, a conclusion that was also repeated by Karl Wiligut. Karl advocating


307


the creation of a witch organization, as can be seen within his article “Maidenschaft in the
Pre-Historic Aryo-Germanic Age”. By accusing so-called witches of consorting with the
Devil, the Church sought the complete destruction of the German religion (culture) and
justified the murder of its spiritual leaders. Himmler saw the actions of the church, and by
extension of all Christianity, as being in league with forces that sought to destroy Germany
and the primordial Germanic religion alongside being vile acts against the pure German
woman. Himmler viewed this as ‘the ideological struggle of the Germanic tribes’ against a
‘homosexual association’ that had ‘terrorized Germany for 1800 years’. Alfred Rosenberg and
Walther Darré agreed with Himmler’s assertion concerning Christianity, with Darré giving an
estimate that the number of “fighters for justice, champions of the faith, heretics, and witches
who had been murdered, tortured to death, and burnt to be nine million!” The craze of the
christian man, the murderous man who would attack his own volk, burn his women, and cut
down the natural idols and harm sacred places was seen to Himmler as an agent of the jew at
work. That the christian man was one who was that of Nietzsche’s Last Man, a form of
dysgenic who would only lead the Germanic peoples down the path of ruin if allowed to
continue to exist.


Occult research had been conducted by various arms of the SS for quite some time
before the creation of the Hexen-Sonderauftrages. In the Ahnenerbe had analyzed the occult
since 1933, for Karl Maria Wiligut and his 'Department for Pre- and Early History' had been
Himmler's premier occultist. More so than any other group researching the paranormal for
their government during the Second World War, the SS and Himmler sought to exploit the
occult to its fullest. Occultism was used on both sides of the war, with the British intelligence
service initially denying Aleister Crowley’s offer to help them but would later be used by
British intelligence, not only that but throughout the centuries Masonic lodges had been used
as a means of spreading subversive elements within a society. Masonic lodges were
specifically targeted by Heydrich, earning him the title of the “Mason Hunter”. While it is true
Hitler did have occult and astrology organizations banned, it is notable that the SS was still
able to preform these various rituals with no issue what so ever, giving credence to the idea
that the Reich simply wanted a monopoly on all occult events going on within Germany at the
time and to prevent foreign occultism. Evola also began a scholarly collaboration with the
Hexen-Sonderauftrages due to his esoteric research intersected with that of the Hexen-
Sonderauftrages. Finally, in the spring of 1939 the ‘research offices of the SD’ agreed to open
its archives on ‘lodges and sects’ to Evola because of the Grail researcher’s desire to write an
ambitious history of mythology and occult societies, urging him to make ‘the earliest results
of his research available’ to the SD. Evola even being tasked with hunting down Masonic
manuscripts to understand how the Masons were able to subvert a nation and destroy it from
within, with these findings to be reported as an ‘anti-Freemason book’. With the full backing
of the SS and the Third Reich, they searched the libraries and museums of Europe for arcane
power. No avenue of study was left unexplored. The Hexen-Sonderauftrages was shielded
from inquiry within and without by direct patronage of Himmler, who passed certain
information on to Hitler. Members of the Hexen-Sonderauftrages were known by their initials
in SS documents, and by their rune-names in internal correspondence, the names given upon
induction into the unit. Himmler was able to amass a library of witchcraft and occult books
numbering in the thousands and studied diligently, searching for traces of the Germanic
paganism in his attempt to reconstruct a truly Germanic religion. The Hexen-Sonderauftrages
never had a central headquarters, as each project maintained its own base of operations,
reporting directly to Himmler. When the Hexen-Sonderauftrages was required to perform
some ancient Germanic ritual for Himmler, they were called to the SS-order castle at
Wewelsburg.


308


Germanic Hlagic and Dril


Himmler deployed 'Sondereinheit H' to discover any traces of old Germanic magic
that survived the witch-hunts, while Archive Department 7 administered book stocks,
archived the confiscated materials, and then assessed their value.


‘Sondereinheit H' would eventually acquire more than 140,000 books on the subject
of the occult from libraries across Europe, and among the manuscripts they found was a copy
of von Juntzt’s 'Unaussprechlichen Kulten' and an ancient spell book written in ancient Gothic.
These books told of a race much older than mankind: the 'Ancient Ones'. The Geheimnisvolle
Korps (Occult Corps) was soon established as the Paranormal Division of SS-
Hauptsturmfihrer Wolfram Sievers' Ancestral Inheritence Office (Ahnenerbe).


The Geheimnisvolle Korps incorporated into one organization the Thule Society, the
Vril Society and the German branch of Crowley's OTO. The Vril society (Vril-Gesellschaft),
also known as the "Alldeutsche Gesellschaft fiir Metaphysik (The All German Society for
Metaphysics), for whom the Isaiah myth was not of central importance, adopted signs/colors
and assigned meaning to them; violent, black, and silver/white. Violet colour for the divine
light (Ilu/ Pralada) of the New Age. Black denotes the present age of darkness.Silver (white)
lightning means that power which paves the way for the divine light of the new aeon through
the darkness into the earthly this world. The Vril Force or Vril Energy was said to be derived
from the 'Black Sun’, - represented as a Swastika made up of Sig runes - which supposedly
exists in the center of the Earth, giving light to the Vril-ya and putting out radiation in the
form of Vril.


Maria Orsic is of central importance when discussing the Vril society. Her father was
a Croatian and her mother was a German from Vienna. Maria Orsic was the head of the
Alldeutsche Gesellschaft fiir Metaphysik founded in the early 20th century as a female circle
of mediums who were involved in what is claimed to be extraterrestrial telepathic contact.
According to Vril documents these telepathic messages also came from the solar system
Aldebaran, which is sixty-four light-years away in the constellation Taurus. The Thule society
believed that Aryans had originated close to the Pleiades, from a planet orbiting the star
Aldaberan (which translates literally as "the follower" presumably because this bright star
appears to follow the Pleiades, or "Seven Sisters" star cluster in the night sky). The upshot of
this belief was that the Aryans were originally aliens. The Vril Society not only taught
concentration exercises designed to awaken the forces of Vril, their main goal was to achieve
Raumflug (Spaceflight), and the creation of a 'Jenseitsflugmaschine' to reach Aldebaran. To
achieve this, the Vril Society, the Thule Gesellschaft and the DHvSS Die Herren des
schwarzen Steins were incorperated into the SS Ahnenerbe as part of an ambitious program to
develop an inter-dimensional flight machine based on psychic revelations from the Aldebaran
aliens. The society was later renamed the ‘Society of Vrilerinnen Women’. In 1917 Maria
Orsic is said to have made contact with extraterrestrials from Aldebaran with her female Vril
circle. In December 1919 a small circle of persons from the Thule Gesellschaft, the Vril
Society and the DHVSS - Die Herren vom Schwarzen Stein met in a specially rented forester’s
lodge near Berchtesgaden, close to the home of Dietrich Eckart. They were accompanied by
the medium Maria Orsic and another medium only known as Sigrun. Maria had
mediumistically received transmission in a secret Templar script — a language unknown to her
— with the technical data for the construction of a flying machine.


Lord Bulwer-Lytton popularized the word Vril in his novel The Coming Race, and
portrayed it as a mysterious power used by a race of superior being living in a subterranean


310


civilization. The novel is an early example of science fiction, however, many early readers
believed that its account of a superior subterranean master race, and the energy-form called
"Vril". In the novel, according to the Vril-ya, the name of the subterranean race, the Vril is the
“ynity in natural energy agencies which has been conjectured by many philosophers above
ground.” Bul- wer-Lytton goes on to describe the Vril in the novel in this way. “J have long
held an opinion, almost amounting to a conviction, in common, I believe, with many other
lovers of natural knowledge, that the various forms of which the forces of matter are made
manifest have one common origin; or, in other words, are so directly related and naturally
dependent, that they are convertible, as it were, into one another, and possess equivalence of
power in their action.” The uses of 'Vril' in the novel among the Vril-ya vary from an agent of
destruction to a healing substance. Vril is described as being able to be changed into the
mightiest agency over all types of matter, both animate and inanimate. It can destroy like
lightning or replenish life, heal, or cure. It is used to rend ways through solid matter. Its light
is said to be steadier, softer and healthier than that from any flammable material. It can also be
used as a power source for animating mechanisms. 'Vril' can be harnessed by use of the 'Vril
staff, or by mental concentration. A 'Vril staff’ is an object in the shape of a wand or a staff,
which is used as a channel for 'Vril'. It is also said that if an army met another army, and both
had command of the 'Vril-force', both sides would be annihilated.


The Vril Race was originally published anonymously in late 1871, but Bulwer-
Lytton was known to be the author. Considering Bulwer-Lytton's occult background (a
member of the Rosicrucians), many commentators were convinced that the supposedly
fictionalized 'Vril' was based on a real magical force. Samuel Butler's 'Erewhon', ('Nowhere' -
in reverse) was also published anonymously, in March 1872, and Butler suspected that its
initial success was due to it being taken by many as a sequel by Bulwer-Lytton to 'The
Coming Race’. It is an assumption of many occultists that 'The Coming Race' is fact disguised
as fiction: that Bulwer-Lytton based his engaging novel on a genuine body of esoteric
knowledge. There is some evidence that Bulwer- Lytton believed in the possibility of a
subterranean world, for he wrote to his friend Hargrave Jennings in 1854:


‘So Rosenkreuz [the founder of the Rosicrucians] found his wisdom in a secret
chamber. So will we all. There is much to be learned from the substrata of our planet.’


Helena Blavatsky, the founder of "Theosophy’, endorsed this view in her book "Isis
Unveiled! (1877) and again in 'Die Geheimlehre' (The Secret Doctrine - 1888). To Blavatsky,
the 'Vril power', and its attainment by a superhuman elite, are worked into a mystical doctrine
of 'race'. The racial ideas of Madame Blavatsky, concerning 'root races', and the emergence of
a spiritually-developed type of human being (Aryan Man) in the Aquarian Age, were avidly
accepted by the nineteenth-century German nationalists who mixed Theosophical occultism
with anti-Semitism, and the doctrine of the racial supremacy of the Aryan or Indo-European
peoples. She speaks of it in the chapter entitled, The Force that Moves Atoms:


“There is a force in existence whose secret powers were thoroughly familiar to the
ancient theurgists but which is denied by modern sceptics. The antediluvian children—who
perhaps played with it, using it as the boys in Bulwer-Lytton’s The Coming Race use the
tremendous Vril—called in the “Water of Phtha”’; their descendants named it the Anima
Mundi, the soul of the universe; and still later the mediaeval hermetists termed it “sidereal
light”, or the “Milk of the Celestial Virgin”, the “Magnes”, and man other names. But our
modern learned men will neither accept nor recognize it under such appellations; for it
pertains to magic, and magic is, in their conception, a disgraceful superstition.”


She then refers to the Vril again-


311


“There has been an infinite confusion of names to express one and the same thing.
The chaos of the ancients; the Zoroastrian sacred fire, or the Antusbyrum of the Par- sees;
the Elmes-fire of the ancient Germans; the lightning of Cybele; the burning torch of Apollo;
the flame on the altar of Pan; the inextinguishable fire in the temple on the Acropolis, and in
that of Vesta; the fire-flame of Pluto’s helm; the brilliant sparks on the hats of the Dioscrui,
on the Gorgon’s head, the helm of Pallas, and the staff of Mercury; the Egyptian Phtha, or Ra;
the Grecian Zeus Cataibates (the descending); the pentecostal fire-tongues; the burning bush
of Moses; the pillar of fire of the Exodus, and the “burning lamp” of Abram; the eternal fire
of the “bottomless pit”, the Delphic oracular vapors; the Sidereal light of the Rosicrucians;
the Akasa of the Hindu adepts; the Astral light of Eliphas Levi; the nerve-aura and the fluid of
the magnetists; the od of Reichenbach; the ectenic force of Thury; the atmospheric magnetism
of some naturalists; galvanism; and finally, electricity, are but various names for many
different manifestations, or effects of the same mysterious, all-pervading causes—the Greek
Archeus. Sir E. Bulwer-Lytton, in his The Coming Race, describes it as the Vril, used by the
subterranean populations, and allowed his reader to take it for a fiction. “These people,” he
says, “consider that in the Vril they had arrived at the unity in natural energetic agencies”:
and proceeds to show that Faraday intimated them “under the more cautious term of


9»


correlation”.


The Vril represents an endless source of power that is neither energy nor matter. This
power can be tapped into and harnessed on a personal level. On a personal level, both as
individuals and collectively as a group, we can tap into this power source and use it for our
own personal needs. The Chinese knew something of the power of the Vril from their contact
with the Torcharians. They referred to it as Feng Shui, which means “wind and water.” It is
also known as Chi, which means “breath of life.” Chi is the force of the uni- verse, filling the
air, landscape, buildings, mountains. It exists everywhere in space—between the planets and
stars. It crisscrosses the landscape as energy lines or ley lines. The Romans believed in the
existence of the Vril and referred to it as Rhea Kybele, which is probably derived from the
Phrygian Goddess, Cybele. The Romans referred to women who had the power to see the
future and discover the will of the Gods, as Cybeles, who practiced a form of Seither Science.
Rhea Kybele means “the rolling astral light,” which was a divine source of universal fire or
“the creative spirit.” It was thought to be vibrating source of power that vibrated everywhere
in the universe and the breath of creative power. The Romans saw it as the ether which
cements an wholes existence together that exist between the invisible and the visible, spirit
and matter, light and darkness, order and chaos, mortals and Gods. It is the substance that
feeds the soul, being a source of astral light. It was fluid, and could be harnessed to magnify
the souls’ spiritual power. Such heroes as Hercules and Romulus were thought to possess a
natural ability to harness it power and give them great powers, which resulted in their divinity
after their deaths.


The Vril Force or Vril Energy was said to be derived from Dark Matter, Dark Energy,
or the 'Black Sun’, - represented as a Swastika made up of Sig runes - which supposedly exists
in the center of the Earth, giving light to the Vril-ya and putting out radiation in the form of
Vril. The term 'Schwarze Sonne’ (Black Sun), also referred to as the 'Sonnenrad' ("Sun
Wheel"), is a symbol of esoteric and occult significance. Its design is based on a sun wheel
mosaic incorporated into a floor of Wewelsburg Castle. It is also used in occult currents of
Germanic neopaganism, and in Irminenschaft or Armanenschaft - inspired esotericism. The
Vril Force or Vril Energy was said to be derived from the 'Black Sun! (dark matter or dark
energy), which is composed of "Prima Materia" which supposedly exists in the center of the
Earth, giving light to the Vril-ya, and putting out radiation in the form of Vril. This is the
force that the inner occult circle of the Thule were so desperately trying to unleash upon the
world, for which the 'Vril Society' had apparently groomed Adolf Hitler.


312


There are believed to be three ways one can access and use the Vril. First, we can
harness its power under our conscious control, to guide us along the path of mystical
transformation, as a force to help in the healing process of all functions of the body and mind,
or as an instrument to assist us to extend our will to control the actions of others. Second, the
Vril can be used to cause action and reaction on the physical plane of existence, creating
desirable outcomes in daily and long-term events in our lives and world-wide. This can be
done through the training of the one-point concentration of the will of the initiates, so that
they can concentrate their collective or individual will, focusing it like a laser, with the
purpose of bringing about a desired change. This is done by combining this one-point
concentration of the will with visualization. This operation is driven or powered by the
heightened emotional state of the initiates. Third, the Vril can be used to exercise and awaken
the Bifrost Gland, so that we can reconstruct the rainbow bridge, by that name, and through it,
reestablish a link between Midgard and Asgard. In this way, we are constructing lines of
communication between ourselves and the Gods.


This occult thinking concerning mystical transformation would also be greatly
influenced by the writings of Nietzsche, specifically of his Ubermensch. The triumph of the
Ubermensch over humanity reiterates the Gnostic theme of man as a higher being, fettered by
a corporeal prison (i.e., the body). Nietzsche's own version of Gnosis (revelatory experience)
is the "trans-valuation of values," and the 'enthronement' of self as the final moral authority.
In a Gnostic context, Nietzsche's concept of 'self-deification' is analogous to the
transformation of man's sensate being. In a Nietzschean context, Gnosticism's "immanentized
eschaton" becomes the governance of the "lords of the earth". Not surprisingly, Hitler shared


313


Nietzsche's Gnostic views. In order to create the Ubermensch, Hitler believed that he required
a racial foundation - and that was ‘die Herrenrasse' (the Master Race). It is very important to
note that the 'Ubermensch' and 'Herrenrasse' are not identical, and the former must be built on
the latter. The concept of the 'Herrenrasse' is purely biological, whereas the concept of the
'Ubermensch' is occult. The 'Herrenvolk' was a concept in Vélkisch ideology in which the
"Nordic race’, a branch of what in late-19th and early-20th century taxonomy was called the
‘Aryan race’, represented an ideal and "pure race".


This doctrine of transformation dates back nearly 6,000 years, finding its crucible in
Mesopotamia. It was the religious doctrine promulgated by the ancient Babylonian, Egyptian
and Hellenistic Mystery cults. The evolution of man into superman - was always the purpose
of the Ancient Mysteries, and it comes as little surprise that Nietzsche viewed the gods of the
Bacchic and Dionysian Mysteries so favorably. They embodied his faith in humanity's
emergent deity. Likewise, Hitler adhered to the religion of 'apotheosized man'. Some,
however, would go on to believe that such doctrines and ideas were seeded within humanity
as to guide them to their next stage of evolution by those beyond our world, Maria Orsic and
the Vril society as said to be followers of this theory. Another area of occult or mystical
transformation is that of Tantra and esoteric Buddhist schools, such as Vajrayana. Within
Kundalini Tantra specifically, it is about the understanding of chakra centers within the body
and the use of various techniques to attune these centers, such as through mantras. Through
this, one is able to transform themselves and achieve a level of power that was once hidden to
them.


314


Libet


Helena Blavatsky, a devotee of Guido von List and the founder of the first
Theosophical Society, did travel in India and Tibet. Theosophical ideas went on to heavily
influence the volkish movements and the NDSAP that grew out of them. Blavatsky’s occult
theory of human evolution being heavily obvious to anyone who has a passing familiarity
with general volkish ideas, for her theory contained the Hyperborean, Lemurean, and
Atlantean races. The influences are quite clear, the NSDAP being clearly interesting in a
variety of lost civilizations, such as Atlantis, Thule, and Hyperborea. Blavatsky was of the
opinion that Atlantis may have correlated with the mythic Buddhist lands of ‘Shambhala’ and
the capital city of Agarthi in Hindu tradition, located under the Himalayas, where the
successors of the third root race of Lemurians resided. The Ludendorff circle likewise argued
that there was a secret conspiracy of ‘Asiatic priests’ led by the Dalai Lama

living in Tibet who were ‘prepared to use any methods in championing their claim to world
domination — including monstrous genocide’.


Expeditions had been carried out by the Sven Hedin Institute for Inner Asian
Research. The institute was named for the famous Swedish explorer Sven Hedin (a
monarchist) whose memoirs 'My Life As An Explorer! were popular worldwide for their tales
of Hedin's travels throughout Tibet. Hedin's descriptions of hidden cities deep within the
Himalayas were as much a source for Nazi interest in Tibet as Blavatsky's theosophical vision
of the East. Though never an official member of the Ahnenerbe (the old explorer was in his
seventies during the war and was against antisemitism), Hedin corresponded with the
organization and was present when the Institute for Inner Asian Research was formally
established in Munich on January 1943. Hedin's closest contact in the Ahnenerbe was Ernst
Schafer, who commanded the Institute for Inner Asian Research and was eventually
responsible for all scientific projects within the Ahnenerbe. Under the influence of Haushofer
and the Thule Society, in 1937, Himmler decided he could increase the Ahnenerbe’s visibility
by sending a large scale expedition to Tibet under the leadership of Ernst Schafer. There were
rumors of secret tasks that included the SS making overtures to the Reting Regent to lay the
groundwork for a German invasion of India through Tibet. Tibet expedition was also involved
in "geophysical" research to prove the Hanns Hérbiger's "World Ice Theory", which may have
included the search for fossilized remains of "giants" as part of the cosmology of the theory.
The final inventory from the expedition included 20,000 black-and-white photographs, 2,000
colour photographs, 17 head casts and the measurements of 376 people, as well as having sent
back specimens of three breeds of Tibetan dogs, rare feline species, wolves, badgers, foxes,
animal and bird skins, and the seeds for 1,600 types of barley, 700 varieties of wheat, 700
varieties of oats and hundreds of other types of seeds. In addition, the team had been given a
Tibetan mastiff, a gold coin and the robe of a lama (believed by Schafer to have been worn by
the Dalai Lama) to be gifted to Adolf Hitler. Another interesting acquisition of the expedition
was the 108-volume sacred document of the Tibetans, the 'Kangschur'. Schafer arrived in
Munich on August 4, 1939, and was greeted personally by Himmler, who presented him with
the SS skull ring and dagger of honour. Because of the war, Schafer’s writings about the trip
were not published until 1950, under the title 'Festival of the White Gauze Scarves: A
research expedition through Tibet to Lhasa, the holy city of the god realm'.


Ernst Schafer admitted hat he had ‘experienced truly strange things’ in the context
of Tibetan occultism, similar to phenomena recorded by parapsychologists such as; mind-
reading and telepathy, clairvoyance, second sight, mediumism and trance states, levitation,
and spook-phenomena. German parapsychologist Hans Bender finished his dissertation on
ESP in 1933 while joining the SA as well and the NSDAP in 1937. Bender’s work on
clairvoyance attracted considerable media attention in the mid-1930 and was extremely


316


grateful that the NSDAP appeared to support his work. By the late 1930s parapsychology had
been legitimized and Bender had become its most prominent figure, so prominent that even
after the 1937 crackdown, high-ranking state ministries and party officials supported him, and
continued to do so after the Hess Action.


Otto Rahn’s second book, Lucifer’s Court (1937), written under the auspices of
Himmler’s Ahnenerbe, would also reference Tibet. In it Rahn speculated that the Grail lay at
the centre of a Cathar cult of Luciferians who practised an Ur-Aryan religion that was drawn
from Tibet and northern India, via Persia, in pre-modern times. Rahn argued that the Cathars
were in actuality practised a variation of Tibetan Buddhism which originally was invented in
the Nordic Atlantis and transferred to Tibet after the flood, only to return to the Germanic
peoples via northern India and Persia. Walther Wiist had a similar theory, that the Germans
are descendants of Atlantis, an ancient Indo-Germanic Empire whose religious teachings
survived in South Asian Buddhism, preserved by the monks of Tibet. Herman Wirth, the first
director of the Ahnenerbe, insisted on the commonalities in race and culture between Nordic
“Hyperboreans’, who lived in the city state of Ultima Thule, and the Indo-Aryan peoples of
the Veda, Brahmana, and Mahabharata. Fuelled by these ideas Himmler himself became
convinced that an ‘advanced civilization’ had once existed ‘in the mountains of Tibet’,
possibly ‘the product of an original, sophisticated race that had sought refuge there from a
global catastrophe’. The civilization in question must have been connected to the legend of
‘Atlantis’. After some kind of natural catastrophe ‘the stranded ruling class of Atlantis’,
Himmler reasoned, ‘spread out from there to Europe and East Asia’. He further confided to
Schafer ‘that the Nordic race did not evolve, but came directly down from heaven to settle on
the Atlantic continent’, citing the Japanese General Oshima’s belief ‘in a similar theory
concerning the origin of the noble castes in Japan’ (which Oshima personally explained to
Hitler as well). In fact, many NSDAP leaders and SS scientists dismissed the idea that humans
evolved from apes as ‘scientifically totally false’ and ‘quite insulting to humans’. They
believed rather that Aryans descended from an ancient ruling class of God-men who had
taken root in Tibet, which added clearly supernatural, faith based contours to their racial
hygienic project. Himmler encouraged his Tibet specialists to research the lost civilization of
Shambala and ordered Heydrich’s successor as SD and Gestapo (RSHA) chief, Ernst
Kaltenbrunner, to export Buddhism to occupied territories.


Biographer Peter Longerich would give an outline of the Reichsfiihrer’s religious
and paint a clear ideological picture: ‘the restoration of a de-Christianized, Germanic’
spirituality through the ‘myths of Atlantis and Tibet’ and ‘via Cosmic Ice Theory /astrology
/astronomy’. Through this mélange of history and myth, Germanic paganism, reincarnation,
and occultism, combined with esoteric theories of creation, ‘a real substitute religion was
created’. Certainly Himmler was more invested in this particular conception of a ‘substitute
religion’ than Hitler, Goebbels, or even Rosenberg.


B17


Che Loft Aryan Homeland


The idea of a fabulous and mysterious homeland of the Aryan people, lying hidden
somewhere in the far northern latitudes had a rich provenance not only in the tradition of
Western occultism, but also in the burgeoning science of anthropology. (Indeed, the very
concept of an Aryan Race owed its existence as much to philology as any other branch of
enquiry.) The German Romantics were greatly attracted to Oriental philosophy and mysticism,
in particular the Zend-Avesta, the sacred text of the ancient Persians.


Thinkers of the calibre of Goethe, Nietzsche, Arthur Schopenhauer and Richard
Wagner found in the Orient a system of philosophy and historiography that allowed them to
abandon the unsatisfactory world view of Judeo- Christianity.


Allied with this admiration for the Orient was a rediscovery of the German Volk, the
pre-Christian Teutonic tribes whose descendants, the Goths, had brought about the final
destruction of the decadent Roman Empire. The problem faced by the German Romantics was
how to forge a historical connection between themselves and the Orient, which they
considered to be the cradle of humanity and the origin of the highest human ideals.


Instrumental in the forging of this link was the classical scholar Friedrich von
Schlegel (1772-1829), who attempted to establish a historical and cultural contact between the
Indians and the Scandinavians through which the Scandinavian languages could have been
influenced by the Indian. Schlegel solved this problem by stating that the ancient Aryans had
travelled to the far north, as a result of their veneration for the sacred mountain, Meru, which
they believed to constitute the spiritual centre of the world. It was actually Schlegel who
coined the term Aryan in 1819, to denote a distinct racial group.


318


Schlegel took the word Aryan, which had already been derived from the ancient
Greek historian Herodotus. At that point, the word Aryan came to denote the highest, purest
and most honourable racial group. This historical scheme was added to by other thinkers such
as Christian Lassen, who stated that the Indo- Germans were inherently biologically superior
to the Semites. According to the historian Leon Poliakov, by 1860 cultivated Europeans had
come to accept that there was a fundamental division between Aryans and Semites. In this
scheme, Nordic Europeans were of the Aryan Race, an this race had come from the high
plateaus of Asia (hence the Ahnenerbe's interest in Tibet). There had dwelt together the
ancestors of the Indians, Persians, Greeks, Romans, Germans, and Celts, before setting off to
populate Europe.


In the desire to rediscover the ultimate mythical and cultural roots of the master race,
the Ahnenerbe turned away from the heat of the biblical Mesopotamian Eden, and looked
instead to the cool and pristine fastness of the Far North. The eighteenth-century polymath
Jean-Sylvain Bailly (1736-1793) had already done much of the groundwork for a radical re-
interpretation of humanity's origin with his highly original combination of Eastern mysticism
and astronomy. According to Bailly, the ancient cultures of Egypt and Chaldea, and India
were actually the heirs of a far older body of knowledge, possessed in the distant past by a
long-lost superior culture living in the antediluvian North. Bailly believed that it was this
ancient culture that invented the zodiac in around 4600 BC. Members of this civilisation had
then moved from northern Asia to India. For Bailly, this assertion was supported by the
similarity of certain legends in later cultures living far from each other: for example, the
legend of the Phoenix, which is found both in Egypt and in the Scandinavian Eddas.


Bailly equated the details of the Phoenix's death and rebirth with the annual
disappearance of the Sun for 65 days at 71A° North latitude.He went on to compare the
Phoenix with the Roman god Janus, the god of time, who is represented with the number 300
in his right hand, and the number 65 in his left (corresponding, of course, with the 300 days of
daylight and 65 days of darkness each year in the far northern latitudes).


Bailly thus concluded that Janus was actually a northern god, who had moved south
with his original worshippers in the distant past. In support of his theory, Bailly also cited the
legend of Adonis, who was required by Jupiter to spend one third of each year on Mount
Olympus, one third with Venus and one third in Hades with Persephone. Bailly connected this
legend with conditions in the geographical area at 79° North latitude, where the Sun
disappears for four months (one third) of the year. To Bailly, this strongly suggested the
preservation of the ancient knowledge of a Nordic civilisation, which had been encoded in
numerous legends passed down to subsequent cultures.


Researchers at the Ahnenerbe speculated that the date for the first appearance of the
Aryans in the polar regions at 25,628 BC, was during the Interglacial Age. The Aryans were
forced to leave their homeland as the environment grew steadily colder and more hostile. The
advent of the Ice Age that scattered the Aryans from their pleasant homeland was just one of a
number


of global catastrophes that proved the downfall of at least three other ancient
civilizations: Atlantis, Lemuria and the culture occupying what is now the Gobi Desert. From
that point the Aryan tradition influenced the great civilizations of Egypt, Sumer and Babylon.
The great Russian occultist Helena Blavatsky, had considerable information to divulge on the
nature of the lost civilizations whose philosophy and knowledge were passed down, in
frequently garbled form, to the great civilizations of the Middle and Far East.


According to Blavatsky, who had consulted a fantastically old document entitled the
'Stanzas of Dzyan' while in Tibet, our remote ancestors occupied a number of lost continents,
the first of which she describes as 'The Imperishable Sacred Land’, an eternal place
unencumbered by the sometimes violent fates reserved for other continents, that was the home
of the first human and also of 'the last divine mortals'. The Second Continent was Hyperborea,
the land which stretched out its promontories southward and westward from the North Pole to
receive the Second Race, and comprised the whole of what is now known as Northern Asia.
The 'Second Race' refers to one of the Root Races.Blavatsky continues:


“The land of the Hyperboreans, the country that extended beyond Boreas, the
frozen-hearted god of snows and hurricanes, who loved to slumber heavily on the chain of
Mount Riphaeus, was neither an ideal country, as surmised by the mythologists, nor yet a
land in the neighbourhood of Scythia and the Danube. It was a real continent, a bond-fide
land which knew no winter in those early days, nor have its remains more than one night and
day during the year, even now. The nocturnal shadows never fall upon it, said the Greeks; for
it is the land of the Gods, the favourite abode of Apollo, the god of light, and its inhabitants
are his beloved priests and servants. This may be regarded as poetised fiction now; but it was
poetised truth then.”


The Third Continent was Lemuria (so called by the zoologist P. L. Sclater in
reference to a hypothetical sunken continent extending from Madagascar to Sri Lanka and
Sumatra).


The Fourth Continent was Atlantis


“Tt would be the first historical land, were the traditions of the ancients to receive
more attention than they have hitherto. The famous island of Plato of that name was but a
fragment of this great Continent.”


In her description of the Fifth Continent, Blavatsky evokes images of cataclysmic
seismic shifts in the land mass of the Earth: The Fifth Continent is Europe and Asia Minor.
The 'Secret Doctrine' takes no account of islands and peninsulas, nor does it follow the
modern geographical distribution of land and sea. Since the day of its earliest teachings and
the destruction of the great Atlantis, the face of the earth has changed more than once. There
was a time when the delta of Egypt and Northern Africa belonged to Europe, before the
formation of the Straits of Gibraltar, and a further upheaval of the continent, changed entirely
the face of the map of Europe. The last serious change occurred some 12,000 years ago, and
was followed by the submersion of Plato's little Atlantic island, which he calls 'Atlantis' after
its parent continent. Blavatsky read in the 'Stanzas of Dzyan' that the Earth contained seven
great continents, 'four of which have already lived their day, the fifth still exists, and two are
to appear in the future.’ Aside from the Stanzas of Dzyan, Blavatsky drew on a huge number
of religious texts, including the Hindu Puranas, which speak of a land called Svita-Dvipa
(Hyperborea), or the White Island, at the centre of which is Mount Meru, the spiritual centre
of the world If we accept the attributes given to Mount Meru in the sacred texts of the Hindus
- it must be conceded that the mountain does not exist anywhere on the physical Earth. This
has led Orientalists to speculate that the White Island and Mount Meru are situated in another


321


dimension occupying that same apparent space as Earth, and which is visible (and reachable)
to beings possessing a sufficiently advanced spirituality.


The legendary realm of 'Hyperborea' also formed a centrepiece in the writings of the
French occultist Rene Guenon (1886-1951) who, like Blavatsky, claimed to have received his
information from hidden Oriental sources. Guenon's Hyperborea is very similar to Blavatsky's.
Along with the later Atlantean civilisation, Hyperborea was the origin of all religious and
spiritual tradition in our own modern world. Guenon also wrote of Mount Meru, although in
symbolic terms. It seems from his essays on symbology that Guenon did not regard Meru as
an actual mountain situated at the North Pole, but rather as a symbol of the earth's axis that
passes through the pole and points to the Arktoi, the constellations of the Great and Little
Bears. At this point, we should pause to consider a question that may have occurred to the
reader: assuming the existence of the prehistoric Root Races of humanity, why have none of
their remains ever been discovered and excavated by archaeologists and palaeontologist’s?
Apart from the obvious but not particularly satisfactory answer that the vast majority of the
Earth's fossil record has yet to be discovered, it should be remembered that, according to
Guenon, Blavatsky and the other Theosophists, the early Earth and its fabulous primordial
inhabitants were not solid, corporeal entities, but were composed of a rarefied spiritual
substance that only later descended into the material state. It is for this reason that their
remains have never been discovered. It is easy to see how the central tenets of Theosophy -
the ancient civilizations, the origins of the Aryan race, and that race's position of high nobility
- were attractive to the German occultists and nationalists, who so hated the modern world of
the late nineteenth and early twentieth centuries. Modernism in general was seen as being
largely an urban, sophisticated, Jewish phenomenon, and this included certain aspects of
science, technology, the Industrial Revolution, and of course capitalism. The doctrines of the
Theosophists successfully fused science and mysticism, taking Darwin's theories regarding
natural selection, and the survival of the fittest, and applying them to the concept of a spiritual
struggle between the races of Earth (resulting in the Aryan race), which was a necessary
component in the evolution of the spirit. It should be remembered that Blavatsky's works
appear to be the result of prodigious scholarship and were extremely convincing. The
rationale behind many later vélkisch projects can be traced back - through the writings of von
List, von Sebottendorff, and von Liebenfels - to ideas first popularized by Blavatsky. A caste
system of races, the importance of ancient alphabets (notably the runes), the superiority of the
Aryans (a white race with its origins in the Himalayas), an version of astrology and astronomy,
the cosmic truths coded within pagan myths ... all of these and more can be found both in
Blavatsky and in National Socialism itself, specifically in the ideology of the SS and the
Ahnenerbe. It was, after all, Blavatsky who pointed out the supreme occult significance of the
Hakenkreuz (swastika).


It is a matter of historical record that the Ahenerbe mounted expeditions to Iceland,
Antarctica and Tibet. The true reasons for these expeditions, however, have been the subject
of considerable debate throughout the decades since the end of the war. The vélkisch concept
of Thule can be traced to Guido von List, Jorg Lanz von Liebenfels and Rudolf von
Sebottendorff, who conceived of it as the ancient homeland of the Aryan race.


The vélkisch fascination with the Scandinavian Eddas led von Sebottendorff to
conclude that the supposedly long-vanished land of Thule was actually Iceland. This link with
the lost Aryan homeland prompted an intense interest in the possibility of discovering further
clues to their remote history, indeed, to their very origin, among the caves and prehistoric
monuments of the island. An organization called the "Nordic Society' was established at
Lubeck by Alfred Rosenberg (1893-1945), the vélkisch mystic, philosopher, and editor of the
'Volkischer Beobachter'. The society counted among its members representatives from
Norway, Sweden, Finland, Denmark and Iceland, who were drawn together in order to defend
the Nordic nations against the Soviet, Jewish and Masonic threat. Rosenberg explained his


322


Thulean mythology in his book 'Der Mythus des 20. Jahrhunderts! (The Myth of the
Twentieth Century), published in 1930, which was a massive best-seller in Germany. In the
first chapter of the book, Rosenberg explains the basis of his belief in an ancient Aryan
homeland in the north:


'The geologists show us a continent between North America and Europe, whose
remains we can see today in Greenland and Iceland. They tell us that islands on the other side
of the Far North (Novaia Zemlya) display former tide marks over 100 metres higher than
today's; they make it probable that the North Pole has wandered, and that a much milder
climate once reigned in the present Arctic. All this allows the ancient legend of Atlantis to
appear in a new light. It seems not impossible that where the waves of the Atlantic Ocean now
crash and pull off giant icebergs, once a blooming continent rose out of the water, on which a
creative race raised a mighty, wide- ranging culture, and sent its children out into the world
as seafarers and warriors. But even if this Atlantean hypothesis is not thought tenable, one
has to assume that there was a prehistoric northern center of culture.'


The expeditions were authorized by Heinrich Himmler under the auspices of the
Ahnenerbe. German interest in Antarctic exploration goes back to 1873, when Eduard
Dallman mounted an expedition in his steamship Gronland on behalf of the newly founded
German Society of Polar Research. Less than 60 years later, the Swiss explorer Wilhelm
Filchner, who had already led an expedition to Tibet in 1903-05, planned to lead two
expeditions to Antarctica with the intention of determining if the continent was a single piece
of land. Filchner's plans called for two ships, one to enter the Weddell Sea and one to enter
the Ross Sea. Two groups would then embark on a land journey and attempt to meet at the
centre of the continent. This plan, however, proved too expensive, and so a single ship, the
‘Deutschland’, was used. The 'Deutschland' was a Norwegian ship specifically designed for
work in polar regions, and was acquired with the help of Ernest Shackleton, Otto
Nordenskjold and Fridtjof Nansen. The expedition reached the Weddell Sea in December
1911. Another expedition was mounted in 1925 with the polar expedition ship 'Meteor' under
the command of Dr Albert Merz. Prior to World War II German scientists were obsessed with
Antarctica. Far from finding a desolate wasteland covered with ice, the Germans discovered
ice-free areas, warm water lakes and cavern systems. The Germans also got interested in
Queen Maud land (or "Neuschwabenland" as referred to by the Germans - Germany was
called "Schwabenland" before it was called Germany - so Neuschwabenland means "New
Germany"). Neuschwabenland is dominated by the giant shelf of ice, flowing slowly from
King Haakon VII - plateau over the South Pole, down to the ocean. This area is called
"Fenriskjeften" after the mouth of the giant Devil-wolf in Norse mythology. According to this
mythology Fenris! (the wolf) teeth were very sharp, and they would kill all people on Earth
during Ragnarok - the end of the world. Most of the mountains in Fenriskjeften have names
with analogies to teeth, or to other parts of the Norse.


The use of wolf symbology is interesting as it touches upon a theme in vélkisch
symbology which used the wolf as a totem of the hunter: Hitler's retreat in Berchtesgaden,
Bavaria was nicknamed "Wolf's Lair", and the tactic used by German U-Boats to defeat
convoys during the War was called "Wolfpack." Hitler, of course, also used the alias "Wolf or
'Herr Wolf. In the years running up to the Second World War, Germany wanted a foothold in
Antarctica, both for the propaganda value of demonstrating the power of the Third Reich and
also because of the territory's strategic significance in the South Atlantic. On 17 December
1938, an expedition was despatched under the command of Captain Alfred Ritscher to the
South Atlantic coast of Antarctica and arrived there on 19 January 1939. The expedition's ship
was the 'Schwabenland', an aircraft carrier that had been used since 1934 for transatlantic mail
delivery.


323


The 'Schwabenland', which had been prepared for the expedition in the Hamburg
shipyards at a cost of one million Reichsmarks, was equipped with two Dornier seaplanes, the
‘Passat! and the 'Boreas', which were launched from its flight deck by steam catapults and
which made fifteen flights over the territory which Norwegian explorers had named 'Queen
Maud Land’. The aircraft covered approximately 600,000 square kilometers, took more than
11,000 photographs of the 'Princess Astrid' and 'Princess Martha’ coasts of western 'Queen
Maud Land’, and dropped several thousand drop-flags (metal poles with swastikas).


The area was claimed for the Third Reich, and was renamed 'Neu Schwabenland'.
Perhaps the most surprising discovery made by this expedition was a number of large, ice-free
areas, containing lakes and sparse vegetation. The expedition geologists suggested that this
might have been due to underground heat sources. In mid-February 1939, the 'Schwabenland'
left Antarctica and returned to Hamburg. The secret expedition had 33 members plus the
Schwabenland's crew of 24. On 19 January 1939 the ship arrived at the Princess Martha Coast
and began charting the region.German flags were placed on the sea ice along the coast.
Naming the area 'Neu-Schwabenland' after the ship, the expedition established a base, and in
the following weeks teams walked along the coast recording claim reservations on hills and
other significant landmarks. Seven photographic survey flights were made by the ship’s two
Dornier Wal seaplanes named Passat and Boreas.


The Dornier Do J Wal ("whale") was a twin-engine German flying boat of the 1920s
designed by Dornier Flugzeugwerke. The Do J was designated the Do 16 by the Reich Air
Ministry (RLM) under its aircraft designation system of 1933. About a dozen 1.2 meter-long
aluminum arrows, with 30 centimeter steel cones and three upper stabilizer wings embossed
with swastikas, were air dropped onto the ice at turning points of the flight polygons (these
arrows had been tested on the Pasterze glacier in Austria before the expedition). Eight more
flights were made to areas of keen interest, and on these trips some of the photos were taken
with colour film. Altogether they flew over hundreds of thousands of square kilometres, and
took more than 16,000 aerial photographs, some of which were published after the war by
Ritscher.


On its return trip to Germany the expedition made oceanographic studies near
Bouvet Island and Fernando de Noronha, arriving back in Hamburg on 11 April 1939.
Ritscher was surprised at the findings of the expedition, particularly the ice-free areas, and
immediately began to plan another journey upon his arrival home. These plans, however,
were apparently abandoned with the outbreak of war. Large, Cargo Carrying Submarines -
Type XXI - Elektroboot It has been suggested, however, that the 1938-39 expedition had
been to look for a suitable ice-free region on the continent that could be used for a secret base
after the war. There is evidence that throughout the war, the Third Reich sent ships, (an in
particular large, cargo carrying submarines), and aircraft to 'Neu Schwabenland' with enough
equipment and manpower to build massive complexes under the ice, or in well-hidden ice-
free areas, and at the close of the war selected scientists and SS troops left Europe and went to
Antarctica.
As Grand Admiral Karl Dénitz stated in 1943:


"Germany's submarine fleet is proud that it created an unassailable fortress for the
Fiihrer on the other end of the world."


Rumours began to circulate that, whilst Germany had been defeated, a selection of
military personnel, Hitler Youth and scientists had left the fatherland, as allied troops swept
across mainland Europe, and had established themselves at a secret base on the Antarctic
continent, from where they continued to develop their advanced aircraft technology.
Furthermore, it is interesting to note that at the end of the war, the allies determined that there
were 250,000 Germans unaccounted for - even taking into account casualties and deaths. In


324


addition, until today more than 100 submarines of the German fleet are missing. Among those
are many of the highly technological XXI class equipped with the so-called 'Walterschnorkel’,
a special designed and coated Schnorkel enabling submarines in combination with their new
developed engines to dive for many thousand miles. A 'trip' to the base without recognition
becomes more than possible with this technology.


Could Neu Schwabenland have been a permanently manned German base at that
time ? The brackish water of the warm (30 degrees) lakes virtually confirmed that all had an
outlet to the sea and would thus have been a haven for U-boats. The two ice-free mountain
ranges in Neu Schwabenland presented no worse an underground tunneling project for
Organization Todt than anything they had encountered and overcome in Norway, and the
Germans were the world's experts at building and inhabiting underground metropolis. At the
end of the war the United States gave anything concerning Ohrdruf a top secret classification
for 100 years upwards. The fact that there had been substantial underground workings there,
and Ohrdruf was the location of the last Redoubt, was concealed absolutely. Fortunately for
researchers, in 1962 the DDR had taken sworn depositions from all local residents during an
investigation into wartime Ohrdruf, and upon the reunification of the two Germanys in 1989,
these documents became available to all and sundry at Arnstadt municipal archive. From the
Arnstadt documents it is clear that the Charite Anlage unit operated in a three-story
underground bunker with floors 70 by 20 meters. When working, the device emitted some
kind of energy field which shut down all electrical equipment and non-diesel engines within a
range of about eight miles. For this reason, even though Ohrdruf was crawling with SS, it was
never photographed from the air nor bombed. Declassified USAF documents dated early 1945
admit the existence of an unknown energy field over Frankfurt/Main "and other locations"
which were able to "interfere with our aircraft engines at 30,000 feet." Ohrdruf, rebuilt below
Neu Schwabenland during the last two years of the war, would not have been difficult, and
since Charite Anlage had the highest priority of anything in the Third Reich, it seems likely
that it must have been. Such a base would have been impregnable, for the suggestion is that
the force-field worked in various ways favourable to the occupants.


325


Glacial Cofmogony


Born 29 November 1860, in Atzgersdorf, Johannes "Hanns" Evangelist Horbiger was
an Austrian engineer from Vienna with roots in Tyrol. Hérbiger's cosmology is known as the
Welteislehre (World Ice Theory), - also known as Glazial-Kosmogonie (Glacial Cosmogony).
Horbiger did not arrive at his theory through research, but said that he had received it in a
"vision" in 1894. According to his theory, ice was the basic substance of all cosmic processes,
and ice moons, ice planets, and the "global ether" (also made of ice) had determined the entire
development of the universe. By his own account, Hérbiger was observing the Moon when he
was struck by the notion that the brightness and roughness of its surface was due to ice.
Shortly after, he experienced a dream in which he was floating in space watching the
swinging of a pendulum which grew longer and longer until it broke."I knew that Newton had
been wrong and that the sun's gravitational pull ceases to exist at three times the distance of
Neptune," he concluded. The earth, Hérbiger stated, is a meeting-point between ice and fire:
Horbiger taught that it had already attracted three moons, and that the one we see at present is
the fourth, which, of course, is made of ice. Like its predecessors, this moon will eventually
collide with our planet, and then it will be the turn of Mars. All of earth's history is the result
of the forces exerted by its successive moons, and can be divided into four distinct geological
epochs; at the end of each epoch, the cosmic forces are at their strongest, due to the closeness
of the moon, and the result has been beings of gigantic size.


The first epoch culminated in the age of giant vegetation and insects: the second in
the dinosaurs, the giant mammals, and the first human beings, a race of giants, as mentioned
in Genesis 6.4, who ruled the earth some 15,000,000 years ago: the third was the mythical
Golden Age, that of Lemuria, Atlantis and Thule, destroyed by the cataclysm of the third
moon falling on the Earth 150,000 years ago; the fourth age is our own. According to
Horbiger, the beginning of this age was marked by battles between the giants who had
survived the third, and the men of the fourth, as recorded in mythologies. Other giants taught
men to found the ancient civilizations of South America, Egypt, Mesopotamia, India and
China. Eventually the giants died out, and man declined into the drabness of Judaeo-Christian
civilization, where he forgot his glorious heritage. But this is only temporary. Affected by the
cosmic rays of a moon which is spiraling imperceptibly closer, man will awaken to a
realization of his place in a living universe, mutations will transform his existence, and demi-
gods and giants will again arise in our midst. Horbiger averred that an 'uprush of fire' was
imminent, that great initiates would co-operate once more with the cosmos and its struggle
between ice and fire, that Supermen would once more walk the earth's surface, and that before
them the slave-men would tremble and obey.


Horbiger worked out his theory in collaboration with the astronomer and
schoolteacher Philipp Fauth, who he met in 1898, and published it as Glazial-Kosmogonie in
1912. Fauth had previously produced a large lunar map and had a considerable following,
which lent Hérbiger's theory some respectability. It did not receive a great deal of attention at
the time, but following World War I Horbiger decided to change his strategy by promoting
the new "cosmic truth" not only to people at universities and academies, but also to the
general public. Hérbiger thought that if "the masses" accepted his ideas then they might put
enough pressure on the academic establishment to force his theory into the mainstream. No
effort was spared in popularizing the theory: "cosmotechnical" societies were founded, which
offered public lectures that attracted large audiences, there were cosmic ice movies and radio
programs, and even cosmic ice journals and novels. The followers of the theory exerted a
great deal of public pressure on behalf of the theory. The movement published posters,
pamphlets, and books, and even a newspaper, 'The Key to World Events'. A company owned
by an adherent would only hire people who declared themselves convinced of the theory's


326


truth. Some followers even attended astronomical meetings to heckle, shouting, "Out with
astronomical orthodoxy! Give us Hérbiger!" During this period, the name was changed from
the Graeco-Latin Glazial-Kosmogonie to the more Germanic Welteislehre ("World ice
doctrine"). One of the early supporters of Hérbiger's theories was Houston Stewart
Chamberlain, the leading theorist behind the early development of the National Socialist Party
in Germany in 1923.


Two organizations were set up in Vienna concerned with the theory, the
Kosmotechnische Gesellschaft and the Hérbiger Institute. The first was formed in 1921 by a
group of enthusiastic adherents of the Theory, which included engineers, physicians, civil
servants, and businessmen. Most had been personally acquainted with Hérbiger, and had
attended his many lectures. Among Horbiger's followers was Viennese author Egon Friedell,
who explained the World Ice Theory in his 1930 ‘Cultural History of the Modern Age'. After
Horbiger’s death in 1931, the followers of the Welteislehre came to the conclusion that given
the changing political situation in Germany, aligning the theory with National Socialism
would eventually lead to its acceptance; the Welteislehre had already been heavily and
successfully promoted as the "German antithesis" of the "Jewish" theory of relativity in the
late 1920s. And so the movement became more and more pro-Nazi, with the Welteislehre
supporters saying things like: "Our Nordic ancestors grew strong in ice and snow; belief in
the Cosmic Ice is consequently the natural heritage of Nordic Man.", - "Just as it needed a
child of Austrian culture - Hitler! - to put the Jewish politicians in their place, so it needed an
Austrian to cleanse the world of Jewish science.". Both Himmler and Hitler can be counted as
followers of Hérbiger's, as can be seen in Hitler’s Table Talk;


“I'm quite inclined to accept the cosmic theories of Horbiger. It's not impossible, in fact, that
10,000 years before our era there was a clash between the earth and the moon that gave the
moon its present orbit. It's also possible that the earth attracted to itself the atmosphere of the
moon and that this radically altered the conditions of life on our planet ... It seems to me that
these questions will be capable of solution on the day when a man will intuitively establish
the connection between these facts, thus teaching exact science the path to follow...... It was a
great step forward in the days of Ptolemy to say that the earth was a sphere and that the stars
circulated around it. Since then there has been continual progress ... Copernicus first.
Copernicus, in his turn, has been largely left behind and things will always be so. In our time,
Horbiger has made another step forward ...The real question is whether the earth came from
the sun or whether it has a tendency to approach it.For me there is no doubt that planetary
satellites are attracted by the planets, just as the latter are attracted by a fixed point, the sun.
Since there is no such thing as a vacuum it is possible that the planets' speed of rotation and
movement may grow slower. Thus it is not impossible, for example, that Mars may become
one day- a satellite of earth ... I shall construct ... an observatory in which will be represented
the three great cosmological conceptions of history’ — those of Ptolemy, Copernicus and
Horbiger.”


It has been said that the real reason both Hitler and Himmler favored the theory was
to counterbalance the perceived Jewish influence on the sciences, similar to the 'Deutsche
Physik' movement. Hérbiger's theory was for instance opposed to Albert Einstein's theory of
relativity. Dozens of scientific journals, books, and even novels were published on this topic.
Horbiger's theories became generally accepted among the population of Nazi Germany and a
German Hérbiger Organization had thousands of members. The NSDAP also considered the
"World Ice Theory' valuable because of its supposed value in weather forecasting. The 1938
'Zur Welteismeteorologie' ("On World Ice Meteorology") by Dr. E. Dinies, published by the
Reichs Office for Weather Service quotes from Hérbiger's Glazial-Kosmogonie and provided
tables of data comparing ice and air temperatures for relative humidity values. A growing
group of ‘believing scientists' expanded the theory during the last years of World War II.


327


Following the Anschluss of March 1938, the Kosmotechnische Gesellschaft was liquidated by
the NSDAP and its funds seized. The Hérbiger Institute, which was a small association which
collected funds for research, was left in possession of all Hérbiger's scientific material,
including a library and a large collection of valuable drawings covering astronomy,
meteorology, and geology as they related to the Hérbiger Theory.


According to the theory, the solar system had its origin in a gigantic star into which a
smaller, dead, waterlogged star fell. This impact caused a huge explosion which flung
fragments of the smaller star out into interstellar space where the water condensed and froze
into giant blocks of ice. A ring of such blocks formed, which we now call the Milky Way, as
well as a number of solar systems among which was our own, but with many more planets
than currently exist. Interplanetary space is filled with traces of hydrogen gas, which cause the
planets to slowly spiral inwards, along with ice blocks. The outer planets are large mainly
because they have swallowed a large number of ice blocks, but the inner planets have not
swallowed nearly as many. One can see ice blocks on the move in the form of meteors, and
when one collides with the Earth, it produces hailstorms over an area of many square
kilometers, while when one falls into the Sun, it produces a sunspot and gets vaporized,
making "fine ice," which covers the innermost planets. It was also claimed that the Earth had
had several satellites before it acquired the Moon; they began as planets in orbits of their own,
but over long spans of time were captured one by one and slowly spiraled in towards the Earth
until it disintegrated and its debris became part of the Earth's structure. One can supposedly
identify the rock strata of several geological eras with the impacts of these satellites. The last
such impact, of the "Tertiary" or "Cenozoic Moon" and the capture of our present Moon, is
supposedly remembered through myths and legends. This was worked out in detail by
Horbiger's English follower Hans Schindler Bellamy; Bellamy recounted how as a child he
would often dream about a large moon that would spiral closer and closer in until it burst,
making the ground beneath roll and pitch, awakening him and giving him a very sick feeling.
When he looked at the Moon's surface through a telescope, he found its surface looking
troublingly familiar. When he learned of Hérbiger's theory in 1921, he found it a description
of his dream. He explained the mythological support he found in such books as 'Moons,
Myths, and Man’, 'In the Beginning God’, and 'The Book of Revelation is History’. It was
believed that our current Moon was the sixth since the Earth began and that a new collision
was inevitable. Believers argued that the great flood described in the Bible and the destruction
of Atlantis were caused by the fall of previous moons. Although Horbiger's theories have
much in common with those of Immanuel Velikovsky (parallels between the two were drawn
by Martin Gardner in Chapter Three of his Fads and Fallacies in the Name of Science), the
scientific community had a much calmer reaction to Hérbiger's theories than to Velikovsky's,
and his publisher was never boycotted.


328


Che tnd of the Abnenerbe


To avoid Allied bombing, the Ahnenerbe relocated to Waischenfeld in Franconia on
August 1943. There they remained until American forces took the city in April 1945. The war
ended before the Ahnenerbe found another permanent home, and, during the interim period, a
great number of documents were destroyed. Had the Ahnenerbe survived the war, Himmler
planned to use its members to staff an SS-University at Leyden in the Netherlands. Those that
survived the war faded back into academia under their own or false names.


329


hitler | UTD againjt the New
World Order


THE INTRODUCTION


September 5, 1938. Fifty-five years have now been fulfilled since the Chilean Nazi
Heroes were murdered after having surrendered to a deception. It made three 5's when we
came together at this cemetery 5 years ago (fifty years, September 5, five p.m.) and now again
today. This achieves the Hyperborean magic; magic that guides our actions and our steps.
The Number Five. 11 is, then, the right moment to retire and end my external tributes to the
Heroes of here and of there and also to the greatest Hero of Hitlerism, Rudolf Hess.


Many years have passed, and we have seen the young age, children transformed to
adolescents and then the maturing of the adolescents. Only the old men have rejuvenated Uus.....
So, the numbers indicate to us the way of a decision: to terminate these outward signs, these
public rituals. Let us now move them to the depths of our hearts. The ‘external men ’ will
continue the fight on the outside. We are going to the parallel world, the inner world (“falling
down from the skin unto the soul”, as the poet said)m There we will continue the Eternal


Combat, although there it has already been won.


Nevertheless, Comrades, I wish for you to know that I will never leave you, that I will


keep on fighting the Eternal Enemy until my very last days here on this Earth.


331


Song for Rudolf Hess


Song sung by a priestess of Esoteric Hitlerism.
Written by: Jorge Mota.


This song was composed before Rudolf Hess was murdered in
the prison at Berlin. He is still singing.


There, in a prison,


334


He is the Messenger of peace,
In defense of a much better world
more than half a lifetime locked up.
There, in a prison,
no one will ever break him,
completely faithful to his ideal
more than half a lifetime locked up.
Peace he wanted in Europe,
Peace he wanted in the world,
No one more imprisoned than he.
No one can speak to him,
They may not write to him.
And his silence is
a strong cry to awaken humanity.
He is the magnificent example,
For we all admire Hess.
Liberation for Rudolf Hess!
None of us want to disappoint you.
And we will always fight to the death!
History will judge the case of Rudolf Hess anew.


Liberation for Rudolf Hess!


335


~ Original Spanish Version ~


A RUDOLF HESS


{Can.ci6rt cantada por una sacerdotisa del Hitlerismo Esot*rico.
Autor: Jorge Mota,
Esta cancion fue compuesta antes de que Rudolf Hess fuera
asesinado en la prisidn de Berlin. Se sigue cantando.)


Allf, en una prisidn,
estd el mensajero de la paz,
por defender un mundo mucho mejor mds de media vida encerrado estd.


Alli, en una prision,
jam“s nadie podra hacerle cambiar,
por ser a su ideal totalmente fiel mds de media vida encerrado estd.


Paz quiere en Europa,

paz quiere en el mundo,

mas encerrado esU.

Nadie puede hablarle,

no pueden escribirle,

y su silencio es

un fuerte grito que despierta a la Humanidad.
Es un hermoso ejemplo,

pues a Hess todos lo admiramos.

i Libert ad para Rudolf Hess’


Y queremos no defraudarte.
jY luchar siempre hasta morir!


La Historia juzgara de nuevo el caso Rudolf Hess. jLibertad para Rudolf Hess


336


THE SPEECH


Chileans, Comrades!


Again we have among us the great circus of democratic elections, the circus of the
‘Jewish Toucans’, which make their glorious appearance with all their paraphernalia,
electronics and psychotronics. They have always done so from the plebiscite but now it is
much more noticeable, almost done with a frenzy. Any vote for a visible candidate, that vote
will always be for the Jew behind them, now it is not only this to consider since they are
rising to the surface with some real nerve. They are like fish in the water, directing, dividing,
they are laughing and thoroughly enjoying themselves. They are those who create ‘the image’
of the candidate and give the rules. All in agreement amongst themselves and laughing at the
credulity and cretinism of the goym (non-jews). Millions and millions of dollars circulating
and they already know who is going to win. It does not matter who it is because everyone has
given them gcx)d guarantees and because the road was cleared long ago; with plots, telephone
espionage and even the murder of a senator. Now we are in the full swing of the dancing
monkeys, while the Jewish master, crazy with joy and laughter, sounds the whip, pre par mg
polls made to fit and gives suspense to the matter, putting the African lambada rhythm to the
pendulum of gullibility. Raining down the millions are the misappropriated entrepreneurs, the
‘tigers’, the ‘dragons’ of this country circus and the Jews, of course, dead of laughter since
they are the real directors of the tragicomic play that is simultaneously an infernal.


Who will be the winner of this absurd democratic game? The one who is most
willing to comply with the orders and meet the interests of the master of the Secret
Government of the New World Order. They all are willing, of course, but one must have
greater willingness, conditions and ductility to obey and comply; this is, ultimately, the
winner in the great farce. And if it turns out that later they do not comply, or resists, because
at the bottom of his soul he did not completely belong to the system and still had a Chilean's
heart, then they eliminate him, as with Kennedy or as with Pope John Paul 1. They have
extreme resources that the jew considers infallible.


Yet, we will annul the vote with our sign!


And what are the interests that the Invisible Government of the New World Order
will impose here in Chile? First, to maintain the paradisiac system of the social market
economy, of “free competition”, “free theft” of usury, the usurer interest, the reign of
subordinated banking and exploitation of agriculture and the worker, the destruction of the
vernacular forest and depletion of natural resources, pollution of cities and rivers, the
liquidation of our export capacity, the privatization of the industry of the copper, the
persecution of the capable and imaginative industrialists; to reduce them to what they have
prepared for the nations of the ‘Third World’, simple producers of the “supply- and-carry” of
raw materials and cheap labor. In particular, the servant who will be elected is the most
willing to destroy our army, to transform it into a simple domestic policing, to serve the
interests of and under the command of the army of the World Government, of the secret
Empire, of the atrocious dictatorship of the new order.


As we have repeated several times, the World Government has, more or less, divided
the world into three zones; above, the nations that still have a name: Germany, England, Japan;
the United States of America, producers of science and technology; in the middle, consumers
of this technology and the manufacturers, and below, at the base, slaves producing raw
materials, underdeveloped regions, which will remain in misery and with a smaller population,
according to convenience through epidemics, synthetic viruses (AIDS), and caused disasters,
as well as some necessary local wars and terrorism as in the former Yugoslavia, in the former


337


Soviet Union, and soon, in the Southern Cone of America, with tensions created artificially
between Chile, Bolivia, Argentina, etc.


The best way to provoke tensions and wars is to accept unfair solutions for Nations,
meekly accepting the Governments provocations, occupations and abuses, which eventually
become efficient and sufficient causes of conflicts and wars. In this matter of accepting
everything and of delivering sections of the homeland, the Freemasons are real experts,
whether Presidents or foreign ministers, who, obeying orders of their international mentors,
apply the formula of the French Grand Orient that “all Nations and homelands should
disappear, once and for all, erasing boundaries and borders”. The formula is repeated by
Edmund de Rothschild: “The idea of a Homeland must be erased even from the minds of little
children”. A typical formula that Jews impose on other people, knowing that it will most
certain’ lead to war and terrible destruction (as in the former Yugoslavia) sooner rather than
later. Well, contrary to what the fantasists think, homelands and borders have not been created
alone. They are here and there by the will of Divine Providence, just like rivers, which when
they deviate from their original channels, one day recover again, destroying everything.


Comrades, the World Government, the New World Order, is a pyramid. A new
pharaonic slavery, where they reserve for us the misery, the huge drama at the base. This is a
plan that has been being fulfilled lor millennia and is nearing its final realization. The
"Bavarian Illuminati”, the “Illuminati”, the Freemasons, have been a key factor in its ultimate
realization while in the service of their masters of the Great Synagogue. This is why on the
US dollar appears the pyramid with a large open eye at the top. It is the Great Eye that will
control everything; the eye of computation, cybernetics, plastic money, credit cards, electronic
money, and the “mark in the flesh”, “without which you cannot buy or sell.” The eye of the
Great Apocalyptic Beast. The hypnotic eye of the Psychotronic and the stronghold of the
prominent agent to enforce the New Order from more than one century ago in the United
States of America, as evidenced by the seal on the masonic dollar. The head office of the
Viceroy of the Totalitarian Empire of the New Order has been installed here in an artery of
our capital: it is the shelter of the Embassy of the United States of America, and the terrible
arm of this empire, the FBI, can also be found there, to enforce the orders of the Empu'e of
Satan, of Jehovah. They are all- embracing and ubiquitous, soon they will be everywhere,
spying, controlling, abducting. It is possible that at this very moment they are also here, but
we are not afraid of them, we defy them, we despise them and their appeasers who have
installed them in Chile, our Homeland!


Comrades: Chile, this magical country of the Andes in the extreme south of the Earth
is one of the only world-wide that has been able to remain more or less intact, more or less
still free; the machinations and the conspiracy of the grand master Criminal and Almighty
owner have not defeated us yet. Something protects us, someone watches over us and helps us.
However, we are at the limit, at the very limit of resistance from ambushes. We still have our
armed forces, there are still men who fight straight ahead, our borders are still intact, they
have not forced us into a fratricidal war. We still have Nazis, Comrades!


However ... For how long? Behold, treachery and betrayal are carried out indirect
and underhandedly, finding partners on
our soil. Chile is secretly being sold to pieces abroad. As we have been repeating year after
year in this sacred place, the Jew walks through the strategic southern Chile like he owns the
place. These visitors are members of the Intelligence Service or of the Israeli Army. And
besides them, there are others who buy huge swathes of territory, either by name, as the
swindler Schislowsky, or make use of a ‘white alias’, such as Douglas Tompkins, to which
our press and television make great propaganda, portraying them as ‘conservationists’, etc. In
Port Montt a head office already exists, having lawyers and approximately three billion
dollars to buy land, hundreds of thousands of hectares (I hectare is about 2 acres), from


338


Chaitin up to Puyuhuapi, for the benefit of foreigners and on the pretext of creating
“Preserves of Nature”. In this way, we would stop being the owners of the most important
part of our Southern territory, the most beautiful, the least contaminated, the purest and the
most magical. There are voices that have been raised in protest, but our leaders want to ignore
all of this for they have also delivered lands to be sold on the Northern border of Chile. So are
fulfilled the requirements of the Grand Orient of France, to which important Freemasons and
rulers of this country belong. And they are also, of course, the dispositions of the Jew
Rothschild, ft is the “Andinia plan”, as far as the South is concerned, and it is being realized
on the Chilean side, in addition to the Argentinian... At this moment they are buying grounds
on our sacred Monte Melimoyu.


Parallel to this immense crime, already about to materialize, is the 'announced crime’
they are mounting by order of the masters of the New Order and through the ‘Head office of
the Viceroy’, of the Satanic World Empire, the most cunning frame- ups and conspiracies
against our Army and Armed forces to try to dismantle them and at the same time trying to
destroy independent traditions and all that represents our soul, our idiosyncrasies, our
peculiarity, which make us unique in the midst of a sea of ephemeral and perishable waves.
Traditions that without which would make life not worth living, nor “encouraging steps on
earth”.

The sinister conspirators have claimed success nearly everywhere. They have destroyed the
eternal Germany, have corrupted Japan, South Africa, turning them into monstrous
conglomerates of anthills never satiated in their materialism, they have destroyed Argentina,
Brazil, Peru; they only lack Chile, our great little magical country. Since this is a race against
time, Comrades, it is possible that we could still win, if we stand, if we resist and we struggle
with faith, with honor, with unwavering courage... a little more, just a little more, Chileans!


This is because the giant of the New Order has feet of clay and he knows it. Because
the time of the enemy is passing, it is possible that the time has already passed to destroy
Chile... Perhaps he underestimated us and he was wrong. That is why now it tries all the more
virulent to liquidate us by all means at its disposal. But it is late... we just need to resist a little
more, Comrades!

On having contemplated this bleak, apocalyptic picture of the world's end, more than some of
you will ask yourself what leads me to maintaining such an optimism, to continue firm,
insisting that at the end we will win... I am going to say it to you, I am going to reveal it to
you now, when there is almost no time left, when tune has already run out...


Together with Leon Degrelle, who still lives in Spain, I am one of the last surviving
fighters of the Great War. And together we have continued in combat, after the disappearance
of our Fuhrer, Adolf Hitler, from the Bunker in Berlin, almost fifty years ago. We have not
lost heart for even a minute of our lives, and in this way we will continue until the end here on
this Earth.


Now then, I know, with absolute certainty that our Fithrer did not die in Berlin, that
Hitlerism was not defeated, only a battle was lost there, but not the War, the Great War,
Sacred and Eternal, which even now continues by other means and in other places.

Behold, Comrades that the so-called “flying disc”, the UFO, that began to appear precisely at
the end of the Second World War, are creations of Hitlerism and its “other technology”,
which they rediscovered along with the implosion and the atomic bomb that Hitler would not
use! All of this has sufficient evidence, but the enemy has managed to hide it from the general
public. And so the world conspiracy has been directed to keep the world in ignorance about
the real identity of the UFOs, but this will not be able to continue for much longer, and soon
you are going to witness the tremendous truth - the aw’fiil truth for the credubus and ignorant
of the astonished masses of democracy - that bases already exist on the Moon and Mars, they
are the bases of the Hitlerists, who are also already on Venus.


339


The World Government of the Elders of Zion know it and that is why it trembles,
having given orders to liquidate the Communist rule of the Soviet Union. Chernobyl was an
ultimatum. The enemy needs to join its forces today, ending the apparent division. It rushes to
seize and destroy the whole earth, before the Nazis come back, before Hitlerism returns.
Although, I do say to them that it is already very difficult that they return before the final
destruction of the whole world, because this Earth is already a patient without remedy,
without possible redemption; it is a dying body, where the microbes of the destruction of the
corpse - Jews - will perish with it. What is now, for us, is to preserve the seed of the ideal, the
power of the spirit, so that it can be collected in other worlds, in the “other earth”, on the
etheric Earth, intangible, in the soul, to preserve it when your body dies. So you see,
Comrades, we are the soul, the sacred seed, the spirit of the Earth, who will be reborn along
with the golden age in the New Earth. Where Rudolf Hess and all the martyrs of the Hitlerism,
sacrificed here, in this beloved suffering land, were the ever golden solar seed, that with his
pure and divine blood will make possible the salvation of the soul of this martyred star, of his
God and divine prisoner of the demiurge, transmuting his energy into the heart of our Fuhrer,
himself back in his Walhalla, where we will also be transfigured one day!


I want to also tell you that this will be the last of my participation in an external
tribute, in this place and with these Sacramentals, dedicated to the martyrs of Chilean Nazism
and to the hero Rudolf Hess. Hereafter, I and those going with me, will produce our tribute in
the depths of our hearts and that “parallel world”, where long ago they already have gone.
Heil Hitler!


Sieg Heil! Sieg Heil! Sieg Heil!


340


THE OATH


To the sound of the “Horst Wessel” anthem that was composed in honor of the first
of martyrs of the German Nazis and was adopted by the Chilean Nazi Storm Troopers, as their
Anthem of Combat; with arm raised, I now invite you to swear:


“On behalf of the Chilean Nazi Heroes and on behalf of the greatest Hero of Hitlerism,
Rudolf Hess, I swear with flesh and blood to my ideals and to fight day and night, fanatically
against the materialism that has destroyed the world and is annihilating our Homeland’ I
swear to fight against the New World Order of the elders of Zion and if necessary to give my
life in combat, with the assurance that at the last moment, when all seems lost, the Chileans
will overcome with the help of our Fuhrer, Adolf Hitler, and his powerful secret weapons.
And with the memory of all our Heroes sacrificed by the satanic ritual crimes of the enemy!”


342


THE TERRESTRIAL U.F.O.


As this is the last public tribute that I will pay to the heroes of the Chilean Nazis and
to Rudolf Hess, I wanted to reveal the existence of Hitler’s U.F.O.s and the bases that they
already have outside the terrestrial realm. This revelation is addressed not to Comrades or to
the public in general, who will surely take it as pure fantasy because they are mostly unaware
of anything relating to this fundamental issue.


The revelation is primarily intended to make known to our enemies, the true hidden
Secret World Government leaders who know of the existence of the Hitlerian UFOs and their
extraterrestrial bases, that we also know that the War has never ended. It did not end in 1945,
it has continued in an almost entirely hidden and secret way, here and outside the earth’s
surface, where it has already been won by our people.


First it was fought in Antarctica, then in outer space. It is the real reason for the fall
of the Berlin Wall, the liquidation of the Soviet Union and now the peace between Jews and
certain Palestinians, etc. It is to join forces colluding to establish a Messianic World
Government (with a Messiah or king as the Protocols of the Elders of Zion advertised) before
it is too late.


They aim to build the Temple in Jerusalem. The “genetic robot” that has been being
prepared over the years within the synagogues and the Masonic lodges by cabalists and
sinister scientists, if it were ready it would already be in place at the head of the most terrible
and satanic dictatorship of the New World Order. With this they would finish the cycle of the
Kali yuga on the Earth; rather, of the Yuga of Lead, or New Kingdom of the Ants, with the
destruction of this poisoned Star.


Terror makes them tremble and hurry because they are aware of the power of
Hitlerism, one never truly defeated. They know that Kalki appears at the last moment to
destroy their sinister plans, to judge and avenge, making them pay for the very last drop of the
blood of heroes spilt in their swarthy ritual crimes. They sense the return of the Last Avatar.
This is why they have concealed from the world, with the most iron-fisted control of the news,
the existence of Hitler’s U.F.O. and of its enormous extraterrestrial power, having already
been in contact with other ancient U.F.O.s; its allies since before 1945.


In the United States of America voices rise to demand that the truth should be
announced on the existence of the U.F.O.s, conducting public demonstrations against
Congress and the White House. They have released some sensational and sensationalist
reports in books and newspapers, the most revealing being ex-agents of the intelligence
services of the country and its armed forces, as John Lear, William Moore and William
Cooper, former member of the intelligence services of the U.S. Navy. In the book by Cooper,
“Behold a Pale Horse”, the protocols of the Elders of Zion are reproduced intact. Cooper and
Lear bring forth information about secret bases and agreements between intelligence and the
“aliens” , the “EBE” as they call them (extraterrestrial biological entities), as well as ensuing
battles in which the aliens have won. It is William Cooper who reveals the existence of bases
on the Moon, Mars and even Venus. However, it is known that Lear and Moore belong to the
CIA. I think that Cooper is also included in the sinister game of universal disinformation;
otherwise, he would not be among the living.


The disinformation consists of concealing the real origin and identity of the U.F.O.s
by pretending to ignore their Hitlerian origins while making a defense for democracy and the


343


ultra Masonic Constitution of the United States. All the while, it seeks to attack and reveal the
conspiracy of the Illuminati of Bavaria, accusing the New World Order of “fascism”, which in
truth is a product of an ancient judeo-Masonic conspiracy, which he does not know or tries to
conceal, thus contributing to the great confusion and planetary misinformation. In order to
document the claims made in my speech about Hitlerists U.F.O.s, I include here two annexes
that refer to these flying objects constructed by the Third Reich during the years of the War
and which were already operative back then. Today they are much more perfected and one
may rest assure that his technology and his “other science” are light years ahead of our
enemies. The Implosion against the Explosion. Also we reproduce, considering it of cardinal
interest, an article of ours about “The New World Order”, which appeared not long ago ina
Magazine of Santiago.


344


THE CIRCULATED LETTER OF
THE GERMAN ARMY ON THE
UFO OF HITLER


The word U.F.O., referring to Unknown Flying Objects (Unberkante Fliegenden
Objette), appeared in the ‘Militarisches Taschenlexikon,’ Fachauskrucke der Bundeswehr, of
K.H. Fuchs and F.W. Kolper, published in 1958 by ‘Atheenaum Verlag, Bonn; in Bad Godes
berg. The section named ‘Flieger,’ which is dedicated to the Air Force and pertaining to the
lexicon of the Armed Forces of Federal Germany, reveals that the Third Reich, in 1944,
already had a list of ‘flying objects,’ in disk form, reproduced in profile and from above. The
‘disk’ could fly more than 2,000 kilometers per hour and from the ground could reach the
altitude of twelve thousand meters within a few minutes. The publication in my possession
says it is unknown if this vehicle was given to the Russians or the North Americans after the
war, since it has not been found.


345


MILITARISCHES


TASCHENLEXIKON


AcH tuit 87 /--mi: himnaen
uttd /6 Tifjt'in


Al HENAUM VERLAG BONN


Die Herausgeber Fregaltenkapitan Assessor Karl-Heinz Fuchs und Friednch-Wilhelm K6lper sowie der gr6Gte Teil der Mitarbeiter gehoren


niegendv S<hcihc: AilKitsauSKinkk iur cincn Kann imkonvenlionelle Flugbcwegungen ;_ 1uf
kreisfénnigcn Fkigk6rper. dcr aus Xieder- und Hochachse austuhren: sofi ‘I i berciis
deuischen Ennvicklungen bis zum Jahie i°44 2_kin/fi utul 12.000 m flohe in ucnigvn MinuJcn


llugfahig gvwordcn wai fin kuyelaraues Mittelstuck —uiruivhi Imbcu Ahuilichg franzosische Konstnikcion
ninnut Jie fiesaiztmg aut, cm auhiiebloi denider mirde »ach dem Krieae bekannl Die deuKchen
Haehe! Ring ist zemrisch um das Mittelstuck Entuicklungen gingen wahrschcinlich vaBviegend
angeordnet de ( ain Audéenraiid \ iele in ihrer in russische und aierikanische Hamle iibcr.
VVilkuHgsridUung vci'Sldibatc Diiser» autwveisi.

Durchmesser des I-lugkorpcrs Mm.


a


dem Bundesninisterium 10r Verteidigung an.
Abb.: I'fo.


UFO: Zu in Wort aewordene Abkui'zung fur "| nbekanntes riugohjda" Oder “unidemiiied flying
obim". womil die Fliegcndcn Scheiben vonviegend anuespi ochen wurde"


346


THE GERMAN DOCUMENTATION
ON THE ‘UFO’


The U.F.O.s or Flying saucers, are they the last ‘secret weapon’ of the Third Reich?
Do they come from the far reaches of space or are they the products of our own imagination?
One thing is true: flying saucers do exist. They were the miraculous secret weapon that was
announced by the Third Reich and they may have achieved militarily an ending different from
the one that is known to us today for the Second World War.


Already long ago was the imagination intimately blended with reality when it
concerns anything about the U.F.O. They have given rise to abundant literature, but literature
very far from any reality. They are exotic narratives and far-flung from the truth because none
of their authors know the true origin of the U.F.O. It has come about that it is within our
power to tell the stories of the U.F.O. It speaks for itself but... is it true or false?


One text reads:


“On Saturday, at dusk, almost dark, a spaceship or U.F.O. came approaching at a relatively
low altitude. Its size may have been even slightly smaller than that of a current aircraft, but its
characteristics were different and it emitted a whistling, hissing sound, ft flew in my direction
and it was possible to take a picture as it flew over me. In its lower part there were three semi-
spherical domes and a dark blue spot. 1 managed to distinguish a Swastika with right angles.
The ship, as a whole, turned out to be quite voluminous and caused in me an incredible,
strange and frightening feeling. After continuing its quiet flight, it began to descend in a
direction that I can remember well since I was heading that same way. In that desolate area
there are only some factories which are all closed at those hours. The ship landed behind a
wall and was illuminated by the western light, which was subtle but strong enough for me to
still see with good enough detail. The three lower domes sat on an equal number of cylinders
for support. A truck equipped with a crane does something that I cannot distinguish well. I see
only two human beings; one below the apparatus and another at the top. Soon, the latter
disappears and I do not see it again. Above all, a great tranquility reigns. Drawn on the ship
there is a cross that seems to be the same as the symbol of the Wehrmacht. The apparatus
appears to have windows but also two small latticework orifices, apparently without any glass.
The flywheel is surrounded by strange metal plates, shaped like turbine blades that could have
possibly been something completely different. On the three lower domes as well as at the top
of this apparatus there are structures resembling projecting pipes or tubes and could be fire
hydrants or something similar (way too thick to be antennas). I estimate that this device had a
diameter of between eight and twenty meters with a fearsome appearance. In addition to the
ship there was also a NSU 80 automobile, with registration to the city of Solingen; later there
also appeared a green Volkswagen, but I could not see any more details. A week after, many
people claimed to have seen UFOs in the same Bavarian area. I think it was the same one, or
similar, belonging to a squadron. My photos have never been published. Later I had contact
with an employee of a gas station and it turned out that he had also affirmed seeing it but as
the people who heard his story mocked him, embarrassed, he ended up contradicting our
original affirmation and said that it was only a prank: The truth is that he and I had both
witnessed it. 1 could see that it was initiating the blast-off but when I tried to get closer to the
ship, it had already detached and gained altitude”.


On December 14, 1944, the New York Times published the following article (being the first
on 'flying saucers' in modern times):


347


“The flying saucers are a secret weapon. A new German weapon has appeared on the Western
German Front. We have been informed today about the statements made by our pilots in the
USAF claiming that flying “balls of silver” have appeared in the skies of Germany. These
have been in formations and some isolated incidents, others seemed practically transparent.”


This matches exactly with statements of witnesses who have seen UFOs, which are
propelled by antigravity energy (later, we will comment on the propulsion system). In the
course of time, the UFO appeared more and more frequently in the news; especially after the
capitulation of the Reich and in the airspace of Northern Europe, these sightings were
reported and promptly published.

They reported many formations which were back then called “big rockets” (meaning
“unknown flying machine produced by the German arms industry”). Especially numerous
were these reports from Scandinavia. During the war, powerfiil German garrisons were
established there and they remained there, and they were feared until the very end of the war.
They were never directly attacked and/or defeated by the Allies. So, we know that what is
currently understood as the UFO was being reported back in 1944 and only later were there
parallels sought with previous phenomena. In 1947 they reappeared in occasional reports;
they were few and rare. But, going forward, they grew both in frequency and in variety.


What great secret, what great source lies behind all of this?... “The inexhaustible
source, for believers, is the Black Sun. That light which has shone, shines and will continue to
shine for eternity; but it is not perceived by the human eye. Nevertheless: it exists! Just as the
Visible Sun shines and illuminates externally, the Black Sun shines and illuminates the
interior of some men, for through it comes the Divine Light”, that is according to the esoteric
aspect of the National-Socialist worldview.


This theory, in force in the Third Reich, presently remains under a blanket of
questions and is an “inscrutable mystery” for the masses. Its main adherents came from the
“Thule Society” and the SS. Indeed, in some respects, their beliefs even differed from other
officials in the NSDAP. The Black Sun was their secret symbol. Ancient knowledge was the
foundation of parting for esotericists of the Third Reich. They were the first men of the XXth
century seeking completely different ways.


They were the first 'greens!' or environmentalists in the whole of history. They
wanted to reach a symbiosis between man and nature. The symbol of the Black Sun can
already be found in the temples of Babylonia and of Assyria. It was known by the Aryan
Phoenicians, or the “Bright” of Palestine and, in the Middle Ages by the Cathars or the “pure”.
They knew not the symbol, but its meaning and the message that it was transmitting. In the
Akkadian culture the symbol was used frequently by means of a special Cross that was very
similar to the Teutonic Knights Cross. It can be seen how the Assyrians kings really displayed
it and wore it around. The origin of the Cross is much earlier than the appearance of
Christianity.


Today we cannot explain the goals that were trying to be reached by the initiates of
the Third Reich. It seems that they may have very well knew the revelation of the i4New
Babylon”; a transcendental power that would originate in the Land of Midnight, when there
will arise the Third Sargon, which will liberate mankind from tyranny and subjugation:


“Tt will come from the North in an unexpected wave upon the Earth which is living under the
poison. A Sun will get angry and its power will be invincible. He will need not ask anyone
what should be done because he perfectly knows the true solutions. It will feature a group of
chosen, loyal stalwarts, who light up the third Sargon; they will shine forever before the
world”. “You walk in error’. This is a statement from the German Sage Victor Schénberger,


348


who was a part of these esoteric groups. A phrase fully applicable today for one of the most
vital problems existing: Energy. Today, we very often talk about finding and using
“alternative energy”, but in those days they had sought it much more than in the present


Today, in practice, it turns out to be only a simple fashion but back then it was a
whole tcNew Science”, a “completely different and refreshing technique”. It could be
expressed in a simple manner as “implosion rather than explosion”. Esotericists of the Third
Reich came to the fundamental conclusion: “God’s work is always constructive and never
destructive”. Any technology based on the explosion, which is consequently the destruction,
could never be based on the Divine Principle.


All combustion engines - which includes the reaction of rockets - work by means of
an explosive and are therefore, based on destructive forces. The final results will necessarily
be a highlighted destruction, because without a doubt, “The opposite of Divine Principle is the
Satanic Principle”.


Modern times are well known for the destruction of the environment, thanks to the
massive employment of energies based on the technique of explosion (of which explosive
nuclear energy is only one fine part). Pollution, harmful gases, lethal waste, etc., show clearly
that the searches for alternative energy (type of which were sought - and found - already then),
are fully justified.

The “flying spinning top” of Victor Schénberger worked with forces of levitation, guaranteed
non-pollutants that did not generate any harm fill noises. In search of new energies and the
means of locomotion, the esoteric principles that could be conceived and used by certain
National Socialist minds held an essential role. Those investigations were based, primarily, on
electro-gravitational levitation and propulsion by k<terriones” (cosmic and terrestrial forces).


It seems that here one was finding the nucleus of the “other technique” that
corresponded with the ideology the National Socialist worldview, which had distanced itself
from all those forces still at work today. It provided an economic autarky (total independence
from the raw materials that were inaccessible) for the Third Reich and at the same time an
abundance of nonpolluting, inexpensive energy. The SS investigative departments, U-13 and
E-4, were working feverishly to understand and to perfect these technologies. The “flying
saucers” of the Haunebu series (that were witnessed from planes and even photographed)
which had confronted the Allies when they invaded the territory of the Third Reich are
particularly important.


Next, we will take a closer look at the design of a ‘‘spinning wheel top” of the
Haunebu type. It is driven via a propeller of “terriones”. The computing of today can re-
construct its pattern and movement in flight. It is assumed that the basic construction of this
“flying spinning top” would correspond to that of other types of “flying saucers” built in
Hitler’s Reich.


Flugkrei3el-Erprobaog, Stand / Ancahl "ErprobungsflUge

HAUNESU I (vorhanden 2 Stilct) 5? E-IV

HAU«EBU_ II (vorbanJen 7 Stuck) 106 e-rv

HAWSBU in (vorhanden 1 StUck) 19 B-IV

(VRIL I) (vorhnaden 17 StUck) 04 (Schumsae)
Ejgfehlungt


Beschleuuigen von AbschluQerprobung


349


und produkticn "gaunebu II"
+,,miL


ale<« 1


m
Amiab..tkMl«-n<hya«al9* 1»
Mas<-F>14-2aHX««r 4 «mMWlacit***** 4«60 (eu. M« | TOM]

s«mnaetla 1« Mvtssiti It Hv«dea


"«am,* S x Ba« t>< “ »«*UMrww.M"*. « * N* 10«, «tarr »M* HISS’ -
AllltsH*™* *« *tB
Braa4«ai«cH4a« 10*
vrMi*ff8fta (un« »»«bl "rw." «0.44.
tan<**> n-<»" « nt>f>
H* <«r*>ricbl Derren


U cays «Um Fwrtl»». "Z7l«aarok*«l


iaitUki .r“BU?-fa»*v»»*Mr © rr.:9<b.Ikai ».) larkart


*
Kke-taU.lo»»IM> 60. :
«oeo ZIW9 M<U«cM
pvalalnZ: (:>“eme “*s,,.*@¢m iy UaM <te
Ky«« {*,*. er;*“*: 29 Kaw tM « s*nt»>kveto>r«aa («»iac tliuvafitan* T*< W*l««cvyaManal«
<?amlyqatS«MkStaecUcMnit ("6 J.f


s"ruw>vt< JtMaaW If (,“ »«eee* <ene» ter2«WadaVorlaf e« VT) HBAcac-ink tin". TftrtU» ml=*t woe Fo«n»*anar .ne<* oe!


eM (>< seeeptS'TSU.. .wiH-I TScJ.e.uct M Sa“ »*


350


D Beventee 194)
SS-Eevietloegestelie 1


ae *Pvaa>rre*M IM«;


UBMUfr +


inte?


TUN TT


*rrAFrrm» TUKmtiEt: .


*9" Be" thala-TakhtaMUr I> *It»« (<+tmc<n"*)
«ale tocMarltO tel* «9 4«Xo] (u.rut*ah ts, # Mone >! «M B*or|

BavatriMM' « < KX ls »ftblttTB»* {) 1 «0 « KSS

T« fiw.,» * "+ <B6. m, 16 «ano tates


B*e'1Vaag> Jf Cor*- ,jre«_a* W Hr»*»*») too nuu*»*«Hr>k (et>ni u


.Pitezese-Shupped


In many photos - appearing from 1945 - there can be seen the same common features
to the various creations of that amazing German engineering. The practical engineering of
these devices based on the principles of propulsion was probably due to the inventiveness of
the German Captain Hans Kohler. It is known that already in 1944, the manufacturing of
i4terriones” converters was taking place in the A EG factories and, of course, certainly in the
Siemens factories.


The propellant of Kohler needed a small amount of an initial energy to be operated.
It could be activated by an electric battery. After a short time, the converter would be
automatically working independently, a full autonomous energy. In addition, it produced
more energy than it consumed. It acted as an “energy catalyst” because, in this case, the
energy is produced from nothing consumable. Transformations of forces were taking place, of
course these were electro-gravitational forces of the interior of the Earth; usable electricity. A
principle of brilliant simplicity, which, once one has mastered, can be used safely and
appropriately
The original plans for the study of the Haunebu-2 allow us to get a fairly accurate idea of how
life would be inside one of these ships. It is likely that the ship could employ and for some
time, an autonomous maneuverability, for it had been designed for such characteristics. We


351


see that these type of ships also have rooms to sleep, eat and live in. The propellant, in a strict
sense, must be found in the globe or central ball, while the surrounding disc seems to be
responsible for carrying out the purposes of driving the apparatus.


There were also experiments with conventional propulsion for “flying discs”,
perhaps as a sort of preliminary phase in the much sought after possession of successful
propulsion mechanics. Under the designation of “V-4” (the general public only knows of the
V-l and V-2, which were modified to be used as “flying bombs”) several “flying discs” were
constructed.


It is easy to recognize that there were simultaneous programs in respect to their
construction, followed by stages of development similar to that followed in the V-l and V-2.
In June 1942, there had already been studies carried out and designs for another “flying
spinning wheel”: the Schriever-Habermohl. This was a “round plane” (one of circular form),
its blast-off was vertical and it was equipped with reactors or “conventional reaction” engines.


At the end of 1942 the first tests of practical flight were carried out, with serious
errors of construction being verified. Specifically, shortly after having started the first flight
we know that the first prototype had a forced landing. The second prototype is designed with
a helix (for vertically supporting the apparatus when needed) and two Walther type reactors
(“reaction tubes’’). The large fin or “rudder”, had already completely disappeared in this
second prototype, which still did not satisfy the technicians. Something similar happened with
the third one since it was not meeting the requirements that were being sought after for a long-
range bomber. There was a long succession of tests and trials. They even went so far as to
make a series of some other models, different from that which we can document today. The
intense examinations of the Schriever- Habermohl were harvesting failures in its early stages.


The engineer Richard Miethe had also began working in 1942 on disc shape devices
that fly and demonstrated a more practical, higher chance of success. It was his work - in
collaboration with the Italian scientist Giuseppe Bellonzo - that would achieve the
construction of a new version of the V-7. Later, the Schriever-Habermohl and Miethe-
Belbnzo teams came together for the intent of a joint effort in the full comprehension of their
investigations. They would also come up with completely new things. The result was the first
legendary and amazing V-7. The photos, taken later, correspond to the phases of construction
of the V-7. It displayed the clearly visible Cross of the Wehrmacht. Dr. Richard Miethe
meticulously reported on the results of their investigations, construction and testing to Adolf
Hitler and obtained great support and confidence from the Fiihrer. This greatly facilitated the
work in this field.


“On April 17, 1944, in the skies over the Baltic and under the control of a Chief and three
Colonels of the Luftwaffe, there was a successful test carried out of the secret weapon V-7.”
A document exists in which there is gathered the general features of the flying device named
V-7, the tests to which it was submitted and the obtained results. The V-7 is something similar
to an “ultrasonic helicopter”; it had a combined twelve “turbo” BMW-028 engines.

In its first test it soared to a height of 20,813 meters and in its second reached 24,000 meters.
All of this is achieved by simply using helium as the base fuel. The document also researches
another line of “flying discs” development; a series called “Vril type”. It addresses the
Schumann Group, in close relationship with some specialized departments of the SS,
especially with the E-4.

Research conducted in non-conventional flight not only had to be realized against the clock,
but also in competition with others of the same kind and with the constant rivalry with
conventional weapons. (The unwanted War circumstances made necessary the immediate
survival of the brilliant and creative innovator of the Third Reich, who with Herculean effort,
never neglected the needs of those scientific investigations.)


352


On the other hand, how would the raw materials, budget allocations and the
necessary manpower be provided? It became increasingly clear that it was impossible to
perfectly coordinate those efforts that detracted resources and labor forces (which resulted in
vita! losses at a necessary time), yet there did not cease to be designed, manufactured and
tested “miracle weapons” of all kinds, on all fronts and in ever increasing numbers.


The real “miracle weapons” - which one still hears spoke of today had unusual
aspects and functioning: they gave off no smoke nor fire, were completely silent, etc. For
these reasons and many other causes they seemed truly unreal. In an intermediate phase, the
project “Fire-ball” developed. The North Americans correctly named this device “Fullfighter”
(Foo Fighter), or “Total Combatant”. The fire balls were projected, under the direction of
technically specialized troops of the SS, in the German city of Neustadt. Later, sensors of
infrared waves (which this gadgetry was provided) were taking charge of the maneuvering to
obtain the final contact with the target to be destroyed. They were based on finding sources of
heat that could only be provided by exhaust gases and therefore enemy planes. The target,
which was primarily destroyed, was the aircraft’s radar equipment, leaving it without
operational orientation and almost “adrift” ...


There was a later phase of the project that was known to destroy the ignition system
of the planes which would remain arrested during the flight. This German gadgetry, a few
special tubes, worked by discharging electricity. It should be mentioned that one of the most
repeated manifestations of UFO reports, after the war, was that the engine of a vehicle would
abruptly stop and foil to run as long the presence or influence of the UFO was in proximity.


The testimonies of this kind since 1945, speak of “sudden absence of power”, “full
engine failure”, and so on. We do not believe that it was mere chance that the “Big Blackout”
which left the huge city of New York without power for hours during the mid-60s, coincides
with multiple testimonies of mass sightings of UFOs in the skies of this city.

This brings us back again to the topic of the Haunebu and Vril series, with their
driving force of electro-gravitational “terriones” and probably several other V-7 projects not
only constructed by Miethe, but tested and ready to enter into service.

The propulsion system of the “flying spinning tops” of the Haunebu series received the name
of the “Thule Terrionador’”. A terrionador is an electro-gravitational propeller of namely
“terriones” coupled to a Van der GraiT type of band wave generator, a magnetic device that
produces energy (a carbon base), and a Marconi style conical dynamo for turbo charging
energy.

Furthermore, it is possible for us to get a fairly accurate idea of the appearance and the
features within the interior of a German flying saucer. There are plans in which a flying
saucer is presented and it is probably one of the Haunebu-2 type of discs because we have the
photographs to compare, but it is not impossible that there could also be different prototypes.
The structure and interior layout of the ship are very clear. It also allows to compare the size
of the male crew member in reference with that of the ship itself.

In a photograph of 1944, you can see perfectly the three lower domes of the ship, identified as
specific devices for combat. In the upper part of the device are installed small windows that
appear armed. We see various pictures of the Haunebu-2 type, which were probably obtained
to leave a record of the tests performed within the same.


In this photo not only can we appreciate the large dimensions of a cannon inside the
ship, but also the official Nazi emblem of the Black Sun. This would indicate that this flying
disc would have already carried out specific missions of combat and, perhaps, secret missions
for future specialization in particular objectives. It is well identified as aggressive by its
emblems; but, without a doubt, it would lead to a lasting impression on anyone who observed
it without being prepared for that purpose or without knowing what it was. It exceeds 25


353


meters in diameter and in its central axis reaches almost 10 meters in height. Only if we bear
in mind such dimensions, will we be able to comprehend the impression that it would make if
something like that was observed closely and unexpectedly.


More plans exist for other types of the Haunebu series. They were made in October,
1943. The sense of its characteristics leaves the impression that they were working on
something that would exceed by far anything already realized. Not only were there the
projects that perfected what was known then and continued until the end of the War, but they
seemed to exceed much of what today is presented and known as “wonders of the modern
world of technology”.


Haunebu is a mysterious word. The true meaning, the real reason for so called
projects and achievements of this series, is still to be deciphered. The name is as mysterious
as the apparatus itself However, the photographs demonstrate that none of this is a simple
invention, but rather the purest reality.


When the technology of electro-gravitational propulsion was under control, this
meant at the same time a higher speed, maneuverability and also other features in the
machines were obtained. The exterior form of a flying disc comes to be comparable to the
visible part, bound by the eyelid, of a human eye. In the evening it can be well lit or
illuminated. We imagine that this lighting can be interrupted at will. In the photos, because of
its large proportions, one can clearly distinguish the details of the small external devices of
the apparatus. At the top, a small cannon; at the bottom, a heavy cannon of large caliber and a
few nodes or protrusions, which are not continued in the frontal part, to the approximate
height of the rims of the device. In other photos we can still see even more interesting details
(The referenced photographs are not included in this text).


It is clear that at that time these devices flew and were actually used. But does
anything similar still happen today? Yes. It can be verified by photography obtained in Iran,
back in 1976 or 1977. The enormous similarity between those apparatuses and those
belonging to the time of the Third Reich can easily be recognized. Most of the pictures show
ships of the Haunebu series, with combat armor and small windows located on the underside
of the ship. There is no doubt of the close parallelism (identity, in practice) of these portholes
and the alternating protrusions from German armored vehicles, such as the Mark III Panther
(or Panther) and Mark IV Tiger (Tiger). However, this was probably only the testing of
conventional cannons shooting a 75 mm caliber. The electric cannons that had been designed
to be installed in other machines were still not perfected back when the photographs were
taken. The weight of the combat devices was insignificant in comparison to the weight of the
whole flying disc and driven by “terriones”. A heavily armored Haunebu-2 ship represented
an approximate weight of 100 tons. It is impressive to think that a flying device of such
weight was so very manageable; it would seem as if it had no weight. All of this is thanks to
the creation of its own force field. We are confident, although we lack the corresponding
photos, of the achievement of a myriad of different inventions and weapons being
implemented; it is unimaginable that they were to simply fight the hostile ground forces from
the air.


Flying discs of much larger dimensions were also planned; there is evidence of this
in the form of studies, sketches, drawings and technical designs. So, we can imagine plans to
equip the ships turrets with double or multiple cannons and such. There is a drawing that
belongs to the project of the Haunebu-4, a “flying disc” of enormous dimensions, where it is
discovered that the plan was to provide it with cannons that emerge when they are needed for
combat, but are normally folded in and hidden in the interior. The dimensions and weight
were something that did not present a problem for the scientists’ that were doing the studies
and designs.


354


There were also programs developed for the construction of ships of smaller
dimensions with great manageability. It is known that there were seventeen constructed
devices of the Vril- 1 series alone. They show a diameter of 11.56 meters, they could reach
speeds of 2,900km/h and were carrying a combat ready remote control cannon. In the existing
photos of these prototypes one does not seem to be able to distinguish that type of weapon.
Therefore, the Vril-1 was the equivalent of a revolutionary fighter aircraft. Other types of
small apparatuses, such as the Vril-2 and the Vril-9 do not seem to have passed the project
phase in those days of open War. In respect to the Vril-9, we can discover the site that the
pilot occupied in this single seat fighter, ft is extraordinary to compare the previous drawing
of the time of the Third Reich with the UFO that was seen by the U.S. astronaut Edwin
Aldridge ... on the moon!

Some photographs show another flying disc, probably a Vril-1, making a series of
performance checks in mid-flight. It appears to be performing maneuvers at a low altitude; but
we could very well have the wrong impression and be mistaken about the matter. In another
photograph is shown a disk flying, obviously not of the Vril type but of the Haunebu series, of
a different construction. It is important to highlight what can be seen in the enlargement of
that photograph, we can clearly see the pilot sitting at the controls of the craft. It also has a
collection of texts and articles that the press had published. Let us take a brief look at what
these newspapers communicate to us.


For example, they inform us that the first flying saucer appeared in Prague in the
year 1945. Title: “The Flying Saucer Invented in Germany”. And already the question was
asked: “Is the Earth under the control of the Flying Discs?” Others speculate on the “danger
of space invasion”. Also “A mysterious ‘Ball of Fire’ is seen flying over the River Elbe”.
Naturally, they speak of “hunting down UFOs”... The U.S. President Jimmy Carter announced
that, “he has personally seen a UFO”. It tells of countless observations made by numerous
people of various class from multiple different places and far away from one another. A
scientist draws our attention: “The U.S. President and Secretary General of the Soviets
seriously spoke about the possibility of suffering a massive attack from UFOs”. One can also
read an article in the US magazine “The Examiner”, dated 1-26-88 under the title “The
mystery of the UFO revealed!” as follows: ‘The secret about the UFOs was already
determined a long time ago. The aliens are actually just Nazis, seeking to rebuild their empire.
The Governments of the world are perfectly aware of the matter and remain silent, because
they are truly terrified”.


In the reports on UFOs there is not only talk about these “flying discs”; we are also
informed of the existence of a few gigantic devices, that usually relate to a cigar-shaped
apparatus and it is believed that that they are the mother ships or hangars for the flying discs.
The “cigar” ships are reported as slower and usually following the flying discs from behind.


In some occasions, however, there have been reports of
completely isolated cigar ships, which is understandable if they are the mother ship or hangar.
In the reports about UFOs, more than once we also find out about the existence of a few
gigantic devices, with form similar to a “cigarette or Havana cigar”. There is belief that these
are the ships harboring mothers, or hangars of those flying discs.


It is well proven that the project for a mother ship and base for the flying discs had
already existed in the Third Reich by 1944 and there is reasonable suspicion to suppose that it
was even earlier, again carrying out parallel programs to the first flying disc projects. This
project of study, manufacturing, testing and use of the ‘‘mothership” was reasonably
maintained as a great military secret, it received a code name: “Andromeda” (the mythical
prisoner that was happily liberated from a powerful and cruel sea beast).


355


The Andromeda type apparatuses, at 109 meters long, were gigantic aircrafts; they were
powered with Thule type propellers and were designed with sufficient internal capacity to
transport and accommodate a Haunebu type apparatus and various Vril types from which they
could fly off and return to the Andromeda ship ir)mid-flight. It is also known that after the
war, two projects of construction of these huge ships of the Andromeda type survived and
were captured by the enemy; but of its true and manufactured operations we cannot provide
verified data. Nevertheless, despite the fact that we have a lack of evidence from the time, it
seems that at the present the Andromeda or a similar type exists. The post-war photographs of
the “flying cigars” are abundant and it is not only fi-om the ground. They have been witnessed
in flight and at various degrees of height, from the most diverse lands of the Earth, both day
and at night. From those accounts it is also known of the operational relationship between the
gigantic ships and the smaller ships traveling in and out.


In 1952, after photographs of George A damsky were published, urgent and
aggressive measures were adopted by specialized departments of the Allies. Thus, for
example, a secret document (that was leaked by the CIA), confesses that “‘a network of
information has been structured on a global scale and orders have been given to all the
principal military air bases under our control, of locating, intercepting and taking down the
UFOs”. Also, the CIA literally advises the Department of National Security that “all this type
of information must be carefully hidden and kept from public access, to avoid a general panic
through the media and public opinion”. The photographs on flying discs from then on would
be confiscated; if they are published, they will be systematically questioned as fake.


In addition, scheduled campaigns that confer an “extraterrestrial origin” and
“evidence” of constant and regular space visits throughout time are promoted. All of this is to
prevent the UFO from being connected to the Third Reich and National Socialism (since
thousands of politically embarrassing questions would arise, in which they could no longer
claim technological nor moral superiority to the Hitler organization and a dark future for the
“winning” powers would be revealed). There is therefore a clear political intention hidden
behind the desire to “avoid global panic”.


But before this, and shortly after the ’‘victory’”, there had actually been a good movie
from Hollywood with special efleets really extraordinary for that time, with the title of “Earth
Flying Saucers” (“terrestrial flying saucers”).


As of today that movie has so completely and mysteriously disappeared that it could
be said it had never existed. We have proof of its existence and yet it has been withdrawn
from the public's knowledge. On the other hand, we have countless invented stories about the
UFOs. There exist multiple ridiculous tales that they have as protagonists to ““venusians”,
“green men” and strange monstrous beings. But there is a California merchant in cereals, who
said he not only saw a UFO land on Earth, but perfectly heard how the crew members were
speaking in German and not in a Martian language. The reaction of the American Government
to his claims was automatic. They needed to remove him from public life. So, he was sent to
prison and they proceeded to erase almost any trace of his declarations.


George Adamsky had more luck than the previous unfortunate man, because he did
not insist upon holding such non-compromising declarations. He claimed to have contacted
“simply with venusians...” The mysterious designs of the ships, seen by Adamsky, are
undoubtedly Swastikas and the symbol of the Black Sun; but Adamsky calls them universal
and ancestral symbols - according to him - also in Venus... Everything is “proceeding from
Venus.....” Simply put, it is far-fetching to think of an extraterrestrial origin for the UFO.
They don’t need to come from other worlds or distant stars. We can find a true answer to the
questions by going back a few decades in time; let us go back to 1938: The German


356


expedition to the Antarctic, under the command of Captain Richter and promoted by Hermann
Goring.


The orders received for the expedition, its “mission”, were to reach not only
scientific but also military goals. These men found that in the vast Antarctic continent were
ice-free regions, having a fundamental importance (economic, strategic, scientific, technical
and experimental) for the Third Reich. The German expedition moved to Antarctic waters
aboard the ship i4Neu Schwabenland” (‘"New Swabia”). A large area would also receive this
name (Neu Schwabenland), from the wide coast to exploring deep into the Antarctic mainland
areas, which were duly marked as new territories of the Reich and were claimed as such
internationally. Technical surveyors, topographers and other components of the German
expedition described and clearly marked the whole territory that had been explored during
1938 and 1939 (this expedition was also provided with the appropriate planes). On a map of
the time is clearly shown the extreme edges of the German Antarctic Territory and at the four
points that marked the corners were hoisted the corresponding National Socialist Flags.


In a document signed by the Reich Marshal Hermann Goring, gratitude and thanks is
given to Captain Richter and the rest of the expedition members for vital services to the Reich
by their work. Goring and the Luftwaffe (Air Force) were arranging a ‘"territory of support”
in the Antarctic Conthent. Given this distant position of isolation, it could be ideal for
aeronautical research. It is even possible that the defenders of the new science had instigated
the territorial enterprise, because, already then, they knew what technological wonders they
were to achieve but were in need of absolute secrecy that the polar isolation guaranteed.


357


Antarctic Territory


358


The route of the “phantom convoy” and the diversion of the two submarines that
went astray from the route to Antarctica and port in Mar del Plata, Argentina (broken lines) on
10 July 1945. The territory of Neu Schwabenland can also be distinguished.

On a world map made back in those years, the territory of Neu Schwabenland perfectly
appears even if a bit limited. It states that it is “German territory”.


Some photos which display the deck of the ship “Neu Schwabenland” show the
Commander of the expedition, Captain Hans Richter in the middle of his crew and the
scientific and technical staff.

In the fiercest moment of the Second World War, Donitz, the Admiral of the
Kriegsmarine (Navy) of the Reich, transmits a mysterious order to the underwater weapon. It
refers to “forces, reserved for the Last Battalion”. It is, for submarines, full of important
missions, and an “additional special” task. Regarding the details and particulars of such highly
secret instructions we will never know anything for sure, for even today they remain an
absolute mystery (The Swastika in Antarctica). In those days, the German submarine fleet
extraordinarily exceeded the surface units and their technologically was the most advanced
and perfected in the whole world.

359


There also existed submarines that were filling the role of merchant ships, to avoid
the surface blockade. “Anti-Sonar” submarines of electrical propulsion were constructed and
quickly dis-mountable. This is a full certainty. It is also known that others (known today only
as projects) were even higher than those indicated. They were fully approved for construction.
Specifically, of those final days there are thousands of questions about really inexplicable
things to the general public. So much so, that we hardly know anything. It is well proven that
the massive transport of men, supplies, ammunition's and thousands of goods through
submarine route was completely possible and sure for the Germans.


Thus, the Third Reich never interrupted the permanent contact with Japan and other
allies; because any point in the world was turning out to be accessible for the submarine. It
was in distant Asia where the main area of secret bases of German submarines was located,
with the full assurance of not being attacked and from those bases they collaborated
effectively with Japan, until the end. Moreover, there is evidence that Japanese scientists
never had an interruption in their collaboration with their German counterparts; because they
were very interested in developing joint research in areas of the New Science. It is thanks to
the submarine traffic that the Allies never managed to interrupt or alter scientific collaboration
between the German and Japanese. This is a reality.

The parallel between the “postwar destination” of the “vanquished” brings strange and
uncomfortable questions, what would be the real strategic and military objectives of that
underwater power? Its objectives appeared to be other than winning the war waged on the
surface. Probably, it was a much more important goal with everything related to Antarctica.

The documents captured by the Allied Forces, related to the German submarine
weapon during World War II, missions, tactics, targets, etc., are still under prohibition of
consultation. What would be any kind of apparent and current justification for that?
Undoubtedly, something that the Allies do not want known. For example, the whereabouts of
about 100 submarines magnificently perfect and virtually indestructible by natural causes are
still not known. The Allied Forces have reviewed well anything that may have sunk of
German submarines and cannot account for them, nor were they voluntarily destroyed -
according to the German Government. In no way can they justify these disappearances. The
submarines have simply disappeared without a trace. It is an amount that represents an
enormous fleet, according to any great powers. Also, these were not normal submarines, since
a good part of them were of the U -21 type, a super submarine manufactured in the last years
of the Third Reich.


Really, we ask again: is it conceivable that 100 submarines of such a size could
simply disappear and they and their crews are never seen, for years, in any sea of the world?
The only explanation are new questions: could it be the so-called “phantom submarines” often
seen at sea, after 1945? They must have special bases, protected, undetectable and an
invulnerable fortress, perhaps within the bosom of the sea ice of the eternal polar ices? In
some official documents of the enemy on the final destination of some of them, a disturbing
conclusion always repeats itself: “Final destination: completely unexplained!”


The German scientists and technicians specializing in submarines had good reasons
to revolutionize the type of design and construction used and to maintain them according to a
modular structure. This way, the submarines of the U-21 and U- 23 types which were of great
size, but having been constructed by modules, could be dismantled, moved, replaced and
reassembled as was necessary or convenient. A few enormous merchant submarines of the U-
10 type could easily transport the individual modules needed to construct the former that they
were “sailing” dismantled in their own bosom. Undoubtedly, this strange action must conceal
something much more important than the possible exposed advantages. We believe that they
were preparing, really, the War of the post-War period.
There exist photos in which we can identify the similarity between a “phantom submarine"’,
officially “of unknown origin”, and the perfectly identifiable German submarine of the U-23


360


type. Also there are a number of bases (today located and in disuse) that have hosted
enormous German submarines in Greenland. These constructions seem to date to a time later
than the War. It would not be impossible that other underground fortresses exist, enabled to
serve as hangars and also for the UFO; as such, they are being used today. Between May 8
and 9, 1945 the guns go officially silent in an invaded Europe. The ancient texts announced:
“The darkness breaks and reigns over any light. The land of the North is under the oppressive
affliction. The corpses of heroes are scattered, languishing at the foot of the sacred mountain”.
(According to the Babylonian text of Marduk). The Admiral named as successor of Adolf
Hitler, Fuhrer of the Third Reich, signed on behalf of the three branches of the Army of the
Reich the capitulation of the German forces “existing in Germany”.


The greater Reich of Germany, therefore, never capitulated as such; that is, that
National Socialist Germany never officially capitulated. The Babylonian prophecies continue:
“Marduk, the Supreme God, gathered from the Earth his Spear, raised it and threw it with
enormous force so that the Earth was opened. Whereas, Marduk realized this, Ishtar, the
Supreme Goddess, ordered all the stars in the sky that, thereafter, illuminate with an unknown
light to the Earth. And there emerged new skies, on a new Earth”.


It is not that long ago that the UFO appeared in the terrestrial skies and has
contributed a new and unknown light. And it should not surprise anyone that these luminous
ships have a remarkable similarity to known and existing aeronautical constructions of the
Third Reich of National Socialist Germany. Hitler had already said it publicly in the
Parliament, after the World War exploded:


“Although the enemy apparently defeats Germany; it is certain that in the end he will
lose... because the war continues against him from abroad. His defeat will be total, from and
to the ends of the earth, the seas and skies.....””


Immediately after the War in Europe, the flying discs appeared (continuously
photographed and in the news). In Washington the panic spread. The radars would not stop
registering the free passage of UFOs in US airspace. It was an authentic open provocation,
which frightened the Government of the United States who dodged any possible challenge for
open combat, and since then, has consented to the disturbing enemy presence. Meanwhile the
UFOs, fully confident of their power, seemed indifferent about making the first move, which
actually would have brought them a quick and definitive victory. They may prefer that their
“winners” feel a slow and agonizing death of their own internal diseases. Actually, the United
States had already measured its power against the UFO, but outside of American territory.
Making good use of the Antarctic climate in the summer of 1946-47, and after having recently
finished the War in Asia, a significant North American fleet came to Antarctica under the
command of the American Admiral Richard Byrd. Its components represented a large force of
4,000 men, who according to information landed under the pretext of developing scientific
research, but it looked more like a real invasion.


This expedition had as its code name “High Jump” (English sports term to denote the
height of the jump). After meticulous and lengthy preparation, the expedition reached
Antarctica in February 1947 and was hastily terminated on March 3 of that year. It
documented the “mysterious” loss of several fighter aircraft, Marine casualties and other
major losses.


Apparently, the “scientific” approach of the operation “High Jump”, from the
beginning to the end, was turning out to be very warlike. Promptly the publication of its news
was interrupted. After canceling the operation, Admiral Byrd unexpectedly communicated to
the press something extremely strange and out of context:


361


“Tt is a very bitter truth to admit; that in case of a new War we can be attacked by aircraft that
has the ability to fly rapidly from one pole to the other. It is necessary to take urgent measures
of defense to intercept enemy aircraft that can come from Polar Regions. It is especially
needed and of interest to surround the Antarctic with a zone of defense and security”.

The invasion of the German Antarctic Territory, new Swabia, (desired by the United
States as a convenient “spoils of war”, apparently unarmed and easy to deal with), turned out
to be a resounding defeat. Not reported openly, but it seemed that mysterious forces were
repelling the American military presence.
In 1958 there was organized a new American expedition to Antarctica but on this occasion
they were carrying terribly effective, even nuclear, weapons. They arrived there in the cold
and dark polar winter. On three occasions - August 27, August 30 and September 9 - they
launched Atomic missiles against the territory of Neu Schwabenland, but they did not land on
the three occasions, but suddenly exploded in mid-flight, while approaching the coast of
German territory.


Currently there happens to be the concern about the existence of a hole in the
Antarctic ozone. After knowing this information one can easily come to a conclusion, other
than the derisory official explanation that scientists gave blaming the phenomenon exclusively
on fluorocarbon nebulizers. The brutal attack fell far from achieving its objective: To
definitively destroy the Nazi enemy and their UFOs.


Ifa hidden power had not existed in Antarctica, then what reason was there to make
American military ventures on the polar zone? They envelop this entire topic with mysticism,
disinformation, discredit and false news. Truly UFOs continue flying, in number and
increasing frequency, and, unfortunately, it is a fact about the hole in the ozone layer and its
consequences.


There is a photo from US military files; apparently it is a UFO command post in
Antarctica, obtained by US intelligence. If it is true, it does not allow us to pinpoint when and
where it was obtained. More easily it would turn out to be a photo captured in Germany. But
still we must consider something much more amazing in reference to the evolution of German
flying saucers. It is a question in regards to the “space programs”. Despite the reports: is it
true that Soviet or North American astronauts only continued German steps? There survive
fragments of a definitive German report.


It is about a “suicide mission” that was carried out by the Haunebu-3, which was
constructed for a flight to Mars. The Haunebu-3 was 71 meters in diameter. Mathematically it
calculated its capacity for autonomy with electro-gravitational propulsion and turned out to be
75,274,000 km; that is, covering the distance from Earth to Mars. At that time, the electro-
gravitational drive was ineffective because it slowly partnered to the metals that could be used
in its construction (for being the only available in Germany). The journey (actually a “journey
into the unknown”) was under such heroically risky conditions that it could not promise any
possibility of returning.


Nevertheless, it was decided, for the Department E-4 of the SS, to carry it out in the
spring of 1945, as a last act of sacrifice. One can only think that they expected some
“extraterrestrial help’’, or to achieve some chance of surviving beyond Earth to return later.
Of course, in Europe, the Reich was in a desperate situation. An idea of this nature could be
understandable in that dramatic time. Nothing was beyond trying, because the War was a War
of an entire genocide and not merely against Hitler, nor against the Weltanschauung that
supports National Socialism, it was against the whole racial stock of Germans. There is
documentary evidence in which Roosevelt and Churchill affirmed it and surely there would be
similar with Stalin.


362


After takeoff it was to fly for eight and half months, reaching the surface of Mars, as
planned, in mid-January 1946. It does not seem that in the navigation there would have been
any problems to address, such as power and survival, but with the electro-gravitational system
practically exhausted, an extremely tenuous Martian atmosphere and the gravitational pull of
Mars, they probably had a rough time in the landing of the ship; but it is still not certain that it
was a forced landing (had it even a minimum of energy, enough to counteract the force of
Martian gravity).

For now, we can only speculate about that company of space pioneers and their fate as the
first heroic and self- sacrificing cosmonauts. Haunebu-3 probably landed with great
difficulties in the middle of January 1946.


Mars seems to be an uninhabitable planet and very unpromising for the allowance of
human survival, nor could they expect help of any kind. But, as incredibly fantastic as this
story may seem, it is a discovered fact, although jealously concealed from the public. In
fairness it deserves the title of i4the greatest adventure by man”.


The crew included German astronauts of both sexes. We can imagine their feelings
when contemplating the Martian surface, hoping to find intelligent life, for the structures that
resemble pyramids from the earth, etc. Let us try to briefly see the Martian soil, through their
eyes.


All these remarkable features and structures could turn out to be even more striking
than they could have imagined. It is possible that the crew of the Haunebu-3 found something
more than any unmanned probe has discovered - perhaps, the true remains of a culture or even
underground living shelters? Who knows!


In ancient verses it is read: “A petrified face looks from the sea towards the land. It
weeps for Marduk in the summit of the Mountain. The Homeland of the Gods is lost. They
neither sing, nor celebrate anything; they are not even prepared with zeal for combat. Even
their thinking is confused. Isthar cries for her People”. She seems to cry for the petrified
Germany. Ruins cover the Earth!


Would it be possible that they (those of the Haunebu-3) had survived and had
descendants and that otherwise the Third Reich had achieved success in conquering the
immensities of space...? We know nothing and we must prevent excessive speculation, blit
this much is true - there is something that escapes the control and domination of the rulers of
the Earth: the UFO. It is a truly ridiculous situation for all the professed power of the enemy
and not only their national potency, but for the very secret world government. Everywhere
that the UFOs want to observe, to visit and to know is within their scope whenever and
however they choose.


No weapons, money or any of the conspiracies of sects and lodges are whatsoever
capable of preventing them in the slightest and when they decide to win, nothing will be able
to stop them. Very contemporary photographs show a Haunebu-3 type ship coming from the
Moon to the Earth. So, what else can be detected in these telescopic photographs of the Moon?


There are photographs of UFOs, taken from spaceships. Many come from NASA
and because of their abundance; they have already stopped being a rarity that attracts attention.
At present, new documents and reports are joined to a long list, almost every day, of Haunebu,
Vril, Andromeda.


Are the above simply hallucinations of an incorruptible and neutral photographic
material? Are they hallucinations promoted by the Nazis? Could the strange and enormous


363


“S” on the lunar surface be the initial German military term “Stutzepunkt”, or “point of
support”? Will an already planned invasion truly come from the outer space of the Earth? Are
the preliminary maneuvers already under way and in front of the very eyes of the Allied
Forces? Will the Third Reich return to fight again?


Of course, all of these are hypotheses, difficult to believe and even to conceive. But,
let’s observe it again as a whole mosaic and the facts that complement each other and they
will lead us to reflect with an elementary reasoning. Even many isolated pieces turn out to be
irrefutable. It is not a question of inventions or tricks; therefore there must be something to it
and a lot of truth behind it all.


If it is contemplated with a panoramic view, we think that there are certainly many
more solid facts than those that we may have imagined. And still there are others... There
might also be considered the American type programs like “STI” (commonly misnamed “Star
wars”). Undoubtedly we have known something about them but now they are presented in a
new light. Especially if one considers that the Americans asked for the collaboration of their
theoretical enemies, the Soviets, in their development. Also, at their own risk, the Soviets
developed their own “STI” project. Could it be that the real purpose of such expensive plans
is the obtaining, in some desperate way, an effective defense against a potential invasion of
UFOs? Should we take at fece value the popular name of “Star Wars”? In other words, what
seems to sound of pure speculation, may no longer be marginal, but fully guessed right.
Taking a panoramic look at the mosaic of exposed information, the question arises:

Are they, who call themselves superpowers, afraid of another Real Superpower who, from
space, is determined to conquer them and can achieve it (easily), demonstrating that it was
only falsely defeated before? Let us return for a moment to the prophecies. Let’s listen to the
revelation of the New Sargon:


“There will be the triumph of the fair and just, of those brave ones who learned to walk
faithfully through the Shadow of Evil. When the Third Sargon comes to fight the Final Battles,
they will be His swords. From the flaming battle crafts, will be destroyed the darkness with its
rays. They will be victorious over the enemies, indifferent to his enormously greater numbers.
And they will exalt themselves on the Earth’s hemisphere forever.”


Unfortunately, in this short space we are not able to touch upon many of the other
details of great interest. For example, the first project of the flying disc, documented even by
the press, the first one in history, was planned and designed in Germany back in 1928. It was
an ongoing project that was implemented in small steps, new technical ideas and inventions
that contributed, directly and indirectly, to the realization of the construction of the V-7, the
revolutionary unconventional thrusters, the Haunebu, Vril and Andromeda types, and so on


“The world will melt in its affliction; but you.... Raise your head with courage, because you


”


364


THE NEW WORLD ORDER


(This is a reproduction of an article by Miguel Serrano that was published in Santiago, on
16th of August of the year 104 [1993].)


One of the Rothschild, more than a hundred years ago, had said: “money is power.
Give me the money and I will own everything”. And they gave it; or better, he sought it, just
when the rest believed that what was really important were the things, especially the things of
the Earth, the apples, gapes, etc. Today, money poisons all things and we think that it is only
worth the money that it produces - if it produces. But there is something more important than
money and that was so even before the conforming to this “pipe dream”: Knowing.
Rothschild knew that money was power, that is, he knew what he would do with the money.
The truly important things are the knowledge and the information, the “data banks”, that
allow to deduce and to know, with almost a 100 percent probability, or safety, of what is
going to happen. This is data processing and its current sophisticated technology.
On this basis, it is more or less fairly easy to understand what is happening on Earth. A very
small group, which up to today has been the proprietor of the money, has bought the
producing brains of computer science, taking possession also of knowing. Result: the New
Order or World Government, is ls a few secret hands, although not unknown.


Benjamin Disraeli (Jewish), Prime Minister of the Queen
Victoria, in England, stated that “The world is governed by very different personages from
what is imagined by those who are not behind the scenes.” Also the German Minister
Rathenau, in 1912, confirmed: '*three hundred men, each of whom knows the others, decide
the destiny of the world and choose their successors”. Lenin revealed to his collaborators that
“behind the October Revolution there are personages much more influential than the thinkers
and executors of Marxism’. Never more than now has this been made so evident. Another
Rothschild, Edmund (Baron by the grace of money), in turn had made statements in the
magazine “Enterprise”: “the structure that must disappear is the Nation”. And in concise step
with the Grand Orient of France: “the idea of a homeland, as it is currently understood should
be destroyed in the spirit of the children. It is necessary to make it disappear is


This Masonic idea is the “Illuminati of Bavaria” (the I!luminati) and was brought to
North America by George Washington. In 1935, it was incorporated by Roosevelt as a symbol
and no less than on the dollar, with the figure of the pyramid with an eye open at the top and
the legend at the bottom: “Novus ordo seculorum”. “New World Order” and the date of 1776,
which is the date of the founding of the lodge of the Illuminati of Bavaria by Adam
Weishaupt (Jewish), submitted to the Rothschild’s.
It was founded on May Ist of that year and this date is commemorated worldwide today under
the pretext of “Labor Day”. The seal of the I/luminati pyramid with its watch fill eye on top,
symbolizes the New World Order and has projected for centuries. Recorded in the currency of
the United States of America, it is saying that it will be imposed by blood and by fire and by
that nation. Only one vigilant eye will control the order adapted to the pyramid, it will be a
terrible and total enslavement at its base.
Again it is another Rothschild; Philip, at a meeting in San Antonio, Texas, of the Council of
Thirteen, the highest level under the top of the pyramid of the invisible and secret government;
it was on August Ist, 1972 that he made the cryptic statement: “When you see the lights of
New York go out, then know that our objective has been achieved”. Does anyone remember
the sudden blackout of New York on the night of July 14th, 1977? The French Revolution is
commemorated on July 14", an important achievement in the plans of the Illuminati.


365


Let us not forget that there was a much greater “Blackout” than that, which affected
eight States, including New York, on November 9th, 1965. On November 9th, 1918 the
armistice was signed in the First World War. But even more so, November 9,h is also the date
on which the National Socialists pay tribute to the victims of the Munich Putsch. This first
“blackout” was a question of explaining the intervention of “flying saucers”, which it has
been claimed that they had been seen flying over the Nation.


Returning to the subject of money, we would confirm that it has no nationality,
having not even actual existence, being overcome by computing, more and more in
“electronic money”, becoming a transfer vibrations; i.e., in pure energy, therefore if Japan
buys an entire North American or German industrial complex, it is not Japan that buys it but
rather there was only an “electronic funds transfer” with a certain intensity of ’‘pulsations”
which has traveled across the Earth. It is the same for the Chilean entrepreneurs, the
“Dragons”, who acquire industries in Argentina. The money does not exist, only a small
group without a face, who knows because it controls that “pulsating movement”, that energy,
and it can be anywhere, even under the Earth and out of the Earth.

This is how they would run Economics and their teachers, those of military strategy, of
geopolitics, not those of geomancy. And now there cannot be a “Mother of all Battles”. There
will be more accumulation of technology and computer science so that the concentration of
technology, the electronic, can be used to cause or predict economic crises, to cause
geographical catastrophes, or to destroy an ‘‘invented enemy,” without losing a man or their
hidden, indestructible fortress. The next universal economic crisis will come with the
destruction of capitalism, after that of Marxism and the end of paper money: banknotes,
checks and even the plastic money - credit cards - without ever affecting the secret Invisible
Government, who will be the very ones who provoked it.


When all this is born in mind it makes it much easier to understand the “liquidation
by decree”, in almost one week, the entire Empire of the Soviet Union was liquidated
(Chernobyl would have been an ultimatum, although it is not completely sure if it belonged to
the Secret World Government). Those that “control the real power in the Soviet Union”, as
Lenin had said, had reached a determined point in the implementation of the globalist new
order (which will be the most totalitarian dictatorship that the world has never known, a total
slavery) and decided that it would be better established by a subtler and more insidious means
than the coarse “dictatorship of the proletariat”, with the use of credit cards (that did not exist
in the Marxist world); of the “electronic external indebtedness” of Nations to the ubiquitous
Banking phantom; for the laser chip (mark) in the wrist or arm, which will replace the “plastic
money” of the credit card, with a new style of the ‘universal brand products” in the
supermarkets. So everything will be better known and it will end forever the freedom of the
individual. Total enslavement. The New World Order. Globalism, better and more effective
than the International Socialism. So already we see the most illustrious representatives of the
old Marxism turning overnight into the lackeys of consumerism, of capitalism, of the social
economy of the market, and becoming the businessmen of the international money because
they still believe that the power is in the money, when it is in the knowledge. They will not be
- especially if they belong to the thkd world - more than the tiny pawns of the masters without
a face of the secret World Government in this new transnational order.


To achieve the Masonic and Enlightenment ideal of the Grand Orient of France (the
Illuminati) and to finish off nations and homelands (“carnal fatherlands” as De Gaulle would
say), they first need to unify the world, standardize it, ending the individual and their natural
particularities. (Nature is not uniform, even snowflakes confirm a difference; there is not one
equal to another. This is also said of geomancy, the magical science of the Earth and its astral
currents; electromagnetic, invisible currents endure, even if the geopolitics of the physical and
visible borders are finished.)


366


Its intention is to end all National Tradition, along with the legendary institutions and all that
helps shape the soul of a peculiarity, of a difference, the intangible thing that has been created
by love and dedication across the centuries to deliver perhaps the only possible and real
freedom to man: to feel different in a sea of ephemeral, perishable waves, in a differentiated
point - geomantist - of the smallest star lost in the closed Universe. The World Government
has already divided the Earth into three precise zones: the creator of technology is at the top,
who extends and perfects the knowledge, but it does not stay in the hands of the inventors but
goes on to the small group of brains of the Invisible Government. The inventors would be
where today there are still Germany, England, the United States and Japan, comprising three
continents. Then there comes the consumers of the technology and possibly the manufacturers
too: for example, Italy and Spain. The rest is called the “Third World” and it is destined for
the “supply and carry”, as is said in military slang to produce raw materials and cheap labour,
and from there you will not be able to leave. This includes South and Central America, Africa,
Asia and the Middle East.


That is why, when we try to leave, our grapes poison themselves, we are sown
strains of cholera and then our most imaginative businessmen are pursued. They are also
pretending to liquidate our copper industry, that is, if it is not transferred into the hands of the
First World. There exist orders from the World Powers given to their financial institutions of
credit, of giving neither loans nor technological information to the producers of copper of the
Third World, which could contribute to the developing and improving of the industry.


The New Order, the World Government, is not only trying to keep the
underdevelopment of countries in certain areas of the Earth, but, in addition, to reduce its
population in particular and the world in general. So you have, for some time, very
sophisticated scientific and technological means capable of producing “synthetic viruses”,
such as AIDS and others even more lethal, that will appear. They can also manipulate the
weather, precipitating “natural” disasters, floods, torrential rains, droughts or introduce
poisons in air pollution, collaborating with the vengeful fury of nature that in the darkest time
of Kali yuga, “gets in tune with man in his destructive delirium”, as said by Professor C. G.
Jung. Thus it would aim to reduce the world’s population, this in addition to some local wars,
which are always less efficient.


The importance that our country is given, as a land area of special planetary impact,
is reflected in the Bunker that the World Government, through its principal agent the United
States, has had built: their Embassy in Santiago. It is something like the headquarters of a
Viceroy, a gigantic center of psychotronic manipulation, information and projection of
subatomic particles, which induce and monitor political developments and social events in
advance. This head office or center of the World Empire of the New Order would be destined
not only to the mastery of our country but of the South Pacific Ocean and of all South
America, up to the Antarctic.


How very small the politicians are, with their immediate electoral worries, when
seen from this perspective! What is it that they really want, what they really seek? Accept it
all, until the slavery? We have said that knowledge is power and knowledge can come in other
ways besides money, for it is the active, individual, thinking brain. It is because of this that
they also seek to destroy the brain, with the technology, the computation, the current
education, the music and the drugs, transforming the young people into entire ignorant muses
and drug addicts, patients with AIDS, into only parodies of a real man. The drug trafficking
and Terrorism are both under the control of the World Government and their Services of
Intelligence.


In particular, the heroin trade, that finances its “covert operations” without the need
to get approved funds from in front of cameras and Senates. It is because of this that it is


367


necessary for the police services and the armies, anything national, to come to rely on and to
be controlled by the “Intelligence of the Empire”. Hence the installation of the FBI into
Chile's Palace, how joyously and recklessly has the Government informed us. All of this,
under the pretext of combating drug trafficking. Our sovereignty is at risk from a mortal
danger on having installed forever (how could it be possible to extract it now?) the most
powerful world machine of a gigantic foreign intelligence service, that is now officially
allowed in our territory. A matter of such gravity cannot be treated lightly and must be the
subject of a law discussed in Parliament, the press and the public. However “we are
hypnotized like” and nobody here seems to understand the importance of such a serious thing.
It would be desirable that our leaders and legislators should give some time to read, study and
learn about the serious revelations and allegations made by the New York Times in February
1990, and the ABC Evening News, on the same date (statements made by American Senators),
about the complicity of the Government in the trafficking of cocaine and chemicals for the
manufacture of illegal drugs in South America, along with money laundering. There is a book
that delivers irrefutable evidence about the complicity of the FBI and the CIA. It accuses the
CIA, the FBI and former President Bush as the main culprits in revelations made by a former
agent of the Intelligence Service of the Navy of the United States, William Cooper, in his
remarkable book, Behold a Pale Horse.


These serious revelations also give proof that there are still other means than money
to access knowledge. There are still men, men of free spirit, a few men of honor. To put an
end to threat that men impose, in addition to murder, the Invisible Government also has other
very sophisticated means, as in the breakdown of compensated energy, but this is another
issue. The so-called “psychotronic war” or “low intensity war’, has produced real
catastrophes, they are amongst us, it could be that one of them is another tragic case of
telephone espionage with victims “acting as under hypnosis”, according to statements by one
of them.

Nevertheless, and in spite of everything, Chile still has not been defeated, because you keep
our traditions, our institutions and our soul. Pertaining to the mortal danger of “globalism”
there are only two possible positions and attitudes: meekly accept the imperialism of the
World Government and New Order, which in the end will impose total slavery and disgrace
for the peoples of the third world or rebel and fight with heroism, to oppose it, to resist.
Because in the Universe there are far greater forces than the purely material ones that exist on
the Earth. The faith and heroism that is able to confront injustice and slavery, in the end will
win. This is a race against time and the will to resist will one day defeat the oppressive giant,
because even though it appears as if to be all so powerful, the giant of the New World Order
has feet of clay.


368


The Donation of Organs and Hitlerism
(Letter by Miguel Serrano)


The signs of the Apocalypse are accelerating. Chile increasingly becomes a satellite
of the World Government and its psychotronic dictates. The mass media, the press, are
controlled by “commissioners” located in key positions; they belong to the “chosen people”.
Almost nothing is published without their approval. Here in Chile, the bacchanal orgy and
current frenzy of “organ donation” is highly suspicious, for the Bible tells us that they are the
favorite food of Jehova. And so it seems that soon the robotic Messiah, the genetic robot, will
be enthroned at the top of the pyramid of the Government of the New World Order.

The following letter was sent to all means of media in the country. Only a few published it.


Dear Director:


The very real demagogic-political-electoral spree of organ donation is something
immoral and scandalous for those who have a true religious and spiritual sense of life. The
human body is not a machine that should exchange nuts, bolts and pulleys. In addition, as the
popular wisdom says, “nobody dies on the eve”; prolonging the life of a body beyond the hour
of Fate (Karma, as the Hindus believe) is a metaphysical sin. Or is it really just the extreme of
materialism; not really believing in an “after life” thus, causing panic and terror of death?


Apparently, we approach the end of the world. The madness is collective and total.
“Banks of kidneys”, “of livers”, “of hearts”, are being established. Transplants will be done
with the organs of animals. Eventually they will be sold in supermarkets, specifying the races
and countries: Taiwan, Indo-China, Japan. It will be a business within the social market
economy. Donors paid while they are still alive. Hospitals and doctors will be happy. All
approved by the Parliament! The presidents and vice presidents of the upper and lower
chambers will regret such a selfless gesture, having them donated free; although they were
compensated with the votes of a grateful electorate. There is a very big contradiction in the
position of the Catholic Church, who enthusiastically promotes the donation of human organs,
the “mortal remains”, as has been defined with the corpse. The question arises: what of the
“resurrection of the flesh”? What is it that will be resurrected? A shell, a mummy, gutless,
without kidneys, no heart, no eyes? Is this the way that Jesus resurrected? For spiritualists, the
body, with all its organs, is a replica of another spiritual body that here in this plane of Earth,
is "‘represented”, reproduced, it translates like the development of a negative, and, therefore,
is also spiritual and not interchangeable. All this must be returned to its origin with the death
and with the resurrection; since it has only been provided or loaned. Anything else is to
destroy the proper “negative”, without any possibility of another reproduction or much less of
eternal life. The dissolution by the worms of the dead body is not its destruction but a
liberation of the energy of every organ, to return it to his invisible existence of another subtler
and more spiritual substance, where it fulfills other functions that are unknown us.


In Chile, we are entering the impasse of the most atrocious materialism. The
machines prolong the life of living corpses; organ transplantation, cybernetics, they are
intervening and modifying Karma, altering or violating the will of Divine Providence, which
is an authentic love. The position of Hitlerism, of National Socialism, is absolutely against the
transplantation and donation of any organs of the human body and also that of animals, it is
against the artificial prolongation of life. In the Battle of the Ardennes, near the end of the
Second World War, the seriously wounded SS man, who could have been saved with a
transfusion of foreign blood, preferred death rather than to accept it.


This is also our definite position.


369


The Planned Attack


On September 27, Miguel Serrano presented a writ for protection to the Court of
appeals in Santiago; after being informed that an illicit attack had been prepared against him.
He was interviewed by the press. The following appeared on “the network” Channel 4:


“T do not believe that it is the extreme left that prepares and moves against me. They are only
the executing arm, as in the murder of the Senator Jaime Guzman, since the real authors are
the Services of Intelligence of the World Government. They have infiltrated the extreme left
and plan to murder all of those who are too bothersome. In my case, it is my complaints
against the sales of the Patagonian lands to foreigners. Chile is being sold to pieces...”


And on September 28, the “La Tercera” Journal published the following:


“The leader of the Chilean Nazi movement, Miguel Serrano, brought before the Court of
Appeals of Santiago a writ of protection for his life, considering that it is threatened by
strangers, after his complaints about “the selling of land in southern Chile to foreigners”. He
dismissed such threats coming from the extreme left and said that the real perpetrators
probably belong to the “government of the new world order”. He said, “I have been informed
that an attack has been prepared against me”. The received information indicates a certain
person chose as an intermediary to offer money to some “extremists,” who happen to have
fallen on serious financial difficulties at the time. That is to say, they offered a “provision of
services.”


The sale of Patagonian land is a huge business. The Humanist-Green party retains
control of its delivery, along with the social democrats. At the head of everything would be a
resident in Argentina, who uses the pseudonym of the Biblical Messiah, Shiloh, and plans to
deliver to the Jews the “promised land” (the South of Chile, the Patagonia). The strange
character, Douglas Tompkins, with a phone line in Puerto Montt, selects the lands, in a
Department of Santiago; they arrange the paperwork and permissions to the foreigners. As we
were saying, Chile is being sold to pieces, in the north and in the south. One day we will be
reduced to a small territory, from La Serena to Bio-Bio, an independent Mapuche State. All of
this will have been done for money, with the most egregious materialism of a consumer
society within the social market economy, where everything is sold, including the Homeland.
All for the glory and benefit of the government of the New World Order”.


370


The End of this Story


(The End of a Yuga)


The Zionist stage has reached its end; it enters the final stretch with the
enthronement of the Messiah of Juda and of the world, biotechnological slavery, technetronic,
cybernetics, technological chips, the clones, and the construction of the Temple of the Jewish
“New Order”- built upon the great lie of the “Holocaust” and its gas chambers. A lie erected
as the irrefutable DOGMA of world slavery, with museums, larger and smaller temples in the
major cities of the Earth. It is the apparent triumph of Juda, built from start to finish on a
GREAT LIE.


371


Excerpt from Unternehmen Aldebaran
concerning the Dril Society and UOT


In order to better understand what we will learn about Aldebaran and its
inhabitants in the later chapters, | would like to include a very important component here.
Namely, it concerns events in the past - in the German past - which are of great importance
and probably represent the most important key to the events of the last fifty years on Earth.
A large part of this chapter will already be familiar to my readers, but a few new aspects
have been added to give the whole thing even more foundation. Most of the information
presented here | have gathered from eyewitnesses, respectively still living members of the
Thule Society, the research of Mr. X. as well as from documents of the British secret service
(all these persons have, of course, no interest in being named).


The VRIL Society


The Gurdjeff disciple and Tibet traveller Karl Haushofer founded a second order
before 1919, the ‘Brothers of Light', which was later renamed the VRIL Society. This also
united the Templars who had emerged from the Teutonic Order in 1917, the 'Lords of the
Light', vom Schwarzen Stein' (DHVSS) and the 'Black Knights' of the Thule and SS elite 'Black
Sun’. In order to make a comparison with the Thule-Society, the easiest way to understand
the difference would be to say that the Thule-Society was dedicated to material and political
things and that the VRIL-Society was mainly JENSIDELY oriented. But there remained
numerous points of connection between the VRIL- and the Thule-Society, like Atlantis, Thule,
the Island of the Blessed of Gilgamesh, the original connection between Germania and
Mesopotamia, but also old sanctuaries like the Externsteine, the Untersberg or the local
mountain of Stronegg. In December 1919 a close circle of people from the Thu- le, DHVSS
and VRIL met in a rented forest house in Ramsau near Berchtesgaden. Among them was
besides the medium Maria Orsic another one, known only as Sigrun. Maria had received
messages in a Templar script - a language completely unknown to the medium - with
telepathic instructions for the construction of a flying machine. According to the VRIL-scripts
the telepathic messages came from the solar system Aldebaran, which can be found 68 light-
years away from us in the constellation Taurus.


At this point | would like to present a brief summary of the messages that the VRIL
telepaths have received over the years and which have been the basis for all further actions
of the VRIL Society:


"The solar system Aldebaran is said to be 68 light-years away from earth and its sun is said to
be orbited by two inhabited planets which form the realm SUMERAN. The humanity of the
solar system Aldebaran is said to be divided into a race of highly grown and spiritually
advanced humans, who are the actual and ruling population of Aldebaran, and several other
human races, which are formed by negative mutations of the highly grown Aldebarans in the
solar system. The 'mutated' races are said to have evolved as a result of the climatic changes
on the individual planets. These coloured 'mutated' races are said to have had a lower level
of spiritual development. The more the races were mixed, the more the spiritual
development of these races is said to have decreased. As a result, when the sun Aldebaran
began to expand, they were no longer able to maintain the space technology of their


372


ancestors in order to leave the planets on their own. Thus, the mutant races, completely
dependent on the great Aldebaran race, were said to have been evacuated by spaceships
and taken to other habitable planets. In spite of these racial differences the different races
are said to have respected each other absolutely and not to have interfered with each
other's habitat, neither the big light-skinned Aldebarans with the other races, nor the other
way round. Everybody simply respected that the others made their own development (in
contrast to Earth). The tall Aldebarans are said to have begun to colonize other earth-like
planets about 500 million years ago. It is said that they first colonized the planet Mallona
(also called Maldek, Marduk or Phaeton by the Russians) in our solar system, which, instead
of today's planetoids, is said to have existed between Mars and Jupiter at that time. Then
Mars, whose highly developed inhabitants are attested to by the great pyramid cities and
the famous "Martian face" recorded by the Mars probe 'Viking' in 1976. And it was assumed
that the people of Aldebaran also came to earth for the first time at this time, which is
indicated by 500 million years old fossilized shoe tracks, with an equally fossilized trilobite
trampled by the heel, a primordial crustacean that lived on earth at that time and died out
400 million years ago. The members of the VRIL-Society were of the opinion that the race of
the Aldebarans should have landed in Mesopotamia later, when the earth slowly became
habitable, and that the master caste of the SUMERANS, who were described as light, white
god-men, should have been able to survive in Mesopotamia. Furthermore, the VRIL
telepaths came to the conclusion that the numeric is not only identical with the language of
the Aldebarans, but also that the Aldebaran-Sumeric sounds like an incomprehensible
German and also the speech frequency of both languages - the German and the Sumerian -
is almost the same."


Whether these statements about Aldebaran correspond to the fact, remains to be
seen, but the construction plans and technical data, which the VRIL-telepaths received -
wherever these data came from - were so exact, that they led to one of the most fantastic
ideas, which was ever thought up by humans: the construction of the 'beyond flying
machine'! The concept of a 'different science' matured (today one would say ‘alternative
forms of energy'). But it took over three years for the project to get off the ground. In this
early phase of ‘other technology’ or 'other science’, Professor Dr. W. O. Schumann, Thule
and VRIL member, gave a lecture at the TH-Munich, from which some sentences shall be
reproduced here: "/n everything and everyone, we know two principles that determine the
din of events: Light and darkness, good and evil, creation and destruction - just as we know
plus and minus in electricity. It is always: Either - Or. These two principles - to be concretely
described as the creating and the destroying - also determine our technical means...
Everything that destroys is of satanic origin - everything that builds up is of divine origin. Any
technique based on the principle of explosion or even combustion can therefore be called
satanic technique. The coming new age will be an age of new, positive, divine technology."
(Source: SS- Secret Archive).


At the same time, the scientist Viktor Schauberger was working on a similar project.
Johannes Kepler, whose teachings Schauberger used, was in possession of the secret
teachings of the Pythagoreans, whose knowledge was kept secret and adopted by the
Knights Templar. It was the knowledge about the IMPLOSION (implosion in this case = the
utilization of the potential of the inner worlds in the outer world). The Thule- and VRIL-
people knew that the divine principle is always constructive. A technology that is based on
explosion and therefore destructive is against the divine principle. Consequently, one
wanted to create a technology that was based on implosion. Schauber- gers theory of
vibration (principle of the overtone series = monochord) ties in with the knowledge of


373


implosion. Simplified one could say: IMPLOSION instead of EXPLOSION! By means of the
energy paths of the monochord and the technique of implosion one reaches the realm of
antimatter and therewith the dissolution of gravity.


In the summer of 1922, the first saucer-shaped flying ship was built, whose
propulsion was based on implosion technology (the Beyond Flying Machine). It consisted of a
disc of eight meters in diameter, above which was a parallel disc of six and a half meters in
diameter, and below that another disc of seven meters in diameter. These three discs were
pierced in the middle by a hole measuring 1.80m, in which the 2.40m high drive unit was
mounted. At the bottom, the central body terminated in a cone- shaped tip, from which a
pendulum extending into the basement ensured the stabilization of the device. When
activated, the lower and upper discs rotated in opposite directions to create an
electromagnetic rotating field.


The performance of this first flying disc is unknown.


In any case, it was experimented with for two years before it was dismantled again
and presumably put into the Augsburg Messerschmidt-Werke was stored. Financial support
for this project appears under the code 'JFM' in the accounts of several German industrial
companies. It is certain that the VRIL engine emerged from the ‘Jenseitsflugmaschine’, but it
was listed for- times as the 'Schumann SM-Levitator'. In principle, the 'beyond flying
machine' should be around itself and generate an extremely strong field in its immediate
surroundings, which would make the space sector enclosed by it, including the machine and
its users, a microcosm completely independent of the cosmos on this side. At maximum field
strength this field would be completely independent of all surrounding universal forces and
influences - like gravity, electromagnetism and radiation as well as matter of any kind - and
could move within any gravitational and other field without any accelerating forces being
effective or noticeable. In June 1934, Viktor Schauberger was invited by Adolf Hitler and the
highest representatives of the VRIL and Thule societies and worked with them from then on.
After this first possible failure, however, the first so-called 'German UFO' was born in June
1934. Under the direction of Prof. Dr. W. O. Schumann, the first experimental circular
aircraft, the RFZ |, was built on the premises of the German aircraft factory Arado in
Brandenburg. During its first and at the same time last flight, it climbed vertically to an
altitude of about 60m, but then began to tumble and dance in the air for minutes. The Arado
196 tail unit attached for control proved to be completely ineffective. With great difficulty
the pilot Lothar Waiz managed to bring the RFZ | back to the ground, jump out and run away
before it started to behave like a spinning top, then tipped over and literally shredded. That
was the end of the RFZ |, but the beginning of the VRIL missiles. Before the end of 1934 the
RFZ 2 was completed, which had a VRIL drive and a ‘magnetic pulse control’. It was 5m in
diameter and had the following flight characteristics: Optical blurring of the contours with
increasing speed and the typical UFO colored glow. Depending on the drive stage red,
orange, yellow, green, white, blue or violet. So it worked - and it was to be another
remarkable- in 1941. worthy fate before itself. It was used as a long-range reconnaissance
aircraft during the phase of the war known as the Battle of Britain, when the standard
German ME 109 fighters proved unsuitable for transatlantic reconnaissance flights due to
their short range. In late 1941 it was photographed over the South Atlantic en route to the
auxiliary cruiser ‘Atlantis’ in Antarctic waters. The reason why it could not be used as a
fighter was that the RFZ 2 could only make directional changes of 90°, 45° and 22.5° because
of its impulse control. Unbelievable some will think - but exactly these right-angled flight
changes are the absolutely typical flight behaviour for so-called UFOs. After the success of


374


the small RFZ 2 as a long-range reconnaissance aircraft, the VRIL company was given its own
test site in Brandenburg. At the end of 1942 the lightly armed flying disc 'VRIL-1-Jager' flew.
It was 11.5m in diameter, a single seater and had a 'Schumann-Levitator drive’ and 'magnetic
field pulsor control’. It reached speeds from 2,900 up to 12,000 km/h, could perform flight
changes at right angles at full speed without affecting the pilots, was weather-independent
and had a 100% space capability. Of VRIL| 17 pieces were built and there were also several
two-seat variants equipped with a glass dome. Also at this time, a separate project, V-7, was
created. Several flying discs were built under this designation, but with conventional jet
engines. Based on the principles of Andreas Epp, the RFZ 7 was developed, a combination of
levitation with a jet propulsion system. The development groups Schriever- Habermohl and
Miethe-Belluzo worked on it. The RFZ 7 had a diameter of 42m, but was destroyed during a
landing in Spitzbergen. Later, however, a rebuilt RFZ 7 was photographed outside Prague. In
July 1941, Schriever and Habermohl built a vertical take-off round aircraft with jet propulsion,
which also had shortcomings. They developed another ‘electrogravitational flight gyro' with
‘tachyon propulsion’, which was more successful. This was followed by the RFZ 7 T, built by
Schriever, Habermohl and Belluzo and also fully functional. However, compared to the VRIL
and Haunebu discs, the V-7 flying discs could be described as more of a toy. Again, the VRIL
and Haunebu disks were quite different from each other. This was mainly due to the fact
that the VRIL missiles were produced by aircraft manufacturers in their factories, and the
Haunebus in the submarine yards. Therefore the Haunebus were much more stable, but also
heavier, which is of no importance for an anti-gravitational propulsion system. Within the SS
there was a group dealing with the production of alternative energy, the SS-E-IV=
‘Entwicklungsstelle IV der Schwarzen Sonne’, whose main concern was to make Germany
independent of foreign crude oil. The SS-E-IV developed from the existing VRIL-engines and
the tachyon converter of Captain Hans Coler the THULE-engine’, which was later called
THULE- Tachyonator'. In August 1939 the first RFZ 5 was launched. It was a medium- heavy
armed flying gyro with the strange name 'Haunebu F. It had a crew of eight, measured 25m
in diameter, reached a speed of 4,800 km/h at the beginning and up to 17,000 km/h later. It
was equipped with two 6 cm KSK (Kraftstrahlka- nonen) in turrets and four MK 106 and had
a space capability of 60%.


By the end of 1942, the 'Haunebu II' had also reached maturity. It varied in
diameter from 26 to 32m and in height from 9 to 11m. It could carry a crew of between 9
and 20, was powered by a Thule tachyonator and reached a speed of 6,000 km/h near Earth.
It was also space capable and had a range of 55 flight hours. At that time, plans already
existed for the VRIL-7 large space ship with a diameter of 120m. It should transport whole
crews. A short time later, the 'Haunebu Ill’, the absolute showpiece of all discs, was
completed with a diameter of 71m. It was flown and also filmed. It could transport a crew of
32 men, had a flight range of more than 8 weeks and reached a speed of at least 7.000 km/h
(according to documents from SS secret archives up to 40.000 km/h). Virgil Armstrong,
former CIA officer and retired Green Beret, describes German missiles during World War II
that could land and take off vertically and fly right angles. They were measured to fly up to
3,000 mph and had a laser weapon as a gun (presumably the so-called KSK Kraftstrahlkanone)
that could penetrate 4 inches of armor. Professor J. J. Hurtak, ufologist and author of 'The
Keys of Enoch’, describes that the Germans were busy building what the Allies called a
‘wonder weapon system’. Hurtak got hold of protocols describing two facts: the construction
of the space city 'Peenemiinde' and bringing the best technicians and scientists from
Germany to the USA


375


Also mentioned was the closer examination of the so-called 'foo- fighters’ (fireballs).
The construction and use of such flukes gobjects was already known to the CIA as well as to
British intelligence around 1942, but was not properly assessed. Foo- fighter’ was actually
the Allied designation for all luminous German aircraft. However, there were probably two
inventions in particular that fell under the term 'Foo-Fighters': The ‘Flying Turtle’ and the
‘Soap Bubble’, two completely different things but considered by the Allies to belong
together. The 'Flying Turtle' was developed by the SS-E-IV in Wiener Neustadt. Their outer
shape was reminiscent of that of a tortoise shell. They were unmanned flying probes
designed to cause interference with the electrical firing systems of enemy forces. They had
advanced klystron tubes built into them, which the SS called 'death rays'. However, the
effective ignition cut-off did not work so per- fectly in the beginning. Later there were
further developments of this technique and the UFO connoisseur will be able to confirm that
the ‘ignition cut-off’, the failure of electrical equipment, is one of the typical characteristics
when a UFO appears. Wendeil C. Stevens, U.S. Air Force pilot during World War II, describes
the 'foo-fighters' as sometimes gray-green or red- orange, which came within 5 meters of
aircraft and then stayed there. They could not be shaken off or shot down and sometimes
forced squadrons to turn around or land.


Another thing altogether were the often referred to as the 'Foo Fighters', netted
‘soap bubbles’. These were simple ba11ons containing thin metal spirals to interfere with
enemy aircraft radar. The success of this idea was probably low, apart from the psychological
effect. At the beginning of 1943 also a cigar-shaped mother ship was planned to be built in
the Zeppelin yards - the so-called 'Andromeda device' (139m long). In it several unassertive
shaped flying ships for (interstellar) long-duration flights are trans- ported. Around Christmas
1943 there was an important meeting of the VRIL Society in the North Sea resort of Kolberg.
Also present were the Medi- en Maria and Sigrun. The main topic of this meeting was the
‘Aldebaran enterprise’. The mediums had received exact information about the inhabited
planets and the sun of Aldebaran and one began to work out a journey there. On January 2,
1944 a meeting took place between Adolf Hitler, Heinrich Himmler, Kunkel (VRIL Society)
and Prof. Dr. Schumann (VRIL Society) about the 'VRIL Project'. It was planned to penetrate
with the VRIL-7 spaceship, named 'Odin', through a light-speed- independent dimensional
channel to Aldebaran. According to the documents of the "Black Sun", the first dimension
channel test flight should have taken place in winter 1944. This flight is said to have been
close to a disaster, as photos show the VRIL-7 after this flight looking "as if it had been on
the road for 100 years". According to the photos, the outer cell cladding had aged
considerably and was damaged in several places. But also the constructors of ‘conventional
discs' (with jet propulsion) had been active in the meantime: On 14 February 1944, the
supersonic helicopter designed under the project V-7 by Schriever and Habermohl, equipped
with 12 BMW 028 turbo- generators, was test flown by the test pilot Joachim Roehlike at
Peeneminde. The vertical climb speed was 800m per minute, it reached an altitude of
24,200m and a speed of 2,200 km/h in horizontal flight. This could also be powered with
unconventional energy. However, it was no longer used, as Peenemtinde was bombed in
1944 and the relocation to Prague was of no use. Before the flying discs manufactured there
were ready for use, the Americans and Russians had occupied Prague.


During the occupation of Germany in early 1945, the British and Americans
discovered in SS secret picture archives, among other things, photos of the 'Haunebu II' and
'VRIL | types' as well as the 'Andromeda device’. President Truman's decision in March 1946
led to the permission of the Fleet War Committee of the USA to collect German material
concerning the experiments of high technology. Under the operation 'Paperclip' German


376


scientists working in the secret were brought privately to the USA. Among them were Viktor
Schauberger and Wernher von Braun. Here is a short summary of the developments that
were to be produced in series:


The first project was led by Prof. Dr. Schumann, who worked at the Technical
University of Munich. In the framework of this project, 17 discus-shaped space flight disks
with a diameter of meters were allegedly built until the beginning of 1945, which are said to
have ascended to a total of 84 test flights, the so- called 'VRIL-1 fighters’. At least one VRIL-7
and one VRIL-7 large space ship named 'Odin', which is said to have been launched from
Brandenburg in April 1945 with a part of the VRIL scientists and VRIL lodge members - after
the blowing up of the whole test site - to Aldebaran.


The second project was under the direction of the SS-E-IV, which had three bell-
shaped space flight gyros built in different sizes by the beginning of 1945: The smallest was
the Haunebu I, with 25m in diameter, of which two were built and had ascended to a total of
52 test flights (about 4,800 km/h). Seven examples of the Haunebu II, with a diameter of up
to 32m, were built and tested on a total of 106 flights (approx. 6,000 km/h). The Haunebu II
type was actually already intended for series production. It is said that there was a tender
between the aircraft companies Dornier and Junkers, which was won by Dornier at the end
of March 1945. The official designation of the heavy flight gyro should be DO-STRA (=Dornier
Stratospheric Aircraft). The 71m diameter Haunebu III was built only once and soared to at
least 19 flights (about 7,000 km/h).


And in the form of plans existed the 'Andromeda device’, the 139m long mothership,
with hangars for a Haunebu II, two VRILI and two VRILII. Furthermore there are documents
that the VRIL-7 spaceship 'Odin' after its completion at the end of 1944 and some flight tests
already should have started to first, still on the earth limited secret missions: Landing at the
Mondsee in the Salzkammergut, with diving tests to determine the compressive strength of
the airframe. Presumably from March to April 1945 the VRIL-7 was stationed in the ‘Alpine
Fortress’ for security and strategic reasons, after which Spain was approached from there in
order to fly important Reich German personalities who had fled here to South America and
'Neuschwabenland' (explanation follows) to secret Reich German bases established here
during the war and to drop them off safely. Immediately afterwards, the VRIL-7 is to leave on
a secret flight to... Japan, about which, however, nothing further has become known.


| also find the remarks of a former German pilot significant, who claims to have
seen various flying disc ver- sions with his own eyes on airfields as well as in flight: once in
the spring of 1943 he had to land his Arado in Neu-Brandenburg (in volume 2 | had
mistakenly written Breslau), because his machine was to undergo a general engine
inspection. However, since this lasted until the next day, he joined his fellow pilots in the
hangar and could not believe his eyes: he saw two large Haunebu II standing there (he came
into this security area through his "red travel pass", a security pass). The next hours he spent
with the pilots and learned a lot about these missiles. It was explained to him that these
would fly easily 50,000 km/h and outside of the earth's atmosphere even over 100,000 km/h.
While he could look at the disks from the outside, it was explained to him that they were
equipped with an antigravity drive, which worked according to the counter-rotation principle
of a squeezed lemniscate. Because of the counter-rotating discs inside the spaceship a
continuing dynamo effect is created. By this effect the spaceships would build up a zero-field
around them, continuously sucking themselves into this zero-field. Depending on where one
would direct this field, it would pull the ship into it. Because of this drive, there would be


377


jerky movements (e.g. 22,5°), but only visible from the outside, which would not be felt
inside. Inside the ships no centrifugal forces would affect the pilots, because the ships have
their own gravitational field. The informant believes that the Germans would have been on
the moon with these already in 1928, if not already at the turn of the century. He does not
exclude this because the origin of the technique used here was not Nikola Tesla, but the
inventor Harvey, who had already experimented with counter-rotating disks in the 17th
century and had supposedly already implemented the principles of motion of hyperbolic
bodies into practical physics. The next morning there was to be a reconnaissance flight
around the Erde (according to one of the pilots this should be possible in about five hours).
Of course the whole crew was standing in front of the gates at sunrise to witness this
fantastic event and to see these uncanny flying machines flying with their own eyes. He
described that only a low humming sound could be heard and that the Haunebuses moved
very ponderously away from the air field (at about 600-700 meters), until suddenly there
was a jolt and the discs disappeared like a flash. And further he reports:


"When | was sitting there with a pilot, he also told me that there is no sound barrier
breakthrough with these missiles. Today | am personally convinced that these things were
used to give the "big-heads" the possibility of escape. This is also the case today (he probably
refers to the Illuminati and other rulers who also keep back such secret weapons for their
own purposes). At that time they tried to get to Mars via the moon as a relay station. But
today we know that this is not possible. So they will have flown from the moon directly to
Venus. Whether this worked, | don't want to say more about it. Only so much, that this is the
background for the whole secrecy around the German flying discs" (didn't George Adamski
have contacts with "Venusians"?)


When asked if he had ever stood by during a launch, he said that on four different
occasions he had experienced such flying discs, but each time of different construction,
during the launch. On one occasion he stood about fifty meters away during the launch of a
"V-7" disc (with conventional turbine propulsion) and described the turbine noise as a "not
unpleasant sin- gen" (between whistling and singing). This conventional disc flew in contrast
to the jerky movements of the antigravity discs, elegantly away like an airplane, but could
also fly upside down or on its side. But also the "disk principle" (of the propulsion) had been
outdated already at that time. He explains that the newer engines of the German flying discs
had no moving parts at all.


In two other cases he had seen the "elegant" VRIL-disks (without a bell, only with a
streamlined dome), which he had liked best.


What happened to the flying ships after the war?


It cannot be completely excluded that a small series of the Haunebu II was
produced. The various UFO photos that appeared after 1945 with the very typical
appearance of these German constructions suggest this possibility.


Some say that a part of them was sunk in the Upper Austrian Mondsee, others say
that they were flown to South America or brought there in parts. It is certain that, even if the
missiles did not necessarily reach South America, at least new ones were built and flown
there on the basis of construction plans, since an important part of this technology was
used in the 'Phoenix Experiment' in 1983 (Montauk Project), which was the follow-up project
of the ‘Philadelphia Experiment' of 1943. (These are teleportation, materialization and time


378


travel experiments of the US-NAVY, which were more successful than most would imagine in
their wildest dreams. German scientists were also involved in this, as well as the Croatian
physicist Nikola Tesla (1856-1943). See the books "The Montauk Project", "Return to
Montauk", and "Pyramids of Montauk" by Preston Nichols and Peter Moon (available from
"Aldebaran Dispatch, see appendix).


In 1938, a German ‘Antarctic expedition’ was carried out with the cata- pult ship
"'Schwabenland'. During this expedition 600,000 km2 were declared German land -
‘Neuschwabenland' - an ice- free area with mountains and lakes. Whole fleets of submarines
of the types XXI and XXIII were later on their way to New Swabia. It is said that until today
more than 100 German submarines have been measured, which were equipped with the
Walter snorkel, which allowed them to stay under water for several months.


In April 1995 | had an interview with a former officer of the German Reichsmarine
who assured me that the Aldebarans had physically helped to develop the new submarine
types. He described a beautiful man, about 6 feet 10 inches tall, with almond- shaped eyes, a
fair complexion, and long blond hair. He described the Aldebaran's clothing as a sort of tight-
fitting jumpsuit, but it seemed to be one piece - no zippers, seams, or buttons. But he had
one more peculiarity: in front of his eyes, about 20 cm apart, two violert-colored rings
floated in the air (like glasses held away from the eyes). These rings, according to his words,
always moved with the head movement of the Aldebaraner. The submarines, according to
his report, were also equipped with Schauberger technology. The front was egg-shaped,
which caused the water to spiral around the submarines. According to the report, the
Aldebarans provided the propulsion system that allowed the submarines to travel at
enormous speeds (officially 170 km/h, but allegedly up to 300 km/h). As I'm revising this
chapter, | get a call advising me that Maj. Gen.a.D. Remer, when he had been led through
Peeneminde in 1944, had been shown a man who was over two meters tall, wore a strange
smooth suit and had long blond hair. And he had golden rings hovering about twenty-five
inches in front of his eyes. He was told "this is one of the Markabians" (but maybe they said
"Aldebarans").


The statement of major General (ret.) Remer thus almost coincides with that of the
Reichsmarine, only that the rings in front of the eyes of "his" alien were violet. It can be
assumed that some of the members of the VRIL society fled to New Swabia after the end of
the war with the existing flying discs (perhaps also with disassembled ones or only with
construction plans). This assumption may seem a bit daring to some, but there are strong
indications that it could have been so. The question is why the Allies under Admiral E. Byrd
carried out an invasion of Antarctica in 1947, thus breaking the armistice with the German
Reich that had been signed with Grand Admiral Donitz. Why did Byrd have nearly 4,000
soldiers, a warship, a fully equipped aircraft carrier including a complete supply system at his
disposal, if it was only supposed to be an expedition? He had eight months at his disposal,
but had to abort after only eight weeks and a high and never publicly stated number of
aircraft losses. What had happened? Lee Van Atta, newspaper correspondent for "El
Mercurio", Santiago in Chile, admitted as a journalist for the expedition, reported on his
interview with Byrd on March 5, 1947, in the largest daily newspaper in South America as
follows: "...Admiral Byrd made the announcement today that the United States would
necessarily have to take protective measures against the possibility of an invasion of the
country by enemy planes coming from the polar region." The Admiral said that he did not
wish to frighten anyone, but the bitter reality was that in the event of a new war the United
States might be attacked by aviators capable of flying from one pole to the other He then


379


remarked that if he succeeded, the United States would be able to send more personnel to
carrying out an expedition; consisting of four thousand North American young men with the
sole support of a handful of experienced explorers. The Admiral emphasized the necessity of
remaining in a state of alert and vigilance all along the ice belt, which was the last bulwark
against invasion..."


Admiral Byrd also reported what the land the Germans had chosen looked like. One
spoke of a "Mar- chental" and "signs of vegetation": "... the bare rocks, however, reflected
so much heat that a whole curtain of meltwater streams flowed over the ice towards the
cold coast." Byrd discovered a similar area in 1929 during his flight to the South Pole. He
spoke of lush green grass, flowers, and animals that looked like moose with grass up to their
bellies....The German Antarctic expedition of 1938/39 led by Captain Ritscher with the
research vessel 'Schwabenland', which also gave its name to 'Neuschwabenland', had a
similar experience: "The Germans discovered an even more astonishing landscape halfway
between the Wohltat massif and the ice cliffs of the coast. It was a low-lying, hilly area with
many lakes, completely free of ice and snow The lakes, called "Schirmacher Lakes" after one
of the flight captains, are among those areas in Antarctica which virtually challenge to their
exploration on the spot." (‘Men and Powers at the South Pole’, The Conquest of a New
Continent, Walter Sullivan, Forum Verlag, Vienna)


Norbert JUrgen-Ratthofer writes about the later whereabouts of the Haunebu
developments in his book 'Zeitmaschinen' as follows: "However, the Haunebu I, Il, and Ill
space flight gyros and the VRIL-I space flight discs themselves initially disappeared without a
trace as of May 1945. In this context it is most interesting, that the Reichsdeutsche Haunebu
lll after its nineteenth test flight then on April 20, 1945 from 'Neuschwabenland', a huge, at
that time officially, Reichsdeutsche territory in the East Antarctica, is supposed to have
started to a space expedition to Mars, about whose outcome, however, nothing is known...
One year later, in 1946, numerous sightings of luminous objects of unknown origin and
clearly of artificial origin suddenly caused considerable excitement among the Allies in East
and West. Again a year later, in 1947, luminous flying objects of mostly round, discus- to
bell-like shape, but sometimes also cigar-shaped 'unknown flying objects’, called UFOs for
short, appeared again over North America, initially until the fifties, in steadily increasing
numbers, no doubt controlled by intelligences."


He writes further that these 'UFOs' are usually not like the German developments.
In this point | am of a different opinion. Well documented photographic material proves that
especially the Haunebu II version has actually been sighted very frequently since 1945. If you
have fought your way through the UFO world for a decade, as | have, you will also notice
that in an unusually high percentage of cases of personal contact with occupants of so-
called UFOs, the specimens are particularly beautiful, were particularly beautiful specimens
of the 'Aryan' species, blond and blue-eyed, speaking either fluent German or another
language with a German accent (for insiders, mention should be made of the Cedric
Allingham case in 1954, the Howard Menger case in 1956 and the Adamski case in 1952).)
The 'alien' George Adamski met several times had blond long hair, blue eyes, wore 'brown'
overalls and had swastikas on the soles of his shoes. After one of the personal meetings, the
latter later threw a roll of film that George Adamski had given him out of the saucer,
exposing only one of the frames....had been made. On it, amidst a series of hieroglyph like
characters, was a large swastika. Furthermore, there are five color photos of a landed and
relaunched flying discus with both a bar cross and a swastika painted on it, which were taken
in 1979 by a night watchman in the Rhineland (three of these photos, one of which shows


380


the bar cross, can be found in the picture section. The one with the swastika is not allowed
to be shown in the FRG, because it would be interpreted again, as in my first book, as "using
signs of unconstitutional organizations" (§86 StPO). The interested person will find this
particular photo on the video "UFOs - Das Dritte Reich schlagt zurick" produced in Austria.
Available from Dambock-Verlag, A-3321 Ardagger 86, Tel and Fax: (0)7479- 6329).


The question arises here, where did the VRIL society get the knowledge for the
construction of these missiles, if not from the Aldebarans? Likewise the knowledge for the
genetic engineering, in which the Germans again are supposed to have been ahead of other
nations by lengths? Not to mention the atomic physics, the rocket technology and the
chemistry (among other things the hydrogen technology). Perhaps through the contact of
Haushofer and Sebottendorff, the founders of the Thule and VRIL Society, with the ascended
masters in Tibet? We learn about the life and education of Germans in Tibetan monasteries
not only through Lobsang Rampa and Russel McCloud (The Black Sun of Tashi Lhunpo), but
also through the book "Der Eremit" (The Hermit) published by a Mr. Felix Schmidt. And the
Tibetans themselves claim that they have intercourse with the "great whites" who come
from "above" (the first travelling white Europeans who reached the Himalayas were greeted
by the Tibetan monks with the question "why do you come from ‘below', otherwise you
would come from ‘above'").


According to statements of Herbert G. Dorsey and other researchers, the intact
drive of a non-terrestrial saucer crashed in the Black Forest in 1936 should have been a great
help for the Germans, besides the construction plans of the VRIL society, by the telepathic
contact with the extraterrestrials. However, there is almost no evidence for this, not to
mention still living eyewitnesses. Another hint to the cooperation with the Aldeba- rans can
be found in Robert Charroux's book "Das Ratsel der An- den". In it he reports about huge
cave systems in the South American Andes. In the chapter "The Scientific Zen- trum of
Narcisso Genovese" Charroux relies on information of the physicist, philologist and humanist
Narcisso Genovese. Ge- novese was a student of the famous Italian inventor Gugliemo
Marconi. He claims that in 1938, after the death of their teacher, Marconi's students decided
to continue the expe- riments and researches he had begun on the use of solar and cosmic
energy. This group of students, consisting of 98 scholars and technicians from different
countries, united to a society, would have taken the resolution to take all necessary
precautions to prevent the misuse of their cosmic energy for war and criminal purposes.
Withdrawn to a lonely region of the Cordilleras (South American Andes) they would have
subordinated their community life to three demands:
on earth there should only be- a single religion, that of the true God or the uni- versal
intelligence,a single nation: the earthly fatherland,
and a single policy: Peace on the planet and understanding with the peoples in space.


Robert Charroux then writes further on p. 165: - "Since the Community did not lack
resources thanks to the war treasures of Benito Mussolini and Adolf Hitler (1), it built in
South America (2) an underground city, better equipped in laboratories, equipment and
technical means than Cap Kennedy, Kuru, Baikonur, Saclay or the CERN from Geneva.
According to the report of N. Genovese this research center has made astonishing scientific
progress, not least thanks to extraterrestrial support. Already since 1946 it has a large
collecting mirror for cosmic energy and after initial exploitation of the matter- antimatter
opposition it is now already able to extract energy directly from the sun."


381


Mussolini's war treasure has only been partially recovered by the Italian partisans. The
German Reich treasure is still used today by the 3rd Black Force for the construction of the
future Reich. The statements about the location of the subterranean city are quite divergent:
according to one, it is supposed to be on the Altiplano (Peru?), according to another, in the
South American jungle (on the Amazon?)."


At the end of August 1994 | had an interview with a member of the "Black Sun"
(called by others the "Third Power" or, as by Charroux, the "Third Black Force") who claimed
to be born in New Swabia. According to the statements of this man, he lives today in an
underground city, together with three million Germans (1994!). According to this, they have
underground as well as above ground bases all over the world. One of the underground
bases is said to be under the Canary Islands. Another one in the Bermuda Triangle, but in this
case on the bottom of the ocean. According to various statements, they can easily glide
under water at high speeds. And when they stop on the seabed, they can increase the
magnetic field of the discs so that it pushes the water away from them, forming an
underwater dome.


Further, they would have a huge base in the Himalayas, at an altitude of well over
5000m. According to him, the Germans are under the protection of the highest Tibetan
lodge, the "dGe-lugs- pa", the yellow caps, and also the Ariannis, the inhabitants of the
subterranean realm below the Himalayas. According to the statement of the member of the
"Black Sun" the VRIL-Germans are supposed to have a large standing army spread all over
the world today (consisting of infiltrated Aldebarans, Arians and Germans) which could be
used immediately if their help should be needed somewhere. Furthermore he talks about an
armada of flying discs because of which the USA and Russia have built the SDI program. But
he also mentioned that they must never attack. That would be against the cosmic law. Only
in the case of an attack would they be allowed to defend themselves, for example, in the
case of a third world war. If they are able to build flying discs that can cancel out gravity, this
presupposes that they have understood the laws of the universe. Therefore, they would
have to know what ‘life’ is and therefore would not be allowed to destroy life. Therefore,
most of them are vegetarians. The member of the "Black Sun" confirmed this.


As asmall example about a contact of the VRIL-Germans and Aldebarans with
Americans | would like to point out the following to give you a picture of how they behave:
The case of Reinhold Schmidt! On November 7 and 9, 1957, the daily newspaper 'Rheinpfalz'
reported on the Californian grain merchant Reinhold Schmidt, who was in Kearney, Nebraska,
USA, had direct contact with an alien spaceship and its crew on 5.11.1957. In 1959, two
years later, Schmidt reported in detail about his experience in a brochure: "Im Raumschiff
zur Arktis - Zwischenfall in Kearney", the German edition was published by Ventla-Verlag,
Wiesbaden. Reinhold Schmidt said: "The men were wearing street clothes, were about 1.80
m tall and weighed about 80 kg. The two women seemed to be about the same height,
weighing about 58 to 60 kg, and | estimate their age to be about 40 years". (S. 11) "They all
spoke to me in English - as it seemed to me - with German accents. To each other they spoke
High German, which | could understand, since | had graduated from a school where German
was spoken as well as English; and | could speak, read, and write German at that time. " (S.
13). "While | was on board the ship, | was told | did not want to get my car started until they
were completely out of sight, or it would not move at all. This was the first time | was told
that the ship had stopped my car." This engine stopping device was a development of the
Germans during the Second World War, with which they tried to stop the electric sy- stem of
enemy bombers and also tanks. Reinhold Schmidt was then, after his story was published, it


382


was broadcast on television, he was then interviewed by countless reporters, but the very
next day he was arrested on the orders of high military authorities and later admitted to a
mental hospital. But since his case had already reached too great a degree of notoriety and
Reinhold was also mentally fully healthy, he had to be set free again.


On 5 2 1958 it came then again to a contact with the Spaceship and its occupants.
He was about 20 miles west of Kearney when his car stopped again. When he asked,
dumbfounded, how he could have been tracked, he was told due to his brain impulses. They
ascended for a short flight and then declared that they wanted to come back, which they did
on August 14, 1958. At 16.15 o'clock the flight went to the northern polar circle and the
Arctic. Stretch by stretch they reached 65,000 km/h and explained to him: "the aircraft could
fly much faster, but the distance would not be great enough to really give it free rein." This
same craft could be used as an airplane in the air, as a ship on the water, or as a submarine
under the water. (S.39) At the northern polar circle they went with the spaceship for about 4
hours at 100-120m diving depth under the surface: "While we were below the surface of the
water, | saw something that had never been made public before. | wrote to Washington for
permission to publish this report. But | heard nothing from the Pentagon until the day |
wrote this down. Since | assume there is no reason for further secrecy, | will make these
disclosures now. We observed two Russian submarines mapping the bottom of the ocean to
establish bases from which they could fire projectiles to any part of the world without giving
warning and without making noise. The world space friends told me that our government
(USA) knows of this activity because three of our submarines are stationed there, and
because one of our small reconnaissance airships and some of our larger planes have flown
over this area. The space friends told me that they would not allow the Russians to do this.
They declared that if we could not prevent the Russians from attacking the world from under
the water without warning or sound, they would do it themselves. | am sure they are
determined to do so". When asked about the possibility of nuclear war, the pilots declared
(for the American "space friends") the following: "They said also that they would not allow a
nuclear war. They made it clear that they are impartial and will not side with any country,
but that they will not stand by and watch our planet destroyed by nuclear bombs either. Our
radiation problem has also been discussed. The space friends are now using a new invention
to cleanse our atmosphere of radiation from the explosion of atomic and hydrogen bombs.
This agent is lowered from a great height and acts like an umbrella covering a large area and
not only cleansing our air but at times destroying the very mechanism of the bomb.”


Also of interest for our topic is the North Pole flight of Admiral Byrd. As he flew far
into the polar region, he wrote about vegetation and animals jumping around. Suddenly
flying saucers appeared next to him and he wrote in his diary, "| can make out a symbol, but |
shall not publish/announce it." ("... | shall not reveal!" - i.e. Be- fehlsform). At the 1991 UFO
conference in Phoenix, Arizona, | asked his nephew, Harley Byrd, what the symbol was, to
which he replied, "A Swastika, of coursei".- "A swastika, of course!" Later, when Admiral
Byrd landed, he found himself facing tall blond-haired giants who were obviously very
advanced in their technical, as well as spiritual, development. And when it came to the
saucer-shaped flying discs... The blond "master" standing opposite him calls them
"Fligelrads" (i.e. "wing wheels" in German). And later, when the pilots of the saucers say
good-bye to Admiral Byrd over the radio again, they say " Auf Wiedersehen " (this German
greeting is found in the middle of his English diary!!). And as I'm writing this, | get the
following. He had worked as a West German agent for the GDR State Security for more than
a decade. In this letter from 11.3.1997 he writes to me the following:


383


",..As a Bundeswehr soldier | took part in a winter night exercise in the Westerwald in 1959. |
have a strange memory of a UFO landing which led to my being dragged/accompanied into
the UFO where | had to lie down on a table for medical examination. German was spoken. |
haven't spoken about it to anyone yet, lest | be considered crazy."


| then spontaneously sent him Karin and Reiner's first book and was curious to see
his reaction. This came by letter on 17.3.1997, in which he wrote: "Dear Mr. Van Helsing..,
warmest thanks for the gift of "The Immensity of Being", which | immediately read in one
breath and was thunderstruck when | saw therein the investigation of people on couches
described several times and thus finally confirmed. | know that during the night exercise - by
the way, | was used alone as an advanced observer - in the deepest winter night | saw a
discus-like flying body land, which stood on stilts and under which a ladder was lowered in
the middle......suddenly | saw out of a cloud a ghostly shining gyroscopic something
approaching and landing silently in gauzy dancing, lightning-fast maneuvers, comparable to a
hummingbird while washing nectar.... The 'gyro' stopped at a height of 2 to 3 meters above
the ground, hydraulically activated 'stilts' were extended, and then a 'gangway' was lowered,
like in passenger planes... The dome had numerous brightly lit windows in which heads and
torsos were visible.... Although | myself... could not normally be made out 'in a hurry' either
by frontal or aerial vision, a suddenly flaring spotlight of the strange aircraft immediately
headed straight for me. Three or four men came down the gangway and straight to me, ...
"Hi, Kamerad, you must be bloody cold to lie on the floor for hours and not be allowed to
move! "Come in for a cup of coffee, would you like that?" | neither understood the anomaly
of the situation, nor did |, the dutiful soldier, think of my observation and security mission. In
the midst of my 'new comrades' | boarded the ‘flying saucer’ by 'gangway', saw the windows
in the circular command room and the all-around (closed) control panels. My 'new
comrades' wore a bluish-white flying combination with a strange emblem on the right upper
arm: white circle with black triangle, the latter with the tip turned downwards. Since the
guys spoke High German from the start, even among themselves, | asked them, suspecting a
special type of weapon in the Bundeswehr, "what kind of 'bunch' they were, I'd never seen
or even heard their tactical sign before." Thereupon one of the men, who looked absolutely
like normal Germans (they were of normal human size, no 'Greys', but one or two women in
combinations), told me that they belonged neither to my, nor to the enemy's, military
organization, but, absolutely independent, in every respect, came from another distant
planet. They smiled, knowing that |, the uninitiated earth-citizen, could never believe such a
thing. They told me the name of the planet, but | don't know it anymore... At one point | was
lying on the table in the middle of the commando scene. There was laughter, and | heard
someone say: "He (I meant he) is all right, that fellow!" Someone was tampering with my
uniform fly. An electrical device with a familiar operating noise was attached to my member,
causing not central but peripheral nervous excitation with subsequent ejaculation. ...1 was
told that | would have great difficulties in my future life because | was quite different from
the mass of my fellow men. | then parted from the crew in the greatest friendship and was
escorted back to my commanded post location by a few men. The vehicle took off and
disappeared ghostlike, without gradual acceleration, fast, several dimensions faster than the
fastest jet fighters..."


Apart from the pictures published in this book, there is other excellent film and
photo material about the above-mentioned flying objects, for example the 60 min
documentary 'UFOs-Geheimnisse des III. Reiches' (available from "Aldebaran Versand", see
advertising page in the appendix). Also the material of the American Vladimir Terziski, who
served a 3 hour slide lecture with photos of German saucers, construction plans and


384


underground German bases at the UFO conference in Phoenix, Arizona in September 1991.
Also of interest is the material compiled by Italian Air Force Commander Renato Vesco in his
book (‘Man made UFOs 1944-1994', Renato Ve- sco and David Hatcher Childress, Adventures
Unlimited Press, Stelle, Illinois 60919, USA).


Design of the planned large space ship Haunebu IV (with 120m diameter)


385


i Glocke SchwingungselaschiuB8 10 Schwingungspanzer
ja YX - Pol Rahmen
Ib XY - Pol Drehkirper
2 Haupt- u. Aniab Elektromagnete
Generator Stromspelser u, Aufnehmer
3 Glocken mantel Vekuum


Das VRIL-Triebwerk (erstellt nach einer Originalzeichnung durch die STM)


386


(Pn Lee (aTetEReeene. % eaber, Lane Manse far ohne Wer Fern Rar
0, her amin ey
“


IPE ae a te dell de $3
oy ee aE Ce ’


387


Bet, 2. Dew, 44


tinge «(198 teter
Durcbesener ; 50 meter (Le Ger Ritts, erveckeet)
Awteioh «4 & Tmle-tempesanoren 'f, 4 4 Scemens—teri teteren |¢
(eve emmers)
( AeePettepelaer @
Coeehetatahes > KSiee kngaben, theuretioct stdtes fast oo cop
Kilometer 7. Sekmade anglick wote

Weichevite | felne Cngeben, FeLn Weere lect enbagrenet
Sevetionng sf Brehwkres =. 2 5 2 = ifem Ese,

| = Seems me foe) tie CoE,

‘2 © Seebtnres «. 2 2} 2 Tee cee,

4 2 RITE), = 4 Remeten ofer Mabetsowseter orp t) t
AeeUpeMEerERg | UONGLEREt, TerEURLIGR Dreloehett-Tikialen wie bet

tenors ITE
Deratweng | (20 Mame (Gupeshente Durwheshad tteeakt |
Weltelifiaigheit, (00 ¢
Sti LhechwsheTanignets ) Pabekanal, vermetiich 25 mimes wie bat
Semone rT
ALlgescions Fineveratges « febskanet, vermetlioh vty Bel fueeeheotrr
wethemasbaiceig bel tag eet wecet
COVetOS ALIGNS Minentntamgls cheett ) CEDeHOERT, Geue vermiieh ver
(V4 orp ee,


Aus reichsdeutschen $S~<jeheisarchiven (Planskiszen, meschriftun:
ma Pragnenten rekonstruiert).


154
The Andromeda device (source: STM archive)


388


Source: CODE No. 9, Sept. 1987, publisher Diagnosen, Leonberg


389


"flying disc" is given here with 2.000-4.000 km/h


zuver las


j L fi f if i
Chisse rad treat : cAr wh Cinezeineiren
Shia ac 2] °
ST ir- o*


Uber devi. ‘
Raum seh fF FF-Lyp |
nichts Genages.|
Beschreibung
Ober runole Kane!

mit groper. Bulle

- angen Datuuger
seein“ ik €
4 a Umien dre adem
tt ee ee vier A e- Dbhevde ~
‘ mie Grape geschbéod
mf dhs. So


Raw See
= Gesehen beim
”


Scat FF Sasi
Eng chen.
Waser mehrpach


#\
Cuncwbe, . wore
| 4 Ew an


ery Crash in ¢ |
¢ Logen-ireis
pSHLe \ —-~) der Zeit um
HASIS oe a eh


390


Che Waffen 55


With the creation of the SS and the seizure of power by Adolf Hitler in 1933, there
was a portion of the SS that was armed and trained along military lines and served as an
armed force known as the SS-Verfiigungstruppen. The Verfiigungstruppen took part in the
Anschluss of Austria and the annexation of Czechoslovakia alongside the general SS and the
Wehrmacht. With the invasion of Poland to defend the Germans being genocided, regiments
of both the SS-Verfiigungstruppen and the Totenkopfverbande were expanded into brigades
and later divisions. These divisions would form the foundation of a purely military branch of
the SS, being first known as the Bewaffnete SS and later as the Waffen-SS.


Himmler’s influence can be clearly seen in the fact that the Waffen-SS was based on
a policy of strict racial selection and emphasis on political purity. This contradicts Otto
Skorzeny, who would later go on to claim that the policy of “Nordic selection” was not the
case, with Skorzeny citing the many ethnicities that were allowed to form divisions within the
Waffen-SS. Skorzeny distorts truth, for as the war intensified recruitment standards changed,
in the beginning the Waffen-SS had much higher standards that were relaxed as the situation
became more and more dire with the turning of the tide of the war. Focus was directed toward
the incorporation of the racial Germans (Volksdeutsche) but over time recruiting of foreigners
of all nationalities while retaining at least some semblance of the original principles of
“Nordic” superiority became the standards. There were many native Waffen-SS Legions from
not just Europe but from many different countries all over the world. The much more “Nordic”


392


Legions were able to be distinguished from the other Legions by a naming scheme, Waffen
for the less Nordic and Freiwilligen for the majority Nordic. The Waffen-SS was seen at first
as an elite military formation, but this character changed after the expansion to include non-
nordic legions. These divisions were, however, expected to fight to the last man as to be apart
of the Waffen-SS was seen as being a crusader against the threat of Bolshevism and
international Capitalism. There was also the fact that most knew that their treatment in
captivity or upon Germany’s defeat, would be extreme horrific compared to that of other
members of the armed forces.


The Waffen-SS was composed of some 42 divisions which were made up of various
different units, such as panzer divisions, panzergrenadier divisions, mountain divisions,
grenadier divisions, cavalry divisions, and a police division. The best equipped and supported
of all German combat units were the SS panzer divisions, which were purely of German
members. The SS panzer divisions formed the strongest and politically most reliable portion
of the Waffen-SS. However, SS panzer division did evolve over time as conditions and
equipment changed, the creation of a panzer division was to meet the conditions as required.
An example is that of the Leibstandarte SS Adolf Hitler which was initially formed from
Hitler’s bodyguard unit, becoming a full infantry regiment with three battalions, an artillery
battalion, and antitank, reconnaissance, and engineer attachments in 1939. After the
annexation of Bohemia and Moravia, it was re-designated as a motorized division but was due
to be reorganized as an SS division in the mid-summer of that same year. The regiment would
be re-organized a few more times before the end of the war.


After 1933 the SS was to accept no new members except from selected graduates of
the Hitler Youth. Under SS leadership, if a candidate satisfied SS requirements in political
reliability, racial purity, and physique, he was accepted as a candidate at the age of 18. The
Waffen-SS was officially a voluntary service but claimed priority over all other branches of
the armed forces in the selection of recruits. However, to meet the high rate of casualties and
the required expansion of Waffen-SS field divisions, service in the Waffen-SS became
compulsory for all members of the SS, and the voluntary transfer of personnel from any other
branch of the armed forces was permitted. This demand would put pressure on members of
the Hitler Youth to volunteer for the Waffen-SS starting in 1943. The demand for manpower
would reach new heights however, and so entire Army, Navy, and Air Force units were taken
over by the Waffen-SS, given SS training, and incorporated into field units. This demand
would culminate in the recruitment change, allowing for nationalities that were seen as non-
germanic.


Recruitment began in other countries due to the growing need for troops. Early in
1943 the German government obtained from the governments of Romania, Hungary, and
Slovakia their consent to a major Waffen-SS recruiting drive among the “racial” Germans in
those countries. And so a recruitment drive in these countries was initiated, putting pressure
on the ethnic Germans to enlist in the Waffen-SS. This recruitment obtained over 100,000
men and were subsequently distributed among the Waffen-SS divisions. Otto Skorzeny would
give a comprehensive overview of the many different nationalities that would eventually
come to serve within the Waffen-SS in his memoir;


“It cannot be denied that the Waffen-SS possessed an esprit de corps, but that is
nothing new, for every army in the world at that time had an esprit de corps. I believe it even
existed in the Red Guard and in certain Siberian divisions, the elite troops of the Soviet Army.
One unique feature of the Waffen-SS was that it was a volunteer army, in which from 1942
European soldiers from many lands and peoples could be found: Albanians, Bosnians,
Britons, Bulgarians, Cossacks, Croats, Danes, Dutch, Estonians, Finns, Flemings, French,


393


Georgians, Greeks, Hungarians, Italians, Latvians, Lithuanians, Norwegians, Romanians,
Russians, Serbs, Slovakians, Swedes, Swiss, Ukrainians, Walloons; as well Armenians,
Belorussians, Hindus, Kirghizes, Tartars, Turkmen and Uzbeks served under their own flags
in the Waffen-SS. Almost all of these peoples were represented in my unit. The only ones
missing were Albanians, Bosnians, Britons, Georgians, Greeks and Serbians.”


However, not all of these units were of the same combat effectiveness nor were all of
this units able to express that which was originally required, that being a high level of
discipline and character to form an elite unit. One unit that comes to mind is that of the 13th
SS Mountain Division Handschar, a division drawn from Bosnian-Herzegovina, that initially
consisted of Bosnian Muslims and Croat volunteers. This unit has often been called the worst
unit in the Waffen-SS. When sen to southern France in 1943, the division would promptly
mutinied, so was returned to the occupied Yugoslavian territory. The unit proved relatively
ineffective and, what is more, increasingly rebellious even when tasked with anti-partisan
missions.


Another unit, one that left a stain upon the whole of the NSDAP order, is that of the
SS-Sturmbrigade Dirlewanger. A unit that was formed initially out of poachers who had been
arrested by the Reich and placed under the command of Oskar Dirlewanger, a man who was
lucky enough to escape true justice. Dirlewanger was a veteran of the first world war, and a
man who fought against the communists during their uprisings in the early Wiemar Republic.
Though he would even go on to participate in the Beer Hall Putsch, Dirlewanger would
eventually show his true colors in 1934 when he raped a 14 year old girl who belonged to the
League of German Girls (BDM), and although he should have received a higher punishment,
such as the death penalty, he was given a 2 year sentence and was expelled from the SA and
the NSDAP. Though he would appeal and have the case re-opened after he completed the 2
year sentence within a prison camp, eventually having his “innocence” proven, this was
contingent on the idea that Oskar had “no idea” of the girls real age, claiming that the girl said
she was nearly 17. Gottlob Berger, a senior SS-Obergruppenfiihrer and a close ally of
Himmler, sponsored and protected his friend and former comrade from the first world war,
Oskar Dirlewanger. It can be concluded that the fault for allowing a sick degenerate to escape
justice, to be “exonerated”, to rejoin the SS, and to later join the Waffen-SS, is the sole fault
of Berger. That Berger was blinded by misplaced loyalty and so brought great shame upon not
only the SS nor just the NSDAP, but the whole of the German nation itself is the highest
crime on can commit while being a member of the SS. The lesson here is to not blindly follow
whatever is the legal procedure, to be as thorough as possible when it comes to background
checks when allowing new members to join what is supposed to be a racial elite, to put aside
past relationships and strive to be the pinnacle of your race. Gottlob Berger failed himself, the
SS, his Reichsfiihrer-SS, his Fuhrer, and the entire German nation in believing a lying
pedophile and, even going so far as to help said degenerate get exonerated. Such actions
warrant the death penalty, for Berger and Dirlewanger. Dirlewanger’s unit would go on to
perform various anti-partisan actions, with many a tale of a wide scope of atrocities, some of
which are real and others very obviously embellished into the extreme sense. It is a travesty to
the honor of the Reich that both men were allowed to operate with as high of rank as they
were able to obtain. It can be safely assumed that both Himmler and Hitler believed Berger
along with the new report from the legal system of Dirlewanger’s “innocence”, which can be
used to excuse comments made by both Himmler and Hitler in regards to Dirlewanger, for
both men would go on to praise Dirlewanger and his penal brigade. The brigade was initially
made up of convicted poachers, but this changed after some time and so convicted criminals
and other lowlifes were conscripted into the brigade. Though somewhat effective in anti-
partisan measures, such a brigade also showed no markings of a truly elite formation, with
Dirlewanger being consistently intoxicated, and having a high rate of casualties. Berger would
say during the Nuremberg Trials: "Now Dr. Dirlewanger was hardly a good boy. You can't
say that. But he was a good soldier, and he had one big mistake that he didn't know when to


394


stop drinking", showing that even with the Allies having sentenced both Goering and
Rosenberg, two people who would have nothing to do with the supposed holocaust, to death
that Berger was still unwilling to let go of his loyalty to Dirlewanger. The Allies would even
commute Berger’s 25 year sentence to 10 years, and allowing Berger to go free early at 6.5
years.


Luckily, this stain does not reflect the entire Waffen-SS nor the greater SS and the
NSDAP, the faults of one man with misplaced loyalty does not reflect upon the character of
the truly great men such as Paul Hausser nor of Heinrich Himmler. Waffen-SS numbers were
limited until later in the war, as the Waffen-SS was seen as ideological and battlefield shock
troops who were also a somewhat pampered rival to the Wehrmacht for the best recruits. The
Wehrmacht made obvious objections to SS recruiting of the best men. The zeal of Waffen-SS
units over that of the officers and men of the Wehrmacht would be relied upon as the tide of
the war began to change against the Reich. Waffen-SS enlistees were drawn from all over the
Reich, who were closely screened according to extremely specific criteria of racial purity
imposed by Himmler and other SS officials: SS-men were expected to be “blood pure” to
1800, while officers had to prove racial purity dating to 1750. However, as stated above, this
criteria would be loosened as the war took a turn for the worse and manpower shortages
became a pressing issue.


With the declaration of war upon the USSR, the desire was to smash Britain’s last
hope, dominate the continent, and to destroy the den of Bolshevism. Operation Barbarossa
was chosen as the name, in reference to the medieval German emperor Friedrich I, known for
his fiery red beard (Barbarossa) and his policy of Drang nach Osten (Drive to the East).
According to legend, Friedrich, who drowned on the Third Crusade in the twelfth century,
was not dead but was slumbering in the Kyffhauser Mountains in Thuringia, waiting to
emerge in Germany’s hour of need and restore it to its ancient glories. There is obvious
parallels to that the legend of Parsifal and the Holy Grail, Wagner having made a play of this
legend, and the Grail being of high importance to the SS. As the war went on, the element of a
“European Crusade against Bolshevism” became more and more important to the image of the
Waffen-SS, this was impart due to the manpower needs. The Waffen-SS therefor was one of
the first truly European nationalist Army in history. Similarly to the Crusades of centuries
prior, the peoples of Europe understood that the futures of their native countries were at stake,
and knew that the Soviet Union was preparing to launch a massive military offensive
operation upon Western Europe. The people’s of Europe had seen the effects of the Soviet
revolution along with the red terror of Bela Kun in Hungary and the Spanish Civil War, and
knew that Trotsky still desired a never ending world revolution. The people of Europe
understood that if the USSR were triumphant, it would mean the end of everything they held
dearly; their families, their religion, their traditions etc. It was for these exact reasons why
millions of people from Europe and around the world made up their minds and joined
Germany in launching Operation Barbarossa, the invasion of the Soviet Union on June 22,
1941. However, unlike the Crusaders of centuries prior, the soldiers of the Waffen-SS were
rarely if ever at odds with one another, for once the racial standards were relaxed, a strong
bond and relationship of mutual respect between soldiers and officers formed. The foreign
Waffen-SS volunteers understood that the Bolshevik system was far more dangerous than
their petty differences or anything they could imagine and had to be defeated. If it wasn’t for
their heroism and sacrifice, Germany would’ve been annihilated and the whole of continental
Europe would’ve been under Bolshevik rule. This is what drove the men who signed up for
the Waffen-SS to fight on with a great of courage, heroism, and self-sacrifice. It was not for,
as Nietzsche would say, the “bovine nationalities”, it was for the higher purpose of a truly
great Europe.


Not since the knightly religious orders of the Middle Ages, had there been such
selfless idealism and heroism. The sheer sense of unity the Waffen-SS had in defense of


395


Europe was unmatched by anything in the world and continues to remain unmatched to this
day, as no military force before or since has had most if not all members of its cause united in
such a way. In this century of materialism, the SS stand out as a shining light of spirituality.
“Greatness in Adversity” is the distinction of the SS. Can any military claim to be of such
greatness? Has the European Union, an organization that objectively hates Europe, lived up to
this standard, a standard that the Waffen-SS sought to embody in the fullest sense? No. No
military is prefect, yes the Waffen-SS made mistakes, but the Waffen-SS strove to be greater
than it’s parts, strove to embody an ideal that was beyond that of simple military matters.


396


Che 55 in Arm


By Jean Mabire


The coffin placed on a cannon shaft passes slowly between two walls of men. On
one side Reichswehr soldiers, on the other the SS and SA. And Last magazine passing
Marshal Hindenburg, who died August 1, 1934. Chancellor & dead... Hitler becomes
Chancellor. For him it is not necessary to keep alive two armies, the army of tradition and the
army of revolution. One is enough. It is very hot and not even a breath of wind moves the
leaves of the crowns and veils that adorn the walls of the fortress-monument of Tannennberg.
There, Hindenburg stopped the Russians, exactly twenty years earlier. There, he will be
buried in a ceremonial ceremony that sets a solemn moment in the life of the II Reich. This
day marks the transition from one period of history to another. Along with the old Marshal,
old Germany is buried. Hitler is there, serious in face, encircled by his loyalists in brown or
black uniforms and the veterans of the Kaiser's Armies, who wore the glorious army uniforms
of the Great War.


A new era began, which the Fiihrer wanted to place under the sign of reconeilation
between army and party. R6hm dead. Hindenburg dead. Will the new military force succeed
in effecting the fusion of the two now conflicting currents, the People's Army & the military
aristocracy? To the sound of the Twilight of the Gods funeral march the coffin is carried into
the Marshals' Tower. A hundred and one cannon shots echo as a final farewell. Hitler remains
alone.


Alone at last.


On March 16, 1935, news of paramount importance not only for Germany but for all
of Europe explodes like thunder: Hitler, the Fiihrer-Chancellor has signed the law for the
reconstitution of the Wehrmacht. And reestablished compulsory military service. The caste
army is to be transformed into the people's army. Hitler becomes its Supreme Leader. Null
match between army & party. The only winner is Adolf Hitler who, at the promulgation of the
law, announces to the country that "the shame of Versailles" & has been erased:


"As of today, the guarantee of ‘the honor & security of the Reich & entrusted again to the
Germanic nation."


The Offiziers Korps jubilates; in the garrisons, competitions for admission to the
Kriegs Akademie, the War School, which is not long in opening its doors, are fervently
prepared...


But on the very day of the reestablishment of military service Adolf Hitler also
created the SS Verfiigungstruppen (SS troops on call). They will be armed formations,
stationed on permanent duty. These new units join the Leibstandarte Adolf Hitler and the
Totenkopfverbande. The Black Order finally has the first nucleus of a real army of its own. A
year later, amid shouts of jubilation and flori throwing, German troops penetrate the
Rhineland.


This occupation of an area "demilitarized" by international decision represents a
symbol. Hitler entrusted the vanguard of this first military operation not to the men of von
Blomberg's Wehrmacht, but to those of Sepp Dietrich's Leibstandarte. On the warpath, the
Bavarian lansquenet has gone ahead of the Prussian aristocracy. Himmler does his math and is


399


fully satisfied. The Black Order now numbers more than ten thousand soldiers in arms. To the
two thousand of the Zeibstandarte and the three thousand of the Totenkopfverbande are added
six battalions of the Verfugungstruppen of about a thousand men each and, finally, the
personnel of the two Junker-Schule in Bad Tolz and Brunswich. But the Reichsfiihrer knows
what the SS lacks to become real soldiers: a real leader. He finds it on the same day by
summoning Standartenfiihrer (Colonel) Paul Hausser:


Himmler - As of today, October 1, 1936, I appoint you as Brigadefiihrer and entrust
you with the general inspection of the Verfiigungstruppen.


Hausser - Count on me. I will make soldiers out of them.


Himmler could not have made a better choice. Hausser is a fresh-faced Nazi, but an
old-fashioned soldier. He is fifty-six years old, but he is in fine shape. And a Prussian with a
face as sharp as a knife. Energetic and intelligent, he is a leader by nature and has a heroic
military career behind him. Hausser earned in the barracks and at the front all his ranks up to
that of division general. In 1932 he stepped aside without ever having engaged in politics.
Conservative & patriot, as befitting a former Kaiser officer, he joined the Stahlbelm (Steel
Helmets) association grouping right-wing ex-combatants & soon was appointed regional
leader for Berlin & all of Brandenburg. He later switched to National Socialism, as did
everyone around him. The day the Stahlhelm was absorbed into the SS he becomes
Standartenfiihrer, a step backward, considering the rank he had previously achieved. No doubt,
he is to be made to pay for having remained, for a long time, outside the party during the
difficult years of the power struggle. Himmler seeks, intelligently, men of this ilk. He seeks
them out for his SS, which is to become a chosen body of the Black Order. He despises the
proletarians, the quarrelsome, the displaced.


Look for qualified leaders. All the better to take them away from the military caste of
the Offizier Korps. He knows how to recognize the competent ones and wants them for that
mixture of pride and loyalty which form the basis of the SS. Hausser has proved, as director
of the Brunswich School, that he has perfectly assimilated the spirit of the new national-
socialist army which the Black Order wants to establish in the shadows. Pious military man
that ideologue now belongs to the SS in arms and will remain loyal to them forever. The troop
he is tasked to inspect comprises about a thousand men, he sets his General Staff the main
objectives :


“Intensive training, absolute obedience, offensive spirit. If you have nothing to add
we can begin immediately....”


Hausser devotes himself to his mission with a truly fanatical spirit. The SS must
become the best troops in the world. So he has decided, and he is a stubborn man. Nothing
will be lacking in these new formations: superior framing, firepower, quality of material,
ideological fanaticism. First of all, since it is illogical to scatter the units of the
Verfiigungstruppe all over Germany, he divides these men from those of the Allgemeine SS
who will be able to consider themselves only a human reserve, a sentimental aid, of such
numerical importance, however, that they will comprise four infantry regiments, nineteen
cavalry regiments, fourteen transmission battalions, nine pioneer battalions, a medical service.
Paul Hausser immediately organized two regiments. The first, in Munich, the Deutschland
entrusted to Felix Steiner,the second, Germania, in Hamburg reporting to, Karl Demelhuber.
Soon a transmission section and a whole company would be added. This is a true professional
army, in which soldiers are hired for four years, non-commissioned officers for twelve, and
officers for twenty-five. Selection is racial, ideological and strictly exceptional. The minimum


400


stature is carried six feet, and a single bad tooth constitutes an element of reform. In 1937, the
men of the Verfiigungstruppe adopt olive-gray uniforms; the black one will be worn for
barracks duty and parades. But they do not intend to blend in with the other Wehrmacht
soldiers and wear I eagle with the hooked cross not on the right chest, above the pocket, but
on the left sleeve of the jacket, They then wear on their lapels a rectangle of black cloth with
silver SS symbols in runic characters.


Brigadefithrer Paul Hausser weighs with one hand the reports that have accumulated
on his table. He murmurs between his teeth, at the address of his Chief of Staff, motionless at
his side with a dossier under his arm:


“The emergence of an armed SS formation definitely does not please anyone.... Least
of all the SS and the army!”


Throughout Germany the local leaders of the 'Black Order seek to subject to their
control & authority the SS units stacked & in arms. As for the Wehrmacht, which & still an
embryo born of the Reischwehr, it cannot help but be scandalized at the emergence of a new
professional troop. But Paul Hausser has found, by joining the SS, an ideal means of
expressing what is surly and gruff about his character. He shrugs his shoulders:


“Tt must well be done by someone. And we will prepare warriors like not even
dreamed of!”


On November 8, 1937, the eve of the anniversary of the Munich putsch, the
customary meeting of the vehement fighters of the National Socialist movement is held. The
next day the new SS men will take the oath before the Blutfahne, the blood-soaked banner
guarded by the Black Order. Heinrich Himmler gathered the senior SS officers around him
and announced to them:


“Today the Verfiigungstruppe, & ready to fight under the same conditions as the
Wehrmacht.”


There is perhaps a little exaggeration in the statement. Only the Deuischland
regiment & prepared for a war. The Germania & Leibstandarte are still military parade troops.
However, an exereit with all | its services, designed as a shock force, is about to be born. The
study hall, the stadium,the swimming pool, the maneuver grounds, replace and annoying
military officials. The SS in arms live in the sun and rain. The more comfortable and modern
the quarters, the more wearisome military training becomes. Hausser was never modest He
knows he can count on the support of the SS Reichsfiihrer-SS. The officers lead the same life
as their men. They run, swim, jump, advance under fire barrages, use the smallest roughness
of the terrain to protect themselves and fight. Paul Hausser has found in Felix Steiner an
irreplaceable right-hand man. He too & an old career officer. At eighteen he left, as a second
lieutenant in the infantry, and fought at Tannenberg where he received his baptism of fire.
Badly wounded, in front of Riga, & decorated with the Iron Cross 1st class. Later, in France,
he fought on the front between Nojon and Arras.


As with Hausser, the end of the war did not constitute for Steiner the end of fighting.
He enlisted, in fact,in the Baltic Frankish Corps and fought in Courland that era admirably
described by Ernest Salomon in his book "The Reprobates." He then switched to the
Reischwehr to pursue his career as if to say to prepare for a rematch. The soldier's profession
kept him away from politics. But this Prussian, round, energetic face with thick eyebrows


401


shading the clear eyes, he found in the armed formations of the SS the employment ground
ideal for his theories. For Steiner, as a good officer of the Frankish Corps, envisions truly
revolutionary theories of education:


“The first enemy is the barracks - he states with his expression gruff and ironic at the
same time.”


His theories do not displease Hausser either, who is one of the very rare Prussian
officers who revolts against certain schemes, undoubtedly functional in peacetime but
jammed in wartime.


“T give you carte blanche. I am interested in results.”


For Steiner I physical training has predominant value. His men must be complete
athletes, capable of running three kilometers in twenty minutes, of climbing steep walls, of
running under the tense fire of machine guns. He repeats to them relentlessly:


“You must seek hand-to-hand combat and fight with the machine gun, with bombs,
with the dagger, rather than with the rifle. You must grab the enemy by the throat. And the
sooner you do that the better.”


For Steiner, and for the officers he subdues with his Olympian calm and unrelenting
will, what matters is the offensive. The traditional army no longer meets the demands of
modern warfare. They are about to give birth to the spirit of "commandos," small, highly
mobile units, for whom initiative counts much more pit than courage. They still lack a
uniform that differentiates them from other fighters. Felix Steiner finds it: a very wide suit
mottled and striped. The 2 predominant colors are red for the fall suit and green for the spring
suit. The camouflage jumpsuit was invented! An army applies to its cadres, officers and non-
commissioned officers. The training of Fuhrers and Unterfuhrers, for the SS in arms becomes
a vital necessity. It matters little to have fought in the streets in the early days of National
Socialism. Today one must lead men into combat by overcoming all the contingencies of a
modern war. Heinrich Himmler determines the requirements of the SS. They are truly
exorbitant. Four hundred new officers a year. And even more exaggerated are the criteria it
imposes:


“Each officer must be a complete leader. He must be a comrade and an example. He
cannot order something that he has not already performed.”


Toughness, fanaticism, willfulness. Need worthy leaders a chosen troop. The
entrance examination to Officer Cadet Schools is terrible, physically, politically and
"racially." Of center, general education has little importance even less social origin. In the
Reichswehr fifty percent of the officers are children of officers. In the Verfugungtruppe they
are but five percent. They are, on the other hand, as many as five percent the sons of peasants.
The SS wants an aristocracy sprung from the people. The nobility of the new Junkers comes
from their hereditary qualities not from their education. What counts is character. These
principles make the traditional Offizier Korp smile /'Offizier Korp, which regards the status of
SS and "pervenu" as synonymous. But Paul Hausser knows how to take every possible
advantage of the enthusiasm of his recruits. He opens two schools for cadre training. In
Brunswich, in a historic castle, Junkers study under crystal chandeliers, in vast halls with
highly polished parquets. The park is immense and platoons pass singing among avenues
lined with ancient trees. In Bad Tolz, one abandons the Baroque style for the modern. The SS
Officers' School resembles a great citadel, erected on the edge of a picturesque, decorously
sumptuous township. The foundation stone had been laid by Reinhard Heydrich himself, in
1934, a year before the seizure of power. In the background, snow-capped mountains seem to


402


climb the sky weighed down by thick grayish clouds, and the Bavarian Alps protect the
school with their mightiness. The whole appears monumental, with the low, understated,
elegant buildings. Only the gigantic portal attracts attention because of the two very tall
towers flanking it. Aspirants marching at a cadenced pace find themselves in an immense
parade ground. A single black banner with the two white SS garlands in the wind. In Bad Tolz,
it is sweltering in summer and freezing in winter. Instruction is very strict: lots of gymnastics
& some philosophy. The essentials & temper the character & give these young aspirants a
sense of authority & responsibility. Prairies and snowy slopes await them for the hard
maneuvers and drills that go on, night and day, for long months. Hours of rest are few. The
trainees gather beside large fireplaces, under chandeliers the size of wagon wheels, around
low tables and in comfortable armchairs, in an atmosphere at once comfortable and monkish.
In Bad Télz, one leaves baroque and romantic Germany for Spartan and primitive Germany;
not far from Junkers Schule one wova Berchtesgaden, the Berghof of the Cape.


“Tt is from here that the second stage will arise, that of man the measure and fulcrum
of the universe, the man-god. The man-god, admirable figure of being, will be like an image
to be adored.... But there are still other later stages of which now & yet no time to speak.”


Before shaping the universe according to the national-socialist Weltanschauung
(conception of the world) national-socialist, Adolf Hitler wants to realize the German
Lebensraum, (the German living space). He begins, now the race against time and toward war.
On February 4, 1938, the Fiihrer decides:


"As of today, I personally assume command of all armed forces. The former General
Staff of the Wehrmacht becomes the Supreme Command of the Armed Forces
(Oberkommando der Wehrmacht: O.K.W.) and passes directly under my orders as my
military staff."


The decree & followed by a major reshuffling of cadres: sixteen generals are laid to
rest & forty-four are changed to other posts. Wilhelm Keitel & appointed Chief of Staff, von
Brauchitsh his aide for the army, Reader for the navy, Géring for the Luftwaffe. A month later;
on March 11, 1938, the Reich Armed Forces entered Austria. And the Anschlus: Hitler thus
carries out the program he had pre-announced in Mein Kampf recalling his native Braunau
am-Inn. Vienna awaits "his" Fiihrer in a joyous atmosphere with Tyrolean peasants in
folkloric costumes and traffic policemen with hooked cross armbands on their dark blue
uniforms. At the head of the military convoy, aiming at the imperial capital, with the
deafening roar of its engines, and an SS battalion of Zeibstandarte Adolf Hitler, commanded
by Sepp Dietrich. Motor-cyclists gray with dust, armored cars flowered already at the frontier,
faces pulled by fatigue, but illuminated by joy; the Fiihrer's Bodyguard could not be
distinguished from the other soldiers except by his boldness and youth. For "Sepp" & a great
day. His ruddy face shines in the Austrian spring sunshine. For this " old" soldier of forty-
five, crossing a new frontier & always a moment of great excitement. And he doesn't mind
waging war without firing a shot, when he arrives among "brothers of the breed."


The leader of the Leibstandarte has increasing military clout. He eclipses the head of
the operation himself, armored vehicle general Heinz Guderian, one of the officers considered
pit loyal to the regime. The SS, meanwhile, today even more so than after the occupation of
the Ruhr, sees sympathy and popularity growing around it, And enlistments continue.


In Austria, the National Socialists have always been numerous. Even before the
seizure of power in Germany, the SS had strong underground sections in Austria. It was the


403


Austrian SS that, led by Otto Planetta attempted the putsch of July 25, 1934, resulting in the
death of Chancellor Dolfuss. But it was also a checkmate for the Nazis. Planetta is executed
with twelve of his comrades, the party banned and hundreds of sympathizers forced to flee to
Germany. The pious decided will reinforce the "Austrian Legion" which, before long, the SS
will take over. Formed by a maximum of fifteen thousand men, they constitute, already now,
the future cadres of the divisions to be born.... The Verfigungstruppe & organized as a real
division, with General Staff and assault troops: the fully motorized Leibstandarte Adolf Hitler,
three infantry regiments: Deutschland, Germania, Der Fiihrer, two battalions for
reconnaissance, an engineer battalion, a transmission battalion, a medical medical corps.
While Sepp Dietrich, Paul Hausser, Felix Steiner, Karl Demelhuber, and Georg Keppler rush
to prepare combat-ready divisions, Theodor Eicke does not remain inactive. The militarization
of the thousand-man Totenkopf formation proceeds hand in hand with that of the
Verfugungstruppe. The Totenkopf currently groups four regiments: Oberbayern, Brandenburg,
Thuringen, Ostmark. Each unit will consist of three battalions made up of three companies of
infantry cd one of machine gunners. All SS troops wearing the olive-gray uniform are ready
for action, anywhere. They are perfectly trained to fight in the streets or in the open country.
The "sidewalk soldiers" have become perfect soldiers. They lack, still, only the test of fire.
Toward the end of 1938, in barracks and camps, training became more intense. For diplomatic
or military purposes, it matters little. What matters is the ultimate purpose.


“We are to liberate our German brothers in the Sudetenland!”


By "coincidence," there exists on Czechoslovak territory a" Free Corps" dependent
on the Sudeten German party, led by Conrad Henlein and Karl Hermann Frank. And, again by
chance, this unit & controlled by the SS. It definitely seems to be in the very nature of the
Black Order to have a special interest in the Volksdeutsche (1.e., for those of German descent,
but citizens of a foreign state). Heinrich Himmler confides to his intimates.


“The vocation of the SS becomes " international." We are interested not only in the


wn


German nation, but the entire German "area".


After 1938, he admitted foreign volunteers into the Black Order. In the course of two
years there will be about a hundred, especially Swiss Germans. Among them are also Swedes
and five North Americans.


The enemy strenuously defends a village whose roofs can be glimpsed from the
shingled greenish and the countryside lush with crops. The men of the Verfiigungstruppe are
flattened to the ground. Machine guns crackle. One must advance. The telephonists turn the
cranks of the field telephones. Immediately a connection is made with the artillery.


Further back, cannons come into action. Raucous barking of departing shots, hissing
of bullets passing over troops stuck in the advance, eruptions of flames and earth when the
target & hit. Artillerymen know their trade and support troops very closely. Shots burst less
than fifty meters from the front line, held by the infantry. Some shrapnel, even hits a few
soldiers, which the nurses, promptly, carry to the rear. The barrage continues for long minutes,
pounding the enemy positions. All the ground around seems plowed by the large-caliber
pieces. Impassive in the holes, the officers stare at the watch. Suddenly the artillery extends
its fire. The infantry can go on the assault.


- Vorwurts! (to 'assault!)


404


The men rush forward, protected by machine gun and mortar fire. They advance in
quick leaps, then drop to the ground, get up to throw hand grenades sprint again amid the
explosions and smoke. The village is reached. Machine guns crackle, house doors are kicked
in with rifle butts. A machine gun flares and a hand grenade. Houses seem to swell. Walls
burst and roofs collapse. The assailants are covered in dust; the camouflage colors of the suit
cannot be distinguished anymore. Under their helmets, covered with leaves, their faces are a
dirty gray color, but they are lit up by a smile. They are the victors. They hiss whistle blows.
The officers run with binoculars the graphic mouse cards. They shout:


- The drill is over!


The SS men take off their helmets and their blond hair has golden highlights in the
rays of the 'summer sun, just beginning of the year 1939. The maneuvers of the
Verfugungstruppe, just finished, are held at an exercise location near Munster. On the top of a
hill, the leaders took turns to follow, with binoculars, the maneuvers. Himmler put his pince-
nez back on, looking satisfied. At his side Adolf Hitler, who likes very much to find himself
on the fields of maneuver, amid the din of bursts and the fury of assaults, smiles. The Fiihrer
does not hide his satisfaction. He turns to the senior officers of the Black Order who surround
him:

“A truly appreciable assault. They are great men!”

Paul Hausser receives the compliments impassively, but his eyes shine with pride.
Hitler then turns to some Wehrmacht officers who have come to scout the maneuvers and
observes:

“T think that was an excellent display of efficiency!”

He remains a few moments to reflect.On March 15 he entered Prague Bohemia-
Moravia & was occupied by the Reich army. Slovakia proclaimed itself independent. Again
the troops did not fire a shot.It is easy to assume, though, that this was the last time. Is his
army ready? What he saw today in Miinster favorably impressed him & he concludes this


show of strength with words of admiration:


“Only men like these are capable of preforming such feats!”


405


Che New German Order


By Jean Mabire


We are in Metz. The French campaign is over.... Heinrich Himmler is pleased to
have chosen an old land of the Empire that & returned to the bosom of the Reich, to deliver
this speech intended for the officers of the Leibstandarte Adolf Hitler. And it is to these men,
the bravest of the brave, the most loyal of the loyal, that he wants to announce to them the
new directions of the Waffen SS. Heinrich Himmler, day by day, sought to realize what has
always been the great dream of the Black Order: the reunion, under one Empire, of all men of
the Nordic race.


He speaks:


“IT want to build an Order that expresses and develops the intimate concept inherent in the
Nordic lineage, in order to attract to us all those in the world who have Nordic blood in their
veins, removing them from the influence and domination of our adversaries. In the general
framework of our future policy we will no longer have to clash with men of our own lineage,
n& against the values that lineage represents. All men of Nordic blood must be at our side,
with us.”


The Reichsfiihrer-SS pauses a few seconds. He dominates with his gaze the entire
Fiirerskorp, the finest of the SS divisions. It is made up of magnificent young men awarded,
for the most part, the Iron Cross, merited in the recent French campaign. Among its officers,
Sepp Dietrich bites his mustache with his grumpy old man's air, which so irritates Himmler.
Comrade Sepp, with his frowning, ironic face, likes to assume the air of a Danube villager
when the Grand Master of the Black Order launches his "high notes." Unperturbed, with a
metallic stare, Himmler continues:


“T repeat, we shall have to have beside us all men of Nordic stock. This idea and purpose we
have been pursuing for years and have never abandoned. Everything we have achieved up to
the present day, & has been done always having in view our aiming at our ultimate goal.
Everything we will still do & directed to the same end.”


However, he cannot refrain from "moderating" his officers a little and reminding
these "warlords" that they are all part of the same Order of which he the Chief:


“But the goal can be achieved if each of us does not stop only at what he loves, his activity,
his company, his regiment-which he must love- and of which he must be proud - but he will
look to something that is greater than any other in the world: the SS.”


Himmler punctuates his words in a clear voice, somewhat high-pitched, but one that
gives a clear sense that what he says flows from a deep, heartfelt conviction.


“The SS is but a means to the ultimate, eternal goal: the idea created by Hitler, the Reich that
he founded, the Empire of all Germans.”


The officers of the Leibstandarte Adolf Hitler are not just men who applaud a speech.
They "feel" its essence and leap to their feet shouting the Heil of victory three times.
Motorcycles and cars get back on the way to the provisions. It is necessary to resume the


406


inspection of weapons, propose men for decorations or punishments, compile reports, prepare
for night exercises and the march at dawn. Tomorrow they will leave for the English Channel
or Holland. For the Caucasus or the Atlantic, for the North Cape or the Crimea. They do not
yet know that a hard fight awaits them. They do not know that the life of an SS officer at the
front lasts no more than a fortnight. All they understand now is that the Old Guard is changing
its appearance. The Waffen SS is no longer just German. Alongside the Reichsdeutche and
the Volksdeutche, they will soon be fighting alongside "German" volunteers. In a small town,
from the wooden-fronted houses, the feudal castle looking like something out of a Grimm's
fairy tale, a man in his forties, with an energetic face, works night and day surrounded by
secretaries in olive-gray uniforms. In Hildesheim, in Hanover, in a land soaked in the blood of
the Saxons once slaughtered by Emperor Charlemagne the Germanische Leitstelle (German
Directorate) of the Waffen SS is installed. Dr. Riedweg does not mind the play on words used
as the title of the newspaper created for the SS in arms: Werden. It actually means: " to
become," but it also evokes the name of the town Werden, where pagans were massacred
because they were guilty of hewing to the Norse deities. Franz Riedweg is not & German. He
is - or rather was, since the Swiss Confederation does not allow such things - a Swiss citizen.
A member of several "frontist" groups such as the Kampfbund or Schweizer Heimatwehr he
& got very busy with some Swiss German comrades who were fascinated by national-socialist
theories. He abandoned Switzerland, not withstanding remaining neutral in a war that spread,
little by little, throughout Europe. Military doctor Riedweg - surgeon by profession, soldier by
vocation - now has on his lapel the rank of Sturmbannfiihrer of the Waffen SS. It was he who
had the idea of the Germanische Leitstelle and managed without much effort to impose it on
Himmler and Berger. Laughing thunderously, he likes to repeat that the Germanische
Leitstelle is something lies between an employment office and a travel agency. By his doing,
about seven hundred Swiss citizens clandestinely cross the border to form a battalion of SS
Mountain Hunters and insert themselves into the regular divisions.


They have no language problem because the Romandi speak German very well,
which they compulsorily studied at the cantonal school But Riedweg already has plans for the
future and thinks these men will be useful to him the day he recruits the Walloons, and why
not, the French. He knows the world very well to know that Nordic "good blood" can be
found everywhere. But it is not yet time, and Riedweg meanwhile, in 1940, limits his
activities among the Scandinavians and the people of the Netherlands. A curiosity. Riedweg is
a son-in-law of Marshal Von Blomberg, who was dismissed from his duties in 1938 following
a plot against Reynard Heydrich. Consequently, the commander of the Germanische Leitstelle,
0G. L. is certainly not in the odor of sanctity with the S.D. or Sicherheitdienst. Such uni
would gladly see him go the way of Réhm.... But he shrugs his shoulders and when they
annoy him, he chases the provocateurs out of his office with the ancient Swiss war cry:


- Haaruus! (Out)!


A few days after crossing the Danish border, the Germans began recruiting men for
the Waffen SS. The Danes bowed to force; King Christian himself did not want Danish blood
to be shed in April 40. He has truly achieved something great and now every morning he rides
his horse through the crowds in the capital showing that he does not care for German patrols
and setting an example of passive resistance that resembles proud neutrality. One strain of the
Danish population lives on German territory, and another German-speaking, on Danish
territory. Therefore there will be no talk of annexation, and the border bars will remain in
place. On one side and 'the other side of the border post mutually recognize the same distant
ancestors. The Viking camp of Trelleborg is similar to that of Haithabu in Slesvig. Haithabu is
one of the most important archaeological research locations promoted by the Black Order
before the war.


407


The SS is impressed by Jutland's past, from where almost all Germanic peoples
originated. Can they count on the local National Socialist Party? Founded in 1930 by Cavalry
Captain Lembcke, and now headed by a doctor named Frits Clausen. A burly, bright-eyed,
easy-spoken man who likes to lose a little too much schnapps and will take too long to get
sober. His party, the Dane NSAP is a perfect copy of the German NSDAP. He wears the
brown shirt of the SA, which is called Storm-Afdelinger here, and at every opportunity sings
in Danish translation I' Horst Wessel Lied, Clausen bides his time. A young wolf grew up in
the shadow of this big ox....


Christian Frederik von Schalburg is but thirty-four years old, but he has had an
eventful, adventure novel life. He was born in Russia to Baltic parents and spent his childhood
in Ukraine. The outbreak of revolution finds him among the czar's cadets. He manages to
escape with his family and reaches Denmark. He joins the Royal Guard and earns the stripes
of Kaptjanlojtnant. Strongly impressed by what he saw in Bolshevik Russia, he cannot help
but enter politics. Militant in the Danish National Socialist Party, & appointed youth leader of
the DNSAP, before the war. At the time of the Finnish-Soviet conflict, Christian von
Schalburg enlists as a volunteer, in the Finnish 'esereito, along with many Scandinavians. But
he arrived too late to participate in the conflict. His desire to fight &, once again, faded. It is
certainly not a parade troop like the Royal Guard that can satisfy his will to fight. He will,
therefore, resign and enlist, among the first Danes, in the Waffen SS becoming one of the
founders of the Nordland regiment. The Nordic myth. which in Denmark & a harmonious
melody, becomes a 'complete work in Norway. The majesty of the landscape & the
continuous testimonies restore, through the centuries, the eternal time of the Vikings. Nothing
& small here, not the fjords, nor the Ic mountains, nor the characters. In the land of Peter Gynt,
things are done big & completely. So Vidkung Quisling...


The son of a country shepherd from the wilder region of Telemark, he enlists in the
army, where he will pursue a career that leads him to be Norway's Military Attaché first in
Petersburg and then in Helsinki. He got to follow the Bolshevik Revolution as he participated
in a relief mission for abandoned populations,in the company of the celebrated explorer
Frjdiof Nansen. Back in Norway, he militates in the People's Party and & appointed Minister
of War. His political avvenlre seems assured. Vidkung Quisling, however, cultivates deep in
his soul a great dream: to affirm the superiority of the Nordic race and its mission in the world.
He knows that the Vikings colonized Iceland, discovered America, founded Russia and
created, around the 10th century, an immense domain. He has read, or rather studied,
Gobineau, Chamberlain and especially Rosemberg.... Clinging to his native
Telemark,obsessed with the heroes of the sagas, proud and dreamy. He cannot escape the
seduction of the "Blood and Soil" theories triumphing in National Socialist Germany. In May
1933. a few months after Hitler seizes power, he founds the Nasjonal Samling movement,
which has as its emblem the cross of St. Olaf, for Nordic revival. He organizes a kind of SA
to which he gives the name Hird. In the elections he gets thirty thousand votes. For a country
of three million, that is both too many and too few.... He continues undaunted. Well meaning,
he does not remain insensitive'to the blandishments of the Black Order. His right-hand man,
Albert Hagelin, lived for a long time in Germany as a party theorist. Dr. Hermann divides his
time between Sweden and the Third Reich. Contacts between the " Nordic brothers" are
excellent. When the Germans, on April 9, 1940, land in Norway, Quisling, who is 52 years
old, assumes power and calls for no resistance to the aggressors. Not succeed, however, in
convincing King Haakon to imitate King Christian of Denmark, and to remain among his
people. The ruler leaves for England. Almost immediately, the Germans dismiss Quisling and
appoint their compatriot Josef Terboven as Reichskommissar. The Nordic idea has, however,
made its way. Norway's greatest living writer, Knut Hamsum, supports the initiatives of those
who want to go "pious beyond" The Chief of Police,Jonas Lie, proves to be a fanatical
sympathizer of the Third Reich and works in perfect accord with Gruppenfiihrer Rediess,
Himmler's permanent envoy. The young Norwegians are not slow to join their Danish


408


comrades in the new SS Nordland regiment, which will be finally formed at the end of 1940.
The Dutch situation closely resembles the Norwegian one. Queen Wilhelmina & took refuge,
like King Haakon, in England.... There is a party, the National-Socialist Beweging, which can
be compared to the Nasjollal Samling. The Reich commissioners, Seyss-Inquart, plays the
same role as Terboven and Anton Mussert and resembles, in many ways, Vidkung Quisling.
He has a remarkable personality. An alumnus of the Polytechnic School in Delft, he chose a
career, in Holland of importance, as a hydraulic engineer. In 1927, at age thirty-three &
already chief engineer for all of Holland. Truly remarkable career. Mussert has, like everyone,
qualities & faults: he is authoritarian, orderly, ambitious, but, like Quisling, & of an
inheritable naivete. His movement, created in 1931, plays a decisive role in Dutch politics.
Three hundred thousand votes in provincial elections & fifty thousand adherents. For a
country of twelve million, not & bad, even considering the slight regression, remarked by the
NSB, in the period before the outbreak of war. What differentiates the Netherlands from
Norway is that the Germans are considerably closer to the former. Indeed, for some Germans
and some Dutch, the Netherlands is an extension of the Reich toward the sea. The SS likes to
point out that it is precisely among the Dutch that they discover the pit beautiful Nordic
specimens. The imagination gallops, just as on all the roads of the Netherlands run the
columns of Mussert sympathizers, with their black uniforms and majestic bicycles with
handlebars turned upward, forcing the cyclists to stand erect like soldiers at a military parade.
The movement also has its " ultras," such as the intellectual Rost van Tonningen or the
commander Hendrik Feldmeijer, who founded before the war the Weerafdeeling, a kind of SA,
and organized Mussert's pet "praetorian guard" on the model of the SS.


In this climate, Himmler's permanent envoy, Hans Rauter, finds fewer interlocutors
than Rediers did in Norway. Immediately, the recruiting sergeants of the Waffen SS got to
work. June 119, 1940, Gottlob meets Anton Mussert, The NSB chief points out:


“Collaboration between brother peoples of German race, but not annexation....”


The German is not too committed and Mussert has some concerns. But His followers
override him. Many Dutch have already joined the Reich troops on the battlefields... Indeed,
two brothers taken prisoner at Dunkirk while preparing to embark for England with the
remnants of what had been the Army of the Netherlands are recaptured by soldiers of the
Leibstandarte Adolf Hitler...


“Come with us...”


Covered in dust and glory these magnificent warriors speak almost their own
language. The two young Dutchmen belonging to the N.S.B. feel among comrades. Without
any problems or qualms of conscience they change uniforms. With a few hundred compatriots
they find themselves in the Munich training camp, where a new Waffen SS regiment is
formed: Westland, open to the Dutch and Flemish and created, by special order of Hitler, on
May 25, 1940, fifteen days after the attack on the West.


In Belgium, chaos. King Leopold slandered and lonely, retreats to the silence of his
palace in Laeken. A few politicians get busy. The population is bewildered. The fact is that
there is not one people in Belgium, but two: Walloons and Flemish. At the moment, the
French-speaking ones, who for a long time have had a certain supremacy in the country,
appear as the losers; the Flemish are now taking revenge. The Germans take advantage of this
situation by remembering the ‘help that was given to them by the "activists" during World
War I. They hint that they have in mind the creation of a new state, such as Croatia or
Slovenia. The Black Order follows the situation closely and especially when it becomes more
complex, Heinrich Himmler despises this people who are so deeply Catholic. The Flamming


409


Movement has seemed, for a long time a "parochial association." The adherents gladly adorn
themselves with medallions, caps, scapulars, before setting out on pilgrimage to the Yser
Tower, the cradle of Flamming nationalism, where on a Cross is the famous cruciform
monogram:


AVV - VVK (AII for Flanders and Flanders for Christ).


The leader of the movement, Staf De Clerg is a very picturesque figure. Leon
Degrelle who knows him very well thus describes him, " A rubicund landowner, hirsute as a
faun, his hands plump, always a little damp, a fine belly.. And the Quisling of Flanders. But
he is not alone. There is also Jef van de Wiele -- Jef cognac to his friends -- who heads a tiny
"ultra" group, the De Viag, Dutch for "flag," but it is also short for De Viaamsch-Duitsche
Arbeidgeme-enschap, Flanders-German Working Community. He makes the exaltation of
Northernism and paganism, which does not displease observers of the Black Order. Heinrich
Himmler's personal representative, Jung claus, still pil monitors with surprise and interest the
evolution of a number of military elders of the Verdinaso, or Verbond van Dietsche Nationaal
Solidaristen, the league of Thiois national-solidarists, founded in 1931 by a curious character.
Joris van Severen resembles a character of the painter El Greco, lost in our time. Slender,
mystical, emaciated, he organized his movement as a kind of monastic guerrilla order. His
style is more fascist than Nazi. His dream is to unite Belgium, Holland, and Luxembourg into
one state, which he calls the Thiois Empire. We cannot know what he would have been able
to do during the German occupation because, arrested during the offensive, and killed by
French soldiers at Abbeville on May 12, 1940. He becomes a martyr and a symbol. His
followers are divided. One side does the wait-and-see, the other switches to the Resistance.
Most of the " tough guys" gather around Jef Francois, former head of the Verdinaso.
Undoubtedly this is an excellent climate for Gottlob Berger's "recruiting sergeants," who have
no trouble directing a good number of young Flemish men into the ranks of the Waffen-SS
Westland Regiment. Among the first to enlist was lawyer René Lagrou. The order comes on
December 3, 1940. It is issued by Gruppenfiihrer Hans Jiittner, head of the SS
Furhrungschauptamt, the ideological military headquarters of the Waffen-SS, and great
organizer


"By personal order of the Fuhrer three regiments are to be grouped together to form
anew division, three infantry regiments and one artillery regiment."


The first regiment is the Germania, one of the oldest of the Verfugungstruppe, the
one, to be understood, from Hamburg; the other two are the Nordland and the Westland, units
grouping Danes, Norwegians, Dutch, Flemish. At the head of the new division will be called
the best, in an absolute sense, of all the Waffen-SS military leaders, the man who was able to
transfuse into the SS his spirit and style: Felix Steiner. He left the command of his old
Deutshland regiment, and reached Munich where the responsibility of forming the first
division of "German" volunteers awaited him. Steiner divides the Germans, the
Volksdeutsche, the Swiss, the Germans, the Scandinavians, and the Dutch. The merger must
be complete and he decides, as in the Foreign Legion, to use one language for training and
commands. Logically it can only be German. Each volunteer retains his nationality, but this
falls before the community of race, and, what is more important, before the camaraderie
between combatants. Training begins immediately and with the only rhythm Felix Steiner
knows: the running pace. The units are divided into maneuver camps between Munich,
Klagenfurt, and Vienna. During I' the winter of 1940-1941 the men live among the snow and
ice. on February 13, 1941, Gottlob Berger comes to check the first results of the training:


“Perfect, Steiner. It could not have been otherwise. But the Brigadefiihrer catches something
in his superior's expression that he does not like.”


410


“Something wrong?”


“IT would like your division to become even more "international" and more Nordic. How
would you like some Finns and a few Swedes?”


“T will make some assault troops.”


They will soon be chosen a thousand to form a battalion of a Frankish Corps. Most
of them, Finns, Swedes from Finland and Sweden who entered clandestinely, have already
fought in the terrible winter war. They are surly, shadowy young men who care about forming
an independent unit with their own officers. They will never part with their dagger, the pukko,
and they will never forget that their greatest enemy, the only one, to clutch at the throat is the
Russian. Their language, with raucous tones born in the thousand-year-old tundra, intrigues
the Germans. They are preceded by the reputation of valiant fighters, and at the SS nothing
above courage is recognized but loyalty. As for the Swedes, under the orders of one of them,
Captain Schmiterloew, they dream of following in the footsteps of Charles XII and despise
their fellow citizens clinging to neutrality and their comforts. Sometimes there are arguments
between the followers of Birger Furugord and Snen Olov Lindholm, the two rival leaders of
the Swedish National Socialist People's Party. At the beginning of 1941 many young Nordic
Europeans experience their great illusion. They are and feel like soldiers in the same army.
But peace is still very fragile c the new state has yet to be born. While waiting, they learn to
fight among the snow of the Bavarian Alps. All that remains is to find a name for this new
foreign division, the 5th Waffen-SS. The name Germany is proposed, but one must be found
that will gives at the same time the idea of Nordism and ‘adventure. The name will be: SS
Division Viking. EN? April 1941, the new unit is ready to fight. It regroups about 20,000 men
according to the typical structure of a selected Waffen SS division: A divisional staff, three
infantry regiments, an assault battalion' (Finns), an armored cavalry regiment, a battalion of
wagon drivers, an assault gun battery, an artillery regiment, an anti-aircraft unit, a heavy
mortar formation, a transmission unit, a reconnaissance motorcycle battalion, a pioneer
battalion, a transport unit, a commissariat service, a field hospital, a military court, the
gendarmerie, and a section of war correspondents. The Waffen-SS continues to reinforce
throughout the first half of 1941. The Leibstandarte is increased to the membership of a
brigade. The Verfugungsdivision has now assumed the name Das Reich. Himmler, in Poland,
has at his disposal five infantry regiments and two Totenkopf cavalry regiments In the
meantime he mobilizes, from among the Waffen-SS men, a few battalions for use in the
concentration camps. Military needs predominate. A "kamp/group" is formed, which takes the
North name and & encamped in southern Norway. After June 1940 a Waffen-SS unit is
stationed in Kirkenes, far beyond the Arctic Circle on the Finnish-Norwegian border. These
SS lost in the far north waited an entire year for orders to go into action, as the days slowly
followed the nights. This 9th SS infantry regiment seems to live outside the world, a world of
ice, silence and sunshine.


411


In the Land of the bodf


Greece, like a magnet attracts sun-born warriors. In 1940 they celebrated not the
games of Olympia, but the soldiers of Sparta. The Germans remember the fragrant islands, the
placidly blue sea, the stony hills brushed by the winds of beauty and strength. On October 28,
1940, the Italians invaded Greece. Better, they attacked it. They embarked on a conquest that
they cannot, by their own means, accomplish. Far more were needed to violate the Greece of
the gods! As was to be expected, the Balkans begin to stir. The mountaineers oil their rifles
and roll their daggers. The Macedonians, come what may, are already in the bush. Bulgarians
join a pact uniting Germans, Italians, and... Japanese. The Serbs imitate them. An old alliance
is revived once again. Hitler wants to overthrow Stalin. A foreign coalition of reactionaries
and communists kills Regent Paul of Yugoslavia and establishes the dictatorship of General
Simovic and young King Peter II in Belgrade. In the spring of '41, selected German divisions
leave France for Austria, Hungary, Romania, and Bulgaria. The Fihrer intends to stabilize the
Balkan situation. He triggers Operation Marita, for which he postpones the great offensive in
the East by a few weeks. To the South! The Leibstandarte, Adolf Hitler brought up to the
strength of an assault brigade, has left Metz and the Verfugungsdivision, now called Reich, is
on its way to Vesoul. Waffen-SS convoys trudge along the mountain roads. The desire to get
first to the base from which the future offensive will start leads them to disrupt the other
columns. Rather than give way to army vehicles, a young Totenkopf officer orders them to
place on the road...anti-tank mines. Another goes so far as to point guns at Wehrmacht
soldiers. Field Marshal Von Brauchitsch complains to Himmler, who feigns surprise.


“You don't have to take it out on some young officers who are a little nervous. There will be
glory for everyone.”


On Aprill6, 1941, German forces crossed the Yugoslav border. In the lead is the SS
Reich division. In a few days, Paul Hausser's soldiers arrive in front of Belgrade. The Danube,
with its muddy waters, bars the way. As night falls, only the rustle of the current can be heard.
The whole division sheds on the boggy banks. Hausser loses patience. He summons
Hauptsturmfuhrer Klingenberg, who commands a detachment of scouts.


“Go and see what is happening on the other side of the river.”


The young officer has a boyish face, illuminated by an eternal smile and his blue
eyes. He takes command of a dozen men and embarks them on a large motor boat. Slowly, the
small SS group moves upstream. On the 'other bank, no one can be seen. In the middle of the
river, Klingenberg decides.


“Let's go for a ride.”


At the same moment, though, the engine stops. The current carries the boat drifting
toward the suburbs of the Serbian capital. Upright arms of cranes and houses follow clearings
of mowed grass. An improvised mechanic tries to get the engine running again. Efforts are
futile. Lying in the bottom of the boat, his comrades are not very comfortable "sailing" in the
middle of the enemy city. The first lights brighten the sky and the fortifications can be
discerned. Finally the engine, coughing, starts up again. Klingenberg carefully observes the
shores with binoculars. His aide asks him:


“What shall we do, captain?”


412


“Let's disembark!”


At the same time, however, the engine stops. The current carries the drifting boat
toward the suburbs of the Serbian capital. Upright arms of cranes and houses follow clearings
of mowed grass. An improvised mechanic tries to get the engine running again. Efforts are
futile. Lying in the bottom of the boat, his comrades are not very comfortable "sailing" in the
middle of the enemy city. The first lights brighten the sky and the fortifications can be
discerned. Finally the engine, coughing, starts up again. Klingenberg carefully observes the
shores with binoculars. His aide asks him:


“What shall we do, captain?”
“Let's disembark!”


And here are a dozen Das Reich soldiers, all alone in the middle of the waking city.
On authority, the officer commandeers two cars - legend will say they were even cabs.... - six
men on each side barely get in with their weapons. Klingenberg commands:


“To the German Embassy. Full speed ahead!”


The Reich representative in Belgrade lives locked in his apartment. The SS officer
wakes him up, then, taking an immense flag with a hooked cross, hoists it over the palace. He
leaves two or three men at the Embassy, takes back the two cars and orders the drivers:


“Immediately to the Yugoslav Parliament....”


The corridors are deserted. Finally the Germans discover a Serb in uniform. And
visibly terrified. Klingenberg calls him "my general" &, gambling, declares:


“Belgrade & completely encircled. The attack will take place in about half an hour. I give you
fifteen minutes to declare your capital an open city.”


What to do but bow before force? By radio, Klingenberg warns his commander:
“T am about to receive the capitulation of the Yugoslav capital.”

Hausser does not hide his joy.
“T congratulate you, you have deserved the Knight's Collar of the Iron Cross.”


Then Das Reich's cars and motorcycles gradually emerge from their hiding places
and make their way to the suburbs of Belgrade. Four days later, on April 10, the Yugoslav
exereito capitulates like the Polish exereito and the French exereito. New Victory Spring. In
Greece the battle & harder & the Leibstandarte Adolf Hitler bears the brunt of this warrior
adventure in the realm of the gods. Sepp Dietrich's men cross Macedonia, single-handedly
giving a dozen wounded, and arrive at the Greek frontier. Before them are mountains and a
hill: the Klidi. The position seems solidly held by the Greeks, the Australians and New
Zealanders and a few British. The order of General List on whom the Leibstandarte depends,
& simple: Break through.


It will take two days to succeed. Two days, more than fifty dead and a Knight's Cross
for Obersturmfiihrer Gerd Pleiss who commands the assault detachment. But after one
mountain comes another. After one hill another hill. After one battle another battle. In the lead,
as always, is the Leibstandarte reconnaissance battalion, commanded by a young


413


Sturmbannfiihrer with a lean, hollow face, prominent cheekbones and a mustache so blond as
to be almost invisible. His name is Kurt Meyer, but his men will not be long in nicknaming
him " Panzermeyer": Meyer the tank. The Klissura hill seems even better defended than the
Klidi. Two of the assault companies execute an encircling manoyra and begin to climb the
mountain. Meyer attacks in front with a small group of soldiers. Everywhere mines burst and
stone blocks plummet on the attacking men. The Greeks, well posted and defended, drop a
deadly rain of bullets on the Germans. The SS men are pinned down. Hidden behind the rocks,
they cannot even raise their noses. Then Kurt Meyer shouts, Forward! No one moves. Not
even Emil Wawrzinek, his aide. Faced with the infernal, relentless firing of the Greek soldiers,
the men of the Zeibstandarte "deflate." Panzermeyer tries one last card. Once again he shouts,
Forward! To no avail. He then defuses a hand grenade and throws it into the midst of his men.
They can do nothing but leap forward. "Never, even in the course of a drill, have I seen such a
perfect collective leap forward." says Meyer. The men advance from rock to rock. The first
one who laughs at 'adventure drags his comrades along. Shouting, cursing, laughing, the SS
continue to advance. They storm the Greek positions and capture more than a thousand
prisoners. Kurt Meyer reports to Sepp Dietrich I had only half a dozen wounded. The leader
of the Leibstandarte grumbles “Go ahead and capture Kastoria.” Panzermeyer captures more
than a thousand Greek soldiers and is awarded the Knight's Cross in recognition of his valor.
The Leibstandarte "sets course" for the south. On April 20, 1941, it reaches the Metzonov Hill,
a position of paramount strategic importance. The mountain cuts off the retreat of sixteen
Greek-British divisions, which remain bagged in Epirus. For the men of the Waffen SS &
undoubtedly the best way to celebrate their Fiihrer's birthday. Three days later, Thessaloniki
capitulates. The Greeks surrender, but the British continue to fight. Panzermeyer reaches
Naupaktos, also called Lepanto, "And now," he says, "let us see the shipowners. The strait
connects the Gulf of Patras with the Gulf of Corinth. To the north is Ellas proper. To the south,
across the strait, the Peloponnesian peninsula. In these waters, in 1571, Don Juan of Austria,
sheted the Turkish fleet. The azure waters were stained with the blood of fifteen thousand
infidels. As for the fleet, Panzermeyer finds in Lepanto's road stead nothing but two festering
barges. But he is in a hurry to learn what happens on the other side of the strait. Without
thinking twice he has the motorcycles, and the side-cars of a battalion of reconnaissance, on
the two barges. A modern interpretation of the Argonauts, Ie SS set foot on the decks of the
boats, dispose of the "impedimenta" and on their bare backs take a sunbath c of foam spray. A
gentle sea breeze ripples the waves. The boats take on water, but the boys keep them afloat,
and Panzermeyr sees them pull away from the shore and begin the fascinating adventure. He
fortifies at Naupaktos and places machine guns at street crossings. With binoculars he scans
the sea and the northern road. Above this legendary scenery is the clear, blue sky. Suddenly a
cloud of dust and a screech of ironclads. Machine gunners preen at the years ready to fire. It is
only a huge automobile carrying Sepp Dietrich. In France, his face was lemon colored. In
Greece, it is the color of pomadoro. He always has the same grumpy mood & turns his
questions into shouts:


“What are you doing here? What about your men?”
“T cover the crossing. I sent them scouting across the strait.”


Dietrich turns eggplant-colored “They are bikers. not sailors! I will have you
transferred to the navy of war! Or if you prefer I will refer you to the Military Council!
Panzermeyer lets himself be called a pirate and an idiot.” Then Sepp grumbles “However I
will testify on your behalf at the trial I will write to your parents when they have shot you.”


He climbs back into the car, which drives away in a cloud of dust. Panzemeyer hopes
that the sea gods will be as propitious to him as those of war. The strait now looks hopelessly
deserted. The boats are gone. They are either in some port or at the bottom of the sea.
"Panzer" is nervous, smoking and drinking coffee. The binoculars explore the sharp horizon: a


414


straight line between the blue sea and sky. At last two small pot-bellied silhouettes appear.
They are the boats. They slowly come taxiing up. They are dangerously overloaded. On the
decks a tangle of men. Some in green, some in khaki. They approach the shore. Now the
Germans and British can be clearly distinguished An elbow is thrown. The boats, they pull
over the sides of the pier. The prisoners disembark; their uniforms are in tatters and they are
resigned, like all prisoners in the world. They go to a song and share the last cigarettes of
blond tobacco. A new rattling, a new cloud of dust. Again Sepp Dietrich enters the scene,
having returned to Naupaktos "to take a ride." He plants himself on his short legs, his helmet
askew, his face like a ruddy old lansquenet. He watches the assembled prisoners and those
disembarking. Panzermeyer barely holds back a burst of laughter. Dietrich does likewise but
checks himself, balances a pd on his legs, hands behind his back, wrinkles his face. Reich
troops occupy the entire north coast, from the Gulf of Corinth from the port of Missolunghi,
to Mount Parnassus. Leibstandarte, crosses the strait. In the lead is the reconnaissance
battalion. Panzermeyer, as usual, precedes his men. Pebbles, cypresses, temple ruins, statues.
The Greeks have laid down their arms. That leaves still a few British, hunted through the
streets and hills of the Peloponnese. The vanguards of the Leibstandarte are in Patras, on the
other side of the strait already crossed by the Panzer SS. Sepp Dietrich, call Kurt Meyer "If
your boys were able to pilot boats they should also be able to unravel a locomotive."
Panzermeyer has always appreciated this kind of "logic" that totally excludes the word
"impossible." He scouts among the bikers a former railroad mechanic. The latter finds the
coal, ignites the boiler, operates the levers. The pressure rises, the machine whistles. In a
cloud of dust the locomotive slides onto the tracks. Cars are attached. Machine guns are
placed at the doors. Thus is born the first Waffen-SS armored train. It runs through the
passage of Arcadia. Far-West atmosphere and version from the Greeks, Sepp Dietrich nibbles
on his cigar. Panzermeyer whistles an obscene song. A young man returns in thought to his
Gymnasium and recites in a half-voice: And in Arcadia ego...Finally, the Leibstandarte Adolf
Hitler arrives at the cradle of his dream: Sparta. But here an order awaits them. The same one
that reached them, not long before, there in I' Auvergne: "Leave Athens to take part in the
Victory Parade." German patrols march on all the streets. The victory parade is textbook
perfect, the pit stupendous of its kind. Leading the troops is the Leibstandarte Adolf Hitler
preceded by the Panzermeyer reconnaissance battalion. Meanwhile, new orders have already
arrived. The first stop is known: Prague. One guesses the second: Kiev. The first great
adventure of the SS is about to begin. From the Baltic to the 'Atlantic, from the Aegean to the
Azov Sea, from Bavaria to the Caucasus, the Fuhrer's men live their prodigious warrior epic.


415


Che Swooftita Over the Coucafuf


A black background on which stands out a heavy sword outlined in gray, some
Gothic letters in red, and two large SS in runic characters in white.


The SS is calling you!


It is the cover of a pamphlet, some fifty pages long, which was widely distributed
and disseminated throughout Europe. Huge posters were also put up with very realistic
drawings of soldiers on parade or in combat: rifles and helmets lined up, menacing machine
guns protruding from a wall to target invisible opponents. The great myth of the "Crusade
Against Bolcevism" gives printers a lot of work. The purpose is clear: all the countries of
Europe must take part in the struggle on the Eastern front, and arrows must be shot from
every nation to stick in some land between Karelia and Crimea... And like a great
international lottery of military glory. First, the allies of Germany. But these soldiers are not
asked to be volunteers. After the start of the war in the East, the Finns entered the battle to
retake the territories lost during the winter war, the Romanians to take back Bessarabia, the
Hungarians because they have always hated the Russians, the Bulgarians because they want to
be on the side of the victors, and the Italians, finally, because they have to support the German
ally who, a few months earlier, had pulled them out of that big Greek entanglement. It will be
two hundred thousand of Mussolini's soldiers who will suffer and die in Russia, They will
fight with the same heroism as the Slovaks and Croats who owe this new Europe a national
independence, though still precarious. The Germans waste no time and gather volunteers in
those countries they claim to "liberate from the Stalian yoke." They are now with them, units
of Latvians and Estonians , of Belarusians and Ukrainians. We will meet them again along our
history. Efforts in recruiting volunteers are greater especially in Western Europe, beginning
with the "Germanic" countries that have already given the Nordland and Westland regiments
of the Wiking Division. Gottlob Berger, even before the attack on Russia, formed a new
Waffen SS regiment grouping Dutch and Flemish and to which he gave the name Nordwest
while a new battalion of Finns is called Nordost. True to Nordic principles, the SS decided to
take no interest except in volunteers of the Germanic race. This time, however, it is not to
incorporate them directly into a large unit along the lines of the Foreign Legion, with German
commanders and German language, as in the Wiking Division. They form national legions
dependent solely on the SS, but where each contingent will retain its own language, flag and
officers. Formula this decidedly bastard that will cause much bitterness, and exacerbate
patriotism, most felt because of the harsh treatment of certain German instructors...


The Danish flag, red with a white cross, garters in the wind blowing from the Baltic
cd ripples the scarlet cloth on which is written, Frikorps Danmark. Behind, parade the new
Danish volunteers from the summer of 1941. Many of them still wear Tuniforms of the Royal
Guard. King Christian did not disapprove of this operation, and many young soldiers of his
Guard think Tavventura will look better in Novgorod than in Copenhagen. Of the five
hundred first volunteers, half are from the Royal Armed Forces and most are not even
members of Clausen's National Socialist Party. Listruzione incomineja in Hamburg. The
Danish Free Corps quickly exceeds one thousand five hundred men. They are commanded by
Obersturmbannfiihrer Kryssing, a career officer, already commander of the fifth danesc
artillery battalion. And a career military man who doesn't want to hear about politics:


“Cut it out with these stories! We are here solely to fight communism. The first one who dares
to discuss politics, I'll put him in the brig....”


417


In this, Kryssing & supported by his aide, Hauptsturmfiihrer Thor Yorgensen. Sent to
the Bad Tolz Officer's School, he emerges a staunch anti-Nazi, and the education of the
recruits entrusted to him is carried out on a purely military and not at all political program.
Will the Frikorps Danmark one day succeed in forming a real fighting unit? Gottlob Berger
does not despair. Heinrich Himmler intervenes:


“T cannot even think that real Germans are incapable of fighting. Everything lies in giving
them a good leader.”


The leader will not be a German but a Danesc. Christian Frederik Von Schalburg
arrives one morning, cap on his ear. The black-white-red ribbons of the Iron Cross earned in
Ukraine with the Wiking Division and the ranks of Sturmbannfiihrer.


“So, Christian, tell us, Russia...”
“These are events that cannot be told. They are experienced...”


He takes the Frikorps into his hands and gives it, immediately, a "formidable shake."
The personal magnetism of this leader & undoubtedly undeniable. Kryssing is eclipsed. In a
few months, the Danes are ready to fight and go into action at Demyansk on the Northern
Front, where Totenkopf Division is fighting. Von Schalbure personally leads them on the
assault. He can rightly repeat La Rochejaquelein's famous words, "If I advance follow me, if I
retreat kill me, if I die avenge me." He falls, shot dead on June 2, 1941. The Waffen-SS will
make Christian Frederik von Schalburg a legendary hero. His successor, Hans Albert von
Lettov-Vobeck, falls in turn. Obersturmbannfihrer Borge Martinsen then takes command of
the Frikorps. He is an excellent officer and a convinced SS. The Danes want to fight as a
Frank Corps in connection with the Totenkopf Division against enemies at the front, or
against partisans, they will sustain difficult and often fierce fighting. Meanwhile, Martinsen
founds, in Denmark itself, the Schalburg Korps a kind of SS and reserve force for the Waffen
SS. Numerous Danish volunteers join, in late 1942, their Norwegian brethren to form a new
SS division, the 2nd, "held in trust" by Wiking, called Nordland and of which they will form
the Panzer-Grenadier- Regiment-Danmark. Meanwhile, at the beginning of the war in the East,
a second wave of Norwegians joined the Waffen SS. On July 29, these volunteers landed in
Kiel, under the orders of Hauptsturmfiihrer Jorgen Bakke, and formed the Den Norske Legion.
They will soon be one thousand five hundred men, most of them from the "German SS," a"
civilian" organization created even before the start of hostilities on the Eastern Front. Vidkun
Quisling does not willingly see the birth of this movement in Norway, because & jealous of
its independence & convinced that it should not be taught lessons in " Nordism " by anyone,
least of all the Germans. But he underestimates the ambition of Jonas Lie, police chief. He is a
40-year-old man, with blond hair, as ricey as a sheep's fleece, with a brutal mask: a tough guy.
He met, while serving in the international police in the Sarre, Reich Commissioner Terboven
and therefore synthesizes better with Himmler's representative, Rediess. Jonas Lie decides to
make a kind of internal putsch, enlisting the ‘help of the militia of the Nasjonal Samling. on
May 21, 1941 the members of the 7th Hird regiment are gathered in Oslo. The Chief of Staff
of this Norwegian SA, Orvar Saether, announces that he has formed the Norwegian SS. He
gives the floor to Himmler.... The Reichsfihrer-SS, in fact, wanted to be present on this
solemn day. He takes the floor:


“The history of SS, from 1925 to the present, is a very long history. Continue to do with us
what we began to do before you. You will, from today, also be the guardians of the Nordic


lineage, like your compatriots serving in the Wiking Division.”


Exactly one month later, these first volunteers receive their baptism of fire in
Ukraine. Himmler is already taking an interest in the second generation. He watches the men


418


of the third. They are giants, axe-cut, wearing a light uniform and an armband with St. Olaf's
cross and double gladius. Jonas Lie departed with his men in the Norske Legion. On the
Leningrad front he will earn the Iron Cross. From late February 1942 the Norwegians began
long ski patrols. Some patrols will cross enemy lines performing real commandos actions. At
the end of the 'year they will join the Nordland Division to form the Panzer-Grenadier-
Regiment-Norge. The third regiment of this new SS division will consist of the survivors of
the Niederlande Legion. It is the Dutch, undoubtedly, who provide the largest contingent of
volunteers to the Waffen-SS. In the Wiking, they are in preponderance. At the beginning of
the war in the East, two thousand five hundred other Dutchmen enlisted in the new
Niederlande Legion. They are commanded by a career officer in the Royal Dutch Army,
Colonel Stroik. And encouraged by another officer, General Seyffardt, former Chief of Staff
of the Dutch Army, who offers the volunteers the tricolor flag. The scene is repeatedly
photographed. Two years pit later, General Seytfardt is assassinated by partisans, and an SS
regiment will bear his name. For the moment ‘atmosphere looks more like a kermesse than a
departure for the front: garlands and accordions. The Dutch volunteers are politically well-
framed: most belong to the Weerafdeling, a Dutch SA, or the NederJansche SS, created after
September 1940 by the lenient pit fanatically social-nationalist Mussert Guard. Their leader,
Heindrick Feldmeijren, makes exactly the same policy as Jonas Lie in Norway: increase the
number of local "collaborators" and then enlist them in the Waffen SS. Feldmeijer did the
Balkan campaign with the Leibstandarte Adolf Hitler and will serve in the Wiking. He will
earn the Iron Cross and rePort a very serious wound, At the end of the war he will disappear
during a bombing raid (Lie, on the other hand, will die of a heart attack that has all the
hallmarks of suicide) . The Dutch who leave for the Eastern Front get to be commanded by
their own officers, forged by the Westland regiment and rough-hewn by the Nordwest
regiment. Education in Poland. Departure for the front in the middle of winter, direction:
northern front.


“Rendezvous in Leningrad, say the Dutch.”


They meet in the snow trenches in front of Novgorod, the sacred city of Rurik le
Varegue, the Swedish founder of Russia. But it is not time for historical reminiscences about
the glorious Nordic past....Siberians attack. The German front lines are rushed past. The
Soviets infiltrate and overflow. They are everywhere. Is the Leningrad Front about to collapse?
German General Staff officers are wasting no time. Let's throw everyone into the battle.


Rifles, a few machine guns, hand grenades, etc. They gather all the men who are in
the depots: pioneers, artillerymen, gendarmes, drivers... to alone the watchword: get killed on
the spot rather than surrender. And the Dutchmen? In line like everyone else. But they have
just arrived and have no experience.... So much the worse.They wanted to be SS. Let them
prove they didn't do it to make themselves look good to the Amsterdam girls.... The
volunteers lack neither enthusiasm nor conviction. They lack, however, equipment, education,
armament. They get slaughtered and suffer heavy losses. The Flemings who came to the front
with them, in the same brigade, suffer the same fate. A curse seems to weigh on the Flemings
throughout their bloody adventures. After the disastrous baptism of fire at Novgorod their
legion will be disbanded. It will be reconstituted pit late. Against all expectations, at the
beginning of the offensive in the East only a thousand men will enlist in the Waffen SS. Most
of the "tough guys" from the various Flemish movements and subdivided into the Westland
regiment of the Wiking Division,¢ fit, without any difficulty, into the SS. The newcomers
have, however, a crisis of nationalism and Catholicism. They set out to fight Russia "for
hearth and altar" and did not find the crusade atmosphere they hoped for and expected. The
Waffen-SS did not know what to make of these " crusaders who regret that they did not leave
taking the curate with them..." No insults are spared to them. “Nation of idiots... People of
serfs,” The poor Flemings sigh. “These Prussians are even worse than the NCOs of the
Belgian army!” A small core is, however, made of a different stuff and strives to become a


419


true SS unit. It includes young men who come from the "civilian" Flemish SS of the
Allgemeene Schutz Scharen Vlaanderen and have formed a militia of the size of a regiment in
Antwerp. Old "Dinaso" Jef Francois enlisted, as soon as the war broke out, in the Waffen-SS
and, in the field earned himself, the ranks of Untersturmfithrer.


All units need their hero. The one of the Flemish SS will be Raymond Tollenaere,
Before the war, he had been the commander of the Viaamsch Naational Verbond in Staf de
Clerq and, in 1940, at the time of the German 'attack, had been arrested as a "fifth column
agent." He certainly did not forget his " sojourns " in the various prisons of Flandria and
Normandy. Now it is time for his revenge. He hopes to have it on the Eastern front, at the
head of his Flemish volunteers. He leaves among the first and falls among the first, on the
Wolchow, not far from Leningrad, in the course of the terrible Russian counter-offensive,
early in 1942. Three regiments of Spanish volunteers are in arms, lost in the North, on the
thankless Leningrad front, sunk in the snow, spied on by death. Coming out of a civil war.
Franco could offer no more. Even among the Spanish peré there are diehard enemies of
Russia who do not miss the chance to assault her, once again, and put the knife to her throat.
They have admired the feats of their fellow skiers, Relations between the Spanish volunteers
and their neighbors, the Dutch volunteers, are excellent. However, General Muiioz's troops
are not part of the Waffen-SS, but dependent on the Wehrmacht. In 1944, "for diplomatic
reasons," the Azzurra Division will be withdrawn from the Eastern Front and will repatriate
together with a few hundred Portuguese from the "Green Legion," Many Spanish volunteers,
however, will enlist, in their personal capacity, in the Waffen-SS and specifically in the 24th
Division, in which there are numerous Italians. Some we will find in Berlin, in the last tragic
days, on the 'last anti-Bolshevik trench, alongside a few other French volunteers. The French
Volunteer Legion, initially in the employ of the Wehrmacht, had its first clash with the lemic,
not far from the Das Reich area of operations. For a very long sctnight from Dec. 7, 1941, the
volunteers with the tricolor crest, fought on the shores of Lake Dijukovo, some sixty
kilometers from Moscow, losing under deadly fire two of their best officers, Lieutenants
Dupont and Terraille, and nearly half of their manpower. The very few survivors would find
themselves, three years later, in the SS Charlemagne Division. Of all the National Legions,
the one that deservedly gained the most fame and glory-the only reputations that count on the
Eastern Front- is undoubtedly the Wallonie Legion.


A thousand men left Brussels one morning in the summer of 1941. They will make
their first military experiences in the Wehrmacht, then move on to the Waffen-SS. Leon
Degrelle dominates his comrades from the ‘height of his unquestioned personality. The
founder of the Rexist movement, he boasts of being the youngest political leader in Europe.
In any case, he imposed his own style: a mixture of insolence, poetry, and facetiousness,
which seriously shook up Belgian political life. His hair dark, straight, his eyes a little sunken
but sparkling, his gestures wide, his speech easy, Degrelle is a big personage. He loves
facetiousness, somewhat heavy foods and leads a very serious life. He leaves for the front as a
machine gunner and earns his stripes in the field between an assault, a political meeting, a
wound. He dreams of reconstituting the old Empire of Charles the Bold and his legionnaires
call him "Modest I of Burgundy," which makes him proud. When he leaves for the Eastern
Front, at the age of thirty-four, he certainly does not imagine that within a few months he will
cause in the Waffen-SS, the great ideological turning point. At the moment he has but one
theory: in the new Europe that will arise, only those peoples who will have contributed to its
creation, with risk and blood, will have the right to speak. The Walloons spend their first
winter in the Donetz region. At the end of February 1942, they arrive in the village of
Gromavaija-Balka. They are alone on the endless steppe over which frosty gusts of wind hiss.
Where are their friends? Who knows? They must be in some corner with the SS of the Wiking
Division.... Impossible to dig trenches. The volunteers take cover behind ramparts of ice
blocks, cut with axes. Three times the Russians attack. Thousands of men suddenly rise from
the snow, disrupt a Wiking company that gets annihilated on the spot, and then attack the


420


Legionnaires. They number four thousand against little more than five hundred Walloons.
Stunned, Degrelle's men count the Russian wagons. There are fourteen of them! Dragged by
Lieutenant Buyds, who seizes a light machine gun and fires volleys advancing, the Walloons
counterattack, singing an old Rexist song. They all fall and, with them, the officer. The
"Burgundians" are rescued at the last moment by the intervention of the Stukas first and the
Panzers later, but they have lost half of their numbers. After a few weeks at the front, of
twenty-four officers, only one remains in the battalion. The survivors, reinforced by new
volunteers who came from Belgium, participate in the spring offensive in Ukraine. The
Germans and their Romanian allies march toward the Caucasus. The Walloons do all they can
to be in the vanguard. For a hundred and twenty hours they fight in the village of Tijerjakow
and lose in combat John Hageman, pastor of the Reich youth, who left among the first with
the most daring of his boys, some of whom are but sixteen years old. The Reich Forces rush
toward the Caucasus. In the lead are mountain hunters and the Wiking Division.


On a sun that transfigures the landscape and radiates with a golden light the domes of
churches, Felix Steiner's men attacked Rostov, July 22, 1942, The Russians have had a whole
year to prepare insurmountable defenses: minefields, grids, anti-tank obstacles. The Wiking
chiefs send the best unit commanders on assault: Gille, you reach the outlying roads, and you
Miihlenkamp, you set up an airfield. And these magnificent soldiers, for whom the word
"impossible" does not exist, transmit their victory bulletin to Command after a few hours:
Objective achieved. Steiner gloats with joy. Rostov is ours! The Wiking Division quickly
crosses the city, leaving soldiers at a few crossroads to regulate traffic. Not but a few minutes
pass and the men are hit by Russian soldiers left within the city. The Wiking is forced to
retrace their steps, and recapture Rostov, at the cost of very hard fighting, street by street. The
Russians get themselves killed rather than surrender an inch of ground. Chariots, intervening
to snuff out soldiers hiding among the rubble, fire at zero. The entire town is raked house to
house. Steiner thinks of everything, even cutting off the enemy's retreat. He calls the leader of
his armored units: Mihlenkamp, there is a ford on the Don, ten kilometers from here. Cereate,
Mihlenkamp, dapper in his black uniform, replies simply “to make allowance,
Obergruppenturer, it is in our hands.” In the center of Rostov the fighting will last a few
more days. The Soviets doggedly defend the N.K.V.D. building, the cathedral of their regime.
The policemen, wearing caps with raspberry-colored bands, get themselves killed one by one
rather than give in. The SS appreciates and knows from experience this stubborn and heroic
resistance. They comment how the SS-men fight well against Stalin. Blokhaus, barricades,
barbed wire. Molotov bottles explode on tank armor, thrown from rooftops, by sharpshooters.
After Rostov, the Caucasus.


The Wiking Division crosses the Kuban, Rubber dinghies slowly advance. The heat
is such that the rubber melts and water trickles in. It is removed with empty cans of preserves.
The division now crosses the Maikop oil fields. And it is easy to guess the target of this
summer offensive: it is Tuapse, on the Black Sea. We advance in a dust that sticks to the skin,
Heat, thirst and mountains.... Victory eludes. The Russians retreat to the peaks, worrying not
to leave in the the hands of the Germans neither arms nor men. The Fuhrer's HQ order’s are
precise, "encircle the enemy forces and destroy them... "But where are the enemy forces?
Rear-guard fighting and isolated shots. Many bodies on the sides of the track. A tank burns,
lost, in the middle of the vast sunflower fields. Occasionally a Cossack village is encountered.
Plum orchards, songs, vines. Piecoli sheets of cultivated land, in the immensity of the steppe.
And a completely different world from ours. The SS men of the Wiking Division no longer
know whether they are still in Europe or are already in Asia. Do they think the war is coming
to an end? ....At Christmas: Tiflis. In the spring: Babylon! Leon Degrelle improvises a
geopolitical lecture to his Burgundians,


“We will meet, on the sacred rivers, on the Tigris and the Euphrates, in Africa with Marshal
Rommel's army about to cross the Suez Canal!”


421


And he concludes, with his communicative laughter, the war will end in the cradle of
mankind! In this summer of 1942 victory seems as close and possible as ever. For the Reich
troops, for the Caucasians, who welcome them as liberators, "new times" have arrived. By the
end of the war, the Waffen-SS will absorb all these Legions, which, although they having lost
hope of victory, will remain loyal in disorder and defeat. Local militias, Soviet prisoners,
Orthodox Muslims, hillbillies, old "Whites" resurrected from history, constitute a
multicolored but weak Army. And a flourish of the most varied colored coats of arms on the
Wehrmacht's olive-gray uniform, testimonies to nationalities, many of which emerged from
the Soviet night. Hates dormant or still alive find their exaltation in a new crusade. Knights
gallop again on their steeds, but with Mauser in their holsters, following foreign flags where
the Turkish crescent and beside the Reich's hooked cross. How &, now, far from the great
Nordic myth! Caucasian volunteers have turned Berlin's army into an army of Babel. Race
and oil are enough and enough to make the Caucasus a more than "interesting" place for the
SS. Political ambitions & wartime affairs take a back seat. What matters now & give birth
here, as throughout Europe, to new Legions. The Georgians, first, provide the contingent for
six battalions, because, as the émigré Nikuratze tells his friend Rosemberg, “Georgia stands
to the Caucasus as Germany stands to Europe....”. The Armenians are not long in
remembering that they are "diehards" and cost five battalions. They speak a language that the
Germans really like, “We hate the Russians and the Jews as much as you do.” Every
population in the Caucasus claims autonomy. Turks, Tatars, Kalmyks, Turkmen are agitating.
“We must create”, they propose, “the Republic of Crimea, of 'Azerbajdian, of Volga.” The
Germans are not unbalanced as far as the political future is concerned, but, at present, they
accept volunteers. They are pouring in from all over, from the Don to the Volga, and the
Wehrmacht is enlisting them in a semi-clandestine atmosphere, because the orders from
Headquarters recommend caution. Certain hill tribesmen have risen up against the Soviets,
before the Germans' arrival, and the relations that are established are of cordial cooperation. 1
first to be surprised at the reception, unusual for them, of the North Caucasians, are the SS
men. Heinrich Himmler, has ready, as usual, the explanation, “Muslim populations
understand us more easily than others. Allah's Paradise & for the warriors. Germans &
Muslims both have a cult of strength. Recruits also extend to the many populations of Central
Asia.” Among them elements who, properly trained, can become excellent fighters "against
Bolshevism." Men from the Kazan, the Ouzbeks, Kyrgyz, Turkmen, flocked into the
autonomous battalions that would later be grouped into a special unit called Osttrkischer
Waffen Verband der SS and that would bear the poetic name of Harun-el-Raschid. More than
a hundred thousand Caucasians and Asians will thus be enlisted in the Reich Forces, among
whom will be found, Ruthenians, Baltieans, Ukrainians and more than thirty thousand
Cossacks. The crossing of the Caucasus will also give the opportunity to realize an exploit, at
the same time, sporting and mystical: the conquest of the Elbrouz.


The ascent accomplished by Wehrmacht mountain hunters, arouses the interest of the
Ahnenerbe and the initiates of the Black Order. For Heinrich Himmler and the SS, the
Caucasus is much more than a victory. For them it represents a symbol. On August 21, 1942,
two dozen German mountaineers begin the final stage. A raging wind from the Black Sea
blows. A storm rages and snow falls thickly. The cold becomes unbearable and freezes all the
equipment. The men, with great effort, continue to climb in a whirlwind of snow that impedes
them. Before noon, the roped parties under the orders of Captain Groth and Giimmerler reach
the summit of the Elbrouz. Adjutant Major Kiimmerle plants the Reich war flag. At 5633
meters an icy wind unfurls the banner with the black cross. The hooked cross flies over the
Prometheus Caucasus. In this summer of 1942, the Armies of the Reich, of which the Waffen
SS is the spearhead, make the sword of Siegfried seethe in the Caucasus sun. The Germanic
heroes rise from legend, invincible. Five months later, in the ruthless rigor of the second
Russian winter, the drama of Stalingrad is consummated.


422


Panzer on the Steppe


Night has been falling for many hours, but for Adolf Hitler the workday has just
begun. He allows himself a moment's pause to sip a bland broth. The light from the lamps
accentuates the signs of fatigue on his face. At times he looks a wax statue, but the flash of his
gaze brightens the face marked by the struggle against fate. As is his habit, he speaks to
himself. He knows that Germany is engaged in a fight to the death. He knows that his greatest
asset, in this implacable war, is men. And he speaks of those he considers the best, “The
Waffen-SS constitutes a select corps of extraordinary men, totally dedicated to an ideal and
loyal to the death.... In thinking about that he rediscovers that flame that burned in the early
years of the party's struggles, when all around it was nothing but a handful of fanatical and
loyal boys. Today there is fighting from Munich to Karcov....” The SS knows that their first
task was to be an example to all and that all eyes are fixed on them. The Fiihrer has decided
to equip the Waffen-SS with better weapons. From the beginning of the war in the East, Paul
Hausser has been demanding tanks. Everyone knows this old "grumpy fox," who in Russia
turned out to be one of the most courageous commanders, which is not rare, but also the most


423


capable of all German generals. Hausser remains a Prussian officer of the highest order, but
possesses in pitt that 'somewhat mysterious air that surrounds all leaders of the Black Order.
The Fuhrer decides, “J authorize the creation of an SS General Kommando and to entrust
Paul Hausser with it.” He will also give him the indispensable means, in mid-1942 the best
divisions of the Waffen SS, Leibstandarte, Das Reich, Totenkopf and Wiking. become
Panzergrenadieredivisionen and receive the long-awaited tanks. Himmler is now an important
figure on the military level as well. He is not pit merely the "first policeman" of the Reich. He
controls the best soldiers. Der getreue Heinrich has succeeded, as was his goal, in getting a
real SS Army established, In fall 1942 pud have two hundred thousand fighters. Now, he
wants to go further. He got the weapons and he wants the men. In one year he will bring the
Waffen-SS's numbers to three hundred and fifty thousand men. More divisions are created.
Immediately two mountain units: the 6th, North which will fight in Finland and the 7th, Prinz
Eugen, in the Balkans. The cavalry brigade will become 18th Cavalry Division and will be
christened Florian Geyer, in memory of the veechius leader of the rebel peasants of the
German Renaissance, Sax Two more Panzergrenadieredivisionen equipped with the most
modern weapons are thus formed. They are the 9th Hohenstaufén,in homage to the famous
German dynasty and the 10th, Frundsberg, named after the creator of the Lansquenet Corps in
the early 16th? century. When a German Army disappears in the maelstrom of Stalingrad,
other cohorts will join the ranks of the SS. For the first time in the history of the Corps, they
will be volunteers. These eighteen-year-old boys are naturally passed from Arbeitdienst
camps to Waffen-SS camps. But this compulsory enlistment causes an avalanche of
complaints. Pastors and priests ask parents to write to the Fiihrer to complain. And so do some
bishops... The SS is considered, in fact, somewhat pagan. Heinrich Himmler wonders if he
has not acted hastily and summons his loyal Hans Jiitter, head of all administrative services,
“Find me a means to calm the "cravings" of these preachers....” The Obersturmfihrer is not
long in finding a compromise and informs the parents, “Your children will do one month of
education and then they can choose between the SS and the Wehrmacht.” The instructors at
Hohenstaufen and Frundsberg know their stuff. Only three boys, at the end of their education,
will ask to leave the SS! It must be said that the prestige of the SS was never that great. From
Kharkov to Demiansk, in the course of the harshest fighting on the Eastern Front in early
1943, the selected divisions performed real miracles. Joseph Goebbels wrote in his journal, "/f
we had twenty men like Sepp Dietrich we would not worry in the least even if half the world
was arrayed against us on the Eastern front." After Stalingrad, Leningrad. The Russians seem
determined to bring back a new prestigious victory in the North. On February 10, 1943, they
attacked in the Krasny-Bor region, launching a dozen divisions, supported by tanks, into the
battle.


Facing them are the Spaniards of the "Blue Division" and the SS Polizei Division.
General Esteban-Infantes faces more than thirty thousand men and about one hundred tanks.
He can line up, barely, five thousand men whose only shelter is holes dug in the snow. His
reserves consist of a few cyclists, pioneers, and artillerymen without guns. His orders are
explicit, “Run out of ammunition, fight with hand grenades, then with hoes and finally with
daggers....”. Three kilometers of advance cost the Russians ten thousand men, but the
Spaniards lost about sixty percent of their numbers, and only ten percent of the men in the
rifle battalion were in condition to stand. The Flemings, who were fighting in the same sector,
went on the counterattack under the orders of Hauptsturmfithrer Schellong. They are
supported by some Tigers sliding on fresh snow.
Hand-to-hand combat! The Finns want, at any cost, to regain the trenches lost by the
Spaniards. Schellong orders, “Conquer them and stay there!” They will defend them for eight
days before being replaced by the Germans. It is the Mountain Hunters who take their place in
the trenches and holes. They are greeted by. ghosts with prey wrapped in rags, with pulled
facial features, week-long beards. In their eyes is still all the horror of the long terrible hours
spent in there. In the rear, trucks await the Krasny-Bor escapees. Engines roar in the cold
February air. With slow, heavy gestures, the survivors hoist themselves aboard. Of five


424


hundred men, exactly forty-five remain. Those of the SS Polizei, terribly tried in their attempt
to block Soviet attacks, fall back to their starting positions at the frozen Snow. The Waffen-SS
men stand on the shores of Lake Ladoga, a lake that & an immense frozen mirror, in the
milky brightness of winter. Snow and frost paralyze the entire front. Meanwhile, at the
General Staff, spring operations are being studied. 1943 will be the decisive year for one of
the two contenders. The Totenkopf Division, which suffered huge losses in the vicinity of
Dimiansk where Hauptsturmftthrer Georg Bochmann's tank men managed to break the
encirclement, was sent for a rest in October to France. She arrived there just in time to
participate in that military walk that would lead, in November 1942, to the occupation of the
"free zone." In February, the Totenkopf were recalled to Russia. Three-quarters of its
personnel are young recruits, but they are commanded by a man who considers his division
the best of all the Waffen-SS.: Theodor Eicke. On Feb. 26, a few days after their arrival on the
Eastern Front, news spreads that tugs at everyone's heartstrings, "Papa" Eicke has crashed!
The "Fieser Storch", the Gruppenfiihrer's small plane, was shot down beyond the Russian
lines in front of Orelka. The Chief of the Totenkopf dead. The decision is immediate
spontaneous, concordant. His body will not remain in Russian hands. A commando of
volunteers penetrates deeply into the Russian rear. Eike will rest under the symbol of ‘eternal
life that distinguishes SS graves. A regiment will bear his name. The entire Totenkopf
Division prepares for the March 1943 offensive. For many weeks, the Waffen-SS operated in
extremely difficult situations in the central sector of the Eastern Front. Karkov & threatened
with encirclement. Two Soviet armies have been launched toward the city. The Russians want
at any cost to drive the Germans back to the banks of the Dnieper. Adolf Hitler disheartened
by the disaster of Stalingrad and the checkmate of Leningrad does not want to abandon
Karkov, the most important Ukrainian city, politically and industrially. He believes that only
one unit is capable of holding the eitta firmly in German hands: the new SS Armored Corps.
A position defended by Das Reich and the Leibstandarte cannot fall into enemy hands.
Unfortunately, the news coming from the front is bad, “Our troops can be encircled from one
day to the next.” At Grand Headquarters no one dares to add, "Like at Stalingrad," but
everyone thinks so. Adolf Hitler & impatient : “Jt is necessary to close "in a curl" and defend
Kharkov, house by house.” After giving this order to Paul Hausser, the Fuhrer thinks the pit is
done and the capital of eastern Ukraine will not fall. On February 14, the encirclement &
completed. The Red Army has closed the last gap as well. A staff officer impassively reads
the newspaper of the SS Armored Corps, “Jn Karkov the population is firing on soldiers and
cars.” There are no forces available to comb the city, All men are engaged in fighting with
the enemy. By order of the Army Command & started the destruction of the railroad, supply
& ammunition depots. The whole thing is in flames. From day to day the need for an orderly
retreat becomes more urgent. Karkov no longer has, by now, a tactical interest. The Fithrer
once again demands that Karkov be defended to the last man." Paul Hausser analyzes the
situation. Never has an SS man transgressed an order received. But, in this case, obeying
means sacrificing, to no avail, the entire SS Armored Corps, the spearhead of the Reich. He
telegraphs to General Lanz, on whom he is tactically dependent: "Decision essential retreat
starting at noon." Lanz is not a National Socialist, but a disciplined military man. He merely
reconfirms the order received from Hitler. Hausser refuses to accept an absurd and
unnecessary sacrifice and in turn sends a message. "J have given orders to evacuate Karkov
and fall back during the night of February 14-15. Report by letter follows." Lanz replies: "In
accordance with the Fiihrer's orders, the SS Armored Corps will resist fmo to the last man on
the present positions east of Karkov." Paul Hausser does not bend. His one eye shines like
that of a barn owl. He stares at the papers very carefully. At his side stand Standartenfuhrer
Werner Ostendorf, who heads his General Staff, Sturmbannfiihrer Muller, head of the
operations office. First reports come in:


-The Russians have occupied the Northeast and Southeast districts.


-Repel them with Das Reich tanks!


425


In the morning of February 15, all that remains is a narrow corridor, beaten
relentlessly by Soviet assault waves, through which to make the fallback. Paul Hausser has
made his decision and comments on it in a metallic voice, “There will be no second
Stalingrad. I am not Von Paulus. I disobey and fall back.”” He knows that he can count on his
men and the elite soldiers of the Wehrmacht's Grossdeutschland Division who are no match
for the Waffen-SS. In the early afternoon hours the order to hold out to the last is again
confirmed. Paul Hausser quickly runs through it and tears it up. It is not even worth answering.
The night will be terrible, but by dawn all the Germans have managed to avoid from the trap.
The last armored vehicles leave the city in flames. Soldiers and partisans already occupy the
houses and, from the windows ¢ from the roofs, fire dry bursts of machine-gun fire. In the
glow of the fires, the Soviets hoist a large red flag over Karkov's central square. Serenely,
Paul Hausser addresses the Fihrer's Headquarters with a message: "The Leibstandarte Adolf
Hitler, Das Reich and Grossdeutschland divisions are intact in their numbers and ready to
counterattack." At the Command, which is based in Zaparoie, Marshal]o von Manstein
determines, without hesitation, which route to take to the west of Stalin's troops. The Russians
want to reach the Dnieper. General Popov's armored elite corps opens the way. But, against
Popoy, General Manstein, has an ace up his sleeve: Steiner. He explains to the latter his plan
of maneuver: - Order the Wiking Division to take Krasnoarmelskole. The security of the
southern front rests entirely on the Waffen SS. Steiner lacks tanks, but he has guns and, above
all, an artillery officer extraordinary: Otto Gille to whom he gives the handovers. “The
Russians must be made to believe that we have suddenly left....” At the good moment open
fire and, at the cost of red-hot barrels, do not stop for a single moment, striking everywhere.
Gille manages to play Popov, who stops his offensive.


Thus begins a most interesting game of chess. The Russians thus switch from
offensive to defensive. From their distant Headquarters, Stalin and Hitler demand news from
their "warlords."

- Well? What's going on?... It is certainly Manstein who has the initiative. Popov's
armored corps & annihilated. At the end of winter, the fate of the guns is still uncertain. One
day, an idea arises. So bold as to seem unbelievable: retake Karkov.... The snow turns to mud.
The cold returns. Abruptly the front & paralyzed by ice. For the Germans the return of winter
& the signal for 'offensive.


Forward! It is necessary to assault the Russians with a pincer maneuver. The month
of March arrives. Never has the Armored Corps & seemed so invulnerable. The tracks of the
tanks bite- 90 the icy snow. Paul Hausser barely conceals his impatience. The Karkov retreat
did not go down well with him. He does not regret disobeying the Fihrer's orders. Now,
however, he wants to prove to him that he was right. The maneuver begins. Exemplary timing
and execution. Peacetime peace and textbook. March 11, 1943, a message reaches the
Armored Corps, “The bulk of the Soviet troops are surrounded by the Leibstandarte, the Das
Reich and the Totenkopf.” Paul Hausser, fmally, smiles. His blade-like face of a knife crossed
by a black bandage, glows. The old fox has beaten the big bear.... The Gruppenfiihrer
comments: “Jt is the beginning of a duel between the Red Guard and the Waffen SS. We will
see each other.” Less than a hundred meters from Hausser's Headquarters a corpse lies in the
snow. And that of a general of Stalin's Guard. The battle is enriched with symbols. But again
the snow gives way to mud. Despite this frozen bog, where men sink to their chests, the
initiative must be resumed. Hausser throws the entire SS Armored Corps into the battle. On
March 8, a message reaches the Command: “We are in the suburbs of Karkov. Four weeks
earlier he had evacuated the city disobeying the Fiihrer. But that retreat & was the prologue
to today's victory. On March 15, 1943, as the red flag was lowered, a large black flag with
the two white Waffen SS was slowly raised.” In the early spring of 1943, the Waffen-SS then
reports a victory that seems decisive. Victory not only over Stalin's Army, but over the


426


Wehrmacht itself... Paul Hausser and his men of the Armored Corps proved that intelligence
and courage can prevail over the enemy, over routine, over discipline itself...


And in this radiant spring now anything seems possible. Victory is within reach of
one or the other contender and it has a name: Kurks. But here again is the mud, the fatigue,
the cold. The Armies of the Reich seem paralyzed after the victory. Enemies clash for many
weeks without a moment's respite. Summer arrives. Everything now seems ready for the last
battle. At the Fithrer's General Staff a name was given to this decisive battle: Zitadelle. At
dawn on July 6, 1943, after a terrifying artillery preparation, the combat begins. The SS
Armored Corps deploys three hundred tanks and pitt of a hundred assault guns. Paul Hausser
is in command of the Deutschland regiment. At his side is a massive, quiet man, Commander
Hans Harmel, who briefs him, “Everything is fine. Wisliceny has the situation in hand.”
Gunther-Eberhard Wisliceny is his best battalion commander. In camouflage uniform, the
Iron Cross around his neck, bareheaded, he sends his companies on ‘assault, as if organizing a
lottery.... Haupsturmfiihrer Helmut Schreiber's 10th Company pays dearly for its conquest of
the Russian trenches. Beware of the counterattack! The SS fortify themselves and do not yield
an inch of ground. From this springboard Paul Hausser pud launch his troops on the assault.
And a race! It's on who pushes quite far. Das Reich, Leibstandarte and Totenkopf seem, once
again, concerned about overrunning each other to repel the Russians. Olympic Games
atmosphere. May the best man win! And the best, that day, will be Georg Karck, commander
of the 9th Company, 2nd Leibstandarte Regiment. Only a handful of men follow him now, but
he does not stop. Methodically he destroys the Russian blokhaus with explosive charges. He
does not stop until the objective is conquered. The Russians are staggered in depth. German
tanks attack followed by infantry groups. The SS rushes to the assault.... Panzers and Stukas
spring into action. Paul Hausser, in command, receives confirmation of victory:


- Lutchki is conquered...
- Teterevino is in our hands....
- Gresnoie is under our fire....


At the head of the 6th company of the Waffen SS's 1st Panzer Regiment, the one of
the Leibstandarte, fights a young lieutenant, Rudolf von Ribbentrop, son of the Reich Foreign
Minister. He knows only one watchword: "Forward, forever forward." Communicate.


- Gresnoie is in our hands.


Paul Hausser feels victory in his grasp. He orders Das Reich division to push
eastward: assault detachments of Deutschland and Der Fuhrer regiments attack Prohkorovka.


Nikita Khrushchev, political adviser to Soviet troops caught at the throat, takes the
assessment of the situation, “Either we resist or the Germans will come to Kursk. They play
all for everything. For them it is a matter of life and death.” For us it is as well. The Soviets
counterattack on the very extensive front of the SS Armored Corps, but the German assault
aviation proves to be able to stop them. The SS always advances. Obersturmbannfithrer
Ullrich, commander of a Totenkopf battalion, manages to cross the Psiol River. On the
evening of 10 July 1943, he reports to his division that the village of Krasnii Oktiabr is firmly
in our hands. The road to Kursk is open. Paul Hausser repeats: -We must advance. Nikita
Khrushchev retorts: - We must resist. At Prokhorovka all is played out. The SS Armored
Corps comes face to face with Tussian reinforcements preceded by the Guard. Once again a
Chosen Corps clashes Gon another Chosen Corps. chosen. The Soviets deploy eight hundred
tanks, the Germans six hundred. July 15, 1943: "One thousand five hundred armored giants,
dear and cannon, advancing, firing, burning, exploding, in this little ocean of valleys and hills
surrounding Prokhorovka." It seems as though fate hesitated. But the fate of the Battle of
Kursk is decided in Sicily, where the Allies have managed to land. Marshal von Manstein and


427


von Kluge are summoned to the Fuhrer's Grand Headquarters. Adolf Hitler is dark in the face,
as in the coming tragic days.... “I am obliged to stop the Zitadelle offensive and send the
Armored Corps to Italy.”


The battle of Kursk is but a series of victories ended in defeat. In the East the war &
now lost! Many Slavs want to enlist in the ranks of the Waffen SS, but they will be more
"desperados" than liberators. 1941, Gottlob recruited volunteers from among the Ukrainians
from former Polish territory before the start of operations in the East. The new unit was based
in Galicia. At its origin was an underground group I'0.U.N., (Organization of Ukrainian
Nationalists) and one man, André Melnik, who succeeded Eugene Konovalets, assassinated in
1938 by a Soviet agent. Everything happens as in Norway and Holland: a young "wolf"
overrules the local party, sympathizing with the Germans by openly siding, with his men, with
the SS. Stephen Bandera appears as the main radical extremist. German special services also
organize a special regiment, Nachtingal, composed entirely of Ukrainian émigrés. Despite the
fact that Alfred Rosenberg and Ostministerium view the Ukrainians favorably,
Reichskomnissar Erick Koch behaves as if in a conquered country. He asserts, “There are no
Ukrainians. We must always remember that we are the race of the rulers.” And so this
extremist is convinced of racial supremacy that he adds, “/f 7 found a Ukrainian worthy to sit
at my own table, I would be forced to have him shot.” The SS, however, does not follow this
hard policy. In the summer of 1942, Heinrich Himmler appoints his loyal Gottlob Berger as
liaison agent to Alfred Rosenberg. Things do not go badly. The great Waffen-SS "recruiting
sergeant" is sympathetic to the ideas expressed by the author of Myth of the 20th Century
about the need to unite the Ukraine with the new Europe that will arise. Rosenberg and Berger,
in his time, will jointly condemn the action carried out by the Einzatzgruppen in Russia and
especially in Ukraine. The scapegoat would be Reinhard Heydrich. At the beginning of the
war in the East he had given a free hand to four commandos of about a thousand men each to
"clean up the rear." Four were the commanding Brigadefiihrers, all belonging to the Black
Order: Heinz Jost, Arthur Nebe, Otto Rasch and Otto Ohlendorf. The balance of these
Einzatzgruppen appears to be of incredible heinousness.


April 28, 1943 marks a decisive turning point in the history of the Waffen SS.
Heinrich Himmler decides to accept the Ukrainians and Belorussians. Success is beyond hope:
one hundred thousand volunteers show up. Fifteen thousand are enlisted, forming the 14th SS
Galicia Division, followed piti later by the 30th SS Weiss Ruthenie Division. Two hundred
and fifty Officer Cadets leave for the Tolz Academy. Instead of the SS symbol, they wear a
rampant lion on their lapels. They are, for the most part, blond, blue-eyed young men,
completely similar to Germans.... After two years of war in the East, theories in favor of
integrating Ukrainians into the "New Europe" are thus taken up by those who not long before
had been its opponents. One day they will be annexed by Russia. Meanwhile, for them,
General Andrei Vlassov, captured in July 1942, remains an element of Suspicion despite his
stances against Stalin, despite his call to arms, in the famous "Smolensk Manifesto." The
Waffen-SS look with a suspicious eye on the two hundred thousand Hiws, short for
Hilfswillige-Russians, in the ranks of the Wehrmacht as auxiliaries and sometimes as fighters.
Their recruitment still takes place in a semi-clandestine atmosphere, but the Osttruppen have
begun their activities. Most German divisions deployed on the Eastern Front have ten to
twenty percent ex-Soviet "volunteers." Essential revolution that little by little makes
prejudices disappear. Many of them deserve the Iron Cross, their officers assert. The
argument is one that impresses the Waffen-SS leaders. On the other hand, by now, the SS
counts among its best fighters, soldiers who come from the Baltic countries and the Balkans.


428


Che fall of the Waffen-55


1944 has just begun, and it will be the year of defeat. For those in charge of the
Reich. only two hopes remain: science and diplomacy. Secret weapons or negotiations? It is
not for the combatants at the front to decide. They have but one delivery:to resist, one goal: to
fight, one tragic conclusion: to die. The Eastern Front &, now, on Germany's frontiers. From
the Baltic to the Adriatic, the Russians amass men and tanks. In mid-January, they launch
their attack against East Prussia. The Reds push toward Koenisberg and Tannenberg. In the
south, Warsaw & fall after three days of fighting. Germans & Soviets know the target of the
next battle:


Danzig.


But there is no more fighting to conquer a city even though it & has become a
symbol of World War II. It & has now come to a showdown. The Germans have crushed the
Russians under the weight of their weapons. Now the Russians retaliate, ruthlessly. The age-
old hatred of the Slavs for the Germans explodes. A savage hatred rising from the depths of
the steppe. The political commissars told the men: - The country & yours, do with it what you
will.


The Russians take revenge on the partisans hanged, the isbas burned, the prisoners
who died of hardship and starvation, the young men rounded up to dig trenches and turn
bombs in the Reich workshops. . Revenge. Khleb za Khleb, Krov za Krov ! (an eye for an eye,
a tooth for a tooth). The German civilians pay for the deported and the dead. This is but the
beginning of the horror. The fight & deadly. The Russians destroy everything. The Allies
demand unconditional surrender. The German soldiers know they have nothing more to lose.
Their comrades are dead, their homes destroyed. All that remains is the homeland for which,
one day, they swore an oath to the Fiihrer that they will keep to the 'last. Almost half the
soldiers fighting in the ranks of the Waffen-SS now know that their country and their family
are under enemy domination. Nothing awaits them but prison or the gallows. Before they die,
they want to sell their volunteer skins dearly. Adolf Hitler decides to create an Army Group to
plug the breach opened between the troops of General Schroner and Rendulic and drive the
Russians back. At the head of these Vistula Army Corps, the Fiihrer designates not a
Wehrmacht general but the man he trusts most: Reichsfiihrer-SS Heinrich Himmler. The
General Staff is furious and insists that Himmler has no military experience. However,
Himmler has been commanding the Home Army for over five months. And an excellent
organizer of men. He is, above all, a National Socialist. Today, when I am surrounded by
traitors and cowards, that’s matters most. Heinrich Himmler accepted this new assignment
and left immediately, establishing his headquarters south of Danzig. In mid-February, Adolf
Hitler decides on a counterattack on the Oder and summons Reichsfiihrer-SS to his
Headquarters. Guderian, the Chief of the General Staff, finds a way to limit the military
power of Himmler by requesting that General Wenck be appointed Chief of Staff of the
Vistula Army Group. Himmler is out of luck. When the counterattack begins, on February 15,
1945, he lies in bed with a form of tonsillitis. Dr. Gebhardt, chief surgeon of the Waffen-SS,
decides to admit him to the sanatorium in Hohenlychen, a hundred kilometers north of Berlin.
The Reichsfiihrer-SS turns the hospital into a Headquarters and broods Wenck. The situation
is tragic: a weak line of resistance runs parallel to the Baltic, from the Vistula estuary to that
of the Oder. There still remain, as at Danzig, a few pockets encircled by the enemy.


429


For the counterattack Himmler counts on Felix Steiner to whom, however, just fifty
thousand men and three hundred tanks remain. The head of the Vistula Army Group drafts a
proclamation to be read to the troops on the eve of the counterattack: "Forward! Forward into
the mud! Forward in the snow! Forward by day! Forward by night! Forward to liberate the
soil of the Fatherland!" Adolf Hitler's latest plan is grandiose: an immense pincer, consisting
of the last SS armored divisions, is to catch the Russians in a trap. Steiner attacks from
Pomerania and Dietrich from Slovakia. Rain and mud. There is hand-to-hand combat.
Everywhere the mammoth T-34 Soviets hurling themselves through fir woods and beet fields.
On one of the flanks of Steiner's offensive are engaged the Walloons of Leon Degrelle, who
sends to the Lindenberg hill his best company, under the command of Obersturmfuhrer
Capelle. The left flank must be hold at all costs. Without any help, because wagons and
cannons are needed for the offensive. Capelle is but twenty years old, but he is now an "old"
soldier who has distinguished himself in Estonia. He occupies the hill with a hundred and
seventy Burgundians. For this giant, trained in the strict discipline of the SS, there is no
problem: one must resist. The position will be defended to the last man. On February 17, 1944,
the Russians attack Lindenberg Hill. Capelle maintains connection with the division and, in a
calm voice, describes the Russian advance, “The tanks are advancing. I no longer have a
front. I have only a few positions, encircled.” All the Burgundians want to die with their
weapons in their hands without abandoning their hole. They are submerged and shot down
with rifle kaleio or shovel. Obersturmfiihrer Capelle sends his last message, “My Command &
encircled. I am a few meters away....” The young officer does not say that & severely
wounded. He lays down his microphone draws revolver & waits for the Russians. He shoots
down a few who rush at him. Then, with the last shot he blows his brains out. Of the entire
company only four wounded are saved, who with the favor of night Will reach the lines of the
Wallonie division. “Here come the Russians!” They seem to be everywhere. Three million
men attack Pomerania. The villages are in flames. Steiner's offensive in Pomerania & blocked
as & happened for Dietrich's in Hungary. Germans & foreign volunteers fight one against ten.
When they reach the lynx they find their positions already in Russian hands. 1 Frenchmen of
the 33rd SS Charlemagne Division, some seven thousand strong, abandon; on February 17,
the camp at Wildflecken. They leave in successive stages on old railroad cars and reach
Hammerstein in freezing cold. Rain is followed by snow. In front of the station where the first
convoy descends, here are wagons.... They are T-34s! We will have to fight to conquer the
shelter under which stops in a cloud of steam, the locomotive. Brigadenfiihrer Krukenberg,
Inspector General of Charlemagne & a cold & irascible old Prussian. His will & proverbial.
He installs himself at Elsenau Castle & asks everyone to stand firm. The young men of the
Company of Honor go hunting for T-34s and destroy Russian tanks even in the park
surrounding the castle. Obersturmfiihrer Weber, who commands them, phlegmatically
announces the balance sheet for the morning of Feb. 27. Eighteen tanks, including one
"Stalin." The gunners were not to be outdone, and Haupsturmfiihrer Roy echoes, “Fourteen
wagons put out of action by my pieces.” But the division are fractioned & encircled. In the
cemetery of Elsenau, they are fighting at the bayonet. Out of about five thousand men
engaged, the dead number more than five hundred and the missing a thousand. The survivors
reach Neustettin, where they find a few comrades. For everyone there is an order, for Division
Charlemagne to assembly at Belgard.


Eighty kilometers on foot in one stage, amid gusts of wind and snow. The roads are
cluttered with refugees. All of Pomerania & on the run. At Belgard, the division is
reassembled as & possible. By the afternoon of March 2, one line regiment & one reserve
regiment are again on the warpath. The French make their stand near the Persante creek.
Night falls and with the night the cold increases and fear emerges. The news that arrives is
always bad, that the Russians are rampant everywhere, that the SS divisions are surrounded.
The Brigadefiihrer decides that they must break through. He puts himself at the head of the
vanguard that is trying to reach the coast and the mouth of the Oder. Obersturmfihrer Edgar
Puaud, former Foreign Legion officer and last leader of the L.V.F. during the Russian retreat,


430


secures the rear guard. Near Korlin & stuck with three battalions. He hopes to escape with the
favor of fog, but at dawn on March 6, the French are caught up. Russian tanks and mortars
fire relentlessly. The dead and wounded number in the hundreds. Oberfiihrer Puaud, wounded
in the leg, disappears and his fate will never be known. The 33rd SS Division has lost its
commander and eighty percent of its manpower. Only those of the 1st Battalion, marching
through the forest paths for twelve hours, manage to escape the Russian patrols. They reach,
at last, the Baltic coast--to find themselves surrounded again. They proceed along the beach,
while the Russians are on the cliffs. Belgard's survivors finally reach Swinemiinde, at the
mouth of the Oder. A sharp order and the men march at a cadenced pace, singing. A German
general watching them asks in amazement, wondering who are these soldiers? They are the
French of the 33rd Charlemagne Division. And, for the first time in a long time, the general
sees men marching who still look like soldiers. Latvians and Norwegians, Danes and Flemish,
Estonians and Dutch Waffen SS fight everywhere with the same doggedness as the French
volunteers. The Walloons of the 28th Division, which escaped the Battle of Stalingrad, set up
at Vittichow. The soul of the defense and Leon Degrelle's Chief of Staff, Sturmbannfihrer
Hellebaut, awarded the Iron Cross First Class and Military Cross, earned on the Yser, in 1918.
Paul Mezetta, Rexist youth chaplain, falls by his side, shot dead. The Burgundians fight
relentlessly for ten days and nights. Finally, the order to fall back comes. Darkness and
confusion. The Walloons during the night manage to disengage from the enemy. Weather is
bad. A platoon mistakenly moves toward Russian-occupied Stargard. The SS, ignoring that
the town & fallen, advance with shoulder arms. They cross the railroad bridge. Russian
soldiers, leaning on the parapet, observe them, but mistake them for comrades. The
Burgundians salute them, convinced they are Germans. When they realize the
‘misunderstanding, they hurry out of town and join the rest of the division, across fields
infested with T-38s and Russian patrols. Reaching their new positions, Leon Degrelle goes on
a rampage. It is impossible to make a connection with the German troops who must cover the
flanks. Right: nothing. On the left: nothing. In front: more than forty Soviet tanks advancing.
Behind, a General Staff constantly repeating over the field telephone, to resist! Leon Degrelle
shouts that infantry invading from all sides. The tanks have opened about twenty gaps in
Leon’s lines, the artillery has been taken out. Resist is the only mission Leon has. Finally,
night falls, the commander of the Wallonie Division gets permission to fall back. He gives his
men an appointment about twelve kilometers east of Szczecin, in a large village beyond a fir
forest. Leon Degrelle, from a unit of four to five thousand men, barely managed to scrape
together six hundred volunteers with which to form an assault battalion. After having them
renew their oaths of allegiance, he entrusts them to Sturmbannfiihrer Diericht, an old Belgian
colonial officer who had passed from the Congolese forest to the heath of Pomerania. This
"katanghese" arranges his men in a wedge in front of Szczecin. Gutted houses, uprooted trees,
dead bodies, fires and explosions.... Behind the Burgundians, a single bridge crosses the Oder.
On the eastern bank, crouching behind a railroad embankment and protected by improvised
barricades, the SS Walloon still resist.


Obersturmfiihrer Leroy, a volunteer at sixteen, has lost, at Tcherkassy his right arm
and left eye. He asks to return to his division and & used as a liaison officer. After a few days
he goes to Leon Degrelle, his brother Loso was killed. The young uflicial leads his men to the
assault by firing the machine gun with only his left arm. The Burgundians will be the last to
fall back and cross and Szczecin bridge. The pale March sun illuminates the Baltic and the
harbor, but it was the sun of defeat.... Spring is coming and, with it, the end of the war. The
situation & now tragic in both West & East. As Felix Steiner in Pomerania, Sepp Dietrich in
Hungary, Paul Hausser cannot hold out in the Rhineland. The Americans cross the Rhine
while the Russians cross the Oder. All that remains is a thin curtain of German troops
wondering when the Allcati will join them to fight, together, the Russians...Last illusions. The
men of the Waffen-SS, however, think nothing of these great political combinations. They
dispute, palm to palm, the ground to the invaders and prove unbeatable in hand-to-hand
combat. When a few soldiers fall or a few wagons burn, the enemy troops retreat, but begin an


431


intense bombardment. Planes and cannons destroy everything. All that remains is to occupy
the ruins. Civilians have already displayed white flags of surrender in their windows. A
handful of Waffen-SS soldiers arrange themselves on a defensive lynch a little further back.
They barricade a road or bridge. Silence and solitude surround them. A few Hitler Youth boys
join them to defend their village and because they have sworn allegiance and courage. The
17th Goetz von Berlichingen Division, badly tried in Normandy, now fights on the Rhine.
This SS wants to die in Aix-la-Chapelle, at the foot of the cathedral, in the ruins of the old city
of Emperor Charlemagne. A few isolated Frenchmen also fight in its ranks, as indeed happens
in many other SS divisions. They want at any cost to "offer" themselves a wagon for their last
fight. A Panzerfaust on their shoulders, they wait for the enemy in the morning mist as the
first fruit trees sprout. All seems quiet. Suddenly a rattling of wagons. The wagon & now a
few meters away. The two French volunteers met in "Germanic camps," controlled by the
Waffen-SS, on the shores of Lake Constance. They are about eighteen years old and this will
be their last fight. They jump up and fire at the same time. The stricken wagon is on fire. A
hellfire pins the two SS men in a ditch. When they manage to get out, they lose sight of each
other & are captured shortly thereafter. They have not taken off the SS insignia nor the sash
with the name of the division; what worries them & their Soldbuch, where their place of birth
& nationality is shown... They have the same thought: devour, page by page the document,
including the stapled photo. After many weeks, Raymond & Olivier find themselves in a
prison camp. The 17th Gotz von Berlichingen Division fights in the Palatinate, while the 37th
Zutzow Division fights desperately in the Wuttenberg. The latter & a cavalry division, which
continues the tradition of the units annihilated in Budapest & will carry out extremely hard
missions, named after its "patron" Adolf Lutzow, founder in 1813, during the Prussians' war
against Napoleon, of the Schwarze Schar, the Black Phalanx, a Frankish Corps composed
mostly of students. In northern Germany, Standartenfiihrer Miilhen Kamp, a former Wiking
tank commander, leads the 30 Januar Division into combat, a date that commemorates the
National Socialists' rise to power 12 years earlier. The last division of the Waffen SS also
arrives in the western sector. And the 38th and last of the "Guard..." It bears the name
Nibelungen, in memory of the old Germanic legend. Its battalions are made up of students and
instructors from the South German SS Schools. All Bad- Tolz and with its cadets, who
became simple soldiers. Himmler entrusted the command of the Northern Forces to General
Heinrici. He knows, better than anyone else, that the end & now near. A few SS repalts,
however, hold out in a few strongholds. A few resolute leaders control the remnants of the
division & continue to fight: Heinz Rheinefarth defending Kiistrin on the Oder, or Heinrich
Petersen who & still perched at Libau in Courland. Other SS men fight in the Danzig and
Gotenhafen region, where a thousand Charlemagne men, who escaped the hell of Pomerania,
form a French Erzatz Bataillon, under the orders of Haupsturmfihrer Martin. They fight
alongside German soldiers of the 4th Polizei Division and Hungarian, Italian, Dutch and
Latvian volunteers. Some, at the last moment, will be evacuated by sea. On the Kriegsmarine
escort ship, which transports him to Denmark, a French SS soldier exclaims: -And to say that
my comrades died for Danzig!


432


The SS no longer exists. Out of one million volunteers, three hundred and sixty
thousand died and more than fifty thousand were missing. Thirty-two army corps and division
commanders fell at the head of their men. The escapees of the Charlemagne assault battalion
cross Berlin. They are Frenchmen and they are not men marching to their doom with their
heads down. It will never be known who first had the idea of whistling between his teeth the
old tune learned on their arrival at Waffen SS training camps in Sennheim, Posen-Treskau or
Bad-Télz:


Where we are there is always in front
And the devil laughs at that. Ah! Ah! Ah!


In a tragic irony of fate, the Waffen-SS song that everyone now, for the last time,
whistles offers the only "moral" of their adventure, a moral that goes beyond good and evil:


We whistle down and up
And we can be cursed or praised


Curse us or praise us


Just as everyone likes it!


433


Paul hauffer


Born on 7 October 1880 in Brandenburg, into a Prussian military family, Paul
Hausser would go on to receive great recognition as one of the defining men of the Waffen-
SS, being praised by even Otto Skorzeny in his memories. Hausser began his military career
by graduating from a cadet academy and was commissioned as a lieutenant in the 155th (7th
West Prussian) Infantry Regiment. He would go on to served as an officer in the Prussian
Army during World War I and attained the rank of general in the inter-war Reichsheer. Even
though Hausser retired from the Reichswehr in 1932 with the rank of Generalleutnant, he
would join World War I veterans' organization Der Stahlhelm, becoming the head of its
Brandenburg-Berlin chapter in 1933, and would become a member of the SA and the SS the
Stahlhelm was incorporated into them as a brigade commander. Heinrich Himmler personally
offered him the job of training the SS-Verfiigungstruppe (SS Dispositional Troops; SS-VT)
and his first assignment was to the SS-Junkerschule Bad Télz. Hausser was in charge of the
troop's military and ideological training but did not have command authority for the decision
concerning troop deployment remained solely within Himmler’s personal control. As a former
General Staff officer, Hausser possessed greatly needed command and organizational
experience. He quickly organized the curriculum of the school into a model copied by all SS
officers, NCOs, and weapons schools throughout Germany-and later throughout Europe.
Hausser’s program emphasized physical fitness, athletic competition, teamwork, and a close
relationship between the ranks, fostering a degree of comradeship that did not exist in the
German Army at that time. Hausser himself was a noted sportsman and equestrian who could


434


successfully compete with men 30 years his junior. Under his leadership, the SS elite soon
exceeded anything the army could field, with Himmler being so impressed that he named
Hausser inspector of SS Officer Schools, in charge of the officer training establishments at
Brunswick and Bad Toelz, as well as the SS Medical Academy in Graz. Paul Hausser had the
single greatest influence upon the military development of the Waffen-SS, with Otto
Skorzeny commenting on Hausser in his own memoir,


“The real creator of the Waffen-SS was thus General Paul Hausser, whose nickname
“Papa Hausser” was a symbol of the affection we felt for him. Together with Felix Steiner, an
old warrior from the Baltic,‘ and Sepp Dietrich, he gave the Waffen-SS a style and an
offensive spirit which could perhaps be compared with that of the Napoleonic Guard.”


Hausser was an intelligent and professionally broad-minded director of training,
overseeing the organization, development, and training of the SS regiments “Deutschland,”
“Germania,” and “Der Fuehrer,” as well as smaller combat support, service, and supply units.
Paul Hausser was quick to see the potential of the blitzkrieg doctrine as so had most of the SS
units motorized to capitalize upon this new doctrine.


Once Hitler commenced with the invasion of Poland, Hausser was an observer with
the mixed Wehrmacht/SS Panzer Division Kempf, however, in October 1939 Hausser was
placed in command of the SS-Verfiigungs-Division (SS-VT), which was formed as a
motorized infantry division. His division would later be renamed the 2nd SS Division Das
Reich, and would serve in the French campaign of 1940 and in the early stages of Operation
Barbarossa. Hausser was awarded the Knight's Cross of the Iron Cross in 1941 and the Oak
Leaves in 1943 for his service in the Soviet Union. He would end up losing an eye from an
injury, but would go on to command the newly formed SS-Panzer Corps. Returned to active
duty in May 1942, as commander of the newly created SS Motorized Corps, Hausser was the
first SS man to become a corps commander, spending the rest of 1942 in northern France,
controlling the Ist, 2nd, and 3rd SS divisions which were superbly equipped units with a
panzer battalion and a company of the first PzKw V (“Tiger”) tanks. In January 1943, Hitler
rushed Hausser’s SS Panzer Corps to Kharkov, the fourth-largest city in the Soviet Union,
which, he ordered to be held to the last man. Hausser, however, was a man of common sense,
strategic skill, and with the courage to stand up to his superiors, refusing to allow his divisions
to be annihilated. Hausser pulled back, saving the army’s 320th Infantry Division and its elite
Grossdeutschland Panzer Grenadier Division in the process. Field Marshal Erich von
Manstein, the commander of Army Group South, devised a brilliant plan to restabilize the
southern sector of the Eastern Front when he realized that the overconfident Soviets were in
danger of outrunning their supply lines. Manstein allowed them to surge forward, while he
hoarded his armor for a massive counterattack. Manstein ordering a pincer movement to cut
off the massive Soviet penetration south of Kharkov, followed by an attempt to recapture the
city. Hausser, commanding the left wing of the pincer, began the most controversial battle in
his military career when his spearheads reentered the burning city of Kharkov. Military
historians generally agree that Kharkov was now doomed and that Hausser should have
encircled the city; instead, he attacked it frontally from the west and began six days of costly
street fighting against fanatical resistance. The conquest of Kharkov was not complete until
March 14, a five day slog. During the battle, the SS Panzer Corps suffered 11,000 casualties,
against 20,000 for the Red Army.


Hausser was able to redeem his military reputation that July, during the Battle of
Kursk, the greatest tank battle in history. Commanding the II SS Panzer Corps, Hausser was
able to penetrate further than any other German unit and destroyed an estimated 1,149 Soviet
tanks and armored vehicles in the process. Colonel General Hermann Hoth, the commander of
the 4th Panzer Army, recommended Hausser for the Oak Leaves, stating that despite being
handicapped by his previous wounds, Hausser “untiringly led all day from the front. By his


435


presence, his bravery and his humor, even in the most difficult situations, he imbued his
troops with buoyancy and enthusiasm, yet he kept command of the corps tightly and in his
hand... . [Hausser] again distinguished himself as an unusually qualified commanding
general.” After a brief stint in both Italy and Poland, Hausser would be finally sent to France,
replacing Colonel General Friedrich Dollmann’s of the 7th Army who had recently died of a
heart attack. Being promoted to SS-Oberstgruppenfuehrer und Generaloberst der Waffen-SS,
which was the equivalent of an American four-star general, Hausser was the first SS man to
be assigned to the command of an army on a permanent basis. Hausser’s men took full
advantage of the fact that they had the advantage of excellent defensive terrain, however, even
this wouldn’t save Hausser’s divisions. They were gradually pushed back and were slowly
being ground to bits with a decisive breakthrough on July 25, 1944. That day, in Operation
Cobra, 2,500 Allied airplanes-1,800 of which were heavy bombers-dropped approximately
5,000 tons of high explosives, napalm, and white phosphorus on a six-square-mile block,
mostly in the zone of the Panzer Lehr Division. Panzer Lehr’s forward units were virtually
annihilated. By the end of the day, it had only about a dozen tanks and assault guns left, and a
parachute regiment attached to it had vanished under the bombs. Field Marshal Guenther von
Kluge had suggested, several days before the bombs fell, that Hausser replace the Panzer Lehr
with the 275th Infantry Division, which Hausser then held in army reserve, but Hausser failed
to act upon this. There is little doubt that Hausser mishandled the entire Operation Cobra.


Paul Hausser had little influence on the campaign in Normandy after July 28. As
General George S. Patton’s U.S. 3rd Army advanced south and east of Mortain and threatened
to encircle the 5th Panzer and 7th armies south of Caen, Hausser joined Kluge in objecting to
Hitler’s plan to concentrate nine depleted panzer divisions in the western edge of the salient,
with the objective of thrusting west to the coast, to cut off Patton. Instead, Kluge and Hausser
wanted to fall back behind the Seine while there still might be time to do so. Kluge was
overruled, however, with the final effort to reach the west coast was directed by an ad hoc
panzer group under Army General Heinrich Eberbach, the former commander of the Sth
Panzer Army, and not by Hausser. It ended with only defeat, and the bulk of Army Group B
was surrounded in the Falaise Pocket on August 17. Hausser, still with his men inside the
pocket, ordered all units capable of action to break out in individual combat groups on the
night of August 19-20. Hausser’s actions saved about one-third of his army, which was on the
far side of the encirclement. The general himself joined the 1st SS Panzer Division
Liebstandarte Adolf Hitler and, on August 20, was marching on foot with a machine pistol
draped around his neck when an Allied artillery shell landed in front of him, and a piece of
shrapnel hit him right in the face. Some soldiers from the Leibstandarte placed him on the
stern of a tank and eventually succeeded in getting the seriously wounded commander back to
German lines, after a number of narrow escapes. He was taken to the Luftwaffe hospital at
Greifswald, where he slowly began to recover. Six days after he was wounded, Hausser was
awarded the Swords to his Knight’s Cross; however, he was unable to return to active duty
until January 23, 1945, when he became acting commander of Army Group Oberrhein (Upper
Rhine), replacing Heinrich Himmler. Six days later this headquarters was dissolved, and
Hausser was given command of Army Group G, controlling the 1st and 19th armies and later
7th Army as well. He was given the task of defending southern Germany.


The war, however, was already lost, and Hausser could do little but fight a delaying
action through the Saar and Palatinate. Hitler would eventually relieve Hausser of his
command and replaced him with General of Infantry Friedrich Schulz. Unemployed for the
rest of the war, Hausser surrendered to the Americans in May. At Nuremberg he was the most
important defense witness for the Waffen-SS, stating that his men were soldiers like any other.
Nevertheless the entire SS, including the Waffen-SS, was condemned as a criminal
organization by the insidious Allies. Hausser himself was not subjected to a long
imprisonment, however. Though Hausser’s military career has clear ups and downs, his
loyalty to the Waffen-SS would surpass the life time of the Reich, as Hausser continued to


436


advocate against the idea that the Waffen-SS had perpetrated crimes against humanity,
however, Hausser can be looked down upon for attempting to shift the blame onto the SS
itself. With the establishment of the Hilfsgemeinschaft auf Gegenseitigkeit der Angehérigen
der ehemaligen Waffen-SS (Mutual aid association of former Waffen-SS members) (HIAG),
Hausser became its first spokesman. Notice should be given to the fact that any member of the
SS could join, with the group openly embraced and advocated on behalf of Dietrich, Walter
Reder, and Herbert Kappler, former SS men who were wrongfully convicted of wartime
massacres. But under Hausser's guidance, by the 1950’s, the HIAG attempted to establish a
position that separated the Waffen-SS from other SS formations and shifted responsibility for
crimes that could not be denied to the Allgemeine-SS (security and police), the SS-
Totenkopfverbande (concentration camp organisation, "Death's Head troops") and the
Einsatzgruppen (mobile killing units). At times he would defend these organizational arms of
the SS however, for in 1957 he wrote an open letter in Der Freiwillige, HIAG's official
publication, to West Germany's minister of defence, stating that Death's Head troops "merely
served as external guards in the concentration camps without the possibility of interfering
with the internal procedure".


What was the Waffen-SS to Hausser? It was the elite army of a united Europe
standing against the existential threats of the day, that being the dual threat of Soviet
Communism and American Globalist Capitalism, both of which are controlled by the singular
threat of jews. Hausser tried to help those who were being persecuted by the regime imposed
upon the Germans after the second world war, a regime built by the Americans and the
Soviets. Hausser would go on to write a memoir, “Waffen-SS in Action”, where he would
described the growth of Waffen-SS into a pan-European force where foreign volunteers
fought heroically as a "militant example of the great European idea".


437


Jofef “Sepp Dietrich


Josef "Sepp" Dietrich was born on 28 May 1892 in Hawangen, near Memmingen in
the Kingdom of Bavaria, German Empire. Joined the Bavarian Army with the 4. Bayerische
Feldartillerie-Regiment "K6nig" in 1911, but served with the Bavarian field artillery. Serving
with distinction, he was promoted to a Corporal 1918 and had an Iron Cross first and second
class. After the first world war, Sepp Dietrich returned in November 1918 to a Bavaria that
was seething with unrest. In that same month, Kurt Eisner, leader of the minority Independent
Socialists in the Bavarian parliament, had declared a Bavarian Socialist and Democratic
Republic, beginning the revolution in Bavaria. Eisner was immediately joined by the
Independent Socialists and they set up a radical government. The more extreme of the
Independents and the Spartacists in Berlin were, however, becoming increasingly
disillusioned with the course that the revolution was taking. The Spartacists themselves had
been founded by a small group of left wing intellectuals and admirers of Lenin, led by Karl
Liebknecht and Rosa Luxemburg, during the winter 1917-18 and assumed the mantle of the
German Communist Party. The name of the movement came from Spartacus, the Thracian
gladiator who led a revolt against the Romans in 73 B.C. The Spartacist demonstrations in


438


Berlin were becoming ever more strident, and in early December matters came to a head
when some soldiers fired on a crowd of Spartacists and killed several. Next day the
Spartacists organized a protest demonstration and the prospect of civil war came closer.
General Groener, who feared that the revolution would cause civil war, especially if, as it
seemed was happening, removed the traditional power vested in the officer corps. Groener
stated that the Army would support the Wiemar government and ensure that the forces in
France would cross over the Rhine by 12 December, the date demanded by the Allies and
agreed in the armistice terms. On 29 December 1918, the Spartacists held a conference in
Berlin. Present were Karl Radek, Lenin’s personal representative, and four other Bolshevik
delegates. Radek saw that the moment for a full-blooded revolution was ripe and persuaded
the delegates, in spite of fierce opposition from Rosa Luxemburg, to boycott the forthcoming
constituent assembly elections and the Spartacists now became officially known as the
German Communist Party. A week later, on 6 January, they formed a revolutionary
committee, which announced the end of the Wiemar government; armed Communists
occupied public buildings in Berlin and a general strike was called.


On 12 December 1918, General Georg von Maercker, commanding 214th Infantry
Division, which, like the remainder of the troops who had fought in France and Flanders, was
now dissolving, asked permission of his corps commander to form a Corps of Volunteer
Riflemen. The gathering momentum of events in Berlin and the anarchy biting deep into the
Army, convinced him that, if Germany was to survive the rigours of defeat, a disciplined
force was required to uphold the Wiemar government until such time as the constituent
assembly became fact. His superior, General von Morgen, agreed, and von Maercker set about
obtaining volunteers from among his troops. In a matter of days he had found enough men to
form three companies and an artillery battery, their base being a secluded monastery at
Solzkotlen in Westphalia. By the end of December, his force, the first of the Freikorps, had
risen to 3000 men, thanks to additional recruiting efforts by three generals deputed to this task
by the Supreme Command. Other Freikorps were also raised, including a number of naval
brigades, most notable of which was the Freikorps Ehrhardt, and the Guard Rifle Cavalry
Division formed from elements of the old Imperial Guard divisions. With the knowledge that
their salvation lay in the Freikorps, the government now approached Colonel Wilhelm
Reinhard, who was in the process of forming a Freikorps at Moabit Barracks, to turn the
Spartacists out of various newspaper offices. The reaction to this was immediate. The Munich
workers, convinced that a right wing counter-coup was under way, began to take revenge. A
butcher’s apprentice entered the Landtag and badly wounded the leading Majority Socialist,
Erhard Auer. Members of the nobility were seized as hostages and the city went into
mourning for Eisner’s death. Munich was now in a state of anarchy, but there was little that
the Wiemar government, with its thinly stretched military forces, could do about it. The
problem was further accentuated by another flurry of serious unrest. The Freikorps would
eventually get control over the situation, opening fire upon the communists, and crush the red
terror before a full revolution could begin.


It is difficult to gauge what effect these momentous events had had on Dietrich. True,
he had been the Chairman of Abteilung 13’s short-lived Soldatenrat, but there is no evidence
that on his return to Bavaria he became involved in any revolutionary activity. Rather, seeing
himself now as a professional soldier with a good war record, he probably had hopes of being
allowed to remain in the post-war Bavarian Army, but this was not to be. Yet, he probably
viewed the anarchy in Munich with increasing distaste, perhaps echoing the words of an
anonymous fellow Bavarian Frontsoldat:


“After the retreat [1918] I returned to Munich with my regiment in December 1918.


The sad picture of Red rule made a most painful impression on us front line fighters. We
could not and would not believe that this issue of the war was what we had fought and striven


439


for through four and a half years. We would not be reconciled to the apparent fact that all our
struggles and sacrifices had been in vain.”


It would seem that Dietrich played little or no part in these momentous events.
Neither he himself, nor the Nazi propaganda machine, ever made any claims that he had an
active part in these tremulous times. However, Sepp Dietrich always asserted that he was a
member of the Freikorps Oberland, which he joined in 1920, and took part in the fighting in
Upper Silesia. The Oberland was formed by Rudolf von Sebottendorf, leader of the Thule
Society in Bavaria, on 19 April 1919. During this period, though, Sepp met and courted a
Munich girl, Barbara, known as ‘Betti’, Seidl, whom he married on 17 February 1921. She
was four years younger than him and they took up residence in the same apartment block in
which he had been living as a bachelor. Dietrich would eventually be employed in the filling
station Tankstelle-Blau-Bock (Blue Buck Filling Station), as the garage manager by a well
known local NSDAP member, Christian Weber, an early Hitler follower and former horse
dealer and night club bouncer. It was through Weber that Dietrich eventually joined the
NSDAP on 1 May 1928. Five days later, he became a member of the SS , just short of his
36th birthday.


Sepp quickly impressed and was promoted Sturmfiihrer on 1 June 1928 and two
months later, on 1 August, was appointed commander of the Munich SS detachment or
Standarte. Since Hitler was, of course, based in Munich it was inevitable that Dietrich would
soon come in close personal contact with him. That Hitler quickly took to Sepp is without
doubt. It is probable that he saw in Sepp’s rough and open Bavarian manner and his proven
war record someone who was utterly dependable and straightforward, whose ready sense of
humour could cheer at the darkest moments. Dietrich obviously impressed Himmler, because
on 18 May 1929, Himmler appointed Sepp as commander of the SS Brigade Bayern, which
meant that he was in charge of the SS throughout Bavaria. Walter Stennes, an SA commander,
would attempt an internal coop due to the SA’s disillusionment with the idea of a legal
revolution. This event is known as the Stennes revolt, and would see the exile of the leaders of
said revolt from not only the NSDAP and the SA, but from Germany as well. Of particular
note is that Otto Strasser, a well known liar, also left the party 1 month after the Stennes
revolt. According to Goebbels, Dietrich played a leading part in crushing the attempted putsch
and another source praises Dietrich for the way in which he prevented bloodshed by the
‘rational and balanced way’ in which he acted. What he actually did is not clear, but Hitler did
pay the SS in Berlin a significant tribute when he said to them: “SS Man, your honour is your
loyalty’. Hitler trusted Sepp to the point were Sepp would accompany Hitler on his tour
across Germany, at times as bodyguard and chauffeur. In fact, Hitler was so fond of Sepp to
the point were Sepp was often able to disregard orders from his direct SS superior, Heinrich
Himmler.


Dietrich would led the Leibstandarte during the German advance into Poland and
later the Netherlands. With the Dutch surrender, the Leibstandarte moved south to France on
24 May 1940, taking up a position 15 miles southwest of Dunkirk along the line of the Aa
Canal, facing the Allied defensive line near Watten. However, that night the OK W had been
ordered for the advance to halt, with the British Expeditionary Force trapped at Dunkirk, to
allow for the force to escape. This would be a sign of wanting peace with Britain for the
greater goal of destroying the Soviet Union. Dietrich, in defiance of Hitler's orders, ordered
his III Battalion to cross the canal on the following day and take the heights beyond, where
British artillery observers were putting the regiment at risk. They assaulted the heights and
drove the observers off. Instead of being censured for his act of defiance, Dietrich was
awarded the Knight's Cross of the Iron Cross. Dietrich would remain in command of the
Leibstandarte throughout the Greek and Yugoslavian campaigns before being promoted to
command of the 1st SS Panzer Corps, attached to Army Group Center, on the Eastern Front.
At the Battle of Normandy, Dietrich commanded the 1st SS Panzer Corps but would rise to


440


command 5th Panzer Army during the later stages of this campaign. Hitler gave him
command of the newly created 6th Panzer Army due to the 20 July Plot, which had made
Hitler distrustful of the Wehrmacht officers. Dietrich led it in the Battle of the Bulge
(December 1944-January 1945). Dietrich would go on to command the 6th Panzer Army in
Operation Spring Awakening, an offensive in Hungary near Lake Balaton aimed at securing
the last oil reserves still available to Germany. Despite early gains, Operation Spring
Awakening would prove too ambitious in scope and failed. The Waffen-SS units involved in
the battle were ordered by Hitler to remove their treasured cuff titles bearing his name as a
mark of disgrace, however, Dietrich did not relay the order to his troops. Shortly thereafter,
Dietrich's troops were forced to retreat from Vienna by Soviet Red Army forces.
Accompanied by his wife, Dietrich and his men surrendered on 9 May 1945 to the U.S. 36th
Infantry Division in Austria.


Dietrich was tried from 16 May 1946 until 16 July 1946, and was sentenced to life
imprisonment due to his involvement in ordering the execution of U.S. prisoners of war, the
Malmedy massacre. But thanks to testimony in his defence provided by other German officers,
his sentence was shortened to 25 years. He was imprisoned at the Landsberg Prison in Bavaria,
serving only ten years and was released on parole on 22 October 1955. However, Sepp was
charged for his role in the killing of SA leaders during the Night of the Long Knives. Being
found guilty and sentenced to 18 months for his part in that purge, after being convicted as an
accessory to manslaughter for providing a firing squad for the executions of six SA men.
Dietrich was returned to Landsberg Prison, but would be released due to a heart condition and
circulation problems in his legs on 2 February 1958. In 1966, Dietrich died of a heart attack,
and at his funeral Six thousand people, including many former SS men, attended to see him
off one last time.


441


Leon Degrelle


Born in 1906 in Bouillon, a small town in the Belgian Ardennes. As a student at the
University of Louvain, he earned a doctorate in law. His keen interests were wide-ranging,
and included political science, art, archeology and Thomistic philosophy. In his student days
he traveled in Latin America, the United States and Canada. He visited North Africa, the
Middle East and, of course, much of Europe. Before the outbreak of the Second World War,
Léon Degrelle was already known as the leader of the anti-Establishment Rexist party in
Belgium, and as Europe’s youngest and most dynamic political figure. During the war he
became known across the continent for his charismatic leadership and courage in combat on
the Eastern Front. Of him Hitler reportedly said:


“If I were to have a son, I would want him to be like Degrelle.”


His natural gifts as a leader were apparent early on. He sought to win support for his
vision of a more just and noble social-political order dedicated to the best long-term interests
of the people. While still in his twenties, he was reaching out to people in many articles and
several books he wrote, through a weekly newspaper he ran, and in numerous speeches.
Mussolini invited him to Rome, Churchill met with him in London, and Hitler received him in
Berlin. Although often provocative and controversial, people read what he wrote and listened


442


to what he had to say because he expressed himself with clarity, passion and obvious sincerity,
and because he dealt with real concerns and issues. In a few short years he won a large
measure of popular backing. On May 24, 1936, his Rex movement scored a remarkable
electoral breakthrough. In a startling rebuke of the Establishment parties, it won 11.5 percent
of the national vote.


In 1937, Degrelle ran for office in Brussels. He was defeated by Prime Minister Paul
van Zeeland. This defeat ended the young party’s early momentum and any chance of forming
an alliance with mainstream Catholic politics. Rex would never regain its earlier popularity.
This would have a dramatic effect on Degrelle, he would lose faith in democracy and
democratic institutions, and would begin to more closely resemble other right-wing
movements. Degrelle and other Rexists soon began to sympathize more openly with Nazi
Germany. As tensions mounted in 1939, Degrelle sought to counter the drift into another
cataclysmic conflict. In September Britain and France declared war on Germany. Events were
to quickly prove that the leaders in London and Paris had badly miscalculated. On May 10,
1940, German forces invaded Belgium and the Netherlands, with Belgian authorities arrested
Degrelle and many others the same day. In July 1940, Degrelle was released from detention.
He began reorganizing Rex and met with German authorities. Within a year the swastika flag
flew from the North Pole to the shores of Greece and the border with Spain. As war continued
between Britain and Germany, the Soviet leaders prepared to seize the opportunity and strike
westwards. But Hitler beat them to it. On June 22, 1941, the Axis forces struck against the
Soviet Union. It was soon clear to everyone that the titanic struggle could end only in victory
for either Hitler or Stalin. This was what Degrelle had been waiting for, and so he organized
the Walloonian legion. On May 24th, 1943, in Pieske barracks near Meseritz, the Legion was
inspected by Reichsfiihrer-SS Heinrich Himmler who announced that the Legion was to be
incorporated into the Waffen-SS from June 1943 onwards and was to be renamed SS-
Sturmbrigade Wallonien. From June to October the Legion completed advanced military
training at Wildflecken and then left for the East. In the fall of 1943, on the river Dnjepr, the
situation had become precarious for the German Army. The Red Army advanced from all
sides and threatened Uman in the Ukraine with the Germans desperately trying to hold on to
their positions. One of those was Cherkassy, an industrial area, some 100 miles downriver
from Kiev; an unprotected but fiercely defended salient some 15 miles deep. Defense was the
responsibility of 5. SS-Panzer-Division "Wiking", commanded by SS-Gruppenfiihrer Herbert-
Otto Gille and on November 20th, the Legion joined this unit as a tactical reserve. During
December, numerous attacks were launched across the river Olschanka and on January 4th,
two Wallonien assault groups had successfully executed a pincer movement near Sakrewka.
Meanwhile, two Soviet regiments had captured the Teklino forest. German counter-attacks
were repulsed at heavy cost and Degrelle, who had risen to SS-Obersturmfiihrer suggested
four companies of the Brigade be deployed. After three days of savage fighting they
succeeded in recapturing the forest but once they had been relieved, the ground was lost again.
On January 20th, the Germans on the Dnjepr found themselves completely trapped and the
Wallonians were ordered to cover a breakout by holding the village of Nova-Buda at all costs.
Degrelle, who had been promoted to SS-Hauptsturmfihrer in the meantime was injured and
was evacuated. He was awarded the Nahkampfspange in Silber (Close Combat Clasp in Silver)
and the Verwundetenabzeichen in Gold (Wound Badge in Gold). The Brigade was the last
unit to retreat from the area. In recognition of their courageous actions, they were mentioned
in a Wehrmacht dispatch; Degrelle was awarded the Ritterkreuz (Knight's Cross) for his
participation. Of the 1850 men who participated in the Cherkassy campaign, only 632
remained. In March 1944, a number of them returned to Belgium and held a victory parade in
Charleroi on April 1st and the next day in Brussels. In the summer of 1944, at the end of the
Cherkassy campaign, a battalion of Wallonians was dispatched to Estonia in support of the
local troops. On July 20th, 452 officers and men arrived in Voka training barracks, 30 miles
west of Narwa. They were inspected by SS-Obergruppenfiihrer Felix Steiner nine days later.
Degrelle, who had attended his brother's funeral who had been murdered by the Belgian


443


resistance on July 14th, arrived as late as August 8th. He left two days later with the 2nd and
4th companies for Maarja-Magdaleine, north of Dorpat, in support of Kampfgruppe Wagner
holding a number of fortifications along a line 20 miles long front from Elva and Liiva to
Patska south of Dorpat. On the August 19th, the Wallonians were dispatched to Patska to
drive the Soviets out of a heavily fortified position. Their mission succeeded but they lost 65
men. The next day, the Soviets attacked again and the Wallonians, meanwhile re-enforced by
lst company were forced to retreat to Kambja. On July 23rd, Degrelle left Dorpat to visit his
troops but near Lemmatsi he ran into the Soviet spearhead. Local Estonian troops could not
withstand the pressure and fled in disarray. Degrelle rounded up every soldier, Wallonians,
Estonians, Germans alike and established a defensive line which they just managed to hold.
This courageous action prevented a possible encirclement of Dorpat, a dangerous situation for
the Germans. For this action, Degrelle was nominated for the Eichenlaub z. Ritterkreuz (Oak
Leaves to the Knight's Cross) by Commander Army Group North), General Schérner, as well
as by General Grasser, commander of Army Group Narwa. He received this decoration on
August 27th. Meanwhile on August 24th , the Soviets captured the bridge over the river Ema
near Néela, again threatening Dorpat with encirclement. The Wallonians, 150 out of the
original 452, were thrown into battle again but due to their small number, they did not achieve
their objective of driving the Soviets out. The remaining 70 or so were posted to various units
and continued fighting until the end of August. Those surviving the battles, some 20 men
were awarded the Iron Cross First Class and returned to Germany by way of Maarja-
Magdaleine in early September. On September 23rd, Degrelle announced that the Brigade had
been renamed 28. Freiwillige- Grenadier-Division Wallonien (Volunteer-Grenadier-Division
Wallonia), as of the 17th and that Reichsfiihrer-SS Heinrich Himmler had named him
Kommandeur (Commander) of the unit. After the liberation of Belgium, vast numbers of Rex
followers and other paramilitary had fled to Germany. Degrelle argued that within a
reasonable time span, he could establish a force of 8,000 men strong but mid-December, the
Division consisted of some 4,300 men, including a company of Spanish volunteers. On
February 2nd, 1945, the Division arrived in Stettin, Poland to try and stop the Soviet advance.
Fierce rearguard battles were fought in various places at high cost, reducing the Division to
the strength of a Kampfgruppe. All to no avail however, on May 3rd 1945, the last volunteers,
numbering some 400 including many injured, were taken prisoner near the city of Hamburg.
Meanwhile, on March 31st, the Rex movement had officially been disbanded by Degrelle.
Between September 1944 and December 1949, a total of 110,803 former followers and
leading members of Rex had been brought to trial in Belgium and sentenced.


At the end of the war he escaped surrender and certain death in Allied captivity with
a daring and perilous flight of some 1500 miles from Norway to Spain. He was critically
wounded when his plane crash-landed on a Spanish beach. But once again, he survived.
Franco was deeply embarrassed by the presence of the Waffen-SS hero and proceeded to
negotiate with the Allied authorities the conditions for his return to Belgium. The negotiations,
however, failed and - aided by friends in the Francoist hierarchy - Degrelle disappeared from
public view before gradually reappearing in the 1950s. Despite having been condemned to
death in absentia by the Belgian authorities, he pursued a prosperous business career,
including building military bases for the American armed forces. Successive attempts by
Belgian governments to obtain his extradition came to nothing and, once he had acquired
Spanish nationality by having himself adopted by an elderly Spanish woman, Degrelle was
relatively secure from retribution. He remarried the niece of Joseph Darnand, the former
leader of the French collaborationist Milice, and revelled in the embarrassment which his
occasional television appearances caused the Belgian authorities. He regretted nothing of his
wartime career and, sitting in his apartment overlooking the sea at Malaga, surrounded by the
regalia of his Nazi past, Degrelle spent his last years reminiscing (with ever greater
exaggeration), and observing with some relish the gradual re-emergence of the extreme right
as a political force in Europe.


444


Che iftory of the Waffen 55


Leon Degrelle
Dear Sirs:


I have been asked to speak to you about the great unknown of the Second World War:
the Waffen-SS. It is somewhat surprising that the organization, which was both political and
military, and which united more than a million fighting volunteers during the Second World
War, is still officially ignored. Why, actually? Why is this extraordinary volunteer army still
virtually ignored in official accounts? An army that was at the centre of a gigantic struggle
that affected the whole world. The answer may lie in the fact that the most striking feature of
the Waffen-SS was that it was composed of volunteers from some thirty different countries.
What brought them together and why did they voluntarily give their lives? Was it a German
phenomenon? In the beginning, yes. The Waffen-SS initially consisted of less than two
hundred members. It grew steadily until 1940, when it evolved into a second phase: the
Germanic Waffen-SS. In addition to Germans from Germany, northwestern Europeans and
descendants of Germans from all over Europe enlisted.


Then in 1941, during the great conflict with the Soviet Union, the European Waffen-
SS was formed. Young men from the most distant countries fought together on the Russian
front. For most of the years before the war, no one knew anything about the Waffen-SS. It
took the Germans themselves some time to realize the special nature of the Waffen-SS. Hitler
was appointed chancellor democratically by winning at the ballot box. He campaigned like
any other politician. He spoke at rallies, advertised on billboards, his message found a large
audience. More and more people liked what he had to say, and more and more people elected
members of his party to Congress. Hitler did not come to power by force, but was duly elected
by the people and duly installed as Chancellor by the President of the German Reich, General
von Hindenburg. His government was legitimate and democratic. In fact, only two of his
supporters were in the cabinet. Later, he repeatedly managed to increase his majority through
elections. When he received up to 90% of the votes in some elections, Hitler earned every
vote for himself. During his election campaigns, Hitler faced formidable enemies: the power
establishment, which had no qualms about manipulating the electoral process. He had to deal
with the Weimar establishment and its well-funded left and liberal parties and the well-
organized bloc of six million members of the Communist Party. Only the fearless and
relentless struggle to convince people to vote for him enabled Hitler to win a democratic
majority. At that time, the Waffen-SS did not even play a role. Of course, there was the SA
with about three million men. They were simple members of the National Socialist Workers'
Party, but certainly not an army. Their main task was to protect the party's candidates from
communist violence. And the violence was indeed murderous: more than five hundred Nazis
were murdered by the Communists. Thousands were seriously injured. The SA was a
voluntary, non-governmental organization, and once Hitler came to power, he could no longer
enlist its help. He had to work within the system he had been elected to serve. He came ina
state of disadvantage. He had to deal with an entrenched bureaucracy appointed by the old
regime. When the war began in 1939, 70% of the German bureaucrats had been appointed by
the old regime and were not members of Hitler's party. Hitler could not count on the support
of the church hierarchy. Both big business and the Communist Party were totally opposed to
his programs. In addition, there was extreme poverty and six million workers were
unemployed. No other country in Europe had ever had so many unemployed. So here is a man
quite isolated. The three million SA party members are not in government. They vote and help
win elections, but they cannot oust the established bureaucracy in government offices. The SA


445


was also unable to influence the army because the top leadership was hostile to the SA for
fear of competition.


This hostility reached such a point that Hitler was faced with a serious dilemma.
What should he do with the millions of followers who had helped him to power? He could not
abandon them. The army was a highly organized power structure. Although it numbered only
1000 men according to the Treaty of Versailles, it exercised great influence over the affairs of
state. The president of Germany was Field Marshal von Hindenburg. The army was a
privileged caste. Almost all officers belonged to the upper class of society.It was impossible
for Hitler to attack the powerful army head on. Hitler was democratically elected and could
not do what Stalin did: he had the entire military establishment executed by firing squads.
Stalin killed thirty thousand high-ranking officers. This was Stalin's method of making room
for his own trusted commissars. Such drastic methods could not be used in Germany, and
unlike Stalin, Hitler was surrounded by international enemies. His election had provoked
international anger. He had addressed the electorate directly, without the interposition of the
established parties. His party platform contained a call for racial purity in Germany and for
the return of power to the people. These principles so enraged world Jewry that it officially
declared war on Germany in 1933. Contrary to what we are told, Hitler had limited power and
was quite alone. How this man survived those early years is beyond comprehension. Only the
fact that Hitler was an extraordinary genius explains his survival against all odds. Abroad and
at home, Hitler had to bend just to demonstrate his good will. But despite all his efforts, Hitler
was gradually cornered. The feud between the SA and the army came to a head. His old
comrade Ernst Rohm, head of the SA, wanted to follow Stalin's example and physically
eliminate the army leadership. The confrontation ended with the death of Roehm, either by
suicide or murder, and many of his assistants, while the army picked up the pieces and put the
SA back in its place. At that time, the only SS men in Germany were to be found in the
bodyguard of Reich Chancellor Hitler: a total of one hundred and eighty men. They were
young men of exceptional qualities, but they played no political role. Their duties consisted of
guarding the Chancellery and presenting weapons to visiting dignitaries. From this tiny group
of 180 men, a few years later, an army of one million soldiers would emerge. An army of
unparalleled bravery that spread its reputation throughout Europe.


Once Hitler was forced to acknowledge the superiority of the army, he realized that
the brass would never support his revolutionary social programs. It was an army of aristocrats.
Hitler was a man of the people, a man who succeeded in eliminating unemployment, a feat
unsurpassed to this day. Within two years he gave work to six million Germans and abolished
rampant poverty. In five years the German worker doubled his income without inflation.
Hundreds of thousands of beautiful houses were built for the workers at a minimal price. Each
house had a garden to grow flowers and vegetables. All factories were equipped with sports
fields, swimming pools and attractive and decent workshops. For the first time, paid vacation
was introduced. The communists and capitalists had never offered paid vacations; this was
Hitler's creation. He organized the famous "Strength through Joy" programs that allowed
workers to board passenger ships at affordable prices and visit any part of the world. All these
social improvements did not please the establishment. Big business magnates and
international bankers were worried. But Hitler stood up to them. Businesses can make profits,
but only if people are paid decently and can live and work with dignity. People, not profit,
come first. This was only one of Hitler's reforms. He initiated hundreds of others. He literally
rebuilt Germany. In a few short years, more than five thousand miles of highways were built.
The affordable Volkswagen was created for workers. Every worker could get this car for a
payment of five marks a week. This was unprecedented in Europe. Thanks to the autobahns,
for the first time workers could visit any place in Germany whenever they wanted. The same
programs applied to the farmers and the middle class. Hitler realized that he needed a
powerful lever, a lever that would command respect if his social reforms were not to be
sabotaged. Hitler still did not oppose the army, but cleverly began to build up the SS. He


446


desperately needed the SS, because Hitler was above all a political man; for him war was the
last resort. His goal was to convince people, to win their loyalty, especially the younger
generation. He knew that the established politicians would oppose him at every turn.


And he was right. Through the high-ranking officers, the establishment plotted to
overthrow the democratically elected Hitler government. The conspirators, who became
known as the Munich plot, were discovered in time. That was in 1938. On July 20, 1944,
Hitler nearly lost his life when noble officers placed a time bomb under his desk. In order not
to alarm the army, Hitler expanded the SS into a force responsible for law and order. Of
course, there was also a German police force, but again Hitler was not sure if it was loyal. The
1500 police officers were appointed by the Weimar regime. Hitler needed the SS not only to
uncover conspiracies, but more importantly to protect his reforms. As his initial Leibstandarte
of 180 men grew, other regiments were formed, such as the Deutschland and the Germania.
The army leadership did everything it could to prevent the SS from recruiting. Hitler
circumvented the obstacles by entrusting the Minister of the Interior, rather than the War
Ministry, with the recruitment. The army countered by discouraging the recruitment of men
between the ages of eighteen and forty-five. Citing national defense, a service period of four
years was ordered for privates, twelve for non-commissioned officers, and twenty-five for
officers. It was assumed that such orders would nip the recruitment of SS men in the bud. The
opposite was the case. Thousands of young men applied, more than could be accepted despite
the long period of service. Young people felt that the SS was the only armed force that
represented their own ideas. The new formations of the young SS captured the public
imagination. In their smart black uniforms, the SS attracted more and more young men. It
took two years, from 1933 to 1935, and a constant trial of strength with the army, to raise a
force of 8000 SS men.


At that time, the name Waffen-SS did not yet exist. Only in 1940, after the French
campaign, the SS is officially called "Waffen-SS". In 1935, they were simply called SS.
However, 8000 SS didn't go far in a country of 80 million people. And Hitler had to come up
with another way to get around the army. He created the Totenkopf guard corps. They were
really an SS in disguise, but their official job was to guard the concentration camps. What
were these concentration camps? They were labor camps where recalcitrant communists were
put to work. They were treated well because it was believed that sooner or later they would be
converted to patriotism. There were two concentration camps with a total of three thousand
men. Three thousand out of a total of six million Communist Party members holding identity
cards. That is equivalent to one in two thousand. Until the war there were less than ten
thousand prisoners. So the skull trick has produced four regiments. At the right moment, they
will join the SS. The Totenkopf kept itself covered by an elaborate system of recruiting
reserves to keep its strength inconspicuous. At the beginning of the war, the skull numbered
400 men. They are sent to 163 separate units. Meanwhile, the first regiment of the
Leibstandarte reached 2800 men, and a fourth regiment was established in Vienna at the time
of the Anschluss. The young men who joined the SS were trained like no other army in the
world. The military and academic instruction was intense, but the physical training was the
most rigorous. They played sports with flying colors. Any one of them would have passed
with flying colors in the Olympics. The extraordinary physical endurance of the SS on the
Russian front, which so amazed the world, was due to this intensive training.


There was also ideological training. They were taught why they were fighting, which
Germany should rise again before their eyes. They were shown how Germany was united
morally by the reconciliation of classes and physically by the return of the lost German
homeland. They were made aware of their kinship with all the other Germans who lived in
foreign lands, in Poland, Russia, the Sudentenland, and other parts of Europe. They were
taught that all Germans were one ethnic unit. The young SS men were trained in two military


447


academies, one in Bad T6lz, the other in Braunschweig. These academies were completely
different from the gloomy barracks of the past. They combined aesthetics with stateof-the-art
technology and were located in the middle of hundreds of acres of beautiful landscape. Hitler
was against any war, especially in Western Europe. He could not even imagine that the SS
could participate in such a war. The SS was above all a political force. Hitler viewed the
Western countries as distinct cultures that could be federated, but certainly not conquered. In
his opinion, a conflict within the West would be a civil war in which one could not win.
Hitler's idea of Europe was far ahead of his neighbors at the time. The mentality of 1914-1918,
when small countries fought other small countries for a piece of land, still prevailed in the
Europe of 1939. Not so in the case of the Soviet Union, where internationalism replaced
nationalism. The Communists never aimed to serve the interests of Russia. Communism does
not limit itself to acquiring parts of territories, but seeks total world domination.This is a
dramatically new factor. This policy of world conquest is still being pursued today, whether in
Vietnam, Afghanistan, Africa or Poland. At the time, this was a completely new concept.
Alone among all the leaders of the world, Hitler saw this concept as an equal threat to all
nations. Hitler vividly remembered the devastation the Communists had wrought in Germany
at the end of the First World War. Especially in Berlin and Bavaria, the Communists
organized a state within a state under foreign command and almost took power. For Hitler,
everything pointed east. The threat was communism.Apart from the fact that he had no
interest in subjugating Western Europe, Hitler was clear that he could not fight a war on two
fronts.


At this point, the Allies made the fateful decision to attack Hitler rather than let him
fight communism. The so-called Western democracies allied themselves with the Soviet
Union with the aim of encircling and destroying the democratic government of Germany. The
Treaty of Versailles had already amputated Germany from all sides. It was designed to keep
Germany in a state of permanent economic collapse and military impotence. The Allies had
ratified a series of treaties with Belgium, the newly formed Czechoslovakia, Yugoslavia,
Poland, and Romania to pressure Germany from all sides.Now, in the summer of 1939, the
governments of Britain and France were secretly negotiating a comprehensive military
alliance with the Soviet Union. The talks took place in Moscow and the protocols were signed
by Marshal Zhukov. I have these logs in my possession. They're amazing. One can read a
report guaranteeing Soviet involvement against Germany to Britain and France. Upon
ratification, the Soviet Union was to immediately provide the Anglo-French forces with
Soviet support of 5500 fighter planes plus the support of the entire Soviet air force. Also 90 to
100 tanks were to be made available. In return, the Soviet Union demanded the Baltic states
and free access to Poland. The plan called for an early joint attack. Germany was still
minimally armed at this point. The French negotiators realized that the 100 Soviet tanks
would soon destroy the 2000 German tanks, but they did not see that it was unlikely that they
would stop at the French border. The British government was also quite willing to let the
Soviets take over Europe. Faced with total encirclement, Hitler once again decided to make
his own peace with one side or the other of the Soviet-British partnership.


He approached the British and French governments and asked for formal peace talks.
His quest for peace was met with a barrage of insults and accusations. The international press
launched into an orgy of hatred against Hitler unprecedented in history. It is amazing to read
these newspapers again today. When Hitler made similar peace overtures to Moscow, he was
surprised that the Soviets were willing to sign a peace treaty with Germany. In fact, Stalin did
not sign the peace treaty for the sake of peace. He signed it to let Europe destroy itself in a
war of attrition and to buy himself the time he needed to build up his military strength. Stalin's
true intention is made clear in the minutes of the Soviet High Command, which are also in my


448


possession. Stalin declares his intention to enter the war as soon as Hitler and the Western
powers have wiped each other out. Stalin had great interest in buying time and letting others
fight first. | have read his military plans and I have seen them implemented. By 1941 Stalin's
ten thousand tanks had grown to 17999, the next year it would have been 320, ten times more
than Germany. The air force would also have been 10 to 1 in Stalin's favor. In the same week
that Stalin signed the peace treaty with Hitler, he gave the order to build 96 airfields on the
western Soviet border, 180 were planned for the following year. His strategy was constant:
"The more the Western powers quarrel, the weaker they will be. The longer I wait, the
stronger I will be." It was under these dire circumstances that World War II began. A war that
was handed to the Soviets on a silver platter. Knowing Stalin's preparations, Hitler knew that
he would have to face Communism sooner rather than later. And to fight Communism he had
to rely on absolutely loyal men, men who would fight for one ideology against another
ideology. It had always been Hitler's policy to oppose the ideology of class warfare with an
ideology of class collaboration.


Hitler had observed that the Marxist class struggle had not brought prosperity to the
Russian people. The Russian workers were poorly clothed, as they are today, poorly housed,
poorly fed. Goods are always in short supply, and housing conditions in Moscow are as
nightmarish today as they were before the war. The failure of class war made class
collaboration the only just alternative for Hitler. To make it work, Hitler made sure that one
class was not allowed to abuse the other. It is a fact that the nouveau riche classes that had
emerged from the Industrial Revolution had greatly abused their privileges, and for this
reason the National Socialists were socialists. National Socialism was a popular movement in
the truest sense of the word. The vast majority of National Socialists came from the working
class. 70% of the Hitler Youth were children of workers. Hitler won elections because the
great mass of workers stood firmly behind him. One often wonders why six million
communists who had voted against Hitler turned their backs on communism after Hitler was
elected in 1933. There is only one reason: they saw and experienced the benefits of class
collaboration. Some say they were forced to switch; that is not true. Like other loyal Germans,
they fought with distinction on the Russian front for four years. The workers never abandoned
Hitler, but the upper classes did. Hitler formulated his formula of class collaboration in
response to Communism in these words: "Class collaboration means that the capitalists will
never again treat the workers as mere economic components. Money is only a part of our
economic life; the workers are more than machines to whom a wage packet is thrown every
week. The real wealth of Germany is its workers." Hitler replaced gold with labor as the basis
of his economy. National Socialism was the exact opposite of Communism. Hitler's election
was followed by extraordinary achievements. We always hear about Hitler and the camps,
Hitler and the Jews, but we never hear about his immense social work. If the international
bankers and the servile press have stirred up so much hatred against Hitler, it is because of his
social work. It is obvious that a genuine popular movement like National Socialism would
clash with the selfish interests of high finance. Hitler made it clear that control of money does
not include the right to the predatory exploitation of an entire country, because there are
people living in that country too, millions of them, and those people have the right to live in
dignity and without want. What Hitler said and practiced had won over the German youth. It
was this social revolution that the SS had to spread throughout Germany and defend with their
lives if necessary.


The 1939 war in Western Europe defied all reason. It was a civil war between those
who were supposed to be united. It was a monstrous stupidity. The young SS were trained to
lead the new National Socialist revolution. In five or ten years they were to replace all those
who had been elevated to office by the old regime. But at the beginning of the war it was not
possible for these young men to stay at home. Like the other young men in the country, they
had to defend their country, and they had to defend it better than the others. The war turned
the SS from a domestic force into a national army fighting abroad, and then into a


449


supranational army. We are now at the beginning of the war in Poland with its far-reaching
consequences. Could the war have been avoided? Definitely yes! Even after it had arrived in
Poland. The Danzig conflict was insignificant. The Treaty of Versailles had separated the
German city of Danzig from Germany and ceded it to Poland against the will of its citizens.
This action was so monstrous that it was condemned throughout the world. A large part of
Germany was cut in half. To get from West Prussia to East Prussia, one had to travel ina
sealed train through Polish territory. The citizens of Danzig had voted with 99% for the return
of their city to Germany. Their right to self-determination had been consistently ignored.
However, the war in Poland began for reasons other than Danzig's right to self-determination
or even Poland's right to self-determination. Poland had attacked Czechoslovakia only a few
months earlier, when Hitler had returned the Sudetenland to Germany. The Poles were willing
to cooperate with Hitler. If Poland turned against Germany, it was because the British
government was doing everything in its power to poison German-Polish relations.


And why is that?


Much has to do with a long-standing inferiority complex of the British rulers towards
Europe. This complex has manifested itself in the British establishment's obsession with
keeping Europe weak through wars and discord. At the time, the British Empire controlled
500 million people outside of Europe, but somehow it was more concerned with its traditional
hobby: Sowing discord in Europe. This policy of never allowing the emergence of a strong
European country has been the modus operandi of the British establishment for centuries.
Whether it was Charles the Fifth of Spain, Louis the Fourteenth or Napoleon of France or
William the Second of Germany, the British establishment never tolerated a unifying power in
Europe. Germany never wanted to interfere in British affairs. The British establishment,
however, always meddled in European affairs, especially in Central Europe and the Balkans.
Hitler's invasion of Prague put the British on the map. Prague and Bohemia had belonged to
Germany for centuries and had always been within the German sphere of influence.British
interference in the area was totally unjustified. For Germany, the Prague regime posed a
serious threat. Benes, Stalin's subservient Czech satrap, had received orders from his masters
in the Kremlin to open the borders to the Communist armies as soon as it was necessary.
Prague was to become the Soviet springboard to Germany. For Hitler, Prague was a
watchtower for Central Europe and an outpost to stop a Soviet invasion. There were also the
historical economic ties between Prague and Germany. Germany has always had economic
ties with Central Europe. Romania, the Balkans, Bulgaria, Hungary, and Yugoslavia have
long had complementary economies with Germany that continue to function today.


Hitler's European economic policy was based on common sense and realism. And the
British establishment could not tolerate Hitler's emerging Common Market in Central Europe,
but only concern for Czech freedom.Nevertheless, the English felt great admiration for Hitler.
I remember Lloyd George addressing the German press outside Hitler's house, where he had
just been a guest. He declared, "You can thank God that you have such a wonderful man for a
leader!" Lloyd George, the enemy of Germany in World War [| said that! King Edward the
Eighth of England, who had just abdicated and was now the Duke of Windsor, also visited
Hitler at his home in Berchtesgaden, accompanied by his wife, who, incidentally, had been
used to force his abdication. When they returned, the Duke sent a telegram to Hitler. It said:
"What a wonderful day we have spent with Your Excellency. Unforgettable!" The Duke
echoed what many Englishmen knew, remarking, "how well the German workers were
doing." The Duke was telling the truth. The German worker, without inflation, was earning
twice as much as he had before Hitler, and his standard of living was correspondingly high.
Even Churchill, the most fanatical Germany-hater of them all, had sent a letter to Hitler in
1938, a year before the war, in which he wrote: "If Britain should ever fall into a catastrophe
comparable to that which befell Germany in 1918, I would ask God to send us a man of your
Excellency's strength and character."


450


The Times of London reported this extraordinary statement.


Friend or foe, all acknowledge that Hitler was a man of extraordinary genius. His
achievements were the envy of the world. In five short years he rebuilt a bankrupt nation,
burdened with millions of unemployed, into the strongest economic power in Europe. It was
so strong that the small country of Germany could withstand six years of war against the
whole world. Churchill acknowledged that no one in the world could accomplish such a feat.
He declared just before the war, "There is no doubt that we can work out a peace formula
with Hitler." But Churchill received other instructions. The establishment, fearing that Hitler's
successes in Germany would spread to other countries, was determined to destroy him. It
stoked hatred of Germany throughout Europe by stirring up old grievances. It also exploited
the envy that some Europeans harbored for Germany. The high birth rate of the Germans had
made Germany the most populous country in Western Europe. In science and technology,
Germany was ahead of both France and Britain. Hitler had built Germany into an economic
powerhouse. This was Hitler's crime and the British establishment decided to destroy Hitler
and Germany by any means necessary. The British manipulated the Polish government
against Germany. The Poles themselves were more than willing to live in peace with the
Germans. Instead, the unfortunate Poles were driven into war by the British. It should not be
forgotten that there were one and a half million Germans living in Poland at the time, which
greatly benefited the Polish economy. Apart from the economic relations with Germany, the
Poles saw the chance to regain their Polish territories from the Soviet Union with German
help, territories they had been striving for in vain since 1919.


In January 1939, Hitler had proposed a compromise to Polish leader Beck to resolve
the Danzig question: the vote of the Danzigers to return to Germany would be respected and
Poland would continue to have free access to the ports and facilities guaranteed by treaty. The
prevailing opinion today that every country must have a seaport really makes no sense.
Switzerland, Hungary and other countries without a seaport manage quite well. Hitler's
proposals were based on the principles of selfdetermination and reciprocity. Even Churchill
admitted that such a solution could make the Danzig problem go away. This admission,
however, did not prevent him from issuing an ultimatum to Germany: Withdraw from Poland
or go to war. The world recently saw what happened when Israel invaded Lebanon. Heavily
populated cities like Tyre and Sidon were destroyed, as was western Beirut. Everyone called
for Israel to withdraw, but no one declared war on Israel when it refused to budge.


With a little patience, a peaceful solution for Danzig could have been found. Instead,
the international press unleashed a massive campaign of lies and distortions against Hitler.
His proposals were deliberately misrepresented by a relentless press onslaught. Of all the
crimes of World War II, you never hear about the great massacres that took place in Poland
just before the war. I have detailed reports in my files documenting the mass slaughter of
defenseless Germans in Poland. Thousands of German men, women and children were
massacred in the cruelest way by a mob outraged by the press. The photos of these massacres
are too disgusting to look at! Hitler decided to put a stop to the slaughter and rushed to the
rescue. The Polish campaign showed that Hitler was a military genius. History had already
begun to recognize this most amazing quality of Hitler: his rare military genius. All of the
Third Reich's successful military campaigns were planned and directed by Hitler personally,
not by the Joint Chiefs of Staff. Hitler inspired a number of generals who became his most
capable leaders in later campaigns. With the Polish campaign in mind, the General Staff had
planned an offensive along the Baltic coast to take Danzig - a plan that was logistically
doomed to failure. Instead, Hitler invented the Blitzkrieg and took Warsaw in short order. The
Waffen-SS appeared on the Polish front and their performance stunned the world. The second
campaign in France was also swift and humane. The Anglo-French forces had rushed to
Holland and Belgium to halt the German advance, but they were outwitted and outflanked at


451


Sedan. Within a few days it was all over. It is said that Hitler had nothing to do with this
operation, that it was the work of General von Manstein. This is completely false. Marshal
von Manstein did indeed have the idea, but when he presented it to the Chiefs of Staff, he was
reprimanded, demoted, and transferred back to Dresden. The General Staff had not brought
this particular incident to Hitler's attention. On his own, Hitler conducted a campaign along
the same lines and repulsed the Anglo-French forces. It was not until March 1940 that von
Manstein came into contact with Hitler. Hitler also planned the Balkan and Russian
campaigns. On the rare occasions when Hitler let the General Staff have their way, such as at
Kursk, the battle was lost.


In the Polish campaign of 1939, Hitler relied not on military textbook theories of
fifty years ago, as espoused by the General Staff, but on his own plan of rapid, pincer-like
encirclement. In eight days the war in Poland was won and over, even though Poland is as
large as France. Three SS regiments were in action during the eight-day campaign: the
Leibstandarte, the Deutschland and the Germania. There was also an SS motorcycle battalion,
an engineer corps and a transmission unit. In all, it was a substantial but small force of 250
men. Sepp Dietriech and his Leibstandarte alone, after breaking out of Silesia, had divided
Poland in two within a few days. With less than 30 men he had defeated a Polish force of 150
men and taken 100 prisoners. Such victories were not won without losses. It is hard to
imagine that out of one million SS men, 3520 were killed in action and 500 more are missing.
That's a cruel number! Four hundred thousand of the finest young men in Europe! They
sacrificed themselves for their beliefs. They knew they had to make an example. They were
the first on the front lines to defend their country and their ideals. Whether victory or defeat,
the Waffen-SS always strove to be the best representatives of their people. The SS was a
democratic expression of power: people gathered of their own free will. Consent at the ballot
box is not the only consent; there is also consent of the heart and mind of the people. In action,
the Waffen-SS held a plebiscite: that the German people should be proud of them, that they
should show them respect and love. This high motivation made the Waffen-SS volunteers the
best fighters in the world. The SS had proved themselves in action. They were not empty-
talking politicians, but gave their lives, the first to go into battle in an extraordinary spurt of
comradeship. This comradeship was one of the most distinctive features of the SS: the SS
leader was the comrade of others. At the front, the results of the SS physical training were
particularly noticeable. An SS officer underwent the same rigorous training as the soldiers.
These officers and privates competed against each other in the same sports competitions, and
only the best man won, regardless of rank. This created a true brotherhood that literally
energized the entire Waffen-SS. Only the teamwork of free men united by a higher ideal
could unite Europe. Look at the Common Market of today. It is a failure. There is no unifying
ideal. Everything is based on haggling over the price of tomatoes, steel, coal, or liquor.
Fruitful unions are based on something higher than that.


The relationship of equality and mutual respect between soldiers and officers was
always present. Half of all division commanders were killed in action. Half! There is no army
in the world where this was the case. The SS officer always led his troops into battle. I was
involved in seventy-five hand-to-hand battles because, as an SS officer, I had to be the first to
meet the enemy. SS soldiers were not sent to battle by officers behind the front lines, they
followed their officers with passionate loyalty. Every SS commander knew and taught all his
men and often received unexpected answers. After I broke out of the siege of Cherkassy, I
talked to all my soldiers, there were thousands of them at the time, one by one. Every day for
two weeks, from dawn to dusk, I asked them questions and listened to their answers.
Sometimes it happens that some soldiers who show off a little receive medals, while others -
heroes - who remain silent, go away empty-handed. | talked to all of them because I wanted to
know firsthand what happened and what they did. To be fair, I needed to know the truth. On
this occasion, two of my soldiers suddenly pulled out their identity cards from the Belgian
Resistance. They had been sent to kill me. At the front, it's very easy to shoot someone in the


452


back. But the extraordinary SS team spirit had convinced them. SS officers could expect
loyalty from their men by example.The life expectancy of an SS officer at the front was three
months. In Estonia I received ten new young officers from the academy in Bad Télz ona
Monday; on Thursday only one was left and he was wounded. In conventional armies,
officers talked down to men, superior to subordinate, and rarely as brothers in battle and
brothers in ideology.


Thus, by 1939, the Waffen-SS had gained general admiration and respect. This gave
Hitler the opportunity to call for an increase in troops. Instead of regiments, there were to be
three divisions. Again, the army leaders laid down draconian recruiting conditions: the SS
were only allowed to enlist for a minimum of four years of combat service. The military
leaders felt that no one would take such a risk. And again they were wrong. In February 1940
alone, 490 people joined the SS. From 250 in September 1939, there would be 1500 in May
1940. So from 180 to 80 to 250 to 1500 and finally to a million men, and all this against all
odds.Hitler had no interest in interfering in the war in France that was forced upon him. The
1500 SS men had to serve under the army and were given the most dangerous and difficult
assignments. Despite the fact that they were equipped with inferior weapons and equipment.
They had no tanks. In 1940, the Leibstandarte was equipped with a few scout tanks. The SS
got wheels and that was it. But with trucks, motorcycles and various limited resources, they
were able to perform amazing feats.


The regiments Leibstandarte and Der Fuhrer were sent to Holland under the
command of Sepp Dietrich. They had to cross Dutch waterways. The Luftwaffe had dropped
parachutists to hold the bridges 120 miles deep in Dutch territory, and it was vital for the SS
to reach these bridges as quickly as possible. The Leibstandarte would accomplish an
unprecedented feat in ten days: advance miles in one day. This was unheard of at the time and
the world was stunned. At this rate, German troops would reach Spain in a week. In one day,
the SS had cleared all the Dutch canals...on flimsy rubber rafts. Here, too, the SS's losses were
high. But thanks to their heroism and speed, the German army reached Rotterdam in three
days.The paratroopers would have been in danger of being wiped out if the SS had not carried
out their lightning attack.


In Belgium, the SS Regiment Der Fihrer faced head-on the French army which,
having fallen into the trap of Sedan, was rushing towards Breda in Holland. There, for the first
time, a small motivated army would be seen confronting a large national army. All it took was
one SS regiment and a number of German troops to unbalance the entire French army and
drive it back from Breda to Antwerp, Belgium, and northern France. The regiments of the
Leibstandarte and the Fuehrer advanced together to the large Sealand Islands between Escaut
and the Rhine. In a few days they would be under control. In a very short time, the
Leibstandarte had then crossed Belgium and northern France. The second major battle of the
SS regiments takes place in conjunction with the Army's Panzer Division. The SS, still with
their tanks, are under the command of General Rommel and General Guderian. They lead an
advance towards the North Sea.Sepp Dietrich and his troops have meanwhile crossed the
French channels, but are surrounded by the enemy in a mud field and just manage to escape
annihilation. But despite the loss of many soldiers, officers and a battalion commander, all
killed in action, the Germans reach Dunkirk. Hitler is very proud of them.


The following week Hitler deploys them to the Somme, from where they will pour
over France. There, too, the SS will prove that they are the best fighting force in the world.
Sepp Dietrich and the SS's 2nd Division, Totenkopf, advance so quickly that they even lose
contact with the rest of the army for three days. They find themselves in Lyon, France, a city
they were forced to leave after the Franco-German peace treaty. Sepp Dietrich and a handful
of SS on trucks had accomplished the impossible. The Fithrer's SS Division was the spearhead
of the breakthrough of the Maginot Line. Everyone had said the line was impregnable. The


453


war in France was over. Hitler marched the three SS divisions through Paris. In Berlin, too,
the heroes were honored. But the army was so jealous that it would not award a single SS man
for bravery and courage. It was Hitler himself who solemnly paid tribute to the heroism of the
SS before the German Congress. On this occasion, Hitler officially recognized the name of
the Waffen-SS. But it was more than just a name change. The Waffen-SS became Germanic,
because volunteers from all Germanic countries were accepted. The SS had found out for
themselves that the peoples of Western Europe were closely related to them: the Norwegians,
the Danes, the Dutch, the Flemings - they all belonged to the same Germanic family. These
Germanic peoples were themselves very impressed with the SS, and so were the French, for
that matter.People in Western Europe marveled at this extraordinary German troop with a
style that was second to none: When two SS scouts on motorcycles arrived in town before
anyone else, before presenting themselves to the local authorities, they would first clean
themselves to have an impeccable appearance. People couldn't help but be impressed.


The admiration of young Europeans of Germanic descent for the SS was quite
natural. Thousands of young men from Norway, Denmark, Flanders and Holland were
surprised and full of admiration. They felt irresistibly attracted to the SS. It was not Europe
but their own Germanic race that so deeply moved their souls. They identified themselves
with the victorious Germans. To them Hitler was the most extraordinary man they had ever
seen. Hitler understood them and had the remarkable idea of opening the doors of the SS to
them. This was rather risky. No one had ever thought of such a thing before. Before Hitler,
German imperialism consisted only of peddling goods in other countries, with no thought of
creating an ideology called "community" - a shared ideal with its neighbors.


Instead of haggling and bargaining, there was suddenly a man offering a glorious
ideal: a stirring social justice for which they had all longed in vain for years. A comprehensive
New Order in place of the amorphous cosmopolitanism of the so-called "democracies" of the
pre-war period. The response to Hitler's offer was overwhelming. Legions from Norway,
Denmark, Holland and Flanders were raised. Thousands of young men now wore the SS
uniform. Hitler created the famous Viking Division especially for them. It was to become one
of the most formidable divisions of the Waffen-SS. The army still did everything it could to
prevent men from joining the SS in Germany and pretended that the SS did not exist. Against
this background of obstructionism at home, it was normal and understandable that the SS
welcomed men from abroad. Germans living abroad provided a rich source of volunteers. Just
as there are millions of German-Americans, there are millions of Germans in all parts of
Europe - in Hungary, in Romania, in Russia. There was even a Soviet republic of Volga
Germans. These were the descendants of Germans, who had emigrated two centuries earlier.
Other Europeans, such as the French Huguenots who went to Prussia, also shared this type of
emigration with the Germans. Europe was thus dotted with German settlements. The victories
of the Third Reich had made them proud to be part of the German family. Hitler welcomed
them home. He saw them, on the one hand, as a source of elite SS men and, on the other, as
an important factor in the ideological unification of all Germans.


Again, the enthusiastic response was amazing. Three thousand volunteers of German
descent came forward from all over Europe. 540 from Romania alone. These were remarkable
numbers for the time. There were numerous problems to overcome. For example, most of the
Germanic volunteers no longer spoke German. Their families had been settled in foreign
lands for about 200 years. In Spain, for example, I see the children of my legionnaires being
assimilated with the Spanish - and their grandchildren no longer speak French. The Germans
are following the same pattern. When the German volunteers arrived at the SS, they spoke
many different languages, had different habits and different needs.How could one find
officers who could speak all these languages? How was one to coordinate such a disparate
group? Overcoming these problems was the miracle of the Waffen-SS assimilation program.
This homecoming of the separate "tribes" was seen by the Waffen-SS as the basis for true


454


European unity. The 3000 Germanic volunteers were welcomed by the SS as brothers, and
they reciprocated by being as dedicated, loyal and heroic as the German SS. Within a year,
everything had changed for the Waffen-SS The barracks were full, the academies were full.
The strictest admission standards and requirements also applied to the Germanic volunteers.
They had to be the best in every way, both physically and mentally. They had to be the best of
the Germanic race.German racism has been deliberately distorted. It was never an anti-"other
race" racism. It was a pro-German racial mania. It was about making the German race strong
and healthy in every way. Hitler was not interested in having millions of degenerates when it
was in his power not to have them. Today you find rampant alcoholism and drug addiction
everywhere. Hitler cared that German families were healthy, that they raised healthy children
to renew a healthy nation. The German racial mania meant the rediscovery of the creative
values of one's race, the rediscovery of one's culture. It was a striving for excellence, a noble
idea.


The National Socialist racial mania was not directed against the other races, but for
their own race. They wanted to defend and improve their race and wished that all other races
did the same for themselves.This was evident when the Waffen-SS added 600 Islamic SS
members to its ranks. The Waffen-SS respected their way of life, their customs and their
religious beliefs. Each Islamic SS battalion had an Imam, each company had a Mullah. It was
our common desire that their qualities should find their highest expression. That was our
racial consciousness. I was present when each of my Islamic comrades received a personal
gift from Hitler in the New Year. It was a pendant with a small Koran. Hitler honored them
with this small symbolic gift. He honored them with what was the most important aspect of
their lives and history. National Socialist racism was loyal to the German race and completely
respected all other races.At this point one hears, "What about anti-Jewish racism?" To which
one may reply, "What about Jewish anti-gentilism?" It is the misfortune of the Jewish race
that it has never been able to get along with any other race. This is an unusual historical fact
and an unusual phenomenon. If you study the history of the Jewish people - and I say this
without any passion - its development over the centuries, you find that they have always been
hated, in all times and in all places. They were hated in ancient Egypt, they were hated in
ancient Greece, they were hated so much in Roman times that 30 of them were deported to
Sardinia. It was the first deportation of Jews. They were hated in Spain, in France, in England
(they were exiled from England for centuries) and in Germany. The conscientious Jewish
author Lazare wrote a very interesting book on anti-Semitism in which he asked himself, "We
Jews should ask ourselves one question: Why are we always and everywhere hated? It is not
because of our persecutors, who have been at different times and in different places. It is
because there is something in us that is very unsympathetic." What is unsympathetic is the
fact that the Jews have always wanted to live as a privileged class, chosen by God and
unquestionable. This attitude has made them unsympathetic everywhere. The Jewish race is
therefore a unique case. Hitler had no intention of destroying them. He wanted the Jews to
find their own identity in their own environment, but not to the detriment of others. The
struggle - if it can be called that - of National Socialism against the Jews was limited
exclusively to one goal: that the Jews leave Germany in peace. The plan was to give them a
country of their own outside Germany. Madagascar was considered, but the plans were
dropped when the United States entered the war. In the meantime, Hitler thought of having
the Jews live five to a time in their own traditional ghettos. They would keep their have their
own organizations, manage their own affairs, and live the way they wanted to. They had their
own police, their own streetcars, their own flag, their own factories, which, by the way, were
built by the German government. As for the other races, they were all welcome in Germany as
guests, but not as privileged residents. In one year, the Waffen-SS had gathered a large
number of Teutons from northern Europe and hundreds of thousands of Germans from abroad,
the Volksdeutsche, or Teutonic SS. At this point the conflict between Communism and
National Socialism broke out openly. The conflict had always existed. In Mein Kampf, Hitler
had clearly stated his goal: "to eliminate the world-wide threat of communism" and, quite


455


incidentally, to conquer a piece of land in Eastern Europe! This expansionism to the East
caused much outrage: how could the Germans claim land in Russia? To which one can reply:
How could Americans claim Indian land from the Atlantic to the Pacific? How could France
claim South Flanders and Rousillon from Spain? And what about Britain, and what about so
many other countries that claimed, conquered, and settled other territories? Somehow it was
okay for all those countries to settle foreign lands back then, but not for Germany. Personally,
I always vigorously defended the Russians, and eventually succeeded in convincing Hitler
that the Germans needed to live with the Russians as partners, not as conquerors. Before this
partnership came about, it was first necessary to eradicate communism. During the Soviet-
German pact, Hitler tried to buy time, but the Soviets intensified their aggression from
Estonia to Bukovina. I'm now reading excerpts from Soviet documents. They're very
revealing. Let's read from Marshal Voroshilov himself: We now have the time to prepare to
be the executioner of the capitalist world as it agonizes. We must be careful, however. The
Germans must not suspect that we are preparing to stab them in the back while they are busy
fighting the French. Otherwise they might change their general plan and attack us. In the same
minutes Marshal Choponitov wrote: "The coexistence between Hitler's Germany and the
Soviet Union is only temporary. We shall not maintain it for very long." Marshal Timoshenko,
for his part, would not be so hasty: "Let us not forget that our war material from our Siberian
factories will not be delivered until the autumn." This was written in early 1941, and the
material was to be delivered only in the autumn. The report of the Commissariat for War
Industries states: We will not reach full production before 1942. Marshal Zhukov made this
extraordinary admission: "Hitler is in a hurry to invade us; he has good reasons for it."


Indeed, Hitler had good reason to invade Russia in a hurry, knowing that otherwise
he would be destroyed. Zhukov added, "We need a few more months to correct many of our
deficiencies by the end of 1941. We need 18 months to complete the modernization of our
armed forces." The orders are quite specific. At the fourth session of the Supreme Soviet in
1939, it is ordered that army officers serve three years, soldiers four years, and naval
personnel five years. All these decisions were made less than a month after the Soviets signed
the peace treaty with Germany. So the Soviets, committed to peace, were feverishly preparing
for war. Between 1939 and 1940, more than 2500 new concrete fortifications were built. 160
divisions were made ready for battle. 60 armored divisions were on full alert. The Germans
had only 10 armored divisions. In 1941 the Soviets had 170 tanks, by 1942 they had 320.
They had 92578 pieces of artillery. And their 17545 fighter planes in 1940 outnumbered the
German air force. It is easy to understand that in view of these preparations for war Hitler had
only one option: invade the Soviet Union immediately or face annihilation.Hitler's Russian
campaign was the campaign of the "last chance". Hitler did not go to Russia with great
optimism. He told me later: "When I marched into Russia, I was like a man standing before a
closed door. I knew I had to break through it, but I didn't know what was behind it." Hitler
was right. He knew the Soviets were strong, but more importantly, he knew they would be
much stronger. 1941 was the only time Hitler had some breathing space. The British had not
yet succeeded in expanding the war. Hitler, who had never wanted war with Britain,
nevertheless strove for peace. He invited me to spend a week at his home. He wanted to
discuss the whole situation and hear what I had to say about it. He spoke very simply and
clearly. The atmosphere was informal and relaxed. You felt at home with him because he
really enjoyed being hospitable. He would calmly butter toast and pass it around, and
although he didn't drink, he would get a bottle of champagne after each meal because he knew
I liked a glass at the end. All without fuss and with genuine kindness. It was part of his genius
that he was also a man of simple ways, without the slightest affection, and a man of great
modesty. We were talking about England. I asked him bluntly, "Why on earth did you not
destroy the British at Dunkirk? Everyone knew you could have wiped them out." He replied,
"Yes, I held back my troops and let the British escaped back to England. The humiliation of
such a defeat would have made it difficult to seek peace with them afterwards." At the same
time Hitler told me that he did not want to dispel the Soviet belief that he was going to invade


456


England. He mentioned that he even had small German-English dictionaries distributed to his
troops in Poland. The Soviet spies there reported to the Kremlin that Germany's presence in
Poland was a bluff and that they were about to go to the British Isles. On June 22, 1941,
Germany invaded not England, but Russia. The first victories were quick but costly. I lived
through the epic struggle on the Russian front. It was a tragic epic; it was also a martyrdom.
The endless thousands of miles of the Russian steppes were overwhelming. We had to reach
the Caucasus on foot, always in extreme conditions. In summer we were often knee-deep in
mud, and in winter temperatures were below freezing. But for a few days, Hitler would have
won the war in Russia in 1941. Before the Battle of Moscow, Hitler had managed to defeat
the Soviet army and take a considerable number of prisoners. General Guderian's armored
division, which had single-handedly encircled more than a million Soviet troops near Kiev,
had advanced to the city's tram lines. At that moment there was a sudden incredible cold snap:
40, 42, 50 degrees Celsius below zero! This meant that not only the men froze to death, but
also the equipment, and on the spot. The tanks could no longer move. The mud from
yesterday had frozen into a solid block of ice half a meter high, freezing the treads of the
tanks. Within 24 hours all our tactical possibilities had been reversed. By this time, masses of
Siberian troops brought back from the Russian Far East were being deployed against the
Germans. Hitler owed those few fateful icy days, which made the difference between victory
and defeat, to the Italian campaign in Greece in the autumn of 1940.Mussolini was jealous of
Hitler's successes. It was a deep and silent jealousy. I was a friend of Mussolini, I knew him
well. He was a remarkable man, but Europe was not of great importance to him. He did not
want to watch Hitler winning everywhere. He felt compelled to do something himself, and
quickly. Impulsively, he launched a senseless offensive against Greece. His troops were
immediately defeated. But this gave the British the excuse to invade Greece, which until then
had not been involved in the war. From Greece, the British could bomb Romanian oil wells,
which were vital to the German war effort. Greece could also be used to cut off German
troops on their way to Russia. Hitler was forced to preemptively ward off the threat. He had to
waste five weeks in the Balkans.


His victories there were an incredible logistical achievement, but they delayed the
start of the Russian campaign by five crucial weeks.Had Hitler been able to start the campaign
on time, as planned, he would have entered Moscow five weeks earlier, in the sun of early
autumn, when the earth was still dry. The war would have been over, and the Soviet Union
would have been a thing of the past. The combination of the sudden freeze and the arrival of
fresh Siberian troops caused some of the old army generals to panic. They wanted to retreat to
within 200 miles of Moscow. Such a nonsensical strategy is hard to imagine! The frost
affected Russia equally from west to east, and a retreat more than 200 miles into the open
steppe would only make matters worse. I was commanding my troops in the Ukraine at the
time and it was 42 degrees Celsius below zero. Such a retreat meant abandoning all heavy
artillery, including battle tanks and armor stuck in the ice. It also meant exposing half a
million men to heavy Soviet sniper fire. In effect, it meant condemning them to certain death.
Let us only recall Napoleon's retreat in October. He reached the Berzina River in November,
and by December 6 all French troops had left Russia. It was cold enough, but it was not a
winter campaign. Can you imagine that in 1941 half a million Germans were fighting howling
blizzards, cut off from supplies and attacked on all sides by tens of thousands of Cossacks? I
have fought attacking Cossacks, and only the very greatest firepower can stop them. To
prevent such a mad retreat, Hitler had to dismiss more than 30 generals within a few days.
Then he called in the Waffen-SS to close the gap and boost morale. Immediately, the SS held
their ground on the Moscow front. Throughout the war, the Waffen-SS never retreated. They
would rather die than retreat. One must not forget the numbers. In the winter of 1941, the
Waffen-SS lost 430 men before Moscow. The regiment Der Fiihrer literally fought to the last
man. Of the entire regiment, only 35 men survived. The men of Der Fiihrer held out and no
Soviet troops got through. They had to try to evade the SS in the snow. This is how the


457


famous Russian General Vlasov was captured by the SS Totenkopf Division. Without their
heroism, Germany would have been destroyed in December 1941. Hitler would never forget it:
He appreciated the willpower the Waffen-SS had shown before Moscow. They had shown
character and courage. And that was what Hitler admired most: courage. For him, it was not
enough to have intelligent or clever collaborators. These people can often fail, as we will see
the following winter at the Battle of Stalingrad with General Paulus. Hitler knew that only
sheer energy and courage, the refusal to surrender, the will to persevere against all odds would
win the war.


The blizzards on the Russian steppes had shown that the best army in the world, the
German army, with thousands of well-trained officers and millions of highly disciplined men,
was simply not enough. Hitler realized that they would be defeated, that something else was
needed, and that only an unshakable belief in a high ideal could overcome the situation. The
Waffen-SS had that ideal, and Hitler used it in full force from then on. Volunteers rushed from
all parts of Europe to help their German brothers. This was the birth of the third great Waffen-
SS. First there was the German Waffen-SS, then the Germanic Waffen-SS, and now the
European Waffen-SS. 1250 volunteers came forward to save Western culture and civilization.
The volunteers signed up knowing full well that the SS would take the most casualties. More
than 2500 out of a million would die in action. To them, despite all the deaths, the Waffen SS
was the birth of Europe. Napoleon said on St. Helena, "There will be no Europe until a leader
rises." The young European volunteers realized two things: First, that Hitler was the only
leader who could build Europe, and second, that Hitler, and only Hitler, could defeat the
global threat of communism.


For the European SS, the Europe of petty jealousies, jingoism, border disputes, and
economic rivalries was uninteresting, it was too petty and demeaning; this Europe no longer
applied to them. At the same time, the European SS men, however much they admired Hitler
and the German people, did not want to become Germans. They were men of their own
people and Europe was the union of the different peoples of Europe. European unity was to be
achieved through harmony, not through the domination of one over the other. I discussed
these questions in detail with both Hitler and Himmler. Hitler, like all men of genius, had
transcended the national stage. Napoleon was first a Corsican, then a Frenchman, then a
European, and then a unique universal man. Likewise Hitler was an Austrian, then a German,
then a Greater German, then a Teuton, then he had seen and grasped the magnitude of
European construction. After the defeat of Communism, the Waffen-SS had a solemn duty to
combine all its efforts and forces to build a united Europe, and there was no question that non-
German Europe should be dominated by Germany. Before we joined the Waffen-SS, we had
experienced very difficult conflicts. We had initially gone to the Eastern Front as auxiliary
troops of the German Army, but during the Battle of Stalingrad we had seen that Europe was
acutely threatened. Great combined efforts were essential. One evening I had an 8-hour debate
with Hitler and Himmler on the status of non-German Europeans in the new Europe. For the
moment we expected to be treated as equals fighting for a common cause. Hitler fully
understood and from then on we had our own flag, our own officers, our own language, our
own religion. We were completely equal. I was the first to have Catholic padres in the
Waffen-SS. Later, padres of all faiths were available to anyone who wanted them. The Islamic
SS division had its own mullahs and the French even had a bishop! We were satisfied that the
Europeans would be brought together with Hitler on an equal footing. We felt that the best
way to earn our place as equals was to defend Europe in this critical hour as well as our
German comrades. For Hitler, courage counted above all. He created a new chivalry. Those
who earned the Order of the Knight's Cross were indeed the new knights. They earned this
nobility of courage. Each of our units that went home after the war would be the force that
would protect the rights of the people in their respective countries. The entire SS understood
that European unity encompassed all of Europe, even Russia. Among many Germans there
was a great lack of knowledge about the Russians. Many believed that the Russians were all


458


Communists, when in fact Russian representation in the Communist hierarchy was less than
insignificant. They also believed that Russians were diametrically opposed to Europeans. Yet
they have similar family structures, an ancient civilization, deep religious faith, and traditions
not unlike those of other European countries. The European SS saw the new Europe in terms
of three major components: Central Europe as the power center of Europe, Western Europe as
the cultural heart of Europe, and Eastern Europe as the potential of Europe. Thus, the Europe
that the SS envisioned was alive and real. Its six hundred million inhabitants would from the
North Sea to Vladivostok. In this span of 80 miles, Europe could find its destiny. A space for
young people to start a new life. This Europe would be a beacon to the world. A remarkable
racial ensemble. An ancient civilization, a spiritual force, and the most advanced
technological and scientific complex. The SS was preparing for the high destiny of Europe.


Compare these goals, these ideals with the "Allies". The Roosevelt s and the
Churchill's betrayed Europe at Tehran, Yalta and Potsdam. They cowardly capitulated to the
Soviets. They delivered half of the European continent to Communist slavery. They let the
rest of Europe morally disintegrate without an ideal to sustain it. The SS knew what they
wanted: The Europe of ideals was salvation for all.This belief in higher ideals inspired four
hundred thousand German SS, three hundred thousand volksdeutsche or Germanic SS, and
three hundred thousand other European SS. Volunteers in total, one million builders of
Europe.The ranks of the SS grew proportionately with the expansion of the war in Russia. The
closer the defeat of Germany came, the more volunteers came to the front. It was phenomenal.
Eight days before the final defeat, I saw hundreds of young men join the SS at the front. To
the very end, they knew they had to do the impossible to stop the enemy.From the one
hundred and eighty-man Leibstandarte in 1933 to the SS regiments before 1939, the three
regiments in Poland, the three divisions in France, the six divisions at the beginning of the
Russian War, and the 38 divisions in 1944, the Waffen-SS reached 50 divisions in 1945. The
more SS members died, the more others rushed in to replace them. They had faith and
persevered to the extreme. The exact opposite happened at Stalingrad in January 1943. The
defeat there was decided by a man without courage. He was unable to face danger decisively
and to say unequivocally: I will not surrender, I will stand firm until I have won. He was
morally and physically cowardly and he lost.


A year later, the SS divisions Viking and Wallonia were encircled in the same way at
Cherkassy. With the disaster of Stalingrad in the minds of our soldiers, they could have been
demoralized. On top of that, I was down with a deep side wound and 102 degree fever. As the
commanding general of the SS Wallonia, I knew that all this was not conducive to morale. I
got up and led attack after attack for 17 days to break the blockade, was involved in numerous
hand-to-hand battles, was wounded four times, but never stopped fighting. All my men did as
much and more. The siege was broken by the courage and fighting spirit of the SS. After
Stalingrad, when many thought all was lost as Soviet forces poured over Ukraine, the Waffen-
SS stopped the Soviets dead in their tracks. They retook Kharkov and inflicted a severe defeat
on the Soviet army. This was a pattern; the SS kept turning setbacks into victories. The same
fearless energy was felt at Normandy. General Patton called them "the proud SS
divisions."The SS was the backbone of the Normandy resistance. Eisenhower remarked, "The
SS fought to the last man, as always."Had it not been for the Waffen SS, Europe would have
been completely overrun by the Soviets by 1944. They would have reached Paris long before
the Americans. The heroism of the Waffen-SS stopped the Soviet juggernaut at Moscow,
Cherkov, Cherkassy and Tarnopol. The Soviets lost more than 12 months. Without the
resistance of the SS, the Soviets would have been at Normandy before Eisenhower. The
people showed deep gratitude to the young men who had sacrificed their lives. Not since the
great religious orders of the Middle Ages had there been such selfless idealism and heroism.
In this century of materialism, the SS is a shining light of spirituality. I have no doubt that the
sacrifices and incredible deeds of the Waffen-SS will have their own epic poets like Schiller.
Greatness in adversity is the hallmark of the SS. After the war, the curtain of silence fell on


459


the Waffen SS, but now more and more young people somehow know of its existence, of its
achievements. Fame is growing and the youth wants to know more. In a hundred years,
almost everything will be forgotten, but the greatness and heroism of the Waffen-SS will be
remembered. That is the reward of an epic.


460


hitler Social Revolution


Leon Degrelle


One of the first labor reforms to benefit the German workers was the establishment
of annual paid vacation. The Socialist French Popular Front, in 1936, would make a show of
having invented the concept of paid vacation, and stingily at that, only one week per year. But
Adolf Hitler originated the idea, and two or three times as generously, from the first month of
his coming to power in 1933.


Every factory employee from then on would have the legal right to a paid vacation.
Until then, in Germany paid holidays where they applied at all did not exceed four or five
days, and nearly half the younger workers had no leave entitlement at all. Hitler, on the other
hand, favored the younger workers. Vacations were not handed out blindly, and the youngest
workers were granted time off more generously. It was a humane action; a young person has
more need of rest and fresh air for the development of his strength and vigor just coming into
maturity. Basic vacation time was twelve days, and then from age 25 on it went up to 18 days.
After ten years with the company, workers got 21 days, three times what the French socialists
would grant the workers of their country in 1936. These figures may have been surpassed in
the more than half a century since then, but in 1933 they far exceeded European norms. As for
overtime hours, they no longer were paid, as they were everywhere else in Europe at that time,
at just the regular hourly rate. The work day itself had been reduced to a tolerable norm of
eight hours, since the forty-hour week as well, in Europe, was first initiated by Hitler. And
beyond that legal limit, each additional hour had to be paid at a considerably increased rate.
As another innovation, work breaks were made longer; two hours every day in order to let the
worker relax and to make use of the playing fields that the large industries were required to
provide. Dismissal of an employee was no longer left as before the sole discretion of the
employer. In that era, workers’ rights to job security were non-existent. Hitler saw to it that
those rights were strictly spelled out. The employer had to announce any dismissal four weeks
in advance. The employee then had a period of up to two months in which to lodge a protest.
The dismissal could also be annulled by the Honor of Work Tribunal. What was the Honor of
Work Tribunal? Also called the Tribunal of Social Honor, it was the third of the three great
elements or layers of protection and defense that were to the benefit of every German worker.
The first was the Council of Trust. The second was the Labor Commission.


The Council of Trust was charged with attending to the establishment and the
development of a real community spirit between management and labor. “In any business
enterprise,” the Reich law stated, “the employer and head of the enterprise, the employees and
workers, personnel of the enterprise, shall work jointly towards the goal of the enterprise and
the common good of the nation.” Neither would any longer be the victim of the other—not the
worker facing the arbitrariness of the employer nor the employer facing the blackmail of
strikes for political purposes. Article 35 of the Reich labor law stated that: “Every member of
an Aryan enterprise community shall assume the responsibilities required by his position in
the said common enterprise.” In other words, at the head of the company or the enterprise
would be a living, breathing executive in charge, not a moneybags with unconditional power.
“The interest of the community may require that an incapable or unworthy employer be
relieved of his duties.” The employer would no longer be inaccessible and all-powerful,
authoritatively determining the conditions of hiring and firing his staff. He, too, would be
subject to the workshop regulations, which he would have to respect, exactly as the least of
his employees. The law conferred honor and responsibility on the employer only insofar as he
merited it. Every business enterprise of 20 or more persons was to have its “Council of Trust.”


462


The two to ten members of this council would be chosen from among the staff by the head of
the enterprise. The ordinance of application of 10 March 1934 of the above law further stated:
“The staff shall be called upon to decide for or against the established list in a secret vote, and
all salaried employees, including apprentices of 21 years of age or older, will take part in the
vote. Voting shall be done by putting a number before the names of the candidates in order of
preference, or by striking out certain names.” In contrast to the business councils of the
preceding régime, the Council of Trust was no longer an instrument of class, but one of
teamwork of the classes, composed of delegates of the staff as well as the head of the
enterprise. The one could no longer act without the other. Compelled to coordinate their
interests, though formerly rivals, they would now cooperate to establish by mutual consent the
regulations which were to determine working conditions. Belgian author Marcel Laloire, who
observed conditions in the Reich first hand, wrote “The Council has the duty to develop
mutual trust within the enterprise. It will advise on all measures serving to improve the
carrying out of the work of the enterprise and on standards relating to general work conditions,
in particular those which concern measures tending to reinforce feelings of solidarity between
the members themselves and between the members and the enterprise, or tending to improve
the personal situation of the members of the enterprise community. The Council also has the
obligation to intervene to settle disputes. It must be heard before the imposition of fines based
on workshop regulations.”


Before assuming their duties, members of the Work Council had to take an oath
before all their co-workers to “carry out their duties only for the good of the enterprise and of
all citizens, setting aside any personal interest, and in their behavior and manner of living to
serve as model representatives of the enterprise.” [Article 10, paragraph 1 of the law.] Every
30th of April, on the eve of the great national labor holiday, council duties ceased and the
councils were renewed, pruning out conservatism or petrifaction and cutting short the
arrogance of dignitaries who might have thought themselves beyond criticism. It was up to the
enterprise itself to pay a salary to members of the Council of Trust, just as if they were
employed in the work area, and “to assume all costs resulting from the regular fulfillment of
the duties of the Council.” The second agency that would ensure the orderly development of
the new German social system was the institution of the “Workers’ Commissioners.” They
would essentially be conciliators and arbitrators. When gears were grinding, they were the
ones who would have to apply the grease. They would see to it that the Councils of trust were
functioning harmoniously to ensure that regulations of a given business enterprise were being
carried out to the letter. They were divided among 13 large districts covering the territory of
the Reich. As arbitrators they were not dependent upon either owners or workers. They had
total independence in the field. They were appointed by the state, which represented both the
interests of everyone in the enterprise and the interests of society at large. In order that their
decisions should never be unfounded or arbitrary, they had to rely on the advice of a
“Consulting Council of Experts” which consisted of 18 members selected from various
sections of the economy in a representation of sorts of the interests of each territorial district.
To ensure still further the objectivity of their arbitration decisions, a third agency was
superimposed on the Councils of Trust and the 13 Commissioners, the Tribunal of Social
Honor.


Thus from 1933 on, the German worker had a system of justice at his disposal that
was created especially for him and would adjudicate all grave infractions of the social duties
based on the idea of the Aryan enterprise community. Examples of these violations of social
honor are cases where the employer, abusing his power, displayed ill will towards his staff or
impugned the honor of his subordinates, cases where staff members threatened work harmony
by spiteful agitation; the publication by members of the Council of confidential information
regarding the enterprise which they became cognizant of in the course of discharging their
duties. Thirteen ““Tribunes of Social Honor” were established, corresponding with the thirteen
commissions. The presiding judge was not a fanatic; he was a career judge who rose above


463


disputes. Meanwhile the enterprise involved was not left out of the proceedings; the judge was
seconded by two assistant judges, one representing the management, another a member of the
Council of Trust. This tribunal, the same as any other court of law, had the means of
enforcing its decisions. But there were nuances. Decisions could be limited in mild cases to a
remonstrance. They could also hit the guilty party with fines of up to 10,000 marks. Other
very special sanctions were provided for that were precisely adapted to the social
circumstances; change of employment, dismissal of the head of the enterprise or his agent
who had failed in his duty. In case of a contested decision, the legal dispute could always be
taken up to a Supreme Court seated in Berlin—a fourth level of protection. From then on the
worker knew that exploitation of his physical strength in bad faith or offending his honor
would no longer be allowed. He had to fulfill certain obligations to the community, but they
were obligations that applied to all members of the enterprise, from the chief executive down
to the messenger boy. Germany’s workers at last had clearly established social rights that
were arbitrated by a Labor Commission and enforced by a Tribunal of Honor. Although
effected in an atmosphere of justice and moderation, it was a revolution.


This was only the end of 1933, and already the first effects could be felt. The
factories and shops large and small were reformed or transformed in conformity with the
strictest standards of cleanliness and hygiene; the interior areas, so often dilapidated, opened
to light; playing fields constructed; rest areas made available where one could converse at
one’s ease and relax during rest periods; employee cafeterias; proper dressing rooms. With
time, that is to say in three years, those achievements would take on dimensions never before
imagined; more than 2,000 factories refitted and beautified; 23,000 work premises
modernized; 800 buildings designed exclusively for meetings; 1,200 playing fields; 13,000
sanitary facilities with running water; 17,000 cafeterias. Eight hundred departmental
inspectors and 17,300 local inspectors would foster and closely and continuously supervise
these renovations and installations. The large industrial establishments moreover had been
given the obligation of preparing areas not only suitable for sports activities of all minds, but
provided with swimming pools as well. Germany had come a long way from the sinks for
washing one’s face and the dead tired workers, grown old before their time, crammed into
squalid courtyards during work breaks. In order to ensure the natural development of the
working class, physical education courses were instituted for the younger workers; 8,000 such
were organized. Technical training would be equally emphasized, with the creation of
hundreds of work schools, technical courses and examinations of professional competence,
and competitive examinations for the best workers for which large prizes were awarded. To
rejuvenate young and old alike, Hitler ordered that a gigantic vacation organization for
workers be set up. Hundreds of thousands of workers would be able every summer to relax on
and at the sea. Magnificent cruise ships would be built. Special trains would carry vacationers
to the mountains and to the seashore. The locomotives that hauled the innumerable worker-
tourists in just a few years of travel in Germany would log a distance equivalent to fifty-four
times around the world! The cost of these popular excursions was nearly insignificant, thanks
to greatly reduced rates authorized by the Reichsbank. Didn’t these reforms lack something?
Were some of them flawed by errors and blunders? It is possible. But what did a blunder
amount to alongside the immense gains? That this transformation of the working class
smacked of authoritarianism? That’s exactly right. But the German people were sick and tired
of socialism and anarchy. To feel commanded didn’t bother them a bit. In fact, people have
always liked having a strong man guide them. One thing for certain is that the turn of mind of
the working class, which was still almost two-thirds non-National Socialist in 1933, had
completely changed. The Belgian author Marcel Laloire would note: “When you make your
way through the cities of Germany and go into the working-class districts, go through the
factories, the construction yards, you are astonished to find so many workers on the job
sporting the Hitler insignia, to see so many flags with the Swastika, black on a bright red
background, in the most populous districts.” The “Labor Front” that Hitler imposed on all of
the workers and employers of the Reich was for the most part received with favor. And


464


already the steel spades of the sturdy young lads of the National Labor Service could be seen
gleaming along the highways. The National Labor Service had been created by Hitler out of
thin air to bring together for a few months in absolute equality, and in the same uniform, both
the sons of millionaires and the sons of the poorest families. All had to perform the same
work and were subject to the same discipline, even the same pleasures and the same physical
and moral development. On the same construction sites and in the same living quarters, they
had become conscious of their commonality, had come to understand one another, and had
swept away their old prejudices of class and caste. After this hitch in the National Labor
Service they all began to live as comrades, the workers knowing that the rich man’s son was
not a monster, and the young lad from the wealthy family knowing that the worker’s son had
honor just like any other young fellow who had been more generously favored by birth. Social
hatred was disappearing, and a socially united people was being born. Hitler could already go
into factories—something no man of the so-called Right before him would have risked
doing—and hold forth to the mob of workers, tens of thousands of them at a time, as in the
Siemens works. “In contrast to the von Papens and other country gentlemen,” he might tell
them, “In my youth I was a worker like you. And in my heart of hearts, I have remained what
I was then.” In the course of his twelve years in power, no incident ever occurred at any
factory Adolf Hitler ever visited. When Hitler was among the people, he was at home, and he
was received like the member of the family who had been most successful.


465


Selection of Dariouf Writing/


45 handbook


Only the National Socialist world view secures us a kind-appropriate life


"National Socialism is a cool-headed theory of reality with the strongest scientific
insights and its mental characteristics. By opening the heart of our people to this doctrine, we
do not desire to fulfill it with a mysticism that is beyond the purpose and aim of our teaching."


-Adolf Hitler
What does “worldview” mean?


It is necessary to explain this concept first, especially in view of the fact that the
present war has become a total confrontation of different worldviews. "Weltanschauung"
means simply looking at the world. In a broader sense, a world view is the epitome of all the
thoughts and ideas of a community of people about the world and life. Every world view is
conditioned and shaped by the whole existence of man, such as race, education, environment
and experience. Worldviews are therefore an expression of human life forms and vice versa.


"Already in the word “Weltanschauung” lies the solemn proclamation of the
decision to base all actions on a specific starting point. Such an opinion can be right or
wrong. It is the starting point for the statement on all phenomena and processes of life and
thus a binding and binding law for every activity. The more now one such conception
coincides with the natural laws of organic life,the more useful will be their conscious
application for the life of a people."


-The Fuhrer on the Reich Party Day 1933


The National Socialist Worldview


The National Socialist Worldview emerged from the findings of the racial, bloody
and moral basic forces of the German people. It is made of the unspoiled and healthiest
ingredients of the people themselves. So it is not a foreigner theory that is practical through a
community effort to realize it, but the announcer and a watchman of a kind-appropriate life.
The life of the German People has itself produced the National Socialist worldview in its most
original order. As a result, this worldview can not be chosen or taken by anyone, but it itself
takes possession of all that, the laws of people and of life, and it forces them into its spell.


National and Social Community


466


The connection of the national and the socialist thought has given the Party its name
and lets us speak of National Socialist Worldview.


The Fuhrer says:


“The great cultural achievements of humanity have always been the highest
achievements of the community life of the people, of the race; they are therefore in their
image the expression of the communal soul and ideals."


Thus, National Socialism is committed to the natural view of life, as it lies in the
blood and has always been in our Germanic ancestors. But it also overcame the
individualistic-materialist ideas of liberalism and Marxism. With the confession to the
concept of the blood community and the establishment of the socialist community, the
nationalization of the
Germans took place.


"With sword and plow for honor and freedom louder, therefore, the battle-cry of a
new race, which wants to build a new empire and seeks standards by which it can fruitfully
judge its action and its pursuit. This call is nationalistic and socialist!"


-Alfred Rosenberg: "Myth of the XX. Century ", p. 534
National Socialism - a Natural Worldview


If we trace our history back to the earliest Germanic prehistoric times, the following
expressions of life of the Germanic-German man become apparent:


1. His upright, proud and blood-conscious manner, the nobility of his mind and his war
likeness, which finds its expression in soldierly hardness and determination and his fighting
spirit, in his high conception of honor and freedom, loyalty and obedience and leadership.


2. His high sense of community (family, clan, people) and his willingness to make sacrifices
for these blood communities.


3. His peasantly genuine, strong, simple and simple nature, his
attachment to the soil, his love for his place.


4. His high creative power, which made him the founder of the cultures and states of the
Occident and thus, from antiquity to today, the ordering and determining factor in the
coexistence of the peoples.

5. His deep faith. This is the basis of National Socialism. He confesses to the high values of
Germanic humanity, whereby it must be emphasized that the idealism of our view has nothing
to do with enthusiasm and fantasy. National Socialism is a life-blooded people's community
and service to the people as a supreme law for every German person. It is the teacher of blood
and honor.A major component of the National Socialist doctrine is the demand for
achievement for the community and hardness against itself. With this life-connected basic
conception, National Socialism stands in irreconcilable opposition to the worldview of
materialism, whose 'Instigator' is the Jew and his vassal peoples. This war represents the
inexorable conflict between these two worlds of ideas.


"In the reality of politics, National Socialism realizes what we, with a religious heart,
see and believe in brave spirit as necessary and right. It is the fate of our people. It is the
mastery of the hereditary world and the environment: it puts the myth of blood and honor into
words. It focuses our eyes again on the essential events of blood and soil. It restores our


467


thinking, faith and action to the eternal order of the world in us and in the world around us. It
gives us the confidence and the opportunity to reverently penetrate the lawfulness of
omnipotence and, according to its laws, also to orient the order that is set and shaped by us
so that it becomes law-abiding and true to life. Because only then is the future of our people
safe, clear and certain."


-Stengelv. Rutkowski: Of omnipotence and order of life


The meaning of the personality


If we see the individual as a servant of the people's community, it does not mean that
it is absorbed in the masses. Genuine national community can not grow out of massiveness,
but only of strong personalities. A healthy forest needs strong trees! National Socialism, then,
emphasizes the value of the personality, which is hot, but not for the sake of its own sake,
because there is no such thing, in truth, for its own sake. It exists only as a bloodless thought-
construction and contradicts the laws of life,according to which humans are born into the
naturally grown orders of family, clan and people.National Socialism wants the personality
fully developed in all abilities and capacities, a bloodthirsty, strong-willed and strong
character, the highest achievement for the people's willing. The means of creating this human
type is in the sense of the National Socialist worldview. The means of creating this type of
human being is education in the sense of the National Socialist Worldview. The prerequisite
for this is the cleanliness and higher development of our blood through rearing.


The Fuhrer says:


"We have the great task to give more and more to the true spirit of the
Volksgemeinschaft and to work out the personality value ever more clearly."


The Struggle as a National Socialist law of life We regard struggle as an inalienable
law of life, for only in the eternal struggle, the precondition of all selection, do personalities
and hard peoples grow. Great things are born only in battle.


"Whoever wants to live, who fights, and who does not want to fight in this world of
eternal wrestling, does not deserve life."


-Adolf Hitler


Fighting designed the German. Through his life, fighting accompanies his entire
existence: struggle with himself, struggle with destiny, struggle with the hostile environment.
In tenacious struggle, he masters fate and fights for himself and his people the essential and
thus God wanted life form. Fighting is the German human divine law for formation and
education, for hardness. "Praised be that which makes hard." That is why he rejects the
previously taught principle of humble allegiance to fate.Struggle and hardship are the main
elements of National Socialism. It is therefore the worldview of the strong, the militant man.
National Socialism springs from genuine soldiering. It is with his combative basic trait the
soldier’s Worldview. But the soldier's sacrificial mission is the most visible socialism. The
soldier is the first socialist in the Reich. The soldier in particular must accept National
Socialism with a special readiness in his heart and be his most fanatical confessor. From this
militant attitude, National Socialism abhors a softening well-being. He is the mortal enemy of
egoism and materialism, leading to a dissolute life. He demands simplicity, hardship and
straightness in life. The strong, genuine peasant and the hard soldier should benefit every


468


German, no matter whether he serves his people in the city or in the country, with the weapon
or the workbench.


"Tf the fight for a world view is not led by self-sacrificing heroes, no death-defying
fighters will be found in a short time,"


-Adolf Hitler: "Mein Kampf" p. 114
Commitment to honor and loyalty


We profess our honor and loyalty, both of which are inextricably linked. The concept
of honor is the center of Germanic existence in general. The lives of our ancestors revolved
around honor and glory, freedom, courage and pride. Her life was always pure and great, as
long as honor had precedence.


"Germanic Europe gifted the world with the brightest ideal of humanity; with the
doctrine of the character value as the basis of all civilization, with the high song on the
highest values of the Nordic being, on the idea of freedom of conscience and honor. "


-Alfred Rosenberg


In recent centuries, the high conception of honor has been greatly affected by the
ideas of humility and humanity. The Fiihrer once again made the honor the starting point of
all German life. Honor is the inner law, the conscience that dictates all our actions and our
attitude towards the community. It is never related to itself, but finds its actual interpretation
in the relationship of the ego to the community. Germanic-German marriage presumption
makes one's own ego withdraw in favor of the honor of the people. Our National Socialist
worldview, with its life and blood laws, is based on honor. The socialist idea of volunteering
for the people and striving to keep our blood pure develops out of honor. But he who has
honor in his body will never abandon his comrade, his people or even his leader. For loyalty
grows out of honor.


My honor is loyalty


The leader gave the SS-man the slogan that commits him to the first soldier of
National Socialism for now and for the future: "SS-man, your honor is loyalty!" "Many things
on this earth can be forgiven, but one never: infidelity." The fidelity we have sworn to the
leader, must be as sacred to us as the fidelity to the German people, his will and his way,
fidelity to the Blood, to our ancestors and grandchildren, loyalty to our kind, faithfulness to
the comrades and loyalty to the immutable laws of decency, cleanliness and chivalry. The
nobility of the German man is shown by a high level of honor and loyalty.


"Let us all be committed to these principles and close the great circle of our
fellowship, strong in the trust of our people, filled with faith in our mission and prepared for
every sacrifice that the Almighty demands of us. Then Germany, the National Socialist Third
Reich will pass through this time of distress, sorrow and grief, armed with the metal that
alone makes the knight survive without fear and blame in the fight against death and the devil:
the strong heart of iron. "


-Adolf Hitler


Laws of life - the basis of our worldview


469


"By trying to rebel against the iron logic of nature, man struggles with the principles
to which he himself owes his existence as a human being. So his action against nature must
lead to his own destruction."


-Mein Kampf
The laws of life


Life on this earth is under iron laws: birth, becoming, waxing, maturing, aging and
death outline a part and are aware of us consciously and unconsciously. These laws apply to
all life, to humans, animals and plants. In addition we have to recall all that we have in the
following words. referred to: struggle for existence, selection, fertility, race, heredity,
environmental impact and development.Fight for existence. Every living thing must fight for
food and reproduction. It is necessary to assert oneself in the struggle for existence. The
struggle for existence is determined by three factors:


1. natural enemies

2. actual environment (climate, etc.),

3. its own specific characteristics

In the struggle for existence, the one who, for whatever reason, wipes out lifeless more people
in this fight asserts himself.


"Who wants to live, let him fight, and who does not want to fight in this world of
eternal struggle, does not deserve life."


-Mein Kampf


The struggle for existence in human life should not be confused with lack of scruples,
elbow room, exploitation and so on. These are expressions of the disabled, the asocial, the
degenerate. Life has added to this law the natural sense of community or community instinct.
Pacifism represents the strongest denial of the law of struggle. What does elite mean? The
struggle for existence causes a constant reading of the better ones. Those who assert
themselves are preserved and can reproduce, while the unfit, the bad for life are eradicated.


"If you are too weak, you can not become a blacksmith. Anyone who has clumsy
fingers can not successfully practice the profession of a precision mechanic. Many
professions require special intelligence. So one can generally say that the members of almost
all professions are groups of elites in different directions."


What does fertility mean?


For some species, their fertility is the only effective weapon in the struggle for
existence. They can only assert themselves when they appear in masses. Fertility also plays an
important role in the conflict between peoples. The danger which the fertility of one people
can pose for another is shown by the present discussion in the East. Above all, the high-
quality peoples must observe this law, otherwise they are doomed.


“But the end will be that one day such a people will be taken away from existence in
this world; For man can defy the eternal laws of conservation for some time, but revenge will
come sooner or later. A stronger generation will drive away the weak, for the urge to live life
in its final form will break again and again all the ridiculous fetters of a so called humanity of
the individual, in order to replace it with the humanity of nature, which destroys weakness to
give the place to strength. Therefore, anyone who wants to secure existence for the German
people by means of self-restraining their multiplication robs them of the future.”


470


-Mein Kampf
What does race mean?


A race is a group of beings with the same inheritable basic characteristics. The
Fuhrer taught us the importance of the race, the knowledge and the value of the meaning of
the blood.


His teaching says:


1. that humanity consists of different races;

2. That every nation fully fleshed out can live only by its blood conditioned laws;
3. That our people are of a blood-pool of predominantly Nordic blood;

4. that our people must live by the laws that govern northern blood;

5. that world history, in addition to the struggle for living space,

represents the struggle of racial worldviews.


Equality of all that carries human face is contrary to experience and observation
(Negro - White). The diversity of people is a fact. Diversity is the lower, the closer people are
related (family resemblance, tribal similarity). Every race has the qualities that are adapted to
its living conditions and thus to one another; it forms a harmonic unit. By crossing this
harmony is naturally disturbed, it creates an imbalance. Countries with a pronounced mixed-
race population (America) can not pursue a consistent, purposeful and clear policy as a result
of their racial disunity. They are constantly interrupted by rebellions, revolutions and power
struggles in their development. In contrast, peoples with a racially uniform leadership are
essentially stable in their development. The history of humanity is the story of race battles.
The story of a peopleis its race destiny. If the history-making race perishes, then the land
becomes desolate, it becomes history-less.


"All the great cultures of the past only perished because the original creative race died of
blood poisoning."


"No, there is only one most sacred human right, and that right is at the same time the most
sacred obligation, namely, to make sure that the blood is kept pure in order to give, through
the preservation of the best humanity, the possibility of a nobler development of these beings.”


-Mein Kampf


What do we need to know about inheritance?


Inheritance means preserving everything good, but also everything bad. Through
them, you transfer your skills and characteristics to your children. The laws of life of race and
elite are incomprehensible without the fact of inheritance. Although this law was considered
to be valid for animals and plants, opponents of this relationship want to give people a special
position. However, it has been shown by the results of race, family, and twin research that the
law of heredity applies to man, of course. Inheritance shows us that we can not go beyond the
scope of inherited heritage. Here man is subject to a natural limitation. Inheritance is destiny.


What does environment mean?


By the term "environment" we mean all the forces that act on the being from the
outside, ie: space, enemies, climate, education, etc. Decisive is the hereditary system; the


471


environment can not change this. In contrast to hereditary theory is the environmental theory,
which wants to interpret all cultural phenomena as an effect of the environment. Marxism has
its most essential basis in environmental theory. In the followers of the environmental theory,
especially the education is given a great importance. However, education is only possible in
the context of genetic engineering. You can not make a hero out of a cowardly child, you can
not turn a fool into an intelligent man. The environment does not shape, but has a long-term
effect, meaning sieving and breeding.


"However much soil, for example, can affect people, the result of influence will
always be different, depending on the breeds in question. The low fertility of a habitat may
spur the one race to the highest achievements, in another it will only bring about the cause of
bitter poverty and finite malnutrition with all its consequences. The inner predisposition of
peoples is always decisive for the type of impact of external influences. What leads to
starvation in some of them leads others to hard work."


-Mein Kampf
The developmental idea


As the earth has gradually emerged, so has life developed on it. Every living thing
reaches in an uninterrupted chain over reproduction and multiplication into the remotest
prehistoric times. The fact of development in nature disturbs dogmatic worldviews. The
developmental thought has overturned the idea of creation; this is its political significance,
also in the field of ideology.


The life-law worldview


"I prophesy here, as well as the knowledge of the orbit of the earth around the sun,
to a revolutionary reorganization of the general worldview. If guided, then the blood and race
doctrine of the National Socialist movement will result in a revolution in the knowledge and
thus in the picture of the history of the human past and future."


-Mein Kampf


What do you have to know about racial thought?


The race idea spans all areas of life. He gives the freedom of action for the right
choice of the spouse and thus determines your and the fate of your children, family and clan.
He gives you a firm position in your people, your state, your continent and in the community
of peoples. It demands your kind performance and action and promises you a completely
happy existence. Biological thinking creates reasonable standards for evaluating things. It
gives you power to make clear decisions, shows what you can and should do and thereby
leads to the formation of the personality. The construction of the idea of race always leads to
the organic order of life and not to imperialism, to the ecclesiastical or political system. The
race-bound thinking affirms the natural life and the willingness of the spirit to enjoy, not only
the individual, but also the peoples. It promises everyone his and denies unjustified claims of
individuals.


The adversaries of the racial idea
Thus the one opponent of the race idea wants the equality of the humans. Such a


principle creates for him because it is un-biological and thus unnatural, the tensions, desires
and demands, the dissatisfaction and thus the presupposition of his power. Thus, the other


472


opponent wants the spiritual attachment to life-hostile laws (dogmas), taking advantage of the
religious feelings of humanity and thus created only the prerequisite of life-legally
unnecessary existence.Thus, a third adversary, Bolshevism, consciously destroys all
manifestations of the natural order of life, such as family, joy in children, one's own home,
attachment to home and soil, attachment to clan and ancestors. He wants complete eradication
of all natural facts and thus creates the conditions for carrying out his plans. Today we
recognize from our thinking in terms of life law, why Bolshevism; in order to get it, it has to
act like that.


We fight for the Eternity of our People


"Our National Socialist program uses the blood related and ground-bound people in place of
the liberalist concept of the individual and the Marxist concept of humanity. A very simple
and succinct sentence, but of enormous impact. For the first time, perhaps, ever since there is
a history of mankind, knowledge has been directed in this land to the fact that of all the tasks
which are placed before us, the most honorable, and most sacred, to man is the preservation of
the blood-blessed nature given by God. "


“Mein Kampf”


National Socialism brought Germany the rebirth after the decline in 1918. It
rearranged German life according to our blood. The Fuhrer created the Reich and united in it
all the tribes of German blood.The racial science becomes the basis of the structure of people
and the state out of the knowledge that all values and cultural achievements are bound to the
genetic material. The doctrine of the equality of all people was opposed to racial doctrine.


The Volk


Our Volk has grown out of the forces of his blood, carried on through inheritance
and read out by the conditions of the environment. For in the struggle for life prove only the
most talented. They alone have the courage to pass on their life to many offspring, while the
less affirmed fear the seriousness of the struggle for life, and hope that they are able to lighten
their living conditions with a few children. As a result, their hereditary traits are gradually
eliminated from the totality of the people. Thus, the existing genetic make-up of the natural
stock of our Volk came about, which can be either maintained, improved or worsened by the
continuation. We must always be aware of this God-given law of life and act accordingly, for
our attitude is one of the determining factors in the form and character of our people.


We therefore demand respect for the hereditary values of our people.We recognize
the reservation of space as a necessary environment for this people.We demand a Volkisch
world view and knowledge of God, which we can understand from our national character. We
demand a volkisch policy, a kind-appropriate law and economic order; an art that has grown
and is supported by the family and the community; we want a language, our national character,
and a history, which shows us the struggle for existence of the different tribes of our people.


The orientation of the people
Essential for the preservation or promotion of a certain racial shape is, in addition to
the fundamental preservation of good genes, the creation of an environment favorable to this


"race". This can only be achieved if a conscious orientation of the national community is
based on these laws (breeding goal) and the bearers of this community live accordingly.


The preservation of the people


473


"For the first time in this Reich it is possible for man to apply the gift of knowledge
and insight given to him by the Almighty to those questions which are of greater importance
for the preservation of his existence than any victorious wars or successful economic battles!
The greatest revolution of National Socialism is to have opened the door to knowledge that all
mistakes and errors of man are conditioned by time and thus can be improved, except for one
thing: the error about the importance of preservation of his blood, of his kind and thus of the
form given to him by God and of the being given to him by God."


"Mein Kampf"


We know from the laws of life and history that peoples do not die out, but are born
out, that is, only the people, who forget their task of passing on their lives to the generations
to come, sink back into nothingness.


The People's State


Neglect of the blood question is the cause of the downfall; Birth decline, dysgenics,
race-mixing and birth defects are the pitfalls and causes for the change of an overall picture.


The eternal people


We fight for our wives and children and thus for the eternal life of our people, not
only in the present great struggle, but always and everywhere. Therefore, we must work for a
life order of our people, which ensures its eternal life also internally. This, however, can only
be an order that preserves and promotes the good and precious blood, but oppresses and exalts
the inferior and alien, an order that allows the clans of the people to grow in the soil of the
home.


Fight against the inferior


Legal measures can lead to the elimination of unwanted, diseased genetic material.
"Law on the Prevention of Diseased offspring." Furthermore, it is possible to keep them away
from reproduction through preventive detention of habitual criminals. The "Nuremberg Laws"
for the protection of German blood and honor are the guarantor that foreign blood interference
does not shift the overall character of the people's hereditary traits.


"The demand that defective people be made impossible for the generation of other equally
defective people is a demand of the clearest reason and in its planned implementation means
the most human act of humanity. It will spare millions of unfortunate undeserved suffering,
but subsequently lead to a rising recovery. "


"Mein Kampf"
To promote good genetic material


In addition to measures to eliminate unwanted inherited genetic laws for the
promotion of good genetic material of the direct propagation of good genes are used. The
"marriage health law" for the protection of the hereditary health of the German people
prevents the mixing of good hereditary dispositions with unwanted ones. The “betrothal and
marriage order” not only allows the timely education for the examination of the spouse, but in
the same way prevents the spread of unwanted genetic material. The "Maternity Protection
Act" serves to secure the expectant mother and the undisturbed care of the infant. What does
the term breed mean? The breeding thought was something natural for our ancestors. Family


474


or clan chiefs ensured the preservation of the best and most capable of both sexes. The legal
measures promoting or preventing them alone are not enough to sustain a people in the same
way forever.


Spouse choice


Each marriage of a family member means taking up a new genetic material in the
clan association. Therefore, the choice of a spouse is not only of decisive importance for the
immediate participants, but also for their descendants. The choice of a woman gives the
husband the only possibility in life to improve or spoil the genotype of the future race. Health
or illness, aptitude or incompetence of offspring are decided by the choice of spouses. In this
decisive step, not position and wealth, but only mental and physical efficiency, must prevail.
It is clear that the one who has the certainty that he is the bearer of ominous heredity must
renounce it. The choice of spouses is the most important step in the life course and for the
passing on of life. Therefore, it is necessary that all questions in this decision be taken with all
sharpness possible.


Summary of our demands


Keep your health good and, as long as you are in the developmental stages, be
abstemious in terms of pleasure poisons (alcohol, nicotine) and sexual activity. (The Nordic
man in general generally does not reach maturity until late.)


Wedding as early as possible. Only then will you fully enjoy the family happiness.
Do not marry a stranger. You are responsible to your people and your descendants for the
purity of the blood.Do not marry a wife with genetic conditions. Otherwise you are to blame
for the suffering of your own children and grandchildren. Choose only a perfectly healthy
woman. The true picture of your future wife's condition and health will be shown by her
clan. Your wife should be at least as full of zeal as you are. Make your and your children's
environment as natural as possible. Avoid kinship because unfavorable genetic traits are
almost always hidden from you and then develop twice in your children. Only the largest
possible number of children guarantees the development of your genome. Especially the most
famous men often come from large families. Biological work must be performed to fulfill the
duties of a professional. Only both together make the life achievement. Remember that nature
demands the struggle for the precious. It is not easy to satisfy the conditions of selection. Only
what you get in a hard fight makes you truly happy. First and foremost is the preservation and
promotion of our people and their people. This task is our life and struggle.


"National Socialism has no starting point for its reflections, statements and decisions,
either in the individual or in humanity. It consciously puts into the center of his whole
thinking the people. "

"The great cultural achievements of men were at all times the highest achievements
of the community life of the people, the race; they are therefore in their creation and in their


image the expression of the communal soul and ideals."


“Mein Kampf”


The Higher Development of our People
Life-law thinking recognizes the development in nature. This obliges us to strive for


a higher development of our people. But the most important fundamental law for the order of
life of our people is that what is ethical is the preservation of the German people's


475


preservation of their species. It is immoral what is worthy of the preservation of the German
people.


“Our cult means exclusively: care for the natural and therefore also for the divine.
Our humility is the unconditional bow to the divine laws of existence that we are made aware
of and their respect. Our prayer is: Brave fulfillment of the resulting Obligations. "


-The Fuhrer at the NSDAP Rally in 1938
Are we godless?


We have had to hear this allegation again and again today and in previous years. We
often clenched our fists in silent bitterness about such abuse by a group of people who
believed that we could criticize us out of the security of a supposed belief. If you were forced
to admit the successes of National Socialism in all areas, the last "but" was still the refuge for
the argument of godlessness. We have learned that there is no discussion with such people.
We are towering over such slander. We no longer think about talking about our beliefs to
everyone. Let's look at the leader. Who has not repeatedly felt his holy belief in an almighty
providence in his great speeches? How often has the Fuhrer known that in all his actions he
knows that Providence is the calling of which he feels.


"I, too, am religious, deeply religious, and I believe that Providence weighs people
and does not determine who is greater than those who cannot stand the test of Providence but
break it. It is a natural necessity that only the strongest are left in the selection. ”


-The Fuhrer on November 8, 1943


If all words and concepts are unable to express our faith, the sublime work of the
Fuhrer shows us that his and thus our faith is deeply imbued with a real awareness of God.


Are we fighting the church?


This reproach has always been made against us by internal enemies together with the
first; that is what our external enemies accuse us of today in the most spiteful way. The Fuhrer
has emphasized infinitely that the Church and its priests always enjoy the protection of the
state provided that they are dedicated exclusively to pastoral care and do not contravene the
political will of the people. Too often and too gladly, the confrontation of the individual with
an old doctrine is equated with "state tolerated" attacks against the church. Basically, it can be
said that at all times and for all peoples there were upheavals in the religious field; one will
not want to deny the right of our time to be allowed to seek a belief in God that is in our
nature.


The racial idea - the core thesis of the National Socialist worldview


Our concept of race is only an expression of a worldview that recognizes a divine
command in the higher development of man.


“If the world is God's creation, the natural laws according to which the universe is
transformed and developed must be divine laws. However, the laws that are particularly valid
for us humans are those that shape our heritage and our environment. That is why racial
knowledge is the highest knowledge for us. Everything else must be based on it. So if for us
life, race, work, nature, home are high and highest values, then not because of arbitrariness,


476


but because all of these things lead to God, to the meaning of life, to a life-appropriate order,
Morality and faith leads."


(Stengel-v. Rutkowski: Of omnipotence and order of life.)


We therefore believe that the races are part of the divine world order. Racial care,
racial unity and race selection are therefore divine imperatives. The purer the races are in
themselves, the purer and richer they will be able to develop their inherent skills and abilities,
the greater their contributions to the meaningful fulfillment of human order.


The people as a link in the order of creation


The starting point for National Socialist teaching is the people. In it we recognize the
visible work of a divine will to order. That is why the sharpest opponent of National
Socialism is any form of international leveling, whether political or religious. Because only
through belonging and confession to the people does the individual stand under the true law of
God. This law obliges him to use his life in the sense of God's order. That is why, for us
National Socialists, a violation of the moral principles of our people, of repentance and
obedience means real blasphemy.A man's highest imperative is towards his people.


"My will, that must be our confession — it is your Faith! My belief rests in me - just
like you - everything in this world! But the highest thing that God has given me in this world
is my people! My faith rests in it, I serve it with my will, and I give it my life.”


-The Fuhrer on May 1935.
Kinship and family as God-given life-conservation institutions


"Caring for the natural and thus also for the divine will is our most sacred task," says
the Fuhrer. Since family and clan are the real bearers of the people, the bond with them means
service to the people, worship. This ministry is free from any mystical semi-darkness of cult
acts. The highlights of life, birth, naming, betrothal, wedding and death become a celebration
and festive event in the family and clan community alone. Both of you, in the middle of which
steps on the path of man only gain the greatest sense, also shape the forms of these events. We
place family and clan as a divine order against uprooting and massing and the homelessness
of an international disenfranchised proletariat. Real faithfulness against pious dishonesty


The opponent is only happy to accuse us of religious crimes or to accuse us of
"paganism". He hypocritically described the desecration of European domes, monuments and
cultural sites as necessary for the destruction of barbarism. We oppose this will to annihilate
the unshakable belief in a just, divine order. The enemy will be mistaken about the strength of
our faith. The belief in a meaningful world order grew out of the National Socialist
understanding of the damage done to this world. It is the backbone of our political will, which
emerged victorious from the struggle of the movement and which will also victoriously end
this struggle.


477


Che Organization and Obligation/
of the 55 and the Police


INTRODUCTION - HISTORICAL BACKGROUND


Restricted to the Armed Forces


I shall speak first of all about the origin, organization, and the spheres of activity of
the SS; secondly, about the organization and obligations of the Police; and thirdly, about the
combined efforts of the SS and the Police, and about the important and vitally necessary
question on the internal security of the Reich.


The SS originated in 1923, very early in the history of the movement, as shock troop
[Stosstrupp] Hitler, was prohibited and disbanded on November 9, 1923. When the party was
re-established in 1925, the SA as a protective organization for the meetings was at first
prohibited. The Fuehrer was also denied the right of speech and assembly in Prussia as well as
in Bavaria. Assembly was permitted only in Saxony and Thuringia which at that time were
entirely red.


In order to ensure the success of these meetings, it was necessary to protect them
from dispersal. Therefore in 1925 the Fuehrer ordered a small organization to be formed in
order to protect these meetings, namely the SS [SS, protective squadrons]-literally Staffeln at
that time, namely small formations with the effective strength of one leader and 10 men in
each location. Even as large a city as Berlin had a squadron of only 2 leaders and 20 men at
that time. Throughout 1925 and 1926 we succeeded in carrying out and carrying through the
meetings of the Fuehrer and also of other party speakers in Saxony and Thuringia with these
squadrons.


In 1926 the SA was again permitted to exist, and for a few years the SS withdrew
more into the background. In the year 1929, eight years ago, I was ordered by the Fuehrer to
take over the leadership of all SS units in the entire Reich, then totaling 280 men, and to
change them according to the order, into a reliable elite organization of the Party. I decided to
tackle this problem - which I should like to discuss here to some extent - because I was a
National Socialist, of course. I want to tell you also how this is to be interpreted. I am a strong
believer in the doctrine that, in the end, only good blood can achieve the greatest, enduring
things in the world. Strengthened by this conviction of mine, I began to work on this problem.


RACIAL PRINCIPLES OF THE SS


Accordingly only good blood, blood which history has proved to be leading and
creative and the foundation of every state and all military activities, only Nordic blood, can be
considered. I said to myself that should I succeed to select from the German people for this
organization as many people as possible a majority of whom possess this desired blood, to
teach them military discipline and, in time, the understanding of the value of blood and the
entire ideology which results from it, then it will be possible actually to create such an elite
organization which would successfully hold its own in all cases of emergency.


This form of selection of good blood has been very often theoretically recognized.
Many books have been written on it from Chamberlain to Guenther of the years 1926/27, and


479


many others which I shall not mention here. Now came the difficult question of the method of
selecting these people. There are two kinds of selection procedures: first, the most severe
selection procedure brought about by war, the struggle for life and death. In this procedure the
value of blood is shown through achievement. In the year 1929, a great number of former
soldiers still existed whose worth could be determined by their record during the war. Wars
however, are exceptional circumstances, and a way had to be found to make selections in
peace time as well, when courage could not be given this test. Thus, I could only draw
conclusions from the appearance of the people in question. Of course, many will argue
immediately: that is all very well but if you judge by height, blond hair and blue eyes and the
dimensions of the skull then the matter is very problematical. That is known to me very well,
too. One could never judge by that alone.


I then went on to require a certain height. I did not accept people under 1.7 meters,
and here I ask you to understand the exact meaning to my words, because I know that people
who have reached a certain height must possess the desired blood to some degree. Of course it
is impossible to be too discriminating here as it cannot be said that people who are smaller
should not possess the same blood. That is natural but by choosing from this pool of people
having the desired height there exists a greater probability of obtaining satisfactory results.


But we went further. It was not enough to go by height, but we began to obtain
photographs at that time. That amounted to a hundred to two hundred people annually who
were eligible for admission. I have personally seen each photograph and asked myself: Does
the face of this man have distinct traits of foreign blood, excessive cheek bones, or as is the
common way of asking: Does this one appear Mongolic or that one Slavic? Slavic,
incidentally, is a faulty expression. It is merely a popular expression.


Why have I done all this? I should like to call to your attention here the types of
soldier councils of the years 1918 and 1919. Everyone of you who was an officer at that time
knows a number of such people by personal experience. You will have to admit that on the
whole they were people whose appearance affected our German eye as rather peculiar, whose
features looked strange and who had some foreign blood in them. They were the type of
people who could be disciplined, who are orderly in normal times, who would even be brave,
bold and daring in time of war but who, because of their blood, would fail to pass the final
great test of character and nerves.


Since I knew these things I said to myself: I shall not accept people whom I expect to
quit, to complain, to become disloyal and traitors, to have bad soldierly manners and the like
at the moment of political tests, because of the nature of the composition of their blood. We
had to be all the more careful because we had only voluntary discipline in the SS during the
years of struggle, and therefore we were unable to compel a man to do something.

It was only possible to deprive the man of his arm band for a period of three or four weeks or
impose on him penal drills, and that only if he voluntarily accepted the punishment. If he was
unwilling he could always say: "I resign, I don't like it any longer." We therefore have
followed the above-mentioned principle of selection and been able to remove the principal
causes of defect.

With this outward screening however, no final selection had been attained, since it was
always the performance of the person during the following months and years which was of
importance. It was my point of view that we should always require difficult tasks and more
than any other organization. Valuable personnel is never trained by means of easy service and
conveniences, but by difficulties and added burdens. We therefore began by exacting from our
men higher dues in spite of the widespread poverty of the times. At a time when no uniforms
were issued to party organizations, we asked our people to acquire black trousers and boots
from their own means-a tremendous expense for an unemployed person who had to pay the 40
marks of his own purse. If he failed to do so and declared: I cannot do that, then we explained


480


to him: please go away, for you somehow failed to understand the matter for you do not
possess the instinctive willingness to a sacrifice of your own accord, for we cannot use you,
Thus we gradually arrived at our intended and desired picture. This briefly-mentioned theory
of selection of people may be criticized, today after eight years I believe I can say with
sincerity that its practical application has justified its existence, and that it has really been
possible to effect a certain selection of people in the SS already during the time of fighting.


THE SS IN POWER: RECRUITMENT &
ORGANIZATIONAL HIERARCHY OF THE
ALLGEMEINE-SS


I shall skip the next few periods and shall now occupy myself with the year 1933.
This year was for the SS the hardest trial; for it was a time when all organizations flourished,
a time of great assault and tidal waves of those who desired membership in the party and its
organizations. A very difficult question confronted us at that time. It was a question of
deciding whether to close the party and its organizations to further membership and thus
remaining pure in quality but small in volume, or of opening them to further membership to
increase their volume. This resulted in a dangerous situation, as was shown as a number of
people poured in who were not entirely loyal and idealists, so that to a certain degree it
became a menace of numbers, of the masses.


The SS too was endangered by this menace. Therefore I closed it in April 1933 while
some of the other organizations still accepted as great a number of people as possible. This
way I had the SS again under my control in April and said: We shall accept no more people.
From the end of 1933 to the end of 1935 we expelled all those of the newly accepted members
who proved unsuitable. In these years I have expelled approximately 60,000 men. Today the
strength of the SS consists of approximately 210,000 men. This has been of great benefit to
the SS and all of its units as its quality has greatly improved whereas it would have suffered
considerably through quantity.


I shall close the question of selection by stating that today we accept young men of
18 years of age. We know them already from the Hitler Youth, have studied them already a
few years, so that we are sure to get only the best. With 18 years they come to us as
candidates.


They are extremely thoroughly examined and checked. Of 100 men we can use on
the average 10 or 15, no more. We ask for the political reputation record of his parents,
brothers and sisters, the record of his ancestry as far back as 1750 and naturally the physical
examination and his records of the Hitler Youth. Further we ask for a record of hereditary
health showing that no hereditary diseases exist in his parents and in his family. Last, but
perhaps most important, is a certification of the race commission. This examining commission
is composed of SS leaders, anthropologists and physicians.


The behavior of this young man in front of this commission is now what is decisive:
Not only the way he stands at attention but also his manly disciplined bearing, the ease and
composition with which he answers the questions posed to him in the course of conversation,
his gait, his hands, in fact all that which we have come to regard in the course of our eight
years of experience as ideal. This is the way we determine whether to accept the man or not.
The first years the company has been very unhappy in many cases. It asked: Why is this man
refused us? We have just located in this or that village a man who has in every respect an
orderly appearance and now when this man confronts the race commission he is being refused


481


at a time when it is so difficult to obtain people. In such cases we have always remained and
still remain severe and that is the right thing. That is the proper way to conduct a veritable
selection.


I now come to the organization of the SS. It is necessary to distinguish among the
following organizations of the SS. First the General SS which consists of about 190,000 men.
This General SS is entirely civilian in nature except for the higher officer corps, which
performs its duties on the higher levels, that is from Sturmbannfiihrer up. I am very proud of
the fact that only 0.4 percent of the General SS are unemployed. These 0.4 percent come from
Upper Silesia where it is really very difficult to obtain work. We have almost only
professionals, and it is my opinion that it should be so. For a really capable man is of little
value to me if he only excels in arts, he must also be otherwise honest and of good character,
and accomplish something in his field, in his profession. A man who changes his position
three times without satisfactory reason is expelled as we have no further interest in him.
People who stand around idle are of no use to us. The General SS, therefore, is entirely
professional in its nature and character and performs its duties nights and Sundays just like in
war time. Besides the General SS there is the Verfuegungstruppe; also the Death Head Units,
the SD, and the race and population system. I shall now discuss individual units in some detail.
The General SS is divided into 13 subdivisions which on the whole are exactly adapted to the
present corps districts and one corps district being planned. Under these subdivisions headed
by Oberabschnittsfiihrer who are Gruppenfiihrer or Obergruppenfiihrer, there are those which
are headed by an Oberfiihrer or Brigadefiihrer. These subdivisions, in their turn, are
subdivided into SS regiments [Standarten]. A regiment, if in its entire force, is made up of
1600 men. Under the regiments we have the battalions [Sturmbanne] and companies
[Stiirme] , and under the companies the platoons.


A great many SS men live very far apart. Of course, it would be much more
convenient to set up a Sturmbanne in some town and in this way have all the people always
together. That would facilitate considerably the exercises which always take place in the
evening hours, instruction and sport, and require much less effort. However, that would
inevitably result in a decreasing quality because not enough people possessing the desired
qualities could be obtained in a town of approximately 20 to 25 thousand inhabitants. We
have, therefore, extended our organization considerably and have many platoons in the
country side. These platoons are then divided up between the villages, so that in a typical
village only the two best young men are SS members. We have meetings over the week ends
when the farmer is not too occupied, or one entire afternoon in the winter, while in summer
we only have monthly roll calls. That is the outline of the organization of the General SS.


The age groups in the SS are as follows: With 18 years the young man enters the SS.
He is first an applicant, after three months he takes the oath on the Fuehrer and thus becomes
a candidate [Anwarter]. As a candidate during the first year he, takes examinations for his SA
sport insignia and his bronze sport insignia. At the age of 19 or 19 1/2, according to the time
of his acceptance, he is conscripted for the labor service and subsequently for the Wehrmacht.
After two more years he comes back from the Wehrmacht unless he remains there as a
prospective noncommissioned officer or reenlists. If he returns to us he is still candidate. In
these weeks he is especially thoroughly instructed in ideology. The first year is for him a
period of elementary ideological indoctrination. In these weeks following his return from the
Wehrmacht he receives special instruction about the marriage law and all other laws
pertaining to the family, and the honor laws. On the 9th of November, following his return
from the Wehrmacht, he becomes an SS man in the true sense. The Reichsfiihrer of the SS is
just as much an SS man in the sense of the SS organization as the common man at the front.
On this 9th of November he is being awarded the dagger, and at this occasion he promises to
abide by the marriage law and the disciplinary laws of the SS, since the family is also subject


482


to these laws. From this day on he has the right and the duty to defend his honor with a
weapon as laid down by the honor laws of the SS. The applicants and candidates do not yet
have this right. The SS man remains in the so called active general SS until his 36th year.
From his 35th to his 46th year he is in the SS reserve, and after his 45th year in the
Stammabteilung of the SS, identified by the grey color patch. Between the ages of 21 and 36
the SS man has to perform a great many duties, especially up to his 25th year. In these first
four years there are a lot of marches, tournaments, i. e., sports of all kinds which take the form
of contests that take place each year between Easter and Summer solstice so that we are able
to select the best men of every company by these demonstrations of physical ability. Every SS
men is being asked to pass some kind of annual test until his 50th year. And the reason for
that? These men are for the most part professionals. In the SS perhaps anywhere from 1/2 to
3/5 live in cities. The workman in the cities is often engaged in occupations requiring him to
stand or the intellectual worker to sit for a considerable amount of time. To that is added the
misery of big cities which in my opinion is also a very serious military question.


MILITARY TRAINING OF SS MEN


People of the 20th Century no longer walk but travel in the subway, railroad or cars.
Nobody is accustomed to marching in all the years of his civilian life. Or take those who hold
leading positions as an example, all the professional State and Ministry leaders. These people
are condemned to sit. Everybody is so pressed for time he has to take an automobile because
there is no other way to keep up with the rush. The result of this is that people grow pale and
fat and in some cases phlegmatic which is never good for the State. If we desire to remain
young we have to be sportsmen. But all that would remain on paper if I did not hold annual
checkups or arouse to a certain degree the ambition of the men so that they really become
sportsmen and pass their annual tests.


The performance insignia of the SA have the following meaning: every form of sport
which requires the use of arms is being executed with both arms. Shot-put is done with both
arms; the same holds true for stone putting. Pistols and rifles are fired left and right. That
appears terribly awkward and unaccustomed in the beginning, but it is an excellent form of
exercise and very successful. Hand grenades and clubs are hurled left and right. In the
beginning no record performances can be expected of course of people past their twentieth
year, since the left arm or in the case of a left-handed person the right arm, are completely
untrained, so that at a distance of 10 m the target is often missed by three or five meters. It
will be, however, a very good development and application of all physical strength if we
require such performances of youths in the ages of 13 to 14 from the very beginning. I believe
that in this way we shall be very successful. Every year the performance insignia differ. Of
course, I do not expect the conditions and time from a 40 year old for a 100 meter race as I do
expect them from a man of 21, but I do require of the man of 40 greater endurance in
marching than I do of the man of 21. I expect a 30 year old man to shoot calmer and better
than a 19 or 20 year old with few examples. They are also graded to the extent that a wounded
war veteran who e. g. cannot swim need not, for that reason, refuse every sport. But I want to
help him by grading the conditions so that one who lost an arm can perform the exercise with
the other arm. Such are the sport activities of the SS from the ages of 18 to 50. Aside from the
sport activity, those between the ages of 21 and 36 receive complete training in street
patrolling and barricading for cases of internal security. Hand in hand with physical exercise
is mental and ideological training. Weekly periods of instruction are held during which pages
from Hitler's Mein Kampf are read. The older a person, the more steadfast must he be in his
ideology and the more training must he get in ideology.


483


ORGANIZATION OF THE
SS-VERFUGUNGSTRUPPE


I now come to the Verfuegungstruppe [Forerunner of Armed Forces SS] . The
Verfuegungstruppe is divided into the following units: SS Regiment "Adolf Hitler," with three
battalions, which is motorized and at the same time contains infantrymen and additional
companies; SS Regiment "Deutschland" with 4 battalions with the usual motorcycle riflemen
and infantry howitzer companies; SS Regiment "Germania" with 3 battalions also with
motorcycle riflemen infantry howitzer companies; the SS battalion "Niirnberg," an infantry
battalion; the SS engineer battalion today in Leipzig; later in Dresden; and the SS signal
battalion today in Berlin, later in Unna, upon completion of the barracks. The Regiment
"Adolf Hitler" is in Berlin. The Regiment "Deutschland" has three battalions in Munich and
one battalion in Ellwangen, the Regiment "Germania" has now one battalion and two
companies in Hamburg, and one battalion in Arolsen and up to now one other battalion in
Soltau. The final garrison is not yet stationary. The time of service is 4 years. No other form
of conscription exists. The annual need for replacement will be approximately 2200 men, not
a great number.


SS DEATH'S HEAD UNITS
& CONCENTRATION CAMPS


I now come to the Death Head Units. The employment and obligations of the
Verfuegungstruppe I shall discuss later in connection with the police. The Death Head Units
originated from the guard units of the concentration camps. In connection with these
concentration camps, I should like to give a few data. We have in Germany today the
following concentration camps which, in my opinion, should not decrease but increase in
number for certain reasons:


(1) Dachau near Munich; (2) Sachsenhausen near Berlin, which is the former camp Esterwege
in Emsland. I have dissolved this camp in Emsland upon the suggestion of Reich Labor
Leader, Hierl, and the judiciary, who declared it was wrong to tell one person that the service
in the swamps to make land arable is an honor, and another, by sending him there as a
prisoner: "I'll teach you people what it means to get sent to the swamps." This indeed is
illogical, and after half or three quarters of a year, I dissolved the camp in Esterwege and
transferred it to Sachsenhausen near Oranienburg. Then there is a camp in Lichtenburg near
Torgau, one in Sachsenburg near Chemnitz and besides a few smaller ones. The number of
prisoners is about 8000. I shall explain to you why we must have so many and still more. We
once had a very efficiently organized German Communist Party [KPD] . The KPD was
crushed in the year 1933. A part of the functionaries went to foreign countries. Another part
was comprised in the very high number of protective custody prisoners in the year 1933.
Because of my extensive knowledge of Bolshevism, I have always opposed the release of
these people from the camps. It must be clear to us that the great mass of workmen are
absolutely susceptible to National Socialism and the contemporary form of state as long as
their way of thought has not been changed by the specifically indoctrinated, trained and
financially backed functionaries.


It would be extremely instructive for everyone-some members of the Wehrmacht


were already able to do so-to inspect such a concentration camp. Once they have seen it, they
are convinced of the fact that no one had been sent there unjustly; that it is the offal of


485


criminals and freaks. No better demonstration of the laws of inheritance and race, as set forth
by Doctor Guett, exists than such a concentration camp. There you can find people with
hydrocephalus, people who are cross-eyed, deformed, half-Jewish, and a number of racially
inferior products. All that is assembled there. Of course we distinguish between those inmates
who are only there for a few months for the purpose of education, and those who are to stay
for a very long time. On the whole, education consists of discipline, never of any kind of
instruction on an ideological basis, for the prisoners have, for the most part, slave-like souls;
and only very few people of real character can be found there. They would pretend to do all
that would be asked of them, repeat all that is said in the Vélkischer Beobachter but in reality,
stay the same. The discipline thus preens order. The order begins with these people living in
clean barracks. Such a thing can really only be accomplished by us Germans, hardly another
nation would be as humane as we are. The laundry is frequently changed. The people are
taught to wash themselves twice daily, and the use of a toothbrush with which most of them
have been unfamiliar. The concentration camps are guarded by these Death Head Units. It is
impossible to use exclusively married people for guard duty as has been suggested once, for
no state can afford to do so. It is further necessary to keep the number of such guards for
concentration camps-there are 3,500 men in Germany-at a relatively high level, for no form of
service is as exacting and strenuous for troops as the guarding of crooks and criminals. In case
of war, it must become clear to us that a considerable number of unreliable persons will have
to be put here if we are to assure ourselves of the absence of highly disagreeable
developments in case of war.


The prisoner guards were formerly members of the General SS. We gradually
collected them into the so-called Death Head Units. They are not arranged in companies, but
in centuries (groups of 100) and have naturally also machine guns. In such camps there are
two or three control towers, manned day and night with fully loaded machine guns, so that
any attempt of a general uprising, a possibility for which we must always be prepared, can be
immediately suppressed. The entire camp can be strafed from three towers.


The time of service in these Death Head Units is also four years. They consist today
mainly of people who have served their time in the Wehrmacht and then enlisted with us for a
period of four years. The Death Head Units have the additional purpose of being the cadre
centuries for approximately 30 Death Head special battalions of the SS in case of war, for
25,000 men with whom we shall guarantee the safety in the interior, I shall come back to this
subject later.


THE SECURITY SERVICE - SD


I now come to the Security Service [SD]; it is the great ideological intelligence
service of the party and, in the long run, also that of the state. During the time of struggle for
power it was only the intelligence service of the SS. At that time we had, for quite natural
reasons, an intelligence service with the regiments, battalions and companies. We had to
know what was going on on the opponent's side, whether the Communists intended to hold a
meeting today or not, whether our people were to be suddenly attacked or not and similar
things. I separated this service already in 1941 from the troops, from the units of the general
SS, because I considered it to be wrong. For one thing, the secrecy is endangered, then the
individual men or even the companies are too likely to discuss every day problems.


That was indeed the principle of the SS from the beginning. Every day problems do


not interest us; every leader appointed by the Fuehrer will be backed by us, every leader
dismissed by the Fuehrer will be removed by us, if necessary by force, because only the


486


command o f the Fuehrer counts. Besides that we are only interested in ideological questions
of importance for decades or centuries, so that the man is really above the concern of every
day and knows that he is working for a great task, which occurs but once in 2000 years. The
SS man is not interested in daily problem of the kind whether perhaps the local group is
correctly manned, whether everything is done properly in the labor front, no matter what it is,
he is not interested.


The Security Service was already separated from the troops in 1931 and separately
organized. Its higher headquarters coincide today with the Oberabschnitte and Abschnitte
(sectors), and it has also field offices, an own organization of officials with a great many
Command Posts, approximately 3-4000 men strong, at least when it is built up. The spheres
which it handles are above all Communism, Judaism, Freemasonry, ultra mundane activities,
the activity of political religion, and reaction. Here, too, the details of the work are not of
interest. You will perhaps see that during your visit; I can, therefore, be short. The, security
service is only interested in the great ideological problems.


For example: Let us say that it is attempted on the part of ultra-Montane people to
effect gradually for the territory of Austria a change into a Swiss like state by means of
scientific exploitation of the theory of the Austrian man. Just as it happened to us in our
history 700 or 800 years ago with Switzerland which, although it still speaks the German
language today, does not consider itself inwardly as belonging to Germany; or as we had to
suffer the loss of Holland with its entire lower German territory a few centuries ago; the
attempt is now being made to point at this problem of the South-East German people, of the
Austrian people, with propaganda, by scientific under running and scientific work at the
universities, until spiritual separation is also possible. We are furthermore interested: Which
German professors support this theory or are connected with any wire-pulling abroad or
elsewhere?


These are spheres which interest us. To us as a security service it is of no interest
whether, for instance, the, cell organization of the German Communist party at Berlin-
Wedding has been broken up or not. This is a question for the executive power. One day it
will be broken up, or it is broken up already, and if it is reorganized, it will be broken up again.
Therefore, this is of no interest to us, on account of that Germany will not perish. We are
interested: What are the Communists large-scale plans for the next years, in which country do
they intend to begin, which influences of Bolshevism are noticeable in foreign Freemasonry
circles, what are their plans, where do the big emissaries go now? Recently, e. g. 800
emissaries went to Austria. They arrived there 3 or 4 months ago, and now we are extremely
interested to know: How is this going to affect Austria? Or what plans do they have, what
great organizational plans for Germany, from which angle do they start, how does Bolshevism
make common cause, for instance, with the religious coalition [Bekenntnisfront], and
suddenly supports as an atheist movement these religious parsons, how is that possible all of a
sudden? Or we are furthermore interested in this: What economic influence do the Jews
exercise-again considered on a large scale-to suffocate business, to commit sabotage and to
transfer foreign currency illegally? These are things which are being studied there
scientifically and-in this case the word really fits-by a general staff, which may sometimes last
for years, tasks which in many or in most cases are only in the beginning stage. After the
Security Service follows the last pillar, the race-and settlement organization. We thus have the
General SS, which represents the majority of the SS, of the order, the Verfiigungs Troops with
a certain task in the country for the protection of the interior, the Security Service, the
intelligence service of the party and the state, and finally the race-and settlement organization
whose task of ideological training is of a positive nature, as contracted [sic] with the Security
Service which has the negative task to seek information about the opponent. In this race-and
settlement office the marriage applications are being handled. In the last 4 or 5 years we have
the order concerning marriages: No SS men can get married without the approval of the SS


487


Reich leader. A physical examination of the bride and guarantees for the bride's ideological
and human character are required. We are not interested whether the woman has a fortune or
not. We request only a statement whether or not she has defects, We prefer it if the rich girls
take along only what they have earned themselves, or their dowry. In addition, the
genealogical table up to 1750 is required, the hereditary physical report of both, and several
police and other reports. This results in tremendous work, especially now that people are
getting married in an unusually great number; because it is our concern, that our men get
married. We desire that they get married at 26 years, if possible, so that there will be really
young marriages which are also able to have children.


THE POLICE


I now turn to the Police and its structure. Today the Police is divided into two
branches, namely civil and security police; the civil police wears a uniform. The security
police is composed of the criminal police and of the Secret State Police [Gestapo]. We can
certainly state without exaggeration that in 1933 we took over a wild confusion, a Police the
decent elements of which were humiliated; for the sword had been taken away from the
officers and a rubber truncheon had been given to the men. The police was permeated by
persons with criminal records and by absolute Marxists; it did not dare to actually take a stand
against any crime because at once the League for Human Rights, the Peace Society and
similar societies intervened, and because absolute glorification of crime was in vogue. This
was the method of planned intellectual Bolshevization.


In Prussia, Goering took over the Police, put the uniformed police in order, and
created a Landespolizei (gendarmerie) which in 1935-1936 was absorbed by the army; the
same occurred in Bavaria. From my SS position, I first of all concerned myself only with the
Secret State Police, with the political Police of the countries and with the Secret State Police
in Prussia. Through the fact that I personally was political police commander of all German
countries, and at the same time deputy of the Gestapo in Prussia, the Gestapo gradually came
under the control of one person.


I may skip the whole further development. On the 17th of June of the previous year I
became head of the German police, that is, of all the German Police together with its auxiliary
organizations. I shall review for you my conception of my task as I have seen and still see it.


First : I shall ultimately form one true Reich police out of these 16 different
gendarmeries, for the Reich police is one of the strongest binding elements that a state can
have. We now have for the first time in German history a Reich Police. Outwardly, I am
eliminating the various uniforms, the laws and regulations which were still in force until six
or nine months ago. When a Hamburg police official was pursuing a criminal who was bold
enough to go into Prussian territory, he could not pursue him farther without the consent of
the Prussian Police. This naturally was to the great advantage of the criminal, for he could
very easily escape. The same was the case between the other states of the federation. These
things were still on such a firm legal basis that one could not do away with them without legal
revision.


For the creation of the Reich police, not only outwardly but also inwardly, I have
already made a beginning in the officers' corps and with the officials, by shifting the people
somewhat, through transfers, etc., in this way showing Germany to them; thus my dear
Bavarians may come North for a change,. and the people from the North go South. If that is
not done they all groan a little about it at first, as was the case with the SS a few years ago.
Now a telegram arrives suddenly, the man is to be at his new post in two days. Transfers are


488


effected on principle only by telegram, that keeps people young and fresh. As stated, this is
only the beginning of our work with the Reich police.


The effective strength of officers and men is very low. That is quite understandable,
for the police has given up much of its good or even best personnel for setting up the
Landespolizei. The Landespolizei was absorbed by the Wehrmacht, and what is left in many
places is the poorest not only of equipment, trucks, autos and other things, but sometimes the
poorest of officers and men. All of this must now be painfully built up and brought into order.
As far as I can, I am now bringing the police up to full strength with men leaving the
Verfuegungstruppe (reserve unit) and the Death Head Units; I am bringing the police officers’
corps up to full strength with SS leaders who come into the police from the Télz and
Brunswick Fihrerschulen [Leader Training schools] by way of the Verfuegungstruppe. This
brings me to an important problem; I am fighting to prevent the police officers' corps from
becoming a second class officers' corps. This happens very easily just as it did in the past.


THE INTERNAL SECURITY DUTIES
OF THE POLICE IN WARTIME


In connection with this whole matter, I now come to the main problem: internal
security and obligations of the police during war. In a future war we shall have not only an
army front on land, a navy front at sea, and an air force front in the air over Germany, but we
shall also have a fourth theater of war, namely internal Germany. This is the basis which must
be kept sound, at all costs, lest the three combat branches of Germany be stabbed in the back
again.


We must clearly recognize that an opponent in war is an opponent not only in a
military but also in an ideological sense. When I speak here of opponents, I obviously mean
our natural opponent, international Bolshevism, under Jewish-Masonic leadership. This
Bolshevism, of course, has its supreme citadel in Russia. But this does not mean that there is
danger of Bolshevist attack from Russia only. One must always reckon with this danger from
wherever this Jewish Bolshevism has gained decisive influence for itself. The states or people
under Jewish-Masonic-Bolshevist leadership, or at least strong influence, will of necessity be
unfriendly toward Germany and will constitute a danger. Thus we must constantly ask
ourselves, "Who is, or would be an opponent in case of war? Who is an ideological opponent,
that is, who is under Jewish-Masonic-Bolshevist influence"? We must clearly realize, that
Bolshevism is the organization of the sub-humans, it is the absolute foundation of Jewish
sovereignty, it is the exact contrary of all that is. It is a diabolical teaching, for it appeals to
the meanest and lowest instincts of mankind and makes a religion of this. Do not be deceived:
Bolshevism, with its Lenin entombed in the Kremlin, will take only a few decades to become
the diabolical religion of destruction, a religion native to Asia for the destruction of the whole
world. (Furthermore, remember that this Bolshevism is working according to plan for the
Bolshevization of other peoples, and the destruction is aimed at the white race. One of the
first institutions founded under Jewish leadership, as early as 1918, was an Asiatic university
as I shall call it. It has a kind of department for each Asiatic population, whether numerous or
not. The functionaries for these populations are instructed not only in their language, but also
as to the customs, as to the religious and class quarrels, and the economic circumstances, etc.
They are instructed whether these people are mostly rich or poor, whether the poorer class is
particularly oppressed, etc. All of this is studied down to the smallest sects. The people who
have finished their education there, then go out in a constant stream to all of these people and
exploit their wishes and longings as their religious differences and their fanaticism, taking
advantage of social misery, to draw them into a whirlpool and thus gradually convince them
that the only ones who can really help them are the people in Moscow.


489


This general movement is also directed against the white race, and is today directed
primarily against resurrected Germany, which was generally considered to have been ruined,
because of having been subdued. If we wish to be immune to the poison of destruction in our
people, our lives must again be founded on social well being, order and cleanliness. We are in
the process of creating both. The first four years have passed; unemployment has almost
vanished, much has been accomplished, much more remains to be done by us. But the most
important thing is the thorough ideological permeation of all our people with the profound
realization that our people, a minority of 70 million in the heart of Europe, could stand only
because we are qualitatively more valuable than the others. And this brings me back to what I
said about the race question at the beginning.


We are more valuable than the others who do now and always will surpass us in
numbers. We are more valuable because our blood enables us to invent more than others, to
lead our people better than the others; because it enables us to have better soldiers, better
statesmen, higher culture, better characters. We also have better quality, speaking of your
profession, because the German soldier is more devoted to duty, more decent, and more
intelligent than the soldiers of other countries. And we shall maintain this quality as long as
we keep our blood and people healthy, so long as this people recognizes and obeys the ancient
laws for preservation of a people which National Socialism, thanks to Adolf Hitler, restored to
it. We shall remain healthy and immune as long as we do not slide back into democracy, into
a hereditary or legitimate imperialism which did not develop from the people. Let us realize
clearly that we shall weather the next decades only if we are a people that has a profound
conviction of itself, believes in its own strength, and proves this strength.


I spoke of the ideological permeation of the whole people in case of war. If this war
should come sooner than any of us believe or wish, that is, if war will come at all, we must
clearly realize that there will always be a residue among the German people who will form a
nucleus for the Comintern. The Comintern have an easy time of it, for they have a political
agitator and at the same time a military spy who sells. Every communist is also a military spy
who reveals any military and industrial secret out of loyalty to his imaginary fatherland,
Moscow, the native land of the proletarians. Because of his conviction, he engages in political
agitation and sedition in exactly the same way in order to start the revolution. The sooner war
would come, the greater would be the danger. The later it comes, the more generations of
youth have grown up, year after year, the less is the danger. The danger would arise again
only if the German people would deviate from today's path. In any case, we must prepare for
this danger, for this internal theater of war, and always realize clearly that any war brought
about by neglect of this internal theater of war would lead to damage.


I picture the scope of obligations in case of war as follows: The police of course
would, according to their duty as I see it, be able to give up a maximum of 15,000 to 20,000
men (not more) to the Wehrmacht as soldiers. I have a total of 80,000 to 90,000 uniformed
police. It must be taken into consideration that a large part of this uniformed police is over or
at least over 40, so that if I should give up 15,000 to 20,000, I really would give up the
backbone of this police. I can substitute men over 56 or 60 whom I may reactivate. That could
be done if unavoidable. However, it is possible only if I assure myself of an attack unit
[Einsatztruppe] which I can use for large scale projects. These are the Death Head Units. By
and large, I can get along with this old Police force. I can carry out all the former tasks of the
Landsturm, i.e. guarding munitions factories, railroad crossings, etc., with civilians over 45,
who would be drafted as auxiliary police as planned provided I have as a backbone a troop
that is young. For this the Death Head Units are provided, ranging in age from 25 to 3 5, not
older and not younger.


490


I do not wish to have any very young nor any old persons, for the sabotage and terror
troops consist of young, very lively persons with the most modern equipment. This opponent
cannot be fought with old Landsturm personnel. The Death Head Units will enter every
government district of Germany. The following measures have been provided: firstly, no unit
is to go to its native province, thus a Pomeranian troop would never serve in Pomerania.
Secondly, each unit will change after three months. Thirdly, the unit will never be assigned to
street duty singly. An individual with the death head insignia will never be used as a
policeman for street service, that must not be. Fourth, if such use is made relentless measures
are to be taken. Anything else is out of the question. Otherwise we would have to reckon in
Germany with such possibilities as parachute jumps, use of saboteurs, use of bold groups of
16 or 20 men who might, with the support of Communist personnel, entrench themselves in a
munitions factory. If these measures are not provided for one could not get along with such a
limited personnel.


CONCLUSION


In closing, I may say one thing: I can manage with the officers' corps of the civil
police and with the men of the Security Service, whom I naturally cannot release even in war,
and with the men and leaders of the Death Head Units, only if I have valuable and decent
people in them. I must make it possible by way of the Verfuegungstruppe which will be in
combat, to have a constant exchange of wounded or those who have been at the front a long
time, in return for officers and men of the police and the Death Head Units. Otherwise, I
either would get no decent characters for these home formations, and then obviously could not
fulfill the obligations; or else there would appear in the home formations manifestations of
disturbances as happened with the fleet during the war, because it didn't get out. This must be
avoided, and for this reason rotation is planned within the organization. Every SS leader of the
Verfuegungstruppe, we have about 300 SS leaders yearly coming from the Télz and
Brunswick SS schools, is placed with the civil police once every half year, in order to become
a reserve officer of the police. I can make good use of these people. If, for instance, one of
them is wounded and has only one arm, he can still render excellent service at home. An
appreciation of this completely new kind of organization must penetrate everywhere, as well
as an understanding of this internal theater of war which will mean the difference between the
existence or nonexistence of our people if we ever would have to stand a trial. It is the
obligation of the SS and of the police to solve positively the problem of internal security. That
is the assignment given to us by the Fuehrer. We are tackling it in all seriousness and are
really convinced that it is no second-rate task, and we are further convinced that only the best
ideological training of our men and a racial selection will enable us to solve this problem
some day.


In this short outline I have depicted for you the task of the SS and police. Just as I do
in every address to Wehrmacht officers, I ask you in your circle to think yourselves into these
somewhat novel channels of thought, and create understanding for it wherever you can. Let us
all clearly realize, the next decades do not signify any foreign political argument which
Germany either can or cannot overcome, but they signify a fight of extermination of the
above-mentioned subhuman opponents in the whole world who fight Germany, as the nuclear
people of the Northern race, Germany as nucleus of the German people, Germany as bearer of
the culture of mankind; they signify the existence or nonexistence of the white race of which
we are the leading people. We have, of course, one conviction: we are lucky enough to be
alive just at the time when once in 2,000 years an Adolf Hitler has been born, and we are
convinced that we shall survive every danger in both good and bad times because we all hold
together and because each one approaches his work with his conviction.


491


Syllabuf for Jdeological
fducation in the 55 and Police


The SS, History and Task


You and the SS,
You wear on your paddock the words:
“My Honor is called Loyalty”


On your collar mirror you wear the double Sig rune of the SS. You have thus
consciously placed yourself in a community which has assumed special duties within the
whole of the people.


Are you aware that you have to carry a certain share of these duties? Have you ever
thought about what the special duties of the SS-man are? Do you know what the law of
fidelity means to you in detail?


Do you know anything about the SS's achievements? Of their tasks during the
struggle and in the new Germany? Of their commitment to the future of a new Europe?


In order for you to answer these questions, you should learn the most important
things about the history of the SS, their tasks and goals. The path of the Black Corps began in
the earliest days of the National Socialist movement. In March 1923, the nucleus of what
would later become the SS the "Stabswache" - formed from specially selected, absolutely
reliable party comrades. These men already wear the skull and crossbones on their caps and
the black-rimmed armbands. In May of the same year, the Stabswache merged into the "Storm
Trooper Hitler" - led by Josef Berchtold. This small unit, determined to the last, united Adolf
Hitler's most loyal fellow fighters. With tasks similar to those of the later SS, the Storm
Trooper has gone down in history, but it steadfastly pursued its uncompromising path of
struggle to the bitter end, which a treacherous system and the bullets of the reaction prepared
for it on November 9, 1923.


The first eight


After the re-founding of the Party in 1925, the Fiihrer ordered the establishment in
the same year of a new, small, very mobile organization, which was to have its model in the
“SS Hitler Strike Force" and was intended, firstly, to give the Fiihrer unconditional protection
during his rallies and propaganda trips, if necessary by employing of their own lives, and
secondly, to guarantee to the Party that security within, which the police give to the State
itself.


At first, no more than eight men were selected for this great task, which demanded
total commitment. Their leader was Julius Schreck. It was he who issued the first guidelines


493


for the formation of the Black Corps. To the life of this faithful, proven fellow fighter of
Adolf Hitler, death brought an all too early end on May 16, 1936, but imperishable for the
future, by order of the Fuehrer, the 1st SS-Standarte in Munich today bears the name "Julius
Schreck!"


The first eight SS-men adopted the uniform of the former Storm Trooper Hitler,
except that the windbreaker was replaced by a brown shirt with a black tie, and the gray ski
cap was exchanged for the black SS-cap.


On April 16, 1925, this SS appeared before the Munich public for the first time -
however, it was a sad occasion, since the old fellow fighter of the Fiihrer of November 9,
Pohner, had to be buried. So on this day four SS-men with torches in their hands walked on
both sides of the coffin and gave the dead fighter his last escort. It was clear that due to the
size of the mission only a few men, selected according to very special criteria, could be
accepted into the SS. In every way they had to meet the high standards demanded of them.
Unconditional loyalty, total commitment of personality, iron discipline - who else but front-
line soldiers could have fulfilled these conditions!


They, who had dared the last mission a hundred times outside, formed the basis of
the young formation. But the conditions went even further: only party comrades could
become members of the SS, and each of them had to be able to name two guarantors, one of
whom was an authoritative person in the local group in which the young SS- applicant was
also listed. Each member was further required to be in the be between 23 and 35 years of age,
of strong build and necessarily in good health. It was a matter of course that sissies, jammers
afflicted with any vices, could never gain admittance! The best was just good enough for the
young formation! Therefore it had to be the highest honor for every party member to be
allowed to serve in the SS. But all virtues and qualities had to be preceded by total
comradeship, which could not be shaken by anything:


All for one, one for all!


The selection principle


It was clear that in the long run the young association could not be recruited only
from the front-line fighter generation. Thus, in the course of time, the conditions for
admission changed, without, however, losing any of their rigor. From the beginning, however,
one principle stood: numerical limitation and the strictest selection! The management in
Munich was never concerned with having the largest possible number of SS-men, but the
emphasis has always been on excellent quality of the men to be selected, which alone
guaranteed the unconditional execution of all orders.


One guide and 10 men

Thus it was determined that in the individual towns a squadron could only have the
strength of one leader and 10 men; these were the so-called "Zehner-Staffeln" (squadrons of
ten). Their leaders (Zehnerfithrer) wore a silver star in the middle of the swastika on their
armbands as the only external sign of their rank. At that time even a big city like Berlin had


only a SS-squadron of 2 leaders and 20 men.


The FM Groups


494


One thing is for sure - even the best, most sacrificial organization cannot do without
a healthy financial basis! So money! - For the expansion of the SS this demand was just as
imperative as for the young party itself. But since the latter was also in the midst of building
up and was not itself in a position to support the squadron financially, the SS (incidentally as
the only branch of the movement) received from the Fiihrer the right to advertise for
supporting members (F. M.). Adolf Hitler himself was the first to join this F.M. group.


This was indeed an ideal solution for the financial underpinning of the organization.
There were many Volksgenossen who (due to their public position, their economic situation
and other serious reasons) were not able to actively join the ranks of the movement. Through
their silent F.M. membership they have not only rendered a great, unforgettable service to the
squadron...


The SS-man as propagandist


The SS grew, and now, in addition to the original first task of protecting the Fiihrer, a
second task was gradually added - that of propagandist! But the men under the skull and
crossbones were not given textbooks on the "art of speaking"; it was known that each of them
had what it took to be absolutely convincing wherever it was necessary to pull back lost
members of the people from the slippery slope of false slogans and phrases. Each of the SS-
men of that time was thus a constant propagandist wherever he might be: on the street, at
home, throughout the day, if only the service permitted it allowed. How many lost, betrayed
men and women have been brought back by these unknown preachers into the militant,
creative element of the young movement! They have won many hundreds, thousands. They
began with the declaration of a National Socialist pamphlet, they introduced the doubters, the
illiterate of spirit, to the party press, and they brought out their heaviest gun, the Fuehrer's
"Mein Kampf," and thus overcame the last doubts.


The Plume of Blood


The year 1926 brought the lifting of the ban on the SA, and so in the following
period the SSn initially took a back seat. But this year also brought a historical high point for
the Black Corps. At the Reich Party Congress in Weimar, the second of the NSDAP, the
leader handed over the most sacred symbol of the movement - the blood flag of November 9,
1923 - to the protection of the SS.


Reichsfiihrer-SS Heinrich Himmler


The day Heinrich Himmler was appointed Reichsfiihrer-SS by Adolf Hitler marks
the beginning of a new, decisive period in the history of the SS. It is January 6, 1929 270 men
throughout the Reich territory, that was the base of the SS, the Heinrich Himmler took over at
that time, when he received the order from the Fithrer to form from this organization an
absolutely reliable force - elite formation of the party.


"SS-Mann is every one of us, whether man without rank or Reichsfiihrer-SS!" So Heinrich
Himmler once said, and he indeed grew together with his men into an inseparable unit during
the long years of struggle. He has made the Black Corps what it is today: the most dedicated
to the Fuehrer, our blood, the Reich and

Europe's most committed force.


495


The order for a larger organization had been given, and it was clear to the
Reichsfiihrer, who devoted himself with his whole personality to the enormous task, that the
new, larger SS could only fulfill its tasks if the guidelines given by the Fiihrer of the
movement had unconditional validity as the highest demand, as the final standard for its
selection and formation.


The virtues of the Order


Only the noble blood, only real race are able in the long run to guarantee real
performance! - This is the main insight with which Heinrich Himmler began his work when
he issued his first order as Reichsfiihrer-SS on January 20, 1929, which states:

"According to the order of our Fiihrer of January 6, 1929, I have taken over the leadership of
the SS
of the NSDAP! "


Now, then, the old fellow fighter and soldier began his tenacious, purposeful
selection, according to which he surrounded himself with those people of whom he knew that,
blood-wise and character-wise, they were really the best that the nation had at its disposal.


And so it was above all four guidelines and main virtues that determined their
selection.


2. Race and clan


"Just as the seed breeder, who is to breed pure again an old, good variety that has
been mixed and degraded, first goes over the field to the so-called Stau- denauslese, we first
set about sifting out purely externally those people whom we believed we could not use for the
building up of the SS. The kind of selection concentrated on the selection of those who
physically came closest to the desired image, the Nordic determined man. External
characteristics such as height and racially appropriate appearance played and still play a
role!"


This is how the Reichsfiihrer once put it, and it is to his decisive credit that he
courageously and convincingly took the path at a time when the racial question was still a
thoroughly unsettled concept in the ranks of the movement itself, and that the theorical
insights of the young movement now found their bodily resurrection in the midst of the
building up for a unique organization. Here, for the first time, the racial question had been
placed at the centre, or rather had become the centre itself, far beyond a negative concept,
emanating from the self-evident hatred of the Jews. The revolutionary thought of the Fuhrer
had been given blood-warming life. It is clear that with the growth of experience in these
fields the determinations of the selection became sharper from year to year, even better hitting
the actual core of things.


"It must be so that the conditions which will be set for our successors in a hundred
or more years will demand many times more from the individual than can be the case today.
Likewise we know that the first selection, made according to external points of view, can only
be the first, but also only the very first principle of selection, that a process of selection going
through all the years of life in the SS must be the continuation, and that the sifting out of all
those who are not suitable for us in character, will, and thus in blood must follow! "


Thus says the Reichsfiihrer, and with this he very briefly and succinctly puts a stop
to any complacency and self-satisfaction. He clearly and unambiguously states that what has


496


been achieved so far is and must be only piecemeal and that there can never be a standstill or
an end in the tremendous planning of a human selection. For there is no standardized SS -
man! There will be every generation of SS - men. must be better than the previous one.


"By laws which we give ourselves, we want to see to it for all future that not every
son of a SS -family registered in the clan-book of the SS has the claim or even the right to
become a SS -man again, but we want to see to it that only a part of the sons of this family are
always taken up and recognized by us as SS -men, and will be further anxious that constantly
the selection and bloodstream of the best German blood of the entire people may enter the
SS!"


The racial selection and the building up of an association of men alone, however,
could not in the long run bring success to the great work. No, all measures had to seem almost
senseless at the moment when the wives of the selected men, their future families and clans
were passed by. After all, our history is rich enough in mistakes made by soldiers' and men's
unions of the past, forgetting the pure blood of breeding and the tradition of the clan. They all
sank back into nothingness after a certain lapse of their existence - and may it have been
centuries. For so says the leader of the kingdom:


"Only the generation nestled between ancestors and grandchildren takes within itself
the proper measure of the greatness of its task and obligation, and of the tininess of its own
and ephemeral significance. "


But who has this knowledge, he will be simple in the highest meaning of the word,
and neither the times of highest personal success will be able to cloud his view - and the hours
of greatest misfortune will never be able to drive him into the arms of despair. - Success and
misfortune, he will accept them without complacency, without arrogance, without desolation -
but he will also never become the victim of tormenting feelings of inferiority and hopeless
self-loss. He will overcome happiness and misfortune with truly balanced calmness.


"We therefore teach the SS-man that all our struggle, the death of the two million of
the World War, the political struggle of the last 15 years, the building up of our military
power to protect our frontiers would be in vain and futile if the victory of the German spirit
were not followed by the victory of the German child."


The Reichsfiihrer-SS therefore, in this clear realization, issued one of the most
drastic and important laws of the SS on December 31, 1931, the "Heiratsbefehl". This order
hit Germany like a bomb at the time. For a liberal based system, for many of our people, who
live only for the moment and stagger from pleasure to pleasure, he must have seemed almost
incomprehensible.


To them it was the most brutal encroachment on so-called personal freedom. It is
self- evident that the Jewish press and propaganda underlined this view with the necessary
emphasis. But all the scorn and derision that was poured out on this order at the time bounced
off the squadron without effect. The Reichsfihrer had foreseen it and said so in the 10th point
of his order:


"The SS realizes that with this order it has taken a step of great importance. Mockery,
scorn and misunderstanding do not touch us; the future is ours! "


3. Will to freedom and fighting spirit


The will to fight and an irrepressible desire for freedom, that is the second virtue and
guideline: therefore, according to unwritten laws, the SS- man should be the best, where it


497


was at all possible - in battle, on the street, on the sports field, later in the greatest of all wars
of freedom. But the better the opponent was, the better for the squadron! Because only so the
title of an elite formation could be rightly led, if the SS was also really efficient the best troop!


In the years of the build-up, the Reichsfiihrer therefore made sporting performance a
duty and task over and over again. Year after year, every SS-man had to pass the most
difficult performance tests. It was especially the Fuehrer Corps that was put to the test here
again and again. Also, every promotion is dependent on the acquisition of the SA. or Reich
Sports Badge.


Thus a great danger was averted from the outset, that of effeminacy. Gemiit- lichkeit
and Vereinsseligkeit, the graveyards of so many men's societies, had thus become impossible
from the outset in the ranks of the Black Corps. The sedate existence on the basis of the
regulars' table, which may be beautiful and attractive for certain people, has never been able
to spread in the SS.


4. Loyalty and honor


Loyalty binds the SS from the Reichsfiihrer-SS to the last man and binds all among
themselves as comrades to the Fihrer. Loyalty begins only where duty is fulfilled, - this
sacred knowledge makes the SS-man insurmountable as the Fuehrer's follower. The
Reichsfiihrer-SS stamped it into the words:


"SS-Men, do more than your duty! "


He declares fidelity to be the further fundamental virtue of the SS which determines their
nature and actions when he says:


"Many things, we teach the SS-man, can be forgiven on this earth, but one thing never can,
infidelity. He who violates fidelity excludes himself from our German society. For faithfulness
is a matter of the heart, never of the mind. The mind may stumble. That is sometimes harmful,
but never inevitable. The heart, however, always has the same pulse to beat, and if it stops,
the person dies, just as a nation dies if it breaks faithfulness. By this we mean loyalty of every
kind, loyalty to the Fiihrer and thus to the German, Germanic people, its knowledge and its
kind, loyalty to the blood, to our ancestors and grandchildren, loyalty to our clan, loyalty to
our comrade and loyalty to the immutable laws of decency, cleanliness and chivalry. One sins
against loyalty and honor not only when he idly lets his or the SS's honor be violated, but
especially when he does not respect the honor of others, when he mocks things that are sacred
to others, or when he does not stand up for the absent, the weak, and the defenseless in a
manly and decent manner. "

5. Unconditional obedience


That leaves obedience as the fourth and last guideline. It is an obedience that is
especially difficult because it comes from pure voluntarism and demands all the sacrifices a
man is capable of making in terms of personal pride, external honors, and many other things
that are dear to him. It demands unconditional commitment without the slightest hesitation,
and it demands the execution of every command of the leader even when the individual once
believes that he cannot overcome it. But this obedience demands the highest degree of control
and overcoming, even of the most ardent will for freedom, when it is forbidden to lift a finger
against an enemy despite being on guard. The old SS-man knows what just this last point
means. He has not forgotten them, the years of struggle, of holding still and waiting, as it
twitched in the fists,
because in every single comrade there was nothing but the will underpinned with boundless
hatred: Down with the accursed system!


498


You've been thinking over and over: why don't we hit it? - Why don't we hit it? -
Now is the time! - Why does the Fiihrer hesitate? They thought: We're strong, we've beaten
the Commune wherever we've met them. - We have conquered the Reichstag. - Down with
the puppets of this rotten system! We want to drive them into pairs! But the Fuhrer's order did
not come. And so they kept silent and waited. The SS is proud of the fact that in all these
years it looked only to him, obeyed only him, and believed unconditionally in his victory. It
has fulfilled the demand for unconditional obedience as only one formation before it has ever
done.


The SS -man in the use of fighting time


In the years of struggle, the men of the SS have been used again and again to protect
the National Socialist thoughts and demands, internally as well as to the outside world. They
fought in countless hall battles, they broke every terror in loyal camaraderie with the SA.

They were the wedge, which the movement drove again and again into the red and black front.
They stood in front of wholly Communist enterprises and factories with the leaflets in their
hands and drew to themselves what was good and valuable. They worked with the same

means in gray tenements and brought the truth even to the poorest leafy colony.


A thousand and a thousand times they gave protection to the speakers of the
movement. With their belts under their chins, their hands on their belt buckles, they stood
year in and year out to the left and right of the lectern - in the sports palace as in the smallest
rural hall. They stood still and motionless, but they observed everything in the room sharply
and thoroughly. They were often hungry, because most of them were unemployed. But they
were always there when the mission demanded it. And they died for their faith!


In the streets at night they were cowardly murdered, stabbed together until they lost
consciousness. But they always held out until the end, even against superior power. And so
the SS made many sacrifices of blood and life. Over and over again they carried one of their
best to the grave, but each time they left the cemeteries even more dogged, even more
fanatical. We do not want to forget those heroes of the Ostmark who, as SS-men, fearlessly
suffered death at the stranglehold of a brutal system, and who, with their sacrificial deaths,
made possible the annexation of the Ostmark to the Reich. But internal security was not
forgotten either. More than once the SS had to be used against the enemies within the
movement, against fragmentation and betrayal of the leader. In those hours of crises so
dangerous for the entire existence of the movement, the Fithrer was able to make use of this
sharp instrument, which then always placed itself unconditionally behind him.


Thus Adolf Hitler gave his most faithful the sentence that has been written on every paddock
lock since November 9, 1931:


"SS -Man, your honor is called loyalty! "


The 18-year-old Hitler Youth, after a thorough aptitude test by special SS-
commissions on his SS-suitability and SS-fitness, initially becomes a SS-applicant. At the
party congress of the same year he enters the SS-applicant and is sworn in to the Fiihrer on 9
November, after a short probationary period. In the first year of service the young aspirant has
to acquire his Wehrsportabzeichen and the bronze Reichssportabzeichen. He then goes into
labor service and the Wehrmacht and then returns to the SS . On the following 9 . November
the SS -candidate is sent to again thorough ideological training as SS -man finally into the SS
accepted into the SS clan. On this day he receives at the same time the right to carry the SS-


499


dagger and vows that he and his clan will adhere to the basic laws of the SS for all times. He
remains in General SS until age 35. He is then transferred to the SS-Reserve and transferred to
the SS-Tribal Department upon reaching age 45.


The Honour Act


In the same order it was stipulated that every SS-man had the right and duty to
defend his honor with weapon in hand. This law is of extraordinary value to an SS-man, for
he knows that he can be called to account for every word and every action at some point, and
that the community is watching to see whether he is doing something dishonorable in word or
deed and has thus sinned against the spirit of the community.


But secondly, he is urged to respect his own honour as much as that of others, so that
he thus serves the life of the community as an unconditionally clean, blameless, political
soldier.


January 30, 1933


When the day of the seizure of power finally dawned, 51,000 SS-men were counted,
who carried forward the greatest of all revolutions at a storming pace, ready to solve every
task set. The influx to our formations became in the following months, then so strong that
from July 10, 1933 an admission ban for the SS occurs, which was lifted only in September
1934 for a very short time. For as before, the Reichsfiihrer did not attach any importance to a
mass organization, but demanded the strictest supervision and examination of all new recruits,
in order to really integrate only the healthiest and most valuable forces into the ranks of the
Black Corps.


The German police


It was not an easy path from the police of the constantly changing system
governments to a National Socialist police force that has the respect and trust of the people.
An enormous organizational achievement was necessary in order to form a large, strong Reich
Police from 16 state police forces. But what we see before us today as the police of the Reich
is the work of one man, the Reichsfuehrer-SS Heinrich Himmler, who here, too, with his
unheard-of tenacity and his never-failing faith went to work. What was the policeman of the
system era? A compliant object for the advocacy of private interests of individuals. Beyond
that, only the execution of laws passed by parliament came into question, but not the
execution of a leader's will. And yet, very soon, even in the ranks of that police force, the best
fighters had their hearts set on our cause, although outwardly, if they were not forced to take a
stand against the movement in the making, they at least had to adopt a "neutral" attitude.


Then we came to power. And the police also came into the hands of the man for
whom there is no resistance. What resisted the new violence of the young state from the old
police, and they were not a few, were weeded out. The good forces, however, were gathered
and drawn over to us. Today the National Socialist police have two great tasks:


1. To carry out the will of the leadership of the State and to establish and maintain the order it
desires;


2. To secure the German people as an organic whole, its vitality and its institutions against
destruction and decomposition.


500


Today the police force consists neither of mere officials nor of mere soldiers, but it
has to build itself up equally on the two powerful pillars of the state, on officialdom and
soldiering. It is the goal of the Reichsfiihrer-SS that this police force should once becomes
one with the SS built on the blood. The directive that the police as an organ for the protection
of the people and as a friend and helper of every member of the people.


Task and importance of the SD


As a political surveillance and intelligence agency, the Security Service (SD)
emerged from the SS as early as the movement's fighting days. Under the leadership of the
SS- Obergruppenfihrer Heydrich, who was cowardly murdered in the service of Europe and
the Reich, it was expanded after the seizure of power into an organization that was led by the
blitz, the organization's rapidity of impact and the precision of its scientific research are
without precedent in the world. Above all, the creator of this organization, so important for
the Party and the State, educated his men to unconditional ideological militancy, which such
an activity requires to a particularly high degree. The activity of the SD, by its very nature,
has become little known to the public, and it is always doomed to remain without praise and
recognition.


Twice during this war, however, the world has had the opportunity to become
acquainted with the lightning- quick precision of the SD's work. Once, when it was necessary
to track down those behind the explosive attack of November 8, 1939 in Munich, and again
on the occasion of the world-historical act of the liberation of the Duce. On both occasions,
the Security Service's involvement was not only for the Reich and Europe, but also for the
whole world.


Today, alongside the SD, there is a huge police organization all over Europe, which
both maintain and guarantee the security, peace and order of the European community. Here
it becomes clear in a particularly meaningful way that the European community of destiny
forged together for the sake of prosperity, needs an uncorrupted organization that is solely
concerned with the welfare of this community entrusted to it for protection. It will be left to
history to determine what part the SD and the police of the Reich played in the achievement
of the final victory.


Folk Festival


With the Fuehrer's decree of October 7, 1939, by which the Reichsfuehrer SS was
appointed Reich Commissar for the Consolidation of German Nationality, the new German
Eastern Bohemia received a responsible head. Time and again, at the height of its history, the
German people turned to the East to develop its creative powers. But this history also teaches
that military victory alone is never sufficient to win the ground. The tragedy of German
Eastern Policy in past centuries lies in the fact that the popular movements which repeatedly
advanced into the East lacked a unified national goal and thus an organic and planned
distribution of forces.


Thus the task of the East is above all a political one. With the repatriation from
abroad of those Germans of the Reich and of the people who are eligible for final return to the
Reich, the loss of the people, which lay in the haphazard, individualistic emigration of past
centuries, will be rectified. The third and most important task is the creation of new German
settlement areas, above all through resettlement, through the settlement of the Reich and
ethnic Germans returning from abroad, which the Fuehrer poses to the Reichsfiihrer-SS in his
decree. It contains the rectification of the centuries-old historical error of the Germans. The


501


Fuehrer had at his disposal a powerful apparatus, suitable for this task, for immediate use in
this work of national politics. The Reichsfiihrer SS as the standard-bearer of the knowledge of
the natural connection between race and settlement has imparted to his SS, in untiring
educational work, this body of thought of the National Socialist fundamental outlook, and has
thus provided in it an executive organ for purposeful work in building up the people. Through
conscious selection, the SS forms a community in which the best forces of the Reich and
Europe are shown the way to creative shaping. For its final reclamation, the Eastern region
needs purposeful and uniformly orientated towards Germans. This selection, which otherwise
nature herself makes among a group of men engaged in a struggle for self-assertion, and for
which generations are necessary, is secured by the leading and directing employment of the
SS. The Eastern region is the frontier of Europe; it alone will forever and ever call the youth
of Europe to the highest probation, to manly employment with the soldier's weapon or the
plough of the Farmers.


The Weapons-SS


The SS had become the supporting pillar of the state. It was the guarantee of internal
security, the perfect instrument ready for any internal use. But there was a danger: this elite
formation, as a result of the fulfillment of its great, inward-looking tasks, would find itself
prevented at the moment of war from being able to stand up with arms in hand. At the very
moment when the whole nation was rising up to lay down its life and blood to the last, the
men of the Black Corps, mindful of their command, would have to stand unarmed. The Fihrer
countered this danger by setting up an active barracked troop - the Waffen-SS. It was
supposed to gather militarily and politically well-trained men. Thus, in the spring of 1933, the
Leibstandarte SS "Adolf Hitler" was created. Within the framework of the further expansion
of the SS - available troops (VT.), the Standarte SS was later added, "Deutscland" in Munich,
SS2 "Germania" in Hamburg-Arolsen and Radolfzell and the Technical units SS-
Pioniersturmbann in Dresden, SS-Night Tower in Unna and the SS-Junkerschulen Télz and
Braun-schweig, which provided for the new generation of leaders, were added. After the
annexation of Austria in March 1938, the Fuehrer ordered the establishment of the fourth
standard SS3 "Der Fuehrer" with the locations Vienna, Graz, Kla- genfurt. In the
meantime, the "SS-Totenkopfverbande" (TV.) had been established, which were formed from
the volunteers of the All-gemeineine SS who had been called up to guard the concentration
camps in 1933. The first use of the Waffen-SS takes place on the occasion of the repatriation
of the Ostmark and the Sudetenland into the Reich. The Waffen-SS standards were also used
during the creation of the Protectorate and the liberation of Memel. In this context, the SS -
artillery , SS -reconnaissance division , SS -FlaMG divisions and all other special units were
created. In the summer of 1939, in order to protect Danzig against Polish aggression, the
"Heimwehr Danzig". The Polish campaign, in which the Waffen-SS still fought regiment by
regiment, brought the large-scale deployment with the weapon and the proving of the young
SS - troop. This achievement was recognized by the Fihrer's order to establish divisions of
the Waffen-SS.


502


The Waffen-SS as a champion of Europe


At the beginning of 1941, the Fithrer ordered the establishment of the "Nordland"
and "Westland" standards, which were to be recruited exclusively from members of the
Germanic border states, Denmark, Norway, the Netherlands and Flanders. This order meant a
decisive act in the history of the political reorganization of Europe. For the first time, united
units of Germanic peoples were included in a German federation. Once again, it was the SS
that took the first step from theoretical knowledge to practical realization. True to its belief in
the mission of the Nordic people and in a rebirth of Europe, it stepped out of the narrow
borders of the nation-state and called upon the Germanic peoples of the same blood to fight
for a common future. This appeal found a thousandfold echo. The Norwegian and Dutch
Legions, the Flanders Legion, the Danish Free Corps and the Finnish Volunteer Battalion
were founded. As a parable of the reawakened Germanic unity, the regiment "Wiking" was
formed in June 1940 by order of the Fuehrer, in which Finns, Norwegians, Danes, Dutchmen
and Flemings fought shoulder to shoulder with their German comrades. In the meantime, this
truly Germanic unit of the Waffen-SS has grown into the "Wiking" Division, which has
indelibly etched its name into the history of the Germanic people through the Eastern
campaign. At the same time, strong protection squads were formed in the individual Ger-
manic countries. The call of the Reich and Europe continued to be answered by many
thousands of volunteer ethnic Germans, primarily from the southeastern European states. The
European fighting community, however, is nowhere better documented than in the formation
of units in many European countries. Thus arose the SS-Volunteer Brigade "Wallonia", the
SS-Tank Grenadier Division "Needer- land", the Volunteer Division of Croatia, Galicia and
Latvia and the Estonian SS-Volunteer Brigade. Out of the common blood sacrifices and
hardships, out of the experience of the advance into the vastness of the East, spiritual values
are growing which will make the old buried source of European and occidental solidarity flow
again and form the cement of a new Europe.


503


The SS, however, is the great basin in which the forces are to gather, clarify and
prove themselves, from which the new world is to grow. In the face of the immense threat
from the East, in all nations of Europe, even outside the Germanic family of nations and our
allies, a feeling of Western community of destiny has broken out that was hardly thought
possible. Everything that is young and strong for the future gathers under the black flag with
the sigrunes, volunteers from the mountains of Bosnia and from the Ardennes, from the far
reaches of Estonia and from the southern Russian steppes. The SS stood at the beginning of
that movement which gave Germany a new face and reshaped Europe. And it has become the
fulfillment of being a pioneer in the world-historical struggle for a future and a new Europe.
The fate of the European Occident.


The European task of the SS


The SS thus grows more and more into its European task: it gathers the awakened
European youth in the struggle against Bolshevism and the Jewish plutocracies. Whoever
believes that the SS thereby loses its original character or departs from the strict principles of
race has no understanding for the revolutionary idea of the National Socialism, which
transcends the borders of the nation-state.


No one in Europe today believes, whatever the outcome of the war, in the return of
the small and larger states which owe their existence solely to British interference in
European affairs. It is understandable that the force of this war should wipe away the
whitewash of a historical development which has often lasted only a few decades, and that the
common roots of the European family of nations should now come to light again. The fact of
the Germanic migration and the former Germanic settlement between the Baltic Sea and the
Black Sea up to the Atlantic Ocean and North Africa has established the blood relationship of
Europe and created what we call European culture. The reorganization of these peoples arises
on the same basis. America and England have no real program for a state reorganization of the
European continent. They already regard Europe only as a colony which they intend to exploit
economically. Bolshevism has just as little in the way of ideas to offer Europe. Marxism
knows no real Volkstum, just as little as it can include the concept of blood in its dictionary.
National Socialism alone affirms the roots of every genuine Volkstum. It knows that only he
who is true to his homeland can be true to wealth.


The revolutionary socialism of Adolf Hitler means for Europe not only a regulation
of the relations between capital and labor, but also a regulation of the relations of the
European peoples to each other on the basis of their historical achievement and their
commitment in the present struggle. From the world-view of this movement alone springs the
creative power and the rich abundance of possibilities for binding the peoples and nations of
Europe to the leadership of a strong Reich. It must be clearly seen that an inner and outer
order of Europe can only spring from the depth of the National Socialist evaluation of the
forces of history. The SS today already forms the iron ring of those men who with a hot heart
envision the reorganization of Europe under the leadership of a strong Germanic center.
Without the commitment of these men, the new cannot come into being. Our continent is
shaken as if by a violent fever; these are the birth pangs of a new era, which wants to arise on
the basis of the blood relationship of the European family of peoples and a socialist order of
their coexistence.


No matter which way fate will lead us to this goal and which setbacks we will have
to face, the goal itself remains unchangeable. It is the only goal for which it is worth living
and fighting at all. The SS knows that everything must now be done to ensure that the
comrades from the European East grow together with it into a fighting community just like
those from the West. The task of the SS must be to unite the youth of Europe in a hard and


505


resolute front. The Western adversary is not prepared to fight for a higher world to die
because he does not know it. The enemy in the East has so far brought only oppression and
dishonor to the peoples. If there are inviolable human values, they will be defended by the
front of the German army. On our side stands the new idea. On our side, too, the scales of fate
must one day tilt, if we remain firm and conscious of the full historical responsibility of this
struggle. This holy seriousness before the greatness of the hour inspires the voluntary youth of
Europe in the ranks of the Waffen-SS.


The hour of probation


And so today the volunteers of Europe are eager to take part in the final, decisive
struggle that will bring peace and a new face to Europe. Quisling, the leader of the Norwegian
renewal movement, said to his SS-men:


"Germany has not asked us, we feel ourselves obliged. Germany's struggle against England
has developed into a general struggle against British world domination. We now want to do
everything we can, of our own free will, to fight on Hitler's and Germany's side for the
Germanic Volksgemeinschaft and the great Europe!"


The battles in Poland and Flanders, in Norway and France, in Serbia and Greece
have been fought. They were battles such as history has never known, fought by the will of
the greatest general who ever strode this earth. But the outcome of the struggle with the Soviet
Union will decide the fate of the European community.


In the previous battles of annihilation there was only one victor: the German soldier
of all arms. He proved to the world once again that there is no other like him. Germany's
youngest troop, the Waffen-SS, however, has received its baptism of fire and inscribed itself
in the book of German soldiering history for all time. The men with the skull and crossbones
have strode across the battlefields of Europe, storming and conquering. Like those first eight,
like that first small SS, which once fought the red or black underworld in dark streets and
smoky assembly halls. The unifying bond of the youth of Europe, however, is their
unshakable faith, which constantly finds its final proof on fronts and battlefields in the great
comradeship.


Europe and the Empire


The making of Europe


Until now, Europe was no more a political concept than it could be described as a
fixed spatial size. As difficult as it was to demarcate the European peninsula geographically
from the land mass of the Old World, as inconsistent and seemingly confused was the
political development of our continent. But if we look at the continent in relation to the other
large areas of the earth, thus from the outside, we notice that the name Europe is more than a
mere geographical auxiliary name. We then realize that the concept of Europe has a certain
spiritual content, and that Europe is to be addressed as an unchangeable blood and cultural
unity. Through long centuries the consciousness of their unity outweighed the feeling of
national uniqueness in the peoples of Europe. Only in the 19th . Only in the 19th century,
when the national principle, taken to extremes, increased the mutual separation to the point of
absurdity, the last remnant of a continental common consciousness sank in the blood of the
European civil wars. Infinite suffering was the result of this delusion. The fragmented Europe,
which could not keep up the competition with larger competitors all over the world, lost one


506


position after the other outside. In our days, however, when it is no longer a question of
distant external positions, but of the "Fortress Europe" itself in the struggle with the non-
European powers from East and West, the peoples of the continent are again made painfully
aware of the necessity of unification in the twelfth hour. The task of this section is to show, on
the basis of the historical development, the foundations of the European continental
consciousness from which the coming reorganization is to take its starting point.


The aim is to show how closely the overall interests of our continent are intertwined
with the destiny of the empire anchored in its centre. Europe as a whole stands and falls with
the existence of an organizing and leading power, which balances its numerous tensions
within and shields its so vulnerable borders from the outside. But history shows that the
heyday of the Empire coincided with the periods of Europe's powerful standing in the world
and the prosperous cooperation between its peoples. Europe and the Empire are fatefully
linked, one is inconceivable without the other in the long run. The name Europa comes from
the area of the eastern Mediterranean and is ancient. The Assyrians called all land lying in the
direction of the setting sun "ereb". It is also certain that the name Europe was used by the
Greeks as early as the 8th century BC. But as a fixed concept of space "Europe" only became
generally accepted around 1500.


Since then, the name of the politically torn and geographically indeterminable
continent denotes a well-settled historical unity that is only similar to itself. We owe this to
the circumstance that our continent is the work of a certain humanity, in spite of many blood
imbalances:


Europe is a creation of the Indo-Europeans


When at the beginning of the 19th century linguistics discovered that a number of
languages of ancient peoples were related to each other, the conclusion was obvious that the
peoples who were carriers of these languages had emerged from a common original people.
The most eastern of these peoples were the ancient Indians and the most western - according
to the knowledge of that time - the Teutons. Thus linguistics called the circle of these related
languages and also the language of the assumed original people "Indo- Germanic". From the
language, however, the term was transferred to the peoples themselves. This term has stuck
and also that primitive people, whose existence has been proved today by prehistoric research,
we know under the name "Indo-Europeans". Its homeland is North Central Europe, and it
emerged from the Nordic people who had been at home in this region since the end of the Ice
Age. Since 4000 B.C., the original Indo-European people began to split up into individual
tribes which, for lack of land and other reasons, went on their own migration. We probably
also call these migrating Indo-European tribes the "Aryans". Empires arose and cultures
flourished wherever they went. The cultures of India, Persia, Greece, and Rome are their most
famous creations. What we marvel at and admire in these ancient cultures was brought about
by Aryan spirit. They carried the torch of creative action into the history-less darkness of
prehistory. Indo-European mankind has also shaped the face of Europe for all time. Although
some of the wandering tribes may have penetrated deep into Asia, the bulk of the Indo-
Europeans remained on the soil of what later became Europe. The individual land-seeking
tribal groups penetrated further and further to the west, south, and southeast of the continent
and gradually filled it in its entire extent. They subjugated the other-racial original inhabitants
of the individual conquered areas, superimposed themselves on them as a master class and
stamped the Indo-European spirit on the emerging cultures. As different as the cultures of the
Hellenes, Italics and Germanic peoples might be, depending on the influence of the respective
racial and spatial environment, they were united by the unmistakable common origin of Indo-
European kind. In this way, the European continent already in its prehistoric times grew the
firm blood basis on which its spiritual unity was later to be founded.


507


In antiquity, Europe was by no means a space in itself. The centre of gravity of the
world at that time lay first in the eastern, then in the western basin of the Mediterranean. The
continental centre of the continent was considered by the people of those days to be the limit
of the inhabited world. Nevertheless, we have to count the last centuries of antiquity as early
European times. The supporting peoples of that period, Greeks and Romans, were in the truest
sense of the word the forerunners of Europe. In the extreme southeast and south of the
continent, respectively, these two Indo-Germanic sister peoples fought against the invasion of
non- European blood carriers from the Near East and North Africa. The struggle of the
Hellenes against the alienated Persians and their Asiatic auxiliary peoples was just as much a
struggle for what was one day to be called Europe as were the battles of Rome with the alien
Etruscans and Punic peoples.


When Greece had sunk into racial chaos and the defensive power of Rome had
slackened, the Germanic tribes entered the scene as the last contingent of the original Indo-
Germanic homeland. The Germanic migration of peoples - in truth the last of its kind - which
began in the first centuries A.D. and lasted until the middle of the millennium. The Germanic
migration of peoples - in fact the last of its kind - which started in the first centuries A.D. and
lasted until the middle of the millennium, overthrew the Roman Mediterranean empire and
created the conditions for an independent continental development of Europe.


The population mixture of the former empire was now covered with the thin warrior
layers of the Germanic immigrants. From the Atlantic to the Black Sea and from the Rhine to
the Atlas the states of the Goths, Heruls, Suebi, Vandals, Franks, Burgundians, Lombards and
Anglo-Saxons were founded. It was truly a "holy spring" that took possession of the ancient
cultural world. Out of the ruins of destruction a new world arose. The supply of creative blood
from the mother soil of Indo-European mankind brought about the emergence of a new
culture. The bearers of this culture, however, were the young peoples who emerged from the
mingling of the old-established population with the Germanic immigrants. A process that
lasted for centuries and was initially accompanied by chaotic confusion. In the system of
states as it emerges at the beginning of the 6th century, we already recognize the outlines of
the later Europe: Italy with the offshore islands and the Adriatic counter coast is united in the
state of the Ostrogoths, on the ruins of which the Lombards then built theirs. In Gaul, Franks,
Burgundians and the Visigoths, who crossed the Pyrenees, fought for supremacy. The
Visigoths established a firm and lasting rule in Spain. North Africa forms the basis of the
Wandalic naval power, which extends over the entire western and parts of the eastern
Mediterranean basin. Finally, on the remote Britannic island in the northern sea, the empire of
the Angles and Saxons, which had been established over the Celto-Roman population mixture
of later England, flourished. This was the framework in which the formation of the later
nations took place under different conditions of the geopolitical and national environment.


Admittedly, the enterprise of those founders of the state seems to us an all too daring
throw. Blinded by the splendour of the old empire, whose perpetuating idea irresistibly
attracted the untapped strength of the Teuton, he wasted himself uselessly in setting goals that
went beyond his possibilities. The thin upper classes of the Germanic founders of the state,
carried away by the impetuosity of their blood, fell prey to selection. The overgrown task
consumed them. While the blood of the conquerors merged with that of the natives and gave
life to a new morality, their empires fell to destruction.


The Franks were an exception. Emerging from the fusion of various Germanic
peoples on the Lower Rhine, they had not participated in the great migration of the tribes.
They only gradually pushed their way into the northern parts of Roman Gaul. In contrast to all
other Germanic tribes of the migration of the peoples, the Franks were not content with a


508


mere subjugation of the foreign population, but they settled down permanently. Today it is
considered proven that the flat country north of the Marne and Seine and partly up to the
Loire was settled by the Franks. The Franks did not extend their power to infinity, but based it
on a healthy settlement policy and remained in constant contact with the Germanic mother
soil, which continually supplied them with fresh forces.


In the outstanding ruler Clovis arose a leader who initiated their rise and established
the supremacy of the Frankish Empire in the emerging world of European states. At the turn
of the 6th century Clovis unified the Frankish constituent states by cunning and force, fought
successfully against the Burgundians and Visigoths, subdued the Alemanni, and thus extended
his power from the Weser to the Garonne. - His successors continued this policy of expansion,
pushed the Visigoths out of Gaul and incorporated Burgundy, Bavaria and Thuringia into
their confederation.


A determined and purposeful policy, the favour of the geopolitical situation and the
biological conditions had worked together to secure for the Franks the predominance in the
system of states of the Europe of that time. Under the leadership of the important Charles
Martel, the young empire passed its valid test. Between Tours and Poitiers, in the year 732, in
a seven-day battle, the Arab hordes flooding over the Pyrenees were devastatingly defeated.
One of those world-historical decisions had taken place that would determine the face of the
world for centuries. The danger of Islam was averted from Europe and thus the development
of the continent out of Germanic spirit was freed.


Towards the end of the 8th century, the Frankish Empire approached the peak of its
power, which was embodied in Charlemagne. His importance, however, goes far beyond the
framework of Frankish tribal history. He summarized, as it were, the results of the migration
of peoples and gave the emerging European community of nations its overarching continental
form.

Through Charlemagne, the unity of the continent found its first realization in idea and reality.
After he had annexed the Lombards, finally included Bavaria and the area of the Eastern Alps
in his sphere of power, and forced the Saxons into the empire, he reached out to the non-
Germanic foothills of his domain and ordered the relations of the Slavic natives on the eastern
border of the empire. For the first time the young continent was under one leadership.
Germania and Galicia, Italy and Christian Spain, the Slavic peoples on the Elbe and Saale, the
Bohemian region and that of the middle Danube formed a masterly system of European order.
It is thanks to the work of Charlemagne that the beginnings of an occidental sense of
community were formed, which was to survive the collapse of the Great Frankish state and
decisively promote the later medieval order of the continent.


The main focus of the historical development was no longer the area of the
Mediterranean Sea, but from now on Europe had its own centre, which in the course of the
centuries shifted only insignificantly from the area of the Rhine to the centre of Germany. The
continent now had all the prerequisites to become an independent spatial unit: It had its own
centre of gravity, a uniform blood basis and a growing sense of community. Beyond the
violent political unification of Europe by Charlemagne, what was the basis of the young
European community feeling? During their invasion of the Mediterranean world, the
Germanic tribes were confronted with three spiritual powers with which they had to deal: The
cultural heritage of antiquity, Christianity, and the Romance nation with its distinctive social
and intellectual morality. While the Germanic ruling classes gradually merged with the
Romance element, they also adopted the Christian faith, which they imbued with their own
beliefs. In addition, they came into contact with the partly still living cultural heritage of
antiquity, which played an essential role in the formation of the new morality of Europe. This
trinity: the young Germanic-Romanic people (the Slavic people would join them a little later),
Christianity, which was at first strongly Germanic, and the spiritual heritage of antiquity


509


formed the basis on which the inner commonality of the young Europe was founded. In
addition, the world-political opposition to the Eastern Empire of Byzantium on the one hand
and to the Arab Caliphate on the other hand brought the European peoples in the process of
formation only became aware of their togetherness in this way.


510


The Empire and Europe in the Middle Ages


The political order of Europe created by Charlemagne collapsed after the death of his
son, Louis the Pious (840), because the maintenance of the enormous power structure went
beyond the possibilities of state leadership. The Carolingian Great State fell into inexorable
decline and one division followed the other. In addition, the process of fusion, which was at
its peak and from which the young nations were to emerge, led to chaotic turmoil on the
former Roman soil, which could no longer be tamed by any powerful personality like that of
Charles. Only the ethnically balanced East Frankish part of the empire - the later Germany -
preserved a remnant of the old unity. It was from this core area of Europe that the rampant
anarchy was to be eliminated and a sustainable continental order established. A decisive step
in this direction was the election of Henry, Duke of Saxony, as German king in 919. The
empire now came into being on the common basis that Charlemagne had once created for the
German tribes.

There were two factors which decisively influenced the whole course of the German
development from that time on and which had a great influence on the shaping of the
European things:


Firstly, particularism, which, older than the nation itself, was only then taking
political shape. From then on, it was to accompany its path like a shadow. On the other hand,
the mission of order on the European continent, which was connected with the empire and
which led the national development of the Germans beyond the national framework.


It is not given to the German people to lead a self-sufficient life alienated from
Europe in the midst of the endangered continent, as the peripheral peoples were able to do.
The fateful intertwining of German statehood and pan-European obligation is already evident
in the history of the founding of the Empire by Heinrich I. The medieval empire came into
being under the pressure of an external danger that threatened Germany and Europe from the
southeast. The raids of the Asiatic kingdom of the Madjars had been pouring unchecked over
the old cultural areas of Europe for half a century without any significant resistance. Only
Heinrich I. succeeded, after a long preparation, to confront the invaders with the concentrated
power of the young empire and to defeat them so emphatically at Merseburg (933) that they
kept their peace for more than two decades.


In addition, the borders of the empire were pushed further east and the East Elbian
regions, sparsely populated with a Germanic-Slavic mixed population, were annexed. Thus,
for the first time, the Slavic tribes in East-Central Europe were brought closer to the cultural
centres of the continent. Gradually the empire imparted to the Slavs those elements of
morality which enabled them to join the Germanic and Roman tribes as the third in the
alliance, as the supporting elements of Europe. On the death of Heinrich I in 936, the German
royal power had established a sufficiently solid foundation from which to tackle the greater
task of leading Europe that fate had ordained for it. Henry's son, the highly significant Otto I,
had at first to struggle with internal difficulties, from which, however, the king's power
emerged strengthened. The king's leadership became more punitive and uniform. Otto created
a significant expansion of his power base by building up a German state church, dependent
only on him, which he fully integrated into the empire and which not only supplied him with
his diplomatic aides and important military auxiliaries, but above all provided him with the
financial means to carry out his policies. The foreign policy also bore the stamp of the mighty
personality of the Saxon ruler. When the Hungarians attacked again in 955, they were
defeated so emphatically in the battle of Lechfeld that they stopped their raids forever. In the
following, mainly under German influence, they were settled and brought to the occidental
culture. Then followed Otto's most decisive step - intervention in Italy. After the collapse of
the Carolingian Empire, this country had fallen into a chaos of power struggles between the


511


former Germanic nobility and the Carolingian part-princes. The papacy itself had become the
plaything of the Roman greats and sank into a swamp of corruption and immorality. The
German king answered the call for help and came to restore order in the sorely tried land. He
created lasting conditions on the peninsula and established the supremacy of the empire there.


When he renewed Charlemagne's dignity in 962 and became emperor, this merely
meant the affirmation of his actual arbitration in Italy and thus in Europe in general. For the
possession of Rome was at that time synonymous with dominion over the Occident. Proof of
how strongly the authority of Otto the Great was rooted in the consciousness of the time is the
smooth transfer of imperial power to his son, Otto I; for the young empire did not possess a
monarchical right of succession. In accordance with the emperor's task as ruler, which now
encompassed the whole of the Occident, Otto II's policy extended over a wide area. On the
Eider, on the Elbe and Oder, before Paris and in southern Italy against Islam, he successfully
represented the sovereignty of the empire. This grew as a matter of course into his superior
position. In world politics, this fact was reflected in the relations with Byzantium, which the
Empire confronted as the leading power of the West. After the premature death of Otto I,
imperial policy suffered a severe setback under Otto III. Under the all-out attack of the Pole
Boleslaw from Bohemia and from the Vistula, the eastern border began to waver. In Italy it
came again to ferment. It was fortunate that the enthusiastic emperor died early and received
in Henry II a capable, energetic successor. Boleslaw was defeated in hard battles, and the old
order on the Slav frontier was restored. Likewise, Italy's sovereignty was enforced
anew.Under the first Salians, Conrad II and Henry IIL, the empire reached the height of its
power. Their powerful position in Germany and Italy enabled the emperors to pursue a vast
foreign policy. Burgundy was annexed to the empire in 1033, which thereby came into
possession of the mouth of the Rhone and the Alpine passes; Bohemia, Poland and Hungary
were united with the empire; King Knud III of Denmark and England came under the feudal
sovereignty of the emperor. The papacy was still entirely subordinate to the imperial power.
Henry III occupied the papal chair as he saw fit and was absolute master in Rome.


One may be of any opinion about the imperial policy of the Middle Ages, but the fact
is, that it resulted from the nature of things themselves and was a quasi-legislative process.
The German task of order in those centuries did not arise out of a the central position, which
did not exist at that time, nor to a numerical superiority, which did not exist either. It resulted
from the national and military strength of Germany, which alone possessed a purposeful
leadership with comprehensive planning, which could not be the case with the other nations,
which were in the throes of their development. Germany alone possessed a degree of internal
unity of blood, which spared her the difficult struggles of the balancing process and made a
strong foreign policy possible. The unity of the Occident had been re-established in a new
form. The emperor was regarded as the undisputed arbiter of the European world. The empire
exercised its supremacy not so much by virtue of its power, but because it was perceived as
the embodiment of the Western sense of community. A dark feeling of common racial origin
may have contributed to the fact that the Occident was perceived as something entirely its
own, as a whole, of which the Emperor was the natural head.


It is peculiar that the modern historical consciousness could be so obscured that one
was no longer able to grasp the original idea of empire in its actual content. The example of
the British Empire and the other modern empires has shown that the idea of empire is
associated with the idea of oppression and desolate egalitarianism. The imperialism of the last
centuries had dulled our view of the peculiar content of the concept of empire. We had
forgotten that the medieval empire meant a system of order that was equal only to itself. It
was only the latest research that cleared up the semi-darkness that had lain over the medieval
creation of empires until recently, and revealed to us the picture of an almost perfect and in its
kind exemplary organization of the inter-ethnic relations of the continent.


512


The Europe of those days was situated in a system of multiple, but balanced order,
which was anchored in the centre of the continent. Around Germany, which was broadly
positioned over the Central European area, were grouped various zones of assignment:
Bohemia was directly attached to the empire; Italy and Burundi were united with it in
personal union; Denmark, Poland and Hungary were in a relationship to the imperial power
that varied in degree and time; England and France, later Byzantium, Cyprus, Jerusalem and
Edessa were in vital relationship to it; finally, the kingdom of Sicily and North Africa, which
depended on it, were temporarily attached. An immense power complex for the circumstances
of that time. And yet, this order was maintained without any significant use of force. The
empire did not rule, it led. It was the stronghold of peace and Walter of a comprehensive order.
The medieval empire represented a historically unique power structure in that it did not know
the apparent opposition between continental unification and national independence. Empire
and nation were of equal importance and complemented each other. In the Golden Bull, which
came into being around the middle of the 14th century, this fact found the following
expression: "Because the sovereignty of the Holy Roman Empire has to order law and
government to foreign nations, which are distinguished by customs, life and dialect". The
Emperor was followed not because he was the powerful one, but because his office of
arbitration was felt to be a divine institution. An age-old longing of European mankind for the
kingdom of peace found a realization in the political order of the Middle Ages for three
centuries. On the unchallengeable basis of the imperial claim to leadership and in possession
of the means of power of the entire Central European area, the empire continued to increase
its political prestige. At the time of the Salian emperors, around the middle of the 11th century.


After a temporary weakening, it surpassed this peak during the reign of the
Hohenstaufen dynasty. Under the successor of the great Staufer Frederick Barbarossa, Henry
VI, the empire experienced its greatest territorial expansion around 1190. Its influence
extended from the coasts of the Atlantic to deep into the Near East and encompassed almost
the entire Mediterranean basin.

The all too early death of the emperor (1197) proved on what an insecure foundation this
mighty power structure rested. The papacy, which in its undisguised striving for political
power had hitherto used every crisis of imperial power to undermine it, and had thus almost
reached its goal in the time of Henry IV (Canossa), now set out on its most audacious foray
into world domination. The Empire, looking after the interests of Europe in all directions, had
failed to establish a firm national power base in Germany and to adapt itself to the incipient
development of the nation-state on the continent. Now that an underage boy wore the crown
(Frederick II), it was easy for the papacy to join forces with the strong special powers in
Germany and with the rising national forces in Europe and thus to bring down the Western
emperor-ship. Under the Staufer Frederick II, the greatness of the medieval empire once again
shone in a radiant late glow, only to be extinguished forever (1250).It is not without a certain
intention that the history of the old empire has been treated here in such detail in connection
with the problem of the organization of Europe. It was intended to show that the medieval
empire has an exemplary significance for the reorganization of Europe in the future. For more
than three centuries Europe was a whole, whose characteristic was unity in diversity, whose
cement was responsibility and whose idea was the realization of a creative order. Thereby, the
actual history of the old empire takes a period of time that is longer than the lifetime of all
modern European hegemonic systems (hegemony = supremacy).


A proof for the grown form and the inner necessity of the medieval order embodied
in the empire is the fact that its political expression was outlasted by the social and cultural
manifestations of this order. The blossoming of the occidental culture lasted beyond the
Hohenstaufen period. The Reich still formed a truly European form of community, in which
the consciousness of supranational togetherness far outweighed the national characteristics. In
the Romanesque and Gothic architecture the idea of the Occident found its fulfillment in the
artistic as well as in the spiritual-religious field of mysticism. These were the last overall


513


achievements out of the common blood origin of the occidental peoples. With the collapse of
the Reich, the German people was eliminated as a cohesive factor in European history.
Through almost seven centuries, German history has been one of particular forces. It is all the
more astonishing that these relatively weak partial forces were still able to master tasks of
European proportions. Right at the beginning of the medieval empire, there are two such
achievements of German special powers that have a continental format: The continuation of
the cultivation of the East by the Teutonic Order and the economic-political creation of the
Hanseatic League.


The Teutonic Order emerged
from the Crusade movement.


It was transferred from Palestine first to Venice, then to Transylvania. When it
received a leader of outstanding stature in the Grand Master Hermann of Salza, its rise began,
which led it far beyond the framework of similar foundations to a world-historical task. The
scene of this became the Baltic area and that of the lower Vistula. Summoned by the Polish
princes themselves, the Teutonic Order was set to conquer and Christianize what would later
become East Prussia. It subdued the Prussians, acquired the surrounding territories and
founded its own state on the newly won soil. The sword was now followed by the plough. The
Order called streams of peasant settlers into the country and founded numerous towns. In a
short time the former wasteland was transformed into a flourishing cultivated area. The
Teutonic Order state soon represented a masterpiece of state, military and economic
leadership. With the exception of the Sicilian kingdom of Frederick II, it was the only
European state of the Middle Ages to display modern features in the strictness of its structure
and its exemplary social justice. The concept of service, applied for the first time by the
Teutonic Order to the state as such, was later adopted and further developed by the Prussian
kingdom. Around the middle of the 14th century, the Teutonic Order reached the peak of its
power. Its foreign policy included the Baltic counter coast as well as the entire Eastern
European region down to Persia in its system. Even though it was only a tiny part of the
declining empire, this state was nevertheless a respected great power. This state of affairs
lasted until the middle of the 15th century. When the so far loosely connected states at the
Baltic Sea grew together to closed national states, the Order, which had been abandoned by
emperor and empire, was not able to maintain its position and collapsed when, in addition,
internal difficulties arose. The work of eastern colonization completed by the Order, however,
was to continue and later form the basis of the Prussian state. The colonial achievement of the
empire is unprecedented in history in its extent and nature. An area twice the size of Henry I's
Germany was opened up to European morality. It was Europe itself that advanced eastward
with the German settlers and absorbed the Slavic peoples from the Baltic to the Adriatic into
the continental community. The beginning of the eastward movement marked the birth of
Central Europe.


This fact found its first world-historical proof in the defence against the Mongols
around the middle of the 13th century. Slavic warriors from the Galician and Silesian regions,
led by a dynasty of princes who had closely aligned themselves with the Empire, achieved a
great defensive success against the onslaught from the East with German support at Liegnitz
in 1241. The Hanseatic League was no less important on the continent than the colonization
work. It arose around the middle of the 13th century from an alliance between Hamburg and
Liibeck to secure trade and to jointly represent their economic-political interests. - The long
lasting internal peace under the Hohenstaufen and the expansion of traffic through the
crusades caused an enormous increase of prosperity and a high bloom of trade. The gradual


514


emergence of the money economy in turn influenced the development of the cities and
increased their importance in trade policy.


When the decline of the imperial power brought about a state of general lawlessness,
the cities took steps to help themselves. The alliance between Hamburg and Ltibeck was
gradually joined by the most important cities on the water's edge, in the Low Countries and
along the Rhine. An economic-political association for the purpose of protecting trade and
traffic came into being, which had more than state functions and military.


For the first time, the Hanseatic League induced the Scandinavian North to step out
of its self-sufficient isolation and to participate in the overall continental life, at first in terms
of economic policy. Central, Western and Northern Europe were thus united in a single
economic area.


It is also remarkable for that great epoch of continental trade policy that, in contrast
to the later, Jewish-influenced merchant, an actually European type of merchant emerged at
that time. From that time comes the great word of the "Royal Merchant". The power of the
Hanseatic League declined for the same reason as that of the Teutonic Order. Without the
support of a strong empire, these two partial powers were no match for closed nation states
like England. The "Holy Roman Empire" of the Habsburgs, however, was even hostile to the
efforts of the Hanseatic League. Like the Flemings and the Dutch, it was sacrificed to Spanish
interests. Thereby, the rise of the English sea power was decisively favoured.


The Age of European Civil Wars


The order that had sunk with the empire was replaced in Europe by chaos. Only now
did the European peoples become aware of what that order had once meant to them. The
division now took its course unhindered. In the struggle of all against all, Europe let pass the
world-political chance which an incomparably favourable historical hour had given it through
the discovery of the New World and which only a continent united in itself would have been
able to exploit.


From the collapse of the Empire around the middle of the 13th century until the
beginning of the 16th century, Europe experienced a process of progressive political and
spiritual disintegration. The formation of national middle and small states led to a state of
perpetual unrest and created that atmosphere of mistrust, of mutual scorn, of endless quarrels
about trifles, which only our generation is beginning to outgrow.


Therefore, attempts were made again and again to bring the conflicting interests into
a certain harmony. All these attempts suffered from the one evil that they were undertaken
from the edge of the continent and consequently from too narrow a basis. For the German
heartland was in a state of permanent fragmentation. Now, however, it became clear that just
as the health of an organism depends on the condition of its heart, so an orderly Europe
depends on the strength of its heartland. The order of the continent can only proceed from the
Empire and must begin in Germany. As chance would have it, after the dissolution of the
medieval empire, the first attempt to give Europe a new order came from the extreme
southwest corner of the continent. On the soil of the old Visigothic empire arose, around the
turn of the in the 16th century, the nation which fought for its unity and independence in a
significant confrontation with the Moors, who at times penetrated far to the north of the
peninsula. From this fierce struggle of race and faith, the nation had emerged steeled and
filled with a high sense of mission. This tremendous impetus not only proved itself in the
great voyages of discovery of those days, but also had an increasing effect on the European
policy of the young Spanish great power. The arrangement of the dynastic relations


515


accommodated this development. When at the beginning of the 16th century Habsburg took
over the Spanish crown, it united the Netherlands, Burgundy, the Austrian hereditary lands
and important Italian possessions with the Spanish rule. These areas of power, which were
scattered all over Europe, seemed to be able to provide just as many brackets for a renewed
unification of the continent; especially since the Habsburg Charles V, moreover, won the
imperial crown and thus the possibility to give his claim for the leadership of the Occident by
the admittedly strongly degraded emperor-ship a legitimate veneer. Charles V also made this
attempt. But it was a mistake that the work of unification was started from the remote Iberian
peninsula, because the emperor-ship of Charles V had to obey the natural balance of power of
his empire; it failed because the unification of Europe was undertaken without and against the
Germans. Another mistake was that Charles V himself took sides in the religious struggles of
the century and subscribed to the counter-reformation efforts of the papacy. In doing so, he
deprived himself of the arbitrator position that belonged to him as emperor. And it was on this
that the Habsburg's creation of an empire broke down. At the end of his reign, which was
filled with long and dramatic struggles, he could consider his life's work a failure. Although
Philip II did not inherit the imperial crown from Charles around the middle of the 16th
century, he took over the entire Habsburg possessions together with Spain, with the exception
of the Austrian ancestral lands. After all, Spain had risen to become the first great power in
Europe and now continued its efforts to complete its dominance. In France, however, an equal
opponent arose whom she was not able to conquer. And when Philip II. failed in the
subjugation of the rebellious Netherlands, this meant, beyond the loss of his richest provinces,
the first great defeat of the Spanish world power. The people of the Pyrenean peninsula had
overreached themselves and wasted their best strength on exaggerated aims. Things went
rapidly downhill and the destruction of the Armada in 1588 was already considered by the
contemporaries as the end of Spain's world dominance.

The Netherlands would not have been able to hold their own against Spain if they had not
been supported by England. Around that time, England took its first steps towards becoming a
naval power and began to exert an influence on the shaping of European relations that would
continue to this day and have pernicious effects.


Until the 15th century England tried to make conquests on the other side of the
channel and to create a platform for a continental European policy. When these attempts
failed and after severe upheavals the House of Tudor seized power, England?s continental
aspirations suddenly came to an end. From now on British politics went its own way and
became more and more alienated from the overall destiny of the continent. As already
mentioned, the disintegration of the Hanseatic League, which until then had ruled the North
Sea, the Baltic Sea and the Atlantic coast, largely promoted the importation of the English sea
power. In addition to this, since the discovery of America the importance of the Atlantic
shipping routes increased more and more and the small British island suddenly moved into the
centre of world traffic and became the most important shipment point of Europe. Under these
favourable conditions England took the step out to sea. It encouraged the Netherlands to
revolt against Spain because its presence on the Channel coast was inconvenient to it, and
finally intervened itself in the struggle against Philip II. It has already been suggested that the
defeat of the Spanish fleet in 1588 marked the end of Spain's world dominance, but at the
same time the beginning of English power. From now on the colonial possession and the
material prosperity of England grew at the expense of the sinking Spanish world empire.


When the Netherlands after the liberation from the Spanish rule unexpectedly rose to
the most important sea and trade power of the time, the previous friendship of England
changed into bitter enmity. She did not hesitate to ally herself with the former mortal enemy,
the "tyrannical" Spain, against her comrade-in-arms in order to get rid of her competition on
the sea. While the French king, who was also allied with England, attacked the small Holland
on land, the English destroyed the Dutch fleet. But now it turned out that France had made her
warlike undertakings in alliance with England on her own account. Spanish supremacy had


516


been destroyed, Dutch naval power had fallen, but in its place, more powerful than it had been,
came France. The English power, which since its appearance in world politics knew only one
goal, to prevent the emergence of a superior great state on the continent, had there grown a
new dangerous opponent.


France had begun and completed the development to a unitary state earlier than the
other European countries, favoured by its geographical position. In the second half of the 15th
century, Louis XI completed the consolidation of France into a closed, tightly governed nation
state. At the time of the Spanish domination, Francis I was able to successfully throw the
weight of the united state into the scales of European politics. At the turn of the 17th century,
Henry IV rescued France from its most serious crisis, into which it had fallen as a result of
decades of religious struggles, by establishing religious peace. Under this king the French
state already reached such an importance that the minister Henry IV, Sully, could think of the
creation of a federation of nations, which should secure France a permanent predominance in
Europe. Cardinal Richelieu continued these hegemonic efforts with success. After the Peace
of Westphalia (1648), France was indeed the undisputed military supremacy on the continent.
Louis XIV had only to continue in this vein, and the century of Spanish rule was followed by
a much more extensive French hegemony. The result, however, was that he thereby incurred
the irreconcilable enmity of England. England unconcernedly allied itself with Holland, Spain
and any other power that wanted to join it against the more and more powerful France. Such a
proceeding resulted logically from the principles which England had followed unwavering
since the beginning of her ascendancy and which have come to light in each of the periods of
her foreign policy described so far. England's policy obeys immutable laws. For the British,
Europe is a hinterland and only of importance in relation to their overseas interests. England's
world power policy needs European backing. A continent united in itself, united to an
energetic representation of its total interests would be able to defend itself against British
paternalism. England, therefore, has an outstanding interest in a divided Europe which is
concerned only with itself. This has at all times been the central point of the political wisdom
of England, which has governed all her actions. England now applied this cardinal sentence of
its policy for the third time and now to its relations with France. Again his proven recipe came
to fruition, to fight the strongest power on the continent in alliance with the second strongest
military power and with the many weak. This time, however, success was a long time coming.
The power of France was constantly growing. For almost two centuries, France made more or
less successful attempts to impose its will on Europe. In order to prevent this, England
brought no less than a dozen coalitions against France in not quite 200 years. The first great
European alliance against Louis XIV came about at the end of the 17th century during the
Palatinate War. After initial successes by the French, the allied powers of Europe, led by
England, succeeded in pushing back Louis XIV. During the War of the Spanish Succession
(1700-1714), which broke out soon after and shook Europe for 14 years, England again joined
the new Grand Alliance against France. The conduct of British policy during this war is
typical of her attitude to the European problem generally. Her means by which she seeks to
undermine French supremacy are: the union of powers against France, her support by subsidy
money, and blockade. When Louis XIV could not be forced down by these methods, England
advised the Great Alliance and decided on the special peace of Utrecht (1712). The motives
were obvious - the supremacy of France was broken and the main opponent of British policy
in Europe was no longer Louis XIV, but the Kaiser, the hitherto confederate, who could now
have tried to give Europe a new order. But this would have violated the laws of English
foreign policy. For the world power of England was based on the disruption of the continent.


During the War of the Austrian Succession (1740-48) England still fought on the
side of France against Austria. Afterwards, when Austria gained a lot of prestige by joining
the Austrian-Russian alliance, England allied with the isolated Prussia during the Seven
Years' War (1756-63) in order to restore the disturbed "European balance". While for the
narrow mind of the continental European this war seemed to be about the possession of the


517


small province of Silesia, it was in fact a conflict of worldwide proportions: it was the final
struggle of England and France for world domination. In India and Canada this fight was
fought out, admittedly then decided in favor of England by the Grenadiers of Frederick the
Great. Again as at the time of the War of the Austrian Succession England, when her aim was
reached, left the Prussian ally and concluded the Peace of Paris with France (1762). Thus
English world domination was secured, and the last important competitor of the Empire in
India and North America was eliminated. But the further development of European conditions
was not at all according to England's wishes. The revolution that broke out in France in 1789
mobilized all the power of the people, threw the armies of old Europe to the ground in a
mighty onslaught, and seized the coast of Flanders. This was the signal for England. The
Great Coalition was formed, in which, under the leadership of England, almost the whole of
Europe united against revolutionary France. The titanic force of Napoleon I, however,
succeeded in unifying Europe militarily after chequered struggles. Even if the principle of
order which he advocated was unfruitful and bore a negative omen, he nevertheless succeeded
in temporarily uniting the forces of the continent. But in so doing he touched the root of
British world domination.


But Napoleon's plan went to pieces. After the failure of the Russian campaign,
England brought all of Europe to its feet against the Emperor. Decisively defeated at Leipzig
(1813), he was pushed to France and forced to abdicate. This also ended the Napoleonic
attempt to give Europe an order. France's attempts at order were doomed to failure for reasons
of geopolitics alone. After Spain's efforts, it was the second attempt to organize Europe from
the periphery. Despite France's unparalleled position, the basis for a sprawl over the entire
continent was too narrow. The French claim to order contradicted the natural balance of
power on the continent. Its basis was force, it lacked the idea and the ability to transform force
into power and power into law. That is why it broke down as soon as the natural relationship
of the European forces was restored and Germany reasserted her old rights. Had France at
least had the will to give Europe a real and viable foundation, and under its supremacy to
overcome the antagonisms to which the continual and permanent interference of England in
European affairs bore the stamp of decomposition from the very beginning. All of England's
efforts to shape the continent in its own sense sailed under the slogan of the "European
balance". We can see the destructive effect of the British contribution to European
coexistence in the endless disaster that this slogan has brought upon the continent.


The resurgence of the
German centre of Europe


It was time for Germany to resume her old mission and give peace to Europe. After
the worst consequences of the national catastrophe of the Thirty Years' War had been
overcome, the signs of a slowly resuming ascendancy became noticeable. Under the cover of
anarchy a decisive change had taken place in Germany. While the old imperial lands on the
Rhine remained in disarray, two nuclei of power had formed on the eastern edge of the
German soil, from which the rebirth of German and European unity emanated: Austria and
Prussia.


The southeast had been the continent's sore spot since the Turks invaded around the
middle of the 14th century. The sorrowful disruption of the Balkan region was only too
suitable to favour the spread of the Ottoman power, which was foreign to Europe. In heroic
struggles, the peoples of Southeastern Europe - Bulgarians, Serbs, Romanians, Croats and
Hungarians - tried to resist the Turkish power one by one. But in the course of two centuries
one after the other succumbed to the superior power. Thus the Turkish danger gradually grew


518


into a European problem. In 1529 the Ottomans stood for the first time in front of Vienna and
planned the conquest of Central Europe and Italy. Thus their onslaught was shattered by the
resistance of Austria. This, which since the beginning of the 16th century, often had to form
the dam against the surging waves of the Turks on its own, was able to cope with this truly
European task. With difficulty and hardship it defended itself against the danger from the
southeast for another century and a half, only to go on the attack itself. In 1683 the Turks
undertook a second major attack, which again led them to the gates of Vienna. This time,
however, the immediate danger shook Central Europe awake and for the first time in a long
time created something like a continental sense of community. The Turkish attack on Vienna
was not only repulsed, but the Austrian troops, joined by auxiliary peoples from all parts of
Europe, now took the offensive. Hungary was cleared of the enemy as if by storm, and the
Germans, advancing across the lowlands, advanced to the extreme arc of the Carpathians and
to the lower reaches of the Danube. Prince Eugene, the hero of the Turkish wars, was not only
an army commander of the first rank, but also one of the greatest statesmen in Europe. In him
we see today one of the most important representatives of the imperial idea and of a true
European order. This man, from whom Austria's position of great power originated,
encompassed the entire problem of the Empire in his enormous conception. In his conception
of the world, Germany again took the first place in the total system, which can only be
thought of from this its central point. The Savoyard's actions were as many-sided as his
thinking. It was he who referred to the Danube as the axis of southeastern politics and who
was at the same time concerned about the thousand details of the cultivation of that area -
commander, statesman and colonizer in one. But he was also the one who put France's
arrogance in its place and shifted the centre of gravity back to Germany.


It was a misfortune for Germany and Europe that the House of Habsburg
subsequently became unfaithful to the principles of Prince Eugene's policy. With one-sided
confessional ties, selfishly concerned only with their own dynastic interests, the Habsburgs
were unable to do justice either to the needs of the maturing south-eastern peoples or to true
continental concerns. The course of the northeastern branch of the German Eastern movement
was already mentioned in the context of medieval imperial history and traced until the
collapse of the Teutonic Order. On its foundations the Prussian power arose in the northeast
corner of the empire. The importance of Prussia for the German- and that always means
European - history is of both a power-political and an intellectual nature. Prussia's path was
marked out from the very beginning. It led inevitably to the unification of Germany in terms
of power. Moreover, we associate the term Prussia with more than a mere power-political
conception. Prussia is for us the modern German type of state par excellence, the embodiment
of the state-creating abilities of the German genius in the forms of modern times. Prussia, that
is an attitude, an infinitely simple, dutiful and wordless world-view of action. It is the form of
existence in which the German Empire was to realize itself anew. The course of development
of this German state knows ups and downs - but it does not make any turns. The inner logic of
human history as a question of will has never been more clearly and more clearly revealed
than in the path that leads from the miserable small state on the sands of the March to the
great power and to the empire.


The real foundations of a Prussian great power policy were laid under King
Frederick William I. His significance goes far beyond the actual results of his governmental
activity. How the soldier-king truly devoted himself only as the highest employee of this state
with almost superhuman renunciation to his service as ruler and only to this, how he knew
only the offer of the utmost fulfilment of duty in the midst of an easy-going and depraved
time, all this borders on the incomprehensible. When Frederick II began his reign, however,
he immediately possessed the foundation from which he could fight for Prussia's position as a
great power.


519


As fate would have it, Germany was to win its resurgence by the circuitous route of
the fratricidal struggle between Prussia and Austria. The object of struggle of the two German
powers was Silesia, at the same time the sliding weight, the possession of which decided the
predominance of one or the other. The Silesian conquest fell easily into the king's lap at first.
But in the Seven Years! War the struggle flared up anew. This time Prussia was isolated, apart
from the doubtful English support; on the other side, however, an overwhelming superiority
had accumulated, to which all the great European powers belonged. In this war Prussia passed
the decisive test of her history. It had asserted itself against the allied Europe and had thus
won the right to join the ranks of the great powers of the continent on an equal footing. The
immediate result of this fact, however, was that Germany now had two great powers side by
side, whose opposition finally split apart the already loose framework of the outdated imperial
union.Nevertheless, Frederick the Great has become the ancestor of the new empire. Not so
much his state and the system he founded, for this collapsed under the blows of Napoleon.
But the Frederician example and the attitude exemplified by the great king were decisive for
the further course of German history. In the superhuman hardship of those seven years he had
shown so much shattering greatness that he became a myth during his lifetime. Currents of
national energy which fertilized the Sturm und Drang of the middle of that century and
decisively conditioned the emergence of the later heyday of the German spirit.


At first, however, the German people had to overcome another low point in their
national development. At the turn of the 19th century, the French Revolution shook the
outdated powers of absolutism. French armies advanced beyond the Alps and the Rhine and,
under Napoleon's leadership, brought about the collapse of one of the old states after another.
Austria was defeated so emphatically that it sank to the rank of a middle power; finally the
Prussian state also succumbed to the army of the Corsicans. But what sank in the battle of
Jena (1806) was only the obsolete state shell of Frederick the Great's Prussia. Its living
content lived on and formed out of itself the germs of rebirth. The circle around Scharnhorst
reformed the army and gave rise to the people's army out of the Frederician spirit. In this
rejuvenated Prussia, in 1813, the tremendous national enthusiasm found the firm state anchor
and the political leadership it needed. This alone made possible the resounding success of the
wars of liberation, which led the Germans and their allies all the way to Paris and swept away
the Emperor (1814). After the elimination of Napoleon, all the conditions for the
reconstruction of Germany seemed to be in place. At the Congress of Vienna (1814-15),
however, it turned out how disjointed Germany's and Europe's affairs were and that the
reestablishment of the Empire had to remain a pipe dream. The unification of Germany failed
with natural necessity because of the Austro- Prussian dualism, apart from the constant
interference of the European powers, one of which, England, even commanded German soil
(Hanover). On the other hand, Austria grew more and more out of Germany, since it had lost
the living connection with her. Accordingly, it could only be Prussia to whom the work of
unification had to fall. But this still had a good while to come. In any case, around 1815, the
re-foundation of the Empire lay outside the practical political possibilities of those days. The
development of the European relations after the Congress of Vienna can only be described as
disastrous. There was a deep tragedy in the fact that the period of Europe's powerful
expansion over the world coincided with the period of its greatest internal fragmentation.
Diverging developments, whose roots reached back to the collapse of the medieval empire,
grew to full maturity in the 19th century. While the spiritual consciousness of the European
peoples had outlasted the former political unity for centuries, now, after countless continental
civil wars, the last remnants of it had disappeared. The mutual national isolation took
unbelievable forms. The hostile brothers no longer wanted to accept that all European nations
were the results of a historical development and children of the one occidental culture.


Thus it came about that the great European colonial powers, in this decade when the


distribution of the world was reaching its conclusion, advanced in isolation into the infinite
overseas spaces. Mutual jealousy prevented them from coordinating their colonial policies


520


and from making Europe as such useful. Under these circumstances, large-scale world powers
like the USA and Russia had to win the race, especially since England, as always, placed itself
outside the European community. Europe fell behind. Instead of that a serious danger arose in
its immediate vicinity. Russia had always regarded Europe only as an arena for its power
politics or as a reservoir of people for its own expansion. It did not count itself to the
continental, for it wanted domination, not cooperation - regardless of whether it camouflaged
its claim to power behind the slogan of the "Third Rome" or the "liberation of the proletariat".
Russian imperialism weighed on Europe as a nightmare pressure that was already felt by
Frederick the Great, and it is only in our day that Europe has entered into a decisive
confrontation with it.


The Empire and the Reorganization of Europe


The stark contrast to the worldwide expansion of Europe in the 19th century was
formed by the state conditions of Germany. The largest nation on the continent was
languishing in the sticky air of the most evil petty statehood. Sovereign territorial states, the
real beneficiaries of the secretly smoldering antagonism between Austria and Prussia, divided
the German soil among themselves. It was only when Bismarck took over the leadership of
Frederick the Great that he resolutely returned to the path of Frederick the Great and thus to
his true mission. This man of genius was destined to restore unity to the German people and
to lead it once again to its historical task of order.


In Bismarck, Germany was born a statesman who was able to ignore the excesses of
the national movement, but who grasped its essentials and was able to transfer them into
reality according to the political possibilities. Undeterred, he followed his path, which led him
through the fratricidal war of 1866 (K6nigsgratz) and two foreign wars (the Danish War of
1864 and the Franco-Prussian War of 1870/71) to the unification of Germany. He never went
beyond the set goal or let himself be carried away by the success of the moment. In the hour
of victory, at Nikolsburg and at Versailles, the greatest thing about him was moderation. Thus
a German Empire was born anew. Admittedly, it was only a small German one, and its
borders covered only a fraction of the area that had once enclosed the empire of the Middle
Ages. Nevertheless, the act of 1871 was a milestone in continental development, for through it
the historical mission of the German nation had regained political form. Immediately after the
founding of the Reich, a shift of European forces and a reorientation towards the reinvigorated
centre began to take place. The Germans automatically regained their historical mandate for
order. At the Berlin Congress of 1878 this fact found its first defeat. With more right than of
Metternich one could say of Bismarck that he was the "Coachman of Europe." From Germany,
he carefully shaped the organization of European peace. The guiding principle of Bismarck's
policy was the balancing of European tensions from the continental centre. In the Empire, as
the centre of gravity of the continent, all antagonisms were to be resolved. After the death of
the great chancellor, however, it turned out that the concept of order on which the political
system of Europe after 1870 had been based was a Bismarckian one par excellence. The
epigones did not fit into Bismarck's work. They were neither able to secure it internally nor to
continue it externally. The foreign policy of the post-Bismarckian period was particularly
unsustainable. The peace period which Bismarck's will for order had brought about was not of
long duration. It was to be expected that the opposing forces would stir. That the successors of
the Iron Chancellor did not heed the signs of this and did as little outwardly


The fact that the German government, both inwardly and outwardly, created the
conditions for a successful struggle against the unavoidable passage of arms was a criminal
negligence. Somewhat late England became aware of the change of things in Europe. Until
the end of the 19th century it still saw France as its main opponent and fought it openly or
covertly wherever the opportunity arose. At last it came to a quarrel between both because of


521


colonial antagonisms in Africa. That England then compromised in the 90s at the height of the
African crisis after Faschoda and joined forces with France followed from its traditional
policy. France was no longer the strongest on the continent, therefore England buried the old
enmity and united with it and with a new European coalition against the threatening German
Empire. Germany had given Europe again a center of gravity in itself, Germany had given
peace to Europe and was able to put the continent in the position to stand united for the
defense of its overall interests. It had thus made an arch-enemy of England, which had
recognized the task of the Reich and its possibilities better than the Reich itself. From a
historical point of view, the world war is a great uprising of the opposing forces against the
Reich. Bismarck's creation broke down because his heirs, in their intellectual narrowness,
failed to think of the idea of empire in its proper European framework. They became
unfaithful to the world-historical idea of an overarching order from Germany and decayed in
the barrenness of liberalist thinking. Wilhelmine Germany perished because it had lost the
idea of the empire. It failed because of its inner inadequacy. What the immeasurable sacrifice
of the war apparently could not bring about for Germany, the Versailles Dictatorship brought
about - the awakening of the nation, the reflection on itself and on its own mission. The basic
error of the peacemakers of 1919 was a blessing for Germany: to believe that one could cut
off the air of Europe's largest nation simply by depriving it of its opportunities for life, and
thereby rid it of its competition. Without the immense pressure that had set in since Versailles,
the emergence of the National Socialist movement would have been inconceivable. It was
truly the uprising of a people forced to fight for its very existence. The Fithrer succeeded in
summoning up the last reserves of national strength and in breaking the fetters of the dictate.


After two decades of truce, however, England called up the old enemies anew
against Germany, especially since the pseudo-peace of the post-war period had emerged from
an exhaustion, not from a balance of power. The realization of a new social justice inwardly
and the prelude to a lasting European order outwardly by National Socialism called the British,
who saw their plutocratic system threatened, back into action. In the Second World War, in
which we see the continuation of the soon to be 30 years old struggle, it became clearer than
ever that it is no longer about Germany alone, but about Europe. Again, as so often in history,
the Reich stands up for the whole Occident against the anti- European powers from East and
West. For the difference between the Bolshevik and the Anglo-American way of thinking,
seen from our point of view, is one of form, not of essence, especially since here as there the
stamp of Jewish spirit is unmistakable. Both have the same character, the crass materialism,
the denial of the personality, the tendency towards the masses. The transfer of the culture- and
race-destroying Americanism to the grown European morality would show the same result as
the flooding by the Bolshevik mass delusion - the end of Europe. National Socialist Germany
and her allies are waging this struggle for the immortal values of the European spirit: freedom
and personality. For the aim is to pass on a great past as well as to ensure a great future.
National Socialism first seized the German people with the revolutionary power of a religious
movement. In the experience of the national revolution of 1933, which was the first true
revolution in German history, the German people found their way back to themselves. Beyond
that, however, the world-historical appearance of Adolf Hitler means a turning point in
European history in general. The enormous energies which the personality of the leader
triggered in the German people spilled over to the other nations of the continent and caused
deep inner changes in them. The reorganization of Europe by Adolf Hitler reaches far beyond
the realm of the state, for it is the result of a revolution in pan- European thought itself. But
the visible expression of the changed European community of nations is THE REICH. The
empire is more than a state, in which the old opposition between empire and nation finds its
balance. The Reich represents the continental interests externally, guarantees a just
coordination of the manifold national claims internally and ensures the autonomous self-life
of each individual European people. The organization of the inter-ethnic relations of each
individual state will be governed by the law of revolutionary European socialism, as will the
coexistence of all the nations of the continent. According to the achievement for the whole,


522


each people will be guaranteed its due place in the continental community. Under the
hardships and travails of a bloody struggle Europe reaches unity. An ancient order and the
command of the time for large-scale unification meet in our days and let the unity of the
continent resurrect. The Europe of the future will be built on the foundations that have always
been characteristic of German imperial thinking. The empire will be the fulfillment of a
thousand years of history and the hoard of all that has come down to us as the living heritage
of occidental culture.


The Fuhrer, his life and his significance for Europe


Youthful years - Viennese period - The Greater
German Question


We know today that with Adolf Hitler, not only the German people, but also all of
Europe, has arisen the great, ingenious leader who, called by Providence, will bring about the
decisive turning point in the life of the peoples of Europe. Adolf Hitler has today become the
outstanding fighter and shaper of an entire hitherto unhappy and inwardly torn continent.
Under his leadership, in the hardships and painful travails of the present mighty struggle
between nations, Europe is achieving a healthy and vital unity. One cannot fully understand
the nature and work of this ingenious builder of the European future without a thorough study
of the history of the development of this outstanding personality. As a child of the people in
the centre of Europe, which has always been particularly exposed to the changing effects of
national forces, but also to the influence of external powers, he became the leader of Europe.
First of all, in his immense faith in the creative positive forces of his own people, he pulled
them out of an apparently final decline and led them towards recovery in all fields. A new
ideal of life became the starting point of the best human powers of his people. It is part of the
nature of surprising ideas that they do not stop at the national borders of those people from
whose blood the creator of the ideas came, but that they radiate beyond the borders in a
formative and fruitful way and usher in a new age in an orderly manner. Thus, long before the
beginning of this war, Adolf Hitler had become the great shining example of all the healthy
and life-affirming forces of the peoples of Europe, who regard his thought processes as
decisive and decisive, also for the development of their own national development. In the
figure of Adolf Hitler the world today recognizes once more that "men make history. Adolf
Hitler is one of those gifted great men whose personality cannot be measured by reason alone.


In view of his unique way of life and outstanding genuine leadership, we sense the
action of a higher power, which only from time to time endows the nations with a truly
creative genius. There is no privilege in Adolf Hitler's cradle. He came from among the
people; his career was not paved for him by traditional possessions and the sound and
splendor of his name. His ancestors are at home in the so-called Waldviertel, in the northwest
of today's Gau Niederdonau (Lower Austria). It is a densely wooded, high-lying landscape, to
which one climbs from the south out of the Danube valley and from which one reaches the
Bohemian basin to the north. Its barren soil supports only poor peasantry. Hitler's ancestors
mostly belong to this small peasantry of the Waldviertel or practice a rural craft, such as
milling. They are descendants of those Bavarian-Franconian settlers who colonized the
Ostmark, cleared its forests, and thus opened up the country to German life and German ways.
Adolf Hitler's father, Alois Hitler (1 837-1903), was the first of his ancestors to leave the
immediate home area. He first became a shoemaker and then a civil servant in the Imperial
and Royal Customs Administration. Customs Administration. In 1885 he marries Clara Pélzel
(1860-1908), who comes from the Waldviertel. From this marriage Adolf Hitler is born on 20


523


April 1889. The birthplace is Braunau am Inn, where the father serves as a customs officer. In
his book "Mein Kampf" (My Struggle), the Fithrer referred to the historical significance of his
birthplace. It is, after all, the site of a memorable blood testimony: Here, at Napoleon's behest,
the bookseller Palm was shot, who had published the polemic "Germany in its deepest
humiliation". Adolf Hitler spent his childhood in Passau, where his father was transferred, and
then in various places in what is now the Gau Oberdonau (Upper Austria), where his father
settled in his retirement. When Alois Hitler died in 1903 in Leonding near Linz, his mother
moved with the family to Linz. In these first years, under her impressions and experiences, the
basic features of Adolf Hitler's nature and character are formed. He is considered to be a small
ringleader, who has an impetuous urge to be active. He is anything but a couch potato. It
becomes apparent that he has a tenacity and defiant will that rubs up against the resistance
that his father and the school put up against him. His father sees in him a future civil servant
and wants to determine his educational path accordingly. For his boy, however, the relative
calm, security and isolation of being a civil servant is not an enticement. He was not a model
boy at school. Out of defiance he does not develop a general eagerness to learn, but turns his
interest to certain objects that arouse his inclination and lie in the direction of his plans.
Above all, it was history and geography that had a great attraction for him. At the secondary
school in Linz, a warm-hearted and enthusiastic history teacher taught him history in a way
that did not consist of a chro- nological series and dead accumulation of knowledge, but rather
vividly imprinted the great historical contexts of the peoples and their culture.


"I learned to understand history in its true sense."


Early on, he took a burning interest in the fate of the German nation. He understands
its history in a national sense and not from a narrow, state-bound thinking or even from a
dynastic point of view. The young pupil of the Linz Realschule is filled with enthusiasm for
the great German cause; he reads with hot cheeks the history of the German-French war of
1870/71 and asks himself why the German people in Austria should not share in the pride of
the victorious march of the German armies and why they are not included at all in a common
German Reich. He becomes an ardent nationalist to whom the thought is ingrained, "Equal
blood belongs in a common empire. " As the first political ideals are formed in the growing
boy, he is simultaneously filled with artistic inclinations and desires. His mind is open to all
that is beautiful and noble, which reveals itself to him in the fine arts, in works of music and
in the theatre. His talent for drawing is unmistakable. Thus the desire to become a painter
arose in him, and even his father's resistance did not dissuade him from this wish. At the age
of 18 he went to Vienna in the hope of being admitted to the school of painting at the
Academy of Fine Arts and to be able to enjoy his artistic training. However, he experienced a
bitter disappointment; he was turned down and told that his abilities obviously lay in the field
of architecture and that he should apply to the academy's school of architecture. But since the
admission depends on the attendance of the building school and the possession of the school-
leaving certificate, the way to the fulfilment of his artistic dream seems to be blocked.
Dejected, he returns to Linz. Shortly afterwards, his mother died. Adolf Hitler does not
despair, however, and moves to Vienna in 1908 with the plan to become a master builder and
with the firm will to break all resistance. He takes up the struggle for life, which causes him
many years of bitter hardship. The five years of his stay in Vienna will be a time of misery.
But later he will judge this time:


"What then seemed to me the harshness of fate, I now praise as the wisdom of
Providence. When the goddess of adversity took me in her arms and often threatened to break
me, the will to resist grew, and at last the will remained victorious. I thank the time that I
became hard and can be hard. And even more than this I praise her for tearing me away from
the hollowness of the powerful life, for pulling the mama's boy out of the soft down and now
giving him to Mrs. Sorge as his new mother, for throwing the resisting man into the world of
misery and poverty and thus letting him get to know those for whom he was later to fight. "


524


Adolf Hitler has to earn his bread as a construction worker, painter and draftsman.
This hard school of life brings him into contact with people and problems that other
politicians only know from hearsay. For Adolf Hitler, living views and experiences become
the foundations of his world view, which he acquires during these years. The idea of National
Socialism is not a product of bookish wisdom and was not born in cloud cuckoo land. Its
authenticity and naturalness arise directly from human striving and struggle, from deep insight
and sure grasp of the essential driving forces and tasks of our time. As a young man, Adolf
Hitler experiences the Vienna of the time not on its poetic surface, as the outwardly
untroubled, fun-loving city on the beautiful blue Danube, but as the political centre of a great
empire that contains the most burning national and social questions as unsolved problems. He
recognizes that the Habsburg Empire is heading towards a steadily increasing internal decay.


The most diverse power groups in the leadership of this state construction, the most
diverse ethnic forces, are in the fiercest feud with each other, so that the parliament of this
empire can only present the sad picture of a wild party quarrel and the fiercest ethnic disputes.
The irresponsibility, narrow-mindedness and lack of strength of the leading statesmen of the
Danube Monarchy have caused all these diverging forces to visibly undermine the artificial
structure of this empire. No one can be found who can powerfully unite the positive national
values which exist in themselves in a great common work for the welfare and future of the
people of this State. Thus, even the numerically strongest ethnic group of this Reich, the
Germans, are heading for dissolution through intrigue, corruption, political aimlessness and
pusillanimity on the part of those responsible. Austria had been forced out of the circle of
German states by the war of 1866. It had not been admitted into the North German
Confederation and into Bismarck's German Empire. This was not the result of Prussian
selfishness or Bismarck's short-sighted narrow- mindedness. Rather, it was the inevitable
result of the nature of the Austrian monarchy, which included millions of Slavs and was
closely connected with Hungary in terms of power. It was absolutely impossible to find a
solution out of the one-sided nation-state thinking of the 19th century, which would have
made possible the unification of different autonomous nationalities in a higher unity. In 1867,
the Austro-Hungarian compromise caused the division of the Danube Monarchy into two
halves and thus the separation of the two empires.


In the political debate in Parliament, even the idea of a threefold division, which
would make the Slavs a third independent pillar of the Habsburg state, is gaining ground.
Thus the ominous deep shadows of vélkisch conflicts lay over Vienna and paralyzed every
movement of internal strengthening and planned construction. Adolf Hitler's observations in
Vienna strengthened his rejection of the Austrian state structure and his opposition to the
Habsburg dynasty: just as he was animated by a fervent love for his own German- Austrian
homeland, he was filled with a deep hatred of the impossible Austrian state structure.


525


Workers' Question and Jewish Question


National Socialism as the Only Salvation


The national problems intertwine and entangle themselves with the social question.
The visual lessons that Adolf Hitler learns here are no less vivid. He experiences the world of
the working class with its unspeakable hardships, insecurity of existence, unemployment,
housing misery and many other worries. The triumph of the capitalist spirit in the 19th
century had given rise to the workers' question. The army of workers that had swelled in the
factories was at first defenceless against the arbitrariness, exploitation and inhumanity of a
system that did not recognize a moral obligation but invoked the immutability of so- called
economic laws. The German workers' will to live rebelled against impoverishment and fought
for socio-political goals, more tolerable working conditions and worker protection. The
selfishness and lack of understanding of the liberal bourgeoisie, the incapacity of the ruling
circles did not allow them to recognize the task of fulfilling these justified demands in the
spirit of a genuine nationalism and of allowing the German workers to share in the goods of
the nation. Thus, tragically, the workers' movement fell into the trajectory of Marxism, which
has no interest in pacifying its followers and bringing them liberation from social hardship.
Marxism sees the improvement of the situation of the working class only in the unification of
the proletarians of all countries in the class struggle against capitalism.


To this end, the degradation of the worker to a homeless, homeless proletarian even
seems desirable to him. Hitler recognizes that the German working class belongs to the blood
and fate community of the German nation and that the whole nation is therefore responsible
for the situation of the working class. Not a national para- this, but the nation is the home and
mother of all working Germans. It becomes clear to him that nationalism and socialism are
not opposites; on the contrary, their union is the basis of a healthy, modern German state.
Both forces of ideas, nationalism and socialism, must merge into one and must not be played
off against each other - they are basically two sides of the same thing: the community of the
people, which in nationalism outwardly makes its commitment to its struggle for destiny and
in socialism brings about the fraternal bond and comradeship of all creative comrades of the
people. Adolf Hitler experiences the practice of Marxism, its intolerance and the terror with
which it dominates the masses, in his own body. The danger and the will to destroy of its
doctrine become clear to him; he thus gains the firm conviction that genuine socialist striving
must turn against Marxism, which is based on negative instincts, despair, envy and hate and
cannot establish a sustainable order of life. True Socialism must not separate itself from the
national womb; the solution of the social question can only proceed from an energetic,
national-community attitude and has as its prerequisite the spiritual overcoming of the
egoistic, materially directed instincts.


Through the phrases of Marxist propaganda the gaze penetrates to the human bearer
of Marxist thought. He comes upon the Jew as the actual leader and mastermind of the sinister
movement; thus the Jewish question becomes clear to him in its deep significance: Jews have
placed themselves at the head of the workers' movement. They see in the destruction of
nations and in the proletarianization of all peoples the precondition for their world domination.
Judaism is the corrosive, parasitic invader of the cultures of the working and value-creating
peoples. The Jew lives his messianic hopes for world domination and offers in the most
ingenious way his great influence in politics, economy, in scientific circles and in the art
business in order to decompose healthy species and to paralyze the resistances opposing him.
The Jewish financial strongman and the Jewish labor leader ultimately play together. The
word uttered by the Jewish man of letters and Great British Prime Minister Disraeli coincides
with the gained knowledge: "The race question is the key to world history. "


527


The only party in Austria which takes up the struggle against Judaism and Marxism is the
Grossdeutsche Bewegung von Schonerers. But it lacks all understanding and psychological
ability to influence the people in its broad strata. Thus it soon ebbs away in the barren mutual
quarrels of the various parties, in intellectual talk and in the stifling air of parliament, to which
its deputies inwardly devote themselves more and more. Quite in contrast to this, the Christian
Social Party knows how to skilfully handle the means and tools of popular effect and to
secure for itself a large following among the masses of the people. It creates for itself a broad
organizational base on which it can base its power and rule. In its basic principles and
objectives, however, it does not represent the vélkisch idealism of the Schénerer movement.
Its opposition to the Jews does not spring from a basic racial conviction, but is bound to
ecclesiastical-confessional thinking - as if the baptismal water could ever erase the racially
conditioned characteristics of Jewish essence!


During these years Adolf Hitler also devoted his attention to the parliament with its
gears, with the result that he sharply rejected this institution; for the picture that presents itself
in the sessions and in the debates of the Reichsrat reveals that it is anything but a genuine
governing body of the state and that in no way are the best of the people assembled in it. In
the parliament the higher abilities of true leadership and expert insight cannot take effect, but
demagogy, empty talk and above all irresponsibility hold a rendezvous here. He deepens these
impressions through untiring study and the reading of fundamental books and writings. It is
always a characteristic of great men that reading does not mean indiscriminate reading to
them, but is based on a strict selection process. Hitler can later say of these years in Vienna
that they gave him the foundations for his further life and work. The seeds of a great future
becoming and maturing were already laid in this Viennese period of his life.


Adolf Hitler, who had been exempted from Austrian military service, enlisted as a
war volunteer and was accepted into the Bavarian Reserve Infantry Regiment No. 16 (List).


The report of a fellow soldier says about his soldiering:


"Adolf Hitler was one of the few who took part in all the battles of the regiment; he
performed superhumanly in the war of position as a combat orderly at a dangerous and
responsible post. Sometimes he was shaken by fever, his teeth chattered, and we wanted to
send him to the doctor, but he had much more important things to do, or he ignored us
altogether? In the 23 months I was around him, he never went on leave, never went to a
military hospital, only went to Lille for half a day. Since the beginning of the war he has
always been in the firing range. Since 1914, always on the alert, he has never slept in a bed. "


Adolf Hitler fights in this war as a conscious soldier of the German people, whose
fate is bound up with the Reich. He refuses to join the Austrian army and thus loses his
Austrian citizenship. - Until the year 1932 he, who ruthlessly devoted himself and his life to
the German cause, was considered stateless, and the blinded civic thinking of his opponents
regarded him as a foreigner. In October 1915 he is promoted to corporal. He is awarded the
Iron Cross II Class in 1914, and the Iron Cross I Class in 1918. For four years, with only a
brief interruption due to a shrapnel injury, Adolf Hitler is in combat on the Western Front.
Towards the end of the bitter struggle he suffers a severe gas poisoning in autumn 1918 and
has to stay in the military hospital of Pasewalk from October 21 to November 19, 1918. He is
half-blind when he has to experience the collapse of Germany during these days. The
November revolt of the Marxists and Jews has put an end to the heroic fighting at the front
and has delivered the German people to the hatred and the dictates of the enemy through
miserable betrayal. Adolf Hitler feels deeply the shame of the collapse, which is characterized
equally by the weakness and cowardice of the previous authoritative strata as by the dignity of
the new rulers. The causes of the collapse do not lie in military defeat. Germany successfully


528


held her ground for four years against a world of enemies. Military defeats alone do not cause
nations to collapse; on the contrary, they can be an incentive to new advancement. But
Germany collapsed in 1918 because her moral and social internal condition already bore the
stamp of untruthfulness and rottenness. The economy had become the mistress of the state.
The peasantry had been outrageously weakened at the expense of an ever-increasing industrial
proletariat. The contrasts of rich and poor clashed sharply. Money profit at any price
dominated the economic life of a large part of the people. Class struggles and Jewish agitation
destroyed the spirit of the national community. At the imperial court, men who dared to speak
the truth became increasingly rare. Sycophancy and whitewashing became widespread. A
consequence of perverse attitudes...


The main reason for this was the general shyness before responsibility. The natural
and eternal orders of marriage and family were in the process of dissolution. It was above all
the Jews who dominated the greater part of the German press, and who led there an insidious
campaign, renewed daily, against God, the moral order of the world, the sense of duty,
bravery, in short against all the higher values of the Nordic race, and thus prepared the
Bolshevization of Germany. The internal collapse of Germany had therefore long been
prepared by the Jewish decomposers of the people and was therefore all the more thorough in
the wake of the military defeat.


The consequences of this internal collapse were the signing of the disgraceful Treaty
of Versailles, the wave of Red terror that swept through the German capitals (the Jew Kurt
Eisner, dictator in Munich!), the submission to foreign countries, which forced upon us a
parliamentary system that was completely contrary to the German way.), the submission to
foreign countries, which forced upon us a parliamentary system that was completely contrary
to the German way, the shameful policy of fulfillment of the governments of the black-red
system after 1918, the expropriation of the industrious German worker and employee through
inflation, the complete triumph of the Jews, who finally patronized all intellectual movements
of our people in the press, theater, film and poetry as well as in the fine arts. It is out of the
deep spiritual distress of this time that the emergence of the Fuehrer's movement must be
understood, the fanatical hardness of its struggle and the will to win that survived all
disappointments and was inherent in it.

During this time Adolf Hitler vows to take up the fight against the spirit of November 1918,
against the forces that brought about the downfall, and decides to become a politician.


"Education Officer" - Founding of the
NSDAP and the SA


After Hitler is released from the military hospital, he is initially assigned to the
replacement battalion of the 2nd Bavarian Infantry Regiment in Traunstein. In Bavaria, the
democratic Marxist revolt develops into an open council dictatorship. In April 1919,
Bolshevism, under Jewish leadership, exercises its reign of terror in Munich. Adolf Hitler
proves his personal courage during these perilous days. After the liberation of Munich, he is
appointed education officer of the 1st Bavarian Rifle Regiment No. 41. He has made his mark
through the firmness of his political opinion and is now to carry out political enlightenment
work against the corrosive Marxist influences. It is clear to him that it is important to firmly
anchor the national idea in the people's consciousness - but that this cannot be done in a
bourgeois style, but that it must be combined with the idea of socialism. During this period, a
variety of vélkisch-minded groups and working-class circles emerged, which recognized the
reasons for the German collapse and combined the idea of national renewal with social
understanding and will. All these party formations and associations, however, fail in practice,
since their good disposition and insight are not complemented by political decisiveness, hard


529


will and readiness to act. There is no doubt that the small group of the German Workers' Party,
which had emerged in 1919 from a Munich group, the Free Workers' Committee for a Good
Peace, would also have met the same fate of failure. Adolf Hitler became acquainted with this
group when he visited one of its small meetings at the Sternecker-Brau in Munich in
September 1919 on official business. He decided to become a member and was accepted on
September 16, 1919 as the seventh member of the Workers! Circle. This decision makes the
chronicle of the Deutsche Arbeiter party German history. From a comer existence, the
unknown corporal of the World War leads the German Workers' Party to the height of world-
historical significance. While all the other groups and endeavors that stirred for the national
cause in post-war Germany failed, Adolf Hitler steered the young movement to victory,
because through him it possessed the firm ideological foundation, the uncompromising,
combative attitude and the bold will for the future. Adolf Hitler proves in a short time to be
the driving force of the party. He overcomes the lukewarmness and timidity that shies away
from any great enterprise and carries their struggle into the public arena with determination
and purpose. He devises the methods of propaganda which will give it a greater echo; above
all, he substitutes the power of speech, in the art of which he improves from year to year. It is
a touching fact, after all, that in 1920 the Fiihrer personally carried from house to house a
hundred typewritten invitations to a meeting. And when Adolf Hitler then wanted to speak at
this meeting, it turned out that no comrade of the people had appeared at this meeting. A
second attempt with 300 invitations also failed.


At last Hitler was able to speak before the first eleven visitors to a meeting. The
number then rose to 34 and went down again. At that time Adolf Hitler called out to his first
party comrades:


"We don't just want to excite the German people, no, we want to whip them up! We
want to preach the struggle, the relentless struggle against a system that will not end until
Germany is either completely ruined or some day some iron skull comes, perhaps with dirty
boots, but a clear conscience and a fist of steel, who puts an end to the talk and gives the
nation the deed."


The first mass meeting of the party in the ballroom of the Hofbrauhaus in Munich is
memorable. On February 24, 1920, Adolf Hitler announces the party's program in front of
2000 people. The 25 points, in the elaboration of which Adolf Hitler was decisively involved,
set the principles for the political will of the party. The leaders of the party promise, if
necessary at the risk of their own lives, to stand up ruthlessly for the implementation of the
program. Adolf Hitler's power of persuasion sweeps the assembly along, and so he can say of
that evening that the movement now takes its course. In the spring of 1920, the party gives
itself the name National Socialist German Workers' Party. It creates the symbols with which it
carries out the struggle for the soul of the German people and the German nationalization. The
black hooked cross in the white field of the red banner (black, white, red, the colors of the
Bismarck Empire, plus the sun sign of the swastika as a symbol of the vitality and resurrection
of the people) testifies to the fact that the party is reflecting on the elemental forces of the
nation and wants to relentlessly destroy all forces that distort the German essence and have
become the undoing of German history as international ideologies.


In 1921 the principle of the Fiihrer was strengthened by the fact that Adolf Hitler, as
the first chairman, could exercise special powers; in place of committees and majority
decisions came the authority and responsibility of the one who was the soul of the movement
and on whom rested the weight of the decision and the burden of the work. Thus a completely
new style of political attitude and appearance emerges in the NSDAP.


On November 4, 1921, 800 Marxists attempted to overpower 46 National Socialists
in Munich. The latter put up a fierce resistance and resolutely defeated the overwhelming


530


force in a fierce counterattack. To commemorate that eventful day, on which the small band
of the Saalschutz had proved their unbreakable loyalty to the movement and staked their lives
for it, the Fiihrer gave the troop, which had to maintain order at the meetings, the name of
"Sturmabteilung" (SA.). From now on it becomes a National Socialist principle that terror can
only be broken by terror. The violence and the will to attack of Marxism cannot be countered
with bourgeois weakness and the excuse that one fights only with spiritual weapons; violence
must come into its own as a salutary antidote.


Breaking of the peace and November 9, 1923


Adolf Hitler is tirelessly active as a "drummer" of the idea. The party soon gained a
foothold outside Munich; however, due to the special political conditions in post-war
Germany, it was only able to develop greater activity in Bavaria until 1923. In Bavaria, after
the rule of the Councils, a bourgeois government was formed, which stood in some opposition
to the Berlin government of the Reich, which was mainly supported by the Social Democrats,
the Democrats and the Centre. The opposition of the Munich government, however, does not
originate from a vélkisch sentiment, which defends national honor against the politics of
fulfillment, political mire, and philandering, but is based on particularistic aspirations; the
plan of political Catholicism plays a role, to create a South German special formation in
relation to the North, which one would perhaps like to leave to Marxism for a time. From
Munich, the lines could then be drawn to Cologne and Vienna. By upholding the Greater
German idea and by setting up the ideal of a national community beyond all confessional,
regional and social divisions, Adolf Hitler's movement counteracted the dark machinations
and plans of confessional particularist circles.


The year 1922 sees a strong growth of the NSDAP; it is now a significant power
factor in Bavaria, as it proves in the successful move to Coburg, which clears up Marxist
insolence. The year 1923 dawns with a heavy burden of fate, with the occupation of the Ruhr
by the French and the proclamation of passive resistance. The NSDAP advocates that passive
resistance, a conceptual contradiction in itself, be replaced by active resistance. She can
consider as one of her own Albert Leo Schlageter, whose heroic sacrificial death on the
Golzheimer Heide is a wake-up call for the national rebirth. The party world of the Weimar
Republic, however, is unable to lead the German people to energetic resistance, and so
developments drift towards chaos. Inflation takes on gigantic proportions and economically
destroys the German middle class. Bolshevism is stirring, especially in Central Germany; on
the Rhine, under the protection of the occupying army, traitorous riff-raff close to the center
are able to operate. In Bavaria, the white-blue circles are preparing to separate from the Reich.
The situation demands an effective decision and swift action.

Thus Adolf Hitler decides to take action on November 8, 1923. In addition to the
party, he has vélkisch fighting units behind him; the great general of the World War, Erich
Ludendorff, will make himself available to the enterprise. When Adolf Hitler, on November 8,
in the upper 192 hall of the Biirgerbaukeller in Munich, he proclaims the German uprising and
the abolition of the November criminals and calls for the outstanding members of the
Bavarian government join him, and the turning point of German destiny seems to have been
brought about that night. v. Kahr, v.Lossow and v.Seisser, however, do not keep their given
word, and so the procession that forms from the Biirgerbrau for a march through the city on
the morning of November 9, 1923, marches into the bullets of the Reaction.


16 German men fall in front of the Feldherrnhalle and in the courtyard of the
Bavarian War Ministry. Adolf Hitler, marching in the front line, is covered by his companion
Graf, who is seriously wounded; he is pulled to the ground and sustains a severe shoulder
injury. He is taken by car to a place outside Munich and arrested a few days later. Hermann
Goring, the SA. commander, is seriously wounded. Among the fallen comrades is a large part


531


of the party leadership; among the victims of the day is also the poet and loyal collaborator
Dietrich Eckart, who is arrested and whose weakened health is so affected by imprisonment
that he dies in Berchtesgaden at Christmas 1923. November 9, 1923 proved that National
Socialists not only live for their ideas, but also know how to die for them. The blood sacrifice
of 9 November 1923 stands as a memorial to later times and acts there as a pledge of future
victory.


For the moment, however, the opponents believe they have finished with the
movement. The organization is banned and Adolf Hitler is brought before a court of law with
Ludendorff and other co-accused. On April 1, 1924, the Hitler trial ended with Adolf Hitler
being sentenced to five years' imprisonment in a fortress; the verdict held out the prospect of
parole after serving six months. In this trial Adolf Hitler did not regard himself as a defendant
who had to conduct a personal defence, but opened the attack himself. In an impassioned
closing speech, he settled accounts with the perpetrators of the November treason and those
guilty of Germany's downfall.


"May you find us guilty a thousand times over: the goddess of the eternal judgment
of history will smile and tear up the prosecutor's motion and the judgment of the court, for she
acquits us! "


His words resonate throughout Germany. The vélkisch movement receives a boost
from this process, and in the spring elections of 1924, 10 National Socialists are able to enter
the Reichstag together with other vélkisch deputies. However, the leadership of the
parliamentary group and the conduct of the political struggle in the country are in the hands of
men who do not recognize Adolf Hitler's supreme claim to leadership, and since Adolf Hitler
cannot intervene from his fortress cell in Lands- berg am Lech, he refuses to take
responsibility for further developments and resigns the leadership.


In Landsberg, the Fiihrer writes his book "Mein Kampf" (My Struggle), which
contains his ideological and political confession.


532


Re-establishment of the party


It takes over the leadership of
the vélkischen movement


The vélkisch movement of 1924 thus visibly lost its clout, and when Adolf Hitler left
the Landsberg fortress in December 1924, he found the movement torn apart into feuding
groups. There was great discouragement among his supporters; the German people had just
elected a Reichstag which was making itself the compliant executor of the politics of
fulfillment. German politics is under the sign of the so-called "Reichstag".


The German economy is now in the grip of the so-called Dawes Plan, which has
superseded the period of indiscriminate encroachments and interventions of the enemy's
policy, but which seals the obligation of Germany to pay tribute all the more strongly. After
the end of the inflation, the German economy is supplied with credits from abroad, which
cause a certain illusory flourishing; in the general striving for monetary gain, the realization of
the true state of affairs, the will for national liberation and the struggle for socialism threatens
to fade away. Adolf Hitler has the courage to declare war on this world of bourgeois
contentment and stabilized conditions and to found the party anew. Only his greatness of soul,
his unshakable faith in the German people and in his own mission enabled him to undertake
this enterprise, which was ridiculed by the general public as hopeless and not given any
further attention. The faithful core of the Munich followers, however, came together in the
founding meeting of February 27, 1925, and so the movement began its existence anew. Now
it has to reckon with different conditions than in the turbulent years of the period from 1920 to
1923. No quick, tangible success is to be expected, one has to use lawful methods; therefore
the ideological foundations have to be worked out all the more clearly.


National Socialist ideas are consolidated and further deepened; a sharp line is drawn
for the sake of Socialism against all merely patriotic associations and bourgeois groups. The
party learns in a masterly manner to wield all the means of political enlightenment. It must
now start all over again. Even if the successes matured only at a snail's pace, the National
Socialists worked with persistent tenacity. In 12 months, more than 2300 meetings and about
3500 speaking evenings were held and several million leaflets were distributed. At the end of
1925 there were 23 National Socialist districts with 27000 members in the Reich.


It is always Adolf Hitler who gives his party the decisive impetus. In the two
volumes of his book "Mein Kampf" (My Struggle), published in 1925 and 1926, he lays down
the iron principles which are the guiding principles of our will and actions. In the early days
he was forbidden to speak in most areas of Germany. Where his word did not penetrate,
however, the untiring efforts of his faithful followers made themselves felt. The movement
spreads to areas where it had hitherto been unknown, and it soon conducts its struggle as well
in the large cities, the industrial and rural economic areas of Northern Germany as in Southern
Germany, in Austria, and in the shape of its brother party, the German National Socialist
Workers' Party in the Sudeten lands. Thus, in the first period of its new existence, which may
last until 1928, the party succeeds in assuming the leading role in the vélkisch league. By
virtue of the figure of its leader, the greater ideological clarity and the enthusiasm of its
followers, it outstripped all the other vélkisch groups attempting to compete and proved itself
to be the "Prussia of the vélkisch movement".


For the first time in 1927 the party congress is held in Nuremberg. 12000 activists of
the movement marched before their leader Adolf Hitler, including for the first time the newly


533


formed columns of the SS. With 300 party comrades the fight for the red Berlin was taken up
at that time.


Fight against the Young Plan - September Election 1930 - Horst Wessel - Banning of the SA.
and SS


When the year 1929 comes, the NSDAP can enter the scene with a well-established,
powerful organization and a fanatical will to attack. It now intervenes more decisively in
political disputes. These were the days of the struggle over the Young Plan, which was to
replace the Dawes Plan, but which, like the latter, had the German honor and German labor in
the shackles of tribute, and bars the prospect of regaining national strength and the sovereign
rights due to a sovereign state. Adolf Hitler puts himself and his party at the head of the
movement against the Young Plan. Even if the petition for a referendum and the referendum
on the Young Plan were unsuccessful, the seed had visibly been sown and the number of
fighters was growing from day to day. The crisis symptoms of the system of the Weimar
Republic are shaking the German national body more and more. The phony economy of the
Dawes period (of pumping foreign money into the German economy at high interest rates) has
collapsed, unemployment and economic distress are raging ever more devastatingly. Under
the chancellorship of the centrist politician Briining, attempts are made to save the system by
emergency decree. But in vain.


The elections of September 14, 1930 represent the overwhelming breakthrough of
Adolf Hitler's NSDAP; instead of the previous 12 Reichstag seats, the party now has 107
mandates. The whole world is under the spell of this event, which affects it as a natural event,
like a landslide. The party, however, did not take part in the elections in order to pay homage
to parliamentarism and its laws; as a popular movement, it set out to gain power in the empire
in a mighty onslaught. The dramatic final battle begins, in which the genius of Adolf Hitler's
leadership and his greatness as a human being are revealed in the spotlight of world publicity.
His opponents try to use all their strength to block his path to the chancellorship.


Communism, commanded by Moscow, and its Jewish masterminds are issuing the
murder slogan to which hundreds of upright fighters for the idea of Adolf Hitler are falling
victim. On the other hand, the governmental authorities use all means of persecution, from
slander to the police truncheon, to break the National Socialist will to fight and to divert the
movement from its path. The "democracy" of the liberal, confessional and Marxist party
world exposes itself and shows its true anti-people, tyrannical face.


On January 14, 1930, Horst Wessel, a National Socialist student who was educating
German workers in Berlin about Bolshevism, was ambushed and shot in his apartment by
communists. The terror of the "anti-fascist" subhumans did not even stop at death. When
Horst Wessel was laid to rest, stones were thrown at the funeral procession, red mobs rushed
out of their hiding places and tore the wreaths from the coffin. Horst Wessel's murderers were
later sentenced to only 6 years and 1 month in prison for manslaughter. That was the justice of
the democratic system.


From February | to June 1, 1931, the movement alone had 12 deaths, 554 seriously
injured and 664 lightly injured. Until August 7, 1931, 60 National Socialist newspapers were
banned. On the part of the state of that time, no measure, not even the smallest, was omitted
that was capable of damaging the movement. On 13, April 1932 the SA, SS and HJ were
banned and dissolved. The reason given for this action was that these organizations were a
source of constant alarm for the peaceful citizens who wanted to pursue their occupation
under the protection of the law. Everywhere the SA. homes were closed, everywhere house
searches took place, and the police tore the Hitler pictures from the walls. It is characteristic


534


of the intolerable degree of Marxist terror that, for example, 50 seriously injured National
Socialists had to be admitted to hospitals in Breslau at that time.


Struggle for power


The red and black parties did not shy away from opposing the figure of the aged
Field Marshal von Hindenburg to Adolf Hitler's will for the future in the Reich presidential
election of 1932. On the other hand, the two presidential elections of 1932 (especially the
second) proved the strength and soldierly discipline of the party. The elections show that the
name Hitler has a magnetic attraction. However, attempts were made to set traps for him and
in the summer of 1932, efforts were made to intercept his popular movement and to give a
reactionary direction to the development by introducing a so-called authoritarian course. Firm
and unshakable, unwavering in his faith, Adolf Hitler defies all the dodges of his opponents.
He holds the leadership of the party securely in his hand and does not give in to the lure of the
moment. He knows how to steer the movement through difficult situations when, towards the
end of 1932, the highest demands are made on his nerve and mental strength. His example
shines before the followers. At the beginning of 1933 the elections in Lippe-Detmold showed
that the movement was gathering for a new wave of attacks.


On January 30, 1933, the first goal is finally achieved: Adolf Hitler is entrusted by
Hinden- burg with the Chancellorship of the Reich. This day is not the date of a mere change
of cabinet; all those will miscalculate who believe that National Socialism will soon be
crippled by the other forces in government and that Adolf Hitler is merely a drummer, but not
the great statesman and popular leader who would succeed in creatively reshaping Germany.
In fact, January 30, 1933, is the beginning of a genuine revolution which will seize all spheres
of human life and of national existence. The political momentum and energy of the National
Socialist movement overcame in a very short time all the opposing forces. The disastrous
diversity, the opposition and confusion of the earlier parties disappear, and the NSDAP of
Adolf Hitler becomes the sole political leader of the German nation. After the death of Field
Marshal v. Hindenburg, Adolf Hitler unites in his person the highest representation and
supreme command in the German Reich. His name has become the symbol of Germany, he is
the leader who will one day assume the same mythical contours for the German people as the
great heroic figures of the German past.


535


Reconstruction of the Empire - Leadership - The
People as a Community of Work and Blood - The Final
Struggle of the Empire against its External Enemies
Begins


When we survey today the work that the Fithrer has accomplished since 1933, it is
almost impossible to measure and appreciate it in all its parts. He has led a nation that was
impoverished and divided to new greatness, to power and strength, and has brought about an
inner purification in it. In all areas of his life he has given the sign for a new beginning and for
new action. Economic distress and unemployment have been eliminated; the German
economy is filled with the living rhythm of work, which is no longer overshadowed by the
class struggle, but creates in the spirit of German Socialism.


His example always inspires us to help the spirit of the Volksgemeinschaft to
triumph over the pride of class, blinded arrogance and prejudice that poison the life of the
nation. Just as former employers and employees today, if the peasants have to regard
themselves as the working representatives of the people, there is no longer any playing off of
town against country; the peasantry has again been recognized in its values and has been
consolidated in its new existence


Biologically, too, the German people have returned to the laws of nature and of life.
In racial legislation and in population policy the conditions have been created for a new
healthy growth of the nation. The spirit of petty statehood and territorial segregation is
banished by the living idea of the Reich. The unity of the Reich is embodied in the person of
Adolf Hitler. In his name the dreams and longings of past generations are fulfilled. He obliges
us to ensure that inner strife and the forces of division, whether they be economic, social,
national or confessional interests, will never again be allowed to gain the upper hand.


Just as restlessly, his work is devoted to national liberation, to securing and
strengthening German life in the outside world. Since 1933 he has guided German foreign
policy with a sure hand. Thus its great successes, which even a world of opponents,
unfavorable observers, and only a few friends must acknowledge, are his most personal deed.
The shameful dictate of Versailles was torn apart by him, German honor restored and German
sovereignty regained.


A mighty army shields the German land with bare arms. The German Ostmark has
now also returned to the borders of the German Reich. The German people will never forget
the image of the Fiihrer making the great announcement of his life on March 14, 1938, and
announcing to German history the return of his homeland to the motherly bosom of the Reich.


A few months later another bulwark of the system of Parisian suburban dictates,

which wanted to take the breath of life from the German people and mocked their right to

self- determination, fell: the Sudetenland was brought into the Reich, and in the spring of

1939 the question of the Bohemian-Moravian area was solved by the establishment of the
Protectorate. At the same time the Memelland is brought back. It is clear that in the course of
these great decisions the question of Danzig and the Corridor must also be tackled. At this
moment, however, a clique of warmongers in France, England and the United States is forcing
a war upon us. They believe they can smother the German will to live in a world conflagration.
But they have miscalculated. They come up against the welded bloc of a nation of hundreds of
millions, which no longer stands alone in this sight. Italy and Japan are joining them. The


537


decisive battle comes to a climax in the summer of 1941, when Bolshevik Russia joins our
opponents. Now the fronts are clear. In this now beginning heroic struggle against the hordes
of Bolshevism advancing from the East in the life-destroying spirit of Stalin, the young
peoples of Europe unite.

The soldiers of the Reich are supported by the heroic Finns, the brave Romanians, Hungarians,
Slovaks and Croats out of responsibility towards the fate of Europe. Volunteers from all
Germanic countries of the North and West, from Spain, France, Estonia, Latvia and Lithuania
will join the fight. Even members of the peoples of the wider eastern region of Europe, who
belonged to the USSR until the first period of the struggle against Bolshevism, are turning
against their brutal oppressors under our leadership. Thus, in truth, the struggle of all the
healthy racial forces of Europe is breaking out against the world of destruction and
condemnation.


As in the internal political struggle for power in 1933, world Jewry in all camps has
now begun the desperate struggle against us. The apparently hostile brothers have found each
other. But like our inner opponents, we will also crush our outer opponents: a newly ordered
Europe and a newly ordered world will emerge from this struggle.


During these years the German people has always found the way to Adolf Hitler
stronger. Just as he believed in the values and the healthy forces in the German people, so
they now believe in him as their leader. He is a role model and an example; our eyes turn to
him when timidity and pusillanimity threaten to afflict our minds. His name is our inner
command. His human nature testifies to the genuine greatness that rests in itself and does not
need externals. His simplicity does not tolerate flattery and sycophancy. He is not a dictator
and ruler, but a leader who has a true relationship of loyalty with his people.


Adolf Hitler as artist, statesman and general


In Adolf Hitler, fate has given the German people and Europe an outstanding leader
who embodies in perfect form the unity of artist, statesman and general, the likes of which
have not been seen since Frederick the Great. In his genuine genius all sounds wonderfully
together. He is the great master builder who feels obliged to the law of the noble and beautiful
and to whom the cultural development of his people is his innermost need and divine mission.
He himself draws up the plans according to which the enormous buildings and artistic works
of National Socialist Germany are created. With his artistic spirit and will, he asserts
architects, sculptors and painters and thus lets arise in stone, ore and color those high works of
a pure and genuine art, which will bear witness for all times to the strong, formative will to
live of Adolf Hitler's empire.


But he is not only the great builder of stones, he is also the ingenious builder and
shaper of the spirit and the souls of his people, the people of his time. The political designer
of the time of the inner struggle for power in the empire became the outstanding statesman
who led his people out of disgrace and humiliation, out of hardship and hunger to the height
of a strong national existence and, as a shaping and ordering force, today leads the young
peoples of Europe, who are becoming aware of their own constructive ability, into an organic
and healthy order. Before the outbreak of the struggle forced upon us by our enemies, he
eliminated, in a genuine work of peace, by his strong statesmanship, all the festering wounds
and substances of conflict in the sphere of radiation of the Reich, which had been created by
powers foreign to the area in order to keep the centre of the continent of Europe in a constant,
energy-sapping turmoil for their own selfish intentions. By eliminating these destructive
forces he became the patron of the healthy, uplifting vélkisch values of Europe. Adolf Hitler
wanted nothing else than to create for his people a meaningful, life- joyful way of thinking
that would be secure for all the future; he saw his purpose in life in the creation of the highest


538


cultural works for his people, he wanted to create the best social institutions in his empire.
This was and still is his last and highest task. But his honest will for peace and construction,
so often shown to the world, is opposed by a world of enemies.


That Adolf Hitler since the beginning of the inevitable confrontation with the
enemies of the Reich, the leadership of his people not only as a politician and statesman, but
also as a general, is for us a fortunate twist of fate. Thus Adolf Hitler, out of his artistic genius
and beyond his great development as a statesman, also became a creatively planning and
responsibly deciding military commander. As one of his closest military associates once said,
one must be deeply moved by the realization of how in Adolf Hitler a military genius took
shape that was on a par with the political one and inevitably took its place alongside it. Thus
his creative power flowed over into the field of the art of war, because fate left him only the
hard and stony path of a conflict in arms, in order to let him reach his last and highest wishes
and plans.


Adolf Hitler, as a statesman and commander, draws from his belief in his own
strength and the strength of the people, as well as from the consciousness of a high historical
mission, those energies which enable him to master every task which fate sets him. We
recognize from history that a people is always really well led when a personality of the
highest self-creative values directs its destiny with unlimited freedom of action. Thus, every
real, final decision in military combat lies solely with Adolf Hitler.


He knows no lazy compromises in this struggle, he does not want to leave necessary
decisions to a later time, only to have peace for a moment from the tremendous tension of
forces in the present. He says himself: "It would be a crime to leave vital problems, which one
can solve oneself, to a later generation. " For all his ruthless harshness to himself and for all
the hard demands he must make on his followers in order to achieve victory, his nature is,
however, sustained by a genuine human goodness and by a deep compassion for the needs
and sorrows of his people. He never thoughtlessly and frivolously uses men to bring about a
decision; if it is necessary, however, he demands the last from leadership and crew in order to
achieve the great goal he has set! This high sense of responsibility towards his followers
justifies every sacrifice before history and creates that boundless confidence of the followers
towards his person which unlocks the best fighting values and creates that intimate and
powerful bond between the commander and the common soldier which is the surest and
strongest condition for final victory.


Adolf Hitler as leader of Europe and fighter for a real
European socialism


The fact that Adolf Hitler tore the broad mass of his people out of a progressive
proletarianization, that he gave the German people work and bread and dignified living
conditions, that he promoted the cultural aspirations of the working classes with all possible
emphasis, earned him the abysmal hatred and anger of the capitalist powers of the world. It
was very clearly recognized in England and America that the new socialist spirit of Adolf
Hitler's Reich would one day irresistibly flow over the borders of this Reich like a broad,
powerful stream, and would fruitfully take hold of other countries as well. It was well known
that such an elementary, life-giving stream would not stop at geographical and political
borders.


The plutocratic cliques in England and America could not and would not stand idly


by and watch such a development for the sake of their sinecures. It was certain that here, out
of the healthy power of the Reich and the great socialist will of its leader, for in the end, it


539


was these forces which declared war on the socialist empire of Adolf Hitler, because they saw
in it the last chance to continue their fragile plutocratic age. Thus it was ultimately these
forces that declared war on Adolf Hitler's socialist empire, because they saw in it the last
chance to continue to endure their fragile plutocratic age. They saw in the war alone the last
chance to perpetuate, by a victory over the Reich, the system of subjugation of mankind so
finely and diabolically devised. They realized very well that a German victory would be the
miserable end of the Jewish-plutocratic caste in Europe. And Stalin had to realize that in his
unrestrained intentions of conquest in Europe only the power of Adolf Hitler's empire could
still put a limit to him. We are in no way thinking of imposing our social measures on other
nations. Adolf Hitler himself said often enough that National Socialism is not an export
commodity with which we want to make other nations happy. The peoples around us will one
day have to decide for themselves how they want to organize things in the area of their own
lives. The decisive factor will be how each individual nation, how each ethnic community in
Europe approaches the great common questions of life on the continent. It is clear that there
can be no compromise now on the question of the solution of the decisive questions of life for
Europe and its people. The principles of European socialism will be put into practice not only
within individual nations but also within the continental community. According to the
measure of achievement for the whole, each nation will be guaranteed its proper rank. The
prerequisite for this is the complete elimination of all liberal-capitalist methods. Thus it will
not be the false "socialism" of the Soviets, which robs the peasant of his property and
degrades all men to lawless laborers, that will rule in Europe, but the genuine socialism of
free achievement with the sacred principle of private property for every creative person. As is
already the case in Germany today, so in the new Europe an organically controlled planning
will prevent every abuse of capital, every unjustified profit, every egoistic exploitation of
human labour power and will put an end to the misery of unemployment and lawless poverty.


The principle of National Socialism, "common good before self-interest," will
prevail throughout Europe, and the principle of achievement will guarantee every work its just
reward. What is now taking shape in the gigantic struggle of the young peoples of Europe
against the world of capitalism and the all-destroying Bolshevism is that great European
community order in which the overall interests of the continent and the interests of the
individual peoples will find a reasonable balance. The great hour of the new Europe, which
has written genuine socialism on its banner, has already dawned in this struggle. The fact that
a large part of Adolf Hitler's socialist goals had already been realized in the Reich before the
beginning of the war forced upon us is our guarantee that after victory the Fiihrer will proceed
to the completion of his great socialist will. This great effort of the Fiihrer will then fertilize
and build up the life of the peoples of Europe on a healthy and viable basis. We are willing to
assert the idea of a genuine socialism uniting the peoples of Europe against all attacks. We
know that in the end we are nothing more than the defenders of the eternal laws of life,
against which the collapsing powers of a rotten past try to rebel. Seen in this light, Adolf
Hitler's heroic struggle, the struggle of genuine Socialism against plutocracy and Bolshevik
destructiveness, wins decisive victory beyond the borders of the Reich.


540


The life-law foundations of our world view


Europe is the richly structured, climatically particularly favoured head of the huge
European continent. The people in this area have experienced, fought through and created
everything together since the beginning. The manifold geographic characteristics have led to
the formation of at first smaller, then by unification and merging to bigger and bigger
communities, to tribal federations and state federations of changing types and changing
relations to each other.


From a biological point of view, smaller communities of similar language, customs
and culture developed into bigger, formed peoples as solid, cultural and state communities.
Thus the individual peoples in Europe today stand with a double inheritance within the
European community, on the one hand with their own closed biological inheritance and on the
other hand with the cultural and historical inheritance acquired in the millennia- long struggle
for life. The realization of the importance of the laws of life has brought about a re-evaluation
of all concepts. The historically developed state terms have lost their meaning, dogmatic laws
are invalidated in relation to the natural connections. Biological laws determine new borders
and connections and enable an overall view of this European community.


The Volk


The individual people has grown out of the forces of the hereditary substance and the
environment. The hereditary world of a people is the sum of the existing hereditary factors.
As a basic biological substance, these always form the prerequisite for a further identical
expression via the path of reproduction. To the hereditary world of a people does not only
belong the fact of a hereditary community from the past, but the reproduction from itself as a
basis for the future formation of this people.


The environment is a given:

2. as natural through the geographical space and

3. as artificial through language, history, art, economy, law, politics, education, religion and
world view.


While the relations of a people to its hereditary world are essentially given, the environment is
changeable and mutable. Biologically, therefore, a people is at once a hereditary, reproductive,
and environmental community.


From this biological concept of people we draw the following insight:


The respect for the facts of life and therefore the God-ordained formations of the living, the
people, determines our whole attitude. The living blood bearers of this community are
responsible for the shaping of the coming generations. The people is a community of descent,
destiny, and ability. Every people has its own ethnic character, the roots of which are
anchored in the racial composition of the people. The people as a reproductive community
obliges us to respect the hereditary values of the national substance (the folklore). The
knowledge of the people as an environmental community furthermore determines our attitude
towards the manifold influences of this environment. It demands a knowledge of God that is
connected to and appropriate for the species and a world view that has grown in the people; an
art and culture that has grown and is alive in the family and community; a language as the
means of expression of this national community and history as the course of the struggle for
existence of the respective living generation.


541


Laws of life and race


From the racially uniform basic elements the peoples have grown in the European
area in historical times by the confluence of more or less closely related races. Each people,
taken as a whole, shows the predominant characteristic imprint of a race. This thus represents
the core race of the people concerned. Various factors have played a determining role in this
characteristic shaping, in hereditary-biological terms the different forms of reproduction,
which determine the quantitative and qualitative transmission of the genetic material, and the
environment, which controls the development of this genetic material through good or bad
living conditions. To this environment belong not only the geographical-climatic conditions,
but above all also all influences from the sphere of action of the spiritual, such as education
and culture. In addition to the fundamental preservation of the hereditary substance, it is
essential for the preservation or promotion of a specific racial form that an environment
favourable to this "race" be created. This can only be achieved, however, if the national
community is consciously oriented towards these laws (breeding goal) and the bearers of this
community live according to them. From the knowledge of the laws of life we have become
aware of the development of smaller and larger communities of life. We recognize that in the
European area often the historical coincidence and not the biological order and allocation was
the decisive factor. From this results for us a new evaluation and the standard for the
coexistence of the peoples (reorganization of Europe). The human being also stands within
the order of natural law with his spiritual and mental ability that is far superior to that of all
other living beings. In the systematic- scientific classification we have to call the whole
mankind a "species". All humans, whether white, yellow or black (racial groups) have as a
"kind", besides the common possibility of reproduction, certain characteristics and qualities
that are characteristic for humans. In spite of these basic commonalities there are, however,
mentally characterized groups that we call races. They are the last, biologically given units,
where each one presents itself through harmoniously coordinated characteristics (physical and
spiritual) and always produces the same out of their own kind.


Race is therefore a group of humans that are characterized by the common
possession of certain hereditary traits. It always produces only its own kind; or more briefly:
Race is a characterizing hereditary community. (According to Stengel v. Rutkowski)


The people of Europe can essentially be assigned to the six great basic races:


1.Nordic race,

2.Faelic race (referred to by many racial researchers as a strike of the Nordic),
3.dinaric race,

4.Western race,

5.Eastern race,

6.Eastern Baltic race.


From a racial point of view, the historical borders of states and peoples fall within

Europe. If we were to depict the people of our continent according to their predominant
affiliation to one of the six great basic races as certain coloured little stones, the result would
be a picture that looks something like this: Larger areas of stones of the same color alternate
with each other and often interlock strongly. In addition, there are often also differently
coloured splinters in the areas of the same colour. Thus Europe shows itself as a mosaic
picture, whereby the colour stones assigned to the Nordic races give the cha- racteristic
character to the whole by position, space and quantity.


542


Or in other words: Areas with predominantly one race reach into other-racial areas or
form bigger or smaller islands in closed settlement areas. The Nordic racial component
determines by its number and its central position as well as by its performance the core of
European mankind and the connection to the others. The biological concept of race is based
on the hereditary substance. The racial classification of people is done according to their
biological equivalence (hereditary community).


Attempts by opponents to blur the biological concept of race and to deprive it of its
binding force to the new order has led to deliberately false conceptualizations. It is
unbiological to call a social class, a nation or a religious community a race, as it has been
done many times and is still done today: "Spanish Race", "Italian Race", "Catholic Race",
"Proletarian Race" and others. The possibility of such a wrong control of life coming from
spiritual-dogmatic principles is only given to man. Well, man can be brought together to non-
biological, even if strong communities. But such systems can only be kept in power as long as
they have the possibility of a permanent influence through education and coercion.


A prime example of this is offered to us by Bolshevism. It deliberately destroys all
expressions of the natural order of life, such as the family, the joy of children, of one's own
home, the attachment to one's homeland and the soil, the bond with one's clan and ancestors,
etc. Only the complete eradication of all biological facts creates the prerequisite for
Bolshevism to carry out its plans. Today we recognize from our life-law thinking why
Bolshevism consciously acts in this way. The fact that every hereditary community is co-
determined by the environment gives education a great importance in principle. Education has
to contribute to the full development of the living and its permanent preservation from our
knowledge.


The task of the school is to develop the biological possibilities that are hereditary and
to bring them to fruition. We cultivate and promote the expressions of real life such as the joy
of the family, of children, of house and land. We do not speak of the "beauty of work" and
"strength through joy" for nothing. The biological order leads to a permanent and not only to
an artificial one-time maximum performance.


The importance of the races


Within the European community of peoples the race that has determined the
European face is the Nordic. Radiating from its core area, the middle of the continent for
thousands of years, it has had an unmistakable influence in all directions, even in the
peripheral areas. The proof of this is provided by the ancient cultures of Greece and Rome.
Furthermore, the blood stream of the center has flowed over Spain, Portugal and England into
all continents in the age of colonization and has seeped into the wide spaces of the East.


The other races of Europe, such as the Dinaric, Western and Eastern, have also made
very valuable contributions, especially with regard to the formation of certain ethnic groups
and folk cultures. Their sphere of influence, however, has never permanently grown beyond
their settlement cores, and they have neither been able to make a decisive contribution to the
preservation of the continent at any time, nor have they impressed their stamp on our
continent. Under the leadership of mainly Nordic elements the peripheral parts of Europe
have reached out into the world by taking advantage of their special geographical position, but
disregarding the vital problems of Europe as a whole. While the European center as a
settlement area of the Nordic race struggled with the pan- European problems, they were able
to form expressions of European culture which, however, only embodied parts of the whole.
The weakness of these parts always became apparent when Europe was threatened from


543


without. In terms of racial history we have thus to see and evaluate the invasion of Africa,
Asia Minor and Asia. Here it has to be emphasized once more that it does not correspond to
the thinking according to the laws of life to emphasize the concept of value within the racial
studies and racial history. Every expression of life and achievement of a race, as a hereditary
and environmentally determined community, is respected by us because we see in it a natural
expression of life. When we emphasize the commitment to the Nordic race for Europe, we do
so not out of a biological valuation, but out of the real political realization that this race, both
historically and in the present, has the ability to unite the whole and thus to unite Europe into
a powerful community of life.

In addition to overcoming the current threat to Europe from Asia, this political will gives the
continent security for the common good of all, the strength to defend everything that makes
life worth living and in which everyone finds the conditions for his proper development.


From this it is also clear that we are never so presumptuous as it is always claimed
by ignorant people and opponents that we ascribe all culture, also that of earlier times, only to
the Nordic race. Peoples with a different racial composition have also created cultures. Only,
other feelings are awakened in us when we try to feel ourselves into the cultures of ancient
China, Babylon or into the ancient Indian cultures of the Aztecs (in today's Mexico) and the
Incas (in today's Peru). We do not deny: these were also advanced civilizations. Yet we feel
an undeniable strangeness toward them. The reason for this lies in the creators of these
cultures themselves, for they are not akin to us but alien to our race; therefore a different spirit
speaks from them. It cannot be denied that the cultural unity of Europe, which we find so
excellently confirmed in all fields of intellectual and artistic life, in the works of the fine arts,
of writing and of music, is essentially due to the penetration of the whole European area with
Nordic blood. The Nordic race in Europe must be called the one that has shaped the spiritual
face of the continent. The history of Europe, seen from a cultural-political point of view, starts
from the moment when the Germanic peoples of the migration conquered the European area
from the Atlantic to the Black Sea and from Scandinavia to the coasts of Africa in dramatic
struggles. Therefore, it must be stated that from the point of view of European culture, the
Nordic race has been the determining one.


Dangers of miscegenation


If two different races mix, the hereditary factors never merge to a new hereditary
mass, which is passed on uniformly. We know from the theory of heredity that, apart from the
coupling of certain hereditary factors, the dispositions are inherited individually and
independently of each other. During the reproduction of such a base breed, these
predispositions diverge again and are distributed to the different offspring. Every mixture of
breeds changes the harmonious picture of the breed. The more distant the mixing breeds are
from each other, the greater will be the disturbance that such a bastardization will cause. In
addition, there are all the disadvantages in health and especially in soul, which result from a
mixture of breeds. Mixed breeds are physically and mentally disharmonious.


Race-mixing means a slow decline of the high-quality race and with it the certain
loss of the vélkisch Eigenart. The consequences of harmful miscegenation are clearly taught
us by history. From the moment a people loses its racial consciousness, moral, spiritual and
cultural decay set in. The opinion, which is still held in many quarters today, that racial
mixing has a culture-forming and even culture-creating effect, is wrong. On the other hand, it
is true that an economic and cultural contact with foreign peoples has often only triggered the
right awareness of one's own nature. This realization, however, compels us all to a strict
demarcation from all foreign races.


544


The German people is not a sum of 85 million people, but a community in which the
Nordic heredity predominates. This hereditary property does not only show itself in the
physical appearance, but primarily finds its expression in an equal racial soul. Because beside
the outer visible characteristics, like hair color, eye color etc., the other numerous
characteristics, which determine the breed, are just as important for an evaluation. The
attitude is also a real proof for the existence of the corresponding racial characteristics.


It is absolutely wrong to make hasty judgments about the character of a person on the
basis of superficial observations of physical features. People who profess their loyalty to us on
the basis of their character prove that they possess Nordic qualities, even if they do not fully
correspond to the Nordic ideal on the outside. The upright confession of a European volunteer
to the empire is therefore not only a political factor, but also an expression of a biological
assignment.


In Europe the corrosive influence of racial mixture with the Jews proved to be
particularly pernicious. These parasites of mankind have managed to avoid a complete
mixture with their host peoples up to the present day. Characteristic for this is the claim of
the English Jew Disraeli: "Every race must perish that carelessly gives its blood to mixtures.
"If in 1928 there were 53 mixed marriages for every 100 purely Jewish marriages in Germany,
this is only proof of how deeply this poison, which is slowly but surely taking effect, had
crept into the German people. Furthermore, there was a special danger in the fact that Judaism
had begun to systematically undermine the species-conscious thinking and acting of the
peoples by means of mental decomposition, in order to use this as a basis for its political and
economic ascendancy to the position of master everywhere. In addition to this, this racial
corruption had spread mainly among the leading intellectual strata of the European peoples.
The Jews made every genuine feeling contemptible, and their entire propaganda work was
consciously aimed at an inner undermining and splitting of the people. The after-effects of
this pre-1933 disintegrating decades-long infection can still be felt in the peoples even today.
It will require strenuous work to eradicate even the last traces of this plague and to return
Europe to the natural and only correct course of life. The solution of the Jewish question has
therefore become a vital question for the peoples of Europe today, beyond the borders of the
Reich.


545


Elements of life-law thinking


The idea of development


Like all other living beings man is arranged in the great variety of life on earth. As a
member of the whole of nature he is subordinated to the generally valid laws of life, but
because of the special degree of development of the spiritual-emotional abilities he has a
special position which raises him far above plants and animals. In spite of these abilities,
which are peculiar only to man and which are so highly developed, it is fundamentally wrong
to attempt to separate man from the whole of nature. Thinking according to the laws of life
leads to the realization that the human being is a physical-spiritual-mental unity, which only
through the harmonious cooperation of all these forces represents the typical human high
quality. The non-biological systems divide this unity and either build their world on the purely
material (materialism, bolshevism) and fight against the spiritual-mental, or they try to base
themselves on the spiritual- mental and are thereby forced to disparage and despise the flesh.
The doctrine of development, i.e. the knowledge of the coherence of all living things, places
the human being in the overall events of nature and determines our attitude and behaviour
towards the living world. Just as the earth, as it is today, did not exist from the beginning, but
was formed and developed in the great events of the cosmos, life on earth has appeared in
innumerable forms and shapes ever since it has existed. In the course of the history of the
earth that variety has developed from the simplest forms, which today presents itself to us in
the countless fixed forms and types as life.


The great thought is alive in our minds today. The great thought is alive to us today
that every living being goes back again and again in an unbroken chain into the farthest
primeval times through reproduction and multiplication of the elders. The scientific proofs for
the idea of development are given by the theory of descent, which can be proven by a great
number of facts. Already in pre-scientific times man has recognized relational connections in
nature and expressed them in his language. Collective names like "fish", "dogs", "cats",
"grasses" etc. are evidence for this. In addition to these ideas gained from observation and
experience, the comparative blood examination (serum diagnostics) has given the direct proof
of relational connections in the animal as well as in the plant kingdom. Thus, the earlier
classification and grouping of organisms, which was based on similarities in form, could be
confirmed as a kinship. All living beings are made of cells. These cells, their basic substance
(protein body), their structure, their fertilization and reproduction processes as well as their
life expressions show extensive similarities in humans, animals and plants. Many diseases
occur in the same way within related groups and show the same course of events.


A comparative view of the blueprints of the living beings often shows close
relational connections, where outwardly due to different developmental trajectories such
comnections do not seem to exist anymore. This can be seen in a very impressive way e.g. in
the skeleton of all vertebrates. The apparently so different limbs show a basic agreement in
the arrangement of the single bones (e.g. wings of a bird, forelimbs of a horse, arms of a
human being). Besides the same formation of egg and sperm cells the first stages of
development of even distantly related animal forms are strikingly similar. These facts again
can only be explained by the assumption of descent from a common ancestor group and by
the fact that these organisms in their individual development go through the basic features of
phylogenetic development once more.


"Memories of earlier stages of development" are furthermore the rudimentary organs,


i.e. those that are still able to develop weakly, but are no longer able to perform their original
function (e.g. vermiform appendix of the human appendix, wisdom teeth, nictitating fold in


546


the eye as rest of the nictitating skin). The enormous richness of forms in nature is an
expression of the ability of living beings to develop. We can prove it on the one hand by the
breeding of cultivated plants and domestic animals and on the other hand by the fact of
sudden and sudden changes that prove to be hereditary constancy. They are called mutations.
The fact of hereditary mutability is a direct evidence for the changeability of organisms. The
evidences for the development and descent from the now living world get a valuable
completion by findings from the history of life on earth. This history shows certain gaps that
are understandable because of the difficulty of the preservation of organic remains through
millions of years and because of the coincidence of finding them. In many cases, however,
prehistoric findings could be used to establish causal connections between developmental
series that do not seem to be directly related to us today.


The fact of development in nature disturbs dogmatic world views that try to construct
regularities from the spiritual alone in order to preserve the idea of creation by denying
development. They like to point out the still existing gaps in the history of life in order to
dissolve the whole of nature into self-sufficient groups and thereby leave open possibilities of
intervention.


Reproduction, multiplication and heredity


Reproduction, multiplication and heredity were the basic facts of the development of
life on earth so far, and they are the prerequisites for its further preservation. For every life-
law thinking it is necessary that these basic processes are known to us all, at least in their
main features. Every reproduction is initiated by fertilization. The fertilization process
consists of the fusion of two cells (cell nuclei). Through this process, the hereditary carriers of
two individuals anchored in the cell nuclei are always united to form a new hereditary
community.


The numerous evidences we have used for the explanation of the development in
nature showed the fact that parents and offspring have far-reaching similarities in
characteristics and qualities. It is an ancient knowledge of mankind that in animal and plant
breeding certain characteristics can be promoted or strengthened and other characteristics can
be eliminated. Only in the last decades the Nordic spirit of research (Mendel, Correns,
Tschermak, de Vries) succeeded in elucidating the laws of these processes, which we call
heredity.


In the cell nuclei of all living beings there are in a certain order those protein bodies
that determine the formation of hereditary characteristics (eye color, hair color, musicality,
predisposition to diseases etc.). These hereditary carriers or chromosomes are constant for
each species. Humans have 48 chromosomes in each of their body cells. During the formation
of the fertilizable egg cells of the woman and the male sperm - a process called maturation of
the sex cells - the hereditary mass is reduced to half. This process happens in such a way that
the single hereditary carriers or chromosomes are splitted according to their length. During
conception these half hereditary masses of both sexes unite in the egg cell and result in a
confluence that is the prerequisite for the beginning of the development of a new individual
(child). Thus, one hereditary material comes half from the father and half from the mother.


So for every trait and characteristic you get the disposition in equal parts from your
parents. Therefore, in case of racial equality and racial unity of the parents, the children agree
in their traits and characteristics with their producers and are also strikingly similar among
themselves as siblings. The children of different-raced or mixed-raced parents, on the other
hand, show no sibling resemblance. In them the different or mixed dispositions are put
together anew. In this case it is important which hereditary disposition has a stronger or


547


weaker effect and thus either appears visibly in the child (dominance) or is present as a hidden
hereditary disposition but does not become effective (recessivity).


Heredity therefore consists in the passing on of characteristics and traits from parents
to offspring. A crossbreed may be similar in appearance to the purebred as a result of
possessing dominant traits. The suppressed traits are not extinguished. They just do not appear.
That which appears healthy on the outside, may cause the covered hereditary dispositions to
become diseases in themselves. One does not yet notice the individual human being's inherent
qualities. On the basis of a purely external individual assessment, therefore, we cannot yet say
anything about the hereditary substance of a human being. However, we can get a picture of
the hereditary structure of a human being if we compare his parents, siblings, cousins and
bases (family and genealogy).


Hereditary factors and environment


The child created by the confluence of the parental hereditary masses has to assert
itself in its environment. This environment is changeable and manifold. It includes father,
mother, family, clan, home, people, space and climate, nutrition, illness, education, profession
and so on. The individual human being is formed in a constant struggle with all these factors.


548


The existing manifold hereditary material experiences different forms in this struggle. Certain
external circumstances will on the one hand promote hereditary dispositions, on the other
hand inhibit them. Thus, even if the hereditary material is largely the same (breed unit), there
will be a great dispersion in the formation of the characteristics. Therefore, appearance and
heredity must be strictly distinguished. The comparative study of identical twins clearly
shows the effect of heredity and environment. Identical twins are completely hereditary.
Coming out of one egg, they are so to say the double formation of an individual. The
similarity is so great that even the susceptibility to diseases (tuberculosis, tooth decay etc.),
the same sensibility and the parallelism of the mental behavior show the same processes.
Nevertheless, in the course of development a different imprinting of the hereditary mass arises
through pure environmental influence, which leads to individuality. The importance of the
environment for the effect of the hereditary material within a whole nation can be seen by
comparing the behavior of the German people in 1918 and today. At that time the
environment (state leadership) promoted and addressed other heritages than today. The face of
our people was therefore also different than now, although from a hereditary-biological point
of view the same substance was present. Despite the importance of the environment for the
development of the individual and his position in the community, it has no influence on the
genetic material. This remains unchangeable beyond the individual (germ line). Properties
acquired during life are not inherited.


By physical training the musculature of the individual can be strengthened
considerably: but the son of the athlete does not get stronger muscles than any average child
without exercise. Likewise, intellectual possession is not inherited in any way. The child of
the scholar has to start from the beginning with the ABC just as any other. If this child learns
better than others, it is merely due to the hereditary quality by virtue of which his father was
already able to become a scholar. It is not the possession that is inherited, but the disposition
to acquire it. Marxists and democrats, in a one-sided overestimation of the effect of the
environment, believed to be able to shape the face of whole peoples by changing this
environment. For them all people are equal. In their opinion, only the environment is to blame
for the fact that whites, blacks and yellows have not yet reached the same achievements in all
fields.


The great task of a nation in general is to protect the hereditary stock of a people
from unfavorable racial mixture, to prevent the increase of hereditary defects, and to shape the
environment in such a way that the best hereditary carriers will achieve the strongest
propagation. Space, seen as climate and landscape, has had a breeding influence on the people
who inhabit it through the centuries. Breeds find their most favourable living conditions only
in their natural environment. Climatic boundaries are essentially also racial boundaries.
Where such borders are sharp, like through mountains and seas, the racial borders are also
clear. In those parts of the living areas of the earth, where there are wide climatic transition
zones, there are more fluid racial borders. In such zones we have in the course of historical
developments racial mixtures as a result of infiltration by other races. Even if the same
environment has an effect, people of different races and species can never completely
assimilate in even the longest periods of time. At the most, they can intermingle and thus give
up themselves and their species. For the life-law thinking the problem of hereditary factors
and environment leads to the following statements: Every human being is formed by the
interaction of hereditary factors and environment. The environment and its influence remain
without effect on the offspring. Acquired characteristics are not inherited.


Reproduction and fertility


In nature, wherever we look, there is an enormous fertility. All living beings bring
forth more offspring than are necessary for the mere preservation of their existence. Eggs and


549


seeds are formed in an inexhaustible abundance. But only a part of them reaches development
through fertilization. In the course of growth again a large number perishes. Even if only a
few offspring pass the way of development up to maturity, the condition for the preservation
of the species is given. The fertility is the condition for the preservation of a sufficient number
of living beings to bring the species to extinction. To what extent the existing fertility can
have an effect as reproduction of a species depends on the habitat. Suddenly appearing
favourable living conditions mostly cause a sudden multiplication. Thus, the knowledge of
epidemics and their successful control was a precondition for the enormous increase of
mankind in the last centuries. From a biological point of view, e.g. in the German people there
was an enormous expansion of the hereditary mass, which was accompanied by a diversity of
the hereditary disposition, which found its expression in numerous geniuses in all fields.
Genius is a happy combination of chosen heredity.


A general increase of race and people does not only cause an increase and
strengthening of the good hereditary substance, but all too often also an increase of the
inferior (hereditary diseases, imbecility etc.). A densely populated centre of Europe, carried
by the sense of responsibility of the Nordic race and conditioned by the narrowness of the
living space, was the first to grasp these problems on a broad basis and to raise the knowledge
of the laws of life to the foundations of a state structure. While the world, in which one denies
the different value of the hereditary substance, sees in the restriction of birth the solution of a
no longer possible general increase, the demand of different reproduction applies to us out of
the recognition of the law of life. From this point of view we consciously intervene in the
natural course of development and in the following we will look at the conditions and the
necessary measures of different reproduction.


Conditions of differential reproduction


Although fertility is very great everywhere in nature, there are nevertheless
enormous differences in the numbers of the individual species. Highly developed creatures
generally have a smaller number of offspring than simpler ones. An eagle produces at most 3
offspring per year, a rat, on the other hand, can often raise 12 young per month. Even within
the human races the natural fertility is different. Thus the Eastern race has the advantage of
greater natural fertility over the Nordic. In addition to the natural fertility the environment
plays a bigger role the more developed the species is. The same is true for the human races.
The Nordic race for example has the longest development time until full maturity compared to
the other Europides.All these processes cause a different fertility. If in the struggle for
existence the less fertile races nevertheless prevail and preserve their kind in terms of quantity,
this is based on the higher capacity of these races. They have developed in the constant
struggle for life through especially hard selection conditions (ice age). The basic law of the
eternal fight, to which all weak and inferior things have to succumb, thus finds its high value.
In the free nature the conditions for the preservation of the species are coordinated and create
a balance. Today it is not possible anymore for the majority of humans, especially the high
quality races, to live only in a natural environment as it is represented by the farming
community. But the artificial environment in which man is placed shows other selection
conditions than the world that made him become the highly developed form in the course of
history. Thus, through urbanization, the conditions of the "struggle for existence" were shifted.
Thus, also in the center of Europe suddenly living conditions arose that offered the special
characteristics of the Jews possibilities for advancement and development. The Jew,
according to his nature, was able to fit into a healthy urban development and to propagate in
his own way a completely unnatural way of life, which we are only now becoming aware of
after the elimination of this parasite. The high quality breeds have to go through a longer
development. They are much more sensitive to the environment than the more primary ones.
All changes of the environment cause different selection conditions, a fact that is important


550


for the different reproduction. The knowledge of these biological conditions led the National
Socialist state to pay special attention to the measures that serve the different reproduction.


Measures for differential reproduction


It is an untenable condition when in a state the relationship between the working and
the sick takes on unhealthy forms. The active, industrious part of the population, those
capable of community work, must expend the nation's forces and resources. By eliminating
those carriers of rotten genetic material, sums can be saved and made usable for other
purposes. The measures of responsible state leadership must therefore serve the systematic
cultivation of good blood. Each nature people merits in correct realization that. In both so-
called "cultural peoples" a false charity, carried en-masse by ecclesiastical circles into the
broad masses, has virtually promoted a counter-selection. From the dogmatic side, every
reasonable intervention is branded as a violation of the divine world order.


Experience teaches us that most hereditary diseases and also the communally
incapable have no sense of responsibility towards their offspring. In the year 1877, 40375
persons were boarded in the German insane asylums. In the year 1926 there were 252793! In
the USA the percentage of the insane has increased from 1904- 1929 more than doubled.


The leader's position on this problem is clear and unambiguous:


"The demand that defective human beings be prevented from procreating other
equally defective human beings is a demand of the clearest reason and, if carried out
according to plan, means the most humane deed of mankind. It will spare millions of
unfortunates undeserved suffering, but in consequence will lead to an increasing recovery.


"


The "Law for the Prevention of Hereditary Diseased Offspring" of 14 July 1933 stipulates:


A person with a hereditary disease may be rendered infertile (sterilized) by surgical
intervention if, according to the experience of medical science, it is highly probable that his or
her offspring will suffer from severe physical or mental hereditary defects. The law lists the
hereditary diseases recognized today, including a number of mental diseases and severe
hereditary defects, such as hereditary blindness, hereditary deafness, etc. In addition, those
suffering from severe alcoholism may be rendered infertile. The court of hereditary health
decides on infertility. With this legislation the beginning has been made for the necessary
purification process of our national body. The effect of this law will already be felt in the next
generations. A second law takes into account the fact that habitual criminals have a hereditary
heavily burdened offspring. On November 24, 1933, the "Law against Dangerous Habitual
Criminals and on Measures of Security and Correction" was created. This law not only
eliminates certain anti-community elements from the national body, but also keeps them from
reproducing.


On September 15, 1933, the "Law for the Protection of German Blood and German
Honor" was promulgated. Among other things, this law forbids marriages between Jews and
citizens of German or related blood. It prohibits extramarital intercourse between Jews and
citizens of German or kindred blood. Marriages between Jews and quarter Jews are forbidden,
as well as between quarter Jews. Marriages between half-Jews and Germans or quarter-Jews
require the approval of the Reich Minister of the Interior. The law also provides for the
prevention of marriages of German-borns with descendants of the Negroes from the time of
the occupation of the Rhine and with Gypsies.


551


The significance of this legislation was outlined by the Reichsmarschall:


"Tt is a confession of the powers and blessings of Germanic -Nordic spirit. We know
that the blood sin is the original sin of the people. We ourselves, the German people, have had
to suffer greatly from this original sin. We know that the ultimate root of all Germany's decay
came from this original sin. Therefore, we must try to reconnect with the lineages of ancient
times. It has truly been salvation in the last hour, and if God and Providence had not given us
the Fiihrer, Germany would never again have risen from original sin, from ruin. "


Another measure is the "Law for the Protection of the Hereditary Health of the
German People" (Marriage Health Law) of October 18, 1935, which prohibits marriages
between sick people and thus prevents the transmission of defective genetic material to
offspring. On 17 May 1942, the Maternity Protection Act was enacted, which legally
stipulated the economic position of the expectant mother and the undisturbed care of the
infant.


In addition to the general state laws for the promotion of good heredity, members of
the SS have had a special marriage license since December 31, 1931. This, too, has the goal of
promoting the high-quality heredity of the Nordic character, as the supporting performance
race of the European community, through a well-considered choice of husband borne by a
high level of racial consciousness.


The family is the last biological unit within the community of a people. In
accordance with this significance, it is given the strongest support in all areas of our national
life. Thus the preservation of the racially valuable for all the future has as its prerequisite the
inclusion of the family and clan. The life of the individual links him with ancestors and
descendants. The national community grows beyond the family and clan. The individual dies,
subject to the laws of nature. Through the passing on of his hereditary property he becomes a
living member of his national community. Through clan and family we are immortal.


"The family is the smallest but most valuable unit in the structure of the whole
state. "(Adolf Hitler.)


Every nationality can only be renewed from within the family. Out of the Germanic-
German feeling we emphasize our clan thought. In close connection with the laws of life, we
have to take account of regeneration on the way via the German family. Every marriage of a
family member means the inclusion of a new hereditary property in the clan. Therefore, the
choice of a husband is not only of decisive importance for those directly involved, but also for
the preservation of the relationship between the family members. The choice of the wife gives
the man the only opportunity in life to improve or spoil the heredity of the coming sex. Health
or sickness, talent or incapacity of the offspring are decided by the choice of husband. In this
decisive step, it is not position and wealth, but only mental and physical ability that must be
decisive. It is clear that the one who is sure to be the bearer of unhealthy hereditary traits must
renounce. The choice of the genus is the most important step in the course of life and for the
passing on of life. That is why it is necessary that all findings of the laws of life are strictly
observed when making this decision.


Marry early, for only then will you fully enjoy the family happiness. Do not marry a
non-tribal woman. You are responsible to your people and your descendants for keeping the
blood pure.

Don't marry a woman with a hereditary disease. You will be responsible for the suffering of
your own children and grandchildren. Choose only a perfectly healthy woman. The true
picture of the health and qualities of your future wife will be shown to you by her clan. I want


552


your wife to be at least as valuable racially as you are. Try to make your and your children's
environment as natural as possible. Avoid a relative marriage, because unfavorable hereditary
dispositions almost always remain hidden from you and then come to develop twice in your
children. Only the greatest possible number of children will guarantee the full development of
your genetic makeup. To the professional fulfillment of duty must come the biological one.
Only both together result in the life achievement. Remember that nature demands a struggle
for what is valuable. Not what falls easily to hand fulfills the conditions of selection. Only
what you win in hard struggle will be your whole satisfaction.


Life Law Thinking and Europe


The diversity of the European peoples is today growing together into a common
larger order. By shifting the emphasis from national-state thinking to the laws of life,
biological processes are gaining decisive importance. Life in its manifestations, its variability
and its possibilities of development triggers the different forces whose interaction has to be
directed by a new order. The new, bio-political thinking is based on self-preservation and the
responsibility for the prosperity of the whole. Just the recognition of the laws of life gives us
the possibility to participate in the shaping of our life. In the course of history, biological
strength and state form shifted among the European peoples. The causes lay partly in an inner
development of forces, partly in the effect of foreign influences. The greater the tension
between state and biological reality, the more unfortunate was the age. The better the
biological equilibrium was, the happier and more efficient was our continent. The pacification
of the European area and the creation of a greater unity can only be accomplished by thinking
in terms of the laws of life. It is part of the leadership task of the Reich that this way of
thinking is offered to all fellow inhabitants of our continent.


553


The Celebration In The Life
Of The 55 family


This publication explains the meaning of the different celebrations and gives
guidance to the families of how to celebrate these occasions in the right spirit. Through
reading this booklet, every SS Man and SS Woman should come to a deeper understanding of
these celebrations.


This section should provide a constant companion especially for the women, as most
of the preparations will fall to them.


The knowledge of the customs of our forefathers gives us inner peace; keeping to
these customs gives us direction and strength.


F. Weitzel SS Lieutenant General.


1. Annual Feasts Of The SS Family -- The Yearly Cycle


554


Since time immemorial our forefathers worshiped the Sun as giver of life and
warmth. Like a golden disk it shone above them, like a wheel it rolled across the sky.


The Sun determines the passing of every day, and its path is itself a circle. It draws
longer and shorter lines around the Earth. At 6 a.m. we can see it in the East, at 12 noon in the
South, at 6 p.m. in the West, and at midnight, during the summer, in the far North, where it
ends its daily cycle.


Furthermore our ancestors saw the passing of the whole year as points on a wheel.
That was the old wheel calendar, which could be seen on the horizon. During the Winter
Solstice the Sun appears in the Arctic North for a short time on the southern point; during
Midsummer Day it is on the northern point. The connection of these points gives the North-
South line of the horizon.


In our latitudes the Sun rises on the Midsummer and Midwinter Days in the
Northeast and the Southeast, and then sets in the Northwest and Southwest. The connecting
lines of these points form an X: divide the already divided circle into 6 parts (the Malkreuz --


then remove the outer Circle and you have the Hagall Rune:


From the far North our ancestors brought with them a foundational experience which
became very important for their future and especially for us as we rediscover our heritage. It
was as follows:


“In the high North, Summer and Winter fought each other as the forces of light and
darkness. The dark Winter with its harshness and cold seemed to win over the short, barren
Summer. And yet Summer arrived year after year despite the might of the Winter. If its arrival
every year hadn't been a certainty, it would have meant the death of the Nordic Folk. Sad and


555


depressed the Nordic Folk watched the circle of the Sun get smaller and smaller at the end of
the Summer. The Sun became weak, old, pale. Its path got shorter, and during Jul time there
would only be a few hours of daylight and then it would sink into the cold North Sea and was
gobbled up, as if eaten by a monster on Midwinter Day. It was dead and lay in its grave. The
question whether the Sun would stay buried was of equal importance to the question whether
mankind would live or die.”


On Midwinter Day the miracle happened: The Sun rose from its watery grave. It was
born like a child, gathered strength, and appeared in front of the celebrating and joyous Folk,
who felt that life was given back to them. This happened every year. And every year they
celebrated this as their most important festival, their sacred and holy night festival. They
greeted the Sun with lit torches to help free it from the ties of the death of Winter. And they
celebrated as often as possible the ever increasing circles of the Sun. Fires would burn high on
the day of spring on which day and night were of same length, as surely the Sun must have
finally won the battle now. And again on Midsummer Night, when the Sun had won its
greatest victory and night lasted for only a few hours. This celebration eventually became the
most important one of all.


The strong Sun made harvest possible, reason for another feast, after which its
strength waned fast and it headed once more towards death, which in turn became new life.


As far back as during the Nordic and Germanic times of the German Folk, people
told the tale of the death and resurrection of the Sun in many different tales. We are fortunate
to know more about this early culture of our Folk than of some periods much later on in our
history. This Sun experience is the subject of nearly all of our pre-christian fairy-tales, which
the brothers Grimm have collected, written down more than a hundred years ago and thereby
preserved for all time. The Sun like princess, killed by a bad, wintry force, resurrected by a
young hero: that is the essence of all these stories, which were wonderfully extended and
varied.


Man also saw the same laws of Die and become new all around him in Nature. The
yearly cycle of the Sun also determines the rhythm of all living things, animals as well as
plants. Their whole life revolved around youth and ageing, dying and rebirth. And man's own
life followed this rhythm. The Nordic man knew that his own life came from the loins of a
man destined to die. In the knowledge of his own death he handed on life. That was the
essence of his beliefs. What he learned from the Sun he saw in his own forests. That's why he
considered trees to be sacred. He imagined that the whole universe was supported by a
gigantic tree. This is the old ash tree which is described in the old saga Edda. In its eternity
the law of die and become provides constant renewal, eternal rhythm.


Therefore the Nordic man had at his celebrations the fires, the Sun Wheel, and the
tree as symbols. In stories we read about the Tree Of Life, which grows on the grave of the
mother and protects the young life through its blessings.

2. Die And Become (Stirb Und Werde)


“Everything goes, everything returns, Eternally rolls the wheel of life, Everything dies,
everything blooms again. Eternally rolls the wheel of life. Everything breaks, everything is
mended, Eternally builds the house of life. Everyone parts, everyone meets again,
Eternally the cycle of life stays true.”


- F, Nietzsche


3. The Celebration Of Yuletide


556


When Neblung (November), the month of the dead, has passed, the time of Yuletide
is starting, with its knowledge of the rising of the sun from its sleep, of the renewal after the
wintry death, of the birth of light from the darkness of the long nights. Although we Germans
no longer live in the far North, and although we can alleviate the depressing feelings through
light and heating, the old experiences of our ancestors are very strong and vivid in us. We still
feel that Yuletide is the greatest celebration of our year. Therefore we make every effort to
celebrate it in style with our family.


4. The Timetable


Firstly you have to look at the whole of this festive time. It used to last from the 6th
day of Jul (December), which was Wotan's Day and is now St. Nikolaus's Day, to the 6th day
of Hornung (January), which was the old Frigga Day and is now Epiphany, with the main
celebration at Midwinter Night, the night of 21st of Jul, when all the mountain tops would
have been alight with fires.


We have become accustomed to some alterations to this timetable. The preparation
time, Advent, now lasts from the first Sunday in Jul to the 24th of Jul. Advent contains 4 Jul
Sundays, Wotan's Day (6th), and the Winter Solstice (21st). The Twelve Sacred Days of the
season start with Yuletide Night on Jul 24th and end on Frigga Day on Hornung 6th. These 12
days are filled with special celebrations, especially on New Year's Eve and New Year's Day.


5. The Jul Wreath


On the first Jul Sunday the Jul Wreath is hung up in the living room. Its fir branches
fill the house with pre Yuletide smells, its red ribbons awaken the joy for the coming
celebrations, and its red candles brighten up the dark winter evenings. The Yuletide Wreath is
equivalent to the old Sun Wheel, and as it is made from living greenery it reminds us of the
old Tree Of Life. Once we have made these connections we will surely make the right
preparations for the festival.


The SS Man should go to his friendly cartwright and ask for a wooden wheel of
about 50 to 80 cm diameter. There is bound to be a spare one lying about. He cuts off one side
of the hub so the wheel can lie flat. It is then stained dark brown or bright red and so becomes
the Jul Wheel of the family, which should be kept on a low table or the family chest in a
corner of the living room.


cote Sa


Rae ai en
The Jul Wheel


The Jul Wheel or Sun Wheel with its deep rooted Germanic religious meaning is
utilised as the base for the SS tree


557


A small, young, forked tree trunk without branches is stuck into the centre of the hub,
so we can recreate the Tree Of Life growing from the Sun Wheel which will be used by the
SS-family at every celebration during the year.


Instead of the cart wheel you can use a wooden wheel with the dividers inset and
decorated with Runic letters. The tree should still be fixed in the centre. The green tree may
be replaced every year by the trunk of the Yuletide tree at the end of the season. It is
important that the wooden wheel has replaced the meaningless cast iron Christmas tree stand,


which has no place in an SS home. The same goes for electric tree lights and the horrible glass
decorations for the tree.


We now place red ribbon both ways across the fork of the tree, the ends of which are
tied to the Jul Wreath, which now hangs freely about half way up the tree.


The typical SS Yuletide Tree sits in the center of the family chest; directly behind is


a Wedding Plate and on either side is a Jul Plate


The Jul Wreath is made by binding bundles of small pine twigs around a wooden
hoop (a child's toy hoop is ideal), and fastening 4 red candles on it.


When the SS Woman prepares the table for afternoon coffee on the first Jul Sunday,
she decorates it with further twigs of pine and lights the first candle on the Jul Wreath. Every
following Sunday an additional candle on the Jul Wreath is lit, thereby the lights grow slowly
until there is an explosion of lights on the Yuletide Tree by the time of Winter Solstice,
portraying the Winter Solstice fires. It is also customary to light 4 candles on the first Sunday,
decreasing every week by 1 candle. This should point to the dying old year, which is reborn in
the many candles on the Yuletide Tree even as its last candle dies away.


6. The Baking
Traditionally the German housewife will bake cakes for Yuletide in three different


shapes:


1.Large Cake,


558


2.Gingerbread and Almond Biscuits,
4. Shaped Biscuits.


The housewife should always be aware that the Yuletide baking has a special
meaning. It should not only taste good, but it should be part of the meaningful celebrations.
The cakes and biscuits should therefore be an expression of the great changes at the Winter
Solstice, like the Yuletide Tree, the Jul Wreath and the candles. Therefore a good SS
housewife should pride herself on keeping to the old recipes and shapes and rejecting all
cheap and American factory produced goods.


The large cake, which is still served today with a candle in the middle, and the large
flat cake are still to be found in every house today.


Gingerbread cakes and biscuits, which taste so nice made with honey and syrup and
which fill the whole house with their delicious aroma, should be cut out in heart shapes, star
shapes, or wheel shapes.


The Jul Plates


Two wooden Jul Plates are shown carved with wheat motifs; many different carvings
including Runic can be found, although wheat motifs are amongst the most common; also
shown are three wooden moulds -- one large and two small -- used to shape biscuits


Eventually every SS household should possess all the wooden cutters for the almond
biscuits. The preferable shapes are:


1.The cockerel -- the announcer of day time

2.The boar -- boarmeat used to be eaten at Yuletide
3.The rider -- Wotan on his horse

4.The hunter -- Wotan


5.The spinner -- Lady Holle in fairytales; Frigga


559


6.The Tree Of Life
7.The human couple.


In addition hand formed biscuits should be made and formed in the shape of the
Runic Letters. This is not at all difficult if the dough is rolled into a long thick spaghetti.
Runic Letters like the Swastika, the 4 spoke, 6 spoke, or 8 spoke Sun Wheel, the Odal Rune in
all different shapes, the pretzel, the Sun Spiral, and the horse shoe can then be formed easily.
These cut out and hand formed almond biscuits should be used to decorate the Jul Wreath,
they should hang on the Yuletide Tree, and they should be found on the Yuletide table of
every SS family.


7. Yuletide Songs And Stories


Jul time is especially a time for children. Parents can't do enough to brighten up these
dull days and long nights. Just think about it: Where do our deep rooted feelings for Yuletide
come from?


Mostly they are memories from our childhood days. First impressions last longer and
leave the deepest sense for these celebrations in our young folk. All later festivities are only
meaningful if this initial understanding is awakened.


Because in Germany every generation has passed on the old traditions to their
children, we now have the German Yuletide, which is envied by all other Nations.


We also have to ensure that these old traditions get handed on in a true and
unchanged way, so that they will awaken in our children a strong feeling for their Homeland
and their Folk, which will provide them with a sense of security in this modern and stressful
world.


At Yuletide children should sing our old Yuletide songs. This requires the mothers to
learn our old songs and teach them with all their hearts and souls. A joint evening at your
local school will help all those parents who were not taught properly in their own childhood to
get it right for their children.


Our best Yuletide songs are:


1.High Up In The Winds
2.0 Yuletide Tree, How Green Are Your Branches
5. Sacred Night Filled With Stars.

The Yuletide season is like no other a time for telling stories. The nucleus of our
fairytales is thousands of years old. If you are able to read between the lines the deeper
meaning of the happenings at the Winter Solstice, you will not only make the children happy
with these stories, but increase your knowledge of the deeper meaning of Yuletide and your


racial inheritance.


It is customary now to tell one story every Jul Sunday which tells of the Solstice and
the coming year.


560


1st Jul Sunday: Little Red Riding Hood -- The child with the red cap (Sun) goes into the
dark wood to visit old mother (Earth Mother) and is swallowed up by a monster; the young
hunter brings her freedom and with it the rebirth of the year.


2nd Jul Sunday: Snow White -- The princely child goes into the deep wood, reaches the
kingdom of the Gnomes (Mother Earth) but is killed by the bad one (step mother); she sleeps
on a mountain in a glass coffin (the ice winter) and is freed and brought home by a young
hero.


3rd Jul Sunday: Maiden Marleen -- The princess with the golden hair (Sun) is incarcerated
in a tower (death of the Sun); the world becomes barren and empty; the prince tries to free her
but is thwarted by the bad bride (the bad one), until the time is right and he recognises the
right bride and brings her home.


4th Jul Sunday: Sleeping Beauty -- The princess reaches the tower of the spinning old
woman (the bad one); she falls into a deep sleep; the world becomes barren and empty until
the young prince comes and freely walks through the rose hedges because the time is ripe
(Winter Solstice); he wakes the sleeping girl with a kiss, the world awakes and radiates in new
light.
See also the old Saga of Sigurd and Briinnhilde in the Waberlohe -- Magic Fire story.


8. Wotan's Day And The Jul Plate


The old feast of Wotan is on Jul 16th. In olden days the God of our ancestors drove
through the air, visited his people, was friendly to them, and left them little presents. He
wanted to announce the start of the Winter Solstice season and the coming of the New Year.


The christian church couldn't suppress these yearly visits of this white bearded, one
eyed leader of the good Spirits. So they put one of its assumed saints, St. Nikolaus, in his
place. But in many areas of Germany the Schimmelreiter -- Rider On A White Horse, also
known as Hruodprecht -- Ruprecht -- The One Shining With Glory = Wotan, or simply Father
Yuletide remained. SS Families should gather together and make the visit of Father Yuletide a
memorable event for the children. They will thank them for it in years to come. But where a
visit cannot be arranged, all members of the family should put their Jul Plates on the window
sill. They will find them in the morning filled with apples, nuts, and hand formed biscuits, the
first messengers of the coming feast.


a


a du alle i


Every member of a family should have his or her own Jul Plate. When a child is born,
it should be presented with this Plate at the Ceremony Of Name Giving. It should be an old


561


pewter plate, wooden plate, or a ceramic plate decorated with the Tree Of Life and lettering.
As this Plate is used throughout the whole life, it should be beautiful, but not too large. It is
used on birthdays to put the candles on it, on Wotan's Day, Yuletide Day, and New Year's
Day for presents, on Easter Sunday for the Easter Eggs, on the Harvest Festival for apples,
during the Wedding Ceremony for bread and salt, and during the Funeral Service the Light Of
Life should extinguish whilst on it.

Produced by the SS porcelain firm of Porzellan-Allach GmbH for Yuletide, 1941,
and available for public purchase; the Plate has a green border with symbolic Tree Of Life
motifs on the lower rim; the centre of the Plate is decorated with snowdrops


9. The Yuletide Tree


After the men of the SS have stood on the mountains around the fires during the
Winter Solstice and listened to the words of contemplation and warning, they bring home one
of the little trees which have seen the fire. It is put into the hub of the Jul Wheel and decorated
with the Lights of Yuletide. Therefore the evergreen Tree Of Life stood in the living room,
telling of the dark winter's death and the shining rebirth of the coming time.


10. Winter Solstice Inside The House Of The SS Man


We have to keep the meaning of the Yuletide Tree in mind, even if we have to buy it
at the market in a town. It should be a beautiful slim tree, the wide branches of which should
spread solemnity and festivity in the room. It should stand in the Jul and SS corner of the
house. It should be decorated with the greatest care. Do not start the preparations at the last
possible minute and rush out to buy the rubbish the nearest shop has to offer.


What meaning is there in angel hair, glass decorations, tinsel and other such nonsense on the
Yuletide Tree of the SS family?


The Jul Wheel, which supported the Jul Wreath, now holds the Yuletide Tree. There
should be nothing on top of the Tree, and the top crown of branches stays free. The best
decorations are the lit candles. In addition lots of red apples should be hung on the tree with
thin wires. The apple is a symbol of the forthcoming life, red is the colour of the Sun. Other
symbols with the same meaning are golden and silver painted nuts. And of course the home
baked shaped biscuits and almond biscuits with their different meanings must be hung on the
tree, together with a marzipan pig, symbolizing the Jul Boar. During the long Jul evenings the
father should cut out the wooden shapes of the Jul Wheel and the Swastika in all their
different forms. They complete the decorations of the Tree. The main impression should
always come from the Tree itself and not from the decorations.


562


The SS Tree


The typical SS Yuletide Tree sits in the centre of the family chest; directly behind is
a Wedding Plate and on either side is a Jul Plate


11. The Yuletide Celebration


We celebrate Yuletide in the evening, not in the morning. Yuletide is the feast of the
newborn light and the renewing life. Therefore it is the feast of the commemoration of the
birth of the child, of thanks to the mother, of good wishes for the growth of the whole Folk.
The reason for our giving presents at Yuletide is to show respect to other members of our Folk
for the part they play in its continued existence.


In Germany Yuletide is therefore a feast for the closer and wider family, which tends
to exclude outsiders but for which a long lost son or one living far away is always welcome to
return.


The presents, which are only valuable if the giver has himself worked on them, are
secretly put under the Tree by the father. When everything is ready the family gathers in the
adjoining room for the evening meal. The table should be festive and laid with care. This is
the start of the Yuletide celebration.


The meal is substantial and the main course should consist of carp, goose, boar, or
hare. These animals have traditionally been eaten at the Yuletide meal and should never be
replaced by other food.


The meal should begin with a short speech by the father and end with a reference to
the coming delights.


563


Not only the presents but the whole celebration should be full of surprises for all the
members of the family. The father lights the candle in the Jul Earthenware Candlestick, from
which the tree candles get their light. On the Tree should be 13 (12 months plus the 13th
renewing) or 27 (3 lunar weeks each with 9 days) candles. He leaves three candles, which are
close together, unlit. He now calls the wife, the children, and any other family members into
the room using a little bell. As they admire the Tree the father lights the last three candles and
says:


This light should burn for our ancestors who are with us tonight. This light should
burn for my dead comrades from the War, and this light should burn for our millions of
German brothers all over the world, who all celebrate Yuletide with us tonight.


After this all should sing the song O Yuletide Tree, How Green Are Your Branches,
without which the Yuletide Celebration is unthinkable, and open their presents. The evening
should be quiet and sincere. At the appointed time the whole family will listen to the Yuletide
address of the Deputy of our Leader and will feel through it a bond reaching out from the
close family to encompass the whole Folk of German brothers. During the evening the family
photographs should be shown, old family stories told, and thoughts about the success of
research into the family history exchanged.


12. New Year's Eve And The Earthenware Candlestick


Yuletide Eve is followed by the Twelve Sacred Days. Those days were important
feast days for our ancestors and nobody worked during this time. Wotan and his Army Of The
Dead were said to ride through the air, and Frigga, or Lady Holle, leads the Army Of The
Unborn above the heads of the Folk.


We should light the candles on the Tree as often as possible during these days.
During the night of New Years Eve the celebrations reach another pinnacle. The happenings
of Yuletide are repeated, and again we say goodbye to the old and look hopefully to the future.


The last evening of the year is a very jolly time. The children have bought small
fireworks and have their own fun. Mother fetches the spoon for the casting of the lead. This
spoon should only ever be used for this purpose. The lead is melted on the spoon and cast into
a bowl of cold water. The resulting figures and shapes foretell the future. Greeting cards are
sent to distant relatives, the punch fills the house with its aroma, and the evening meal should
be as grand as the one at Yuletide.


At midnight, when the candles on the Yuletide Tree are burnt down, the SS Man will
put the Jul Earthenware Candlestick on the table. This Candlestick with its year candle has
been lit at every family celebration during the last year. Therefore its candle has burned down.
It should therefore receive a new light tonight. Just as our ancestors never let the sacred hearth


cooking fire extinguish, so our SS Jul Earthenware Candlestick must always have a light. So
the candlestick becomes a symbol of the never dying sunlight. Everyone becomes very
thoughtful when finally the old year candle burns down and the new one is put in its place.


The Julleuchter -- Jul Earthenware Candlestick
Presented by Reich Leader Of The SS Himmler, the Jul Earthenware Candlestick is
the essential symbol used by the SS family throughout the year to mark celebrations and


commemorations


World famous Jul Earthenware Candlesticks being produced at the Allach factory


7
”


-


SS personnel receiving the Jul Earthenware Candlestick and Citation This is the wish of the
Reich Leader Of The SS to his SS Men:


565


Jul Earthenware Candlestick Citation


This is the wish of the Reich Leader Of The SS to his SS Men:


The Reich Leader Of The SS Berlin, Julfest, 1943


“T give you this Jul Earthenware Candlestick. It is fashioned in the traditional style
of our Folk.


Its light shall burn during the New Year's Night, which for us falls on the night of
the 31st of December to the Ist of January.


The small candle shall burn as a symbol of the ending
year during its last hours. The large candle shall light


up at the first moment of the New Year.


566


aiLtc


UND
FOUR DAS KRIEGSJANR 1945


WEIL HITLER!


Abita


RETCHSPOMRER'


A Yuletide Card printed for Yuletide, 1945, on behalf on Reich Leader Of The SS Himmler;
note the Jul Earthenware Candlestick used to decorate this simple card, which reads: MY
HEARTFELT BEST WISHES FOR YULETIDE AND FOR THE WAR YEAR 1945, HEIL
HITLER!


13. The Easter Celebration


The name Ostern -- Easter is of Germanic origin. It indicates that the Sun rises
exactly in the Ost -- East. With the arrival of the Easter time the fight between Winter and
Summer is decided in favour of the coming Summer, because when Easter arrives, the
Equinox is already past.


Easter is a moveable feast, as it is not only determined by the Sun but also by the
Moon. Easter Sunday is the first Sunday after the full Moon which follows the Spring
Equinox.


The christian church has chosen this ancient Germanic feast of reawakening and
resurrection for their celebration of the resurrection of christ. Easter is the feast of the
victorious spring during which the law of eternal life of Nature is visible in the thousands of
buds and growing seeds around us. These days of Easter are celebrated by the Germanic man
through the gathering around the Easter Fire, the Tree Of Life in the house, willow catkins,
Easter Eggs, and the festive meal. Because he sees God's revelation in the laws of Nature, all
these symbols are signs of his closeness to God.


Easter is a festive time, which lasts for many days. Today we normally start the
festivities on Green Sunday (Palm Sunday) with Easter Sunday being the greatest feast day. If
this celebration is to have meaning for us we have to spend as much time as possible with the
family and start the preparations early enough.


14. The Easter Tree


567


On Green Sunday (Palm Sunday) the children go into the woods and cut flexible
brushwood from weeping willow trees, birch trees, and hazel trees, which will be bound into a
Wreath.


This Wreath should be hung on the branch in the Jul Wheel positioned in the SS
corner. On Maundy Thursday the Wreath is decorated with willow and hazel catkins, and on
Easter Sunday the Easter Eggs are added.


15. The Easter Eggs


Everyone knows that the Easter Bunny lays the Easter Eggs. To honour this the
Bunny appears on the table in the shape of almond biscuits, and in the Easter Nest shaped in
chocolate. The Easter Nest of every member of the family is his or her Jul Plate which is
padded with moss or cotton wool and hidden in the house or garden the night before Easter
Sunday. The main content of the nest are the Easter Eggs. They should not be replaced by
sweets but should be real, living eggs. The egg encloses most clearly the force of the new
awakening life. That is why everyone eats eggs on this, the feast of resurrection.


To show that these eggs have a special meaning, they are coloured and painted.
There are many ways to achieve this colouring. Often the eggs are coloured brown by boiling
onion skins and letting the eggs soak in this brew. If you buy coloured food dyes you can
make red, yellow, blue, or green shells.


With a solution of 10 % hydrochloric acid the coloured eggs can now be inscribed
with mottos, Runic Letters, borders, and drawings. The verses on the eggs should be directed
towards the finder of the egg, and should make them laugh, the louder the better. The children
can help with the painting of the eggs, but should not do the engraving because of the obvious
danger of drops of acid stinging their eyes.


Besides the eggs which will be hidden, the ones which have been used for the Easter
baking should be decorated. These shells will be hollow and the finished eggs can be hung
singly or in chains on the Easter Wreath.


The coloured egg shell halves of the eaten eggs will be stuck upside down on the
ends of the catkins on the wreath. The chocolate bunnies will decorate the base of the Jul
Wheel until they are eaten.


16. The Easter Walk


It has become a good custom that the whole family will go for a walk on the first day
of Easter. Even bad weather can't stop the morning walk on Easter Sunday. The father must
not forget that he will take on the role of the Easter Bunny so that the children can find the
woods full of Easter Eggs and (imaginary) Bunnies. In this way every year the children are
awakened from the effects of winter hibernation through this special experience. Father
should make sure of the laughter and the happiness of the children by telling them the old
fairytales of the blind, the lame, and the naked who saw a hare, how far the hare runs into the
woods, how the Sun jumps three times at Easter when he hears laughter, and whatever he
knows about Miinchhausen, Eulenspiegel, and the daring Bomberg, all of whom have made
people laugh with their nonsense. A sip of water from the little stream in the wood should
taste especially good on Easter Sunday. And on returning home lunch should consist of soup
made from sorrel, fresh vegetables, and scrambled eggs.


17. The Easter Fires


568


The Easter Fires which are being lit in all our Folk Community are fires of joy about
the victorious rising of spring. Therefore they already point towards the fires during
Midsummer Night. If the SS Man cannot take part in one of the celebrations around the fires
of his Homeland, he should light the Jul Earthenware Candlestick underneath the Easter Tree
in the SS corner of his house and contemplate the meaning of these fires for his ancestors and
the meaning of Easter for him and his family.


* Spring is coming to greet us, the south wind blows mild, All the meadows bloom
with red and blue flowers. Outside, the brown heathland weaves a lovely dress for herself And
invites everyone to the May dance. Forest birds sing the songs you wish for, So come to the
happy dance, the journey is worth it. Under the green lime trees the white dresses shine, All
the sorrows of winter are over for us children.” -- Old German Folksong.


An Osterfeuerrader -- Easter Fire Wheel made by the village of Liigde outside Bad
Pyrmont, carved with a proverb: KEIN ZEIT ALTER, KANN UNSEREN ANFANG
DENKEN GOTT ALLEIN WOLL UNSER ENDE LENKEN 1934 -- Nobody can predict
from where we will start; God alone will guide us to our destiny, 1934


The tradition of the Easter Fire Wheel has lived on through the centuries. A large wooden
wheel is brought to the top of a mountain or cliff, it is stuffed with straw which is set alight,
and it is then rolled down the mountain or cliff emphasising the joy about the rising of spring.
Everyone from the village takes part in this celebration.


569


The Easter Fire Wheel is taken through the village and then on to the top of the cliff or
mountain; an element of sacred ceremony prevails throughout the whole proceedings


The Easter Fire Wheel is stuffed with straw, afterwards the straw is set alight and the wheel is
rolled down the cliff or mountain


Ein Volk, ein Reich, ein Fiihrer -- One Folk, one Reich, one Leader, 1938


In 1934 torchbearers were organised to form a huge blazing Swastika on the slopes of the
Osterberg while the wheels ran down the hill


18. The Time Of May


570


In olden times May was the preferred month for wedding feasts. The young people
used to go and look for land to work and cultivate after their marriage. This connects the time
of May to this day, with the celebration of our young strong workforce. All German people
feel a bond with each other on May Ist, because they are all part of the German workforce
and therefore part of the German existence. May Ist was made the great festival of unity for
all working Germans by the National Socialist Revolution. On this day the SS family should
spend as much time as possible outside its home with work colleagues and comrades. But
May flowers and greenery should adorn every house, and everyone should be aware that May
1st is connected to another feast in May which has the Greek name of Pentecost. The
significance of Pentecost is that, whereas May Ist is celebrated outside the house, Pentecost is
celebrated within the family.


The hub of the Jul Wheel supports a small green birch tree, decorated with colourful
ribbons: the Tree Of Life in May. Every girl should be dressed in white as if she herself was
the Queen Of May, who is the central figure of the May Dance. In the evening a cool drink
refreshes all the people who have wholeheartedly taken part in the largest celebration of the
German Folk Community during this, the old marriage month.


19. The Summer Solstice


The Sun has reached its longest curve over the sky. On this day his light is stronger
and longer lasting than on any other day. In the far North it stays light for 24 hours. After its
birth at Yuletide the light has reached its height of growth. The middle of the year is for us
symbolic for the middle of our life, symbol for our strong virile actions, the unity in the home,
and the existence of our Folk.


Together with those organization which take an active part in the building of the
German Reich, the SS marches to the nightly fires on the hills and mountains. The play of the
Sun is a sign of the eternal cycle of life, the fire is the sacred gloom of the never extinguishing
strength of the Sun, and the speeches will give direction and appeal for the fights to come.


Inside the SS home the children have collected pine brushwood or the red blooms of
the sorrel. They are bound into a wreath and fastened upright onto the Jul Tree. When the fires
have died down, the father will come home, light the Jul Earthenware Candlestick, the candles
on the Wreath, wake the children, and tell them of the celebrations and the speeches. This
awakens in the children the desire to be part of the celebrations of the secrets of the Summer
Solstice.


20. The Harvest Festival


During autumn the days become shorter and the nights longer, and the year nears its
end. The Earth lets the plants grow, the Sun has ripened the fruits, and now the barns and
cellars are filled with the gifts of the Earth. The harsh winter time may come now. The Folk
look thankfully to their God who lets everything grow, and honour him through the Harvest
Festival.


Many Germans come to the Biickeburg, where The Leader holds his address of
thanks. Inside the home of the SS Man everything will be prepared for the celebration.
Especially in the towns the connection to the harvest on the farms should be stressed. The
children will go across the fields and collect straw for the harvest crown. This straw should
really be collected, not bought, to deepen the understanding of the harvest work. At home this
straw will be bound into a Harvest Wreath or Crown and hung from the Tree Of Life in the
middle of the Jul Wheel. It will be decorated with red apples and other fruits, and underneath


571


will be placed the Jul Plate holding bread and salt. This provides a good setting in which to
listen to The Leader's words.


21. The Death Rites


Nebelung (November) is the Month Of The Dead. The year is dying, with the last
leaves falling from the trees. This time is very sad and melancholic. We understand anew, that
as the resurrection at Easter is part of the yearly cycle, so is the dying in autumn. Life contains
birth and death. Because life is sacred for us, so birth and death are untouchable.


Historically the days of remembrance fall into this month of Neblung. The 11th of
November, 1914, was the day of Langemarck, the 11th of November, 1918, was the death
bringing day of the armistice, and on the 9th of November, 1923, was the march to the
Feldherrnhalle. Every November The Leader, and with him the whole Nation, returns to the
Feldherrnhalle to commemorate our dead martyrs.


Everyone should visit the graves of his dearly departed during this month and take
wreaths of flowers and lights of life. The SS Man, who feels especially close to the departed,
will light his Jul Earthenware Candlestick in honour of his fallen comrades and the dead of his
family on these long dusky evenings. If more members of the family are gathered a toast
should be drunk in honour of the dead. The Wreath which is destined for the graveyard should
first hang on the Jul Wheel for a day or so to deepen the meaning and to let it carry all the
special greetings of the family to the family's ancestors. During this time the pictures of the
ancestors should be displayed in the SS corner, and the general talk should be about their
good lives and brave deaths.


22.The Jul And SS Corner


The typical SS Corner showing the family chest which is filled with cherished family
and SS mementos; upon the chest in the centre is the Jul Earthenware Candlestick with two
Jul Plates, and to one end the Family Book; behind the chest is a wall drape with beautiful
traditional motifs; the chest is made to the requests of the family, and can be encountered with
carved Runic Symbols


The home of an SS Man should be recognizable through its SS corner which is set
aside for special celebrations of his family. In this corner all those things should be kept
which remind us of our higher duties. From this Jul corner and SS corner a happy and strong
glow should envelope the whole house and all the people living in it. In this corner all those


572


things should be kept which strengthen the voice of our blood and the duties to land and Folk,
everything that demonstrates our beliefs.


The corner should be dominated by the family chest, holding any family heirlooms
and the different decorations which are used during the year. A small table may be used at
first, but gradually every family should have its own chest.


The Jul Earthenware Candlestick stands on the chest all year round, surrounded by
the Jul Plates, one for each member of the family, which are being used for all the yearly
celebrations as well as for birthdays, weddings, and the day of death. At times the Jul Plates
are replaced by the Jul Wheel, which is used for holding the Tree Of Life, Advent Wreath,
Easter Wreath, May Wreath, Solstice Wreath, and Harvest Wreath. The wall behind the chest
should be hung with the picture of The Leader and the Reich Leader Of The SS, family
pictures and ancestor's names, memorabilia of war times. The large SS Runes the handsome
Swastika must be there, too.


The Jul corner and SS corner is the yardstick of how much the SS Man and his wife
take part in the customs of the SS.


23.The Family Book


Every SS Man has to be strictly reminded here of his duty, of which his sons and
daughters will remind him in the future. He has to ask his still living parents and grandparents
to write down all their childhood memories immediately and all other relevant memories
which should be handed on to future generations. The names and dates on the ancestry plaque
will be meaningless to future generations if they are not accompanied by as many stories as
possible about the life, the difficulties, the celebrations, and the environment in which they
lived. This knowledge of their blood line will protect our future generations against the
advances of the newly rich and the social climbers.


The grandparents, who often have a very good memory for childhood events, are
obliged to record their knowledge and experiences for their great grandchildren. The SS Man
should simply walk up to them, put a notebook in front of them, and say: Now write down
how it used to be. Their reluctance normally fades fast and the old people will generally enjoy
writing.


When the grandparents have finished, it is the turn of the parents of the SS Man. He
himself should also start to write down everything, but especially his experiences of the War,
and the comradeship and the heroism of his fellow SS Men.


These stories should be read to the family on Yuletide Eve. In this way the essential
family spirit is being preserved and strengthened.


24.Our Runic Letters


For 5,000 years the Nordic Folk have been using Runic Letters to symbolically
express a wish or a sacred thought. One of the oldest symbols is the Swastika, which is the
sign of the sacred cycle of the Sun and which therefore may be looked upon as the symbol for
the ideology of the Nordic Race. Today it is the symbol of our Third Reich.


The SS Officer Corps wear the Sig Rune, Gibor Rune, Tyr Rune, Fa Rune, and


Hagall Rune on their Totenkopf - Death's Head Rings. The Man Rune and Yr Rune are used
as signs for birth and death on announcements, obituaries, and on headstones. The Ing Rune


573


and Odal Rune are signs for the blood (weddings) and the ground (sign on family estates and
farms).


The SS Totenkopfring -- Death's Head Ring Produced in silver, the Ring bore Runic Signs amidst oak leaves on the outside;
the inside was engraved with the owner's name, the date he received the ring, and the signature of Reich Leader Of The SS
Himmler


“1 award you the Death's Head Ring of the SS.

It is intended to be:

A symbol of our loyalty to The Leader, of our unwavering obedience to our superiors, and our unshakeable
sense of bonding and comradeship.


The Death's Head is the reminder to always be ready to risk one's own life for the life of the whole.


The Runes across from the Death's Head are holy symbols of our past, to which we are once again connected
through the philosophy of National Socialism.


Both of the Sig Runes represent the name of our Schutzstaffel -- Protective Echelon. The Swastika and Hagall
Rune are intended to keep our unshakeable belief in the victory of our philosophy in front of our eyes.


The Ring is encircled by oak leaves, the leaves of the old German tree.

This Ring may not be acquired through purchase, and it may never be allowed to fall into unauthorised hands.
This Ring is to be returned to the Reich Leader Of The SS upon your discharge from the SS or upon your death.
The making of imitations and copies are punishable offences. It is your duty to prevent their occurrence.


Wear this ring with honour!”


H. Himmler


This is the Death's Head Ring Citation. The Ring is a symbol of the new SS religion. Upon
the death of the wearer the ring is kept at Himmler's Wewelsburg Castle.


All these Runic Letters should be liberally used for the Yuletide baking and for the decoration
of Easter Eggs and presents:


574


Hagall Rune: means The All Surrounding. Hagal
(Germanic) literally means I destroy. Through the
destruction of the enemy overall peace is achieved.


Sig Rune: means victorious Sun and promises the
winning strength. The two Sig Runes on the flag of the
SS express the old saying of Sig und Sal, which is the
redemption which lies in the victory of the Sun.


| 3


Gibor Rune: is made up from the Sig Rune and the Is
(ice) Rune, and is therefore a combined Rune. The Is
Rune is the North-South line of the year and
symbolises the life, or, in human terms, the
personality. The Gibor Rune therefore stands for the
winning strength of the personality.


Tyr Rune: symbolises the Germanic God Of War, Tyr
(= Ziu = Zeus), and its meaning is self sacrifice for the
sake of one's honour.


=


Fa Rune or Fe Rune: Fe is to be found in the Germanic
word Feod = farm animals. It symbolises all movable
farming goods, livestock, riches. The Fa Rune and Tyr
Rune together mean self sacrifice until death, despite
material, worldly goods.


Man Rune: Its lifted arms show the birth of a living
creature.


Yr Rune: Its arms pointing downwards indicate the
death of a creature. The Man Rune and Yr Rune are
taken from the spokes of the Year Wheel.


Ing Rune: Ing means to be born, to stem from, and has
its use in today's German language as a suffix to
hundreds of words. The Rune shows two life carriers
linked up and is therefore used at weddings.


4


Odal Rune: Odal or Alod is the Germanic word for
inheritance and kinship. This is also its meaning. It
stands for everything that we connect with the
Homeland, the family estate, the family farm, the soil,
and so on.


25. The Birthday Celebration


Although it does not rate amongst the great feast days of the year, it deserves a
mention here as it is a yearly celebration for every member of the family.


This feast day should be thoughtfully organized by all members of the family.


The Jul Plate of the birthday child, decorated with candles, should stand on the
family chest, surrounded by small presents, the cake and flowers of the season. Ifa child's


575


birthday is being celebrated, there should be a small amount of earth in the Jul Plate, and the
Jul Earthenware Candlestick should be surrounded by as many small candles as the age of the
child demands. The candles could also be arranged on the outer ring of the Jul Wreath.


Alternatively you could buy a beautiful wooden ring, decorated with Runic Letters.


The Birthday Ring -- Geburtstagsring -- completed with 14 candles; notice the
carved Runic Symbols on the wooden circle; a ceramic candle ring is also available from the
Porzellan-Allach GmbH; on either side of the Birthday Ring are the Jul Earthenware
Candlestick and the Family Book.

The Birthday Ring can accommodate 14 candles. Every year one additional candle is
lit, until the child at the age of 14 years joins the Hitler Youth or the League Of German Girls
and shape their own life.


A general rule about the giving of presents is that the value of the present is not
linked to its commercial value, but to the care and attention with which it was chosen, and the
bond it therefore creates between the giver and the receiver.

When giving presents to children, guard against spoiling them.

26. The Structuring Of Family Celebrations

These are celebrations which are held within the framework of the family. They are:
1.The Naming Of The Child Ceremony

2.The enrolment of the child into the Young Folk or the Young Maidens


3.The entering of the child into the Hitler Youth or the League Of German Girls


4.The Wedding Ceremony and the Acceptance Of The woman Into The SS Kinship
Ceremony The Funeral Of Family Members Ceremony.


Even to this day it seems impossible for many people to imagine these celebrations
without the church and its servants. Especially the woman folk were held captive by the
trappings of wedding veil and incense, organ music and dark churches, and thought they
could not do without such rituals.


The Party and its organizations are trying to advocate the thought of celebrating
these festive occasions in accordance with our ideologies. But repeatedly it was observed that


576


the ceremonies of the church were copied, with Officials doing the important actions, and that
the celebrations were used for propaganda purposes outside the family.


It has to be repeated: our celebrations have to reflect our ideology: they must be
simple, clear, and to the point. Only then can we fully understand and appreciate them, and
only then will they give us inner strength. The Nordic man very definitely rejects any mystical
atmosphere which is created by light effects, nice smells, and rousing speeches. We know that
our feelings are deeply moved when we have a clear and true understanding of the greater
connections of our fate. We are happiest when we receive new vigour and willpower from
such an hour of celebration.


Our celebrations should be carried along by the comradeship, the participation, and
the sense of belonging of all concerned. In this it already differs from the business like church
celebration. The speaker should change at every occasion. He should not always be the unit
Leader or Senior Leader. A close friend or comrade is often much better equipped to do the
honors.


Invitations should only go to the actual participants. Any theatrical widening of this
circle is being strongly condemned.


The following guidelines show an approved way of celebrating as true SS Men and
women should. But every family should find the form which finally is best suited to its
circumstances within these guidelines.


27. The Naming Of A Child


The giving of the name is a family celebration, with only the closest family members
present. Besides the parents there are only the closest relatives and some SS members which
are close to the father.


The father will give the name and an SS member will accept the child into the SS
community.


The giving of the name should happen in the family's home. The rooms should be
decorated with greenery and flowers. The family will sit in a semicircle, the parents in the
middle, the mother holding the child.


The one who gives the name speaks first. The father can ask another member of the
family to do this for him. The speech should be short and simple, thanking the mother and
connecting the name to the child. Therefore the right choice of the name is of the greatest
importance.

Please do read the book of names by B. V. Selchow, which is a collection of good
old German names, gives their meaning, and has a section on foreign names and their country


of origin, to forewarn against their use.


The SS member will now receive the child into the SS community. He too will speak
simply as a friend of the father. Thoughts he might speak on are:


1.The rising Germany in which this child will grow up


2.The love of The Leader for all children


577


3.The reverence The Leader feels for the mothers
4.The deed of the woman for the increase of the Folk


5.The duties of SS members within the wider SS family.

He than gives a small gift to the mother. This could be an Ancestry Book or a piece
of jewellery such as a brooch. In some areas of Germany (Schleswig-Holstein, K6In) every
SS Company owns some cradles, which are brought to the house of the newly born. Very
needy families get a free layette, and every baby's name is engraved on the cradle.


The celebration is brought to a happy end with either a festive meal or a nice chat
around the coffee table. Some light music may be played.


The birth of the child and the giving of the name is remembered on every birthday.
The child should be given its own Jul Plate during the day of the name giving, which is used
on every birthday and for every great celebration throughout the years.


28. The Enrolling Into The Young Folk Or Young Maidens, And The Entering Into The Hitler
Youth Or League Of German Girls


The Life Turning Point
Youth celebrating their turning 14 years of age and their consequent induction into
the youth organizations of Germany.


At the age of 10 years, and again at the age of 14 years, the young German takes
important steps for their future. They make their first promise at 10, and swear their first oath
of obedience to The Leader at 14. They also become members of the appropriate political
organizations. There they will be educated within the circle of their comrades, which will
enable them to swear their final oath to The Leader. These two important days in the life of
the young boys and girls will become annual celebrations for their National Socialist families.


578


The church chooses these ages of the children for their first communion and
confirmation. But a great amount of attention and expectations of the child centers on the new
suit, the new dress, the new prayer book, the present from the godparents. The 10 year old
will understand hardly anything of the happenings in the church, and the 14 year old will
understand not much more.


But the son and the daughter of a National Socialist parent will know exactly what is
happening to them, when on the 19th of April, the evening before The Leader's birthday,
wearing the smart and beautiful uniform of the Young Folk or the Young Maidens, after the
singing of a solemn song and listening to the comradely speech of their Section Leader, they
all proclaim together with thousands of others in the Reich:


”I promise to do my duty in the German Young Folk / Young Maidens with love and loyalty to
The Leader and to our flag, so help me God."


When the boy proclaims this, he sees a new world light up to which he now belongs,
a world of Army drums, trumpets, marching comrades, flags, and Leaders.


The Oath Of Allegiance To The Leader


ICH VERSPRECHE,
ALLE ZEIT MEINE PFLICHT ZU TUN
IN LIEBE UND TREUF ZUM FOHRER
UND ZU UNSERER FAHNE


VERPFLICHTUNG DER JUGEND 98 MARZ 1945


flenpy Simmoleit


WURDE AM HEUTIGEN TAGE AUF DEN FUIHRER
VERPELICHTE]


Ly VANS
fh ore SI RACER Daw SCAR


579


This Oath was taken by Henry Simmoleit when he joined the Hitler Youth at 14
years of age. The Citation is dated 28th March, 1943. Many Oaths were taken at the time of
Adolf Hitler's birthday, 19/20th of April


The parents stand by and are happy that they were able to give to The Leader the best
birthday present they could possibly give him, and so thank him for all he has done.


At home the child will be the centre of the family. It will receive a small present,
perhaps a picture of The Leader, a book, or the neatly written promise it just took. The father
should say a few words to remind the child of the importance of this day. The child will surely
remember these words throughout their life, and so they will provide a sense of direction for
the future.


The family meal should be festive, with flowers brightening up the table and with the
child's favourite foods.


At the age of 14 the boys step up from the Young Folk into the Hitler Youth, and the
girls from the Young Maidens into the League Of German Girls.


The solemn ceremony takes place on April 20th. The words of the Oath taken are:


”I vow to serve The Leader Adolf Hitler true and selflessly in the Hitler Youth / League Of
German Girls. I vow to always work for the unity and comradeship of the German youth.

I vow obedience to the Reich Youth Leader and all the Leaders of the Hitler Youth / League
Of German Girls. I vow to always be worthy of our sacred flag,

so help me God.”


This solemn promise should be echoed in the way that this day is celebrated by the
whole family of the 14 year old.


29. The Wedding And The Acceptance Of The Woman Into The SS Community


The wedding will take place in front of the Registrar. Until the start of the Second
Reich only the church wedding was valid. Since 1875 the law demands every matriage to be
acknowledged by the State. Even so many people see the church ceremony as the more
important one. This view was encouraged by Officials, who often performed the civil
ceremony in cold, dark, and drab rooms, making it a mere formality.


The Third Reich has a different view of the marriage. It perceives it as the nucleus of
the State. In contrast to the former State and the church, persons who want to marry are being
advised and tested for suitability to marry and genetic health. The State cares for the family,
tries to remove financial obstacles as far as possible, and increasingly stresses the importance
of the family.


All this should now be noticeable at a wedding in the Registry Office. There are
already some local authorities which have a lovely room for the ceremony. In time Officials
in smart uniforms will perform the ceremonies according to the edicts of the Reich Leader Of
The SS.


Meanwhile the wedding of an SS Man may be officiated by any high ranking SS
Official. The exchanging of the Rings should follow the marriage vows.


580


The couple are joined as man and wife during the Registry Ceremony. The so called
SS celebration of the blessing of the marriage smacks too much of imitating the meaningless
church rituals and has to be avoided.


During the wedding feast the woman should now be accepted into the SS. The meal
should be arranged in the home of the newly wed couple if at all possible. The tables should
be adorned with greenery and flowers, with special attention being paid to the places of the
bride and groom.


A special friend from the ranks of the SS should sit opposite the couple. Just before
the meal or during its earlier part he talks to the couple about the value and regard the State
and the SS have for the family and the importance of the preservation of the Folk. He should
talk about the SS motto My Honour Is Loyalty, which now becomes also the motto for the
woman. He should point out that as long as the couple keeps to the SS laws and do their duty,
the SS will protect them.


This SS Non-commissioned Officer holds a Marriage Edition of My Struggle given
to the young couple during the Wedding Ceremony. The SS Dagger was also carried during
the Ceremony


581


My Struggle, A handsome Marriage Edition


In 1933 50 National Socialist couples were married in a beautiful mass service at the Church
Of Lazarus in Berlin


He then accepts the woman into the ranks of the SS and hands the couple a small gift.
This could be a book or a picture. He also gives them a wooden plate holding some bread and
salt, and two earthenware mugs. These gifts shall remind them to keep to a simple and clean
life style. The words of the speaker should end with a Sieg Heil! for The Leader and the
newly weds.


The closer the friendship between the speaker and the couple, the more meaningful
his speech will be. He witnessed the growing of the relationship, the growing of the love
between bride and groom, the occasional disagreements which were resolved quickly in true
SS fashion, and he helped the couple to grow closer.

The remaining feast should be happy and if possible should end with dancing.


582


The bride's dress should be festive, but veil and bridal wreath are oriental traditions and
should therefore be avoided.


Different groups of the SS community can help with the cooking of the food,
providing of music, decorating of rooms, and so on. The groups range from the Hitler Youth
to the SS Band and the Women's Group.


The SS Dagger
The blade bears the SS Motto Meine Ehre hei®t Treue -- My Honour Is Loyalty. If an


SS Man dies, his Dagger is swapped with the Dagger of a close comrade or relative,
symbolising the continuation of the SS through struggle and duty


30. The Funeral Rites


This most solemn of our celebrations has to be most carefully planned. It is the duty
of the SS Unit Leader to see that everything runs smoothly. He may choose his best SS Men
to help in this.


Firstly the Unit Leader will visit the wife or the parents of his SS comrade to see how
he can help. He will do his best to alleviate the pain and feelings of helplessness, and will help
the family in a manly way.


At the same time he starts the preparations for the funeral. All those difficulties
which used to arise from a church burial have been swept aside by the Decree of the Interior
Minister in 1939.


The lying in state will happen either in the home of the deceased, his work place, the
SS meeting place, or the cemetery. The coffin should stand in the middle of the room, covered
with the SS Flag on which lie the dagger and the cap of the deceased. Six SS Men in uniform,
wearing steel helmet and white gloves, provide the Guard Of honour.


583


The room is decorated with flowers and greenery by the SS comrades. The simple
green fir wreath, sign of ever renewing life, should show the SS Runes on its ribbon and is
placed on the coffin as a greeting from the SS Unit and the Reich Leader Of The SS.


The family should be given private time to say goodbye before the public ceremony,
which is followed by the walk to the graveyard. The coffin should be transported on an open,
flat cart, so that the SS Flag can be seen from afar. Horses should not be dressed in black, but
the cart should be decorated with greenery. The 6 pall bearers walk beside the cart.


The SS Musicians and the SS Unit walk in front of the coffin, the family members
and close friend behind it. Other people may follow, and all wreaths are transported on a
separate cart.


At the side of the grave the coffin is put in full view of everyone. Only one piece of
music should be played, after which the Unit Commander says a few heartfelt words about the
life of the deceased, his sense of duty, his commitment to the SS, to his family, and to his
work. The mourners are reminded that the deceased has returned to his ancestors, and that he
will live on in his children and in the Order Of The SS.


After this the Unit Commander takes the Dagger from the coffin and exchanges it
with the Dagger of a relative or close SS comrade as a sign of the continuing struggle and
sense of duty of the SS.


The SS pall bearers will now lower the coffin slowly into the grave, a drum roll is
played during this, and the Honour Guard fire a volley. The Honour Guard should not stand
too near the grave, as wives and mothers are upset by the loud noise of gunfire.


After the coffin has been lowered, the relatives and close friends may step forward to
throw flowers into the grave. Then the SS comrades will start to fill up the grave in solemn
silence. When this is done the SS Men form a ring around the grave and sing the SS Song Of
Loyalty. It is especially important that this last part of the ceremony has to be faultless.


The funeral of the wives of SS Men is essentially the same, of course without the
exchanging of the Daggers. It is the duty of the Unit Commander to support any of his men in
any way possible with the funeral of a wife or a child.


On all these sad and solemn occasions the strength, unity, and comradeship of the SS


will be the greatest comfort to the grieving SS man, and will in time help him to overcome his
grief and sorrow.


584


Che Doice of Our Anceftor/


Che Pagan Snow White
and the foil Queen Chriftianity


There they hang on the wall, one hundred ninety-six little plaques in oval, gilded
frames. And there are still far fewer than there ought to have been. All the frames in the upper
rows show only a name with a couple of dates on white paper. But in the lower rows they
become alive. The portraits begin about the time of the Thirty Years War. They are fine
miniatures, carefully painted with a pointed brush on ivory, which has long since yellowed.


One cannot but think of the difficulty the artist must have had in capturing those
stern, proud features with his soft, marten-hair brush. All of the white ruffled collars, the lace,
the puffed sleeves and on the “gentlemen,” the jabots have a frivolous effect on these portraits
dating from the beginning of the eighteenth century. “Ladies”? “Gentlemen”? No, indeed! In
spite of the velvet and silk there is not a “lady” nor a “gentleman” among them. They are all
women and men—and that says far more than the “gentleman” of today.


For they. there on the wall, living again in their portraits—were free! This is what we
have come to, that we must banish our ancestors to pictures or vital statistics on the wall in
order to give them a faint presence in our dim memories. Ancestors? People today do not even
know the birth dates and death dates of their own parents. Of course, they are written down
somewhere. It is a wonder if one knows even a little about his grandfather, not to mention his
great-grandfather.


As for great-great-grandfather, one does not think about him at all, as if he had never
existed. Earlier—much earlier—things were different. That was before words had become but
mere merchandise, used to concoct lies, when a man still lived by his word; then it was not
necessary to write down and record one’s ancestors. That was a time when the living flow of
blood from son to father, from father to grandfather and great-grandfather and great-great-
grandfather still had not been choked off. It had not yet sunk, as it has today, so deep beneath
all of the alien values within mind and soul, that most of us can no longer hear its rustle, even
in the stillest hour. Once the whole past dwelt in the hearts of the living. And from this past
the present and the future grew upward like the strong limbs of a healthy tree. And today?
They laugh at the fables of our Folk, They do not even understand them. Nevertheless, that
which remains with us from the “Once upon a time” of our fables, serves as a reminder, a
finger showing us the way back into the millennia of our great past. You believe that we have
no use for what is past and gone? Nonsense! The man in whose breast the “Once upon a time”
of his race is no longer awake—has no future which truly belongs to him. How timely would
be the appearance of a man who would teach us again the meaning of our fables, and show us
that our struggle for the freedom of the earth which has borne us was, also, the struggle of our
ancestors a hundred and a thousand years ago!


586


Did you know that when you read about Snow White and the Wicked Queen who
came over the mountains, that those mountains she had to cross each time she came to kill
Snow White were the Alps, and that the Queen came from Rome, the deadly enemy of
everything Nordic? Think about the Queen’s Daily query: “Mirror, mirror on the wall, Who is
the fairest of them all?” When you think of this saying think about Rome, which could not
rest until everything Nordic, bright and joyful was exterminated, and only darkness
remained—dark like the Wicked queen in the fairy tale, so that she could be the fairest in all
the land, after everything white was dead.


That which came over the southern mountains to us tolerated no peers. Everything
had to kneel before it and kiss its feet. When the queen came over the Alps the first time,
dressed as a peddler from a distant land, she offered Snow White a bewitched corset—
bewitched because it was alien. Then she pulled the laces so tight that Snow White fainted
and fell. The emissaries of Rome bound the Nordic spirit in the suffocating bonds of alien
concepts and deceitful words. But the queen’s ruinous plan did not succeed. The dwarves—
the good spirits of the Folk— came and freed Snow White. The Frisians crushed the Roman
emissaries who tried to break the strength of our people with their doctrines of misery and
servitude. For nearly a thousand years the Nordic tribes struggled against the poison from
Sinai, which gradually fouled their blood. And when the vain queen again asked her mirror,
the answer was: “... but Snow White, over the seven mountains with the seven dwarves is a
thousand times fairer than you.” Driven by her restless jealousy, the queen came over the
snowy wall of the Alps with a new deception. She offered Snow White a magnificent
glittering Comb, the most exotic thing she had ever seen. The “Holy Roman Empire” diverted
the Nordic will-of-action away from its natural course; one after another, Nordic leaders have
gone off to Rome and the consequence has been turmoil and Roman law in our land, which
has enchained our Nordic pride.


It began with Karl, the eternally cursed Frank, murderer of Saxons. From Aller to
Verdun, the blood of the most noble or our people is on his hands. In recognition for his
deeds, the Roman priests bestowed upon Karl the title of “The Great.” Silent forever are the
lips of our Folk who named this wretched Frank, “Karl the Saxon slayer”! Despite this, the
Nordic spirit remained unbroken; the Wicked queen still was not the fairest in the land. And
so, for a third visit she came and presented Snow White with a rosy- cheeked, but poisoned
apple. The first bite stuck in Snow White’s throat and caused her to faint as if dead. This
apple symbolized the rejection of our own nature, the abandonment of tribal ways. “As if
dead,” the fairy tale says, acknowledges the enormous strength which slumbers in our people,
recognizing that one day will come the great hour, when that strength will mightily throw off
the chains of Sinai. Has it yet come, this long awaited hour?


“Snow White” is but one of the hundreds and hundreds of age-old Nordic tales
which remind us, with as many different images, of the difficulties, the oppression and the
deep wisdom of our ancestors. And as Rome cracked its whip over our land, mercilessly
annihilating every genuine manifestation of our own nature, our wise forebears wove into
these tales, using colorful symbols and allegory, a legacy of our heritage. But Rome’s
influence extended over our tales and sagas, falsifying them, giving them new meaning and
made advantageous to Roman domination. Thus, it was that our people no longer could
understand the voice of our ancestors, that we went astray these many centuries, becoming
more and more alienated from our own ways and enslaved to Rome, and thus to Judah. Only
he who bears his own soul, living and burning in his breast, is an individual—a master.


And he who abandons his own kind is a slave. The key to freedom lies within us!
Now we must hearken again to the voice of our ancestors and protect our essence from alien
influences, protect that which wants to grow out of our own souls. Stronger than any army is
the man who wields the power which resides within him!


587


Reflectively, I look over the long rows of my ancestors. The last members reach so
far back that hardly more than a name and a date on a sheet of paper remain. Yet their voices
come alive in my blood, because their blood is my blood.


I think of how the French-speaking monks came from Switzerland to convert our
forefathers, the Goths and the Vandals. Even their deadly enemies, the Romans said: “Where
the Goths are, there virtue rules. And where the Vandals are, there even the Romans become
chaste.” And to such men the commandments from Sinai were offered as guiding lights for
their lives! Can one understand why these men laughed when they heard those
commandments, which demanded that they not commit acts they never would have dreamed
of committing?


Can one understand that they raised their swords in wrath when the monks told them
that they were “born in sin”—these best of the Goths, whose very name means “The Good
Ones”? Cannot one understand the unspeakable contempt with which these noble men
regarded those who promised them a reward in heaven for abstaining from doing things which,
according to their own nature, were beneath the dignity even of animals? To such men the
commandments were brought; men infinitely superior in human dignity and morality than the
monks who brought them. For countless generations they had lived far above the moral
plateau on which the commandments from Sinai then operated. Thousands of years before the
time of the “Christ” the monks claimed to represent, our ancestors had sown the seeds of
culture and civilization throughout the world on their fruitful voyages and wanderings.


When | contemplate the small portraits and see in their firmly composed faces the
expressions of my ancestors, which compel no more notice of these times, it seems as if we
have descended from a high, high ladder—a ladder which we must yet again climb.
Nowadays, it is seldom that we can even appear to be like they were. They were on intimate
terms with Allfather and did not need to call on halo-wearing intermediaries when they
wished to speak to him. And even then, they did not know how to beg; they were too strong,
too proud and too healthy for supplication. Blessings prayed for are not true blessings! They
wanted nothing of gifts; either they already had everything they wanted or, if they lacked
something, they got it for themselves. Their creed was a saying as brief as a wink and as clear
and deep as a mountain stream: “DO RIGHT AND FEAR NO ONE!” As for their religion,
there was no necessity to put it into words, which suited a people who were naturally frugal
with their words anyway. They carried their spiritual consciousness deep within their souls; it
served them like a compass needle which always steers a ship on its proper course.


Was that not a better religion than one which must be written down in a thick book,
lest it be forgotten—and which one cannot properly understand until a priest comes and
interprets what is written there? And even then, an act of faith is required to believe that this
intricate interpretation is correct. In their day, faith grew from the blood and it was knowledge.
Today it must be learned, for it is an alien faith, unable to strike roots in our blood. It is
dogma and doctrine which none can know and which most of us silently renounce, because it
is contrary to nature and reason. Tell me—have we become better since taking on this new
religion? A great wordless sorrow resides in the breast of most of us, a boundless sense of
homelessness, because the way of our ancestors lives on eternally in our Nordic blood like a
dream.


We want, once again, to be free of sin—like our ancestors were. We are tired of
being humble and small and weak and all the other things demanded of us by a god who
despises his own creations and looks on the world as a den of corruption. We want to be
proud again, and great and strong, and to do things for ourselves!


588


How different are those faces there on the wall from the faces of today! Only if one
looks very closely does one still find a trace of that clarity of the features in the present
generation. What lived so dominantly in our ancestors that it showed in their faces has
disappeared back into our blood to dream. That is why faces so often deceive us today. Many
a person whose hair color and eye color come from the south, still have the greatest part of
their blood from Nordic fathers. And many who appear forgotten by the last two thousand
years bear their bright hair and grey or blue eyes only as a deceptive mask, for their blood
bears no trace of their fathers from the Northland. The one has only the appearance of the
alien and retains his Nordic blood. The other has taken the blood of the alien and retains his
Nordic face as an illusory mask. Which is better?


Today, one must look into a person’s eyes and see whether or not they are still firm,
shining and keen. The soul is illuminated through the eyes and it does not deceive. There were
many a rebel among those there on the wall, and men who left home; many had refused to
bend to those with power. They could not go crooked, these fellows. They preferred poverty
abroad over submission at home. But they did not stay poor for long. Those who went abroad
followed the restless stream of their blood, which gave them no rest until they had found
themselves; rejecting that which was foreign to them and flowing into the bloodstream of
their fathers, and so became conscious links in the chain of ancestors, closing the great
kindred circle.


When one of these came home again—and they all came home—he had become a
calm, complete man. It is hard to describe this quality of completeness. If others are babbling
in confusion, and such a man utters softly only a couple of words, then all the others will
understand and become quiet and attentive. And such a man does not ask questions; others
ask him! Look at their eyes; just as they mastered life, so they stood on intimate terms with
death. To them death was life’s trusted companion. Those same eyes show up among them
even in the most recent generations. There is one of them; Erik was his name and he fell at
Kemmel. The steel helmet on his head seems to be a part of him. His mouth is a hard, straight
line. But in his twenty-year-old eyes twinkles a silent laugh. And with this laugh, foreign to
his mouth, and a wink, saluting with his fist against his breast, beckoning as he steps past,
Erik greeted death. I cannot imagine this Erik, with bent knee and plaintive voice, begging
some god up in the clouds for mercy and help. This is the way I picture him: leaping up from
a crouch and with a fierce shout, plunging his great sword into a charging enemy—then, still
in the same leap, being struck by an arrow and collapsing back to the ground with his final
thought, “I gave my best for Germany!” Erik seized the bitter cup with a proud laugh and
drank it down in a single draught without a grimace. And he likely rapped the cup with a
fingernail, so that all could hear it was empty. He did not pray, “Father, let this cup pass from
me.” He reached out and seized it for it himself, for he knew... everything necessary is good!
Beneath Erik’s portrait is his motto, written in his own firm, clear hand: “Let a man be noble,
benevolent, loyal and good.” Does that not say far more than those commandments Moses
had issued to the depraved rabble in the desert, in order to make that horde grasp the
rudiments of humanity? The Commandments were appropriate for that Hebraic bunch. Even
the Egyptians had driven them out of their lands. Even as slaves the Hebrews were too wicked
and infected Egyptian life. The Hebrews—the chosen people of god! It is ludicrous that
anyone take it seriously.


A commandment presupposes a transgression. One can recognize from the mere
necessity for such commandments (which demand nothing more than the barest behavior
required to claim the designation “human beings”) to what kind of creatures they had been
given, creatures truly entitled to claim no more than a resemblance to human beings. To the
men of the North these commandments were a slander, an unforgivable insult to their sacred
blood. So, there rose out of the burning indignation of the Nordic blood a Wittekind*, who


589


returned again and again to lead his people into battle against the doctrines from Sinai. For
these teachings are a deadly poison to our blood. You ask—when will Wittekind return no
more? Hearken: Wittekind will die only with the last Northman! So long as a single Aryan
lives, Wittekind is alive and the world is not safe from him!


[* Wittekind was Saxon Chief who lead resistance against Charlemagne, King of the Holy
Roman Empire, who forced Christianity on the German people. Wittekind was symbolic of
Northern Paganism and all out resistance against domination. ]


Seventy million Aryans on this glorious earth are more than enough for anything that
comes from Sinai. The last remnant who are still pure will still be poised when swords
resound on shields and the bugles sound for the last, great battle of this wretched millennium.
He who slumbers still, whose blood is dull and sour, no glory for him! He will be
thoughtlessly trampled underfoot by the valiant who rush into battle down every street of
Aryan homelands. An ancient custom among our kind has remained alive even to the present
day in most parts of our Northland. There was a time when it seemed that this practice,
handed down to us from our forefathers, would die out. But it has been revived—and the time
is at hand when all our great and beautiful people will again recognize the significance of this
custom and be made sound by it.

Our ancestors gave to each child a powerful name, full of joy and vital energy. Actually, they
only lent him this name. And it became a shining hope for the child, far ahead of him on his
life’s course.


The child bore this name in his soul like his most precious treasure, for it was to him
both a goal and a sacred responsibility. This name strengthened the child’s soul as he
developed into a conscious, mature individual. When the child had become a youth, the
elders of the kindred gathered for a celebration, at which they decided whether or not the
developed character of the young man suited the name which had been given to him. If the
man and the name were found to be in harmony, then his name was given to him for life.
Otherwise, the young man chose a suitable name for himself one which characterized his
nature. So it came to be that our ancestors were like their names and their names like them.
And so their name carried weight like a rune-carved sword, like their word and a handshake,
like yea and nay.


In Christian times our ancestors were compelled by the new law from abroad to
adopt still another name; it was written down in the church register, primarily for the benefit
of the census taker. The authorities were obliged to write the living heathen name of a man
beside his characterless Christian name in his register, lest it become nothing but a list of
phantoms. In those times the most upright men and the proudest women sprung forth from our
race. I step closer to the rows of pictures and read the names. The oldest are: Helge, Fromund,
Meinrad, Markward, Ran, Waltari, Eigel, Asmus, Bjoern. Peculiar names, are they not? They
are names born from the great language of our people. There is nothing foreign in them, no
spurious sound. They ring true to the ear. These names taste of the salty sea, of the heavy,
fruitful earth, of air and sunshine—and of the homeland. Do you notice that? A few will
notice—but all too few. Their own language has become foreign to them and has nothing
more to say to them. After these first rows our ancestors began to name their sons Gottlieb,
Christian, Farchgott, Leberecht, Christoph (which mean: God-lover, Christ- worshipper, God-
fearer, Righteous-liver, Christ-carrier)... Still later came the names Paulus, Johannes, Petrus,
Christophorus, Korbinianus, Stephanus, Karolus. By those times our forefathers had no other
names. Do you feel how something has been broken in these men, how they have become
alienated from their own nature? Do you feel how steeply the ladder descends?

A destiny is locked up in the transformation of these names. It is not the destiny of an
individual or of a clan, but of a whole people—our Folk. But then something strange
happened. Those who had been named Karolus and Paulus by their fathers suddenly regarded


590


these names as annoying, alien, unsuitable, ridiculous. And now comes the generation that
went into the Great War. The names with little iron crosses behind the dates on which they
fell—a mere 20 or even fewer years from their birth dates, read: Jochen, Dieter, Asmus,
Erwin, Walter. Roland, Georg... These are the names we still have today.


And what are the names of our youngest, those who carry their names into the third
millennium after the time of Nordic self-forgiveness? Gerhardt, Hartmut, Deitrich, Ingo,
Dagwin, Guenther, Hellmut, Gernot, Dagmar, Ingeborg, Helga... Has the Great War done this?
The names tell the story. A few men wear priestly garments. But the painter has given us a
clue. And whoever is able to find this clue can see how little or how much the strong heart of
the man is darkened by the shadow of the black robes he wears.


The paintings are all bust portraits, nevertheless in one of them the artist shows a
hand. It is a strong, sinewy hand, of the sort which could steer a ship through a storm. The
black book in his hand looks like a frivolous toy. Such a hand does not bless an enemy; it
crushes him. His name is Frith. That is a strange name for a priest. “Frith” means “peace
robber.” Another portrait shows a man with grey, windswept hair. He has a hawkish nose and
in his eyes one perceives unlimited vision. Did Ran really bow his head in remorse,
repentance and humility? Did he really despise the world and place his confidence in a power
other than his own? I know why fate ordained that these men must wear the black robes; had
it not been for them, there would be far fewer heathens in the North today; without them there
would be many more who would have exchanged their own image of God for an alien one
and would have grown weary of their own strength and the world; and many more would
have been seduced by the alien doctrine into becoming its slaves and forgetting their own
blood. They are true saints, for they have preserved their healthy inner selves. despite the
priests cassocks. They fought the enemy with his own weapon. People called them
“HEATHENS”. A few were so proud of this title that they incorporated it into their names, as
one might don a precious jewel. For the heathen is one who remains true to himself and his
kind, whose blood flows pure in his veins. And this pure blood regards the world with neither
the hateful sneer of Sinai or the weak knees of Nazareth. It bears divinity, pure, clear and
beautiful in its red stream, so long as the race endures. None of these men has ever sought
God. One does not seek that which dwells in one’s own soul. None of these men has ever
been torn with doubt about the divine. Only he who betrays the divinity in himself and offers
his soul to an alien god knows such doubt. Doubt is eternal where there is the eternal alien,
and thereby the eternal unknown. The Christian is an eternal doubter.


Can any man be loyal, who is disloyal to himself? Can any man be great, who is
consumed with a longing to return to dust? Can any man be strong, who loves weakness? Can
any man be proud, who wanders along in humility? Can any man be pure, who regards
himself born in sin? Can any man be happy in this world, who despises the world? And can
any man bear the Creator in his soul, who despises divine Creation? What a strange god you
Christians have, who created you upright, but who commands you to crawl to him on your
knees!


We heathens do not beg to our Creator; it would be an insult to the divinity in our
souls. Nor do we heathens come to the Creator to complain. We do not proclaim our failures
to the world and least of all not to the Creator. We seek to overcome our faults and to grow.
Our way is not complaining, but anger—and first of all anger against ourselves. Nor do we
repent, we heathens, because we cannot be cowardly; we have the courage to stand by our
deeds.


Why have you Christians made the name “Heathen” an insult? You should not


peddle your pettiness in the streets, for it permits people to see that the love you are
commanded to display is bound up with hate, and that the forgiveness your religion requires


591


of you is burdened with your desire for vengeance. Only the envious stoop to insults. We see
your envy and are ashamed for you, since many of you are still brothers of our blood. There
was a time when it was a disgrace to be a Christian. But then you began to conquer the masses
and so you were able to turn the tables and make virtue a disgrace. Then you labeled us the
“strange” ones and called us heathens. We have remained “strange”, despite your insults. We
will never be a mass or a herd. Do you know that there are, also, many among you who are
“strange” as we are? Why do you not throw away the beggar’s rags which cover the noble
garments of your manhood? Are you ashamed to be “strange”? Afraid to be called heathens?
When you Christians have finished burying your god in the sky—come to us; we heathens
will again show you the Creator. And do not think we have settled accounts with you
Christians. We weigh silently— but we do not weigh with false weights. We do not deceive
the God in us, since we do not deceive ourselves. And as we have weighed justly, so have we
calculated, so we would be reckoned with justly by God for our souls. You see, we do not
repent, since we have nothing to repent. Our value lacks nothing. We retained and preserved
our whole worth. And now you weigh! And when you have weighed. calculated and
evaluated, ask your envious spirit how much you have lost. He who has lost nothing of his
worth is without envy—and without hatred for us heathens. The petty man hates whatever is
superior to him, while the great man admires it. The petty man pities whatever is beneath him,
while the great man scorns it, if it merits his scorn, or he helps it up. There in his cradle lies
my son, reaching, reaching gleefully toward his ancestors’ portraits on the wall.


This tiny, laughing bundle of life is the next step of the future of my race. I was the
last step. He is the next. And behind me I see the path of my race passing back through the
distant millennia until it is dimmed by the mist of time—for the generations which came
before the earliest on the wall are, also, real. My race’s entire path through time I do not
know—but, I do know that I live and that I am only a link in the chain in which no link must
fail, so long as my people live. Otherwise, I never would have been. For generations a
parchment-bound book has been passed down through our family. I open it and inscribe a
yellowed page for my son: “Your life is not of this day and not of tomorrow. It is of the
thousand years which came before you and the thousand years to come after you. During the
thousand years before you, your blood was purely preserved, so that you would be who you
are. Now you must preserve your blood, so that all of the generations of the next thousand
years will honor you and thank you.” That is the meaning of life, that divinity awakens in the
blood. But only in pure blood does it live! Of whom have I spoken? Of my ancestors? They
are only a symbol of the Folk of which I am a living part. To whom have I spoken? To my
son? My son is only a part of my Folk. The wisdom of a thousand generations slumbers in
you. Waken it and you have found the key which will open the doors of your truest
aspirations. Only he who esteems himself is worthy of being a man. Only he is a man who
bears the living past and future in himself, for only he is able to stand above the present hour.
And only he who is master of the present is successful; he alone is fulfilled. As only in
fulfillment is divinity.


Thus sayeth the Voice of our Ancestors...


592


National Sociali(t
Racial Policy:
A Speech to German Women


by Dr. Walter GroB


Background: This is the text of a speech delivered by Dr. Walter Gro, the head of
the Nazi Party’s Office of Racial Policy. He was speaking to a women’s meeting at the Gau
party rally in Cologne on 13 October 1934. The text was widely distributed. This is an
interesting example of Nazi racial propaganda early on in Hitler’s regime. It does not mention
the Jews directly, but lays the foundation for anti-Semitism. GroB (1904-1945) in a later
speech said: “As far as the historical appearance of the Jew in Europe is concerned, we
believe that the hour of his death has irrevocably arrived.”


My Dear German Women and Girls! When Germans come together today to discuss
the things that concern us both as individuals and as a nation, it is a solemn occasion, whether
we wish it to be or not. During the political struggles of the past, we could speak of party
programs or of civilization without any involvement of our soul. Now we have forgotten how
to approach an issue merely with our understanding, merely with our mouth, merely with our
heart. We have become whole people once again. When we speak with others, we do so with
our full being.That is what made the movement strong, and great, and powerful from its first
days. It is also that which the enemy, on this side of the border and the other, cannot
understand, and which it hates with deadly strength. As this great and beautiful people’s
movement began, so also began a hard and bitter struggle between enemy and German forces,
between an old world that is really long dead and buried, and the new world that is struggling
to reach the light through us. This struggle has been going on in people’s hearts and souls for
years, and is nowhere near its end. The world finds it difficult to understand that which is at
the center of our endeavors:
the value of blood and race.


Our enemies first laughed in pity, then in hatred as we spoke of it. Let us speak of
what we National Socialists mean by that so that it will become clear why the German woman
may be even more concerned about these matters than the man, his state, and his fighting
organization can be. There was a time in the past when we were untrue, untrue in the deepest
sense. We were untrue not to other people, or parties, or states, or kings, but untrue to
something far greater, untrue to the laws of life. As long as the world exists, as long as life
grows, flourishes and perishes, so long will this life have the urge to live on into the future
and win new territory. Whether plant or animal or man — as we, or I, or you: wherever there
is life, it has the longing to bring forth new life. It should be unnecessary to speak of such
things. We speak of them only because for a few decades a crazy era ignored, blasphemed,
and mocked these greatest, most beautiful and purest dreams of life. This was an age that
made the idol of money supreme and said: “The world should be governed not by what serves
life, but rather by what some fool of an accountant decides is best.” We know the results. The
great laws of life were evaluated according to money sacks and checkbooks. When we think


594


back on our parents, grandparents, and great grandparents, there were many children in the
house. It may have been crowded and hard financially, but we were happy, perhaps because
there were so many of us in so large a family. But the time came when people said: “As man
or woman, as parents or teachers of leaders, you have the duty to show the people the way to a
better future.” That better future, people thought, could only be a richer future, a future in
which the individual had more money. And when they were asked where this money would
come from, a false teaching arose in the last century: “The fewer people there are, the more
an individual child can inherit from his parents.” He who loves his children and wishes

a prosperous future for his nation should therefore see to it that Germany’s population is small,
and that only a few children continue the family after he is gone.


That was the terrible teaching of birth control, which Marxism preached and the
bourgeois followed. No one dared stand against it. That was the doctrine that made us what
we are today: a dying people, in which fewer children are born each year, in which today
more people die each year than are born. This all was supposed to lead to a happy future. It
understood happiness only in terms of possessions. It was therefore inherently false. But even
in its own terms it was false, for it forgot something: When a people begins to die, when a
people no longer obeys the laws of life, when a people values money more than its existence
and posterity, this people is on the path to disaster, both historically and politically. Within a
few decades it will be dead, oppressed by other peoples who are stronger, closer to life, and
who follow life’s laws better than we.If present trends continue, by the end of the century
Germany will be a nation with only 40-50 million inhabitants, and we know that on our
borders other peoples are growing quickly and strongly. Sooner or later, these other peoples
will come in conflict with a shrinking and dying German people, and the result of the
supposed doctrine of happiness will be a hard and bitter national death for our children.


Those who believed that they can give their children a happy and peaceful future by
reducing the number of children err deeply. They give the children only the promise of a hard
and bitter struggle for Germany’s existence as a state and as an idea. Today when we work to
show people that the ideas of yesterday are false, that the state and nation cannot do without
the family, that the family cannot exist without children, and when we not only provide
economic support to make it easier to begin families and have children, but also tell people
again and again of the sanctity of life and the necessity of continuing our people into the
future, our enemies on both sides of the border suddenly have insults and hateful things to say
about us. They wish to disturb our work. Suddenly there are voices saying: “National
Socialism’s doctrines are inhumane and barbaric. National Socialism’s views on children turn
people into breeding animals. When it says that it is the duty of men and women to continue
the eternal chain of life, a chain that begins in the distant past and continues into the future, a
chain of which we are only a link leading into the distant future, our enemies on both sides of
the border claim: “You reject the dignity and value of humanity. National Socialism holds
that men and women have no value other than that of breeding cattle.” It is a shame that we
have to respond to such words, but it is necessary because our enemies have always tried to
persuade women to oppose us, even though what we say is rooted in the souls of the men and
women we speak to. This is our response: “You are mistaken in accusing us of thinking that
the only purpose of humanity is to continue the species by passing on our blood to future
generations. We know the other values. We support them and find wherever we can those
values that the individual shows in his work and selfless service. We know well enough that
each person lives a double life. The first is the one he lives between birth and death. We are to
do as much as we can to make this life rich, to accomplish that which is good and beautiful, to
use our strengths and gifts for others. That is the duty of the individual. But as a person you
are something more.


You are a member of the chain of life, a drop in the great bloodstream of your people.
There, too, you have duties and obligations before the eternity of the nation. You have the


595


duty to pass on what you received from your parents and ancestors. I do not believe that such
behavior, which obeys both the laws of reason and of life, is barbaric, hateful, or inhumane. I
believe instead that the barbarism is to be found in the years we have left behind us, when any
dirty lout could besmirch the most valuable, holy life of a man or women in their families, or
drag children through the filth, without anyone defending their culture against such an attack.I
believe that when we tell people once more of the great value of blood, and remind them that
they have duties not only for the 60-year span in which they work and serve, but also to the
millennia of the past from which we come and to the millennia of the future to which we are
heading, then we are giving them higher values than those of yesterday. Let me say also,
however, that it is wrong if someone thinks that only those who found families and bear
children are valuable to our state. We know

that is not so. We know there are reasons why some people leave their people’s flow of blood.
We know that some are denied what the nation places great value on. We do not ignore them
or think ourselves their betters. We only say this: “My friend, you and I must do our duty to
our people, and when we cannot fulfill it in one way, then we must do what we can with even
greater energy and devotion.When you do your duty, you are one of us, we extend our hand to
you, we honor your humanity and your service for Germany. Let us work together so that in
the future, as many people as possible will be able to serve the nation in both ways.


That is a piece of the thinking of blood and race that National Socialism has taught
us. And there is another aspect. When we see people today, we can recognize that we are not
all alike. There are differences in value;each person does not have the same value as anyone
else. In the past, people believed that these differences were superficial, the result of the
environment in which one grew up. People believed that what became of a person depended
primarily on the house he grew up in or in his social environment, or the class he came from.
They believed that a person born in a slum, surrounded by shadows, troubles and poverty, a
child lacking in love and affection, could only become a second-class human being, a
physically and psychologically ill member of the society, someone failed by the society and
the state. One thought that a child growing up in such slum inevitably became sick, or even
criminal. It was because he grew up in such a poor environment. The Marxists claimed that if
every child in Germany grew up in an environment that gave him all he needed, he would
inevitably become a useful, decent, upright, proud and honest adult. After a few years or
decades, the entire German people would consist of such decent and useful people. In the past
people believed the environment was responsible even when a person failed miserably. We
recall the days of delirium, when millions of unemployed had been thrown on the street by a
sick political and economic system, made superfluous. A single person pried the tracks apart
and derailed a train in the middle of the night. Within a minute he murdered 30 innocent
people who had never done anything to him, and stole their money. And what did the world of
yesterday say? “He can’t help himself. He is a victim of circumstances. He has Beethoven’s
hands and an artistic temperament. We need not put him on the gallows or in prison to protect
us and our children. No, this poor Schlesinger is only sick because of his environment. Put
him in a modern sanitarium, give him what he needs: radio, a library, a smoking salon, a
language teacher, a pastor, a newspaper room, give him everything he needs to put him in
touch with better things. In a few years, this mass murderer of 30 people will leave as an ideal
human being, so pure and innocent that one can put him in charge of a kindergarten.” That’s
what people thought in the past.Today that seems a bad joke to us, a crazy fantasy, but a few
years ago it was government policy in Germany. Those who did well under such policies and
have joined to fight us think that they can accuse our doctrines of blood and race as barbaric.


Why do we see things differently? Because we have learned something: In the end
you are not as important and significant as you thought yesterday;your strength and abilities
are not as great as you believed during the liberal era. Oh yes, it was a lovely dream to say: “I
will do with my life what I want, and if I happen to be a teacher, I will teach what I want, and
do what I enjoy, and what I think right.” Well, that was your idea. We are a bit more modest,


596


a bit more humble before the laws of fate. We have learned that what I can do for myself or
what you can do for yourself, or what we can all do to each other, is not as important, or as
deep, as that which a greater power has already done to us. It is that power that even before
our birth gave us a part of our nature, and laid out our path for us in the world. Here are joined
two things: the knowledge of modern science and the sensitivity and understanding of a
humble person. Suddenly we see that: What you are, what I am and what I can be in my life is
in part

predetermined by that which I have inherited.


If my inheritance is good and strong, and if I am true to it and develop what is within
me, my life will be successful, and perhaps of benefit and joy to others. If such an inheritance
is denied me, or if for some inexplicable reason fate has given me other, perhaps weak,
perhaps even bad traits, I can struggle against them for my entire life, and will still not be able
to rid myself of that which slumbers in me because of the actions of a higher power.We see
then that a good part of a people’s history is determined by what it has inherited. If we ask
what sorts of physical or intellectual traits these may be, or what groups there are, we will see
that each people has three groups. The first is a large group of people with average gifts, the
most of us who are able to deal with the normal problems life presents us with. Next there is a
very small group. This group has received a better inheritance than most of us, not because of
any particular virtue on its part, but simply because of fate. The leaders of humanity, those
who build states, lead people, or touch the soul, come from this group. And there is a third
small group with particular traits, also not their fault: those who are sick or genetically
defective. They are not up to the challenges of life and need outside help to survive.As
humanity or a nation go through the centuries, the decisive fact is which of these three groups
is the strongest. One might say:


“That is not a question at all. The strongest will win, the group from which the
leaders come. This superior group has to be the strongest in the end, it must gradually have
its way.”


Well, that is how things would be without people, if people with their little brains did
not believe that they could change the laws of life given to the world by heaven.Man has
interfered in these matters. He has tried to change the laws of struggle and existence and
selection. Those were ancient laws of life, to which men too were subject: That which cannot
meet the challenges dies.

That is hard, perhaps, but it is also the way that nature makes life stronger and better. Man has
tried more and more to abolish these laws. He has kept life going by using artificial means in
cases where, left to itself, it would have ended. He used all his understanding, love and
sympathy to keep a person alive, even when it is no joy, but only a burden and misery. We
now keep thousands, even tens of thousands of unhappy creatures alive through artificial
means, those to whom life itself has denied the right to life. But keeping them alive was not
itself the problem. What is worse is that they were given the opportunity to pass on their
unfortunate physical and mental characteristics. That was the worst that happened: we took
the physically weak, the mentally ill, the genetically defective criminals and not only kept
them alive and cared for them — that is our duty as human beings, which we certainly do not
want to ignore in the future either — and gave them the ability to have children with the same
deficiencies, thus doubling or multiplying their misery. The German people do not know the
extent of this misery, it does not know the depressing spirit of the homes where thousands of
cripples live their lives only by being fed and cared for, poor creatures who are worse than
any animal. The animal, at least, is as it should be. These poor creatures are distortions of life,
no joy either to themselves or others. They are a burden throughout their miserable existences,
but thanks to the selfless care and devotion of those who care for them may live 60, 70, or 80
years. The German people do not realize the enormous sums that have been spent for decades,
money that is taken from those who are healthy, who could do something useful, but cannot


597


because the money is lacking. There was a winter in which children in Bavaria did not even
have wooden shoes to wear as they walked through the snow on their way to school. They had
to walk for hours bare-footed. At the same time, the government made sure that those
unfortunate souls in a large institution had fresh bananas twice a week so that they got the
necessary vitamins. But these vitamins could not give them joy or strength or health. But they
were thus denied to those somewhere in the Bavarian forest, or in the Ruhr, or in a poor
fishing village on the Frisian coast, where they could have reduced the poverty and need in
some worker’s house. At the same time there was a case where a single mentally ill Negro of
English citizenship lived for 16 years in an institution in Berlin, costing 26,000 Marks. 26,000
Marks were thrown away on a life that had no meaning. 26,000 Marks that could have been
used to prepare a dozen strong, healthy, and gifted children for life and a job. But I am not
speaking of this as a kind of theft. Money is not an end in itself. Rather, we have here
committed a theft of spirit and soul, because we tried to persuade the nation and humanity that
our own greatness could come from sacrificing for the worst and most helpless. In the end, we
went so far as to put the sick and the dying before the young, strong, healthy, and promising.
That is against nature and life. A nation going this way is heading for the abyss. We went so
far as to preach year after year to healthy families that they should have no children, or at
most one, else they sinned against the nation and the spirit of this enlightened age. But if some
imbecile of a whore and a genetically ill criminal had children, they were not only a financial
burden for their entire lives, but also took the labor of people whom our society gave nothing
better to do than to change these poor creatures three times a day and feed them. That is a
perversion of everything great and healthy, and is a sin against life and the spirit of creation.
With full knowledge of our duties as human beings and the requirements of pity, we made the
decision not to allow such miserable creatures to pass on their misery to the next generation,
multiplied perhaps two or three or more times. That is a major accomplishment, for which our
children and their children will one day thank us.


I know that there are those who will say:


“You are meddling in matters that are not your concern. You are interfering in an
area outside human control. Life and death are not in the hands of man, but in those of a
higher power. If God wants sick and genetically ill people to be born, you may not interfere
through laws, operations, or any other measures with God’s will. And if you do so — and you
have with your Law to Prevent Inherited Illness — then you are acting against the will of God,
and you are heretics.”


This is our answer:


“My friend, you are wrong. It is true that we are subject to a higher power. We
humans may never interfere with the great laws of the Creator. But you are wrong. See the
laws the Creator has established for his world and your life. The great law is that life must be
able to preserve itself, and that if it cannot, it will collapse. It is the hard, brutal law of the
struggle for existence and of selection and extinction. It was the law we saw day by day, hour
by hour, under all the clouds of heaven and all the stars of the sky, in which life seemed to
find a senseless death, whether plant or animal or person, whether in distant Africa or near
us. That which cannot meet the challenges of life dies, no matter how much pain it causes,
and even if your small understanding or mind cannot comprehend it, these are the great laws
of life and of the world that God himself gave us. These are laws, my German friend, that in
our crazy fantasies we broke in the past.”


With overweening human pride and false pity, we broke the great law and kept those


alive who under the laws of God would long since have perished. Today we are once more
following these old laws, using humane methods, for they follow a more hard and brutal


598


course in nature according to God’s will. We are doing nothing more than reestablishing the
laws of creation, and bowing to the heavenly order.


We are thus showing piety and true humility — you are the heretics. This applies as
well to the third and last principle of our racial thinking. This third and last principle is that
the people on this world, in America, Africa or China, are different both in body and soul.
They are not equal, as yesterday’s lie had it. People are different. They not only speak
different languages and look different: no, they are different in the depths of their hearts and
natures, and in their abilities for good and evil. In the past people believed that these
differences were accidental, the result of climate or civilization, and that one could overcome
these differences and create a unified man in a unified state in which all would be equally
happy. We have learned that such ideas are false. We have learned that the differences
between the major blood groups of the world, between the major races, are not the result of
human action, but of the laws of Creation. We have learned that the lines between blood and
blood, race and race, are also the lines between soul and soul and spirit and spirit. We have
learned that the opposite of the old phrase “What God has brought together, let no man put
asunder” is also true. We have learned: What God has separated, man should not bring
together. Heaven thought it good not to have only one type of people on the earth, but
different
kinds, various racially-bound peoples. That is a part of Creation. We bow before this truth and
respect the borders. That means that the foundation of our separation of the races is not a
matter of politics or economics, but rather it rests on a higher level, to which we in the end are
responsible. In our Reich, we are separating that which belongs to us, because it is blood of
our blood, from that which does not belong to us, because it is foreign. We are doing that
which is right not only for the moment, but for eternity. Believe me, my dear German fellow
citizens, it is not true, as some say, that this doctrine is a sign of arrogance or superiority or
boasting. We do not think ourselves better than the other races on the earth. No, we do not
think ourselves better, nor do we believe that others are worse than we are. We insist only on
one thing — a law established by the Creator himself:


Man differs from man and race from race in this world. The others may not be better
or worse, but they are different than we are, and because they are different than we are, there
is a kind of wall between us that is part of the laws of life. That is the core of National
Socialism’s racial thinking. Our goal is not to insult others, to say: “What a great guy I am!”
Rather, we hold to the humble recognition that each healthy piece of life has its corner of the
world, and its special tasks. This is just as true of humans as it is of plants and animals in all
their multiplicity. We know that one type is no more valuable than another. But we also know
that each variety of life has a right to existence only as long as it keeps itself pure and strong.
Only when a tree bears the proper fruit does it have a right to live. Otherwise it will be cut
down and destroyed. We do not know why things are the way they are, and it would be
foolish to ask the reason. That is how things are. Our task is to humbly accept the laws that
govern our human existence, and to accept the fact that we are born Germans in Germany, not
as Chinese or Eskimos. That is not because of our virtues, nor it is our fault, nor was it our
will. It was fate that came from above. We have no choice but to accept this fate and to
develop the abilities that fate has given us according to necessity and law.Others may develop
in their own way, in their own land. We must listen to the depths of our own people, to draw
from blood and inheritance the strength we need to build our homeland. A higher power will
take care of the life beyond.I believe, my dear German fellow citizens, that everyone who is
of our spirit will grant the correctness of our thinking about blood and race, and will say: “I
see now that you are not only on the right path, but are honest and in the deepest sense true to
demands that are greater than the laws of man.” Let us then together follow the path to a new
worldview. Let us go the path of blood and race, which does not ignore faith and knowledge
and a sense of higher powers. Let us go this path, not a path of matter, superstition, and heresy,
but rather a path of deep humility and piety before the laws of God. Let us go along this path


599


together and listen to the deepest depths where blood and soul rule. Let us draw from there the
strength to build the state, and even more important the Reich. It will be a Reich not only of
politics, a Reich of organization, or the economy, but a Reich of a people. Germany today has
the fortune to find a new way, led by a great Fiihrer. German women today have the good
fortune to see a strong and loyal woman at their head. Let us together go forward, hand in
hand, as befits comrades building the future, and let us join the strength of men and women,
rooted deep in their blood, to build what the world has never before seen:


The holy Reich of the German soul.


Heil!


600


Clan and folk


Walther GroB, 1943


A political revolution proves its spiritual and ideological character by its ability to
transform traditional ideas and concepts of folkish life and to fill them with new content
almost unnoticed. National Socialism has been able to do this in many areas over the last two
decades. But one of the most striking examples of the transforming and formative power of its
new spirit is the change that the content of the word “folk” has undergone in the feelings and
consciousness of Germans in our days.


Not too long ago, a fragmented and atomized Liberal epoch was so alienated from
the idea of a folkish community that it did not even have a valid word for it. For up to the
threshold of the world war of 1914, the word “folk!” was misused as a designation for a
splinter of the whole, for a single social stratum in its struggle against the other. Terms like
“freedom of the folk”, “rights of the folk”, the founding of folk’s papers and folk’s homes are
an eloquent expression of the shocking fact that neither the proletarian nor the bourgeois side
had any understanding of the true nature of the folk at that time. And when Bismarck, forger
of the Reich, in the midst of the petty parliamentary bickering of the parties, hurled in bright
indignation at his opponents the historic words: “Folk! We all belong to the folk, I belong to
the folk too!”, even the great chancellor’s political entourage took this remark as half a joke
and responded with the benevolent mockery of witty caricatures—proof of how far ahead the
great chancellor was of the political sentiments of his time. For it was only in the steel storms
of the World War, only on the battlefields of the years 1914-1918, that the German soldier
experienced the greatness and unconditionality of the community, for which the word “folk”,
which had been misused for so long, was now regained with elementary self-evidence. And
what had then been the experience and possession of one part of the nation, the soldier at the
front, and initially only for the exceptional historical period of the greatest of the wars to date,
was lifted into the consciousness of all Germans after the collapse of National Socialism and
made it an imperishable possession also for times of peace and historical everyday life. Since
then, “folk” has been the word for the highest and ultimate community, which connects our
own small fate with that of the millions beside us and gives it historical greatness in fortune or
misfortune, in victory or defeat.


At the same time, however, the spirit of the new age carried out another
transformation of the time-honoured word. It broke through the traditional boundaries that
purely state thinking had set for its validity. It extended it beyond the decomposed space of
the systemic realm and included the millions and millions who live in foreign states and
foreign countries, although they are of our
blood and therefore members of the German folk.In the midst of the deep decline of our
history, National Socialism presents before our eyes, in the proud word “folk”, the enormous
image of a hundred million Germans on this side and on the other side of the borders, who are
an indissoluble unity through common blood and common language and common destiny.
And even this is not enough. Once again, the spiritual revolution of our time expands the
boundaries of the concept of the folk and now boldly and irresistibly reaches beyond our own
time. Before the hundred million Germans of today, their parents lived, their grandparents,
their ancestors, decade after decade, century after century back into the most distant, unknown
past. And after us will live our children, our grandchildren, generation after generation
through the centuries into a distant, unknown future. They all belong together, they all


602


together make up the great river of blood in which every generation, including ours, is only
like a wave that rises and reflects the light of day for a moment to sink and make way for the
next. But the stream itself flows undisturbed towards its distant goal. And before this mighty
image of the highest community, the age finds in quiet shuddering the profound phrase of the
“eternal folk of the Germans”.


So enormous has been the transformation and so profound the enrichment of the
meaning of the word “folk” in our days. But it is necessary that we also give an account of the
consequences that this spiritual development has for our ideas of the structure and the basic
elements of the folk. As long as the folk was understood to be at best the community of those
living side by side in one time, it could well be thought of as the sum of the individuals, as a
summary of the individuals. But the eternal folk cannot be won in this way. For the individual
human being is transient. He may have an effect on the future through his work, but as a
living being, he is denied duration and participation in future times. His physical existence is
exhausted between birth and grave. Only in the circle of the family and the clan does man
gain a share in the eternity of his folk: as the child of his parents and ancestors, as the father or
mother of future generations. And so, according to its structure, the folk today stands
transformed before our inner gaze. Whereas the liberal era preferred to draw superficial
comparisons between folks and organisms composed of cells, as the folk are supposedly
composed of single individuals, today the family appears to us as the smallest unit, as the
germ cell and ultimate building block of the folk. In it are resolved the forces of procreation
and birth, of rearing, of growth and again of new birth, which only give the folk the character
of the lasting and thus, insofar as this exists on earth, of the eternal. Family and clan, as the
last and smallest unit of the greatest and highest concept of our world view, thus acquire a
new, consecrated meaning that has nothing to do with the narrow, petty-bourgeois ideas of a
sunken, plush sofa epoch, but arises from the great vision of the immediate, living connection
between the most distant epochs of our history. In the family we see the end point of all
lineages that reach from the past to the present and convey to us the tremendous heritage of
historical experience, in it at the same time the countless sources from which the ever-
renewed life flows towards future historical greatness.


So it is no wonder that the time of the imperfect concept of the folk brought with it
the decay of the nations and also the decay of the families. Since the community was seen to
be composed of individuals, the evil word of the family as a private matter was coined in
dangerous arrogance. The terrible consequences of this misconception are well known. There
was no room for family and kin in those days. Child poverty and childlessness became
widespread. The decline in the birth rate also ate away at the existence of our folk. Misjudged
in its historical significance, promoted by corrosive propaganda, virtually untouched by feeble
resistance from bourgeois circles, fertility-death made its entry into town and country, and the
life curve of the nation finally plunged inexorably into dizzying depths in the age of the
system. Only National Socialism brought change here. From the moment it came to power,
the situation improved from year to year. With full awareness of the historical significance of
the problem, the Party and the state used their means to restore and increase the will to family
and child and to secure the preconditions for their life, which had been sacrilegiously
destroyed yesterday. Not some unworldly so-called morality of yesterday, but only the mighty
force of the German Revolution has brought about the miracle of the increase in the birth rate
since 1933, and it alone can do it because it alone has the spiritual and ideological
prerequisites which are indispensable for this. One of the greatest proofs of the inner strength
of this new age is that the newly awakened sense of family and the folk’s joy in having
children have at first been only imperceptibly disturbed by the severe test of this war. The first
two years of the tremendous struggle of the present time have, quite in contrast to the last war
and quite contrary to the effects among our enemies, brought only a slight decline in births in
Germany~—a proud testimony to the strength and confidence of the renewed nation.


603


Nevertheless, the war also confronts German population policy with new tasks and
difficulties. With longer duration, a stronger decline in births is of course inevitable. At the
same time, however, the demand for folk of one’s own blood and best performance is growing.
The gaps which even the victorious war tears in the ranks of the folk must be filled; the newly
won territories need enormous numbers of people in order to fulfil their future task for the
Reich; the world power Germany, which will stand at the end of the victorious struggle, needs
a thousand more heads and hands in all spheres of life than the country which is pressed into
narrow limits. than the narrowly confined state of the past: the demands which the generations
of today and in the future will make on the human power and the racial value of our folk. If
we measure the successes of our population policy against this mandate of history rather than
against some mathematical figure, then, with all justifiable pride in what has been achieved,
the magnitude of what still remains to be done becomes clear, and it becomes understandable
that our population policy is really only at the beginning, is really only in its infancy. If we are
really serious about the idea that a nation does not consist of individuals, but of families and
clans, which only fulfil their final task in a large group of healthy children of the best blood,
then this idea also means a radical revolution in countless areas of the economic and practical
order of state and social life, the full extent of which obviously only a few people today see
clearly before their eyes. Here, during the war and even more so after the victory, a rethinking
will be demanded in countless areas, before which many a mind caught up in the past and
tradition may fear, but which the compelling force of our new idea and the inexorable demand
of history will demand and enforce.Alongside the practical, legal and economic
reorganization in the sense of population policy, however, there is the spiritual development,
which leads to a new ideal and type formation, which is also not yet complete, because for too
long foreign and anti-life ideas have dominated our folk and determined their tradition. All
too often in the past, there has been tension between the bourgeois idea of the family and the
shining examples of powerful professions and outstanding personalities. All too easily, the
world of the family has smacked of the narrow and dull, of the private in the worst sense of
the word, lacking the broad view of active life and even more so the far-reaching spirit of
political boldness. The cosy self-sufficiency of a Biedermeier ideal, to which the world is
exhausted within the confines of four walls, seemed to belong inevitably to the idea of the
family, from which therefore the man of action and the great work, the man and finally also
the woman, fled with the longing for the breadth of the spirit and the share in the great life of
history. This is how it came about that bachelorhood and child poverty were most widespread
in precisely those places where, for the sake of above-average achievement and the most
valuable assets, we had to feel the strongest desire for abundance of children. After all, the
above average procreation of the best of the folk is the only way to the regeneration and the
real development of a nation. For in this field, too, a change of knowledge and attitude has
taken place. The age-old dream of humanity of a better and higher life in future times was to
be realized for centuries, even millennia, through the higher education and development of the
individual, the individual who again has been the sole focus of attention. Education and
upbringing, sometimes of the mind, sometimes of the body, in the most favourable case both
together, have appeared to countless generations of striving and thoughtful people as a means
of achieving that high goal of increased folkdom and humanity. But it is only in our days that
we have become fully aware that education and training are irrevocably linked to the
dispositions that can be educated and trained, that not school systems but only the selection of
the best, that not education but only breeding and breeding across the generations can improve
the dispositions of a folk. There is no other way to this goal. And whoever seriously strives
towards this goal will see the decisive task in the formation and shaping of families and clans.


That is why the contrast between the formation of types and the formation of ideals,
of which we have just spoken, was so infinitely disastrous, and that is why the change that is
taking place here today is of such profound significance. For it is true that ours is more
strongly marked than earlier times by the model of the strong, the bold, the heroic man who
sees the wide world as his field, which he cultivates, in war and peace, with plough, sword or


604


thought. But with this ideal of the far-reaching human being, living in the distance of time and
the vastness of space, we immediately associate the demand for family and children, not as a
contradictory image, but as the completion and fulfillment of a truly fully lived life. Only both,
the individual achievement and deed and the supra-personal one of family formation and child
rearing, together make up the full commitment of man to his folk, which we demand of
everyone and which only fulfills existence. Only the two together do justice to the nature of
the human being, to be at the same time an independent individual and a link in the chain of
generations, which must not break. For what we possess in powers and abilities we owe to the
loyalty of those who gave us the fiefdom; a span of time is their inheritance and entrusted to
us to work and act; like our parents and forefathers, however, we must pass it on to our
children and grandchildren so that it outlasts us as it once did before us.


Today we educate our folk to such a view and attitude, and before the greatness of
this task the contrasts of yesterday sink. To the figure of the fighter, the hero, the victor, the
servant in the great work belongs the domestic image of his family and clan; and these no
longer exclude for us the great thoughts and feelings that move the world and shape history.
Just as the folk cannot be without their families, so today the small unit of the German family
lives consciously in the whole community of the folk, and what was often contradictory
yesterday finally rings together in one full chord.But here, as we speak of the ideal of
education and attitude of our time, a word must not be omitted about the limits of its
realization. The great models which the new age sets up should awaken the longing, spur the
forces, designate the goal towards which the nation must strive. But they must not, abused by
small and narrow folks, become the oppressive norm, the unjust measure of each individual
destiny. The nature and disposition of the folk of a nation are infinitely varied, as are their
earthly course and their fate. Not everyone has the same opportunities in fiefdom, not
everyone the same strength, and the lots of fortune and misfortune, of fulfillment and
renunciation are allotted to them differently. There is always an unfilled space between the
ideal and reality, and what we make out to be the rule must also have its exceptions. Our
generation in particular has experienced this hard in this area, when the world war took 2
million men from us and thus in countless cases the possibility of marriage for our girls. And
even outside the exceptional times of war, there will always be a small number of people for
whom inner or outer reasons prevent them from fulfilling what we demand as the norm, and
what is often the deepest longing of their hearts, even for those who renounce it. A strong and
healthy folk can tolerate these exceptions. Only the zealot will, short-sightedly and blindly
against all reason, make his principle the final judge of life, which at times takes special paths
for people and folks. National Socialism is spiritually great enough to understand and
appreciate the exception, its goal and ideal too strong and too compelling not to allow the
exceptional time its own law, the special human being his other form of life.It is not a
question of each individual member of the nation realizing at all costs and without exception
what the idea of family and kinship demands of the whole, but that it should determine the
spirit and the attitude of the folk as a whole and practically ensure their eternal life. The idea
and the ideal are exclusive and unconditional and tolerate no compromise. Their application
to individual destiny may then, in our case, be confidently full of generosity.No one will see
in this a feeble retreat when he considers that in a short time we have so thoroughly displaced
an ideal that was hostile to life in long past epochs:


The ideal which, in asceticism and celibacy, taught a supposedly higher form of life
and thus drained infinite strength from the family and the folk. Here the replacement has been
radical, and the effect of this conversion from the preaching of death to the high image of
perfect life will secure our folkish future.But now that we have gone over a number of ideas
concerning the nature and significance of family, clan and folk, it seems necessary to me to
add a warning against overestimating thoughts themselves. For it is too easy for man, in the
joy of invention and discovery of the new age, to believe that with the knowledge of biology
and statistics, with the demands and forms of his intellect, he has touched the ultimate essence


605


of those mighty forces which, in procreation, birth and selection, lead from the family to the
folk, from the past into the future. And occasionally voices are raised that see hereditary laws
and sober ideas of purpose as the legitimate successors to the romantic feeling of love that is
supposedly so outmoded today.But from the deepest depths of life itself springs that
incomprehensible force which brings the sexes together. Imperceptibly, almost unconsciously,
it directs drives and feelings towards each other, delicately and gently and yet with irresistible
force. It does not think and does not want, the superstructure is far away from it, and yet it
mysteriously achieves its ends. It fills the person and lets him be completely himself, and at
the same time it lets him forget himself and become completely absorbed in the other. It
encloses the lovers in the magic circle of their own world, but precisely through this it works
out of him into the distance and expanse. Where the fleeting moment of the deepest happiness
stretches into eternity for the feeling, the spark of life really leaps out of the other. Where the
fleeting moment of deepest happiness stretches to eternity for the feeling, the spark of life
leaps in truth from the present into the undreamed-of future. Mysterious and sublime at the
same time is this realm of love to which humanity owes its existence. Today we have enough
freedom and sobriety of spirit to see the natural in its beauty and violence and to call it
unbiased. But we also do not want to forget the spiritual wealth that this world contains. It is
one of the highest goods of life, one of the strongest driving forces in all its fields, one of the
most delicious things that the individual can encounter on his life’s journey. In a thousand
tongues the poets sing the miracle of true love, in the tones of the masters it resounds, it
guides a thousand times the chisel of the artist through the shining marble, it moves the
thinkers and strengthens the great of history in their heavy work, and only the small and weak
would like to deny it and flee from it into the deified world of mere understanding.

But it kills everything original, for its deepest springs bubble up in the mysterious, and only
the exuberance of the heart and the shuddering awe find their way to them.


Let us not forget this, if today we know and think more of what ultimately wants to
be felt and lived. We want to educate a new generation, bright and brave in the awareness of
its spirit, strong and beautiful in body, rich and proud in its genuine feeling, which sustains
the folk by making the individual happy, and elevates us to gods when it fills man.


606


Blood if holy


Walther Grok


Dear German Boys and Girls! As we talk about blood and race this evening, we are
discussing a theme that is in the center of today’s intellectual and worldview battles. You all
know that those who oppose our movement for political or worldview reasons have been
forced more and more over time to grant the political and economic achievements of National
Socialism. They can no longer be denied even by the most hostile critic. As soon as the
discussion turns to National Socialism’s intellectual foundations, however, as soon as the idea
itself is debated upon which everything we do is based, there are objections. And as in the
past, National Socialism’s racial thinking is called into question or openly opposed. We see
that if we survey the world press, as well as in discussions with groups within the country
who still believe that they can reject individual aspects of the National Socialist worldview. I
have previously spoken about what we mean by racial thinking in the broad sense. I said then
that the doctrine of blood and race for us is not primarily an important and interesting part of
biological thinking, but rather above all a political and worldview attitude that determines our
fundamental approach to many aspects of life. The two most important facts underlying this
approach are the knowledge of the power of inheritance and the knowledge of the deep and
spiritual significance of racial differences within humanity. Since we realize our dependence
on inherited characteristics, we do not fall prey to the old error of overestimating outward
influences of education, training, and welfare policies. We realize the responsibility for
passing on our own genetic material, since from it alone will flow the strength of the future.
We are therefore humble about our own accomplishments, for they have their roots in what
we received from our ancestors without any effort on our 1/4Walter Gross on Race (1935)
own patt, yet we are also proud that our own brief lives are links in the chain of generations.
Weare a bridge from the greatness of the past to the most distance future. Since we have
learned to recognize and respect the physical and intellectual characteristics of the earth’s
various races, we are free of the sick desire that sees no differences, or seeks to make
everything the same in the political, cultural, and religious realms. We are conscious once
again of our characteristics and want to care for and protect them because they are the natural
way for us to live as a people and a nation. At the same time, we respect the characteristics of
the earth’s other races, since we no longer want to want to subordinate them or force them to
accept our ways of thinking and feeling as we once did, but are instead convinced that they,
too, should live and act according to the laws of their blood. That is in brief the content of the
racial thinking that we teach and learn. We might ask why this simple, yet powerful idea
causes so much conflict. If we examine the matter, we will find that the reasons for its
rejection have often varied over time. The opponents of our racial doctrines have been
consistent in rejecting new thinking, but they regularly changed the battlefield on which they
tried to fight us, and have thereby forced us to deal with and defend this question from various
perspectives. When one first dared to speak of race many years ago during the rotten era of
liberal bourgeois thinking and Marxist corruption, people responded to the dangerous new
thinking on so-called scientific grounds. They rejected our genetic knowledge and ridiculed
racial science and its proponents, announcing from pulpits, editorial offices, and meeting halls
that they were dealing only with the fantasies of a handful of ignorant fools. It is good to
remember those days, to recall the nasty tactics of the opponents of our worldview. There
were then serious and learned scientists who were working out a new way of looking at the
world, and others over many years used every means to attack their honor and trample them
down, despite all the cries about the freedom of science — because that is what the rulers of
the day wanted. Happily, that is behind us. Those in every camp and in every country around
the world have realized that the scientific basis of our racial thinking is no longer in doubt.
Serious scientific discussion in this area concerns only the extension of our thinking in


608


particular areas, no longer the scientific validity of the fundamental principles. Science has
become quieter about the matter, which means that the opponents of our worldview must find
new ways to defend their old values against a new age. Soon they found a new slogan for the
battle: one took to the field against us in the name of humanity, ethics, and morality. The
scientific foundations could no longer be disputed, but they had great and unacceptable effects
in the life of the nation. You know the kinds of things thrown at us in recent months: the idea
of inheritance, for example, was suddenly dangerous since it removed individual
responsibility for one’s actions and gave everyone an excuse to be lazy, bad, or depraved,
since those things were the results of one’s inheritance. Worried aunties of both sexes wrung
their hands and saw an approaching era without discipline or conscience, and thought that
they could blame the false teachings of National Socialist racial doctrine. We took on that
battle, and can probably say that we have already won it. Such charges against our views are
simply untrue, nothing but a nasty trick. In any event, we are not the masters of our own fate,
since we are always dependent on what we have inherited, on what Heaven has given or
denied to us. That does not mean that we or others have nothing to do, or that education is
unneeded. The opposite: What we do, whether for good or will, with our inherited
characteristics is our own responsibility. We can squander and waste our abilities, or we can
develop and use them. We can be lazy and 2/4Walter Gross on Race (1935) allow what is
weak or bad in us to grow, or we can bravely fight our whole life against them. That is the
decision that each of us must make, and we demand that each individual realizes the great and
difficult doctrine of responsibility alongside the knowledge of the inherited nature of our
character. That is a clear, understandable attitude, and before it all the objections of our
opponents have gradually given way. Against their will, they must today grant the moral
justice of our position, just as they had to do with its scientific correctness earlier. Recently,
they have had to surrender their second line of defense as they continue to retreat. But now
the old battle continues in a new, and to be honest, more important arena. Recently, arguments
have been increasing that although National Socialism’s racial doctrines are correct, and that
they may be defended on pedagogic and moral grounds, they still have to be rejected in the
name of faith, religion, and piety. After all, some people mutter, one is replacing God with the
idol of blood, putting a human theory or material things in the place of the eternal strength of
the spirit. If we look into the reasons why people from religious standpoints are still trying to
oppose the united worldview of the German people, we find a thousand variations of this
point, which is used as the last defense against the movement’s victorious idea. Dear boys and
girls! In this third area of conflict, we want to continue the great battle of our day with the old
fighting spirit we used against the dark forces of the past. We have a right to do so, for no
objection could be more dishonest or foolish than this one. No one in the name of racial
doctrine supports barren materialism. No one wants turn the facts about race into an idol and
use it to destroy genuine piety. We do, however, believe that we have a right to have more
respect for our racial worldview than was allowed by the impious and arrogant philosophies
of the past. If we bow once more before the facts of creation instead of preferring empty
liberal or scholastic chatter, how is that impious? If we are once more conscious of our own
nature, of the inheritance given to us from Heaven, is that human arrogance or idolatry? If we
once again humbly understand that our lives as humans are bound by our race, and that we
can no nothing other than follow and act according to the laws of blood that God himself has
placed us under, how can that be heresy or impiety? It is not in fact greater piety, and in the
most genuine and truest form? Yes, we see in the facts and laws of race as something holy and
divine, not because we want to promote ourselves, but rather because we also see there the
power of the creator. We are more honest than our enemies, who found in them something
uncomfortable for the previous system of political power. If we seek to respect the differences
and particular virtues of the races that Heaven itself created, we thereby serve the Creator and
his laws. We do a more pious work than the squabbling scribes whose gray dogma is more
important to them than real blood-filled life. The best in every people and throughout all time
have drawn their deepest and truest faith from observing the world’s order. With both pride
and humility, we affirm that we see the laws of blood and race with their wonderful


609


relationships and heavy burdens, as a holy part of that great order behind which we sense the
Creator. Today we once again raise anew the flag of life against the doctrine of death, and
serve the future with the faithful affirmation: The blood given to us by God is holy.


610


Che Breeding Goal of the 55


by SS-Hauptamt


The Meaning of Life


To preserve and increase oneself is the deepest meaning of life. Through its racial
policy, the National Socialist leadership places itself at the service of life and strives to fulfil
its meaning for the German folk. The preservation and increase of life, however, includes the
urge for improvement, higher development and perfection, which is inherent in all living
things. Every living being strives for the full development of its inherent powers. The supra-
individual life of genera and species is completed in their growing adaptation to the
environment. The all-embracing life on our earth causes species to come into being and pass
away, it forms ever new forms out of itself with the aim of the growing perfection of
individuals and species, their higher development, the increase of functions. It is not blind
chance that directs the coming into being and passing away in the millions of years in which
life has taken place on earth, no matter how much it may push itself into the foreground in
individual cases and cloud our view, above it stands the divine will of the all-embracing life,
which is in itself fulfillment and perfection.


Folks and races are the highest expressions of life. Their task, too, is preservation
and increase; their meaning, too, lies in the striving for development, increase and perfection
of their being and essence. They remain if they obey this law of life, they perish and others
take their place if they refuse to obey it.


The preservation and multiplication, the development and increase of life takes place
in the struggle for existence to which every plant, every animal, every species and every
genus is subjected. In this struggle they are weighed, selected or exterminated. Human beings
and human races are also subjected to this struggle; it determines their value and their right to
exist. The cultured folks, however, through their artificially created environment, their
cultural world, have largely removed the individual from this struggle; the folk community as
a whole stands up for it, it must always stand up for its existence and its position in the world,
for its living space and its culture. The folk as a whole can and must therefore demand from
each of its members unconditional commitment to the whole in war and peace. The individual
is driven to this commitment by the law of duty in his breast, which compels him to develop
his strength in the service of the highest values of his folk and to make sacrifices for family,
clan and folk.


The Goal of Folkish Evolution


It is given to cultured folks, as the highest forms of life, to consciously recognize and
shape that which lives unconsciously in all living things. Out of their innermost being they
create the ideal to which they are called to aspire. In the works of their best painters, sculptors,
poets and sages, this physical and spiritual ideal takes tangible form. Legend and history hold
in the memory of the folk those men and women in whom the racial and folkish essence has
been most purely and perfectly expressed and who point the way to the future for the living
generation. The best and most far-sighted leaders of the folk have always striven to promote
them in the fulfillment of their innate law and have sought forms which would lend
permanence to their work and serve the higher racial development.


611


The conscious development and improvement of a kind or race is called breeding.
Mankind has known for thousands of years the breeding of animal and plant races, whereby,
building on the law of evolution of life, a high increase of characteristics was achieved
according to certain goals set by the breeder himself (often, however, contrary to nature). The
confusing abundance of hereditary factors in humans makes the process of inheritance
infinitely more complicated than in animals and plants, and this is compounded by the slow
succession of the sexes and the resulting difficulties in maintaining a direction of selection. A
“conscious” breeding up of an entire folk according to the example of animal and plant
breeding is therefore beyond the possibility of human ability and will.


The higher development of a cultured folk must be borne by a consciousness of a
completely different kind than conscious animal breeding. It presupposes an inner vision of
the racial essence in its perfection, which is at the same time felt as a divine commandment
and in this respect is the core of every kind’s own religion. It presupposes the will to devotion
and sacrifice, which subordinates one's own self to the divine commandment that works itself
out in the community of blood and destiny of the folk. What the animal accomplishes by
virtue of its instincts, the human being must, in addition, fulfil according to his conscience
and the law of ought in his breast. History gives us enough examples of the higher
development of cultured folks as well as of their decline and fall. The precondition for the
continued existence of the folks is the preservation of the purity of the race; the precondition
for higher development, however, is the existence of a sufficiently numerous selection of men
and women who are prepared to take on more duties, to make greater sacrifices and to
embody the ideal of the race more purely than the other members of the folk. For the higher
development of a race and a folk, as in all of nature, can only ever come from individuals who
maintain themselves as the best and most capable and in the course of generations multiply
proportionately and again and again make a selection of the best from among themselves.


The way in which this higher development of cultured folks takes place, i.e. how this
selection is formed and shaped in each case, what goals it sets for itself, what bond binds the
individual members together, is predetermined by racial characteristics and by the particular
conditions of life; it changes and varies in the course of history with the changing destinies of
the folk and their increasing culture. The goal of development, however, is always the same
and is more or less clearly and unambiguously expressed in all forms of selection: it is the
perfection, it is the increase of the physical of the physical, mental and spiritual powers of a
folk. This goal, however, is only achieved if it flows from the deepest essence of the dominant
race of a folk and fully corresponds to its dispositions. Often this selective stratum was not
built up in accordance with the racial substance of the folk or it was no longer in accordance
with the changed living conditions of the folk, often it set itself goals which were alien to the
race and the folk, then its existence was not lasting and its decline sometimes dragged the
whole folk with it to ruin. The cultured folk of the present day, whose selective class has
remained most unchanged through the centuries and which is most clearly aware of its task of
taking on more duties than the others, is the Japanese folk; Japan owes its steady upward
development and the long duration of its Reich to the selective class of the samurai.


In the history of the European folks, reference can be made to the Spartans and the
Roman Senate, to the French Chevalier and the English gentleman. Among the German folk,
the German Order of Knights, the guild of Hanseatic merchants, the Prussian officer corps,
the Protestant clergy, all formed a selection along certain lines through certain periods. But in
Germany, as in Japan, a selective class has not yet developed that embraced the whole folk
community and felt responsible for it. The main obstacle was the non-racial religion, which
distorted the ideal of the Nordic race and thus prevented the respective selection strata from
creating an ideal that was entirely their own. The strong influence of antiquity also prevented
the free, unbroken development of an original German-Nordic culture, although we do not
want to overlook the support we owe to antiquity. It has severely impaired the German


612


selective strata of the past in the formation and development of a racial ideology. Today, in
National Socialist Germany, we must build on completely new foundations and seek new
paths; for the selection examples of our history can only become instructive for us through
their mistakes.


Nature and Task of Selection


The breeding goal of the German folk is determined by the Nordic race, for it is the
basic race of the German folk; it unites the German folk into a blood community. Adolf Hitler,
through his racial policy, has for the first time in the history of our folk created the
prerequisite which makes possible the clear elaboration of a uniform breeding goal for the
whole German folk. Through the prevention of race-mixing, the fight against counter-
selection, the enhancement of the will to have children and the creation of a race-appropriate,
kind-specific environment, the German folk was educated to think racially, and the direction
of their future development was set for centuries, even millennia. On this basis, an order of
men could be formed who are prepared to carry the torch into the future for our folk in hard
discipline and to advance on the difficult path of the higher development of the folkish being
and the racial forces by taking on increased duties.


That the Nordic race alone can determine the breeding goal of the German folk is
clear from the history of the Aryan folks. It created the cultures of these folks; as long as it
determined the destinies of these folks, they rose to great heights; their decline brought about
the downfall of the folks and their cultures, for disorganization always means cultural decay.
Preservation and increase of the Nordic blood share is therefore is therefore the most
important component of the breeding goal of the German folk. This does not mean a
devaluation of the other European races which have contributed to the building of our folk.
We know what we owe to the Flemish perseverance, the Eastern warmth of spirit, the Dinaric
originality, the Western mobility; the impact races have contributed to the fullness of life and
the incomparable richness of German culture; the high level of achievement of the German
folk is also a consequence of their special racial composition. Nevertheless, especially for the
German folk, who are forced by their central position, more than other folks in Europe, to
constantly fight for their self-assertion and world standing, the preservation and increase of
the share of the Nordic peasant and warrior races is the indispensable precondition of their
existence.


The Nordic race, like all living things, represents an infinite variety of phenomena
within the unity formed by the common basic stock of Nordic hereditary factors. No two
members of this race are perfectly alike; there are gradations, differences, degrees of physical,
mental, character and spiritual qualities, powers and values. If we add to this the fact that
almost every Nordic German also carries in him blood elements of some other race, then we
understand what a wealth of manifestations of Nordic humanity there is in our folk. Therefore,
the level of achievement of the races can be raised or lowered by different propagation within
the races. A higher development of the Nordic race and thus of the German folk therefore
requires the formation of a selection within the Nordic race. The bearers of the best heredity
must unite to form an order whose most important task is to see to it that the most efficient
members of the race reproduce most strongly.


The wide range and the great diversity in heredity and appearance within the Nordic
race makes this selection process possible. the selection process which leads to higher
development. The values according to which the selection is carried out result from the nature
of the of the Nordic race; the desired image of the German man of Nordic blood is the goal to
which it strives for.


613


The selection extends to the whole German folk and its Nordic blood heritage, it
does not separate it into a layer of the leaders and one of the led. On the contrary, it forms the
unifying bond and the formative core of the folk community. The selective orders of the past
could therefore not last and could not fulfil their deepest meaning, because they either
detached themselves from the folk or were too one sidedly bound to a specific purpose or
profession. The separation from the folk community carries with it the danger that the fullness
of the Nordic race will no longer be grasped through limitation and that through inbreeding
the inferior will also be nurtured and inherited, while high-quality racial hereditary traits will
be lost in the selection layer. The Order, whose task in National Socialist Germany is
selection, will accept all those. The Order, whose task in National Socialist Germany is
selection, will accept all carriers of high-quality Nordic heredity who are willing and able to
place themselves in the service of the higher breeding of our folk by accepting greater
obligations. As development progresses, its aims will become ever higher and its demands
ever more stringent.


Every valuable human race forms certain types out of the wealth of its appearances,
which embody individual sides of its nature in a special way. The German Order of Knights,
the Hanseatic patrician class, the Prussian officer corps formed such a selection of typical
Nordic humanity. The National Socialist Order of Selection will encompass all the valuable
types of the Nordic race; it will form further types from within itself and thus bring the whole
wealth of the Nordic soul, the whole fullness of the physical and spiritual hereditary traits to
development and enhancement.


The Order of the SS


The order-laws issued by the Reichsfiihrer-SS include everything necessary for the
formation of a selection which must be the standard bearer of the future of the National
Socialist Reich. The SS is an association of Nordic men selected according to special criteria.
The physical ideal of the Nordic race determines selection. Every selection must start from the
body, because the living body is the manifestation of the soul, is the carrier of the heredity.
There is no Nordic soul, no Nordic spirit and no Nordic character without the Nordic body.
The increase of the Nordic blood portion can only take place from the physical. That is why
the selection order of the SS must extend to those German men who bear the best Nordic
imprint in their physical appearance.


For the members of the SS there is the “marriage permit”, which is “granted or
refused solely on the basis of racial and hereditary health considerations”. The wife of the SS
man must also be a carrier of good Nordic heredity; for only from the marriage of Nordic
people may we expect children of Nordic race. The prerequisite of every higher racial
development is the right choice of spouse. The greater the number of hereditarily valuable
clans of German, Nordic-determined kind, the greater the guarantee for the upbringing and
increased performance of our folk. The SS man, out of responsibility for the future of his folk,
takes upon himself a duty which is not imposed on the folk community as a whole, namely
that not he alone, but the Order, decides on the choice of his wife. Mockery, scorn and
misunderstanding will not deter him, for anyone who wants to see this “regulated choice of
spouse” as a “human breeding establishment” only shows that he is a stranger to life itself and
is caught up in a spirit that has detached itself from life and the eternal laws of nature. It is
that racially alien and instinctless spirit which knows only the erotic instinct as decisive for
the choice of marriage, which does not know that in the choice of a marriage partner only the
racial instinct as a shaped and formative instinct may show the way.


In reality, by the way, the majority of marriages neither in the present, nor even less
in the past, are concluded on the basis of the erotic instinct. The choice of marriage is and was


614


often made according to aspects that have just as pernicious an effect as the rule of the chaotic
instinct, namely according to the property, class or denomination of the spouse. Binding the
marriage licence for SS men to racial and hereditary health considerations also prevents
marriage on the basis of class, material and denominational grounds. In reality, therefore, it
re-establishes the natural soil on which alone a healthy marriage grows, in which the spouses
are united by genuine love, which is only present where the instinct is pure and fully effective.
The racial instinct speaks all the more clearly and powerfully the sooner the man and the
woman come to marriage after full maturity.


The Order of the SS places the choice of spouse of its members under the
responsibility for the future of the folk. It goes without saying that every SS man also has the
obligation to marry and to found a family with many children. The bearers of the best Nordic
heredity must multiply the most within the folk community. The increase in the physical and
spiritual fitness of a folk is bound up with the increase in the number of children in their
physical and spiritual families. “The question of many children is not a private matter for the
individual, but a duty to his ancestors and to our folk.” The selection strata of the folks very
often did not promote the founding of families and the abundance of children; for the German
Order of Knights, for example, celibacy was the order's duty. In this way, the meaning of
selection is reversed: instead of increasing the valuable heredity of the folks, its transmission
is prevented and the most valuable clans are condemned to extinction. The SS is therefore not
an order of men, but the conjured community of the clans of SS men, which renews and
expands itself from generation to generation.


In this way, the Order creates the possibility of applying selection to its own
offspring. This is the only guarantee that the Nordic selection layer formed by the clan
community will remain a selection for all future times.


Out of the deepest obligation to his own Nordic race, the Reichsfiihrer-SS issued the
order of October 28, 1939, pointing out the danger to the Nordic heredity of our folk evoked
by the war, namely that many of the best young men fall without their heredity living on in
their children. “Only he can die quietly who knows that his clan, that all that his ancestors and
he himself have wanted and striven for, finds its continuation in the children.” The limits of
perhaps otherwise necessary bourgeois laws and customs” cannot apply to our young soldiers
who prove themselves as whole men out on the fronts and daily stake their lives for the future
of the German folk. This future is then only fully secured when they, who lay down their lives,
live on in their children.


Selection of Nordic-destined men, choice of spouses according to racial criteria,
marriage obligation and abundance of children are the biological foundations on which the
Order of the SS is built and through which it initiates the higher development of our folk and
secures it for the future. In order for it to endure as an Order, it must also have an inner,
spiritual bond, a community of a special kind must unite the members of the Order, the spirit
of common obligation must fill each individual man.


The common goal is the selection of the best Nordic humanity, the increase of the
Nordic blood share through abundance of children, in which the SS man and his wife see their
highest happiness and the meaning of their lives, is the development of all the powers inherent
in the Nordic heredity and the undiminished transmission of the dispositions to the future
generations.


The Order of the SS unites in the common National Socialist worldview. The SS is a


following of Adolf Hitler ready to the last devotion, it is a conspiratorial order of the National
Socialist worldview.


615


The Order is united by the common faith that flows from the Nordic attitude of the
soul. For the Nordic man there is only one faith, which is in harmony with his reason and his
thinking. That is why he has always fought the hardest battle against priesthood and priestly
deceit, against mystification, superstition and mediocrity, which stands between him and the
divine workings of Providence. From the depths of the Nordic soul, he feels directly
connected to the divine will to order the all-embracing life that reveals itself in nature, in his
folk, in his clan and in his blood. The confession of this inherent faith is the touchstone for
membership of the Order, for it is in the struggle for freedom of spirit that the Nordic soul
proves itself.


The Reichsfiihrer-SS, through the SS Honour Law, united the Order by a common
conception of honour anchored in the essence of the Nordic race. “The honour of the German,
determined by the racial consciousness and the custom of the folk, guarded by the individual,
valued by the whole German folk as the most precious jewel and the highest good on earth
has been since ancient times the epitome of loyalty, loyalty to oneself, to the kinsmen of the
same blood, to one's fellow swordsman, to one's comrade, to the Fiihrer of the folk, to blood
and soil.” (Reichsfihrer-SS H. Himmler.)


The high character values of the Nordic race, to which the Reichsfihrer-SS commits
his men, give the will of the Order members a common direction that binds them all. Besides
honour and loyalty, it is the idea of freedom, namely the freedom to do what our best,
innermost nature drives us to do, the freedom to serve the Fiihrer and the Reich. Freedom is
joined by obedience, the unconditional obedience of the political soldier to his Fiihrer, which
is nevertheless a free obedience, since Fiihrer and followers are of one blood and therefore of
one mind. Fighting spirit and toughness are the most original characteristics of the Nordic
race, toughness as a service to one's own body, a controlled way of life, because only he who
remains master of his own life makes himself master of the enemy. “Whoever wants to live
must fight, and whoever does not want to fight in this world of eternal struggle does not
deserve to live.” (Adolf Hitler.) Deeply rooted in the Nordic nature is also the respect for the
personality of the blood and folk comrades, which grants them the same honour as itself and
holds their property sacred.


The prerequisite for admission to the Order of the SS is the Nordic blood heritage.
However, selection is followed by probation through performance; for it is only in
performance that it becomes apparent whether the selection was fully valid and correct.
Performance, military service and parenthood are obligatory values for the SS man.


Part of the essence of an order is the bond of a particularly deep and strong
comradeship, which not only embraces the SS men but also includes their clans. In the
“Lebensborn”, the Order of the SS has created an institution which supports hereditary-
biologically valuable, large families, which cares for racially and hereditary-biologically
valuable expectant mothers and their children, even if they are illegitimate, which supports the
wives of the SS men with advice and deeds, The law of the Reichsfiihrer-SS of 9 November
1937 makes it the sacred task of the SS, as a conjured community of the clans of the SS men,
to assist the wives and children of deceased comrades in every way. In this way, every SS
man and his relatives feel embedded in a strong community on which they can rely in every
situation in life.


The clan community of the Order will also create a special form of education and has
already done the preparatory work for this. The education of the younger generation has
proved to be one of the best means of binding the Order in various Orders of the German past,
because the youth grows up in comradeship and, at the most malleable age, absorbs the spirit
of the Order into which it will one day enter. An increased sense of duty and a heightened
sense of honour will be the goal of this education. At an early age, the youth must become


616


aware of their responsibility towards their own person, towards their clan, race and folk. A
purely German-Nordic spirit will determine the physical, character and spiritual education of
the Order's youth.


The deepest meaning of the SS, to be an order of German, Nordic-dominated men,
includes in itself the special task of the SS to be guardians and caretakers of German
peasantry and soldiery, for the Nordic race will only be able to exist as a peasant and warrior
race. That is why the Order leads its members back to the land as far as possible, that is why it
takes on the difficult but for our folk so important task of settling the newly won East. The SS
Wehrbauer (soldier-peasant) is the forerunner of this eastern settlement, in him peasantry and
militancy prove themselves at the same time, here the man can steel himself in constant battle,
so that from the soldier-peasantry the best offspring will arise for the Order.


As an order of Nordic-determined men, the SS also has the task of initiating the
community of all the Germanic folks. The Reichsfiihrer-SS is instructed by the Fiihrer (order
of 12 August 1942) to conduct negotiations with all Germanic folks in Denmark, Norway,
Belgium and the Netherlands within the sphere of the NSDAP, its branches and affiliated
associations. The SS is the bearer of the Nordic idea in Europe, it calls upon the best of the
Germanic folks across state and national borders to join its ranks and take up the fight for the
preservation of Nordic blood. The laws of the SS will not only determine the racial structure
of the German folk, they will also contribute to that of all the Germanic folks of Europe.


The Order of the SS does not want to be a leadership class, but a select class of
Nordic people, it does not strive for a new gentility in the folk community, which would one
day have to tear it apart again, it stands under the law “I serve” and wants for itself only
higher duties, greater commitment and harder struggle. He who makes the highest demands
on himself, who works hard on himself, who despises lavish living, is called to lead a folk.
The words of our Fiihrer Adolf Hitler point the way for the SS and its leadership task: “The
political leadership of a nation must seek the most essential distinction from the rest of the
folk not in higher enjoyment, but in harder self-discipline.”


617


5 Race Cheory
and
Plate Selection Guideline


You and the Question of Blood In this period of struggle for the future of our folk
you will become conscious — through the family and clan and beyond — of the bond that unites
us all in an inseparable and sworn community of striving. Furthermore you know that your
life, your essence, all abilities and characteristics stem from your ancestors, and that you must
take over the same role for the generations which come after you. You cannot shake it off;
rather, you have the obligation and duty to adjust your life and live it accordingly. Consider
for once what a tremendous revolutionary change has taken place in the thought and action of
our folk in such a short time. After years of decline new life-courage, lifewill and confidence
broke through in the German folk on a wide front. National Socialism has pulled up our folk
from threatened annihilation not only economically and politically, but also biologically. The
answer to the question of how the Fuehrer and his following could achieve such
accomplishments is very simple: Adolf Hitler has again made the laws of life of our kind —
whose observance is the prerequisite for any further development — the foundation of our
thought, action and feeling. What our ancestors, who were firmly rooted in the soil,
instinctively recognized as right through the feeling of their kid, has through the course of
history been partially erased and covered over by foreign intellectual and racial influence. The


618


knowledge of the laws of life and awakened consciousness of our kind are today a certain
signpost for our entire action. So we want to look at the following described foundations of
the laws of life of our world view from the perspective of the great community of the entire
folk and make the resultant duties of the individual a principle of our entire life.


What is Race?


What is not of good race in the world is chaff. (Adolf Hitler, Mein Kampf)


The great number of life forms shows groups which more or less resemble one
another and show common physical characteristics. They have the same nature. We call such
groups of life forms "species." The mankind living today forms a "species," for humans are
fertile among each other. By the observation and comparison of a White, Negro or Mongolian
it becomes immediately clear to us that it is not enough to only speak of the "human" species;
rather, that for a more precise analysis a further subdivision must be made. This leads to the
concept of human races. The individual races can be distinguished by differences which they
have in respect to the 3 uniqueness of their hereditary, intellectual-psychological and physical
features, tendencies and characteristics. Each race has certain characteristics and features
which are unique to it. These RACIAL FEATURES are passed on to the offspring. Race is
hence a group of life forms which distinguishes itself by the common possession of certain
hereditary features. It always produces only its own kind. Or shorter: race is a characterized
community of hereditary factors (Stengel v. Rutkowski).


As long as a race remains pure its hereditary essence is passed on unadulterated from
one generation to the next. It is hence necessary for the racial consciousness of humans of the
same race to be raised and the dangers correctly recognized which lead to a mixing, alteration,
degeneration and hence annihilation of the races affected. The predominant race determines
the folkish character and continues its influence in it as a hereditary factor. As in the
Germanic peoples, the predominant Nordic race gives the German folk, too, the predisposition
of our kind.


What is a Folk?


Each folk represents a visible community to the outside world. The same blood, the
same soil, the same language, customs, culture and history are an inseparable bond. For a
population to become a folk, race as well as history and culture are necessary. The generation
alive at any one time is only one link in the chain which begins with the earliest ancestors and
continues with the following generations into the future. All of them together form the folk
community. The existence of the individual is only then purposeful if it is innerly bound with
the entirety of the folk. The presently living blood-carriers of this community bear the
responsibility for the shaping of the coming generations. Each folk has its own unique folkish
character. The roots of this unique folkish character lie in the racial composition of the folk.
Folk is a community of descent and of fate. As a hereditary community it is large able to
create and shape its own environment.


The Meaning of Race


The common heredity determines the physical and intellectual-psychological
abilities of a race. "Race" as a practical concept relates not only to the specially formed and
working life force within us, but beyond that also to the highest value, to the concept of value,
to the world view. There are races which can create high cultures and those which can never


619


elevate themselves on their own strength. There are races with heroic bearing and those
without the courage to fight. Cultural accomplishments are exclusively the creation of higher
races. The elevation of mankind continues or ceases with the preservation of the purity and of
the strength of the culture-bearing races. The racial composition of a folk is unique. Its
alteration always has a transformation of its nature and culture as a consequence. Each racial
mixing always means a lowering of the worth of the higher race. Related Race — Foreign Race
— Same Breed — Foreign Breed Mankind displays strictly separated racial groups. Very
roughly expressed, we distinguish between: White, Black and Yellow. Each of these groups in
turn contains a number of subraces with certain common features. In this case one speaks of
related races. Opposed to these stand the foreign races. Folks which in regard to their racial
composition show the same elements as the German folk are of "related race" ("artverwandt").
To these belong the majority of European folks. Since the racial core of our racially related
folks is often very diverse, one must look quantitatively at the racial elements for the
foundation of a distinction. In the Germanic folks Nordic blood predominates in their racial
composition. Their relationship to the German folk is hence referred to as being of the "same
breed" ("stammesgleich"). Other folks which also show a small amount of Nordic blood, but
which in their substance are not Nordic, are referred to as being of "foreign breed"
("stammesfremd"). The existign positive racial composition of the German folk rests on the
fusion of related races and the large predominant portion of Nordic blood.


The Origin of the Nordic Race


The main territory of the Nordic race encompasses the area of southern Scandinavia,
Jutland, the North and Baltic Seas and reaches into central Germany. Already in the earliest
period the Nordic man was a settled farmer. He invented the plow, which other folks later
adopted, cultivated crops and breed pets. The explosive population growth of this Nordic
mankind led to a new, necessary acquisition of space and caused wave after wave to stream
down into bordering areas: into the European area and into the wide parts of Asia. The
previous original inhabitants — even if often for only a short time — were imprinted with the
mark of Nordic culture. Not: "From the East came the light!", as was claimed by science
earlier; rather, "From the North came the strength!"


The Meaning of the Nordic Race for Mankind
The Fuehrer says in Mein Kampf:


"Everything that we today marvel at in the world, science and art, technology and inventions,
is the creative product of few folks and perhaps originally of ONE race."


The high cultures of the Indians, Persians, Greeks and Romans — created by the Indo-
Germanics — clearly show the Nordic (modern "Indo-Aryan") creative spirit. With the decline
of the Nordic ruling class they, too, again disappeared. Even today we feel related to these
cultures, which have a common racial origin. We are not so presumptuous, however, to
believe that all cultures, even in earlier times, can only be credited to the Nordic race. Folks
with other racial composition have also created cultures. In us, however, other feelings are
roused if we try to relate to the cultures of Old China, Babylon or the old Indian cultures of
the Aztecs (in present-day Mexico) and the Incas (in present-day Peru). It cannot be denied:
those were also high cultures; but towards them we feel undeniably foreign. They are not
related to us, but rather, are of foreign race. A different spirit speaks from them. Never did
these foreign cultures reach a commensurate peak with those based on Nordic spirit. The
technological development of today has also emerged under the leadership of the Nordic race.
This is just as much true, for example, in modern Turkey, the progress of America and the rise
in the Far East. Wherever mixed with closely related races the influence of the Nordic race


620


has always proven beneficial and developed abilities which produce the highest cultural
achievements.


The German Folk and the Nordic Race


Despite the often heavy mixture and meshing of races in the various provinces of the
Reich we find individual races more pronounced in the various parts of Germany: There are
areas in which a tall stature, narrow face and light colored hair, eyes and skin predominate
(physical appearance of the NORDIC race). Closely related to Nordic man — perhaps only
described as a variation of the same — but larger, wider and more stocky appearing is FALISH
man. In many parts of the Reich we find large people with a short head and a narrow face,
large nose, brown eyes and black hair (physical appearance of the DINARIC race). Or in
individual areas are found small, slender and nimble people with dark eyes and hair color
(appearance of the ALPINE race). Finally, conspicuous in certain parts of the Reich are short,
round-headed people with wide faces, brown eyes, brown to black hair and dark skin color
(physical appearance of the EAST BALTIC race). In all provinces of the Reich, whether
North or South, West or East, the NORDIC RACE is more or less strongly represented. Many
people in our folk cannot be absolutely assigned to one or another race. In each folk are found
—next to examples who are in appearance racially pure — the individual races in more or less
mixed form. In the German folk the Nordic heritage predominates. The Nordic race is not
only the PREDOMINANT RACE; it is also found in the BLOOD OF ALMOST ALL
GERMANS. "Blood and soil" are not empty concepts, rather our destiny. Hence the breeding
goal of the German folk is also given. It is completed in the fulfillment of the laws of life of
its predominant race. The portion of Nordic blood in the hereditary makeup of the German
folk is about 50%.


Furthermore family trees teach us: EACH GERMAN HAS NORDIC BLOOD IN
HIM. So the German folk is, in the truest sense of the word, a blood community. History on a
racial basis has long proven that the Nordic race has a much larger share of extraordinary men
than other races. The Nordic race is above all the carrier of the high degree of ability of the
German folk. Great deeds in all spheres have made it the leader race of mankind. There is no
other human race which has produced so many extraordinary leaders, commands and
statesmen.


In glorious exploit Nordic man conquered large areas, founded states and created
cultures. Already around the year 1000 Vikings had landed in America. The opening up of
entire continents was led by the Nordic spirit. One of the striking characteristics of the
northern race is self-control. Nordic daring is the foundation of the martial accomplishments
of Nordic races. Conscientiousness and strength of will, paired with reliability, greatly
strengthen the drive for independence. These characteristics, however, reduce his ability to
sympathize, and the danger is great that the Nordic man loses himself and expends himself.
Nordic man possesses a great love for sport and competition; he stands there where one must
dare. Therefore he is also more frequently found than other men in those professions which
are tied to danger. But here, too, is the knowledge: more important than skin color is the
character of the man. One belongs essentially to the race whose virtues he professes through
deed. If one examines the individual countries of Europe according to their racial composition,
one initially notices that in almost all states the same races are represented. We find the
Nordic race represented outside of Germany, in the Scandinavian lands, England and Holland
and even in Russia, Italy, France, Spain and so on. We also find, however, East Baltic man in
the various European countries. The overall racial evaluation of a folk does not come down to
that. It is a matter of the STRENGTH OF THE PORTIONS OF THE INDIVIDUAL RACES
in the respective folk. And there we determine: already just numerically the Reich marches far


621


ahead of all other folks in respect to the Nordic portion. With natural right Germany can claim
the leadership of the predominantly Nordic Germanic folks.


Law of Life — Heredity


"The strong must rule and not mix with the weak, and hence to sacrifice his own
greatness."


(Adolf Hitler, Mein Kampf)


What Does Heredity Mean?


Each look at the world around us shows that offspring resemble their ancestors.
From the sperm of a beech tree again grows a beech tree. Negroes breed negroes, Whites
always Whites. Even in the case of very young children, the relatives notice for example that
the nose was "inherited" from the father, the eyes from the mother. Later other characteristics
appear like industriousness, talent, susceptiveness to certain illnesses. That an inheritance has
taken place is ancient knowledge of men. Breeders have always tried to promote the passing
on of certain features and characteristics and to prevent animals and plants with undesirable
characteristics from breeding. That this was a matter of development according to natural
laws, however, has only been recognized and proven during the last few decades. Like every
event in nature, heredity, too, is subject to unchangeable laws. The laws of heredity — like all
other laws of life — have the same validity for plant, animal and man. In the offspring either
the characteristics of both parents are again recognizable or a characteristic of the father or
mother predominates. Many times a characteristic can be traced through many generations or
it skips entire generations to later suddenly again make an appearance. Heredity is hence the
passing on of features and characteristics from parents to offspring. Not only physical
characteristics are inherited, but also intellectual and psychological. Man possesses TWO
hereditary factors for each characteristic. The child receives the hereditary factors in EQUAL
PARTS from the parents. A mix-breed can resemble a purebred as a result of the possession
of predominant hereditary factors in his appearance. The suppressed hereditary factors are not
thus eliminated; they simply do not appear in that generation. What appears healthy on the
outside can hide the covered over hereditary factors for sickness inside. One does not see on
any many what hereditary factors lie in him. A purely external evaluation can hence never be
conclusive. Two different races distinguish themselves through a great number of hereditary
factors. By their mixture (crossing) these hereditary factors are randomly brought together,
whereby in the descendants a great diversity results in regard to the hereditary makeup.


The result of such a mixture is disruption of the continuity of the hereditary structure.
The laws of heredity today form the basis of our knowledge of the formation and development
of successive generations. Since normal and sick hereditary factors are passed on equally to
the offspring, an enormous importance of the knowledge of hereditary factors and the duty to
intervene and work — to restrict and to promote — for the formation of coming generations
follows. At conception, essence and worth of a person for his folk and his race are already
determined. Certainly education and environment can later develop and promote certain traits
and restrain others (in that generation only), but the fundamental essence remains
unchangeable. Hence the responsibility for the next generation lies with us.


622


The Significance of Mate Selection


The right choice of mate is not only the prerequisite for the preservation of the
species, but also for the continuance of high selectivity. It is the foundation of any racial
higher development. The selection of a racially highly worthy wife in itself still does not
necessarily mean an improvement of the race. That only comes when the right mate selection
is followed by the breeding of an above-average number of children. For what would the
elimination of bad hereditary factors from the folk help, if simultaneously a reproduction of
the good hereditary factors was not preserved and expanded? If, for example, mate selection
was made by a man who did not want any children, then this would mean a deterioration of
the race, because elimination of good hereditary factors from the future generation would
result.


Appearance and Hereditary makeup


If there were only physical differences between the individual human races, the
question of belonging to a race would be rather unimportant. Therefore the appearance of a
man — which is given by the totality of visual features, characteristics and abilities — must be
strictly kept apart. The hereditary makeup of a person has a much greater meaning than his
appearance. Often it is extremely difficult to derive psychological disposition from the
appearance of an individual. By heredity, chance may combine a preponderance of the
physical traits of one race with the psychological traits of another race. In most cases,
however, one will be able to figure the psychological disposition from the physical
appearance or at least
approximate it correctly.


Environment and Hereditary Factors


Every person carries a great treasure of hereditary factors in himself from birth. In
the course of his life only a portion of them are realized. Environment has a part in the
formation of the individual. Climate, nutrition, living space, position, etc., can have a visible
influence on the development of a person. If a life form lacks the environmental conditions
needed for it to flourish, then it is stunted. Its appearance is thus subject to many changes due
to the environment, but not the hereditary makeup. Environmental influences are not able to
fundamentally alter the hereditary makeup (the preservation of Germandom for centuries on
foreign folkish soil is a visible proof of the strength of the blood). Due to lack of possibilities
for development the individual person often is sooner or later ruined. For the preservation and
further evolution of a race, the necessary foundations for life must be present or be created.


Hence are derived the following determinations:


1. Each person is formed by the cross-effects of hereditary factors and surroundings.
2. The environment and its influence remain without effect on the descendants.

3. Acquired abilities are not inherited. (Only through natural selection are traits passed
between generation.)


The last fact is of especially fundamental importance. Through physical exercise the
muscles of an individual can indeed be significantly strengthened. The son of an athlete,
however, does not therefore get stronger muscles than any average child. Likewise,
intellectual knowledge is in no way inherited. The son of a scholar has to start at the
beginning with the alphabet just like every other child. The same is proven by the mother


623


tongue, which has been practiced for many generations. Marxists and democrats have — with
much fantasy and one-sided over-estimation of the effect of environment — believed that a
change of this environment could improve the destiny of entire folks. For them all people are
the same. Hence, placed under the same conditions, Whites, Blacks and Yellows must also
achieve the same accomplishments in all areas.


But we know:


Racially and ethnically alien people can never become equal even in the same living
space and even over long periods of time. They always remain what they are: alien blood
which must be kept away from our folk body if it is not to slowly but irretrievably fall to
destruction. The great folkish task hence consists of protecting the genetic mass of the folk
from race mixing, to prevent the spread of genetic defects and to shape the environment so
that the best genetic elements of the folk achieve the greatest procreation.


The Meaning of the Laws of Life for a Folk


The laws of nature run according to an unchangeable, un-influenceable will. They
are valid for all life forms. It is therefore necessary to acknowledge these laws, and their
observance must be viewed as the prerequisite for the preservation and further development of
life. Failure to observe the laws of nature is followed by decay, deformity and finally, ruin.
National Socialism has made the re-establishment of a natural order of life a goal and has
given the necessary government recognition to the validity of the laws of nature for man.


The Law of Fertility


Animals and plants produce more offspring than is necessary for their survival.
Here are a few examples:


A poppy produces about 4,000 seeds. If all the seeds grew and again reproduced,
after five years there would be 256,000,000,000,000 poppy flowers. Already by the sixth year
the entire surface of the earth would no longer suffice to hold all of these plants. A single
female cod contains three to four million eggs. After just a few generations of reproduction,
the waters of the earth would be stuffed full of cod. Such examples can be expanded upon as
much as desired. The enormous fertility which we find in nature again and again receives the
necessary curtailment through the destruction of large numbers of individual creatures. The
prospects of survival are not equal for all life forms. The FERTILITY, however, is the
prerequisite that a sufficient number of creatures remains preserved so that the species does
not perish. Without fertility there is no further development. The birth rate will determine the
future of our folk. The number of cribs must be much larger than the number of coffins. Only
then can we offer successful resistance against all arising dangers and turn into deed our right,
which is due us on the basis of our leading position in Europe.


The Law of Struggle and Selection


We have gained knowledge about the development of life on earth largely through
sedimentation and fossils. The examinations show again and again: in the oldest layers of the


624


crust of the earth, very simply designed, basic creatures appear; in later layers we find more
highly developed life forms, and finally in the most recent layers the most most highly
developed organisms. Development means change, growth, reproduction, expansion, etc.
Each development requires huge spans of time and knows no standing still. The life of the
individual disappears completely in the evolution of the species. How does nature intervene in
events and direct? If we go through the world with open eyes, we see that there is hard
struggle everywhere. A struggle for existence or nonexistence. Struggle is a fundamental law
of nature. The deeper meaning of this eternal, apparent battle of annihilation is this:


Everything weak and/or inferior is annihilated. Only the strong and powerful designs
procreate.


The goal is hence a selection upward, the preservation of the best. We only have to
correctly recognize the natural events and act accordingly. What our ancestors correctly
understood instinctively, being much more strongly bound to nature, must again become our
common knowledge. It is not a matter of the INDIVIDUAL, rather the promotion and
preservation of the SPECIES.


In National Socialist terms that is phrased:


"Communal good goes before individual good" or "the individual is nothing, the folk is
everything.”


Each folk needs space to live. Again and again throughout history the struggle for
living space occurs. The growing, healthy folk alone has the moral right to expand its living
space and, if necessary, to conquer it.


In Nature, Selection Occurs through the Struggle for
Survival


We must never carry over the concept of "struggle for existence" into economic life.
We understand it in a purely biological sense. Artificial, often unnatural selection takes place
ona large scale in every culture-folk (culture-folk appears to refer here to political states, as
opposed to ethnic-cultural states, or folks). Intellectual inferiors, criminals and sickly people
are frequently saved from destruction. Thus bad hereditary make up is not only preserved, but
also passed on to future generations. Medical accomplishments especially prevent a selection
that once also applied to man. With nature-bound people of a similar culture — as we must
view our ancestors — the same selective forces were in effect as with animals. This selection
developed man more highly. But the rise of culture and especially of civilization allowed the
laws of nature to be forgotten. Man can perhaps postpone their effect, but never eliminate it.
Just as many species of animals and plants have become extinct over the course of history, so
have entire folks been destroyed because they violated the laws of nature. Hereditary changes
and environmental influences (natural selection) pushed evolution continuously onward. The
formation and splintering off of new races was kept within bounds by nature through selection.
In nature, those creatures unsuited for the preservation of each race were eliminated, while the
carriers of favorable qualities remained. Selection preserves the race at its peak. The death of
the individual creature has nothing to do with the essence of selection, but is only a means for
it. Traits are gradually eliminated when they are no longer passed along to the same degree.
Then in the next generation this trait is no longer strongly enough represented. The effect is
the same whether this elimination is achieved through sterilization or abstinence, through
death or otherwise. The most important selection is fertility. The person who has no children
can have a long life, but he is forever purged from the life of the race. His genetic


625


combination working together with certain environmental conditions represents something
unique. The permanence of individual accomplishment, however, is only then secured if the
creative person provides for the perpetuation of his work descendants of himself. FERTILITY
alone determines the continuation of hereditary makeup. Every selection which affects a folk
is an enduring and irrevocable success or failure. With this knowledge the main cause for the
decline of ancient culture-folks becomes understandable. In them the carriers of industrious
hereditary traits, the culture-bearers and creators, were eliminated. The inferior won the
greatest victory over them: the victory of a greater birth rate.


During the Persian wars, approximately 500 BC, Sparta had 8000 combat-worthy
men. In the year 244 BC, only 700 were produced. The decline of Sparta and the collapse of
Rome were nothing other than a failure of the fertility of the genetically able. Reverse
Selection and Deformity It stands confirmed that all culture-folks, especially the basically
Nordic-Germanic in character, are an example of reverse selection in regard to fertility. That
means: The fertility of the capable is less than that of the less capable. The ever unequal
reproduction of the capable and less capable, however, leads to a lowering of the superior
hereditary factors in a folk and invariably mean its racial and hence cultural decline. Earlier
the fundamentally false view was often taken that higher ability was confined to certain
"classes" of the population. "Talent is a monopoly of a social class." (H.W. Siemens) In the
National Socialist state therefore selection and state help are not based on rank or social
classes, but solely and limited to ability and accomplishment, industriousness and bearing.
The National Socialist Education institutes, the Adolf Hitler Schools, the Langemarck Study
and the Order Castles ("Ordensburgen") are living proof of this. They produce the future
leaders of the German folk in all areas. The lower fertility of the Nordic-based folks is
confronted with a high reproduction rate of especially those European folks which show
Asiatic strains. In 1933 Germany's natural population growth with 66 million inhabitants was
233,297. In 1933 Poland's natural population growth with 32 million inhabitants was 402,465.


The danger of a racial transformation in Europe is great. It is upon us now to prevent
it. We know that the number of heads of a folk alone do not make up its strength or
significance. But no one will deny that, next to qualitative level, size and natural growth of a
folk are the most significant foundations for its influence and power.


War and Reverse Selection


Every war represents a reverse selection in pure form. It is followed by more or less
severe folkish-biological damage for the participating peoples. Precisely the most industrious
and most capable lose their lives on the battlefield. Germany lost two million of its best men
in the First World War. Three-quarters of a million people fell victim to the enemy's hunger
blockade. About the war and overcoming it in regard to population politics, the Fuehrer said:


"The successful outcome of this war will give the German Reich tasks which it will only be
able to fulfill through an increase in its population. It is therefore necessary that the gaps
created in the folk body through war be filled by growth in births."


From the order of the Reichsfuehrer-SS of October 28, 1939:
"Many a victory of arms for a folk was simultaneously a devastating defeat for its life force
and its blood. In this regard the unfortunately necessary death of the best men, as regrettable


as it is, still is not the worst part of war. Much worse is the absence of the children that were
not conceived by the living during the war and by the dead after the war."


626


The sacrifices which this war demands of our folk are very painful from a human and
a population-political standpoint. But they are by no means senseless, because they have
brought the life and future of our folk. They serve the security and defense of our natural right
of life.


Dangers of Race-Mixing


The "irrational" animal only joins with members of the same race for procreation.
People close to nature like the Germanics — the farmer, who is rooted in the soil and close to
the earth, who feels the call of blood and race — acted from the same instinct over many
generations. Only the "overly rational" cultured person believes he can act against nature.
That is always to his detriment. If two different races mix, their hereditary traits never merge
into a new genetic mass that will be passed on uniformly. We know from the study of heredity
that, aside from the coupling of certain genetic factors, traits are inherited individually and
independently of each other. At the propagation of such bastards these traits further separate
and divide themselves up in various descendants.Every racial mixing changes the harmonious
balance of racial makeup. The farther apart in origin the mixing races are, the greater will be
the disruption which such a bastardization has as consequence. Furthermore come all the
disadvantages in the areas of health and especially psychology which result from race-mixing.
Mixed-breeds are physically and psychologically disharmonious. Race-mixing means a slow
decline of the higher race and hence the sure loss of the uniqueness of a folk. The
consequences of a harmful racial mixture are taught clearly to us by history. From the
moment a folk loses its racial consciousness a moral, intellectual and cultural decline set in.
The popular opinion today that race-mixing is culturally expansive and even culturally
creative is false. True, on the other hand, is that contact with foreign folks and races often first
triggers in us the correct consciousness of our own essence. This knowledge, however,
requires us to adhere precisely to strict separation of everything foreign to our kind in racial
matters.


About race-mixing the Fuehrer says:


"Blood-mixing and through it the sinking of racial level is the sole cause of the dying
off of old cultures."


A series of culture-folks shows the following common path of development, which, however,
does not represent a law of life: After a slow rise to a certain level there follows a short golden
age and then a rapid decline. The decline of strength is almost always introduced through the
replacement of simplicity, sobriety and health with pleasure-seeking, lack of principles and
sickness.

Simultaneously bloody wars eradicate the best carriers and lack of children steadily reduces
the number of the capable. The death blow, however, is dealt by mixture with foreign blood.
It has the consequence that inner contradictions become even greater. With such division it is
then easy for a vigorous folk to triumph over the sickly one. The Nordic race is the carrier and
foundation of the German people. Nature teaches us as the highest law:


The individual is not the purpose, rather the means of life.


The German folk is not the sum of 85 million people, but rather a great oneness, a
community, in which the Nordic hereditary makeup predominates. This hereditary makeup
shows itself not only in physical form and appearance, but also finds its expression above all
in a COMMONLY DIRECTED RACIAL SOUL. Not decisive, even if desirable, are the
physically Nordic features of the individual person alone. Instead, his psychological-


627


character traits are. The Nordic race is the race of the German folk; it impresses its
stamp on our essence; it determines our thought, action and feelings.


The Jewish Question


The destructive influence of race-mixing with the Jews proved especially harmful in
our folk until the rise to power of National Socialism. These parasites of mankind have well
understood to the present day how to prevent a complete merger with their host folks.


Representing this is the statement of the English Jew Disraeli:
"Every race must perish which subjects its blood to mixing without care."


If in the year 1928 for every 100 pure Jewish marriages in Germany there were already 53
mixed marriages, then this proves how deeply this slow but steadfastly working poison had
crept into our folk. Furthermore there existed the special danger that Jewry BY MEANS OF
SPIRITUAL DECAY HAD BEGUN TO SYSTEMATICALLY UNDERMINE THE
RACIALLY CONSCIOUS ACTION AND THOUGHT OF OUR FOLK in order to raise
itself politically and economically to predominance. Alongside this undermining,
miscegenation spread primarily in the intellectually leading groups of our folk. Jews made
sincere feeling despicable and their propaganda aimed intentionally at the inner undermining
and fragmentation of the folk body. The aftereffects of this destructive, decades-long infection
are even today detectable in our folk. It requires intensive effort to eradicate the last traces of
this pestilence and lead our entire folk back to the natural and only correct path of life. The
solution to the Jewish question has today become a vital task beyond the borders of the Reich
for the peoples of Europe.


The Population-Political Development of Germany and
its Neighbors


After a short increase in the number of births in the decade after the 1870-71 war, the birth
rate sank slowly until the turn of the century and then descended faster.


These are above all of a psychological nature. The declining birth rate started first
among the wealthy, who because of comfort and pleasure-seeking were scared off from
rearing the appropriate number of children. The broad masses then copied this example.
Today it must become the opposite and in the wealthier circles the number of children must
especially increase.


The Development of Births in Germany


After the 1870-71 war there were in Germany annually 40 births for every 1000
inhabitants. At the turn of the century there were only 35 births for every 1000 inhabitants
annually. The birth rate reached its lowest point during World War I when it reached 14 births
for every 1000 inhabitants annually. Even more terrifying is the following picture of the
decrease of births:


1870 with 42 million inhabitants there were about 2 million births.


628


1933 with 65 million inhabitants there were about 0.9 million births.


The renewed positivity of the changed psychological attitude with the rise to power of
National Socialism brought a tremendous turnaround.


There were....


1933: 14.7 births per 1000 inhabitants
1935: 19.9 births per 1000 inhabitants
1939: 20.8 births per 1000 inhabitants


This turn is certainly very encouraging in itself, but the increasing birth rate should
not be overestimated. The numbers above still do not ensure the necessary increase of our
people. This war is a great biological test of strength. The birth development in the last decade,
however, clearly shows the new life will and life confidence which determined the turnaround
in this sector. History proves through many examples that a folk can only harvest the fruits of
its industriousness and its strength of accomplishment when it has sufficient people at its
disposal. The greater the space, the greater the need for people to protect this space (soldiers),
to ensure nourishment (farmers), and to produce industrial products (workers). All folks
which for whatever inner reasons were no longer able to achieve an increase in population
strength simultaneously with the strengthening of their power fell victim to annihilation.


Let us look at the fertility of the European peoples:
1936-37 Germany had per 1000 inhabitants 19.4 births


Sweden had per 1000 inhabitants 14.2 births
Norway had per 1000 inhabitants 15.1 births
England had per 1000 inhabitants 15.5 births


In comparison...


Poland had per 1000 inhabitants 26.2 births
Rumania had per 1000 inhabitants 31.5 births
Ukraine had per 1000 inhabitants 34.0 births


The quantitative development of the Germanics, Latins and East Baltic speakers of Slavic
language:


Germanics Latins East Baltic

1810 59 million 63 million 65 million
1930 149 million 121 million 226 million
1960 160 million 133 million 303 million


The peoples of the Soviet Union are increasing annually by about three million. In
the Asian area Japan has doubled its population in the last 70 years. It has an annual growth of
about one million people. Likewise China and India are constantly increasing their
populations despite famine and pestilence. If we do not ourselves provide for the appropriate
quantity of offspring and produce an
increase of the Nordic hereditary makeup, then Nordic blood will become more and more
displaced by Eastern and East-Baltic blood. The Nordic race or, we can safely say, the
Germanic folks march at the end when it comes to fertility. The number of births, however,
decides the fate of folks. The German victory of arms is thus only a complete one if it is
followed by the victory of the child.


629


"Two weapons are at the disposal of each folk in the struggle for survival: Its ability to fight
and its fertility. Never forget that the ability to fight of a folk alone can never make it possible
for a folk to survive into the far future, rather that the inexhaustible fountain of its fertility is
also necessary." (The Reichsfiihrer-SS)


Racial Hygiene and Population-Politics of the National Socialist State
The Fuehrer says in "Mein Kampf":


"Whoever is not physically and mentally healthy and worthy must not perpetuate his suffering
in the body of his child."


Above our action stands the folk community. It is an indefensible condition if the
relationship in a state between the productive and the non-earning levels takes on unhealthy
forms. The active, working portion of the populace must support the lives of those unable to
work. There are lunatics who previously cost the state tens of thousands of marks. In the
(Weimar) period the number of criminals was shockingly high, and criminals often heavily
reproduced themselves. By eliminating these carriers of lazy heredity millions can be saved
and used for other purposes. The actions of any responsible state leadership must serve the
systematic care and increase of those of good breeding. It is the duty of the state to undertake
all things so that the people who uselessly claim the strength of others and for whom life itself
means misery ARE NOT BORN. Every natural folk soon eradicates the inferior when it
correctly recognizes this fact. In the so-called "culture-folks," however, a false charity —
carried into the broad masses especially by clerical circles downright promotes a reverse
selection. From the point of view of the church any reasonable intervention is labeled a
violation of the godly world order. It is plain nonsense to claim that God wants what we call
inferior. Otherwise we also would not have the right to temporarily or permanently remove a
murderer or a criminal from the community. The laws of nature show us exactly that the life
of our folk and maintenance of its good breeding stand above the well-being of a congenitally
severely deformed person. Action must not lie with the personal "I," but with the entirety of
the folk. Furthermore experience shows that most of the congenitally ill possess no sense of
responsibility toward their descendants. In 1877, some 40,375 persons were cared for in
German lunatic asylums; in the year 1926 it was 252, 793 (!) persons. In the USA the
percentage of the mentally ill has more than doubled from 1904 to 1929.


National Socialism has intervened here appropriately.


The position of the Fuehrer toward this problem is clear and unambiguous: "The
demand that it be made impossible for defective people to produce other just as defective
people is a demand of clearest reason and in its systematic execution is the most humane act
of mankind. It will save millions of unfortunates undeserved suffering and in its consequence
lead to increasing recovery." The German government created the "Law for Prevention of
Congenitally Malformed Offspring" on July 14, 1933. The law decrees: Whoever is
congenitally ill can be sterilized through a surgical operation if according to the experiences
of medical science there is great probability that his descendants would suffer from severe
physical or mental congenital defects. The law lists presently known congenital illnesses,
including a series of mental illnesses and severe hereditary defects such as congenital
blindness, congenital deafness, etc. Furthermore those who suffer from severe alcoholism can
be made infertile. The Congenital Health Board decides about sterilization. With this
legislation the necessary beginning is made for the purification process of the folk body. The
effect of this law will already be felt in the next generation. It was a decision of not to be
underestimated significance if the National Socialist state put an end to the untenable
condition with iron vigor. That moral offenders possess congenitally greatly damaged
offspring is taken into account by a second law. The "Law Against Dangerous Moral


630


Offenders and for the Measures of Security and Improvement" was created on November 24,
1933. Through this law certain anti-social elements are removed from the folk body. On
September 15, 1933 the "Nuremburg Laws" were announced at the Party Day of Freedom.
They encompass the following laws:


1. The "Reich Flag Law"
2. The "Reich Citizen Law"
3. The "Law for the Protection of German Blood and German Honour"


The "Reich Citizen Law" determines who is a subject and who is a citizen. Subjects
are those who belong to the Protection Union of the German Reich and who are especially
obligated toward it. Reich citizen is the category of someone of GERMAN or RELATED
BLOOD who has demonstrated through his actions that he is willing and able to loyally serve
the German folk and Reich. The "Law for the Protection of German Blood and Honour"
forbids among other things marriage between Jews and subjects of German or related blood.
According to the regulations of the "Reich Citizen Law" and of the "Law for the Protection of
German Blood and Honour," people of one quarter Jewish heritage are to be integrated
through their offspring into the German folk. Therefore marriages between Jews and quarter
Jews are forbidden as well as between quarter Jews. Marriages between half Jews and
Germans or quarter Jews require the permission of the Reich Minister of the Interior. The law
also provides that marriages between people of German blood with offspring of the
miscegenated French from the period of the Rhineland occupation as well as with gypsies is
prevented.


The meaning of this legislation was summarized by the Reich Marshal:


"Tt is an affirmation of the strengths and blessings of the Germanic-Nordic spirit. We know

that the blood sin is the original sin of the folk. We ourselves, the German folk, have had to

suffer greatly from this original sin. We must therefore again try to make a connection with

the line of generations from dark prehistory. It has truly been the salvation in the final hour,
and if God and Providence had not given us the Fuehrer, Germany would have never again
arisen from this original sin, from decay."


A further measure is the "Law for the Protection of the Congenital Health of the
German Folk" (Marriage Health Law) of October 18, 1935. It forbids the marriage between
people with heritable illness and hence prevents the passing on of defective hereditary factors
to descendants. National Socialist Germany has naturally been sharply attacked by hostile,
Jewish-led foreign countries, even though the Reich does not stand alone in the world with
these measures. Many states in the USA had already passed legal measures decades ago in
order to prevent the increase of inferior hereditary factors. First in 1926 such legal moorings
were established in some American states and in 1929 in Denmark and parts of Switzerland.
In California 9,000 people have been made infertile during the last 20 years.


Racial Consciousness and Racial Pride
of the SS-Man


In the Reichsfiihrer-SS order of December 31, 1931 it says in point one that the SS is
an association of Nordic-determined people selected according to special standards. The
principal point of our worldview is the idea of race. We have the unshakable belief that the
blood, our hereditary makeup alone, is decisive for lasting and peak accomplishment. Hence,
we place the idea of selection at the forefront of our ideals. Our ideal of selection is the
physically and mentally-psychologically hereditarily fit person of Nordic-Germanic character.


631


We do not want to be only an association of the physically best, but also the most loyal and
most valuable in character.


The Clan Community — Family Hygiene — The
Question of Offspring


The preservation of the racially worthy for all future includes the family and clan as
a natural prerequisite. The life of the individual links him to ancestors and descendants. From
the family and clan the union extends to the folk community. The individual person dies,
subject to the laws of nature. Through the passing on of his hereditary makeup he first
becomes a living member of his folk community. We believe in the immortality of our folk.


The Fuehrer says about the family:


"The destruction of the family would mean the end of all higher humanity...It is the
smallest, but most valuable unit in the construction of the entire state structure."


The family is the life foundation of the Reich. It produces future generations. Each
folk can only be renewed out of the family. From Germanic-German feeling we empathize
with the idea of clan. In close connection with the laws of life, by way of the German family,
we have allowed for upward breeding. The family is a member of the sensible community of
the clan; it is the acknowledged order for the propagation of the coming generation.


Special Duties of Mate Selection


We know:


The selection of a wife gives us the ONLY POSSIBILITY in life to improve the
hereditary makeup of the coming generation.
Health or sickness, talent or inability of the descendants is determined by the mate selection
of its ancestors. At this important step in the life of a man, position and wealth must not
decide, but only mental and physical soundness. It is also clear that whoever is certain that he
is the carrier of unhealthy hereditary factors must abstain.


The Fuehrer says in "Mein Kampf":


"There is no freedom to sin against posterity and hence against the race. What is
being neglected in this area on all sides must be remedied by the folkish state. It must put race
in the middle of life in general. It must care for the holding pure. It must
declare the child the most treasured possession of a folk. It must take care that ONLY THOSE
WHO ARE HEALTHY PRODUCE CHILDREN; that there is only one shame: despite one's
own sickness and deficiencies to nonetheless put children into the world...”


It is just as much a lack of feeling of responsibility not to pass along good hereditary
makeup by voluntary refusal, and hence narrow or even dry up the river of life.
Accomplishment in profession alone is by no means the only one that the community needs.
Just as important is fulfillment of the BIOLOGICAL DUTY. Both together produce the
German life accomplishment. The SS-man should marry as young as possible. The mother of
his children must be the carrier of worthy blood. Then his family is in every regard an
enrichment of the clan and of the folk. In correct recognition of the future formation of our


632


folk — toward which we must accomplish the largest part — the Reichsfiihrer-SS had already
on December 31, 1931 issued the BETROTHAL AND MARRIAGE ORDER. It states:


1. The SS is an association of German, Nordic-determined men selected according to special
standards.


2. In accordance with the National Socialist world view and in recognition that the future of
our folk lies in the selection and preservation of the racially and congenitally healthy good
blood, I am introducing marriage permission for all unmarried members

of the SS effective January 1, 1932.


6. The desired goal is the congenitally worthy clan of German, Nordic-determined kind.


4. Marriage permission will be given or denied solely and only according to racial and
congenital health standards.


5. Each SS-man who plans to marry must receive marriage permission from the Reichsfiihrer-
SS.

6. SS-members who despite refusal of marriage permission nonetheless marry will be stricken
from the SS; they will be given the option of resignation.


7. The appropriate processing of marriage requests is the task of the Race Office of the SS.


8. The Race Office of the SS will keep the "Clan Book of the SS" into which the families of
SS-members will be entered following the granting of marriage permission or approval of an
entry request.


9. The Reichsfithrer-SS, the head of the Race Office and the expert advisors of this office are
obligated by their word of honor to silence.


10.The SS is aware that it is taking a step of great importance with this order. Scorn, mockery
and misunderstanding do not bother us; the future belongs to us!


The Reichsfiihrer-SS H Himmler


Furthermore SS-men standing before a commitment must again and again be


reminded of the fact that an engagement, too, can only come after permission from the
Reichsfiihrer-SS.


From a 1935 speech by the Reichsfiihrer-SS:


"So we are assembled and march according to irrevocable laws as a National
Socialist, martial order of Nordic-determined men and as a sworn community of its clans
along the path into the far future, and we wish and believe that we will not only be the
grandchildren who fought it out better, but beyond that the ancestors of later generations
necessary for the eternal life of the German/Germanic folk."


Hence the guidelines for mate selection of the SS-man are set down and the
foundations created so that the SS directly does the main part in the formation of the leading
clans of coming generations. The SS in the Struggle for the Future of Nordic-Germanic Space
History shows us how often the rise and fall of flourishing empires and cultures has occurred
in the course of millennia. Mankind owes its greatest accomplishments to the creative strength


633


of the Nordic race. As soon as the carriers of this culture disappeared, decay was unavoidable.
In recent centuries the process of de-Nordicization took on ever-greater forms. We have
learned the roots of the de-Nordicization and shown the dangers which today surround us. The
National Socialist state has correctly recognized these dangers. Laws have already been
created to prevent further decay, and measures are also underway to enlighten our entire folk
in this sense. Furthermore from us must come — if we really want to possess leadership in the
Germanic space — an appropriate direction of all Germanicdetermined folks. In place of the
de-Nordicization must come a conscious re-Nordicization. Biological insight demands a clear
separation of the races. The disadvantages of race-mixing are known to us. The great colonial
activity through settlement of Nordic-Germanic farmers in the East will form a wall against
the advance of East Baltic people of Slavic language. The SS has here, too, stepped into the
front line for the solution of these life-critical questions and will, obeying its laws, fulfill the
tasks placed before it. Insight and will for the promotion and strengthening of the Northern
Race — coming from our direction — will then become the common possession of all Nordic-
Germanic people. We know the path that leads to ascent. We men of the SS carry along with
the feeling of responsibility toward our own persons above all the feeling of responsibility
toward the folk and coming generations. The idea of race is the principal item of our
worldview. Adolf Hitler will triumph in this struggle, too, not because he rebels against the
laws of nature, but because he has again given them their due and is willing to be
unconditionally true to them. We want to be counted among the best of the Fuehrer. To him
and to our folk belong our entire devotion and loyalty. Our strength and our spirit will help
determine and order the new racial reconstruction of the Germanic-determined folks of
Europe.

Summary of our Demands


1. Guard your health and — as long as you are still at a developing age — practice restraint
above all in regard to recreational poisons (alcohol, nicotine) and sexual activity. (It must be
remembered that the Nordic person generally achieves full maturity especially late in
development.)


2. Marry as early as possible. Only then will you completely enjoy family life with your wife.


3. Do not marry a woman of FOREIGN BREED. You are responsible to your folk and to your
offspring for the HOLDING PURE OF THE BLOOD.


4. Do not marry a congenitally ill woman. Otherwise you carry the guilt for the suffering of
your own children and grandchildren.


5. Choose only a completely healthy wife for yourself. The true picture of the state of health
and characteristics of your future wife are shown to you by her clan.


6. Your wife should be AT LEAST as racially worthy as yourself.
7. Endeavor to get yourself and your children back into the country.


8. Avoid marriage with a relative, because undesirable traits are almost always concealed
from you and then emerge TWICE as strong in your children.


9. You must preserve your hereditary makeup for your folk in the LARGEST POSSIBLE
NUMBER OF CHILDREN. In your children you live on.


634


for the victory of our kind


Herbert Backe


Germany is in the midst of the most enormous upheaval in its history. Out of a
sorrowful development of the many hundreds of years our country, through the genius of
Adolf Hitler, has been undergoing a revolution, the last stage of which we are witnessing
today and which will fundamentally change not only the face of Germany, but of all Europe
and perhaps even of the whole world. It is only the dynamic force of the National Socialist
movement that created a life-affirming, duty sworn, soldierly community out of a
downtrodden, sorrow stricken, self-divided people. Only the National Socialist movement was
in a position to raise the German people, embittered by the collapse of 1918 and the
development of a political and economic catastrophe, to a self-sacrificing, and active
community-minded comrade of the Volk. Whoever wants to understand and comprehend the
causes of our time must take the trouble - in spite of all present worries and notes - to think
back to those years when the National Socialist movement was struggling to gain power in the
state and to eliminate the November system.


Fundamental change


If 1 am taking the floor here in Hanover for the first time after being commissioned
by the Fuhrer, it is because I regard this
region in many respects as 'my own’, I can call it home. Already as a working student almost
twenty years ago I became an SA man in Gottingen. For three years I was able to promote and
fight for the National Socialist idea here in Hanover as an assistant at the Technical University.
Finally, when I took over a lease in the Hanoverian countryside in 1928, I saw my task in
winning the country people for National Socialism. At that time I struggled for the hearts of
the Lower Saxons, first as a party orator, then as a Preuflischer member of the state
parliament for the electoral district of Hanover Sud. It was not always easy to carry the
National Socialist idea from village to village, for the peasant was, for good reason,
mistrustful of anyone who advertised with political slogans. But as deeply as I was imbued
with the absolute correctness of the National Socialist idea, I was also firmly convinced that
the farmer would become the most devote men for Adolf Hitler. And after subsequent events
have proved this view correct. It was precisely the distinctly rural constituencies that were the
first to produce a National Socialist majority. The loyalty expressed by this confession - I may
express this at this point - has not only remained to this day, but has grown. The achievements
of our country people in the battle of war are irrefutable proof of this. At the moment of the
seizure of power, the national socialist agricultural policy took on a difficult legacy. I do not
need to go into the details of that bleak period from 1918 to 1933. It should still be vivid in
the memory of all the people. One thing, however, I must emphasize the work of
reconstruction since 1933 did not mean the elimination of economic hardships alone, but
above all the execution of the world's most important first step. Not only economically, but
also ideologically, the dross of liberalistic views of life had to be removed, which for a
century and a half had dominated the relationship of people in Germany to the community, to
the economy, and to all other aspects of the life of the nation. The primacy of the individual
had to be overcome by the faith and will of the community. Only in the realization of the
principle The aim was to build a healthy national and economic life based
on the principle of "public interest before self-interest". It was out of this view that the
fundamental revolutionary agrarian-political laws were created in 1933. The first of these was
the Reich Agricultural Law, which pointed to the farthest future of our people. It was
followed by the Reich Food Law, the laws on the agricultural market organization and the
other numerous agricultural policy and agricultural economic measures.


636


From the spirit of National Socialism


So why were these laws enacted in such rapid succession immediately after the
seizure of power? Should a single class of the people be given a privileged right to life?
Should a single class be particularly challenged independently of the life of the people? No,
my fellow citizens, it was precisely the agricultural policy of the new Reich that was deeply
rooted in the National Socialist world view. These laws were enacted not only for the
peasantry alone, but for the entire German Volk. Decisive for the economic and blood
strength of a people is its peasantry. All of the political and economic demands of National
Socialism had the idea of a "peasantry", which only made sense and could only be realized if
a strong, viable peasantry guaranteed the biological future of the people and ensured
economic independence, i.e., above all, freedom of food.


Agricultural policy in Germany was thus born solely out of the spirit of national
socialism. The task set us by the Fuhrer at that time: saving the peasantry could not be solved
by economic measures and aid alone; for, on the one hand, a millennia of history have proved
to our satisfaction that only partial successes, at best, could be achieved with economic aid,
and, on the other hand, the peasantry was to be secured economically not for the sake of the
peasantry itself, but in order to secure the biological tasks of the peasantry for the future of the
people. It was therefore not any agricultural specialists, practitioners of agriculture or
departments who made and implemented the new agricultural laws, but men who had grown
up in the National Socialist movement and had joined in its struggle. The extent to which
these laws are shaped by the National Socialist spirit becomes apparent today when we
compare German agricultural policy with the agricultural policy of, say, Soviet Russia. In no
field is the antagonism between National Socialism and Bolshevism greater than in that of
agrarian policy; in our case it is characterized by the erbhof (hereditary farm) as the basis of
the peasant clan, compared to the kolchos (collective farm), which has suppressed every
creative activity and self-responsibility of the individual and has thus led to the decline of the
once flourishing Russian agricultural and food economy. And so it is only today that it
becomes apparent with particular urgency how much National Socialist agricultural policy has
preserved itself as a basis not only for today but for all times to come. From this, it is self-
evident that agricultural policy in Germany is and must remain a task of the NSDAP. The
party alone possesses the dynamic and revolutionary impetus and the forward-looking spirit
necessary to keep agricultural policy, principles, and guidelines pure, to continue to shape
them and to ensure that the bodies responsible for implementing agricultural policy steer upon
the right course at all times and in all circumstances.


Agricultural policy in the foreground


Sometimes in recent years these principles have seemed to take a back seat to the
issues of the day. The confined space of Germany, the scarcity of land, the dependence of
Germany on food supplies from abroad as a result of liberal development, inevitably led to
food policy being in the foreground. But this should not obscure the fact that we were only
able to pursue food policy because the prerequisite, that of the agricultural policy, had already
been so completely solved in 1933 with a few laws. In this framework Germany was able to
pass the agricultural policy decisively. Only a healthy agricultural policy can create the
preconditions for a healthy food economy. The correctness of this sentence is proven by
Germany's food economy performance in contrast to that of most other countries. The shaping
of this National Socialist agricultural policy must therefore be transferred back to where alone
it found the necessary activism, i.e. in the party, in the Reich Office for Agricultural Policy.


637


Clear distribution of tasks


You have to be clear about one thing: The creation of the of the Greater German Reich now
makes it possible to solve many of the decisive problems within the agricultural sector,
problems which could not be solved before the creation of the Greater Reich. These issues,
however, can only be solved if the most active and determined of the nation stand up to solve
them. We do not want to overlook and forget the sometimes almost insurmountable
difficulties which confronted the implementation of the new agricultural policy in 1933. It is
always extremely difficult to replace outmoded forms with new, forward thinking ones, and
there will always be people who are mentally rigid and lack a vision of the future, and who
oppose any new order with a myriad of misgivings. This will also be the case with the
reorganization of the agricultural policy area in Germany and Europe. And that is why the
solution of these great tasks requires the full commitment of the party and the revolutionary
spirit of National Socialism. At the moment when the Fuehrer entrusted me with the
management of the affairs of the Reichsleiter, the Reichsbauernfiihrer and the Reich Minister
of Food and Agriculture, I therefore decided to implement a clear division of tasks between
the Reich Office for Agricultural Policy, the Reich Nutrition Council and the Reich Ministry
of Food. At the same time, this provided the opportunity for a fundamental simplification of
the administration and the establishment of a simple and clear organization in which all
available forces could be concentrated on the most essential. In accordance with the principle
that leadership is the task of the Party, I dissolved the former Reichshauptabteilung of the
Reichsnahrstand. Its tasks, as far as those of political leadership are concerned, | transferred to
the Reich Office for Agricultural Policy in the NSDAP. The other fields of work of the old
Reichshauptabteilung, such as the professional, social, economic, legal, and social care that
was demanded for country people. The task of implementing and enforcing our land
regulations was assigned to a reorganized Reichshauptabteilung. A corresponding
simplification of administration results inevitably from this for the Land and District Farmers'
Associations. I have dismissed or dissolved all special representatives or special offices which
hitherto existed outside the Reich Main Departments. Their duties have been transferred to the
Reich Headquarters. Thus a concentration of forces has been effected in the Reich Food
Council, in keeping with the severity of the war and the magnitude of the tasks which the
Reich Food Council is now and will be called upon to perform in the future.


With real idealism


My comrades in arms, the peasant does not like to be "administered" from the core of
his healthy view of life. He is averse to any bureaucratic structure. On the other hand,
administration is necessary. But it must not become an end in itself. Where there is an idea of
order, there must also be an instrument for maintaining order. It must be clear, however, that
the creative cannot come from the administrative, that even the best administration only ever
administers the existing,- that is, to preserve it in essence. Revolutionary times, however, set
new forms. They must even consciously create something new in contrast to the traditional
structures, whereby it depends on the self-sacrificing personality of man to create new healthy,
viable conditions. Therefore, in order to take into account the dynamics of our time, the form
of self-administration and honorary leadership has been consciously resorted to in the
establishment of the Reichsnahrstand. However, this healthy idea must not be exaggerated to
the extent that the administrative tasks also necessary in the Reichsnahrstand are now to be
performed by honorary leaders. Therefore, the new Reichshauptabteilung I, which essentially


638


comprises the actual administration, will in the future be led by a civil servant and not by an
honorary farmer.


In general, I am of the opinion that the enormous tasks before us require a fighting
front of all interested men and forces. The tasks of the future cannot be solved by working
formations, but only by a real idealism . It is not who has done something that is essential, but
that something is done. It is not prestige or status that is decisive, but only the task itself. We
therefore are proud of everyone who fights in our ranks. Yes, we cannot have enough people
who cooperate in strengthening and enhancing the peasantry as the bearers of our blood
power and guarantors of our freedom of food. National Socialism has taught us that we should
never see what divides us, but only what we have in common. And the tasks set for us today
are worth putting this common ground in the foreground. I therefore particularly welcome the
fact that the Reichsfiihrer-SS Himmler has been appointed by the Fiihrer as Reich
Commissioner for the Consolidation of the German People. I have therefore, as one of the
first measures, not by means of paper agreements, but by assigning two men from the Reich
Commissariat for the Consolidation of German Nationality. Similarly, the basis for
cooperation with other branches of the Party has already been established. With this short
essay I have clarified the essential forms of the distribution of tasks between the Reich Office
for Agricultural Policy, the Reich Food Board and the initiation of cooperation with other
Reich departments.


With this brief outline, I have described the main forms of the of the distribution of
tasks between the Reich Office for Agricultural Policy, the Reich Food Board, and the Reich
Ministry of Food, and I have indicated the initiation of cooperation with other Reich agencies.
And I will now conclude by stating that the Reich Office for Agricultural Policy, and thus the
party, will in future be responsible for are responsible for the basic orientation of agricultural
policy, while the Reich Ministry of Nutrition will be in charge of state management and the
Reich Nutrition Service will be responsible for the practical implementation of agricultural
and nutritional tasks. This creates clear areas of work and the prerequisites for the cooperation
of all agencies that I have called for.


The current food problems


When the German peasantry now looks back on the times that has passed, we may
well say without arrogance that the men and women and the youth of of the country have
achieved unheard-of feats in the struggle to secure our bread, we can say without arrogance
that the men, women and youth of the country have achieved unheard-of things. The German
country people have once again, as so often in German history, proved themselves as a
battalion. With pride I may emphasize at this point emphasize once again that the Fuehrer
himself described the achievements of the German peasantry as unique. of the German
peasantry as unique and unparalleled. Since the beginning of the battle of production, the the
coverage of their own needs from their own land has been has been substantially increased.
Despite all the difficulties caused by the war the war conditions, production was again
increased, especially in the last years of the war, production has again been increased, thus
creating the the prerequisite for maintaining the military strength and labor and manpower of
our people.


But the German peasants have surpassed themselves in the last spring tillage. What
was achieved in those weeks has no precedent in the history of German agriculture. The
winter damage we suffered in cereals and seed oils this year was more extensive than at any
time in decades. Around 2.5 million hectares that were tilled last fall had to be tilled again this
spring. This means an area equivalent to the size of the agricultural land in Lower Saxony,
Westphalia and Oldenburg. This additional work was accomplished despite a lack of
manpower and limited operating resources. At the same time, weather conditions delayed the


639


start of spring work by four full weeks compared to normal years. The full extent of this
achievement can perhaps only be appreciated when one considers that, according to available
statistics, about 3 million hectares remained uncultivated in 1917. In contrast, practically no
hectare of land remained uncultivated during the third spring tillage of this war. In addition,
we have not only maintained the total area under cultivation, but have even been able to
increase the area under root crops, which requires a particularly large amount of labor.
Similarly, in the case of sugarbeet, the high acreage expansion of recent years was achieved
once again. Potato acreage has seen a very significant expansion this spring, which is
probably even greater than we planned and expected. In this context, let us not forget
connection that in the world war year of 1917, about 800,000 hectares less potatoes and
around 170,000 hectares less sugarbeet than in 1914. were cultivated than in 1914, whereas
today we not only have already greatly expanded cultivation of root crops thanks to our
measures, but root crops thanks to our measures, but also, for example, in the case of potatoes,
by around 400,000 hectares = 13% compared with the high level of the previous year.
expanded.


Supply of operating resources


It is self-evident that the necessary replanting of the wintered land will require
considerable additional agricultural inputs, seeds, equipment, and fuel. In view of the well-
known difficult situation in the trade -the supply of goods - where every kilogram is in any
case precisely preallocated and quota-allocated, it seemed impossible at first to meet these
additional demands. Today I can say that the management of German agriculture has done
everything possible to meet these additional requirements. It is clear that this has not been
without friction and difficulties. The quantities of seed necessary for replanting the wintered-
out areas have been procured, although the requirements for summer seed cereals alone have
increased by some 250%. More than 130,000 wagons of seed potatoes were transported in a
few weeks, which is more than twice as much as in the last year of peace. In view of its other
than normal use for military and other war-related transports, the German Reichsbahn has
rendered a great service to the German food industry. If the supply of foodstuffs showed
certain local difficulties, this was due to the difficult transport conditions. However, for a
given transport volume, we considered it more advisable to transport the seeds first and then
the drying agents. Here, too, wartime conditions set limits that we were unable to
exceed.


It was a particularly difficult task to meet the increased demand for fuel as a result of
the reordering. If, in spite of this, German agriculture has been able to manage the great peak
workload of this spring with a limited allocation of operating resources, this again proves how
every farm manager strives over and over again to do the best he can with what little is
available. German agriculture can be assured that in such difficult times everything necessary
will be done on the part of the management. But just as the military leadership has to plan the
supply of ammunition and rations to the soldiers down to the last detail, but then difficulties
arise in the execution of the plan and there are occasional shortages, but the troops
nevertheless continue to fight and win, German agriculture will continue to stand its ground in
the future. It can be sure that everything possible will be done to facilitate its tasks within the
framework of the war effort.


As important as production is in itself, what ultimately remains important is the
supply of food to the people. The amount of food delivered is proof that the nation could rely
on the people here as well. Already after 1940/41 year, the agricultural sector has been
required to make a delivery of bread grain in the war year 1941/42 again that exceeded
expectations by almost 800,000 tons. The change in the utilization of the potato harvest,
caused by the increase in consumption of table potatoes from 13 million tons before the war
to about 23 million tons last year, also demonstrated the exemplary willingness of the


640


agricultural sector to deliver. Without this willingness to deliver on the part of the farm
managers and their followers, it would undoubtedly not have been possible in the last few
weeks to guarantee the supply of potatoes for consumption in the large consumer areas to the
extent actually achieved and to catch up with the early potato harvest. Only by delivering the
last quantity of potatoes needed by farmers' households and the economy as such was it
possible to compensate for the frost losses in potato stocks and also to meet the additional
demand for several hundred thousand tonnes of seed potatoes.


Success of the Community effort


The most impressive example of the usual readiness of the agricultural sector to
deliver milk, however, is expressed in the development of milk deliveries to the dairies. In
1941 it exceeded that of 1938 by no less than 3 billion liters. The 3 billion liters of additional
milk delivered, however, made it possible to produce an additional 90,000 tons of butter,
which was of decisive importance in view of the loss of oil supplies from the world market.In
commemorating these achievements of our rural people, I must point out that in all these
cases we have worked without state coercion, as was the case in the World War. The Fuhrer
did not appeal to the sense of sacrifice of the peasants and agricultural workers for nothing.
All of them, who worked day after day and often during many hours of the night in the fields,
in the stables, and wherever else it was necessary, have surpassed themselves by these efforts.
It will have to be left to a later time to do justice to this effort. This tremendous success,
which was of decisive importance for the military and military-economic strength of the
Reich, was due in part to everyone, the farm leaders, the agricultural followers, the
countrywomen and also the boys and girls of the country. Last but not least, however, it has
been my volunteer farmer leaders, in particular the more than 60,000 local farmer leaders,
who showed unconditional loyalty alongside the agricultural followers who have supported
the efforts of the farm leaders. Even from their own earnings, the agricultural workers have
contributed substantially to the supply of the markets. It was not uncommon for farm workers
to take over the management of the farms at the side of the farm wife when the farm manager
himself was at the front. We must not forget the heavy burdens our countrywomen have to
carry. One must have seen the farms themselves, where the men are in the field and the
woman alone took over the management of the farm, often with only foreign laborers to help
her. We have no illusions about the fact that the woman often had to do more than was her
natural duty. The entire German people owe her a great debt of gratitude. It will be all the
more necessary in the future to give her the relief she deserves as the mother of her children
and the sustainer of our national strength. As spokesman for the German rural people, it is
also my duty to take this opportunity to thank all those helpers who have rendered outstanding
services to food security. Tens of thousands of helpers have been mobilized by the Party to
bring comradely aid to the rural front which is fighting so hard. The German country people
will not forget this expression of the community spirit of town and country.


Our thanks are due in particular to the energetic work of the Commissioner for Labor
Deployment, Gauleiter Pg. Sauckel, and his staff for the procurement of hundreds of
thousands of workers from the East, an achievement which was accomplished in a few weeks
and will continue to be accomplished in spite of difficulties which often seem insurmountable.
In spite of this enormous help, however, the cooperation of all, especially of women and
young people, must succeed more than ever in recovering the harvest and ensuring the new
sowing. We therefore welcome the appeal of the Reichsfrauenfuhrerin, Frau Scholtz-Klink, to
the women of the city to help the German countrywoman to make her great and decisive task
easier.


Tasks still to be performed


641


Men and women of the land! The past years have been difficult and full of privation
for you. Perhaps some of you have even had the feeling that, within the framework of the new
German national and economic order, the rural economy is regarded only as the fifth wheel on
the wagon. Up to now, demands have only been made on the people, without the self evident
reciprocation of the people as a whole having made a corresponding appearance. But here, too,
one must evaluate the facts. In the years before the present struggle broke out, the German
national economy had first of all the task of working for armament, of making the German
sword sharp. Political and military developments proved that the military and industrial
buildup, the construction of the West Wall, the production of armored cars, airplanes, and
gears was the most important task at first. The Fiihrer himself has often enough expressed
how much he regrets having to put aside his great peace work for the German people in order
first to secure the freedom of the people. National Socialist agricultural policy has hitherto
been able to devote itself essentially only to the task of striving for freedom from food and, by
renouncing a just remuneration for the work of the peasantry, to making possible the carrying
out of the slaughter of labor and thus the necessary Aufrustung. All the fundamental problems
of the healthy popular and economic reorganization of the peasant habitat had to and must be
put aside until victory clears the way here too. Principles of the reorganization The
revolutionary beginning of this reorganization, however, had already been initiated by the
Reichserbhofgesetz, published as early as 1933. The previously mentioned compelling
nutritional and economic demands initially prevented the correct further development of the
principles laid down in the Reich’s Hereditary Court Act. We must be clear that with the
Erbhofgesetz the reorganization of the rural structure in the sense of the creation of healthy
farms began, even if the final realization of these principles failed due to the fact of the
narrowness of the German living space.


In Germany, which had been stifled by Versailles, it was practically impossible to
bring the idea of the hereditary court to a full breakthrough. A large-scale reformation of the
German peasantry, the indispensable extension of the law on hereditary estates, could not be
carried out. At first it seemed absurd to speak of an inheritance law and of a new formation of
the German peasantry in a country that still had millions of unemployed to accommodate.
After all, the desolate settlements on the outskirts of the cities of that time, and the small,
small settlements of the Marxist Ara, were seen as a means of alleviating the labour and
economic hardship. It was not the consolidation and enlargement of farms that seemed to
offer a way out, but the division into small and micro-enterprises. One must recall this
development in order to understand how revolutionary the idea of the hereditary farm
was.The The triumphant march of the German armies has brought about a new situation.
There is enough land available to provide a healthy livelihood for hundreds of thousands of
new of new farming families a healthy livelihood. In the near future, we can approach the
reorganization of land tenure and create new legal entities not only in the new areas, but also
in the Reich itself. We shall now be able to achieve a structure of ownership which is
reasonable and sensible for the preservation of the people's strength and the safeguarding of
their livelihood. This great work will take years.


In the course of settling the acquired territories with thousands of volunteers,
especially the soldiers as farmers, who will have become acquainted with these regions and
turn the conquered soil into German land, it will also be possible to convert many non-viable
small and very small farms in the homeland into healthy farms that permit the use of modern
machinery. This structural change will have to be carried out with the necessary caution, so as
not to spoil the source of life of ancient farming settlements. There will be a repetition of the
processions of Germans willing to settle who have so often moved eastward in the course of
German history. Only on the basis of the healthy economic structure created by the
reorganization of the German peasantry and the reallocation of land will it be possible to
begin the reorganization of villages in a big way. Through the regeneration of the German
peasantry and the reorganization of villages, that economic balance will be created which will


642


raise the standard of living in the countryside and thus create the prerequisite for the peasantry
to be able to fulfill its most important task, that of being the source of the people's blood. For
the larger the areas to be settled, the more this most fundamental task of the peasantry will
come to the fore, since, as I have already said elsewhere, a secure food policy will come about
entirely as a result of a sound agricultural policy.

In order to improve the living conditions


The leadership of the Reich knows about the preliminary work that you, men and
women of the country, have done. The Fuehrer himself is the guarantor that after this victory
the German people as a whole will step up to improve the living conditions of the country
people. All the problems that beset you today - rural exodus, undervaluation of farm labor,
price issues, supply of the necessary inputs, structural design and modernization of farms -
will then find their solution of their own accord as parts of a whole. If I briefly outline the
future tasks and solutions here, it is also to help you, who are overburdened with daily worries,
to look to the future. Measured against this future, the present hardships, as difficult as they
may seem to us, are small. Nothing new can be born without sacrifice and struggle. But this
new thing, the basic form of which was laid in the agricultural policy of the NSDAP as early
as 1933, can only now be fully developed. Thus, agricultural policy is now entering a new,
decisive stage. If its core - the hereditary farm - encompassed only a part of agriculture in the
constricted Germany, it will then step out of this narrow framework. Not only by the fact that
innumerable hereditary farms will come into being in the new territories, and not only by the
fact that new hereditary farms will be created by reallocation in the old Reich territories, but
also by the fact that the granting of hereditary farm status in the old Reich will be granted to
all those who profess their allegiance to National Socialism and the people and who have now
substantiated this allegiance by deed and performance during the war and in the war economy;
For the hereditary farm was not economic consolidation as an end in itself, but economic
consolidation in order to preserve the clan, the clan as the nucleus of the growing people.


Preservation in war


The tasks and objectives laid down by the National Socialist agricultural policy are
unavoidable, and - to this end - can only be referred to in the following terms, you can rely on
it, my fellow countrymen - you will be honored. Thus, for the first time in its history, the
German country people will also enjoy the full benefit of an unrestricted evaluation of their
achievements. The prerequisite for this development, however, is victory. For this reason it
must be our task to accomplish the given war tasks with the most ruthless effort:


1. We must produce as much food as the German soil is
capable of yielding


2. We have to put as much food on the market as possible,
with the utmost frugality in our own consumption.


The magnitude of the work done so far should not blind us to the fact that the tasks
we have to master in the fourth year of the war will not be less, but greater. I will have to
demand even more from you in this 4th year of war than before. The last winter dealt us a
hard blow. We must and will overcome them. You yourselves know best why we have to
expect a lower yield of winter cereals and seed oils this year. We must make up for this
shortfall by stepping up deliveries to make up for it. In the interest of supplying the front, I
have to expect the agricultural sector to go beyond the usual economic limits when it comes to
deliveries in the interest of supplying the fighting front and the homeland. Therefore, I appeal
to your performance, your spirit and your attitude. It is through your performance that the
forthcoming harvest will be saved without loss and all your strength will be used for the
preparation of the next harvest. But your spirit and attitude are the prerequisite for the success


643


of the great delivery in all fields. The number of those who in attitude and performance in this
war is infinitesimal. It is our duty not only to look up to these few, but, for the sake of
cleanliness in our ranks, to subject them to exemplary punishment. But you other many, you
workers and brave ones, do not only fulfill your duty by your own exemplary performance,
but you must also, with the necessary national socialist spirit of attack, urge those who are
weak or suffering to faith and commitment. It was in accordance with this old law of struggle
that National Socialism began and had its unimaginable successes. According to this law, here
in Lower Saxony, too, a small group of National Socialists has, through their commitment and
struggle, won over the people thanks to the Fuhrer. How much easier it is today for you, who
are the vast majority of the faithful, to win over the few others to the task.This war is about
the existence of the whole nation. There should be no doubt in anyone's mind that in the event
of a collapse the enemy would wipe us out economically and popularly. All the people's
strength is now stretched to the limit. The Home Front must consider itself as responsible for
the outcome of this struggle as responsible as the soldier. Without adequate nutrition neither
the manpower nor the of the nation can be maintained.


In this struggle, let us think of ourselves as soldiers who, at the complete sacrifice of
their personal lives, labor and property, are fighting for the sake of the Reich. Let us
remember, in those hours when we may think we are collapsing under the burden of daily
work, our fathers, husbands and sons at the front who, in an unparalleled sacrifice and with
incomparable courage, have lost their lives in the struggle for the Reich.Heroism have kept
Bolshevism away from our borders. Let us also remember in those hours the men of the
agricultural organization in the East who, under particularly hard working conditions and at
the risk of their lives, create the conditions so that the new areas in the East can begin to
supply Germany and Europe with grain, seed oils, and other products. Let us lift up our hearts
in this hour! Let us not be weighed down by the cares of everyday life. We have sworn
unconditional allegiance to the Fiihrer. This oath will be kept. As great as the present
difficulties may be, we do not want to overestimate them.We always want to see them in the
context of the great times and the great tasks that lie ahead of us. Let us be clear about the fact
that the preservation of the peasantry in this war will be decisive for its future position in the
nation and for its value in the national community. What we sacrifice today will be repaid in
many ways after the victory. Thus, believing in the leader and his historical mission, we want
to go back to our hard day's work. In the future, as in the past years, we want to be the
Fuhrer's most faithful followers. Our sole guideline and slogan for the coming weeks and
months can only be: Work for the the victory of our weapons and thus for the victory of our
kind!


644


Che Germanic Revolution


When we see today that a large number of young men from Scandinavia, from the
Netherlands, from Flanders, from Wallonia, from Switzerland, together with Volksdeutsche
and Reichsdeutsche, have joined the Waffen-SS with the aim of fighting a common enemy, it
is important that we are not only trained in and familiar with the weapon, but also know what
this fight is about. We, who come from the most diverse countries and are under a unified
command in the "Germanic SS Panzer Corps", we must be aware that the external military
unity and uniformity which defines this Germanic 44 Panzer unit must be anchored in a
similar unity of heart and will. For this it is necessary that we learn to know and respect each
other. We must understand that in addition to our military mission, we also have a political
task to fulfill, which each of us must know and see. 'This task is called:


Germanic feeling, thinking and acting.


We did not set ourselves this task arbitrarily, but rather it was but was made
particularly clear to us by this war. It has existed as an imperative requirement for several
decades, but especially since the time of the First World War, which made the interaction of
supranational capital forces and international political ideas for the dissolution of independent
states and peoples particularly clear.


Why do we speak of Germanic and what does that mean? The answer to this
question is given by our ethnic origin.


By prehistoric and race research we know today completely exactly and can it prove
that the Teutons were a group of closely related ethnic tribes which lived and settled about
2000 b.d. in the area south Scandinavia, Jutland, Danish islands, northern Germany (between
Weser-Oder, in the south limited approximately by the Thuringian forest). The Teutons
originate from the Nordic family of peoples of the Indo-Germans and are the only ones who
remained resident in the original homeland of the Indo-Germans, so that we can address them
as the immediate descendants of the Indo-Germans. The first period of Germanic
development is marked by a high cultural flowering and was a time of maturation and growth,
a natural consequence of the loss of blood through the Indo-Germanic migration. This state of
affairs lasted for about a millennium, during which the Germanic peoples, as settled farmers
and seafarers, developed their houses and farms, their household goods, their clothing, their
tools of the trade, their weapons and ships to a level of perfection that still allows us to admire
this creative ability with wonder and awe today, in the rich finds made in all the countries of
the North Sea and Baltic Sea regions, which are all similar. Beside the hard fight with nature
in forest and field and on sea, the sporty competition, like sword dance, horse jump, race,
stone throwing etc., played a large role, likewise the knightly duel. The joy of fighting, the
conception of honor, loyalty, bravery and chivalry is for the Germanic just as much an
expression of his racial disposition as his cultural creations and achievements.


The Germanic land-grabbing period was initiated by the eastward march of the
Germanic tribes. All of eastern Germany from Posen to Silesia was settled. The Illyrians
living there were partly pushed back, partly absorbed, so that two tribes emerged, the
Bastarnes - i.e. the Bastards - and the Skirs - i.e. the Skirs = Unmixed. The Bastards and the
Skirs then advanced in a broad front in southeastward direction to the north coast of the Black
Sea, where they came into contact with the Greek-Roman culture. Those powerful Nordic
cultures, which had grown up from the Indo-Germanic ethnic groups of the Greeks and Italics
and later disintegrated again by the influx of foreign, oriental and negroid blood.


646


A second Germanic wave started from northern Jutland. Cimbri (from Himmerland)
and Teutons (from Tyland) appeared on the way through the Baltic Sea at the mouth of the
Oder, moved up the Oder, advanced further to the Danube and penetrated westward over Gaul,
into the Roman Empire, where they succumbed after changeful. There they succumbed to the
numerical superiority of the Romans after changeable fights in the Lombardy, in the Etschtal
(101 b.d.Ztr.). From another Jutish region, Vendsyssel, the Vandals set out and settled in
Silesia and in the Krakow-Lemberg area in the last century BC. They brought it to high way
of life and great prosperity and were masters of gold and blacksmith art. The Burgundians
came from southern Sweden via Bornholm (Burgundarholm) and settled in the area north of
the Wandals to Pomerania. Rich grave finds show them to be masters of the art of
weaponsmithing. The Danes came from central Sweden and settled in southern Sweden, later
crossing over to Jutland. From the Norwegian Rogaland the Rugians advanced to the
mainland via the island of Riigen, which they thus gave its name. As the last East Germanic
people, the Goths and Gepids from the Swedish counties of Oster- and Westergotland and
from Gotland moved at the beginning of our era across the Baltic Sea to the mouth of the
Vistula, from here in a 200-year migration the way, which the Bastarns and Skirs had
preceded centuries before, to the Black Sea. The Ostrogoths established at the beginning of
the 3rd century in the Odessa-Rostov area a powerful empire. In the Crimea, Gothic was still
spoken in the 16th century. The Visigoths drove the Romans out of Romania, the Roman
province of Dacia, and settled here as in Transylvania and Wallachia. The Gepids settled in
Hungary.


Just as in the east, the Germanic tribes also spread to the west. Around 800 B.C. the
Rhine area up to Bingen, the whole of Belgium and a part of northern France were Germanic.
In the south, the Germanic tribe of the Suebi, which came from the area of the middle Elbe,
made constant advances towards the Alps, which in the 1st century B.C. led to a powerful
push into Gaul into the Roman Empire.


The Roman power in the Mediterranean region tried to eliminate these permanent
threats from the Germanic north. First, shortly before our era, the influence of the Suebi was
pushed back to the Danube, and at the beginning of our era, there is the Roman attempt to
subjugate the Germanic tribes from the west across the Rhine and to incorporate them into the
Roman world empire. This attempt was defeated in the year 9 by the annihilation battle in the
Teutoburg Forest. Through this act, the Nordic-Germanic race and its culture found time to
further develop and perfect itself in a species-specific manner. Fate had decided against a
Roman-dominated cultural development in Europe. Beside the Roman-led, Mediterranean, a
Germanic-led, Nordic culture grew!


In the now following 300 years of a more peaceful development the people power of
the Teutons grew by their rapid, numerous multiplication in such a way that this pent-up
power had to flood once all ramparts of Roman power and culture, particularly since this gave
itself more and more to the decomposing influence of a materialistic oriental world and
already showed all decay symptoms of an overvalued, material life conception. (Declining
birth rate, lack of will to fight, gold!).


This time came with the beginning of the 4th century, where the largest Germanic
migration and land seizure began, which went down in history as the so-called migration of
nations. Again it was the East-Germanic tribes, as they had already done about 1200 years ago,
who set the entire Germanic peoples and tribes in motion, so that in the course of about 200
years the whole of Europe, including North Africa, was covered by Germanic state
foundations. The Ostrogoths moved from the northern Black Sea coast to Italy and shattered
the center of the Roman world empire, which had already been disintegrated by alien ideas.
The Burgundians from the Baltic Sea coast to the Upper Rhine and the Rhone Valley and the
Lombards from the North Sea coast at the mouth of the Elbe to northern Italy. Northern Italy.


647


The Saxons advanced from the area of today's Netherlands, already in the 3rd century from
the sea side against the the Flanders-Gallic coast of the Roman Empire, so that the coast from
the coast from the Scheldt to Brittany was called the "Saxon Coast". At the beginning of the
5th century they expelled from here the From here, they drove the remnants of the Roman
legions out of Britain and, together with the Angles and Jutes who came from Denmark,
settled England, thus turning it into Germanic territory. After the climatic conditions in
Scandinavia had normalized again, the North Germanic tribes that remained there pushed
their settlement area as far north as central Sweden and in Norway. The West Germanic tribes
of the Frisians, Franconians, Thuringians, Swabians and Bavarians, who had settled between
the Rhine, the Elbe and the Alps, did not detach themselves from their tribal areas in a closed
manner similar to the North Germanic tribes, but spread out systematically. This is also the
reason why they did not perish. All other Germanic tribes and their state foundations were lost
as such, because the supply of people from the Germanic homeland was missing and they
wore themselves out in their permanent battles with the subjugated population or mixed
racially, which amounted to annihilation. Even the Franks, who settled the whole of Gaul
from their homeland on the Rhine, fell victim to this fate for the most part, albeit over much
longer periods of time.


If we look back over the described 1300 years of Germanic migrations through the
whole of Europe, then we recognize that Germanic blood flowed into the bloodstream of all
European peoples and thus became both the cause of the development of European states and
the common, unifying factor of a newly reviving occidental culture. And what confronts us,
for example, in buildings, sculptures, in painting, in poetry and music of a past millennium, in
all countries of Europe with the same expression, with the same feeling and the same
sensibility, has grown just as much out of this common Germanic heritage as the will of all
European peoples, which is burgeoning today, to defend this common culture against
Bolshevism and terror. In the migrations of the Germanic tribes we find an essential partial
cause for the understanding of the present European conditions and developments.


The only Germanic peoples who developed out of their tribes and have endured to
the present day are the Swedes, Norwegians, Danes, Dutch, Flemings, Walloons, English and,
as the largest Germanic people, the Germans. Between these Germanic peoples there is a very
close degree of kinship, which is shown in many similarities of customs and traditions,
especially among the peasants, in forms of settlement, in language, in the same opinions about
honor, loyalty, courage, bravery, chivalry, and so on. So when we say Germanic, it does not
mean German, or Norwegian, or Danish, or Dutch, but it means that we come from a
Germanic root by blood, on the basis of the common origin and the manifold interconnections
of all our tribes. The fact that, in spite of this Germanic kinship, no Germanic community
developed among the Germanic peoples, but that these Germanic peoples in part faced each
other in fierce feud or incomprehension, has its special reasons, which we will examine in
detail.


The life of the individual as well as that of peoples is determined and shaped by two
elemental forces, race and space. We have heard and recognized that the Germanic peoples
come from a common racial root and are therefore closely related to each other. Their life and
destiny is therefore determined by the one elementary force of race. The fact that, despite the
racial kinship among the Germanic peoples, no Germanic community has been able to
develop since then is due to the other elemental force that intervenes in life and destiny, space
or, as one can also say, the environment. Space or environment exert a great influence on
which of the many dispositions that we carry within us are now particularly developed and
emerge in the course of time as a typical characteristic.


An example, very roughly and simply sketched: Let us consider two peoples who are
racially related to each other on the basis of their ancestry, i.e. who both have the same


648


genetic makeup. One people lives and lives in the inland and develops here all the abilities
which are necessary for the control and exploitation of the soil. It becomes a so-called inland
people. The other people, however, with the same hereditary disposition, lives at the sea. Here,
especially the abilities necessary for mastering and exploiting the sea will develop. This
people will become a seafaring people and its interests will therefore often be different from
those of the related inland people. Or: One people lives in the vicinity of hostile peoples and
must therefore, because it is brave and combative due to its disposition, constantly wage wars.
Through struggle and hardship this people will become hard, tough and strong and a heroic
ideal will develop. The other people, however, with the same kind of martial disposition, live
in a peaceful environment. It will first use its martial disposition to raise and increase its
economic possibilities, which will result in great prosperity that will make life beautiful and
comfortable. In this people, in the course of time, after the struggle with external enemies is
absent, an ideal of economic struggle and well-being will develop and will cover the warlike
disposition, so that the two kindred peoples, in spite of the same hereditary dispositions, will
come to entirely opposite conclusions in the ideal aim of their lives and will therefore no
longer understand each other. These examples, which are intentionally kept uncomplicated,
have shown us how strongly space and environment affect the development of our disposition.


Let us take a look at our own families and clans. How often can we see that brothers
from one and the same farm, one of whom kept the farm, the other became a soldier and the
third created an independent business in the big city, that these three brothers, despite the
same hereditary factors, after a longer period of time came to completely different objectives,
ways of life and views, because their surroundings, their environment, made different
demands on them. What connects them, besides their blood relationship, is the common
experience of youth, their environment. Already the next generation, which already lacks the
common experience, will be only intellectually aware of the kinship and thus come to an inner,
cool distance. This inner distance and this coolness will intensify with each further generation,
unless a common experience in the form of hardship or a great task and objective, or both
together, brings the clan together again and, besides the blood kinship through the common
fate, a close cohesion, a real community of hearts, mind and will arises anew within the clan.


In the history and in the coexistence of the related Germanic peoples, space and
environment also play the same strong co-determining role. The Germanic German people
received from the destiny its place in the center of our continent. Germany became the
heartland of Europe. Its borders in the west, south and east were always threatened by hostile
and mostly alien forces.


When the Germanic people of the Germans first entered history as a state and an
empire at the beginning of the 10th century, they had to fend off the most serious attacks from
the East. The Hungarians, at that time still a wild horsemen, raged for years in raids as far as
France, until they were so devastatingly defeated by the Germans in 955 that they never again
advanced westward.


The heavy depopulation of Germany's eastern territories of Germanic tribes at the
time of the migration of peoples meant that eastern peoples of Slavic language pushed ever
more strongly into the old Germanic settlement area and became a military and racial danger.
In centuries of fighting, old Germanic settlement areas were reclaimed in the east by
systematically pushing forward border markers and the eastern peoples were pushed away.
Carinthia, Styria, Ostmark, Bohemia-Moravia, Silesia, Krakow-Poznan, East Prussia, became
a permanent protective wall against the East. In addition, outposts were established far to the
northeast, up into the Baltic States as far as Estonia, and to the southeast as far as Hungary,
Romania and Serbia. This expansion and this holding of Germanic type against the East, as a
safeguard of Europe, was an almost exclusive achievement of all tribes of the German people.


649


Only in the northeast have participated to a greater extent Dutchmen and at the time of the
colonization by the Teutonic Knights also sporadically men from the north.


In this context, the Transylvanian Germans deserve a very special mention. About
800 years ago, they started their migration from a large, strong and united empire towards the
East and settled in the Transylvanian area, also an old Germanic settlement area, as we have
already heard, and here, in contrast to all other Germanic settlements that had been pushed far
to the East, they asserted themselves as a united ethnic group, pure, brave and upright, in the
midst of foreign people, until the present. They were the strong, good example for all
Germanic scattered settlements of the southeast and the support in the heavy afflictions of the
centuries. They stood for Germania on outposts and march with us today in the common fate
struggle of Europe true to their kind and tradition.


In the 13th century the Mongol storm came from Inner Asia and penetrated as far as
Silesia, where it was broken by the self-sacrificing resistance of the young Mark of Silesia. In
the 16th and 17th centuries is the time of the Turkish wars, which tried to flood Europe in
repeated, massive advances. Twice the Turks stood before Vienna and besieged this city, and
each time they were repulsed, until at the end of the 17th century, under the eminent general
Prince Eugene, the Turkish threat was finally crushed and eliminated. Through this victory,
Europe was saved from perishing in a mixture of races, similar to the former Nordic cultures
of the Greeks and Romans.


In addition to these large-scale attacks from the East, which fortunately came in the
form of individual advances in long intervals, there were the constant defensive battles against
Slavs, especially in the Bohemia-Moravia region and in Poland.


This constant threat from an aggressive Slavic-Asiatic-Oriental mixture of peoples
from the East was accompanied by a no less dangerous threat from the South. The Oriental-
Mediterranean culture, which had become alien to the Germanic people, laid claim to
leadership over Europe in the cosmopolitan Romanesque Church, which felt itself to be the
spiritual successor of the Roman Empire. In centuries of power-political struggles, the
German people defended itself against this Romance alienation and lost its state unity and
power, which had made it the political, spiritual and economic center and regulatory center of
Europe in the 300 years of its medieval imperial history, until about the middle of the 13th
century, around which all the peoples and states of Europe and beyond were grouped in
recognition.


Luther, out of his Germanic disposition and feeling, opposed the ever more
threatening Roman "supremacy" with his protest. In the heart of Europe the opposites collided
and the German people fought them out in the Thirty Years' War almost to the point of
bleeding to death, but still prevented a final victory of alien forces. In this struggle, for the
first time, the Germanic North came to the side of the Germanic Center with an ideal
objective. King Gustav Adolfus of Sweden intervened in the war to save Protestantism in
Germany and, in contrast to the French plans, intended to unite the German tribes, which had
become exhausted and directionless in the struggle and party quarrels, in a great Nordic
empire in order to erect a powerful Germanic protective wall against the south and west. With
his early death as a soldier, his constructive ideas of empire, which went far beyond the north,
also went to his grave.


When the French revolutionary armies and ideas from the West under Napoleon


wanted to conquer Europe, they were primarily directed against Germany again. This attempt
to dominate the central European-Germanic area by Romanic power and ideas also failed


650


finally because of the will to resist and the power of resistance of the Germanic German
people.


Thus, the Germanic people of the Germans, in its most diverse state and ideological
imprints of a millennium, repeatedly intercepted and repulsed all attacks from the East, South
and West directed against the heartland of Europe. Thus it became the champion of a
Germanic Central Europe, because it secured a home for Germanic culture, Germanic morals
and above all for Germanic man in this area. If the German people had not been able to fulfill
this task, Germanic culture would have perished in this core area of Europe in the alien
mixture of peoples and ideas from the East, South and West. And from such a base in Central
Europe, foreign blood and foreign spirit would have invaded the Germanic peripheral regions
of Western and Northern Europe with all the more power and would have caused the
Germanic peoples there to sink into the twilight state of a Slavic-Oriental-Mediterranean
racial chaos. Thus the historical struggle of the Germanic people of the Germans, consciously
or unconsciously by the fateful elemental forces of race and space, was and is also a struggle
for the preservation and the existence of all Germanic peoples.


While the German people defended the entire Germanic substance of Europe in its
permanent conflicts with foreign blood and foreign spirit and thereby, partly out of exhaustion,
partly out of the old Germanic inherited evil of disunity, became fragmented tribes and
politically impotent, it provided the smaller Germanic peoples situated on the periphery of
Europe with the possibility and the time to settle dynastic and tribal feuds, to consolidate
themselves and then finally to orientate themselves towards the West without great foreign
disturbances from the outside. The fact that this orientation of the Germanic peoples and
states did not take place towards the Germanic heartland of Europe, but away from Europe,
had the following reasons lying in the space, in the environment:


1. The spatial position of the Germanic peoples in the north and west of Europe points them
out to the sea, especially since this became more and more the connecting road of the
continents after the discovery of America, the circumnavigation of Africa and the opening up
of India and East Asia. However, this fact alone would not be a reason to orientate away from
Europe, if not


2. Central Europe would have lacked a strong central power to which the Germanic peoples
could have leaned, similar to the Middle Ages. As a result of the battles described above,
Germany had not yet matured into a cohesive Germanic nation-state, but since the end of the
Three Years' War (1648) had disintegrated into many more or less meaningless sub-states.


3 Another Germanic people, the English, had become a strong nation-state in the 17th century,
which also found its ideological underpinning in Puritanism. By destroying the Spanish,

Dutch and later the French fleets, England became the world's greatest sea power and
expanded its empire. England became the natural beneficiary of Germany's centuries-long
defensive struggle against all alien attacks from the East, South and West. This was clearly
demonstrated after the final liquidation of Napoleon and thus the elimination of France as the
leading power in Europe, when England, despite little of its own, was the leading power at the
Vienna Peace Congress of 1815 and imposed its system of European balance at this peace
conference to secure its empire. An essential part of this English security system on the
continent was the domination of the coasts of the English Channel and the North Sea and a
control of the Baltic Sea. England achieved this by creating the two independent Netherlands,
Belgium and Holland, and incorporating them, along with the Nordic states, into the English
economic system. The multiple maritime, colonial and commercial interests meant that the
Netherlands, Denmark - from which the English took the entire war and merchant fleet in

1807 - Norway and Sweden accommodated English intentions. The Netherlands hoped for the
protection of its colonial empire. Denmark, after the bleak experiences of the Napoleonic War,


651


a revival of its maritime trade and economy. Norway, which had become independent again in
1814, hoped for the development and expansion of its shipping, trade and economy. Sweden
outlets for its ores and timber. England did not disappoint these hopes at that time and wisely
understood to give the Germanic states and peoples, within a limited framework of the
English economic system, the opportunity to let their militant dispositions take effect in
economic and colonial entrepreneurship. The resulting close economic ties and the extensive
financial benefits flowing from them for a leading class inevitably led to a strong political
dependence on England, which could not be resolved without destroying the economic and
financial foundations of the beneficiaries.


England and the great economic opportunities that arose under its protection and
brought wealth and prosperity to the Germanic countries in the 19th century made it easier for
the Germanic countries to turn away from Central Europe and to rely on an independent
policy rooted in their own historical experience. This development into the purely economic,
which was particularly promoted and increased under the influence of the ideas of the 19th
century of the unrestrained freedom of the individual and the determining value of the
material, together with a strong mechanization, let the originally economic militancy sink
more and more into the more laborious and unscrupulous mercantilism which led to an
effeminate, unmanly lifestyle and objective in prosperity and well being. Quite in contrast to
England, which under the influence of materialism also sank strongly into the mercantile, but
through the military and political domination of its world empire had to live in a permanent,
hard tension of strength.


The Germanic peoples felt themselves more and more as outposts of the English
system of power on the continent and believed in an unshakeable existence of bourgeoisie, of
well-being and enjoyment. But they were already imperceptibly treading the path that Rome
had once taken - by throwing itself completely into the sewer of material thought processes
and thus began to become more and more accessible to foreign influences, while they
neglected and partly even denied their own racial, Germanic& nature.


In this orientation turned away from Europe and dissolving its own kind, Bismarck's
Germany emerges and becomes in a short time the undisputed continental power of Europe.
The old continental powerhouse of Germanism, Germany, is forming again and stands next to
the younger oceanic powerhouse, England. The latter sees in it a threat to its imperial security
and the Germanic countries, which for their part built their security on that of England,
perceive the rediscovery and reflection of the kindred German people as a disturbance and
threat. To such an extent that any combative sense has already been stifled in the material
world and has given way to the need for tranquility of a sedate bourgeoisie, that Germany's
struggle for self-assertion and for the shaping of its own national destiny was regarded as
unreasonable and dangerous, even though it profited economically from it.


When Germany in the First World War, even after a strong economic upswing, in
large parts of leadership and people rotten with materialism, can be overcome by England just
for that reason, the Western-oriented Germanic peoples believed in the restoration of their
undisturbed, comfortable and superficial bourgeoisie. With an intensity almost bordering on
enthusiasm, they paid homage to international, pacifist ideas and swore to world brotherhood
in the League of Nations, but at the same time, freed from the dull fear of war, threw
themselves increasingly into the economic opportunities offered by a demand for goods
backed up by the war. It was not noticed that the international, supranational capitalism,
which appeared in the background of the war and especially at the Versailles Conference,
consciously trumpeted this slogan of pacifism and world brotherhood to the world in order to
uproot national forces of resistance. The Germanic peoples were already so strongly
dominated in their attitude and conception by thinking in terms of profit and gain, and were
thus weak and effeminate, that almost no defensive forces arose against an ever stronger state


652


dependence on anonymous, supranational capital forces. In all these Germanic countries there
were individual densities, researchers, scientists, writers such as Bj6rnson, Grundtvig,
Vigeland, Kjellen, Hamsun, Sven Hedin, who warned their peoples again and again not to
lose themselves in the material world, because they saw in it a danger for the racial existence
of Germanicism in general and who always hoped that the largest Germanic people, the
Germans, would find themselves again to become the center and rallying point of the
Germanic element. But the leading classes and the broad bourgeoisie of the Germanic
countries could no longer be warned in their unrestrained pursuit of profit. The will to defend
and the power of defense of their peoples were more and more eroded and paralyzed.


The power of resistance of the German people, which the international capitalist
wire-pullers had come to know in a four-year struggle, was also attempted to be maintained in
a permanent state of weakness, primarily through the exploitative system of reparation
payments. The success of the work of a great and industrious people was steered away and
flowed into the pockets of international capital. Unemployment, hardship, misery and the ruin
of the national economy were deliberate consequences. Through this kind of ruthless
oppression, the same international forces that had already emasculated the Germanic states
hoped to drain the racial strength of the German people. In addition, credit upon credit was
pumped into Germany's neighboring states and a pseudo-bloom (prosperity) was artificially
created there with the intention, on the one hand, of eliminating Germany's natural outlets as
customers by self-supply and thus again damaging Germany, and, on the other hand, of
bringing the borrowing countries into increased economic and thus political dependence on an
international capitalist system which was building itself up with the goal of world domination
centered in America. The governments became more and more shadow governments, which
no longer took decisions on their own responsibility, but carried out orders of an anti-people
supranational center.


The planned destruction of the economic strength of the German people led to a
disruption of the entire European economy. This disruption was furthered because
international capital, in its quest for effortless profit through the exploitation of technology,
cheap labor and methods, produced agricultural products and industrial goods so cheaply in
other parts of the world that these goods were offered more cheaply in Europe than they could
be produced here. The world economic crisis which broke out in 1929 was the outward sign
of an unholy political and economic disorder and unreasonableness, caused by the
excessiveness of the, international capital. The small and rich Germanic countries in Western
and Northern Europe were also affected by this crisis. Sales difficulties, unemployment,
losses and misery made these countries feel that in the long run no economic prosperity is
possible without a reasonable, natural, political order. But this fact was neither recognized nor
did the hardship lead to the awakening of appreciable national defenses. On the contrary, in
their pacifist basic attitude the Germanic peoples became the suitable breeding ground for the
rift fungus communism. Needy workers, blasé citizens, and decadent intellectuals alike
became champions of a new international doctrine whose goal, similar to capitalism, was the
destruction of every national and popular community in order to be able to build a world
domination of exploitation and oppression on such a humanity that had become a will-less
mass. Their support became Soviet Russia.


Capitalism and communism, with their corrosive slogans of pacifism and world
brotherhood and their system of exploitation, terror and oppression, were also raging among
the German people, but it turned out that, in spite of a lost war, this people, as so often in its
history, mustered the inherent defensive forces and opposed them to these alien ideas and
developments threatening the whole of Europe: Adolf Hitler gathered the inherent, racial
defensive forces that had been alive in the best German front-line soldiers of the First World
War and, in a long inner struggle, awakened the same defensive forces in all strata of the
people, especially among the youth. He led the German people to the only sources of its


653


strength, to its old Germanic blood values, and drew from them the content, form and goal of
anew, great and original future.


In 1933, Germany was facing political and economic catastrophe as a victim of the
international supranational powers of capitalism and communism. There Adolf Hitler took
over the responsibility for the fate of his people and began with the realization of the species-
own, national and social objective pointed out by him. From the common blood the fate-
bound national community arose out of the most different fighting interest groups and parties.
From the obligatory care for this national community grew a socialism, which made work and
achievement of the individual for this community, the standard of value and which mobilized
a whole people for the greatness, honor, freedom and the rise again of its national and national
life. In this new, species-conscious conception of life and demand, directed against all
internationalism, capital was now no longer the cause and goal of politics, but the goal of
politics was the people in all its strata. The demand was to secure, maintain and elevate the
life of the people, both internally and externally. In this task, the economy had only an
exclusively serving role to play, namely, to supply the naturally developing needs of a people.
Capital had the task of financially enabling the economy to fulfill its mission. In this way,
capital and the economy were released from their internationally dominated and dominant
position and given their natural task: To serve the national welfare of its own people.


The Germanic people of Deutschland had developed ideologically in opposition to
the other Germanic peoples, who were frozen in materialism, and a deep gulf of
misunderstanding developed, which was especially deepened by the Jews who had emigrated
to all countries of Europe and America and by their clique of opinions.


When it became apparent that Germany, in spite of all predictions to the contrary,
was experiencing an unimagined upswing politically, militarily, economically and culturally,
and was thus providing proof, visible to the whole world, of the correctness of the
reawakening and purposeful unification of the native Germanic forces, this fact had the effect
of a magnetic field of force. The German people, forcibly separated at Versailles, with the
exception of Poland, flowed back to their core people in a peaceful process. But also the
German people, who for centuries had voluntarily settled in the southeast and east, felt
themselves included in this new racial-political current of force and aligned themselves with
the European, Germanic center.


This completely new, in its effects not yet to be overlooked, which developed here in
the heart of Europe in the Germanic people of the Germans and triggered an unheard-of
dynamic force of national and social will and ability, found fearful rejection among the
kindred Germanic peoples of the continent. They did not want to leave the political calm, they
were afraid of the new European reality created by Germany, and a part of these peoples
stared to the West, to England-America, and another part to Moscow. Both parts hoped for
help from the alien forces of capitalism or communism against the native development of the
related German people. In these Germanic peoples the realization was already clouded by
internationalism that the salvation of the Germanic kind announced in the German example
would not have triggered any inner sympathy, let alone understanding and fighting. It was
only a few who, out of pure, natural youthfulness or out of a realization born of deep need,
saw the immense dangers of the downfall of their peoples and therefore joined the individual
volkisch callers of their countries for a Germanic community of destiny. Germany's path and
rise was the hope of these few, and they saw in it the only possible future for their peoples.


England opposed the German path, despite the fact that the Fiihrer offered the
inviolability of the English Empire as a guarantee and precondition of the Anglo-German
cooperation he sought, in order to prevent England from feeling threatened by Germany's
growing strength. Germany's interests on the continent were nowhere opposed to England's


654


natural oceanic interests, so an understanding would have been possible. A renewed struggle
between the two largest Germanic peoples, which would only lead to a further weakening of
the Germanic substance in the world, was to be prevented by the efforts of the Fuhrer. The
English ruling class rejected this cooperation because, on the one hand, out of long-practiced
political tradition, it did not tolerate an ordered European continent under the leadership of a
single strong continental power and, on the other hand, because it saw in Germany's example,
especially in its socialism, the dangerous attack on the English worldview and thus on the
Empire. This worldview, called Puritanism, once caused the concentration of the best racial
Germanic forces in the soldierly and religious and thus became the cause of the English world
empire building. In the 19th century, under the influence of materialism and liberalism, this
worldview gradually became the protective shield of the hugely growing English capital. It
was no longer the safeguarding and promotion of the race, i.e. the people, that was the most
important thing, but the safeguarding and promotion of capital. And since in the hands of the
English, political ruling class there is for the most part English national capital, and since this
capital rules, exploits, oppresses and thereby earns hugely with the same methods of
international capital, therefore German Socialism is a direct attack against the English
capitalist system and against the world outlook of distorted and aging Puritanism which
supports this system.


England is mobilizing its best racial forces in defense of a sinking age of liberalism
and capitalism. It has not recognized in its materialistic delusion that the international
communism of Moscow as well as the international capitalism of Washington threaten the
English people and Empire as much as all Europe. England further failed to recognize that the
upheaval in Germany is a racial defense and concentration against the dual oncoming assault
from the East and the West, and that the Anglo-German cooperation offered by the Fuehrer,
besides strengthening the Empire, would have resulted in the largest Germanic grouping of
forces which would have unequivocally secured the security of the European nations and the
African colonies against the continental areas of America and Greater East Asia and their
claims to domination.


In the struggle of the two greatest Germanic peoples, Germany and England, for the
victory of a new Germanic age with the living idea of blood and race against a sinking age of
money, two more power factors have now intervened which have made this war a struggle to
the death for all Europe:


1. Communism, that teaching of the Jew Marx, who in his slogan "Proletarians of all countries
unite" documented his intention to blur all national, ethnic and racial differences in order to
realize the "dictatorship of the proletariat", i.e. the exploitation of all by one class, on such an
international mass mush, has become power-political reality in the Soviet Union. The rulers of
the Bolshevik system have uniformly turned the diverse mixture of peoples and races of
Russia into a primitive, compliant, proletarian mass by destroying the peasantry, dissolving
and preventing the formation of new private property and possessions, suppressing any free
development of personality. With this mass as a huge slave army, an enormous armament
production and an equally enormous and large army was built up by exploiting the rich
mineral resources and all modern technical achievements. This material armament was
increased by an intensive orientation of the Soviet mass, which was educated for war against
Germany, against Europe, whereby it was and is the intention of the Bolshevik leadership to
conquer state by state, people by people, from the' almost inexhaustible Russian base, and to
turn it into a mass, a proletariat, a slave by Bolshevik methods. The world revolution,
prepared in the individual peoples by the work of the Socialist and Communist parties and the
weakening and undermining of the military power and the will to defend, thus achieved, was
to be realized in this way by the armed power of communism, the Soviet Union. Here the
communist intention for conquest and subjugation met with the slumbering racial forces of an
awakening inner-Asian world. What in former times caused individual peoples or tribes from


655


the East to break into Europe, into Germany, robbing, murdering and plundering, meets us in
the Soviet Union newly awakened, organized and united and purposefully led. Behind the
doctrine of Communism there suddenly stands a race whose primal instinct of hatred against
the racially superior, the more valuable, has broken out in the Slavic-Indo-Asian peoples of
the Soviet Union and has been incited and directed against Europe. Communist doctrine and
the striving for world domination have combined with the anti-European racial instincts of a
mass of 200 million and meet us in the fanaticism of the Red Army. This East, mobilized and
armed in such a dangerous unity, was to take advantage, according to Moscow's will, of the
quarrel and hoped-for exhaustion of the two largest Germanic peoples, Germany and England,
to invade Europe, to decimate all its peoples in their best and most efficient strata, and to
press the rest as a lawless proletarian mass into drudgery for the further increase of Soviet
armaments production for the continuation of world conquest.


2. International capitalism, whose aspiration it is to get dominion and determination over the
national capital of all peoples, in order to secure thereby its effortless profit from the labor of
the peoples, i.e. to enslave all peoples, this international capitalism needs for the attainment of
its goal in each people the political leadership, the world domination. The rulers of
international capital, these advocates of a political claim to world domination as a prerequisite
for the economic exploitation of all peoples, have - similar to communism in the Soviet Union
- created their power-political basis in the highly technicalized America. The American
people with its partly Germanic determined efficient strata, the American economy and the
natural wealth of this continent have become the means by which the rulers of ‘international
capital want to realize their political world domination. This clique, which remains in the
political background, has succeeded in determining the policy of the United States and in
driving the American people into this war of the two Germanic peoples, Germany and
England, because it, too, hoped for the exhaustion of both, similar to communism, the
possibility of finally being able to establish its dominion of economic exploitation over all
European peoples. An American newspaper recently expressed this with the following words:
"Let the Bolsheviks devastate Europe, then we will have the opportunity to colonize there and
create new sales areas." Here we are shown with brutal frankness the imagined cooperation
between international communism and international capitalism on our European continent.
The link of these so unnatural appearing partners Soviet Union and America is the only
international people of this earth, which is at home in every nation and parasitizes without
losing sight of its own inner unity and its aim, Jewry. It is Jews who control and exploit the
development and power of communism in the Soviet Union just as they control and exploit
the development and power of high capital in America, and with cold calculation have
concentrically set about the destruction, the extermination of Europe in this war. Against this
Europe, which through Adolf Hitler and the German people seemed to come to an inherent,
new tremendous development and independence of its racial, Germanic forces. A process
which, through its exemplary effect, could also lead to similar indigenous developments in
other peoples and countries with racially valuable and self-confident populations, and thus,
for racial reasons, would inevitably have to lead to the extermination of international Jewry.
In order to prevent this, in order to preserve the Jewish species and to secure the exploitative
influence which it already had in its hands through communism and capitalism over large
parts of the world, hence this expansion and harshness in the present world war which
international Jewry is waging in order to preserve its racial existence. The struggle of two
Germanic peoples for the enforcement of their different conceptions of life became in the last
sense a merciless race war, which, through the racial awakening of the East in Bolshevism
and the Jewry fearing for its existence, is no longer directed against one people or one stratum,
but against all the peoples of Europe. In the last consequence also against the Germanic
England. This is already indicated by internal conflicts with communism and the indebtedness
of the national English capital to the Jewish international capital of America.


656


But this war will become a common fate precisely because of its radical,
comprehensive threat to all European peoples, and here especially to the Germanic element
which carries Europe. The common hardship and dangers of this war will make the Germanic
peoples of Europe understand more quickly than in peaceful times the common task of an
original, Germanic development and cooperation, such as the German people have already
begun. The profound shock which the Germanic peoples must experience today through the
loss of many material values, through the collapse of their previous views of life, and through
the hardship and uncertainty of this war, will gradually give rise to the realization of a
common Germanic future of their own kind, and will lead to the influx and gathering together
of the hitherto divergent Germanic national forces around the Germanic bloc of the German
people in the European core area.


It is self-evident that this gathering and grouping of Germanic peoples in Europe can
proceed in organic development and only under the one constraint of self-preservation, in the
face of the present concentric attack against all our lives and existence. This imperative of
self-preservation was also the reason why Germany had to occupy the Germanic lands in the
North Sea area. Wallonia, Flanders, the Netherlands, Denmark and Norway were intellectual,
political and military bridgeheads and deployment bases on the continent within the
framework of the English security system. Due to the strong mechanization and
mechanization of the means of warfare and their resulting greater and more rapid long-
distance effect, the peripheral areas of Western and Northern Europe in particular have gained
increased strategic importance, both for those who want to attack this continent and for those
who have to defend it. When Germany had to recognize that England wanted to occupy the
Germanic countries closely connected with her intellectually, politically and economically,
also militarily, without the governments of these countries wanting to offer serious resistance
and indeed not being able to do so, it was an act of self-preservation for Germany to occupy
these countries. For only with a protected western flank could Germany defend Europe
against the East with any prospect of success, and this becomes clearer to us today with every
passing day. With the elimination of England's political and military bridgeheads in Western
and Northern Europe, however, the intellectual bridgeheads were by no means eliminated. A
very large part of the population of these countries clings wistfully, always only in retrospect,
to a vanished material happiness and a superficially harmonious order of civility, and does not
yet see above the daily worries of war and the daily political strife the great common
Germanic mission of our age.


It is Germany's task to realize that in the majority of the Germanic population the
realization of and enthusiasm for a common, specific task cannot come from kinship alone,
but that first the common, deep, inner experience must be added, which allows the task to be
understood and grasped. This deep experience is the present war. The German people, too,
after their deep experience of the First World War, needed 15 years until they really
understood the Fuehrer and followed him with conviction and determination, and only in this
war did a small part of the German people realize their overall Germanic responsibility and
task on the racial basis of the German Revolution. And likewise the transformation of the
Germanic peoples requires time and on the part of Germany patience and understanding for a
slow, organic development. Here, too, as once in Germany, there must be men by whom the
new task is experienced inwardly and then comes alive in them, and who then lead their
people as an unswerving example, as a new man, as a pacesetter and enthusiastic champion.
This development must be promoted with understanding.


Professor Krekel-Netherlands said very correctly what is basically also true for the
other Germanic peoples: "The organs for grasping the living historical reality have almost
atrophied in this people. The Dutch people do not want to enter into the new European reality
because they know that they will have to give up their cherished tranquility, their historyless
existence. In this inability, in spite of all talent, lies the doom of this people.... A new people,


657


anew Dutch man is to be created ... Only the total change can redeem this people from its
materialism. Only a Holland which has learned to affirm history as destiny and to live again
from the depths of the people can do justice to its task. Only the courage which is ready to
bear the responsibility at the decisive moment can save the people and create the new

man .... ."


This new man with the courage to take responsibility for his people is already
beginning to form everywhere. Especially in the Germanic youth, who defend the future of
their peoples in the hardest fight in the East with weapons in hand and found new foundations,
and in many cases do not find any understanding for this from the closest family circle and
from wide circles of the population, on the contrary they have to let themselves be set back,
suspected, harmed and insulted. This youth is the model, the new history-forming force of its
peoples, which experienced the community of the Germanic peoples in the Germanic front-
line soldiery and learned to recognize the common task from this experience. In this Germanic
front-line soldiering, the bonds between the related Germanic peoples grow organically out of
their common destiny, thereby creating the conditions for mutual understanding, trust and
faith. Only on this basis and in such an atmosphere will the cooperation forced by this war be
transformed into one of voluntarism. The Germanic front-line soldier will carry this
voluntarism of cooperation as a Germanic cell into his people and form new Germanic cells
again and again. Each of us must promote, support and strengthen the voluntarism of such
cooperation, because only then will we be able to realize the vital needs of our peoples, which
have come to us from our blood and our race, and thus lay the foundation for a proud and
great Germanic future. Free in the development and evolution of national characteristics,
bound and united by the task of belonging together, which has been recognized as common,
Germanicism, which has been flowing apart for centuries, will, from the European periphery
in the West and North, as well as from the East and Southeast, be placed like a strong clamp
around the Germanic core area, strengthening the Germanic people of the center and again
held and bound by its strength.


The greater, the stronger, and the harder the commitment of the youth of the
Germanic countries at Germany's side becomes, by which they have already earned respect,
recognition and equal rights, the greater will be the joint responsibility of the Germanic
peoples in shaping our common Germanic future. Next to the Germanic people of the
Germans, who in this struggle for life are once again making the greatest sacrifices of
property and blood, whose cities are being destroyed by a militarily useless method of
fighting dictated by the hatred of old men, but who therefore recognize all the more surely
where the true forces of morality lie and feel all the more clearly, that this struggle is a true
struggle of destiny, the other Germanic peoples should step beside this Germanic people as
equal factors, in order to assume their share of responsibility, within the framework of a
common planning, both for their area and for the East, with their special national abilities, in
the development and expansion of our Germanic community.


That it will be so depends solely on us, on our ability, on our will and on our faith. If
we want to free our Germanic peoples from their international political and spiritual
confusions and disturbances with the same determination and fanaticism as the Germans once
did, we will succeed in leading our peoples out of the apparent doom of this time to a
Germanic future of our own kind, just as the few Germans did at that time.


658


Securing furope


The Second World War - an ideological confrontation


It is an undisputed fact that in Germany the historical view has always shown a
western orientation, which has shown very little understanding of the course of history of the
eastern region of our European continent. Only very few were aware of the fact that it was
only the resistance of Germanic man against the peoples of the East, i.e. the securing of
Europe against Slavic-Mongolian tribes, that made possible the existence of the European
peoples and states in their present form. Today we are experiencing the greatest ideological
confrontation in the history of the world. The plutocracies and Bolshevism have set Asiatism
in march against the reorganization of Europe; again it is said: secure Europe against the East!
- The task of this paper shall therefore be to show how deeply founded is the claim to
leadership of Germanism in Europe for securing the living space not only of the German
people, but also of the other European cultural peoples against the plutocratic and Bolshevik
plans for world domination of every appearance. The Second World War is first and foremost
an ideological conflict; the political, military and economic measures in its course are nothing
other than the attempt of each side to shape the world according to its own spirit. Europe, and
with it the whole world, is faced with the choice: Rule of superior races or rule of inferiors
with the suppression and annihilation of the most valuable races, order or anarchy, cultural
construction or cultural annihilation.


From Russia the incendiary torch was to be thrown into all the countries of the world.
The slogan under which Jewish Bolshevism wants to ignite the world revolution in order to
establish world domination over the peoples of the earth on its ruins is: destroy in order to rule!
The Jew, by reason of his racial composition, is an anti-social element, a criminal nature.
Communism, as the political organization of the criminal nature of the world, is, from the
depths of its subhumanity, an opponent of every fixed order. It knows no cultural construction,
it knows only cultural destruction. Through it, the vast, rich Russian area became a land of the
most terrible misery and the harshest terror. If the seizure of power by Fascism in Italy was a
serious sign to the whole world that there were still peoples in Europe who were not willing to
bow to the international domination of Bolshevism, the National Socialist revolution in
Germany and the establishment of the Spanish state of order under General Franco meant an
exceedingly serious setback for the Jewish plans for world power of every shade. But Jewry
now held all the more doggedly to its plans. Jewish hatred pursued "Fascism" in every way,
by the most ruthless means. It was probably the strongest move to bring Bolshevik Russia and
plutocratic England into an alliance against the rising Germany and the reorganization of
Europe. This alliance could succeed only because Jewish Bolshevism had succeeded in
depriving former Tsarist Russia of its ruling class by murder, in bloodily subjugating the
peoples of that empire, and in establishing its own rule over the countries. Furthermore, in the
course of the last hundred years, Jewry had succeeded in imposing politically, economically
and culturally upon the traditional English ruling class, and in this way had gradually usurped
the control of a people which, in its basic substance, must be regarded as almost Germanic.


A similar process exists in North America, which today is also dominated by a
Jewish plutocratic clique and its henchmen. Thus it is to be understood that Jewry, under the
leadership of England in particular, was able to bring together an arms-strong coalition
against the leader's aims, which were in themselves peaceful. France and Poland, as the best
equipped states, were given the task of eradicating by force a system which no longer gave
Judaism any influence in political, economic and cultural matters. Right at the beginning of
this war, the rapid demise of Poland showed the opponents that it was not so easy to bring
National Socialist Germany to its knees. The plans for the expansion of the war were carried


660


out, involving more and more European states in the coalition against Germany. Belgium,
Holland and Norway were strongly ideologically bound to Jewish plutocratic England,
especially in their leadership. But even these states could not turn the tide. In dashing victories
they too, together with France, the states of Yugoslavia and Greece fared no differently,
suffering a politically and militarily devastating defeat as a result of their servility. Thus the
Soviet Union, the last "mainland sword" of England and the plutocracy, had to be led into the
encounter in order to crush the hated National Socialism. Had one hoped on the enemy side to
encounter a German Wehrmacht weakened by the previous campaigns and suffering from
lack of material, one found oneself thoroughly disappointed. In outrageously swift action,
Germany and her allies succeeded in the summer of 1941, despite desperate resistance, in
beating the Soviets all along the line and in the winter in taking up a position extending from
the North Sea via Leningrad to Taganrog on the Sea of Azov. Even the extremely heavy
winter battles and the spring offensives of the Soviet Russians were not able to break the
resistance of the Germans and their allies. If one considers the course of events from the
Polish campaign onwards, one comes to the conclusion that the greatest credit for the
successes is due to the Fihrer himself, who time and again recognized the enemy's intentions
to attack in good time and knew how to forestall them; Not only did he bring about the
success of the military actions by his timely action, but also an infinite number of blood
sacrifices were spared the German people by the fact that the Fuehrer's actions usually broke
out at a time when the enemy had not yet completely finished his preparations, The
achievements of the German troops and their allies have often been emphasized by the
Fuehrer himself. But they could only be achieved because an understanding of the National
Socialist will and with it of the European mission had sunk deep into the hearts of the people,
giving each individual soldier a final heroic attitude, a Germanic faith. It sprang from the
consciousness that sacrifice for the people was a vital necessity, a moral duty. The National
Socialist worldview thus proved stronger than the Jewish plutocratic or Jewish-communist
idea, which in the final analysis is the same thing. Today it is not only a question of the
existence or non-existence of the German people, but the future of all valuable peoples is at
stake who may claim to live their own lives according to the laws of their nation and their
race. In the Far East it is Japan, our ally, which is fighting the most difficult battle of its life
for the preservation of its people, its kind and its morals. Europe, however, has risen up
against the constant threat and paternalism under German leadership to create a new order
instead of a development which sooner or later would have to lead to chaos.


At the same time as Germany, volunteers from all peoples and states have enlisted
who in some form or other have felt the Jewish plutocratic fist or the Red Beast in their own
flesh. Today there are thousands and thousands of volunteers from Germanic countries in the
Waffen-SS units, volunteers who only a few years ago, misjudging the true interests of their
peoples, seduced and incited by incompetent governments, Jews and Jewish mercenaries,
fought against Germany, some with weapons in their hands. Today the situation for Germany
is different from that of 1914/18. At that time the whole world stood together against a
Central European Germanism that was not clearly aligned ideologically. Today, however,
strong allies with the same or similar ideals stand at Germany's side. The state orders which
have hitherto prevailed in Europe are losing more and more of their significance; a new idea
of community is growing which will embrace all phenomena of life.


I. The east Germanic land take in eastern Europe


The gigantic struggle which Germany's Wehrmacht, and with it the selection of the
responsible nations of Europe, is waging in a mighty victory race into the vastness of Soviet
space has its historical foundations and prerequisites. Again and again Asian peoples invaded
Europe and again and again their attacks failed because of the resistance of the Germanic-
Germanic people. For thousands of years Germanic tribes have formed the living eastern wall
against the steppe nomads. Only this defense made it possible in the course of history for the


661


states to be formed in Europe, as they have presented themselves to the observing eye in the
last millennia. Behind this defensive zone, which in the course of history has diversified in its
breadth, strengthen the European order, culture and morals were able to rise to become the
most dominant in the world. It is thanks to this struggle of Germanism that Europe, which has
no natural frontiers separating it from Asia, has been able to build up its independent life.
With reverence and pride we see the German soldier today standing from the North Sea to the
Black Sea on ground that has more than once felt the tread of Germanic warriors. When the
East Germanic tribes prepared to move eastward from the region between the Oder and the
Vistula about 800 B.C., the first great Germanic migration began in Eastern Europe. The
reason for this search for land was the following: The Germanic population had increased
more and more; there was a certain lack of space, which was aggravated by the fact that at
that time storm tides and a gradual deterioration of the climate in northern Europe began to
narrow the food base more and more. There were thus essentially two moments which caused
the migrations of the East Germanic people:


1. Space shortage from population increase,
2. Nutritional difficulties due to climatic influences.


This land-grabbing of the East Germanic tribes took place partly in a form
completely different from that of the West Germanic tribes. The West Germanic tribes had
spread slowly and step by step to the south and west, one settlement being pushed forward
after the other. By this slow procedure the inner coherence was not lost, and made possible
without difficulty, in a kind of neighbourhood settlement, a close cohesion of the new
settlement areas with the old ones. The settlement of the East Germanic tribes, on the other
hand, represented more of an overseas and overland settlement, which proceeded in leaps and
bounds, and frequently enough left large stretches of country uninhabited behind their backs.
The first wave of settlers to move to Eastern Europe was the Bastarnes and Skirs, who set out
from the region of Posen and the Vistula arc in a broad front between the Pripet Marshes and
the Carpathians, heading for the Black Sea around 500 B.C. The second wave of Germanic
tribes, which reached the Black Sea through the Vistula Arc, was the first to move to Eastern
Europe. The second Germanic wave, which took the way to the east, was formed by the
Vandals, who settled in Silesia, Galicia, Poland and Posen (about 100 B.C.). As the third and
last wave of East Germanism, but at the same time also the most powerful, the Goths and
Gepids moved to the east of Europe and founded a powerful empire at the Black Sea around
200 AD. The Goth king Ostro-gotha commanded at that time a Gothic empire, which
extended in the west up to Romania and Hungary, over today's Bessarabia, Moldavia,
Wallachia and Transylvania, in the east over the Ukraine with Crimea to the Don. This Gothic
foundation of the empire did not last long, however, Ostrogotha itself divided the territory
into that of the Ostrogoths and the Visigoths; the dividing line was the Dniestr River. A lively
exchange of goods took place by sea with Byzantium and the Mediterranean countries. The
flowering of the Ostrogothic Empire falls under King Ermanarich, who eventually ruled over
a vast empire stretching from the Black Sea to the Baltic, including the settlement areas of the
Aists and Finns. The Goths had not moved into completely deserted areas in southern Russia,
but they found here the remains of the Bastards and Skirs, as well as a native population,
which they brought under their rule. They ruled as a relatively small upper class. The land-
grabbing was out of all proportion to the real number of Goths. In spite of all its prosperity
and apparent strength, this powerful empire already carried within itself the seeds of death. It
lacked the influx of sufficient new forces from the old Germanic region. The population did
not grow in such proportions that a lasting dominion could have been established. The popular
strength of the Gothic empire was sufficient to secure its rule over the subjugated peoples and
tribes, but not against a strong external enemy. Under these circumstances, even the
outstanding efficiency of Ermanarich could not preserve an empire against the Huns who
were advancing from the east.


662


Numerous as swarms of locusts, the Huns invaded the land, small, yellow, slit-eyed
Mongol creatures. They hunted through the land as if they were mounted on their shaggy,
tough horses. Soon they appeared here, soon there. The decisive battle in 375 AD against
them was lost. Ztr. against them is lost. Ermanarich gives himself death. With this, the wall
that protected the rest of Germania was broken. A large part of the Ostrogoths were
annihilated, a part became tributary and fought in future on the Hunnic side against their own
brethren; only a small part succeeded, as did the Visigoths, in escaping westward across the
Danube. As a result, the Hun hosts poured further and further into Central Europe, spreading
death and misery. In front of them, the Germanic tribes retreat into the Central European area,
in order to migrate further into the Western Roman Empire, to Italy (Goths) or to France,
Spain, even to North Africa (Vandals). The impetus for the great Germanic migrations, which
we know as the historical migration of peoples and as part of the Germanic landgrabbing, is
given. Franks, Alemanni, Saxons and above all the Visigoths, together with the Roman
governor of Gaul, Aetius, finally stopped the Hun king Attila in his advance to the west in the
famous decisive battle at Mauriacum, now Chalons sur Marne (Catalaunian Fields, in 451),
and beat him back. The Hunnic danger to Central Europe was hereby for the time being
eliminated. Since the Hunnic eastern nomads had overrun the important, promising
Ostrogothic kingdom in 375, however, a firm guard against the eastern nomadic storm had
been lacking in that region between the mouth of the Volga and the White Sea.


That Hunnic invasion in the year 375 belongs to the series of invasions, repeated
every few centuries, which have taken place westward from the living district of the
Mongolian racial core in Asia and have brought so much nameless misery and senseless
destruction of high cultural values for Europe: The invasions of the Huns, Avars, Hungarians,
Tartars, Ivan IV, turning his gaze westward, Peter the Great's European policy, Russia's threat
to Europe in 1914/18, and finally belongs in great historical intimation in one and the same
context. The advance of Bolshevism against Europe. For centuries there has been a struggle to
secure Europe against Asia. The main share in this decisive struggle is borne by the forces
rooted in the Central European, Germanic region. The marching direction of the Germanic
peoples to the south and west was not stopped by the retreat of the Huns. The Germanic
peoples succeeded in destroying the Western Roman Empire and in subjugating Italy, France,
Spain and North Africa, but here the Germanic tribes were gradually absorbed by the
inhabitants of these countries. The Christianization that began at that time undermined
Germanic racial consciousness by its slogan, "Christians are all equal!" Thus, outside the
narrower area of Germanic settlement, a stream of blood seeped away, carrying within it the
most valuable forces. When Attila died suddenly two years after the battle of Mauriacum, his
empire disintegrated, The remnants of the Ostrogoths were able to shake off the Hunnic rule,
A large part of them turned to the west, united with the part of the people that had already
escaped before the Hunnic storm and stormed against the Western Roman Empire, whose
inheritance they finally took over, until they too tragically perished. The Goths, who remained
in the Russian region, essentially successfully repelled further attempts by the Huns to resume
their old rule over the Ostrogoths. After a changeful fate, these Goths, who had partly
preserved their old Germanic language until the 16th century, were tartarized. From the 6th
century onwards, a new danger for Germanicism became apparent, which is still present today:
the infiltration of the sites in Eastern Europe abandoned by the Germanic tribes by cultureless
Slavic tribes. It is true that considerable parts of the Germanic tribes had at that time remained
settled in the Vistula region, but they were no longer of any importance for the Germanic
people as a whole; they became cultural fertilizer for the Slavic peoples. Slowly and steadily,
with uncanny precision, often silently and almost imperceptibly, the Slavic peoples advanced
in places as far as the Elbe, Saale, Salzach and Drava rivers. The German model helped them
to grow into the European cultural community, even if they were not themselves capable of
great cultural achievements. It is a peculiarity of the primitive peoples rooted in the European
and Asiatic steppes is that they are not able to produce any permanently valuable political,


663


military, economic and cultural achievements of their own; to the east and west of this
cultural rift are countries of the highest culture, such as the European and the East Asian.
Achievements which the peoples of this cultural rift have accomplished have not been
accomplished by pure-blooded members of these tribes. They always brought with them
streams of blood from other peoples who were at the same level of culture. Historical research
has made it clear how the advance of Slavs on Central European soil has had a devastating
effect on our German nationality. If the Ostwall had held in 375, perhaps 1500 years later
there would have been no Slavic, i.e. Polish and Czech, problem of such severity. This is the
tragedy of the defeat of such a great and proud people as the Goths. The existence of the
Germanic tribes in the region of the Vistula, the Ukraine, etc., before the Slavic settlement,
however, proves that the Germanic claim to these regions can be justified by us as their
descendants with more justification than the so-called "historical" claims of Slavic peoples to
Central European, to German central space. If one wants to justify historically a claim to
possession of the East, then here in the first place the claim of the Germanic peoples is given,
who today basically only move back into the territories which they once possessed.


IL. The repulsion of Mongolian-Slavic peoples from the Central European area


From the 9th century onwards, a second phase of the Germanic struggle against the Slavic
Mongolian peoples advancing from the East begins, which was to retain its character for
about a thousand years, until the World War of 1914/18. It is characterized by two separate,
independent processes:


1. the direct defense and pushing back of Mongolian-Slavic tribes coming from the east.
Peoples from the German central area. Establishment of the "Marches" and the subsequent
attempt to push back Slavicism (Henry I, Crusaders, Frederick the Great, etc.);


2. the indirect defense against and binding of Slavic-Mongol forces in Eastern Europe since
the Warager, the dwindling of Germanic influence since the Mongol storm up to the World
War, and the annihilation of Germanic-Germanic influence in Bolshevik Russia. The advance
of Slavs into the central German area had essentially endangered Bavarians, East Franks,
Thuringians and Saxons. The relationship between Germanic and Slavic neighbors was
seldom completely peaceful, since the Western Slavs often provoked the Germanic border
tribes to the utmost by their assaults, cruelty and deceit. It is not surprising that in these border
wars the Germanic border tribes had to do a great deal of work in order to create peace for
themselves, and even went so far as to exterminate entire Slavic tribes. These border wars,
however, were able to secure the soil from further encroachment by the Slavs, but
Germanicism was not in a position to regain formerly Germanic soil in this way. This could
only happen since the Germanic tribes were united by a central power, when Charlemagne
united the power over the German tribes in himself. It is to his credit and to that of the
following emperors and kings that the reclamation of the East was again undertaken and
further advanced in the following period. The rulers of that time acted, on the one hand, out of
military interest, and, on the other hand, their deep religiousness, which, for racial reasons
alone, was a Gertnanian religiousness, a Gertnanian will in ecclesiastical form, was a
powerful impulse for them to convert the pagan or half-pagan Slavic tribes to Christianity.
Christianization thus acquired a Teutonic character, which in the end remained in the long run
more lasting in its effects through the re-Germanization of the Eastern territories than the
efforts of the Church to extend its Christian sphere of power eastward. If one traces the
reclamation of the German eastern region in broad outline from a geographical point of view,
its course is as follows:


1. Bavarian settlement and Germanization of the eastern Alpine region (today's Ostmark east
of the Salzach-Drau source). Time: 740-1200. Here are to be noted as particularly remarkable:


664


a) 740-900 the long-lasting battles with the Avars on the part of the Bavarian dukes and
Charlemagne. Foundation of the Ostmark around 800 by Charlemagne between Enns and the
Vienna Woods. 100 years later collapse in the Magyar storm. Time: 894-907.


b) Re-establishment of the Ostmark and the Mark of Carinthia by Otto the Great and new
settlement with Bavarians and Franks. 855 Battle of the Lechfeld. 1198 Foundation of the
united Duchy of Austria-Styria. The southeastern cornerstone of 'today's German national
territory was created with the settlement of Upper and Lower Austria, Styria, Carinthia,
Carniola (in part), Burgenland and the linguistic island of Gottschee.


2. From 928 onwards, reclamation, Germanization and later settlement of the land between
the rivers Saale and Elbe up to the Oder (preparatory work of Charlemagne. Creation of the
Sorbian Mark).


a) 930-1120 Conquest, securing of castles in the country (King Heinrich I, Emperor Lothar of
Supplinburg), manorial and ecclesiastical penetration of the country.


b) 1125-1250. Under the Wettins, the land is settled by Germans; Slavicism is gradually
assimilated. Hereby a country had become German settlement area again, which covered
approximately today's Saxony and the southeastern Brandenburg (Lausitz).


3, From 1125 to about 1375 reclamation and settlement of other eastern territories.


a) Mark Brandenburg (Askanier), Mecklenburg (Heinrich der Lowe), Pomerania, Silesia,
Posen, East Prussia, Pommerellen up to the area of the Vistula, Galizien.


b) In the 14th century. Bohemia and Moravia becomes more populated (Emperor Charles IV),
Hungary (Transylvania, Spi8)


4, The land seizure that led to the settlement of Livonia and Estonia in the 13th century had a
different character, since despite the greatest efforts of the Teutonic Knights, there was no
influx of peasants.


German tule here was based solely on the noble German landlords, on the German
citizens in the cities and the German scholars and clergy. The greatness of the deed of this
eastern settlement from the Baltic to the Balkans is to be sought above all in the fact that it
almost doubled the German area. This eastern settlement was the precondition for Germany's
development into a great European power in later centuries and in modern times. To a large
extent, however, the German nation owes its present greatness, in addition to the princes, to
the beneficial work of the Hanseatic League and the Teutonic Knights, which at that time
grew far beyond its task of Christianization. The deeds of a Frederick the Great for the
Eastern settlement in the 18th century then finally created a firm foundation on which we are
still able to build today. It is regrettable that the domination of the Italian area, which was
necessary in itself at that time, was tied up for centuries in the south by the necessity of
gaining influence on the occupation of the papal throne in Rome, so that the German human
effort in the east and north-east to secure and fill up those areas filled with or threatened by
Slavs could not take place in a stronger form. The expansion in the east was basically always
only a matter of particular forces. It was endangered as soon as a combined strong power
arose on this frontier. The development of Germany's relations on her eastern frontier is
closely connected with her development within the country. Whereas in France, for example,
the royalty triumphed over the nobility and made possible an early union of states, in
Germany it was the nobility, with its statehood, which again and again prevented German
unity. This is one of the main reasons why the reclamation of German territory east of the


665


Oder always remained a piecemeal effort and why the tasks of the East could only be tackled
again after the unification of the German people under Adolf Hitler.


It is nevertheless remarkable that the German emperors and kings, in spite of the
general turning of their gaze to the south and west, saw themselves induced again and again to
intervene in the affairs of the Polish state that was forming in the tenth century. The Polish
state was a foundation of the Viking Dajo (Miesko I, 960-992), who united the Slavic tribes
that had advanced from the Ukraine. Their residences extended over the area between the
Oder and Vistula south of the Netzelinie, This Polish state and the individual duchies into
which it later disintegrated were Germanic in their internal structure. At the top were the
nobles, descendants of Germanic conquerors. Gradually the Germanic lords became more and
more mixed with the Polish landed nobility and lost their inner connection with the Germanic
area. Asiatic blood came in through slaves and through the later Mongol raids, and thus more
and more Mongoloid traits developed in the racial image of the eastern Polish peasant in
particular. As a result of its internal disunity, the Polish state succeeded only once in the
course of its history in bringing together a multi-ethnic state (from the Black Sea to the Baltic),
after the personal union between Poland and Lithuania in 1386, taking advantage of the
weakness of the German and Russian empires. Even the battle of Tannenberg in 1410 against
the Crusaders did not bring the Polish Empire a lasting victory. Later, the German element
brought order and culture, especially to the cities of the countries settled by the West Slavs.
Many thousands of German citizens were assimilated by the Polish and Czech national bodies.
But the West Slavs, like all the other tribes of the aforementioned cultural rift, have never
been able to produce a culture of their own. Here it has always been purely Germanic forces,
or Germanic forces that have merged into Slavicism, that have created cultural values. With
their poverty of their own achievements, the Western Slavs themselves did not even shrink
from claiming for themselves the achievements of purely German artists and scholars, such as
Veit StoB, Copernicus, Parler. But for the second time a Mongol storm was to threaten
German settlement territory. Under Temujin, the Mongols had brought an enormous Asian-
Eastern European empire under their rule. His grandson Batu advanced with his Mongol
armies, breaking through the barrier zone of the Varangian Empire, as far as Central Europe.
Again, as so often, the German emperors were tied up in Italy and left the defence to the
individual German princes. Henry the Pious of Silesia finally succeeded, in an extremely
bloody battle of Wahlstatt near Liegnitz in 1241, in warding off the threatening Mongol
danger from the Germanic core area for the second time in German history. The Mongols may
have retreated to Eastern European soil, but, as is made clear elsewhere, they destroyed the
advanced rampart of the Varangian Empire between the Dnieper and the Volga. For Eastern
Europe, this Mongolian campaign became of great importance in the course of the whole of
its later development up to our own day. The restless Mongol blood permeated the Slavic
tribes and gave the Russian empire a character with which we again have to contend today in
a bloody struggle.


III. The founding of the Russian Empire and its consequences for Europe - The danger of the
Turks and Judaism threaten Europe


While the land-grabbing from the German heartland, described in broad outline,
slowly gained ground again towards the east step by step from the 8th century onwards, from
the 4th century onwards, the German Empire had been in a state of decline. In the sixteenth
century a Germanic people, coming from Sweden, gradually began to establish a far advanced
eastern front: the Normans or Varangians. The Normans, who advanced to the east of Europe,
were only one wing of that mighty North Germanic sea migration which in the east reached as
far as the Volga, and in the west discovered Iceland, Greenland, America, and advanced
around the whole European continent as far as the Mediterranean. These Viking campaigns
were essentially as bound to the water in the east of Europe as the great voyages in the west.
For a long time a trade route was known to the Varangians, which led from the Gulf of


666


Finland, from the Neva to Lake Ladoga and from there upstream to Lake Ilmen, upstream to
Lake Lowa and then, overcoming the narrow watershed, to the Dnieper or the Volga,
following these rivers downstream to the Black Sea or the Caspian Sea and further to
Byzantium and Persia. Likewise, at times they navigated the Duna Dnieper-Black Sea
connection and the Vistula with its tributaries. The Vikings were strong merchants and
colonizers with unquestionably strong political and military talents. All their efforts in Eastern
Europe had to be directed towards securing the trade routes between North and South,
primarily between the Baltic Sea and the Black Sea, politically and militarily. From
Aldeigjuborg on Lake Ladoga and Holmgard or, as it was later called, from Novgorod at Lake
Ilmen, Rurik, a Varangian prince, laid the foundation for a dominion in Eastern Europe in 862,
from which the Russian Empire was to emerge later in the course of the centuries. Coming
from Holmgard, the Varangians established themselves in Kanugard = Kiev on the Dnjepr.
From these two strong points, the neighboring tribes were subjugated and made tributary, and
they also voluntarily came under Varangian rule in order to gain support and protection from
the surrounding tribes. In time, all the tribes between Lake Ladoga and the Black Sea along
the trade route described above belonged to the Varangian Empire. With this, a Germanic
exclusion zone was again created in Eastern Europe for the protection of the core area. This
time, however, this exclusion zone also protected the Slavic people from flooding and made
possible the formation of a Polish-Lithuanian state, which threatened the German settlement
in the East, which was advancing from the Elbe. As a consequence, the Russian Empire
attracted the attacks of the Mongolian nomads (Golden Horde), who were only able to
penetrate as far as Central Europe once in the 13th century, as already mentioned (Battle of
Wahlstatt near Liegnitz in 1241). The Varangians were culturally far above the Slavic peoples
they ruled, they brought to the same cultural goods that had been foreign to them until then.
Their military influence was strong. Castles were built, a new art of war was developed, and
the Slavic followers were introduced to new weapons.


The goals of the Varangians were at first:


1. to establish the most advantageous trade relations with the neighbors and to secure the
traffic with the foreign trade centres,


2.to unite the native tribes, and to consolidate them firmly in one hand, in order to eliminate
any threat to these trade routes,


3.to protect the country from external enemies.


The Varangians always remained in the minority. Although they had the power to
establish a new empire in Eastern Europe, they were unable to build a purely Germanic
empire in Eastern Europe due to the lack of essential additions in terms of people and blood.
In the course of the centuries, more and more Slavic and other components were added to the
originally pure Germanic blood of the Varangian princes and their men. The constant power
struggles of the princes among themselves often destroyed the last remaining Germanic
bloodlines. In addition, a powerful Russian nobility emerged, which was Slavic and
Mongolian by blood and had no relations to Germanicism at all.


The 10th century saw an event which, apart from the lack of blood refreshment of
the Gerrnanian lords, was to acquire the greatest significance for the further direction of the
Russian Empire: the adoption of Greek Orthodox Christianity by the Varangian princes. The
cultural and character development of the Russian Empire in got by the acceptance of the
Byzantine Christianity another direction than that of the other European countries. Through
this a dividing line was drawn to the rest of Europe, which, the more the Greek-Orthodox
faith distanced itself from its common Christian origin from about 1054 (complete separation
from Rome), had an ever stronger effect. The Church as theology had just as little creative


667


effect on culture in Russia as in Europe. The Russian Empire became more and more
alienated from Europe, and this at a time when national passions generally played a far less
important role than religious passions. It is not least to be attributed to their work that the
Russian Empire remained until our time at the door of Europe from a cultural point of view,
that the attempts on the part of Russia to introduce the Russian people as a full member of the
European cultural community failed again and again. But in no other country, even in later
centuries, has the Church had such a dominant position in everything, culture, economy,
legislation, etc., as in Russia. The reason for this is to be found above all in the fact that the
Greek Orthodox religion was from the beginning the state religion, brought from above, the
princes, to their peoples, and which in the course of its history was seldom seriously shaken
by internal struggles. In its orientation it also played a great role that the clergy was not
formed by Germanic peoples, but by Slavs. This meant that the Germanic character of the
Russian empire founded by the Varangians was lost from the outset. This purely Slavic
spiritual influence contributed not inconsiderably to the Slavization of the princely families.
The fact that the Greek Orthodox Church was, so to speak, of one piece, opened up
possibilities for it, which, however, it did not always know how to exploit for its own blessing
and for the blessing of the Russian peoples. The Russian Empire became not only the land of
Eastern Christianity, but also Orthodox at the same time the land of sects. In no country has
mysticism acquired such importance and formed the character of the people as in the Russian
Empire. It is the Russian Church's own fault that it had to perish so ignominiously in 1917.
For with all the power that was given to it, it did not understand how to guide and educate the
Russian people spiritually and how to take over the spiritual shaping of the Europeanization
of the country that began with Ivan IV. The decisive factor for this was the level of education
of the Russian clergy. The Greek Orthodox Church has always done little for the education of
its clergy. Often enough the clergy could just read and write. An occupation with foreign
languages was very rare and also not necessary, since the church writings were written
exclusively in Russian. Thus, the Church was no more capable of creating and forming
culture in Eastern Europe than it was in Central and Western Europe. Here, too, it lacked the
racial basis from which such tasks can only be successfully tackled. The Western means of
culture were given into the hands of a people without any spiritual preparation, who were not
at all accustomed to handling such dangerous weapons. As a result, European culture always
remained something alien to the Russian people, much admired and eagerly imitated, but not
understood by the masses.


As a result of the decline of the Germanic influence in the leadership and the shaping
of the Russian people in spiritual and cultural terms, the Russian Empire lost more and more
in the course of the centuries the character of a protection for Europe against Asia. This
development was accelerated by the historical course of events in Eastern Europe. At the
beginning of the 13th century, an enormous power had accumulated in Asia, when the
Mongol chieftain Temujin was proclaimed Genghis Khan of all Mongol tribes and established
a vast Asian empire in huge campaigns of conquest. His sons and grandsons continued these
campaigns of conquest, and Temujin's grandson Batu and his Mongols, rushing against
Europe, destroyed Kiev, the main pillar of the Vagaean empire, in 1240, and set about the
threatening advance into Central Europe. In the aforementioned Battle of Wahlstatt in 1241,
this threat to Central Europe was averted. In spite of the victory, the Mongols had met with
such resistance that it seemed advisable for them to retreat to the Russian Empire after a
march through Hungary, Moravia, and Dalmatia. Europe had escaped a great danger, and
German blood had not flowed in vain; but all Eastern Europe was subdued by the Mongols,
and the Grand Princes of Moscow became subject to them. With Mongol support they sought
to extend their empire. They were related to the Mongol Khans by marriage, had their
dignities confirmed by them, and became more and more compliant executors of Mongol
aims. The number of Mongols in the state service of Moscow increased, as did the resulting
racial mixtures, Of the Grand Prince Vasily I (1425-1462) it is said that he loved the
Mongols and their language above all things, and persecuted the native princes without mercy.


668


In this connection it is of no importance whether the Mongols of Genghis Khan were one or
several tribes, what is important is that the racial basis of these tribes was completely different
from that of the Germanic or Indo-Germanic races of Eastern Europe, Mongolism had a
racially disintegrating effect to the highest degree. This also explains to a certain extent the
imbalance of character of the peoples living in Eastern Europe. Bolshevism, in turn, brought
an increase in Mongol influence in Eastern Europe. Probably everyone, who in the first and
second world war the types of Russian prisoners of war it will have struck you how much
more pronounced the mongoloid influence of the prisoners of war of the present war. In the
course of the battles in the Russian Empire, the Lithuanians also came into a relatively loose
temporary dependence on the Mongols. This had the consequence that the Greek Orthodox
faith also gained stronger influence in their country, which was only later pushed back after
the unification of Lithuania and Poland. Numerous are the fights between Lithuanians and
Poles with the Russian rulers, to which since the 16th century frequently fights with the
Swedes are added. At times, the Russian rulers succeeded in advancing their domain almost to
the East Prussian border (Ivan II), conquests which, however, were always lost in the course
of the battles. The influence of the Mongol rule went so far that Moscow adopted Mongolian
ways of life, When since the 15th century the mighty Mongol empire approached its
dissolution, Moscow took over this inheritance, From this developed in the course of history
an ever greater danger for the rest of the continent. Central Europe could not enjoy a long
respite even after the Mongol storm. Again and again new dangers threatened from the east or
southeast. By the middle of the 14th century, the Turks had gained a firm foothold in Europe.
In 1389, the Serbs and Bulgarians were defeated in the Battle of the Field of Blackbirds, and
Emperor Sigismund lost the Battle of Nicopolis (1396). Until the second siege of Vienna
(1683), the direct Turkish threat to Central Europe was to remain constant. It was at this time
that the first attempt was made to plunge Germany into a war on two fronts. The "most
Christian" king of France allied himself with the Turks in order to achieve a division of the
German armies to the east and west. Subsequently, the attempts of the Western European
states were to be repeated again and again to heckle Germany from the West and the East. In
the Middle Ages we encounter a new power that began to play a role in Europe; Judaism. The
Judaism of the Middle Ages showed exactly the same international connections as in modern
times. Judaism had established itself in Germany during the Roman campaigns, and from the
14th century the position of the Jews was already so consolidated that they were to a certain
extent an economic power. Their unscrupulous trading practices and their usury had since that
time, the Jews spread more and more to the East and gradually established themselves in
Eastern Europe as well. In the Russian Empire, however, they were to attain importance only
in the 19th century.


IV. The first signs of a threat to Europe from the Russian Empire.


In the Russian area the development to a united Russian state, as already mentioned
above, had progressed under the Mongol rule. With the destruction of the purely Germanic-
Varagian princely dynasties the Mongolian-Slavic element in the leadership gained more and
more the upper hand. After the Mongols had thrown off their yoke (1480), the protective zone
for Central Europe became a threat to this area, which was to take shape for the first time
under Ivan III (1462-1505) and then above all under Ivan IV (1533-1584).Russia had
developed into a continental state in the vastness of the Russian plain, which lacked any direct
connection to the rest of Europe. The Baltic coast, as well as the Black Sea coast and the
Lithuanian-Polish land mass, was in the hands of foreign states. Ivan IV had for the first time
clearly recognized that if he wanted to open his country to European progress, he would have
to have a direct geographical connection with Europe (1553 establishment of trade relations
with England via Arkhangelsk, 1558-1583 Livonian War, later from 1645 establishment of
trade relations with France). From this time on, beyond Peter the Great (1682-1725), date the
never-ending struggles of the Russian Empire to advance further into Europe by land between
the Baltic and the Black Sea and to gain useful coasts in the south and north. Only in this


669


sense can the struggles of the Russian Empire to gain the Baltic area and Finland, the battles
with the Turks over the Balkans, the Black Sea and Constantinople, the struggles for the land
of the Vistula arc be understood. Peter the Great was the first Russian ruler who purposefully
thought far beyond the borders of his country. He had, perhaps in no small part, acquired
political foresight through his travels in Europe, who included in his calculations the
European countries of the center and the West. The Russian people were to share in European
culture and civilization, and the Russian Empire was to become a European power. This
inevitably led to a shift in the European balance of power, the violence of which had to be
borne first and foremost by the Central European area, squeezing it between two powerful
groups of states in the West and the East. From now on, the Central European-Germanic area
from the coast of the Arctic Sea to the Black Sea was confronted with an adversary in the East
who ruled over a land mass larger than the whole of Europe, an adversary who, moreover, had
a constantly growing population. And here we meet at the same time the Russian man in his
thinking and feeling. These Russian plans of conquest receive their mystical mantle: European
progress is to be made serviceable to the Russian people, but at the same time the Russian is
to redeem the peoples of Europe from their "depravity," bring them, as it were, a new ethic.
This idea of world improvement has never again sunk into the East of Europe. From that time
on it has remained alive in the Russian Empire through Pan-Slavism and Bolshevism up to
our own day. There is not a single Russian ruler who did not have the frequently attacked and
also denied double-sensed testament of Peter the Great constantly before his eyes, The tsars
were aware of the inadequacy of the Russian peoples .They had recognized that Europe was
culturally centuries ahead of the Russian Empire. They sought in every way to remedy this
state of affairs. A constant stream, especially of German people, peasants, citizens, scholars
and officers, was directed by them into their empire. They accomplished great creative deeds
in all spheres of life and had an exemplary effect on the Russian leadership and its

peoples .Peter the Great was the great reformer of the Russian Empire. He led Russia out of
its isolation in world politics, but also created a permanent threat to the Germanic people's soil.
With the Battle of Poltava in 1709, Sweden forfeited its supremacy in the Baltic Sea region
and the Russian Empire became a European power. Since the Peace of Nystadt in 1721,
Sweden has not risen above its position as a third-rate Germanic power. The claim to
leadership soon passes to Prussia-Germany. It has been asserted above that Peter the Great
thought far beyond the. thought far beyond the borders of his country. It can be assumed that
he already had a kind of tripartite division of the European area in mind, which led him to
conclude an alliance with Louis XV of France in a personal attempt, France, however, had not
yet recognized at that time that it might be possible to take Germany in its heels with Russian
help. Otherwise it cannot be explained that it still had little interest in an alliance with the
Russian Empire.


Peter the Great also expressed this turn towards the West in purely external terms.
Instead of the previous capital Moscow, he founded the new capital of his empire in
Petersburg on the Baltic Sea, Petersburg became the "window to Europe". In the later time
flare up again and again fights of the Russian empire with the Swedes and Turks. The
participation in the Seven Years' War against Frederick the Great also has the goal to carry the
Russian influence further into Europe. Under Peter the Great, the second great attempt since
the Mongol invasion to penetrate Europe is recorded. The later policy of the rulers who
followed - including the Bolsheviks - is nothing other than the continuation of this striving
towards the West. The difference between now and then is that the leading aristocracy of the
time had certain ties of various kinds to the West, ties which the Bolsheviks have thoroughly
cleared up, except in the purely practical field. A defense and securing of the Germanic core
area in the "force-field" was practically not attempted in this century, with the exception of
the Swedes. There was by and large a lack of understanding in this century of the dangers
massing in the East. Frederick the Great, too, was far too busy during his wars in the other
theatres of war to be able to combat the dangers threatening from the East in any other way
than on a secondary theatre of war. That he understood the great task of eastern settlement in


670


time of peace is proved by his attempts at internal colonization and by his recruitment's for
land in the Polish divisions. If the Russian Czars always proceeded unerringly on their
western frontier, this was due to the fact that their hands were not tied to the east, south and
north in the way that they were to the German Central States in the heart of Europe. In 1815
the land mass of the Russian Empire had advanced to the national and cultural frontier of
Europe proper. It is a sign of the Russian thinking of that time, which was turned towards
Europe, that it almost completely neglected the great tasks that lay in Siberia and approached
the mobilization of the enormous sources of strength of this region practically only with
people who in most cases had been banished to this region by the tsars as asocial elements.
Often enough, however, these exiles were racially valuable elements who carried strong
streams of Germanic blood. The Russian rulers always made the mistake of imposing
European culture on their country without taking into account the spiritual structure of the
peoples. There remained constantly an undigested residue of culture, which carried the
discord into the Russian souls. This is also the main reason why Russia is the typical country
of revolutionaries and do-gooder. For this reason the Jewish element and Jewish thinking
were able to take root here. In its state structure and in its cultural aspirations, the Russian
Empire had remained alien to the Russian soul, and the latter took bitter revenge for the too
little understanding shown to it. It is the tragedy of the Russian people that they did not carry
out this revenge themselves, but in the end, in their lack of independence, fell victim again to
a current brought to them from outside: Jewish Bolshevism.


V. The development of parties and intellectual currents in the Russian Empire destroyed the
last Germanic influences in Eastern Europe and created the precondition for the threat of in
the 20th century


For a deeper understanding of the present course of our contemporary events, it is
necessary to bear in mind the foreign and domestic political events of the preceding century.
The end of the 18th century, through the French Revolution, brought forth schools of thought
which placed the relationship of man to the community, to the people, and to the State on an
entirely different basis, and from which parties developed which are called liberalist,
democratic, and socialist, with their various modifications. In the 19th century the struggle of
these ideas with the conservative direction and the struggle of the parties among themselves
began, which tried to assert their influence for the guidance of the destinies of the state, A
fourth power joined them, which now also appeared as a party and again announced its claims
to power: the Catholic Church. These party struggles created entanglements that often made
the domestic and foreign policy of almost all European countries at this time appear only from
the point of view of party policy.The economic upswing which also began in this century, and
the manifold economic ties which arose as a result of the economy increasingly leaving
national soil and entering into supranational, international entanglements, complicated and
blurred the party fronts, and here again gave rise to new questions of power which had never
been felt in such strength and in such breadth in the earlier centuries. And almost unnoticed,
Freemasonry and Judaism created for themselves a key position which in many cases proved
to be more powerful than the will of princes and politicians. Seemingly all the leaders of
states took the party currents into consideration and sometimes, purely by force of the
pressure of these currents, made mistakes which had serious effects on the life of states and
peoples. In this misjudgment of dynamic forces, which were often only misguided, and in
their wrong use from the people's point of view in the field of domestic and foreign policy,
and sometimes also in the purely military field, one has found the cause of the great conflicts
of the 20th century. It is a great opportunity to see the events of the twentieth century that
have brought such unspeakable suffering to millions of people. In this century, however, one
also finds the beginning of the self-reflection which, as a reaction to these terrible mistakes,
gave the German people National Socialism and its leader Adolf Hitler. This is also the
beginning of the upheaval that made the Italian people fascist, gave the Spanish people a
rebirth, and caused the slow realization of a new national twilight among many other peoples


671


of Europe, and indeed of the world. And finally, in the twentieth century, the injustice
inflicted on the Japanese people, without knowledge of the true circumstances, when in the
middle of the last century, by force of arms, the doors to the Japanese islands were opened to
the American merchants. The essentially imperceptible guidance by Jews and Freemasons, the
partly tragic mistakes, partly deliberate acts, born of ideologies, cost the world tons of blood,
destroyed cultures and economies, and brought misfortune upon peoples who, in the broad
mass, were often themselves little to blame for their misfortunes. Thus a century which, on
the face of it, had served, especially in its last phase, the peaceful development of relations
between nations and the increase of material goods, became the source of profound conflicts
in the next century, in which, purely by force of events, the further development of the world
had to be clarified once and for all. From this point of view one must therefore also consider
the conditions which in the 19th and 20th centuries up to our own time have placed Russia in
ever stronger opposition to Europe and its bulwark Germany. All Russian schools of thought
have in some way pursued foreign policy aims and formed a threat to Europe. The help which
Russia had rendered to the European states against Napoleon in the wars of liberation
involuntarily brought about a stronger influence of the Russian Empire on the destinies of
Europe in the Congress of Vienna in 1815. The Congress was dominated by the Austrian
minister Metternich, who sought to establish a certain balance of power in Europe, Austria
and Prussia were to form the "strong centre", Russia and France as equally strong "side
weights" as possible. He resolutely opposed the annexation of Poland to the Tsarist Empire
and was prepared to sacrifice the whole of Saxony in order to gain Prussian support.


Hardenberg and Wilhelm von Humboldt would have been willing to join forces with
the Austrians against the Russians at such a price; then Frederick William himself intervened.
He did not want to endanger his personal friendship with the Tsar and ordered his state
chancellor to drop the resistance to the Russian wishes. This swing of Prussia became decisive
for the progress of the congress, Alexander enforced his will. Although he had to give the
German Danzig to the Hohenzollerns, after considerable hesitation also the so-called Duchy
of Posen and the old German Thorn, furthermore the Tarnopol district and the salt mines of
Wielicka to the Austrians, he himself secured no less than 82 per cent of the former Polish
territory of 1772. Krakow was made into a small republic, because no one begrudged the
other the possession, later it fell to Austria. The partition of Poland meant a considerable
strengthening of Russian influence in Europe. Like a huge wedge, the Russian Empire now
pushed itself between the German lands in the north and southeast. As the main points of the
tsarist policy it can be stated that they were:


1. A foreign policy and military intentions were to penetrate as far south, north and central
Europe as possible,


2. was pursuing the internal political goal of Europeanizing the Russian Empire to the greatest
possible extent.


This policy was made easier for them by the fact that a European feeling of
community in any form did not exist, because the rulers of the individual countries and states
mostly thought in an absolutist and selfish way, and the conservative schools of thought
supporting them were constantly and jealously watching over every movement of a different
kind. The other intellectual and ideological fronts after the French Revolution were only
beginning to develop in the 19th century. There was no sense of European responsibility at
that time that saw the concerns of its own states as part of a larger whole.


The peoples were at this time struggling for their influence in politics and were
completely disunited in their foreign and domestic aims, conservative tendencies were
opposed to liberalist and later to socialist and anarchist ones, the latter two always appearing
as the enemies of the rulers, and in consequence of their erroneous doctrine there could be no


672


question of a politically or even nationally understood European feeling of community. The
monarchist top echelons of the states camouflaged their egoistic views through a sense of
community among the rulers that was more outwardly displayed than inwardly felt, and which
found expression in addressing the ruling princes as "cousin" or "cousin". Only a few reigning
heads really meant the address "cousin" inwardly as seriously as it was expressed in the
attitude of Emperor Wilhelm I. The danger which the Russian Empire could mean for Europe
was therefore not yet so outwardly perceptible at that time, since the Russian Tsar stood in
close alliance both with the Prussian king and ultimately with the Austrian imperial house.
The friendship apparently determined Russian foreign policy to no small extent and ultimately
made possible the unification of Germany under Bismarck The Russian tsar actually felt
drawn to the monarchs of Prussia and Austria in certain matters, however, only on a purely
personal level, since he perceived in their emperorship and kingship the embodiment of
traditional rulership par excellence, Almost all Russian tsars consciously struggled to
maintain their absolutist position and believed that they were the only ones who had the
power to rule. Almost all Russian tsars consciously struggled to maintain their absolutist
position and believed that they could count on neighbourly help from the friendly states of
Prussia and Austria in an emergency, despite some differences - especially with Austria in the
Balkans, Their entire policy, however, suffered from the fact that Peter the Great had made
Petersburg a European capital, without being able to win over Russianness for the tasks of a
European state, In the nineteenth century, Moscow Russianness embodied more than ever the
opposition to Petersburg. The Moscow Russianness embodied in the 19th century more than
ever the opposition to Petersburg and its European way of thinking, Basically, the Russian
Tsar since Peter II from the house of Schleswig-Holstein-Gottrop was felt and fought by the
old Muscovite direction as a foreigner, as a German. Germans" still held the most important
offices of state, and officers with German names and Germanic blood played an outstanding
role in Petersburg's guard regiments. Petersburg increasingly became a city with a typically
international-European character, in which German, Italian and French culture and art
occupied a dominant position. Moscow, however, remained the embodiment of the Muscovite
turn. An important role in the further development played the liberalist and romantic ideas,
which brought with them the young generation of the freedom wars. It is not surprising that
Russians returning from Europe made comparisons between Russia and the other countries of
Europe, that their culture and civilization, and for Russian conditions, exceedingly liberal
constitution made a special impression on them. It is in the nature of the East Slav peoples to
be radical. No doubt this is a consequence of the whole disposition and history, a consequence
of the religious nihilism which has made itself felt again and again in the course of time. But
it is also quite understandable that the fear of this radicalism caused the Russian rulers, after
the epoch of the wars of liberation, to take only half measures in their liberal reforms. The
vacillating attitude of the Russian tsars caused an ever-increasing radicalization among the
people themselves, as a result of which hardly any Russian ruler could leave his palace
without the danger of assassination, truly a shameful sign! But this eternal ferment in the
country also had a strong effect on foreign policy. In part, foreign policy tasks were
undertaken by Russian rulers primarily to distract the people from domestic difficulties. For
the first time this moment appeared with Nicholas I. His predecessor, Alexander I (1801-
1825), had himself brought liberal ideas from Europe, tried to push through a reform of self
government, but lapsed back into strong absolutism when he noticed with concern the
increasing radicalization among the people. In foreign policy he increased Russia's influence
on Europe by concluding the Holy Alliance. He made a significant attempt to settle peasant
soldiers in western Russia. Alexander I wanted to create a reliable border population capable
of military service, a counterweight against the restless Poles, but also to remedy the peasant
plight of some regions. In any case, these measures had a strong Russifying effect in the
border regions. The reign of his brother and successor, Nicholas I (1825 to 1855), after some
fluctuations, was strongly absolutist. His reign saw events of a foreign and domestic political
nature that were to carry strong weight for the future. The Decembrist Uprising (Russian:
December People) in 1825 was the first attempt from officer circles to achieve a constitutional


673


change by force. It was put down, many hundreds of noblemen were banished to Siberia for
forced labor, Nicholas I created a secret political police in the "3rd Department", from which
the "Ochrana" later emerged. From this moment there is a second, as it were, subterranean
Russian history, which sometimes was to be more significant for the fate of the Russian
Empire than the official history of the Tsar. On the one side stood the Russian state apparatus
with the Tsar at its head, and on the other stood the revolutionary groups and parties that were
forming, ranging from the liberalists to the anarchists and nihilists. It is worth noting here that
these revolutionaries included precisely the honest and educated Russian, the awakening
intelligentsia, which, thanks to its position, was sometimes able to influence the direction of
the state itself. It was in this period that the works of the poets and thinkers Gogol, Pushkin,
Turgentjeff, etc., were written, all of whom were on the side of the revolutionary groups. Now
there was also the mighty upsurge of the Slavophile idea and Pan-Slavism, which grew out of
Romanticism, and which held the conviction that the Russian Empire could be saved only by
Russianness, not by Europe. The Slavophiles believed that Russia itself could leapfrog the
whole of European development, that from the Middle Ages via Pietism and Humanism,
Reformation and Enlightenment. Russia would be called to rejuvenate and renew Europe,
which had grown old. Are these not sounds that we have heard constantly from Soviet-
Russian Bolshevism down to our own day? The Pan-Slavic idea appealed to all circles. It is
no proof to the contrary that in 1830/31 and 1861 the Poles revolted against Russian rule, for
the Poles, too, felt themselves to be Slavs, but because of their education and culture they
considered themselves to be "the chosen people of Slavdom. The Polish uprisings will have to
be dealt with elsewhere, since they had a strong foreign policy impact. After the death of
Nicholas I, Alexander II ascended the tsarist throne (1855-1881). Alexander II was
determined to usher in an age of reform. His reformist domestic policy was in complete
contrast to his father's absolutist one. But he was not energetic enough to carry through his
plans fully. Alexander II, will to join the Russian Empire to Europe, to make it a European
constitutional and legal state, failed, That his reform remained piecemeal became fatal for the
entire Empire. The liberation of the peasants in 1861 became an internal political burden,
since it freed the peasants externally, but did not give them enough land. In 1862, therefore,
the first radical party in Russia was founded under the name of "Land and Freedom" (Semlya
i Volya), whose programme had significance until the Bolshevik Revolution. The creation of
the agricultural self-administration, the Semstvos, also came to a halt halfway, even though its
merit for the people's school system, medical system, road construction, etc., was not
recognized. - things which had hitherto received little attention in the Russian Empire - should
not be disregarded. The proclamation of compulsory military service in 1874 did not bring the
people any closer to the tsar either, since the education of the next generation of soldiers was
more a matter of loyalty to Russia than to the tsar. The revolutionary circles felt that the
manner of carrying out the reforms was not extensive enough. The half-measures rather
increased the influx both from the ranks of the intelligentsia and from the peasant population,
since the dangerous tension caused by the almost complete absence of a healthy middle class
in the cities and the deep abyss between the noble landowners and the peasants had in no way
been bridged by the reforms, Alexander II had probably outwardly freed the Russian man, but
his attempts to give him better living conditions, to give him a new purpose in life, remained
stuck in the rudiments. The Russian became revolutionary in the sense of destruction.


In an appeal of the "Young Russia" it says already in 1862: "Russia is entering the
revolutionary period of its existence. From below, the muffled grumbling of the people can be
heard, Today beaten down, flogged to death, tomorrow the people will rise again together
with Stenka Razin and Pugachev. The only way out is revolution, bloody and inexorable
revolution. We shrink from nothing, although we know that rivers of blood will flow, that
innocent victims will be destroyed. We are ready to sacrifice our own heads for it. "Thus the
Russian would be persecuted, banished and imprisoned as a "revolutionary idealist"; but he
would act, suffer and die as a "martyr" for a resulting human "ideal state" through which
Europe, indeed the whole world, would be redeemed. Insane as these thoughts were,


674


nevertheless a large part of the entire young Russian intelligentsia fell into this delusion,
Bakunin's disciple Nethayev wrote in his revolutionary catechism- "The revolutionary knows
only one science - destruction. For it and it alone he studies mechanics, physics, chemistry,
and even medicine. For him there exists but one enjoyment, but one consolation, one reward,
one satisfaction- the reward of revolution, Day and night he may have but one thought, but
one aim- relentless destruction, All means by which this is promoted are right. While we
admit no other activity than destruction, we recognize that the form in which this activity is
carried out may be very manifold: Poison, dagger, rope, etc. The revolution sanctifies
everything without distinction."


And so we see Russian anarchism as the mastermind behind the scenes of history,
and assassination becomes a means used without restraint, to which the Russian tsars, their
relatives, members of the government and noble landowners fall victim, as do leading
personalities of the rest of Europe. Behind this anarchism, however, stands Jewry as ruler and
whipper-in, unwilling, however, to sacrifice its own personality. Alexander II also fell victim
to this last brutal means, the assassination, in 1861. He died during a ride in Petersburg under
the bombs of the Narodnaya Volya. This was the last attempt of a Russian Czar to carry out
reforms in the Russian Empire. From now on, the fortunes of this mighty empire, which had
been so immensely rich and yet always so poor, were drifting inexorably towards ruin. His
successor, Alexander III (1881-1884), wanted to turn the wheel again, wanted to return to the
absolutist rule of the all-powerful Tsar, but he did not consider that history knows no turning
back, that there is not even a standstill in history, His father's liberal ministers had to go, the
beginnings of the constitutional state were destroyed by a decree in 1881 on "Measures for the
Preservation of State Order and Public Tranquility", the Semstvo order was nationalized, and
the post of governor was created, who was to be in charge of state affairs.


The arbitrary rule and corruptibility of the officials increased. The arbitrary rule and
corruptibility of the officials increased and with it also the hatred of the state by the broad
masses, their destructive desire was from now on directed against everything that had
anything to do with the state and state building, Slowly also the Russian church lost more and
more the power over its followers, Now also it was, as nihilistic and anarchistic directions
gained in strength and power, regarded by the revolutionaries only as an instrument for the
domination of the masses. Under Alexander III, after nihilism, an ideology finally penetrated
the Russian Empire which was to retain its terrible significance in Eastern Europe to the
present day: Marxism. It is typical of East Slavic thought that even this European import was
further sharpened and radicalized in the Russian sphere. Russian Marxism has never been a
workers' movement in the sense propagated by it. It was always a direction of the
"intelligentsia" and, above all, of the "oppressed intelligentsia". From the outset, therefore,
Jewry played a major role in this new party. Judaism, which, as already mentioned, had begun
to spread to the east of Europe in the Middle Ages, united with Judaism, which had settled on
the Black Sea coast from about the tenth century onwards. Since the Jews had also made
themselves unpopular in the Russian cities through their trading practices and usury, the Tsars
constantly tried to prevent the influx of Jews into the interior of Russia. The so-called
"Cherta" fixed the Diina and the Dnieper as the eastern boundary for the settlement of the
Jews. It was not until the reign of Tsar Alexander II, and later his successor Nicholas II, that
this "Cherta" was broken in many ways and Jews who practiced a trade and the Jewish
intelligentsia were allowed to settle in towns east of the aforementioned line. The last
remnants of the "Cherta" disappeared during the World War. The Russian Generalissimo
Nikolai Nikolayevich recalled the experiences which Russia had made with the Jews during
the last Turkish War. There, too, as always, the Jews had provided a large proportion of the
spies and traitors, had served between the enemy fronts whoever paid them best. When in
1915 the Russian side became convinced that the German advance could no longer be stopped,
Nikolai Nikolaevich secured his front by having the Jews forcibly transported to the interior
of the Reich in May 1915. Thus Jewry had been given a completely free hand inside Russia.


675


In a short time the Jews dominated the leading positions in the international Marxist
secret societies. Marxism is a Jewish product, and its doctrine of the international unification
of the exploited proletarians against the capitalist exploiters in order to bring about a classless
and stateless social order has always been akin in kind and spirit to the thinking and feeling of
all Jews. Their people-less and stateless parasitism could only gain by the destruction of all
states and peoples. Here one can already see how the circle begins to close, how Jewry, out of
its attitude, tries to establish Jewish world domination on the one hand through the Marxist-
Bolshevik doctrine and on the other hand through the plutocratic-international money
economy. If men like Lenin have attained paramount importance in the Bolshevik leadership,
they have been basically only forward posts of Jewry, which has constantly known how to
remain in the background when in exposed positions. When the separation of the majority
party (Bolsheviks) from the minority party (Mensheviks) was completed at a London
congress of Russian Marxists in 1903, the struggle of the Bolsheviks for power began under
Lenin's leadership; Europe was now threatened not only by the danger of Russian imperialism
but also by the undermining of Marxist doctrine. The last tsar, Nicholas II (1894-1917), was
himself much too weak to stop the development inside the country. It came to the revolution
in 1905 as a result of the lost war against Japan. The sinister influence of the last tsars, and
later of "Saint" Rasputin, hastened the end of the Romanovs and closed another chapter in the
development of the Russian Empire. The fall of the Tsardom in Russia, however, as history
has shown, did not mean a cessation of the threats coming from the East of Europe, but, on
the contrary, a strengthening of them by the subterranean stirrings of Bolshevism.


V1. The antagonisms of European power in the 19th century prevent a clear position on the
Eastern Question and result in a stronger influence of the tsars on European destinies.


The domestic political development of the Russian Empire, described here in brief
outlines, was only decisive in the background for the shaping of Russia's foreign policy in the
19th century and in the period up to the World War. It was still primarily the will of the Tsar
that was decisive, although he knew very well how to use internal political tensions and pan-
Slavic ideas for foreign policy actions. Thus the Turkish wars were quite popular in the
Russian empire, since they were led for the "protection of the Christians against the infidel
Turks". Less popular was the thought of a war against the Germans, even though Pan-Slavism
was opposed to Pan-Germanism by interested parties. Moreover, from the nineteenth century
onwards, the expansion of the interests of European states, the establishment of colonies,
trading posts, etc., made political relations between them more and more complicated.
Political, military and economic conditions of a country or a group of countries influenced in
many ways the actions of other, geographically distant peoples and states. In this century it
became obvious that any event in any part of the world could no longer be regarded as an
isolated act, but as a result of the extensive interconnection of states and their interests began
to have an effect on states and areas of other parts of the world. Thus, the Balkan policy of the
Russian Empire, the attempts of its influence on the Black Sea and the Mediterranean resulted
in entanglements with states far away from the Russian Empire. These include the Russo-
Turkish War of 1827/29, the clash of British and Russian interests in Persia and Afghanistan
from 1829 onwards, the Crimean War of 1853-56, which in its origins was a Russo-Turkish
war, the Russo-Turkish War of 1877-78, which ended with the Congress of Berlin, the Russo-
Japanese War and its background of 1904-05, and finally the fight against the Bolshevik
armies by "White Armies". This also includes the expansions of the Russian Empire to
Transcaucasia, Armenia, Persia, south of the Aral and Balkan Sea to Afghanistan and in East
Asia to China, Manchuria and Korea. The influence on Finland increased the pressure on
Northern Europe, the Baltic Sea and the Atlantic. In all these cases, the largest land power in
the world came up against the largest sea power in the world: England. In the 19th century,
England was the adversary of Russia, who for the most part, in the proven British manner,
sent foreign nations forward to push back and weaken the Russian colossus. In the time of this


676


conflict, the young German Empire Bismarck later gained strength, and the skill of the great
German statesman succeeded in mastering the manifold dangers that threatened the young
foundation of the Empire.


It is the duty of every politically thinking person to learn from history and to
recognize mistakes. From the Middle Ages to the present day, the borders of the German
nation have not coincided with the political borders of the German national territory. In the
north and south, the sea and mountains provided natural protection, but not in the east and
west. The large neighbors in the north, west and south had it basically already from natural
conditions easier to come to vélkisch unions (e.g. collecting area Paris basin). Germany has
had to defend itself constantly against attacks and influences of all kinds, has lived constantly
in a struggle with greater internal and external resistances in order to come to a unification.
Since the great conflicts of the Middle Ages, the external power struggles in the West have
always been basically in favor of France and to the disadvantage of Germany.


The German space has always been small and valuable in relation to its population
and could never be used generously in battle, as in the neighboring Russian Empire, where the
vastness of space has formed a strategic factor not to be underestimated. In the 19th and 20th
centuries, Germany's central position has been decisively used by her neighbors and
adversaries in the East and West in their calculations. It is true that Germany's central position
offers great economic advantages in peace, and the advantages of an internal front in war have
been made quite clear during the World War; but it always compels preparation for a war on
two fronts, unified organization, planned spatial planning, and the constant readiness of the
entire nation to defend itself. These moments have been of great importance in the policy
between Germany and the Russian Empire in the 19th century until our time always played a
major role. The relationship of Russia to the Central European states, at their head Austria-
Hungary and Prussia, was, as already described, largely determined by the personal
relationship of Tsar Alexander I. to the Austrian Imperial House and the Hohenzollerns.
Under him Poland was established as a constitutional state, with a constitution that embraced
everything that European liberalism offered (1815). Poland was connected with the Russian
Empire only through the person of the Czar. Securing Europe against the East no longer
seemed necessary at the moment. Especially in the period from 1818-1820 Germans streamed
into the vastness of the Russian Empire. Partly these were peasant settlers from the Old
Empire, who were mostly settled in Transcaucasia and received the same rights as the
Germans who had immigrated since Catherine II (Manifesto of July 22, 1763), partly the
settlers came from the Congress Polish area. Accordingly, the latter already represented a kind
of "daughter settlement". It should be mentioned here that the flow of German settlers to the
East had again taken on stronger forms especially in the 18th and 19th centuries, since the
promised freedom of religion, self-administration, exemption from military and civilian
service, tax relief, etc., provided a strong impetus for migration to the East. In the 19th
century the existing maximum number of Germans, including those in Congress Poland (here
above all also urban settlements, industry in Litzmannstadt), can be estimated at about 2
million people, however, their political influence in the Russian empire was not high, since
the Germans of Russia showed among themselves only small cohesion, a task for the safety of
Europe these settlers already purely numerically no more to fulfill could, also hardly
understanding for such a task had, they lost with the beginning German persecutions in the 20,
century ever more their vested rights and are under Bolshevik rule the heaviest.


The people have been subjected to oppression and persecution. To a large extent. To
a large extent, Bolshevik rule scattered the remaining Germans to the four winds; many
perished in Siberia. Today there may not be 300,000 Germans left in the Soviet Union.
Nikolaus I believed that he could master the internal difficulties of his empire through a
strong foreign policy. The relationship to Austria worsened particularly by the resumption of


677


the Balkan policy, With support of France and England the Turkish-Egyptian fleet was
destroyed in Navarino in the course of the Greek freedom fight in 1827. In the Peace of
Adrianople in 1829, the Russian Empire got hold of the Danube estuaries and the Black Sea
coast north of Batum. The Danubian principalities and Serbia became practically Russian
vassal states, The "Holy Alliance" which united the Russian Tsar with the rulers of Austria
and Prussia had fallen into disarray as a result of the threat to Austria-Hungary. But after this
conflict it was restored. Nicholas I from that moment possessed the undisputed preponderance
in the three-night alliance. Twenty years later this preponderance was to acquire special
significance. In the meantime, in 1830, the Polish uprising had been bloodily put down.
Prussia, into whose eastern provinces the revolt threatened to spill over, indirectly aided the
Russian project by occupying its eastern frontier under Gneisenau and Clausewitz; Congress
Poland lost its free constitution and became a Russian province. At the same time, the Russian
Empire began to expand across the Caucasus. Armenia with Yerevan was annexed to the
Russian Empire (1828), Turkestan and Afganistan came under Russian influence, England
saw this advance of the Russian sphere of power to the south as a threat to its position in
Persia and India, It approached from this time above all France and sought in all ways to
prevent a further disintegration of the Turkish Empire. Meanwhile, the year 1848, with its
turmoil, gave Nicholas I another opportunity to consolidate his influence in Central Europe.
The uprising of the Hungarians against Vienna was put down with Russian help, Austria was
saved from a split. As a result, the Austrian Chancellor Schwarzenberg was given the
opportunity to take a more energetic stand at the Bundestag in Frankfurt am Main, to reject
the German constitution and to re-establish the Bundestag under Austrian leadership. Then, at
last, in 1850, Russian pressure compelled Frederick William IV to renounce for the time
being the Prussian policy of union at Olmiitz; Schleswig-Holstein was surrendered to the
Danes at the Russian instigation. This period showed the height of Russian power in Central
Europe. The Russian Czar influenced the history of the whole Central European area. Prussia
and Austria were too weak to escape Russian tutelage.


They were in complete disagreement even as to the settlement of internal German
relations. It is obvious that the Russian Empire would have been in a position at this time to
take possession by force of large areas of Central Europe. The policy of the Russian Czar was
to support Austria, to prevent incipient Prussian attempts at unification, and at the same time,
as a powerful friend of the Prussian and Austrian rulers, to indirectly direct the history of
these states in such a way that they could not become dangerous to the Russian Empire. A
unified German Empire could escape the tutelage of the Tsar, but not a Germany in which
almost two equally powerful groups of powers struggled for influence. Emperor Nicholas I
felt strong enough to resume the traditional Balkan policy. His decision was facilitated by the
disagreement and tension between Austria and Prussia, In the year. 1853 war broke out
between the Russian Empire and the Porte, England and France immediately sided with
Turkey, unwilling to tolerate an encroachment of Russian influence on the south-eastern
European area. Austria believed that she could no longer tolerate an increase of Russian
power in the Balkans, since half of the state would then have been embraced by the Russian
Empire from north to south, and forced Russia by an ultimatum to vacate the Danubian
principalities. A Russian campaign against Turkey had hereby become impossible. The allied
powers attacked Russia in the Black Sea itself (Crimean War). The end of this war
experienced Nicholas I. no longer, his successor, Alexander II., after the unfortunate course of
the same, had no choice but to offer peace, The Russian Empire lost the Danube estuaries, the
Danubian principalities and its conquests on the Armenian border in the Paris Congress of
1856, Maintaining a navy on the Black Sea was also prohibited. On the Russian side, Austria-
Hungary has always been reproached with the fact that its policy during the Crimean War was
insincere and in no way friendly. It must be remembered that a seizure of the Balkans by the
Russian Empire would have meant a strong threat to the Austro-Hungarian monarchy. The
failure of the Russian action in the Balkans in 1853 averted from the Central European area a
danger which should not be underestimated. If the Russian plan had succeeded, a front in the


678


south would have been added to the front in the east. In the event of a later attack from the
Russian side, Hungary and Galicia would then have been difficult to hold, apart from the
unreliable attitude of the Hungarians at the time, since this area would have offered the
possibility of Russian attacks from the north, east and south, and the geographical conditions
could also only have been used to a limited extent in favor of the defense of this area. By its
resolute action against the Russian Empire, Austria-Hungary averted a great danger from
Europe in the middle of the last century.


VIL Securing Europe through Bismarck


The following period saw, perhaps also as a result of the still existing bitterness
against Austria, a stronger rapprochement of the Russian Tsar with Prussia. Not least, the
close family ties to the Prussian ruling house may have played a role here. In addition,
Bismarck had succeeded in gaining Alexander's goodwill and friendship during his time as
envoy to St. Petersburg in 1859/62, so that the ruler of Prussian history from 1862 onwards
was no stranger to the Tsar. The Russian Empire had been weakened to a large extent by the
Crimean War. It was still in political opposition to England, France and Austria-Hungary. An
alliance with Prussia was the natural counterweight. The apparent abandonment of Central
European interests by Bismarck was necessary in the same period in order to finally wrest the
leadership of the German tribes and states from the incompetent Austria. It is the mainspring
of Bismarck's actions in the sixties. He needed the unconditional goodwill of the Czar to be
able to unify Germany; Prussia could not afford to create enemies on all fronts at once.
Bismarck would never have succeeded in uniting the small German states under Prussia's
leadership against the opposition of Austria, France, and the Russian Empire. It is from this
standpoint that the Prussian-Russian friendship must be viewed. It also makes Bismarck's
action appear in the right light when, in 1863, during the renewed uprising of the Poles, he
resolutely opposed the steps taken by the Western powers to force the Czar to yield to the
Poles. The so-called Alvensleben Convention for the defeat of the Poles had less a military
than a political significance. All his life Bismarck stood on the view that "an independent
Poland would mean a second French army on the Vistula." The correctness of this view was
confirmed in the years after the World War.


It was on this basis of friendship with Russia that Bismarck was able to tackle the
urgent tasks in Prussia (army organization under Roon, curbing the dangerous liberal
influence in parliament) and the settlement of internal German relations (war with Denmark in
1864, Austro-Prussian War in 1866). With Russian cover behind him, Bismarck could set
about countering French claims to power, which had been growing since the benevolent
attitude of the Russian Czar, which Bismarck's diplomacy had caused, is to be attributed to
the fact that Bismarck was able to undertake the great work of unification in the Franco
Prussian War of 1870/71 and that Austria-Hungary was prevented from intervening in favor
of France. Bismarck was convinced that a unification of Germany could only be achieved in a
war against France. As early as 1862, on the occasion of the Hessian constitutional question,
the Prussian war plan saw in war against France a means of unifying Germany. Bismarck,
however, would never have been able to put his thoughts into practice if the genius of a
Moltke had not been at his disposal for the elaboration of military plans. Moltke had
constantly to take account of possible opponents in his war plans. Austria had not forgotten
the defeat of 1866, and regarded with anxiety the increase of Prussia's power; Napoleon III.
likewise believed that he must by all means prevent a unification of Germany under Prussian
leadership. Only Russia was only too glad to see Austria weakened as a result of her
opposition in the Balkan question and was sympathetic to Bismarck's aims. As early as 1867,
Moltke drew up war plans, all of which took into account an Austrian-French alliance against
Prussia. In 1868 a firm military agreement was reached between Prussia and the southern
German states, which guaranteed Prussian leadership in a war against France. The war of
1870/71 then united the German states with the exclusion of Austria to the Little German


679


Empire, as it should exist until 1918. Even after the establishment of the German Empire,
relations with the Russian Empire initially remained unclouded, The balance of power in
Central Europe had shifted fundamentally, As long as the German-Russian understanding was
maintained, however, no serious threat to this area was to be expected. The year 1872 saw the
Three Emperors' Alliance, which also outwardly certified the agreement of Austria-Hungary
and the Russian Tsar with the rise of Germany. Not only Prussia-Germany was the
beneficiary of the Prussian-Russian agreement, but also Russia was backed by it, which
enabled it to start further conquests. Under the protection of the benevolent neutrality of the
new German Empire, Russia expanded further, in 1865 Tashkent was conquered, in 1867 the
General Government of Turkestan was founded, in 1868 Russia established its rule over
Samarkand and Bukhara, in 1873 Shiva followed. This empire also appeared as a competitor
in East Asia. In 1858, the Amur River was established as the Russian-Chinese border, but in
1860, despite this agreement, Russian troops occupied the coastal province south of the Amur
on the Sea of Japan, and Vladivostok was founded. The Russian Empire sold its possession of
Alaska, which appeared strategically and economically unimportant and endangered, to the
United States of America for a few million dollars. The great European success of these years,
however, the Russian Empire owed decidedly to Bismarck, who stood up for Russia at the
London Conference in 1871 and thus succeeded in having the provisions of the Peace of Paris,
which had forbidden Russia's rearmament on the Black Sea after the Crimean War, dropped
again.


VII. The natural antagonisms between the peoples of Central Europe


The year 1875 then brought the first disgruntlement between Germany and Russia,
which, however, in its first stage was more a mutual mistrust between Bismarck and the
Russian Prime Minister Gortschakow. In 1873, the French Defense Commission (Seri de
Rivicre, Brianon, etc.) was founded with the aim of reorganizing the French army. In 1875 it
came to the "war-in-sight". Such a crisis due to the French Cadre Law, The Russian Prime
Minister Gorchakov was convinced that Bismarck intended a preventive war against France in
order to throw the strengthening France back to the ground. Bismarck in no way wanted to
stop France from rearming by force of arms at that time. He was of the opinion that the newly
founded German Empire first needed peace in order to consolidate itself and to exploit the
fruits of its victory, especially in the economic field. He tried, by political pressure alone, to
limit the French armament tempo. Gorchakov nevertheless intervened in favor of France, as
did England. The disgruntlement was there, aggravated by Bismarck's distrust of the Pan-
Slavist idea, of which Gorchakov was a supporter, and which from the beginning had been
strongly anti-German and had gradually become a political power in the Russian Empire. A
year later a serious tension arose in the wake of the Russo-Turkish War of 1877-78, which
reached its peak when in the Berlin Congress Russia felt cheated of the fruits of its successes
by Bismarck, who acted as an "honest broker".


Russia strengthened the garrisons on the western border of its empire. From now on,
Pan-Slavism increasingly demanded a war against the hated Germans. In 1879/80 the
situation in Germany was considered so serious from the military side that a detailed
memorandum by Moltke pointed out the military strengthening of the neighbors. Bismarck
concluded a secret agreement with Andrassy in Gastein in 1879, which secured the dual
alliance of Germany-Austria-Hungary against attacks by Russia, while Emperor Wilhelm I
and Tsar Alexander II met in Alexandrovo to discuss the situation. Once again they succeeded
in convincing the Russian Czar that the German states did not intend to attack the Russian
Empire. Gorchakov had to go and Giers took over the direction of Russian foreign policy, but
the development could no longer be stopped. Russian military circles were already preparing
an alliance with France. Miljutin built roads, railways and fortresses on the western border of
the Empire. Gradually, more and more cavalry regiments were transferred to the western
section. French money gained more and more influence in the Russian Empire, Still Bismarck


680


managed to keep open the way to Petersburg by peaceful means. In 1881 a neutrality
agreement was concluded between the three emperors - empires, the year 1884 saw the Three
Emperors Alliance; the secret reinsurance treaty was signed in 1887 between the German and
the Russian empires, which was to withdraw Russia from France according to Bismarck's will,
the tension between the two empires nevertheless continued to rise, even if after the death of
Alexander II in 1881 with his successor Alexander II some hopeful attempts at an
understanding between the German emperor and the Russian tsar were made, Bismarck's
policy was the policy of a great genius, which violated natural conditions and forced them to
its will, The reinsurance treaty with Russia was the masterpiece of a statesman, but by its very
nature it could only have significance as long as Bismarck's power stood behind it; it had to
forfeit its value when the figure of Bismarck was relegated to the background and eliminated
by Kaiser Wilhelm II. At this moment the natural antagonisms between the East and the
centre of Europe again came into their own. Germanness was forced into a defensive position
and had to prepare itself for a tremendous confrontation. That this did not happen in a
sufficient manner is the criminal fault of the German political parties. The year 1885 was to
be fateful in this respect. Out of concern for its position in the Balkans, Austria broke up the
Three Emperors' Alliance by intervening in the Balkan turmoil. Austria's relations with the
Russian Empire were subsequently disturbed to such an extent by Russia's behavior in the
Bulgarian sovereign question that the Three Emperors' Alliance could no longer be extended.
The eighties of the previous nineteenth century also shows a wealth of tensions outside the
Austro-Russian antagonisms. Germany had taken the first tentative steps towards a world
policy through the acquisition of colonies, which immediately set her at odds with England.
Similarly, the England-Russia tension had grown stronger as the Russians continued to exert
influence in Persia and Afghanistan; England therefore sought to gain annexation to Austria in
order to obtain a "continental diagonal" against Russia. But the occupation of Egypt by
England also meant a far-reaching disturbance of the England-France relationship. Turkey,
under pressure from Bismarck, refused to act against Russia. In 1887 there was a
Mediterranean entente between England, Austria-Hungary and Italy, with special
encouragement from Bismarck. In addition, there were strong internal difficulties in Germany,
which led to the rejection of the military draft. And in the background stood France, which for
the moment remained isolated, but knew only one goal: to rearm in order to take revenge on
Germany for the ignominy suffered in 1870/71. There would always have remained the
possibility of fundamentally relaxing the relations of the great powers. German peace policy
was honest, almost too honest, and sought only to preserve the peace that was generally
threatened. The formidable, awe-inspiring figure of Bismarck prevented the worst at that time.
It continued to have an effect even after Bismarck had resigned as Chancellor of the Reich,
and even, in a certain sense, after his death. From now on, however, Germany was
irredeemably caught between two ideologies that wanted nothing more than the destruction of
this state: Eastern Pan-Slavism and the French Revancheidee. At its side, Germany had only
Austria as a confederate, which was itself in need of support because of its nature as a nation-
state. The Triple Alliance of 1882 between Germany, Austria, and Italy was, for purely
political reasons, a more than questionable structure from a military point of view. Gradually
the fronts began to emerge that were present in 1914 at the beginning of the struggle between
nations, Germany and Austria were more and more torn apart by factional pity. The parties
fought each other to the knife, forgetting that there were unfavorable neighbors on the borders
of the Reich, who were only waiting to pounce on the states of Central Europe as soon as they
had achieved greater military strength. In 1888, Moltke wrote a memorandum on the
deployment in a two-front war. The years 1890/94 brought an increase in the standing army of
a whole 60,000 men, in return for a reduction in the period of service from three to two years.
In 1894, Schlieffen for the first time drafted a memorandum on a war on two fronts. This
memorandum, like Moltke's, was also imbued with the conviction that a middle-ranking state
such as Germany's can only defend its limited space by attacking the strongest opponent. The
liberalist economic upswing feigned a flourishing of the German-Austrian economy, which,
however, had to be regarded as highly questionable from the point of view of defense


681


economics. In 1883, in a letter to the War Ministry, Moltke drew attention to the question of
food and raw materials in the event of war. In 1900 General Blume dealt with the economic
difficulties. But nothing was done on the part of the Imperial Government to meet all the
threatening dangers.


When Bismarck's successor, Caprivi, refused to extend the reinsurance treaty in 1890,
this meant a radical departure from Bismarck's political principles. The events that followed
are nothing but the consequence of the collapse of Bismarck's policy. In the same year the
military conventions between France and the Russian Empire were concluded, and in 1893
they were extended into an alliance, and with them the fears of England about a union of
Germany with Russia faded away. It is the tragic fault of Kaiser Wilhelm II to have
overestimated the strength of Germany. He always believed that he could tip the scales of
European, indeed of world politics, He overlooked the fact that the political antecedent had
passed to another group of powers through the non-renewal of the reinsurance treaty with
Russia. It was no longer Germany that determined the political direction in the future, but a
group of powers hostile to Germany in the East and West of Central Europe. The danger of
Germany's change of course was not recognized until it was too late. The events of these
years, however, meant not only a tremendous break in German policy, but also in Russian
policy. Russia did not believe in the policy of the "two irons in the fire" which henceforth
determined German policy; it believed in a German-English unification and took refuge in the
alliance with France. The alliance between the republican France and the completely
absolutist Tsar Alexander III was concluded by the latter only with reluctance, In 1899 the
Franco-Russian alliance got the version in which it was later incorporated into the Entente-
cordiale with England (1904), In 1907 England finally reached an agreement with the
Russians on the Asiatic questions, In the meantime there were still various weak attempts,
especially on the part of Germany, to clarify the increasingly worsening situation. But the
strong personality was missing to stop the contemplative storm. The death of Alexander III
placed the leadership of Russian destiny in the hands of Nicholas I. Young, inexperienced
and weak in his decisions, he, like the German imperial leadership, was unable to turn the
helm of his ship of state, which, driven by pan-Slavic power groups, was inevitably heading
for war with Germany and thus to its demise. The understanding reached between Austria and
the Russian Empire in 1897 brought temporary relief and apparently lessened the pressure of
the Russian colossus on Central Europe. It was also probably honestly meant on all sides, but
the conditions themselves had already become too strong. Even the attempts of the Tsar
through the Hague Peace Conferences of 1899 and 1907 to reduce armaments and to create
international peace conferences, although born of good will, could no longer stop the fate.
Once again, in 1905, an opportunity presented itself for the Central Powers to escape from
their oppressive grip, when the Russian Empire lay weakened by the loss of the Japanese war
and by the revolution. But it was used neither politically nor militarily to avert fate. Thus
conditions drifted unceasingly toward world war. German parties, it must be said to their
shame, often pursued a policy which meant damage to German prestige and position. One
need only think of the interaction of the Center with the Reichstag deputies of the Polish
minorities, which revealed that it was more important for the Center to pursue a Catholic
policy than a German one. The German governments were themselves a plaything of the
parties. Instead of uniting the divergent forces in the German peoples in one stream, preparing
them for the impending struggle for existence, they allowed themselves to be carried along by
the waves of party passion. It is only one example of the political arrogance and lack of
understanding that had taken hold everywhere when, after the Russo-Japanese War, Kaiser
Wilhelm II awarded both the Russian defender of Port Arthur and his conqueror the Order
Pour le Merite. It must be regarded as the greatest fault of the influential personalities and
Kaiser Wilhelm II that they pushed Germany onto the path of world politics without
themselves having the unconditional upper hand in Europe. Germany was thus led into
entanglements which it was unable to cope with in terms of power politics and population
policy. The few warnings, especially on the military side, were not heard; Germany neglected


682


her task in the East and missed the last opportunity in 1905 to avert the danger threatening
from the East. But it also neglected to secure its position vis-a-vis England. One spoke of
English "cousins" and did not see that the latter were not even thinking of supporting the
Germans "as relatives". England saw only the threat to her world empire from the rising
Germany. Germany lulled herself into the hope that, in spite of all differences, the close
economic interdependence of these two states would not lead to a warlike conflict with
England as an enemy, and yet it was precisely from England's side that the encirclement had
been pursued in the last years before the World War, All the enemies of Germanness and
enemies of the Central European regional order had found each other in this policy of
encirclement. Behind these games on the world stage, however, stood the Masonic and Jewish
powers, and ultimately also England, which felt threatened by the growth of the German fleet
and German world trade.


England has never been concerned with a real European order, she has never
understood the danger threatening Europe from the East, England has been anxious for
centuries to keep Europe in a state of political equilibrium, and this was by no means done out
of a European community feeling, but solely out of her urge for her own world position.
Whenever Great Britain encroached upon the European mainland, it was always in order to
gain some advantage for herself or to fight states which threatened her position as a world
power. Thus, England's action against Germany was primarily because, on the principle that
"to trade follows the flag," it feared English trade being outflanked by German trade. England
always regarded trade as a question of political power. One of the last phases was the
construction of the Baghdad Railway, through which Germany interfered strongly with
English spheres of interest in terms of space policy. It was always England's endeavor that in
Europe two groups of powers of approximately equal strength held each other in balance. In
pursuit of this tactic, England alternately offered her help to this or that state which was
outstripped by another in economic or military terms. The promises of aid made by England
frequently enough brought the continental states into warlike entanglements, and while the
European states were tearing themselves apart in wars, the overseas theatre became free to
England; she was able to subdue the most valuable countries of the earth to her dominion and
incorporate them into her world empire. After all, England ruled over about 1/5 of the earth's
surface. Thus the conviction was formed in England that it was the God given profession of
the Englishman to rule seas and countries and to patronize other nations, anyone who opposed
this was a sinner against the divine world order. It is understandable that Freemasonry and
Judaism found similar tendencies in the English ideologies of world domination as they
themselves aspired to. The amalgamation of these three efforts at domination is therefore to
be regarded as quite understandable.


IX. Germany beats back the danger coming from the East in the World War 1914-1918


The defensive geographic situation of Germany and Austria-Hungary at the
beginning of the World War of 1914/18 was as follows. To the north, the Central European
bloc was largely protected by the Baltic and North Seas. The Baltic offered a partially suitable
coast to possible Russian landing attempts. But the German fleet as a whole was always
superior to the Russian. The passage through the canal between the North and Baltic Seas
passed close to the German coast and could easily be blocked. The German fleet at Kiel held
the Russian Baltic fleet in check by its mere presence, The North Sea coast was thoroughly
hostile to landing attempts. The strength of the German fleet was also sufficient to protect this
short stretch of coast. However, the fleet in the "wet triangle" of the German Bight was to be
regarded as blocked by the stronger British fleet itself. In the south, the Alps represented a
strong strategic obstacle. They offered a variety of defensive possibilities. The Adriatic coast
was probably difficult for the small Austrian navy to monitor, but for strategic reasons it
offered little incentive for a landing. The frontier against Serbia, with the exception of the
Sava-Danube section, might be regarded as not secured by nature. However, the inhospitality


683


of the terrain had to be taken into account, the western border showed no obstacles difficult to
cross. The Vosges ridge gave friend and foe the same opportunities for attack and defense.
The northern section was completely open. Fortifications, especially in the central section,
prevented the enemy from breaking through to the Main line and from separating the spaces
between north and south by an enemy push-through. If necessary, the Rhine formed a
considerable defensive position in the background, but this could only be used in extreme
emergencies, since it would have eliminated war-important industries from the enemy and
would have brought the armament center in the Ruhr area into the immediate vicinity of the
enemy. The eastern border was divided into two clearly separated sections, the southern
section and the northern section. The southern section could be seen as a defensive zone
against Romania. In its northern part, the further course of the Carpathian ridge, albeit at the
cost of Galicia, provided opportunities for defending the Hungarian lowlands. The junction
between the northern and southern sections could offer the enemy an incentive to break
through into the Bohemian Basin. The northern section, which stretched from the Carpathians
along the German-Russian border to the Baltic Sea, was essentially unprotected. However,
there were also some natural obstacles on this northern section, such as the Inasurian Lake
District in East Prussia, which was to gain great importance during this war.


The connections between the eastern and western fronts were sufficient for rapid
troop movements. Only between the Balkan and Carpathian fronts were traffic conditions
unfavorable. The railroad lines along the eastern front were poorly developed and caused
considerable difficulties for troop movements on a large scale. In the given circumstances,
however, one had to reckon with the fact that the two Central Powers would be enclosed on
all sides in a besieged fortress. Exceptions were perhaps a part of the Balkans, the Baltic Sea,
and the traffic with Sweden, which could not be disputed by German shipping. From the
English side, it was believed in Germany that a close blockade of the German Bight was to be
feared. In the course of the war it turned out that the English were not willing to move their
precious warships so far from their base in England. As is well known, England preferred to
make a wide blockade generally out of the North Sea, extending from about the Orkney and
Shetland Islands to the coast of southern Norway. It is certain that military geographic
considerations played a major role in the German military authorities. Both the elder Moltke
and Schlieffen recognized exactly the weaknesses and strengths of the German-Austrian
positions and used them in their calculations. Above all, German considerations must have
been that the space of the Central European states was narrow and far too precious to be
sacrificed to generous plans.Both states were to be defended only by attack. Only in an
emergency did the war plan provide for the surrender of East Prussia and West Prussia up to
the Vistula line.For reasons of transport and organization, it was expected that the French
would mobilize more quickly than the Russians. The German railway deployment had been
determined down to the last detail and guaranteed that the German troops on the borders
would be ready for war quickly. However, consultation with Austrian military authorities on
the war plans had only taken place in very vague terms, since the German side feared that the
plans would be kept secret, a fear that was quite justified in view of the wide variety of
nationalities in the Austrian army. Polish and Czech circles, in particular, were considered
unreliable and often contributed to the betrayal of military secrets.


Schlieffen's plan of attack was initially directed against the west, in order to first
decisively defeat the strongest and most combat-ready opponent here. In the east, it was
believed that energetic attacks by the Austrians would be able to stop and tie up the Russian
army to a large extent until troops were released in the west. The German plan therefore
believed that it could manage with only a few divisions in addition to Landwehr and
Landsturm formations to protect the eastern border, although it was known on the German
side that in the Franco-Russian general staff discussions a French demand for an immediate
offensive by the Russians in the general direction of Berlin had been made and promised by
the Russian general staff. The course of the World War battles on the fronts, especially in the


684


East, is generally too well known for it to be necessary to go into detail. In general, it may be
said that the allied troops succeeded, in part after the heaviest fighting, in driving back the
Russians who had penetrated beyond their borders and in penetrating far into Russian territory
in the course of the campaign. Even the later intervention of the Romanians on the side of the
enemy forces did not bring them any success. The occupation of Rumania was extremely
valuable for the Central Powers, since from that moment on, above all, Rumanian oil was at
their unrestricted disposal. It is a proven fact that it was only Rumanian oil that made possible
the spring offensive in the West in 1918. In addition, the food situation, which had become
extremely scarce, was not insignificantly improved. In 1917, when the strategic advantage in
the West passed to the enemy powers, the old Tsarist Russia was at the end of its tether. The
Central European area had remained free from the invasion of the Slavic and Mongol troops
of the Russian Empire, and the enemy had been driven far from all frontiers into the interior
of the country.


In this context, the play of the West Slavic forces is interesting. The Czechs were
almost entirely on the side of the Russians. They were the most unreliable element in the
Austrian army. In droves they defected to the Russians, only to reunite there in the "Czech
Legion". Among the Poles the forces were striving apart. At the beginning of the war, the
Tsar had promised the Poles a constitution. After the occupation of Poland by German and
Austrian troops, the German Emperor had also promised the Poles the establishment of a
Kingdom of Poland. This promise of the Emperor was a political imprudence and at the same
time a slap in the face of the Tsar. With the exception of a small minority, the Poles did not
even think of accepting the gift of a Kingdom of Poland from the hand of Emperor Wilhelm I.
Their hope went to France and the gradual exhaustion of German forces. In no way during the
World War did the Poles succeed in gaining substantial cooperation for the goals of the
Central Powers. The completely unclear war aims of the German government also contributed
a great deal to creating uncertainty everywhere in East and West. As a result, however, the
fighting troops in particular lacked an impetus. The idea of an eastern settlement in the Baltic
countries, which came later from Hindenburg and Ludendorff, probably showed a definite
direction, but was also vague and indefinite. In any case, planning was lacking in every
respect. It could not even begin, since there was no great German idea promoting the
continuation of the German settlement in the East. It was certainly the conviction that
somehow the East, which was rich in foodstuffs, would have to be made serviceable for
German nutrition even after the war, in order to prevent similar catastrophes as during the war
in the future, but the regulation of the conditions was postponed until later. On the German
side it was also believed that consideration would have to be given to Austrian conditions,
since the Austrians also wanted to be taken into account in the case of a land acquisition in the
East. There was, however, no common line either in Germany or in Austria, much less
between these two powers, even in the slightest. In this sense, the Peace of Brest-Litovsk was
never a peace that was in any way satisfactory. It may well have separated the new
revolutionary Russian Empire from the Central European area to a considerable extent, it may
well have eliminated this empire as a European power factor to a large extent, but it lacked
the final consequence, it lacked the idea of what to do with these newly won territories. The
threat to central European soil from the Slavic voice had in no way disappeared. It was rather
aggravated, especially since the Poles had been promised their own kingdom, which had to be
closely related to the Central European area, in order not to have a Poland as a hostile power
on the eastern border right from the start. One thing, however, had been achieved: the new
revolutionary bloc within the old Russian Empire had been considerably pushed away from
the Central European area. The defeats that the Russian troops had to accept from the Central
Powers did not remain without repercussions within the country. The organization of
transportation, which had always been one of the weakest points of the East Slavic peoples,
became increasingly difficult. The most necessary war, crew, and material transports
generally met the requirements of the front, but there was a lack of an organizing hand and of
sufficient rolling stock and manpower to ensure further civilian supplies. Inflation and food


685


shortages led to unrest; the political incitement of the masses by Jewry and its fellow travelers
took on ever more threatening forms. The intolerable conditions of society, the cultural high
status of a few and the half-education of the leading classes on the one hand, the presence of
primitive people who were far behind culturally and economically, on the other hand, led to
the creation of a new social order.


They were, on the other, working together to make the appeal to the baser instincts
fall on fertile ground. The tsarist government had become weary of war in contrast to the
people's representatives, the Duma opposed the tsarist government, close threads ran to the
English embassy. Finally, even the highest generals of the army agreed to a revolution and to
the deposition of the tsar. In early March 1917, hunger revolts broke out in Petersburg, The
government used garrison troops against the revolutionaries. They failed. The requested
regiments of guards from the front were not deployed at all or were deployed too late,
Revolution ensued. On March 15, 1917, the Tsar signed his abdication. England, however,
which was usually so tradition-bound, welcomed the change in the political leadership of the
Russian Empire with the greatest satisfaction, since it believed that in this way it could
continue to count the Russian masses as a factor in the war. The House of Commons sent a
telegram of congratulations to the Duma to the following effect: "The House of Commons
sends fraternal greetings to the Duma, and offers its hearty congratulations to the Russian
people on the introduction of libertarian institutions, in the fullest confidence that these
institutions will not only secure happy and speedy progress to the Russian nation, but will also
secure the continuance, with renewed firmness and energy, of the war against the stronghold
of an autocratic. Militarism which threatens the freedom of Europe. "It is a mistake to believe
that this Duma represented the peoples of the Russian Empire. In the real Russian people
lived quite different volcanic and subterranean forces. Stronger influences than those of the
Masons, Liberals and Democrats were already preparing to usurp power in the Russian
Empire. The bourgeois revolution formed only an intermediate stage to the final revolution in
November of the same year, when Lenin took over the chairmanship of the Council of
People's Commissars, where the Red Tsar took the place of the White. The revolution raged
through the country, spreading terror, misery and death. The counter-revolutionary uprisings
repeatedly challenged the conduct of the Red Revolution. The continuation of the revolution
was carried out by exerting all the forces within the country. The reign of terror of the
Bolsheviks ruthlessly swept away the hitherto leading strata of the Russian Empire. Thus the
last Germanic bloodstreams, which in the East could still have some significance for the
whole of Germany, were destroyed, and the German settlers in the Ukraine, in the Caucasus
and on the Volga also fell victim to it. From the moment that Jewish Bolshevism raised the
red flag on the Kremlin in Moscow, the last vestige of a German-German influence in Eastern
Europe was destroyed. This danger became immense when the last remnants of Europe's
security against the East were eliminated in the violent peace of Versailles. In order to free
their hands on the outside world, the Bolsheviks soon concluded an armistice with the Central
Powers. In December 1917, the Brest-Litovsk peace negotiations began. Trotsky Bronstein, in
Jewish rabble-rousing, tried to drag the negotiations along on Lenin's behalf, since in
Petersburg and Moscow themselves they hoped for the outbreak of a revolution among the
Central Powers. Moreover, Lenin was not at all willing of his own accord to cede Russian soil
to any other powers. Only the energetic intervention of German military authorities and the
further advance of German troops saw the Bolsheviks ready to sign the peace treaty at the
beginning of March 1918. Meanwhile, Ukraine had broken away from Bolshevik Russia with
German help. German troops secured German soil far ahead of the old line of 1917. In spite of
this quarantine line, however, the Bolshevik poison penetrated to a greater extent into the
Central European area, contaminating the homeland and above all weakening the position of
the stage.


From this time on, the Bolsheviks began to intensify their attempts to revolutionize the world.
The revolutionaries had at first only the possibility of spreading their ideas without substantial


686


support, only out of themselves. From the moment Jewish Bolshevism got hold of the Russian
Empire, it had at its disposal a state power which it was willing to use to revolutionize the
world, despite all attempts at denial. The Bolshevik rulers were always guided by the clear
realization that he who possesses Europe and the Central European area above all else can
have influence over the most important parts of the world. After the collapse of the Central
Powers in 1918 a development took place which had as its aim, in an unbroken chain, the
revolutionization of the European area. The healthy forces in the German people desperately
resisted the Jewish-Marxist doctrine. From the Kapp Putsch, through the internal political
struggles of the systemic era of the birth and the struggles of the National Socialist Party of
Germany, through November 1923 in Munich, the sacrificial death of one Horst Wessel and
the reorganization of the German area after the seizure of power, to the tremendous struggle
of our day, there leads a single chain of struggles for the security not only of the German
people but of Europe. The disgraceful Treaty of Versailles aided and abetted the Jewish
subhumans, leading the German people to the brink of ruin. One good thing came out of the
disgraceful Treaty of Versailles: even if many good Germans regarded the ideological dangers
threatening from the East as slight, this disgraceful treaty led them to a self-contemplation of
their Germanness; it became the seedbed for the reawakening of the German people. The
German people, as a result of this humiliation, turned back to themselves. The National
Socialist Party and its leader Adolf Hitler, however, became the heralds and executors of this
purified will of the people.


X. Bolshevism interferes in the internal political relations of the European states.


Stalin continues the policy of the tsar in foreign affairs. The Peace of Versailles
threw back the development of Germany in the East more or less to the line of the times of
Frederick the Great. Although the unity of the Kleindeutsche Reich had not been shattered,
such a number of military provisions had been added to the Versailles Dictate that Germany
as a military power was no longer able to represent a factor in Europe, much less in the world.
The Versailles Dictate represents a compilation of the desires of politicians, military leaders,
and economists from a wide variety of countries, all of whom, each against the other, sought
to realize their views and goals. The Dictate of Versailles has pronounced relations with the
East of Europe, even if at first sight it appears to be a work of purely Western Jewish-
democratic machinations. Here again one must delve into the background of the Jewish plans
for world domination and their foundations. The Jewish plans for world domination cannot be
separated from certain national foundations. There is no people on earth which shows such a
branching out and intermarriage over all the countries of the world as the Jewish. Detailed
observations have proved, for example, that there is hardly a Jewish family which does not
have relatives both in Eastern Europe and in the countries of the West. From this point of
view the new foundations of the Eastern European states also gain their special significance.
With the exception of Estonia and Finland, all the others formed the reservoir of strength for
Jewry in Western Europe and America. Thus, for example, one can trace a comparatively
short line from the Jews surrounding the American President to the Jews in Germany and the
countries farther east. In this sense the genesis and consequences of the Versailles Dictate also
take on a face that is particularly turned towards Eastern Europe. The sufferer was the
Germanic-German man, who was sacrificed without pity to all the dangers rushing upon him
from the East.


From the point of view of foreign policy, the new "democratic" Germany found itself
in a dangerous position. It was surrounded by enemies, and there was no thought of fulfilling
its tasks in the East, despite the fact that the Slavic-Germanic border had been moved forward
into the middle of the European area. Polish land began 150 km east of Berlin. Poles and
Czechs subjugated and harassed the same Germans who had been their culture-bringers for
centuries. One German position after another was occupied by the Slavs. East Prussia, cut off
from the territory of the Reich, faced an uncertain fate. Slowly and tenaciously Slavicism tried


687


to work its way across these borders and gain further ground. Fanatical Polish and Czech
priests and teachers were the tireless propagators of Slavic ideas. The Poles and Czechs have
always been aware that only he who owns the soil can call a country his own. In the first place,
therefore, their efforts were directed to getting hold of the land in order to make the German
people rootless; millions of Germans have had to leave their ancestral home. And in spite of
the fact that the German people lay on the ground without rights or protection, they still feared
it at bottom, they tried in imperialist megalomania to lay claim to further power on German
soil and to realize it. The maps circulated by Poles and Czechs about this speak eloquently.
(Maps 14 and 15.)Poland as well as Czecho-Slovakia suffered constantly from the fact that,
on the one hand, despite all their pan-Slavic ties, they were nevertheless compelled, if they
did not want to give up their independence, to make a front against their great Slavic brother
in the East; on the other hand, they were constantly in the strongest opposition to Germanism
and could not come to any agreement with it. The existence of these West Slavic states meant
a permanent threat to European peace. Europe can never come to peace if to the east of its
core there exist a Polish and a Czech state which are not willing to live in peace and quiet
with Germanness. Since, according to the experience of history, neither Poles nor Czechs are
capable of pursuing peaceful aims together with Germany, their attitude entitles Germany, in
the interest of the whole, to pursue a policy towards the Poles and Czechs which forces them -
even against their will - to cooperate in the great European tasks. To have given little thought
to the consequences of the establishment of the Polish and Czech States in this sense is one of
the greatest crimes of the authors of the Versailles Dictate. They saw here something new,
something foreign, which they did not understand and which they endeavored to keep away
from old Europe by means of a barrier zone extending from the Arctic Sea to the Black Sea.
The Versailles Dictate therefore created states and groupings of states such as are unique in
history. Everywhere a groping and searching for political and military alignment began,
everywhere a reestablishment and recycling of trade relations. The politicians of both the old
and the new states were not in a position to start again from where they had stopped in 1914.
Everything was in flux. Rarely have the views of politicians and the military been so opposed
to each other anywhere in Europe as in the post-Versailles period. The military experiences of
the World War, the experiences of the use of space and time and their filling with new
weapons, with air fleets and submarine flotillas, contributed in no small measure to this. All
had to realize that hardly any point on earth still possessed a permanent strategic value,
whether in Europe or the rest of the world.


Permanent new groupings of powers therefore emerged time and again. The interwar
period between the First and Second World Wars became a time of agreements and pacts
because of this uncertainty. Whereas before the world war of 1914/18 there had been a kind of
European equilibrium which essentially influenced the fate of the world, it had become clear
that as a result of the changed circumstances, the growth of American power, Japan's position
of power in the East Asian region and the fragmentation of Europe, this play of forces had
moved far beyond the borders of Europe. From a purely European point of view, it could no
longer be understood. Even a small European continental state, such as Czecho-Slovakia, had
to take this change into account and had to be evaluated as a factor from this point of view as
well. And one more fact stands out in this connection. The Western powers and the Soviet
Union had a variety of states in their grip, ranging from the North Cape to Greece. All these
were states which had no direct possibility of expanding themselves without causing the most
serious shocks. Likewise, none of these states possessed even the smallest overseas colony. If
one considers the demarcation of the Central European area intended by Versailles at that
time, then one first understands its hopeless situation, but also the greatness of the Fihrer's
deed in leading Germany out of this chaos of states. It is understandable that this Central
European area, as long as it possessed the Versailles form, could never come to rest, an area
above all in which almost as many peoples of other states as Germans lived, but who only had
at their disposal a surface area which amounted to somewhat more than one-sixth of the
possessions of the other states of the Central European area. Versailles had profoundly shaken


688


the fabric of the German state. The leaders of Germany's fortunes after Bismarck had failed
utterly in domestic and foreign policy. Short-sightedly they themselves brought up the
emancipation of the Jews. Jews suddenly appeared in all the leading positions of the new state,
The ship of state sailed under the Jewish flag, Let us mention only a few names such as
Rosenfeld, Simon, Schiffer, Meyer-Gerhard, Eisner, Rathenau and others. After all, one never
forgets. It was Jews living in Germany who gave the enemy the opportunity to prove
Germany's war guilt as enshrined in the Versailles Dictate. The antagonisms in Germany
became more and more acute, Spartacist uprisings were supported by Russia with money,
organizers and propaganda means of every kind. The founding of the "People's State of
Bavaria" by the Jew Eisner, the founding of the soviet republic in Munich by the Jews Levin,
Mithsam, Landauer and Sinzheimer, the establishment of the "Red Guard", looting in Berlin
and other places in Germany, in addition to the shooting of nationalists, these were the
highlights of that sad time, In Thuringia, the Vogtland and the Ruhr, the Reichswehr and
volunteers soon crumbled the Spartacist uprising. These power struggles cannot be seen as
isolated acts in German history. One must constantly bear in mind that the ideologies which
gave rise to the bloody clashes in Germany at that time were nourished by the Jewish-
Bolshevik side. They represent nothing more than Soviet interference in Central Europe in
order to make the countries in the heart of Europe ripe for Bolshevik rule. The threat of
violence from the East had only taken on a different sign as in the days of the Russian Czars.


In other countries, too, the revolution was raging; after the collapse, Austria had
made an attempt to join the German Reich, but here, all at once, the famous "right of self-
determination of peoples" was not allowed to be applied, since a union would have given
German concerns an unwelcome boost. After the collapse of Austria-Hungary, the Jew took
over the management of the rest of the Austrian state, and Austria, as a result of its legislation
for the protection of minorities, which had been forced upon it, became a paradise for the
Jews, who immigrated en masse from Poland and other countries of the East. After a short
time the Jews had already acquired such power in Austria that Vienna had almost become a
Jewish city, Austria almost a Jewish republic. In Hungary, Bela Khun (Cohn) had set up a
Russian-style soviet dictatorship. A reign of terror raged that surpassed everything that had
ever happened on European soil in terms of robbery, torture and murder. When the counter-
revolution succeeded, Bela Khun fled with his Jewish followers to Austria and was accepted
there as a "state guest". Italy too, shamefully abandoned by the beneficiaries of the Versailles
Dictate, was close to the brink of Bolshevik destruction until Mussolini powerfully seized the
helm of the state at the last minute. In Poland and Czechoslovakia, Bolshevism used Pan-
Slavism as a pretext for spreading its ideas. Here Bolshevism was given a national mantle in
order to penetrate the national circles of Western Slavs. Especially in Czecho-Slovakia his
efforts were accompanied by success. This was less successful in Poland, which, as a direct
neighbor of the Soviet Union, was at least able to lift a small corner of the camouflage which
enveloped the Bolshevik Empire from the barbed wire of its border onwards. For one thing
the Russian Empire has always understood and has been developed by the Bolshevik rule to a
true art: not to let itself be seen in the cards in any respect. Even old York von Wartenburg
felt this when . he exclaimed. "It is the puzzling thing about Russia that we cannot see into it!"
Even we of to-day have well recognized the nature of Jewish-Bolshevik domination; of the
magnitude of its military might we had only a vague idea until this conflict in the Second
World War.


In all other European countries, Bulgaria, Romania, Sweden, France and Spain,
Bolshevism is very active. The Jew was always the promoter and propagator of Bolshevik
demagogy. How many people have fallen victim to the ravages of Bolshevism is still not clear
today. Many millions have lost their lives in the Soviet Union alone. In the twenties
Bolshevism had become a power in all countries, demanding its attention both domestically
and externally. Another Jewish power, however, which had become great through the world
war, also influenced the destinies of the nations - the Jewish plutocracy. Jewry was now ina


689


position to throw the ball to each other from two sides, just as the circumstances demanded. It
was on this background of Jewish international world influence that the politics of the states
of Europe and the rest of the world took place. The Versailles Dictate had created an
intermediate or buffer zone between the Soviet Union and the rest of Europe, which included
the new states of Finland, Estonia, Latvia, Lithuania, Poland and Romania. Lithuania, Poland
and Romania, which already existed from earlier times. These weak border states were
responsible for guarding the East. They were supported in the first place by France and
England, who, in creating this cordon, had in mind above all the avoidance of close contact
between the Soviet Empire and Germany, which was lying on the ground. All the Western
States feared an immediate bloody campaign of revenge if Germany became Soviet and the
strength of the Russian Empire! could be placed directly at its disposal. It was believed, often
not wrongly, that German nationalism, in despair of national misfortune, would throw itself
into the arms of Bolshevism. Thus the League of Nations became a supervisory body over the
Central European area, especially over Germany. Constant pressure was brought to bear to
prevent Germany from daring to adopt a policy of her own. Gradually even the most die-hard
democrats, centrists, etc., in Germany saw in the twenties that the draining of the German
people by the Versailles provisions must lead to a catastrophe. In a certain sense an
antagonism arose in the own ranks of Internationalism, Masons and Jews against their own
Judeo-Masonic leadership, as the Jewish economic and financial circles of Germany
themselves began to suffer under the oppression of the German Reich. It must be stated in any
case that the economic stranglehold on the German throat was loosened only because even
Jewish international circles rooted in the German area resolutely resisted a further
strangulation of the German people, because this would have plunged Central Europe into
chaos and made a further economic utilization of the German people impossible. Only in that
case, if the German economy were allowed to recover to some extent, could one hope to
continue to exercise international domination in Germany with success. All too soon the
world had to realize that with the destruction of Germany there had also begun a simultaneous
destruction of the prosperity of the world, that the center of Europe could not be destroyed
with impunity.


These general considerations accommodated a German policy which, in 1922,
sought for the first time to regain a certain freedom of movement through the Treaty of
Rapallo with the Soviet Union. This act on the part of Germany, in order to gain something
like a free hand on one side at least, was regarded with the greatest suspicion on all sides,
since at that time the ruling forces of the West still did not know how the course in the Soviet
Union would one day run, and for this reason it had been preferred up to that time not to
resume diplomatic relations with the Soviet Union. The Jewish financial circles had supported
the Menshevik direction of the Russian Social-Democracy most vigorously, but when the
Bolsheviks declared that the foreign debt was no longer due, the wrath of the Jewish bankers
was aroused. They realized that the leadership of Eastern Europe had slipped out of their
hands. This also sufficiently explains the support of the White armies and Poland against the
Bolsheviks in the years 1918/20. Only very gradually did the international solidarity of Jewry,
of Jewish rule in East and West, again become more apparent, to the same extent that the
Bolshevists had again become "socially acceptable". At that time the Treaty of Rapallo had
immediately aroused the opposition of England and France in particular, but also of Poland
and Czechoslovakia, which manifested itself in renewed and intensified blackmail. The
international Jewry and the stock exchange controlled by it saw to it that through further
pressure the Mark sank into the bottomless pit in 1922/23 and that any desire for freedom on
the part of the German people was nipped in the bud. During this time there was a lively
exchange of goods between Germany and the Soviet Union. German machines, German
engineers and skilled workers went to the Soviet Union in increased numbers and were
employed there within the framework of the Russian Five-Year Plan. Germany was very
restricted in its freedom of movement, it had to somehow get its economy going again and try
to make an impact abroad. The Russian Five-Year Plans accommodated the German striving


690


to get out of the confines of space. It must be stated with all clarity that Germany played an
outstanding role in the initial construction of the Soviet Union. Only later did America take its
place. It is the tragic consequence of the foolishness of that time that Germany's participation
in many of the military points of the Five-Year Plans forged weapons which were later to be
used against the same Germany when it had to take up the flag of Europe in the Second World
War against the Jewish Bolshevik Asiatism. It was against this economic background that the
political power struggles of the last ten years before the National Socialists came to power in
Germany were played out. Germany was always viewed with suspicion, especially by France.
France had set up the system of "collective pacts" to secure its hegemony in Europe and did
not think of letting go of it. Any attempt, even the slightest, to rearmament was nipped in the
bud. The power struggles of the parties in the German Reichstag prevented any strong
external political activity, and Germany ultimately remained isolated despite its admission to
the League of Nations. In no way could it think of fulfilling its historical tasks towards the
East. The situation was no better for the USSR, which, despite all its efforts, was unable to
join the West for the reasons already described. Germany and the Soviet Union were directly
and indirectly confronted with a pact system which was unmistakably directed against
Germany at its apex, but which, through the interweaving of interests, also always contained a
point against the Soviet Union. After all, Poland, which was in an alliance with France, also
saw the danger coming from the East, even if it was seen here more in terms of power politics
than ideology. Relations with the Lithuanians and the Czechs were tense anyway Romania
had found a foothold in the small Entente, but also found itself between three probable
opponents in the East, South and West, namely between the USSR, Bulgaria and Hungary
Only with difficulty could the League of Nations bridge all these antagonisms, even if only
externally. League of Nations has never in any way promoted or even possessed a European
sense of community, despite the fact that European states, namely France and England, were
the most influential partners in it.


The two isolated states of Germany and the Soviet Union came closer together in the
so-called Berlin Treaty of April 24, 1926 (extended in 1931 and 1933). On the one hand, this
treaty defined the line of Germany, which did not want to be drawn into the threatening
Anglo-Soviet conflict (marching through Germany against the Soviet Union); on the other
hand, it indirectly gave the USSR protection against strong attacks by the Western powers.
Already in the years 1921 to 1925 the USSR had managed to secure its southern border by
treaties of friendship with Persia, Afghanistan, Turkey, China and Japan. The Soviet Empire
had to gain time in order first to consolidate its forces within the country, and then to be able
to place the power of the state in a strengthened form behind the Bolshevik idea. Never did
the Soviet Union renounce the international character of Bolshevism, in spite of its apparent
renunciation of it. The two Five-Year Plans always served primarily to create out of the Red
Army an offensive weapon, in order to bring with its help to the world the gratification of the
Bolshevik idea. Germany's turning to the USSR sprang only from the compulsion to get out of
the entanglement in which the Western Powers held her. Lenin and Stalin, through the failure
of the partial Bolshevik uprisings in the states of Europe, had seen that with the underground
work of Bolshevism alone the goal of bringing the whole world under sickle and hammer
could not be attained, There had to be a strong military force behind it to force, if necessary
by force of arms, the carrying out of the Bolshevik revolution. The struggle of the Bolsheviks
in Moscow for de jure and de facto recognition in the twenties also served only this one aim,
They sought to stimulate the covetousness of the countries by means of trade earnings in order
to in turn gain entry for Bolshevism into these countries through trade representations and
consulates. In addition, the trade relations had to serve the rearmament in the second place.
Thus the Soviet Union slowly grew to become an important factor in the world economy and
thus also became a considerable political power again. Gradually, however, the Bolshevik
Jews succeeded in convincing their plutocratic co-religionists that basically their ideas of
world domination were not so different; only the methods of achieving this world domination
of Jewry were different. After all, the League of Nations was nothing more than an institution


691


for the fortification of Jewish plutocratic power. This League of Nations of the Western States
was opposed by a League of Nations of the Bolshevik Eastern peoples in their union as the
"Union of Socialist Republics". England and France, as the dominant powers of the League of
Nations, never grasped the danger threatening Europe from this union. Sailing in the Jewish
wake, they have betrayed it without understanding. The work done in this respect by
Litvinov-Finkelstein is in no way to be underestimated. These considerations also make the
admission of the Soviet Union into the League of Nations (1934) and the finally intimate
relationship between plutocracy and Bolshevism in this world war appear understandable. In
this way, the Soviet Union was able to "consolidate itself internally and gain a certain role as
a state power externally. At a feverish pace, the more the conditions in Europe seemed to be
coming to a head, the more rearmament was undertaken in order to be able, when the time
came, to get it in time. Germany, on the other hand, still had a long and arduous road ahead of
her. The fetters of the Versailles Dictate, its defensive geography, and the hatred and
resentment of its neighbors made a rise much more difficult and dangerous.And yet this rise
was to come. It is regrettable that in this small framework the internal political events in
Germany cannot be dealt with in more detail, even though they are closely related to the later
events in foreign policy. Never have domestic events and foreign policy actions had such a
strong mutual interaction as in the German Reich since the National Socialists took power in
1933. The Fithrer's assumption of power created the internal conditions for a turnaround in
foreign policy. In a short time, a formidable Wehrmacht was again created. Germany, united
and strengthened under National Socialist leadership, suddenly became a participant in the
political game that should not be underestimated. The German revolution, however,
‘simultaneously meant the revolution of interstate relations. In a short time, they threw the
distorted images of democratic political leadership overboard.


If one examines the period from the end of the World War to the assumption of power, it can
be seen, looking to the East, that two currents are pressing against the Central European area:


1. The attempt by West Slavic peoples, the Poles and the Czech Republic, to penetrate further
into the Central German area. These attempts find benevolent toleration from the Western
powers, and economic support from the Versailles Dictate itself through the provision of two
rivers, the Elbe and the Oder. The free port district for Czecho-Slovakia in the port of
Hamburg marks the furthest extension of a West Slavic advance. The advances into the
Central European area itself are weak and, seen as a danger, do not go much beyond the limits
laid down in the Versailles Dictate, since these Slavic states are for the time being still fully
occupied with their work of consolidating conditions in their own new state formations. The
weak defense from the German side is therefore to be regarded as sufficient within the
German Reich territory, but not the protection of their own nationality in the newly founded
states of Poland and Czecho-Slovakia.


2.The attempt of the East Slavic-Mongolian peoples, especially under Jewish leadership, to
penetrate the Central European area and beyond into the whole of Europe by three routes.


a) By blending the Pan-Slavic idea with the Bolshevik doctrine, to give the Incidental Slav
peoples a new impulse to unite all Slav peoples and to unite the West Slav peoples, not
forgetting the Slav Balkan peoples, with the Bolshevik core empire. In the course of the
Polish-Soviet War in 1920, a violent confrontation ensued, which, however, was lost by the
Soviet side. Later the attempt of the economic influence follows. Thus, these are attempts to
drive the Slavic-Mongolian front directly to the west.


b) The direct attempts of ideological, political, military and economic influence on the states
sanctioned by the Versailles Dictate, Finland, Estonia, Latvia, Lithuania and Romania. Here,
too, the Soviet Union attempted to gain influence through military means of power as early as
1919/20. In Finland, Estonia, Latvia and Lithuania German troops played an important part in


692


driving out the Bolshevik hordes. The later defensive struggle, as a result of German
powerlessness and political opposition, was not supported by Germany, if one does not want
to call Germany's relatively strong economic relations with these countries a support, but
primarily politically by the states of the European West, by France and England, which,
however, were also Poland and Czecho-Slovakia in the struggle for their state existence. In
these countries, therefore, it is likewise a question of Bolshevism attempting to work directly
beyond its western frontier.


c) To make spatially distant peoples ripe for the Bolshevik revolution by spreading Jewish-
Bolshevik doctrine, to expand and occupy these outlying positions in order to conquer the
other surrounding states from them again. Special attention is paid here to the states of Central
and Northern Europe, since their importance had become clear to the Bolsheviks. After the
failure of the attempt at Bolshevik interference, their main activity was transferred to Asia
Minor, North Africa and, above all, Spain. The defense in the European states is of varying
strength in itself. In three important states it leads in the course of time to a radical
renunciation of Bolshevism, in Italy, which dominates the central part of the Mediterranean,
in Germany, which dominates Central Europe, and later on the Iberian Peninsula in Spain and
Portugal. In general, it must be said here that the defense against the danger threatening from
the East is at first not led out of the strength of a superior worldview, but that state-political
concerns play the greatest role. Later, the picture changes in part through the creation of the
German-Italian-Spanish bloc of order. Neither France nor England had the slightest thought of
seeing the enemy in the Bolshevik idea that was storming from the East; they were concerned
only with the preservation of the status quo as it had been established by the Versailles
Dictate. The European states, already undermined by Bolshevism, were thus just as
defenseless in the face of Soviet propaganda as they were militarily completely inadequate to
counter the threatening advance of the Russian war machine.


XL. National Socialist Germany takes over again the old historical task of securing Europe
against the East.


The period of the German attempt to come to terms with the new Soviet Russia
without any ideological defensive force was brought to an end by the National Socialist
revolution in Germany their sudden end, It meant at the same time a rupture of political
principles and actions, which the states of the Versailles Dictate were at first almost stunned
to face. They did not understand German policy, they did not understand the speed of German
action, and above all they did not understand that the principles of the National Socialist
world view determined their political actions down to the last detail. They faced the sudden
German activity with a lack of understanding which made it partly more difficult, partly also
easier, since the enemy's policy here simply could not keep pace. German foreign policy
could at first count on no other help than the willingness of its own people to go along with
and support this policy to the utmost. The seizure of power in Germany had dealt a heavy
blow to world Jewry. Jewry knew very well that only he who possessed the heart of Europe
could really rule Europe. From all sides the heat against National Socialist Germany began.
New plots, new alliances were prepared and .forged to finally destroy this hated country,
perhaps even to wipe it off the map. There may have been many leading Jews at that time who
"regretted" that at that moment there was no sword available in any country of Europe to
crush National Socialist Germany. Moreover, during the first years of the National Socialist
revolution it was hoped that there was still time and that the movement would collapse again
of its own accord. Italy was the first to take account of the emerging shift in power by
attempting to create a bloc out of Italy, France, England and Germany. The Four-Power Pact
of Rome in 1933 was never ratified, however. In the first place, it was again England that
made Jewish views its own. The agitation of Jewry against National Socialism and the plans
for world domination foisted upon it soon fell on fertile ground in London, but England did
not feel militarily strong enough to take immediate action against Germany. The secret


693


archives of the former Czechoslovak Foreign Office have made the duplicity of British policy
convincingly clear. But they also prove that the British Government prepared the war against
Germany against the will of the broad mass of the English people, that the British
Government counted even then on being able to play off the USSR against National Socialist
Germany. The whole of Chamberlain's readiness to understand, according to these documents,
had only the purpose of gaining time for rearmament. There has never been in England,
before the Second World War as before the First, a sense of European unity which recognized
the necessity of protecting Europe in its open flank against the East. Even now England has
only her own policy in mind, never the interests of Europe. In this world war, just as in earlier
times, England has committed historical treason against Europe and has driven Bolshevik
Russia against Europe out of her own narrow capitalist interests, in order to relieve herself
and not to have to make any sacrifices in the interests of Europe.


This egoistic policy of England was opposed by the purposeful will of the Fihrer,
who was imbued with the conviction that Europe, without a strong Germany, must constantly
be and remain the plaything of intersecting interests. The Fihrer consciously pursued a
European policy which did not shrink from the responsibility for the fate of Europe. In 1934
the Fiihrer succeeded in reaching a certain political agreement with Pilsudski, in which the
question of minorities also played a role, and in dispersing the heavy weather clouds in the
German-Polish sky. This treaty and the later apparently improving relations between
Germany and Poland had far reaching significance; France was greatly disturbed by this
agreement and sought to join with the Soviet Union, which was only too glad to seize the
opportunity to regain greater influence in Europe (Eastern Pact Plan). Again and again the
Fuhrer emphasized, contrary to the bellicose sounds which resounded above all from the other
side of the Rhine, the willingness to live in peace and tranquility with all peoples, especially
France and England (e.g., in the reclamation of the Saar region). The Jewish-led press,
however, deliberately created everywhere a psychosis of hatred and aggression against the
German Reich, which was transmitted to the governments and prevented a peaceful
understanding. There was no willingness to allow Germany to satisfy its most elementary
needs. In the meantime, the situation in Austria had become more and more acute.


The Marxist unrest of 1934 was followed by a steady increase in Austrian voices in
favor of National Socialism and of union with Germany. The possibility of a union of
Germany and Austria to form the Greater German Reich met with excited protest on all sides
and led to various declarations of guarantee and tensions. It always proved to be the greatest
obstacle that France did not want to renounce the security system of the "collective pacts". In
the opinion of the Western powers, a union of Austria and Germany would have shaken the
balance of power in the whole of Europe to the greatest possible extent. It was a long and
arduous road that the Fihrer had to travel until finally, in 1938, Austria and then the
Sudetenland were allowed to return to the Greater German Fatherland. One of the most
important stages in this process were the declarations of October 24, 1936, between Germany
and Italy, which overcame Italy's distrust of German efforts at hegemony and made possible a
strong German policy after the establishment of the Berlin-Rome axis. After the establishment
of German military freedom and the invasion of the neutralized territories of the Western
Zone, which had been caused by the Franco-Soviet-Czech pact of 1935, Germany had again
become capable of alliance, (Map 16.) Like a red thread running through the Fihrer's active
policy since the assumption of power is the idea of securing the German and European area
against the dangers threatening from the East. The defeat of Bolshevik ideologies within the
Reich has always been carried out with this in mind. For in the East of Europe sat the power
in the USSR which threatened Europe with its Bolshevik claims to power. This internal
Bolshevik danger had first of all to be overcome, if the further preconditions for a
strengthening Germany were to be given. As a second problem, it was only then that the
tensions with the West Slavic states, whose anti-German policy posed a constant threat to the
German area, could be settled.


694


As we know, the attempt was successful at first, since Poland was also increasingly
feeling the Soviet pressure coming from the East. It was only Poland's later turning towards
France and England and its rejection of German proposals for the settlement of the ethnic
differences that led to warlike confrontations. In the same way the anti-German attitude of
Czecho-Slovakia finally caused the dissolution of that state. Hereby the dangers directly
threatening the German heartland had been averted. Thirdly, during the Spanish Civil War it
seemed necessary to combat the Bolshevik attempts at influence here too, since in the event of
a Bolshevik victory in Spain there was a danger - here the Fiihrer's purposeful action in the
overall interests of Europe obviously already begins - that the rest of Europe might be taken in
hand by Bolshevism. The fourth and most important problem to be settled was the relation to
the Soviet Union, the hearth of all unrest in Europe, unrest. At first the Fithrer, like Bismarck,
succeeded in settling the problems peacefully with the USSR, contrary to the law of gravity.
These efforts were foreign policy and military in nature, since Germany's military strength
was not sufficient to enable it to throw its Wehrmacht into the balance as a political weight.
Only the unchanged anti-European attitude of the Soviet Union brought the natural
heavyweights back into their own. Throughout its existence, during the struggle and after the
seizure of power, National Socialism has drawn attention to the questions threatening the
world through Bolshevism. In 1936 it became obvious even to those who were far away that
National Socialism was in no way willing to abandon the main points of its program, but to
realize honestly and with conviction what it had written on its banners. It caused a great
sensation everywhere when, on November 25, 1936, Germany and Japan joined forces to
fight the Communist International. A year later, in November 1937, Italy also signed this
agreement. The fronts were fixed in their main lines, on the ramparts of which Bolshevism
was to and must one day break. Today too, imbued with the spirit of National Socialism, it
follows the call of the Fihrer, who with a strong hand and a sense of responsibility takes up
again the flag which Germanic leaders had already held aloft more than 2000 years ago
against the Mongol hordes charging in from the East.


Again and again the Fithrer tried to settle the differences peacefully; again and again
he tried to reach an agreement with the "democratic" states for the good of Europe, out of true
conviction he extended his hand of peace to them, he offered disarmament, wanted to
guarantee borders and tried to free the Western powers from the entanglement of their
collective security pacts and to make them aware again of their great European cultural
mission. Again and again his peace proposals were rejected. It is not Germany's fault that
these unification for the good of Europe, which have been striven for again and again, have
remained without success. The fault was and is borne only by international Jewry, which
already dominates France and England to such an extent that these peoples are no longer able
to free themselves from their tutelage.


As a result of the resurgence of Germany, a reassessment of the Central European
area and, above all, of the states of the buffer zone vis-a-vis the Soviet Union had to be
undertaken. Whereas in the period before the seizure of power this border area had had the
task, according to the will of the authors of the Versailles Dictate, of preventing the coming
together of two states, it now separated two mortal enemies, the National Socialist world view
and Bolshevism, and for the time being prevented a warlike confrontation. The Soviet Union
grew militarily stronger with every year of the Five-Year Plan and prepared itself for a
passage of arms into Europe. But also the German Wehrmacht became more powerful day by
day. Whereas Germany had hitherto been able to consider defence policy only passively as a
result of its military weakness, it now gradually became an active factor in European politics.
Germany had a decisive interest in not allowing the Soviet Union to penetrate further into the
Baltic region. Germany was militarily and economically interested to the highest degree in the
independence of the buffer belt, especially as long as its armaments were not superior to those
of the Soviet Union and of a possible second adversary in the West. The Soviet Union, on the


695


other hand, if it wanted to regain full weight as a European power at all, if it wanted to carry
the Bolshevik revolution further into the Baltic and Central European area by force of arms,
had to try to break up this belt and, if possible, to reach a frontier into Europe roughly
corresponding to that before the First World War in 1914. Germany, as long as these buffer
states existed, was the natural ally of them. Poland, too, which could hardly do without the
flank cover provided by the existence of Lithuania, Latvia, Estonia and Rumania against the
East, if only for purely strategic reasons, was deluded enough not to include in its calculations,
for ideological reasons, the support which it could have found in Germany. The Jewry of the
world, in its hatred of National Socialist Germany, has always succeeded in keeping all these
States from adopting a rational policy towards the strengthening German Reich. In Finland
and Estonia alone, which have only very small Jewish populations, there were perceptive
sections which regarded National Socialist Germany as a natural ally against the Bolshevik
Moloch. The peace efforts of the Fuhrer, who in the final analysis wanted nothing more than
to build up the new German state in peace after the establishment of the Greater German
Reich, were unsuccessful, since Jewry of all shades had already decided on a war of
extermination against Germany. It is in this sense that all Germany's efforts for peace are to
be understood: the lifting of the war-guilt lie by Germany, the attempt to guarantee Belgium
by Germany, and the efforts to come to a reasonable settlement with England. Even the
Munich Agreement remained only an episode, honestly meant on the part of the Fiihrer,
dishonestly held and commented on by the enemies.


Germany was willing to live in peace and friendship with her neighbors, but she
could not admit that Czechoslovakia was becoming the "aircraft mother ship" of the Soviets.
Czechoslovakia stuck out like a thorn in the German flesh. The Fuehrer, in spite of all the
oppression and enslavement to which German people were subjected in Czechoslovakia, was
prepared to live in peace and friendship with that state also. The hostile influences were
stronger and forced a radical solution of this question. It was Poland's blindness that finally
brought about the Second World War. The Fuehrer's desire for the annexation of German
Danzig and the creation of a narrow, strategically worthless connection to East Prussia were
certainly modest. Fate had willed otherwise. Poland, too, had become so completely enslaved
to the international Jewish and West-Idustrial currents that it did not see the danger of
jeopardizing its existence as a state after barely twenty years of independence. After the
Polish campaign had ended, it had become clear before all the world that Germany had
rediscovered the historic path to the East. Germany was once again securing Europe; but at
the same time a people of almost 100 million was in the process of acquiring the space it
needed in order to be able to live. Today we are still in the midst of events of that Second
World War, and yet we must already bow reverently before a higher power which forced the
German people, one might almost say against its own will for peace and against the patient
peace efforts of the Fiihrer, onto a course which will give it once and for all the space for its
peoplehood and which will secure Europe for a long time against attacks from the East.But
even with the destruction of the Polish state, the way to European peace had not been cleared.
The Fihrer's renewed offer of peace to the West was rejected by England and the Jewish
plutocracy. Germany had to fight on. In the background, however, Bolshevik Russia was
already preparing for the decisive clash of arms.Since Germany was still strongly bound by its
enemies in the West, it had to agree to the Soviet Union "liberating" the Belorussian and
Ukrainian parts of the former Polish Empire and advancing to a demarcation line agreed
between the German and Soviet governments in the catchment area of the Vistula. At the
same time, Germany could not prevent the Soviet Union from establishing itself through
bases on the Baltic coast. A short time later the Soviet-Finnish war broke out (December 1,
1939), which was broken off by the Soviet side, in order to bring Finland also under Soviet
influence. Finland was forced to surrender bases at the Baltic Sea to the Soviet Union after a
heroic fight (March 12, 1940).


696


The year 1940 saw the destruction of German opponents in the northwest and west,
then in the spring of 1941 of the Balkan peoples under Jewish plutocratic influence. Again the
Soviet Union took advantage of the German bond and brought Lithuania, Latvia and Estonia
completely under Soviet influence (August 3, 5 and 6, 1940). From this moment on, the
Soviet Union had gained a starting position against National Socialist Germany which
appeared more dangerous than at the beginning of the First World War. If the First World
War, at least in its beginning, had essentially still been fought in two dimensions, on water
and on land, now the air was added as a third dimension, in which and from which enemy
action was to be expected. For the Soviet air force, together with the naval forces, now
threatened the German Baltic shipping and the military-economic assets of northern and
northeastern Germany in the most serious way. When finally, on November 10, 1940, Molotov
demanded in Berlin that the Fiihrer agree to the occupation of the whole of Finland and
northern Scandinavia, it had become clear that the Soviet Union was not thinking of
renouncing its expansion into Europe that it would soon feel strong enough to pursue its aims
further by military means a new Chinggis Khan threatened Central and Northern Europe, a
new procession of Slavic-Mongolian peoples was preparing itself, and once again the core of
Germanic peoples was faced with the task of securing its living space. This Mongol storm,
however, got its special face through the international forces of Jewry behind it, which
whipped the masses of the Russian peoples forward against the German Reich for the
preservation of its world dominion. Germany entered into a struggle for being or not being,
Germany's Wehrmacht stood as a wall in front of its own and European borders and protected
its own country and Europe, which was often enough still inwardly hostile to it, from the
Bolshevik hordes. Even if today many members of European nations still do not understand
the purpose and deeper meaning of this titanic struggle that broke out in the East, one day
they will have to realize that this struggle was also waged for them in order to preserve their
own kind and morals. Some of the peoples of Europe still stand aloof, but they too will one
day understand that the victims of this war have fallen for them too, and will bow down
before them in gratitude; Germany, however, is consciously fighting for the ground in order to
free and secure herself and Europe from Jewish plutocratic and Jewish Bolshevik
domination.Securing Europe! Towards the north, the west and the south Europe is secured by
defensive geographical conditions, but it is also constricted, never has a people in the long run
been able to benefit from these, for European people were able to conquer and hold
substantial parts of the European soil from their own sides. In the East, however, Europe lacks
all natural protection; from the East, through the Caspian depression, the streams of foreign
blood flooded into the European region. Thousands upon thousands of Germanic clans have
been annihilated in this eastern region, because the heartland was unable or unwilling to
protect them. From now on Germany will not let the safeguarding of Europe out of her hands,
neither in terms of blood nor politically, militarily and also economically. The most valuable
human races of the European area shall never again be corrupted by blood streams and
ideologies of foreign races. German energy will see to it that what has been won by the sword
will never again be lost in peace. One word of the Reichsfihrer-SS, however, must become a
fact for the fulfillment of this task:


"Our task is not to Germanize the East in the old sense, that is, to teach the people living


there German language and German laws, but to see to it that only people of really Germanic
German blood live in the East."


697


Alfred Rofenberg on the Racial
Soul


The following excerpts summarizing Alfred Rosenberg’s ideas about the Race Soul
are from his great book, The Myth of the Twentieth Century: An Evaluation of the Spiritual-
Intellectual Confrontations of Our Age.


Rosenberg believes that there is a spiritual as well as a biological side to race. It must
be noted that he does not deny the existence of the individual person and the individual soul,
but that these are connected to the race and race soul and that some important characteristics
of people are shared by the race to which that person belongs.


We on our side do not deny very diverse influences: landscape and climate and
political tradition; but all this is outweighed by blood and the blood linked character. Things
evolve around the reconquest of this order of rank. To reestablish the ingeniousness of healthy
blood, is perhaps the greatest task upon which man can set himself today. At the same time,
this affirmation gives evidence of the sad situation of the body and the spirit, that such a deed
has become a vital necessity. A contribution to this great coming act of liberation of the 20th
century is what the present book intends to be. Not only the shaking up of many awakening
men, but also of opponents, is the desired result.


Today one of those epochs is beginning in which world history must be written
anew.The old images of the human past have faded, the outlines of leading personalities are
distorted, their inner driving forces falsely interpreted, their whole nature for the most part
totally misjudged. A youthful life force -- which also knows itself to be age old -- is impelled
toward form; an ideology, a world view, has been born and, strong of will, begins to contend
with old forms, ancient sacred practices, and outworn standards. This means no longer
historically but fundamentally; not in a few special domains but everywhere; not only upon
the heights but also at the roots. And this sign of our times is reflected in a turning away from
absolute values, that is to say, in a retreat from values held to be beyond all organic
experience, which the isolated ego once devised to create, by peaceful or violent means, a
universal spiritual community. Once, such an ultimate aim was the Christianising of the world
and its redemption through the second coming of Christ. Another goal was represented by the
humanist dream of mankind. Both ideals have been buried in the bloody chaos of the Great
War, and in the subsequent rebirth out of this calamity, despite the fact that now one, and now
the other, still find increasingly fanatical adherents and a venerable priesthood. These are
processes of petrifaction and no longer of living tissue: a belief which has died in the soul
cannot be raised from the dead.


Humanity, the universal church, or the sovereign ego, divorced from the bonds of
blood, are no longer absolute values for us. They are dubious, even moribund, dogmas which
lack polarity and which represent the ousting of nature in favour of abstractions. The
emergence in the nineteenth century of Darwinism and positivism constituted the first
powerful, though still wholly materialistic, protest against the lifeless and suffocating ideas
which had come from Syria and Asia Minor and had brought about spiritual degeneracy.
Christianity, with its vacuous creed of ecumenicalism and its ideal of HUMANITAS,
disregarded the current of red blooded vitality which flows through the veins of all peoples of


698


true worth and genuine culture. Blood was reduced to a mere chemical formula and explained
in that way. But today an entire generation is beginning to have a presentiment that values are
only created and preserved where the law of blood still determines the ideas and actions of
men, whether consciously or unconsciously. At the subconscious level, whether in cult or in
life, man obeys the commands of the blood, as if in dreams or, according to natural insight, as
a happy expression describes this harmony between nature and culture. But culture, with the
growth of all subconscious activity and of expanding consciousness and knowledge, becomes
more and more intellectual, and ultimately engenders not creative tension but, in fact, discord.
In this way, reason and understanding are divorced from race and nature and released from
the bonds of blood. The ensuing generation falls victim to the individualistic system of
intellectual absolutes, and separates itself more and more from its natural environment,
mixing itself with alien blood. It is through this desecration of the blood that personality,
people, race and culture perish. None who have disregarded the religion of the blood have
escaped this nemesis -- neither the Indians nor the Persians, neither the Greeks nor the
Romans. Nor will Nordic Europe escape if it does not call a halt, turning away from bloodless
absolutes and spiritually empty delusions, and begin to hearken trustingly once again to the
subtle welling up of the ancient sap of life and values. Once we recognize the awesome
conflict between blood and environment and between blood and blood as the ultimate
phenomenon beyond which we are not permitted to probe, a new and, in every respect, richly
coloured picture of human history becomes manifest. This recognition at once brings with it
the knowledge that the struggle of the blood and the intuitive awareness of life's mystique are
simply two aspects of the same thing. Race is the image of soul. The entire racial property is
an intrinsic value without relationship to material worshipers who apprehend only discrete
events in time and space, without experiencing these events as the greatest and most profound
of all secrets. Racial history is therefore simultaneously natural history and soul mystique.
The history of the religion of the blood, however, is conversely the great world story of the
rise and fall of peoples, their heroes and thinkers, their inventors and artists.


"This unity also holds for German history, for its men, its values, for the very old and
new Myth, and for the supporting ideas of German folkhood. One form of Odin is dead, that
is, the Odin who was the highest of the many gods who appeared as the embodiment of a
generation still given up to natural symbolism. But Odin as the eternal mirrored image of the
primal spiritual powers of Nordic man lives today just as he did over 5,000 years ago.
Hermann Wirth finds traces of decline also in the ancient world of gods and influences of the
Eskimo race. This may be so, but does not influence what is actually Germanic. He embodies
himself in honour and heroism, in the creation of song and or art, in the protection of law and
in the eternal search for wisdom. Odin learned that through the guilt of the gods, through the
breaking of the bond to the builders of Valhalla, the race of the gods must perish. Despite this
decline, he nevertheless commanded Heimdall to summon the Aesir with his horn for the final
decisive battle. Dissatisfied, eternally searching, the god wandered through the universe to try
to fathom his destiny and the nature of his being. He sacrificed an eye so that he might
participate in the deepest wisdom. As an eternal wanderer he is a symbol of the eternally
searching and becoming Nordic soul which cannot withdraw self confidently back to Jehovah
and his representatives. The headstrong activity of the will, which, at first, drives so roughly
through the Nordic lands in the battle songs about Thor, showed directly at their first
appearance the innate, striving, wisdom seeking, metaphysical side in Odin the Wanderer. But
the same spirit is revealed once again with the great, free Ostrogoths and the devout Ulfilas. It
is also revealed, in accordance with the times, in the strengthened Knights Order and in the
great Nordic western mystics as seen in their greatest spirit, Meister Eckehart. When, in
Frederick's Prussia, the soul which once gave birth to Odin was revived at Hohenfriedberg
and Leuthen, it was also reborn in the soul of the Thomas church cantor, Bach, and in Goethe.
From this viewpoint our assertion will appear deeply justified, that a heroic Nordic saga, a
Prussian march, a composition by Bach, a sermon by Eckehart, and a monologue by Faust, are
only varied experiences of one and the same soul. They are creations of the same will. They


699


are eternal powers which were first united under the name Odin and which later gained form
in Frederick the Great and Bismarck. As long as these powers are operative, as long as Nordic
blood mixes with a Nordic soul and will, Nordic man will be active and work in mystic union.
This is the prerequisite of every true to type creation."


"The racially linked soul is the measure of all our ideas, our striving will and actions,
the final measuring rod of our values."


700


FRIEDRICG NIETSCAE


Alfred Rosenberg


We have come together today to commemorate a great German who once became a
revolutionary out of inner protest against his intellectual and political environment, who had
to bear the fate of being misunderstood for decades, and who is only now approaching his
historical appreciation. This debate of ours today cannot be about showing in detail the
development of all Friedrich Nietzsche’s thoughts, nor about examining what has emerged, as
it were, from the manifold, rich effectiveness as a system of his thought, but rather about
commemorating the man himself. We can do this today with all the more understanding in a
general overview of his work, because Nietzsche’s work is not so much about the construction
and expansion of a philosophical edifice, but essentially always about the problem of the
attitude of destiny. It was this attitude to the fate of the time that surrounded him that forced
Nietzsche to take his path from the “Birth of Tragedy” to the “Untimely Meditations” to
“Beyond Good and Evil” and to his ever-harder onslaught against the entire world of the 19th
century. His personal experience is therefore more closely linked to his work than that of
many other thinkers and designers; indeed, his work can hardly really be interpreted without
this experience. The essential question of his life, which he once voiced: “Is today - greatness
possible?”, determined his entire thoughts and actions. It is unlikely that such a question ever
became the fate of a thinker; for he, who searched for greatness, nobility and nobility of
attitude and mind, and for the conditions of a hierarchy of existence that took these into
account, saw around him precisely the decline of such possibilities and the increasingly clear
emergence of everything that he felt and valued as the opposite of greatness and nobility. This
question he posed to life and its negation by the environment of his time, this is the human-
thought conflict of Friedrich Nietzsche and is at the same time the secret of his ruthlessly
dissecting analysis and his prophecy of the conflicts of a future world, which grows out of the
merciless realization of the situation. Nietzsche was the Prometheus of his time, whose torch
illuminated even the darkest corners of the most guarded and yet so often mothballed
traditions, but also a dangerous torch that threatened to set fire to many things that were still
rightly guarded, serving as a bridge from the past to the future. Nietzsche was born into a time
of tremendous enrichment of knowledge from the historical epochs of all folks. The 19th
century was not only a century of technology, but also a century of the collection of historical
knowledge of the oldest nations and cultures, a century when all forms and styles of art were
scientifically arranged before the contemplating eye, an age which he himself described as an
epoch of “style masquerades”. The latest industrial buildings combined with historical and
art-historical knowledge to create a confusing intellectual costume. The “European mixed
man”, however, needed such a costume, for the poorer he became inwardly, the more he
believed he needed to drape himself with the borrowed and learned treasures of the past in
order to cover up or conceal his ever-increasing emptiness. In the 19th century, the European
nations rebuilt themselves in terms of power in the midst of this environment. It was only at
this time that France was able to bring the storms of the revolution of the 18th century into
viable form, Italy, after centuries of disunity, was united as one state, and Germany
experienced a new foundation of the empire as the apparent fulfillment of a long-cherished
dream of its best.


However, this national political upswing was combined with the problems of a new
industrial age, which the liberal worldview was not able to really master. It taught freedom of
the economy, freedom of trade, it lived in a spiritually limited optimism, as if the facilitation
of traffic, the exchange of living goods with other continents, the increase in technical
comforts etc. meant an eternal progress of culture and civilization, even if disturbed by many
a military political conflict, but basically unstoppable. Art was regarded as relaxation or


701


entertainment, people lived or tried to live the old styles, and only a few understood that this
amalgamation of historical and art-historical knowledge did not yet mean creative power. The
social tensions that arose were also seen as disturbing phenomena of “economic progress”,
but people closed their eyes to the fact that the industries were pushing millions and millions
more down into a stratum that could call itself the proletariat. It was overlooked that such an
oppressed, ever-growing stratum could become the victim of doctrines that incited it against
everything that had once really founded folks, states and cultures. Dissolution, collapse, wars
and revolutions loomed on the horizon. This same gaze then had to feel all the more lonely in
this busy, short-sighted, yet presumptuous environment, as warnings and a helping new
representation of form were not heard, or barely heard, but in any case not understood, and
ultimately remained entirely without echo. To portray this development means to tell
Nietzsche’s life from the inside and to make both his relationship to Germany, to history, to
Europe, to religion and to the social question of his time understandable. He knew very well
that he could not be fully heard, he also knew that he no longer belonged to the 19th century,
and he called himself and the few he hoped for the “Europeans of the day after tomorrow”,
the “firstlings of the twentieth century”. But this insight could not heal and forget the wounds
that arose again and again when Nietzsche’s analysis and remote view came up against his
presence and when his calls remained unheard all his life. Like him, many had felt who hoped
for the heroic Germany of 1871 and saw the Bleichréders, then the Ballins and comrades
grow up in the shadow of this conquered empire. Some had spoken out who today we also
classify as the prophets of our time, some had become close to Nietzsche, others had worked
unknown to him: they did not become a jointly coalescing intellectual and political power. It
was something that was missing in this age of busy commercial politics to lead great folks to
the consciousness of themselves, namely great suffering. This is also why Nietzsche knew
very well when he wrote:


“The discipline of suffering, of great suffering - do you not know that only this discipline has
created all the elevations of man so far?”


Only such a common suffering increases the tension of the soul, only the sight of a
great and universal destiny strengthens inventiveness and bravery in the struggle. Only such
suffering can call people, i.e. a whole community that feels a suffering together, to great
achievements. And this prerequisite for the realization of his prophecy in a contemplating folk
had to be denied Friedrich Nietzsche. There are epochs in world history in which thinkers and
statesmen, struggling in vain against their time, draw a new shape for the future and make it
possible, without ever being able to participate in its fulfillment themselves. There are other
thinkers and statesmen whose thought and action can be translated into a great political-
revolutionary, ideological movement, where they, marching ahead as it were, also at the same
time formative and politically leading, unite worldview and state policy. Nietzsche was one of
the first and thus had to savor the tragedy of such a fate to the full, because he did not resign
himself to this fate with humor and composure, despite his desire to do so, but the less he was
heard, the more vehemently he spoke, and the smaller the echo, the louder he called for an
answering voice. Wilhelm Raabe, who also had to reject many things about the Germany of
that time and his entire era that were dangerously heading towards a dark future, said
thoughtfully:


“The German genius draws a third of its strength from the philistine.”


This smiling and wise insight could not suffice for Nietzsche, who essentially did
not see the sedate, quiet, industrious petty bourgeoisie before him, but found it long since
overgrown by a capitalist bourgeoisie, and who saw this upper middle class developing into
ever more exclusive wealth-conditioning positions on the one hand, and on the other hand the
increasing disenfranchised of this whole age. The “too-much as well as the nothing-
possessors” seemed to him to become “dangerous beings”. And yet this was precisely the


702


environment through which Nietzsche would have had to pass in order to find a hearing even
among the folk. This was the second tragedy of his life, that he, who wanted to touch the best
sides of the Germanic essence in Germany, could not reach this essence, so that finally that
layer of intellectual leadership, which could have created a bridge here, was so mentally
dazed by trade and technology that it was not willing to give up this connection. Thus
Nietzsche’s circle became smaller and smaller, and only a few were finally able to understand
his loneliness, if not share it. And this last loneliness was ultimately decisive in understanding
much of the form of Nietzsche’s attack against his time, including the exaggeration of this
form. But it is this loneliness and power of vision at the same time that places Nietzsche today,
beyond all the conditions of time and tradition, in the middle of the great events of this 20th
century that he predicted, in the middle of the huge conflict that the German folk has to fight
through today, but also in the midst of that process in which everything that Nietzsche
inwardly fought against as impudent and base has united against a Germany that, in
overcoming all these depressing forces and phenomena of the 19th century, is preparing to
enter the 20th century with a new idea, with a new spirit. It was a Germany which, in
overcoming all these depressing forces and phenomena of the nineteenth century, set out to
endow the twentieth century with a new idea, with a new attitude to life, with a truly large-
scale German and European view of the world. In this large context, Nietzsche’s position in
German thought and in European existence particularly moves us today, in view of the clash
of two worlds. I know how much these two problems of his life are fought over, and that it is
not difficult to produce seemingly contradictory, even mutually exclusive quotations for them.
But words alone, juxtaposed with each other, brought out of completely different moods and
epochs, are only, seen in themselves, fleeting symbols, if the human being and his overall
attitude have not been recognized in their essence. What can then be interpreted as struggle
and rejection is often not the fight against an actual core, such as Germanness, but a bitter
confrontation with the given appearance of the time, and much of what appears as hatred is
essentially only wounded and disappointed love. Only when we have understood this will we
be able to properly grasp Nietzsche’s life - and not only Nietzsche’s, but the lives of many a
militant in Germany. I would just like to remind you of those beautiful words that were, as it
were, the prelude to Friedrich Nietzsche’s whole inner awakening, when he declared that he
thought so much of the pure and strong core of the German being that he dared to expect from
it the elimination of forcibly implanted foreign elements and that he considered it possible for
the German spirit to return to itself.


“But let him never believe,” Nietzsche added at the time, almost anticipating everything,
“that he can fight similar battles without his household gods, without his mythical homeland,
without a ‘bringing back’ of all things German!”


“Believe no one that the German spirit has lost its mythical homeland for ever, when it still
understands so clearly the bird calls that tell of that homeland. One day he will find himself
awake, in all the morning freshness of a tremendous sleep: then he will slay dragons, destroy
the treacherous dwarves and awaken Briinhilde - and Wotan’s spear itself will not be able to
hinder his path!”


Here a hope was expressed that literally went all out, that not only demanded a
cleansing of all overgrowing foreign plants and their juices, but believing it to be expected, a
true inner rebirth that led back to the last roots and longed for the supply of strength from
them for a great future. From another side sounds the soldierly attitude in Nietzsche’s thinking,
to which he always attached particular importance. In 1870, he writes in a letter that he
immediately applied for leave to do his duty as a soldier. In 1871 he writes of our army,
which he found fresh and strong, in old Germanic health:


“We can build on this: we can hope again! Our German mission is not yet over! I am bolder
than ever for not everything has yet perished under French-Jewish flattening and ‘elegance’


703


and under the greedy hustle and bustle of the ‘present time’. There is bravery after all, and
German bravery at that, which is something inwardly different from the élan of our
unfortunate neighbours.”


And he goes on to write to the same friend:


“Only as fighters do we still have a right to exist in our time, as pioneers of a coming
saeculum, the formation of which we can roughly sense in ourselves, namely in our best hours:
since these best hours obviously alienate us from the spirit of our time, but must nevertheless
have a home somewhere; which is why I believe we have such a dull scent of the coming in
these hours.”


These and other passages express the inner will to reshape German thought and
destiny that wants to express itself and expects an answer from the best souls of his time, but
at the same time also the fearful foresight that his “present time” does not want such a renewal
at all, but pleases itself in the superficiality of industrialized metropolitan life, even exhausts
itself. Once again, Nietzsche refers to the father of a friend, whose wonderful German spirit,
whose Prussian seriousness he admires, and from whom everything can be hoped for, “while
I,” he continues, “am now highly dubious about the ‘German culture’ floating on top.” When
Nietzsche now emerges with his works and openly begins a central struggle against
everything that is backward, hypocritical and musty, he notices that there are only a few
around him who hear him, and that a following does not want to find itself in the midst of the
superficial maelstrom of his time. In 1874, he then states that he is basically melancholic, and
adds: “I seek nothing more than a little freedom, a little real air of life, and resist, revolt
against the many, unspeakably many unfree things that cling to me.” His “great frontal assault
on all kinds of current German obscurantism” earns him outright rejection, and when it finds
no echo, he melancholically states again: “What concerns the Germans of today is none of my
business - which, of course, is no reason for me to be angry with them.” After that, his
disappointment and his attacks continue to increase, and then from the year 1888 comes a
final echo:


“T humbly suggest that the ‘spirit’, the so-called ‘German spirit’, has gone for a walk and
lives somewhere in the summer resort - at any rate not in the ‘Reich’ - rather already in Sils
Maria...”


To search for the essence of this German spirit and its position in history, and thus
also to examine the European spirit, which moved along similar paths to German thought, is
the analytical course of investigation that Nietzsche now embarks on for his life. This
penetration and evaluation of German-European intellectual development, however, is not
conducted by him in the style of an indifferent erudition; rather, he declares from the outset
that he has a loathing for any “talent without desire” and that where we would find such a
thing: in the circle of scholars or even among the so-called educated, it must only evoke
“repugnance and disgust” in us. On the contrary, he advocates an inward involvement in
every investigation of everything human and, unlike many doctrinaires of his time, considers
it necessary that the “Schopenhauerian man”, i.e. the truly deeply inquiring man, be full of
strong consuming fire at his core and far removed from the “cold and contemptuous neutrality
of the so-called scientific man”. This turn of phrase is the fiery force that moved Nietzsche
throughout his life; he has certainly been such a flame, as he says of himself, throughout his
existence. In this investigation, he knew that the waters of religion had flooded back and left
behind swamps and ponds; the nations were separating in the most hostile manner and were
desiring to tear each other apart, and the sciences, pursued without any measure and in the
most blindly permissive manner, were splintering and dissolving everything firmly believed;
the educated classes and states, however, were being carried away by a “magnificently
contemptible money economy”. Never had the world been more worldly, never poorer in love


704


and goodness as it was in his time, the learned classes were no longer lighthouses or asylums
and were becoming daily more restless, thoughtless and loveless. Everything served the
“coming barbarism”, including the present art and science. The educated had degenerated into
the greatest enemy of education, because he wanted to lie away the general illness, and thus
he had to become an obstacle to every doctor. The truth, however, of which so much is
preached in this liberal, loveless society, has become for so many a quite undemanding being,
from which no disorder and out-of-order on the part of the ruling powers is to be feared any
more. This “truth” of the liberal age is, according to Nietzsche, a comfortable and cozy
creature which would assure all existing powers again and again that no one should have any
trouble on their account. But a new inquisitional censorship, the unbreakable silence, would
have spread against uncomfortable phenomena. And therefore it was clear that a certain
darkness and dullness weighed on the best personalities of the time, an eternal frustration with
the battle between pretense and honesty that was being fought in their bosoms, a restlessness
in their confidence in themselves, and that was one of the reasons why they were completely
incapable of being both guides and disciplinarians for others. Science, once so high in its
onslaught against other ages, dethroned itself in many cases, the spirit of a - rootless -
journalism invaded the universities and sometimes called itself philosophy. A smooth, skillful
lecture comes to the lectern, Faust and Nathan the Wise on the lips, “the language and the
views of our disgusting literary newspapers”, he, on the other hand, is convinced: when one
speaks of thinkers and philosophers, it is necessary for a philosopher to have an “indomitable
and rough masculinity”. This, however, had declined in his age, and real men were seldom to
be found. This whole current, leading more and more towards decline, was the condition for a
Hélderlin and a Kleist to spoil by this inadequacy as well as by their own unusualness, not to
have endured the climate of this so-called German education, and only “natures of ore, such
as Beethoven, Goethe, Schopenhauer and Wagner, are able to withstand”. But it was precisely
such lonely people who needed love, who needed comrades before whom they could be open
and simple, as they were before themselves, in whose presence the spasm of concealment and
dissimulation would cease. If one took away these comrades, one would create a growing
danger for the development of the German spirit. The most terrible antidote to unusual people
is to drive them so deeply into oneself that their reemergence is always a volcanic eruption.
And Nietzsche adds the shattering word:


“Yet there is always a demigod who endures to live in such terrible conditions, to live
victoriously; and if you want to hear his lonely songs, listen to Beethoven’s music.”


“How,” Nietzsche says in another passage, “is the great productive spirit to endure
among a folk that is no longer sure of its unified inwardness and that falls apart into educated
people with educated and seduced inwardness and uneducated people with inadequate
inwardness. How can it bear it if the unity of the folk’s feeling has been lost, if, moreover, it
knows that the feeling of precisely that part of the folk which calls itself the educated part of
the folk and claims a right to the national artistic spirits is falsified and coloured? Perhaps he
prefers to bury his treasure now because he feels disgust at being fastidiously patronised by a
sect, while his heart is full of compassion for all.”


Today, the instinct of the folk no longer accommodates such a man; it is unnecessary
for him to spread his arms longingly towards them. The only thing left for him to do now
would be to turn his enthusiastic hatred against that inhibiting ban, against the barriers erected
in the so-called education of his folk, in order to judge at least that which for him, the living
and life-producing, was destruction and degradation:


“.,..80 he exchanges the deep insight of his destiny for the divine pleasure of the creator and
helper, and ends up as a lonely thinker, an overshadowed sage.”


705


What Nietzsche has in mind with all these insights and attacks, he feels in himself as
“holy coercion”. He says to himself: “Here help must be given, that higher unity in the nature
and soul of a folk must be restored, that rift between the inside and the outside must disappear
again under the hammer blows of adversity.” And Nietzsche says about the goal towards
which this reconciliation should lead, to form the lost whole again:


“So let my testimony stand here expressly that it is German unity in that highest sense which
we strive for and strive for more hotly than political reunification, the unity of the German
spirit and life after the annihilation of the opposition of form and content, of inwardness and
convention. ”


Nietzsche justifies this whole attitude towards the German spirit, which is becoming
ever more acute, by his observation of the liberal age, incapable of confronting the depressing
value systems, which has now begun to overgrow the empire founded in a heroic war. He
points to the growing giant danger and above all to the bio-political threat in the East and says:


“Tt will probably take not only Indian wars and entanglements in Asia to relieve Europe of its
greatest danger, but internal upheavals, the breaking up of the Reich into small bodies, and
above all the introduction of parliamentary nonsense...”


He says that he does not wish for this development, but that one must face it and
muster the resolve to make Europe threatening, as it were, that is, to send a will to this Europe
in order to give this part of the world a planning calculated for 9 millennia; for the long-spun
comedy of its petty statehood and likewise its dynastic as well as democratic polyglotry must
come to an end:


“The time for small politics is over: already the next century brings the struggle for earth-
domination, the compulsion for big politics.”


In view of this overall assessment, he once again hopes for a strict German heart, for
the German form of scepticism, for a “Fridericism that has been raised to the spiritual level”,
and he states more than once that today, when in Europe the herd animal alone has come to
honour and distribute honours, a completely different type of man must come to rule in order
to turn this fate around. Thus begins a profound critique of the entire social structure, a
critique of the Marxist movement, which at that time was already falsely called socialist, such
as is inconceivable today in a more consistent and devastating manner. For him, Marxism is
the tyranny of the lowest and stupidest, i.e. of the superficial, envious and three-quarter actors,
taken to its logical conclusion by “modern ideas” and their latent anarchism. Nietzsche
opposes above all the attempt to abolish the concept of property, because the abolition of this
concept of property must breed a destructive struggle for existence; for man is against
everything he possesses only temporarily, without precaution and sacrifice, he deals with it
exploitatively, as a robber or as a dissolute profligate. And in the midst of this criticism there
is already a hint of a way out:


“Keep open all channels of work to small fortunes, but prevent the effortless, sudden
enrichment; withdraw from the hands of private individuals and private companies all
branches of transport and trade which are favorable to the accumulation of large fortunes,
that is to say, in particular, the money trade, and regard both the too-much and the nothing
owners as dangerous creatures.”


And consequently he adds:


“The exploitation of the worker, as is now understood, was a stupidity, a robbery at the
expense of the future, a danger to human society.”


706


Against the Marxist idea of class struggle, he cites the relationship between soldier
and leader, which is still more decent and better than the relationship between employer and
employee at that time. About this age he writes:


“One wants to live and has to sell oneself, but one despises the one who takes advantage of
this need and buys the worker.”


Even then, Nietzsche thinks nothing of the national bourgeoisie and calls the two
opposing parties - the socialist and the national - or whatever their names may be in the
various countries of Europe: “worthy of each other”, i.e. both unworthy. It is understandable
that such thoughts, set down at first in reasoned, later in aphoristic attacking form, bursting
into the complacency of the liberal world, were not heard, dismissed with smiles and not
taken note of by the people of his time, even where he pointed out the whole hypocrisy of the
Marxist programme of a paradise, a stateless and class words: “struggle free ideal society with
the prophetic Marxism requires the most abject prostration of all citizens before the
unconditional state, as nothing like it has ever existed .” This premonition of the Marxist
dictatorship, which we see marching against us from Moscow as a mortal enemy, is thus
clearly prophesied. It is connected with that force which Nietzsche described as particularly
dangerous, with out us wanting to claim that he has now been able to survey the entire
structure and psychology of this East in every detail. Nietzsche knows, however, that, in spite
of all knowledge, the development which has now begun cannot be reversed in a short time,
and therefore he predicts that from this mixture of liberalism, plutocracy and anarchy the great
crisis of Germany and of the whole European continent must emerge. He is deeply convinced
that this mishmash initiated by the entire liberal movement in whi ch he proclaims a tireless
hatred of Rousseau as the intellectual originator of these currents most terrible all must one
day lead Europe to the embracing conflicts, and perhaps then to harsh tyrannical phenomena.
He means:


“The democratisation of Europe breeding tyrants is at the same time an involuntary event for
the word understood in every sense, including the most spiritual. ”


This clear recognition of the most extreme possibilities of development separates
Nietzsche as a thinker and active, soldierly philosopher ever more clearly from all the
movements of his time. The observation of the artistic confusion of styles and this clear
recognition of the attitudeless present, uncritically inclined towards all kinds of contradictory
traditions, then unite in him to form a critique of his entire age, the like of which is
inconceivable in a sharper and more caustic way. As with every great phenomenon, one must
not be confronted with the alternative of having to acknowledge everything or nothing on the
part o f his disciples. Rather, Nietzsche, who after decades of misunderstanding and
misrecognition is now entering the epoch of his general national recognition, will have to bear
the same fate as all other greats: what is time related, what can only be interpreted from his
personal fate, but precisely because of this is not to be valued as unconditional, will be able to
be forgotten, but all the more clearly the actual core and the relentlessly correct thrust of his
thought will find its deep recognition and 1011 reverence in the midst of a superficial world.
And with this, the essence of Friedrich Nietzsche’s entire human tragedy has also become
comprehensible. He once wrote to a friend:

“You know, no female voice has ever had a profound effect on me, although I have heard
celebrities of all kinds. But I believe that there is a voice for me in the world: I am looking for
it. Where is she?”


He sought this voice of understanding and friendship. He also made a number of


friends, but little by little, with the ever sharper realization of an approaching spiritual and
political destiny, his former companions also withdrew. The companions of his scholarly


707


years sink into the bourgeois world. Richard Wagner also does not seem to want to take the
path forward, and in this painful farewell, which is still borne by a distant admiration, the
greatest inner crisis in Nietzsche’s life comes to light when he declares that Wagner as an
artist, to whom he now believes he must contrast spiritually, is also alienating those people in
Germany who are worth working for. It is precisely in relation to this that he once writes:


“My writings shall be so dark and incomprehensible! I thought that when one speaks of
adversity, those who are in adversity will understand one. This is certainly true: but where
are those who are ‘in distress’ ?”


And later, faced with the realization of remaining without an echo, he exclaims:
“A thousand times better solitude! And if need be, perish alone!”


In the end, this is the attitude towards the world, the farewell to all the hopes of his
youth, the full awareness of being lonely and, as long as he himself lived, never being heard.
From this loneliness he then speaks of the dark hours when he did not know how to live, when
a black despair seized him such as he had never experienced before. Nevertheless, he knows
that he will neither be able to slip backwards, nor to the right, nor to the left, and that he no
longer has a choice. It is this logic that keeps him going in the face of all this fate. It is true
that his last writing betrayed the ordeal of this condition, and he adds a few sentences that we
want to remember today as the human legacy of a great loner:


“One should not expect ‘beautiful things’ from me now: just as little should one expect a
suffering and starving animal to tear its prey with grace. The lack for years of a really
refreshing and healing human love, the absurd loneliness which it entails that almost every
remnant of connection with people becomes only a cause of wounding: all this is of the worst
and has only one right for itself, the right to be necessary.”


With this last word, that support was pronounced which still carried Nietzsche
through all the hardships and struggles of his life. He was aware that what he was saying was
a word for the times to come “ for some generation must begin the struggle in which a later
one is to be victorious who, in the midst of this democratised, ”so that there had to be
someone spiritually the 19th century, was able to plant neglected world at the end of the flag
of a new hope and a new faith in spite of everything. Many of the best suffered under the
Griinderzeit and the materialised epoch. The word “ Reichsverdrossenheit ” (disenchantment
with the Reich) that arose at that time was not only a surface manifestation of economic and
social developments, but at the same time an inner disappointment of those hopes that had
permeated everyone with the proclamation of the German Reich in Versailles. I do not need to
mention the names of those who withdrew in bitter ness and pain over the rise of the inferior
in the stock exchange and Marxism, of the philistine in politics and society. But no one felt
those vibrations of a subterranean, as deeply as Friedrich Nietzsche. Even if in some areas of
threatening rumbling or the other of those prophets of our time may be particularly close to us,
as an overall personality and as an unwavering discern of an entire epoch that was preparing
to perish, Friedrich Nietzsche was probably the greatest phenomenon of the German European
intellectual world of his day! And for one thing must be borne in mind in all his later
confessions and criticisms: if he only suffered wounds in his utterances and therefore took up
a fighting position against the direct perpetrators of these wounds, exactly the same would
have happened if he had lived for a long time in France or England or another state. For
everywhere the same phenomena of decline were at work, disintegrating old established
traditions without thereby creating new bonds and raising new ideals. The whole world was
paying homage to lower values. To make possible the reevaluation of these values of a
decaying liberal humanity into an ideal of the noble, hard personality, greatness, that has
essentially been Nietzsche’s teaching, which runs through all his works. If in recent times


708


particular emphasis has been placed on his “will to power” , then this core has also been
rightly singled out as that centre of resistance in character from which both the reasoned
treatises and the ecstatic proclamations of and the harsh attacks of his last writings can be
explained, “ Zarathustra ”. At this point, however, we must protest against the attempts of our
present view of existence as a commitment to peaceful existence as pushed by our enemies so
as to military weaken us, for example, on the so well-- mannered democratic society of the
West, as an incarnation as the enemy of the eternally “peace disturbing” Prussian militarism.
Rather, what is being expressed here is a law of life. Every great achievement in the world
wants to achieve significance, every great state idea wants to assert itself, every scientific
12discovery strives for general recognition, every great artistic deed seeks its audience and
every thinker expects an intellectual echo and hopes for a following. Through all the
phenomena of life there is the will to bring to bear in the outside world what creative power
has penetrated to the outside world. Competition in all fields has always been the decisive fact
of life, and it took all the hypocrisy of a democratic age to try to persuade the world that the
entire pursuit of power, in a roundabout way, as the pirates of the stock exchange and high
finance were striving to do, was a beneficial activity for peace. In truth, there have never been
institutions of power that have acted as hyenas of life as the heartless capitalists of the
international stock exchange, never such a chloroforming of whole folk as has happened
through an all powerful assault on the great Jewish press, and never more insidiously has a
culture of a continent been prepared as after these influences by the Marxist dictatorship
movement. That which Nietzsche prophesied, European anarchism, was on its way:
November 1918 for Germany, the sinking into the bloody fog of a bestial civil war among
many folk s. The dictate of Versailles was an infernal attempt to force a whole great folk into
conditions from which they could expect only despair, anarchy and the splitting up of their
existence. Similar dangers passed through all the other countries. To everyone’s astonishment,
however, that German spirit of which Nietzsche had spoken forebodingly and full of deep
hope at the beginning of his work awoke: out of the darkness of betrayal, a new noble idea of
life and a world view that reverently acknowledged the laws of this life emerged militantly
into the daylight of time. This will to live was not content with looking and recognizing, but
was connected with an instinct bound will from the roots of the German being and formed
itself into a political power against all powers. When this appeared, already in world historical
format, all those conspired against it who understood an example of nobility as an attack
against their own immodest existence understood that with the appearance of a true to , who
life aristocratic ideal which nevertheless formed a national community, there was a danger for
the large profits of the money kings and their henchmen: the second declaration of war against
a new Europe plunged it into a second world war. The powers that are n ow wrestling with
each other have therefore not arisen anew; they are preformed by the liberal movements of the
19th century, by the over technification of a new age, by the unrestrained rule of money and
gold, by the monopolization of the whole news system in Europe by hands foreign to the race.
The European citizens of culture, who have grown tired in the lulling of their powers of
resistance, are now being flooded by a destructive passion from the East which, in a strange
combination with Jewish Western Marxism, has shaken not only Germany but the whole
European continent to its foundations. If we proudly declare that National Socialist Germany
is still defending this old Europe alone, if we can say, 13the 19th century, but even perhaps in
a somewhat different sense like Nietzsche in more profoundly, that we are the “ good
Europeans ” today, then that is a historically honestly won right. At the same time, however,
we want to explain with all modesty, so as not to lapse into the kind of foolishness Nietzsche
rightly castigated, that many phenomena of the old age are still perceptible i n our country,
that many philistines still spread the stuffy atmosphere Nietzsche suffered so much from, that
some small scale schematic thinking has not yet achieved the freedom Nietzsche dreamed of
and we ourselves dream of, that some are in danger of walking around as philistines instead of
being Faust. But despite this realization, we still feel the great pull of a new age in our
experience and know that what has carried us and gives the German nation today the inner
will for indomitable resistance is also founded in that deep shaking of the lonely Nietzsche,


709


which carried him through a painful life, which in solitude often led to despair and
accusations, but which was always driven forward at the same time by the absolute necessity
of such a debate with the future. In a truly historical sense, the National Socialist movement
as a whole stands today before the rest of the world as Nietzsche as an individual once stood
before the forces of his time. The struggle of two principles is repeated in a monstrous
experiment of nature and life. The effectiveness of the whole world of despised money men
and their mercenaries, the passion of millions of envious Bolsheviks whipped up by hatred,
the rage underworld, all this laden work of decomposition of the Jewish mind to be washed
away from the heart of Europe by a mighty cleansing wave shortly before the apparently
achieved goal. Now the floods of men and material of these powers are rushing against this
awakening heart of our continent, against a doctrine and attitude of destiny which tests every
slogan of intellectual struggle and politics for its true values, i.e. finds a freedom really worth
defending only when it is borne by a sense of honor, which is able to welcome a liberality
only so far as it can be combined with a genteel attitude, i.e. with rejection of the weak
breeding of the inferior and alien to the community, finally welcomes a social justice which
embraces all parts of a national community and, in the larger sense, of a pan-European
community of peoples, which, over and above the recognition and assertion of the justified
needs of a single folk, raises this call also for a whole continent, in order to make the causes
of the incitement of the millions against the German Reich and Europe disappear. But if at
that time, many, many decades ago, a few lonely people could only see the coming anarchy
and its wars prophetically and finally broke down because of the impossibility of being heard,
today the National Socialist Greater German Reich stands as a b lock of will of 90 million in
the midst of this tremendous struggle, also in the full consciousness of serving here the
necessity of a great so called humanitarian life, the necessity of a European destiny. If today
the so democracies welcome Bolshevism in their midst as belonging to them, even granting it
the right to call itself democratic, then they have stamped themselves with the stamp of
baseness. Those who call this destructive rage against all the finer goods of the past and
against a newly emerging, formative will related to themselves have ceased to be Europeans
in their leadership. Thus we National Socialists today see the work of those powers which,
coming over from the past, began to become a dangerous force of decomposition in the 19th
century and today, in a great, festering process, are leading to the most terrible disease of
European being, and at the same time, in the midst of this ominous stream, we see some
prophets raising their voices demanding that these anti creative values be broken in order to
help realize a new hierarchy of life. Among them, we honor the lonely Friedrich Nietzsche
today. After stripping away all that is time conditioned and all too human, this figure stands
beside us spiritually today, and we salute him across the ages as a near relative, as a spiritual
brother in the struggle for the rebirth of a great German spirituality, for the shaping of a
generous and spacious thinking and as the herald of a European unity, as a necessity for the
creative life of our old continent, which is today rejuvenating itself in a great revolution.


710


Juliu{ foola 55 Cecture/


Aryan Doctrine of Holy War


The purpose of the first lecture is to emphasize those motives of our ancient tradition
that lead to the overcoming of the opposition between the ascetic and the soldierly, the sacred
and the heroic and that let us see in the fight and the victory a positive way to the inner
perfection and the transcendental ascent of the personality in full dependence on "religious"
premises.


By the second lecture it is tried to remove above all the suspicion that this
completion by the heroic leads into the mystical- formless and subjective- worldly. Therefore,
the Grail tradition is chosen as a further point of reference. In this tradition the first task, -
with the idea of the kingdom and of a fighting order, is closely connected to supraindividual
and historical aims: the hero who has seen the Grail is cursed. Furthermore, the Grail tradition
was chosen as a reference, because the doctrine in question is expressed by elements that are
of Nordic origin and that point back to our common Roman - Germanic - Gibelline reality.
The two lectures emphasize that this is not a matter of a "dead" past, but of meanings that
could serve as a higher point of reference for the symbols and myths of today's renewing
movements.


The Occult Forces of World Overthrow strive to prevent this increase and
consequently to paralyze the spiritual power of such symbols and myths. The third lecture
attempts to uncover and expose the main weapons of this secret war, in order to prevent in
advance the action which our opponents take against the resumption of the main motives of
the Aryan tradition of the deed, the Order, and the Empire in its highest and most
unadulterated form.


Our culture is faced with an alternative in which the main root of its crisis is revealed.
On the one hand, we have a culture without life, an ethic of uncertainty, a faith that basically
corresponds very little to our way of life. On the other hand, we have a paroxystic
development of everything that is action, admittedly in a materialistic and almost barbaric
sense. It is hardly necessary to emphasize how, of these two termini, the second proves from
day to day to be the predominant one. Our civilization is essentially characterized by action.
This above all because the tradition peculiar to the Occident is in fact a tradition not of pure
knowledge or of contemplation, but of action. The action known today is nothing but a
depotentiated action, because it is secularized and deprived of any transcendental point of
reference. Biese's situation springs from hidden origins, hardly suspected by most. It is not too
risky to think that in a certain respect Christianity is one of these causes. This faith, which is
neither Aryan nor Roman, but of Semitic-Southern origin, came into being - instead of being
an addition to our old tradition - as its brusque interruption. Psychology teaches how
inhibitions paralyze sublimation and transform suppressed energies into germs of disease.
Analogous is the diagnosis of the process to which we owe the secularization and
materialization of our tradition of the deed. The Christian dualistic conception of the spirit
dissected our culture of action. It blocked its way upwards, the way to absolute spirituality. It
erected an invisible, yet stubborn barrier, so that in running against it the forces conditioned
by the deed values finally found no other area accessible for their discharge than that of the
material. From this a pathological over saturation of this area arose. The desecrated action,
deprived of any transfiguring power, inevitably had to degenerate into fever and mania; it
became doing for doing's sake or a doing that is only bound to time-conditioned realizations.
From the Reformation and humanism on, this process could no longer be stopped.At this


7i2


turning point of our history, the necessity of a revolt and a return to the tradition of a sacred
and spiritual action arises for the best. Only in this way can the Aryan Occident find its
liberation and receive a soul that is truly suited to it. Only in this way will our heroic vocation
attain its highest development and will our aspirations for reconstruction be able to find
fulfillment.


Tonight we want to venture a short excursion into a world that is almost buried under
the positivist superstitions of modern civilization. Our aim is to bring back to light some of
the basic concepts of our ancient common tradition of action and its culmination in the
mystical doctrine of victory.First and foremost, we want to look at "games". It will be
surprising for the moderns to learn that the definition of fighting games given by Livius is res
divinae. The classical equivalent of what today is sport was therefore something sacred,
religious: it was a "divine thing", res divinae. Moreover, in Greece and Rome the games were
dedicated to symbolic figures of gods and heroes or to their likewise symbolically meant
deeds. In the strictest sense they had the significance of a cult or rite. The fighting games,
reports Dion Cassius, are held rite facte, ritually. They therefore follow a strict and
unchangeable tradition. The slightest violation brought with it the necessity to repeat them in
order to avoid that divine powers could turn against the city in a disastrous way. Moreover,
Rome was convinced that the neglect of the sacra certamina, the holy fighting games, would
evoke a grave danger. In moments of public misfortune or political danger the games were
performed almost in the sense of an incantation rite.The directors of the Roman games were
originally always austere priestly figures. No profane representations were tolerated in the
circus, but they took place under the sign of the altars and temples consecrated to the great
Aryan gods.The solemn procession with which the games were introduced was similar to the
procession of the triumphators themselves. The symbols of the highest Capitoline gods were
carried into the circus, as it were to symbolize their invisible presence, which moreover found
its mystical expression by the presence of empty chairs. The victorious army leaders on their
part went from the capitol to the circus to celebrate the games. Thus, the games prove to
belong to the mystical and sacral as well as to the heroic and triumphant element.Ancient man
experienced secret and divine forces behind the physical world, behind human thoughts and
instincts, behind collectives and great historical destinies. The rite was not for him an empty
and formalistic ceremony. The rite was for the tradition-bound man an objective spiritual
technique, effective to act on these forces, to unleash them, to subdue them or to lead them
into certain directions. This background is not to be addressed as superstition, but it is
conditioned by a transcendental and super-religious realism.


From this background the secret meaning of the fighting games stands out
tangibly.The fighting games became in their deeper meaning a rite of former heroic character.
They were a method to unleash divine powers by means of a certain action or to renew the
presence and effectiveness of divine powers in the collective consciousness. It is therefore not
surprising that mystical numbers and symbols dominate the architectural structure of circuses
and racetracks in such a way that their tangible materiality is adapted to higher meanings.
Deep down, at the altar dedicated to the deity Consus, a subterranean entity full of greedy
expectation of the blood spilled during the fighting games, there was a kind of breakthrough
point of unearthly powers. Above, however, the statues crowned by goddesses of victory and
Olympian deities and in their center the symbols of the sun flame embodied the opposite
principle, the truly divine power. Thus a physical matter was elevated, however unconsciously,
to a symbolic and supernatural plane. The circus was thus transformed into a fateful centre, as
it were, - Tertullian says impressively: into a council of gods. Analogies created mysterious
connections. The victor could thus appear clothed in divine character, if not downright as the
momentary incarnation of a hero or a god. If we pass from the Aryan-Roman traditions to the
Hellenic ones, we only want to remind that in Olympia the Olympic games were considered
to be founded by Heracles, as a reminder of a metaphysical fight, of the fight and victory of


7i3


the Olympic powers over the Titanic ones. At the moment of triumph the victor was regarded
as a revelation of the Olympian god, of Zeus himself.


With this we have approached the leading point of our considerations. In the ancient
traditions, heroic intoxication and victory appeared as a path to inner exaltation, analogous to
that taught by the classical mysteries, according to which death is transformed into
resurrection in the initiate. In this sense, the games, far from being an expression of
superstition, could solemnly recall the deeds of gods and demigods: ancient funerary art
accordingly frequently used as material the figures of Olympian victors and triumphant
warriors to express the confidence of the deceased in a perfect and indestructible life beyond.
On this basis, the already indicated conception of the fighting games as a heroic rite, as a
method for the awakening and renewal of superhuman powers, which were felt by the
communities of the people to be decisive for their destinies and their greatness, becomes
understandable. In Rome, a whole series of games had the purpose to renew the Victoria of
Caesar, who was understood as a being endowed with an independent and indestructible life.


Let us now proceed to a second and higher form of appearance of the spiritual
tradition, in so far as it has relation to the action. We have to speak shortly of war as a "holy
war". It is hard to deny a metaphysical justification and a transcendental intention for the
bloody undertakings and conquests of all ancient peoples. In the tradition-based world view
every reality becomes a symbol. This also applies to war. On this basis, war and "God's way"
could not infrequently merge into one and the same thing.All are familiar with the
characteristic testimonies that the Nordic-Germanic tradition offers us in this respect. As is
generally known, Valhalla is the seat of celestial of immortality, which is reserved for the
"free" of divine descent and the heroes fallen on the battlefield. The lord of this place, Odhin-
Wotan, is presented to us in the Ynglinga saga as the one who, with his symbolic sacrifice at
the world tree Yggdrasil, has shown the heroes the way that leads up to the divine abode
where eternal life blossoms - like on a shining mountain top that shines above the clouds.
According to this tradition, no sacrifice or cult is more pleasing to the supreme God, none
bears richer supramundane fruit than that sacrifice which the hero makes by falling fighting
on the battlefield. But even more: by the heroes who offer a falling sacrifice to Odhin, the
crowd of those is strengthened whose this god needs for the last fight against ragnardkkr, i.e.
against the doom of the darkening of the divine which lies threatening over the world since far
times. In the Edda it says: "However great the number of heroes gathered in Valhalla, there
will never be enough of them when the wolf comes forth. - Here, the wolf is the symbol of the
dark and wild powers that the culture of the Aesir had originally succeeded in subduing and
subjugating. Analogous is the Iranian-Aryan doctrine of Mithra, the "warrior without sleep",
who fights at the head of the fravashi, i.e. the transcendental parts of his faithful, against the
enemies of the Aryan faith. We shall shortly have to go into more detail about the fravashi,
who basically correspond to the Valkyries of the Nordic tradition. First, however, we would
like to clarify the general concept of the "holy fight" by means of three further testimonies,
which we take from the Islamic tradition, the medieval crusader tradition and the Indo-Aryan
tradition.


As far as the Islamic tradition is concerned, it must be emphasized at once that the
idea of the holy war is primordial. The Islamic tradition distinguishes between two holy wars:
one is the Great Holy War and the other is the Lesser Holy War. Having said this, the Islamic
tradition distinguishes between two holy wars: one is the Great Holy War, the other the Minor
Holy War. This distinction derives from a saying of the Prophet who, on his return from a
warlike enterprise, said:

"From the small we have returned to the great Holy War."


The great Holy War belongs to the spiritual order. The minor Holy War, on the other
hand, is the material struggle, the physical war fought in the external world against an enemy


714


people, especially against the infidels, the unrighteous, or the barbarians. The great holy war
is the fight of man against the enemies he carries within himself. More precisely, it is the fight
of the supernatural element in man against everything that is libidinal, passionate, in bondage
to the forces of nature. In this sense, in a text of Aryan warrior wisdom, in the Bhagavad-gita,
it is said:


"By the realization of that which is beyond the mind, strengthen thyself by thyself
and slay the enemy in the form of the desire which is difficult to defeat."


The precondition for the inner work of liberation is that such an enemy, the
"unbeliever" and the "barbarian" in us, should be annihilated. Within the framework of a
heroic tradition, however, the small Holy War is only understood as an external struggle, only
as a way through which this great Holy War can be realized. For this reason, in Islam "holy
war" and "way of God", jihad, often appear as synonyms. Thus we read in the Koran:
"Fighting in the way of God -.i.e., in the Holy War - those who sacrifice the earthly life to the
life to come: for to him who fights in the way of God and is killed, or to him who conquers,
we shall pay a high price". And further, "And those who are slain in God's way, -never does
He misguide their works. He will guide them and give peace to their hearts. And he will bring
them into paradise, which he has made them to know.Here the physical death in war is
alluded to, to which the so called Mors Triumphalis, the "victorious death", of the classical
tradition corresponds exactly. But the same doctrine can also be understood in a symbolic
sense. Whoever has experienced a "great holy war" in the small war, has generated a power
within himself that enables him to conquer the crisis of death. But also without having been
killed physically, one can experience death, one can have won and realized a "survival".
"Paradise", "heavenly realm" and similar terms are in reality nothing else than symbolic
symbolizations of transcendent states of consciousness, on a higher level than life and death.


These considerations may also be taken as a premise for finding again the same
meaning under the outer Christian garb which the heroic Nordic occidental tradition was
forced to throw over in the Crusades in order to be able to appear to the outside world.Much
more than one is generally inclined to believe, in the crusade ideology the liberation of the
temple, the conquest of the Holy Land had points of contact with the Nordic tradition, which
refers to the mystical Asgard, to the distant land of the Asgardians and heroes, where death
does not reign, and where the inhabitants enjoy an immortal life and a supernatural peace. The
Holy War appeared to be a thoroughly spiritual war, so that it could literally be compared by
the preachers to a "purification, as it were, of the fire of the Purgatory even before death." -
What glory for you to come out of the battle crowned with nothing but laurels. But how much
greater is the glory of winning an immortal crown on the battlefield," - thus spoke to the
Templars a Bernard of Clairvaux. The "absolute glory* - the same that was attributed to the
Lord in heavenly heights, in excelsis Deo, by theology - was also promised to the crusader.
On this basis, Jerusalem, the dreamed-of goal of the "little Holy War", presented itself in a
double aspect, as an earthly city and as a heavenly city, and the Crusade as a prelude to a truly
immortal achievement.The military vicissitudes of the Crusades at first caused surprise and
confusion. But then they only had the effect of purifying the idea of war of any residue of
materiality. The unfortunate course of a crusade was compared to virtue pursued by
misfortune, the value of which can only be judged and rewarded in relation to a non-earthly
life. Thus, a point of view was taken that is above victory as well as defeat and that
concentrates every value judgement on the ritual side of the deed. The true center was
therefore the holy war, independent of its visible results, as a means to achieveimmortal glory
out of the active sacrifice of the human element. The dualism of victory and virtue is naturally
influenced by the general dualism that is characteristic for the Christian faith. Nevertheless, in
this attitude a higher point of view breaks through again, which has its root and its logical
place not in Christianity, but in the heroic reality of the Aryan antiquity.


715


To this reality belongs the tradition as it appears in an Indo-Aryan text, the
Bhagavad-gita.The same doctrine here acquires a metaphysical basis. The compassion that
keeps the warrior Arjuna from fighting the enemy is called by the god: "Cowardice, unworthy
of a noble and removing from heaven". The promise is: "Killed, - you will have paradise,
victorious, -you will have the earth. Therefore, rise resolutely to the battle." The inner
direction capable of transforming the little war into the great Holy War, into death and
triumphant resurrection, is clearly circumscribed: "By consecrating every action to me," says
the god, "with the spirit dwelling in the highest state of I, far from every thought of possession,
freed from the fever of the spirit, fight!" In equally clear terms it is said of the purity of this
action: it must be willed for its own sake, apart from every empirical purpose, from every
passion, from every human impulse.


"Equating in value pleasure and sorrow, advantage and loss, victory and defeat, arm
thyself for battle: thus thou shalt incur no stain."


As a further metaphysical justification, the God explains the difference between that
which is absolute spirituality and as such indestructible - and that which as a physical and
human element has only illusory existence. With the consciousness of the metaphysical
unreality of what one can lose as transient life and mortal body, or by which one can cause the
loss in others, is connected the knowledge of that manifestation of the divine, according to
which it is a power that travels with itself in irresistible absoluteness. In relation to the
greatness of this power every conditioned form of existence appears as negation. That is why
this power reaches a terrible revelation wherever this negation is actively negated, that means
where in the onslaught of every limited existence is torn away or destroyed. The individuals
are subjected to becoming, to transformation, to disappearance, exactly because in them a
power blazes that transcends them, a power that wants infinitely more, than what they can
ever want. On this basis, it is possible to circumscribe more precisely the energy that is
capable of bringing about the heroic transformation. Values are transformed into their
opposite: death becomes the assertion of life. The sacred warrior appears as a manifestation of
the divine, as a metaphysical force of destruction of the finite. He actively draws this force
upon himself, transfiguring and liberating himself in it by breaking the bonds of the human.
The suggestive expressions of another text, but belonging to the same tradition, are: "Life like
a bow; the soul like an arrow; as the target to be pierced - the absolute spirit. To connect with
this spirit like the swift arrow bores into its target. In short, therein lies the metaphysical
justification of war, the transformation of the small war into the great holy war, as it was
familiar to the heroic Indo-Aryan world. With this, all prerequisites are given to advance to
the understanding of the most inner content, which is the basis of a group of classical and
nordic traditions, culminating in the mystical doctrine of victory. As a starting point we may
observe that in classical and Indo-European antiquity several ideas appear in a peculiar
combination: the idea of the soul as demon and "double"; the idea of a goddess of death;
finally the idea of a goddess of victory. In other words: it is the idea of a single being that is
goddess of battle and victory at the same time, as well as it embodies the transcendental
element of the soul.


Let us try to come to a spiritual understanding of these different elements. First of all,
we must examine the meaning of the "demon" or the "genius" or the "double", and how it
relates to the "demon" or the "genius" or the "double". The key to this is already given in our
interpretation of that profound power. The key to this is already given in our interpretation of
that deep-lying power towards which human existence is nothing but mere negation. It is only
to be added that this power, in one side of its unfolding, was conceived as formative energy.
The demon is similar to the "laren" of which Macrobius says: "They are the gods that keep us
alive. They nourish our bodies and regulate our souls." Ancient man saw in the demon or
double a deep-seated power which secretly directs all those bodily and mental processes to
which ordinary consciousness does not reach, but which nevertheless condition our existence


716


and our destiny. It may be said that between the double and the ordinary consciousness there
is a relation like that between the individuating and the individuated principle. According to
the teachings of the ancients, the first is a supra-individual force, therefore superior to birth
and death. The second principle is subject to dissolution in the ordinary way. It is remarkable
that in the Nordic tradition the conception of the Valkyrie merges with that of the fyljgya, that
is, with a spiritual entity working in man, to whose power his destiny is committed. The same
applies to the frawashi of the IranianAryan tradition. The frawashi - Darmesteter explains - is
the innermost power of every being, is that which sustains it and causes it to be born and to
exist. At the same time, the frawashi, like the Valkyries, are terrible war goddesses who
bestow luck and victory. Let?s stay for a moment with this equation.It is known that the Indo-
European antiquity possessed a distinctly aristocratic conception of immortality. Not all of
them escape the dissolution of the anointment, the extinguished illusory existence in Hades
and in Niflheim.


Immortality is a prerogative of a few, and essentially a hegemony of a few heroic
prerogative. An afterlife not as shadow but as demigod is only granted to those whom a
special spiritual act has raised from one to the other nature. Here, unfortunately, we cannot
give all the proofs that lead to the following conclusion: in a technical sense, such a spiritual
act consisted, according to the ancient traditions, in a change of the sense of self from the
common human consciousness, which is limited and individuated, to a deep, supra-individual,
individuating power, which is beyond life and death, and of which we have said that the idea
of the "demon" corresponds to it.But the demon transcends each of the finite forms in which
he reveals himself. Therefore, the brusque transition from the ordinary ego state to the
"demonic" state has the meaning of a destructive crisis: like a lightning strike due to a
potential that is stretched too high. Such a destruction and crisis actually takes place through
death. Let us now assume that under very exceptional circumstances the demon can, so to
speak, break into us and thus make us feel its destructive transcendence; then one would have
a kind of active experience of death, and it now becomes clear why the figure of the double or
demon in the ancient imaginations could merge with the deity of death. In the nordic tradition
the warrior sees his Valkyrie at the moment of death or the danger of death.Let's go further. If
in religious asceticism, mortification, renunciation of one?s own ego, elan of devotion to God
are the preferred means with the help of which one undertakes to successfully overcome the
crisis just mentioned, then in the frame of a heroic tradition the way to this goal is the active
upswing, the unleashing of the gate element. As a new manifestation of this element we see
e.g. the dance as a sacred method used in order to achieve the spiritual and spiritual balance of
the soul stasis so as to evoke and employ deeper forces. In the life of the individual, unleashed
to Dionysian rhythm, another life sank in, as it were as the thawing of its abysmal root. Furies,
Erinyes and other wild spiritual natures are the ancient symbolic representations of this power.
Therefore, they correspond to a form of appearance of the demon, according to its terrible and
active transcendence. On a higher level there are the sacral fighting games. Even higher is the
war. On the clairvoyant summit of danger and of the heroic battle swing, the possibility of
such an experience was acknowledged. Seeing the expression ludere, to play, to fight contains,
according to Brugmann, the idea of loosening. This is an allusion to the power inherent in
combat to release deeper hidden forces from individual limitation and to let them emerge
freely. This is the reason for the second equation. The demon and the goddess of death are not
only identical with the Furies, Erinyes and other unleashed Dionysian beings, they are also
equivalent to the storm maidens of the battles. The frawashi are called "the terrible ones, the
all-powerful ones," "those who attack in the storm and give victory to the one who invokes
them." The same entity finally assumes the form of the goddess of victory. This last
metamorphosis marks the happy completion of the inner experiences described.Just as the
demon or doppelganger signifies a deeper power in its latent state vis-a-vis ordinary
consciousness, just as the furies and erinyes reflect a particular manifestation of demonic
unleashings and outbursts - so too the goddess of victory is the expression of triumph over
this power. She signifies the victorious ascent to a state beyond the danger of ecstasies and


717


subpersonal forms of decomposition, a danger that always lurks behind the frenetic moment
of Dionysian action.


It means the ascent to a spiritual state that makes free, immortal, inwardly
indestructible.But where the deeds of the spirit are expressed in deeds and real facts, it is
found that the physical really corresponds to the metaphysical, the visible to the invisible.
Such spiritual deeds then show themselves to us as the secret soul of warlike undertakings, the
crowning glory of which is real and actual victory. The material military victory then becomes
a mere correspondence for a spiritual fact which has conditioned the victory where outer and
inner are connected. Thus, the victory appears as a tangible sign for an initiation and mystical
rebirth that happened in the same point. The furies and death, which the warrior has withstood
materially on the battlefield, also meet him inwardly, in the spiritual, in the form ofa
dangerous awakening of the deepest reasons of his being. By triumphing over these, the
victory is his. And the glory that then surrounds him is no empty sound, but a real power, a
metaphysical revelation, an illumination of the supreme world.This explains why, in ancient
traditions, every victory acquired a sacred significance. Thus the emperor, acclaimed on the
battlefields, offered the experience of the brusque presence of a mystical power that
transformed him. Thus at last is to be grasped the profound, by no means theoretical sense of
a supernatural character breaking through in the glory and divinity of the victors. From Nike,
the goddess of victory, the Doric hero Heracles receives the wreath that makes him partaker
of Olympian immortality. When the souls of the heroes are led to the seat of immortality by
the Valkyries - the Valkyries were at the same time understood as those forces that terrify the
enemy - they are also the ones who bring about the final victory.


Mystical theology teaches that the beatific spiritual vision takes place in glory, and
Christian iconography surrounds the heads of saints and martyrs with the aureole of glory. All
this, however, means an atrophied inheritance of our highest heroic devotion. The Iranian-
Aryan tradition already knew the glory, understood as heavenly fire, which descends on kings
and leaders, makes them immortal and bears witness to them in victory. And the ancient royal
crown symbolized glory as a sunlike and heavenly mystical fire. If one examines the deepest
meaning of the conception of the test of arms as a divine judgment, which was peculiar to
chivalry, one discovers the same conception: the victory is equal to a supernatural sign for
truth, justice, right. By virtue of the same thought the ceremony of triumph in Rome had a far
more sacral than military character. The triumphator went to the temple of the luminous
Capitoline god of heaven to place in his hands the laurel of victory, thus expressing that the
true creator of victory was not so much the human and mortal part of the victor as a
transcendent, supra-personal element which made him like God. For this reason, in the
ceremony of triumph the victor clothed himself with all the emblems and symbols of the deity.
Light, sunlike splendour, glory, victory, divine kingship are ideas that are closely connected in
the classical and Indo-European world. In this sense the mystical doctrine of victory is for us a
shining culmination of our common tradition of deeds.This tradition still speaks to us audibly
today.This tradition confronts us today with the alternative: loyalty or betrayal. We can only
repeat here the words we wrote at the entrance of this excursion into the old heroic world have
set. - Today we are confronted with the imperative need to overcome - whether it is a tired,
bloodless spirituality formed by pious feelings or abstract speculation - or whether it is the
materialistic degeneration of the deed. Even if the outer and time-conditioned manifestations
of the old-Aryan tradition of deeds belong to the past, the spirit that is inherent in it is still
alive today and may claim the highest right compared to the old and newly created idols.
Above all: it must return to new life the ideal of a force that is at the same time spirit; of a
victory that is at the same time transfiguration and enlightening glory. May a barbaric
civilization continue to intoxicate itself with the animal-activist and mechanical ideal of life -
all this does not interest us, does not concern us.


718


War: let us say it with a loud voice: war should be for us neither a cruel slaughter,
nor a sad necessity, but the way to a higher way of life and the test of the divine mission of a
people. For the ancient Aryan, by the way, every war was the parable of an eternal struggle
between metaphysical powers: on one side stood brute force, the Titanic-Tellurian, the
barbaric in the classical sense, the feminine-demonic. We have already had the opportunity to
point out that our culture today is experiencing years of decision, the ultimate meaning of
which is most closely connected with such a realization. After the collapse of our old Europe,
after the rationalistic and individualistic devastation and all that the revolt of the masses and
the demoniac of materialized collectivism have brought about in every field up to the final
point of Bolshevism, dark forces are today preparing for the final attack. To these forces
correspond most exactly the Ideas of the ancient Aryans concerning the subterranean forces,
opposed to which, in the symbolism of the sacred struggle, stood the solar principle of order
with its militia. This knowledge and this metaphysical dualism are to be called to new life
today and give the final meaning to our heroic calling. A new front is to be formed, uniting all
those who still stand firm and are bearers of tradition. From distant times, the evocative
formula still resounds: Life, like a bow; the soul, like an arrow; the target to be hit: the highest
spirit. Let this be the watchword of the new Holy War, the principle of an irresistible, heroic
and, as it were, metaphysical momentum. It is no paradox: perhaps never have our old myths
of the last decision and the last battle, of the newly awakening band of heroes in the struggle
against the encroaching demon of the mass world, the sunny tradition of the deed and the
mysticism of victory been so intensely topical as they will be in the times to come; in the
times that will shape the entire European-Western destiny.


719


Grail as Nordic Mystery


In one form or another, in all great traditions of antiquity, and especially in the Indo-
European ones, the idea of a mighty world ruler recurs again and again; of an invisible empire
that surpasses every visible kingship; a place that in a higher sense has the meaning of a pole,
an axis, an unchangeable middle point, and that is pictured as a solid land in the middle of the
life-society, as a holy, untouchable region, as a land of light or "sun-land". Metaphysical
meanings, symbols and dark memories are spun into a single fabric. The idea of the olympic
kingship and the heavenly mission rises up. The traditional principle is: "He who rules by
virtue of (heavenly) virtue resembles the pole star. Unchangeable he dwells in his place, while
all else circles around him."The thought of the king of the world, conceived as the cakrawarti,
rises up; the cakrawarti, king of the king, immovably turns the wheel of the empire. Invisible
as that of the wind, his action reveals the fatefulness of the forces of nature. In a thousand
forms and in closest connection with the idea of a northern Hyperborean land, the symbolism
and analogy of the seat of the middle, the seat of constancy breaks through: the island, the
mountain high, the castle of the sun, the preserved land, the wise island, respectively the
island of splendour, the hero's court. "Neither by land nor by sea is the holy land reachable",
so the Hellenic tradition reports. "Only the flight of the spirit leads there", murmurs the Far
Eastern tradition. Other texts speak of the mysterious magnetic mountain into which those
who have reached spiritual enlightenment are carried away. Other writings tell of the land of
the sun, from which symbolic figures emerge who have to take over the royal dignity in the
midst of master-less races.


This is also the island of Avalion, i.e. the island of Apollo, the sun god called
Aballun by the Celts. Legendary divine races such as the Tuatha dé Danann, who came from
Avallon, were also said to have come from "heaven". The Tuatha took certain mystical
objects with them from Avallon: a stone that marks the legitimate kings, a lance, a sword, a
vessel that "gives inexhaustible food", i.e. the eternal nourishment, the "gift of life". These are
the objects of the later Grail legend. From the heights of primitive times this thought descends
to the Middle Ages, and in this period assumes peculiar manifestations. These are, among
others, the ideas of the kingdom of the priest-king John and of King Arthur. "Priestking John"
is not a name, but a title. A dynasty of "priestkings John" is spoken of as that which, like the
Davidic dynasty, embodies the royal and at the same time the spiritual dignity. The kingdom
of John often takes on the features of the "original place" - the "earthly paradise". There the
tree grows: a tree which in the variants of the saga sometimes appears as the tree of life, but
sometimes also as the tree of victory and world domination. The Stone of Light is also found
there: a stone that resurrects the imperial beast, the eagle. John holds the people of Gog and
Magog - the elemental powers, the demon of the collecti- vum - under his spell. The legends
tell of symbolic journeys that the greatest rulers in the history of the world would have made
to the land of John the priest-king or to lands of equal importance to seek there some kind of
supernatural consecration for their office and power. John, for his part, would have sent
emperors, such as "Frederick," symbolic gifts containing the meaning of a heavenly
commission. One of the heroes who entered the kingdom of Johan-Ogier is the Dane. From
the Ogiersage, however, the kingdom of John is equated with Avallon, i.e. with the
hyperborean island, the Urnordic sun land, the Aryan white island. It is to Avallon that King
Arthur retreats. A tragedy, variously portrayed by the texts, forces him to seek refuge there.
Arthur's retreat has only the meaning of the becoming latent of a principle. "Arthur" never
died, according to the legend. He still lives in "Avallon." He will reveal himself again. In the
figure of king Arthur only a new form of appearance of the "polar ruler", of the world-king-
thought can be seen.


The historical is carried along and shaped by the suprahistorical. Already the old
ethymology traces the name "Arthur" back to arthos, i.e. bear, which again points us back to


721


the "central idea" through the astronomical symbolism of the polar star. The symbolism of the
Round Table, of whose knighthood Arthur is the highest head, is a solar and a "polar" one. It
is reported that the castle of Arthur, like Mitgard, the light abode of the Nordic Asen, - is built
"in the middle of the world". (in medio mundi constructum). In some texts this castle is
described as revolving: it revolves around itself, as in the "white island," ¢veta-dipa, of the
Indo-Germanic Indi- ens in the Hyperborean land, whose god is the sunlike Vishnu, the
swastika revolves, as the CelticNordic"glass island"-a likeness of Avallon- revolves; as the
fateful wheel of the eakravartl, the Aryan king of the world, revolves. The supernatural
features of the Aryan world-king are embodied, as it were, in Myrddhin, or Merlin, an adviser
inseparable from Arthur, who is at bottom no other being distinct from him, but something
like an augmenting part of him. The knighthood of Arthur will seek the Grail. The knighthood
of Arthur, which gathers its members from all countries, has the slogan: "He who is leader
shall be bridge for us". According to ancient ethymology “pontifex" means the bridge builder,
the one who establishes the connection between the two shores, the two worlds. In addition,
there are dark historical memories and geographical transmissions of temporal meanings. The
island country lying at the outermost border of the "world", which is spoken of in many
traditions, indeed only points to the primordial center in the primordial distance of time. For
the Greeks the land of the sun is Thule. Thiile is equivalent to the Airyanem-Waéjé, the land
of the extreme north of the Aryan Persians. Airyanem-Waéjé is the "seed" of the Aryan-
Iranian primal race, in which the conception of the King of Kings, the Bearer of the Law from
the God of Light will reappear. Airyanem- Waéj6 knew the kingdom of the sunny Yima, the
golden age. But Hesiod remembers, "When that age (the golden) came to an end, those

divine men continued to exist, and became in invisible form the guardians of men." This,
because the "sense of history" is decay: in place of the golden camethe silver age - that of the
"mother," afterward the bronze age - that of the Titans, lastly the iron "dark" age; kali-yuga,
time of the wolf, twilight of the gods. Why? Many myths seem to want to establish a
connection between "fall" and hubris, i.e., promethaic usurpation, titanic rebellion. Again
Hesiod remembers: Zeus, the Olympic pri- ciple, creates a race of heroes who are more than
Titans and can again attain a god-like life. Through them, the sunny primordial spirituality, the
golden age, can be restored. A symbol: the Doric-Aryan Heracles, ally of the Olympians,
enemy of the Titans and Giants. The doctrine of the supreme centre and the world ages is
related to the doctrine of cyclic laws and manifestations in closest connection. Without this
reference many my- then and memories would remain in the state of unstructured and
incomprehensible fragments. "This happened once - this will happen again", tradition teaches.
And also: "Every time the spirit perishes and nefariousness rises, I reveal myself: for the
protection of the righteous, for the destruction of the gusts, for the firm restoration of the law,
I take on a body from age to age." In all traditions, in various forms, more or less
accomplished, there is always to be found the doctrine of the cyclical appearance of a single
Principle, which continues to exist in an unrevealed state in the intervening periods.


Faith in the Messiah, Last Judgement, Regnum etc. - all these are only fragmentary
representations of this knowledge, distorted by an unbridled religious imagination, a
knowledge that, however, also underlies those unclear conceptions that have as their object a
ruler who has never died, who has withdrawn into an inaccessible abode and who will one day
reveal himself again for the last battle, a "sleeping" emperor who will awaken; a wounded
prince who awaits the one who will heal him and lead his empire to a new period of
prosperity. These well-known motifs from the saga of the emperor lead us very far back into
the tents. The Urarian myth of Kalkiavatara already embodies the same meanings in
meaningful connection with the other symbols already alluded to. Kalki avatara is "born" in
Shambala - one of the designations of the Ur-Nordic centre. The teaching is transmitted to
him by Paragu-rama, the "never died" bearer of the tradition of the divine heroes, the
destroyer of the rebellious, desecrated warrior caste. Kalki-avatara fights against the "dark
age" and essentially with its demon leaders Koka and Vikoka, which even ethymologically
correspond to Gog and Magog, the subterranean forces ruled by the priest-king John and


722


unleashed in the dark age against which even the Ghibelline, awakening emperor will have to
struggle.


The Grail legend can be traced back to this world of thought and can only be
understood historically as well as supra-historically on the basis of these tradition-bound
teachings and this supra-traditional symbolism. Whoever believes to exhaust the Grail Saga in
terms of content by defining it as a mere Christian legend, as a "pagan-Celtic folklore" or as
the poetic fiction of a sublimated chivalry, will only receive the external, the insignificant and
the unimportant from this literature. Equally misleading would be any attempt to make the
Grail saga dependent on a particular "folk spirit". We can explain: The Grail is a Nordic
mystery. But then we should understand by "Nordic" something much deeper and more
comprehensive than merely German or even IndoGermanic, and refer to the Hyperborean
tradition, which in the last analysis is the same as the original tradition itself. It is to this
tradition, in fact, that all the main motifs of the cycle in question can be traced. Extremely
significant in this respect is already the statement of Perceval le Gallois that the writings about
the history of the Grail were found on the island of Avallon, where "the tomb of Arthus lies".
And not only that: other texts call the land where Joseph of Arimathea would have originally
brought the Grail, or where certain mysterious ancestors of Joseph lived, the "white island",
"isle blanche" and the island of Avallon, "Insula Avallonis". These are again the names of the
nordic primeval center. If England was described as a kind of "Land of the Verne Issums" of
the Grail and as a region in which the Grail adventures mainly took place, then it was also
described as a "Land of the Verne Issums" of the Grail.


If we look at the actual events, many things already lead to the suspicion that this is
essentially a symbolic country. England was also called "Albion" and "white island", Albania
a part of it, Avallon the place Glastonbury. The old CelticBritish mythology seems to have
transferred to England or to a part of England certain memories and meanings, which refer
mainly to the Nordic primeval centre, to Thule, the land of the sun. The true "land" of the
Grail is this. Thus, it happens that the Grail realm comes into closest connection with the
symbolic realm of Arthur, the devastated realm, "la terre gaste" and the kingdom, whose ruler
is wounded, lethargic or decayed. A rocky island, a glass island, the turning island, the Isle of
the Tournance, a land surrounded by waters, an inaccessible place, a mountain height, a sun
castle, a wild mountain and a mountain of salvation (Montsalvatsche and Mons Salvationis),
an invisible, inaccessible castle that can only be reached by the called ones, and even by them
only at the risk of their lives, and so on: These are the principal stages of all the adventures of
the Grail heroes; they are nothing else but as many manifestations of the symbolic abode of
the World King. The memory of the primeval centre returns: "Eden" is called by one text the
Grail-land. The Lohengrin cycle and the Saxon Chronicle of Halber- stadt report: "Arthur sits
with his knights in the Grail, which was then the Earthly Paradise, -i.e. the primeval land - and
has now become a place of "sin"".


In the literature of chivalry, the Grail is actually a supernatural object, which has the
following main characteristics: it "nourishes" - (gift of life); it illuminates (spiritual
enlightenment); it makes invincible. From its other aspects especially two are to be
emphasized:


Firstly, the Grail is a celestial stone which not only appoints kings, like the stone taken by the
Tuatha from Avallon, but also designates the rulers who are to become "priest-king John"
(Titurel).


Secondly, the Grail is the stone that sprang from the crown of Lucifer at the moment of his
defeat (Wartburg War).As such, the Grail symbolizes a power that Lucifer lost in the Fall, and
it retains the traits of a Mysterium tremendum in the other texts as well. Like a terrible power,
the Grail kills, crushes or blinds any knight who approaches it too closely without being


723


called or worthy of it. This aspect of the Grail is related to the so-called trial of the "perilous
seat". Someone is now missing from Arthur's round table. A seat is empty, which ultimately
belongs to the highest head of the order. Whoever occupies it without being the expected hero
will be struck by lightning or swallowed by the earth. The Grail can only be attained through
struggle, "it must be won", says Wolfram von Eschenbach.


The mystery of the Grail is divided into two motifs: one refers to a symbolic realm,
appearing as the image of the highest centre, which is to be restored. The Grail is no longer
present in it or has lost its virtue. The king of the Grail is infirm, wounded, senile or caught in
an evil spell that seems to keep him alive while he has been dead for centuries (by the Turlin).
The other motive is ordered by the existence of a hero who, by being able to fight for the
Grail, shall feel obliged to such a restoration; otherwise he fails his task and his heroic power
is cursed (Wolfram). He is supposed to be able to forge a broken sword together again. He is
supposed to be the "avenger". He shall "ask the question" of what kind of task is this? It
seems to be the same as that which Hesiod assigned to the heroes: that evil which, born in the
ages of decay, has to restore the primeval age. As the Hesiodic hero is to overcome and
conquer the Titanic, so the Grail hero is to overcome the Luciferic danger. It is not enough for
the Grail knight to prove himself in all kinds of natural and supernatural adventures as a
"heart of steel" and the "best and bravest knight in the world": he should also be "free from
pride" and attain "wisdom" (Wolfram, Gau- tier). If Lucifer has lost the Grail, some texts
(Grand St. Graal, Gibert de Mostreuil, Morte Darthur) attribute without further ado to Lucifer
the demonic power that works against the Grail knights in various trials. And not only that,
but in each case the Grail King is powerless due to suffering from a burning, poisoned wound
he got in the service of Orgelluse, whereby it is readily apparent that Orgelluse is nothing else
than a female personification of the principle of pride, in French orgueil. But in the castle of
the same Orgelluse other Grail knights, for example Gawain, are put to the highest test. But
they are not defeated. They win. They marry or "possess" Orgelluse. The purpose of these
trials is to realize a pure power, a spiritual manhood, to raise the heroic quality to an
Olympian, royal, sunlike level, to a plane detached from all power of chaos. "The earthly
chivalry shall become a heavenly one," is to be read in Queste du Graal. Only under this
condition the way to the Grail Castle is opened and one can persevere on the "perilous sit"
without being crushed, as the Titans were crushed by the lightning of the Olympian God. The
peculiar main motif of the whole Grail cycle, however, is, as already stated, the following: To
the Heroic the one who has gone so far in such accomplishment of a non earthly chivalry,
imposes upon himself another decisive task: Once he is allowed into the Grail Castle, he is to
sympathize with the tragedy of the wounded, paralyzed, or only apparently living Grail King,
and to take the initiative in the absolute act of restoration. This is enigmatically expressed
several times by the texts: for example, the Grail hero is supposed to "ask the question". What
question ? Here the authors seem to want to remain silent. One has the impression that in this
point something prevents the author from speaking, and that a banal explanation is given to
cover the true answer. But if one follows the inner logic of the whole narration, then it is
almost obvious what it is really about: The question to be asked is the question of empire; it is
not a matter of knowing what certain objects in the Grail Castle mean, but of feeling the
tragedy of decay and, having once reached that consummation which the vision of the Grail
signifies, of broaching the question of restoration. Only on this basis the whole thing explains
itself, and the miraculous virtue of this enigmatic question becomes understandable: because
the hero, who is not indifferent, and asks the question, redeems the seich with this question.
He who was only apparently alive disappears; he who was wounded is lightened. Anyway, the
hero takes the place of the previous one as a new, true king of the grail. A new cycle
begins.According to some texts, the dead knight, who seems to remind the hero of his revenge
and task, appears in a bier drawn by swans. The swan is the beast of Apollon in the land of the
Hyperboreans, in the Nordic Urland. Drawn by swans, the Grail Knights ride from the highest
centrum where Arthur rules: from Avallon.


724


In other texts, the Grail hero is called the "Knight of the Two Swords". In the
theological-political literature of that time, especially in the Ghibelline, the two swords meant
nothing else than the double power, the double dominion: the temporal and the supra-natural.
A classical text speaks of the Hyperborean country as the one from which families like that of
the Heracids originated, who carried at the same time the royal and the priestly dignity. The
inaccessible and untouchable Grail Kingdom is also in that form a reality according to which
it is not bound to any place, to any visible organization and no earthly kingdom. It is a home
to which one belongs after a birth other than physical, in the sense of a spiritual dignity. This
kingdom unites, in unbreakable chain men who can be scattered in the whole world, in space,
in time, in nations, to such an extent
that they appear to be united, and the one does not need to know about the other. In this sense
the realm of the Grail, like that of Arthur and John, like Thule, like Mitgaard and Avallon, is
always there. It is immovable because of its "polar" nature. It is therefore not closer or further
away from the current of history. It is much more the currents of history, the people and their
empires, that are able to approach it more or less.Now, at a certain time, the Ghibelline
Middle Ages seemed to show such an approach to a great extent and to offer, so to speak, the
historical-spiritual material by means of which the Grail Kingdom would not only become
occult, but also visible and, as in the original traditions, an inner, but at the same time also an
outer reality. In this way, it can be argued that the Grail was the crowning glory of the
medieval imperial myth and the highest creed of the Ghibellines. Such a confession is really
rather to be looked for in the legend than in the life and the clear, political will of that time. In
the same way, what is most deeply and dangerously expressed in detail is less expressed by
the formation of forms of the reflecting consciousness, but rather by the symbolism of the
dream and the subconscious originality.


The Middle Ages waited for the Grail Hero, so that the "dry" tree of the Empire
might blossom again, that every disruption, every usurpation, every opposition might be
destroyed, and that a sunny order might indeed reign. The Grail Kingdom, which was to be
led to a new splendour, is itself the Holy Roman Empire of the German Nation. The Grail
hero, who would have become the "ruler of all creatures" and the one to whom the "highest
power" is handed over, would be the historical Caesar, "Fridericus," if he had been the
executor of the Grail Mystery or of the Hyperborean Mystery.History and superhistory
seemed to meet in a moment: There was a period of me- taphysical tension, a culmination and
highest hope - afterwards again collapse and dispersion.All Grail literature seems to be
crowded into a short period of time: No text seems to have been written before the last quarter
of the twelfth century and after the first quarter of the thirteenth. At the end of the first quarter
of the thirteenth century one suddenly ceases - somewhat, as if obeying a watchword - , to
speak of the Grail. Only after many years and in already different moods does one write about
the Grail again. This looks as if at a certain moment a current had appeared, but immediately
thereafter would have withdrawn again into the invisible (Weston). The time of this
submergence of the Grail tradition corresponds approximately to the eve of the tragedy of the
Templars.


Perhaps there lies the starting point to the collapse. In Wolfram, the knights of the
Grail are called "Templeise" or Templars, although no temple comes into question for him. In
some texts, the knight-monks of the mysterious "island" wear the same sign of the Templars:
a red cross on a white robe. In other texts, the Grail adventures take on a twilight atmosphere:
The Grail hero arguably accomplishes "vengeance" and restores the realm. A heavenly voice,
however, announces that he should retreat with the Grail to a mysterious island. The ship that
comes to fetch him is the Templar ship: it carries white sails with a red cross. Secret societies
seem to have preserved, like diverging veins, the old symbols and traditions of the Grail cycle
after the collapse of imperial culture: Gibelline "faithful of love", later minstrels, hermetics.
One reaches with it up to the Rosicrucian movement. In the Rosicrucians, the same myth
reappears: the Castle of the Sun, the Emperor as "Ruler of the Fourth Kingdom" and destroyer


725


of all spiritual usurpation; an invisible brotherhood of transcendent personalities united
exclusively by their intention and their being; finally, the strange mystery of the Resurrection
of the King, a mystery that turns into the statement that the King is already alive and awake.
Whoever attends this mystery wears the Templar flag: a white banner with a red cross. The
Grail animal, the dove, is also present. However, a watchword seems to be given here as well.
At a certain moment, people everywhere suddenly stop talking about the Rosicrucians.
According to tradition, the last true Rosicrucians left the Occident and retreated to "India" at
the time when absolutism, rationalism, individualism and enlightenment were already paving
the way for the French Revolution. Withdrew.India is a symbol here. It means the site of the
priest king John, the Aryan king of the world. It's Avallon. It's Thule. According to one text,
dark times have come to Salvatierra, where the Monsalvatritters are located. The Grail may no
longer remain there. It is taken to "India", to the kingdom of King John, which "lies near
Paradise". Once the Grail knights have arrived there, the Holy Spirit and his castle suddenly
and miraculously appear there, because "nothing of it shall remain among the sinful peoples".
Parsifal himself assumes the office of "Priest John." Of Shambala, the mystical "city of the
north", whither the "northern ways" or the "ways of the Aryan gods", deva-yana, lead, it is
said by the Tibetan ascetics: "It lies in my spirit".


In every ending lies a beginning resolved. Today a world of decay is dissolving. New
forces are emerging from the depths. Decisive battles are preparing. Primordial symbols are
conjured up: under the sign of swastikas, eagles, Romanesque Hyperborean axes, new peoples
march. The myth of the Reich has once again been resurrected. There is already talk of a new
state, which has to become a state of orders: of a new order, which has to unite all occidental
forces struggling against the demony of the collective and the dark tide of the Third
International. With this, perhaps new times are gradually maturing: Times in which the myths
of our common Ghibelline greatness..,of the invisible, inviolable centre, of the Aryan master
who is to awaken, of the avenging and restoring hero will no longer be regarded as fables of a
lost romantic past, but will reveal themselves as the truth and reality of those who can rightly
be regarded as the only living ones.It would be very welcome if the spiritual vanguard of the
German renewal movement, in particular, would give itself the clearest account of this and, on
this basis, awaken in itself the ability to find in its present myths the path that can really make
possible the reconnection with the origins, with the secret tradition of the Empire and the
mystery of the North.


726


The weapons of secret war


There is a secret war: this is the war that is waged underground by the forces of
world overthrow using means that almost always elude the common methods of research. The
concept of the secret war belongs to a so to say three dimensional conception of history; not
the two dimensions of apparent causes, events and leaders come into question, but mainly the
dimension of depth. In this subterranean dimension there are forces and influences whose
effect is determining, and which often do not even refer to the simply human- whether
individually or collectively. Above all, we want to clarify the meaning of the term
"subterranean" used by us. We are not thinking of a dark irrational underground which stands
in the same relation to the generally known part of history as the unconscious stands in detail
to the waking consciousness. We can only speak of the unconscious in the face of those who,
according to the three-dimensional conception of events, appear to us less as subjects than as
objects of history, in that in their thoughts and actions they hardly make any account of the
actual influences they obey and of the true aims they realize.


Thus, their center falls more into the preconscious and subconscious than into the
clear, reflecting consciousness, and in this respect one may well say that indeed the most
decisive actions of the secret war are carried out in the
subconscious. But from the point of view of the real perpetrators of history, things are
completely different; here, neither the subconscious nor the unconscious can be mentioned:
We have much more to do with thoroughly intelligent forces which know quite exactly what
they want and what means are most suitable for the realization of what they want. To assume
that the ground of the story is made up by the "irrational", the "life", the "becoming" or any
other of these unclear, newly invented, "things", is to assume that we are dealing with the
"unconscious".


The idea that the third dimension of history is made up of ten beings is hurried
philosophy and a very dangerous error: as will be expressed later, we even see in it one of the
suggestions that were spread in certain circles in the service of certain aims of the secret front.
So: the third dimension of history must not disappear in the fog of abstract philosophical
concepts, but is to be thought of as occupied and inhabited by very precise "intelligences". If
certain secret societies can be the immediate organ of these forces, one must not, however,
persist in this and assume that these latter exhaust the essence and the effect of the invisible
enemy, for it is a struggle that is ultimately metaphysical. According to one of the various
conceptions of history widespread in the Occident, history is not to be seen as a mechanism of
natural, political, economic or social causes, but as the development of a plan - the
"providential" plan - which is resisted by opposing forces with their historical bearers. Such
forces are sometimes called moralistically "forces of evil" or religiously Christian as
antichristian forces or forces of antichrist. Such a conception has something in itself under the
following three conditions: it is to be translated from the theological to the practical level, it is
to become the general methodological principle for a deepened knowledge of events, it is to
be generalized and freed from the one-sided Christian premises, because it is also valid with
regard to non-Christian culture. If we are speaking essentially of human institutions, then it is
better to speak without further ado of forces of tradition and forces of anti-tradition, of forces
of spiritual hierarchy and cosmos and of forces of revolutionary upheaval and chaos. Today,
more than ever, there is a need to deal with such thoughts, which are not to be confused with
philosophical speculations, but are indispensable weapons for the right action, action that is to
be considered. We would like to remind you of a very significant passage of the "Protocols of
Zion":


"The way of thinking of the goyim is only animalistic, so they are incapable of
foreseeing the consequences that a certain cause can bring about, if it is presented under a
certain light. Just because of this difference in thinking between us (the wise men of Zion) and


728


the goyim we easily come to the realization of being the chosen ones of God and of our
superhuman nature, compared to the instinctive and animalistic way of thinking of the goyim.
These latter understand the "facts", but they do not foresee them and are incapable of
inventing anything except material things".


This document, which makes Judaism the main perpetrator of the overthrow of the
world, refers to the non-Jews (goyim): if we let them generally apply to those whom we have
called "objects" of history, then this judgment on the goi still seems terribly apt today. The
way of thinking of most of today's "men of action" seems indeed childish - compared with
that of their masked opponents. They concentrate all their forces on the immediately tangible,
and they are incapable of grasping causal relations beyond an extremely limited and almost
always crassly materialistic horizon.The secret front on the other hand works with what we
like to call the imponderable or the imponderable quantities, an equation taken from the
positive sciences. It very often causes changes that are almost imperceptible, from which
slowly but fatefully considerable effects emanate. It almost never works by a direct resistance,
but by a purposeful steering that leads the forces to the desired goal. What Wundt once called
the "heterogeneity of goals" plays the main role in this: certain people or circles who believe
that they can only enforce what they want, serve as tools, to realize or make possible
something quite different, whereby a superior influence and "meaning" betrays itself.
Therefore, the "differential" between what is intended and what has happened, between the
principles and programs and their true consequences in history, offers the most precious
material for research into the real forces at work in history.


Having said this, let us consider some of the means which are most frequently
employed in our own times by the masked forces of world overthrow, in order to camouflage
their actions, to prevent those of their opponents in advance, and to exert their influence
constantly.


1.) The positivist suggestion. First of all, one should get acquainted with the idea that the so-
called "positive" method of looking at history and events is rather a suggestion that has been
systematically spread in modern culture by the anti-traditional forces to cover their action than
a spontaneous phenomenon or prejudice peculiar to a very limited way of thinking. Those
who believe that history is exclusively man made and determined only by economic, political
and social factors do not see far and confuse the causes with the effects. This is exactly what
the forces that want to work underground want. A culture dominated by "positive" prejudice
offers the most excellent prerequisite for acting from the third dimension. To a large extent,
unfortunately, this is the case with modern culture. It is a culture directly incapacitated, blind
and defenceless by positivist,

rationalist and scientific prejudice. Today one speaks of renewal, but one is far from tearing
off the mask of so many ideas that still form the basis of the modern way of thinking and
teaching: Ideas that are in fact not so much errors or delusions as suggestions, deliberately
propagated by the conspirators, who are bent on destruction and domination. We have already
spoken about certain conceptions of history that are no longer "positivistic" and have
"becoming", "life" or "spirit" as their basis. We can see in this an example of the application
of a second instrument of the secret war, namely:


2.) The tactic of substitution. It is used every time the danger of the "awakening" makes itself
felt and the "objects of history" try to get rid of the ideas through which the occult play of the
forces of world overthrow easily prevails. In the case just alluded to, these obscure notions of
"becoming," "life," "unknowable," etc., are indeed only a bait for those who were no longer
satisfied with the positivistic schemes, lest their eye should turn where it should look.
Through the fog of such terms the field of vision is veiled as well as through the dark night of
positivist agnosticism. One plays with philosophy and world-view while the conspiracy
progresses.


729


3. ) Tactics of the Adulterated Likenesses. It is about the following: The effects of the work of
destruction can carry over into the material and take such a visible and extreme form that they
finally call for a reaction. This reaction looks for symbols and my- then in an unclear way that
are suitable for the reconstruction and can even find them. It is almost always about symbols
and points of reference from the tradition-bound past, which are being used by the deeper
forces of a final destruction are awakened to a new life. In such cases the secret fight is not
enforced by any direct action, i.e. there seems to be no resistance against these symbols, one
rather tries to let only fakes and imitations of them spread and become effective. Thereby, the
reaction is either dampened or diverted or even turned into the opposite direction. In this
direction then the same influences set in that worked in the fighting evil and decay and against
which one tried to defend oneself. This tactic can take place in different fields, in the spiritual
as well as in the political, and seems to be especially popular today. It is worthwhile to list
examples of it. The most typical case is formed by "traditionalism". Tradition is bondage to
the metaphysical-forming. Tradition is the secret of all that has form in a higher sense,
consequently of what race and culture mean in a higher sense. Continuity, i.e.
uninterruptedness, overcoming of the temporal within the temporal, is tradition, and tradition
owes this property to the existence of a knowledge of symbols and principles and meanings
that are supra-individual and suprahistorical, as well as to a ruling elite that legitimizes itself
by this supra-historical reality. Now, it often happens in the modern world that the vague
longing for a return to tradition is diverted into the form of "traditionalism", i.e. into the form
of vague assumptions of amateurish or militant character, which confuse tradition with the
concoctions and the routine, end up in a short-winded particularism and lazily persist in
certain traditional forms without knowing anything about their spirit. As such, the
"traditionalist" entities offer the best pretext for playing their opponents, whose light attack
against traditionalism is only the cover of their fight against traditionalism and which has as
its true aim the promotion of revolutionary overthrow. Thus reaction is prevented, and the
manoeuvre leads brilliantly to the desired result. One should be very careful that similar
things are not done with the main ideas of today's renewing movements - respectively with
race and empire thoughts, Romanism, Aryanism, etc. It may well be said that among these
ideas there is not one which is not exposed to the danger of similar perversions, because the
adversary knows only too well what curative effect might result from these ideas if they were
to break through in the most genuine and highest form.In a lecture held in December, also
within the framework of the D I G, we have already dealt with this question, as far as it relates
to the Nordic and the Nordic tradition. And our two previous lectures could easily already
mean a similar contribution with regard to the tradition-bound conception of the act and the
realm?


4. ) Tactics of upheaval. - The secret forces of the overthrow of the world knew very well that
the prerequisite of the order to be disrupted is the supernatural element, the spirit, conceived
not as a philosophical abstraction, but as a higher reality, the final goal of the process of the
transcendent perfection of the personality and the legitimation of every true rulership. Having
limited the influence which the last occidental creed could still exert in this respect (we cannot
here examine the means employed for this purpose), the forces of subversion had to strive to
ensure that every new aspiration for the supernatural awakening outside the ruling religion
would be diverted and paralyzed. What we call, with reference to the various theosophistic,
spiritualistic, orientalizing and "occultistic" sects of the modern age, the New Religion,
spiritualism is mainly the result of such a maneuver. In all this it is again almost exclusively
about distorted images, imitations and distortions of a spiritual knowledge, which is the fault
of circles of half-educated people and enthusiasts, who often seem to be subject to a really
demonic influence in this respect. Thus a double result has been achieved. First of all, it has
been easy to refer the discredit into which these imitations had to fall to the teachings
themselves, by which the latter have been put out of danger. Lately, this maneuver seems to
be carried out also by political means: there are for example, circles that see everywhere only


730


"Freemasonry" and secret societies, where it is a question of esoteric symbols, even if the
reference goes to ancient traditions that have nothing to do with the heresies of Freemasonry
and show spiritual-aristocratic traits. Then there is the positivist prejudice which sees in all
this only superstition and fantasy. In the second place, by means of misunderstood "exercises",
most of those who practically strived for the supersensible, were not directed towards the
supernatural, but towards the subnatural, i.e. towards the "unconscious", towards medianity
and in general towards a world that far from meaning the increase of normal personality, only
manages its collapse and its decomposition. This means, to the "unconscious", to the
medianity and in general to a world that, far from being the increase of the normal personality,
can only bring about its collapse and its decomposition, by which the human being directly
becomes the unsuspecting tool of the darkest influences. With the "New Spiritualism" the
world conspiracy has thus eliminated the danger which the true supernatural in the modern
anti-material culture could have meant for the secret front, and it now looks with satisfaction
at those who the secret doctrine of the superman in theosophist circles of old women, inferiors
and subhumans, or to the others who dance to the beat of rationalist-political idols,


5.) Tactics of recoil. - It is realized when one of the forces, which one wants to eliminate
from the world because of its still tradition-bound character, is induced to take the initiative
for an action, which in a first moment is directed against a similar, i.e. traditional force; when
this is destroyed, it turns against the former and carries it away. The secret forces of world
overthrow often reach the goal by suitable infiltrations, that the representatives of one
tradition believe to defend it best by attacking and discrediting other traditions. Those who do
not give an account of it and attack the tradition in the shape of another culture related people
for material reasons, have to be afraid that sooner or later the tradition will also be attacked by
a movement, so to say of a backlash. The forces of world overthrow count very much on this
tactic: consequently, they strive with all means to keep every higher idea under the tyranny of
particularistic interests, of pro-selitist aspirations, of pride and greed: they know quite well
that this is the best method to disrupt every unity and true solidarity and to promote a state of
discord in which their game becomes very easy.The case is similar with every Machiavellian
use of the revolutionary forces. Some short-sighted statesmen have at times thought that it
might, under certain circumstances, mean a strengthening of their people to promote or
support revolution in opposing nations. Without suspecting it, they have come to the opposite
conclusion. While they thought they were using the revolution as a means, the revolution has
made them its tool: having found the paths paved by other peoples thanks to those politicians,
the revolution has almost always reached and demolished the first ones as well. It can be said
that the whole of modern history has been the scene of an overthrow that has been tragically
realized precisely in this way. In this context it can never be emphasized enough that only the
unconditional, ascetic, unshakable loyalty to an idea can protect one from the forces of occult
war; if the ability of this spiritual loyalty and the solidarity of a kind of holy war is lost, if one
obeys the random motives of a so-called realpolitik, then the front of resistance is broken and
with it the possibility of any true independence and freedom is lost.Let us mention one of the
latest manifestations of such tactics: the "principle of nationalities" and of "anti-imperialism"
are myths invented by the Freemason and Jewish wirepullers of the Allies for the mobilization
of every force against the Central European empires and for the destruction of them; but they
have now become ideologies which in the future will be able best to promote, for example, a
general uprising of all colored peoples against the great European powers and their claim to
supremacy. No wonder that on this basis such an ideology has passed into the hands of the
Comintern and become an important tool of Bolshevik propaganda outside Europe.


6. ) Tactics of the scapegoat. - When the secret forces of Walt's overthrow feel the danger of
being exposed in some aspect, they strive to direct and concentrate all the attention of their
opponents on certain elements. The whole reaction is then unloaded on these elements, who
have become real scapegoats. The whole reaction is then unloaded on these elements that
have become real scapegoats. The occult front is then free to continue its game, since its


731


opponents believe that they have now discovered the enemy and have nothing more to look
for. As champions of anti-Semitism in Italy, we certainly cannot arouse any suspicion: that is
why we have sometimes admonished certain radical anti-Semites to be careful lest, seeing
only the Jew everywhere, they should occasionally fall into such a trap. The same admonition
could be directed to those who see only Freemasonry everywhere, and so on, since such
tactics are effective in many other areas as well. With this we do not want to misjudge in the
least the extent of the guilt of e.g. Jews and Freemasons, but rather raise the question whether
deeper and more mysterious forces have determined the functional role of Judaism and
Freemasonry in modern times, and we are convinced that it would be too good if with the
elimination of Judaism and Freemasonry a golden age could be started without further ado, as
some sincerely believe.One should beware of any one-sidedness and never lose sight of the
overall picture of the true secret front.


Now for the:


7.) Tactics of dilutions. - It is a special aspect of the "tactics of replacement". To understand
what it is, let's start with the following: The process that has led up to today's general crisis
has distant origins and various phases. In each of these phases the crisis was already present,
although in a form that was not yet acute, potential rather than current. The doctrine of
"progress" may be regarded as one of those suggestions which the secret forces of world
overthrow spread so that the process of decline continues under the sign of illusory values,
especially the illusion of the "achievements" of the technical-mechanical civilization. The
tragic experiences of the last years, however, have managed to partially evoke this hypnosis,
with which one has begun to account for the fact that the speed of the alleged "progress" only
meant that of a race to the bottom. To stop and to return to the origins as the only way toa
new normal culture then became slogans. The secret front then mobilized new means to
prevent any radicalism. First of all, it coined and spread the slogan of "unseasonableness";
then it took it upon itself to direct the forces striving towards the origins again to conditions in
which the crisis and the evil appeared in milder and consequently less perceptible forms. This
trap also succeeded. The leaders of the world upheaval know, of course, that from this
moment on there is no longer any great danger: reaction will soon follow the same path and
find itself again at the starting point, but now without the possibility of resisting the final
collapse. One could cite numerous historical examples of this tactic as well. The leaders of
today's counter-revolutionary movements should be very attentive to this. For example,
certain features of today's nationalism should be carefully examined from this point of view.
Everybody knows about the subversive and anti-hierarchical role that the collectivist
demagogic concept of "nations" has played in relation to previous cultural forms. Now, the
reference in today's struggle against the various internationals and Bolshevism goes back
predominantly to the idea of nations. It is therefore necessary to form the concept of the
nation in such a way that it no longer refers to a stage of that path which has led to the very
corruption that is to be fought against today. We have already had the opportunity in our
writings to take a closer look at this problem and to systematically distinguish between two
opposing concepts of nation. Here we must confine ourselves to two words. According to the
first view, nation means only the mass - we have deliberately not said people, but, in French,
"nation" - it is only a pretext for eliminating all difference and rank in a humiliating leveling.
As such, the nation appears in occidental history in the downfall of the old hierarchical states
and as a prelude to that further leveling, which will no longer have the nation as its general
denominator, but the international. - According to the other view, on the other hand, the
nation as a certain community of the people has the meaning of a first reaction against
internationalist egalitarianism: it already embodies a principle of difference, which is to be
developed in a further intra-ethnic meaningful division and ranking. Then there is no longer
talk of nation, but rather of empire in the tradition-bound sense.


732


8. ) Tactics of confusing the principle with its representatives. - In many respects the decay of
the tradition-bound institutions has the decay of their leaders and representatives as
precondition. But the real dissolution and destruction is made possible by the tactic of
confusing the principle with the person, and this is another weapon of secret warfare. If the
representative of a certain principle seems to be unworthy, one proceeds in the process against
this representative at the same time or even essentially against the principle itself; in any case,
one also drags the principle into this process. Instead of limiting oneself to declaring that
representative as not up to the principle and to replace him by someone else, one claims that it
is the principle that is wrong, corrupt, and in decay, and must be replaced by a new principle.
Everyone knows that in only too many cases the attack against one or another degenerate
aristocrat has turned into an attack against the aristocratic principle itself and into a weapon of
demagogy. History abounds with examples of this tactic, to which world subversion owes
much. The hierarchical order of the ancient society culminated in a spiritual rulership, to
which the warrior nobility, later the bourgeoisie and finally the working class was
subordinated. The collapse of this order was in many respects brought about by the tactics just
indicated. The warrior nobility did not stand up against the representatives of the pure
spiritual authority in order to replace them by other more worthy representatives of the same
principle, but in order to emancipate themselves under this pretext and to lay claim to the
highest authority. In a subsequent phase or culture, the third estate rose up against the
degenerate warrior nobility, not that true aristocrats and warriors might take its place, but to
usurp power.


In a third phase, the process against a certain destructive and negative side of
capitalism and the bourgeoisie (i.e., against the third estate) did not have as its goal a
corresponding reform, but was the pretext for the revolt of the masses and the usurpation of
the gradually deposed power by the proletariat: Class struggle, Third International, birth of
Bolshevism. If we have had to confine ourselves to a few examples, and to deal chiefly with
the exposition of the principles, we hope that this circumstance will not be an obstacle to the
discovery of the manifold possibilities of application of these principles, and of the valuable
results to which they may lead, if systematically applied to any given field of study can lead
to a secret battle. Indeed, it can be argued that there is hardly any territory in which the secret
struggle has not taken place in some way. Let us reiterate that these are not "philosophical"
attitudes, but very serious matters. We are even convinced that no leader or fighter of the front
of the anti-subversion and tradition can be considered mature and up to his true tasks until he
has developed in himself the ability to see clearly into this subterranean world of causes and
to fight the enemy with the same invisible weapons. I remind you once again of the myth of
the Wise Men of Zion: compared to them, people who only understand the "facts" are like
dull-witted animals. Especially in times which, like today's, are the prelude to the final
decision of an entire cultural world, we must feel the demand in ourselves to awaken in this
elite or in this Order, which has been spoken of so often in our lectures, the ability to
supplement the material struggle with an invisible, subtle struggle, with a secret,inexorable
knowledge, which now, however, is not in the service of dark powers, but of the light, sunny
principle of Aryan spirituality.


733


The SS, guardians and "orders" of the swastika revolution


One of the most interesting, significant, and easily least known creations of the N.S.
Revolution is the so-called Korops of the SS. SS is the abbreviation of Schutzstaffel, it is the
"Black Corps" for the protection of the Third Reich. If the army - the Reichswehr - is the
organ of external defence of the state, the SS is the organ of internal defence. In this peculiar
organization, individual features of an ancient form of order are found in a syn- thesis
together with a political, a biological and heroic elite, a "bodyguard" of the Fuhrer, a
"Geheime Staatspolizei" in the higher sense, and finally a group destined to put into practice
and defend the basic ideas of the N.S. world-view in a straight line. They are two hundred
thousand men, united by an inviolable oath of loyalty and honor, and who, according to the
values of their own leader, Reichsfiihrer Heinrich Himmler, feel themselves to be a fighting
order of National Socialism. Their aspirations turn to the original: they want to form a unity in
which the resumed connection with the primeval forces of the original race and with the
myths of the great Nordic primordial beginnings is transformed into the principle of a new
indomitable life, and here the new sense of blood enter into a mysterious connection with the
ancestor and the deceased and let the individual overcome his individualistic feeling in order
to insert him into the continuity of the tribe and into a stream of life that opens up to new
future paths. The sacred signs of Germanic pre-Christian antiquity are invoked again: the
"runes" are often used to designate special sections of the "Black Corps". The custom
introduced in Germany of designating the various formations with their initials (K.d.F., H.J.,
B.d.H., S.A. etc.) has led to a particularly significant application in the abbreviation of the
Schutzstaffel SS: due to the similarity of the two letters with the sign of the so-called "Runes
of Victory" - Siegrunen - one has easily come to replace the former by the latter. So now it is
the "runes of victory" of Nordic antiquity, the zig-zag signs, which are used on every occasion,
on SS uniforms, in letters of summons, and so on. And thus one of the cases has come to pass
in which modern man steps to conjure up elementary things, the scope of which he is only
dimly accountable for, and which are no longer "views" and "theories" and "sorts," but
powers, forces, and certain primordial beginnings. These zigzags of the siegrunes, now worn
on all the uniforms of the SS, are the same as those represented in the ancient Egyptian
symbol by the image of the sceptre, and which possess the significance of the terrible solar
power which sanctifies, deifies, and makes invincible the kings.


They also appear as the destructive force in the symbol of heavenly power, which
was especially used by the Olympian god heads of the Aryan race in their continuing struggle
against dark titanic and telluric forces. This is also the meaning that recurs today in the first
still unclear views; Himmler, for example, sees the SS, as the bearer of the "Siegrunen", now
also assumes the significance of the anti-Bolshevik fighting organization, and is - according to
the words of SS-Gruppenfiihrer R. Heydrich, one of the other leaders of the "Black Corps" -
aware of the tasks corresponding to the struggle, which are directed not only against the
visible, but also against the hidden enemy.If we briefly touch upon the development of the SS,
we can say that its first beginnings lie in the so-called Stabswache, which was created by
Nationalism in March 1933, followed by Hitler's "Stosstrupp", which consisted of selected
and militarily trained elements who placed themselves at the unconditional, personal disposal
of the Fiihrer. After the semi-military party organizations had been banned and the corps
could no longer appear to the outside world, the real SS, which exists today, was created in
the summer of 1923 by Julius Schreck, Hitler's confidant; at the same time, the present black
uniform with the silver skull on the cap was introduced. When Heinrich Himmler took
command of this corps on January 6, 1929, it numbered 270 men; but from that time on it
developed an effective striking power, not only outwardly, but also inwardly against
disaffected or doubtful elements of the party. At the time of the seizure of power, the "Black
Corps" already numbered one hundred thousand men; its power, authority, and prerogatives
increased more and more and received their final sanction in 1934. The SS was the organ
which Hitler essentially made use of in the measures of June 30, 1934, and in the liquidation


734


of the dissolution tendencies which emanated from Ernst R6hm and von Schleicher. On the
basis of the loyalty and the merits of the SS on this occasion proved the "Secret State Police"
or GSP, which had been subordinated to the S.A. (Sturm-Abteilungen in brauner Uniform) in
the brown uniform (R6hm was one of its main leaders), was only designated as an
independent organization, and it was also fully assigned the service of the "Secret State
Police" or GSP. Their leader Himmler has the official title of "Reichsfiihrer SS und Chefs der
Deutschen Polizei".


Thus the SS has become the most powerful organization of the Party, in direct
consultation with Hitler. It is, it may well be said, the backbone of the movement, the organ
which supervises it in all its parts and vouches for its security. As far as Germany in general is
concerned, its second great foundation consists in the army, in the Reichswehr, which, as is
well known, does not exhaust itself in the simple military element, but which also has its own
tradition, its own ideal, and an indirect relationship to the nobility, especially the Prussian
nobility. It is not too bold an assertion to say that the way in which relations between the SS
and the Reichswehr continue to develop is of decisive value for Germany's future. As far as
the other N.S. organizations are concerned, such as the "Labor Front" or the S.A., however
important their tasks may be in the political view and in the dynamics of the political decisive
forces for the new Germany, they will always stand in second, subordinate line. Heinrich
Himmler is to thank for the intellectual shaping of the SS, the specification of its tasks, the
drawing up of an essay in the July issue of the Rassegna Italiens ( XVI. ) reports on the
"Ordensburgen", principles and rules that apply to them. The basic idea here is the creation of
anew "elite", a new nobility. When asked who in the old states was prepared to sacrifice
everything to defend, support and protect his prince, Himmler easily came to the conclusion
that such a task always belonged to the nobility, an elite that was recognized by the prince and
his tradition precisely as "noble". This nobility, as the guarantor of the principle of suzerainty,
sank in the critical period of the post-war due to the dangers of capitalism and by siding with
the liberalism of the 19th century, and showed itself incapable of remaining equal to its
tasks.The healthiest elements remained in the army, but as such they were excluded from the
political struggle altogether, because the army is given tasks of external defense, which,
though not insignificant, are independent in relation to the political form of its nation. It was
therefore necessary to move on to the idea of an elite that would be closely connected with the
specific political idea of the new state, i.e., an elite that would have political and martial value
at the same time, and that would be regarded as the new guarantor of the meaning and
stability of the political national and revolutionary order. This is the ideal development of the
SS as the "revolutionary elite of the Third Reich" Their formation and organization have been
guided by considerations of a bio-logical-racial, ethical and spiritual nature.


As far as the first point is concerned, Himmler starts from the premise that his people
are capable of culture in the higher sense and of invincible resistance to their own enemies
insofar as a sufficient quantity of Nordic blood flows in their veins. If such blood, beginning
with the prince and ending with the peasant, seeps away, the people falls into decay. Thus, for
the construction of the new state and its elite the selection and the nature of the Nordic
elements will play an essential role. In the storm troopers of the SS, the selection in question
is made for two reasons.The first degree is mainly biological. All those persons are admitted
to the SS who are certainly of Aryan origin and who approach the pure Nordic type in figure,
proportions and facial features. It is assumed, of course, that due to the possible variations in
all races, traits and sensibilities of another race can appear in a physical Nordic type, but it has
also been observed that Nordic traits are more likely to be found in a body of Nordic type than
elsewhere. In a further selection we have to do some cross-checks. Here we want to
emphasize that the Nordic-racial in the SS is not limited to the individual but extends to his
family and his origin.An SS man is not allowed to marry whom he wants. According to a law
enacted by Himmler in 1931, a body that is eligible for this must determine that the woman he
chooses offers sufficient guarantees of the likelihood of an origin corresponding to his type


735


and race. On this basis, the SS considers itself a "clan order," and it is on this antiindividualist
basis, tied to blood, that it seeks to develop. Already in the ability to submit to this law in
marriage, a first proof of higher order is shown, and thus one confirms one's willingness to
subordinate the purely personal moment of feeling and passion to the demands of a super-
individualistic form of order.


The second degree of selection has as its prerequisite the principle of adaptability
according to the words of Hitler: "If | demand a heroic deed, the Heroic will answer to it. If,
on the other hand, I promise many advantages, the commercial spirit will answer this call".
When moral qualities are demanded, which are chiefly ascribed to the Nordic race, one hopes
already for a more inner discipline than the spontaneous selection of the second degree. How
materials are controlled according to the measure of the loading test, it is the one who wants
to belong to the SS who is put into special situations in which his racial characteristics are to
prove themselves.If we consider the ethical nature of the SS only in this way, we arrive,
according to Himmler, at the following principal qualities. The first and most fundamental of
all is loyalty. "Everything," says Himmler, "can be forgiven except treason." Hitler himself
occasionally gave the events of June 30, 1934, to the SS as a slogan: "SS- man, your honor is
loyalty," in apparent reference to the norm of old German law: "All honor comes from
loyalty." By this is meant every kind of loyalty: loyalty, and above all respect for the Fiihrer
and the race, loyalty to the cadres and the rules of decency, honor and chivalry. Himmler
added: "One sins against loyalty and honor not only when one violates one's own honor or
that of another, but also when one scorns things that are sacred to others, or when one does
not manfully stand up for the absent, the weak, and the unprotected". In a law of November 9,
1935, Himmler asserted for the SS not only the right, but the duty, to duel if required by
circumstances.


After loyalty and honor comes obedience, which must be unconditional and
unlimited. It is said that after the Prussian officer has taken his oath of allegiance, he no
longer has what is his. This tradition has been taken up by the SS. In the name of the Fuehrer
and the N.S. Weltanschauung one must be prepared to do anything, including sacrificing one's
own pride, the external and all that may be personally dear and valuable to us. One must be
able to refrain from an action, even if everything in us rebels against it and urges us to
intervene, just as one must be able to act on a single sign, even if one feels an aversion to it
that seems unclear to us. Himmler regards this quality of unconditional obedience as
fundamental not only for ourselves, but also to balance the be- toned sense of ego and the
burgeoning desire for freedom of the Nordic German man, qualities which have often been
the cause of much unhappiness for him.Other qualities required of the SS man are love of
truth, the ability to adhere unbendingly to what has been decided with the greatest deliberation,
absolute rectitude, and as a basis, of course, combative spirit.


In his speech in Magdeburg on June 12, 1937, on the occasion of the meeting of the
German nobility, Himmler said that these virtues correspond to as many tests to which the SS
is subjected and which complete the selection procedure. A member of the SS formation
becomes one who, after a year and a half of probation, has taken the SS oath of allegiance.
The Fiihrer and has completed his military and labour service in an irreproachable manner; he
shall then receive the dagger of honour of the SS. It is interesting to note that by a law passed
by the in the decree of the SS Council of November 9, 1936, it was decreed that each SS
group leader had to guarantee under oath:1) that no recruiter would be accepted if he could
not meet the corresponding requirements, even if he was a son or a relative, 2) that in each
year a quarter of the new elements would not come from families or circles of the SS. This is
to prevent the SS from forming a kind of hereditary caste, in which measures other than those
of actual qualification predominate; furthermore, one strives to bring the best elements into
the SS in the right proportion, wherever they may come from, even if only to prevent them
from forming other groups that break away from the central elite, as is said to have happened,


736


according to Himmler, in ancient Rome, for example, where the best blood at a given moment
was found outside the Senate. From what has been said about the characteristic qualities of
the SS-man, it is clear that there is a tendency to transcend the old plan, peculiar to a simply
political corps, and to strive for that which is peculiar to an "order", in the ancient sense. It is
quite clearly recognized that without the presupposition of a religiosity and a purely spiritual
point of view, the invoked values of loyalty, honor, truth, etc., would become empty formulas,
and a unity belonging to a sworn Order would be impossible. Therein lies the third point of
view of the SS, the purely spiritual.


In a booklet entitled: "Fifty Questions and Answers for the SS Man", after
considering the formulas of the solemn oath of allegiance and obedience, it is asked: "Do you,
then, believe in a God?"-The answer to this is, "Yes, I believe in a higher God, and consider
him presumptuous, stupid, and not fit for us who does not believe." But here this generic
commitment to fidelity, made uncertain enough by respect for any religious conviction that
does not mix with politics, is less interesting than the tendency to resurrect a precise form of
Geistigkeit tied to Nordic tradition, but in the sense of Indo-Germanic, in order to give the SS
also the character of a "Stosstruppe der Weltanschauung" - weltanschaulicher Stosstrupp
(Heydrich). -We have referred to the principle that the "return to the origins" has a significant
part in the behavior of the SS.


This tendency becomes tangible in the so-called "Ahnenerbe", a word which has
more or less the meaning of "inheritance of the ancestors" and represents a particular cultural
form of the SS. The noblest work of this organization is that of reestablishing contact between
the old traditions and the more conscious elite of the new Germany; it proceeds from the
premise that what unconsciously emerges as instinct from the depths of the soul is exposed to
continual danger and cannot attain true realization unless it is supported by conscious spiritual
power and clear vision (Walther Wiist). It is therefore advisable to investigate "the spirit and
the deeds of the Nordic Indo-Germanism" and to give "the results of this investigation a living
form" and to communicate them to the German people. And in this respect also, at least
programmatically, the methods of "rigid science" and rationalism is strongly opposed, any,
"naturalistic" interpretation of the ancient religions will regain, in myth and symbol
"objectivity" and "rigid science" will be able to serve as a cover for the hidden workings of
paralyzing and destroying forces (Heydrich). The matter is typical and most interesting. The
leaders of the SS, who have to perform the most difficult and important political functions,
who have to control the Geheime Deutsche Staatspolizei, and who constitute the bodyguard of
the Fihrer and of National Socialism, are at the same time people who are vividly interested
in the world of symbols and primordial myths, and they are people with whom one can
discuss super-sensible problems and issues with traditions of origins. We have noticed this
fact personally and repeatedly, and it has not made us very happy when we think of the level
of many Italian circles, of that certain culture in our country on which the revolution of the
Blackshirts has had no influence, that culture which, even if it is ours, is not the only one,
which, even when it comes to our most sacred things, like the ancient Roman world, sticks to
the same positivistically ignorant knowledge, and which, surrounded by academic
pretentiousness, belongs to the "enlightened" and rationalistic world of the past century.
However, if we want to avoid any partiality, we must nevertheless state that, as far as this
intellectual attitude of the SS comes into consideration, we cannot always say the same about
the principles that would really be worthy of this name, although lively interest and a proper
sensitivity are undeniable. For the reconstruction of the old traditional world, wrong mental
points have been adopted all too often, by which the meaning of many thoughts has been
distorted and their scope has been limited, especially by a certain elite, from which political
benefit considerations have been derived. The main reasons for this were the desire to draw
conclusions from the past, and the particularism of a certain racialnational attitude. These
observations are also valid for the different attempts of the new Germany to complete the N.S.
world view with its traditional and symbolic content of a higher order. But they must not lead


737


to a hasty participation, because it is not easy to orientate oneself in such a course of events,
because one cannot destroy from one day to the next the pernicious effects of an erroneous
way of thinking and of a wrong culture, which the occidental man has made his own for
centuries. If, however, the SS, which is not a group of intellectuals, but a corps already firmly
organized in the sense of an order supervising one of the most powerful renewing European
movements, will succeed in creating from its own ranks an elite capable indeed of realizing,
with full consciousness of principles, the aspiration of returning to the origin, the significance
of such a realization would be something very special.


On the first stage of such a completion we would indeed come across forms of a
spirituality and a civilization like those of the Ghibelline Middle Ages with its orders of
chivalry, which represent a synthesis between the Nordic-Germanic and the Roman element.


The second stage would lead us to the general original Indo-European spirituality
and its solar traditions, which is equal to the origin of all that can hold for us the value of a
civilization in the higher sense, in our age, which can be for us the subject of history. From
this it is easy to see that an elite which would actually be capable of a realization of the kind
would have a value not only for its own nation, but also for all other Aryan peoples who are
fighting against the same enemy and account for the fact that this struggle cannot be decided
until it is completed by an idea, by symbols and professions of order, which are basically
metaphysical in themselves. While the Jewish-Communist press endeavors to portray the SS
as a type of the GPU, we are inclined to think of the "Black Corps" as the guard of the
swastika revolution, of the connoisseurs of the "Siegrunen," the "Runenblitz," and the
Totenscha- del, symbolizing the oath of loyalty unto death, as the oath of an order in the
higher sense of tradition; as a spiritual solidarity that could become supranational; we think of
unity which could include tested and equally attuned groups of different nations, all renewing
within themselves the great heroic and metaphysical views of Aryan and Nordic spirituality,
and thus forming the front necessary for us when, as today and as in the near future, there is
danger of the decisive struggle breaking out against the tide of dark forces attached to the
symbols of the various internationals.


738


Che Werwolf Unit


Willibald Alexis’ Der Werwolf (1848), appearing in the year of the Germany
national revolution, and Hermann Lons’ Der Wehrwolf(1910), published before the First
World War, portrayed ‘werewolves’ not as monsters but as heroic guerrilla resistance fighters
sworn to protect German blood and soil against foreign interlopers and their subversive
elements. Werewolf inspired nationalistic fiction found their most concrete political and
intellectual expression in Fritz Kloppe’s paramilitary Organisation Wehrwolf. Founded in
1923, after the German defeat during the First World War, as a response to the French
occupation of the Ruhr, the Wehrwolf fashioned themselves as a ‘dreaded pack of wolves
hunting down those who wronged the German nation in the dark of the night’ and that is
exactly what these counter-revolutionaries did. As one Wehrwolf pamphlet explained: ‘Why
do we fight? Quite simply because so much Nordic blood pulses through us that we cannot
live without fighting.’ The ‘contemporary church can no longer meet the spiritual needs of the
people’, the Wehrwolf pamphlet continued, ‘Only ‘we, the racial-bundish movement, we the
werewolves, will clarify and shape . . . the articles of faith of the coming time’. The
Wehrwolf’s had a broad investment in racial theories and vélkisch religion was reinforced by
Kloppe’s interest in J. W. Hauer’s German Faith movement as well as the ariosophic writings
of the ‘Atlantis’ scholar and future SS leader, Hermann Wirth, and the rune researcher,
Siegfried Kummer. So the general anti-christian narrative, along with the push for a pagan
revivalism, should not surprise anyone. The Wehrwolf also developed ties to Field Marshall
Erich Ludendorff’s esoterically inclined Tannenberg Association and the Thule-inspired Bund
Oberland. Kloppe even set up a Jung Wehrwolf division for youths under seventeen, replete
with ‘Death’s Head’ insignia (later appropriated by the SS).


‘The Wehrwolf stands on racialist soil,’ Himmler wrote in July 1924. ‘It desires from
every member or new initiate the unconditional commitment to patriotic and racialist
[vélkischen] Germanness.’ Due to the Wehrwolf’s constant surveillance by the Weimar
police Himmler was afraid to join Kloppe. But the future SA Chief and Nazi Police
Commissioner of Berlin, the appropriately named Wolf Graf von Helldorff, did become a
Wehrwolf leader. Helldorff and Ernst R6hm, both immersed in vélkisch esoteric doctrines,
were merely two of the most important early NSDAP leaders among the ‘patriotic
paramilitary associations’, eventually bringing thousands of their ‘Werewolf’ and other
vélkisch groups into the ranks of the Brownshirts or stormtroopers. The famous Weimar
horror writer, Hanns Heinz Ewers, had been contacted by Joesph Goebbels to act as a
propagandanist when campaigning for power. Ewers was involved in the vélkisch-esoteric
paramilitary milieu, so it should hardly be surprised that Heimsoth and R6hm appear


739


positively (albeit by pseudonym) in Rider. Rider epitomized a moment of remarkable
convergence between nationalist paramilitary groups behind the NSDAP. By the time Ewers
finished Rider in 1931, most members of the vélkisch movement, in the words of Helldorff’s
Werewolf, ‘viewed a revolution under the leadership of National Socialism with joy. With
their march into the Third Reich, they could no longer be treated as peons.’ Ewers however,
would later leave the NSDAP due to his issues with antisemitism and for having homosexual
tendencies, his material would be out right banned by Rosenberg but this ban would be
removed later.


“Werewolf? as a term for unit specification would later be used by Odilo Globocnik,
the SS leader in charge of suppressing jewish subversion across much of eastern Europe,
using the code name ‘Werewolf’ for his own racial resettlement operations aimed at
reintroducing ‘the Volksdeutsche and people of German racial origin. Werewolf would be
used again as Operation Werewolf, which was a Special Forces unit designed to carry out
vicious guerrilla attacks on Allied occupiers and collaborators. Ethnic Germans fleeing the
Russians accused Slavic partisans of vampirism, which is one way of expressing the horrific
attacks the soviets were committing on the Germanic people’s. Himmler was, as anyone
would be, furious at the news of the atrocities committed by the Allies and the Soviets,
outlining his fury in a speech to the new Volkssturm [people’s militia] of 1945’, whom the
Reichsfiihrer-SS encouraged to ‘harass “like were-wolves” the allied lines of communication
in occupied Germany’, obvious invoking the imagery of the brave men who fought the French
occupiers of the Rhineland. Given that Trotsky and his red army had acted like vampires to
that of the native populations, werewolves were as belonged to that rare group of heroes who
could change against such beasts, such as the hero Sigmund. Operation Werewolf was to be
much more than just a last-ditch military operation, it was the culmination of the Wagnerian
vision of total victory or apocalypse. Goebbels too embraced the Werewolf imagery and the
Wagnerian vision as a central feature in his end of propaganda, even created his own ‘Radio
Werewolf’ station. “The members of the Werewolf organization are to use any means to
harm the enemy,’ declared the Radio Werewolf broadcast. ‘Woe to the enemies of the country,
but thrice woe to the traitors of our won people who put themselves at their disposal!” SS
officers, Hans-Adolf Priitzmann and Otto Skorzeny were placed on Operation Werewolf with
trainees being recruited for their ideological fanaticism and battle-hardened brutality.
However, due to the unavailability of seasoned fighters, many Werewolf recruits were from
the Hitler Youth instead. Trained in secret locations in Berlin and the Rhineland under
Skorzeny, with guerrilla training being similar to that of Special Forces in Allied countries,
including techniques for survival in harsh conditions, sabotage, hand-to-hand combat, and
assassination. There is also the possibility that Himmler and Priitzmann form women only
Werewolves units, due to the fact that the Soviets used them, manpower was short, and that it
fit into the Wagnerian trope of fighting Valkyrie.


Werewolf groups were more dangerous among local German ‘collaborators’ and
Slavs than among Allied forces due to the terror tactics that were employed, such as; blowing
up captured planes, planting bombs, setting military installations on fire, assassinating
collaborators, and shoot retreating Wehrmacht troops. It was easier to recruit refugees fleeing
the Russians in the east so the Eastern divisions were better organized and more widely feared.
Skorzeny reported that werewolf units were more active and effective in the eastern zones,
reflecting not only the greater urgency of partisan warfare but also the fact that the werewolf
concept resonated with Germans in the East. In order to combat the Werewolf units, General
Eisenhower order for thousands of innocent Germans to be placed in concentration camps as
well as reprisals against suspected guerrillas. The Soviets were even more ruthless and
indiscriminate, outright raping the population, once again displaying the true face of the soviet
monstrosity.


740


Werwolf Inftruction Manual


The Guerrilla War
Nature of Guerrilla Warfare


The guerrilla war that is conducted in a hard, determined fashion, and with clear political aims,
is an effective means to assist one’s own military, and political struggle, and to harass and
paralyze the enemy’s war effort, economy and politics through military subsidiary actions. In
the guerrilla war the lack of numbers and material is compensated for through special combat
tactics, better knowledge of the land, daring decisions, cunning deception and utmost
determination. The guerrilla war is not a momentary substitute, but an essential part of
modern warfare. In desperate situations it is the ultimate means to defend freedom and life of
nation to the utmost. Conducted conjunction with general military operations, clear political
objectives and qualified means the guerrilla war can lead to success of decisive importance.
This is particularly the case in a long war and in times of political upheaval. The guerrilla war
is conducted in the front-line, the flanks, but most of all in the rear of the enemy and his
country, in enemy occupied areas and in countries that are allied with the enemy or are
important to his war effort, economy and politics.


Aims of guerrilla warfare are:


To harass, lie down and destroy enemy forces. To harass and destroy the enemy’s supplies,
his transport means, his communications network, and his industrial and supply facilities. To
exterminate all the enemy’s helpers and frustrate all enemy measures through ruthless combat.
Violence against terror! To support any regular army reconnaissance, intelligence and
espionage.


Organization


The organization of guerrilla warfare has to adapt to the war situation, the terrain and the
extent of control that the enemy exerts over the operational area. The guerrilla war is
supported by front-line troops through raids, reconnaissance patrols and special assault
detachments. Cut off units, groups of stragglers and soldiers on evasive action also support.
These missions in the front-line area are mostly of short duration. Every arising opportunity
for such guerrilla action must be exploited quickly and skillfully by all units of the
Wehrmacht. The troops are to be educated to solve these tasks by resourceful improvisation.


It is the task of special assault detachments to bring combat action to the enemy’s rear area
through carefully planned and far-sighted missions. These missions are the backbone of
guerrilla warfare. Special assault detachments are also used to unleash and support the fight of
local resistance groups. Originating out of the population, the guerrilla war is conducted by
local resistance movements. Without support from the population or an armed power
resistance groups cannot sustain themselves for long. This support must therefore be achieved
and held by all means. The strength of employed units must be kept limited so that
maneuverability as well as the potential to hide camouflage and rigidly direct command and
control are maintained. It is therefore better to form new independent units instead of
enlarging existing ones. Guerrilla warfare can only be executed with a large number of small
units independently employed, but under one command.


741


Command Principles


The most important command principles for guerrilla warfare are the combination of clear
methodical planning with ruthless daring in the execution of an operation. Careful and
thorough examination of the possibilities for success is necessary when initiating the guerrilla
war.


The guerrilla war is executed in 3 stages:


When beginning the guerrilla war, it is necessary to limit action to passive resistance, one-
man operations, or smallest size guerrilla groups, especially if the situation is unclear, the
terrain unfavorable, or it the enemy exerts tight observation and control. At this stage secret
harassment and destruction missions have the priority over combat actions. Missions of
guerrilla groups, and guerrilla platoons in the strength of several guerrilla groups, with combat
and larger destruction missions are only possible in favorable terrain with the support of the
population and when the general situation is clearly understood. The last stage of the guerrilla
war is the deployment of the guerilla task forces. This is possible in weakly secured areas,
with the help of the population or the regular army, or with enduring support and resupply by
air.


Larger unit stages must include the foregoing. It must be avoided, that when
operations of larger units are instituted, that those of the small and smallest units are stopped.
Greatest care must be taken when converting from the combat form of the last siege of
guerrilla war to the general uprising of the population, and thus to the form and style of
regular war. Premature timing for the uprising of the concentrated popular masses can destroy
all achievements that have been won by guerrilla warfare up till then. In general planning as
well as with each mission, the command must be dedicated to avoiding serious setbacks,
because in guerrilla warfare setbacks are much graver than in regular warfare. It is especially
important to avoid open confrontation with the superior enemy forces. After a successful raid
and immediate far-reaching withdrawal is advised. Thorough reconnaissance is the
prerequisite in order to avoid superior enemy forces and choose profitable targets. The
guerrilla war can only be conducted if one’s own reconnaissance is superior to that of the
enemy. This is ensured by skillful use of scouts, through help from the population, but most
of all by using informants along with an excellent information and communications network.
Knowledge of the country and local area will simplify reconnaissance and often make
difficult and enduring exploration unnecessary. Careful planning must unite itself with
ruthless and daring boldness when carrying out a mission. Untiring and never lessening
aggressiveness and activity are the most important prerequisites of success. The enemy must
be hit, and the initiative taken again and again. Defensive actions are only a last means of self-
defense in guerrilla warfare. Surprise over the enemy is achieved by secrecy, cunning in
planning and daring raids. Surprise is the queen of the art of the guerrilla warfare. Greatest
possible maneuverability of the small guerrilla units, avoiding all patterns, using tricks and
ruses, exploitation of darkness and terrain, quick comprehension and mastering of situations,
careful camouflage, ambushes, raids and secret destruction missions are the means by which
surprise is achieved. Psychological warfare must go hand-in-hand with combat activities.
Every possibility to waken and strengthen the will for resistance in the population, to wear
down the enemy’s morale and undermine his prestige must be used. The choice of the
operational area for guerrilla units is the task of the higher command. Points to be considered
are:


The requirements of the political and regular army high command;
The result of reconnaissance and intelligence;

The suitability of terrain;

The possibilities for resupply.


742


The requirements of the regular army high command are the most important considerations in
guerilla warfare.
The following tasks may be assigned:


aa) To initiate and support the local guerrilla warfare ambitions in the enemy’s sphere of
influence as a means of political pressure and to disrupt his war industry.

bb) Obstruction of the enemy’s troop deployment.

cc) Preparation of the guerrilla unit’s own, far-reaching attack operations through local
reconnaissance, as well as harassment of the rearward connections of the enemy. In the last
days and hours before the attack, these activities should be increased up to a temporary
paralyzation of enemy command, control and communications centers as well as massive
interruption of trafficways. In the further course of the attack, the guerrilla units can be of
valuable assistance to the advancing friendly troops.

dc) Cover of retrograde operations of the friendly forces through actions against the flanks of
pursuing enemy attack spearheads, and against the supply lines of the enemy, that are
lengthened in the course of his attack, and thus are vulnerable targets.

ee) Combat with all means to gain time in periods of weakness and after serious attacks in
regular war. After a collapse and in seemingly hopeless situations, this fight in the areas
where the enemy is most vulnerable must under ruthless self-sacrifice be increased to the
utmost effectiveness.


The result of their own and the regular army reconnaissance gives the guerrilla command
information as to how far the requirements of the regular war high command can be satisfied
and where especially valuable targets are found. Often the guerrilla command will exploit
political or military possibilities for combat actions independently. The sustainability of
terrain in the planned operational area must be determined through reconnaissance or judged
by men familiar with the country, because it strongly determines the combat possibilities and
combat forms.

The attitude of the population is of equally large importance for the choice of the operational
area. A hostile attitude can make operations even against important targets, almost impossible.
Sufficient support from the population on the other hand makes missions against a number of
less valuable targets profitable because of the accumulating effect. The possibilities of
resupply, by land, by sea or by air, must be considered thoroughly. They are contributory
factors for the choice of the operational area and of prime important for the length of
operations.


Prospects of Success and Boundaries


The prospects of success by means of guerrilla warfare are determined by the
political, military and economic situation, the terrain, population density, traffic infrastructure,
national characteristics and religious habits, the attitude of the population and most of all, by
the toughness and combat effectiveness of the employed guerrilla units. Without a clear
political will, the guerrilla war can achieve only temporary success, even if conducted with
tactical skill. On the other hand, quick and lasting consequences can be expected, if the
political and military high command recognize and exploit the advantages that the guerrilla
operations have achieved. This must be done in timely fashion and with utmost determination.
The necessity of a reliable support network through secret assistance by the population in the
operational area, dependence on help through strong friendly forces or continuous resupply by
air, sets certain boundaries for the prospects of success of guerrilla warfare. The terrain
strongly determines the possibilities and combat means of the guerrilla war. Covered strongly
undulated terrain with insufficient traffic infrastructure, poorly passable terrain, and most of
all wooded areas and mountains assist guerilla missions. Open terrain with high population
density and a well-developed traffic infrastructure presents great problems for the conduct of
guerrilla warfare. Large cities and industrial areas offer after adequate adaptation of the


743


organization forms, good possibilities for guerrilla actions. This is especially the case in the
ruins of destroyed larger settlements.


Formation of Guerrilla Units
General Requirements


In the guerrilla war, it is not the strength of the employed units and the mass of their weapons
that give success, but the inner strength of the guerrillas, their daring craftiness and ingenuity
in exploiting all favors of the terrain and helpful means. When forming and reinforcing
guerrilla units, consideration must be taken of these factors. Still able are volunteers who
besides enthusiasm and willingness have the doggedness, toughness and ingenuity needed.
Gaps in their military training can be closed. The variety of tasks performed by a guerrilla unit
makes it necessary that it not only include good soldiers, but also men with technical and
practical skills, and such with political and propagandistic abilities.


Leaders


The correct choice and training of the leaders is of decisive importance. The leader of a
guerrilla unit should be demanding of himself and others, when conducting his mission. On
the other hand, he must provide never-ending concern for the welfare of his men, this
maintaining the battle-worthiness of his unit. His daringness as a combatant, his leadership
success and his unconditional fairness must waken confidence. Confidence is the fundamental
of leadership in guerrilla units. The authority of the leader rests solely on his personality, not
on rank and insignia. The leader of a guerrilla unit carries a high measure of responsibility. He
has the same rights as the commander of an independently operation battleship, and he may
impose any punishment -- even death -- to keep up discipline. Besides military proficiency
and personality, a feeling for political and propagandistic possibilities is of high value for the
leader of a guerrilla unit.


The Men


The guerrilla must be an excellent soldier and unite the capabilities of an infantry man with
those of an engineer. Furthermore, his mission requires from him a close relationship to
nature, frugality and ingenuity in the exploitation of all means and makeshifts available.
Through his behavior towards the population, he must win the confidence and respect of all
freedom-loving people. Weaklings and traitors fear him like the plague. It is important that a
large number of the men know the operational area and are in command of the language of the
country, yes even of the local dialect. Acquiring and training radio operators in due time must
not be neglected in any case. Even women may be suitable.


Order of Battle


The strength of the guerilla unit must adjust itself to the enemy situation, the mission and the
terrain. In areas under tight observation and with insufficient cover and concealment, it is only
possible to operate in smallest-size groups, which at the utmost may temporarily be united for
a common mission. In sparsely occupied areas or terrain with good possibilities for cover and
concealment, stronger units can hold themselves. But even these units must always be
structured into groups and platoons. The smallest independently operating unit is the guerrilla
group. It consists of 1 leader and 4 guerrillas. Under difficult circumstances and for special
tasks, reconnaissance or destruction missions, even smaller guerrilla teams may be employed.
Formation of stronger groups is of doubtful usefulness. The guerrilla platoon consists of
several guerrilla groups and a command squad with an overall strength of 10 leaders and 40
guerrillas. Guerrilla platoons are to be employed where terrain and the enemy situation permit
it. In especially favorable situations, for example in poorly secured, densely wooded, or


744


mountainous areas and when the guerrilla unit’s effect on the situation in the operational are
has progressed sufficiently, guerrilla task forces which consist of several platoons, are to be
formed. The following assignment of command tasks has proven itself effective for larger
guerrilla platoons and guerrilla task forces.


Leader

Leader of the reconnaissance service and the command squad
Leader for political questions

Leader of the signals squad

Weapons and material warder

Doctor or medical orderly

Cook

Mess sergeant and accountant


In smaller guerrilla platoons, several tasks must be united. A back-up must be named and
instructed in the tasks so that casualties do not cause interruptions. When the guerrilla warfare
has grown to have even greater importance in an area a local secret command staff must be set
up. Liaison officers are to be attached to it.


Armament


The armament of the guerrilla units must be light. It must not hinder maneuverability, but on
the other hand should enable a destructive firepower in worthwhile close-range targets. In the
guerrilla groups some of the guerrillas must be therefore equipped with rifles. Pistols and
daggers may also be of value. Hand grenades are indispensable. Additionally, depending upon
the mission, explosives are added to the equipment. It is very advantageous to use a
suppressed weapon and to have a sniper rife. Also, some of the weapons should be equipped
with luminous sights. It may become necessary to equip the guerrilla platoons with several
machine guns and bazookas for certain missions. Especially in the mountains, it is
advantageous to take along mortars. Depending upon the situation and the mission, guerrilla
task forces must carry heavier high angle- and anti-tank weapons. A uniform caliber of the
armament is important because of ammunition resupply. Especially suited are all weapons
with calibers that are common in the operational area. Supplementation and replacement of
arms through procurement of enemy weapons is always a good policy. In difficult supply
situations, raids to obtain weapons and ammunition must be conducted.


Equipment


The equipment of the guerrilla soldier and the whole guerrilla unit must be adapted to the
circumstances and the situation in the operational area. It must be so light that
maneuverability is not restricted. Appendix 1 may serve as a guideline. It is best to carry the
most necessary equipment pieces directly on the body, so that the guerrilla is still combat
ready after losing or having to temporarily hide his rucksack. All pieces of equipment that are
not constantly carried along must be hidden in concealed caches in the operational area.
Suitable waterproof containers are needed, therefore.


Clothing


The clothing must be adapted to the climate of the operational area, the task, and the duration
of the mission. The uniform common with the infantry ranger units of the Army is best suited.
Except in large towns, the clothing of the peasant population in the operational area may
always be used in emergencies. Kidney warmers are good to keep healthy. It has proven
useful to take along several thin undergarments instead of one thick one. Thus, several
different layers can be worn over each other, enabling a better adaption to the existing


745


weather. The clothes must be impregnated against lice. Shoes with rubber soles, or sports
shoes, are useful for special missions.


Training
Fundamentals


Good infantry training is of great value to the guerrilla. Where it is lacking, the most
important branches must be taught to mend. Weapons training, marksmanship, utilization of
the terrain and combat training, close-quarter tank destruction and guerrilla battle techniques
in squad, group and platoon formations must be taught. Furthermore, engineer training is
necessary to the extent that each guerrilla has a basic knowledge of installing barriers and
obstacles and can work with demolitions. As many guerrillas as possible must be instructed in
the special field of destruction and sabotage techniques. A practical instruction in first aid is
indispensable because of the possibilities of becoming wounded. The following principles
must be held as valid for all training phases:


All branches must be adapted to the special requirements of guerrilla warfare, living in the
field and night combat. Everything not necessary must be dispensed with. Important aspects
must be repeated again and again. It is more important to maximize maneuverability, the
capacity to adapt, the ingenuity and the “hunter” instinct than it is to drill the men.


Utilization of Terrain and Camouflage


Proper utilization of the terrain and camouflage will enable one to find concealment form the
enemy in order to deceive, dupe and surprise him. One must offer only the very smallest and
poorly visible target possible in case of discovery. Camouflage against air view must never be
forgotten. Utilization of the terrain requires the skillful use of all possibilities of cover and
concealment, and consideration of the color of the back and underground.


Sunlight and shadows must also be considered. The guerrilla must always be intent on
offering only a small target. Camouflage is achieved by adapting to the surroundings with the
help of natural and artificial means and by avoiding noticeable movements. The following
points concerning cover and concealment must be remembered: Cover for campsites, halt and
rest areas during the march and when advancing is offered by mountains, hills, boulders,
valleys, gulches, forests, hedges, bushes, corn- fields, houses, barns, walls, fences ditches, dirt
piles etc.

The guerrilla sneaking up on enemy guards must make use of even the smallest depressor,
furrow, dirt and rock-pile, mole mound and grass bundle for cover and concealment


746


Picture 1. Utilization of small cover
Consideration of the color of the back and underground is necessary: for example, the grey-
green uniform offers no camouflage against light yellow-colored sand. Especially to be
considered is the contour against the sky which the guerrilla offers to the eye of the enemy
when advancing over hills and even the smallest elevations. This contour effect is not only a
give-away at daytime, but also during bright nights (Picture 2).


Right! Wrong!
Picture 2, Consideration of back and underground


=


-


Every shadow offers good camouflage (Picture 3).


747


Picture 3. Shadows as camouflage against air observation


The guerrilla must always take care that he offers only as small a target as possible (Picture 4).
Right! Wrong!


Picture 4. Minimizing the target


The most important natural camouflage means are: small trees, twigs, grass, moss, wheat,
herbs, leaves etc. Face and hands must be subdued with dirt, soot or grease paint in the winter,
with blackboard chalk or flour. When camouflaging campsites, it is advisable to replant small
trees, bushes, grass and moss. The camouflage thus becomes more natural and does not wither
as fast.

The most common artificial camouflage means are: the tent canvas, blankets, camouflaged
uniforms, camouflaged poncho shirts, large camouflaged nets to cover foxholes etc.. and
small camouflage nets to cover the face and the shoulders. Camouflage poncho shirts and
snow poncho shirts are easily self-made. Old clothing pieces, fishing nets and rope are also of
value. These artificial camouflage means may be supplemented with natural means like twigs,
grass etc. Different colored rags, bundles of bush and paper can be tied to nets. It is useful
eyelets and bands to the cap, so that camouflage may be quickly attached and changed
(Picture 5).


748


Picture 5. Small camouflage net
Avoiding all sudden movements is part of camouflaging. At dusk and in the dark only quick
movements and sounds are noticeable. The following rules must be followed: Always
remember: How does the enemy now see me? Don’t forget to adapt your camouflage to your
surroundings! Avoid sudden movements! They destroy all camouflage efforts. And pay
attention to shape, shine and shadow.

Navigation in Terrain


The simplest way to navigate in terrain is to know the operational area thoroughly. The
guerrilla must therefore be taught to remember special orientation features that are easily
recognized by day (dominant heights, church towers, factory chimneys, single trees, field
barns, groups of boulders etc.). In order to orientate himself at dusk and in the night. He must
remember their contours. He must also memorize dominant lines which can serve him as
conduction lines during night marches. Such lines are fences, walls, hedges, waterways, high-
tension power lines, forest edges, dams, railways, streets, tracks etc. When conduction lines
and orientation points can easily be mistaken for others, additional features must be
memorized for verification so that mistakes are ruled out. In uniform terrain, especially in
forests, orientation points and conduction lines are very important. At cross-roads, for
example, the guerrilla must memorize the specific features in order to find the right way. Gaps
in the skyline, dominant treetops, path starting points etc. serve as additional reference
verification signs at uniform forest edges. Certain important distances should always be
estimated and memorized together with the conduction lines and orientation points.
Evaluation of the number of steps from one orientation point to the next also is a good means
of easily finding the right way at night. When using a map to plan a night march, orientation
points and conduction lines can be memorized with its help. This helps to avoid having to use
a light when referring to the map in the dark. If the terrain is totally unknown, or if the
guerrilla is lost, the first step in order to find the right way is to determine the navigational
directions. The following principles may be used: The position of the sun is fairly accurately
in the east at 0600 hours, in the southwest at 1500 hours and in the west at 1800 hours. A
good method to determine the southern direction is by the use of the watch. Hold the watch
level and point the small hand towards the sun. When the angle between the hour- hand and
the 12 is cut in half, this line, extended forward before noon and backward in the afternoon,
points south


(Picture 6).


749


Picture 6. Determining the Southern Direction with the Pocket Watch
Left: Morning 0600h Right: Afternoon 1500h


At night the northern direction is found with the help of the North Star. It is found by
extending the distance between the rear two stars of the Big Dipper approximately 5 times
(Picture 7)


Picture 7. North Star and Big Dipper
North Star 2. Big Dipper


At night the directions can also be determined by the position of the moon: the full moon is
exactly opposite the sun and thus in the southwest at 0300 hours and in the west at 0600 hours.
The first quarter of a waxing moon stands where the sun was 6 hours ago: for example, in the
west at 2400 hours. The last quarter of a waxing moon stands where the sun will stand after 6
hours; for example, in the east at 2400 hours. In order to determine one’s own position with
the help of a map, it must first be aligned with the true north with the help of the sun or one of
the other means; then the surrounding area is checked for terrain features that are easily found
on the map (streets, churches, dominant hills etc.). These points are then compared with the
picture of the map so that one’s own position can be ascertained. Determination of a certain
terrain point is achieved as follows: Mark your own position on the map, choose a clearly
visible terrain feature that is not too near (e.g. church) and align the map to it. The upper edge
of the map now points north. If other terrain features are sighted along a line marked from
one’s own position with the help of a ruler or pencil, the line on the map must lead to the
wanted terrain point. The difficulties of navigating in unknown terrain, especially in forests
and at night, make it necessary that every guerrilla learn how to use a compass. When using a
compass, hold it away from steel and iron objects (e.g. gun) as far as possible because the
needle will otherwise be deflected. With the help of the compass, maps can be aligned with
true north, directions may be determined, and a plotted course can be maintained with the help
of a compass bearing. The compass, next to the sun is the most practical means by which to
navigate. Each guerrilla must therefore be trained in its use.


Reporting and Communications


750


Reliable, quickly transmitted reports and messages are fundamental to the security and
command of the guerrilla unit. The guerrilla must be taught to observe attentively and to
avoid unclear and exaggerated statements. He must transmit or deliver important messages
quickly. Signals that are clearly visible or well understood over long distances are best suited
to transmit simple messages, warnings and orders. They must be arranged well in advance and
changed from time to time. Too many signals with various meanings are to be avoided. They
can cause more confusion rather than help. It is especially important to arrange signals with
the sympathizers in the population. These signals mostly serve as a warning. Such signals
may be: opening or closing certain attic hatches, windows or shutters, opening or closing of
curtains, hanging out of wash or unsuspicious clothes, putting on lights in certain rooms and
so on. These signs can mean: “Danger of Enemy.” “No danger.” “Enemy in the village.” Or
“Enemy in the house.” They can also indicate that the sympathizer has an important message
for the unit. All guerrillas acting as observers, scouts or guards must consider the following
points when reporting: Can the message be given with a signal? Is it necessary to send a
messenger? Is it necessary to draw a sketch? All oral or written messages must be checked for
the possibility of sending a part of the message immediately with a simple sign. This is
especially important for warnings. Written messages must be avoided as much as possible. All
messages must clearly state: What have I seen myself? What has a comrade noticed? Which
reports are from the population? What is speculation? Reports from the population must have
indication as to how trustworthy the message seems; presumptions must be explained. It must
always be considered that even calm men cannot observe clearly during a combat situation
and tend to exaggerate due to excitation. The following points must be followed: When was
the observation made? What was observed (e.g. a platoon, 2 cannons etc.)? Which enemy
activity was observed (determine the exact position)? The further intention of the message’s
sender must always be included. Each messenger and courier must know to whom the
message is addressed, where he will find the addressee, and what he must do if he cannot find
him, and respectfully after he has delivered the message. He must memorize the contents of
the message so that he can destroy the message when in danger. The messenger must not give
away the position of the leader’s perimeter through wrong conduct. He must detour and cut
back very often. Written messages should not be signed nor have an address on them. Simple
signs are sufficient. Code names and abbreviations used in the guerrilla unit may also be
employed. Messages from helpers out in the population can be hidden in predetermined
“mailboxes,” Well suited for this purpose are: hollow trees, cracks in walls etc. When using
such mailboxes, it is advisable to agree on a sign in the vicinity indicating that a message has
been left. This helps to avoid having to check the dead mailbox. Use of flashing signal lights
is only possible if the enemy situation permits it. In the mountains, they are of use in order to
avoid difficult, time- consuming message deliveries through to the valleys. Care must be
taken that these flashing messages are coded. It is best to use only short signs. Long enduring
blinking should be avoided. Pigeons may be given to reconnaissance patrols in order to bring
important messages to the higher command. Radio transmission is indispensable in a guerrilla
war when lacking other technical means of communications. Training of good radio operators
in due time and far-sighted acquisition of replacements must never be neglected, even when
lacking sufficient number of radio sets at the moment. Employment of women for this task is
possible.


Close-Quarter Battle


The training in close-quarter battle must be conducted in a guerrilla-like, sporting
way. It should enable the guerilla to: a) fight with the spade, dagger or without a weapon and
not depend solely upon his firearm. b) overwhelm an enemy silently when encountering him
unexpectedly (especially at night). c) overwhelm a guard silently. d) break a hold and deliver


751


defensive blows and punches. Often the whole mission depends upon overcoming the enemy
silently, during an unexpected encounter or when disposing of a guard. Close-quarter battle
must therefore be practiced again and again. Strict regulations cannot be given, but when
disposing of a guard, the following points must be observed: Only specifically skillful
guerrilla should be employed for the task. Leave unnecessary equipment. Wear shoes with
rubber soles or sports shoes or take off your boots. Sneak to a secure position near the guard
and study his habits, then sneak to the place best suited for the attack. When jumping on the
guard and hitting him, make sure he cannot cry out. Depending upon orders, drag the guard
away or dispose of him. Take away papers, weapons,

equipment etc. Disappear quickly or carry on with your mission. When practicing breaking a
hold, it is important that the guerrilla learns to react energetically and quickly so that he is
able to overwhelm an enemy who is superior in constitution. It is not necessary for the
guerilla to know a large variety of close-quarter battle methods. It is better that those which
suit him best become second nature. Blows and punches against vulnerable parts of the body
are mostly executed with the fist or the edge of the hand. Kicks against the knee or shins can
drop an enemy to the ground before he is able to react. The following parts of the body are
best attacked with blows and punches: Temple, base of the nose, upper lip, neck, Adam’s
apple and back of the neck; Main arteries, heart, kidneys, groin.


Roadblocks


Roadblocks are an important means of guerrilla warfare. They are employed together with
ambushes to hinder pursuit by motorized troops and to harass enemy traffic. The effectiveness
of obstacles can be multiplied through the use of hidden explosive charges. The guerrilla
group must always be able to set up simple roadblocks with the means available. Training
must enable the guerrillas to choose and build an obstacle best suited for the number of men
and means available. When ambushing on heavily frequented roads, obstacles in the form of
mines must be employed. These should be detonated electrically or by trip wire (Picture 8).


—


ble
:


-¢ | : = ~~
2 .
Picture 8. Single Tree Blockade


752


To hinder pursuit or in harassment operations, antitank mines or improvised mines with
pressure or relief-pressure.


wo. ao


; i
' a‘ ' 4
Picture 10. Tree Blockade


Detonators may be used successfully. Mines must always be carefully camouflaged.
Destruction of bridges made of iron, masonry, or wood by demolition, requires considerable
amounts of explosives and a thorough instruction in handling of explosives and fuses and in
calculating the charges. This is a subject of special instructions and regulations. Even without
explosives and mines, guerrilla groups can set up obstacles that will efficiently hinder the
enemy:

Single trees are chopped down so that a stump of about | to 1 % meter’s height is left standing.
The treetop must fall in the direction of the enemy, and the whole width of the street must be
obstructed (Picture 9).


753


Picture 11. Wire Cable Blockade


The direction in which the tree should fall is determined by a notch (1/5 to 1/3 of the
diameter). Saw cuts should end in this notch. Jamming of the saw is avoided by using a wedge.
The growth of the tree and branches of other trees may influence the direction in which the
tree falls. In this case, push with sticks or pull with ropes in the direction necessary. (Picture 9)
Tree blockades are made by cutting down trees over a distance of 20 to 30 meters. The trees
should fall crosswise over each other, with the treetops towards the enemy and outwards so
that visibility into the obstacle is obstructed. Only tress in favorable positions are cut (Picture
10).

Wire obstacles are set up at an angle to the road axis with the height of 1 to 1.20 meters using
strong trees and with additional anchorage by strong pegs. Wire obstacles are very efficient
against cars and motorcycles (Picture 11).


754


sh
‘ae BG
; meet i


Picture 12. Destroying a Road


Destroying a road: The road is dug out over its complete width, 2 to 3 meters wide and 1
meter deep. The earth is thrown down the embankment (Picture 12). This obstacle is very
effective in mountains on roads that run along slopes. Repair of the street is complicated if the
bottom of the ditch is angled downhill (Picture 13).


i ee -


Picture 13. Destroying a Road

Wrecking of wooden bridges is sufficiently effective if the planks and support beams of some
parts of the whole bridge are removed. Destruction is completed by sawing through or
removing the supports. The wood must be removed or rendered useless by chopping or


755


cutting it. Against armored vehicles and light reconnaissance tanks, the wrecking can be
camouflaged by sawing the beams only halfway through. The bridge will collapse after a
vehicle has driven on it.

It requires a long time to prepare the incendiary destruction of wooden bridges. The fire must
be nourished from below. Therefore, a large quantity of inflammable material like tar, pitch,
oil, gasoline, petroleum, straw etc. is necessary and must be fastened under every beam and
all supports. Hanging or setting up containers (barrels, Jerry cans) filled with tar, petroleum,
oil etc.. directly under the planks, pouring engine oil over the bridge before igniting it and so
forth, accelerate the destruction. Sufficient draft is created by removing some planks.
Destruction of a bridge by burning it down requires 5 to 10 hours. Long lasting obstruction of
a road is achieved by erecting several echelons of barriers in depth. The effect of barriers is
multiplied by phony obstacles. They must be identical to real barriers. Phony barriers should
be erected in connection with the real ones or in alternation with real ones. A phony barrier
will only be effective if the enemy notices it and if he has encountered a similar real obstacle
before. If mines have already exploded in the direction of the enemy, motor vehicles will be
easily stopped by a simple wire or wire rope, a conspicuous sign on the road, fresh tar spots
on the asphalt of the road, brushed spots on cobblestones, freshly repositioned cobblestones,
dug up and refilled holes, iron pieces or pieces of wooden planks placed on earth, wires
leading into the earth near chopped down trees.

When setting up phony barriers, a great variety should be tried. In general, the following
fundamentals must be observed when setting up barriers: It should not be possible to bypass
the barrier. The enemy should come upon the barrier unexpectedly (behind curves, bushes etc.)
The barrier should be watched and be under control by one’s own fireteam or reinforced
through hidden charges. Large barriers (tree blockades, destruction of roads, wrecking and
burning of bridges) which require more men and longer time can only be accomplished under
favorable circumstances. Help of the population is mostly necessary. When laying mine
barriers, care must be taken that other persons do not observe the work.


Tactics
Reaching the Operational Areas


By staying behind operations. This possibility is only given in mobile warfare and during
enemy offensives. It is most favorable if the guerrilla unit can stay behind in the
predetermined operational area. If this is not possible, it is very important to choose an area
within the battle zone out of which the guerrilla unit can march into the operational area under
greatest possible cover and concealment. It is very difficult or almost impossible to stay
behind in areas where the points of main battle effort are. Supply and weapons caches must be
set up in due time. The guerrilla unit hides itself in well-camouflaged fox-holes (Picture 14),
dense, vast pine forests, field-ruins, cellars etc. in order to stay behind. Secret passage through
enemy lines in times of static battle action. If circumstances permit, the whole guerrilla unit
must infiltrate to a favorable sector at a favorable time. Friendly troops must support them
with all means available. Suited therefore are quiet sectors of the front line that are secured
mainly by fortified strongpoints, densely wooded terrain, out of which concealed routes into
the operational area can be found. Dark nights and favorable weather: rain, fog, snow and
gusty winds, must be exploited. Field-ruins, mining installations and other complex build-up
industrial districts are hard to oversee and also favor infiltration. A rendezvous point (RV)
with good cover and concealment must be arranged if the guerrillas are to pass through enemy
lines on their own. A RV is also important and therefore must be ordered if the unit is forced
to disperse.


756


Picture 14. Foxhole

A certain waiting period must be ordered for the RV. Instructions must be given in the case
that a guerrilla comes late. After the successful passage through enemy lines, the guerrilla unit
must cautiously advance into the enemy’s rear area as far as possible and lay up in a good
hide-out before dawn.


Forced passage.


Where a secret passage through enemy lines is not possible, an attack of temporarily united
guerrilla units through enemy lines may be in order. In some cases, such attacks may be
conducted solely for this purpose. Daring thrusts of tank packs into the enemy’s rear promise
success in some cases. The guerrillas will dismount where there is possible undercover. All
forced passages are difficult and therefore only to be used as a last possibility. Over water or
through the air by parachute drop or air landing in the operational area or near it. All
identification papers, letters, photos and anything else that may give the enemy intelligence
clues must be turned in prior to the mission. False, misleading documents and papers may be


757


taken along. It is also necessary that the guerrilla memorize a well-planned cover story (past
life, family, mission, own unit) so as to deceive the enemy’s intelligence.


Selection of Targets for Destruction and Combat


In most cases, the leader of a guerrilla unit has the freedom to choose his targets
within the boundaries drawn by his mission. In unclear situations, he will restrict himself to
small actions in order to find out how the enemy reacts, and which attitude the population
takes. With greater knowledge about the enemy and the attitude of the population, he will go
on to larger actions. These must stay within the boundaries set by his mission, his unit’s
strength, the enemy situation and the terrain. The golden rule that severe setbacks must
avoided in guerrilla warfare must never be forgotten. Several successful small actions hurt the
enemy more than a half successful large operation. An unsuccessful operation often leads to
total destruction of the unit; thus, the intention connected with its mission would not be
fulfilled.


Reconnaissance and Intelligence


Careful reconnaissance must give the leader of a guerrilla unit the fundamental
information he needs to make decisions. It may also be of importance for the general planning
of the guerrilla unit and the regular war command. The general aim of reconnaissance is to
determine the enemy situation in respect to strength, location of staffs and units, movements,
intentions and combat strength. Guerrilla warfare targets require careful reconnaissance and
observation of the troop barracks, officer and functionary quarters, fuel, ammunition and food
depots of the enemy his security measures and habits, his traffic routes and communication
installations. Furthermore, the attitude of the population in the operational area and the effect
of the guerrilla unit’s activity on the enemy and the population is of importance.The main
effort lies on the detection and reconnaissance of suitable targets and gaps in the enemy’s
security measures. Immediate guerrilla warfare reconnaissance is conducted by scouts and
small reconnaissance parties, but most of all by men of confidence and occasional helpers out
of the population. The results of reconnaissance will be insufficient without the willing and
understanding help of the population. This help must therefore be sought after. The scout
should see everything without himself being seen. Besides his special mission, he must
always keep the security of his unit in mind; he must give warning in due time if danger
threatens. If the scout cannot avoid combat, he must strive to destroy the enemy quickly. The
dead enemy is searched for identification papers, letters, notebooks and other sources of
information; his corpse is hidden to prevent early discovery and pursuit. It is often favorable
for scouts to disguise themselves as local inhabitants. Greatest caution must be taken when
questioning local residents. The important questions must be placed unsuspiciously among
other unimportant ones. Precautions must also be taken when preparing to move on: asking
misleading questions about routes and locations that the scout never intends to take, turning
away from the intended route, and cutting back to deceive possible pursuers are all in order
here. It is very important that the scout avoids leaving tracks or covers those that he has made.
He avoids enemy controls by bypassing them on hidden paths. Occasionally it is right to
boldly mingle in with the traffic on a busy main road. Permanent informants and occasional
helpers out of the population will often deliver the most valuable information because they
can constantly observe the enemy activities without difficulty. The most important task of the
reconnaissance service therefore is to install a network of informants. A continuous
surveillance must be ensured in the cities, command-centers and traffic injunctions. Well
suited as informants and occasional helpers are persons that are in contact with the occupation
forces. This is especially the case if they have access to the camps and barracks like
innkeepers, door-to-door salesmen, barbers, and personnel from stores delivering goods. It
will be of greatest value if individual soldiers that are dissatisfied or ideologically close to the
guerrilla unit or persons attached to the enemy’s army can be won as informants. Untrained


758


informants must be given exact instructions as to which information is of value. In order to
avoid endangering the informant, a “mailbox” is agreed upon. This means that he is ordered to
leave his observations and information at a certain hiding place. Occasionally an unsuspicious
rendezvous is arranged with him. This may be in the traffic stream of a busy street on market
days, in front of food distribution points, stores, and in heavily frequented public offices.
Usable reconnaissance results are often only obtained after long and patient observation. If
other sources bring no results, it may become necessary to take a prisoner in order to question
him. The best time therefore is during a rainy night. Usable results are often obtained by
listening in on the enemy’s radio communication and tapping his telephone wires. See special
instructions for this. The reliability of all reconnaissance elements and sources must be
constantly controlled by comparison and rechecking. Important decisions must only be based
on information that has been verified through several independent sources. After the target
has been determined, the information obtained by intelligence must be supplemented by a
thorough reconnaissance of the terrain around the target. It is very important to find concealed
routes for the approach and withdrawal. A sketch of the area is of value. Often the
reconnaissance activity will be determined by orders from the Wehrmacht.


The March
Guerrilla units almost always march at night. Bad weather must be exploited. They avoid
dwellings, roads and paths that are often used. When forced to use paths and tracks, greatest


caution must be exercised; marching at the edge or parallel to the path lessens the danger. The
march of the guerrilla unit must be a steady cautious advance (Picture 15).


YW K


Picture 15. Noiseless walking Left: On soft ground
Middle: On hard ground Right: On grass


758


an J . a?
a ~ "s
A ; "
; ,; ne fr _ — fal 7“ n
amend “e oa A
——


L | A A A oO A A
o « 3

It is best to advance from sector to sector with frequent silent halts in order to listen
and observe. The march of the guerrilla platoon is secured by advance scouts. Larger units
employ an advance party and a rear guard. In general, it is not necessary to secure the flanks,
spreading out too much attracts the attention of the enemy. The advance party must always be
intent to avoid terrain that makes a silent advance impossible. Before reaching defiles and
areas with little cover and concealment, scouts are sent out to reconnoiter and secure the
march route and the flanks. The guerrilla unit waits in combat readiness until they return.
These scouts must also advance from sector to sector. Communication between the scouts and
the unit is achieved with the help of unsuspicious signs (animal sounds, visual signs). The
meanings of these signs must often be changed. Greatest care must be taken to avoid, or
respectively, to cover tracks. Where this is not possible, the enemy must be deceived with
false tracks and by cutting back. It is strictly forbidden to smoke during the march. Marches
will only be conducted at daytime when it is absolutely necessary, in this case, every
possibility for cover and concealment must be used in order to avoid detection by ground or
air surveillance. Long detours are often unavoidable. The behavior of domestic animals, wild
beasts and birds must be observed because it is often possible to draw conclusions as to the
presence of humans out of it. If the unit comes upon single local inhabitants, they must be
taken along under the pretense that they are needed as couriers or guides. While they are with
the unit, they must be questioned and deceived as to the real intentions of the unit through
conversation conducted for this purpose between members of the unit. Finally, they must be
sent off in a misleading direction. Security measures must be taken immediately during longer
march rest periods. The guerrillas securing the area must be able to provide heavy firepower.
Before resting, the unit must cut back. The area for the rest must offer good cover and
concealment as well as fields of fire against any enemy following the tracks of the unit
(Picture 18). When continuing the march, even after a short rest, a personnel check must be
made so that nobody is left behind.


Picture 16. Cutting Back Before Resting


The rest area is designated by the circle.

Checkpoints for Planning

Preparatory intelligence and reconnaissance give the leader the information he needs in order
to plan an operation. When he has reached a decision, he must reconsider the plan of
operation he intends to conduct and talk it over with his men. Where the possibility is given,
he must practice important details with them. When planning the following points must be
observed:

Place! — Where? Where is the target? Which routes of approach? Which routes for withdrawal?
Which advantages of the terrain can I exploit? Time! — When? When is the best time for the
operation? At night? During the day? During moon-light? During complete darkness? When
do the guards change? When is the target not secured strongly? Forces! - Who? Who is


760


guarding/securing the target? Regular army? A special unit? Language? How strong?
Positions of guards? Attitude of the population living near the target? Who will execute the
operation? Required strength? Distribution of tasks. Combat means! — What? What means for
destruction are necessary in order to conduct the operation? Amount of explosives and
incendiaries? Which type of weapons? Which type of special clothing? Which equipment?
Which helpful aids will I find at the target? Execution! - How? How will I execute the
operation? Combat plan? Demolitions plan? Possibilities to infiltrate secretly? Preparation,
jump-off position? Deception of the enemy? How do I avoid the security elements? How do I
avoid or break resistance?


The key-words, “Where? — When? — Who? — What? — How?” are mainly intended for the
planning of interdiction operations. Used accordingly, they may also be considered when
planning other operations.


Interdiction Operations
In the first phase of guerrilla warfare, interdiction operations are of prime importance. The
parts of this phase are directed against targets in the enemy’s rear:


Supply of the enemy’s attack spearheads: fuel, ammunition, equipment, maintenance services;
Railway installations: rails, railway bridges, train stations, signal boxes, turntables, switch
points, communication and signal means, repair shops;

Bridges on supply routes;

Transport facilities: trucks, cars, trailers, tractors, locomotives, railway wagons, airplanes,
horse-drawn carts;

Air traffic: airports, airfields, hangars;

Oil pipelines, fuel dumps, tank trucks, filling stations;

Ammunition dumps, food stores, equipment stores;

Communication installations: Telegraph and telephone lines and transmitting stations,
broadcasting stations, radio communication installations;

Installations at waterways, floodgates, lifting tackles;

Powerplants, gas and waterworks, dams;

Mines and industrial plants of all sorts.


They are executed through demolitions, incendiaries, and as a last resort, by other mechanical
means. Thorough instruction on the means used for destruction is a prerequisite to success.
Technical instructions therefore must be extracted from engineer manuals and special
handbooks. The tactical planning and the execution of interdiction operations requires caution,
cunning and ingenuity. When preparing such an operation, the following must be considered:
Which is the most vulnerable part of the target?

Which essential part of the installation can be destroyed, and which means are necessary —
gunfire, demolition, or incendiaries? Therefore, what is needed and what strength is necessary?
At which time of the day should the raid be conducted — daytime, in the night, or at dawn?
Which signs will signal the beginning and the end of the attack on the enemy installation?
Which routes are best suited for approach and withdrawal? Where is the rendezvous point
(RV) after the execution of the operation?


Surprise is the main prerequisite for success. Therefore, absolute secrecy of all preparations is
necessary. All communication lines leading away from the enemy installation are severed
when the raid starts. Even in small-scale operations, a clear distribution of destruction,
security and combat tasks is necessary. A security party secures, protects or warns against
surprise: a destruction party destroys the target. Small units must avoid combat. In large-scale
operations a reserve is held back in order to break unforeseen resistance and cover the
withdrawal of the unit after execution of the operation. The reserve should primarily be
equipped with a sufficient number of automatic weapons. The reserve party can cover the


761


withdrawal with gunfire and by laying out mines or booby traps. With the latter, it is possible
to gain a considerable amount of time. In larger scale operations, simultaneous diversionary
and feint attacks, ambushes along the roads leading to the target, or mining of the routes can
occasionally be advantageous. When strong enemy firepower can be expected, his possible
fire plan must be considered during the planning. The instructions under number 9 are valid
for the withdrawal.


Ambush


Next to interdiction operations, the ambush is one of the most promising means of waging
guerrilla warfare. It is successful if the enemy is completely surprised. This can be achieved
through careful planning and occasionally by skillful and quick improvisation. The smaller
the operation, the easier its execution and the larger the possibility of avoiding failure. The
approach to the ambush site must be unnoticed by the enemy and the population. Enemies met
by chance must be killed inconspicuously. Local inhabitants must be detained for the duration
of the operation. If necessary, the operation must be cancelled. The ambush must be set up in
suitable terrain. Areas that are too obvious as ambush sites like defiles, hollows etc. must be
avoided. Well suited on the other hand are inconspicuous positions in hedges, forest edges,
cornfields, settlements and gardens, especially if they offer possibilities of covered and
concealed withdrawal. Patient, noiseless, and motionless waiting, often over a longer period
of time, are necessary when laying in ambush. Fire only opens up when the order or
predetermined sign is given. In larger scale ambushes the advance party of the enemy should
be allowed to pass in order to hit the more valuable targets following. If sufficient forces are
available, a separate ambush may be set up for the expected advance party. Fire on the
advance party may open up only after the main ambush is sprung. In smaller operations, only
weaker enemy units, that can be completely destroyed, are ambushed. The most effective
arms in ambushes are automatic weapons. Their effect is greatly multiplied if mortars etc. can
also be employed. Where it is possible, the ambush should be combined with minefields. The
pictures 17, 18 and 19 give a guideline as to how ambushes may be set up.


Ambushes are set up
at roads
at railways


Hereby the following peculiarities must be observed. In ambushes at streets, it must always be
considered that the enemy will secure his march routes and watch over them, with patrols,
security elements, reconnaissance parties and airplanes. The ambush must therefore be
camouflaged so well that enemy security elements and stronger enemy units that are allowed
to pass do not notice it. Reconnaissance must be continued during a larger operation in order
to make an unexpected enemy attack impossible. The tasks of security and reconnaissance
elements, on one side, and combat and reserve elements, on the other, must be closely and
carefully defined.


762


2? Be" "


oa]


.
-


-_


These guerrillas open up fire from the flanks. A machine gun or two guerrillas then fire on
and along the road and especially into the road-ditches. When ambushing motorized march
columns, the front of the column must be forced to stop. This is done by using barriers. Only
then is fire opened up on the vehicles.


Pa P 4


4


Picture 18. Road Ambush of a Guerrilla Platoon


It is very advantageous if a small guerrilla unit can execute ambushes at various roads in short
order. The enemy is thus deceived into thinking that the area is infested with guerrilla units.
This forces the enemy to employ intensive security measures and ties up a larger number of
his troops. When this has been achieved, the main effort of the guerrilla unit is shifted to other
operations.

In ambushes it railways, the aim is to completely destroy as much material and enemy
personnel as possible. Ambushes at railways are the task of larger guerrilla units, platoons or
corps. Smaller units may conduct demolition of rails and harassment by occasional gunfire.
Ambushes at downhill sections of the railway, and if possible, at a curve in connection with
mines, are potentially worthwhile. Obstructions of longer durations are thus achieved; also,
the curve can be covered more easily by gunfire.


763


z= rt \ i
ia A P


. ay A A a "

™ . rh % a A ; _

s A A. f A * .
aes r |

| Pet, eatltaes SP eldest


—— a eet OS


Picture 19. Railway Ambush of a Guerrilla Platoon

The ambush site should be away from fortifications, rail-way stations, and junctions as far as
possible in order to avoid quick intervention by enemy security forces. Communication wires
must also be cut. Before the operation, intelligence and reconnaissance must concentrate on
observing traffic density protective measures, and who occupies the trains. During the
operation, every guerrilla group and every single guerrilla must know exactly which task they
have been given. After successful demolitions, the main impact of the gunfire must be
directed against the cars that are damaged least. Soldiers jumping out of the train must be
taken with fire from the flanks. Possible cover near the train must be controlled by gunfire. In
most cases a sign for the opening of fire is not necessary. It is opened up with the explosion of
the mines and the derailing of the train.

It is very important that a sign for cease-fire be predetermined in order to avoid endangering
the guerrilla groups that have been assigned the task of destroying the remains of the train and
salvaging the usable booty (weapons, ammunition, food, medicine, clothing).


Raids


By fully exploiting the surprise element of a raid, it is possible to destroy an enemy that is
superior in numbers or weapons. But if the raid is unsuccessful, the operation often ends with
high losses. If the enemy has a great numerical superiority and fights with tactical skill, this
can lead to the destruction of the guerrilla unit. Therefore, the decision to raid a superior or
stronger enemy, for example, a strongpoint, an enemy-occupied village, a staff, an airport, a
camp, a railway station, should be considered very thoroughly. All circumstances must be
checked. Reliable and secure routes of withdrawal in case of failure are a prerequisite. Only a
leader with very good tactical training will be able to plan and conduct a raid or a well-
defended larger target. Improvised raids at each possible opportunity are far more promising
and much easier than attacks against such difficult targets. Even smaller guerrilla units can
achieve good results. Such possibilities are given by chance when coming upon stragglers,
wood collection parties, messengers, lone vehicles, staff on reconnaissance. They may also be
sought or created: for example, by guerrillas hiding on a train and attacking the personnel on
the locomotive. Or by burglarizing the apartment of a functionary and killing him, or
attacking enemy duty offices, powerplants, out-posts that are insufficiently secured. Skillful
exploitation of such possibilities is the nature of guerrilla warfare. They offer good chances of
success at little risk. The raid of a larger target that is easy to defend and well secured, for
example, an enemy- occupied dwelling, requires careful planning. Sufficient forces must also
be available. This is only possible for larger guerrilla units. The aim is the destruction of the
important enemy installations that are set up there, i.e. powerplants, fuel dumps, staffs etc.
Thorough reconnaissance and intelligence must be conducted before planning. Strength, order


764


of battle, armament and deployment of the enemy, his security and defense instructions,
defensive installations, barriers, communication lines to neighboring villages, immediate
security at the operation target, must be established in advance. In order to achieve a certain
familiarity with the habits of the enemy, intelligence and reconnaissance must be conducted
over a longer period of time. The help of the inhabitants is absolutely necessary. The combat
plan is made according to the results of the intelligence and reconnaissance. It must primarily
contain:

Disposition of forces, combat means and equipment; Order of battle, allocation of security,
relief assault and destroy groups; Assignment of the attack and destroy targets; instructions to
the security and relief groups; Support on the part of the inhabitants or through guerrillas that
have infiltrated;


March and approach


Time of attack (if necessary, attack signal) watch word, recognition signals
Orders for withdrawal, immediate, secondary rendezvous points
Place of the leader during the attack


The raid must start by surprise. The operation must be called off if the element of
surprise is lost before the attack. The execution of a raid requires ruthless daring, energetic
momentum and flexible improvising. Unexpected enemy defense must be broken. Surprise
over the defenders must always be taken into consideration when raiding large objects, even
after very thorough reconnaissance. The first, most important aim is the simultaneous
destruction of all securing elements if this is possible. This is best achieved through guerrillas
that have infiltrated into the village before the raid and attack the sentries or guards at a
predetermined time or signal. At the same time all communication wires leading from the
village are cut. The second aim is to seize the most important key positions before the alarmed
defenders can man them and at the same time attack the barracks, where the soldiers must be
killed or contained. The most important rules of street combat must be observed: containing
enemy resistance pockets through automatic weapons and mortars; avoiding open places and
the middle of the street, using all possible cover that doors, corners, columns etc. offer:
smoking out houses that are stubbornly defended with hand grenades, if necessary, by
demolitions or by burning them out. Only after successful paralyzation of the defenders can
the planned destruction be executed. Unexpected disturbances must be quieted by the relief
groups held in readiness. Unceasing reconnaissance during the execution of the raid must not
be neglected. Elements must secure against neighboring villages. Streets, on which enemy
reinforcements may arrive, must be sealed with barriers. After execution of the operational
aims on which the raid was based, the groups withdraw in predetermined order after the signal
to do so has been given. The relief groups that were held in readiness cover the withdrawal
and disengagement from the enemy. Raids against weaker objects, train stations, depots and
supply and industrial installations outside of enemy guarded settlements can be conducted by
small guerrilla units. These must be planned according to the same basic tactical rules that are
valid for operations against strongly secured settlements. They promise easier success.


8. Disengagement


Skillful disengagements from the enemy and withdrawal after the execution of an operation,
or when breaking off of an operation, is a tactical component of guerrilla warfare. Successful


765


withdrawal secures the possibility of landing new surprising blows against the enemy.
Withdrawal is easiest if it is possible to completely destroy the enemy. This must be
considered when choosing a target. Operations in which the guerrilla unit could be engaged in
a long-lasting fight with superior enemy forces must be avoided. They do not fit in with the
character of guerrilla warfare because they make withdrawal extremely difficult. Concealed
routes of withdrawal must always be reconnoitered even if complete success can be expected.
Orders for the withdrawal along these routes must be given in advance. The withdrawal from
the enemy is conducted individually or in small groups. Rendezvous points and waiting times
must always be ordered beforehand. In most cases, it is appropriate to determine an
immediate RV (1-3 kilometers) with a short waiting time (1-3 hours) and a secondary RV
with a longer waiting time (about 24 hours). The RV points should offer good cover and
concealment, close observation posts, and concealed routes of withdrawal. It is absolutely
necessary to secure the RV. The possibility that the enemy may find the RV by treason must
always be considered. The rest area of the unit must therefore be away from the RV point.
Only a guide remains at the RV. Groups must always be ordered to cover the withdrawal of
the guerrilla unit with gunfire and barriers if the operation is conducted by a larger guerrilla
unit.


i — i
“ =e 7 c
. & ff An A mn
A yy a ©
A 7. .
a a 4
i
i?
ft a - ra
; =F
r Zand
in = - FF
nt “- *
7


Picture 20. Backtracking and Jumping Off the Track


The guerrilla first went to the forest edge where he backtracked and jumped off his
tracks into a group of bushes. He waded through a creek in order to further conceal his tracks.
It is best to give this task to the relief groups held in readiness. Pursuit from skillful scouts,
tracking dogs, and trackers must always be expected. All possibilities to deceive them and
conceal one’s own tracks must be used. Such possibilities are: backtracking, cutting back,
jumping off the track at suitable places, wading through streams. Setting up ambushes along
the route of withdrawal now and then after a successful operation can lead to new success and
make further withdrawal easier.


Securing the Rest Area


Permanent camps can only be set up in very favorable terrain such as widespread
forests, moorlands and mountains. Care must be taken to camouflage the camp and the trails
leading to it very well. A sure and safe measure is to only walk on hard, rocky underground. It
must be avoided that beaten trails come into being. Care must be taken to secure the
encamped guerrilla unit even where permanent camps cannot be erected. An effective security
measure is to change the hideouts, which can be in isolated farms, cellars, ruins, hunting
cabins, barns, dense pine groves, as often as possible. Immediate security is ensured by
listening and observation posts. These are supplemented by a constant reconnaissance of the
surrounding area. The best security is achieved with the help of the populator. Women and
children may be of useful service. Certain unsuspicious signals for warning and alarming the
guerrilla unit must be ordered in advance. The same holds true for changing codewords and


766


identification signals. Hideouts should have an emergency exit. Good protection can be
achieved where it is possible to mine the approaches or set up booby traps using hand
grenades with trip wires. Each guerrilla must always have his weapon within reach even when
resting.


Protection Against Countermeasures

The following countermeasures may be expected from the enemy:
Use of informants and provocateurs.

Employment of special hunter forces.

Encirclement and search of the operational area.

Securing and guarding of all war-vital installations.


The use of informants and provocateurs forces the guerrilla unit to reinforce their
observation teams and use special precautions when contracting civilians. Men of confidence
and sympathizers must be ordered to observe the enemy agency that recruits and employs the
informants against guerrilla units. Informants that have been uncovered must be destroyed.
The employment of special hunter forces by the enemy is a considerable problem for guerrilla
fighters. It is the mission of these hunter forces to detect, pursue and fight the guerrilla units
with the same means and methods — cunning, camouflage, surprise — that the guerrillas use.
Because of this, the enemy hunter forces, which consist of specially picked men, are
particularly dangerous. Only untiring watchfulness and never lessening caution can protect
against surprise attacks from enemy hunter forces.


It may become necessary to concentrate the complete guerrilla war effort in an
operational area on destroying an especially dangerous enemy hunter force. Encirclement and
search of the operational area requires a large number of troops. If the enemy sees himself
forced to employ such measures that tie down a large number of his forces, this is already a
success. Such large-scale operations must be feared less than the employment of hunter forces
because there always are sure possibilities to evade:


aa) Withdraw from the operational area when the enemy intention of encirclement has been
detected;

bb) Exfiltrate through enemy lines where they are very thin at the beginning of the
encirclement in favorable terrain;

cc) Stay behind the lines in well-camouflaged foxholes or similar hideouts; dd) Break out of
the encirclement at a weak point in the line.


The securing a guarding of the land and of all-important installations by the enemy makes
careful reconnaissance and planning for guerrilla actions but does not make the actions
impossible. There is no countermeasure of the enemy that cannot be rendered useless through
skillful adaption to it. The attitude of the population and the amount of assistance it is willing
to give to the guerrilla unit is of great importance.


Action Against Enemy Agitation


Because of the close relationship of guerrilla warfare and politics, action against
enemy agitation is a task that is just as important as interdiction and combat actions. All
means must be used to ward off enemy influence and waken and maintain a clear political
will. Tactical activities must always take consideration of this necessity. It is essential for the
guerrilla unit to have constant news of the general situation.


The intellectual-political instruction is intended for:
the guerrilla units


767


the population
the enemy


Because of their strenuous combat activity, the guerrilla units themselves need
special intellectual-political care and leadership. Guerrilla warfare is not possible without a
clear political will. The guerrilla not only submits to extreme hardships and constant danger,
but also to the intellectual influences that are predominant in the rear area of the enemy. His
political will must be strengthened and hardened against these wearing influences, and his
spirit challenged to constant watchfulness. The most effective means of intellectual-political
instruction for the guerrilla unit is the example of their leader. If he is filled with a glowing
love for the fatherland, prepared to make any sacrifice for the freedom of his peoples and
willing to bear any hardship, then his guerrillas will also. Warding off enemy agitation is an
easy task then. The guerrilla must be enabled to express his political belief clearly and
convincingly through the intellectual training. He must be able to argue the cause of his
fatherland, of truthfulness and justness with wit. The population in the operational area sees
the guerrilla as a representative of the nationhood from which they have been cut off. His
attitude, his confidence and unyielding will to fight must be a stimulus to all those with a
positive attitude. The leader in charge of political questions has the important duty of
establishing and maintaining contact with the population. This must be done under
consideration of all precautions. He must find out their sufferings, worries, and opinions, and
observe all measures of the enemy command and administration attentively. Every possibility
must be used to unmask enemy agitation and lies, to supply the population with true news,
reminding them of the eternal values of nationhood, and root out cowardly servility. All
means to reliably spread news is good. Often the simplest is the most effective (mouth-to-
mouth, chain and ring letters, inscriptions with chalk, paint, and stamps on walls, enemy
billboards and proclamations, pamphlets from hand to hand). It may become necessary for
larger units to acquire a duplicating machine or a printing press, and also material needed to
make simple stamps. The achievements of the guerrilla unit must be made public without
restraint. Friend and foe should talk of them. It is no disadvantage if the unit is credited with
deeds and capabilities that exceed its potential. It is wise to show restraint when requisitioning
and demanding support from the population. All unnecessary inconveniences and danger to
the population should be avoided. The guerrilla unit must try to help and protect as far as this
is possible within their mission. Traitors must be rooted out without pity. If it is possible to
point out the true situation and the unavoidable results of the enemy’s policy, in addition to
the initial mission, then this should be done. Suited here are pamphlets, handbills, and
inscriptions on walls. It can also be of use to let a prisoner free if he spontaneously shows
signs of individual and political insight. The political leader of the unit must have the
opportunity to instruct and influence him before this is done. Caution must be exercised. The
tactical mission and the security of the unit have priority.


Accommodation and Food Supply


Shelters

Permanent camps with bunkers, log cabins, permanent tents or light emergency shelters may
be built if the general situation permits it, and the terrain offers sufficient cover and
concealment. Such camps offer the advantage of a certain level of comfort. Their detection by
the enemy, on the other hand, cannot be avoided, even with very good camouflage, because of
the beaten trails that have come into existence.


768


~ «
Picture 21a. Earth bunker (cutaway)


Temporary protection is achieved by choosing the construction site in unpassable terrain, far
off from the settlements, in dense undergrowth.

Bunkers and log cabins are built with simple means that are adapted to the available material
and the skill of the constructors. Fanciness must be avoided.

Adaptation to the surrounding terrain through camouflage and avoiding beaten tracks are the
best protection for a bunker (Picture 21).


-a


Picture 21b. Earth bunker (Layout)
Construction of bunkers or huts can become absolute necessity during long missions in winter
and in some areas work must start in due time in autumn.


769


Tents and emergency shelters are sufficient in summer. By using some poles and braces,
larger tents in square or circular form can be easily built. They offer the advantage of a certain
living comfort. The principles of careful camouflage and adaption to the surrounding terrain
are also valid for tents. Twig huts or twig walls combined with canvas roofs comply with the
principles of camouflage very well. They are set up very easily and quickly. In addition, more
space is achieved with the same number of tent canvas pieces. Twig huts may be built in
umbrella, half-tent, or house form. Guidelines here are given in the pictures 22 and 23.


Picture 23. Round Twig Hut
Lashing 4. Fireplace

Flue 5. Air inlet

Twigs 6. Sleeping place


Spruce and pine branches are fastened to spars with wire, string, or flexible twigs. Their
needles must hang downwards in order to drain off rain. They must be packed one upon the
other from bottom to top. A clean and accurate packing of pine twigs also makes a good
sleeping place.


770


Picture 22 and 24. Twig Hut and Twig Roof

It cushions and protects against cold and moisture from the ground. Twig huts may be built
halfway into the ground. They can then be camouflaged more easily and are much warmer.
The dug-up ground must be carefully hidden, it is advantageous to cover the roof with a layer
of earth or snow and maybe some leaves as camouflage. Permanent shelters cannot be erected
where the terrain does not offer adequate cover and concealment. In this case, suitable
emergency hideouts like lone farms, animal sheds, barns, hay lofts and ruins must be chosen.
With some skill, it will be possible to arrange warm pieces in them, even during winter.
Heating and Cooking Fires

It is necessary for the guerrilla to build fires as a source of warmth and to cook. Matches must
always be protected against moisture and used very sparingly. It is a good idea to keep a small
emergency supply in a waterproof separate container (bullet casing closed with wax). Moist
matches will light more easily if they are rubbed in the hair before striking them. If matches
are missing, it is possible to shoot fire in the following way: remove the bullet, pour most of
the powder on a piece of paper or bark; add paper wads, dry grass or similar material; stick a
soft loose paper plug in the shell, fire at the prepared ignition material, and blow softly.
“Shooting” a fire is not very easy in humid air. It works better if a teaspoon of the filling from
a flare is added to the paper. In strong sunlight, the fire material that was prepared can be
ignited with the help ofa lens. After ignition, the fire is nourished further by small sticks with
shavings (Picture 25), dry pine twigs and dry grass.


w ee


771


Picture 25, 26a. Star-Shaped Fire, Pit Fire Sticks with Shavings


Campfires are only allowed if the enemy situation permits it. The most advantageous types
are shown in picture 26.


a. a ee

Picture 26b. Log-Fire and Invisible Fire

Care must be taken to always avoid treacherous smoke and glow from a fire. It is best to cook
at night. If it is possible to build a stove, the smoke must be conducted in such a way, that it
disperses between the trees.

Water

Surface water out of streams of all kinds should always be boiled before use. Water
purification tablets may replace this measure in emergencies.

Latrine and Waste

Where it is not possible to use an existing latrine, it must be avoided that latrines are set up
near the camp so that the enemy’s attention is not drawn to the site. The same applies to
urinating and dumping of waste near camp.

Food Supply, Subsistence

Where the guerrilla units must live off the land, they must requisition their food from villages
that are far away from the camp.


Staple rations must always be saved. More insufficiencies do not allow for them to be touched.
They may only be used when under enemy pressure or when all other possibilities to
acquisition food are blocked. Concentrated food that is supplied by air must be used very
sparingly. The mess sergeant must know which amount of food is needed by the unit. He must
then determine type, amount and work out a plan — the acquisition debit — to get it. He is
responsible for the execution of the acquisition.


7 et


772


Picture 27. Foxhole for Wounded
Bread or flour, groats, vegetables or white cabbages, fat and meat and salt are mainly needed.
Ready-made grots may be replaced by barley, wheat, rye or oats in emergencies.


Calculating an amount of 2-3-kilograms raw weight of food per man and day adds up to about
50 kilos for a 20-man unit. That is about 300 to 400 kilos per weeks, which is the equivalent
of one or two horse drawn carts. The acquisition plan must be based on such calculations. No
more than one week’s supply should be kept openly in permanent camp.


Picture 26. Sledge for Wounded

Staple supplies of long-lasting food (bacon, smoked meat, groats, salt, honey etc.), if possible
to last for one month, should be scattered throughout the operational area. Care must be taken
that it is stored in such a way that it is safe from wild animals and rats. The food that is
constantly needed is stored in well-camouflaged foxholes near the accommodation. It should
be sufficient for about one month. Potatoes can be kept in holes and covered. Wheat, groats
and so forth are best buried in wooden barrels or boxes and sealed from the top with a water-
proof wooden lid and a thin layer of clay etc. and then camouflaged. Vegetables may be
buried in the same way as potatoes. Cabbage is best kept in wooden barrels: bacon may be
kept along with wheat. Fat and butter should be well salted and poured into small wooden
kegs. The opening is sealed by nailing a lid on. The kegs are buried or hung in the trees in
dense pine groves. In summer, meat will only keep if it is heavily salted and, if possible,
smoked. In winter, meat will keep almost indefinitely if it is frozen. Tea can be made out of
lime blossoms, blackberry leaves, young leaves of wild strawberries and others. Roasted
acorns, barley, wheat and so on may serve as coffee substitutes.


6. Emergency Rations


Wooden flour is a good emergency ration. It is best acquired from young pine or
birch trees in the following way: remove the outer rough bark; separate the soft, moist layer
underneath and cut it into small pieces; changing the water several times, cook it until the
resin taste is lessened; carefully dry the pieces until they are dry and brittle; grind down and
pulverize them into flour. The yellow-brown wooden flour that has been obtained in this way
can be used to extend wheat or rye flour. It may also be eaten pure. To do this, prepare a
dough using milk or water, roll it out very flat, cut it into pieces and roast these on tin or iron
pans. Very young spruce sprouts can be eaten raw or cooked. Edible mushrooms are good
food, berries also. Mushrooms become poisonous after a frost, whereas many berries, like
mountain ash and barberries, only become edible and tasty after they have been frozen.
Cranberries, whortleberries, elderberries, and hawthorn, which are found in moorlands, are
very nutritious and tasty. Lime buds and most moss (with the exception of the yellowish ones),
especially the greyish white well-known reindeer moss, are edible. The bitter taste that is
inherent in them can be removed by soaking them for several hours in water to which wood
ash has been added. After that you can cook them into a mash that is fairly tasty. In
emergencies, you can eat moss raw after washing it thoroughly. At the banks of rivers and
lakes you can dig out the thick roots of calamus reeds. They can be eaten raw, cooked or
baked.


773


Higuel Serrano on the 55


Do you consider the SS to have been an esoteric order as some authors claim?


Miguel Serrano: The SS was, also, influenced by the Templar Order, as Julius Evola told me.
There was an elite SS which was working with Tantrism, (of course this had no connection
with California style Tantrism and similar trends). The SS did not have enough time to reach
their goals. But, in any case, they tried hard to produce the Over-man by using blood alchemy
— the Absolute Man.


As we know, you have devoted your life to Esoteric Hitlerism. Could you tell us briefly — for
our readers who are just hearing the term Esoteric Hitlerism for the first time — what exactly
it is?


Miguel Serrano: Esoteric is a Greek word referring to God. Esoteric Hitlerism is that which
transcends the field of politics, and, in one way or another, makes contact with the spiritual
sense and symbols. We believe that if the world does not come to an end soon, it will be only
because Hitlerism transformed itself into a new religious faith, able to change the
materialistic man of today into a new idealistic hero, to whom the afterlife is as important as
life itself. That was the attitude of the heroes at Thermopylae, who fought for honor and duty
— for Dharma. If only it were possible to develop all over the world a heroic attitude, a sort
of Order of Warriors — priests of the new religion of Hitlerism — the world could be saved
and materialism destroyed. Esoteric Hitlerism is a totally new world view (Weltanschauung),
a Cosmogony. The SS tried to transmute man to superman, in Sonnenmensch, or Sun-Man, a
man who will again be a god. This is an old Aryan concept, which is not unlike traditional
Greek thought, and the initiation of the Mysteries of Apollo and Dyonisus. The Dorian Greeks
had a nostalgia for Hyperborea, and so do Hitlerists.”


How do you envision the future of Europe? Does Europe have a common “soul” which can
transcend the differences?


Miguel Serrano: At the end of World War II the SS approved and made known the Charte of
Charlottenburg, and they conceived a real “New World Order” of ethnic fatherlands, or
natural groupings of racial and linguistic stocks. They even published a map of Europe
wherein all the artificial boundaries dating back from World War I were abolished. With the
material loss of World War II, the Charter of San Francisco was approved, that is the United
Nations, where all races are mixed, so that the Jews can control them all. This is the
“Globalism” of today’s unnatural and monstrous world.


774


Che Invocation of the Black Sun


As appears in the Third book of the Trilogy of Esoteric Hitlerism “Manu: For the Man to
Come”- Miguel Serrano and the Martial Thulean Order of A-MOR. All words in brackets “{-
}” are extra words for clarification by the translator (1).


THE INVOCATION


Very early, when the Morning Star, Oyeihue {Venus}, calmly gives its message of light to
you, extend your arms towards Her:


I pronounce my Oration to Lucifer:


Oh, Luci-Bel, Oh Morning Star Oyeihue
May your deep light fall upon me Moist
Cover me in your petals Of light

Like in the skies of Autumn.


Permit me to pass Through your Window Towards the Black Sun That waits behind you


Oh, Black Sun!
Absorb me in your light Backwards
Faster than the light Of the Golden Sun


And give me shelter In the nonexistence Of the Green Ray


Where the Master Dwells
Even the Masters of my Master And dwell the high Secret Guides Of Esoteric Hitlerism


Oh, Green Ray!

Engulf me in your nonexistence But more real than any existence Help me to realize
Impossible Dreams

The Resurrection of the Beloved


The return of the Fuhrer, Adolf Hitler The re-creation of Esoteric Hitlerism And the
possession of the Archetype Until the consummation of its Myth And it’s Legend
In the Resurrection of the Flesh The Immortal Vajra.

Permit me to return to the Black Sun


Oh, Black Sun!
Reabsorb me in your rotating light


And carry me to your home The Morning and Evening Star Yepun-Oyeihue


Oh, Morning and Evening Star! Together with the Beloved Now that She may fight Within
me


In my Impenetrable body of Red Light The Immortal Vajra
The Incorruptible Power of Odil


It Resides in NOS


776


The Vision and the Voice

And quickly we come to realize the Legend and the Myth Of A-MOR
Until the consummation And Transfiguration

Into the Absolute Man and Woman


Oh, Evening Star, Yepun! Allow me to pass Through your Window To the Golden Sun


And with Chastity
There in Order to continue fighting The power in dawn
I reclaim.


Oh, my Guide Lucifer! Oh, Sun of Gold!
Let us pass in the Nostalgia Of the Green Ray


So that She and I We leave here
Towards something never heard Towards It-She
Beyond the Green Ray And of its Nonexistence


Heil! Sieg Heil!
(1) This English translation was made possible by Jason Thompkins (Winter - 2007).


NOTES BY TRANSLATOR:


Oyeihue is the esoteric feminine name of Venus as the Morning Star, ELLA-SHE-LUCIBEL,
when rising in the East at Dawn. It is the name given to the Mornning Star by the native tribes
of Chile, the Araucanas.

Yepun is the esoteric masculine name of Venus as the Evening Star, EL-HE-LUCIFER, when
setting in the West at Evening. It is the name given to the Evening Star by the native tribes of
Chile, the Araucanas.


For those not familiar with the writings of Don Miguel Serrano you may find the word and
term ‘Lucifer’ in the wrong context. In the Martial Order of A-MOR ‘Lucifer’ is the supreme
Guide for the Walkers of the Dawn. He is the God of Light and Beauty. ‘Lucifer’ is also
known by other names in his Archetype such as Wuotan-Wotan-Odin, Shiva, Apollo and
Abraxas. LUCIFER must not be confused with any sort of "Christian Devil" or "Satan". If
anything Lucifer is more closer to the Kristos than any sort of 'boogeyman’ with a pitchfork
since Christ said "I am the LIGHT of the world". LUCIFER is the Supreme Guide in the Kali
Yuga and God of the utmost Beauty and Light. Light in the sense of "Gnosis" or Knowledge,
light in the sense of Inspiration and Wisdom and also Light in the sense of Spectral Light.


777


BERSERKER


BOOKS
