AFFIDAVIT


My name is Harold Weisberg. I reside at Route 12, Frederick, Maryland. I
am 66 years old. My experiences include those of reporter, investigative reporter,
Senate investigator and government intelligence analyst.

1* From the time President John F. Kennedy was assassinated, I have
conducted what I believe is the largest and broadest inquiry into the official
investigations of this, to me, the most subversive of crimes in a representative
society. From the time Dr. King was killed, I have conducted investigations and
studied that case extensively. I conducted the investigation for the habeas corpus
effort and for the two weeks of evidentiary hearing in federal district court in
Memphis, Tennessee, as ordered by the sixth circuit court of appeals. I have
published seven books on both cases.

2. The Department of Justice has recognized my expertise in several ways,
including the following. In a Kennedy assassination records suit (C.A. 75-226) in
which 1 alleged the existence of relevant records not provided, rather than
contest my allegation it informed that court' that "plaintiff could make such claims
ad infinitum since he is perhaps more familiar with events surrounding the investi-
gation of President Kennedy's assassination than anyone now employed by the F.B.I."
In C.A. 75-1996, which is for King assassination records, the Department persuaded
that court that, although it can draw on FBI and the Department personnel, it
required my services as its consultant - in my suit against it.

3. Unlike most of those popularly regarded as subject experts on these
assassinations, ^ am not a "conspiracy theorist."

4. My continuing inquiries are motivated by the belief that if in such
times of great crisis our basic institutions fail then society is further
jeopardized. My quest, therefore, is for fact, especially the .records of the
pfficial investigations, so that independent examination can be made. of them and
of the functioning or nonfunctioning of our basic institutions.

5. Of all the Government agencies involved with both crimes and their
aftermaths, the FBI was most involved. It performed most of the investigative
services for the Warren Corunission, whose consideration of having its own


1


K


investigators the FBI opposed. The FBI conducted the King assassination investigation
throughout the country and through its offices of Legal Attaches (Legats) in
foreign lands.

6. In the course of these two investigations the FBI generated more records
lJl ' ‘ believe will ever be known. Most of them by far are kept in the field
offices. Within my extensive experience it is common for field office information
of substantial importance not to reach FBI Headquarters (FBIHQ) and for FBIHQ to
make special interpretations of field office information that is not always
faithful to the underlying field office records. While it is a cannon practice
r for the field offices to provide FBIHQ with summaries of some of the field office
information, all such information is not and cannot be provided to FBIHQ.' Much
of the information obtained by the field offices is not of interest to FBIHQ but
has other values. Where investigations do not yield what FBIHQ wants often the
fleld 0IIlces mer<:1 y retaln thi s information in their files. What is regarded as
negative information often is not sent to FBIHQ. What can be embarrassing to the
FBI is withheld as a general practice. Examples of the foregoing follow.

7. Based on my extensive personal experience and detailed comparisons
between FBIHQ ari field office versions of ostensibly the same information, these
are among the reasons I believe that the field office files are of enormous
historical and other importance and should be preserved.

8. I also believe that the field office records should be preserved in the
interest of improving the FBI and making it a better and more efficient agency.

9. To illustrate the volumetric relationship I cite the Attorney General's
statistical representation of the FBI's King assassinations records. I caution
that his statistics, whatever their source, are conservative. He stated that there
were approximately 3,500 FBI records in Washington compared to 203,500 in the field
offices.

10. Under Freedom of Infomation (F0IA) I have obtained and. studied more
than 100,000 pages of FBI records relating to the assassination of President
Kennedy (JFK records) and more than 50,000 pages relating to the assassination of
Dr. King (MLK records). Unlike most F0IA requesters, I also have obtained relevant
records from about 10 field offices on these and related subjects. I have compared
them with FBIHQ records and have perceived much significant information in them


2


t'


that never reached FB1HQ.

11. What does not reach FBIHQ is not fully sunmarized and cannot be fully
summarized iri FBIHQ files. Often this is what is embarrassing to the FBI. This
is particularly true of many thousands of pages detailing domestic intelligence
activities which were of incredible scope. Illicit activities and deficiencies
in investigations are among the categories of information that, to the degree
possible, are kept out of FBIHQ records. By keeping information out of FBIHQ
files, FBIHQ is in a better position for deniability. It is not uncamon for the
FBI to lie with great vigor and indignation, particularly when it has been
criticized.

12. Summaries that are sent to FBIHQ represent the information FBIHQ
wants for its own purposes. The FBI’s purposes need not and often do not coincide
with the interests of others, including scholars. The FBI's purposes in the
summaries do not include preservation of proofs of its illicit activities and
failures. Before illicit activities are authorized, FBIHQ requires assurance
that there will be no embarrassment to it. Once the field offices provide these
assurances and the acts are performed, the field office reports are drafted to
mask the illicit nature of the means of obtaining the information by attributing
it to anonymous sources described as having provided dependable information in

the past.

13. The FBI’s euphemisms extend to not getting caught and not being
embarrassed. "Full security" is one such euphemism. While the time now available
to me does not permit full searches of my files to provide all the Ulustrations
possible, I attach as Exhibits 1 and 2 what was inmediately retrievable because
they are part of an administrative appeal I filed. These reflect such uses of
language, the personal attitudes of the Director and other high officials toward
the Attorney General and Dr. King, the code name "JUNE" to hide political
surveillances and the extension of authorization for telephone surveillance of

Dr. King to wherever he want and to microphone or bug surveillance, of which the
Senate's Church committee could find no authorization.

Ik. These particular copies come from what was not destroyed after his
death of what Director Hoover termed his "Official and Confidential files." The
rest of these and other records I have and have examined make it clear that the


3


actual purposes of these surveillances were to collect embarrassing personal
information about Dr. King and to use it clandestinely and by indirection publicly
to destroy him as a person and as a leader. The FBI even planned to replace him
in his position of leadership with one more to its liking.

15. These and many other such records also reveal that when the field
offices did not obtain embarrassing personal information about Dr. King they
merely informed FBIHQ that their electronic intrusions into his life were "not
productive."

16. What is intended for distribution outside the FBI is often rewritten
to withhold what the FBI does not want distributed outside the FBI. Files I have
examined contain directives to the field offices to redraft information to make
it 'suitable" for distribution by FBIHQ. This is a practice that extended to the
Presidential Commission on the assassination of President Kennedy (Warren Commission)
and other official bodies as well as other executive agencies. The practice is

not limited to the protection of legitimately confidential sources. Information
not "suitable" for distribution remained in field office files. It is more
common for the field offices on their own to determine what is "suitable" for
dissemination and to provide it only while reserving the "unsuitable" information
in their files.

17. An illustration of the irrmediately preceding paragraphs that misled
the Warren Commission and led to basic factual error in its Report is the

t rewriting for "suitability" of information obtained by New Orleans Field Office
agents relating to the distribution of ostensibly pro-Castro literature. by Lee
Harvey Oswald prior to the assassination of President Kennedy. A leaflet was
printed by the .Jones Printing Company, supposedly for Oswald and for him alone.

However, both of the persons at the Jones Printing Company who saw and dealt with
the man who picked up the printing job told the FBI agents that the man was not
Oswald, as the field office records indicate, and as both later told me in tape-
recorded interviews.

18. The job was done in the name of Osborne. Despite the FBI's knowledge
that the only witnesses both stated that this man was not Oswald, the rewritten

s urinary report (Exhibit 3) states that "Under the name OSBORNE OSWALD ordered
1,000 copies" of the handbill that he, without authorization, attributed to the


Fair Play for Cuba Committee, which he pretended to represent but did not
represent. On page 407, lines 4 and 5, the Warren Report says that "under the
name Osborne he had, printed a handbill ..." (Exhibit 4)

19. During the time of the investigation the results of which are
misrepresented in Exhibit 3, the New Orleans FBI learned that the Secret Service,
which has responsibility for the security of the President, was investigating
Oswald's literature. It immediately notified FBIHQ, which had the Secret Service
called off of that investigation. Thereafter, Exhibit 3 remained unquestioned.

20. An example of the kinds of records FBIHQ does not want in its
possession are its clandestine tapings of intercepted conversations. The Atlanta
Field Office was chided for sending a tape of a conversation the FBI recorded
between Dr. King and an associate, Clarence Jones. (FBIHQ 100-3-116-1036,
attached as Exhibit 5) The "JUNE" designation represents clandestine interceptions,
which have separate filings. In what for the FBI is severe language, Atlanta was
"instructed to advise the Bureau by return communication as to the reason why

the recording was furnished to the Bureau ..." (page 3, paragraph 3) This was
regarded as sufficiently important to be kept in Director Hoover's so-called
"Official and Confidential" files, from which this copy comes. * More relating to
FBIHQ' s lack of knowledge of what the field office files hold follows below.

21. When FBIHQ wanted to deny that any "black bag" job had been done on
James Earl Ray, it directed Atlanta Special Agent in Charge (SAC) Hitt to provide
such an affidavit. Dutifully, Hitt did provide the affidavit. 'He did not do the
"black bag" job. An agent named Burgess did. The Atlanta files contain Burgess's
account of it.

22. Important as photographs of direct relevance to major crimes would
appear to be, in the case of both of these assassinations FBIHQ and the field
offices saw to it that photographs of the scene of the crime in the King case and
of the actual assassination of the President and of the building from which it
was allegedly committed were kept out of FBIHQ files to the degree possible.

23- When photographs taken by a photographer on the spot when Dr. King
was killed were sent by the New York Field Office to FBIHQ, it immediately' sent
them to Memphis, the Office of Origin, stating explicitly that it was keeping no
copies. Thereafter, in my C.A. 75-1996, which has a specific Item requesting


5


such photographs, FBIHQ provided affidavits attesting that the FBI had no such
photographs, a false assurance repeated by the Assistant United States Attorney
handling the case.

2 When the Memphis Field Office obtained prints of Memphis Police
Department photographs of the scene of the crime, it did not send copies to
Washington. It required much effort and time in court for me to obtain copies of
any of these Memphis police crime-scene pictures. When I did, they did not match
the FBI’s descriptions of them and FBIHQ claims it is unable to reconcile the
differences. (I have not yet obtained copies of the photographs provided by the

New York Field Office.)

*

25. In Dallas, when the FBI was notified of the existence of photographs
of the crime and the area of the crime at the time it occurred, the field office
examined them, did not send prints or even a report to FBIHQ and placed a false
report in its own files. (Exhibit 6)

26. The non sequitur explaining not sending FBIHQ copies of the still
pictures is that it ’’did depict the President's car at the precise time shots were
fired; however, the pictures were not sufficiently clear for identification
purposes.” The accompanying statement, that the motion pictures ’’failed to show
the building from which the shots were fired,” is straight-out false.

27. After I obtained copies of Exhibit 6 from the Dallas files (they were
not in FBIHQ files) and called them to the attention of others, the photographer’s
film was examined. It not only does ’’show the building from which" the FBI
claims all shots were fired, it shows the very window. It also shows what
photoanalysis interprets as two images in motion where Oswald alone supposedly
•was. The Dallas Morning News of November 26, 1978, printed an entire page of
still photographs depicting the images in motion.

28. I have copies of many certifications of the preservation of JFK
assassination evidence in the Dallas Field Office files. These cover a period of
several years despite an earlier Executive Order (of October 31 » 1966) requiring
that all evidence be deposited in the National Archives in the national interest.
However, this does not mean that nothing was destroyed. According to the Department
of Justice, important evidence was destroyed, Executive Order or no Executive
Order.


6


r


29 . I also have records reflecting that FBIHQ returned Laboratory test
results to the Dallas Field Office despite the Dallas office’s contrary instructions.
This relates to basic evidence of the assassination of the President. It also
coincides with an unsworn representation in one of three of my FOIA suits in

which these records are material. By sending this information back to Dallas,

FBIHQ was able to - and did - deny having it. It did not inform the court or me
that this relevant information was in Dallas. Simultaneously, it refused to
search the Dallas files.

30. There has always been controversy over the number of shots fired when

the President was killed. It was known from the first that at least one shot

*•

missed and caused a minor injury to a bystander, James T. Tague. This -was
observed by police at the scene who reported it on the police radio. If the FBI
did not know by any other means, it knew because it transcribed the recordings
of the police broadcasts for the Warren Commission. However, this "missed” shot
is in direct contradiction of the FBI’s lone-assassin theory, which permits no
"missed" shot. The FBI therefore ignored it and in many FBI records accounted
for three shots only being fired, with the President struck by the first and third
shots and TeiiS Governor John B. Connally struck by the second -shot. The most
important of these many reports is of five large volumes. It was ordered by the
new President. In this report, in the interest of the lone-assassin solution
ordained by the Director, the FBI made no reference to either this missed shot or
to Tague. To perfect the Director's "solution" to "the crime of the century," the
FBI also avoided any mention of one of the President's known wounds. While this
arcane police science cannot be attributed to a lack of information at FBIHQ, the
fact is that Dallas files abound in contrary information.

31. When I discovered that the actual results of the scientific tests
performed by the FBI were never given to the Warren Commission and that even its
relevant testimony was not by the expert who performed them; I requested all these
results. When I did not obtain them, I filed C.A. 2301-70 in federal district
court in Washington. (The Congress cited this suit as requiring the 197*4 amending
of the investigatory files exemption, after which I refiled it as C.A. 75-226.)

32. To date I have not received either a first-person FBI affidavit
attesting that the information I seek does not exist, a total defense under the


7


Act, or the relevant records.


33. The missed bullet struck a curbstone, leaving a visible mark that was
contemporaneously photographed by several professional news photographers. One
photograph was published in the Dallas Morning News . As that curbstone exists

in the National Archives today, the scar or chipped hole no longer exists. At
that precise point the curbstone is now its smoothest . It is visibly of different
texture and shade.

34. Notwithstanding the obvious alterations, the FBI subjected that spot
to spec trogra phi c analysis. Of the dozen elements of the alleged bullet, this

fine analytical technique detected only two, lead and antimony, according to the

*

only records thus 1 far provided by the FBI. These represent a common alloy found
in such common objects as paint, type metal and automobile tire wheel-weights.

35. Under discovery I asked for the spectrographic plate, a relatively
small and thin piece of film. I had been assured in February 1975 that all these
spectrographic plates existed and would be provided to me once I paid the FBI

$50 for each of them, which I could not afford. But when it cajne time to produce
this film, the government represented that it had been discarded in "routine
housecleaning. "

36. There are many FBI regulations that prohibit the destruction of any
of the evidence involved in this case. Records may not be destroyed while
litigation is pending. There is also the previously cited Executive Order. No
affidavit was produced to attest to the destruction. Instead, it was alleged by
Department counsel to have been destroyed "routinely," - this one small piece of
film and not any of the others of identical size. This is like saying the FBI
urgently needed the file space taken up by an ordinary post card and to meet this
need, of all that is in its files, it had to destroy basic evidence relating to
the assassination of a President.

37. An expert could read that film and provide dependable interpretations
about the substances detected and not detected in the testing.

38. The FBI examined a patch on the curbing. It did not report the
patching or in any way explain it. Those in FBIHQ who saw its copies of before-
and-after pictures, copies of which I can provide, also reported nothing of that
destruction of evidence.


8


39- Prior to the curbstone being cut out of the Dallas street and
flown to Washington, the Dallas Field Office conducted an investigation of which
an obviously inadequate and incomplete summary was sent to FBIHQ. Relevant and
important records remained in Dallas.

40. There are accounts of where other bullets struck. One struck a
concrete sidewalk. Thereafter the field office went to that point, removed what
is required for spectrographic analysis, sent this to the FBIHQ Laboratory for
testing and the test was made. Then FBIHQ returned everything to Dallas so that
throughout the litigation that began in 1970 and remains in court today it would
pretend this relevant information does not exist. (The original case in federal
district court in Washington went to the Supreme Court. The present case is
C.A. 75-226. The case in which I obtained proof of the making of the test is
C.A. 78-0322. But in no case have the results of the testing been disclosed.

They are in the Dallas Field Office. I did not obtain this withheld proof until
after the record was closed in C.A. 75-226.)

41. If permission is granted to destroy field office files, vital
information like this can be forever lost to the nation.

42. Among the large number of relevant field office records of which the
Warren Comnission never knew another kind is copies of volunteered amateur motion
pictures of Oswald engaged in the leafletting activities that led to his arrest
and of the arrest itself. These movies show that Oswald had an unknown associate.
These movies were given to two field offices, which sent them to New Orleans.
Dallas was informed. Actual movies of an Oswald associate and his arrest were
evaluated as valueless. Although no record I have seen in the almost 100,000
pages disclosed by FBIHQ reflects that the FBI has prints of these films, it does.
In this case the records of four field offices are involved. (My F0IA request

of January 1, 1968, for copies of these films has not been complied with and my
appeals are without response.)

43. The FBI's explanation for never having reported Oswald's presence and
prior history to the Dallas Field Office is that he had no record indicating any
tendency toward violence. The Dallas Field Office knew otherwise. Only a few
days before the assassination, Oswald went to the Dallas Field Office to see
Special Agent James Patrick Hosty, Jr., who was case agent on him and his Russian-


9


bom wife. In Hosty's absence Oswald left a note. From all the differing FBI
accounts after this was leaked to the press - which was not until after the
Special Agent in Charge’s 1975 retirement was secure - it was a threat. One
version is that Oswald threatened to blow up that office and the police head-
quarters.

44. Allegedly this note was destroyed in Dallas. Supposedly I have all
relevant FBIHQ records as a result of C.A. 77-2155. There is no copy of the note
in those records, no authorization of its destruction, no copy of any report
informing either FBIHQ or the Warren Commission about it - no record at all
prior to the July 1975 time of the leak.

45. Obviously, this information should have been provided contemporaneously
to the Presidential Commission. The FBI did not let the Conmission know and an
incredibly large number of FBI personnel, some of relatively high rank as well

as a large number of field Special Agents, had knowledge of this matter. All
preserved silence. Hosty was a live witness before the Commission. The FBI
instructed him not to volunteer. The uninformed Commission had no basis for asking
questions about this. He did not report this to the Commission. He retired from
the FBI 14 years later.

46. All FBI field offices hold information not available at FBIHQ. From
the Dallas, New Orleans and Memphis field offices alone I have obtained many
thousands of pages of them, with compliance in both cases far from complete.

I have received thousands of pages from several other field offices and they also
have not as yet complied fully. Where the records were in FBIHQ files, they were
provided to me from FBIHQ files, with those field office records being withheld
as "previously processed.” From this also it is clear that especially in
sensational and other major cases the number of field office records not duplicated
at FBIHQ is beyond estimation. They are irreplaceable. Many individual illustra-
tions are available.

47. Miami, for example, never provided FBIHQ with t£i tape recording of
threats against both the President and Dr. King. This was recorded by an informant
for Miami authorities, who gave it and a transcript to the FBI. (My separate FOIA
request is without response after many years.) The Warren Comnission was not even
told that these threats were recorded. It was not told that a police agent did


10


this for Miami authorities or that he had been a symbolled FBI informer. The
few records provided to me from FBIHQ files in C.A. 75-1996, supposedly holding
all important information or sumnaries of it, do not begin to.

48. This particular threat against the President was made shortly before
he went to Miami, three days before he was killed, to address the Inter-American
Press Association. His Miami motorcade was canceled. He was flown by helicopter
to the place at which he spoke. Neither FBIHQ records provided to me as a result
of C.A. 77-2155 nor any other FBI records provided in the several other cases in
which they are relevant begin to provide the considerable information in several
field offices, particularly Miami and Atlanta but including others.

49. Information of this nature does not have to be in accord with the
official accounts of the crimes to have historical importance. Both of the men
involved also had long records of participation in extremist activities that

in themselves are of historical importance. That an agency like the FBI would
underinform a Presidential commission and thereby restrict it in itself is
significant information.

50. I believe all such records also have importance in self-government
because if they are preserved they can be studied by persons outside of government
who have citizen interest in being able to make independent assessment of the
manner in which the agencies of government function or fail to function.
Destruction of field-office-only copies would reduce if not eliminate the
possibility of any such independent study, as this case illustrates. Because
both of the principals have been dead for several years, I know of no reason other
than avoiding embarrassment for the FBI’s noncompliance under FOIA.

51. The preceding Paragraphs dealing with information relating to the
investigaton of the assassination of President Kennedy that was not provided to
Washington state general truths that are applicable to the FBI's investigation of
the assassination of Dr. King and a desire that information not flattering to the
FBI not be available to others.

52. Similar illustrations relating to the FBI's King assassination records

follow.

53- The FBI supposedly undertook to account for every possible detail of
James Earl Ray’s life after he escaped from the Missouri State Penitentiary a


11


year before that crime. It went into great detail about his correspondence
course studies, which are not related to the crime, but it made no effort to place
him for two of the four days immediately preceding the crime, which could reveal
conspiratorial meetings. When it learned that he had said where he was the two
nights preceding the night he spent in Memphis - he spent both nights in
Mississippi near Memphis - it conducted no investigation to confirm where he
stayed or to inquire into possible conspiratorial meetings. The reoond^f these ^
two nights it ignored entirely, the other it decided was not worth the time to
check it. Yet the time it had spent in checking out totally irrelevant motel

registrations, with tracings throughout the entire country, boggles the mind.

%

While there is no way of knowing what may be squirreled away in field office files
relating to where Ray was and when he was there or about meetings with others,
if this information exists, as it should exist, it is not in the FBI Headquarters
file, every word of which I have read.

5^. Illustrations of what remains withheld and was never sent to Washington
can be provided from what is within the public domain, from existing FBI records
and from court records.

55. Charles Quitman Stephens, an alcoholic, is the only 'alleged eyewitness.
Allegedly, he saw Ray two hours before Dr. King was killed. In fact, he was a
witness to nothing and the FBI knew it. He was so drunk at the time of the

crime he did not know what had happened until he was told. He was in bed when
the fatal shot was fired and he saw nothing. But he signed an affidavit claiming
he saw a fleeing man who resembled Ray.

56. Stephens was shown a photograph of Ray about April 18, 1968, which
is two weeks after that assassination. He was firm in making a negative
identification. This is recorded in CBS-TV News footage. CBS telecast Stephens
examining this photograph and making the negative identification.

57. In C.A. 75-1996 I have been given copies of what is represented as
all King assassination records of FBIHQ and the Memphis Field Office. No actual
investigative report of the Stephens interview in which special agents showed him
a Ray photograph was provided. In its place there is a brief suranary report,
referring to Stephens and several other persons. In it Stephens is represented
as not making a positive identification of Ray rather than as actually making a

r


12


negative identification. This is consistent with the decision to use a Stephens
affidavit in the extradition, which required some Ray identification. A false
and misleading affidavit was prepared, he signed it, it was used and Rpy was
Extradicted. This is the only means by which Ray was placai anywhere in Memphis
at the time of the crime.

58. From my knowledge of the kinds of records made in field offices, of
the subject matter and of FBI filing practice, I believe that other Stephens
information is in the Memphis Field Office and filed in other than the "main”
file on the King assassination. (It is known by the cryptonym of MURKIN.)

59- Relevant to this is a record known to have been obtained by Memphis
FBI agents that is not in the FBIHQ MURKIN records. This is the manifest of a
cabdriver named James McCraw, who knew Stephens and frequently transported him to
a liquor store. Minutes before Dr. King was killed, McCraw found Stephens too
drunk to get out of bed. McCraw returned to his cab, radioed the dispatcher,
was given another pick-up, and heard a broadcast report of the King assassination
before reaching that fare.

60. As defense investigator I located McCraw and produced him as a witness
at the Ray evidentiary hearing of October 197*4. He testified as stated above and
that the FBI obtained his manifest. He was not rebutted or disputed in any way.

(I conducted the investigation for the successful habeas corpus effort and for
the evidentiary hearing ordered by the sixth circuit court of appeals.)

61. The Stephens-McCraw case, like the cases of the Dallas crime-scene
photographs and information relating to the missed shot and the curbstone,
illustrates an FBI practise, of the field offices not 'providing FBIHQ with
information FBIHQ is known not to want.

6 2. Destruction of invaluable records of domestic intelligence operations
has been an ongoing FBI practice under regulations that permit it. The nature of
these records is embarrassing to the FBI today. In Memphis, before and after
the King assassination, the FBI intruded into the lives of countless persons, not
all black, who strove to improve the community, to better substandard wages and
working conditions and to bring diverse elements together for commnity betterment.
The FBI had informers throughout the community, both black and white. The FBI
also was regularly provided with the results of domestic intelligence by the


13


Memphis Police Department and its informers.

63. A nonuni formed young black policeman so thoroughly penetrated these
groups and B£. King's Memphis party that he was regarded by one group of young
blacks as their "minister of transportation.? He was the first person to reach
the body of the fallen Dr. King. This was kept secret by the FBI. lam
responsible for bringing it to light.

64. A large number of the Memphis Field Office's domestic intelligence
records have been destroyed. The destruction is recorded with references to records
allegedly holding summaries of them. However, all the details of these domestic
intelligence operations could not be included in surmaries. The FBI had no interest
in preserving some of the information that to others is of sociological, historical
and political-science importance. Morever, the still existing original records
reflect much about the FBI and its attitudes and operations.

65. FBI agents referred to adult blacks as "boys" and in one case as

"monkey faced." They called others who were not prosecuted pimps and drug pushers.
The FBI regarded this domestic spying as so inportant it did not apprehend those

who were wanted, like military deserters and draft dodgers. White preachers who

were active in efforts to attain better conditions for blacks (who received less
than the minimum wage from their City of Mejhis employment) and others who

participated in these efforts to improve the community were the subject of FBI

investigations that extended into foreign countries. Pacifists were labeled as
subversive. White women, even reporters, if seen with black men from the various
organizations, were the subject of special investigations that extended to their
families and their families' businesses. Upper middle-class white women who
supported the backward-looking mayor but opposed the strike situation he had
brought to pass and perpetuated were carefully indexed in the Memphis Field Office
records only. A black woman who informants said conceived out of wedlock wa£ so
thoroughly investigated by the FBI that her relatives are listed in field office
reports, are indexed there and where they were subject to retaliation, as from

the federal and local governments, their employment was searched out and reported.
All such information was not sent to Washington in surimaries but all is an
important record of the period and of the FBI at war in peace. This subject is
already of scholarly interest. I have made my records available for a study that

14


will be presented to a major historical association next year.

66. Even how these field office records are filed, information which is
automatically eliminated in the summaries, has significant values. Where there
was no real violence and the FBI longed to report violence because the Director
proclaimed there would be violence, cases were classified as of racial violence.
Sanitized reports were prepared for distribution, and few intelligence
organizations, including the military, did not receive copies. They held less
than all the information the Memphis Field Office received. Countless copies of
reports of these domestic intelligence operations were widely dispersed in
Memphis files. Dozens and more than dozens of copies in separate files are not
uncommon. They are filed by the names of persons and of organizations. The file
number indicates the FBI’s classification. When the local NAACP supported the
strike of the Sanitation Department workers , for example , it earned a
’’subversive" filing.

67. From all available records the FBI’s domestic intelligence operations
in Memphis were massive. The Memphis Field Office also has copies of police
domestic intelligence records that were not sent to Washington. Police intrusion
into private lives and belief also was enormous. When a Viet Nam veteran sued

to obtain copies of the police records that related to him and federal district
court ordered them to be provided, the police burned all their files. This means
that the FBI's are the only known remaining copies. This was not public knowledge
at the time of the burnings. This also makes the FBI's Memphis Field Office
copies even more valuable as a record of the period and of the area.

68. FBI field offices have special and bizarre filing arrangements, some
so far out that in my FOIA cases I have not been able to obtain explanations of
them from FBI or Department appeals personnel. There are field office files
designated as "dead files," as "new dead files" and even as "do not file" files.

69- Bizarre FBI filing extends to records on me. My FOIA requests are
filed under "internal security." In field office records, copies of which were
not provided to me from FBIHQ files under my Privacy Act request, I am actually
filed under bank robberies despite no connection with any, ever. There was
filing on me as a candidate for government employment and subject to a security
investigation when I was not a candidate for government employment and it was


15


certain I would not be. I am filed under " treason" and under ’’espionage" without
sense or reason. (Not that this prevented the Department from forcing me to
become its consultant in 1977, with the FBI’s assent.) The letter I wrote to
the editor of our local paper is filed and indexed in Baltimore. It also was not
provided from FBIHQ records. (This related to the unjustified firing of a college
professor who was a total stranger to me.) Obviously flase and defamatory raw
material in field office files relating to me was sent in summary form to FBIHQ,
which, without indicating the at best doubtful nature of the libelous fabrications,
informed the President of the United States that my wife and I annually celebrated
the Russian Revolution. It was a religious outing at a farm we owned and was
long before the anniversary of the Russian Revolution. This libel was given wide
FBIHQ distribution throughout the Government, including the Congress and Attorneys
General .

70. Aside from other importances in preserving the underlying records of
the field offices, if they are destroyed, there will be no way in which the injured
innocent will ever be able to relieve the harm done to them and their reputations.
There will be no real way in which others can learn the truth.

71. The bizarre in FBI filing and even file titles makes field office
files even more important. Seme file titles come straight from Orwell.- For
example, records of leaks to sycophantic writers and the FBI’s arranging for
publication of books favorable to it are under "Research Matters," Number 9^1.

The secret records on Jim Garrison in the New Orleans Field Office are classified
as "80. Laboratory Research Matters." Several years of records relating to one
of Garrison's lieutenants are under "67. Personnel Matters." An asterisk in the
FBI's file list indicates this means "Applicant-related classification."

72. K ch field office information, including a considerable amount relating
to the assassination of President Kennedy, does not exist in FBIHQ records because
it was handled by phone. I have many field office records of such phone
conversations in which FBIHQ callers were given information but where the calls
were not followed by the sending of field office records to FBIHQ. A general
practice is to keep the actual investigative reports in the field offices and to
send what is known as FD302s to FBIHQ. In these FD302s much, including sources,
often is withheld.


16


73- The actuality is that FBIHQ does not know what information the field
offices have in major political cases. I learned this by accident from a slip-up
in filing in the King case and from one field office in the JFK case. These two
instances indicate the magnitude of field office records in such cases and the
extent of the information that does not reach FBIHQ.

74. Attached as Exhibit 7 is a 19-page teletype of December 12, 1975, fran
the Chicago Field Office in which it informed FBIHQ of its holdings relating to
Dr. King and the Chicago end of the investigation of his assassination. This was
in response to a Bureau directive of the same day. So carefully were the Chicago
records inventoried that a list of this magnitude could be transmitted virtually
by return teletype.

75. There are 59 FBI field offices. All 59 received the same directive.

Yet at FBIHQ the file on the King assassination holds this one slip-up only. When
I asked FBIHQ under a case in court for copies of the other similar inventories,
it merely lied and described this as a one-of-a-kind volunteering of information.

(I learned otherwise in C.A. 78-0322 but since 1976 FBIHQ has not provided any
other inventories of records relevant in that litigation, C.A. 75-1996.)

76. Were it not for an accident in FBIHQ Central Failes, where a clerk
properly applied the only partly legible file number for MURKIN records, 44-38861,

I would not have received this record. Moreover, it cannot be detected in a search
of the FBIHQ Central Files General Index in a search for MURKIN records because it
is "Not Recorded" as filed under MURKIN. It is indexed under "Internal Security. 1 ’
This is the meaning of the file number 100-106670. It is an FBIHQ file number for
Dr. King as an "internal security" hazard to the nation.

77. For several years the FBI had need to provide information for internal
Departmental investigations and for Congressional investigations. These led to
more of the special filings of the inventories provided. Those records have not
been released to me in these various cases in court on the technicality that they
are not in the files the FBI searched.

78. Another single slip-up, where one of the 59 field offices filed a
record relating to the assassination of President Kennedy under that file
designation, enables me to attach Exhibit 8, the Dallas copy of the FBIHQ 's
teletype of January 6, 1977, and Exhibit 9, the Dallas response of the next day.


17


79. At FBIHq no copy of any inventory thus provided was filed under the
Kennedy assassination hearing. I also did not receive any copy from any other
field office. The FBI's dodge here was filing under the number for the
Congressional committee rather than the Kennedy assassination. As with the
Chicago record above, Exhibit 7, if it were not for aberrational accuracy in
Dallas filing, the vast extent of these holdings of records of great historical
and political importance today would still be secret.

80. This also illustrates another importance of not destroying field
office records - because search by proper subject at FBIHQ need not and within my
experience does not produce existing records. Searches of FBIHQ records under
the subject of the Kennedy assassination would not have produced these
significant documents, the inventory and the FBIHQ directives sent to all its
field offices.

81. What I am saying and mean to say is that from the first the FBI has
undertaken to convert the Act requiring disclosure of public information into a
justification for withholding information. Today it withholds from me FBI
information disclosed by the Warren Conmission and disclosed by the FBI in Warren
Ccmmission files not published by that Commission. What this "means is that
information disclosed by the FBI prior to FOIA now is withheld by the FBI under
FOIA. This withholding policy also adds importance to the existence of any
record that may be located by or for a requester, particularly those in field
offices, where FBIHQ often lacks knowledge of the exact content of field office
records, as will be seen below.

82. Exhibit 8 above, the directive for the providing of inventories, is
oarefully drawn. It does not ask for an inventory of all relevant records.

Rather does it ask for the extent of only those files specified in the directive.
The field offices correctly understood this to mean no other relevant files.

There are countless other relevant files but only those inside the FBI or subject
experts of greater than average expertise would be aware of this.

83. From Exhibit 9 it can be seen that the extent of the Dallas Field
Office records is vast. The two main files are of 227 volumes of records or
approximately 20,000 numbered records, without counting attachments. The special
indices, which exist in addition to the regular indices, are of forty-two and a


18


half linear feet of cards and then are not all-inclusive.

84. Withholding under claims to exemption that have in the past proven
to be spurious prevents knowing what else within the directive was filed in
Dallas. The FBI's claim to exemption (7)(B)(2) has never been justified within
my experience and has been held to be unjustifiedly claimed by the Department's
appeals office in one of my cases. With regard to the claim to (7)(E), while
certainty is impossible because of the withholding, it is not unlikely that this
is invoked to withhold what is within the public domain, including various
surveillances of the widowed Marina Oswald.

85. Exhibit 8 reflects that FBIHQ was not even aware whether relevant
records had been destroyed even though in both cases any destructions would have
been contrary to regulations.

86. An internal Dallas Field Office record, a memorandum from the case
supervisor to the SAC, reflects that in 1975 the FBI had to ask the Dallas office
for what the Dallas files held relating to a matter of considerable significance
to FBIHQ, reports that Oswald had served the FBI. This was eleven and a half
years after those reports achieved wide news attention. It also was the subject
of FBI Warren Commission testimony. I use this to illustrate' that even when the
matter is of extraordinary significance to FBIHQ, it must seek information from
the field offices and to reflect that after the amending of the Act the inquiry
was made by phone, which left no FBIHQ record for retrieval under an FOIA files
search at FBIHQ. (Attached as Exhibit 8-A)

87. Generally, the FBI refuses to search field office files in response

to information requests even though its regulations, ‘as I understand them, require
search of two field offices prior to requiring the requester to make special and
separate requests of field offices. To obtain any copies of JFK assassination
records from the major field offices involved, Dallas and New Orleans, I had to
file C.A.s 78-0322 and 78-0420.

88. From review of what was provided to me from other field offices
involved in the investigaton of the King assassination, I state that in general
the situation described above applies to them and that they have many files and
records not duplicated at FBIHQ. If these field office records are destroyed,
that information will be lost forever. From my knowledge of the content of these


19


files, they contain information embarrassing to the FBI as well as information
of significant historical value not included in FBIHQ files.

89. The actual investigations are conducted by the field offices. FBIHQ
could not begin to hold all relevant records if it wanted to, which it does not
want for reasons that include the political. Despite the multitude of records
at FBIHQ, the extent to which it goes to avoid having records boggles the mind.

I illustrate with these two major crimes.

90. In the investigation of the assassination of the President, in
addition to avoiding all the photographic evidence possible, the FBI performed
no tests on the unfired bullet found in the alleged death rifle. It made no
scientific comparisons between it and the various bullet specimens retrieved,
including from the bodies of the victims. Not having this evidence gave the FBI
fewer evidentiary problems to contend with. Yet it went to great trouble to
prove that a hair recovered from a blanket indubitably that of Lee Harvey Oswald
was Oswald’s hair and was a pubic hair. In the King assassination, where it
again shunned all the photographs it could - it never obtained any news pictures
at all - the FBI again avoided tests of the so-called fatal rifle and of the
remnant of fatal bullet. Swabbing the barrel to determine recent firing is a
normal test. It was not performed on the so-called fatal rifle. The FBI fired
this rifle but specimens were not recovered for ballistics comparison with the
specimen removed from Dr. King's body. The FBI also obtained a rifle Ray had
purchased and returned. After first determining that rifle could not be fired
because of hardened encrustation of cosmoline, a preservati ve , the FBI did swab
the barrel of that rifle, to "prove" that an inoperable rifle had not been fired.
Instead of the normal practice of recovering test-fired bullets and making
comparisons, the FBI contented itself with pretending the fatal bullet was fired
from the so-called fatal rifle. It made this representation in an affidavit used
in the Ray extradition.

91. However, to perform its duties and to conduct those extralegal
activities that have attracted much attention in recent years, the FBI requires
records. It plays safe by keeping records in the field offices - out of
Headquarters files. As a result the field office records are of extraordinary
value and cannot be duplicated. There is no possible duplication of the more


T


20


nr


-


than forty feet of Dallas indices, for example, and none could now be made.

92. From my experiences large numbers of FBIHQ records are alleged to be
missing. Most of these, even including a file of reports sent to the Attorney
General, allegedly cannot be found. Where these are based on sunnaries provided
by field offices, the actual field office records become even more important.

93. In the King assassination investigation the FBI kept ticklers as
control files. When I sought these under FOIA, the FBI provided none. When I
persisted and provided leads to the Department's appeals office, it found an
important one of these ticklers. It had been arranged by about three dozen topics.
It had been shifted from where it belonged. And it had been gutted - long after
the suit that includes it was filed. While there is no way in which such ticklers,
in themselves records of great importance, can be replaced, not destroying the
field office files will at least preserve the underlying informational basis of
these case ticklers.

9 1 *. The Chicago Field Office's records on and about Dr. King, when it
allegedly conducted none of the electronic surveillances on him, are so large they
could not possibly be duplicated at FBIHQ. All their information of interest and
value to persons outside FBIHQ would not be summarized in FBIHQ* records. People
outside the FBI have other than prosecutorial interests and with political records
may well see and understand other than the FBI does.

95. I select Chicago to illustrate this because of the public disclosure
of almost 7.7 million pages in its domestic intelligence records. (See Exhibit 10,
attached) Dr. King was but one subject of its multitudinous domestic intelligence
operations. There also were many other subjects in thd other field offices.

96. I am not one of those who believes the FBI should be abolished. I
believe it needs reform. Proper study of the kinds of field office records of
which I have read many thousands of pages is required for there to be actual
reform, rather than mere talk of it. Within my experience the FBI still
misrepresents to courts of law to avoid exposures that could lead to necessary
reform by exposing past misconduct and failures. For the benefit of the FBI as
well as for historical purposes, all these records should be preserved.

97. Where the innocent have been injured by these records, destruction of
them denies rectificaton. In my own case I still await compliance with my Privacy

21


i


Act requests first made in 1975. Until I can obtain copies, I am not able to
provide correcting statements, which is my right under the Privacy Act. In
several cases I still await the delivery of field office files the existence of
which I proved long ago.

98. There is another importance in the field office records. They
represent an American practice of the ways of authoritarian societies and systems
of government. I believe they should be preserved as a means of reminding all of
us, especially officials, that they do not represent the American way and that
our agencies must not transgress against American rights.


WEISBERG


5


FREDERICK COUNTY, MARYLAND

Before me this day of July 1979 Deponent Harold Weisberg has

appeared and signed this affidavit, first having sworn that the statements made
therein are true.

My corrmission expires June 1, 1982.


I.


— — ina — **■


. -


UNITED STATES C<

Memorandum


^jo . «Hr. V.JC. Sullivan

1 ’ - {

-mow yG. C. Koore^ 6« fj V

. tcrrOOMMUN 1ST INFILTRATION


-^uwtcx^JJrinurixa* *mu,inn*»vn . . ....

■ <-5oUTHERN CHRISTIAN LEADERSHIP CONFERENCE -

" . " • ••* JUNE


•% r-# . ■■ ■ T " ■* * ^ w * ' ^

L.. 4 v;.* : -,<<J

1 - *Mr. DeLoJ^i _ „\'7 r - 't^Z -

1 - Hiae Holmes , .

. - * ' ' ■• •. - A ;^g* —

. '/ -CATt- December !i9/ 1967


1 - Mr. V. C.'fculllvan
1 - Hr. C. C. Hoore
1 - Hr
1 - Hr


. - . v, . * . . .•• ;«k.ta 4

• C. C. Hoore , “*^ 7 -» — >

. Eot*nus Pij^L}~ v

. d. Mil ••r N ?v-- VTU^


\


< *


s *. •• *


ii


i£--:


PURPOSE:

-Attached for your approval &a a memorandum €0 V'* ?Tf

the Attorney General requesting a telephone aurvelllanca .-i -4
of Southern Chrlattan Leadership Conference ISCLC; . - •

Atlanta. Ceorgla, In an effort to obtain Intelligence - - T* .* *
of their plans for massive civil disobedience tn the ^ _

Nation's Capitol and 10 to 15 cities throughout the . - •-

United States In the Spring of 1968.

_ •*.•■• .... -if.

pACKGROUND : ‘ • ' ' : !

On December 13, 1967, you approved an airtel ’
mhlch was directed to Atlanta Office requesting them to
VorZcVm survey a. to the feasibility of instituting
a secure telephone surveillance of SCLC'a J«adquartera,
Atlanta, Ceorgla. By communication dated W7 *.

• Atlanta recomnends installation and advises it can be .
accomplished with full security*

. OBSERVATIONS: -


• • - r .


. J ^

. , ’ -^l« f*-»

* i 4 .


J •’ Elnce sCLC'a President. Hartin Luther King, -?r^.

, baa urged massive civil disobedience throughout the < country y A . ^

. , • in an effort to spur Congress into action to e p

•••: ;? leht of the Negro, It is felt that we need this — - r — y

; installation to obtain racial Intelligence Information : ^ '

:,y * . - n .. *Xi * ‘1 7C/ U


Id*’

:


11


; v <7>


* * -a

1 al’W^. <. 1


• CONTINUED - OVER


'^79 JAM 10 1988 -- •*

"j yat^T-r yrir—


*1 JAN * «68


Jr.


• V - * 4 * \*v . *


J

y


r


r 2 .

“ • L , *r.-r


UNITED states qovj 'rntwientt - - ' ?

Memorandum ROUTE IN


J Mr. A. H. Balmont


J

<-OM n Mr. V. C. Sullivan

yy

^JtCT __COMlfUNIST_PAKTy, CSA


»atl: January 27 , 1P64
. J D H I *


' (2
r. Col:


NEGRO QUESTION
"COMUUNIST IHTLUJINCEUN RACIAL -MATTERS
LNTLILNAL BKCUlimr - COmUNIST


Memorandum 1/23/64 from Mr. F. J. Baumgardner to mymelt
advlaed of authority given to the Milwaukee Office for a microphone LL n
■urveil lance (misur) to cover the activities of Martin Luthor King, . H^fv
Jr., and his assoclatea while In Milwaukee, Wisconsi n, vh »iv hr 1 e*
scheduled tr> m*-


SAC Baker of the Milwaukee Office phoned me this morning
to advise that King had arrived in Milwaukee and checked into the
Shxoeder Bote] iui scheduled and that the mi bur rn*. RCt^v ated at
10:30 a.m. today. Symbol numbers assigned tnf1 HM

Baker alf>o advised that the local police have taken i
Close to the suite of rooms engaged by Kiug no that protection
be afforded King. In vIct* of thin, it was the conj
that the
plana la


likelihood of IClDg'a going ahead with any
greatly minlinir.ed. I agree with thlo obae

Milwaukee in to keep the Bureau promptly advised of all
daveI^pm€mt.^andjupon receipt of additional information you will ba
further Informed.


V


ACTION;

Hone. Ter Information.

100-3-116

1 - 100-106670 (Martin Luther ILing, J


iz


i

1

1

1

1


Mr. Belmont
Mr. Sullivan

K: 6r.Sfi‘ ran * r

Mr. Pursy Lh
Mr. Hy an
Mr. ivmohue
Mr. Phillips


¥CS;k*J f) A r

w- T~l~J m A "* J


L smj . L

y ,, U, .

/<"' i - / L


ezFEB 'fi l%4


M


r.:.i


£


' h


I* ; \~j

-2a*

t «£•
»

iy-viv.v


$


TO

"*ow ,
‘U^JtCT.


• *£“««** covJLUct ' - ' . : : - . ; ,

■ ern °randu m ^OmE 'm ENVELOPE

*'* r * A * H. . -


**** Jaxmtxy 28# le64

JUNK


>•4


qgS’SKj*?.-**

‘‘SlTSS?. &sj«£ “n®*

A^/AT

phone ■urvi^i r A ^ < ^ LLni you 1/27 /a^ ^

. « -AasSSi s:> : srgSKl

* * lw,t ^tht (1/27/64). “^refor* 4i* C ontlnu* d

&ECOAaiEwn.0TTn w . *

^ on «« For Information.

100-3—12.6

* ■ r oseTO < ^ ti " ^ *.> (a®

* “ Mr. Bnlmoct . '

“ Mr. Gallivaxi

‘ “ *^ r . baiun^Bj-ciner

* - *r. Bland

1 - Mr . rorayth
^ “ Mr , Ry an
J “ Mr . Donohue
1 “ Mr. Phillip.


■1 :


WC S:faai
“1^


y Q


/>


*j>/


,4


/


y


FFRR 1JM


4 £~</¥/ 6 / 7 - 3


k:lV


, FAIR PLAY FOR CO?. A •

(FFCC)

NEW ORLEANS

No r- :rd was found in Nov/ Orleans cf cho issuance
of a p«..<ie pci-ait tu LEE HARVEY OSWALD tuning April, 1962.

l-.ow 'Cr7.er.ns Police Department records indicate he
vas ...rested August 5, 1963, for disturbance of the. o^ce
for vnreu he war. fined §10. C 1 August 12, 1963.

Under the name OSBORNE, OSWALD ordered 1,000
copies printed of "Hands Off Cuba" FPCC handbills from
Jones ^Printing Company, A22 Girod Street, New Orleans,

Kay 29, 1963, whirch he probably received on June A, 1963.

As LEE OSBORNE ho ordered 500 copies printed of an FPCC
membership application from the Mailers Service Company,

225 Magazine Street, New Orleans, on June 3, 1963, receiving
same on June 5, 1963. Shortly thereafter he ordered 300
copies printed of an FPCC membership card by the same firm,

OSWALD was arrested by the New Orleans Police De-
partment on August 9, 1963, in the 700 block of Canal Street
and charged with disturbance of the peace by creating a
scene following ar. altercation with CARLOS JOSE BRINCUIER
CLLSO M-.CA.aO HERNANDEZ, and MIGUEL MARIANO CRUZ (members of
the anti-Castro Cuba Students Directorate (Dircctorio
Revol uclonario Escudiant.il) (D.R.E.) while he was distributing
FPCC handbills. Ac the cim.c of arrest, he was in possession^
of a National FPCC membership card issued May 28, 1963,
signec by V. T. LEE, Executive ‘Secretary; Now Orleans Chapter
FPCC membership card issued June 6, 1963, signed by A. KiDELL,
President; and a cardboard sign reading. "Viva, Viva FIDEL."
During police interrogation, OSWALD stated .he had first"
become interested in the FPCC* wnilo a Marine at Los Angeles,
Calircrnia, in 195S; that the New Orleans Chapter of FPCC
consisted or 35 persons, five of whom regularly attended
monthly meetings on Pine Street; denied being a 'Communist
but seated he was a socialist and embraced the teachings of
KARL MAPJ< in "Das Kapital"; and that he would not allow
memoe r r. o_ his family to learn English as he hated America
and d:.u not want them to become Americanized; and that there


v_


s


Sr, Q " t,lesc entries in the
ted to leave a complete record


I'd it to appear to be a bravo

ftt is my supposition. ****»■

deserves close attention in any
e tor the assassination and the
.at occasion. While (here are
‘ l °® wa ld s actions and plan-
ties that should lie considered
, en he made his attack on
Place i n history. If the at-
^ught, the pictures lowing
j Socialist. Worker’s Party
on the front pages of news-
as ’ m fact, one of (hem did
•cumstances of the attack on
hot Oswald was concerned
circumstances surrounding
(o believe that such concern
nng possible motivation for

mates that in spite of the
8 w * s apparently not dan-
nation and other traits re-
ng of another human being
ose if he thought there was
1 he thought was sufficient
nature of the motive that
sr ‘ Marina Oswald indi-
ineral Walker to Adolph
t General Walker “was a
was the leader of a fascist

>ugh all °f that mjght ^

is life, ho said if someone
ia many lives.” a, »


the United States
.he Fair Play f or Cuba
ne Commission has been
?as involved in any con-
'ffht into ceitain aspects
: motivation for the

may have distributed


Fair Play for Cuba Committee materials on one uneventful oc-
casion in Dallas sometime during the period April 0-24, 1 0153 11 *
Oswald’s first public identification with that cause was in New Or-
leans. There, in late May and early June of 10(53, under the name
Cee Osborne, he had printed u hamlhill headed in huge letters “Hands
Off Cuba, an application form for, and a meml>ers1iip card in, the
New Orleans branch of the Fair Play for Cuba Committee.*” He
first, distributed his handbills and other material uneven! fully in the
vicinity of the U.S.S. W/uip, which was berthed at the, Dtimaiue Street,
wharf in New Orleans, on June Mi, l!>«3. 31 " He ilisl rilmled literature
in downtown New Orleans on August 0, l!M53,uud was arrested liecuuse
tl,re e anti-Ciistro (’uhaii exiles, and again on August
10, lot,. 5. ' I' o Mowing his arrest, he was interviewed by the police, and
at Ins own request, by an agent of the FI5J. 3 ” On August 17, 1963 lie
appeared briefly on a radio program and on August 21,- 1963,’ he
debated over radio station WDSTT, New Orleans, with Carlos Krin-
gnier, one of the Cuban exiles who had been arrested with him on
August 0. ,M Hringuier claimed that on August S, I !)(;:!, Oswald had
attempted to infiltrate an anti-Castm organization with which lie was
associated. 353

Wliile Oswald publicly engaged in the activities descrilied above,
his organ izat ion” was a product of his imagination.*” The imaginary
president, of Hie nonexistent, chapter was named A. .1. 1 1 itlell,’- 5 the
name that Oswald use, I when he piiivlinsetl the assassination weapon.”"
Marina Oswald said she. signed llml name, apparently chosen liecaiise
it rhymed will, “Fidel,” »’ to her husband's niemhership card in I la-
New Orleans chapter. She testified that he threatened In heal her if
she did not. do so.*” The chapter had never been chartered by the
national FPCC organization.’” It appears to have been a solitary
operation on Oswald’s purl in spite of his misstatements lo the New
Orleans police Unit, it had 3f> menda-rs, 5 of which were, usually present
at meetings which were held once a month. 3 ’ 0 .

Oswalds Fair Play for Cuba activities may be viewed as a very
shrewd political operation in which one man single handcdly created
publicity for his cause or for himself. It is also evidence of Oswald’s
reluctance to describe events accurately and of his need to present
himself to others ns well as to himself in a light, more favorable Ilian
was justified by reality. This is suggested by his misleading and some
time untruthful .statements in his letters to Mr. V 'I' D-e (hen

■2-X 1 di 'T l<,r 0f FPCC - In one of tll0Se leHers, dated August I.
1J63, Oswald wrote that, an office which he had previously claimed to
have rented for FPCC activities had been “promply dosed :t days
later for some obsure reasons by the renters, they said something
about remodeling act., I'm sure, you understand.” x " I ' • wrote ( hat
thousands of circulars were dist.nihed” 3 ” and llml ho continued i„
m-eivo inquiries through his post office 1k,.x which he endeavored
to keep ansewenng to the la-sl of my ability.” 333 |„ his Idler lo

t ,h ' hIuU ' <I !'»' was then alone in his ellWls on behalf

ot f 1 CC, but he attributed his lack of siqiport to an attack by Cuban

407


coMMrei


Sl&L&LL S


a.


i'


&TE IN ENVELOPE ^ - • ' :

. . • /. .* < ^ "* ■ > *

• •*. - - a •- • ^


'SSS? !,I3T D.Tunzid'nr EiCUL KATTOS :%i -

. IBTEUOL EECDEITT - C~— — — • .- 7' m.ld B^rrSion)

^ . *•.*’:.**. ^ .• .#*-? • ^ ^ • Bosack ^

■ . • ' :•• *V *■'•'•. • '- 1 — Mr. Phillip, > .*•% *

Boxer enc* is *i*de to Bureau •’Jane" letter to *
your perconal attention 3/0/64 which furnished certain
obGcrvationn relativo to recent handling by your ©if ice :dli.?V. -
- ©i ixLfomation bding obtained through highly sensitive •• '

•ources. . ~ - *. — -v


-r


. • "Another natter ha* coae to tho Bureau*, attention * •

relative to^your office*, handling of infornation fron • —

sensitive aourccG which necessitate* further *
. evaluation of your office*, administrative handlltur of -
captioned investigation. - ... . -- '


■*.' v


/k . »


By airtel 3/2/64 to the Bureau, copie* to
Vf^. r T° rk » offlco submitted a letterhead .ecorandun :

* 7 “' of date under the title of "Connunist Infiltration

Southern ChriEtitij leadership Conference. IS » C H ThJLa
trns f ollovod by another air tel to the Bureau, copie* to
Ke\r lort r dated 3/2/G4 which alco encloood t.ttj c f S2ne

cane Eouthern Christian Leadership Conference -
la-LC; t.tlo , The latter air tel and LEU wore rubai t ted • ro-
under eovor of etill another airtol doted 3/5/64, copies
of which were alco furnishod to Her York, The 3/6/64
airtol notod that it was Eervlng as a cover for corrected
copies of an airtol dated 3/2/61 and that previous copies d
of the original airtol and L!Li should bo destroyed. Jt V -
alco noted that your office had originally failed to '

denignate copiec for tho Now York and Bureau filos on the-^ * *'
ECLC but wan nuking; such designation by aeon* of the revised
cirtel and LUi, . .


>:


-*>*' — -


Tho Bureau recoivnd n fourth communication fre

your offlco, a radio granulated 3/6/64, which Instructed that *-7 /


S -


SFPirba ut

( 6 ) j/


MA^IO 1 P.B 4


4.111* ULUC LOU XU ax ^7 /


better to Atlanta

C 0 J 13 J 1 IIBT PAETY
SE 6 E 0 QUESTION


bureau to hold up dlBceaination. - You would thus be
"• *V * taking *11 possihle action to prevent an eabarraaBing *,

' -.•.n- situation arleiing wherein the Bureau sight be required 'to"*^';''
write corrective correspondence to outside -agendoe. Tor
- • your information, It woo only by a' stroke of good fortune ^-


rr * ## # * j — v Acuuipi, ui jour wujD« • ^ U '

letter ©1 3 / 5 /G 4 for par ding a tape recording of the : - r r 7 *' ’*

conversation between Ling and Jones referred to In the —
v! ® dlncuacod alcove. Nowhere in this 3 / 5/64 communication

V-T' '* 11 stated an to v£y tho recording I« being furnished the

' v , !v*® UPe=,u » 11 bein 6 noted that your office does not normally

V*.; • o^bnit to tho Bureau recordings in this case.- The Bureau Vv?;.-*-
. can only acanne that possibly you suhnittod the recording w"/"--
• ' .because of the error which had occurred In the original •' •'

that bo the cane, such roason should have been •' . '•*•

indicated in your lottcr of 3 / 5 / 64 . If it was some other - •
treason, same nhoulci have been stated* ~* v. * . , *• % :

• *.'7. • > ' f . . n . •'*


\ r


.'1‘n — .•


* *J # *+


"You are instructed • to advise the Bureau by return
communication as to the reason why the recording was furnished i
to tho Bureau and tLo disposition you desire nade of tho
recording. < . *•:


It..


Kelative to your request H3 to dectruction of the V ’ v
€r iGlDJil slrtcl and LEU, be advicod that it is contrary *• ’ \

to Buroau rccord-hocping procedures to destroy originals* /,

of any connunicntionc even though they contain errors. The*. • .* :
usual procedure 1 b to rotain tho originals with appropriate
notations an to the errors. * „ -.* ... ... , . •

. • : . . . ... >'■***» -v"V ' 7 :’»*.•*• s*. : *r v* ' '‘i- '■ •

' '* r * -• . ’ - “ 7 >*•*•* * : *’ . *• ** **?*.'• -V* *

* '*' * Instant communication as wall *C the roferred to Z-^- ’■

Buroau letter of 3/D/64 would indicate the necessity for -f
somo roasseosnont relativo to your office’s handling of ~Z t-v--'-.
rattors in cn.pt loncd case, particularly those relating to ^'.t - ••

information being obtained iron highly sonsltivo sources, *2^ liy

* • . . ’ . . . * . • .

- .« V 4 *• - \ • ; 1 .. . . • • . ^ .. • . a . • * ’

• _ ' < ■ ■ ■■ . - • .* . . i— t - -• . -•


t


&>


V


04


' . c"


- i» r

-


[6T PARTT, •'• • -.-Y\.- Vvi - •

J'JESTION • — • • V • • Y. * :••;. £ 'SV&sBs. r'\'

r .9T TWn.TTTMmr tw *• » r>r»t w 1 1 - Y. • •• * 7 :‘T^1' :


‘•letter to Atlanta
' ' 7 - .-“Mi CXmU 2 fI 6 T PJJ

> Fixmo question'* .... --. . . .. - ... . a _

’ - '.:,r r -• CCtUimiST IKTLUZNQC IX RACIAL MATTERS " >r * U -

VAC A' . -i-w'.v.-' ^ v-

' •' ”• Correspondence in this and related’ cases la ertreaoly^ ’ ‘

h f? v {* I°" Should examine clonely tho Better of peroonaoi-’*V' ' Y
^ lo ^snt .to captioned and related caeca and tahe such • :- T '" .
otepB •* «■« noceoaary to insure that sufficient personnel
*'• i ‘\ MTe ■•osicrxied to thlo case to, in turn, insure it la - "*Y

Y.* * 5 ° Botioul °u® attention warranted. The conference " -

- . had at the Boat of Covernnont with perconnel of tout office ’• -V

>. / E^ceabcr, 1 PCC, hishlichted the Importance ohlch the • ■

. . " reau bnc attached to enptioned cbeo. There ban been do ’ c Y -* .

" ' 5 ‘ ^banco, ThiB Ac still one of the coot important cases . * Y"'Y ■

• ••• ;.• .-'being handled by the Bureau in the aecurity field. Zt ia~ •/*- . ’

» • absolutely imperative) that thero be no lotdoun in*the ~-\l \ ** ‘

necessary time and attention belnc devoted to this Batter.” '•

• . ' . V- • Thf ’ Buroau cculd bo recoptivo to obtaining any

•obcervationc or rocoimendntio no your office any have ^. 1 ** y «■;
relative to tho natters dlacucsod heroin. • - ‘


•-i -
V C-


•’C


• I . W •

• * a * * •.

Z ~

'.•--r ;.^V' V'

* * y S-'iyJ

t . " .t ■ *# .


- - . - » w A '/s-^’r • : '* V . ^ •

\‘ r ^ -r * . •. b -l* • - ‘ *

: V - • ' •. \V. .. • • * ••••*.*.’. " ^ ; * •. >

- v J - • , ~ • * • . T


, *; .t J*


r.v :/•


• * . . ,

* ... %y* ,r*/ •*. .* . ■

/ ^ -• « *. ~ -•••
•;? • ^ ' i - * . *


• c. * i • • *- -

< • / , . . 7 .>


** — • i ^ ^ »

/: fy
T : *.VsV-
- ; * V ^


- 4 -


* -i . .


< * —


i'-' ;r - ‘i-r ; W.'iTj«S 1

se—t. - *• ; ‘:


cat


* -»./r *v . *1

ari * r


; ^ X \N - ^ . * V *


. \*\ '

.•h*a •-•


f '.


SA MILTON


bjbct:.


,. newsom •”-*•*.*>.■« v'-'v-- -*' 7 ;.y>r* v* .'•>? ; S.vW^2P *

# * • - - v -a — • - _f f- -- .<•>' • r- V- .

«..*«•% W • • . . » «'/V »*• . •-*«■. ' '>A- •*•> y ■*. .* Mf* •' k*

■• _ " ^ * vxP. ;-:-£v» *


t y* ; ^ •'♦•"* •


ASSASSINATION OF PRESIDENT KENNEDY r~ y
Mr. WALTER BENT, Ernies Service Manager, Etttuo


Mr. WALTER BENT, Bale* Service Manager, Eastman **:

Kodak Company, Processing Service Division, 3131 Manor Way,
telephone FL 7-4654, Dallas, telepbonically advised his ‘

mpany had received two rolls of 6 miliioeter Kod a chrome


one roll of 35 mlllmeter
BRCl N'SQN . Chief Engineer


i -Z.:


film In a package from Mr . _ CHARLES


as, Texas.


eer, Karel Mfg. Company, 9230 Denton Drive.-. ^py'.

• /v- , . • •.*•:/•- r -•*,-• *-5 r-.z^\iy j s ■*.

Mr. BRONSON enclosed a letter with bin Ilia, wtating
that the file had been taken mt> the instant President KENNEDY -.x
was assassinated. BRONSON also advised In the letter that from
the position he was stationed when he took the film, he feele
quite certain the Texas School Book Depository building was
clearly photographed and he feela that the window from which thi^
shots were fired will be depicted in the' film. Be stated for y^’
this reason he believes he may have a picture of the a6iiasaln, *'*
ms he fired the shots. . . - v --wj_ -L? *.


i

fi

v

l


% ' *1 r %

* vs:


r- -. j


. -• V» i


' 7. ST?


Mr. BENT stated Mr. BRONSON 1 * letter indicated he :;‘f
desired to be cooperative regarding the film with proper — r.
authorities and BENT is of the opinion that BRONSON will haws
moi object ion to turning tbe film over to proper authorities im *•
tbs event it Is of value to the investigation.. .* » v - .->,r..*’ V"- -

«/«. .««. - — . . .. - ... . ••...■«« — . V ^ ■*» >< * 4, -> -» ~ >

Mr. BENT stated that be would make errangeaente wltb^£^U-
Mr. BRONSON to view the file at the Kodak Processing Cgnjer and ■
would arrange this so that FBI Agents could be present/ai tbe same
time interview BRONSON concerning hia film of the scene*


CTTT.r

-w. r- r -*


Mr. BENT assured bln full cooperation regarding ell ^
film received of a like nature that aiay possibly be connected
with this natter and arrange.ents were made with bin to lnnediately
notify BA NEWSOM of any flln of possible value . - , r ;, ->r.^ w v v. •

* • « •#>'. • w • , V • k -

z ' i:


( ?V Dallas

V_JHi<;rnb:

& r -


.1


- N 'a’b


J 11 fp

MOV-251963

Dallas


» • *•*

*\«4 i <• %•— .>* a V . w.

• • «•

• • •• S^w •• 4

*v- •. v ’•*"'* 4 •,

'T.-r r-*^7

•a /ap ■>*-.* *Wk*


- .— ' we xa - . <-vwi «n. v a?-*’- ^r-.— r.t“ •'

r - • * 4 - *

— - — , l * « ■ *•. .• ' • '• V* •• - .A • • ►*. . ^ •'


•11 color film made by 8 altimeter Kodachrome In thin iru ind ‘* • -
also most other film for the area is processed by this diTislon.V^.-f-
Mr . BENT explained that his employees have not worked Sines - TV
Saturday and they are due back to work at lj.|30 (hi, 11/25/63^^*^. ..

When processing of recent file orders begin, he expects other =

Hies taken at the approximate time of Presidents assassination.^--?

• ♦ • • -• — .. * • •• • • * ' ’ • t i, . ». ^ ^>\aju. ■ • A

Be aald that BRONSON's film should be processed and —

ready for viewing by 3:00 PM. Be was told that SA NEWSOM would -*!-... *


. : . • ’ f'-i-*, _ ^ 1 ?-‘V*VXrr. i


v . ••• < •

■ *.* T . r __

V-'.' V •


v. . •


> i


: • . r - • - * * a . • • • -w- •* -

• ♦ f « • a , 1 ^ •

• * • • - - - •» . - e 4 *• •• » ' - * *> 1 ' t W . . Va a*«I wi-t «

- - - . "“i ? ' f v . v ry • . - ■

- * « , . • t l • • • *-*.“• ea*." . p * •

* . ' • • • • * - ♦ - jm m - .


7 j / ' *> - ' i

**. : . »


r


^ * i» * ”Vi * *• ' . * • , • **.*•- * V *•*..-! * %*T «•* *■_-«* mt -Si* • k ; » *- .

•* *v._r- - • - • * • — t v c » » : j * * • . Ji-v, . . ..

• ******* **»»V *e,»* . • * . - **- , ’ /• %-**- - 1 * e*‘ ; % >S* ? \ *v. . ' ? ;• '


**1 J ' • • ^ •* *'* : • “* » •» *1 ' \ • i * . •** • « *• «Vt- ’ e * •*•**•• j* 1 ** • '

/*• a x.*. -* • -* *Vr. 9+'Mf , v .‘ e>. % • - 1 . * • • *.n it- : - t ». H


t>r •* ■ * . .. ’


: -r 4 | . „


• » i -


*•


Hr. WALTER I^TtfT, Sales Service Ha na £«**. Eas
rnmruMlv Processing Service Division, 3131 Ha nor Way,

5S w5SKSbS BRP^ON. Chief *

CompIrSy/ 9230 Denton Drive, - e ^e contacted by SAS KILT® X. ^ -

fSO« and EMORY E. HORTON on ll/23/o3- . * . •*•• ~ r- • t-


C4. * .•*


ind EMORY E. HORTON on llAO/ox- . - A - - r . MrUV.5

■ pilau taken by Hr, BpoWSToN at the time -i

President's assassination lnctudtaft 35 “a* color slides ^ .->ie±jK--.:~
^hleh were* taken .1th . Lel« W^r.. •"£ » “. -

film were reviewed. These films failed to ahow the boxia^ ^ ..

from which the shots were fired. Film' J* 1 however; •'

president 's c*r at the precise' time •^ B f « I ^ d 2^ic!tlS

the pictures were not sufficiently clear ror xaen^ v ;

purpoDCB a . , ■ ■» 1 * . ^ -

f Depository Building in the background of her plctur ^ J hQt ;- .

other U3u.l. In the £i4Ker« tekln, £.*.•.
plctureB Mt the tliie*


*> Wr.Trt **

. r. . — . — - • *-


, •. Arra ncrenento hi ve "been »ade with Kr • VALTER^ BEHT

whereby e.ih^fkage of film ~celved for

inh a°ellp^of W pn pe t ts ched^reque s t lng IndlvWu^t*:^

notify the local FBI offlc ®.*" Resident wH assAsslnated.^ ♦ -

pa ckage, reflect the scene when the President all the . ;. .*

Hr. B/6 advised this company does the p sout hwe«t *

eout^este^ states Ay l^el is bel g ^ ^ ^ mmt . .

,'offlces notifying them or the sdovc *u & ' *

they receive calls of this type, • ~ . ' ~7\

• ' '

wu»iHtoj_. — uau 'Ll :
utouui^C^nu^t; — i f?. ~

NOV-251963 ‘ I'x


• • • *7 ^ fVW> -t- 7 . ••

i^^N/aa * ......

.. * \ (2) ^>1. > •; .-.

. • *.,** . V ^ ^ ^ . . , ...


FBI — DALLAS


■* r*.*' * ♦ "


.’• W- ’


r_r-


N .• .


I K


£xrf/&/T 7


riRgi?? C3 CODE


1 '


*.! h •


•Vj'\ »* »•*.


64C°i1 NiTEL 12-12-75 TG


- — i

i


‘ FROM


D IRECTOR ( 1 0P- 1 0G 670)

/ -

CHICAGO 000-35356)


fy


y^ , <•- v*

t ^


MARTIN LUTHER KING, JR., BUDEDs DECEMBER 12, 1975.


4


k


REBUTEL, DECEMBER 9, 1975.

A) FIELD, OFFICE FILE NUM3ER , CG 4 4-1114.

B) TITLE A fiD CHARACTER OF FILE, "ASSASSINATION OF MARTIN
LUTHER KING,'' JR., CIVIL RIGHTS (CODE NAME: (mURKIK)^

C) DESCRIPTION OF FILE CONTENTS:

THE CHICAGO FILE UNDER THE ABOVE CAPTION, CONSISTS

t •

TOTAL OF 24 VOLUMES COMPRISED OF A TOTAL OF 1794 SERIALS.

INCLUDED IN THIS MATERIAL ARE EIGHT SUBFILES, A THROUGH H.

MAIN CG 4 4-11 14, WHICH CONSISTS OF SIX VOLUMES WITH 819 SERIALS,
. . * .**

contains material relatikg to investigation conducted to locate

PERSON OR PERSONS RESPONSIBLE FOR ASSASSINATION OF DR, MARTIN


A.* v».

T.’i. ..

»:• .• J / *.

•1. Ar-L.i '

•• • .* Cor... — (
* *. !nv. j

ii. wP'trx

•r ..»•*(/*/ J

f: L’viL _

t ’ i»V. .

t 0 ,1m. |

V.r** I?c** „

*:r J?^y ...

k


::r P'-c’r 1

N 7?


i

• tit*


• /.


v •

f

| LUTHER XING,’ JR.

SUB A, WHICH CONSISTS OF SEVEN VOLUMES WITH |B SERIALS, „

, CONTAINS REPORTS CAPTIONED "JAMES EARL PAY, AKA - FUGITIVE,

A • . ■ S3 J '- 1 • :i;)

I.O. 4 182, DR. MARTIN LUTHER KING, JR., - VICTIM, CR - .

J % ..a V* ■«/


7/ ' ■' ■ -/ ' .

NOT RECORofiB - , I

46 jan 10 1976


r *1


»Vi

( c;


r*>v

E


*r.


84 JAN20


1976


s


' * * . .

*; . ,
3

fe

'•fy-
-vr - •

* r ’ ‘

|

<


1 .* v »


.1

r

, I


. I


PAC-E TVO CG 10C-35356 *

CONSPIRACY AND UFAC - ROUGERY" AS WELL AS OTHER COMMUNICATIONS

RELATING TO FUGITIVE INVESTIGATION DURING PERIOD APRIL 10, I960,

#

TO OCTOBER ?., 1968.

V$IJB 8, WHICH CONSISTS OF ONE VOLUME, WITH 274 SERIALS,
CONTAINS* MEMORANDUMS RELATING TO ASSASSINATION OF MARTIN LUTHER
KING, JR., AT MEMPHIS, TENNESSEE, DURING PERIOD APRIL 2, I960,

TO AUGUST 7, 1966.

SUB C, WHICH’ CONSISTS OF THREE VOLUMES, WITH 423 SERIALS,
CONTAINS CHICAGO NEWSPAPER CLIPPINGS DURING PtRIOD APRIL II,
1968, TO APRIL 6, 1972, RELATING TO ASSASSIfMT ION OF MARTIN
LUTHER KING, JR.

SUB D, WHICH CONSISTS OF THREE VOLUMES, WITH 08 SERIALS,

ARE BULKY EXHI3 ITS CONSISTING OF ARREST RECORDS, PHOTOGRAPHS,
INTERVIEW LOGS, AIRLINE MANIFEST, FINGERPRINTS AND OTHER
MISCELLANEOUS ITEMS RELATING TO INVESTIGA.T ION OF ASSASSINATION
OF MARTIN LUTHER KING, JR.

SU3 E, WHICH CONSISTS OF ONE VOLUME, WITH 66 SERIALS,
CONTAINS MEMORANDUM, TELETYPES, AIRTELS AND OTHER COMMUNICATIONS
CONCERNING THREATS MADE AGAINST DR.' MARTIN LUTHER KING, JR.


P- T

•»

V


- r • ■ •'

‘ •' - ’’ - : 'V " L** *

. v . ; v .

. ...

.

; ■ 'Ws ^ A . ; r .j- V' wyVT j**.' j w-


0 :-


. * ,

•s'.


I .


«•

•f.

* V

»

. Z


PAGE THREE CG 100-35356

DURING THE PERIOD MARCH 17, 1966, TO MAY 2, 1968.

SUB F, WHICH CONSISTS OF ONE VOLUME, WITH 17 SERIALS,
CONTAINS INFORMATION RELATING TO AN INVESTIGATION OF A SUSPECT
IN MURK Iff. . *

SU8 G, WHICH CONSISTS OF ONE VOLUME WITH 39 SERIALS,
CONSISTS OF FD- 302' S (INTERVIEW RESULTS) OF JERRY WILLIAM RAY
(BROTHER OF JAMES RAY) AS WELL AS INTERVIEWS OF OTHER

INDIVIDUALS.- ” ^

SUB H, WHICH CONSISTS OF ONE VOLUME, WITH 31 SERIALS, SZT£
FORTH MEMORANDUMS RELATING TO INTERVIEWS OF JERRY WILLIAM RAY
-RE HIS BROTHER JAMES RA.Y, AS WELL AS OTHER MISCELLANEOUS DATA.

THERE ARE NO JAPES, ELECTRONIC SURVEILLANCE LOGS AND/OR
TRANSCRIPTS, PHOTOGRAPHS, "BULKY EXHIBITS OR ANY SIMILAR
MATERIALS IN ADDITION TO ROUTINE CORRESPONDENCE DESCRIBED


; \


;

1 v-l


above.


%


* # » -


n


FIELD


OFFICE FILE NUMBER, CG 100-35356.


■ {


B)


TITLE


AND CHARACTER OF FILE, "MARTIN LUTHER


r - *
»■; 1


-


..." ‘


s;i


- C"


•


v • *•. ‘

1-4

Jp{ ; :

' 'V- j

" j . •'

. ; J l'-.-


ii ’ 1 v -


-•jr J *

\ '


*


,1


fc. •


W' ; -
-•*> ■
v-

m-


. V ,

TV

*


)


»•-


f


2


Page FOUR CG 103-33356 '*

C) DESCRIPTION OF FILE CONTENTS:

CONSISTS OF 17 VOLUMES, 2225 SERIALS. SUBFILES OF
NEV.’S CLIPPINGS < E IG*HT VOLUMES, 1434 SERIALS) AND ARREST
RECORDS FOR PEOPLE INVOLVED IN RIOTS AFTER MARTIN LUTHER KING S
DEATH <L0 VOLUMES, 2484 SERIALS).

NO 1A IN FILE, OR BULKY EXHIBITS IN FILE.

MAIN FILE APPEARS TO CONSIST PRIMARILY OF INFORMATION
FROM INFORMANTS, CHICAGO AND OTHER OFFICES, MEWS MEDIA. AND
PD SOURCES, RELATIVE TO DEMONSTRATION, RALLY,, PUBLIC APPEAR-
ANCE, TRAVEL AMD RELATED ORGANIZATIONAL ACTIVITIES OF SUBJECT
IN CHICAGO AND ELSEWHERE. HO ELECTRONIC SURVEILLANCE TAPES,
LOGS OR TRANSCRIPTS APPARENT. ONLY PHOTOS APPEAR TO BE NEWS
MEDIA PHOTOS.


' - .


A) FIELD OFFICE FILE NUMBER , CG 9-3964.

B) TITLE AND CHARACTER OF FILE,

LUTHER KING, JR., - VICTIM, EXTORTION - RM"
REPORT SEPTEMBER 1, 1966).

C) DESCRIPTION OF FILE CONTENTS:


MARTIN
(SPRINGFIELD


..V ' ' v* \

.


•i -


i.


i

i ■ . -


k-m


■ -'A :.•*%& ■ ■


' »•

V


* -.M- -


*■

Kf •


PAGE FIVE CG 100-353

CONSISTS OF THREE SERIALS, SPRINGFIELD REPORT SETTING OUT
THREATS AGAINST KING, PROVIDED CHICAGO AS KING THEN BELIEVED

BY SPRINGFIELD TO BE IN CHICAGO. NO ACTIVE INVESTIGATION IN

$

CHICAGO. NO IA SECTION, TAPES, ELECTRONIC SURVEILLANCE LOGS,
PHOTQGRA.PHSOR BULKY EXHIBITS IN FILE. *


FIELD OFFICE FILE NUMBER, CG 44-558.

B) TITLE AND CHARACTER OF FILE, "J. EARL DOWNS, COMMISSIONS
OF PUBLIC SAFETY, SHREVEPORT, LOUISIANA; REVEREND C.C. MC CLAIN,

dr. martin luther king, reverend harry blake, reverend wyatt

TEE WALKER - VICTIMS"

C) FILE CONTAINS RESULTS OF INTERVIEW OF WYATT TEE WALKER
CONDUCTED ON JUNE 12, I9 60.

v. THC;RE * r£ NO JAPES, ELECTRONIC SURVEILLANCE LOGS AND/OR

TRANSCRIPTS, PHOTOS OR BULKY EXHIBITS IN THE FILE.

: FILE CONTAINS SIX SERIALS.

A) FIELD OFFICE FILE NUMBER, CG 157-1152.

B> TITLE AND CHARACTER OF FILE, "PLANNED CIVIL RIGHTS.

.


PAGE EIGHT CG 100-35356


CONSISTS OF COMMUNICATIONS FROM CHICAGO DIVISION TO OTHER

FIELD OFFICES A.flD THE BUREAU, RE ACTIVITIES OF CAPTIONED GROUP

*

FROM JULY, 1966, TO SEPTEMBER, 1968.

1(10 TAPES, ELECTRONIC SURVE ILL ANCS- LOGS, AMD/OR TRANSCRIPTS
PHOTOS 0$ BULKY EXHIBITS IN FILE. THERE ARE TWO SUB FILES.

SUB B, CONSISTS OF NEWSPAPER CLIPPINGS, HAS SIX VOLUMES,
826 SERIALS.

SUB C, CONSISTS OF ARREST RECORDS MADE DURING DEMON-
STRATIONS, ONE VOLUME, 148 SERIALS.

1A EXHIBIT, SIX MISCELLANEOUS PAMPHLETS AND E-67 SERIALS
IN EIGHT VOLUMES.


WIFE:

A) FIELD OFFICE FILE NUMBER , CG 9-6328.

B) 11TLE AND CHARACTER OF FILE, "UNS'JB,

MRS. MARTIN LUTHER KING, JR. , - VICTIM. EXTORTION".

C) DESCRIPTION OF FILE CONTENTS:

THIS FILE CONSISTS OF ONE VOLUME, A TOTAL OF SEVEN SERIALS.
THESE INCLUDE COMM'JNICAT IONS’ BETWEEN CHICAGO, THE BUREAU AND


page seven cg 100 - 35356 '

C) DESCRIPTION OF FILE CONTENTS:

CONSISTS OE. SEVEN SERIALS, ALL RELATIVE TO TITLED MATTER,
ROUTINE COMMUNICATION. NO BULKY EXHIBITS, TAPES, SURVEILLANCE
LOGS jOR PHOTOGRAPHS.

A) FIELD OFFICE FILE NUMBER, CG 157-14 14 .

B) TITLE AND CHARACTER OF FILE, "ALLEGATION " " tHfflflfli

AKAJ OF PLOT TO KILL MARTIN LUTHER KING, JR., CHICAGO,
ILLINOIS, SEPTEMBER 6, 1966, INFORMATION REGARDING”.

C) DESCRIPTION OF FILE CONTENTS:

CONSISTS OF FIVE SERIALS, AL\. RELATIVE TO CAPTIONED MATTER,
SUBJECT CALLED OFFICE AND MADE CAPTIONED ALLEGATIONS. NO
BULKY OR JA EXHI31TS, LOGS OR TAPES.

ft) FIELD OFFICE FILE NUM3ER , CG 157- 126 1.

B) TITLE AND CHARACTER OF FILE, "DEMONSTRATION’S BY CHICAGO

*

FREEDOM MOVEMENT ( CFM) - SOUTHERN CHRISTIAN LEADERSHIP CONFERENCE
(SCLC) RACIAL MATTERS".

C) DESCRIPTION OF FILE CONTENTS:.


PAGE SIX CG 103-35356

march from soldiers field to city hall, Chicago to Detroit,

LED BY MARTIN LUTHER KING, JR., JUNE 26, 1966, RM".

»

C) DESCRIPTION OF FILE CONTENTS:

Consists of 51 serials, from nevs,* Chicago pd and office
sources Relative to march and its aftermath.

NO EXHIBIT SECTION OR BULKY, NO TAPES, LOGS OR
TRANSCRIPTS.

A) FIELD OFFICE FILE NUMBER, CG 157-661. . r

B) TITLE AND CHARACTER OF FILE, "CIVIL RIGHTS ACTIVITY,

SUMMER OF 1965, PHILADELPHIA, PA., DR. MARTIN LUTHER KING,. JR.;

SCLC. Rtf".

C) CONSISTS OF fil ME SERIALS. GENERAL INFO RE ALL OF ABOVE,
SOURCE AND NEWS MEDIA INFO, OTHER OFFICE COMMUNICATIONS. NO
IA SECTION, NO BULKY EXHIBITS, LOGS OR TAPES.

*

A) FIELD OPFICE FILE NUMBER, CG 157-1249.

B) TITLE ADD CHARACTER OF FILE, "MARCH AND RALLY, JULY 31,
1966, HARVEY, ILLINOIS, FEATURING MARTIN LUTHER, KING, JR.,

RM".


i


j


r 1 ^ j


PAGE NINE CG 100-35356


OTHER FIELD DIVISIONS; A REPORT OF THE F3I IDENTIFICATION
DIVISION, LATENT* FINGERPRINT SECTION, AND A HANDWRITTEN LETTER


PREPARED B


It.he file contains no exhibits, tapes, electronic

SURVEILLANCE LOGS* OR TRANSCRIPTS, PHOTOGRAPHS OR ARE THERE
ANY SUBFILES.


B) TITLE AND CHARACTER OF FILE,

RACIAL MATTER”. .

C) DESCRIPTION OF FILE CONTENTS:

THIS DEAD FIL-E CONSISTS OF ONE VOLUME OF 36 SERIALS AND
SERVED AS A DEPOSITORY FOR INFORMATION DEVELOPED RE SUBJECT.

IT PRIMARILY CONSISTS OF LIVE INFORMANT REPORTS BUT ALSO
INCLUDES OFFICE MEMORANDA AND REPORTS OF OI.HER GOVERNMENTAL
INVESTIGATIVE AGENCIES.

THIS FILE CONTAINS NO EXHIBITS, TAPES, ELECTRONIC
SURVEILLANCE LOGS OR TRANSCRIPTS, PHOTOGRAPHS OR ARE THERE ANY
SUBFILES.


A) FIELD OFFICE FILE NUMBER, CG 157-659.


V


PAGE ten CG 1 OB-35356


MOTHER:

‘ A) FIELD OFFICE FILE NUMBER, CG 44-2269.

B) ^TITLE AND CHARACTER OF FILE, “MARCUS UAYNE CHENAULT,

MRS. MAFH I M LUTHER KING, SR. - VICTIM, EDWARD BOYKINS - VICTIM

JIMMIE MITCHELL - VICTIM".

C) DESCRIPTION OF FILE CONTENTS:

THIS FILE CONSISTS OF ONE VOLUME, A TOTAL OF 15 SERIALS.
IT PRINCIPALLY CONTAINS COMMUNICATIONS BETWEEN CHICAGO, THE
' BUREAU AND OTHER FIELD DIVISIONS INCLUDING AN INVESTIGATIVE
REPORT PREPARED BY CHICAGO. THE l A SECTION CONTAINS A

; PHOTOGRAPH OF SU3JECT CHENAULT.

THE FILE CONTAINS NO BULKY EXHIBITS, TAPES, ELECTRONIC
SURVEILLANCE LOGS OR TRANSCRIPTS, OR ARE THERE ANY SUBFILES.


t BROTHER:

A) FIELD OFFICE FILE NUMBER, CG 157-3535

B) TITLE AND CHARACTER OF FILE, "'JNSU3; THREAT TO ASSASSINATE
ALFRED D. KING - RACIAL MATTER". .


<< .»

i‘i-:

M ■


PAGE ELEVEN CG 100-35356
o description of file contents*

this \,LE CONSISTS of ONE VOLUME CO STAIN ISO ELEVEN SERIALS.

THESE INCLUDE ROUTINE COMMUNICATIONS BETWEEN CHICAGO. THE BUREAU

and other offices.

THE FILE CONTAINS NO EXHIBITS. TARES. ELECTRONIC
SURVEILLANCE 'LOSS OR TRANSCRIPTS. PHOTOGRAPHS ’nOR DOES IT HAVE

any subfiles.


.

1

'W- i

:$*> •!

■■ ;

* ‘H*

- £* i

. *r ■

*


BROTHERS

A) FIELD OFFICE 'FILE NUMBER, C3 157-576.

B, TITLE AND CHARACTER OF FILE. -REVEREND A.O. WILLIAMS XING,

racial matters".

•c> DESCRIPTION OF FILE CONTENTS:

THIS FILE CONSISTS OF ONE VOLUME CONTAINING TVO SERIALS.
ORE SERIAL IS A NEWSPAPER CLIPPING ARD THE OTHER IS AD A IRTEL
FROM ANOTHER OFFICE TO T HE BUREAU.


4 ;'" ' :


THE FILE CONTAINS NO EXHIBITS, TAPES, ELECTRO MC SURV-1L
LANCE LOGS OR TRANSCRIPTS, PHOTOGRAPHS NOR DOES IT HAVE ANY


SUBFILES.


.


jwr— ■ , ;


page twelve cg 100-35356
/ * •

NO 1-.NFO ASCERTAINED RE MARTIN LUTHER KING, SR., OR
CHRISTINE KING FARRIS.

*

A) FIELD OFFICE FILE NUMBER, CG 105-16238.

B) TITLE AND CHARACTER OF FILE, "COMMUNIST INFILTRATION OF THE
SOUTHERN LEADERSHIP CONFERENCE. INTERNAL SECURITY-COMMUNIST".

C) DESCRIPTION OF FILE CONTENTS:

THE CHICAGO MAIN FILE UNDER THE A30VE CAPITON CONSISTS
OF 37 VOLUMES COMPRISED OF 3,237 SERIALS.. THERE ARE TWO SUBFILES,
SU9 A (EXHIBITS) AND SUB B' (NEWSPAPER CLIPPINGS). THE SL'3 A
FILE CONTAINS NINE ITEMS CONSISTING OF LEAFLETS, CREDIT RFPORTS
AND PHOTOGRAPHS OF CERTAIN INDIVIDUALS ASSOCIATED WITH SCLC.

« t H

THERE ARE NO TAPES, ELECTRONIC SURVEILLANCE LOGS AND/OR TRAN-
SCRIPTS OR BULKY EXHIBITS.

THE MAIN FILE CONSISTS OF REPORTS FROM LIVE INFORMANTS
AND ROUTINE COMMUNICATIONS BETWEEN THE CHICAGO DIVISION AND
OTHER DIVISIONS AND/OR THE 'BUREAU.


iV'.v ■
■

Vr .


Vt.,

• r -v.


PAGE THIRTEEN CG 100-35356

A) fa ELD OFFICE FILE NUMBER , CG |0e-41324.

B) TITLE AND CHARACTER OF FILE, "COMMUNIST INFLUENCE IN
RACIAL MATTERS. INTERNAL SECURITY - COMMUNIST".

C) DESCRIPTION OF FILE CONTENTS:

• FILE CONTAINS REPORTS FROM LIVE INFORMANTS AMD ROUTINE

COMMUNICATIONS BETWEEN THE CHICAGO DIVISION, OTHER FIELD
OFFICES AND THE BUREAU.

THERE ARE NO. TAPES, ELECTRONIC SURVEILLANCE LOGS AND/OR
. TRANSCRIPTS IN THE FILE.


. !


if---


;: : .V ;M


THE BULKY EXHIBIT SECTION OF THE FILE CONTAINS A COPY
OF THE DRAFT OF A BOOK ENTITLED "PAGES FROM THE LIFE OF A
BLACK COMMUNIST" AUTHORED BY CLAUDE LIGHTFOOT, CHAIRMAN OF
THE NATIONAL BLACK LIBERATION COMMISSION, , COMMUNIST PARTY, USA.

IBS PHOTOGRAPHS TAKEN DURING A MARCH FROM MEMPHIS, TENNESSEE

TO JACKSON, MISSISSIPPI ON JUNE 5, 1966.

.


I

I


THE 1 A SECTION OF THE FILF GOUT A I NS SIX DIFFERENT PAMPHLETS


OR LEAFLETS CONCERNING THE SUBJECT MATTER OF THIS FILE.

#

THE FILE CONTAINS 8,453 SF.RIALS IN 24 VOLUMES.


• .*WP5 }

% r " *

*


♦v iwiV m *


PAGE FOURTEEN


CG 103-35356


i

r


' t

r


A) FIELD. OFFICE FILE NUMBER , CG 100-40624.

B) TITLE AND CHARACTER OF FILE, "COMMUNIST PARTY, USA,

NEGRO QUESTION, COMMUNIST INFLUENCE IN RACIAL MATTERS, INTERNAL
SECURITY- COCWUNIST".

C) DESCRIPTION OF FILE CONTENTS:

FILE CONTAINS REPORTS FROM LIVE INFORMANTS AND ROUTINE
COMMUNICATIONS BETWEEN THE CHICAGO DIVISION, OTHER FIELD
OFFICES AND THE BUREAU.

THERE ARE NO TAPES, ELECTRONIC SURVEILLANCE LOGS AND/OR
TRANSCRIPTS IN THE FILE.

THE ! A SECTION CONTAINS NINE PHOTOGRAPHS OF DIFFERENT
"INDIVIDUALS. EIGHT DIFFERENT PAMPHLETS OR LEAFLETS RELATED
TO THE SUBJECT MASTER OF THIS FILE, CONSISTING OF EIGHT VOLUMES
AND £6 1 SERIALS.


’'V.V- *

A) FIELD OFFICE FILE, CG 100-18956.

B) TITLE A.ND CHARACTER OF FILE, "CP, USA NEGRO QUESTION,

'

IS-C".

j C) DESCRIPTION OF FILE CONTENTS:

THIS FILE, CONSISTING OF 12 VOLUMES WITH 5303 SERIALS,


'

• ;V r : ,


PAGE FIFTEEN CG 100-35356

ACTS AS A DF.POSITORY OF INFORMATION CONCERNING COMMUNIST PARTY
EFFORTS TO INFLUENCE THE NEGRO POPULATION TO THEIR IDEOLOGY.
THIS FILE, WHICH ALSO CONTAINS TWO VOLUMES OF 48 EXH131TS,
CONSISTS MAINLY OF INFORMANT REPORTS, LETTERHEAD MEMORANDA,
NEWSPAPER CLIPPINGS AND ROUTINE CORRESPONDENCE. IT IS ONLY
ONE OF MANY SUBFILES RELATING TO OTHER PHASES OF CP ACTIVITY.
THERE ARE HO KNOWN TAPES, ELECTRONIC SURVEILLANCE LOGS AND/OR
TRANSCRIPTS OR OTHER SIMILAR MATERIAL IN THIS FILE.


' A) FIELD OFFICE FILE NUMBER, CG 100-3373L.

B) TITLE AND .CHARACTER OF FILE, "COMMUNIST PARTY, USA, NEGRO

MATTERS, IS - C*.

f *

C) DESCRIPTION OF FILE CONTENTS:

THIS FILE CONSISTING' OF FOUR VOLUMES WITH 3L'4 SERIALS, IS
A REPOSITORY OF INFO CONCERNING CP EFFORTS TO INFLUENCE THE
NEGRO PEOPLE TO ITS PROGRAM. THERE ARE ALSO 27 EXHI3ITS
IN THE FILE -RELATING TO THE NEGRO PUESTION. THIS FILE CONSISTS
OF NEWSPAPER CLIPPINGS, INFORMANT REPORTS AMD ROUTINE COMMUN-
ICATIONS. THERE ARE NO KNOWN TAPES, ELECTRONIC SURVEILLANCE
LOGS AND/OR TRANSCRIPTS.


PAGE SIXTEEN CG 109-35356


•«* «


:W


ASSOCIATES:

A) ' FIELD OFFICE FILE NUMBER, CG

B) TITLE AND CHARTER OF FILE,

C) DESCRIPTION OF FILE CONTENTS:

THIS FILE CONSISTS OF ONE VOLUME CONTAINING 85 SERIALS.


IS- C“,


THESE SERIALS ARE CORRESPONDENCE BETWEEN CHICAGO, THE BUREAU
AND OTHER FIELD OFFICES. INFO OBTAINED FROM ELECTRONIC
SURVEILLANCE AND ANONYMOUS SOURCES APPEARS IN THESE SERIALS.

THE 1 A SECTION OF THE FILE CONTAINS A PHOTOGRAPH OF THE SUBJECT.

THE BULKY EXHIBIT SECTION OF THIS FILE (IB 1-133), *

CONTAINED INFO OBTAINED THROUGH ANONYMOUS SOURCES AND THE LOGS
OF ELECTS KO 1C SURVEILLANCE OF SUBJECT. ALL MATERIAL IN THE
BULKY EXHIBIT SECTION WAS DESTROYED I iJ 197 5.


V*


PAGE SEVENTEEN CG 130-35356

VOLUME 2 OF SUB l IS A DUPLICATE COPY OF VOLUME I.

SUBFILE 2 CONSISTS OF ONE VOLUME IN WHICH THERE ARE FOUR
SERIALS. THESE SERIALS ARE CORRESPONDENCE BETWEEN THE BUREAU
AND CHICAGO OF AN. ADMIN ISTR AT I VE NATURE RE AND

REVIEW OF CHICAGO FILE 157-2209, COUNTERINTELLIGENCE
PROGRAM, 3LACK NATIONALIST HATE GROUPS, REVEALED THAT THE
CHICAGO DIVISION NEVER SUBMITTED ANY COUNTERINTELLIGENCE
PROPOSALS CONCERNING MARTIN LUTHER XING, JR., HIS FAMILY
OR THE SCLC UNDER THIS CAPTION.

A) FIELD OFFICE FILE NUMBER, CG 100-32854.

B) TITLE AND CHARACTER QF FILE, "COMMUNIST PARTY, USA,
COUNTERINTELLIGENCE- PROGRAM, IS-C".

C) DESCRIPTION OF FILE CONTENTS:

THIS FILE, CONSISTING OF 3606 SERIALS'AND APPROXIMATELY
20 VOLUMES, ACTS AS THE CONTROL FILE OF SUGGESTIONS UNDER THE
Cl PROGRAM TO DISRUPT AND/OR NEUTRALIZE INDIVIDUALS OR
ORGANIZATIONS BELIEVED SEEKING TO DESTHO v THIS COUNTRY. FILE


page eighteen cg 100-35355

consists OF letters and memoranda containing suggested »tans of
implementing thisprogram. the folloni.no data PERTAINS to

CAPTIONED INDIVIDUAL?

.> HEADSUARTERS BT LETTER dated MAY IS, 1957, REQUESTED

V0RI '' !i H,:ACCI A “° RTLANTA, SU3MIT FOR CONSIDERATION Cl
RECOMMENDATIONS RE POSSIBILITY OF XING AND DR. BENJAMIN

SPOOK RUNNING ON A "PEACE TICKET" IN 1968 SHORING THE GENERAL
PUBLIC THE COMMUNIST BACKING OF KING AND SPOOK. BY LETTERS
DATED MAY 27, 1967, YnD JUNE , 6 , „ t7 ,

RESPECTIVELY, in -COINTELPRO" CAPTION, NSW YORK, CHICAGO AND
ATLANTA FURNISHED HO WITH OBSERVATIONS FOR POSSIBLE Cl MAINLY
USIN3 FRIENDLY NEWSPAPER REPORTERS WHICH WERE NOT TO BE

Implemented until such a ticket is announced.

NO FURTHER ACT ION TAKEN..

2. CHICAGO BY A INTEL DATED MARCH ?e^i9S«f UNDER
-COINTELPRO" CAPTION, SUGGESTED Cl PROPOSAL AGAINST KING AS A
RESULT OF CL AUDE' LIGHT FOOT * S (CP LEADER) OWNERSHIP OF TENEMENT
DWELLINGS LOCATED IN AREA WHERE KING HAD TAKEN All APARTMENT
AND WAS CONCENTRATING HIS EFFORTS ON SLUM CLEARANCE. CHICAGO


l.


r

i


^ — ,


PAGE NINETEEN CG 100-35356

SUGGESTED FRIENDLY REPORTER INTERVIEW KING SPECIFICALY
CONCERNING LIGHTFOOJ* S OWNERSHIP OF SLUM DWELLING WITH
POSSIBLE E.13ARR ASSING QUESTIONS TO KING. WHILE Cl EFFORTS WERE
CARRIED OUT - CONCF.RNING LIGHTFOOT'S OWNERSHIP OK THESE BUILDINGS,
THERE IS NO INDICATION THAT EFFORT TO INTERVIEW KING WAS
IMPLEMENTED.

END.


HOLD


<£>/✓ f/ijr £


O

- unTt'^Tsiates GO-^R.NM^

Memorandum .

SAC, DALLAS (89-*»3) < p)


DA Tit-


6/5/75


AOM


lUBjxci:


SA


ROBERT P- CEMBEBLIHO


ASSASSINATION OP JOHN

FITZGERALD KENNEDY
DALLAS, TEXAS

MISCELLANEOUS— INFORMATION CONCERNINO

00: DALLAS hhaMIGAN at FBI HQ

O„S/ 30 / 7 S. SAC ; MIU.CAM u A ii |SJh«LIN a. folio,, s
telephonlcally advl.it "Washington

An article has teen J sal at ant Dallas

Star" that back In ^^onwl^-ed that t e h i s face.

■ « S3.

in order to to „. r lng a at°r: listening In

hrt„i 0 tS running If. lnd 2£’ t hrei men arranged a «on-

rerencfoait nS*SSS“' £££??.£•

ALEXANDER Mil. "^i^enoog" within ^^nShlAg

SL/lOentlfUJtlo^/Sr LEE RAR™ '“Rr m

Government payro picked oat of

nomter. region It did.

. Mr BRANIOAN ref lected that we ^o^a^flle.re view

— Z 1-e "


(?-Vp ? lIas
ftfo :ako

(1 l<^

<b


\


\

)


> /

/


l/.J. J-virii/


flonJj Kti“Urly


Ml to SMI,


.'.C AS ES ,1

If hi cud


>TAJ — DALLAS


"in::


'T ’ '■••. ft

415 3156.5254 , !

’ I vj V /*>]

:? m i 1

'*1 .*$1 .

iyc,;.ii 77 j| ;

f|5ECTP^^45- 117290^,
iiLl SACS /ipUTIKC h


Sfj StLE^ pKMTIEE ,Q$ ASSASS^nO 8S
pj Ehi$c^ hmf.au i^vetyh kov&*j 3E»'» ?«•*, m<

EEFSREijjCp iiUiiS.AU , TELETYPE 3fT FORTH IKE U
j SELECT COMMITTEE ASSA3SIKATJQHS (MSO’l

ip. 3Y : JJ||: ;.l«ElY-l]pp8TH COWRIT*? 10 nVST'f.jy

IIS Or JpH?.' F. !^;j; spy Af«- MANTIS - J

. IN 00 l«lX(.nON •.-lTK.IriE HSC KVESJlCAllOfJ

JIIG11CE IFS.niUCTEO THE BUK'SAl'jji

fc.j "V 1HF.$3C ST.tr r i.

I ti jjyji JO l:. F. KEUKEDY ASSATSlNAl JOM AKP j
v'R . t )^SASS 1 fiA r I0a it AU WELL AS ^QSEI.Y KEl |j
;c: OKpUi, TO ivKP-A.T^KOf. THE I'.JC 3EVI r '’, vP|j

*W\ m ;1


•A • \*3ml


*U* IU.
; CyS/)R»;


lh'4».A t.t L


we|K '0 UStll 7 r>: > CU'AR

jj. ‘ 1 Em %}?,. 1 Bvr * 10 *V 0F ALL ^aiehia^s AVAII,
FF1C£ K'WiAwnipjri ru: #.#>.* . — * L I.


l*“ IHI CJgES SET T0WI.J5EL0V. M


jP !l f ' JBJSI: Sjp*Wka ! 1 jUTi, TIILCS

Jf*M JK * 4 ^i UKfcAU WU WEKE At_

g^V^TORY^Lj PE.fi I] NENkittATERl Al ^fcUJjVE TO IMJ

m \ JR, ^ ASS,aATI %- ,T is 'Wore,

7HA * I

» t»aw^ a W$^i i»v^
fc p 1 ) fimp 13 * 3 * 1 x *® } ^ f fl


1 ,\* A .<» p r pj<

' ?2 , J$£J

:•/. M.;


DAL US


^DALLAS


"> #$%**' ..Si ..
kfJfei^AuV'rr. Oswald

♦ tTS Y ‘ /?

4 i


,H IW Il,i: *¥

r fit I

|» i

^S#JU iv-j

| m| , ‘

f# -I

M[| 3 1

T:U, 1 EAV FILL

* Cu : , *i

I


vi c t i m \;*-


3 UMCAV M 1 :: A A;


i*


iACE^HHEE <C?-H 729 T) CLEAR


W-: PRESIDENT* S COMMISSION 0.*; THE ASSASSJNAty^i* OF

m PRF.SJPtL’T KENNEDY (VAHHES flOWHlSSlOli)

OCht AC F T L.E Cg-l ’.JhSC 1^:

W

V' Pr.Fr/, RILE FIELD OFFICE INVENTORIES FOR h

^ILEC HELATUXi TO AS0V2, THE FOLLOWING SPECIFIC 'jj j jjpg MUST
Ijfcf ISCLUOEDi (A) FIELD OFFICE KILE NUMBER, IMCU^JKG OFFIcYj ! |[I
Hp>n •*: 4*5 MIL; A.".) CALV./CIER *>! vll.L: C.) VE.djgfti fc.r .. M


^Ci'JPI IQN OK FILE COHIF.uTS, INCLUDING U’JiE i.MER Jjj nO .'.'TAINS

1 *

g* ELECTRONIC SURVEILLANCE LOC 5 «HitL /D r. Il^jisCRIFTG,


giOTOCpA.'HS, -liLKY EXHIBITS AND ANY OTHER SlMH^C^TFNJ Al
pv'ljlS JN f^DHION lO^DUIlKL CORprSPO iVOZNCE. ffi ? ANY Cl , 8

|E /,!; •“ n>’-F.s, nc,> fi jis noted, very briefly iijtojubu

^CLUti:* .*7 ATE ME NT DEdCftJftlSb ALL Sl^FILtC K3lATlffi}0 I HE
H* FILE; (PL ACCOM KT KIR Sm/PC:P£*OF FILE A’I^/LATEn -«£

|>,T 1 UX3 • FPL EXAMPLE, WD1WJE KUrEERC OK SEUCKysi AND ... Hi

if mV> , igHB'i j 1 p||

••* I I • « *. I ‘ mm. ,iL tOK l.'.'ftS /I v.’Vl'SCR I •'■ T ’ j fUM-a . 1 7

• ' : J" . ' '

yifimu. : EU*» •< , ; j§*Sl k

r. i JTOK” , j 1

V • IV 13 KHRIHLR NOTED IHAi IN REFERENCE!', BUIILA'i/jELFTYFE A
| ; :;'.iya!3ER t»4. I ?7C , YOU VHtF ?. EXITED 01 IMF. £££ THAT '*
iX.’KL


yA % 1P7 f. , YOU VEitF Rr.r.I HDt.1.' Of IHF. 1.401, THAT V
■ H • jSM*t '* I f

.5 fQSU^S! ?.Vin&5llA.*Y ♦ 1 :iT?U,IGf.:cn OR Jgf.CSK.4L /If


c


.u


t ,


H


rcHiiMf.v- ir/rs).'.) cu lac
Value such as the kcmcuy and king assassination jln ves jig a t


Jf'F

- 1 /tRt excluded rson cl*:-. l*es fi-rucr io n of files and RF.rot:.s

->'{• .

^J»fiCSkAM hUL SMOUU- *.0 7 LE OSS1UOYLO.

Jlvf YOU f>n£, THE M- '•U.S::, IN 5 THU Cl EC TC -t. LPL'r £>Y TELETYPE

2JTT I W FOHlM YUUi; UVEKIOFY REGARDING T'lE ABOVE LISIEP JOKX f, it'
JiEXfEDY ASSA&SINATIOU FILES. IN ADDITION, YCU' A*E REQUEST E!>

m* :~'r y * tkv$. .« v? it&rifau 1 . rll*; ir io v-.# ;s/.iv!Jt 1 1 ; t


M.o :
>H


jK&j/UK*. OI^.NN ASTATSI 10 W (,ni ; :VI\) AND 7M:. ArOVf. LJTTf.r; riLEJ^j

’» or ’
' *


r

I


L

mb


Stri.iOYLl

r 7


V


;Jf :.o . 3


i,


^L* J ** * *• •*

P*


^yi.


r*

rMiv 1 1 1


m


f jvm::


j'l'TEL YCL’.i RESULTS All*. KUO.*. IfSVF? 1 IS A II VE

in:: , civil hjc'srs nroTidh, ovmjhessioijal »’ I't.ir,

flL LCuATS ADVISED SEPARATELY.


L V i

i>\h 1


t^ir

V


l .V


•i-.v-!


. ; i


u


' *. r


'U;


V v..*v. .3-14-74)


c


F B I

Dau: 1/7/77


rM

o

I


i r«n*mii the following in


Vim.


(Type in plaintext or code)


TELETYPE


(I'recedenciJ


S65


FM DALLAS (89-43) (P)

TO DIRECTOR (62-117290) PRIORITY
BT

E F T O

ATTN: GENERAL INVESTIGATIVE DIVISION, CIVIL RIGHTS SECTION,

\CONGRESSIONAL INQUIRY UNIT.

H^JSE SELECT COMMITTEE ON ASSASSINATIONS.

RE BUREAU TELETYPE TO ALL SACS, JANUARY §, 1977.

RESULTS OF F*LE INVEN TORY, DALLAS DIVISION, AS FOLLOWS: j

1. ASSASSINATlfo(J OF PRESIDENT JOHN FITZGERALD KENNEDY,
DALLAS, TEXAS, NOVEMBER 22, 1963, MISCELLANEOUS - INFORMATION
CONCERNING. OO: DALLAS , BUREAU FILE 62-109060. DALLAS i *LE

•89-43.

THE DALLAS OFFICE IS OFFICE OF ORIGIN IN CAPTIONED CASE.
THIS FILE CONSISTS OF 122 VOLUMES, INCLUDING NINE VOLUMES
OF NEWSPAPER CLIPPINGS. THE 122 VOLUMES CONTAIN 9930 SERIALS,
WITH MANY INDIVIDUAL SERIALS CONTAINING NUMEROUS PAGES. THE


1 )- Dallas
Sibjw \ ^
(1) .


icfa

,>6:'


• , \ CKXJM O-NO-M


•Mf rme-r;« ? - - ■ ff •

I. ••••$** .


fr'D-3G (K®v.> U-74)

t

•>


c


rx

o

F B I

Dale: '


Traoifflil the following m . . . ■ — — j

(Type in ptainlexi or code)

Vi* I

U*iecedenc§) |

DL 69-43 PAGE TWO ,

i

ABOVE VOLUMES ARE APPROXIMATELY 13 LINEAR FEET IN SIZE.

.THIS FILE ALSO CONTAINS 301 EXHIBITS WITH MANY INDIVIDUAL
EXHIBITS CONTAINING NUMF.ROUS PHOTOGRAPHS AND OTHER DOCUMENTS.-
THE EXHIBITS ARE APPROXIMATELY TWO LINEAR FEET IN SIZE.

2. LEE HARVEY OSWALD, AKA; INTERNAL SECURITY - RUSSIA -
CUBA. 00: DALLAS. BUREAU FILE 105-82555, DALLAS FILE 100-

10461.

THE DALLAS OFFICE IS OFFICE OF ORIGIN IN CAPTIONED CASE.

{ '

THIS FILE CONSISTS OF 105 VOLUMES, INCLUDING SIX VOLUMES
OF TRANSLATIONS, THREE VOLUMES OF INVENTORY WORKSHEETS, AND ONE
VOLUME OF OSWALD WRITINGS. THE 105 VOLUMES CONTAIN 9360
SERIALS, WITH MANY INDIVIDUAL SERIALS CONTAINING NUMEROUS
PAGES. THE ABOVE VOLUMES ARE APPROXIMATELY 13 LINEAR FEET IN

*

SIZE. THIS FILE ALSO CONTAINS 498 EXHIBITS, MANY INDIVIDUAL
EXHIBITS CONTAINING NUMEROUS PHOTOGRAPHS AND OTHER DOCUMENTS.
THESE EXHIBITS ARE APPROXIMATELY 2% LINEAR FEET IN SIZE.

IN ADDITION TO THE ABOVE EXHIBITS, ADDITIONAL BULKY EXHIBITS
CONTAINING NUMEROUS PHOTOGRAPHS AND OTHER DOCUMENTS AS WELL AS
COPIES OF WARREN COMMISSION EXHIBITS ARE LOCATED IN A SECURE
METAL CABINET WITH THE TOTAL VOLUME OF THESE EXHIBITS BEING


Approved: Sent ^ P* r

Spec tut Agent ut Charge


GPO ; 1911 o - 990*941


PD-36 (Kov,^- 14-74)


o


o


F B I

Dale:


Trenenil the following in .


Vk.

0


(Typ^ in plaintext or coda)


(Precedence)


! 1


! t


DL 89-43 PAGE THREE

i

APPROXIMATELY 15 CUBIC FEET.

' • l

3. MARINA NIKOLAEVNA PORTER-, AKA, MARINA OSWALD,

I

IS-R, 00: DALLAS, BUREAU FILE 105-126032, DALLAS FILE

105-1435. . * I .

THE DALLAS OFFICE IS OFFICE OF ORIGIN IN THIS CASE. THIg


I f

■ |

I !


V


v:

M!


FILE CONSISTS OF ONE VOLUME CONTAINING 182 SERIALS. THIS
FILE CONTAINS FOUR EXHIBITS IN THE SUB A SECTION.

4. JACK L. RUBY, AKA; LEE HARVEY OSWALD (DECEASED) -
! VICTIM. CR. BUREAU FILE 44-24016, DALLAS FILE 44-1639.

THE DALLAS OFFICE CONDUCTED THE PRIMARY SUBSTANTIVE
INVESTIGATION IN CAPTIONED CASE. THIS FILE CONSISTS OF 94
VOLUMES, INCLUDING SEVEN VOLUMES OF NEWSPAPER CLIPPINGS.

• THESE 94 VOLUMES CONTAIN 6455 SERIALS, WITH MANY INDIVIDUAL

SERIALS CONTAINING NUMEROUS PAGES. THE ABOVE VOLUMES ARE

I

APPROXIMATELY 11 LINEAR FEET IN SIZE. THIS ,FILE ALSO CONTAIN^

i

186 EXHIBITS, WITH MANY INDIVIDUAL EXHIBITS CONTAINING NUMEROUS
PHOTOGRAPHS AND OTHER DOCUMENTS. THE EXHIBITS ARE APPROXIMATELY
FIVE LINEAR FEET IN SIZE.

5. THE PRESIDENTS COMMISSION ON THE ASSASSINATION OF

i ‘ I 1

j


I


T


Approved:


Sent .


. Wt Per .


Special Agent in Charge


"1 — r


. 1,4: .-pi ~ •


: Itjl O *


li-IH


KD-Ob <IUv.j2- 14-74)

,1


c


r*


O


F B I

Uhl*:


Transmit Lh« following in

Vu»


(Type in plaintext or code )


(precedence)


DL 89-43 PAGE FOUR

PRESIDENT KENNEDY. BUREAU FILE 62-109090. DALLAS FILE
62-3588.

THE DALLAS OFFICE SUBMITTED ROUTINE COMMUNICATIONS.

A REVIEW OF THE 26 VOLUMES CONTAINING THE RESULTS OF HEARINGS
BEFORE THE PRESIDENTS COMMISSION IS SET FORTH IN THIS FILE.

|

THIS REVIEW WAS CONDUCTED BY SAS OF THE DALLAS OFFICE.

THIS FILE CONSISTS OF TWO VOLUMES CONTAINING 189 SERIALS.

I

THE ONLY EXHIBITS IN CONNECTION WITH THIS FILE ARE BOOKS
DEALING WITH THE PRESIDENTS COMMISSION AND TVJO AFFIDAVITS
FROM SAS OF THE FHI .


[r&4 '.-H -v'f! i


\>


Sent .


. M P»r


Approved:


Special Agent in Charge


OK) iiho-m-p


ov^i- 14-74)


C


O


F B I

DaL«;


Transmit ih« following in .
Via


(Type in plaintext or cod*)


f Precedence)


! ‘


t , •

i!

■i.


DL 89-43 PAGE FIVE


1r


>


i , :


T

PARA


•’I »■-. * . • 1 1 i' •* ’ (


FOR THE ADDITIONAL INFORMATION OF THE Bp READ , THE DALLAS
OFFICE HAS ESTABLISHED A SPECIAL JOHN F. KENNEDY ASSASSINATIO

FILES INDICES CONSISTING OF APPROXIMATELY 40j LINEAR FEET OF

>

3" BY 5" INDEX CARDS. THESE INDEX CARDS ARE MAINTAINED SEP
FROM THE GENERAL INDICES. ALSO ESTABLISHED yJAS A SPECIAL
COMMUNICATIONS INDEX IN THE EARLY MONTHS OF THE JFK ASSASSINATIO*
INVESTIGATION CONSISTING OF APPROXIMATELY 2^ LINEAR FEET OF

5" BY 8" INDEX CARDS WHICH ARE ALSO MAINTAINED SEPARATE FROM

;

. THE GENERAL INDICES.

NO KNOWN MATERIAL RELATIVE^ TO THE MARTIN LUTHER KING, |

J * I

JR. ASSASSINATION (MURKIN) AND THE ABOVE LISTED FILES ,

RELATED |TO THE JOHN F. KENNEDY ASSASSINATION HAVE BEEN
r DESTROYED UNDER THE DESTRUCTION OF FILES AND RECORDS PROGRAM.

BT ‘


Approved:


Special Agent in Charge


Sent


M Per


GPO . I in o • MO-MI


TV I I x

■ >: , * * f

u - •; ;


.7-y^ v -

■km*-

■'j^V;K.

,‘T' >W


. • |
I * »•


* K-


' >, r #

• i* X e w

'

J : . l.V s •*

' 'r '••<’* .

•yid ; .

* S, . .


THE WASUIN<;'I i in COST swur. *i>'« 9. ms


A3


Spying Case /\ IT i il a v i Is


2 FBI Officials Reveal
Extent of Cliicago Files


r

1 ? Y •" ;

By Rob Warden ^

BPAClul lo The WiLaitltWUMl Pont

CHICAGO— The Chicago office of
the Federal Bureau of Investigation
has nearly 7.7 milium panes of files on
suapuclud "auhvm'Hlvu" and
"extremist" groups uticl Individuals —
enough to make a slack more lltun
twice as high as the World Trade Cen-
ter or a string reaching from Pitts-
burgh to Denver.

The extent of the files, which are
maintained on Ihe tilnth floor of the
Everett M. Dirk sen Federal Building
here, was revealed in affidavits by
two FBI officials iiuulu public* yester-
day In connection wilh three U.b. Dis-
trict Court civil suits that charged the
FBI with Illegally spying on persona
and groups engaged U) lawful political
activities.

FBI documents previously made
public in connection with the suits re-
veal these groups are among those on
whom fllos are kept under the
“subversive’* classification: the Ameri-
can Civil Unities Union, the Alli-
ance to End Repression, the Chicago
Comm ttee to Defend the Bill of
Rights and the National Association
of Social Workers.

Among those on whom files are
kept under the “extremist" classifica-
tion arfc the Kev. Jesse L. Jackson’s
operation PUSH, the Afro-American
Patrolmen’* League, the National As-
sociation lor the Advancement of Col-
ored People and the Congress on Ra-
cial Equality.

The affidavits revealing the extent
ut the files were made by Thomas K.
Vornherger nod James W. Awe, tup
officials of Uie FBI’s records manage-
ment branch in Washington.

Voritbergcr’s affidavit says the
FBI’s Chicago office— one of 59 field
offices nationwide -lias under the two
classifications 11.207 linear feel of
files, including 802 fqeL opened after
Jan. X, lUtiU. i

The total is enough to make two
Slacks as tall as the l.35l>-foot World
Trade Center and a Hurd slack iluU
would reqeh slightly beyond the 4011

— • - ^ "l 1 ,f M ^


floor of the llQ-gtory twin-tower com-
plex.

Awe’s affidavit says there are about
2(M| pages per inch in the average file.
This means there are almost 7.7 mil-
lion pagos, Including 1,0 million
‘opened since Jan. 1, 19110.

I.nld out end Lo end, thAt would be
enough 814 -by-1 1-inch sheets to stretch
1,336 miles, or slightly more than the
flight distance from Plttaburgji to
Denver.

The extent of similar files In the
FBI’s 56 other field offices ^ un-
known.

The costs of gathering the Informa-
tion In the Chicago files were stagger-
ing. Just to photocopy the pages
would require more Lhap a million
man-hours and cost more than $8 mil-
lion, according to Vornberger’a affi-
davit

It has been disclosed that from 1966
to 1976, the Chicago FBI office paid
out more than $2.5 million to 6,145
"Inform ants" and "confidential
sources" who contributed Information
lo the files.

During that 10-year period, th$ FBI
disclosed, the Chicago office opened
files on nearly 27,900 organizations
and Individuals on whom tharf had
been no files.

The FBI said it checked a sample of
to 1976 and found that 84.6 percent
were on individuals and 15.4 percent
were on organizations.

There are four times as many sub-
versive files as extremist files, the
FBI estimated. Those classifications
do not include any sedition, sabotage
or other criminal investigative files.


»


•f. ; ‘

it} •*.$

•Wi*

* ;

, V* r .

• ,:stf 1


t

a »

. %
i •


? *, 1 .


m


iH nr—--'-— m mm mmmmmm * \ * mm —" l "


- + 5-.,


.1 '
