X.2 S?f


\r



i';.v '* n 4*. . ’ii *!>• t * 1* . > f j .

gal break-ins and had harassed members of fringe political
groups. At times, these exclamations rang so hollow as to be
almost comic, like Claude Rains, in Casablanca , announc-
ing, that he was shocked to learn that. gambling was taking
place in the casino.

rr mg • J This is too bad, because it gives the impression at the

* M start that Elliff either is about to do a number in praise of

J -FmA* , ‘ the Church committee (official name: Select Committee to

w Study Governmental Operations With Respect to Intelli-

gence Activities) for having had the courage to criticize
Hoover three years after his death, or is as innocent as a
chipmunk of the true workings of the Bureau.

In fact, the book is not a paean to his former employer,
and Elliff is not naive about the Bureau or about what con-
stitutes real and imaginary Reform.” Working both with
the senate committee and under the “auspicis” of the Po-
lice Foundation (whatever that means), he has produced a
study that is not only thoughtful and sound, but particu-
larly valuable at a time when Congress is getting ready to
craft the first legislative charter ever to govern the Bureau.

The most important thing Elliff has to say is his insist-
ence that FBI investigations be linked to some specific (ac-


the end— of the reform enterprise.” Although most fcivil lib-
T OHN ELLIFF BEGINS his book on a shaky note by say- erties groups argue that it is necessary to hold the Bureau

gj ing that it was only after J. Edgar Hoover’s death and to a “criminal standard” in its investigations and intelli-

the disclosures of Watergate that there were “for the gence-gathering, Elliff makes clear that the criminal code
first time in fifty years . . . credible allegations of illegality is so sweeping that the government stands a fair chance of

in the FBI.” This is likely to strike a good many people as making at least a technical case against anyone. This is

nonsense, or at least remind them that one of the funnier something known to all prosecutors, who say as a matter of
things about the Church committee hearings (in which El- course that the most important decision they make is not

Ilff, as a committee staffer, played a role) was the way .• ± whether to indict but whether to investigate. And it is, ac-
people who should have known better professed great cording to Elliff, the bottom-line reality that must be ad-

fi> hock and surprise to learn that the Bureau had staged ille- . dressed in any true reform effort.

: v f ‘ * 1 1 '• : , ’ / , ’ } 1 ; ! ‘There are many more federal criminal laws today [than

r llTmMn ,T„ m \ m • Jn 1940], especially in such areas as organized crime, civil.

ANTHONY MARRO is Washington bureau chief for News-. 11

day. ~

; U'itl '.-A . u-

I .• -r& v 1 ‘ r* ’ • j j*vr.4 *y«dr

: * ■ J _ :


.


THE REFORM OF FBI INTELLIGENCE
OPERATIONS. By John T. Elliff. Princeton. 248
pp. $14.50 !

By ANTHONY MARRO


■> »


4 ,


*s *i r f ‘«v ) .%
*22 • t ■ • « * J . ■


(Continued on page 4) .

* * i r c. r .y s t v'i'. i

1 > 1 « •


j t . uA

. - • rr


fights, bombings and riots, assaults on
American and foreign officials, and
white-collar crime,” he writes. "In
combination with the law of conspir-
acy and the federal fugitive laws,
“which allow investigations to locate
jpersons who cross state lines to avoid
^prosecution, the scope of federal juris-
diction is immense ”

The result, he notes, is that the FBI
)lnd the Justice Department have enor-
discretionary power to decide
r they will allocate their resources.

I thus merely limiting intelligence
operations to criminal situations can
'amount to virtually no limit at alL
r*Even the most rigorous probable
cause standard is not much of a re-
straint if all that is needed is probable
cause of a conspiracy.”

The key, then, is not merely in link-
ing investigations and intelligence-
gathering to crimes, but in setting and
enforcing rational and lawful priori-
ties, to insure that agents spend their
time investigating serious threats, not
dossier-building on harmless Trotsky-
fet groups.

Much of what he has to say has been
Said before— most notably in the
Church Committee reports— and oth-
ers have managed to make the subject
more interesting. (When it comes to
lucid prose, Elliff beats out the Church
jpommittee reports, but only by a
nose.) Nonetheless, this is an even-
handed and scholarly, account of the
efforts to reform FBI intelligence
operations, and as cogent a summary
as will be found of how they got out of
hand in the first place. Among other
things, Elliff warns against looking for
individual bogeymen (Hoover in-
cluded), and assigns fair blame to at-
torneys general of all political stripes,
<9$ well as to the congressional over-
sight committees that looked the other


¥


r* ; . . .

way for 50 years, or actually opened

the way for abuses.

It was, after all, Ramsey Clark, con-
sidered something of a saint by many
liberals, who urged the FBI to mark
for possible future detention anyone
who belonged to or participated in “a
basic revolutionary organization.”
And, he writes, “It made little differ-
ence whether the Attorney General
was a liberal like Ramsey Clark or a
conservative like John MitchelL . . .r
Whatever their ideological bent, Attor- !
neys General usually preferred to let
the FBI set its own guidelines or,
where it sought direction, to grant
whatever investigative authority the
Bureau desired."

Elliff believes that the result of the
recent disclosures, the drop in public
confidence in the bureau, and the di-
rect reform actions of Edward Levi,
the former attorney general, and Clar-
ence M. Kelley, the former FBI direc-
tor, were new domestic security guide-
lines that have, in fact, brought an end
to 40 years of investigations of lawful
political activity. a ^ .a ><« : . .

The question, of course, is how long*
the reforms will last. Guidelines have
been set before, only tQ collapse like
beanbags the first time the White
House pressured the bureau for quick
results. A major theme of Elliff’s book
—and the thing the committees shap-
ing the new FBI charter would do well,
to heed— is that true reform in the
long run requires both rational priori-
ties and a reliable mechanism for see-
ing that they are followed.

“Whatever the standards for intelli-
gence investigations,” he writes, “they
are no more effective than the means
adopted to enforce them.” This would
seem to be obvious, except that even
now— four years after the start of the
Church Committee investigation, and
well into the debate over the proposed
charter— it’s not clear that any such
mechanism will be put into place. □ •
