10/20/84
Gary liack
KXAS-TV
P.0. Box 1780
FortWorth,TX 76101
Dear Gary,
The FBI's 8/17 and 10/4 letters appear to be normal. There is a questionable
records are preprocessed and at FBIHQ.The'possibility of significance is it the
DL copy or copies of the Moorman pix were not sent to FBIHQ。
restofwhatwediscussedonthis.
for filing by subject, with a copy of this, the Jean hill stuff with Moorman. I
read it some hours ago but recall nothing new in the *oorman records.
All are FBIHQ records. 105-82555-2028 refers to seyeral items by their
ngmbers in previous correspondence。 When we spoke you thought they'd excised
what relates to Item 13 because of the white space. I think not, that it would have
were close to the bottom of that page.
I find it interesting that DL did not in any of these records disclose to
PBIHQ that it had made any copy, even after Hu raised the question. I do not
believe that once the question was raised it kept any secrets from FBIHQ, so
I
prsume there are other records, even if the matter was handled by phone.
After going over these records I see no explanation for the selection of
irrelevant records included in what was sent you.I presume it was some kind of
accident, perhaps parts of several other requests.
When you told me about the 1965 Philip Geraci records I wondered about the
FBI'sinterest as of theM but the records are self-explanatory and also accurate.
Albeit inconplete.An explanation is inorder.
That Geraci and the other boys planned those right-wing extremist operations
is correct and they were properly reported to the FBI by Jeff Parish and to others
by the FBI.I conducted a fairly couplete investigation of Geraci for other
reasons,interviewed his father,his mother twice and him the second time I spoke
That the FBI carried its work no farthur, or its interest, appears to be a little
uusual and I'n inclined to believe that it did,whether or not those additional
  d  1      
who was both_a source-anformer for.me and a narcfink.She is not mentioned.It is
she who met Geraci when he returned to N.o., and then something out of the ordinary
happened.He_went to see Bringuier,who instead of informing his parents or the
police, arraanged for him to stay at a dive known as he Silver Dollar, and there he
This and another Bringuier factor may account for the incompleteness of what was
sent you.The other factor is that Bringuier was,as I told you,a liar to have an
alibi for sonething else.Bringuier placed the date of Oswald's visit to him at
8/5/63 (also in other records 8/2) and thus, because of the raid on Ricardo Davis'
so-called camp on the other side of Lake Pontchartrain Bringuier was suspicious.
The initial FBI reports quote wqa Garaci as placing the date as perhaps in July.
Bringuier. His first visit was much earlier. I have copies of receipts Bringuier
gave him that are, as I recall, in June, provided by father and mother from a shoe-
Boxofsuchstuff:as perhaps in July.
Bringuier. His first visit was much earlier. I have copies of receipts Bringuier
gave him that are, as I recall, in June, provided by father and mother from a shoe-
Boxofsuchstuff:

--- PAGE BREAK ---

2
Philip was in Vietnam when I saw the parents, and both were cooperative。I
The mother's recollection was quite clear.Philip and Vance Blalock were both
in the CAP and wanted t:ings for their uniform, perhaps overseas caps. The motherthe parents, and both were cooperative。I
The mother's recollection was quite clear.Philip and Vance Blalock were both
in the CAP and wanted t:ings for their uniform, perhaps overseas caps. The mother

the end of the school term,and she drove the boys to the Quarter for them to get
fairly often afterward.） So the actual time was not long after LHO got to No and
coincided roughly with his getting his literature and picketing the Wasp.
With regard to the older gay "liario," the father told me more, where he picked
boys up, of complaining to school authorities, and the other descriptions, from him,
the girl and I'n not now sure, Philip, it may have been liario Bermudez, a Shaw crony.
I emphasize may because it also may not have been and there is no certainty.
NO put two different file numbers on its copies of the first two records, 105-
2467 on the 5/5/65 teletype and 100-2467 on the 5/6/65 airte1. 105 = Foreign
Counterintelligence and 10O= Subversive Matter. The airtel also is on a printed
form, with boxes to be checked."Bombing Matters" is checked, "Racial Matters" isn't.
But "Boubing Matters" is not ordinarily filed in 100 or 105.Ordinarily 174,and the
original at FBIHQ was filed in 174-1-133?7. (Somehow the 2467 seems familiar but I
cannot place it.)
What appears to be unusual and I think indicates an omitted record or records
is not correcting the contradiction in N.o.file numbers.Either N.O.,FBIHQ or
bothwouldhavedonethis.
I have a copy of the Jeff. Parihs
6juvenile report and as I recallit the name
provide his later info, which involved ringuier and the gangbang (as I recall
   a    a  (   1    
Philip (mental hospitalization） to the FBI.Not included in what you got.
Also odd is the fact that %one of the 1965 records bears a visible FBIHQ file .
It is both Not Recorded and serialized on the TT of 5/5,not normal,and only the
serial numbers appear on the others.Most likely Oswald, 106-82555,but cauld be JFK,
62-109060.
follow in alphabetical serialization of 5414,Geraci ending with and Brandle
beginning with C.(This might be fron later insertion into a file or from a purpose
other than filing serialization.） A new FBliu file # is given these records. Meo of
the FBIHQ is at the end of F are knwon to me,1O44O1 has John Birch Society records
and 107261 Minutemen records. 62Miscellaneous, non-subversive.This story,of
the reporter trying to get a riffe when he used the nane "Hidell," is well knom.
(I can(t make out the San Antonio record, also F, and I'm placing this in my
Klein's file.b* (eub 3)
The renaining records relate to *oorman and lill, from 105-82555. In a sense 8
                1
scalp went more or less up is not new. No FBI followup on this indicated here.
T n
(Serial 2677.) On p.3 Hi1l says that a federal agent asked her hou she felt when 8
  1     a    1 4 
g       0 4    1  
Walthers, picking sounething up not far from where Hi1l had been.t05-82555-3464, that
no exhibit numbers wereassigned by DL tothe four+olaroids of Tip.it's wounds
because DL did not know if HQ would be giviing them to the Conmission reflects the
general field office knowledge that the FsI waa not giving everything to theL tothe four+olaroids of Tip.it's wounds
because DL did not know if HQ would be giviing them to the Conmission reflects the
general field office knowledge that the FsI waa not giving everything to the

--- PAGE BREAK ---

3”
Commission and if unusual in that the FBI required its ow identification numbers
for its own purposes and investigation. It kmev the Tippit killing was included in
theComnission's mandate,too.
But in not giving these to the Commission,if in the end it didn't,the
FBI was exercising a kind of control over the Commission. (My file, FBI Comrnission
relations.4lao Tippit killing.)
Please excuse my haste in this. i'Ve been away for two days, which is very
unusual and as tiring, and I'n trying to catch up. V you have any questions, please
a8k。
Good luck on the rest of the project,
94= "Research Matters" but is actually used for,propaganda, lobbying, the media
and publishing and FBI contacts, etc. Thy aud do iWzmy 7.