The National Security Act Turns 75

Published: Jul 26, 2022 | Briefing Book # 799 | Compiled and edited by visiting Scoville Fellow Rachel Santarsiero

Landmark statute established the CIA, the NSC, and the foundations of the Department of Defense – the Underpinnings of the Modern National Security State
Wide-ranging law contributed to a “complete overhaul” of the Executive Branch, transformed U.S. foreign policy making, and empowered America’s global engagement through the Cold War and beyond

[This chart depicts the Joint Chiefs of Staff recommended organizational structure for a single Department of the Armed Forces. The chart was created as part of a committee established by the JCS on May 9, 1944, to study the most efficient and practicable organization of the parts of the executive branch concerned with national defense. The committee later presented its recommendations during congressional hearings during the fall and winter of 1944-1945 and completed its report on April 11, 1945. The Joint Chiefs of Staff never take formal action reflecting either approval or disapproval of the recommendations of their special committee, and the report is forward to the president on October 16, 1945, accompanied by separate memoranda from each member expressing his views on the proposal.]

General George C. Marshall in 1945 as Chief of Staff of the U.S. Army. In 1947, Marshall became the 50th U.S. Secretary of State. (Truman Library, Accession Number 2014-3569).

Secretary of Navy James Forrestal on February 20, 1946. (Truman Library, Accession Number 99-409).

Truman’s presidential airplane Sacred Cow . The aircraft was often called the “flying Oval Office,” and this is where Truman signs the National Security Act into law on July 26, 1947. (National Archives).

James Forrestal is sworn in as Secretary of Defense by Chief Justice Fred Vinson on September 17, 1947, after the National Security Act goes into effect. Left to right are General Dwight D. Eisenhower, John L. Sullivan, Admiral Chester Nimitz, Senator Stuart Symington, Major General Alfred M. Gruenther, and Thomas J. Hargrave. (Truman Library, Accession Number 97-1766).

President Harry S. Truman with members of his National Security Council on August 19, 1948. (Truman Library, Accession Number 73-2703).

Washington, D.C., July 26, 2022 – 75 years ago, President Harry S. Truman signed the National Security Act into law, marking a major restructuring of the U.S. government’s military and intelligence apparatus in the years following World War II. U.S. strategists saw the act as essential for enabling America’s future global mission of protecting and advancing Western interests. The law’s architects could not have foreseen how this fundamental restructuring would revolutionize U.S. policy making in later years, especially after earth-shaking events like 9/11.

But despite its great significance, even at the time the National Security Act was overshadowed by other pronouncements such as the Marshall Plan and the Truman doctrine.

Today, on the law’s 75th anniversary, the National Security Archive publishes a compilation of key declassified U.S. documents that show the run-up to its enactment, the debates surrounding the unification of the military departments, and the establishment of three major national security organizations: the National Security Council (NSC) and the Central Intelligence Agency (CIA), and the office of a civilian Secretary of Defense. This publication also sheds light on how the law, originally crafted with the intent of military and intelligence reorganization, evolved into something that would overhaul the Executive branch and establish the essential framework for foreign policy making during and after the Cold War.

Rachel Santarsiero is a Herbert Scoville Jr. Peace Fellow at the National Security Archive.

The Beginnings of a New “Peacetime” National Security Apparatus

Following the rise of Nazism, the attack on Pearl Harbor, and the turmoil of World War II, the U.S. emerged as the world’s sole superpower, full of potential, but determined not to allow a perceived global threat—Soviet-led Communism—to dominate the scene. The war had already introduced some valuable organizational experiments—the Joint Chiefs of Staff, the Office of Strategic Services (OSS, the intelligence and covert actions agency used during the war), and the State-War-Navy Coordinating Committee (SWNCC). But with its determination that the U.S. resist a return to isolationism and instead play a leading role in world affairs, the Truman Administration sought to strengthen the nation’s postwar security apparatus with a new set of government structures to better coordinate diplomacy, military operations, and intelligence gathering. [1]

Reforming the Military – The Unification Debate

The leadup to the signing of the National Security Act was filled with conflict, controversy, and compromise. Despite shared sentiments for postwar security organizational reform amongst Truman and his officials, the military departments in particular were at odds over what exactly reform should look like, especially regarding a unified armed forces department.

Inspired in part by the level of coordination achieved by the British Committee of Imperial Defense during World War II, many U.S. officials had the topic of military unification on their minds. [2] In April 1945, the Joint Chiefs of Staff Committee report “Reorganization of National Defense” recommended a single department of the Armed Forces with a civilian head above a military commander of the armed forces [Document 1]. The army had submitted a similar plan that advocated for centralization, with Secretary of War Robert P. Patterson making the case that a single military department would be more supportive of army programs. [3]

The Navy, seeking to preserve its autonomy, was starkly opposed to unification. Secretary of the Navy James Forrestal feared that a military department funded by a single defense appropriations bill might draw funds away from the Navy. In May 1945, Forrestal tapped Ferdinand Eberstadt, Vice Chairman of the War Production Board, to assess the question of unification. In what was dubbed The Eberstadt Report , the 250-page proposal stressed the need for civil-military coordination but opposed the establishment of a single military department. Eberstadt argued that military unification “looks good on paper,” but in reality, it would not survive “the acid test of modern war.” [4] Both he and Forrestal were also skeptical that a single civilian could run such a large, consolidated department, and Forrestal in particular objected to a plan that would “deprive the navy secretary of a seat in the Cabinet, hence direct access to the president.” [5] As a substitute for consolidation, the report recommended a national security council, making the argument that a council could act as a “policy-forming and advisory, not an executive, body.” [6] Eberstadt’s report was submitted to Congress in October 1945 and was viewed as an alternative to the Army plan [Document 2].

For much of 1945 and the start of 1946, the Army-Navy unification discrepancy dominated the scene. Truman, drawing on his Senate experiences serving on the Military Affairs Committee, was largely pro-unification, and ultimately pressed Patterson and Forrestal to come to an agreement.

Meanwhile, the Air Force, which had long been a part of the Army, was determined to exercise its own independence and even aspired to become a dominant department. In a memorandum that captures these postwar ambitions, Commodore Arleigh A. Burke, then with the Atlantic Command (and a future Chief of Naval Operations), felt compelled to write to the commander-in-chief of the Atlantic Command, Vice Admiral William H.P. Blandy, about a fervent speech given by Army Air Force Brigadier General Frank A. Armstrong in which Armstrong (who “had been drinking but ... was by no means under the influence of intoxicating liquor”) bluntly declared that the Air Force would be a “predominant force during the peace … we do not care whether you like it or not, … the Army Air Forces are going to run the show.” [Document 3].

Organizing for Intelligence

Beyond the matter of armed forces reorganization was the question of what role the intelligence apparatus would play in the foreign affairs and defense establishments. Having endured a war against several dictatorial powers, the American public understandably was wary of the growth of government intrusion in their daily lives. Truman, sharing the public’s sentiments, was adamant about not creating an intelligence bureaucracy that could develop into an American “Gestapo.” However, he and top officials such as Forrestal and Army Chief of Staff George C. Marshall understood that a peacetime foreign policy in the postwar landscape had to include institutional reorganization not just for military purposes but also for intelligence reasons. [7] A major impetus for the latter was the experience of Pearl Harbor and the determination not to be caught so dangerously unaware again.

In 1945, the Joint Chiefs of Staff had submitted its own proposal to the president on the formulation of an independent agency, but recommended it be established through presidential directive [Document 4]. To prevent an intelligence apparatus that would “trample on the rights of the American people,” Truman attempted to integrate the OSS into the State Department, effectively designating State as the lead agency in coordinating intelligence. [8] However, State rejected this, and the president instead signed a presidential directive establishing the Central Intelligence Group (CIG) as the overarching intelligence body, replacing the defunct OSS.

The creation of the CIG also ensured that Truman could rely on an intelligence agency responsible to the president rather than the military services. To that end, among other developments, U.S. intelligence began preparing a “daily summary” for the president's eyes only, even before the CIA was officially established." [9] This, however, was a temporary solution and it would take more time for even a preliminary consensus to develop on what the structure and role of the Central Intelligence Agency would be (see below).

Final Wrangling

After months of army-navy clashes, the two military secretaries ultimately settled on armed forces unification in January 1947. Their proposal gave general authority to a Secretary of National Defense with the caveat that individual secretaries would administer the three departments as separate units. Their plan also outlined agreements on a National Security Council, a Central Intelligence Agency, and a JCS without a single chief or chairperson. A series of Forrestal’s diary entries from February to July 1947 illuminate the Navy’s continued skepticism on the unification bill as it moved through Congress, even after the Patterson-Forrestal agreement [Documents 5-7].

Meanwhile, State remained wary of an independent intelligence agency and a powerful security council. In a memorandum to the president sent in early 1947, now Secretary of State George Marshall cautioned Truman on the ramifications of the latter [Document 8]. Marshall was worried that a council with statutory power and responsibilities would introduce “fundamental changes in the entire question of foreign relations.” Ultimately, the ambiguous language defining the council would later allow each president to use the NSC as he or she saw fit.

Following months of a congressional tug-of-war over the bill, President Truman signed the National Security Act into law on July 26, 1947, codifying the establishment of the National Security Council (NSC), the Central Intelligence Agency (CIA), the merging of the War and Navy Departments as well as the establishment of an independent Department of the Air Force under a new entity called the National Military Establishment. The law also institutionalized the wartime Joint Chiefs of Staff as well as established the National Security Resources Board [Document 9].

Back to the Big Board

Despite the enormous expenditure of time and energy that went into the legislation, in the immediate period following its passage it was clear the National Security Act had serious shortcomings. For example, as one scholar later put it, the section that established the CIA “fulfilled Napoleon’s standards for a good constitution: ‘short and vague’.” [10] On April 30, 1948, a paper written by the State Department’s Policy Planning Staff to the NSC indicated the uncertainty felt by the State Department officials as they tried to figure out how to use the CIA and other governmental organizations, political operations, and “political warfare.” [Document 10]. This document was later followed by NSC 10/2 in June of 1948, which became the official Truman edict on using the CIA and the Office of Policy Coordination to carry out covert operations. [11] Perhaps more fundamentally, the military branches, while housed under the freshly-created National Military Establishment, were hardly unified; the civilian-led Secretary of Defense operated at the mercy of the other military secretaries, possessing much less authority than the Secretary of State wielded; the duties of the CIA were poorly defined (partially contributing to State’s continued authority over matters of intelligence); and the president barely confided in his newly established NSC.

Amidst this confusion, tensions flared among practitioners in the new security landscape outlined by the law. Forrestal, recently appointed the first Secretary of Defense, was particularly discontented. In a moment of grim humor, he predicted, “this office will probably be the greatest cemetery for dead cats in history.” [12] Unable to “overcome the institutional weakness inherent” to his position [13] , Forrestal concluded that he “would continue to fail unless his position was strengthened by new legislation.” [14]

Partially as a response to the act’s ambiguities, two independent task forces were created to evaluate the recent reorganization. These recommendations would inspire President Truman to sign the National Security Act Amendments of 1949, establishing the Department of Defense as an Executive Department (replacing the National Military Establishment), that now included the Department of the Army, the Department of the Navy (including the U.S. Marine Corps), and the Department of the Air Force [Document 11]. By strengthening the role of the secretary of defense and centralizing authority within the new Department of Defense, these modifications “completely changed the character of the defense department” and would help revolutionize foreign policy making. [15]

That same year, Truman also signed the Central Intelligence Agency Act of 1949, a piece of legislation that allowed the CIA to secretly fund intelligence operations and develop personnel procedures outside standard U.S. government practices [Document 12]. Along with documents like NSC 10/2, the CIA Act was influenced by the results of other internal discussions, notably the Dulles-Jackson-Correa report of January 1, 1949 [Document 13]. The intelligence act also exempted the CIA from having to disclose its “organization, function, names, officials, titles, salaries, or numbers of personnel employed.” As Clark Clifford, Truman’s administrative assistant, put it later, the CIA became “a government within a government, which could evade oversight of its activities by drawing the cloak of secrecy about itself.” [16] But it was always ultimately responsible to the president, as Clifford himself sought.

Era of Dramatic Expansion

The NSC, CIA, and Department of Defense that would emerge and grow in the years following the 1949 amendments would in some respects be almost unrecognizable from the bodies envisioned in 1947. It wasn’t until the war in Korea that the NSC became an integral part of the Executive Office of the President, and each president would use it in slightly different ways. But each well understood its value for centering decision making authority more firmly in the White House and bypassing many of the inevitable political and bureaucratic obstacles to the policy process. As a result, NSC influence would continue to swell in size with each subsequent administration. This trend became evident under Truman’s immediate successor, President Dwight D. Eisenhower. [Document 14] By the time the Cold War ended, the NSC staff and the newly created national security adviser to the president would create an “unassailable position of preeminence” within the national security bureaucracy. [17]

As for the military, by converting the Department of Defense to a cabinet level department, the 1949 amendments ensured that the secretary of defense now held authority over the other military secretaries. Later, provisions like the 1986 Goldwater-Nichols Act would further enhance the authority of that office, “particularly in the areas of budgets and strategy.” [18] These developments helped pave the way for the increasingly dominant role the defense secretary would come to play in foreign policy matters after the Cold War – most visibly in the years after the September 11, 2001, terrorist attacks.

Lastly, the power of the CIA in covert operations overseas, specifically after the issuing of NSC 10/2 and the 1949 Central Intelligence Agency Act, continued to grow during the first three decades of the Cold War, not just providing intelligence gathering and analytical functions but carrying out many dozens of covert operations, from influencing elections to helping to overthrow governments and even attempting to assassinate foreign leaders. More recently, a key element of the 1947 National Security Act would be overhauled in 2004 when Congress created the Office of Director of National Intelligence (ODNI), replacing the CIA as the overarching intelligence body.

The State of National Security Today

The National Security Act of 1947 was passed against the backdrop of a changing security landscape fueled by the aftermath of a world war, the rising threat of international communism, and the emergence of phenomena like new technologies. At the time, the authors of the Act were almost certainly unaware of the wide-ranging and long-lasting implications the law would have during the Cold War and beyond.

At present, despite intervening events like 9/11, and the subsequent creation of the Department of Homeland Security and the ODNI, several factors that led to the formulation of the 1947 National Security Act continue to exist—albeit in slightly different forms. Instead of a world war against Nazism, Russia and China represent the largest global threats. Instead of combatting communist ideology, the world has been confronting a tide of international terrorism in the form of extremist groups like al-Qaeda, ISIS, and al-Shabaab. Instead of technologies like radar and overhead reconnaissance, we’re now dealing with the ramifications of cyber technology. These factors have already been inspiring calls for fundamental reorganization today, as they did in 1947.

Secretary of the Navy James Forrestal commissions Ferdinand Eberstadt to conduct a study on postwar and military. That report, known as the original “Eberstadt Report” is submitted to Congress and is seen as the Navy’s alternate plan for armed forces unification. The pages included here are from the “Introduction” and “Conclusion and Recommendations” sections of the report. On pages, 1-2, the report includes a message from Eberstadt to Forrestal summarizing the methodology of the study. From pages 3-4, Eberstadt concludes that unification of the armed forces under a single branch would not improve national security. On page 5, the report recommends three independent departments—each headed by a civilian secretary of Cabinet rank and tied together “by strong ligaments of coordination expressed by formal interorganizational links.” Under the Navy’s specific recommendations on pages 6-14, the Navy advocates for the organization of the military forces into three “coordinate departments,” a National Security Council, continuation of the Joint Chiefs of Staff, a Military Munitions Board, a Central Intelligence Agency, and an “appointment of a commission to make an over-all study of the problems of national security.”

U.S. State Department, Foreign Relations of the United States, 194 7, Volume 1 (Washington, D..C.: Government Printing Office, 1973) , pp. 713-715.

In a memorandum to President Truman, Secretary of State Marshall strongly criticizes the provisions for establishing a National Security Council and expresses reservations about the establishment of a Central Intelligence Agency because “the powers of the proposed agency seem almost unlimited and need clarification.” Marshall, however, does not specify what language he is wary of approving. Rather, he seems concerned generally about setting up agencies with wide-ranging responsibilities that might diminish the influence of the State Department.

[1] Douglas T. Stuart. “Ministry of Fear: The 1947 National Security Act in Historical and Institutional Context.” International Studies Perspectives . Oxford University Press. Vol 4. No 3 (August 2003), 296

[2] Anna Kasten Nelson. “President Truman and the Evolution of the National Security Council,” The Journal of American History . Oxford University Press, Vol 72. No 2 (September 1985), 361

[3] Charles A. Stevenson. “The Story Behind the National Security Act of 1947,” Military Review . (May/June 2008), 15

[4] Stevenson, 16.

[5] Nelson, 362.

[6] Stevenson, 16.

[7] Stuart, 296.

[8] Stuart, 299.

[9] For examples of the CIG’s daily summaries, see the CIA’s virtual reading room .

[10] Stuart, 299.

[11] Office of the Historian, Foreign Relations of the United States. “ National Security Council Directive on Office of Special Projects .” June 18, 1948. See also John Prados, Safe for Democracy: The Secret Wars of the CIA (paperback) (Ivan R. Dee, 2009)

[12] Stevenson, 19.

[13] Nelson, 370.

[14] Stevenson, 19.

[15] Stevenson, 13.

[16] Clark Clifford & Richard Holbrooke, Counsel to the President: A memoir (New York, 1991), 170.

[17] Stuart, 302.

[18] Stuart, 298.

Documents

Organizational Chart, Single Department of Armed Forces Proposed by Special Committee of JCS (Richardson Committee), 23 March 1945
Mar 23, 1945 | Source U.S. Congress. Senate. Committee on Military Affairs. Hearings on S. 84 and S. 1482: Department of Armed Forces; Department of Military Security, pp. 411-39. Congress, 1st session. Washington: Government Printing Office, 1945 (For chart, see p. 412).

Report, to the Honorable James Forrestal, “Unification of the War and Navy Departments and Postwar Organization for National Security,” (henceforth, Eberstadt Report), “Introduction” and “Conclusions and Recommendations,” page 1-14, 22 October 1945
Oct 22, 1945 | Source U.S. Senate, 79th Congress, 1st session, Committee on Naval Affairs, Committee Print

Memorandum, United States Atlantic Fleet, Commodore Arleigh A. Burke to Vice Admiral William H.P. Blandy, Subject: Remarks made by Brigadier General Frank A. Armstrong, Jr., of the Army Air Forces at Princess Anne Country Club, 17 December 1946, [Unclassified]
Dec 17, 1946 | Source Arleigh Burke Papers-Pre-CNO Personal File, Operational Archives, NHHC
U.S. Navy Commodore Arleigh A. Burke, writes to Vice Admiral Blandy, commander-in-chief of the Atlantic Command, about a gathering for members of the Armed Services at the Princess Anne Country Club. The heart of the memo is a lengthy paraphrase of a short but fiery speech made by General Armstrong, the Deputy Commander of the Armed Forced Staff College, which illustrates the Air Force’s (or at least Armstrong’s) unvarnished ambitions at the time not only to be its own independent department but to become “a predominant force” within the U.S. military. In the last paragraph, Burke mentions “Admiral Forrestal,” but it should be noted that this is in reference to Rear Admiral Emmet Forrestel, the commander of the Norfolk Naval Base and Station, not Secretary of the Navy, James Forrestal. As a sidenote, General Armstrong was the primary inspiration for the character Brigadier General Frank Savage in Twelve O’clock High , a 1949 American war film starring Gregory Peck (and a later TV series starring Robert Lansing) about aircrews in the United States Army’s Eighth Air Force, who flew daylight bombing missions against Nazi Germany and Occupied France during the early days of American involvement in World War II. The name “Savage” was inspired by Armstrong’s Cherokee heritage. Many of the training and disciplinary scenes in Twelve O’Clock High also derive from Armstrong’s experience commanding the 306th Bomb Group.

Memorandum, From Secretary of War Stimson and Secretary of the Navy Forrestal to President Truman, Subject: Establishment of a central intelligence service upon liquidation of OSS, 19 September 1945, [Top Secret]
Sep 19, 1945 | Source National Archives and Records Administration, RG 80, General Records of the Department of the Navy, SecNav/CNO Top Secret Correspondence File 1945, A8, Box 21, Folder A8. Top Secret. Also reproduced in CIA Cold War Records: The CIA under Harry Truman, pp. 8–10.
In this memorandum from Secretary of War Henry Stimson and Secretary of the Navy James Forrestal to President Truman, the war secretaries outline the Joint Chiefs of Staff plan on the establishment of a central intelligence service. The JCS recommend the establishment of the agency through presidential directive.

Diary Entry 1465, Secretary of Navy James Forrestal, Subject: 76-77 Club, 6 February 1947, [Unclassified]
Feb 6, 1947 | Source Seeley G Mudd Manuscript Library, Princeton University Library
James Forrestal’s diary is generally highly valued by historians. In this entry, he describes a dinner with John Sullivan and Admiral Sherman at the 76-77 Club where they discussed the proposed armed services unification plan. Forrestal presents “a list of the Navy’s misgivings” of what would happen if unification won out in Congress. He goes on to say that most of the people at the dinner were “against any merger” on the basis of wanting to “oppose any Democratic proposal.” Forrestal, however, concludes his entry by stating it would be unfortunate if the unification debate were to become political and “identified with the fortune of either party.”

Diary Entry 1580-1581, Secretary of Navy James Forrestal, Subject: Unification, 13 April 1947, [Unclassified]
Apr 18, 1947 | Source Seeley G Mudd Manuscript Library, Princeton University Library
In this entry, Forrestal describes a lunch with Senators Gurney, Robertson, Tydings, and Saltonstall, Clark Clifford, and Admiral Sherman where they discussed the status of the unification bill. Forrestal stated to his colleagues that he thought the bill might pass in the Senate but fail in the House. He expressed concern over including precise language that defined the roles and functions outlined in the bill. While the Marines feel “strongly” about including definitions of functions, the White House has “equally strong” views that the bill should not include specific definitions. The men then discussed reasons for and against including imprecise language into the bill. This entry highlights the concerns that were percolating over the act’s ambiguities even before it was passed into law.

Diary Entry 1749, Secretary of Navy James Forrestal, Subject: Conversation – President Truman, 22 July 1947, [Unclassified]
Jul 22, 1947 | Source Seeley G Mudd Manuscript Library, Princeton University Library
In this entry, James Forrestal discusses a meeting with President Truman, who plans to nominate Forrestal as Secretary of Defense. Forrestal asks if the president intends for the military establishment to be civilian led, to which Truman responds that is his intent.

Memorandum, Secretary of State George Marshall to President Truman, Subject: Comments of the Secretary of State on Draft of Bill to Promote the National Security (Fourth Draft, dated January 28, 1947), 7 February 1947, [Confidential]

National Security Act of 1947, 26 July 1947
Jul 26, 1947 | Source National Archives and Records Administration, Series: Enrolled Acts and Resolutions of Congress, 1789 – 2013, Record Group 11: General Records of the United States Government, 1778 - 2006, National Archives and Records Administration Catalog
The National Security Act (Public Law 80-253, 61 Statute 495) is signed into law by President Harry S. Truman on July 26, 1947, while aboard his VC-54C presidential aircraft Sacred Cow. The act merges the Department of the Army (renamed from the Department of War), the Department of the Navy, and the newly established Department of the Air Force (DAF) into the National Military Establishment (NME). The act also creates the position of Secretary of Defense as the head of the NME, the National Security Council, and the Central intelligence Agency. The law enacts major restructuring of the U.S. government’s military and intelligence agencies following World War II.

Policy Analysis Paper, State Department Policy Planning Staff/Council, Subject: The Inauguration of Organized Political Warfare, 30 April 1948, [Top Secret]
Apr 30, 1948 | Source National Archives and Records Administration, Record Group 59. Department of State Records, Policy Planning Council Records, 1948-1962, box 28, Political and Psychological Warfare
This Policy Planning Staff paper is circulated to the National Security Council, and states that a new, independent organization should be set up to plan and conduct “political warfare.” The author defines “political warfare” as “the employment of all the means at a nation’s command, short of war, to achieve its national objectives.” This report marks the first time that all outlined operations are defined as “political warfare operations” instead of “psychological warfare operations.” The author of the paper is unknown, but there is speculation that George F. Kennan composed it or a draft. Although all Policy Planning Staff papers are supposed to include dissenting views, if they exist within the department, this paper does not.

National Security Act Amendments of 1949, 10 August 1949
Aug 10, 1949 | Source National Archives and Records Administration, Series: Enrolled Acts and Resolutions of Congress, 1789 – 2013, Record Group 11: General Records of the United States Government, 1778 – 2006, National Archives and Records Administration Catalog
The National Security Act Amendments of 1949 (Public Law 81-216, 63 Statute 578) establishes the Department of Defense as an Executive Department including the Department of the Army, the Department of the Navy, and the Department of the Air Force as military departments, not as Executive departments. The Secretary of Defense now has more explicit control over the military secretaries as well as over the Munitions Board and Research and Development Board.

The Central Intelligence Agency Act of 1949, 20 June 1949
Jun 20, 1949 | Source Homeland Security Digital Library
The Central Intelligence Agency Act (Public Law 81-110, 63 Statute 2018) authorizes the CIA to secretly fund intelligence operations and conduct personnel actions outside of standard U.S. Government procedures. The act also exempts the CIA from having to disclose its “organization, functions, officials, titles, salaries, or numbers of personnel employed.” It also creates a program called “PL-110” to handle defectors and other “essential aliens” outside normal immigration procedures, as well as give those persons cover stories and economic support.

Report, The Central Intelligence Agency and National Organization For Intelligence, by Chairman Allen W. Dulles, William H. Jackson, and Mathias F. Correa, 1 January 1949, [Top Secret]
Jan 1, 1949 | Source CIA FOIA Electronic Reading Room
The Dulles-Jackson-Correa Report (also known as Intelligence Survey Group (ISG) and the Dulles Report) was created after the NSC decided that a survey group should evaluate the organization, activities, and personnel of the Central Intelligence Agency. The ISG, or Dulles committee, consisted of Alen Dulles as chairman, Mathias F. Correa, and William H. Jackson. Overall, the Dulles survey group criticizes the Central Intelligence Agency for failure to perform its coordinating functions, for failing to fulfill its assigned responsibilities to produce national intelligence, and for poor management of both itself and interdepartmental responsibilities. The report makes no recommendations for changes in existing legislation, but it urges a closer liaison between the CIA and the Secretaries of State and Defense.

Memorandum, Executive Office of the President, National Security Council, Robert Cutler to Dwight D. Eisenhower, Subject: Recommendations Regarding the National Security Council, 17 March 1953, [Confidential]
Mar 17, 1953 | Source White House Office, Office of Special Assistant for National Security, Special Assistant Series, Administration Subseries, Eisenhower Library
President Dwight D. Eisenhower’s administrative assistant, Robert Cutler, writes a memorandum to the president in which he calls the National Security Council a “top mechanism in Government for aiding in formulation of security policies.” He proposes a new NSC system of recommendation, decision, and implementation that he later describes as the “policy hill” process. He also recommends “adding some staff personnel to perform functions for which no staff personnel now exist.” In his response to Cutler, Eisenhower approves the recommendations and asks that Cuter bring him a list of names of those to nominate for the Planning Board of the Council.
