IN THE UNITED STATES COURT OF APPEALS
FOR THE DISTRICT OF COLUMBIA CIRCUIT
CENTER FOR NATIONAL POLICY REVIEW
ON RACE AND URBAN ISSUES, et al.,
Plaintiffs-Appellees,
V。
No.73-1090
CASPAR W. WEINBERGER, Secretary of
Health, Education and Welfare,
Defendants-Appellants.
MEMORANDUM CONCERNING THE EFFECT OF
WEISBERG V.DEPARTMENT OF JUSTICE
On August 22,1973,this Court ordered that further
consideration of this case be held in abeyance pending the
decision by the Court en banc in Weisberg v. U.S. Department of
Justice
(No. 7l-lo26), and Committee to Investigate Assassinations,
Inc. V。 U.S. Department of Justice (No. 7l-1829)
Weisberg was
decided.in an opinion filed 0ctober 24, 1973.
On November 14,
1973, the'Court ordered the parties herein to file supplementary
this case is affected by the Court's opinion in Weisberg.
This
1/ Appellant 's petition for rehearing in Weisberg was denied
on November 19, 1973.
Committee to Investigate Assassinations was decided in an
order also filed 0ctober 24, 1973.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

memorandum is submitted pursuant to that order.
A。
The Principles of Weisberg.
1。
The district court in the instant case rejected the
government's invocation of Exemption 7 on the sole ground
that it had "not made a sufficient showing that the_ prospect
of enforcement proceedings is concrete" (App. 14). Asinstant case rejected the
government's invocation of Exemption 7 on the sole ground
that it had "not made a sufficient showing that the_ prospect
of enforcement proceedings is concrete" (App. 14). As

imminent prospect that adjudicatory proceedings will be
commenced by an agency, the pre-disclosure concern of
exemption (b)(7) is not presented and there is no reason
for applying its limitation on the general right to disclosure
under the statute" (Brief for Plaintiffs-Appellees, p. l4).
Weisberg clearly rejects.the foregoing interpretation
of the Freedom of Information Act, which would rewrite
Exemption 7 to read "investigatory
filescompiled for concrete
or imminent adjudicatory proceedings.
Weisberg held, instead,
that "the: statute speaks for itself" and that the sole issue
多
in an.Exemption-7 case is.whether the agency's files:
(1)
"were
investigatory in nature; and (2） were compiled for law
enforcement purposes."
"When that much shall have been
established * * * such files are exempt from compelled dis-
2/
closure" (Opin. 6).
2/
The basis for plaintiffs! reading of Exemption 7 is the
assumption that "the concern of·exemption (b)(7) is only to
preclude pre-disclosures to a defendant in iitigation and
adjudicative proceedings:" (Brief for Plaintiffs-Appellees,
p. 16). But this constricted reading of the purposes  under-
iying Exemption 7 was clearly rejected by Weisberg (opin. 7)
. (continued on page 3):

--- PAGE BREAK ---(Brief for Plaintiffs-Appellees,
p. 16). But this constricted reading of the purposes  under-
iying Exemption 7 was clearly rejected by Weisberg (opin. 7)
. (continued on page 3):

--- PAGE BREAK ---

Again, Weisberg makes it unmistakably clear that
Exemption 7 applies when the court determines that the head
of the Executive Department correctly designated "investigatory
files as having been'compiled for law enforcement
Whenthe
reviewing court makes that limited determination,
"nisduty
in achieving the will of Congress under the Freedom of
Information Act" is "at an end" (0pin. 13, 14-15).
Applying the foregoing principles, the Court in Weisberg
held that Exemption 7 protected the investigatory files in
question there even though, as the dissent pointed out,no
criminal or civil action pertaining to the investigation "is
future action is contemplated by anyone" (Opin.19)。 In short,
the majority of the Court in Weisberg squarely rejected the
engrafting of additional requirements to the explicit
provisions of Exemption 7 itself。 Instead, as noted above,
the sole issue.under Exemption 7 is whether the agency's
(footnote2continued):
November 26,1973, pp.12-13. There the Court stated, in
proceedings had terminated (Slip 0pin., p. 13):
It is clear that if investigatory files were
made public subsequent to the termination of
enforcement proceedings, the ability of any
:investigatory body to conduct future investi-
gations would be seriously impaired. Few
persons would respond candidly to investigators
if they feared that their remarks would become
public record after the proceedings。 Further,
the investigative techniques of the investigating
body would be disclosed to. the general public.

--- PAGE BREAK ---ared that their remarks would become
public record after the proceedings。 Further,
the investigative techniques of the investigating
body would be disclosed to. the general public.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

files:
"(1) were investigatory in nature; and (2) were
  sh   a a    
3/
from compelled disclosure" (Opin. 6).
2. We do not ignore the statement in the Court's
opinion in Weisberg
that:
"We are not.discussing any
problem exceptthat ofcompelled disclosureof Federal
Bureau of Investigation investigatory files compiled for law
enforcement purposes"
(Opin.8-9)。 The context of-this
statement'is:
We are'not here speaking of trade secrets,
or personnel and medical files, or patent
information or internal revenue returns, or yet
other material which, by statute (see, e·.:
41 CFR  105-60.6o4,'1972), had been spec1fica1ly
exempted from disclosure。We are not treating
3/In refusing to engraft additional requirements onto the
explicit:provisions of Exemption 7, Weisberg also rejected the
government must establish the nature of some harm which is
likely to result from public disclosure of the file"(opin.22).
Appellants_did establish (pp. 25-30) that the purposes of
Exemption 7 would be frustrated by public disclosure of the records
in question.
Weisberg also confirms （opin.15, fn.15） the correct-
ness
of our elucidation (Main Brief for the Appellants, P·
13, fn.5) of the "except to the extent available by law
exception to Exemption 7.
This exception, as in Weisberg,
has no application to the instant case, since plaintiff is
not engaged in litigation" with the agency.

--- PAGE BREAK ---nt available by law
exception to Exemption 7.
This exception, as in Weisberg,
has no application to the instant case, since plaintiff is
not engaged in litigation" with the agency.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

of geological information or matter required
by Executive order to be kept secret.We are
not discussing any problem except that of
compelled aisclosure of Federal Bureau of
Investigation investigatory files */ compiled
for law enforcement purposes. Certainly the
answer does not depend upon what this appellant
desires to accomplish if access be afforded.
The Court has toid us that the Act does not
"by its terms, permit inquiry into particularized
needs of the individual seeking the information."
EPA v。Mink, 410 U.S. at 86. * * *
*/ Attorney General Richardson, acting pursuant
to Title 28U.S.C. Section 509,by Order No.
528-73,July 11,1973, 38 Fed. Reg.No.136,
19029, [and see 5 U.S.c. S301] has amended earlier
regulations relating to materials exempted from
compulsory disclosure under the Freedom of
Information Act.
"Possible releases that may be
considered under this section are at the sole
discretion of the Attorney General and of those
persons to whom authority hereunder may be
delegated."
The Order provides for access to
material within the Department's investigatory
files compiled for law enforcement purposes
that are more than fifteen years ola" subject to
techniques and procedures.
I！
（Emphasis added)
Compare text quoted supra,
and identified in'Frankel
V. Securities and Exchange Commission, 46o F.2d
at 817-818,n.9,supra。
We think that the emphasis in the above-quoted language
enforcement purposes."
That is made clear not only by the
context of the statement, but by the Court's subsequent
statement:
"[T]his much is certain, * * * the Attorney
General, like the heads of other Executive departments,
was
authorized to refuse disclosure under Exemption 7 if he could

--- PAGE BREAK ---ent
statement:
"[T]his much is certain, * * * the Attorney
General, like the heads of other Executive departments,
was
authorized to refuse disclosure under Exemption 7 if he could

--- PAGE BREAK ---

determine as here that the issue involved investigatory
files compiled for law enforcement purposes" (Opin. 13;
emphasis added).
Certainly, there is no support for the view_that
Exemption 7 is applicable only to the FederalBureau Qf
Investigation, and not other Executive Departments,or that
Exemption 7 has one meaning when applied to FBI files and
an entirely different meaning when applied to files_of other
Executive Departments。
See Soucie v. David, 145 U.S. App.
D.C.144, 448 F.2d 1067, 1078 (1971)。 Such a distinction
would also be contrary
to
the decisions in Frankel (involving
4/
.SEC investigatory files
and Evans
(involving FAA
investigatory files),
which.this Court expressly relied
upon in Weisberg (Opin. 6-7).S
Similarly, Weisberg recognized
(Opin. 6) the authority of the House Committee report, H.Rept.
No.1497, 89th Cong., 2d Sess., which had stated (at p. 11)
that the term "law enforcement" in Exemption 7 is not confined
：
to enforcement of criminal statutes,but includes
"all kinds
4/. Frankel v. Securities and Exchange Commission, 460 F.2d
5/ Evans V. Department of Transportation, 446 F.2d 821 (5th
Cir., 1971), certiorari denied, 405 U.s. 918 (1972).

--- PAGE BREAK ---l kinds
4/. Frankel v. Securities and Exchange Commission, 460 F.2d
5/ Evans V. Department of Transportation, 446 F.2d 821 (5th
Cir., 1971), certiorari denied, 405 U.s. 918 (1972).

--- PAGE BREAK ---

of laws,labor and'securities laws, as well as criminal
laws"
(emphasis added).
The
contention that the principles of Weisberg are
limited
to
FBI files
Swas recently rejected by thisCourt
in Aspin
Department
t of Defense, No. 72-2147, decided
November 26, 1973, where the Court applied the Weisberg
Referring
 to Weisberg, the Court in Aspin stated (opin.
13-14):
[T]he point remains that a§ 7 exemption
wasthere upheld asapplied to filesalmost
ten years oid where no prosecution was ever
conducted。
This squarely rebuts appellantis
broad argument that when there is no longer
any prospect for future enforcement pro-
ceedings
(necessitated in Weisberg by the
death of the only suspect)
the97exemption
from disclosure must terminate as well.

--- PAGE BREAK ---re is no longer
any prospect for future enforcement pro-
ceedings
(necessitated in Weisberg by the
death of the only suspect)
the97exemption
from disclosure must terminate as well.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

3。 We think it clear, in light of the principles set
forth~in Weisberg, that Bristol-Myers v. F.T.C., l38 U.S.
App. D.c.22, 424 F.2d.935 (1970), certiorari denied, 400
U.S.824, must be limited to its particular facts and that
it has no application here.
In Bristol-Myers,
the Court held that the files_in
question had not been shown on the record in that case to
be investigatory files compiled for law enforcement purposes
This ruling was based upon several considerations:
(1）the
agency had made "a conscious decision" not to maintain any
enforcement proceeding and to convert the files into ordinary
agency files pertinent to rulemaking (see Aspin,
supra,opin.s
11); (2) Bristol-Myers was demanding studies and reports
"which the Federal Trade Commission had cited as the basis
for a proposed rule.If the investigative files withheld
by the Commission were among the documents thus publicly
cited it could be argued that they had lost their protected.
status" (Aspin, supra, opin. ll, fn. 28); and (3) no enforce-
ment proceedings had ever been commenced,and there was
nothing else in the record to show the existence of "investigatory
files compiled for law enforcement purposes"so that the
agency's invocation of Exemption 7 amounted to no more than
"the bare assertion by an agency that the files were compiled
for law enforcement purposes" (Aspin, supra, opin. ll).

--- PAGE BREAK ---he
agency's invocation of Exemption 7 amounted to no more than
"the bare assertion by an agency that the files were compiled
for law enforcement purposes" (Aspin, supra, opin. ll).

--- PAGE BREAK ---

In the instant case, by contrast,
neither of the
first
two special circumstances of
Bristol-Myers
is present
主.e.,
"conscious decision"
there was no
to
convert
the
materials into rulemaking proceedings
and
the materials did
not lose
etheir protected
status
by
being
"publicly cited"
as
the
basis for a proposed
rule。
Cf. American Mail Line,
Ltd. v.Gulick,
U.S. App. D.C.
411 F.2d 696 (1969).
Moreover,
in the
instant
case,
aswe now
demonstrate,the
agency's invocation of Exemption 7 does
not
restupon
"bare
assertion
1
but upon.detailed
1affidavits
and
testimony in the
record
which
demonstrate
the
genuineness
ofthe
government's
invocation of Exemption7
in
this
case

--- PAGE BREAK ---

B。
The HEw Files at Issue on this Appealare Protected
(2) "Were Compiled for Law Enforcement Purposes.
In the instant case, detailed affidavits and testimony
in the record clearly show
"how
and under what
compiled"
and
thatindeed
"they were 'investigatory files
Therefore, under
the principles of Weisberg
(opin.15),those files are
protected by Exemption 7.
Title VI of the Civil Rights Act of 1964, 42 U.S.C.
200od, provides that:
No person in the United States shall, on the
ground of race,color,or national'origin,be
excluded from participation in,be denied the
benefits of,or be subjected to discrimination
under any program or activity receiving Federal
financial assistance.
Pursuant to this statute,42 U.S.C.200od-l,and
implementing HEW regulations, 45 C.F.R. 80.8 (1972),
s
aouarager se yons "'met fq paztrouane sueew xauzo fueu pue
to the Department of Justice with a recommendation that
appropriate litigation be brought by it.See Adams v.
Richardson,
U.S. App. D.C.,
480 F.2d 1159 (1973)。

--- PAGE BREAK ---sueew xauzo fueu pue
to the Department of Justice with a recommendation that
appropriate litigation be brought by it.See Adams v.
Richardson,
U.S. App. D.C.,
480 F.2d 1159 (1973)。

--- PAGE BREAK ---

TT
The HEW files at issue on this appeal are clearly
"investigatory in nature" and were clearly "compiled for
law enforcement purposes," i.e., effecting compliance with
the prohibitions in Title VI through the procedures and
sanctions available under the statute and regulations。
There
fore, under the principles of Weisberg, the files are
protected by Exemption 7。
The detailed affidavits and testimony of responsible
HEW officials in therecord establishthat the files were
compiled by HEw investigators and attorneys for the purpose
of uncovering evidence of, and proving, illegal discrimination
by school districts in violation of Title VI (App. 38, 40,
49-5l). Mr. Cioffi, HEW's Coordinator for Northern and Western
Desegregation Programs, stated in an affidavit that (App. 4o):
In order to prove a violation.of Title
VI, some culpability must be established on
the part of a State or local agency.The
fact that segregation exists is not enough
:in itself to prove such culpability.Evidence
must be gathered by our investigators.
-To obtain evidence establishing the necessary "culpability"
to prove a violation of Title VI, the HEW investigators in
the cases at issue on this appeal visited the sites of possible
violations,collected and analyzed data,much of it

--- PAGE BREAK ---bility"
to prove a violation of Title VI, the HEW investigators in
the cases at issue on this appeal visited the sites of possible
violations,collected and analyzed data,much of it

--- PAGE BREAK ---

6/
confidential,
and interviewed witnesses, including persons
and organizations that had made complaints (App. 38-39,
49-51):
Since HEw has no subpoena power to assist it in
this process, Mr.Cioffi explained, much of the investigations
(App：40):
are based upon good faith understandings
between our investigators and their sources,
and it is absolutely crucial that our
investigators be abie to assure potential
informants that their participation and
sometimes their evidence be kept confidential.
These matters arouse strong emotions and
informants are often subject to social pressures
not to speak to our investigators。Occasionally,
our informants have been threatened with
physical violence.Our information often
comes from extremely vulnerable people。For
instance, in the Ferndale, Michigan case, we
were able to partially establish culpability
through the questioning of an eighty-four year
old witness.. Our first interviews with her
were given under assurances of confidentiality
because of her fear of possible harassment.
6/ The confidential nature of data in the files is set forth
Dy Mr. Cioffi's affidavit (App. 42-43).Referring to HEw's
"elosed" files, the district court, after in camera inspection,
-..noted that they contained (App. 28):
** * individual students!names coupled
with test scores, attendance records,
behavioral patterns, and the like. *'* *
The Court also noted that the files contained (ibid。):
.the 'rough' work product of an investigator;
* * * inter- and intra-office memoranda * * *
other documents of a confidential nature,
I·e.s complaints by named parents * * *.

--- PAGE BREAK ---id。):
.the 'rough' work product of an investigator;
* * * inter- and intra-office memoranda * * *
other documents of a confidential nature,
I·e.s complaints by named parents * * *.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

13
As in many other law enforcement investigations,
illegality in connected areas, and premature disclosure
could. harm the investigatory process。
For instance,
in his affidavit, Mr. Cioffi noted (App. 44, 4o-41):
[I]n 1969, we investigated the Dayton, Ohio
School District for discrimination in teacher
assignments, and obtained compliance in 1969.
We are presently investigating the same
district for discrimination in student assign-
ments. Obviously, premature public disclosure
ofinformation obtained under assuranceof con-
fidentiality during the teacher assignment
phase would have complicated our present efforts
to'obtainvoluntarycompliance in the secondarea。
￥
Disclosure sometimes enables the subject
of our investigators to obstruct our efforts.
After we had conducted an investigation of the
Tucson, Arizona School District's standards
used to determine which students wouldbe sent
to the special school for retarded children,
some of the information we had uncovered was
leaked to the press. All the children in the
special school were returned to the regular
:schools and no record remains.of who attended
.the school for retarded children.After
conducting a compliance review of the Uvaldi,
Texas School District in the spring and summer
of l970,a letter of noncompliance was somehow
prematurelymadepublicthroughthe Mondale
Committee.The local press and radio station
released the information verbatim.As a result
the negotiaion _has since been hampered and further
investigation [made] extremely difficult.

--- PAGE BREAK ---mittee.The local press and radio station
released the information verbatim.As a result
the negotiaion _has since been hampered and further
investigation [made] extremely difficult.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

14
The-HEW investigators.thus used traditional investigative
techniques, such as confidential witness interviews, in order
to "establish culpability" and obtain evidence of violations
of Title VI. The investigatory files which they, and
reviewing attorneys, compiled in this process were plainly
directed toward effecting compliance with TitleVI by
establishing the basis for the sanctions available under
the statute and regulations. Mr. Cioffi stated in an affidavit
that the files were often returned by HEW's legal staff for
further gathering of evidence "necessary to meet the heavy
evidentiary burden placed on the Department .in showing
noncompliance with Title VI in Northern cases" (App. 149-l50).
As Mr. Cioffi testified in a deposition (App..l5l-i52):
* * * the lawyers * * * keep bouncing back
and forth for more and additional evidence in
thecase。
They are not satisfied with what
is coming_out of the field and go back and get
additional information.
*
*
*
* * * [I]n cases,letters of noncompliance
have gone out.
In other cases,letters of non-
compliance have not gone out because the attormeys
feei that there is not enough evidence or
evidence sufficient or of a quality to substantiate
the allegations or.recommendations being made
from the field.

--- PAGE BREAK ---ut because the attormeys
feei that there is not enough evidence or
evidence sufficient or of a quality to substantiate
the allegations or.recommendations being made
from the field.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

15
While plaintiffs criticize HEW for engaging in allegedly
p. 6),·there can be no doubt that the files in question are
Atautnues atam faua 4eua pue "aanzeu ut Arozestasaautu
7
"compiled for law enforcement purposes.
The files were
compiled for the purpose of supplying the evidentiary basis
for the entire arsenal of law enforcement procedures available
under Title VI, including adjudicatory hearings and Department
of Justice litigation.
Indeed, while Weisberg does not
impose such a requirement, we pointed out in our earlier-
filed briefs that the only files at issue on this appeal are
7/ Plaintiffs! complaint in this action specifically
recognized that "HEw is charged with enforcement of a number
of federal civil rights statutes, including Title VI of the
** *-[HEW] to undertake factual investigations"; and that
(App。 7-8)。
Mr. J. Stanley Pottinger, then Director of HEW's Office
for Civil Rights, stated in an affidavit filed herein that a
school district concerned in terms of compliance with applicable
statutory or regulatory,requirements is under active considera-
tion and investigation." (App. 33)。

--- PAGE BREAK ---d herein that a
school district concerned in terms of compliance with applicable
statutory or regulatory,requirements is under active considera-
tion and investigation." (App. 33)。

--- PAGE BREAK ---

being
actively used to achieve compliance with Title
000
VI.
In sum, the detailed affidavits and testimony in the
record in this case clearly establish that HEw's "open
and active" investigatory files were "compiled for
law enforcement purposes." No useful purpose would be
served_by a remand in order that "the district court shall
so determine."
(Weisberg, opin. 6). Under the principles
Weisberg, the files in question are clearly protected
by Exemption 7。
8/ Since the oral argument of this appeal, one of the
Twenty-two cases then at issue on the appeal (Mount Vernon,
New York) has been brought to an adjudicatory hearing.Two
of theother cases
(East Chicago, Indiana, and Berkeley,
California) have been settled and are considered by HEw to
be in,compiiance with Title VI. Therefore, there are now
nineteen
"lopen and active" investigatory files at issue on
this appeal.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

17
CONCLUSION
For the reasons stated herein,and in our earlier
filed briefs, the district court's judgment should be
reversed and the Court should direct the entry of judgment
for defendants with respect to the files at issue on this
appeal.
Respectfully submitted,
LEONARD SCHAITMAN
RONALD R. GLANCZ
Attorneys,
Department
of Justice,
Washington,.D.C.20530.
202-739-3688
CERTIFICATE
EOF SERVICE
I hereby certify that on this 5th day of December, 1973,
I served the foregoing Memorandum Concerning the Effect of
Weisberg v. Department of Justice, by mailing a copy, postage
prepaid,'to:
Joseph L.Rauh,Jr.,Esquire
John Silard, Esquire
Rauh and Silard
lool Connecticut Avenue,N.W。
Washington,D.C。20036
RONALD R. GLANCZ
.Attorney.